Right far to lunge as now were to recyte
The anciēt estate wherein our self hath reyned
What honour what laud given vs of very right
What glory we have had duty vnfaīd
Of eche creature which duty hath cōstrayned
For aboue all goods syns our fathers tale
We Iupyter were ever principal.
☞If we so have ben as truth it is in dede
Beyond the compass of all comparison
Who could presume to show for any mede
So that it might appear to human reason
The hye rename we stand in at this season
For syns that heaven and earth were first create
Stood we never in such triumphant estate.
❧As we now do where of we would report
Such part as we se mete for time present
Chefely concerning your perpetual conforte
As the thing self shall prove in experiment
Which hyely shall bind you on knees lowly beute
Soolly to honour our hyenas day by day
And now to the matter give ear and we shall say.
☞Before our presens in our hye parliament
Both gods and goodesses of all degrees
Hath late assembled by come assent
For the redress of certain enormities
Bred among them thorough extremities
Abused in eche to other of them all
Namely to purpose in these most special.
¶Our foresaid fathers Saturny and Phebus
Eolus and Phebe these four by name
Whose natures not only so far contrary
But also of malice eche other to defame
Have lunge time abused right far out of frame
The dew course of all their constellacyons
To the great damage of all yerthly nations.
¶Which was debated in place said before
And first as became our feather most ancient
With berd e white as snow, his lockes both cold &amp; hot
Hath entered such matter as served is intent
Lauding his frosty mansyon in the firmament
To ayre and yerth as thing most precious
Pourgynge all humours that are contagious.
¶Howe be if he alleges that of lunge time paste
Little hath prevailed his great diligence
Full oft upon earth his fair frost he hath cast
All things hurtful to banish out of presens
But Phebus intending to keep him in silence
When he hath laboured all night in his powers
His glaring beams maryth all in two hours,
☞Phebus to this made no manner answering
Where upon they both then Phebe defied
Eche for his part laid in her reproving
That by her showers superfluous they have tried
In all that she may their powers be denied
Where unto Phebe made answer no more
Then Phebus to Saturn had made before.
☞Anon upon Eolus all these did fl
Complaining their causes eche one a row
And said to compare none was so euyn as he
For when he is disposed his blasts to blow
He suffered neither son shyne, rain nor snow
They eche against other, and he against all three
Thus can these four, in no manner agree.
¶Which scene in them self and further considering
The same to the redress was cause of their assemble
And also that we evermore being
Beside one puissant power of deite
Of wisdom and nature so noble and fre
From all extremities the mean dividing
To peal and plente eche thing attemperynge.
☞They have in conclusion holly sundryd
Into our hands as much concerning
All manner of wethers by them engendryd
The full of their powers for term everlasting
To set such order as stands with our pleasing
Which things of our part no part required
But of all their parts right humble desired.
☞To take upon vs whereto we did assent
And so in all things with one voice agreeable
We have clearly finished our foresaid parliament
To your great welthe which shall be firm and stable
And to our honour far inestimable
For sing their powers as ours eddied to our own
Who can we say know vs as we should be known.
☞But now for fine the rest of our entente
Wherefore as now we hither are descended.
Is only to satisfy and content
All manner people which have ben offendyd
By any whether mete to be amendyd
Upon whose complaints declaring their grefe
We shall shape remedy for their relefe.
¶And to give knowledge for their hither resort
We would this before proclaimed to be
To all our people by some one of this sort
Whom we list to chose here amongst ally
Wherefore eche man advance and we shall se
Which of you is most mete to be our eryer.
❧Brother hold up your torch a little hyer
Now I beseech you my lord loke on me first
I trust your lordship shall not find me the wurste.
☞Why what art thou that approchest so ny.
¶Forsooth and please your lordship it is I.
¶All that we know very well, but what I.
☞What I, some lay I am I perse I
But what manner I so ever be I
I assure your good lordship I am I.
¶What manner man art thou show quickly.
☞By god a poor gentleman dwells her by.
☞A gentleman thy self brings witness nay
Both in thy light behauour and array
But what art thou called where thou dost resort.
❧Forsooth my lord master Merry report.
¶Thou art no mete man in our besynes.
For thine appearance is of to much lightness.
☞Why can not your lordship like my name
Mine apparel nor my name another.
❀To none of all we have devotion.
¶A proper lycklyhod of promocyon
Well than as wise as ye seem to be
Yet can ye se no wisdom in me
But syns ye dispraise me for so light an elft
I pray you give me leave to praise my self
And for the first part I will begin
In my behauour at my coming in
Wherein I think I have little offendyd
For sewer my courtesy could not be amendyd
And as for my seure your servant to be
Might ill have ben mist for your honesty
For as I be saved if I shall not lye
I saw no man sew for the office but I
Wherefore if ye take me not or I go
Ye must anon whether ye will or no
And syns your entente is but for the wethers
What skies our appyrell to be fryse or fathers
I thynhe it wisdom syns no man forbad it
With this to spate a better if I had it
And for my name reporting all way truly
What hurt to report a sad matter merely
As be occasion for the same entente
To a certain widow this day was I sent
Whose husband departed without her wittynge
A special good lover and she his own sweating
To whom at my coming I caste such a figure
Mingling the matter according to my nature
That when we departed aboue all other things
She thanked me heartily for my merry tidings
And if I had not handled it merely
Perchaunche she might have take it heavily
But in such fashion I conjured and bound her
That I left her merrier then I found her
What man may compare to show the like comfort
That daily is showed by me Merry report
And for your purpose at this time meant
For all wethers I am so indifferent
Without affection standing so up right
Son light, moan light, ster light, twy light, torch light,
Cold hete most dry, hail rain frost snow, lightnīg thūd
Cloudy, misty, windy, fair, foul aboue heed or under
Temperate or distemperate what ever it be
I promise your lordship all is one to me.
❧Well son considering thine indyfferency
And partly the rest of thy declaration
We make the our servant and immediately
Well would thou depart and cause proclamation
Publishing our pleasure to every nation
Which thing ones done with all diligence
Make thy returns again to this presens.
❀Here to receive all sewters of eche degre
And such as to the may seem most meetly
We will thou bring them before our majesty
And for the rest that be not so worthy
Make thou report to vs effectually
So that we may here eche manner sewte at large
Thus se thou depart, and loke upon thy charge.
¶Now good my lord god our lady be with ye
Friends, a felyshype let me goo by ye
Think ye I may stand thrusting among you there
Nay by god I must thrust about other ger
¶Now syns we have thus far set forth our purpose
A while we woll withdraw our godly presens
To enbolde all such more plainly to disclose
As here will attend in our foresaid pretens
And now according to your obedience
Rejoice ye in vs with joy most joyfully
And we our self shall joy in our own glory
¶Now sirs take heed for here comes gods seruaūt
Avaunt cartely keytyfs avaunt
Why ye drunken horizons will it not be
By your feith have ye another cap nor knee
Not one of you that will make courtesy
To me that am squire for gods body
Regard ye nothing mine authority
No welcome home nor where have ye be
Howe be it if ye axyd I could not well tell
But sure I think a thousand mile from hell
And on my faith I think on my conscience
I have ben from heaven as far as heaven is hens
At Loin, at London, and in Lumbardy
At Baloocke, at Barforde, and in Barberry
At Canturbery, at Coventry, at Colchester
At Wansworth, and at Welbecke, at Westchester
At Fullam, at Faleborne, and at Fenlowe
At wallyngeforth, at wakefelde, and at waltanstowe
At Tawcon, at Typtre, and at Totnam
At Glouceter, at Gylforde, and at Gotham
At Hartforde, at Harwyche, at Harcowe on the hill
At Sutbere, at Suthampton, at shoters hill
At Wallyngham, at wittam, and at werwycke
At Boston, at Brystowe, and at Berwick
At Grauelyn, at Grauesende, and at Glastenbery
Ynge Gyngyange Iabyerde the parish of Butlbery
The devil him self without more leisure
Could not have gone half thus much I am sure
But now I hane warned them let them even chose
For in faith I care not who win or lose.
☞Now by my troth this was a goodly hearing
I wont it had ben the gentylwomens blowing
But it is not so as I now suppose
For women's horns sounds more in a man nose.
¶Stand ye merry my friends euerychone.
❀Say that to me and let the rest alone
Syria he welcome and all your meyny.
¶Now in good sothe my friend god a mercy
And syns that I mete the here thus by chance
I shall require the of further acquaintance
And privily to show the this is the matter
I come to sew to the great god Iupiter
For help of things concerning my recreation
According to his late proclamation,
☞Mary I am he that this must speed
But first tell me what be ye in dede.
¶Forsooth good friend I am a gentleman.
¶A goodly occupation by saint Anne
On my fathe your friendship hath a merry life
But who makes all these horns your self or your wife
Nay even in ernest I ask you this question.
¶Now by my truth thou art a merry one.
☞In fatyhe or vs both I think never one sad
For I am not so merry but ye seem as mad
But stand ye stylt and take a little payne
I will come to you by and by again
Now gracious god if your will so be
I pray ye let me speak a word with ye,
¶My son say on let vs here thy mind.
¶My lord there stands a suitor even here behind
A gentleman in yonder corner
And as I think his name is master horner
A hunter he is and comes to make you sport
He would hunt a sow or twain out of this sort.
☞What so ever his mind be, let him appear.
¶Now good master horner I pray you come ne'er,
❧I am no horner knave I will you know it.
¶I thought ye had, for when ye did blow it
Harde I never horizon make horn so go
As lefe ye kissed mine ars as blow my hole so
Come on your way before the god Iupyter
And there for your self ye shall be sewter.
¶Most mighty prince and god of every nation
Pleases your hyghnes to vouchsaue the hearing
Of me which according to your proclamation
Doth make appearance in way of beseeching
Not sole for my self but generally,
For all came of noble and ancient stock
Which forte aboue all doth most thankfully
Daily take payne for wealth of the come flock
With diligent study always devising
To keep them in order and unite
In peace to labour the increase of their living
Whereby eche man may prosper in plente
Wherefore good god this is our hole desiring
That for ease of our pains at times vacant
In our recreation which chiefly is hunting
It may please you to send vs whether pleasant
Dry and not misty the wind calm and sryll
That after our hounds yournynge so merely
Chasynge the dere over pale and hill
In hearing we may follow and to comfort the cry
¶Right well we do perceive your hole request
Which shall not fail to rest in memory
Wherefore we will ye set your self at rest
Till we have harde eche man indifferently
And we shall take such order universally
As best may stand to our honour infinite
For wealth in cōmune and eche man singular profit
¶In heaven and earth honoured be thy name
Of Iupyter whom of his godly goodness
Hath set this matter in so goodly frame
That every wight shall have his desire doubtless
And first for vs nobles and gentylmen
I dout not in his wisdom to provide
Such whether as in our hunting now and then
We may both toys and receive on every side
Which thing ones had for our said recrearyon
Shall greatly prevail you in proferrynge our health
For what thing more needful then our preservation
Being the weal and heads of all come wealth
❀Now I beseech your friendship whose head be you.
¶Whose head am I, thy head what say thou now.
☞Nay I think it very true so god me help
For I have ever ben of a little whelp
So full of fancies and in so many fits
So many small reasons and in so many wits
That even as I stand I pray god I be dede
If ever I thought them all mete for heed
But syns I have one head more then I knew
Blame not my rejoicing I love all things new
And sure it is treasour of heads to have store
One fear can I now that I never could before.
☜What is that.
¶By god syns ye came hither
I can set my heed and my tail together
This head shall save money by saint Mary
From hensforthe I will no Apothecary
For at all times when such things shall mister
My new head shall give mine old tail a glitter
And after all this then shall my head wait
Upon my tail and there stand at receipt
Sir for the rest I will not now move you
But if we live shall smell howe I love you
And sir touching pour suit, here depart when it please you
For be ye sure as I can I will ease you.
☞Then give me thy hand that promise I take
And if for my sake any suit thou do make
I promise thy payne to be required
More largely than now shall be recited.
¶Alas my neck, gods pyty where is me head
By saint Yue I fere me I shall be ded
And if I were me think it were no wonder
Syns my head and my body is so far a sonder
Master person now welcome by my life
I pray you howe doth my mistress your wife
☜Sir for the presthode and wife that ye allege
I se ye speak more of dotage then knowledge
But le pas sir I would to you be suitor
To bring me if ye can before Iupyter.
☜Yes mary can I, and will do it in dede
Tarry and I shall make way for your speed
In faith good lord if it please your gracious godshype Merry re.
I must have a word or twain with your loldshyhe
Sir yonder is another manin place
Who makes great suit to speak with your grace
Your pleasure ones known he comes by and by.
¶Bring him before our presens soon hardly
❧Why where be you shall I not find ye
Come away I pray god the devil blind ye.
☜Most mighty prince and lord of lords all
Right humbly be secheth your majesty
Your merchant men thorough the world all
That it may please you of your benygnite
In the daily danger of our goods and life
First to consider the desert of our request
What wealth we bring the rest to our great care &amp; grief
And then to reward vs as ye shall think best
What were the surplusage of eche comodyte
Which grows and increases in every land
Except exchange by such men as ye be
By way or intercourse that lies on our hand
We fraught from home things whereof there is plants
And home we bring such things as there be scant
Who should before vs Merchants accounted be
For were not we, the world should wysh and want
In many things, which now shall lack rehearsal
And privily to conclude we beseech your hyghnes
That of the benefyte proclaimed in general
We may be part takers for come entres
Stably shynge whether thus pleasing your grace
Stormy nor misty the wind measurable
That sauely we may pass from place to place
Bearing our sells for speed most valeable
And also the wind to change and to turn
East, West, North, and South, as best may be set
In any one place not to lunge to sojourn
For the length of our viage may less our market.
Right well have ye said and we accept it so
And so shall we reward you or we go hens
But ye must take patience till we have harde mo
That we may indifferently give sentence
There may pass by vs no spot of negligence
But iustely to judge eche thing so upright
That eche mans part may shyne in the self right
☜Now sir by your faith if ye should be sworn
Harde ye ever god speak so syns ye were borne
So wise to gelitelly his words be shout.
☜I thank his grace my sewt is well bestod.
❧Sir what voyage entende ye next to go.
☜I trust or inydlent to be at Syo.
¶Ha ha is it your mind to sail at Syo
Nay then when ye will, by lady ye may go
And let me alone with this, be of good chere
Ye may trust me at Syo as well as here
For though ye were fro me a thousand mile space
I would do as much as ye were here in place
For syns that from hens it is so far thither
I care not though ye never come again hither.
¶Sir if ye remember me when time shall come
Though I requite not all, I shall deserve some.
¶Now fare you well &amp; god thank you by saint Anne
I pray you mark the fashion of this honest manne
He puts me in more trust at this meting here
Then he shall find cause why this twenty year.
¶God be here, now Christ keep this company.
❧In faith ye be welcome even very skantly
Sir for your coming what is the matter.
❧I would fain speak with the god Iupyter.
¶That will not be but ye may do this
Tell me your mind I am an officer of his
¶B ye so, mary I cry you mercy
Your maystershype may say I am homely
But syns your mind is to have reportyd
The cause wherefore I am now resortyd
Pleases it your maystershype it is so
I come for my self and such other mo
Rangers and keepers of certain places
As forests, parks, purlewes and chases
Where we be charged with all manner game
Small is our profit and great is our blame
Alas for our wages what be we the ne'er
What is forty shillings or five mark a year
Many times and oft where we be flitting
We spend forty pens a piece at a sitting
Now for our vantage which chefely is wyndefale
That is right nought there blows no wind at all
Which is the thing wherein we find most grefe
And cause of my coming to sew for relefe
That the god of pyty all this thing knownuge
May send vs good rage of blustering and blowing
And if we can not get god to do some good
I would hyer the deuyil to run thorough the wood
The roots to turn up, the tops to bring under
A mischief upon them and a wild thunder.
❧Very well said I set by your charity
As much in a manner as by your honesty
I shall set you some what in ease anon
Ye shall put on your cap when I am gone
For I se well ye care not who win or less
So ye may find means to win ȳour fees
¶Sir as in that ye speak as it please ye
But let me speak with the god if it may be
I pray you let me pass ye.
¶Why nay sir by the mass ye
¶Then will I leave you even as I found ye.
¶Go when ye will no man here hath bound ye.
❧What ye devil should skill though al ye world were d•̄
Syns in all our speaking we never be harde
We cry our for rain the devil sped drop will cumme
We water millers be nothing in regard
No water have we to grind at any stint
The wind is so strong the rain can not fall
Which kepeth our myldams as dry as a flyn•
We are undone we grind nothing at all
The greater is the pity as thinks me
For what avails to eche man his corn
Till it be ground by such men as we be
There is the loss if we be forbonre
For tourhynge our selves we are but drudges
And very beggars save only our told
Which is right small and yet many grudges
For grynden of a bushel to give a quart bole
Yet were not reparacyons we might do wele
Our mylstons, our whele, with her kogges, &amp; our tryndyl
Our floodgate, our mylpole, our water whele
Our hopper, our extra, our yren spyndell
In this and much more so great is our charge
That we would not reck though no water ware
Save only it touches eche man so large
And eche for our neighbour Christ bids vs care
Wherefore my conscience hath pricked me hither
In this to sew according to the cry
For plente of rain to the god Iupyter
To whose presence I will go even boldly.
¶Sir Idoute nothing your audacity
But I fere me ye lack capacity
For if ye were wise ye might well espy
Howe rudely ye err from rules of courtesy
What ye come in revelling and reheytynge
Even as a knave might go to a bear baiting.
¶All you bear record what favour I have
Herke howe familiarly he calls me knave
Doubtless the gentleman is universal
But mark this lesson sir you should never call
Your fellow knave nor your brother horizon
For nought can ye get by it when ye have don.
¶Thou art another brother nor fellow to me
For I am gods servant may thou not se
Would ye presume to speak with the great god
Nay discretion and you be to far od
Bier lady these knaves must be tied shorter
Sir who let you in, spake ye with the porter.
¶Nay by my troth nor with none other man
Yet I saw you well when I first began
Howe be it so help me god and holydam
I toke you but for a knave as I am
But mary now syus I know what ye be
I must and will obey your authority
And if I may not speak with Iupyter.
I beseech you be my solicitor,
¶As in that I will be your well wyller
I perceive you be a water miller
And your hole desire as I take the matter
Is plente of rain for increase of water
The let where of ye affirm determynately
As only the wind your mortal enemy.
¶Troth it is for it blows so aloft
We never have rain or at the most not oft
Wherefore I pray you put the god in mind
Clearly for ever to banish the wind.
¶Howe is all the whether gone or I come
For the passion af god help me to some
I am a wind miller as many mo be
No wretch is wretchydnes so wretchyd as we
The hold sort of my craft be all mart at ones
The wind is so weyke it sturrerh not our stones
Nor skantly can shatter the shytren sail
That hangs shaterynge at a women's tail
The rain never rests so lunge be the showers
From time of beginning till four and twenty hours
And end when it shall at night or at none
Another begins as soon as that is done
Such revel of rain ye know well enough
Destroys the wind be it never so rough
Whereby syns our mylles be come to styll standdynge
Now may we wind millers go euyn to hanging
A miller with a moryn and a mischief
Who would be a miller, as good be a thief
Yet in time past when grinding was plente
Who were so like gods fellows as we
As fast as god made corn we millers made meal
Which might be best forborne for common weal
But let that ger pass for I fear our pride
Is cause of the care which god doth vs provide
Wherefore I submit me intending to se
What comfort may come by humility
And now at this time they said in the cry
The god is come down to shape remedy.
No dout he is here even in yonder trone
But in your matter he trusts me alone
Wherein I do perceive by your complaint
Oppression of rain doth make the wind so faint
That ye wind millers be alan caste away.
¶If Iupyter help not it is as ye say
But in few words to tell you my mind round
Upon this condition I would be bound
Day by day to say our ladies sauter
That in this world were no drop of water
Nor never rain but wind continual
Then should we wind millers be lords over all.
¶Come on and assay howe you twain can agree
A brother of yours a miller as ye be.
¶By mean of your craft we may be brothers
But while we live shall we never be lovers
We be of one craft but not of one kind
I live by water, and ye by the wind.
And sir as ye desire wind continual
So would I have rain ever more to fall
Which two in experience right well ye se
Right selde or never together can be
For as lunge as the wind rules it is plain
Twynty to one ye get no drop of rain
And when the Element is to far oppressed
Down comes the rain and sets the wind at rest
By this ye se we can not both obtain
For ye must lack wind or I must lack rain
Wherefore I think good before this audience
Eche for our self to lay or we go hens
And whom is though weyken when we have finished
Leave of his suit and content to be banished.
¶In faith agreed but then by your licens
Our mylles for a time shall hang in suspense
Syns water and wind is chiefly our suit
Which best may be spared we will first dispute
Wherefore to the see my reason shall resort
Where ships by mean of wind try from port to port
From land to land in distance many a mile
Great is the passage and small is the while
So great is the profit as to me doth seem
That no mans wisdom the welthe can exteme
And syns the wind is conveyer of all
Who but the wind should have thank aboue all.
¶Omit in this place a tree here to grow
And thereat the wind in great tage to blow
When it hath all blown this is a clear case
The tree removes no hear bred from his place
No more would the ship blows the best it could
All though it would blow down both mast &amp; shroud
Except the ship flete upon the water
The wind can right nought do a plain matter
Yet may ye on water without any wind
Row forth your vessel where men will have her synde
Nothing more rejoices the mariner
Then mean cools of wind and plente of water
For commonly the cause of every wretch
Is excess of wind where water doth lack
In rage of these storms the peril is such
That better were no wind then so far to much.
¶Well if my reason in this may not stand
I will forsake the see and leapt to land
In every church where gods service is
The organs bear brunt of half the quere I wis
Which causes the sound of water or wind
More over for wind this thing I find
For the most part all manner minstrelsy
By wind they deliver their sound chefely
Fill me a bagpipe of your water full
As swetly shall it sound as it were stuffyd with woll.
¶On my faith I think the moon be at the full
For franty ke tansyes be then most plente full
Which are at the pride of their spring in your head
So far from our matter he is now fled
As for the wind in any instrument
It is no parcel of our argument
We spake of wind that comes naturally
And that is wind forced artificially
Which is not to purpose but if it were
And water indeed right nought could do there
Yet I think organs no such commodity
Whereby the water should banished be
And for your bagpyppes I take them as nyfuls
Your matter is all in fancies and tryfuls.
☜By god but ye shall not tryfull me of so
If these things serve not I will rehearse mo
And now to mind there is an old proverb come
One bushel of marche dust is worth a kings ransom
What is a hundredth thousand bushels worth than.
¶Not one myte for the thing self to no man.
¶Why shall wind every where thus be object
Nay in the hye ways he shall take a effect
Where as the rain doth never good but hurt
For wind makes but dust and water makes dirt
Powder or syrup sir which lycke ye best
Who licks not the tone may lycke up the rest
But sure who ever hath assayed such syppes
Had lever have dusty eyes then dirty lips
And it is said syns before we were borne
That drught doth never make derth of corn
And well it is known to the most fool here
Howe rain hath pryced corn within thy. vii. year.
❧Sir I pray the spare me a lyteell season
And I shall privily conclude the with reason
Put case on somers day without wind to be
And ragious wind in winter days two or three
Much more shall dry that one calm day in somer
Then shall those three windy days in winter
Whom shall we thank for this when all is done
The thank to wind nay thank chiefly the son
And so for drought of corn thereby increase
The son doth comfort and ripe all doubtless
And oft the wind so leyth the corn god wot
That never after can it ripe but rot
If drought toke place as ye say yet may ye se
Little helps the wind in this commodity
But now sir I deny your principal
If drought ever were it were impossybyll
To have any grain for, or it can grow
Ye must plow your land hero we and sow
Which will not be except ye may have rain
To temper the ground and after again
For springing and pluming all manner corn
Yet must ye have water or all is forlorn
If ye take water for no commodity
Yet must ye take it for things of necessity
For washing for showering all filth clensynge
Where water lacks what beastly being
In brewing, in baking, in dressing of meat
It ye lack water what could ye drink or eat
Without water could live neither man nor beast
For water preserves both most and least
For water could I say a thousand things mo
Saving as now the time will not serve so
And as for that wind that you do sew fore
Is good for your wyndemyll and for no more
Sir sith all this in experience is tried
I say this matter stands clear on my side.
¶Well syns this mile not serve I will allege the rest
Sir for our will I say mine is the best
My windmill shall grind more corn in one hour
Then the water mile shall in three or four
Ye more then thine should in a hole year
If thou might have as thou hast wished here
For thou desire to have excess of rain
Which thing to the were ye worst thou coudest obtain
For if thou did it were a plain induccion
To make thyue own desire thine own destruction
For in excess of rain at any flood
Your mylles must stand styll they can do no good
And when the wind doth blow the uttermost
Our wyndemylles walde a mayne in every cost
For as we se the wind in his estate
We moderour sails after the same rate
Syns our mylles grind so far faster then yours
And also they may grind all times and hours
I say we need no water mylles at all
For wyndemylles be sufficient to serve al.
¶Thou spekeste of all and consider not half
In boste of thy grist thou art wise as a calfe
For though aboue vs your mylles grind far faster
What help to those from whom ye be much farther
And of two sorts if the tone should be conserved
I think ye mete the most number be served
In vales and weldes where most commodity is
There is most people ye must grant me this
On hills and downs which parts are most varain
There must be fewyt can no mo sustain
I dar well say if it were tried even now
That there is ten of vs to one of you
And where should chefely and necessaries be
But there as people are most in plente
More reason that you com. vii. mile to mile
Then all we of the vale shod climb the hill
If rain came reasonable as I require it
We should of your wind mylles have need no whyt.
¶Stop foolish knave, for your reasoning is such
That ye have reasoned even ynonght and to much
I harde all the words that ye both have had
So help me god the knaves be more then mad
Another of them both that hath wit nor grace
To perceive that both mylles may serve in place
Between water and wind there is no such set
But eche mile may have time to use his fet
Which thing I can tell by experience
For I have of mine own not far from hens
In corner together a couple of mylles
Standing in a mars between two hills
Not of wherytaunce but by my wife
She is feofed in the tail for term of her life
The one for wind the other for water
And of them both I thank god there stands another
For in a good hour be it spoken
The water gate is no sooner open
But clap sathe the wyndemyll euyn straight behind
There is good sped, the devil and all they grind
But whether that the hopper be dusty
Or that the mylstones be somewhat rusty
By the mas the meal is mischievous musty
And if ye think my tale be not trusty
I make ye true prompse come when ye list
We shall find mean ye shall taste of the grist
¶The corn at receipt happily is not good
¶There can be no sweter by the sweet rood
Another thing yet which shall not be cloaked
My water mile many times is choked.
☜So will she be thought ye should burst your bones
Except ye be perfect in setting of stones
Fere not the lydger beware your conner
Yet this for the lydger or ye have won her
Perchance your lydger doth lack good peckynge
¶So saith my wife and that makes all our checking
She would have the mile pecked, pecked pecked every day
But by god millers must peck when they may
So oft have we pecked that our stones wax right thynne
And all our other ger not worth a pynne
For with peckynge and peckynge I have so wrought
That I have peck a good peckynge iron to nought
Howe be it if I stick no better till her
My wife says she will have a new miller
But let it pass and now to our matter
I say my mylles lack another wind nor water
No more do yours as far as need doth require
But syns ye can not agree I will desire
Iupyter to set you both in such rest
As to your welthe and his honour may stand best.
¶I pray you heartily remember me.
❧Let not me be for gotten I besecheye
¶If I remember you not both a like
I would ye were over the ears in the dyke
Now be we rid of two knaves at one chance
By saint Thomas it is a knavish riddance.
❧Now good god what a folly is this
What should I do were so much people is
I know not howe to pass into the god now.
¶No but ye know howe he may pass into you.
¶I pray you let me in at the back side.
¶Ye shall I so, and your forsyde so wide
Nay not yet but syns ye love to be alone
We twain will into a corner anon
But first I pray you come your way hither
And let vs twain chat a while together.
☜Sir as to you I have little matter.
My coming is to speak with Iupyter.
¶Stand ye styll a while and I will go prove
Whether that the god will be brought in love
My lord howe now loke up lustily
Here his a darling come by saint Antony
And if it be your pleasure to mary
Speak quickly for she may not tarry
In faith I think ye may win her anon
For she would speak with your lordshypen alone.
☜Son that is not the thing at this time meant
If her suit concern no cause of our hither resort
Send her out of place, but if she ve bent
To that purpose, he are her, and make vs report.
☜I count women lost if we love them not well
For ye se god loves them never a del
Mistress ye can not speak with the god.
❧No, why.
¶By my faith for his lordship is right bossy
With a piece of work that needs must be done
Even now is he making of a new moon
He saith your old moons be so far tasted
That all the goodness of them is wasted
Which of the great wet hath ben most matter
For old moons be like, they hold no water
But for this new moon I durst lay my gown
Except a few drops at her going down
Ye get no rain till her arising
Without it need and then no mans devising
Could wish the fashion of rain to be so good
Not gushing out like gutters of Noyes fludde
But small drops sprinkling sortely on the ground
Though they fell on a sponge they would give no sound
This new moon shall make a thing spring more in this while
Thē a old moae shall while a man may go a mile
By that time the god hath all made an end
Ye shall se howe the whether will amend
By saint Anne he goes to work even boldly
I think him wise enough for he looks holdely
Wherefore mistress be ye now of good chere
For though in his presence ye can not appear
Tell me your matter and let me alone
May hap I will think on you when you be go en
¶Forfoth the cause of my coming is this
I am a woman right tayre as ye se
In no creature more beauty then in me is
And syns I am fair, fair would I keep me
But the son in somer so sore doth burn me
In winter the wind on every side me
No part of the year wot I where to turn me
But even in my house am I said to hyde me
And so do all other that beauty have
In whose name at this time this suit I make
Bescchynge Iupyter to grant that I crave
Which is this that it may please him for our sake
To send vs whether close and temperate
No son shyne no frost nor wind to blow
Then would we get the streets tryme as a parate
Ye should se howe we would set our self to show.
☜Yet where ye will I swear by saint Quintyne
Ye paste them all both in your own conceit and mine
¶If we had whether to walk at our pleasure
Our lives would be merry out of measure
One part of the day for our apparelynge
Another part for eating and drinking
And all the teste in streets to be walking
Orin the house to paste time with talk ynge.
¶When serve ye god.
¶Who bosteth in virtue are but daws.
Ye do the better namely syns there is no cause
Howe spend ye this night
¶In dancing and singing
Till midnight and then fall to sleeping.
¶Why sweet heart by your false faith can ye singe
☜Nay nay but I love it all thing.
¶Now by my troth for the love that I owe you
You shall here what pleasure I can show you
One songe I have for you such as it is
And if it were better ye should have it by gys.
❧Mary sir I thank you even heartily.
¶Come on sirs but now let vs singe lustily.
❀Sir this is well done I heartily thank you
Ye have done me pleasure I make god a vow
Ones in a night I lunge for such a fit
For lunge time have I ben brought up in it.
¶Oft time is scene both in court and town.
Lunge be women a bringing up &amp; soon brought down
So fete it is, so nete it is, so nyse it is,
So trick it is, so quick it is, so wise it is
I fear me self except I may entreat her
I am so far in love I shall forget her.
Now good mistress I pray ye let me kiss ye
Kiss me quoth a why nay sir I wis ye.
☜What yes hardly kiss me ones and no more
I never desired to kiss you defore.
❧Why have ye always kissed her behind
In faith good enough if it be your mind
And if your appetite serve you so to do
By lady I would you had kissed my ars to.
¶To whom doest thou speak foul whore can thou tel.
☜Nay by my troth I sir not very well
But by coniectour this ges I have
That I do speak to an old bawdy knave
I saw you dally with your simper de cocked
I rede you beware she pick not your pocket
Such idol husyfes do now and than
Think all well won that they pick from a man
Yet such of some men shall have more favour
Then we that for them daily tail and labour
But I trust the god will be so indifferent
That she shall fail some part of her intent
☜No doubt he will deal so graciously
That all folk shall be served indifferently
Howe be it I tell the truth my office is such
That I must report eche suit little or much
Wherefore with the god syns thou caust not speak
Trust me with thy suit I will not fail it to break.
¶Then lean not to much to gender gyglet
For here desire contrary to mine is set
I herd by her tale she would banish the soon
And then were we poor launders all undone
Except the son shyne that our clothes may dry
We can do right nought in our laundry
Another manner loss if we should mys
Then of such nyreby ceters as she is.
❧I think it better that thou envy me
Then I should stand at reward of thy pit
It is the guise of such gross queynes as thou art
With such as I am evermore to thwart
By cause that no beauty ye can obtain
Therefore ye have vs that be fair in disdain.
¶When I was as young as thou art now
I was within little as fair as thou
And so might have kept meyf I had would
And as dearly my youth I might have sold
As the tryckest and fairest of you all
But I feared perils that after might fall
Wherefore some belines I did me provide
Lest vice might enter on every side
Which hath tree entry where ydylnesse doth reign
It is not thy beauty that I disdain
But thine idol life that thou hast rehearsed
Which any good women's heart would have pierced
For I perceive in dancing and singing
In eating and drinking and thine apparelynge
Is all the joy wherein thy heart is set
But nought of all this doth thine own labour get
For hottest thou nothing but of thine own travail
Thou might go as naked as my nail
Me think thou should abhor such ydelnes
And pass the time in some honest besines
Better to less some part of thy beauty
Then so oft to ieoberde all thine honest
But I think rather then thou would so do
Thou hottest lever have vs live ydylly to
And so no dout we should if thou might have
The clear son banished as thou dost crave
Then were we launders mart and unto the
Thine own request were small commodity
For of these twain I think it far better
Thy face were son burned and thy clothes the swetter
Then that the son from shining should he smytter
To keep thy face fair and thy smock be shytter
Sir howe lycke ye my reason in her case.
Such a railing whore by the holy mas
I never harde in all my thief till now
In dede I love right well the tone of you
But or I keep you both by gods mother
The devil shall have the tone to fet the other.
¶Promise me to speak that the son may shyne bright
And I will be gone quyikly for all night.
❧Get you both hens I pray you heartily
Your suits I perceive and will report them truly
Un to Iupiter at the next leisure
And in the same desire to know his pleasure
Which knowledge had even as he doth show it
Fere ye not time enough ye shall know it.
❧Sir if ye medyll remember me first
¶Then in this meddling my part shall be the wurst.
¶Now I beseech our lord the devil the burst
Who medleth with many I hold him accursed
Thou whore can I meddle with you both at ones.
¶By the mass knave I would I had both thy stones
In my purse if thou mettle not indifferently
That both our maters in issue may be likely.
¶Many words little matter and to no purpose
Such is the effect that thou disclose.
The more ye bib, the more ye babyll.
The more ye babyl, the more ye fabyl
The more ye fabyl, the more vnstabyl.
The more unstable, the more vnabyll
In any manner thing to do any good
No hurt though ye were hanged by the holy rood.
❧The less your silence, the less your credence
The less your credence, the less your honesty
The less your honesty the less your assistance
The less your assistance the less ability
In you to do ought wherefore so god me save
No hurt in hanging such a railing knave.
¶What monster is this I never harde none such
For loke howe much more I have made her to much
And so far at last she hath made me to little
Where be ye Launder I think in some spyttell
Ye shall wash me no ger for fere of fretting
I love no launders that shrink my ger in wetting
I pray the go hens and let me be in rest
I will do thine errand as I think beft.
¶Now would I take my leave if I wyste howe
The longer I live the more knave you,
¶The longer thou live the pity the gretter
The sooner thou be rid the tidings the better
Is not this a sweet office that I have
When every drab shall call me knave
Every man knows not what gods service is
Nor I my self knew it not before this
I think gods servants may live holily
But the devil servants live more merely
I know not what god gives in standing fees
But the devil servants hane casweltees
A hundredth times mo then gods servants have
For though ye be never so stark a knave
Yt ye lack money the devil will do worse
But bring you straight to another mans purse
Then will the devil promote you here in this world
As unto such tyche it doth most accord
First Pater noster quies in celis
And then ye shall sens the strife with your helys
The greatest friend ye have in field or town
Sandynge a typ to shall not reche your crown.
¶This same is even he by allycklyhod
Sir I pray you be not you master god.
¶No in good faith son but I may say to the
I am such a man that god may not miss me
Wherefore with ye god if thou would have ought done
Tell me thy mind and I shall show it soon.
¶Forsooth sir my mind is this at few words
All my pleasure is in catsynge of vyrdes
And making of snow bailes and throwing the same
For the which purpose to have set in frame
With my god father god I would fain have spoken
Desiring him to have sent me by some token
Where I might have had great frost for my pitfalls
And plente of suowe to make my snow balls
This ones had boys lives be such as no man leddes
O to se my snow balls light on my fellows hedes
And to here the birds howe they slicker there wings
In the pitfall I say it passes all things
Sir if ye be gods servant or his kinsman
I pray you help me in this yt ye can.
¶Alas poor boy who sent the hither.
¶A hundred boys that stood together
Where they herd one say in a cry
That my god father god almighty
Was come from heaven by his own accord
This night to sup here with my lord
And farther he said come whose will
They shall sure have their bills full
I fall wethers who list to crave
Eche sort such whether as they list to have
And when my fellows thought this would be had
And saw me so pretty a pratelynge lad
Upon agreement with a great noise
Send little Dycke cried all the boys
By whose assent I am purueyd
To sew for the whether a foresaid
Wherein I pray you to be good as thus
To help that god may give it vs.
Give boys whether quoth a nonny nonny.
¶If god of his whether will give nonny
I pray you will ye sell any
Or send vs a bushel of snow or twain.
And point vs a day to pay him again.
¶I can not tell for by this light.
I chepte nor borrowed none of him this night
But by such shift as I will make
Thou shalt se soon what way he will take.
❧Sir I thank you then I may depart.
❀Ye farewell good son with all my heart
Now such an other sort as here hath been
In al the days of my life I have not scene
No suitors now but women knaves and boys
And all their suits are in fancies and toys
If that there come no wiser after this cry
I will to the god and make an end quickly
Oyes, if that any knave here
Be willing to appear
For whether foul or clear
Come in before this flock
And be he hole or sickly
Come show his mind quickly
And if his tail be not lyckly
Ye shall lycke my tail in the neck
All his time I perceive is spent in wast
To wait for mo suitors I se none make hast
Wherefore I will show the god all this process
And be delivered of my simple offes
Now lord according to your commandment
Attending suitors I have ben diligent
And at beginning as your will was I should
I come now at end to show what eche man would
The first suitor before your self did appear
A gentleman desiring whether clear
Cloudy, nor misty, nor no wind to blow
For hurt in his hunting and then as ye know
The Merchant sud for as of that kind
For whether clear and measurable wind
As they may best bear their sails to make speed
And straight after there came to me in dede
Another man who named him self a ranger
And said all of his craft be far brought in danger
For lack of living which chefely is wind fall
But he plainly says there blows no wind at all
Wherefore he desires for increase of their fleeces
Extreme rage of wind trees to tere in pieces
Then came a water miller and he cried out
For water and said the wind was so stout
The rain could not fall wherefore he made request
For plenty of rain to set the wind at rest
And then sir there came a wind miller in
Who said for the rain he could no wind wyn
The water he wished to be banish all
Beseeching your grace of wind continual
Then came there another that would banish all this
A goodly dame an ydyll thing iwis
Wind, rain, nor frost, nor son shyne would she have
But fair close whether her beauty to save
Then came there another that lives by laundry
Who must have whether hot and clear here clothes to dry
Then come there a boy for trost and snow continual
Snow to make snow balls and frost for his pitfall
For which god wot he sues full greatly
Your first man would have cools to blow meanly
The second the same save whether clear and not windy
The third desired storms and wind most extermely
The fourth all in water and would have no wind
The fyfte no water but all wind to grind
The sixth would have none of all these nor no bright son
The seuent extremely the hot soon would have won
The eight and the last for the frost and snow he prayed
By lady we shall take shame I am afraid
Who makes in what manner this sort is led
May think it impossible all to be speed
This number is small there lacks twain of ten
And yet by the mass among ten thousand men
No one thing could stand more wide from the other
Not one of their suitors agrees with an other
I promise you here is a shrew piece of work
This ger will try whether ye be a clarke
If ye trust to me it is a great folly
For it passes my brains by goods body.
❧Son thou hast best diligent and done so well
That thy labour is right much thank worthy
But be thou sure we need no whyt thy counsel
For in our self we have forsene remedy
Which thou shalt se but first depart hens quickly
To the gentleman and al other suitors here
And command them all before vs to appear
☜That shall be no longer in doing
Then I am in coming and going
❧Such debate as from aboue he have harde
Such debate beneth among your selves ye se
As lunge as heads from temperance be defarde
So lunge the bodies in distemperaunce be
This perceive ye all but none can help save we
But as we there have made peace concordantly
So will we here now give you remedy.
¶If I had caught them
Or ever I taught them
I would have taught them
To be ne'er me.
Full dere have I bought them
Lord so I sought them
Yet have I brought them
Such as they be.
☜Pleases it your majesty lord so it is
We as your subjects and humble suitors all
According as we here your pleasure is
Are presed as your presens being principal
Head and governor of all in every place
Who joys not in your sight no joy can have
Wherefore we all commit vs to your grace
As lord of lords vs to peryshe or save.
☜As lunge as discretion so well doth you get
Obediently to use your duty
Dout ye not we shall your sauete provide
Your greuys we have harde wherefore we send for ye
To receive answer eche man in his degre
And first to content most reason it is
The first man that sud wherefore mark ye this
Oft shall ye have the whether elere and styll
To hunt in for recompense of your payne
Also you merchants shall have much your will
For oft times when no wind on land doth remain
Yet on the see pleasant cools you shall obtain
And syns your hunting may rest in the night
Oft shall the wind then rise and before day light.
❀It shall retell down the wood in such case
That all ye rangers the better live may
And ye water millers shall obtain this grace
Many times the rain to fall in the vilely
When at the self times on hills we shall purvey
Fair whether for your windmills with such cools of wind
As in one instant both kinds of mylles may grind.
☜And for ye fair women that close whether would have
We shall provide that ye may sufficiently
Have time to walk in and your beauty save
And yet shall ye have that lives by laundry
The hot son oft enough your clothes to dry
Also ye pretty child shall have both frost and snow
Now mark this conclusion we charge you arrow.
¶Much better have we now devised for ye all
Then ye all can perceive or could desire
Eche of you sud to have continual
Such whether as his craft only doth require
All wethers in all places if men all times might hyer
Who could live by other what is this negligence
Vs to attempt in such inconvenience.
¶Now on the other side if we had granted
The full of the some one suit and no mo
And from all the rest the whether had forbid
Yet who so had obtained had won his own wo
There is no one craft can preserve man so
But by other crafts of necessity
He must have much part of his commodity.
¶All to serve at ones and one destroy an other
Or else to serve one and destroy all the rest
Another will we do the tone nor the other
But serve as many or as few as we think best
And where or what time to serve most or lest
The direction of that doubtless shall stand
Perpetually in the power of our hand.
❀Wherefore we will the hole world to attend
Eche sort on such whether as for them doth fall
Now one now other as likes vs to send
Who that hath it ply it and sure we shall
So get the whether in course to you all
That eche with other ye shall hole remain.
In pleasure and plentiful wealth certain.
☜Blessed was the time wherein me were borne
First for the blissful chance of your godly presence
Next for our suit was there never man beforne
That ever harde so excellent a sentence
As your grace hath given to vs all arrow
Wherein your hyghnes hath so bountifully
Distributed my part that your grace shall know
Your self soole possessed.
☜Likewise merchants shall yield vs holy
Only to laud the name of Iupyter
As god of all gods you to serve soolly
For of every thing I se you are norysher.
¶No dout it is so for so we now find
Wherein your grace vs rangers so doth bind
That we shall give you our hearts with one accord
For knowledge to know you only as our lord
☜Well I can no more but for our water
We shall give your lordship our ladies sauter
¶Much have ye bound vs for as I be saved
We have all obtained better then we craved.
❧That is true, wherefore your grace shall truly
The hearts of such as I am have surely.
¶And such as I am who be as good as you
His hyghnes shall be sure on I make a vow.
¶Godfather god I will do somewhat for you again
By Christ ye may hap to have a bird or twain
And I promise you if any snow come▪
When I make my snow balls you shall have some

