IN ych come welthe, most high prche¦mynence,
Is due unto laws for soch commodity,
As is had by them, For as Cicero gives sentence
Where as is no law, can no good order be,
In nature, in people, in hows nor yet in city.
The bodies aboue, are underneath a law,
Who could rule the world, were it not vndre awe?
Like as Chrysippus, full clarkely doth dyffyne,
Law is a teacher, of matters necessary,
A knowledge of things, both natural and divine
Persuading all truth. dissuading all injury.
A gift of the lord, devoid of all obprobry,
An wholesome doctrine, of men discrete and wise,
A grace from aboue and a very heavenly practyse.
Our heavenly maker, monies living to direct,
The laws of Nature, of Bondage, and of Grace,
Sent into this world, with viciousness infect,
In all righteousness, to walk before his face.
But Infydelyte, so works in every place,
That under the heavens, no thing is pure &amp; clean,
So much the people, to his perverse ways lean.
The law of Nature, his filthy disposition.
Corrupts with idols, and stinking Sodometry.
The law of Moses, with Avarice and Ambition.
He also polluted. And ever continually,
Christ's law he defyleth. with cursed hypocrisy,
And with false doctrine, as will apere in presence,
To the edyfyenge, of this Christen audience.
Of Infydelyte, God roil himself revenge.
With plages of water, of wild fire and of sword.
And of his people, due homage he will challenge.
Ever to be known. for their God and good lord,
After that he hath, those laws again restored,
To their first beauty committing them to faith.
He is now in place, mark therefore what he saith.
I Am Deus pater, a substance envy∣syble,
All one with the son, &amp; holy ghost in essence.
To Angel and Man. I am income∣prehensyble,
A strength infinite, a righteousness, a prudence,
A mercy, a goodness, a truth, a life, a sapience.
In heaven and in earth, we made all to our glory,
Man ever having, in a special memory.
Man I say again, which is our own elect,
Our chosen creature, and servant over all,
Aboue the others, peculiarly select,
To do vs homage and onour name to call,
Acknowledging vs for his author principal.
Endued him we have, with gifts of special grace
And laws will we send, to govern him in place.
Steppe fourih ye iii. laws, for gydaūce of Mākynde
Whom most inteyrly, in hart we love and fauer.
And teach him to walk, according to our mind,
In clennes of life, and in a gentle behauer.
Deeply instruct him, our mysteryes to saver,
By the works of faith, all vices to seclude,
And preserve in him, our godly similitude.
Of duty we ought, always to be obeysaunt,
To your cōmaundement, for just it is and pleasant,
Your precepts are true, &amp; of perpetual strength
On justice grounded, as will apere at length.
Proudenesse ye abhor, with like inconveniences,
All they are cursed, wych go frō your cōmaūedemētes
Our laws are all one, though you do three apere
Like wise as our will, is all one in effect.
But because that Man, in himself is not clear
To time and person, as now we have respect,
And as three teachers, to him we you direct,
Though ye be but one. In token that we are three,
Distinct in person, and one in the deyte.
We consydre that, for as concerning Man,
Four several times, are much to be respected.
Of Innocence first, of his transgression than,
Than the lunge season, wherein he was afflicted,
Fynally the time, wherein he was redeemed.
Of pleasure is the first, the second of exile.
The third doth ponnysh, the fort doth reconcile,
Whā Angel was made, this law he had by &amp; by,
To serve you his lord, and with laudes to prosecute
This law was given Man, in time of innocence,
In no wise to eat, of the forbidden fruit.
These two laws broken, both they were destitute,
Of their first freedom, to their most high decay,
Till your only son, ded mānys whole raūsome paye
When Angel in heaven, and Man in paradise,
Those laws had brokē. The law of wicked Sathā
Impugned your laws, by craft &amp; subtle practyse.
Where you said. Eat not. He said unto the womā,
Eat, Ye can not dye, As Gods ye shall be than.
By this first of all, your lauds Man proved true.
And Sedans law false, which he now daily rue.
Let him thā beware, how he our laws neglect
Only to Angel, and Man we gave liberty,
And they only fell, becoming a froward sect.
Not by our motion. but their own vanyte.
For that we gave them, to their felycyte,
Abused they have, to their perpetual evil.
Man is now mortal and Angel become a devil.
Lose Man we will not, though he frō vs doth fall
Our love towards him, will be much better than so
Thu law of Nature, teach thu him first of all,
His lord God to know, and that is right to do.
Charge and enforce him, in the ways of vs to go,
Thu law of Moses, And Christ's law fynally
Raise him and save him, to our perpetual glory▪
For time of exile, than I must be his teacher.
Yea, for three ages, both get and governor.
From Adam to Noah, from Noah, to Abraham,
And than to Moses, which is the son of Amram,
Where must I remain, for the time I shall be here?
In the hart of Man, his conscience for to stere,
To righteous living, and to a just believe,
In token whereof, this hart to the I give.
Thu shalt want no grace, to confort him with all,
If he to the faith, of my first promise fall.
Then my course is next, for time of his pōnishment•
For three ages more, to the must he consent.
From Moses to Dauid frō thens to the Jaws exile
And so fourth to Christ, which will Man reconcile
Where shall I sweet lord, for that same seasō dewell
With soch harde rulers, as will the people compel.
Our mind to fulfil, withuot vain gauds of fables
For a sign of this, hold these same stony tables.
All they that observe, our laws inviolably,
Shall every where prosper, increase and multiply
Then I perceive well, my course is last of all.
What though it b• so? yet art thu principal,
Our all the world, thy beams shalt thu extend,
And styll continue, till the world be at an end.
Where shall I father, for that same time persevere?
With the faithful foot, must thu continue ever.
Thu shalt my people, return from far exile,
And for evermore, to my grace reconcile.
Take this precious book, for a token evident.
A seal of my covenant, and a living testament.
They that believe it shall live foreuermore,
And they that do not, will rue their folly sore,
Blessed shall he be, that you my laws will keep.
In city and field, whether he do work or sleep,
His wife shall increase, his land shall frutyfye.
And of his enemies, he shall have victory.
The sky will give rain, whā seasonable time shall be,
The works of his hādes, shall have prosperyte.
Cursed shall they be, that will not our laws fulfil,
Without and within, at market and at mile.
Of corn and cattle, they shall have non increase,
Within their own hows, shall sorrows never cease
Never shall they be, without bile, botch, or blayne,
The pestilence &amp; pox, will work thē deadly payne,
Show this unto Man, &amp; bid him take good heed,
Of our righteousness, to stand always in dread.
We visit the sin. and the great abhomynacyon▪
Of the wicked sort, to third and fort generation.
Thu law of Nature, instruct him first of all,
Thu law of Moses, correct him for his fall,
And thu law of Christ, give him a godly mind.
Raise him unto grace, &amp; save him from the find.
Our heavenly blessing, be with you every chone,
All praise and glory, to your majesty alone.
Here styll to tarry, I think it be your mind.
My office ye know, is to instruct Mankind.
Than God be with you, we leave ye here behind,
THe law in effect. is a teacher general,
What is to be done. &amp; what to be laid aside
But as touching me the first law natural
A knowledge I am whom God in Man doth hyde,
In his whole working, to be to him a get,
To honour his God and seek his neybers health,
A great occasion, of peace and public wealth,
A sore charge I have, Mankind to over se.
And to instruct him, his lord God to obey.
That lord of heaven grant, I may so do my duty
That he be pleased, and Man brought to a staye.
His brittle nature, his slyppernesse to way,
Much doth provoke me. But if God set to hand,
He shall do full well. For non may him withstand,
〈♫〉Brom, brom, brom, brom, brom. Bye brom bye 〈♫〉bye. Bromes for shoes and pow•h•rings, botes and 〈♫〉buskyns for new bromes / Brom, brom, brom.
Marry God give ye good even,
And the holy man saint Steven,
Send ye a good new year.
I would have brought ye the pox.
Or else anymage of wax.
If I had known ye hear.
I will my self so handle.
That ye shall have a candle,
When I come hither again.
At this your soden motion.
I was in soch devotion,
I had ne'er broke a vain.
That might have done ye smart.
No, no, it was but a fart,
For pastime of my hart,
I would ye had it forsooth.
In serupp or in sows,
But for noyaunce of the hows,
For easement of your toth,
Now have I my dream in dede,
God send me wele to speed,
And sweet saint Antony.
I thought I should mete a knave,
And now that fortune I have
Among this company.
Why dost thu call me knave?
I said. I would be your slave,
If your grace would me have▪
And do your work anon,
I would so rub your botes,
Thereof should from the rotes,
When ye should do them on,
Thu art disposed to mock,
Soon may thu have a knock,
If thu with me so game.
Your mouth shall kiss my dock,
Your tongue shall it unlock,
But I say what is your name?
I am the law of Nature.
I thought so by your stature,
And by your ancient gature,
Ye were of soch a rature,
When I first heard ye speak.
Ye commoned with God lately,
And now ye are his bailey,
Mankind to rule discreetly,
Welcome sir huddy peke.
If thu use soch villainy.
I shall displease the truly.
By the mass I the defy,
With thy whole cuckoldrye,
And all that with the hold.
Why dost thu me blaspheme,
And so ungodly deem?
For by this blessed book,
I went ye had been a coke,
And that made me so bold,
For a coke ones having age
With • face demure and sage,
And ancient to behold.
As you have here in place,
With a heard upon your face,
What is he but a coke old?
Ye are disposed to dally,
To leap and ouersallye,
The compass of your wit?
I counsel ye yet in season,
Somewhat to follow reason,
And gnaw upon the byrte,
Then after our great madness,
Let vs fall to some sadness,
And tell me what ye in tend,
God sent me unto Man,
To do the best I can,
To cause him to amend.
Soche creatures as want reason.
My rules obye yche season,
And that in every bondre.
The sun and moan doth moan,
With the other bodies aboue,
And never break their ordre.
The trees and herbs doth grow,
The see doth ebb and flow,
And varyeth not a nail.
The floods and wholesome sprynges,
With other natural things,
Their course do never fail
The beasts and birds engendre,
So do the fyshes tender,
According to their kind
Alonlye man doth fall,
From good laws natural,
By a froward wicked mind.
Now will I prove ye a liar,
Next cosyne to a friar,
And on the gall ye rub.
Ye say thy follow your law,
And varyee not a straw,
Which is a tale of a tubbe / 
The sun ones in the clyppes
Away the clearness slips
And darkened is the day,
Of the planetee influence,
Arises the pestilence.
To many ones decay,
Doth not the see so rage,
That non can it assuage,
And swallow in town and streate?
The ayre which gives breathe,
Sumtyme infects to death,
By his most pestilent heate.
The beasts oft vndemure,
Which were left to monies cure,
Will him sumtyme devour.
Thus are your rules forgot,
As things of slendre note,
In creatures day and hour,
It is the will of God,
To use them as a rod,
Of his just ponnyshment.
When Man doth not regard,
The lord nor his reward,
Nor to his laws consent.
They never are so ronnysh,
But when God doth Man ponnysh.
For his unhappiness.
From God they never fall,
Nor from laws natural,
Doing his busynesse.
And you are the same law,
That keep them vndre awe,
By youy most politic wit?
God hath appointed me,
Mankind to ouerse,
And in his hart to sytt.
To teach him, for to know,
In the creatures high and lowe,
His glorious mageste,
And on his name to call,
Or power celestial,
In his necessity,
To think him everlasting,
And wonderful in working,
And that he creates all,
Both govern and conserve.
From them he never swerve,
That to soch faith will fall.
In dede here is good sport.
But why do you resort,
Unto this present place?
Man always to exhort,
To seek all health and confort,
Of the only God of grace.
First in the hearts rejoice,
And than with open voice,
To worship him alone.
Knowledgynge his deyte,
His power and eternyte.
When he shall make his moan▪
I shall keep ye as well from that,
As my grandam kept her cat,
From licking of her cream.
What will thu keep me fro?
Tell me ere thu farther go,
Me think thu art in a dream.
From causing of Mankind.
To give to God his mind,
Or his obedience.
What is thy name? tell me.
Marry Infydelyte,
Which never will agree,
To your benyuolence.
Thu canniest not keep me from man.
Yet will I do the best I can.
To trouble ye now and than.
That ye shall not prevail.
I will cause ydolatrye.
And most vile sodomy,
To work so on graciously,
Ye shall of your purpose fail.
I defy the wicked find,
With thy whole venomous find,
God puts now in my mind,
To fl thy company.
Ye are so blessed a Saint,
And your self so wele can paint,
That I must me acquaint,
With you no remedy.
Avoid thu cruel enemy,
I will non of the truly,
But shurne thy company,
As I would the devil of hell.
And are ye gone in dede?
Small wyttam be your speed,
Except ye take good heed,
I will be next of your counsel.
Now will I work soch masterye,
By crafts and sutyle policy,
The law of nature to poison.
With pestilent ydolatrye,
And with most stinking sodomy,
That he shall have no Foison.
Where are these vyllen knaves?
The devils own kyd•in slaves,
That them I can not se.
I conjure you both here,
And charge ye to apere,
Like two knaves as ye be.
Ambo is a name full clean,
Know ye not what I mean?
And are so good a clarke.
By Tetragrammaton,
I charge ye, apere anon,
And come out of the dark.
Have in than at a dash,
With swash miry annet swash,
Yet may I not be to rash,
For my holy orders sake.
Nor I son by my troth,
Cha caute a courage of sloth,
And soch a comberouse couth,
Ych wot not what to do.
At Christmas and at Paske.
ye may dance the devil a mask,
Whyls his great cauldron plow.
you soch a prati minion.
And you now in religion,
Soch two I never saw.
Is not thy name ydolatrye?
Yes, an wholesome woman verily.
And wele seane in Philosophy,
Mennys fortunes she can tell.
She can by saying her Aue mary,
And by other charms of sorcery,
Ease men of toth ache by and bye,
Yea, and fetch the devil from hell.
She can milk the cow and hunt the fox,
And help men of the ague and pox,
So they bring money to the box,
When they to her make moan.
She can fetch again all that is lost,
And draw drink out of a rotten post,
Without the help of the holy Ghost.
In working she is alone.
What, sumtyme thu were an he,
Yea, but now ych am a she,
And a good midwife per de,
Young children can I charm.
With whisperings and whysshynges.
With crossings and with kyssynges
With blessings and with blessings,
That spretes do them no harm.
Then art thu like to Clisthenes,
To Clodius and Euclides,
Sardinapalus and Hercules,
Which themselves oft transformed.
Into a womannys lyckenes,
With agylyte and quickens,
But they had Venus syckenes,
As writers have declared.
Let her tell fourth her matter.
With holy oil and watter,
I can so cloyne and clarter,
That I can at the latter,
Many suttylters contrive.
I can work wiles in battle,
If I do ones but spittle,
I can make corn and cattle,
That they shall never thryue.
When ale is in the fat,
If the bruar please me nart,
The east shall fall down flat.
And never have any strength.
No man shall tonne nor bake,
Nor meat in season make,
If I against him take,
But lose his labour at length.
Their wellys I can up dry,
Cause trees and herbs to dye.
And slay all pulley,
Whereas men doth me move.
I can make stoles to dance,
And carthen pots to prance.
That non shall them enhance,
And do but cast my glove.
I have charms for the plough,
And also for the cowgh,
She shall give milk enough,
So lunge as I am pleased.
Apace the mylle shall go,
So shall the cradle do,
And the mustard querrie also,
No man therewith diseased.
Thou art thu for me fytt.
The woman hath a wit,
And by her ger can sixth,
Though she be somewhat old.
It is mine own sweet bully,
My muskyne and my mullye,
My gelouer and my cullye,
Yea, mine own sweet hart of Gold.
I say yet not to hold.
Peace fondelinge, tush a button,
What will thu fall to mutton?
And play the hungry glutton,
Before this company?
Rank love is full of heate,
Where hungry dogs lack meat,
They will dirty puddings eat,
For want of befe and cony.
High, minion for money,
As good is draff as honey,
When the day is what and sonnye,
By the blessed rode of kent.
Say fourth your mind good mother,
For this man is non other,
But our own loving brother.
And is very wele content.
I never miss but paulter,
Our blessed ladies psaulter,
Before saint Savers alter,
With my beds ones a day.
And this is my come cast,
To hear Mass first or last.
And the holy friday fast,
In good time mowt I it say.
With blessings of Saint Germyne,
I will me so determine,
That neither fox nor vermin,
Shall do my chuckens harm.
For your gese seek saint Legearde,
And for your ducks saint Lenarde,
For horse take Moyses yard,
There is no better charm.
Take me a napkin folte,
With the bias of a bolt,
For the healing of a colt,
No better thing can be.
For lamps and for bottes,
Take me saint Wylfrides knots.
And holy saint Thomas lots,
On my life I warrant ye.
For the cowgh take Iudas care,
With the paring of a pear,
And drink them without fear
If ye will have remedy,
Three syppes are for the hyckock,
And vj. more for the chyckock,
Thus may my pretty pyckock,
Recover by and by.
If ye can not sleep but slumber.
Give otes unto saint Vncumber,
And beans in a certain number.
Unto saint Blase and saint Blithe▪
Give onions to saint Cutlake,
And garlic to saint Cyryake,
If ye will shurne the head ache,
Ye shall have them at queen hythe.
A dram of a shepes tyrdle.
And good saint Frances girdle,
With the hamlet of an hyrdle,
Are wholesome for the pyppe.
Besyden these charms before,
I have feats many more,
That I keep styll in store,
Whom now I over hyppe.
It is a spoored I trow,
To hear how she out blow,
Her witch crafts on a row,
By the Mass I must needs smile.
Now I pray the let me know,
What sedes that thu canniest sow.
Mankind to over throw,
And the law of nature beguile.
My self I so behave,
And am so vile a knave.
As nature doth deprave,
And utterly abheire.
I am soche a vice truly,
As God in his great fury.
Ded ponnysh most terribly,
In Sodomy and in Gomoire.
In the flesh I am a fire,
And soch a vile desire,
As bring men to the mire,
Of foul concupiscence.
We two together began,
To spring and to grow in manne,
As Thomas of Equine scan,
In the fort book of his sentence.
I dwelt among the Sodomites,
The Beniamytes, and Madyanytes,
And now the popish hypocrites,
Embrace me every where.
I am now become all spiritual,
For the clergy at Rome and over all,
For want of wives to me doth fall,
To God they have no fear.
The children of God I ded so move,
That they the daughters of men ded love,
Working soch ways as ded not behove,
Till the floude them over went.
With Noes son Thā I was half joined,
When he his drunken father scorned.
In the Gomorytes I also reigned,
Till the hand of God them brent.
I was with Onan not unacquainted,
When he on the ground his increase shed,
For me his bretherne Ioseph accused,
As Genesis doth tell.
Dauid ones warned all men of vs two,
Do not as mules and horses will do,
Confounded be they that to images go,
Those are the ways to hell.
Both Esaye and Ezechiel.
Both Hieremy and Daniel,
Of vs the abhomynacyons tell,
With the prophets euerychon,
For vs two God struck with fire &amp; watter.
With battle, with plages &amp; fearful matter,
With painful exile, than at the latter,
Into Egipt and Babylon.
As Paule to the Romans testify,
The gentyles after Idolatry,
Fell to soch bestial Sodomy,
That God ded them forsake.
Who followed vs as he confess,
The kyngedom of God shall never possess,
And as the Apocalypse express,
Shall sink to the burning lake.
We made Thalon and Sophocles,
Thamiras, Narrow, Agathocles,
Tibernius and Aristoteles,
Themselves to use unnaturally
I taught Aristo and Fulmus,
Semiramis and Hortensius,
Crathes, Hyliscus, and Pontius,
Beasts to abuse most monstru•uslye.
Marry thu art the devil himself,
If ye knew how he could pelf,
Ye would say he were soch an elf.
As non under heaven were else
The fellawe is wele decked,
Dysgysed and wele necked.
Both knave bald and pyepecked.
He lacks nothing but beles.
In the first age I began,
And so perseuerde with manne,
And styll will if I canne,
So lunge as he endure.
If monkysh sectes renew,
And popish prestos continue,
Which are of my retinue.
To live I shall be sure.
Clean Marriage they forbid,
Yet can not their ways be hyd,
Men know what hath betide,
When they have been in apparel.
Oft have they buried quick,
Soch as were never sick,
Full many a propre trick,
They have to help their quarrel.
In Rome to me they fall,
Both Bishop and Cardinal.
Monk, friar, pressed and all,
More rank they are than antes.
Example in pope July,
Which sought to have in his fury,
Two lads, and to use them beastly,
From the Cardinal of Nantes.
Well, you two are for my mind,
Steppe fourth and do your kind.
Leave never a point be hynde,
That may corrupt in man,
The law wryt in his hart.
In his flesh do thy hart. 
And his soul to pervert, 
Do thu the best thu can.
Here have I pretty gins.
Both brouches, beads and pynnes,
With soch as the people wynnes,
Unto ydolatrye.
Take thu part of them here, 
Beads, rings, and other ger,
With their abhomynacyon.
Idolatry with wickedness,
And Sodomy with filthiness.
To his most utter dampnacyon.
These two will him so use,
Each one in their abuse,
And wrap him in soch evil.
That by their wicked cast,
He shall be at the last
A morsel for the devil.
Now underneath her noynges,
Idolatry hath kings,
With their nobylyte.
Both dukes, lords, knights and earls.
Fair ladies with their pearls.
And the whole commenalte.
Within the bones of Sodomy.
Doth dwell the spiritual clergy,
Pope, Cardinal and pryst.
Nonne, Chanon, Monk and friar,
With so many else as do desire,
To reign vndre Antichrist.
Detesting matrimony,
They live abominably,
And burn in carnal lust.
Shall I fell ye farthernewes?
At Rome for prelates are stewed,
Of both kinds. This is just.
The law of Nature I think,
Will not be able to wink,
Against the assaults of them.
They having so high prelates.
And so many great estates,
From hens to Hierusalem.
Pause now a little while,
Mine ears doth me beguile,
If I hear not a sound.
•yen folk hath sped I guess,
It is so by the Mess,
Away now will I round, 
I think ye marvel, to se soch alteration,
At this time in me, whom God left here so pure▪
Of me it comes not, but of monies operation,
Whom daily the devil, to great sin doth allure,
•nd his nature is, full brittle and unsure.
By him have I got this foul disease of body.
And as ye se here, am now thrown in a leprye.
I wrought in his hart, as God bad earnestly,
Him oft provoking, to love God over all.
With the inner powers, But that false Idolatry.
Hath him perverted, by slights diabolical.
And so hath Sodomy, through his abuses carnal.
That he is now lost, offending without measure.
And I corrupted, to my most high displeasure.
I abhor to tell, the abusyons bestial.
That they daily use, which boast their chastyte.
Some at the alter, to incontynency fall,
In confession some, full beastly occupied be.
Among the close nonnes, reigns this enormyte.
Soch children slay they, as they chance for to have.
And in their preuyes, provide them of their grave.
Ye Christen rulers, so you for this a way,
Be not eluded, by false hypocrisy.
By the stroke of God, the world will else decay
Permit prestos rather, Gods lawful remedy
Than they should incur, most bestial Sodomy.
Regard not the pope, nor yet his whorish kyngedom
For he is the master, of Gomor and of Sodomy.
With Man have I been, which hath me thus de∣filed▪
With Idolatry, and unclean Sodomy.
And worthy I am, from God to be exiled,
Pity me yet lord, of thy most bounteous mercy.
I will fourth &amp; morn, till thu send remedy
Promise hast thu made, to a glorious liberty,
To bring heauē &amp; earth, thā will thu (I trust) re¦store me.
THe lord perceiving, his first law thus co∣rupted,
With unclean vices, sent me his law of Moses,
To se him for sin, substancyallye corrected.
And brought in again, to a trade of godliness.
For I am a law, of rigour and of hardenes.
I straightly command, and if it be not done.
I threaten. I curse, and slay in my anger soon.
To God I require, a perfyght obedience,
Condempnynge all soch, as do it not in effect.
I show what sin is, I burdē sore mānys cōscyence
To him am I death, when his life is infect.
Yet if he take heed, to Christ I him direct,
Forgiveness to have. with light, health &amp; salvation,
Least he should despair, &amp; fall into dampnacyon.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha,
A pastime quoth A, I know not the time nor when,
I ded laugh so much, scene I was an honest man.
Believe me and ye will, I never saw soch a spott,
I would ye had been there, that ye might have made the fort.
Where would have had met tell me good brother 〈◊〉.
At the Mynorasse ser, late yester night at complyne.
At the Mynorasse? Why. what was there a do?
For soch an other, would I to Southampton go.
In dede yesterday, it was their dedycacyon
And thydre in Gods name, came I to se the fashion.
An old friar stood forth, with spectacles on his nose
Beginning this Anteme, a my faith I do not gloss
〈♫〉Lipids preciosi.
And what ded follow of this?
I shall tell ye ser by Gods bliss.
Then came Dame Isbell, an old Nōne &amp; a calm,
Crowing like a capon, and thus began the Psalm.
〈♫〉Saepe expugnauerunt me a iuuentute mea.
And what includes this mystery?
A simple problem of bytcherye.
When the friar begōne, Before the Nonne,
To singe of precious stones.
From my youth say she, They have confort me,
As it had been for the nones.
I assure the plain, I set not by soch gaudee,
Thy usage show the, to be brought up amōge bawds
It was a good world, whā we had soch wholsō stories
Preached in our church, on sondayes &amp; other ferries.
With vs was it merry,
When we went to Berry.
And to our lady of grace,
To the blood of hails,
Where no good chere fails,
And other holy place.
When the prestos might walk.
And with young wives talk.
Than had we children plenty.
Than cuckolds might leap,
A score on a heap,
Now is there not one to twenty.
When the Monks were fat.
And rank as a ratte.
With bellies like a Bore.
Then all things were dere,
Both befe, bread and bear,
Now grudge the iourers sore.
When Byshoppes might burn.
And from the truth turn.
The silly simple soul.
Than durst no man creak,
Open mouth nor speak.
Of Christ nor yet of Powle.
Now are the knaves bold.
With Scriptures to hold,
And teach them every where.
The carter, the sowter.
The bodger, there clowter,
That all will away I fere.
At vs so they pull.
Our livings are dull,
We are now like to fall.
If we do not fight,
For the churches right,
By the Mess we shall lose all.
But I pray ye ser, tell me what is your name▪
The law of Moses, to lye I were to blame.
In these same parties, what do ye now intende?
Mankind to reform, that he his life amend.
I show what sin is, &amp; what thing pleases god,
I confort the just, and the ill I ponnysh with rod.
The cōmen people, have thought it commodious,
Diverse Gods to have, with rytes superstitious.
My cōmaundement is, to seek one God alone,
And in all their needs, to him to make their moan.
Among the Gentyles, was it thought nō injury,
If a man were hurt, to slay his adversary.
This thing I forbid, and say, thu shalt not kill,
Law is the revenger, the man may do no ill.
Some persons there are, that inordinately love.
Those are persuaded, all things them to behove.
Which I inhibit, saying contynuallye,
No rape shalt thu do, nor yet commit aduouterye.
Thu shalt do no theft, nor covet that is not thine.
Against thy neyber, shalt thu not falsely dyffyne.
We may do nothing, if we be pynned in thus.
Neither you nor God, to that hardetrade shall brine∣ge vs.
We must have one God, &amp; worship him alone?
Marry that in dede, would make a Turk to groan.
If we be stricken, we may not strike again?
A proper bargain, and discreetly uttered plain.
For cumpanyes sake, ye say we may not love?
I defy your worst, and to you there is my glove.
What, thu will not fight? thy wits are better thā so
In the quarrel of love, I shall prove ye ere I go,
By the Mess I think, to put ye to your fence.
Thu were much better, to keep thy patience.
Nay by cocks soul friend, I must lay ye on the coat
In loves cause to fight, ye may soon have me a float
Nay, have at your pysche, defend ye if ye may.
Soch a foal art thu, as seek thine own decay.
If Iones meddle, to the it will be death.
Dedyst thu never hear that law sleath ī his wreath
By the blessed lord, than will I play Robsons part.
Why, what part will thu play?
By cocks soul give over. so soon as I sele smart.
It will be to late, if I ones couple with the.
Then let me alone, and we shall soon agree,
And I shall be glad, to be acquainted with ye.
Acquaintance good fellawe, thu may soon have of me.
The worst fault I have, I am hasty now and thā,
But it is soon gone, I toke it of a woman.
But what mean those tables, that ye have in your hand?
Keep silence a while, and thu shalt understand.
Three things I declare, the first are the precepts moral.
Next, the laws judicial, &amp; last the rytes ceremonial
The moral precepts, are Gods cōmaundemētes ten.
Which ought evermore, to be observed of all men.
The laws of Nature, the moral precepts declare,
And ye plesaūt works, to God they teach &amp; prepare
They stir man to faith, &amp; provoke him also to love
To obeye, to sorne, and to worship God aboue.
In two stony tables, God wrote them first of all,
That they should remain, as things continual.
The first hath but three, which tēde to Gods high ho∣nor,
Geuē hath the second, &amp; they concern our neybour.
The first doth expound, the first law natural.
The next the other, making them very formal.
In sprete is the first, yt we should God honour &amp; love.
To outward working, the second doth vs move.
Forbidding all wrōges, preserving just marriage,
Norryshynge true peace, and other godly usage.
What is the effect, of your laws Judicial?
Soch things to cōmaunde, as are civil or tēporall.
From vice to refrain, and outward injury,
Quiet to conserve, and public honesty.
These are to support, the laws of the second table.
Ceremonial rytes are also commendable,
In holy days, garmētes, temples &amp; consecracyons,
Sacrifices &amp; vows, with offerings &amp; expiacyōs
Which are unto Christ, as fygurs, types &amp; shadows
As Paule doth declare, in his pystle to the Hebrues.
These are only figures, &amp; outward testimonies,
No man is perfyght, by soch dark ceremonies.
Only pertain they, unto the third cōmaundement,
Of the Sabboth day, till Christ the lord be present.
In his death ending, the whole Iudaycal presthode.
Good days might ye have, ye speak it full wele by the rode.
I am a poor lad, &amp; by my troth bent earnestly,
To wait upon ye, and to be your very lackey.
What art thu called, I pray the heartily.
Gray friar am I non, by the Mess I cā not flatter.
I am Infydelyte, to tell the truth of the matter.
And hast thu so lunge, dissembled thus with me▪
Yea, for advantage, to smell out your subtylyte.
Avoid hens I say, thu false Infydelyte.
Nay that I will not, by Yngham Trynyte.
Will thu not in dede, thā will I fet hither the pour
Of judges &amp; kings, to subdue the withī this hour.
Soch knights will I have, as shall cōfounde thē all
As Sadducees &amp; scribes, with the sect pharysayeal
By help of my children Idolatry and Sodomy.
The law of Nature, I kissed ones in a leprye.
I have yet two more, Ambition &amp; Covetousness.
Which will do as much, to the law of Moses.
Where are my whoresons, that they come not away.
Yea, whoreson on thy face, even in thy best array.
I will thu know it, I am a worshipful Doctor.
A Scribe in the law, and a profitable proctor.
By wresting the text, to the scriptures sore decay.
And what will thu do, my fellawe Covetousness?
A veil will I sprede, upon the face of Moses,
That nō shall perceive, the clearness of his cōtenaūce.
Which is of the law, the meaning &amp; true ordynaūce.
Why, what will ye say, unto ye ten cōmaundemētes?
We must poison them, with will works &amp; good in∣tents.
Where as God doth say, No siraunge gods thu shalt have,
With Saints worshipping, that clause we will deprave.
And though he cōmaunde, to make no carved image,
For a good intent yet will we have pilgrimage.
Though he will vs not, to take his name in vain,
With tradycyons yet, thereunto will we constrain.
No Sabboth will we, with Gods word sanctify,
But with lip labour, and idle ceremony.
To father and mother, we may owe non obedience,
Our religion is, of so great excellence.
Though we do not slay, yet may we heretykes burn,
If they will not soon, from holy scripture turn.
What though it be said. Thu shalt do no fornycacyō,
Yet will we mayntene, much greater abhomynacyon
Though theft be forbid, yet will we continually,
Rob the poor people, through prayer &amp; purgatory
God hath inhibited, to give false testimony,
Yet we will condemn, the Gospel for heresy.
We should not covet, our neybers hows nor wife,
His servant nor beast, yet are we therein most rife.
Of mē make we swine, by the draff of our tradycyōs
And cause thē nothing, to regard but superstycyōs.
As dogs unreasonable, on most vile carren fed,
So will we cause them, seek idols in their need.
And always their groūde, shall be, for a good intēt.
More myscheues I trow, the devil could not inuēt
Than your two can do by the Mess ye are alone,
Little could I do, were ye ones from me gone,
To the corrupting. of the law of Moyses,
Go forward therefore, in your deceitfulness.
With superstycyons, the Jaws ceremonial laws,
I will so hādle, they shall not be worth ij. straws.
The laws Judicial. through cawtels and delays.
I will also drown, to all righteous mēnys decays
To set this forward, we must have sophistry,
Philosophy and Logic, as science necessary.
The byshoppes must hold, their prestos in ignoraūce
With lunge latyne hours, least knowledge to them chance.
Let them have lōge matins, lōge euē songs &amp; lōge Masses.
And that will make them, as dull as ever were asses.
That they shall never, be able to prophecy,
Or yet preach the truth, to our great injury.
Let the cloysterers, be brought up ever in silence,
Without the scriptures, in payne of dysobedyēce.
Se the lay people, pray never but in latyne,
Let them have their Cred, and service all in latyne
That, a latyne believe, may make a latyne soul,
Let them nothing know, of Christ nor yet of powle
If they have English, let it be for aduaūtage,
For pardons, for Syrges, for offerings and pylgry∣mage.
I reckon to make them, a new Cred in a while,
And all in English, their conscyēce to beguile.
Rehearse unto me, the Articles of that Cred.
The articles are these, give ear and take good heed
First they shall believe, in our holy father Pope,
Next in his decrees, and holy decretals.
Then in holy church. with sencer, cross and cope.
In the Ceremonies, and blessed Sacramētals.
In purgatory then, in pardons and in trentals,
In praying to saints, and in saint Frāces whoode,
In our lady of Grace, and in the blessed rood.
They shall believe also, in rellyckes and religion,
In our ladies psalter, in fre will and good wurkes.
In the ember days, and in the popes remission,
In beds and in belles, not used of the turks.
In the golden Masses, against soch spretes as lurks
With charms and blessings. This cred will brine∣ge in money.
In English therefore, we will it clarkely cōueye.
Yea, and burn the knaves, that will not believe that, cred,
That into the ditch, the blind the blind may led
Then I hold it best, that we always condemn,
The Bible readers, least they our acres contempne.
Yea, never spare them, but evermore play the bitter,
Expressing always, the tropes and types of thy my∣tar.
Why, what dost thu think, my mitre to signify?
The mouth of a wolf, and that shall I prove by &amp; by.
If thu stoup downward. loo, se home the wolf doth gape.
Ready to devour, the lambs, least any escape.
But thy woluyshnesse, by three crowns will I hyde,
Making the a pope, &amp; a captain of all pride.
That when thu doest slay, soch as thy laws contēyne
Thu may say, Nor I, but the powers ded them con¦dempne.
These Labels betoken the laws of senon &amp; cannon
I trow thu would say, the ij. laws Civil &amp; Ca∣non.
As I spake I thought, &amp; styll think by saint Iohan
Yea, persecute styll the instructors of the people.
And thu Covetousness, let no bell ring ī steple,
Without a profyght. Tush, take money every where
So nigh clyppe and shave, that thu leave never a hear?
I caused the pope, to take but now of late,
Of the Gray friars, to have canonyzate,
Franciscus de pola, three thousād ducats and more,
And as much besides he had not lunge before,
For a Cardinal heart, of the same holy order,
Thus draw we to vs, great goods frō every border.
Pope Clement the seuēth payed ones for his papacy
Three hoored thousād, good ducats of lawful money
I marvel how he, could come to so much good.
Yes, yes, by pollage, and by shedynge Christen blood.
Crosers and mytars, in Rome are good merchandise
And all to little, to maintain their pomp and vice.
The pope for whoredom, hath in Rome and Viterbye
Of gold and silver, a wonderful substaūce yearly
Tush they be in England, that much rather would to dwell,
Whores in their dyoceses, than the readers of Chri∣stes Gospel.
They do the better, for by thē they may have profyght
As for the other, do trouble them day and night,
Well, now steppe foreword, and go do your busynes.
To the corrupting, of the law of Moyses.
Doubt not but we shall, make him a cripple blind.
Singe then at our farewell, to recreate our mind.
Now am I left alone. And these, ii. merchaūtes gone,
Their myschefes to conclude.
I think within a while, They will trappe &amp; beguile
The worthy law of Iude.
Ambition first of all, With his rytes bestial,
will make the people swine.
In draff will he thē led, And with tradycyōs fed
Where they shall sup or dine.
Covetousness will work, That many one shall bark,
Like dogs against the truth.
Some shall Gods word defile, &amp; some will it revile
Soch beastliness ensuth.
Ambition hath this hour All the whole spiritual, pour
And may do what him lust.
Now covetousness doth rule, And hath both horse &amp; mule.
All matters by him dyscust.
Now byshopryckes are sold, &amp; the holy ghost for gold
The pope doth bye and sell.
The truth may not be told, vndre pains manifold
With sendynges down to hell.
The people prestos do famish, And their goods frō them ravish.
Yea, and all the world they blind.
All princes do they mock, And rob the silly flock
Nothing they leave behind.
On the face of Moyses, A veil they have cast dou∣ghtles.
The light of the law to hyde.
Least Mē to Christ should cōme, frō ceremonies dōme
As to their heavenly get.
The law can never be, at any liberty.
Where soch two enemies reign.
Now is it time to walk, of this more will I talk,
when I come hither again.
If pity may move, your gentle christen hearts,
Let it now stir ye, to morn this heavy chasice.
Two enemies with me, have played most wicked par¦tes.
And left me stark blind, God knows to my sore greuaunce,
And I think also, to your more hynderaunce.
To lead you to Christ sometime, a get I was.
Now am I so blind, I can not do it, Alas.
Most rigorously, those enemies now of late.
Ded fall upon me, and spoil me of my sight.
One was Ambition, which ever ought me hate,
And Covetousness, the other enemy hight.
Now forsooth and God, in their most cruel spite.
The one made me blind, the other made me lame,
And whā they had done, there at they had great game
Thus a blind cripple, I wander here alone,
Abiding the time, and grace of restauracyon,
By the son of God To whom I make my moan,
My cause to pity, and grant me supportacyon,
Least I be left here, to utter desolation,
And extreme decay, without any remedy.
If he ded not help, of goodness and of mercy,
Ye christen princes, God hath given you the pour,
With scepture and sword, all vices to correct.
Let not Ambition, nor Covetousness devour,
Your faithful subjects, nor your officers infect.
Have to your clergy, a diligent respect
And se they do not▪ corrupt the laws of God,
For that doth require, a terrible heavy rod.
God gave me to man, and left me ī tables of stone,
That I of hardiness, a law should specify,
But the pharysees, corrupted me anon,
And toke frō me clean, the quyuernesse of body,
With clearness of sight, &amp; other pleasures many.
Now will I to Christ, that he may me restore,
To more perfection, than ever I had before.
Unfaithfulness hath, corrupted every Law,
To the great decay, of Adams post∣ryte.
Were is not for me, which now do / hither draw,
All flesh would perysh, no man should saved be.
I am Christ's Gospel, and infallible veryte,
Soch a power of God, as saves all that believe,
No burden nor yoke, that any man will grieve.
In the blood of Christ, I am a full forgiveness,
Where faith is groūded, with a sure confidence.
I am soch a grace, and so high tidings of gladness,
As raise the sinner, and pacify his conscience.
I am sprete and life, I am necessary science.
I require but love for mānys justification,
With a faith in Christ, for his health and salvation,
Gods been son have ye, it is joy of your life,
I have heard of ye, and of my masters your wife,
If thu heardest of me, it was by the voice of God.
Nay, he that spake of ye, was selling of a Cod,
In an oyster boat, a little beyond queen hythe,
A northern man was he, &amp; b•sought ye to be blithe,
If he spake of me, he was some godly preacher,
Nay ser by the rood, nor yet a wholesome teacher.
After what manner, ded he speak of me? tell.
He swore like a man, by all cōtentētes of the Gospel
He swore and better swore, yea, he ded swear &amp; swe∣are again.
That speaking is soch, as procures eternal payne.
Will not the people, leave that most wicked folly?
And is so damnable? To hear it I am sorry.
But what dedyst thu mean, whā thu spoke of my wife?
Nothing, but I thought, it was joy of your life,
That ye were so good, to your neybers as ye are.
Why, how good am I? thy fantasy declare.
Ye ease them among, if it be as I hear,
When ye are a broad, there is fine miry cheer.
As thu art, thu speak, after they hearts abundaūce
For as the man is, soch in his utterance.
My wife• is the church, or christen congregacyon,
Regenerate in sprete, doing no vile operation,
Both clean and holy, without either spott or wryncle
The lamb with his blood, ded her wash &amp; be spryn¦cle,
This is not the church, of dysgysed hypocrites
Of apish shauelynges, or papystycall sodomites.
Nor yet as they call it, a temple of lyme and stone.
But, a lyuysh building, grounded in faith alone,
On the harde rock Christ, which is the sure founda∣cyon.
And of this church some, do reign in every nation,
And in all cōtrayes, though their nombre be but small
Their number is soch, as hath rōne over all
The same Danes are they, men prophecy of plain,
Which should over rōne, this realm yet ones again.
What Danes speak thu of? thy meaning show more clearly.
Dane Iohan, Dane Robert, Dane Thomas, and Da¦no harry.
These same are those Danes, that lay with other mēnys wives.
And occupyco their lādes, to the detrymēt of their lie¦ues.
These are accounted, a great part of the church,
For in Gods service, they honourably wurche,
Yelling and crying, till their throats are full sore.
That church was described, of Esaye lunge before.
This people (saith God) with there lips honour me
In vain worship they teaching mēnys fatuyte.
Apparent is that church, and open to the eyes,
Their worshyppynges are, in outward ceremonies.
That coūterfet church stādeth al by mēnys tradycyons
Without the scriptures, and without the hertes af∣feccyons.
My church is secrete, and evermore will be,
Adoring the father, in sprete, and in veryte.
By •he word of God, this Church is ruled only,
And doth not consist, in outward ceremony.
This congregacyon, is the true Church mylytaūt
These coūterfet de•a•des, are the very Church ma∣lygnaunt.
To whom Christ will say, I know nō of your sort.
Much are they to blame, that there bretherne so report
Soch are no bretherne, but enemies to Christ's blot.
As put salvation, in shaven crown, mitre, or what.
I pray ye how lōge, have your sweet spouse cōtynued
Sens the beginning, and now is in Christ renewed.
Adam had promise, of Christ's incarnacyon,
So had Abraham, with his whole generation.
Which was unto them, a preaching of the Gospel,
Into salvation, and deliverance from hell.
By this time I hope, ye have a fair increase?
She is not barren, but bears and never cease.
The Corinthes first epistle, hath this clear testimony
In Christo Iesu, per Euangelum vos genui.
I have begot you, in Iesu Christ saith powle,
By the Gospel preaching, to the cōfort of your soul
Than are ye a cuckold, by the blessed holy mass,
As I said before, so comes it now to pass.
For I am a prophet, by high inspiracyon led.
Now like I my self, much better than I ded.
Ye said that saint paule, begat your wife with chyl∣de
By mysunderstādynge, thu art vngracyously begylde
An only minister, was paule in that same doing,
That he therein ded, was by the Gospel preaching.
His mind is the Gospel to have done yt operation
And this must thy hold, for no carnal generation
Marry so they say, ye fellawes of the new lerynge.
Forsake holy church, and now fall fast to wynynge,
Nay, they forsake whoredom, with other dāpnable usage.
And live with their wives, in lawful marriage,
whyls the popes oiled swarm, reign still• in their, old buggerage
Yea, poor married men, have very much a do,
I coūte him wisest, that can take a snatch and to go.
Thu semest one of them, that detests matrimony,
Which is a fore God, a state both just and holy.
Of soch as thu art, saint paule ded prophecy,
By the holy Ghost, that a certain cūpanye,
In the latter days from the truth of God should fall
A rendynge to spretes, of error diabolical.
Which in hypocrisy, will teach lies for advantage,
W••h marked consciences, inhibiting marriage.
Thu appear by thy fruit to be Infydelyte.
I am non other, but even the very he,
And hither now come I, to cōmen the matter with ye
Avoid cursed find, and get the out at the gates.
Nay first will I serve ye, as I lately served your ma¦tes
And he•e will I not for this place is for me?
Who should here remain, but Infydelyte?
Well, than for a time, I must depart from hens,
But this first will I say, before this audience.
Easier will it be, concerning ponnyshment,
To Sodom and Gormor, in the day of judgment,
Than to those cities, that resist the veryte,
At the suggestions, of Infydelyte.
That people will be, for ever and ever lost,
For it is the great sin, against the holy Ghost.
In the old law first, the father his mind expressed,
Than came his sōne Christ, &amp; made it more manifest.
And now the holy Ghost, is come to close up all,
If he be not heard, extreme dāpnacyon will fall.
No prayer remains, nor expyacyon for sin,
To them that no profyght, or the word of God will win.
Take good heed therefore, &amp; say that ye have warning
God send your mother, of you to have a fondelynge.
By the mass I think, he is wele out of the way,
Now will I contrive, the drift of an other play.
I must work soch ways, Christ's law may not con¦tynue,
In a while am I like, to have non else of my retinue.
Companions I want, to begin this tragedy,
Namely false doctrine, and his brother hypocrisy.
They will not belong, I suppose now verily,
By cocks foul me think, I se soch a company.
Hem I say children, will not my voice be heard?
As good is a beck, as is a dew vow guard.
By my honesty welcome, mine own cōpanyons both.
Thu shalt sure have, a livery of the same cloth,
Gramercyes by God, my old friend Infydelyte.
What, brother snyp snap, how go the word with the?
What, friar flip flap, how say ye to, Benedicite?
Marry nothing but well, for I cry now aduaūtage
At her purse or arse, tell me good friar fuccage?
By the Mess at both, for I am a great penytensar,
And sit at the pardō, Tush, I am ye popes own vicar
If thu lackest a piece, I know where thu may be sped.
With coyse of a score, &amp; brought even to thy bed.
Art thu not ashamed, to talk so like a knave?
No, for it is soch ger, as the holiest of vs will have,
Pope, Cardinal, bishop, mōke, chanon pressed &amp; friar,
Not one of ye all, but a woman will desire.
Our orders permit vs not▪ to have them in marriage
No, but ye fetch them in, by an other carriage.
Ye do even as we do, we both are of one rate.
By the Mess I laugh, to hear this whoreson prate
What fashion use ye, to vs here intimate.
Ego distinguo, whether ye will have lyons or parys.
Of them both to show, it will not be far amiss.
In parys we have, the mantle of Saint lewes,
Which women seek much, for help of their barēnes.
For be it ones laid, upon a womānys belly,
She go thens with child, the miracles are seane there Soily.
And besides all this, ye would marvel in cōfessyon.
What our fathers do, to assoyle them of transgression
Iohan Thessecclius, assoyled a young woman ones.
Behind the high alter, till she cried out of hes bones.
And as for lyons, there is the length of our lord,
In a great pillar. She that will with a coorde,
Be fast bound to it, and take soch chance as fall,
Shall sure have child, for within it is hollow all.
Tush, I could tell ye, of much more wondre thā this,
In course to hear them, I think ye would bliss.
As thu hast begun, go foreword in it and tell.
Soch a knave I suppose, is not from hens to hell.
In our religion, was an holy popish patriarch,
Which of all bawdry, might be the great monarch.
The nōnes to confess, he went from place to place,
And two hōdred of them, he broached in that space.
Many spices he eat, his currage to pruuoke.
Soch a fellawe was he, as of that ger had the stroke.
Now, somewhat will I tell to cōfirme thy tale withal
In king ferdynāds time, in Spain was a Cardinal
Petrus mendoza, was the very man that I mean.
Of some as he had, great nombre besides the queen.
One of his bastards, was earl, an other was duke,
Whom also he abused, and thought it no rebuke.
Joins Cremons, an other good Cardinal,
For reformation of the clergy spiritual,
Came ones into Englāde, to dāpne prestos matrymo¦ny.
And the next night after, was takē doing bytcherye.
〈◊〉 E•fius also, which fiercely came to dispute,
In lipsia with luther, minding there him to cōfute
For marriage of prestys, three children had that year.
By this may ye se that sūtyme we make merry cheer.
Marry that ye do, I shall bear ye record now.
But how will ye answer, for breaking of your vow?
We never break vow, so lunge as we do not marry,
Though we in whoredom, be never so bold &amp; busy.
By your order than, ye may walk much at large.
What hast thu hypocrisy? to lay for thy discharge.
Saint Frāces habit, with the holy girdle &amp; what,
Non can go to hell, that therein dye by the rode,
In case saint Frances, be sure upon their side,
Else may they fortune, to be of their purpose wide.
For I read of one, that should have gone to the devil
But the spretes of hell, could do to him non evil.
Till saint Frances came, &amp; toke frō him his cowl,
Then went he to hell, the friars ded hear him howl.
I will therefore serve, S. Frances with hart &amp; mind
With daily memories, that he may be my friend.
And than I care not, for all the devils in hell,
That I have told you, is more true than the Gospel.
Then are ye more sure, thā monks for your heritage,
For their lands are here, but ye claim heaven for advantage.
Yet is it to them a very pleasant thing,
Their abbot at home, to be called lord and king.
Nay, monk and chorle, for here is no king button.
If he be a king. his mace is a mary bone,
Any his crown a cow torde. Soch knaves as come from the carr,
Must be called kings, for playing a popish part,
It become not the, the Romish pope so to lurch.
Considering he is, the highest of the church.
If he be the highest, than is he the whether cock,
Ah, now I perceive, thu art disposed to mock,
Of all holy church, he is the principal head.
Marry that is true, he sends out bulls vndre lead
And he hath two keys, the one to open hell,
The other speareth heaven, thus do new heretykes tel
They report also, that dogs have no deuocyō,
To his holy laws, not to his old instruccyon.
Why should dogs hate him? make that more euy∣dent.
They love no pese porrege, nor yet read hearynges in lent,
Stock fish nor oysters, but curse him body and bone,
And would his read sprottes, &amp; rottēfysh were gone
Tush, I hear them I, and that makes me full sad.
Either thu doest mock, or else thu art sure mad.
I hear the people, complain very much of the.
What is their prattling, I pray the heartily tell me.
They say, thu teach, nothing but lousy tradyciōs
And lies for lucre, with damnable superstycyons.
And thus they cōclude, yt the draff of popish prystes
Is good enough for swine, by whom they mean the papists.
Yea, and they say also, the diet of men is all.
To most vile carren, the dogs will soonest fall.
Than do they compare, the papists unto dogs.
Marry that they do, &amp; to soch swinish hogs.
As in swill &amp; soffe, are brought up all their life.
Soch are the papists, they say both man and wife.
They say of the also, that thu art a noughty knave,
By prowling and lying, ye fryers would all have.
Thine order they say, is sprung even out of hell,
And all this knowledge, they have now of the Gos∣pell.
Why, where is he now, I besych the heartily tell,
By the mess abroad, &amp; I warāde ye makes revel.
I commoned with him, and he ded vs despise,
Against him therefore, somewhat must we deuyse.
Marry that must we, or else it will be wrong,
He will sure destroy vs, if we do suffer him lunge.
Needs must we serve him, as we ones served Christ.
Why mad brained whoresōs, how ded ye hādle Christ?
As he preached here, we followed frō place to place,
To trappe him in snare, and his doctrine to deface.
Than found we the means, to put him so to death,
Least he against vs, should open any more breath.
And we set four knights, to keep him down in his grave.
That he never more, our living should deprave.
And thus must we serve, the Gospel, no remedy,
Else will be destroy, our living perpetually.
Better one were loft, than we should perysh all,
As Cayphas ones said, in counsel pharysaycall.
By God &amp; wele said. Whā ye have him this grave,
Stāpe him down till he shit. &amp; serve him like a knave.
We must so ordre him, that he go no more at large.
Four knights will we hire, whō we shall straight¦lie charge,
To keep him down harde. The first are ambitious prelates,
Then covetous lawers, that Gods word spiteful¦lie hates,
Lords without learning, &amp; justices unrightful,
These will keep him down, and rap him on the scull.
There someners &amp; there scribes, I warāde ye shall stere
With balyues and catch polles, to hold him down every where.
I trow Rug &amp; Corbet, At Norwich will do their part.
With wharton of Bongaye, and for my sake put him to smart.
And I will raise up, in the universities,
The seven slippers there, to aduaūce the popes decrees
As Dorbel &amp; Duns, Durande &amp; Thomas of Equine
The mastre of sentence▪ with Bachon the great divine
Hēricus de Gādauo. And these shall read ad clerū,
Aristotle and Albert, de secretes mulicrum,
With the cōmentaryes, of Auicen and Aueroyes.
And a Phebo Phebe, which is very good for boys.
Yea, and let the pope, as Gods own vicar here,
In his hand three crosses, &amp; iij, crowns on his head here.
His power betokening, in heauē, in earth, &amp; in hell
That he may command, all kings to subdue the Gospel.
His self may do that, he need cōmaunde nō other.
Is not he the head, of the holy church our mother?
May not he make saints, and devils at his own pleasure?
Which hath in his hādes, the keys &amp; churches trea¦sure?
So wele as he made, S. Hermā first a saint,
And twenty years after, of heresy him attain?
First he sent him to heaven, by his canonyzacyon,
And from thens to hell, by an excommunycacyon,
We read of Formosus, that after he was dead,
One pope his fingers, an other cut of his head.
And threw his carcass, into the floude of Tyber,
With the head &amp; fingers, as Platina doth remēber.
In token that he, is judge over quick and dead,
And may dāpne &amp; save, by his pardons vndre lead,
Syluester the secōde, to the devil himself ones gave
For that high office, that he might dampne &amp; save.
He offered also, his stones to Satan, they say,
For prestos chastyte, and so went their marriage a∣way.
Here is one cōmynge, enquire what he intende.
Ha? it is the Gospel, from him God vs defend.
Show me brother mine, who ded the hither send.
The father of heaven, of his mere benyuolence,
I desire therefore, to have fre audience.
Ye mind than to preach, before this company?
In the laws of God, would I instruct thē gladly.
For non other way, there is unto salvation,
But the word of God, in every generation,
That quyckeneth, that saves, yt brings unto heau••
As before his death, Christ taugh the Apostle eleven.
Preach here thu shalt not, without the auctoryte,
Of pope or bishop, or of some of their affynyte.
Gods word never takes, his autoryte of man.
Thu shalt not here preach, do thu the best thu can.
Gods blessing on your good hart, it is spoken even like a man.
Ye know this day ser, we have a full holy feast,
And must go processyō, with the blessed rode of reast.
We have lunge matins, lunge laudes, lunge hours lunge pyyme.
Mass, euē songe, cōplyne, &amp; all must be done ī time.
Sensing of the aulters, &amp; casting of holy water.
Holy bread making, with other necessary matter.
Have God commaūded, any soch things to be done?
What is that to the? go meddle thu with old shone.
Canniest thu say but they, are good sygnyfycacyons?
I say they are fruit, of your ymagynacyons
To bring in lucre, &amp; darken Gods high glory,
Of you God doth axe. no soch vain beggary.
Christ never sent his, to show sygnyfycacyons,
But his living, word to all the christen nations.
Ye forsake the lord, as Esaias doth tell,
And highly blaspheme, the holy of Israel.
In his first chaptre, this horrible sentence is,
Quis haec frustranea quaesiuit de minibus uestris.
Who hath required, of you soch sacrifice?
In vain offer you, that vncōmaunded service.
Your incense to me, is great abhomynacyon,
I fore abhor it, and much detest your fashion.
When ye pray to me, I give ye non attendance,
But avert my face (saith God) &amp; my coūtenaunce.
By this ye may se, that the lord doth not regard,
Your māgy muttering, neyher graūt it any reward
No mā wills Paule, to speak in the congregacyon
In a strange language, without interpretation.
In your latyne hours, the flock do ye not consydre,
But declare your selves, to be Romish all togydre.
Be not led about (saith Paule) by any strange ler¦nynge,
What else is your doctrine, but a blind popish thyn¦ge?
He testyfyeth also, Non enim vt baptizarem,
Misit me Christus, sed ut euangelizarem.
Christ hath not me sent, that I should baptise, saith Paule.
But to preach his word, to the confort of monies soul.
Loo, though baptyme be, a thing very necessary,
Yet must it give place, to Gods word, no remedy.
Why than prefer ye, your draffysh ceremonies?
To the Gospel preaching▪ O damnable injuries.
Why suffer ye him, to prattle here so lunge?
Get the hens shortly, or with the it will be wrong.
Peace be here &amp; God, Mastre doctor, by your leave,
That I may declare, a pardon here in my sleue.
Of our lady of Boston, Ingham, and saint Iohan¦nes frarye,
With the indulgence of blessyd saint Antony.
Wele, take thy pleasure, and do it hardily.
Sir he doth me wrong for this day it is my •acyon.
To preach my brotherhede, &amp; gather my lymytacyon
Who first speak first speed, steppe fourth and read thy pardon,
And when he hath done, your course is father wardē
What course appoint ye, for preaching of the Gospel
I would thy Gospel, &amp; thu were both now in hell.
Why, &amp; shall this baggage, put by the word of God?
Thu will not be answered, till thu feel a sharper rod.
Good christen people, I am come hither verily,
As a true poctour, of the hows of saint Antony.
Of clean remission, I have brought ye indulgence,
A pena &amp; culpa, for all your sin and offence.
By the auctoryte, of pope Leo &amp; pope Clement,
Pope Bonyface, pope Pius, pope Iohan &amp; pope In∣nocent.
And here I bless ye, with a wing of the holy Ghost.
Frō thonder to save ye, &amp; frō spretes in every coost.
Lo, here is a belle, to hang upon your hog,
And save your cattle, from the biting of a dog.
So many as will come, to this holy fraternyte,
Come paye your money, &amp; ye shall have letters of me
Let me have a letter, for I will be a brother.
Then give me a belle, for I will be an other.
O damnable leading, of Babylonicall sodomites,
Your selves ye declare, to be shameful hypocrites.
Lord pity thy people, and take away these gydes,
These scorners, these robbers, these cruel homicides
Soch prophets are they, as God ded never send,
As Hieremy saith, they damnable ways pretend.
Wo hypocrites wo, for here ye trifle and mock,
With christen people, &amp; the kyngedō of heauē vplocke
Ye count it a game, to lose that Christ hath bought,
With his precious blood. &amp; here most dearly sought
Oh ye are wretches, and pestilent Antichrists,
Ministers of Dagon, and most deceitful papists.
Like ravenous wolves, poor widows ye devour,
By tyttle of prayer, eternal dāpnacyon is your,
Your own dreams ye follow, but matter much more weighty,
Ye do not esteem, as iudgemēt, faith, and mercy.
Wo pharysees wo, ye make clean outwardly,
But inwards ye are full, of covetousness &amp; bawdry,
Painted tumbes are ye, a prying right beautiful,
But within ye stink, &amp; have thoughts very •home¦full
Ye slew the prophets, your doings yet bear wit∣ness,
How think ye to avoid, that point of unrighteous¦ness?
Oh raging serpētes, and vyperouse generation,
How can ye escape, the danger of dampnacyon?
Who made the so bold, to meddle within my cure?
And teach new learning? An heretyke art thu sure?
If due search were made, we should find the (I think) no pryst.
Yes, anointed of God, but no popish Antichrist.
Let me se, where are, the letters of thy orders?
Where Christ his self is, &amp; not in these same borders
No soch pryst am I, as is anointed with olye,
But the holy Gost, for I am non of this soil.
Here I attach the, for a busy scysmatyke.
And will the accuse, for an heinous heretyke.
Lay hands upon him, &amp; deprive him of this ape¦rell.
Loo, thus will I hādle, all thē yt shall take thy quarrel
Hold away with this ger, &amp; lay it fourth a side.
Nay, tarry brother mine, for away shalt thu not slyde
I am not going, why doest thu slander me?
Burn him to ashes, and show to him no pity.
Brent shall he not be, if he will no more do so.
Fellawe how say thu? will thu here abjure or no?
I will neither abjure, nor yet recant Gods glory.
I offered the reason, and thereto thu will not apply,
Wele get the foreword, for thu shalt sure dye.
The temporal power, shall judge the to the fire,
At our accusement, and holy religious desire.
Though you for my sake, imprison men cruelly,
Famish them, stock them, &amp; them with fagotesfrye
Hurt me ye shall not for I can never dye,
And they foy my sake, shall live perpetually.
Here is a prating, with a very vengeance hens.
This horrible heretyke, now shall we well recompense
Yea, burn him wele friar, and let him no longer reign,
Lay on grene faggots, to put him to the more payne.
By the mess I laugh, to se how this ger doth wurke
He is like of thē, to have no more grace than a turk,
For soch knaves they are, as a man shall not lightly find,
And take hell over. Companyōs they are to my mind
My busynesse all, is now at a good conclusion,
That I have here brought, these. iij. laws to cōfusyon
Now shall I be able, to live here peaceably,
And make frowlyke chere, with hey how frisk Jolly.
The law of Nature, I kissed first in a leprye.
By the secrete help, of ydolatrye and sodomy.
The law of Moses, I made a cripple blind,
Avarice &amp; Ambition, to help me were not behind
And now Christ's law, I have brent for heresy,
By help of false doctrine, &amp; my cosyne hypocrisy,
On these same. iij. laws, all other laws depend,
And can not prevail, now these are at an end.
If christen governors, do not these laws uphold,
Their civil ordynaūces, will soon be very cold.
Well, this valeaūt George, hath made them all to stoup
Cheer now may I make, &amp; set cock on the houpe.
Fill in all the pots, and bid me welcome hostess,
And go call me hither, mine own sweet mynyō Bess
QVid gloriaris in malicia? queen potens es in iniquitate.
Thu vengeable wretch, replete with poison and vice,
Why doest thu thus rejoice, in cruel¦tie and malice?
Think thu that God sleeps, &amp; will not his defēde
And that thy mischief, shall never have an end?
The blood of innocents, to him for vengeaūce call
And therefore this hour. must I fiercely vpō the fall
Thu sprete of the ayre, I straightly conjure the here.
By panton &amp; Craton, and charge the to com no ne'er.
Think thu to stop me, with thy foolish cōiuracyon
Whom God sends hither, for thy abhomynacyon?
What art thu called? thy name to me rehearse.
I am vindicta Dei, in pōnyshment most fearce,
With water, with sword, and with fire I must the pearce.
Be good in thy office, and thu shalt have money and meat.
By filthy rewards, thu canniest not me entreat,
But that I will do, as God hath me commanded.
For if worldly gifts, my fury might have changed.
The universal world, had not been drowned with water,
Nor Sodomy and Gomor, with so fiery fearful mat∣la.
Nor yet the Israelytes, with terror of the sword,
With hungry and pestilence, in the anger of Gods word.
Pharao in Egipte, the plages had never felt,
Might I have been stopped, for silver or for gelt.
Into Egipte I brought, ten terrible pōnyshmentes
Upon the people for breaking his commaūdemētes
Their wholesome waters, I turned into blood,
I multiplied frogs, to poysō therewith their fond
I made wasps &amp; dranes, them grievously to sting,
And all kinds of flies, soon after ded I in bring
Upon their cattle, I threw the foul pestilence,
Both borche, bile &amp; blayne, they had for their offence.
Lightnings and haylynges, destroyed their corn and fruit,
A sworn of hungry locusts, their pastors destitute
The space of three days, I gave them palpable dark¦ness,
I slew the first gootē, of mā &amp; beast for thy rudeness
For I never strike, but for the, Infydelyte.
Strike for me quoth A? By the mary Mass I defy the.
What, thu will not so, thy brains are not so light.
Anger me not to much, for if thu do, I fight.
All that will not help, thy wicked workings now,
When the stronger come, the weaker must needs bow
The law of Nature, infected thu hast with a leprye?
Nay, it was not I, but that witch Idolatry,
And that bold shorn knave, that men call Sodomy
Of whom sprung they first? but of Infydelyte?
Therefore thu shalt have that plage of penalty,
Which they first tasted, for their inyquyre.
For those two vices, I drowned the world with wa∣la.
In token whereof, I plage the with the same matter.
Tush, I defy thy worst. This shall not drive me hēce
For after the floude, with Cham had I residence.
And so continued, till Moyses law came in.
With his jolly tricks, a new rule to begin.
And him thu corruptedest, with Avarice &amp; Amby∣cyō,
And so dedyst leave him, in miserable cōdycyō,
Thu shalt have therefore, that than to them was due,
Most terrible barrayle, the Israelytes untrue,
That time ded suffer, for their infydelyte,
Wherefore with this sword, I justly banish the.
Because thu shalt here, give place to Christ's gospel
Yet will I not hens, but against ones rebel.
Sed not I remain, with Iudas and other more?
When Christ preached here, &amp; taught them in vexed him sore?
Yes, &amp; after that, was I with Simon Magus.
With Saunder Copper smith, with Elimas and De¦metrius.
And now I persevere, amōge ye rāke rabble of papists
Teaching there shorlynges, to play the Antichrists.
The innocent blood, of saints contynuallye,
Doth call unto God, to revenge their injury,
Against false doctrine, and cursed hypocrisy.
Whom thu hast raised, the glory of the Gospel,
To darken, and his friends, most miserably to quell.
Wherefore thu shalt have, like as thu hast deserved
For thy wicked doings, thy ponyshmēt now doubled.
Ignis ip sū precedet, the Prophet Dauid saith thus
Are{que} inflame mabit in circuitu inimicos eius.
A consuming fire, shall run before the judge,
His enemies consuming, they shall find no refuge.
Obe scelera &amp; culpas hominum, ritus{que} nephandos
In cineres ibit tellus, tenuem{que} fauillam.
As Mantuan writes, for the wickedness of the.
The earth to ashes, by fire shall turned be.
Credo, credo, credo, I say, Credo, credo, credo,
To the devil of hell, by the Mess I wene I go.
As ye have seane here, how I have stricken with fire
The pestilent vice, of Infydelyte.
So will I destroy, in the fierceness of mine ire,
All sectes of error, with their enormyte,
Which hath risen out, of that inyquyte.
For as it is said, that my hand hath not set,
Shall up by the rote, no power may it let.
The Apostle Iohan, in the Apocalypse doth say,
He saw a new heaven, &amp; a new earth appearing.
The old earth &amp; see, were taken clean a way,
That heauē is mānys faith, that earth his under∣standing,
Whom we have renewed by our most secret working.
The old cankered earth, exiling with the see.
Which is superstycyon, and Infydelyte.
A new Hierusalem, the said Iohan also se,
As a beautiful bride, prepared to her husband.
Our true faithful church, is that same fair city,
Whom we have cleansed, by the power of our right hand.
As a spouse to Christ, in every christen land.
Bannyshynge the sectes, of Babylonicall poperye,
That she in the sprete, may walk to our glory.
Resort ye three laws, for you will I clear also,
Of soch infeccyons, as by Infydelyte,
Ye have received, That ye with her may go,
Declaring the ways, of Christen liberty,
That vs she may take, without perplexity,
For her only God, and be our people styll.
In our laws walking, according to our will.
At your commandment, we are most blessed lord.
Approach nigher than, and ye shall be restored.
Thu law of Nature, we first begin with the,
Restoring the again, to thy first puryte.
Avoid Idolatry, Avoid vile Sodomy,
We charge ye no more, this law to putrefy.
Keep styll that same hart, for a sign perpetual.
That thu were written, in monies hart first of all.
Thu law of Moses, give me that veil from the,
No longer shalt thu, neither blind nor crooked be.
Hens thu Ambition, and cursed Covetousness,
I here banish you, from this law ever doughtles.
Lose not those tables, which are a token true,
That thu in the flesh, shalt evermore continue.
Thu law of the Gospel, though thu be last of all.
In operation yet, thu art the principal.
From the I exile, hypocrisy and false doctrine,
With all that depend, upon the papystycall lyne.
Reserve the same book, for a sign of heauēly pour.
For that book thu art, that Iohan from heaven ded devour.
Everlasting praise, to thy glorious majesty.
Our heauēly governor, great is thy gracious pity
Of mankind thu art, the eternal felycyte.
Now leave thy servants, in thy perpetual peace.
To do the service, from hens will we not ceace.
For our eyes have seane, what thu hast now prepared.
For thy peoples health. which hath been here declared
A light thu hast sent, which is thy joyous Gospel.
To the consolation of the hows of Israel.
In rejoice of this, make we some melody.
The name of our God, to praise and magnify.
I assent thereto, and will singe very gladly.
Now have we destroyed, the kyngedom of Babylon,
And thrown the great whore, into the bottōlesse pyt,
Restoring again, the true faith and religion,
In the christen church, as we have thought it fit,
Depurynge these laws, so to continue yt.
Man is our creature, &amp; hath grace in our sight,
To dwell with him now, is our whole hearts delight
Man is our people, his God we are again,
With him will we have, continual residence.
Away will we wipe, from him all sorrow &amp; payne:
He shall no longer, despair for his offence,
Nor have ī his soul, any careful doubt of conscyēce
The old popyshnesse, is past which was dāpnacyon,
We have now renewed, our christen congregacyon,
Grande fourth christē faith, &amp; take our aduertysemēt
We here appoint the, to govern our congregacyon.
Se thu do nothing, without the admonishment,
Of these three laws here. Enprent their declaration
Of my sweet promises, and than make thu relation,
To my folk again, that they may walk to me.
Without popish dreams, in a perfygt liberty.
Most heavenly maker, in yt thu doest commaūde me,
Evermore will I, full prompt and diligent be.
Thu law of Nature, shalt teach man God to know
And that to refuse, whereby any ill may grow.
From this your precept, shall I not varye I trow.
The ache thu him also, to worship one God aboue,
And his poor neyber, to prosecute with love.
I hope blessed lord, to do as me shall behove.
And thu shalt teach him, to love God in his hart.
And those to forgive, by whom he suffered smart.
In your appointments, will I do also my part.
Work thu in the hart, a knowledge necessary,
In the flesh work thu, by outward ceremony.
Change thu to the spret, the workings of these two,
And cause our people, in a perfyght way to go.
Take heed christē faith, to the teachynges of these three
And move our people, to walk in the veryte.
The promises we made, in all these three at Gospel,
We would thu should so, to our congregacyon tell.
Our everlasting blessing, be with you evermore.
To thy sweet name lord, praise &amp; perpetual honou¦re.
It hath pleased God, to put me in this office,
To govern his church, and christen congregacyon,
And therein to do, as ye shall me entice.
Give me I pray you, soch wholesome exhortation,
As may be to Man, a clear edyfycacyon.
And I will be glad, to take your advertisement.
As it shall become, any child obedient.
Ye speak it full wele, thā mark what shall be said
And dylygentlye, loke that it be obeyed.
The effect of me, is for to know the lord.
Everlasting, strong, most gracious and godly.
And as touching Man, to have fraternal concorde.
Fauer to norrysh, and to do non injury.
To keep couenaūtes made, and love true matrimony.
These noble effects so temper you in Man.
That them to fulfil, he do the best he can.
The effect of me, is for to worship the lord.
As one God alone, and to fl from Idolatry.
Nor to slay nor steal, nor yet to bear false record,
To show what is sin, and to seek the remedy,
Public peace to hold, &amp; sore to pōnysh the guilty.
From these good effects, se that Mā never swerve,
Than shall he be sure, that God will him preserve.
The effect of me, is for to love the lord,
In the inner sprete, and to fauer friend &amp; enemy,
And in all points else, with Gods will to accord
To preach remission, to save and to justify,
In Christ all to seek, life, justice, peace and mercy.
These heavenly effects, in Man so incorporate,
That he may in sprete, be newly regenerate.
More sweet than honey, are your three exhortacyons,
And registered they be, in my momoryall.
Now will I foreword, to all the christen nations,
And sem effect, these laws observed all,
To the abolyshment, of the dreams papystycall.
Now the light is come, the darkness dies away,
I trust in the lord, men will walk in the day.
Good christen people, to these three laws apply,
First know that ye have, a living God aboue,
Than do him honour, and his name magnify,
Worship him in spret. as the Gospel you doth move
Than obeye your king, like as shall you behove,
For he in his life, that lord doth represent,
To safeguard of the just, &amp; sinners ponnyshment.
Se that ye regard, soch laws as he doth make,
For they are of God, as Solomon doth report.
Of these laws doubtless, those laws their groan∣dynges take.
To the public wealth, to give aid, strēgth &amp; cōfort
For preservation, of all the christen sort.
In no case follow, the ways of Reygnolde Pole,
To his dampnacyon, he doubtless plays the foal.
Save a due respect, unto your country native,
Which hath brought ye up, &amp; given ye norryshment.
Even from your cradles, to these days nutrytyue.
So that ye may do, to her wealth and preferment,
My master to her, no hateful detriment.
A dog to his friend, will never be unloving,
Let reason in ye, not lose his natural working.
Who lives without law, shall perysh without law
And▪ therefore we have, three laws to you described,
That after their live, ye should in your living draw
We▪ have also showed, how they have been corrupted,
By foul Idolatres, and sodomites polluted,
By covetous prestos, and by ambitious prelates,
Hypocritical friars, false doctors &amp; false curates
Who hath restored, these same three laws again?
But your late Iosias, &amp; valeaūt king Henrye.
No prince before him, toke ever yet soch payne,
Frō Englāde to bānysh, Idolatry &amp; foul sodomy
Covetousness. Ambycyō, false doctrine &amp; hypocrisy,
It was he that brought, Christ's veryte to light,
When he put the pope, with his filthiness to flight.
Frō dānable darkness, as my bother here doth say,
He hath delivered, this realm of England godly
Bringing his subjects, into the true path way,
Of their sowles safeguard, if they now follow it wy∣sly.
And left them he hath, the same way still to fortify,
His noble son Edward, soch a kings of god elect
As questyonles will, perform it in effect.
Pray all to the lord, for the lunge continuance,
Of his graces life, in this worlds habitation.
And that of his nobles, he have true maintenance,
In the principles, of this most worthy foundation.
That he may to Christ, bring vs from desolation.
Pray for queen Bateryne, &amp; ye noble lord protector
With the whole counsel, that God be their direc∣tour,

IF profyght may grow, most Christē audyēce.
By knowledge of things, which are 〈…〉,
And here for a time. Of much more 〈…〉
Aduaūtage might spring, by the ser〈…〉¦ses heavenly.
As those matters are, that the Gospel specify.
Without whose knowledge, no man to the truth 〈…〉
Nor ever attain, to the life perpetual.
For he that knows not, the living God eter〈…〉
The father, the son, and also the holy Ghost,
And what Christ suffered, for redempcyon of vs all▪
What he commanded, and taught in every coost.
And what he forbode. That man must needs be lost.
And clean secluded, from the faithful chosen sort.
In the heavens aboue, to his most high dysconfo〈…〉
You therefore (good friends) I louyngel〈…〉 〈…〉
To way soche matters, as will be uttered h〈…〉
Of whom ye may lo•e, to have no tryfelin〈…〉
In fantasies feigned, nor soche life gaudying,
But the things that shall, your inward stoma〈…〉
To rejoice in God, for your justification,
And alone in Christ, to hope for your salvation.
Yea, first ye shall have, the eternal generation.
Of Christ like as Iohan, in his first chapt•• wright▪
And consequently, of man the first creation,
The abuse and fall, through his first oversight,
And the raise again, through Gods high grace &amp; myg〈…〉
By promises first, which shall be declared all,
Then by his own son, the worker principal.
After that Adam, bywayleth here his fall,
God will show mercy, to every generation.
And to his kyngedome, of his great goodness call,
His elected spouse, or faithful congregacyon,
〈…〉 shall apere, by open protestacyon,
〈…〉 from Christ's birth, shall to his death conclude.
〈…〉no that thereof, will show the certitude,
IN the beginning, before the heavens were create,
In me and of me, was my son sēmpyternall.
With the holy Ghost, in one degre or estate,
Of the high Godhed, to me the father coequal.
〈…〉his my son was, with me one God essencyall,
•••hout separacyon, at any time from me.
〈…〉 God he is, of equal dignyte.
〈…〉 the beginning, my son hath ever be,
〈…〉s father, in one essencyall being.
〈…〉e create, by him in yche degre,
〈…〉 &amp; earth, and have their diverse working.
〈…〉 power, was never made any thing,
〈…〉 wrought. But through his ordinance,
〈…〉e his strength, and whole continuance.
〈…〉 him is the life, and the just recoueraunce,
〈…〉 Adam and his, which nought but death deserved.
And this life to men, is an high perseverance,
Or a light of faith, whereby they shall be saved.
And this light shall shyne, among the people darkened,
With unfaithfulness: Yet shall they not with him take.
•ut of wilful hart, his liberal grace forsa•e.
Which will compel me, against man for to make,
In my displeasure. And send plages of coreccyon,
Most grievous and sharpe, his wanton lusts to slake,
By water and fire, by sickness and infection.
Of pestilent sores, molesting his compleccyon
By troublouse war, by derthe and painful fierceness,
And after this life, by an extreme heaviness,
I well first begin, with Adam for his lewdness,
Which for an apple, neglected my commandment.
He shall continue, in labour for his rashenesse,
His only sweat shall, provide his food and raiment.
Yea, yet must he have, a greater ponnyshment.
Most terrible death, shall bring him to his end.
To teach him how he, his lord God. shall offend.
Merciful father, thy pytiefull grace extend,
To me careful wretch, which have me sore abused.
Thy precept breaking. O lord, I mind to amend,
If thy great goodness, would now have me excused,
Most heavenly maker, let me not be refused,
Nor taste from thy sight, for one pore sinful cr〈…〉
Alas I am frail, my whole kind is but slyme▪
I wott it is so, yet art thu no less faulty,
Thā thu haddyst been made, of matter much more worthy,
I gave the reason, and wit to understand,
The good from the evil. And not to take on hand,
Of a braynelesse mind, the thing which I forbad the.
Soch heavy fortune, hath chefelye chanced me,
For that I was left, to mine own liberty.
Then thu art blameless, and the fault thu lay to me?
Nay, all I ascribe, to my own imbecyllyte.
No fault in the lord, but in my infirmyte,
And want of respect, in soche gifts as thu gave me.
For that I put the, at thine own liberty,
Thu ought my goodness, to have in more regard.
Avoid it I can not, thu lay it to me so harde.
Lord now I perceive, what power is in man,
And strength of himself, when thy sweet grace is absent.
He must needs but fall, do he the best he can,
And danger himself, as ap•reth evident.
For I synned not, so lunge as thu were present.
But when thu were gone, I fell to sin by and by,
And the displeased. Good lord I axe the mercy.
Thu shalt dye for it, with all thy posteryte.
〈…〉 fault good lord, avenge not thy self on me.
〈…〉 but a worm, or a fleshelye vanyte.
I say thu shalt dye, with thy whole posteryte.
Yet mercy sweet lord, if any mercy may be.
I am immutable, I may change no decree.
Thu shalt dye (I say) without any remedy.
Yet gracious father, extend to me thy mercy,
And throw not away, the work which thu hast create,
To thine own Image, But avert from me thy hate.
But art thu sorry, from bottom of thy hart?
Thy displeasure is, to me most heavy smart.
Than will I tell the, what thu shalt stick unto,
Life to recover, and my good fauer also.
Tell it me sweet lord, that I may thereafter go.
This is my covenant, to the and all thy offspring.
For that thu hast been, deceived by the serpent,
I will put hatred, betwixt him for his doing,
And the woman kind. They shall herafter dyssent.
His sede with her sede, shall never have agreement▪
Her sede shall press down, his head unto the ground,
Slay his suggestions, and his whole power confound,
Cleave to this promise, with all thy inward power,
Firmly enclose it, in thy remembrance fast.
Fold it in thy faith, with full hope day and hour,
And thy salvation, it will be at the last.
That sede shall clear the, of all thy wickedness past,
And procure thy peace, with most high grace in my sigh,
Se thu trust to it, and hold not the matter light.
Sweet lord the promise, that thy self here hath made me,
Of thy mere goodness, and not of my deserving,
In my faith I trust, shall so established be,
By help of thy grace, that it shall be remaining,
So lunge as I shall, have here continuing,
And show it I will, to my posteryte,
That they in like case, have thereby felycyte,
For a closing up, take yet one sentence with the.
At thy pleasure lord, all things might ever be,
For that my promise, may have the deper effect,
In the faith of the, and all thy generation.
Take this sign with it, as a seal thereto connect,
Crepe shall the Serpent, for his abhomynacyon.
The woman shall sorrow, in painful propagacyon.
Like as thu shalt find, this true in outward working.
So think the other, though it be an hidden thing.
Incessant praising, to the most heavenly lord,
For this thy succour, and vnderserued kindness.
Thu byndest me in hart, thy gracious gifts to record,
And to bear in mind, now after my heaviness,
The brute of thy name, with inward joy and gladness,
Thu disdain not, as wele apereth this day,
To fetch to thy fold, thy first sheep going a straye.
Most mighty maker, thu casts not yet away,
Thy sinful feruaunt, which hath done most offence.
It is not thy mind, for ever I should decay,
But thu reseruest me, of thy benyuolence,
And hast provided, for me a recompense,
By thy appointment, like as I have received,
In thy strong promise, here openly pronounced,
This goodness dere lord, of me is undeserved,
I so declining, from thy first instytucyon,
At so light mocyons. To one that thus hath swerued,
What a lord art thu, to give soche retribution?
I damnable wretch, deserved execution,
Of terrible death, without all remedy,
And to be put out, of all good memory.
I am enforced, to rejoice here inwardelye,
An imp though I be, of hell, death, and dampnacyon,
Through my own working. For I consydre thy mercy.
And pytiefull mind, for my whole generation.
It is thu sweet lord, that workest my salvation,
And my recover. Therefore of a congruence,
From hens thu must have, my hart and obedience.
Thought I be mortal, by reason of my offence,
And shall dye the death, like as God hath appointed.
Of this am I sure, through his high influence,
At a certain day, again to be revived.
From ground of my hart, this shall not be removed.
I have it in faith, and therefore I will singe,
This Anthem to him, that my salvation shall bring.
Oeternal Sapience, that procedest from the mouth of highest, reaching fourth with a great power frō the beg〈…〉¦nynge to the end, with heavenly sweetness disposing a•• creatures, come now and instruct vs the true way of thy godly prudence.
I have been moved, to strike man diversely,
Sens I left Adam, in this same earthly mansyon.
For whyc he hath done, to me dyspleasures many,
And will not amend, his life in any condition.
No respect hath he, to my word nor monycyon.
But doth what him lust, without discrete advisement,
And will in no wise, take mine advertisement.
Cain hath slain Abel, his brother an innocent,
Whose blood from the earth, doth call to me for vengeaūce
My children with mennis, so carnally consent,
That their vain working, is unto me much greuaunce.
Mankind is but flesh, in his whole dalliance.
All vice increases, in him contynuallye,
Nothing he regards, to walk unto my glory.
My hart abhors, his wilful misery,
His cankered malice, his cursed couetousenesse,
His 〈◊〉 lecherous, his vengeable tyranny,
〈◊〉 ••rcyfull mourther, and other ungodliness.
•ill destroy him, for his outragyousnesse.
•nd not him only, but all that on earth do stere,
•or it repented me, that ever I made them here.
Most gentle maker, with his fraylenesse somewhat bear
Man is thy creature, thy self can not say nay.
Though thu ponnysh him, to put him somewhat in fear,
His fault to knowledge, yet seek not his decay.
Thu may reclaim him, though he goes now astray,
And bring him again, of thy abundant grace,
To the fold of faith, he acknowledging his trespass.
Thu know I have given, to him convenient space.
With laufull warnings, yet he amends in no place.
The natural law, which I wrote in his heart,
He hath outraced, all goodness putting a part,
Of helthe the covenant, which I to Adam made,
He regards not, but walk a damnable trade,
All this is true lord, I can not thy words reprove,
Let his weakness yet, thy merciful goodness move.
No weakness is it, but wilful working all,
That reigns in man, through mind diabolical.
He shall have therefore, like as he hath deserved.
Lose him not yet lord, though he hath deeply swerued,
I know thy mercy, is far aboue his rudeness,
Being infinite, as all other things are in the.
His folly therefore, now pardon of thy goodness,
And measure it not, beyond thy godly pity.
Esteem not his fault, farther than help may be,
But grant him thy grace, as he offends so deeply,
The to remember, and abhor his misery.
Of all goodness lord, remember thy great mercy,
To Adam and Eve, breaking thy first commandment.
Them thu releuedest, with thy sweet promise heavenly,
Sinful though they were, and their lives negligent.
I know that mercy, with the is permanent,
And will be ever, so lunge as the world endure,
Than close not thy hand, from man which is thy creature.
Being thy subject, he is vndreneth thy cure,
Correct him thu may, and so bring him to grace.
All lies in thy hands, to leave or to allure,
Bitter death to give, or grant most suffren solace.
Utterly from man, avert not then thy face,
But let him saver, thy sweet benyuolence,
Somewhat though he feel, thy hand for his offence.
My true seruaūt Noah, thy ryghtousnesse doth move me,
Somewhat to reserve, for monies posteryte.
Though I drown the world, yet will I save the lives,
Of the and thy wife, thy iij. sons and their wives,
And of yche kind two, to maintain you herafter.
Blessed be thy name, most mighty merciful maker.
With the to dispute, it were vnconuenyent.
Why doest thu say so: Be bold to speak thy intent.
Shall the other dye, without any remedy?
I will drown them all, for their wilful wicked folly,
That man herafter, thereby may know my power,
And fear to offend, my goodness day and hour.
As thy pleasure is, so might it always be,
For my helthe thu art, and sowles felycyte.
After that this floude, have had his raging passage,
This shall be to the, my covenant everlasting.
The sees and waters, so far neuermore shall rage,
As all flesh to drown, I will so tempre their working.
This sign will I add, also to confirm the thing.
In the clouds aboue, as a seal or token clear,
For safeguard of man, my rainbow shall apere.
Take thu this covenant for an ernest confirmation,
Of my former promise, to Adams generation.
I will blessed lord, with my whole hart and mind.
Farewell than just Noah, here leave I the behind.
Most mighty maker, ere I from hens depart,
I must give the praise, from the bottom of my hart.
Whom may we thank lord, for our helthe &amp; salvation?
But thy great mercy and goodness undeserved.
Thy promise in faith, is our justification,
As it was Adams, when his hart therein rested,
And as it was theirs, which therein also trusted.
This faith was grounded, in Adams memory,
And clearly declared, in Abels innocence.
Faith in that promise, Old Adam ded justify,
In that promise faith, made Eua to prophecy.
Faith in that promise, proved Abel innocent,
In that promise faith, made Seth full obedient.
That faith taught Enos, on Gods name first to call,
And made Mathusalah, the oldest man of all.
That faith brought Enoch, to so high exercise,
That God toke him up, with him into paradise,
Of that faith the want, made Cain to hate the good,
And all his offspring, to peryshe in the flood.
Faith in that promise, preserved both me and mine,
So will it all them, which follow the same lyne.
Not only this gift, thu hast given me sweet lord,
But with it also, thine everlasting covenant,
Of truse for ever, thy rainbow bearing record,
Neuermore to drown, the world by floude inconstant,
Making the waters, more peaceable and pleasant.
Alac I can not, to the give praise condign,
Yet will I singe here, with heart meke and benign.
O most orient clearness, and light shining of the sempi∣ternall brightness. O clear sun of justice and heavenly ryghtousnesse, come hither and illumine the prisoner, syttyn¦ge now in the dark prison and shadow of eternal death.
Mine high displeasure, must needs return to man,
Considering the sin, that he doth day by day:
For neither kindness, nor extreme handelynge can,
Make him to know me, by any faithful way.
But styll in mischief, he walk to his decay.
If he do not soon, his wickedness consydre,
•t is like doubtless, to perysh all togydre.
In my sight he is, more venom than the spider
Through soch abuses, as he hath exercysed,
From the time of Noah, to this same season hyder.
An uncomely act, without shame Cham commysed,
When he of his father, the secrete parts reveled.
In like case Nemrod, against me wrought abusyon
As he raised up, the castle of confusion,
Ninus hath also, and all by the devils illusion,
Through image making, up raised Idolatry,
Me to dishonour. And now in the conclusion,
The vile Sodomites, live so unnaturally
That their sin vengeance, axes contynuallye▪
For my covenants sake, I will not drown with water.
Yet shall I visit, their sins with other matter.
Yet merciful lord, thy graciousness remember,
To Adam and Noah, both in thy word and promise.
And lose not the sowles, of men in so great nombre,
But save thine own work, of thy most discrete goodness.
I wore thy mercies, are plentiful and endless.
Never can they dye, nor fail, thy self enduring,
This hath faith fixed, fast in my understanding.
Abraham my servant, for thy most faithful meaning.
Both thu and thy stock, shall have my plentouse blessing.
Where the unfaithful, vndre my curse evermore,
For their vain working, shall few their wickedness sore.
Tell me blessed lord, where will thy great malice light,
My hope is, all flesh, shall not perysh in thy sight?
No truly Abraham, thu chauncest upon the right.
The thing I shall do, I will not hyde from the,
Whom I have blessyd, for thy true fidelity.
For I know thu will, cause both thy children &amp; seruaūtes.
In my ways to walk, and trust unto my covenants,
That I may perform, with the my ernest promise.
All that will I do, by assistance of thy goodness.
From Sodom and Gomor, the abhomynacyons call,
For my great vengeance, which will upon them fall.
Wild fire and brimstone, shall light upon them all.
Pytiefull maker, though they have kindled thy fury,
Cast not away yet, the just sort with the ungodly.
Parauenture there may, be fifty righteous persons,
Within those cities, will thu lose them all at ones?
And not spare the place, for those fifty righteous sake?
Be it far from the, soch rigour to undertake.
I hope there is not, in the so cruel hardiness,
As to cast away, the just men with the rechelesse,
And so to destroy, the good with the ungodly.
In the judge of all, be never soche a fury.
At Sodom if I, may find just persons fifty,
The place will I spare, for their sakes verily.
I take upon me, to speak here in thy presence,
More then become me, lord pardon my negligence.
I am but ashes, and were loathe the to offend.
Say fourth good Abraham, for ill dost thu non intende.
Happily there may be, five less in the same nombre.
For their sakes I trust, thu will not the rest accombre?
If I among them, might find but five and forty
Them would I not lose, for that just company.
What if the city, may forty righteous make?
Then will I pardon it, for those same forties sake.
Be not angry lord, though I speak undiscreetly.
Utter thy whole mind, and spare me not hardily.
Parauenture there may, be thirty found among them.
May I find thirty, I will nothing do unto them▪
I take upon me, to much lord in thy sight?
No, no, good Abraham, for I know thy faith is right.
No less I suppose, than twenty can it have?
Could I find twenty, that city would I save.
Ones yet will I speak, my mind, and than no more,
Spare not to utter, so much as thu hast in store.
And what if there might, be x. good creatures found?
The rest for their sakes, might so be safe and sound,
And not destroyed, for their abhomynacyon,
O merciful maker, much is thy tolleracyon,
And sufferance of sin. I se it now in dede,
Wit save yet of fauer, out of those cities to lead,
Those that be faithful, though their flock be but small.
Loath and his household, I will deliver all,
For righteousness sake which is of me and not them.
Great are thy graces, in the generation of Sem.
Well Abraham well, for thy true faithfulness,
Now will I give the, my covenant or third promise.
Loke thu believe it, as thu couetyst ryghtuousnesse,
Lord so regard me, as I receive it with gladness.
Of many peoples, the father I will make the,
All generacyons, in thy sede shall be blessyd.
As the stars of heaven, so shall thy kynered be,
And by the same sede, the world shall be redressed.
In circumcision, shall this thing be expressed,
As in a sure seal, to prove my promise true,
Prynt this in thy faith, and it shall thy soul renew,
I will not one Jot, Lord from thy will dyssent,
But to thy pleasure, be always obedient,
Thy laws to fulfil, and most precious commandment.
Farewell Abraham, for hear in place I leave the.
Thanks will I rendre, like as it shall behove me.
Everlasting praise, to thy most glorious name.
Which sauedyst Adā, through faith in thy sweet promise,
Of the womannys sede. And now confirmest the same,
In the sede of me. Fosoth great is thy goodness
I can not perceive, but that thy mercy is endless.
To soch as fear the, in every generation,
For it endures, without abreuyacyon.
This have I printed in deep consideration,
No worldly matter, can race it out of mind.
For ones it will be, the final restauracyon,
Of Adam and Eve, with other that hath synde.
Yea, the sure helthe, and raise of all mankind.
Help have the faithful, thereof, though they be infect,
They condemnation, where as it is reject.
Merciful maker, my crabbed voice direct,
That it may break out, in some sweet praise to the,
And suffer me not, thy due lauds to neglect,
But let me show forth, thy commendacyons fre.
Stop not my wind pypes, but give them liberty,
To sound to thy name, which is most gracious,
And in it rejoice, with hart melodious.
O most mighty governor, of thy people, and in hart most desired, the harde rock and true corner stone, that of two makes one, vnynge the Jaws with the gentyles in one church, come now and relive mankind whom thu hast four¦med of the vile earth.
STyll so increases, the wickedness of man,
That I am moved, with plages him to confound▪
His weakness to aid, I do the best I can,
Yet he regards me, no more than doth an hound.
My word and promise, in his faith takes no ground,
He will so lunge walk, in his own lusts at large,
That nought he shall find, his folly to discharge.
Sens Abrahams time, which was my true elect,
Ismael have I found, both wicked, fearce, and cruel,
And Esau in mind, with hateful muther infect,
The sons of Iacob, to lusts unnatural fell,
And into Egypt, ded they their brother sell.
Laban to idols, gave faithful reverence,
Dina was corrupt, through Sichems violence.
Ruben abused his fathers concubine,
Iudas gate children, of his own daughter in law.
Yea, her in my sight, went after a wicked lyne,
His sede Onanspylte, his brothers name to withdraw.
Ashen lived here, without all godly awe.
And now the children, of Israel abuse my power,
In so vile manner, that they move me every hour.
Pacify thy wrath, sweet lord I the desire,
As thu art gentle, benign and patient.
Lose not that people, in fierceness of thine ire,
For whom thu hast showed, soche tokens evident,
Converting this rod, into a lively serpent,
And the same serpent, into this rod again,
Thy wonderful power, declaring very plain.
For their sakes also, put Pharao to payne,
By ten diverse plages, as I shall here declare.
By blood, frogs, &amp; lice, by flies, death, botch, &amp; blayne.
By hail, by grassoppers, by darkness, and by care.
By a Soden plage, all their first gotten ware,
Thu flewest in one night, for his fearce cruelnesse.
From that thy people, withhold not now thy goodness.
I certify the, my chosen servant Moses.
That people of mine is full of vnthankefuln〈…〉 
Dere lord, I know it, alas yet way their weaken〈…〉
And bear with their faults, of thy great bounteousnesse.
In a flamynge bush, having to them respect,
Thu appoyntedest me, their passage to direct.
And through the read see, thy right hand ded vs led.
Where Pharaoes host, the floude overwhelmed in dede.
Thu went before them, in a shining cloud all day,
And in the dark night, in fire thu shewedest their way,
Thu sent them Manna, from heaven to be their food,
Out of the harde stone, thu gave them water good.
Thu appoyntedest them, a land of milk and honey,
Let them not perysh, for want of thy great mercy,
Content they are not, with foul nor yet with fair,
But murmour and grudge, as people in despair,
As I sent Manna, they had it in dysdayne,
Thus of their welfare, they many times complain.
Over Amalech, I gave them the victory.
Most glorious maker, all that is to thy glory.
Thu sent them also, a law from heaven aboue,
And daily shewedest them, many tokens of great love.
The brazen serpent, thu gave them for their healing,
And Balaams curse, thu turnedest into a blessing.
I hope thu will not, dysdayne to help them styll,
I gave them precepts, which they will not fulfil.
Nor yet knowledge me, for their God and good lord,
So do their vile deeds, with their wicked hearts accord,
Whyls thu hast talked, with me famylyarlye.
〈…〉 mountain, the space but of days forty,
〈…〉ghtes all, they have forgotten clearly,
〈…〉 are turned, to shameful ydolatrye.
For their God they have, set up a golden calfe.
Let me say somewhat, sweet father in their behalf.
I will first conclude, and then say on thy mind,
For that I have found, that people so unkind,
Nor one of them shall, enjoy the promise of me,
For entering the land, but Caleb and Iosue.
Thy eternal will, evermore fulfilled be.
For disobedience, thu show the sons of Aaron,
The earth swallowed in, both Dathan and Abiron.
The adders ded sting, other wicked persons else,
In wonderful nombre. Thus hast thu ponnyshed rebels.
Never will I spare, the cursed inyquyte,
Of ydolatrye, for no cause, thu may trust me.
Forgive them yet lord, for this time if it may be.
Think thu that I will, so soon change my decree?
No, No, friend Moses so light thu shalt not find me.
I will ponnysh them, all Israel shall it se.
I wot, thy people, hath wrought abhomynacyon,
Worshipping false gods, to thy honours derogacyon,
Yet mercifully, thu may upon them loke.
And if thu will not, thrust me out of thy book.
Those great blasphemers, shall out of my book clean,
But thu shalt not so, for I know what thu doest mean.
Conduct my people, mine Angel shall assist the,
That sin a• a day, will not uncorrected be.
And for the true zele, that thu to my people hast,
I add this covenant, unto my promises past.
Raise them up I will, a prophet from among them,
Not onlyke to the, to speak my words unto them,
Who so hears not, that he shall speak in my name,
I will revenge it, to his perpetual shame.
The pass over lamb, will be a token just,
Of this strong covenant. This have I clearly dyscust,
In my appointment, this hour for your deliverance.
Never shall this thing, depart from my remembraūce.
Laud be for ever, to the most merciful lord,
Which never with draw, from man thy heavenly cōfort.
But from age to age, thy benefytes doth record,
What thy goodness is, and hath been to his sort.
As we find thy grace, so ought we to report.
And doubtless it is, to vs most bounteous,
Yea, for all our sins, most ripe and plenteous.
Abraham our father, found the benyuolouse,
So ded good Isaac, in his distress among.
To Iacob thu were, a get most gracious,
Ioseph thu sauedest, from dangerous deadly wrong.
Melchisedech and Iob, felt thy great goodness strong,
So ded good Sara, rebecca, and fair Rachel,
With Sephora my wife, the daughter of Raguel.
To praise the sweet lord my faith doth me compel,
For thy covenants sake, wherein rest our salvation.
The sede of promise, all other sedes excel,
For therein remains, our full justification,
From Adam and Noah, in Abrahams generation.
That sede procures, Gods mighty grace and power,
For the same sedes sake, I will singe now this hour.
O high king Emanuel, &amp; our leg lord, the lunge ex∣pectacyon of Gentyles, and the mighty saver of their mule∣tytude, the helthe and consolation of sinners, come now for to save vs, as our lord and our redemer.
FOr all the fauer, I have showed Israel,
Delivering her, from Pharaoes tyranny,
And giving the land fluentem lac &amp; mel,
Yet will she not leave, her old ydolatrye,
Nor know me for God. I abhor her misery.
Vexed her I have, with battles and decays,
Styll must I plage her, I se non other ways.
Remember yet lord, thy worthy servant Moses,
Walking in thy sight, without rebuke of the.
Both Aaron, Ietro, Eleazar, and Phinees.
Evermore feared, to offend thy mageste.
Much thu acceptedest, thy servant Iosue,
Caleb and Othoniel, sought the with all their hart,
Aioth end Sangar, for thy folk ded their part.
Gedeon and Thola, thy enemies put to smart,
Iayr and Iephte, gave praises to thy name.
These to leave idols, thy people ded coart,
Samson the strongest, for his part ded the same.
Samuel and Nathan, thy messages ded proclaim,
What though fearce Pharao, wrough mischief in thy sight?
He was a pagan, lay not that in our sight.
I wot the Beniamytes, abused the ways of right,
So ded Holes sons, and the sons of Samuel.
Saul in his office, was slothful day and night,
Wicked was Semei, so was Achirophel.
Measure not by them, the faults of Israel,
Whom thu hast loved, of lunge time so inteyrlye,
But of thy great grace, remit her wicked folly,
I can not abide, the vice of ydolatrye▪
Though I should suffer, all other villainy.
When Iosue was dead, that sort from me ded fall,
To the worshipping of Asteroth and Baal,
Full unclean idols, and monsters bestial.
For it they have had, thy righteous ponnyshment.
And for as much as they, ded wickedly consent,
To the Palestynes, and Chananytes ungodly,
Idolaters taking, to them in matrimony,
Thu threwest them vndre, the king of Mesopotamye.
After thu subduedest them, for their Idolatry.
Eyghtene years to Eglon, the king of Moabytes,
And xx. years to Iabin, the king of Chananytes.
Oppressed they were, vij. years of the Madyanytes,
And xviij. years vexed, of the cruel Ammonytes.
In iii. great battles, of iij. score thousand and five,
Of this thy people, not one was left alive.
Have mercy now lord, and call them to repentance.
So lunge as they sin, so lōge shall they have greuaūce.
Dauid my servant, somewhat must I say to the,
For that thu lately, hast wrought soch vanyte.
Spare not blessed lord, but say thy pleasure to me.
Of late days thu hast, misused Bersabe,
The wife of Vrye, and slain him in the field.
Mercy lord mercy, for doubtless I am defyelde:
I constitute the, a king over Israel,
And the preserved, from Saul which was thy enemy.
Yea, in my fauer, so much thu dedyst excel.
That of thy enemies, I gave the victory.
Palestynes and Syryanes, to the came tributary.
Why hast thu then wrought, soch folly in my sight?
Despising my word, against all godly right.
I have synned lord, I besyche the, pardon me.
Thu shalt not dye Dauid, for this inyquyte,
For thy repentance, But thy son by Bersabe,
Shall dye, for as much, as my name is blasphemed.
Among my enemies, and thu the worse esteemed.
From thy hows for this, the sword shall not depart,
I am sorry lord, from the bottom of my hart.
To further anger, thu doest me yet compel.
For what matter lord? I besyche thy goodness tell.
Why dedest thu number, the people of Israel?
Suppose in thy mind, therein thu hast done well?
I can not say nay, but I have done undiscreetly,
To forget thy grace, for a human policy.
Thu shalt of these iij. chose which plage thu will have,
For that sinful act, that I thy soul may save.
A scarceness vij. years, or else iij. months exile,
Either for iij. days, the pestilence most vile.
For one thu must have, there is no remedy,
Lord at thy pleasure, for thu art full of mercy,
Of a pestilence, then iij. score thousand and ten,
In iij. days shall dye of thy most puissant men.
Oh lord, it is I, which have offended thy grace,
Spare them and not me, for I have done the trespass.
Though thy sins be great, thy inward hearts cōtrycyon.
Doth move my stomach, in wonderful condition.
I find the a man, according to my hart,
Wherefore this promise, I make the ere I depart.
A fruit there shall come, forth yssuynge from thy body,
Whom I will advance, upon thy seat for ever.
His trone shall become, a seat of heavenly glory,
His worthy scepture, from right will not dysseuer,
His happy kyngedome, of faith, shall perysh never,
Of heaven and of earth, he was author principal,
And will continue, though they do perysh all.
This sign shalt thu have, for a token special,
That thu may believe, my words unfeignedly.
Where thu hast minded, for my memorial,
To build a temple, thu shalt not finish it truly.
But Solomon thy son, shall do that accyon worthy,
In token that Christ, must finish every thing,
That I have begun, to my praise everlasting.
Immortal glory, to the, most heavenly king,
For that thu hast given, continual victory,
To me thy servant, ever sens my anointing,
And also before, by many conquests worthy,
A bear and lyon, I slew through thy strength only,
I slew Golias, which was vj. cubits lunge.
Against thy enemies, thu made me ever strong.
My fleshly fraylenesse, made me do deadly wrong,
And clean to forget, thy laws of righteousness.
And thouh thu vysytedest, my synnefulnesse among,
With pestilent plages, and other unquietness.
Yet never took thu, from me the plenteousnesse,
Of thy godly sprete, which thu in me dedyst plant,
I having remorse, thy grace could never want.
For in conclusion, thy everlasting covenant.
Thu gave unto me, for all my wicked sin.
And hast promised here, by protestacyon constant,
That one of my sede, shall soch high fortune win,
As never ded man, sens this world ded begin.
By his power he shall, put Satan from his hold,
In rejoice whereof, to singe will I be bold.
O lord God Adonai, &amp; get of the faylhfull hows of Is¦rael, which sumtyme aperedest in the flamynge bush to Mo¦ses, and to him dedest give a law in mount Sine, come now forto redeem vs in the strength of thy right hand.
I Brought up children, from their first infancy,
Which now despyseth, my godly instytucyons.
An ox knows his lord, an ass his masters duty,
But Israel will not, know me nor my conditions,
Oh froward people, given all to superstycyons.
Unnatural children, expert in blasphemies,
Provokes me to bate, by their ydolatryes.
Take heed to my words, ye tyrants of Sodomy,
In vain ye offer, your sacrifice to me.
Discontent I am, with you beasts of Gomorra,
And have no pleasure, when I your offerings se.
I abhor your fastes, and your solempnyte.
For your tradycyons, my ways ye set a part,
Your works are in vain, I hate them from the hart.
Thy city sweet lord, is now become unfaithful,
And her conditions, are turned up so down.
Her life is unchaste, her acts be very hurtful,
Her murder and theft, hath darkened her renown.
Covetous rewards, doth so their conscience drown,
That the fatherless, they will not help to right,
The poor widows cause, come not before their sight,
Thy peaceable paths, seek they neither day nor night,
But walk wicked ways, after their fantasy.
Convert their hearts lord, and give them thy true light.
That they may perceive, their customable folly.
Leave them not helpless, in so deep misery,
But call them from it, of thy most special grace,
By thy true prophets, to their sowles helthe and solace.
First they had fathers, than had they patriarchs,
Than dukes, than judges, to their gydes and monarchs,
Now have they stowte kings, yet are they wicked styll,
And will in no wise, my pleasant laws fulfil.
Always they apply, to idols worshipping,
From the vile beggar, to the anointed king.
For that cause thu hast, in two divided them,
In Samaria the one, the other in Hierusalem.
The king of Iuda, in Hierusalem ded dwell,
And in Samaria, the king of Israel.
Ten of the twelve tribes, bycame Samaritans,
And the other two, were Hierosolymytanes.
In both these cuntreyes, according to their doings,
Thu permyttedest them, to have most cruel kings.
The first of Iuda, was wicked king Roboam,
Of Israel the first, was that cruel Hieroboam.
Aby than followed, and in the other Nadab,
Then Basa, then Hela, then Zambri, Ioram and Achab.
Then Ochosias, then Athalia, then Ioas,
On the other part, was Ioathan and Achas.
To rehearse them all, that have done wretchydlye,
In the sight of the, it were lunge verily.
For the wicked sin, of filthy ydolatrye,
Which the x, tribes ded, in the land of Samarye,
In space of one day, fifty thousand men I slew,
Three of their cities, also I overthrew.
And left the people, in soch captyuyte,
That in all the world, they wit not whither tefle.
The other ij. tribes, when they from me went back,
To ydolatrye, I left in the hand of Seasick.
The king of Egipt, which toke away their treasure,
Conveyed their cattle, and slew them without measure.
In time of Achas, an hundred thousand and twenty,
Were slain at one time, for their ydolatrye.
Two hundred thousand, from thens were captive led.
Their goods dispersed, and they with penury fed.
Seldom they fail it, but either the Egipcyanes,
Have them in bondage, or else the Assyreanes.
And alone they may, thank their ydolatrye.
Wele, yet blessed lord, relive them with thy mercy.
Though they have been ill, by other princes days▪
Yet good Ezechias, hath taugh them godly ways.
When the prince is good, the people are the better.
And as he is nought, their vices are the greater.
Heavenly lord therefore, send them the consolation,
Which thu hast covenanted, with every generation.
Open thu the heavens, and let the lamb come hither,
Which will deliver, thy people all together.
Ye planetes and clouds, cast down your dews and rain,
That the earth may bear, out healthful saver plain.
May the wife forget, the child of her own body?
Nay that she can not, in any wise verily.
No more can I them, which will do my cōmaundementes,
But must preserve them, from all inconveniences.
Blessed art thu lord, in all thy acts and judgements.
Wele, Esaias, for this thy fidelity,
A covenant of helthe, thu shalt have also of me.
For Syons sake now, I will not hold my peace,
And for Hierusalem, to speak will I not cease.
Till that righteous lord, be come as a sūne beam bright,
And their just saver, as a lamp extend his light.
A rod shall shut fourth, from the old stock of Iesse,
And a bright blossom, from that rote will arise.
Upon whom always, the sprete of the lord shall be,
The sprete of wisdom, the sprete of heavenly practyse,
And the sprete that will, all godliness deuyse,
Take this for a sign, A maid of Israel,
Shall conceive and bear, that lord Emanuel.
Thy praises condign, no mortal tongue can tell,
Most worthy maker, and king of heavenly glory.
For all capacities, thy goodness doth excel,
Thy plenteous graces, no brain can cumpas truly,
No wit can conceive, the greatness of thy mercy,
Declared of late, in Dauid thy true servant,
And now confirmed, in this thy latter covenant.
Of goodness thu made, Solomon of wit most pregnaūt,
Asa and Iosaphat, with good king Ezechias,
In thy sight to do, that was to the right pleasant.
To quench ydolatrye, thu raysedest up Helias,
Iehu, Hellseus, Micheas, and Abdias.
And Naaman Syrus, thu pourgedest of a leprye,
Thy works wonderful, who can but magnify?
Arise Hierusalem, and take faith by and bye,
For the very light, that shall save the, is coming.
The son of the lord, apere will evidently,
When he shall resort, se that no Joy be wanting,
He is thy saver, and thy life everlasting,
Thy release from sin, and thy whole righteousness.
Help me in this songe, to knowledge his great goodness▪
O frutefull rote of Iesse, that shall be set as a sign amon¦ge people, against the worldly rulers shall fiercely opē their mouths. Whom the Gentyles shall worship as their hey∣uenly lord, come now for to deliver vs, and delay the time no longer.
I Have with fierceness, mankind oft times corrected.
And again I have, allured him by sweet promise.
I have sent sore plages, when he hath me neglected.
And then by and by, most comfortable swetnes.
To win him to grace, both mercy and righteousness.
I have exercysed, yet will he not amend.
Shall I now lose him, or shall I him defend?
In his most mischief, most high grace will I send.
To overcome him, by favour, if it may be.
With his abusyons, no longer will I contend.
But now accomplish, my first will and decree.
My word being flesh, from hens shall set him fre.
Him reaching a way, of perfyght righteousness.
That he shall not need, to perysh in his weakness.
Manasses (lord) is past, which turned from the his heart,
Achas and Amon, have now no more a do.
Iechonias with other, which ded themselves avert.
From the to idols, may now no farther go.
The two false judges, and Bells wicked prestos also.
Phassur and Semeias, with Nabuchodonosore,
Antiochus and Triphon shall the displease no more.
Three score years and ten, thy people into Babylon,
Were captive and thrall, for idols worshipping.
Hierusalem was lost, and left void of dominion,
Brent was their temple, so was their other building,
There high prestos were slain, there treasure came to nothing
The strength and beauty, of thine own heritage,
Thus dedest thu leave then, in miserable bondage.
Oft had they warnings, sumtyme by Ezechiel,
And other prophets, as Esaye and Hieremye,
Sumtyme by Daniel, sumtyme by Ose and Iohel,
By Amos and Abdias, by Ionise and by Sophonye,
By Nahum and Micheas, by Egg and by Zacharye,
By Malachias, and also by Abacuch,
By Olda the widow, and by the prophet Baruch.
Remember Iosias, which toke the abhomynacyon.
From the people then, restoring thy laws again.
Of Rechab consydre, the faithful generation,
Whō to wine drinking, no friendship night cōstrayne.
Remember Abdemelech, the friend of truth certain,
Zorobabel the prince, which ded repare the temple,
And Iesus Iosedech, of virtue the example,
Consydre Nehemias, and Esdras the good scribe,
Merciful Tobias and constant Mardocheus.
Iudith and queen Hector, of the same godly tribe,
Devout Mathathias, and Iudas Machabeus.
Have mind of Eleazar, and then Joins Hircanus,
Way the ernest faith, of this godly company,
Though the other clean, fall from thy memory.
I will Iohan I will, for as I said before,
Rigour and hardiness, I have now set a part,
Minding from hens fourth, to win man evermore,
By wonderful kindness, to break his stubborn hart,
And change it from sin. For Christ shall suffres make,
In monies frail nature, for his inyquyte,
This to make open, my messenger shalt thu be.
As thy pleasure is, so blessed lord appoint me,
For my helthe thu art, and my sowles felycyte.
Lunge ere I made the, I the predestynate.
Before thu were borne, I the endued with grace.
In thy mothers womb, were thu sanctyfycate,
By my godly gift, and so confirmed in place,
A Prophet to show, a way before the face,
Of my most dere son, which will come the until,
Apply the apace, thine office to fulfil.
Preach to the people, rebuking their negligence,
Doppe them in water, they knowledgynge their offence.
And say unto them. The kyngedome of God doth cum.
Vnmete lord I am, Queen puer ego sum.
An other than that, Alac I have no science,
Fit for that office, neither yet clean eloquence.
Thu shalt not say so, for I have given the grace,
Eloquence and age, to speak in the desert place,
Thu must do therefore, as I shall the advise,
My appointed pleasure, fourth utter in any wise.
My strong mighty words, put I into thy mouth,
Spare not by speak them, to east, west, north and southe.
Go now thy way fourth, I shall the never fail.
The sprete of Helias, have I given the already.
Persuade the people, that they their sins bywayle.
And if they repent, their customable folly,
Lunge shall it not be, ere they have remedy.
Open thu their hearts, tell them their health is coming.
As a voice in desert, se thu declare the thing.
I promise the sure, thu shalt was he him among them,
In Iordane a floude, not far from Hierusalem.
Show me yet good lord, whereby shall I know that mā.
In the multitude, which will resort to Iordan?
In thy mothers womb, of him hottest thu cognycyon.
Yea, that was in sprete, I would now know his person.
Have thu no fear Iohan, him shalt thu know full well.
And one special token, before will I the tell.
Super quem uideris spiritum descendentem &amp; manentem
Super eum, hic est queen baptizat spiritu sancto
Among all other, whom thu shalt baptise there.
Upon whom thu seyst, the holy Ghost descend,
In shappe of a dove, resting upon his shoulder.
Hold him for the same, that shall the world amend.
By baptym of sprete, and also to man extend,
Most special grace. For he must repare his fall,
Restoring again, the justice original.
Take now thy journey, and do as I the advise,
First preach repentance, and than the people baptise.
High honour, worship, and glory be unto the.
My God eternal, and patron of all puryte.
Repent good people, for sins that now are past,
The kyngedome of heaven, is at hand very ny.
The promised light, to you approaches fast,
Have faith, and apply, now to receive him boldly.
I am not the light, but to bear testimony,
Of him, am I sent, that all men may believe,
That his blood he will, for their redemption give.
He is soch a light, as all men doth illumine,
That ever were here, or shall be after this.
All the world he made, by his mighty power divine,
And yet that rude world, will not know what he is.
His own he entering, is not regarded of his.
They that receive him, are Gods true children plain,
In sprete regenerate and all grace shall attain.
Many do reckon, that I Iohan Baptist am he.
Deceived are they, and that will apere in space.
Though he come after, yet was he lunge before me,
We are weak vessels, he is the well of grace,
Of his great goodness, all that we have we purchase.
By him are we like, to have a better increase,
Than ever we had, by the law of Moses.
In Moses harde law, we had not else but darkness,
Figure and shadow. All was not else but night,
Ponnyshment for sin, much rigour, payne and roughness,
An high change is there, where all is turned to light,
Grace and remission, anon will shyne full bright.
Never man lived, that ever se God before,
Which now in our kind, monies ruin will restore.
Help me to give thanks, to that lord evermore,
Which am unto Christ, a criers voice in the desert,
To prepare the paths, and high ways him before,
For his delight is, on the poor simple hart.
That innocent lamb, from soch will never depart,
As will faithfully, receive him with good mind.
Let our voice then sound, in some sweet musical kind.
O perfyght key of Dauid, and high scepture of the kin∣dred of Iacob, which openest and no man speareth, thu spea∣rest
and no man opens, come &amp; deliver thy servant 〈◊〉 kind bound, in prison sitting in the darkness of 〈◊〉 and bitter dampnacyon.
THe matters are soch, that we have uttered here,
As ought not to slyde, from your memorial.
For they have opened, soch comfortable ger,
As is to the helthe, of this kind universal,
Graces of the lord, and promises liberal,
Which he hath given, to man for every age,
To knit him to Christ, and so clear him of bondage.
As Saint Paule doth write, unto the Corinthes plain,
Our fore fathers were, vndre the cloud of darkness,
And unto Christ's days, ded in the shadow remain.
Yet were they not left, for of him they had promise,
All they received, one spiritual fading doubtless,
They drunk of the rock, which them to life refreshed,
For one saving helthe, in Christ, all they confessed.
In the women's sede, was Adam first justified,
So was faytfull Noah, so was just Abraham.
The faith in that sede, in Moses fourth multiplied,
Like wise in Dauid, and Esaye, that after cam.
And in Iohan Baptist, which showed the very lame.
Though they se a far, yet all they had one justice,
One Mass (as they call it) and in Christ one sacrifice,
A man can not here, to Good do better service,
Than on this to ground, his faith and understanding.
For all the worlds sin, alone Christ payed the price,
In his only death, was monies life always resting,
And not in will worcester••, nor yet in mennys deserving.
The light of our faith, make this thing• evident,
And not the practyse of other experiment.
Where is now fre will, whom the hypocrite a comment.
Whereby they report, they may at their own pleasure,
Do good of themselves, though grace and faith be absent.
And have good intents their madness with to measure.
The will of the flesh, is proved here small treasure,
And so is monies will, for the grace of God doth all.
More of this matter, conclude herafter we shall

