IN to this desert, the holy Ghost hath brought me,
After my baptyme, of Satan to be tempted▪
Thereby to instruct, of Man the imbecyllyte,
That after he hath, Gods holy sprete received,
Diver•ely he must, of Satan be impugncd,
Least he for Gods gift, should fall into a pride.
And that in apparel, he take me for his get.
Think not me to fast, because I would you to fast,
For than ye think wrong, and have vain judgment▪
But of my fasting, think rather this my cast,
Satan to provoke, to work his cursed intent,
And to teach you ways, his myschefes to prevent,
By the word of God, which must be your defence,
Rather than fastings, to withstand his violence.
I have fasted here, the space of forty days,
Performing that fast, which Moses had in figure,
To stop their mouths with, which babble &amp; prate always
Thus ded our fathers, My name and fame to dysuygure.
Therefore now I taste, of fasting here the rygure,
And am right hungry, after lunge abstinence.
This mortal body, complains of indigence.
No where I fourther, but every where I no,
For I am Satan, the come adversary,
An enemy to Man, him seeking to destroy
And to bring to nought, by my assaults most crafty.
I watch every where, wanting no policy,
To trappe him in snare, and make him the child of hell.
What nombre I win, it were very lunge to tell.
I heard a great noise, in Iordane now of late,
Upon one Iesus, sounding from heaven aboue.
This is mine own son, which hath withdrawn al hate,
And he that doth stand, most highly in my love.
My wits the same sound, doth not a little move.
He comes to redeem, the kind of Man I fear,
High time is it than, for me the cools to steer.
I will not leave him▪ till I know what he is,
And what he entendeth, in this same border hear.
Subtlety must help, else all will be amiss,
A godly pretence, outwardly must I bear,
Semynge religious, devout and sad in my gear.
If he be come now, for the redempcyon of Man,
As I fear he is, I will stop him if I can.
It is a grant joy, by my holydome to se,
So vertuouse a life, in a young man as you be.
As here thus to wander, in godly contemplation.
And to live alone, in the desert solitary.
Your pleasure is it, to utter your fantasy.
A brother am I, of this desert wilderness,
And full glad would be, to talk with you of goodness▪
If ye would accept, my simple company.
I dysdayne nothing, which is of God truly.
Than will I be bold, a little with you to walk.
Do so if ye list, and your mind frely talk.
Now forsooth and God, it is joy of your life,
That ye take sech pains, and are in virtue so rife.
Where so small joys are, to recreate the hart.
Here are for pastime, the wild beasts of the desert,
With whom much better, it is to be conversant,
Than with sech people, as are to God repugnant.
Ye speak it full well, it is even as ye say,
But tell me how lunge, ye have been here, I you pray.
Forty days and nights, without any sustenance.
So much I judged, by your pale countenance.
Then is it no marvel, I trow, though ye hungry.
My stomach declares, the weakness of my body.
Well, to be plain with you, abroad the rumour doth rōne
Among the people, that ye should be Gods son.
If ye be Gods son, as it hath great lykelyhode,
Make of these stones bread, and give your body his foot.
No offence is it, to eat when men be hungry,
But to make stones bread, it is unnecessary.
He which in this fast, hath been my special get,
Foot for my body, is able to provide.
I thank my lord God, I am at no soche need,
As to make stones bread, my body so to fed.
Whā I come in place, where God hath appointed meat,
Giving him high thanks, I shall not spare to eat,
Not only for that, this similitude I bring,
But my purpose is▪ to conclude an other thing.
At the fathers voice, ye toke this life in hand,
Minding now to preach, as I do understand.
In case ye do so, ye shall find the office harde.
My mind is in this, ye should your body regard,
And not undiscreetly, to cast your self away.
Rather take some ease, than ye should so decay.
I put case ye be, Gods son, what can that further?
Preach ye ones the truth, the byshoppes will ye murder.
Therefore believe not, the voice that ye ded hear,
Though it came from God, for it is unsavoury gear.
Beyond your cumpas, rather than ye so run,
Forsake the office, and deny yourself Gods son.
Ye speak in that point, very unadvisedly,
For it is written, in the eyed of Deutronomye,
Man lives not by bread, or corporal fading only,
But by Gods promise, and by his scriptures heavenly.
Here ye persuade me, to recreate my body,
And neglected Gods word, which is great blasphemy.
This caused Adam, from innocence to fall,
And all his offspring, made miserable and mortal.
Where as is Gods word, there is both sprete and life,
And where that is not, death and dampnacyon is rife.
The strength of Gods word, mightily sustained Moses,
For forty days space, thereof soch is the goodness.
It fortified Helias, it preserved Daniel,
And help in the desert, the children of Israel.
Sore plages do follow, where Gods word is reject,
For no persuasion, will I therefore neglect,
That office to do, which God hath me commanded,
But in all mekenesse, it shall be accomplished.
I had rather nay, considering your feblenesse,
For ye are but tuly, ye are no strong person doughtlesse.
Well, it is not the bread, that doth a man uphold,
But the lord of heaven, with his graees manifold.
He that Man create, is able him to norysh,
And after weakness, cause him again to flourish.
Gods word is a rule, for all that man should do,
And out of that rule, no creature ought to go.
He that it followed, can not out of the way,
In meat no• in drink, in sadness nor in play.
Ie are styfnecked, ye will follow no good counsel.
Yes, when it is soch, as the holy scripture tell.
Scriptures I know non, for I am but an hermit I▪
I may say to you, it is no part of our stody.
We religious men, live all in contemplation,
Scriptures to stodye, is not our occupation.
It longs to doctors. Howbeit I may say to you,
As blind are they as we, in the understanding now.
Well shall it please ye, any farther, with me to walk,
Though I little profyght, yet doth it me good to talk.
To tarry or go, it is all one to me.
Let vs than wander, into the holy cite,
Of Hierusalem, to se what is there a do.
I shall not say nay, but am agreeable thereto.
My purpose is this, A voice in your ear ded ring,
That ye were Gods soon, and well-beloved darling,
And you believe it, but ye are the more unwise,
For to deceive you, it was some subtle practyse.
Well, upon that voice, ye are given to persyghtnesse
Not else regarding, but to live in ghostliness.
Ye watch, fast and pray, ye shyne in contemplation,
Leading here a life, beyond all estimation,
No meat will ye eat, but live by Gods word only▪
So good are ye w••t, so perfyght and so holy.
I will bring ye (I trow) to the well of ghostliness,
Where I shall fill ye, and glutt ye with holiness.
What, holy, quoth he? Nay, ye were never so holy,
As I will make ye, if ye follow handsomely.
Here is all holy, here is the holy city,
The holy temple, and the holy prestos here be.
Ye will be holy? well, ye shall be aboue them all,
Because ye are Gods son, it doth ye so befall.
Come here, on the pinnacle, we will be by and by.
What mean ye by that? show fourth your fantasy,
When ye were hungry, I ded ye first persuade,
Of stones to make bread, but ye would non of that trade.
Ye laid for yourself, that scripture would not serve it,
That was your buckler, but now I am for ye fit.
For the suggestion, that I now shall to ye lay,
I have scripture at hand, ye shall it not denay.
Keep it not secrete, but let it than be hod.
If ye do believe, that ye are the son of God,
Believe this also, if ye leap down here in scoff,
From this high pinnacle, ye can take no harm theroff.
And therefore be bold, this enterprise to jeopardy·
If ye be Gods son, cast down your self here backward.
Truly that need not, here is other remedy,
To the ground to go, than to fall down folyshlye.
Here are gresynges made, to go up and down thereby,
What need I than leap, to the earth presumptuously.
Say that ye ded it, upon a good intent.
That were neither good, nor yet convenient.
Dangers are doubtful, where soch presumption is.
Tush, scripture is with it, ye can not fare amiss.
For it is written, how God hath given a charge,
Unto his Angels, that if ye leap at large,
They shall receive ye, in their hands tenderly,
Least ye delhi your foot, against a stone thereby.
If ye do take scath, believe God is not true,
Nor just of his word, And than bid him adieu.
In no wise ye ought, the scriptures to de prove,
But as they lye whole, so ought ye them to have.
Nomore take ye here, than serve for your vain purpose
Leaving out the best, as ye should trifle or gloss
Ye mind not by this, towards God to edify,
But of sincere faith, to corrupt the innocence.
Why, is it not true, that soch a text there is?
Yes, there is soch a text, but ye wrast it all amiss.
As the Psalm doth say, God hath commanded Angels,
To preserve the just, from dangerous plages and perils.
Well, than I said true, and as it lies in the text.
Yea, but ye omitted, four words which followed next,
As (in all thy ways) which if ye put out of sight,
Ye shall never take, that place of scripture a right.
Their ways are soch rules, as God hath them commanded,
By his living wo•de, justly to be observed.
If they pass those rules, the Angels are not bound,
To be their safeguard, but rather them to confound.
To fall down backward, of a wanton penyshnes,
Is non of those ways, that God ever taught doughtles.
Then if I ded it, I should tempt God very sore,
And deserve to have, his anger evermore.
I will not so do, for their fathers in the desert,
Ded so tempt him ones, and had the hate of his hart▪
The clause that ye had, makes for nō outward working,
If ye mark the Psalm, thoroughly from his beginning.
But what is the cause, ye wēt not fourth with the next verse•
It made not for me, if ye will, ye may it rehearse.
Thu shalt (saith the Psalm) subdue the cruel serpent,
And tread vndre foot, the lyon and dragon pestilent.
No nigher (I say) for there ye touche fre hold.
Some love in no wise, to have their rudeness told.
To walk in Gods ways, it becomes a mortal man,
And therefore I will, obeye them if I can.
For it is written, in the sext of Deutronomy,
Thu shalt in no wise, tempt God presumptuousely.
What is it to tempt God? after your judgment.
To take of his wo•de, an outward experiment,
Of an idle brain, which God neither thought not meant.
What persons do so? Make that more evident.
All soch as forsake, any grace or remedy,
Appointed of God, for their own policy.
As they that do think, that God should fill their belly,
Without their labours, when his laws are contrary.
And they that will say, the scripture of God doth slay,
They never searching, thereof the veryte.
Those also tempt God, that vow presumptuously,
Not having his gift, to keep their contynencye.
With so many else, as follow their good intents.
Not groūded on God, nor yet on his commandments.
These throw themselves down, into most deep dāpnacyon.
Little good get I, by this communication.
Will ye walk farther, and let this prattling be?
A mountain here is, which I would you to se,
Trust me and ye will, it is a commodious thing.
If it be so good, let vs by thydre going.
Lo, how say ye now, is not here a pleasant sight?
If ye will ye may, have here all the worlds delight.
Here is to be seane, the kyngedome of Arabia,
With all the regions, of Africa, Europe; and Asye,
And their whole delights, their pomp, their magnyfycēce▪
Their riches▪ their honour, their wealth, their concupyscēce.
Here is gold and silver, in wonderful habundaunce,
Silks, veluetes, tissues, with wynes &amp; spices of pleasance.
Here are fair women, of countenance amiable,
With all kinds of meates, to the body dylectable.
Here are camels, stout horses, &amp; mules that never will tyre,
With so many pleasures, as your hart can desire.
Well, he be praised, which is of them the giver.
Alas it grieves me, that ye are soch a beleuer.
Nothing can I lay, but ever ye avoid me,
By the word of God. Leave that point ones I pray ye▪
If I bid ye make, of stones bread for your body,
Ye say man lives not, in temporal feeding only.
As I bid ye leap, down from the pinnacle aboue,
Ye will not tempt God, otherwise than you behove.
Thus are ye styll poor, thus are ye styll weak and nedye,
And what suppose ye, will that need remedy?
Forsake the believe, that ye have in Gods word,
That ye are his son, for it is not worth a torde,
Is he a father, that se his son thus famish?
If ye believe it, I say ye are to foolish.
Ye se these pleasures. If you be ruled by me,
I shall make ye a man. To my words therefore agree.
Loke on these kyngedomes, and incomparable treasure,
I the lord of them, may give them at my pleasure.
Forsake that father, which leaves the without confort,
In this desolation, and hens fourth to me resort.
Knowledge me for head, of this world universal.
And I will make the, possessor of them all.
Thu shalt no longer, be desolate and hungry,
But have all the world, to do the obsequy.
Therefore kneel down here, and worship me this hour,
And thu shalt have all, with their whole strand and pour.
Avoid thu Satan, Thu devil, thu adversary,
For now thu persuade, most damnable blasphemy.
As thu art wicked, so is thy promise wicked,
Not thine is the world, but his that it created.
Thu canniest not give it, for it is not thine to give,
Thus dedyst thu corrupt, the faith of Adam and Eve.
Thus dedyst thu deceive, both Moses and Aaron,
Causing them to doubt, at the lake of contradiction.
Get the hens thu fiend, and cruel adversary,
For it is written, in the tenth of Deutronomye.
God thu shalt worship, and magnify alone,
Hold him for thy lord, and make to him thy moan.
He is the true God, he is the lord of all,
Not only of this, but the world celestial.
Thy persuasion is, I should not his word regard,
O venomous serpent, dampnacyon is thy reward.
Provide will I so, that thy kyngedom shall decay,
Gods word shall be heard, of the world though thu say nay.
Well, than it helps not, to tarry here any longer,
Advantage to have, I se I must go farther.
So lunge as thu live, I am like to have no profyght,
If all come to pass, I ma ye sit as much in your light,
If ye preach Gods word, as me think ye do intende,
Ere four years be past▪ I shall you to your father send,
If pharysees and scribes, can do any thing thereto,
False prestos and byshoppes, with my other servants mo.
Though I have hynderaunce, it will be but for a season,
I dought not, thine own, herafter will work some treason
Thy vicar at Rome, I think will be my friend,
I defy the therefore, and take thy words but as wind.
He shall me worship, and have the world to reward,
That thu here forsakest, he will most highly regard.
Gods word will he tread, underneath his foot for ever,
And the hearts of men, from the truth thereof dyssener,
Thy faith will he hate, and slay thy flock in conclusion.
All this will I work, to do the utter confusion.
Thy cruel assaults, shall hurt neither me nor mine,
Though we suffer both, by the providence divine.
Soch strength is ours, that we will have victory,
Of sin death and hell, and of the in thy most fury.
For God hath promised, that his shall tread the dragon,
Underneath their fete, with the fearce roaring lyon.
The father of confort, and heavenly consolation,
Hath sent vs hither, to do our administration.
We come not to help, but to do our obsequy,
As servants becomes, to their lord and mastre mekelye.
If our office be, to wait on creatures mortal,
Why should we not serve, the mastre and lord of all?
It is our confort, it is our whole felycyte,
To do our service, and in your presence to be.
We have brought ye foot, to confort your weak body,
After your great fast, and notable victory.
Unto all the world, your birth we first declared,
And now these vytayles, we have for you prepared.
Come nigher to me. Sweet father thanks to the,
For these gracious gifts, of thy lyberalyte.
How meke art thu lord, to take that nature on the?
Which is so tender, and full of infyrmyte.
As Monies nature is, both feeble faint and weary,
Weak after labour, and after fasting hungry.
Forsooth heaven and earth, yea, hell may be astoyned,
The Godhede to se, to so frail nature joined,
In his own he is, for he the world first create,
Yet seems the world, to have him in great hate.
About thirty years, hath he been here among them,
Some time in Iewrye, and some time in Hierusalem.
But few to this day, have done him reverence,
Or as to their lord, showed their obedience.
My coming hither, is for to seek no glory,
But the high pleasure, and will of my father heavenly.
He will require it, at a certain day, no dought,
And shall revenge it, loke they not wele abought.
The lord here for you, was borne and circumcised,
For you here also, he was lately baptised.
In the wilderness, this lord for you hath fasted,
And hath ouerremen, for you the devil that tempted.
For you friends for you, this heavenly lord doth all,
Only for your sake, he is become man mortal.
Take the shy eld of faith, and learn to resist the devil▪
After his teachynges, that he do you non evil,
Full sure shall ye be, to have vs on your side,
If ye be faithful, and hold him for your get.
If they follow me, they shall not walk in darkness,
But in the clear light, and have felycyte endless,
For I am the way, the life and the veryte,
No man may attain, to the father but by me.
In monies frail nature, ye have conquered the enemy.
That man over him, should always have victory.
Our manner is it, most highly to rejoice,
When Man hath confort, which we now declare in voice.
Let it not grieve you, in this world to be tempted,
Considering your lord, and your high bishop Iesus,
Was here without sin, in every purpose proved,
In all our weakness, to help and succour vs,
Farthermore to bear, with our fragylyte thus.
He is unworthy, of him to be a member,
That will not with him, some persecution suffer.
The life of Man is, a prof or harde temptation,
As Iob doth report, and Paule confirms the same.
Busy is the devil, and labours his dampnatyon,
Yet have no despair, for Christ hath got the game.
Now is it easy, his cruelnesse to tame▪
For Christ's victory, is theirs that do believe.
Where saith take roting, the devil can never grieve.
Resist (saith Peter) resist that roaring lyon,
Not with your fastings, Christ never taught ye so.
But with a strong faith, withstand his false suggestion,
And with the scriptures, upon him over go,
Then shall he no harm, be able you to do.
Now may ye be bold, ye have Christ on your side,
So lunge as ye have, his veryte for your get.
What enemies are they, that from the people will have,
The scriptures of God, which are the mighty weapon,
That Christ left them here, their sowles from hell to save.
And throw them headlondes, into the devils dominion.
If they be no devils, I say there are devils non,
They bring in fasting, but they leave out, Scriptum est,
Chalk they give for gold, soch friends are they to the Be.
Let non report vs, that here we condemn fasting.
For it is not true, we are of no soch mind.
But this we cover, that ye do take the thing,
For a fruit of faith, as it is done in kind,
And only Gods word, to subdue the cruel find.
Follow Christ alone, for he is the true shepherd,
The voice of strangers, do never more regard.

