WHy is there no courtesy• now I am come
I t•owe that all the people be d•me
Or else so god help me and halyd•••
They were almost a sleep.
No words I harde, no• yet no ••lking
No instrument went nor ballattes synging
What ails you all thus •• sit dreaming
Of whom take ye care?
Of my coming ye may be •l•d
Therefore I pray you 〈…〉
For all your desire shall be had
I can amend your che••e
By God I think ye have forgotten me.
I am wealth of this realm look upon me
For I am to every man loving and fre•ndly
For wealth hath no pere.
Brother wealth have ye not yet done?
ye praise your self aboue the moon
Every man may perceive thereby soon
That you lack discretion•
Wherefore, by god I cannot say to much
I am so wealthy of substance and rich
In all the world where is one such
As I am of comparison.
Wealth is good I cannot den•y
Yet praise your self so much ye may
For wealth oftentimes doth decay
And wealth is nothing s•re.
Wealth hath ben ever in thy• country
And here I p•rpose styll for to be
For this is the land most mete for me
And here I will endure.
Therein ye speak•full lovingly
For in this realm wealth should be
yeth no displeasure I pray you heartily
But in the way of communication.
And for pastime I would •peak some ways
Of no comparison, nor to you no dysp•ire,
I doo not intende that manner always,
But for a recreation,
Brother wh•t soever ye say to me.
I will hear yo• p•ci••tly
I am content and I 〈◊〉 you heartily
Begin and say your pleasure•
I thank you h••••lie th•• will I
Some what unto my purpose apply
Though wealth be praised maru•lu•lie
yet to mine understanding.
Wealth is mutable, and th•t in shame
And wealth is haughty and proud of name
Wealth t• cruel, and in great blame
For wealth is ••er wavering.
To whom have I done any harm can ye say,
ye stander me no•e, yet I trust I may
Answer for my selte in every manner way
ye will not deny that?
God forbid but ye should d• so
And ye may doo it when•her I will or no
Inlykewise, I must answer you else•
When ye say not true.
Though I be but to you a poor man
yet health I height, the same I am
That is desired universally than
Some calls me as good as you
As I, mary there in deed ye do compare.
Such words might bring you soon in care
Lewd parson, thou art not ware
Of what substance I am
Yes I can tell what you are, be not displeased
wealth is of great substance, that cannot be denied
yet show your commodities, and ye shall be answered
I promise you wellh is fugitive.
What say thou`am I a tagetyue
I was never so taken up in my life
Nor called unsure, well I will make no strife
yet where as thou dost lay,
Thai I should show my commodities always
The best for my self whereof I ask praise
if I should staud her all my life days
yet I could not say.
Nor half the benefits that comes of me
yt cannot be told nor recited shortly
Wealth is the 〈◊〉 of althing earthly
That you cannot deny.
Ferste god save, our sovereign Lady the Queen
With all the counsel and all that wish them b•no
Am not I wealth with them ever at eve
Who should be there but I?
Men of the law, and jolly rich merchants
There be wealthy both of goods and lands,
Without comparison is in their hands
I walth hatg all freasure.
O good sir, of whom comes all this
Of god only, to yo• no thank I wis
And yet mans wealth •tands not all in riches
I dare say that boldly,
W•an a man hath a competent living
with the grace of god that passes all thing
Love of his neighbour, and good reporting
Then is he wealthy,
Wealth of goods is but a fame
Ye is well•hy that hath a good name
Every wise man will coueyte the same
For other wealth I not reche
if a man have never so much good name
Every wise man will covey•e the same
if his disposicions be nought and wood
Then he is but a wretch,
Nay thou art a wretch, and a fool vuwyse
wealth of riches thus to despise
Doest thou not se all the world arise
By goods and substance
He that hath plenty of silver and gold
May have all thing whatsoever he would
when can wealth lack, seeing all thing is sold
A•d wealth is of assurance.
I deuye that, your saying is nought
Grace• heaven, nor cunning, cannot be bought
wi•hout great pain, ād good deeds wrought
Else man cannot them have.
Stop thereat, and hold thy peace
May not men by hey•en with riches
As to bylde churches and make bye ways
Such deeds mans soul doth sans
Yea, •ut yet ye •used mark one s•ynge
if these goods came with wro•ge doing
Shall ye have heaven for so spending
Or yet a•y mede.
Nay nay except that ma• himself doo meek
And make resist•ce the right ho•our to seek
Else all such good deeds is not woth a leek
wealth hereof take heed.
Why think thou that all men which h•th wealth
Gets their goods with brybry and s•ealeth
Thy repor•e is nought therefore Helthe
I counsel thee to •ay the best.
So I will, but yet I must say true
And •ow a little more I will say to you
Much sorrow and care w•lth doth •few
He i• seldom in rest.
when a man is a little hit and wealthy
A•d hath in his •hes•e treasures plenty
Then will he wrangle, and do shreudly
By his power and might.
With his neigh•ores he will go to law
And a wreak his malice for value of straw
wealth is fykle and out •f awe
wilful in wrong or right
Thou speak with a slanderous tong•
All of evil will, and yet it is wro••e
wealth in this realm hath bin louge
Of me comes great honour.
Because that I wealth •ath great port•
All the world, hy•her doth resort
Therefore I w•l•h, am this realms comfort,
And here I will endure.
So I wold ye shou••, and I shall do the same
Health I am called, and that is my name
If I would not abide hear I were to blame
For here I am well cheri•head
Yet say your self, nhw indifferen•lie
And if every man doo not love me
Health as well as wealth, yes verily
Thereof I dare be reported
Why should they love thee• that wo•lt I know
As well as me, I pray you show
I am the superior of hi• and lowe
No man may compare with me.
To show why I will not be afraid
For I can bide by that I •aue said
If wealthy men be very well apaid
Or much they set you by.
But of wealth, if they have never so much
Goods, tryasure and gold, and be called rich
Yet if they lack health, there payne is such
That they were better dye.
A man to were gold, and be in pay•e
What joy hath he? none, but would be fain
To give all his treasure for health plain
Or else he were very mad:
For if a man be never so pour
Yet if he have health, that is a treasure,
Then for his living, he may labour
And in his heart be glad,
I never marked thus much, nor understood
That Health was such a treasure, and to man so good
Wherefore I am sorry, a•d I will change my mood
Now I pray you forgive me.
I will forgive or else I were to blame
And I pray you to forgive me the same
I love you heartily, and will praise your name
if it please you to keep my company.
Why tarry sirs whether are ye going
I see well ye looked not for my commi•g
Lo, out of sight out of remembry•g
Abc•ce is cause of strau•gnes,
What look ye on werwhy are ye so strange
From your fellow liberty, doth your minds chaūge
I• your company I was wont to range
What needs all this business,
By liberty now I doo not set
Saying that health and I am met
As feloweh together no man shall let
Me for to love him best.
Let me hear what ye do say
Then ye are about to cast me away
How hippos this? mary then I may
Go pike straws and take me rest.
I pray you tell me whom I have o•fended
if I have made a fault it shalde amended
with so short warning let me not be voided
I crow yet ye do but jest.
Why do ye make this cauelacion
we entende to make no alteration
wealth and I have had communication
He is my friend of old.
What was the matter, I pray you tell
Me thinks I ought to be of counsel
Or else I promise you ye doo not well
With you I should behold.
The matter is done we are agreed
To reason it more it shall not need
O brother health, thou art in deed
More preciouser then gold.
Gods body how comes this ger to pas
I am cast out at the cartes arse
The world is nothing as it was
For I am here refused
Why be you angry that we doo agree
Then are ye not wy•e, for if ye love me
I will love him again, so it should be
Or else I were mysaduised
Then of my love ye set no store
My company I see well ye looked notfore
Farewell I will get me out of the door
yet I am your betters and so am I called.
Such presumptuous words will have a fall
your comparison is but feeble and small
What can ye do nothing at all
As you have reputed.
What were ye both two, were not I.
Wretches and caitiffs, look not so hye
Think no scorn hardly
For I may be your pear
if wealth have never so much substance
Lacking Liberty and we•r in durance
Within a white, I am in assurance
ye would pray me come ne'er.
If Health be never so lust and strong
yet if Liberty were kept from him lunge
Then sorrow and care would be his songe.
yt would abate your cheer.
Fie of wealth which lacks •ybertye
Fie of Health and be in captivity
Fie of riches and lack good company
Liberty hath no pere,
Will ye hear how he doth clatter?
What need ye to rehearse all this matter.
ye know that we twain before any other.
Liberty must needs have styll.
Liberty o• vs is glade to wait
ye sty•de to far i• your own conceit
I wis liberty ye ran make no bait
To catch vs at your will.
Now there ye lye, I can suffer no lo•ger
Wealth for Liberty doth lobo•re ever
And health for Liberty is a great store
Therefore set me not so light
Liberty I pray the reason no more
ye are welcome to vs as ye were before
In dede of liberty it is great suitor
Therefore welcome by this light
Now I thank you both full kindly
your strange words a little did grene me
And now at your cōmaūdement I am ready
And at your own will.
Mary I am come at the first call
Will, your own man have me who shall
For I am will servant to you al
Ye shall not need to send for me.
Who is acquanted with this man
He is very homely and little good he can
To come in here so boldly, then
D••ue him away quickly,
Why, I cam not till C was called
your own will opeuly ye named
Then I came a pace lest I should be blamed
There•ore I pray you let me hyde styll,
Whose will, or what will, doth he mean
Thou art not my will, I forsake thee clean
My will and their wills is often scene
Our wills can none ill
Alas good masters I can none ill
yet by my troth I am your evil will
your will, &amp; your will, &amp; yonr will, therefore keep m•
I love ye by gods mother,
This is a strange saying unto me
My will, your will, and his will, this cannot be
For in our wiles is great diversity
For one is not like another,
Yet by Christ your own will I am
The maddest will, and the merriest, than
For gods sake now, let me be your man
Till ye have better acquaintance.
I perceive this fellow is kind
And owes to vs good will and mind
Some kinds again then let him find
Let him have some furderauuce
By god •ir and I durst be so bold
A•quaintance of this man claim I would
and ky•ted to, if the troth were told
we be of one consangnynitie
How so? let me here that I pray thee heartily
Will and liberty•is, of ounce•erie old
with ont lyber•ye, will• dare not be•old
And where will lacks, liberty is full cold
Thyrfore will and liberty must needs be of kin.
In dede as he says it may well be
For will ever longs unto lybrtye
Therefore good friend welcome to me
I pray you al be good to him
For your sake he is welcome to b• all
Let him come to our place an• than he shall
Have succour of vs and help withal
&amp; now we will •apart. And wealth &amp; health goth out.
Will ye go hence. I thank ye masters with al my heart
I will s•ke you out I warra•t you fear not
Now they be gone I am glad by saint mary
A little while hear I purpose to tarry
How to deceive wealth, health, and liberty
Now must I deuyse.
For I am a child that is pas grace
I will I am called that in every place
Doth much mi•chief this is a plain case
Virtue I doo utterly despise,
But if they wit what I were
Then of my purpose I should be never y• •ere
I will keep my •onge le••e that I ••r.
My whole intent and will.
But now I marvel by this day
Where shrewd wit is gone a stray
Some crafty touche is in his way
I here him, peace, stand styll
¶Dien vous guard playsaunce
On seven or no •••chance, what youkers dare avaunt
To play a groat or twain.
Lo hear I have in store
Two or three grotes and no more
I take great thought therefore
For to keep it, it is much payne
I come vow out of a place
where is a company of small grace
Thieves and horse that spends a pace
They were drunken all the sort.
One of their purses I did a spy
Out of his sleue where it did lye
And one winked on me with his eye
But there began the sport
Their false falsehode, and I crafty wit
got the purse lo, hear I have it
I ran my way and let him sit
Smoke and shitten arse together.
And if that I had ill will here
with this money we would make good chere
Gentle brother will, I pray the appear
For thou art in some corner.
I would come in but I am a feared
Least that I be taken by the beard
With some catchepol, I have heard
How thou haste stolen a purse
Thou horsou art thou mad, cum in I say
This is not the first hazard that I have scoped
if I make au hand to deck my self gay
what am I the worse.
From thy company I cannot abide
I must •edes hold upon •hy side
y••will and shrewd wit who ca• hyde
For they will be together.
Now welcome will and what ch•a••:
By god I thought for thee a tho•sand year
P•ace for gods body who cummeth there
Hauce bear pot As soon router.
Gut nyuen s•one rutters by the moder got
It •jest ōwne s•hon, for s•aue ye no•e
De qus•eker mau iche by do do
Uan the groat bnmbarde well ic we•e
Dartyck dowsant van inhibit mete
Ic best de mauikin van de keening dangli•er
De grot kaiser kind ic been his •usket•r
Her• ye not d•onkē hance how he be gius to pra•e
The ma low perte slemi•ge is a lit•le to cheke mate
Let the knave aloe, for his name is war.
Such drunken sl•miniuges your company wilmar
Ic bes• nen emond, ic best in soche
ye sect nete vell ic force•aue ye in doche
C••pt whore leyf with yo•r gound stand ne'er
yt be•ummes you better to handle a pot of bear
Dat might ic vell dan, ic can skynke fr•lyck
Tab bers fr•w, ic bri•ges brore, begot•s nemerick
The horse• k•a•• by •he •es•e is drunk
A winking for dep• his even be clean lonck
Ic •or••e ye vell ye seg dac ic ••op
No neck, u• neck, ic count ho•e for an and or cope.
Well coppin I pray the heartily tell vs true
Wherefore come thou hither for any thy•g to sew
ye icke f•g•r en būbardere vā de koyni•g wei it be
Hob twe scaling de dagh ic c•n scote de culueryn
Nay ye shall walk a fleming knave, will ye not see
We have English g•nners ynow, there is no rome empty
Ic best en •om•erde mo•ye to m• spreken
what segye ye bones, it sal ye yode sty•n
We speak not to thee thou art a s•one man
But go thy way they be not here that promote y• cā
Cant ye me a de house dragon van degrot here.
Hauce ye must go to y• court &amp; for wealth inquire
What segre ye wealth nenyke he is net whore
wealth best in s•aunders, it my self brought him door
Be shrew your whoreson s•eminges heart therefore.
in dede as he saith, by war in •laūders theris wealth store
Segt ye dat brower, by the moder got dan
Gut nought it mot waft, to sent cafrin to mi laninā
Is he gone, farewell hanykin hows
I pray god give him a hounded drouse
For I trow a knave brought him to house
But now brother wit.
We must deuo•e how that we may
Be in service with wealth always
Let me here what thou can do or say
To help for to contrive it.
For thy pleasure that I shall
This will I doo first of all
Flatter and lye, and evermore call
Them my good masters styll.
Then with swearing, lying and powlinge
Brybry theft, and privy piking
Thus I shred wet, will ever be doing
I warrant there ill will.
I •un thee thank, this is well devised
And I ill will, would have every man despised
B•• now another thing must be con•riued
O• else al will be nought
There is one they call good remedy
I• this realm, he hath gee•t actor••y
He is a no•le m•• and much worthy
M•ny thiuges he hash wrought
He is called l•st, discreet and indifference
Willing to fulfil his souer•i•es commandment
H• is not afraid to do right punishment
T•erfore of him I am afraid
So an I to this makes me very sad
Yet oftentimes I h••e been harde bestadde
N•w yt I •m •a•ned of him I am v•rye glad
〈◊〉 c•aft• w•le for him •h•l•e ha•e
P••ce no mo words but 〈◊〉
M• think I •ear mast wealth ca••
K••le do••e 〈…〉 devout orison
T••t they may hear vs pr•y
N•w 〈…〉 Wealth, He••h, and L•bertie.
Liberty and health retur•eth back with wealth
S•rs you sh•ll have by•• •odds blessing
S••ce •e worth for •our praying
ye are well disposed and of good living
I w•ll love you the •erteral way
Sir this do we use ever• day
F•r w••th health and liberty 〈◊〉 •ray
This sa•• is m• brother, 〈…〉
He is an hard honest man.
For•oath ma••la I am his •rather
To be 〈◊〉 ser•a••, was my cū•ing hither
A• lo•ge as we two be to gether•
ye shall not pe•y•he than
To have you both 〈◊〉 service I am content
How say you liberty will you thereto cousin•
Will and wit, god hath vs lent
We may be glade of them
If we should refuse will and wit
we were to blame •or they be fit
Therefore by my well they shall not •lye
They be welcome to me,
God thank you maize•ers all three
ye shall find vs pore but 〈◊〉 we cannot be
My tongue stom•les, I cry you mercy
We will be true I should •ay,
Sirs go your way home unto one place
And w• will hye vs after •pace
And when we come we shall set you in case
To hau• a living •lway.
Th•n loke ye do both truly and just
For we must put you in great 〈◊〉
All our thou•hold guide y• must
B•have you self well.
Masters fear not for I h••e wit i•ough
To beguile my self, and 〈◊〉 beguile you
I have begyled many one I may say to you
I pray you keep that in councelll
Beware of that, what doth he say?
Beguile vs all, yet I charge ye •ay
Ye shall not beguile vs if I may
I will beware betyme.
Sir be not angry I you pray
•he fool wots not he doth say
He means •hat he will be profitable always
And save you many things.
What he means I can•ot te••
But his saying is not well
Depart hence sirs by my council
And tarry vs at our lodging.
¶Now and it please ye, will ye •ere any synging
Therein I tell you I am s••what •o•nyng
ye shall hear and ye list.
Sir I pray you sing and ye ran
Now will I begin like a lusty blood thā. 
Sirs now go your way of you I am glad
As of any ser•aunts that ever I had
For these can do doth good ••o bad
We must needs have such men
What were we if we lacked will:
And without •yt we ••old live ill
Therefore will and wit I will •epe styll.
I promise you I love them
Sir your maystership is •a•tely welcome
T•ke your place here aboue as it is reason.
I pray you •ardon vs, we know not what ye be
ye seem a man of honour, and of great anctority
S•r to know wherefore ye come we are desyrons
I am be that ought for to be well known
Of you three specially, and of duty
Great payne and business as for mine own
For you I have taken because I lo•e you heartily
To m•i•taine you is all my de•ire and faculty
yet hard it is to doo, the people be so variable
And many be so wilful, they will not be reformable.
Sir I pray you pardon vs of our ignorance now
I se well ye know vs better tha• we do yo•
I pardon you, for I doo know you w•l both
well•h, and ••l•h, is your 〈…〉
Th• which •ngla•d to forbe•e were very lot•
For by wealth and health comes •re al sa••es
Many other •e•••nes •or our gre•t wealth ••ames
T•a• they •a•e not pre•um, nor thy dare no• •e bold
To stry•e again En•la•d or a•y right with hold.
Sir ye be welcome, I de•e•h you show •s your name
Good remedy forsooth I 〈◊〉 the s•me
if I 〈◊〉 •o bold• I would pray you har•ely
To sh•we vs apart of you• great ac•oritie,
My actoritie is given to •e most special
To maintain you three, in this realm to be
What mine intent is. I will tel, •u• not all
For that were to lunge to rehire•e of a surety
And I desire you all or to be loving •o me
For your own ease, come w•lth and profit
Good remedy, then we •anst des•re yo•r aiding
For by good remedy comes all ou• preferri•g.
All that I doo intende, if ye• will thereto agr•e
And to be reformable for your own case
It is not the thing that lies only in me
But my good will, therefore I will not cease
To have your love a•d favour, and thereby to please
Al the world over, and to promote •his realm
That you three may prosper, ye pierce•ue what I mene
The chief part of all wealth lies in great estates
Their substance and lands. is right commendable
Prelates of the church is wealthy of riches
Merchaūtes hath marchaūdise &amp; goods iucōperable
Mē of •awe &amp; franklins is wealthy which i• laudable
Th•s wealth of riches is divided diverse ways
A•d to these ma•• charges, come now a days
My heart re•o•se•h to •er• your good reporting
〈◊〉 are we bound to god, which provides althing
Forsooth here is 〈◊〉 half• that I cou•• re•erse
The benefits of god that •e shows to you wealth
Co•cider English men, how va•iant they be &amp; fer•e
O• al nacious •one such, when they have their •elth
No land can do vs •arm, b•• with fall••d or •elth
r•mēbre what nōbre of m•• or a•••erie• good ord•nā•e
Specially ye grace of god, which is our 〈◊〉 forderāce
If there be any that will grudge, surm••• or ••o
Again wealth, health &amp; liberty, then ••st I for ye •••e
Sh•w •in auctoritie and power, for •o remedy it •o
That no•e of you shall diminish nor amiss• be •an
I good remedy therefore may &amp; will speak• won• blāe
For the come wealth, &amp; health both of the soul &amp; b•die
y• is mi office &amp; power, &amp; therefore I have my actoritie
Our lord con•inue ye, &amp; we thank you har•lie
Both for your good i•struction, and for your kindness
That you int•nd• so well for vs good remedy
when we have need we will desire your goodness
When we be infect in the soul or body
Then will I seek good remedy for succo•r
As yet I thank god I have no need greatly
if I have then will I seek to have your favour
Sir now we will depart hence with yo•r licence
For other divers business that we mus• have tohether
Sirs I am content, now when ye will depart
To god I commit yo• I will not make you tarry
But yet I pray with all my mind and heart
Take heed in any wise exchewe i'll &amp; shrewd company
y• a mā be never so •ood &amp; vs• 〈…〉 be •ut•rist•̄
He shall •e his name, &amp; to some vice they will him tēp
•herfore bewar• of such people, &amp; •eom thē be exemp•
yes yes I warrant you of s•c• I will beware.
Farewell good remedy &amp; well to fare.
I pray god be •our speed &amp; preserve you frō pain
it is mi mind ye should prosper I wold have it so •own.
Here is none of our acquaiutaūce will re•our•eth
we have made to louge tar•ounce
that will y• say perc••uncle
And they begone home come away apar•
Nay by god not so •astie
A little while we will larry
Good even s•r to you mary
Dwell ye in this place?
Nay good fellow I dwell not •ear
Wherefore doest thou •hat inqui••:
Would thou ought with any •ear
Speak •e not afryde
By God I would I had yo•r gown
And were a mile without the town
Thereon A would borrow a crown
It is I that so said
Hew look thou one him half a scorn
I p•omise you he is a scant gentleman bore•e
What sūy•st thou in his face
For somewhat in his face I lok•e
In dede his mastership stands a crook•
For false shrews both of you I took
And children that be past grace.
I will swear for him, as •or this years twenty
that he hath ben ever as true as I
yet sometime he will steal and make a 〈◊〉
He is of my alliance.
In good faith the same think I
That ye be both like, full unthrifty
Sirs how do ye live, show me quickly
Or I shall put you in durance
How live we? mary our meat
Cummest thou hither for to threte:
So lordly sir wittam doth speak
From wh•n•e doth he come can ye show
What dost thou aisle can thou tell?
Hast thou any thing with vs to mell?
By the mass thy hands doth tykell
Thou shalt bear me a blow.
you false thieves I know ye well
I shall let your purpose •u•y deal
ill will, and shrewd wit, the devil of hell
Take ye both for me.
Mary thou lie, our names be not so
Call vs but wit, and will, add no more thereto,
if thou doest thou were as good no
We shall handle you shrewdly
Sirs farewell here I will no longer abide
For you both shortly I will provide
Tha• all your •al•e craft shall be out tried
And our subtility known 
To go so soon the whoreson was wise
therefore some now I must devise
that each man may wealth, health and liberty despise
Or else he will mar all our meteor.
Brother wat, let me alone
When they come you shall see me a none
C•mplayne of him• unto them ec•one
And put him out of favour
Peace no mo word•s, for they come yonder
Sirs I am glade that you h• hear
How doth all our household• with them what chere•
Is every thy•g in order there
A•ir• our intent?
ye sir they be all merry and glad
With revel and •out sometime they be mad
Pipe whore by•t hoof, every knave and drabe
Is at our commaundeme•t.
What do ye say, then •e are to blame
A•d we put you in trust for the same
To keep such rule, it is a shame
It is not for our honour•
By the mass •he whoreson doth lye
There is no such rule by gods body
A man may break his •eck as lightly
As his fast in your kechin, or seller truly.
With that another I am •o• co•te•t
I would there should be libera•itie comp•ēt
A•d with honesti it is con•onioned
That our nei•hbour fare the better
you be a•g•y with all that we have done
Cum away brother let vs go •eus soon
I know a n•w m•ester where we shall be welcum•
God be with •ou gentle moister
Why will ye begone •or a word
P•raduenture we did but board
Me think ye should your master ford
For to speak my mind.
Nay •ay, I can tel what was the matter
Remedy was here, and he did •latter
ye trust he more than vs and better
But mark the end, what ye shall find
With good remedy we spake in dede
To ••low his counsel we had need
He warned vs that we should take heed
Of excess and prodigality.
I marvel ye speak so of good remedy
It is I that can do more than be
Wit can make shift at necessity•
When Remedi cannot be heard
I know some that hath this thousand year
Sought god remedy and yet never the ne'er
wit can put remedy by, yea this is clear
For wit is a crafty lad.
And will is an ungracious stay
Will hath done many things me• say
And if ye let wit and will go his way
ye will repent it soon.
Why what cause have you to go your way
ye shall abide which vs though you say nay
I will follow will, and wit always
And so I have ever done
if I wilt al my masters would so do
Then from your service I would •ot goo
Speak •ow when•her ye will or no
And let vs know your mind
Sirs ye be welcome to me plain
And for your company I am full fain
I had lever suffer great payne
Then to leave my wit and will,
Then let vs go hence, with ki•dnas my herye do kill
I pray you let vs go, wherefore do we bide styll.
As touching my first purpose hither I am com again 
I trow ye k•ow me, good remedy is my name
That every day doth take great• abor or payne
To amend all faults, I am chosen to the same
if any ma•s conscience here doth grudge or shame
Having in him self remorse, &amp; mends in time &amp; space
I am good remedy, and god is full of mercy and grace
Therefore I will stand aside, &amp; a little while remain
Of wealth, Health and Liberty, for to inquire
How they be ordered, and if any man complain
I will be glad to show me remedy, my think I se one a¦pear.
Bigots drowse it my self bin cūpt heye scō lansiu•
Ic mot in ander land lo•en, al is quade dan
Thou fleming frō whēce come y• &amp; what dost you here•
Ic my self cumt frō sent Katryns door mot ic skin• de cā beer
Get y• thither again, &amp; tarry here no lōger
Sir ic mot mid ye spreken ic my self be en scomaker
What and thou be therewith I have nothin a doo.
Ic dest al forlore, copin is dod, ic might jot do there•o
I pray thee go hence, for thou dost trouble me ill.
Nen ic seker, ic will not gon, ic wold fain live whore still
There is to mainy allaunts in this real, but now I
good remedy have so provided that English men shall
live the better daily.
What segt ye by got• drowse, dai is de quade man
Be de moro go, ic my self love descone Englishmau.
Fie on ye flattery•g known, fie ou you aliaūts al I •ay
ye can with craft &amp; subtle •iget angle•shmēs wealth away
O skon master, ic hob whore bin, this datten yeore
ic ••nskote de colue•in• &amp; ic can be or bear droer•
trust see so pro•id that wealth fromy•n have I shall
Ic seg to you dat wealth is lopen in an a•der cont•y
wat he beg• dar brough, for•tan ye net, segt me
Ic understand the well, yet thou least like a knave
wealth is here ī Englād, &amp; wealth still i trust we shall have
Ic meant no quad ic love de english man 〈◊〉 min •ere
Cūp up sent Katrin and ic shall ye geuē two •lope bear,
Get ye hence drōkē •leming you shalt tarry no le•ger here
More it net mare here bin, water sal ic gewest kiskin 
Ic will to de Kaiser began, dar sall ic wall skinkin
Is he gon• I pray god the devil go with him
where is wealth, health &amp; •iberty. I wold see thē come i•
Health comes in with a kercher on his head.
¶O good lord help me, by yonr licence my sovereign
I am homely to com her in your presēce thus diseased
Need constrains me, for remedy I wold have fine
I am īfect both body &amp; soul, I prai you be not displesed
Why what ail you show me, yet you I do not know
Glad I am to remedy auy man, that is affirmity
I perceive by your physiognomy, yt ye are very weke feeble &amp; low
yet show me your g•iefe, &amp; I will help you gladl•.
Gracio{us} remedi I tha•k you, yet I am half ashamed
to show you mi malady &amp; mi name, I was cal•ed health
Therefore I am well worthi to be punished &amp; blamed
Because I have not followed your coūsel, but al thing
may be suffered save wealth.
Are you health, this makes me very pe••i•e and sad
yet be of good chere, &amp; show how you were infect
To remedy you a•d succour you I wold be very glad
For god will pu•each the people when they be de•elt
Sir I thank god thereof for well worthy I am
My conscien•e doth judge, some trouble have I must
A me•des I will make to god and if I can
Will ād wit hath deceived me in them I put my trust.
if thou have •oone amiss, and be sorry therefore
Then half am•des is made, for that is contrission
Let that pass, now will I axe you one thing more
Where be wealth ād Liberty, be they of good disposiciō
As for wealth is fallen in decay, and noses•itie
By wast &amp; war, thorough ill will, and •hrewd wit
And liberty is kept in durance and captivity
God help vs all, and send vs good remedy for it
For to hear this tale it makes my hart heavy
yet be of good cōfort, god is full of grace, &amp; I am good
¶Sir, thē I beseech you help vs in the way of charity
I would fain but I cannot tel which way to begin
Except I might catch will &amp; wi•, then I trow I could
Tie thē shorter, for they destroy wealth, health &amp; liberty bi sin
if I had ye thieves, puny•h thē extremely I wole.
You may soon catch them, if ye will stand a side
From this place they two, will vote•onge abide.
Me think•h I here them com, help to hold thē fast will turns
Cum in wit for here is no body
We may ve bold and talk largely
Our hearts to ease and show plainly
What we have done.
I must needs laugh I cannot forbear
To remember war•e that knave will ye hear
The whoreson fleming was be ••itten for fear
Because he should boyd so soon.
Herke now do I marvel by this bread
For I we•• surely •hat h•lth be dead
I saw saw him go with a kercher on his head
As he should go to hanging.
Hark in thine Ear, if t••e whoreson hap
To complain to him that weres the red cap
I fear thou shortly he will vs cla•
By the heles from out living•
Nay nay, there is no doubt
By him I have reported all about
Tha• he doth not well, his good name to put out
ylwyl cannot say well,
Friend therein thou art the more to blame
Cos•au•der me wro•gfully, and vudesr•ued
But or thou drpart thou shalt answer for the same.
where is Wealth &amp; liberty, how hast thou thē ordered?
Qury cicis quest is un malt ombre
Me is un spy &amp; nardo compoco pa•lauere.
Thou folse thief is thine English tongue gone
as mischeuo{us} il will &amp; shrewd wit, ye have destroyed ma¦no on
Sir hurt not me, &amp; I will tel you troth anon
This same i• as false a knave as ever cam within saint Iohēs
Per amorde my as pi ca un poco
Eo quires and a• pour lag•••n• creae so
I can not tel what thou dost m•ae blabbler:
But you shalt speak English &amp; confess an other matter,
Sir I beseech your lordship, in the way of charity
Let not these thefes escape your hands they have de∣stroyed vs v•terly.
Sir, believe him not he speaks but of malice only
we be true men, thereof we shall fetch good witness
An honest man that shall be bound for him and me
The law saith plain, nulla fides con••••acts
that is troth, but who will be witness or boūd for the
There is three among you in this hows
I Iyf•o to fetch them quickly
They will come vnsēd for I warrant you if they will
what be their names, tel me what they be,
That on is Iohn Irische and Iohn s•oler
But full these be honest men all thr•••
Trust not their words they will dissemble styll
They are so false and cra••y, all •heir intent is ill.
ye lye falsely, I •peak but right a•d reason
And by the law of arms ye must ned•s be •an
you a•e called good remedy which a• al season
Should leave to mans life, and ma••taine the same
we be he•e •oath your prisoners wrongfully accused bi de•am
Keep ou• of vs fast let him lye for all
That other sor friends and witness goo shall.
Sir let him not goo a•d le•e me behind
He will ever •e a false knave, for I k•ow his mind
Hold thy tongue foals• k•aue I do not mean so
I here now ye ca•not agree, which of you should go
No by gods body there shall none go but I
Tho• playact the knave it must needs be I
Keep them safe I pray you for if they scap again
Many me• shall repent it, it shall•e to our pay•e
They be here yet, to keep them fast is mine inteut,
Have them away both to prison in continent.
Lo false knave this is for thy crafty wi•.
Now fast by the heals we are lake to sit.
I am co••ent so that I may have comp•ny
if I should be hanged, I wold be hāged honest 
Go bence with them &amp; bring wealth &amp; liberty.
Com away ye thenes, now I shall keep you s•rely,
Lock vs up &amp; keep vs as fast as ye can
yet ill will and ••rowed wit shall be with many a man.
I am half ashamed, that long i• hath ben said
That noble men by such wretches hath ben decay•ed
they did rejoice and jest, and were very well apaid
Trusting to •cape clea•e, and •till for to have rained
But now they shall not so, let them be well assured
That ylwyl and shrew de wit shall have but i'll rest
For wheresoever they be I will break• their nest
In the honour of god we ask you forgive•es al th•e
we ought to be ashamed •o look you in the face
By our folly &amp; negligence, we have done so unwisely
we were towel deceived, we p•t vs to your grace
This shall be a good warding for vs along space
when man is well punished then he will beware
w•o that knows what need is, well after dread •are
I may not blame you greatly for by mine own reasō
I know ylwyl and shrewd wit deceives great &amp; small
if ye can remābre this• and beware a •other season
This is a good example and lerni•g to you all
Now serve god and love him, &amp; for grace ever call
And ylwyl and shrewd wit, from yo• I shall ab•taine
ye have vs•d them to lunge to your damage and pain.
Forsooth sir ye sai troth, they did vs great disp•esur
Full hard it is to banquishe the vngr•cious ylwyl
He is so crooked, by slattery, dissula•ion &amp; such other
Man mind i• so var•able, &amp; glad to report i'll
I fear many one yet would have him rain styll
For some unto their own will hath so much affection
yet the devil an• i'll will is both of o•e complexion
ill will is nought, but worse is shrewd wit
For he contryueth al subtle ymanginacien
yt were impossible for a man else to doo it
shrewd wit breweth myscef• &amp; false conspyracion
He hath put me liberty in prison, ād great at tribulation
if it had not been for your good remedi &amp; fortheraūce
I • other yt hath liberty, should have bē in durance.
Be al of good chere, and have no mistrust
The e•de of i'll will and shrewd wit is but shame
Though they reygue a while, wrongfully and vniu••
yet truth will appear and their misdedes blame
Then wro•ge 〈◊〉 su••ued, and good remedy ta••
Though •alsehodeloke, and hide his matters all
Craft w••l out and disc•te will have a fall
Whereas ye are now, in distress all three
Near were ye brought in case like •o mar
Now have ye no dou•t, if ye will •e ruled after m•
I shall restore ye again as well as ever ye were
Wealth keep styll this realm, look ye stray not fa••
And Health be of good chere, yo•r disease I ca• soon mēde
Liberty now ye •e released do no more off•nd,
Now let vs al thāke god ye good remedy hath s•ude
Trust to him only for his grace and goodness
we are forgiveness o• our trespa• I trust we will amēd
And clean for•ache syn, folly, and unthriftiness
〈◊〉 we will here cōclude, sovereign of your graciousness
we beseech you to •emyt our negligence, &amp; misbehauor
There we have said amīs, we cōmit also your favour
And for your preservation heartily we will pray
your realm to increase, w•th •oy a•d tranquillity
That wealth, health &amp; liberty, may co•tin here always
By the oversight and aide of him that is good remdy
which willingly doth his deu••, under your actoritye
As part here apereth your p•rpose to my•taine
God continue his good•es, that lunge he may reign
Iesu preserne queen Elizabeth ye noble prīcis worthy
Iesu continue her health long for to endure
Ies• endue her w virtue grace &amp; honour
Iesu maintain the lords of ye coūsel to exec•te good remedi ever
Iesu speed and help al them gods honour to further
Iesu increase the comunaltie to prosper and doo well.

IN the Book of Genesis it is expressed,
That whē God to Abrahā made sure promise
That in his séede al nations should be blessed:
To send him a son by Sara he did not miss,
Then to Isaac (as there recorded it is)
By Rebecca his wife, who had lōg time bē ba¦rain
Whē pleased him, at one birth he sent sons twain.
But before Iacob and Esau yet borne were,
Or had either done good, or ill perpetrate:
As the prophet Malachie and Paule witness bear,
Iacob was chosen, and Esau reprobate:
Iacob I love (said God) and Esau I hate.
For it is not (saith Paule) in mans renewing or will,
But in Gods mercy who chooses whom he will.
But now for our coming we shall exhibit here
Of Iacob and Esau howe the story was,
Whereby Gods adoption may plainly appear:
And also, that what ever Gods ordinance was,
Nothing might defeat, but that it must come to pass.
That if this story may your eyes or ears delete,
We pray you of patience, while we it recite.
NOw let me sée what time it is by the star light?
Gods for his grace man, why it is not yet midnight,
We might have slept these four hours yet I dare well say.
But this is our good Esau his common play:
What the devil ails him? now truly I think plain,
He hath either some worms or bottes in his brain.
He scarcely sléepeth .xij. good hours in two wéekes.
I wot well his watching makes me have lean chéekes.
For there is none other life with him day by day,
But up Raga, up drowsy hogs head I say:
Why when? Up, will it not be? Up. I come anon.
Up, or I shall reyse you in faith ye drowsy hooreson.
Why, when? shall I fette you? I come sir by and by.
Up with a wilde wenyon, how long wilt thou lie?
Up I say, up at once. Up up, let vs go hence,
It is time we were in the forest an hour sense.
Now the devil stop that same yelling throat (think I)
Somwhiles. For from he call, farewell all wink of eye.
Begin he once to call, I sléepe no more that stoned,
Though half an hours sleep were worth .x. thousand poūd.
Anon when I come in, and bid him good morrow:
Ah sir, up at last, the devil give thée sorrow.
Now the devil break thy neck (think I by and by)
That hast no wit to sleep, nor in thy bed to lye.
Then come on at once, take my quiver and my bow,
Fette Louell my hound, and my horn to blow.
Then forth go we fasting an hour or two ere day,
Before we may well sée either our hands or way,
And there range we the wilde forest, no crumb of bread
From morning to starck night coming within our head,
Sometime Esaus self will faint for drink and meat:
So that he would be glad of a dead horse to eat.
Yet of fresh the next morrow forth he will again,
And sometime not come home in a whole night or twain:
Nor no delete he hath, no appetite nor mind
But to the wilde Forest, to hunt the Heart or Hind,
The Roebuck, the wilde bore, the fallow Déere, or Hare:
But howe poor Raga shall dine, he hath no care,
Poor I, must eat Acorns or Bearies from the Trée.
But if I be found slack in the suit following,
Or if I do fail in blowing or hallowing,
Or if I lack my Staff, or my Horn by my side:
He will be quick enough to fume chafe, and chide.
Am I not well at ease such a master to serve,
As must have such service, and yet will let me starve?
But in faith his fashions displease more than me,
And will have but a mad end one day we shall sée.
He passes nothing on Rebecca his mother,
And much less passes he on Iacob his brother.
But peace, mum, no more: I see moister Esau.
Howe now, are we all ready servant Raga?
Art thou up for all day man? art thou ready now?
I have ben here this half hour sir waiting for you.
And is all thing ready as I had, to my mind?
Ye have no cause, that I know, any fault to find:
Except that we disease our tent and neighbours all
With rising over early eche day when ye call.
Ah thou drowsy draffesacke, would thou rise at noon?
Nay I trow the sixth hour with thée were ouersoone.
Nay I speak of your neighbours being men honest,
That labour all the day, and would fine be at rest:
Whom with blowing your Horn ye disease al abouts.
What care I for waking a sort of clubbishe louts?
And I speak of Rebecca your mother, our dame.
Tut I pass not whether she doe me praise or blame.
And I speak of your good father, old Isaac.
Peace foolish knave: As for my father Isaac,
In case he be a sléepe, I doe him not disease,
And if he be waking, I know I do him please,
For he loves me well from mine nativity,
And never so as now, for mine activity.
Therefore have at it, once more will I blow my Horn
To give my neighbour louts an hail peal in a morn.
Now my moister Lightfoote, how say you to this gear,
Will you do your duty to red or fallow Dear?
And Swan mine own good cur, I do think in my mind,
The game shall run apace, if thou come far behind:
And ha Takepart, come Takepart, here, how say you child
Wilt not thou do thy part? yes, else I am beguiled.
But I shrew your chéekes, they have had too much meat.
I blame not dogs to take it, if they may it geat:
But as for my part, they could have pardie,
A small releuauit of that that ye give me.
They may run light enough for ought of me they got,
I had not a good meals meat this wéeke that I wot.
If we have luck this day to kill Hare, Teg, or Doe,
Thou shalt eat thy belly full, till thou cry hoe.
I thank you when I have it, master Esau.
Well, come on, let vs go now servant Raga.
Is there any thing more, that I should say or do?
For perhaps we come not again this day or two.
I know nothing moister, to God I make a vow,
Except you would take your brother Iacob with you:
I never yet saw him with you an hunting go,
Shall we prove him once whether he will go or no?
No, no, that were in vain: Alas good simple mom.
Nay, he must tarry and suck mothers dug at home:
Iacob must kéepe home I trow, under mothers wing,
To be from the Tents he loves not of all thing.
Iacob loves no hunting in the wild forest:
And would fear if he should there sée any wild beast.
Yea to sée the game run, Iacob would be in fear.
In good sooth I wene he would think eche Hare a Bear.
What brother mine, what a word call ye that?
Sir I am scarce waked: I spake ere I wit what.
Come on your ways my child, take the law of the game.
I will wake you I trow, and set your tongue in frame.
Oh what have you done moister Esau, Gods apes.
Why can ye not yet refrain from letting such scopes?
Come on, ye must have thrée iertes for the nonce.
One.
Oh, for Gods love sir have done, dispatch at once.
Nay there is no remedy but bide it, there is twain.
O ye rent my cheverel, let me be past my pain.
Take heed of Hūting terms frō hensforth, there is thrée.
Whoup. Now a mischief on all mopyng fools for mée.
Iacob shall kéepe the Tents ten year for Raga,
Ere I move again that he hunt with Esau.
Come on, now let vs go. God send vs game and luck,
And if my hand serve me well,
Ye will kill a Duck.
AH sir, I sée I am an early man this morn,
I am once more begylde with Esau his horn.
But there is no such stirrer as Esau is:
He is up day by day before the Crow pis:
Then makes he with his Horn such tooting and blowing
And with his wide throat such shouting and hallowing,
That no neighbour shall in his Tent take any rest,
From Esau addresses him to the Forest.
So that he makes vs whether we will or no,
Better husbands than we would be, abroad to go,
Eche of vs about our business and our work.
But whom doe I sée yonder coming in the dark?
It is my neyghbor Zither, I perceive him now.
What neighbour Hanan, well met, good morrow to you.
I sée well now I am not beguiled alone:
But what boot to lye still? for rest we can take none.
That I marvel much of old father Isaac,
Being so godly a man, why he is so slack
To bring his son Esau to a better stay.
What should he do in the matter I you pray?
Oh it is no small charge to fathers before God,
So to train their children in youth under the rod,
That when they come to age they may virtue ensue,
Wicked pranks abhor, and all lewdness eschew.
And me thinks Isaac, being a man (as he is)
A chosen man of God, should not be slack in this.
Alack good man, what should he do more than he hath don?
I dare say no father hath better taught his son,
Nor no two have given better example of life
Unto their children, than both he and his wife:
As by their younger son Iacob it doth appear▪
He lives no looce life, he doth God love and fear.
He kéepeth here in the Tents like a quiet man:
He gives not himself to wildness any when.
But Esau evermore from his young childhood
Hath ben like to prove ill, and never to be good.
Young it pricks (folks do say) that will be a thorne,
Esau hath ben nought ever since he was borne.
And whereof comes this, of Education?
Nay it is of his own ill inclination.
They were brought up both under one tuition,
But they be not both of one disposition▪
Esau is given to looce and lewd living.
In faith I warrant him have but shroud thriving.
Neither see I any hope that he will amend.
Then let him even look to come to an ill end.
For youth that will follow none but their own bridle,
That leads a dissolute life and an idle,
Youth that refuses wholesome documents,
Or to take example of their godly parents,
Youth that is retchelesse, and takes no regard,
What become of them self, nor which end go forward,
It is great marvel and a special grace,
If ever they come to goodness all their life space.
But why doe we consume this whole morning in talk,
Of one that hath no reck no care what way he walk,
We had been as good to have kept our bed still.
Oh it is our part to lament them that doe ill.
Like as very Nature, a godly heart doth move
Others good procéedings to tender and to love:
So such as in no wise to goodness will be brought:
What good mā but will mourn, since god vs al hath wrought
But ye have some busynesse, and so have I.
And we have ben long, farewell neighbour heartily.
COme forth son Iacob, why tarriest thou behind?
Forsooth mother, I thought ye had said al your mind.
Nay, come I have yet a word or two more to say.
What soever pleases you, speak to me ye may.
Saying thy brother Esau is such an one,
Why rebukest thou him not when ye are alone?
Why doest thou not give him some good sad wise counsel?
He lacks not that mother, if it would avail.
But when I doe him any thing of his fault tell,
He calls me foolish proud boy with him to mell.
He will sometime demand by what authoritée,
I presume to teach them which mine elders bee?
He will sometime ask if I learn of my mother,
To take on me teaching of mine elder brother?
Sometime when I tell him of his lewd behauour,
He will lend me a mock or twain for my labour:
And sometime for anger he will out with his purse
And call me as please him, and swear he will doe worse.
Oh Lord, that to bear such a son it was my chance.
Mother, we must be content with Gods ordinance.
Or, if I should néedes have Esau to my soon,
Would God thou Iacob hottest the Eldership won.
Mother, it is to late to wish for that is past:
It will not be done now wish ye never so fast.
And I would not have you to wish against Gods will:
For both it is in vain, and also it is ill.
Why did it not please God, that thou shouldest as wele
Tread upon his crown, as hold him fast by the heal?
Whatsoever mystery the Lord therein meant,
Must be referred to his unsearched judgment.
And what soever he hath pointed me unto,
I am his own vessel his will with me to do.
Well, some strange thing therein of God intended was,
And what he hath decréed, must sure come to pass.
I remember when I had you both conceived,
A voice thus saying from the Lord I received:
Rebecca, in thy womb are now two nations,
Of unlike natures and contrary fashions.
The one shall be a mightier people elect:
And the elder to the younger shall be subject.
I know this voice came not to me of nothing:
Therefore thou shalt follow my counsel in o thing.
So it be not displeasing to the Lord I must.
I fear the lord eke, who is merciful and just:
And loath would I be, his majesty to offend,
But by me (I doubt not to work he doth intende,
Assay if thou can, at some one time or other,
To buy the right of eldership from thy brother:
Do thou buy the birthright that to him doth belong,
So may thou have the blessing, and doe him no wrong.
What thou hast once bought, is thine own of due right.
Mother Rebecca, if withouten fraud I might,
I would your advise put in ur with all my hart,
But I may not attempt any such guileful part:
To buy my brothers eldership and his birthright,
I fear would be a great offence in Gods sight.
Which thing if I wist, to redéeme I no would,
Though I might get thereby ten millions of gold.
God, who by his word and almightifull decrée,
Hath appointed thée Esau his lord to bée,
Hath appointed some way to have it brought about.
And that is this way, my sprite doth not dout.
Upon your word mother, I will assay ere long,
Yet it grudges my heart to doe my brother wrong.
Thou shalt do no wrong son Iacob, on my peril.
Then by Gods leave once assay I will.
Then farewell dere son, Gods blessing &amp; mine with thée.
I will again to the Tent. Well you bée.
Ah my swéete son Iacob, good fortune God thée send.
The most gentle young man alive, as God me mend.
And the most natural to father and mother:
O that such a meke spirit were in thy brother,
Or thy sire loved thée as thou hast merited,
And then should Esau soon be disherited.
WHere art thou my boy Mido, when I doe thée lack?
Who calls Mido? here good moister Isaac.
Come lead me forth of doors a little I thée pray.
Lay your hand on my shoulder, and come on this way.
Now O Lord of heaven, the fountain of all grate,
If it be thy good will that my will shall take place:
Send success to Iacob, according to thy word,
That his elder brother may serve him as his lord.
Sir, whither would ye go, now that abroad ye be?
To myfe Rebecca.
Yonder I doe his sée.
Lord, thou know Iacob to be thy servant true,
And Esau all froward thy ways to ensue..
Yonder she is speaking, what ever she doth say:
By holding up his hands, it séemeth she doth pray.
Where be ye wife Rebecca? where be ye woman?
Who is that calls? Isaac my good man?
Where be ye wife Rebecca, let me understand?
She comes to you apace.
Here my lord, at hand.
Saving that what so ever God doth is all right,
No small grief it were for a man to lack his sight.
But what the Lord doth send or work by his high will,
Can not but be the best, no such thing can be ill.
All bodily punishment or infirmity,
With all man of nature, what ever they be,
Yea and all other aff•ictions temporal:
As loss, persecution, or troubles mortal,
Are nothing but a trial or probation.
And what is he that firmly trusts in the Lord,
Or steadfastly believes his promise and word,
And knows him to be the God omnipotent,
That féedeth and governs all that he hath sent:
Protecting his faithful in every degrée,
And them to relieve in all their necessity?
What creature (I say) that doth this understand,
Will not take all thing in good part at Gods hand?
Shall we at Gods hand receive prosperity,
And not be content likewise with adversity?
We ought to be thankful what ever God doth send,
And our selves wholly to his will to commend.
So should it be, and I thank my lord Isaac,
Such daily lessons at your hand I doe not lack.
Why then should not I thank the Lord, if it please him
That I shall now be blind, and my sight wax all dim.
For who so to old age will here live and endure,
Must of force abide all such defautes of nature.
Why must I be blind too, if I be an old man?
How shall I grope the way, or who shall lead me than?
If the Lord have pointed thée such old days to sée,
He will also provide that shall be méete for thée.
I trow if I were blind, I could go well enough,
I could grope the way thus, and go as I do now.
I have done so ere now both by day and by night,
As I see you grope the way, and have hit it right.
Yea sir boy, will ye play any such childish knack?
As to counterfeit your blind moister Isaac:
That is but to mock him for his impediment.
Nay I never did it in any such intent.
Nay it is to tempt God before thou have néede:
Whereby thou may provoke him in very déede,
With some great misfortune or plague to punish thée.
Then will I never more do so while I may see:
But against I be blind, I will be so perfight,
That though no man lead me, I will go at midnight.
Now wife, touching the purpose that I sought for you.
What saith my lord Isaac to his handemayde now?
Ye have oft in covert words ben right earnest
To have me grant unto you a boune and request:
But ye never told me yet plainly what it was,
Therefore I have ever yet let the matter pass.
And now of late by oft being from me absent,
I have half suspected you to be scarce content.
But wife Rebecca, I would not have you to morn,
As though I did your honest petition worn.
For I never meant to deny in all my life
Any lawful or honest request to my wife.
But in case it be a thing unreasonable,
Then must I néedes be to you untractable.
Now therefore say on, and tell me what is your case.
I would, if I were sure in your heart to find grace:
Else sir I would be loathe.
To speak do not refrain,
And if it be reasonable ye shall obtain:
Otherwise, ye must pardon me gentle swéete wife.
Sir, ye know your son Esau, and sée his life,
Howe looce it is, and howe stiff he is and stubborn,
Howe retchelesly he doth him self misgouerne:
He gives himself to hunting out of reason,
And serves the Lord and vs at no time or season.
These conditions can not be acceptable
In the sight of God, nor to men allowable.
Now his brother Iacob your younger son and mine,
Doth more apply his heart to séeke the ways divine.
He lives here quietly at home in the Tent,
There is no man nor child but is with him content.
Oh wife, I perceive ye speak of affection,
To Iacob ye bear love, and to his brother none.
I déede sir, I can not love Esau so well
As I doe Iacob, the plain truth to you to tell.
For I have no comfort of Esau God wot:
I scarce know where I have a son of him or not.
He goes abroad so early before day light,
And returns home again so late in the night,
And vneth I set eye on him in the whole week:
No sometime not in twain, though I doe for him séeke.
And all the neighbours sée him as seldom as I.
But when they would take rest, they hear him blow &amp; cry.
Some sée him so seldom, they ask if he be sick:
Sometimes some demand whether he be dead or quick.
But to make short tale, such his conditions be,
That I wish of God he had ne'er been borne of me.
Well wife, I love Esau, and must for causes twain.
Surely your love is bestowed on him in vain.
First active he is, as any young man can be:
And many a good morsel he brings home to me.
Then he is mine eldest and first begotten son.
If God were so pleased, I would that were fordonne.
And the eldest son is called the fathers might.
If yours rest in Esau, God give vs good night.
A prerogative he hath in every thing.
More pity he should have it without deserving.
Of all the goods his portion is greater.
That the worthy should have it, I think much better.
Among his bretherne, he hath the preeminence.
Where Esau is chief, there is a gay presence.
Over his bretherne he is sovereign and lord.
Such dignity in Esau doth ill accord.
He is the head of the fathers succession.
I would Esau had lost that possession.
And he hath the chief title of inheritance.
Wisdom would in Esau change that ordinance.
To the eldest son is due the fathers blessing.
That should be Iacobs, if I might have my wishing.
And the chief endowement of the fathers substance.
Which will thrive well in Esau his governance.
By title of Eldership he hath his birthright.
And that would I remove to Iacob if I might.
He must have double portion to an other.
That were more fit for Iacob his younger brother.
In all manner of things divided by a rate.
Well given goods to him that the Lord doth hate.
Why say ye so of Esau mine eldest son?
I say true, if he procéede as he hath begone.
Is he not your son too, as well as he is mine?
Wherefore do ye then against him thus sore rapine?
Because that in my spirit verily I know,
God will set up Iacob, and Esau down throw.
I have showed you many a time ere this day,
What the Lord of them being in my womb did say.
I use not for to lye: And I believe certain,
That the Lord spake not these words to me in vain.
And Iacob it is (I know) in whom the Lord will
His promises to you made, and to your seed fulfil.
I doubt not his promise made to me and my seed,
Leaving to his conveyance howe it shall procéede.
The Lord after his way change thinheritance,
But I may not wittingly break our ordinance.
Now would God, I could persuade my lord Isaac,
Iacob to prefer, and Esau to put back.
I may not do it wife, I pray you be content.
The title of birthright that comes by descent,
Or the place of eld•ship coming by due course
I may not change nor shift, for better nor for worse.
Natures law it is, the eldest son to knowledge,
And in no wise to bar •ym of his heritage,
And ye shall of Esau one day have comfort.
Set a good long day then, or else we shall come short.
I warrant you, he will doe well enough at length.
You must needs cōmend him being your might &amp; strēgth
Well, now go we hence, little Mido where art thou?
I have stood here all this while, listening howe you
And my Dame Rebecca have been laying the law,
But she hath as quick answers as ever I saw.
Ye could not speak any thing unto his so thick,
But she had his answer as ready and as quick.
Yea, women's answers are but few times to séeke.
But I did not sée Esau neither all this same wéeke:
Nor I do love your son Esau so well,
As I do love your son Iacob by a great deal.
No doest thou Mido, and tell me the cause why?
Why? for I doe not: And none other cause know I.
But every body as well one as other,
Doe wish that Iacob had been the elder brother.
Well, come on, let vs go.
And who shall lead you? I?
No, it is my office as long as I am by.
And I would all wives, as the world this day is,
Would unto their husbands likewise do their office.
Why dame Rebecca, then al wedded men should be blind.
What thou foolish lad, no such thing was in my mind.
I Have heard it oft, but now I féele a wonder,
In what grievous pain they die, that die for hunger.
Oh my gréedie stomach howe it doth bite and gnaw?
If I were at a rack, I could eat hey or straw.
Mine empty guts doe fret, my maw doth even tear,
Would God I had a piece of some horsebread here.
Yet is moister Esau in worse case than I.
If he have not some meat the sooner he will die:
He hath sonke for faintness twice or thrice by the way.
And not one siely bit we got since yesterday.
All that ever he hath, he would have given to day
To have had but thrée morsels his hunger to allay.
Or in the field to have met with some hogs,
I could scarcely keep him from eating of these dogs.
He hath sent me before some meat for to provide,
And comes créeping after, scarce able to stride.
But if I know where to get of any man,
For to ease mine own self, as hungry as I am,
I pray God I stink: but if any come to me,
Die who die will, for sure I will first served be.
I will see if any be ready here at home:
Or whether Iacob have any that peakishe mom.
But first I must put all my dogs up,
And lay up this gear, and then God send vs the cup.
OH what a grievous pain is hunger to a man?
Take all that I have for meat, help who that can.
O Lord, some good body for Gods sake give me meat.
I force not what it were, so that I had to eat.
Meat or drink, save my life, or bread, I reck not what.
If there be nothing else, some man give me a cat.
If any good body on me will doe so much cost,
I will tear and eat his raw, she shall ne'er be roast,
I promise of honesty I will eat his raw.
And what a noddy was I, and a hooreson dawe,
To let Raga go with all my dogs at ones:
A shoulder of a dog were now meat for the nones.
Oh what shall I doe? my téeth I can scarcely charm,
From gnawing away the braun of my very arm.
I can no longer stand for faint, I must néedes lie.
And except meat come soon, remediless I die.
And where art thou Raga whom I sent before?
Unless thou come at once, I never sée thée more.
Where art thou Raga, I hear not of thée yet?
Here as fast as I can, but no meat can I get.
Not one draught of drink, not one poor morsel of bread
Not one bit or crum though I should straight way be dead.
Therefore ye may now see how much ye are to blame,
That will thus starve your self for following your game.
Ah thou villain, tell thou me this now?
If had thée, I would eat thée, to God I vow,
Ah, meat thou whoreson, why hast thou not brought me meat?
Would you have me bring you that I can nowhere geat.
Come hither, let me tell thée a word in thine ear.
Nay, speak out aloud: I will not come a foot ne'er.
Fall ye to snatching at folks? adieu I am gone.
Nay for gods love Raga, leave me not alone:
I will not eat thée Raga, so God me help.
No, I shall desire you to choose some other whelp.
Being in your best lust I would topple with ye,
And pluck a good crow ere ye brake your fast with me.
What? are you mankene now? I reckon it best I,
To bind your hands behind you even as ye lye.
Nay have mercy on me, and let me not perish.
In faith nought could I get wherewith you to cherish.
Was there nothing to be had among so many?
I could not find one but Iacob that had any,
And no grant would he make for ought that I could say,
Yet no man alive with fairer words could him pray.
But the best red pottage he hath that ever was.
Go pray him I may speak with him once ere I pass.
That message by Gods grace shall not long be undone.
Hie thee go apace, and return again soon.
If Iacob have due brother•y compassion.
He will not sée me faint after this fashion,
But I dare say, the wretch had rather sée me throst,
Than he would find in his heart to do so much cost:
For where is between one fremman and an other,
Less love found than now between brother and brother?
Will Iacob come forth to show comfort unto me?
The horizon hypocrite will as soon hanged be.
Yet peace, me thinks Iacob is coming in dede:
And my mind gives me at his hand I shall speed.
For he is as gentle and loving as can be,
As full of compassion and pity.
But let me sée, doth he come? no I warrant you.
He come quote I? tush, he come? then hang Esau.
For there is not this day in all the world round,
Such an other hodypeake wretch to be found.
And Raga my man, is not that a fine knave?
Have any mo masters such a man as I have?
So idle, so loitering, so trifling, so toying?
So prattling, so tra•ling, so chiding, so boying?
So jesting, so wresting, so mocking, so mowing?
So nipping, so tripping, so cocking, so crowing?
So knappishe, so snappish, so eluishe, so froward?
So crabbed, so wrabbed, so stiff, so untoward?
In play or in pastime, so jocund, so merry?
In work or in labour so dead or so weary?
Oh that I had his ear between my téeth now,
I should shake him even as a dog that lulls a sow.
But in faith if ever I recover my self,
There was never none trounced as I shall trounce that elf▪
He and Iacob are agréed I dare say, I,
Not to come at all, but to suffer me here to die.
Which if they doo, they shall find this same word true,
That after I am dead, my soul shall them pursue.
I will be avenged on all foes till I dye.
Yea and take vengeance when I am dead too I.
For I mistrust against me agréed they have:
For the one is but a fool, and tother a stark knave.
I assure you Iacob, the man is very weak.
But hark once again, me think I hear them speak.
I promise you I fear his life be already past.
Mary God forbid.
Lo now they come at last.
If ye believe not me, sée your self where he is.
Fie brother Esau, what a folly is this?
About vain pastime to wander abroad, and peak,
Till with hunger you make your self thus faint &amp; weak.
Brother Iacob, I pray you chide now no longer,
But give me somewhat wherewith to slake mine honger,
Alack brother, I have in my little cottage,
Nothing but a mease of gross and homely pottage.
Refresh me therewithal, and boldly ask of me,
The best thing that I have, what soever it be.
I were a very beast, when thou my life doest save,
If I should stick with thée for the best thing I have.
Can ye be content to sell your birthright to mée?
Hold, here is my hand, I doe sell it here to thée.
With all the profits thereof henceforth to be thine,
As frée, as full, as large, as ever it was mine.
Then swear thou hand in hand before the living Lord,
This bargain to fulfil, and to stand by thy word.
Before the Lord I swear, to whom eche heart is known
That my birthright that was, from hensforth is thine own.
Thou shalt also with me by this promise indent,
With this bargain and sale to hold thy self content.
If eche penny thereof might be worth twenty pound,
I willingly to thée surrender it this stoned.
And if eche cicle might be worth a whole talent,
I promise with this sale to hold me content.
Come, let vs set him on foot that he may go sup.
Nay, first I will know a thing, ere I help him up.
Sir, will ye eat folk when ye are long fasting?
No, I pray thée help me up, and leave thy jesting.
No trow, eat your brother Iacob now if you lust.
For you shall not eat me, I tell you, that is just.
Come, that with my pottage thou may refreshed be.
There is no meat on earth that so well likes me.
Yet I may tell you, it is pottage dearly bought.
No not a white, for my bargain take thou no thought.
I defy that birthright that should be of more price,
Than helping of ones self, I am not so unwise.
And how then sir, shall poor Raga have no meat?
Yes, and if thou can my brother Iacob entreat.
God grant I have enough for Esau alone.
Why then I perceive poor Raga shall have none.
Well, much good do it you with your pottage of Rice:
I would fast and fare ill, ere I eat of that price.
Would I sell my birthright being an eldest son?
Forsooth then were it a fair thréede that I had spoon.
And then to let it go for a mease of pottage,
What is that, but both unthriftiness and dotage?
Alack, alack, good blessed father Isaac,
That ever son of thine, should play such a lewd knack.
And yet I doe not think but God this thing hath wrought,
For Iacob is as good as Esau is nought.
But forth comes Mido, as fast as he can trot:
For a cicle, whether to call me in or not?
HA, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha,
Now who saw ere such an other as Esau?
By my truth I will not lie to thee Raga,
Since I was borne, I never see any man
So gréedily eat rice out of a pot or pan.
He would not have a dish, but take the pot and sup.
Ye never saw hungry dog so slab pottage up.
Why howe did he sup it? I pray thée tel me how?
Mary even thus, as thou shalt sée me doo now.
Oh I thank you Iacob: with all my hart Iacob.
Gently done Iacob: A frendely part Iacob.
I can sup so Iacob.
Yea than will I sup too Iacob.
Here is good meat Iacob.
As ere was eat Iacob.
As ere I saw Iacob.
Esau a dawe Iacob.
Sweet rice pottage Iacob.
By Esaus dotage Iacob.
Ioily good chéere Iacob.
But bought full déere Iacob.
I was hungry Iacob.
I was an unthrift Iacob.
Ye will none now Iacob.
I can not for you Iacob.
I will eat all Iacob.
The devil go withal Iacob.
Thou art a good son Iacob.
And would he never have done Iacob?
No, but styll cogeld in like Jack daw that cries call kob.
That to be killed I could not laughing forbear:
And therefore I came out, I durst not abide there.
Is there any pottage left for me that thou wot?
No. I left Esau about to like the pot.
Lick quote thou? now a shame take him that can all lick.
The pot shall need no washing, he will it so like.
And by this he is sitting down to bread and drink.
And shall I have no part with him, dost thou think?
No, for he praide Iacob ere he did begin,
To shut the tent fast that no mo gestes come in.
And made he no mention of me his servant?
He said thou were a knave, and had thée hence, avaunt.
Go shift where thou coldest, thou got nothing there.
God yield you Esau, with all my stomachere.
I must in again, lest perhaps I be shent,
For I asked no body licence when I went.
Nay it is his nature, doo what ye can for him,
No thank at his hand but choose you sink or swim.
Then reason it with him in a mete time and place,
And he shall be ready to flée straight in your face.
This proverb in Esau may be understand:
Claw a churl by the tail, and he will file your hand.
Well iwis Esau, ye did know well ynouw
That I had as much need to be meated as you.
Have I trotted and trudged all night and all day,
And now leave me without door, and so go your way?
Have I spent so much labour for you to provide,
And you nothing regard what of me may betide?
Have I run with you while I was able to go,
And now you purchase food for your self and no mo?
Have I taken so long pain you truly to serve,
And can ye be content that I famish and starve?
I must lackey and come lugging greyhound and hound
And carry the weight I dare say of twenty pound,
And to help his hunger purchase grace and favour,
And now to be shut out fasting for my labour.
By my faith I may say, I serve a good moister,
Nay nay, I serve an ill husband and a waster.
That neither profit regards nor honesty,
What marvel I then if he pass so light on me?
But Esau now that ye have sold your birthright,
I commend me to you, and god give you good night.
And let a friend tell him his fault at any time,
Ye shall hear him chafe beyond all reason or rime.
Except it were a fiend or a very helhounde,
Ye never saw the match of him in any ground.
When I show him of good will what others do say,
He will fall out with me, and offer me a fray.
And what can there be a worser condition,
Than to doe ill, and refuse admonition?
Can such a one prosper, or come to a good end?
Then I care not howe many children God me send.
Once Esau shall not beguile me, I can tell:
Except he shall fortune to amend, or doe well.
Therefore why doe I about him wast thus much talk,
Whom no man can induce ordinately to walk?
But some man perchance doth not a little wonder,
Howe I who but right now did roar out for hunger,
Have now so much vacant and void time of leisure,
To walk and to talk, and discourse all of pleasure.
I told you at the first, I would provide for one:
My mother taught me that lesson a good while agony.
When I came to Iacob his friendship to require,
I drew ne'er and ne'er till I came to the fire.
There harde beside me stood the pottage pot,
Even as God would have it, neither cold nor hot,
Good simple Iacob could not turn his back so thick,
But I at the little got a goulpe or a like.
So that ere I went I made a very good meal.
And dynde better cheap than Esau a good deal.
But here comes now moister Esau forth.
AH sir, when one is hungry, good meat is much worth.
And well fare a good brother yet in time of néede,
The world is now meetly well amended in déede.
By my truth if I had bidden from meat any longer,
I think my very maw would have fret asonder.
Then had I been dead and gone I make God a vow▪
Surely then the world had had a great loss of you.
For where should we have had your fellow in your place?
What should I have done with my birthright in this case.
Kept it still, and ye had not been a very ass.
But the best pottage it was yet that ever was.
It were sin not to sell ones soul for such gear.
Ye have done no less in my conscience I fear.
Who is this that stands clattering at my back?
A poor man of yours sir, that doth his dinner lack.
Dinner whoreson knave? dinner at this time a day?
Nothing with thée, but dinner and mounching always.
Why thou whoreson villain slave, who is hungry now?
In dede sir (as séemeth by your words) not you.
A man were better fill the bellies of some twelfe,
Than to fill the gut of one such whoreson elf,
That doth none other good but eat and drink and sleep.
He shall do some thing else whom ye shall have to keep.
And that makes thée so slothful and so lither,
I dare say he was six hours coming hither,
When I sent him to make provision before,
Not passing a mile hence or very little more.
And yet being so far past the hour of dining,
Sée and the knave be not for his dinner whining.
Fast a while, fast with a mischief gréedy slave,
Must I provide meat for every glutton knave?
I may fast for any meat that of you I have.
Or deserve thy dinner before thou do it crave.
If I have not deserved it at this season,
I shall never deserve it in mine own reason.
Ye promised I should eat till I cried hoe.
Yea that was if we toke either hare, tegge, or Doe.
But when your self were hungry, ye said I wot what.
What thou villain slave, tell thou me now of that▪
Then, help, run apace, Raga my good servant.
Yea then was then, now is it otherwise: avaunt.
Have I nothing to do but provide meat for you?
Ye might have geuē me some part when ye had enough.
What, of the red rice pottage with Iacob I had?
Why, the crow would not give it his bird, thou art mad
Is that meat for you? nay it would make you to rank.
Nay soft brother mine, I must keep you more lank.
It hath made me even since so lusty and fresh,
As though I had eaten all delicates of flesh.
I feel no manner faintness whereof to complain.
Yet to morrow ye must be as hungry again,
Then must ye and will ye wish again for good chere:
And repent you that every bought this so dere.
Repent me? wherefore, then the Lord give me sorrow,
If it were to do, I would do it to morrow.
For thou foolish knave, what hath Iacob of me bought?
But a matter of a straw, and a thing of nought.
My birthright and whole title of mine eldership.
Mary sir I pray God much good do it his friendship,
If I die to morrow, what good would it do me?
If he die to morrow, what benefit hath he?
And for a thing hanging on such casualty:
Better a mease of pottage than nothing party.
If my father live long, when should I it enjoy?
If my father die soon, then is it but a toy.
For if the time were come, think thou that Iacob,
Should find Esau such a lout or such a lob,
To suffer him to enjoy my birthright in rest?
Nay, I will first toss him and trounce him of the best,
I think to find it a matter of conscience,
And Iacob first to have a fart sir reverence.
When my father Isaac shall the matter know:
He will not let Iacob have my birthright I trow.
Or if he should keep it as his own, I pray you,
Might not I live without it and doo well ynow?
Do none but men eldest sons prosper well?
How live younger brethren then, I beseech you tell?
Once, if any thing be by the sword to be got:
This falchion and I will have part to our lot.
But now come on, go we abroad a while and walk,
Let my birthright go, and of other matters talk.
Who? I walk? nay I trow not, till I have better dined.
It is more time to séeke where I may some meat find.
What say thou drawlatch? come forth with a mischéef.
Wilt thou not go with me? on forward whoreson théef.
Shall it be as pleases you, or as pleases me?
Nay as pleases you sir, me think it must be.
And where be my dogs? and my hound? be they all well?
Better than your man, for they be in their kenell.
Then go sée all be well in my part of the tent.
With a right good will sir, I go incontinent.
And I will to my field the which I cleansed last,
To sée what hope there is, that it will yield fruit fast.
THou know little Mido where my mother is.
I can go to his as straight as a thread, and not miss.
Go cal his, and come again with her thine own self.
Yes, ye shall sée me scudde like a little elf.
Where I have by the enticement of my mother,
Bargained and bought the birthright of my brother:
Turn it all to good O Lord, if it be thy will:
Thou know my heart Lord, I did it for no ill.
And what ever shall please thée to work or to do,
Thou shalt find me pressed and obedient thereto.
But here is my mother Rebecca now in place.
How say you master Iacob, ran not I apace?
Yes, and a good son to go quick on your errand.
Son how goes the matter? let me understand.
Forsooth mother, I did so as ye me bade,
Esau to sell me all his birthright persuade.
Hast thou bought it in dede, and he therewith content?
Yea, and have his promise that he will never repent.
Is the bargain through? hast thou paid him his price?
Yea that I have, a mease of red pottage of rice,
And he eaten up every whit well I wot.
When he had supped up all, I saw him like the pot.
Thus he licked, and thus he licked, and this way.
I thought to have licked the pot my self once to day.
But Esau beguiled me, I shrew him for that,
And left not so much as a like for pusse our cat.
Son Iacob, forasmuch as thou hast so well sped,
With an himne or psalm let the Lord be praised.
Sing we all together, and give thanks to the Lord,
Whose promise and performance do so well accord.
Shall we sing the same himne that al our house doth sing▪
For Abraham and his seed to give God praising.
Yea the very same.
Then must we all kneel down thus,
And Abra our maid here must also sing with vs,
Kneel down Abra, what I say, will ye not kneel down?
Kneel when I bid you, the slackest wench in this town.
BLessed be thou, O the God of Abraham,
For thou art the Lord our God, and none but thou:
What thou workest to the glory of thy name,
Passes man reason to search what way or how.
Thy promise it was Abraham should have seed,
More than the stars of the sky to be told,
He believed and had Isaac in deed,
When both he and Sara seemed very old.
Isaac many years longed for a son,
Rebecca thy handmaid long time was barren,
By prayer in thy sight such favour he won,
That at one birth she brought him forth sons twain▪
Wherefore O Lord, we do confess and believe,
That both thou can and wilt thy promise fulfil:
But how it shall come we can no reason give,
Save all to be wrought according to thy will.
Blessed be thou O God of Abraham. &amp;c.
Now dout not Iacob, but God hath appointed thée
As the eldest son unto Isaac to bée:
And now have no dout, but thou art sure elected,
And that unthrift Esau of God rejected.
And to sell thée his birthright since he was so mad,
I warrant thee the blessing that he should have had.
Yea? how may that be wrought?
Yes, yes, let me alone.
Ones good old Isaac is blind, and can not sée,
So that by policy he may beguiled bée.
I shall devise howe, for no ill intent, no thought,
But to bring to pass that I know god will have wrought
And I charge you twain, Abra, and little Mido.
Nay ye should have set Mido before Abra, trow.
For I am a man toward, and so is not she.
No but yet I am more woman toward than ye.
I charge you both that what ever hath hene spoken,
Ye do not to any living body open.
For my part it shall to no body uttered be.
And slit my tongue, if ever it come out for me:
But if any tell, Abra here, will be prattling.
For they say, women will ever be clattering.
There is none here that pratleth so much as you.
No mo words, but hence we altogether now,
NOw since I last saw mine old father Isaac,
Both I do think it long, and he will judge me slack
But he comes forth, I will here listen and sée,
Whether he shall chance to speak any word of me.
On lead me forth Mido, to the bench on this hand,
That I may sit me down, for I can not long stand.
Here sir this same way, and ye be at the bench now,
Where ye may sit down in gods name if please you.
I marvel where Esau my son doth become,
That he doth now of days visit me so seldom.
But it is oft scene whom fathers do best favour,
Of them they have lest love again for their labour.
I think since I saw him it is a whole wéeke.
In faith little Mido I would thou would him séeke.
Forsooth moister Isaac, and I knew it where,
It should not be very long ere I would be there.
But shall I at adventure go séeke where he is?
Séeke no farther Mido, already here he is.
Me thinks I have Esau his voice perceived.
Ye guess truly father, ye are not deceived.
Here he is come now invisible by my soul:
For I saw him not till he spake harde at my poule,
Now go thou in Mido, let vs two here alone.
Sir if ye command me, full quickly I am gone.
Yet and if I call thée, sée thou be not slack.
I come at the first call, good moister Isaac.
Son Esau.
Here father.
Is none here but we?
None to hearken our talk father, that I doo sée.
Son Esau, why hast thou been from me so long?
I cry you mercy father, if I have done wrong▪
But I am loath to trouble you having nothing
To present you withal, nor venison to bring.
Son Esau, thou know that I do thée love.
I thank you for it father as doth me behove.
And now thou séest my days draw towards an end.
That is to me great ruth if I could it amend.
I must go the way of all mortal flesh.
Therefore while my memory and wit is yet fresh,
I would thée endow mine heritage to succéede:
And bliss thée, (as I ought) to multiply my séede.
The God of my father Abraham, and of me,
Hath promised, that our séede as the sand shall be.
He is a God of truth, and in his words just.
Therefore in my working shall be no fault I trust.
Now therefore son Esau, get thée forth to hunt,
With thy bow and quiver, as erst thou hast been wont,
Bring me of thy venison that is good.
Ye shall have of the best that runs in the wood.
When thou comes home, to dress it, it shall behove:
And to make for mine own tooth such meat as I love.
Thus doo mine own dere son, and then I shall thée kiss
With the koosse of peace, and thée for ever bliss.
Your will t'accomplishe most dere father Isaac,
Wits all good hast and speed, I shall not be found slack.
Then help lead me home, in my tent that I were set.
And then go when thou wilt.
I shall withouten let.
THis talk of Isaac in secrete have I heard.
And what end it should come to my heart is afraid.
Ne'er had I so much ado to forbear to speak.
But the Lord (I trust) will Isaacs purpose bre•ke.
O God of Abraham, make it of none effect:
Let Iacob have the blessing whom thou hast elect.
I for my part shall work what may be wrought,
That it may to Iacob from Esau be brought,
And in will I go to sée what I can devise,
That Isaacs intent may fail in any wise.
NAy, we must on hunting go, yet once more again
And never com home now except we speed certain
But I trow for hunger I have provided here:
That what ever befall I Raga shall have chere.
I have no time to tell what delicates here be,
But think this to be true) for better men than me.
And what? shall Esau hereof have any part?
Nay I trust to convey it by such pretty art,
That till the bag be clear, he shall it never sée.
I shall, and if he faint, feed him as he fed me.
I shall requite his shutting me out of the door.
That if he bid me run to get him meat before,
I shall run as fast as my feet were made of lead,
And tell him, there is none, though I may well be spead.
I will be even with him for my fare last day
When he was with Iacob.
What is it that thou doest say?
Sir on your behalf I earnestly wish and pray,
That if like need chance, ye may fare as last day
When ye were with Iacob.
Well, come on, let vs go.
Even when ye will, is there let in me or no?
Son Iacob even now is come the very hour,
That if thou have any grace or heart or power,
To play thy part well, and stick unto it throughout,
Esau his blessing will be thine without dout.
Mother I know your good will to be unfeigned:
But I sée not which way the thing may be attained.
I have it contrived how all thing shall be done,
Do thou as I shall bid thée, and it will be won.
Mother in me shall be no fault or negligence.
Then hearken very well unto this my sentence.
I heard old Isaac in a long solemn talk,
Bid thy brother Esau to the field to walk,
And there with his bow to kill him some venison,
Which brought and dressed, he to have his benison.
For I am aged (said Isaac) truly:
And would bless thée dere son before that I dye.
Now is Esau gone to do it even so.
But while he his away, I would have thée to go,
Abroad unto the flock, and fet me kiddos twain.
Of which I shall with a trice make such meat certain,
As shall say come eat me, and make old Isaac
Like his lips thereat, so toothsome shall it smack.
I shall make him thereof such as he doth love,
Which in thy brothers stéede to bliss thee shall him move.
O sweet and dere mother, this devise is but vain,
For Esau is rough, and I am smooth certain.
And so when I shall to my father bring this meat,
Perchance he will féele me, before that he will eat.
Old men be mistrustful: he shall the matter take,
That I went about my father a fool to make.
Mother by such a prank the matter will be worse:
And I in stead of blissing shall purchase me his curse.
〈◊〉 be thy curse my son, let it light on me.
Only fet thou the kiddos hither, as I bid thée.
Doo thou thy true deuoire, and let God work therein.
Upon your word mother, I will the thing begin,
Send me little Mido to help me bear a kid.
He shall come by and by, for so I shall him bid.
Now lord, &amp; if thou please, that this thing shall take place,
Further this our enterprise, helping with thy grace.
ARe ye here moister Iacob? I came you to look:
And here dame Rebecca hath sent you your shepecroke
And hath commanded me to wait on you this day,
But wherefore or why, she would nothing to me say.
Come on then, follow me Mido a little ways.
Whether ye shall lead me, I am at all assays.
And art thou able to bear a kid on thy back?
I am able (I trow) to bear a quarter sack.
How say you to this corps? is it not fat and round?
How say ye to these legs? come they not to the ground?
And be not here arms able your matter to speed?
Be not here likely shoulders to do such a déede?
Therefore come moister Iacob, if this your dout be,
For bringing home of kiddos, lay the biggest on me,
So that if we make a feast, I may have some part.
Yes that shalt thou Mido, right worthy thou art.
I Come to sée if Iacob be gone a field yet,
A little slacking may all our purpose let.
But now that he is gone, he will be here at once.
Therefore I will call my maid Abra for the nonce,
That all thing within may be in a readiness.
Abra, where be ye Abra?
Here within mistress.
Come forth: when? Abra, what Abra I say.
Anon.
Must I call so oft? why come ye not by and by?
I was washing my vessel forsooth mistress I.
And in very déede, look that all your vessel be clean.
There is not one foul péece in all our tent I wene,
Then make a great fire, and make ready your pot
And sée there be plenty of water cold and hot.
And sée the spit be scoured as clean as any pearl.
If this be not quickly done cal me nought girl.
Nay, soft, whither away? I have not yet all done.
I thought ye would have had me as quick to be gone,
As when ye call Abra, ye would have me to come.
Than sée ye have made ready cloaues, mace, and sinamom
Pepper and sasfron, then set herbs for the pot,
We will have the best that by me can be got.
And let no foul corner be about all the tent.
If ye find any fault, hardly let me be shent.
Is there any thing else but that I may go now?
Nought, but that when I come I find no faut in you.
No I warrant you, I will not let my matters sleep.
Any good wench will at his dames bidding take keep.
Now God of Abraham, as I trust in thy grace,
Send Iacob the blissing in Esau his place.
As thou hast ordained right so must all thing be.
Perform thine own words lord which thou spoke to me.
Now will I go in to sée that mine old husband,
May of my secrete working nothing understand.
Or in case he smell what we have thus far begone,
He may think it all for Esau to be done.
HE that were now within, should find all thing I wene,
As trim as a trēcher, as trick, as sweet, as clean.
And seeing that my dame prepares such a feast,
I will not I trow be found such a fluttishe beast,
That there shall any filth about our tent be kept,
But that both within and without it shall bée swepte.
It hath been a proverb before I was borne,
Young doth it prick that will be a thorne.
WHo will be evil, or who will be good,
Who given to truth or who to falsehood,
Eche bodies youth shows a great likelihood.
For young doth it prick that will be a thorne.
Who so in youth will no goodness embrace.
But follow pleasure, and not virtues trace,
Great marvel it is if such come to grace.
For young doth it prick that will be a thorne.
Such as in youth will refuse to be tought,
Or will be slack to work as he ought,
When they come to age, their proof will be nought.
For young doth it prick that will be a thorne.
If a child have been given to any vice,
Except he be guided by such as be wise,
He will thereof all his life have a spice.
For young doth it prick that will be thorne.
It hath been a proverb. &amp;c.
Now have I done, and as it should be for the nonce,
My swéeping and my song are ended both at once.
Now but for fetting mine herbs I might go play.
Deborra nurse Deborra, a word I you pray.
What is the matter? who calls me Deborra?
Forsooth gentle nurse even I little Abra,
I pray you swéete Deborra take in this same brom,
And look well to all thing till I return home:
I must to the garden as fast as I can trot,
As I was commanded to fet herbs for the pot.
But in t• mean time, I pray you nurse look about
And sée well to the fire that it go not out,
I will amble so fast, that I will soon be there,
And here again I trow, ere an horse like his ear.
There is not a pretier girl within this mile,
Than this Abra will be within this little while.
As true as any steal: ye may trust her with gold.
Though it were a bushel, and not a penny told.
As quick about her work that must be quickly spead
As any wench in twenty mile about her head.
As fine a péece it is as I know but a few,
Yet perchance her husband of her may have a shrew.
Cat after kind (saith the proverb) sweet milk will lap,
If the mother be a shrew, the daughter can not scope.
Once our mark she hath, I marvel if she slip:
For his nose is growing aboue his over lip.
But it is time that I into the tent be gone.
Lest she come and chide me, she will come now anon.
HOw say ye? have not I dispatched me quickly?
A straw for that wench that doth not somewhat likely,
I have brought here good herbs, &amp; of them plenty
To make both broth and forcing, and that full dainty,
I trust to make such broth, that when all things are in,
God almighty self may wet his finger therein.
Here is time and percelie, spinach, and rosemary.
Endiue, suckorie, lacteux, violette, clary,
Liver wort, marigold, sorrel, hearts tong, and sage:
Peniryal, purselane, buglosse and borage,
With many very good herbs mo than I do name.
But to tarry here thus long, I am much to blame.
For if Iacob should come, I not in readiness:
I must of covenant be shent of our mistress.
And I would not for twenty pound I tell ye,
That any point of default should be foun• in me.
I Come to sée if Iacob do not return yet,
I can not marvel enough what should be his let,
And greatly wonder he is away thus long.
I fear much of his absence, lest some thing be wrong.
As well as heart can wish all thing is ready here.
And now to me eche moment seems a whole year.
But hark, me thinks I here a young kid blée
It is so in déede, I sée Iacob, well is mée.
Hark moister Iacob, heard ye ever kid blue so?
I wene she knows before hand where she shall go▪
I would not my father Isaac should hear:
Nay, she will scarcely be still, when she is dead, I do fear.
But lo I sée my mother stand before the tent.
O Lord, me thinks long son Iacob since thou went
And me thinks mother, we have hied vs well:
I have made many féete to follow, I can tell.
Give me thy kid my son, and now leat me alone,
Bring thou in thine Mido, and sée thou bée a stone.
A stone? howe should that be mistress? I am a lad:
And a boy alive, as good as ere ye had:
And now in bringing home this kyd I have I trow,
Tried my self a man, and a pretty fellow,
I meant thou shouldest nothing say..
One warning is enough, ye bad vs so last day.
Well let me go in, and venison hereof make:
And hear thou Mido? sée that good heed thou take,
In any wise to come in my fathers sight.
Why he séeth no better at noon than at midnight.
Is he not blind long since, and doth his eyes lack?
Therefore go in dame, I bear an heavy pack.
I leave you here Iacob, and heartily you pray,
That when néede shall require, you be not far away.
I shall be ready mother, when so ere you call.
O How happy is that same daughter or that son,
Whom the parents love with hearty affection.
And among all others howe fortunate am I,
Whom my mother Rebecca tendered so greatly?
If it lay in her to do any good ye sée,
She would do her earnest deuoire to prefer me.
But as for this matter which she doth now intende,
Without thy aide O Lord, howe should it come to end.
Nevertheless forasmuch as my said mother,
Works upon thy word O Lord, and none other,
It shall become me to show mine obedience,
And to thy promise O Lord, to give due credence.
For what is so possible to mans judgment,
Which thou can not with a beck perform incontinent?
Therefore thy will O Lord, be done for evermore.
Oh Iacob, I was never so afeared before.
Why what new thing is chanced Mido, I pray thée?
Old Isaac your father, heard your young kid blue.
He asked what it was, and I said, a kid.
Who brought it from the fold, I said you did.
For what purpose? forsooth sir said I,
There is some matter that Iacob would remedy:
And where hast thou ben so long little Mido, quote he,
That all this whole hour thou were not once with me?
Forsooth (quote I) when I went from you last of all,
You bade me be no more but be ready at your call.
But of the kiddos bleayng he did speak no more.
No, but and if he had called me before,
I must have told him al, or else I must have made a lye,
Which would not have been a good boys part truly.
But I will to him, and no longer here remain,
Lest he should happen to call for Mido again.
I Were best also to get me into the tent,
That if my mother néede me, I may be present.
But I sée his come forth, and nurse Deborra also,
And bring gear with them what so ere it shall do.
Where is my son Iacob? I do him now espy.
Come apace Deborra, I pray thée let vs hye,
That all thing were dispatched somewhat to my mind.
It is happy that Iacob ready here ye find.
Mother, what have ye brought? &amp; what things are those?
Gear that I have prepared to serve our purpose.
And because that Esau is so rough with hear:
I have brought sleues of kid next to thy skin to wear.
They be made glouelike, and for eche finger a stall:
So that thy fathers féeling soon beguile they shall.
Then have I brought a collar of rough kiddos hear,
Fast unto the skin round about thy neck to wear.
Come, let me do it on, and if Isaac féele,
He shall therewith be beguiled wondrous wele.
And what shall this gear do, that ye have brought?
It shall serve anon I warrant you, take no thought.
Now, thoroughly to ravish thy father Isaac,
Thou shalt here incontinent put upon thy back,
Esau his best apparel, whose fragrant flauour,
Shall conjure Isaac to bear thée his favour.
Mary sir now is moister Iacob trim in déede,
That is all triksie and gallant so God me spéede,
Now I sée apparel sets out a man.
Doth it become Esau so? nay beshrew me then.
Ye may now go in nurse, and leave looking on him.
I go, mary sir Iacob is now gay and trim.
No forsooth mother, this raiment likes not me.
I could with mine own gear better contented be.
And but for satisfying of your mind and will,
I would not wear it, to have it for mine own still.
I love not to wear an other birds feathers.
Mine own poor homely gear will serve for all wethers.
Well content thy self, and follow my mind this day.
Now the meat by this time is ready I dare say.
Before that with to much enough it be all spilt,
Take thy time, and assail thy father when thou wilt.
Yea, but have ye provided mother I you pray,
That no body within may your counsel bewray?
I warrant the matter all safe from uttering,
I have stopped all mouths for once muttering.
Therefore while the time serves, I thée warn,
To slack when all things are ready may do harm.
Go before, &amp; I follow: but my chekes will blush red,
To be scene among our folk thus apparelled.
COme Mido, for without thée I can nothing do.
What is it sir, that ye would have my help unto?
Nothing but to sit abroad, and take th'open air.
That shall be well done, the weather is very fair,
Praised be the God of my father Abraham.
Who sends all thing needful for the use of man,
And most tenderly provides he for me Isaac,
Better than I can féele or perceive what I lack.
Where is my most dere father? as I would have it,
Taking the open ayre, here I sée him sit.
O my most déere father Isaac, well thou be.
Here I am my swéete son, and who art thou tell me?
Dere father, I am Esau thine eldest son,
According as thou baddest me, so have I done.
Come in dere father, and eat of my venison,
That thy soul may give unto me thy benison.
But how hast thou sped so soon? let me understand.
The Lord thy God at the first brought it to my hand.
And art thou Esau mine elder son in déede?
To ask that question father, what doth it néede?
Come ne'er that I may féele whether thou be he or not,
For Esau is rough of hear as any goat.
Let me féele thy hand, right Esau by the hear,
And yet the voice of Iacob sowneth in mine ear.
God bless thée my son, and so will I do anon,
As soon as I have tasted of thy venison.
Come on, lead me in, I will eat a pittance.
A little thing God wot to me is suffisance,
I may now go play, Iacob leads Isaac.
But I never saw such a pretty knack,
How Iacob beguiled his father, how slightly.
Now I sée it true the blind eat many a fly.
I quaked once for fear lest Iacob would be caught,
But as hap was, he had his lesson well taught.
But what will Esau say, when he comes home?
Choose him, but for me to go in it is wisdom.
NOw I beseech the Lord prosper Iacob my son,
In our hardy enterprise which we have begone.
Isaac is eating such meat as he doth love,
Which thing to bless Iacob I dout not will him move:
If he obtain the blessing as I trust he shall,
Then shall my soul give to God laud perpetual.
But I will in to harken how the thing doth frame.
Come in dame Rebecca,
Who is it that doth me name?
My moister Isaac is coming forth straight way.
He shall not find me here in no wise if I may.
SEt me down on the bench where thou did me first find:
Now forsooth I have eat meat even to my mind.
It hath refreshed my soul wonderfully well.
Nor never drank I better wine that I can tell.
If it were to your liking I am very glad.
It was the best meat and wine that ever I had.
Come kiss me son Esau with the kiss of peace,
That my love towards thée may the more increase.
I bless thée here for ever my son in this place,
The Lord my God of might endue thée with his grace.
What sweet flauour my sons raiment doth yield,
Even the fragrant smell that comes from a field.
Which the Lord hath blessed, and the same lord bless thée:
With the dew of heaven, the Lord thy ground increase
That the fatness of the earth may never cease.
The Lord send thée abundance of corn and wine,
And prosper continually all thing that is thine.
The Lord make great people servants unto thée:
And nations to do homage and fealty.
And here to succeed my place, mine heir I thée make,
Of all things that I have, possession to take.
Lord and ruler be thou over thy brethern all,
And bow to thée as head, thy mothers children shall.
Cursed be that man that shall thée curse or missay:
And who that blesses thée, blessed be he for aye.
Thus here have I made my last will and testament,
Which the Lord God ratify never to repent.
Serve the Lord our God, and then well shalt thou spéede,
And he shall keep promise to multiply thy séede.
My day draws on, for old and féeble I am.
When I dye, put me to my father Abraham.
Now kiss me once again my son, and then depart,
And enter upon all, whereof now Lord thou art.
The Lord God reward your fatherly tenderness.
Which ye have here showed me of your mere goodness.
Go in peace my dere son, leaving me here alone:
And send little Mido to lead me in anon.
Lord God when thou shalt sée time as thou think best,
Dissolve this féeble carkesse, and take me to thy rest.
How do ye moister Isaac? I am here now.
For my moister Iacob did bid me come to you.
Nay boy, it was not Iacob, I dare well say so.
Forsooth it was Iacob, if my name be Mido.
If that be a true tale, some body is come slack,
But lord that I have done, I will not now call back.
But yet I will go sée if I be deceived:
For in déede me thought Iacobs voice I perceived.
O Lord, the God of Isaac and Abraham,
I render thanks to thée though a sinful woman,
Because of thy word and promise true art thou,
In sending Iacob the blessing of Esau.
And for thus regarding a sinner as I am,
I eftsoones thank thée O Lord God of Abraham,
Thy mercy and wisdom shall I sing evermore:
And magnify thy name, for Gods there is no more.
But I will to my husband Isaac, and sée,
That for this matter he take no gréefe at me.
NAy, now at last we have well sped I warrant you:
Good luck is not evermore against Esau.
He coursed and coursed again with his dogs here:
But they could at no time take either hare or dere.
At last he killed this with his bow as God wold.
And to say that it is fat venison be bold.
But dressed it must be at once in all the haste,
That old father Isaac may have his repast.
Then without delay Esau shall blessed be,
Then faith cock on houpe, al is ours, then who but he?
But I must in that it may be dressed in time likely,
And I trow ye shall sée it made ready quickly.
NAy now old moister Isaac (I warrant you)
Hath blessed Iacob in the place of Esau.
At home here with vs it is judged no small change
But a case wonderful, and also very strange.
The younger brother is made elder, and again,
The elder must now serve the younger as his swain.
And from hensforth we must all make courtesy and bow,
Unto moister Iacob, and not to Esau now:
And Esau him self must under Iacob bée,
At his commandment even as well as we.
But I care not I warrant you: for our household
Love Iacob better than Esau twenty fold.
None loves Esau but for his fathers sake:
But all good folks are glad Iacobs part to take.
And now by Esau no man will set a pin,
But yonder he comes now, I will get me in.
I Trow I have now won my spurs for ever,
For once better venison killed I never.
And though it were somewhat longer I could it take,
Yet the goodness thereof doth some recompense make.
My father Isaac shall thereof have such meat,
As in all his life he hath not the better eat.
Whereupon I doubt not, after tender kissing,
To be straight endowed with his godly blyssing.
As his full and true heir in his place to succéede,
And t'enioye the promise that God made to his séede,
And when I am once in my place of succession,
And have all manner things in full possession:
I shall wring all louts and make them stoup (I trow)
I shall make the slaves couch as lowe as dog to bow.
I shall ruffle among them of an other sort,
Than Isaac hath done, and with an other port.
But now will I go sée what hast within they make
That part of my hunting my old father may take.
MIdo, come Mido, where art thou little Mido?
Here ready moister Isaac, what shall I do?
Come lead me to mine old place, that I may sit down
That can I as well as any boy in this town.
O Lord my God, how déepe and vnsercheable
Are all thy judgements, and how immutable?
Of thy justice, whom it pleases thée, thou doest reject,
Of thy mercy, whom pleases thée, thou doest elect.
In my two sons O Lord, thou hast wrought thy will,
And as thy pleasure hath wrought, so shall it stand still.
Sense thou hast set Iacob in Esau his place:
I commit him to the governance of thy grace.
Now where is Isaac that he may come and eat?
Lo where he is sitting abroad upon his seat.
Dear father Isaac, the Lord thy God thée save.
Who art thou my son? &amp; what thing would thou have?
I am your eldest son Esau by my name,
New come home from hunting, where I had ioyly game,
I have made meat thereof for your own appetite,
Meat for your own tooth, wherein ye will much delete.
Come eat your part, dere father, that when ye have don,
Your soul may bless me as your heir and eldest son.
Ah Esau, Esau, thou comes to late,
An other to thy blessing was predestinate,
And clean gone it is from thée Esau.
Alas,
Then am I the unhappiest that ever was,
I would the salvage beasts had my body torn.
The blessing that thou should have had, an other hath
Alas, what wretched villain hath done me such scath?
Thy brother Iacob came to me by subtiltée,
And brought me venison, and so prevented thée.
I eat with him ere thou came, and with my good will,
Blessed him I have, and blessed he shall be still.
Ah Iacob, Iacob, well may he be called so:
For he hath undermined me times two.
For first mine heritage he toke away me fro,
And sée, now hath he away my blessing also.
Ah father, father, though Iacob hath done this thing:
Yet let me Esau also have thy blessing.
Shall all my good huntings for thée be in vain?
That is done and past, can not be called again.
Mine act must now stand in force of necessity.
And hast thou never a blessing then left for me?
Behold, I have made thy brother Iacob thy Lord.
A most poignant sword unto my heart is that word.
All his mothers children his servants have I made.
That word is to me sharper than a rasers blade.
I have also stablished him with wine and corn.
Wo be the day and hour that ever I was borne.
What am I able to do for thée my son?
Ah Iacob, Iacob, that thou hast me thus undone.
Oh unhappy hap: oh misfortune, well away,
That ever I should live to sée this woeful day.
But hast thou one blissing and no mo my father?
Let me also have some blessing good swéete father.
Well, nature pricks me some remorse on thée to have.
Behold, thy dwelling place the earths fatness shall have.
And the dew of heaven which down from aboue shall fall:
And with dint of sword thy living get thou shall.
And to thy brother Iacob thou shalt be servant.
Oh, to my younger brother must I be servant?
Oh, that ever a man should be so oppressed.
Thine own fault it is that thou art dispossessed.
Father, change that piece of thy sentence &amp; judgment.
Things done can not be undone, therefore be content,
Let me be in quiet, and trouble me no more.
Come Mido, in gods name lead me in at the door.
Oh would not this chafe a man, and fret his guts out?
To live as an vnderling under such a lout?
Ah hypocrite, ah hedgecréeper, ah sembling wretch:
I will be even with thée for this subtle fetch.
O God of Abraham, what reason is herein,
That to slay ones enemy it should be made sin?
Were not one as good his part of heaven forgo,
As not to be revenged on his deadly foe?
God was angry with Caim for killing Abel:
Else might I kill Iacob marvelously well.
I may fortune one day him to dispatch and rid:
The Lord will not see all things, some thing may be hid.
But as for these misers within my fathers tent,
Which to the supplanting of me put their consent,
Not one, but I shall coil them till they stink for pain,
And then for their stinking, coil them of fresh again.
I will take no days, but while the matter is hot,
Not one of them shall scope but they shall to the pot.
WHere are we now become? marie sir here is array,
With Esau my moister this is a black day.
I told you, Esau one day would shite a rag,
Have not we well hunted, of blessing to come lag?
Nay I thought ever it would come to such a pass,
Since he sold his heritage like a very ass.
But in faith some of them I dare ieopard a groat,
If he may reach them, will have on the petticoat.
COme out whores &amp; thieves, come out, come out I say.
I told you, did I not? that there would be a fray.
Come out little whoreson ape, come out of thy den.
Take my life for a penny, whether shall I run?
Come out thou little fend, come out thou skittish Gill.
Out alas, alas, Esau will vs all kill.
And come out thou mother Mob, out old rotten witch,
As white as midnightes arsehole, or virgin pitch.
Where be ye? come together in a cluster.
In faith and these thrée will make a noble muster.
Ere ye escape my fingers, ye shall all be tought.
For these be they which have all this against me wrought.
I wrought not a stroke this day but led Isaac.
If I wrought one stroke to day, lay me on the jack.
Hence then, get thée in, and do against me no more.
I care as much for you now, as I did before.
What say thou little théefe? if I may thée catch,
Ye shall run apace then I wene, so God me snatch.
Now to go Mido, or thou art caught in a trip,
Nay for his sake, Abra, ye shall drink of the whip.
Nay for Gods love good swéete moister Esau,
Hurt not me for Mido: speak for me Raga.
Sir spare little Abra, she hath done none evil.
A little fiend it is, and will be a right devil,
And she is one of them that love not me a deal.
If ye let me go, I will love you very wele.
And never any more ado against me make?
Raga shall be surety.
Sir I undertake.
Then hence out of my sight at once, and get thée in.
Adieu, I set not a straw by you nor a pin.
What says thou thou Ti•? once ye shall have a rap.
The best end of suretiship is to get a clap,
Now come on thou o•de heg, what shall I say to thée?
Say what ye lust, so ye do not touche me.
Yes, and make powder of thée, for I dare say, thou,
Hast been the cause of all this feast to Esau.
No it was Iacobs feast that I did help to dress.
Nay I thought such a witch would do such business.
But by my truth if I should dye incontinent,
I knew not of the purpose wherefore it was meant.
But wilt thou tell me truth if I do forgive thée?
Yea if I can moister Esau, believe me.
Is it true that when I and my brother were first borne,
And I by Gods ordinance came forth him beforne,
Iacob came forthwith, holding me fast by the heal?
It is true, I was there, and saw it very wele.
Is it true? well Iacob I pray God I be dead,
But for my heles sake, I will have thée by the head.
What devil was in me, that I had not the grace
With kicking back my heal to mar his mopishe face?
But my father Isaac will not long live now,
If he were gone, Iacob I would soon méete with you.
For my soul hates Iacob even to the death,
And I will ne'er but hate him while I shall have breath.
I may well dissemble until I sée a day:
But trust me Iacob, I will pay thée when I may.
But if ever I hear that thou speak word of this,
I shall cut out thy tongue, I will not miss.
But come on Raga with me, so mote I thrive,
I will get a good sword, for thereby must I live.
Live quote you? we are like to live God knows how.
What ye saucy merchant, are ye a praetor now?
I Am glad that Esau is now gone certes.
For an evil disposed man he is doubtless.
Yet am I no gladder of his departure hence,
Than I am that Rebecca is come in presence.
Deborra, what dost thou tarrying here so long?
I came full ill afraid least some thing had ben wrong
For Mido and Abra told me of Esau.
In dede here he was, and departed hence but now:
And one thing I tell you dame, let Iacob beware,
For Esau to mischief Iacob doth prepare,
Call Iacob hither, that I may show him my mind.
Send him hither quickly, and tarry ye behind.
That he give place awhile, it is expedient,
And howe he may be sure, I will the way invent.
MOther Rebecca, did ye send for me hither?
Yea and the cause is this, thou must go somwhither,
To hyde thée from thy brother Esau a space.
In dede to men's malice we must sometime give place.
He lies in await, to slay thée if he can.
Thou shalt therefore by my rede flée hence to Haran,
And lye with my brother Laban a man aged,
Till Esaus wrath be somewhat assuaged.
When all things are forgotten, and his fury past,
I shall send for thée again in all goodly haste.
Yea, but howe will my father herewith be content?
Thou shalt sée me win him thereto incontinent.
And here he comes happily, Iacob hear me,
Make a sign to Mido, that he do not name thée,
Then get thée in privily till I do thée call.
As ye command me mother Rebecca, I shall.
WHere be ye good wife?
My dame Rebecca is here.
I am glad swéete husband that I sée you appear,
For I have a word or two unto you to say.
Whatsoever it be, tell it me I you pray.
Sir ye know, that now our life days are but short
And we had never so great néede of comfort,
Now Esau his wives being Hethites both,
Ye know to please vs are much unwilling and loath.
That if Iacob eke would take any Hethite to wife,
Small joy should we both have or comfort of our life.
Wife ye speak this well, and I will provide therefore,
Call Iacob quickly, that he appear me before.
I can run •pace for him if ye bid me go.
Go hye thee at once then like a good son Mido.
O Lord save thou my son from miscarrying.
Come moister Iacob, ye must make no tarrying,
For I it is that shall be shent if you be slack,
Here is your son Iacob now moister Isaac.
Son Iacob, make thée ready as fast thou can,
And in all hast possible get thée unto Laban.
He is thine own uncle, and a right godly man,
Marry of his daughters, and not of Canan.
In Mesopotamia shalt thou lead thy life.
The lord prosper thée there, without debate or strife.
And the God of Abraham prosper thée in peace,
He multiply thy séede, and make it to increase,
Now kiss me dear son Iacob, and so go thy way.
Kiss me also swéete son, and hence without delay.
Now most tender parents, as well with heart and word,
I bid you well to fare, and leave you to the Lord.
Nay moister Iacob, let me have an hand also.
Even with all my heart farewell little Mido.
Now will I depart hence into the tent again.
As pleases God and you, but I will here remain.
ANd is he gone in déede to mine uncle Laban,
In Mesopotamia at the town of Haran?
And is Iacob gone to the house of Bethuel?
The whirlwind with him, and flinging fend of hell.
But I shall m•te with him yet one day well enough.
And who is this? my mother, whom I sée here now?
She stood here al this while sir, did ye not her sée?
Did thou sée her stand here, &amp; would not warn me?
Son Esau, before God thou art much to blame,
And to do as I hear of thée, is a foul shame.
Mother what is it ye heard of me of late?
That thou doest thy brother Iacob deadly hate.
Hate Iacob? I hate him and will do till I dye.
For he hath done me both great wrong and villainy.
And that shall he well know if the Lord give me life.
Fie upon thée to speak so like a lewd caitiff.
My moister Esau is of nature much hot,
But he will be better than he saith, fear not.
My birthright to sell did he not make me consent?
But the same to do were not thy self content?
There is no man to blame for it but thine own self.
Yea mother, sée that ye hold with that mopishe elf.
It is your dainty dearlyng, your princkoxe, your golpoll,
He can never be praised enough of your soul,
He must ever be extolled aboue the Moon,
It is never amiss that he hath said or done.
I would he were rocked or dandled in your lap:
Or I would with this fashion I might give him pap.
I marvel why ye should so love him, and me not?
Ye groaned as well for the one as tother I wot.
But Iacob must be advanced in any wise:
But I shall one day handle him of the new guise.
Both on thy fathers blessing and mine I charge thée,
That thy soul entend never such iniquity,
Beware by the example of Caym I thée rede,
That thou bring not the Lords curse upon thy head.
And what should I take all this wrong at Iacobs hand?
Forgive, and the Lord shall prosper thée on the land.
My son Esau hear me, I am thy mother:
For my sake let pass this grudge against thy brother.
Sir, your mothers request is but reasonable,
Which for you to grant shall be much commendable.
Mother, though it be a great thing that ye require:
Yet must all malice pass at your desire.
And for your cause mother, this mine anger shall slake.
I thank thée my son, that thou dost it for my sake
For your sake with Iacob I will be at accord.
And shall I call thy father to be as record?
As pleases you mother, I can be well content.
Then will I go call him hither incontinent.
And where he doth already love thée very well,
This will make him to love thée better a great deal.
Truly sir, this is of you a right gentile part:
At least if it come from the bottom of your heart.
It must now be thus, but when I shall Iacob find,
I shall then do, as God shall put into my mind.
He hath at my word remitted all his quarrel.
Forsooth I love him the better a great deal.
And if he be here, I would commend his doing.
All pressed here father to tarry on your coming.
Son Esau, thou haste thy self well acquitted.
That all quarrel to Iacob thou haste remitted.
It was the Lords pleasure that it should thus be,
Against whose ordinance to stand is not for thée:
But now to the intent it may please the Lord,
To knit your hearts one day in a perfect concorde,
We shall first in a song give laud unto his name,
And than with all gladness, within confirm the same.
As ye think best dere husband I agrée thereto.
Mée ye may command to what ye will have me to do:
And so may ye do also Raga my man.
I sée none, but praise we the Lord the hest we can.
Cal forth all our household that with one accord,
We may all with one voice sing unto the Lord.
O Lord the God of our father Abraham,
Howe deep and vnsearcheable are thy judgements▪
Thy almightifull hand did create and frame,
Both heaven and earth and all the elements.
Man of the earth thou haste formed and create,
Some do thee worship, and some stray awry,
Whom pleases thee, thou dost choose or reprobate,
And no flesh can ask thee wherefore or why?
Of thine own will thou did Abraham elect,
Promising him seed as sterres of the sky,
And them as thy chosen people to protecte,
That they might thy mercies praise and magnify.
Perform thou O Lord, thine eternal decree,
To me and my seed the sons of Abraham,
And whom thou haste chosen thine own people to bee,
Guide and defend to the glory of thy name. FINIS.
When Adam for breaking Gods commandment
Had sentence of death, and all his posterity:
Yet the lord our God who is omnipotent,
Had in his own self by his eternal decrée,
Appointed to restore man, and to make him frée,
He purposed to save mankind by his mercy,
Whom he once had created unto his glory.
Yet not all flesh did he then predestinate,
But only the adopted children of promise:
For he forknewe that many would degenerate,
And wilfully give cause to be put from that bliss:
So on Gods behalf no manner default there is,
But where he chooses, he shows his great mercy:
And where he refuses, he doth none injury,
But thus far surmounted mans intellection,
To attain or conceive, and much more to discuss:
All must be referred to Gods election,
And to his secret judgment, it is méete for vs,
With Paule the Apostle to confess and say thus:
Oh the déepnesse of the riches of Gods wisdom,
How vnsearcheable are his ways to mans reason?
Our part therefore is first to believe Gods word,
Not doubting but that he will his elected save:
Then to put full trust in the goodness of the Lord,
That we be of the number which shall mercy have:
Thirdly so to live as we may his promise crave.
Thus if we do, we shall Abrahams children be:
And come with Iacob to endless felicity.
NOw unto God let vs pray for all the whole clergy,
To give them grace to avaunt gods honour and glory.
Then for the Queens majesty let vs pray,
Unto God to keep her in health and wealth night and day,
And that of his mere mercy and great benignity,
He will defend and maintain his estate and dignity,
That she béeing gréeued with any outward hostility,
May against her enemies, always have victory.
God save the Queens counselors most noble and true,
And with all godliness their noble hearts endue.
Lord save the nobility and preserve them all:
And prosper the Queens subjects universal.

