WHat fury fell enforces me to flee thunhappie seat,
That gape and gasp with greedy jaw, the fleeing food to eat?
What god to Tantalus the bowers where breathing bodies dwell
Doth show again? is ought found worse then burning thirst of hell
In lakes allow? or yet worse plague then hunger is there one,
In vain that ever gapes for food? shall Sisyphus his stone,
That slipper restless rolling payse upon my back be borne?
Or shall my limb{is} with swy••er swing of whirling wheel be torn?
Or shall my pains be Tityus pang{is} thencreasyng liver styll,
Whose growing gut{is} the gnawing gripes and filthy fowls doe fill?
That sryll by night repairs the panche that was deuowrde by day,
And wondrous womb vnwasted lythe a new prepared pray.
What ill am I appointed for? O cruel judge of syrights,
Who so thou be that torments new among the souls delights
Styll to dispose, add what thou can to all my deadly woe,
That keeper even of dungeon dark would sore abhor to knot,
Or hell it self it quake to see: for dread wheroflykewyse
I tremble would, that plague seek out: Lo now there doth arise
My brood, that shall in mischief far the grandsiers gilt out go,
And gyltles make: that first shall dare vnuentred ylls to doe.
What ever place remains yet of all this wicked land,
I will fill up: and never once while Pelops house doth stand
Shall Minos idle be.
go forth thou de•…estable spright,
And vex the godd{is} of wicked house with rage of furies might.
Let them contend with all o•…fence, by turns and one by one
Let swoordes be drawn: and mean of ire procure there may be none,
Nor shame: let fury blind inflame their minds and wrathful will,
Let yet the parent{is} rage endure, and longer lasting ill,
Through childerns childern spread: nor ye•… let any leisure be
The former fault to hate, but styll more mischief new to see,
Nor one in one: but ere the gilt with vengeante be acquit,
Increase the crime: from brethern proud let rule of hyngdome flyt,
To runagat•…s: and swaruyng state of all unstable things,
Let it by doubtful dome be toste, between thuncertayne kings.
Let mighty fall to misery, and miser climb to might,
Let chance turn thempyre up so down both give and take the right.
The banished for gilt, wh•…n god restore their country shall,
Let them to mischief fall a fresh: as hateful then to all,
As to them selves: let Ire think nought unlawful to be done.
Let brother dread the brothers wrath, and father fear the soon,
And eke the soon his parent{is} power. let babes be murdered ill,
But worse begot: her spouse betrapped in treasons train to kill,
Let hateful wife await. and let them bear through seas their war,
Let blood shed lye the land{is} about and every field afar:
And over conquering captains great, of countries far to see,
Let lust triumph: in wicked house let whoredom coun•…d be
The lightst offence: let trust that in the breast{is} of bre•…hern breeds,
And truth be gone: let not from sight of your so heinous deeds
The heavens be hyd, about the poale when shyne the starts on hye,
And flames with wonted beams oflight doe deck the painted sky.
Let darkest night be made, and let the day the heavens forsake.
Disturb the godd{is} of wicked house, hate, slaughter, murder make.
Fill up the house of Tantalus with mischiefs and debates.
Idorned be the pillars high, with bay and let the gates
Be garnished greene: and worthy there for thy return to sight,
Be kindled fire: let mischief done in Thracia once, there light
More manifold. wherefore doth yet the uncles hand delay?
Doth yet Tyestes not be whale his childerns fatal day?
Shall he not find them where with heate of fires that under glow
The cawdern boils? their limb{is} eche one a pieces let them go
Dispersed: let fathers fires, with blood of childern filed bee:
Let dainties such be dressed: it is no mischief new to thee,
To banquet so: behold, this day we have to the releaste,
And hunger starved womb of thine we send to such a feast.
With foulest food thy famine fill, let blood in wine be drowned,
And droonke in sight of thee: lo now such dishes have I found,
•…s thou wou•…st shone. stay whither dost thou •…dlong way now take?
To pools and flood{is} of hell again, and styll declining lake,
And flight of •…ree full freight with fruit that from the lips doth flee,
To dungeon dark of hateful hell Let leefull be for me
To g•…: or if to light be thought the pains that there I have,
Remove me from those lakes again: in midst of worser wave
Of Phleghethon to stand, in seas of fire beset to be.
Who so beneath thy pointed pains by destinies decree
Dost styll endure, who so thou be that vnderliest allow
The hollow den, or ruin who that fears and overthrow
Of falling hill, or cruel cries that sound in caves of hell
Of greedy roaring lyons throats, or flock of furies fell
Who quakes to know, or who the brand{is} of fire, in dyrest payne
Half burnt throws of, hark to the voice of Tantalus: again
That hastes to hell. and (whom the truth hath taught) bell•…ue well me
Love well your pains, they are but small. when shall my hap so bee
To flee the light?
disturb thou first this house with dire discord:
Debates and battles bring with thee, and of the unhappy sword
Ill love to kings: the cruel breast strike through and hateful heart,
With tumult mad.
To suffer payne•… it seems well my part,
Not woes to work: I am sent forth like vapour dire to rise,
That breaks the ground, or poison like the plague, in wondrous wise
That slaughter makes. shall I to such detested •…rymes, apply
My nephews hearts? o parent{is} great of godd{is} aboue the sky,
And mine, (though shamde I be to grant,) although with greater payne
My tongue be vexed, yet this to speak I may no whit refrain,
Nor hold my peace: I warn you this, least sacred hand with blood
Of slaughter dire, or frenzy fell of 〈◊〉 fury wood
The aulters stain, I will resist: And guard such gilt away.
With strypes why dost thou me affryght? why threaist thou me to fray
Those crallyng •…uakes? or famine fixed in empty womb, wherefore
Dost thou revive? now fries within with thirst kindled sore
My hart: and in the bowels burnt, the boiling flames doe glow.
I follow thee: through all this house now rage and fury throw.
Let them be driven so, and so let either thirst to see
Eche others blood. full well has •…elte the cummyng in of thee
This house: and all with wicked touche of the begun to quake.
Enough it is. repair again to denns and loathsome lake,
Of flood well known. the sad•… soil with heavy foot of thine
Aggrieved is. see thou from springs howe waters doe decline
And inward sink? or howe the banks lye void by drought heate?
And whotter blast of fury wind the fewer clouds doth beat?
The treese be spoiled, and naked stand to sight in withered woodds,
The barren bows whose fruit are fled: the land between the floodds,
With surge of seas on either syd•… that wonted to resound,
And nearer fords to separate sometime with lesser ground,
Now broader spread, it hears howe aloof the waters rise.
Now Lerna turns against the stream, Phoronides likewise,
His poares be stop•…e. with customde course Alphéus drives not still,
His holly wau•…s. the trembling topps of high Cithaeron hill,
They stand not sure: from height down they shake their silver snow,
And noble fields of Argos fear, their former drought to know.
Yea Titan doubts him self, to roll the world his wonted way,
And drive by force to former course The backward drawing day.
THis Argos town if any God be found, and Pisey bowers that famous yet remain,
Or kingdoms else to love of Corinth{is} ground, the double havens, or soondred seas in twain,
If any love Taygetus his snows, (by winter which when they on hill{is} be cast,
By Bores blasts that from Sarmatia blows, with yearly breathe the summer melts as fast,)
Where clear Alphéus roons, with floude so cold, By plays well known that there olimpik{is} hight:
Let pleasant power of his from hens withhold such turns of strife, that here they may not light:
Nor nephew worse then grandsier spring from vs, or direr deeds delight the younger age.
Let wicked stock of thirsty Tantalus, at length leave of, and weary be of rage.
Enough is done, and nought prevailed the just, or wrong: b•…trayde is Myrtilus and drowned,
That did betray his dame: and with like trust borne as he bare, himself hath made renounde
With changed name the sea: and better known to mariners thereof no fable is.
On wicked sword the little infant thrown, as ran the child to take his fathers his,
•…nripe for thaulters offering fell down dead: and with thy hand (o Tantalus) was rent,
With such a meat for gods thy boards to spread. eternal famine for such food is sent,
And thirst: nor for those dainty meates vnmilde, might meeter p•…no appointed ever bee.
With empty throat stands Tantalus beguiled, aboue thy wicked head there leanes to thee,
Then Phineys fowls in flight a swifter pray. with burdened bows declined on every side,
And of his fruits all bent to bear the sway, the tree deludes the gapes of hunger wide.
Though he full greedy, feed thereon would fine, so oft disceyude neglects to touche them yet:
He turn•…s his eyes, his jaws he doth refrain, and famine fi•… in closed gumms doth shet.
But then eche branch his plenteous retches all, letts lower down: and apples from on hie
With lither leaves they flatter like to fall, and famine stir: in vain that beds to try
His hands: which when he has roughed forth anon to be beguiled, in higher ayre again
The harvest hangs, and fickle fruit is gone. then thirst him grieves no less then hungers payne:
Wherewith when kindled is his boiling blood like fire, the wretch the waives to him doth call,
That meet his mouth: which straight the fleeing flood withdraws, and from the dried ford doth fall:
And him forsakes that follows them. He drinks the dust so deep of gulf that from him shrinks.
O Dastard, court, o wretch, and (which the greatest yet of all
To tyrants check, I count that may in weighty things befall,)
O unrevenged: after gilts so great, and brothers guile,
And truth tree•…de down, dost thou provoke with vain complaints the while
Thy wrath? already now to rage all Argos town through out
In armour ought of thine, and all the double seas about
Thy fleet to ride: now all the fields with fervent flames of thine,
And towns to flasshe it well beseemde: and every where to shyne,
The bright drawn sword: all under foot of horse let every side
Of Argos land•… resound: and let the woods not serve to hyde
Our foes, nor yet in haughty top of hills and mountains hie,
The builded towers. The people all let them to battle cry,
And clear forsake Mycenas town. who so his hateful head
Hydes and defends, with slaughter dire let blood of him be shed.
This princely Pelops palace proud and bowers of high renown,
On me so on my brother too, let them be beaten down.
Go to, do that which never shall no after age allow,
Nor none it wished: some mischief great there must be ventured now,
Both fierce and bloody: such as would my brother rather long
To have bin his. Thou never dost enough revenge the wrong,
Except thou pass. And fiercer fact what may be done so dire,
That his exceeds? doothe ever he lay down his hateful ire?
Doothe ever he the modest mean in time of welthe regard?
Or quiet in adversity? I know his nature harde
•…ntractable, that •…roke may be, but never will it bend.
For which ere he prepare him self, or force to fight entende,
Se•… first on him: least while I rest he should on me arise.
He will destroy or be destroyed, in midst the mischief lies,
Prepared to him that takes it first.
Doothe fame of people nought
Adverse thee fear?
The greatest good of kingdom may be thought,
That still•… the people are constrained their princes deeds as well
To praise, as them to suffer all.
Whom feat•… doth so compel
To praise, the same his foes to be, doothe fear enforce again:
But who in deed the glory seeks of favour true tobtayne,
He rather would with harts of •…che be praised, then tongues of all.
The tree•… praise full oft has hoped•… to meaner men to fall:
The false but unto mighty man. what •…ill they, let them will.
Let first the king will honest things, and no•… the same dare nil.
Where leefull are to him that rules but honest things •…lone,
There reigns the king by others leave.
And where that shame is none,
Nor care of right, faith, 〈◊〉, nor holiness none staythe,
That kingdom swarues.
Such holiness, such p•…tie, and fey the,
Are private goods: let kings run on in that that likes their will.
The brothers hurt a mischief count, though he be near so ill.
It is but right to doe to him, that wrong to brother were.
What heinous hurt has his offence let pass to prove? or where
Refraynde the gilt? my spouse he stale away for •…echerie,
And reign by stealth: the ancient note and sign of impetie,
By fraud he got: my house by fraud to vex he never ceaste.
In Pelops house there fostered is a noble worthy beast,
The close kept R•…mm: the goodly guide of r•…tche and fairest flocks.
By whom through out on every side depend a down the lockes
Of glittering gold, with fleece of which the new kings wonted wear
Of Tantalls •…locke their sceptors guile•… and mace of might to bear.
Of this the owner reigns he: with him of house so great
The fortune fleethe: this sacred Rā•… a aloof in safety shet,
In secret mead is wont to grase, which stone on every side
With rocky wall encloses round the fatal beast to hyde.
This beast (aduentryng mischi•…fe great) adjoining yet for pray
My spoused mate, the traitor false has hens conveyed awa•…e.
From hens the wrongs of mutual hate, and mischief all up sprung:
In exile wandered he, through out my kingdoms all a long:
No part of mine remains safe to me, from trains of •…is.
My fierce deflourde, and loyalty of empire broken is:
My house all vexed, my blood in doubt, and nought that trust is in,
But brother foe. What staiest thou yet? at length l•… now begin,
Take hart of Tantalus to th•…, to Pelops ca•…t thine eye:
To such examples well beseems, I should my hands apply.
Tell thou which way were best to 〈◊〉 that cruel head to death.
Through appears with sword let him be 〈◊〉 and yield his hateful breathe.
Thou speak of the end: but I him would oppress with greater payne.
Let tyrant{is} vex with torment more: should ever in my rain
Be gentle death?
Doth 〈◊〉 in thee prove•… no whit?
Depart thou hens all piety, if in this house as yet
Thou ever weary: and now let all the flock of furies dire,
And full of strife Erinnys come, and double brand{is} of fire
Megaeta shaking: for not yet enough with fury great
And rage doth burn my boiling breast: it ought to be replete,
With monster more.
What mischief new
〈◊〉 thou in •…age provide?
Not such a one as may the mean of wonted gre•… abide.
No gilt will I forbear, nor none may be enough despite.
What sword?
To little that.
what fire?
And that is yet to light.
What weapon then shall sorrow such find fit to work thy will?
Thyestes self.
Then ire it self yet thats a greater ill.
I grant: a tomblyng tumult quakes, within my bosoms lo,
And round it rolls: I moved am and wot not whereunto.
But drawn I am: from bottom deep the roaring soil doth •…rye
The day so fair with thounder sounds, and house as all from hie
Were rent, from roof, and rafters craks: and lares turned abought
Have wryde their sight: so beete, so beete, let mischief such be sought,
As ye O gods would fear.
What thing see•…e thou to bring to pas?
I note what greater thing my mind, and more then wont it was
Aboue the retch that men are wont to work, begins to swell:
And staythe with slothful hands. What thing it is I can not tell:
But great it is. Beete so, my mind now in this feat proceed,
For Atreus and Thyestes both, it were a worthy deed.
Let eche of vs the crime commit. The Thracian house did se
Such wicked tables once: I grant•… the mischief great to be,
But done ere this: some greater gilt and mischief more, let ire
Find out. The stomach of thy son o father thou e•…spyre,
And sister e•…e, like is the cause: assist me with your power,
And drive my hand: let greedy pa∣rents all his babes devour,
And glad to rent his children be: and on their limbs to feed.
Enough, and well it is devised: this pleases me in deed.
In mean time where is he? so long and innocent wherefore
Doth Atreus walk? before mine eyes already more and more
The shade of such a slaughter walks: the want of children cast,
In fathers jaws. But why my mind, •…et dreadst thou so at last,
And fain•…st before thou enterprise? it must be done, let be.
That which in all this mischief is the greatest gilt to se,
Let him commit.
but what disceyte may we for him prepare,
Whereby be•…rapt he may be drawn, to fall into the snare?
He wotes f•…ll well we are his foes.
He could not taken be,
Except him self would take: but now my kingdoms hops he.
For hope of this he would not fear to meet the mighty Jove,
Though him he threatened to destroy, with lightning from aboue.
For hope of this to pass the threat{is} of waives he will not fail,
Nor dread no whit by doubteull shelves, of Lybike seas to sail.
For hope of this (which thing he doth the worst of all believe,)
He will his brother see.
Who shall of peace the promise geeue?
Whom will he trust?
His evil hop•… will soon believe it well.
Yet to my sons the charge which they shall to their uncle tell,
We will commit: that home he would from exple come again,
And miseries for kingdom change, and o•…er Argos reign
A king of half: and though to harde of hart our prayers all
Him self despise, his children yet nought w•…tyng what may fall,
With travels •…ierde, and apt to be e•…tysde from misery,
Request{is} will move: on the one side his desire of Empery,
On •…hother side his poverty, and labour harde to see,
Will him subdue and make to yield, although full stout he bee.
His travels now the time hath made to seem to him but small.
Not so: for day by day the grief of ill increases all.
Tys light to suffer miseries, but •…euy them t'endure.
Yet other messengers to s•…nde, in such affairs procure.
The younger sort the worse precept{is} do easily harken to.
What thing against their uncle now, you them enstru•…te to do,
Perhaps with you to work the like, they will not be a dred.
Such mischie•…e wrought hath of•…e returned upon the workers head.
Though neu•…r man to them the ways of guile•… and gel•… have taught,
Yet kingdom will. Fear thou they should be made by counsel •…aught?
They are so borne. That which thou 〈◊〉 a cruel en•…erpryse,
And dyrely deem do•…no to be, and wickedly likewise,
Pe•…haps is wrought against me there.
And shall your soons of this
〈◊〉 be ware that work you will? no secretnes there is
In their so g•…even and tender ye•…es: they will your trains disclose.
A privy counsel close to keep, is lea•…nde with many woes.
And will ye them, by whom ye would he should beguiled bee,
Them selves beguiled?
Nay let thē both from fault and blame be free.
For what shall need in mischiefs such as I to work entende,
To mingle them? let all my hat•… by me alone take end.
Thou least thy purpose ill my mind: if thou thine own forbear,
Thou sparest him. Wherefore of this let Agamemnon hear
Be minister: and client eke of mine for such a deed,
Let Menelâu•… present be: truth of 〈◊〉 seed,
By such a pracktise may be tried: if it refuse they shall,
Nor of debate will bearers be, if they him uncle call,
He is their father: let them go. but much the fearful face
Betrays it self: even him that faynes the secret weighty case,
Doth oft betray: let them therefore not know, how great a guile•…
They go about. And thou these thy•…gs in secret keep the while.
I need not warned be, for these within my bosom deep,
Both faith, and fear, but chiefly •…aythe, doth shet and closely keep.
THe noble house at length of high renown, the famous stock of ancient Inathus,
Appeasoe and laid the threats of brethern down. but now what fury 〈◊〉 and 〈◊〉 you thus,
Eche one to thirst the o•…hers blood again, or get by gyl•… the golden ma•… in hand?
Ye little wo•…e that so desire to •…no, in what estate or place doth kingdom stand.
Not 〈◊〉 make a king or high renown, not 〈◊〉 weed with purple •…an •…ie,
Not 〈◊〉 looks, or head 〈◊〉 with crown, not g•…yng 〈◊〉 with gold and 〈◊◊〉.
〈◊〉 king he is, that fear hath laid aside, and all 〈◊〉 that in the breast are bred:
•…home impotent ambition doth not guide, nor fickle favour •…he of people led.
Nor all that west in metals mines hath found, or •…hanell 〈◊〉 of golden Tagus shows,
Nor all the grain that 〈◊〉 is on ground, that with the heate of 〈◊〉 •…uest glowes.
Nor whom the 〈◊〉 of lightning flame shall beat, nor eastern wind that 〈◊〉 upon the seas,
Nor swelling surge with rage of wind replete, or gr•…edie 〈◊〉 of 〈◊〉 displease.
Whom not the prick of soldiers sharpest spear, or pointed pike in hand hath made to •…ue,
Nor whom the glimpse of sword might cause to fear, or bright drawn blade of glittering steel subdue.
Who in the seat of 〈◊◊〉 his feet, beholds all happs how under him they lye,
And gladly runs his fatal day to meet, nor ought complains or grudges for to dye.
Though present were the princes every chone, the scattered Dakes to chase that wonted be,
That shining seas beset with precious stone, and red sea coasts doe hold, like blood to see:
Or they which else the •…an mountains hye, from Sarmats strong with all their power withhold:
Or he that on the floude of Danubye. in frost a foot to travail dare be bold:
Or Seres in what ever place they lye, renounde with fleece that there of silk doth spring,
They never might the truth hereof deny, it is the mind that only makes a king.
There is no need of sturdy steeds in war, no need with arms or arrows else to fight,
That Parthus wont{is} with bow to fling from far, while from the field he falsely fayneth flight.
Nor yet to siege no need it is to bring, great goons in cart{is} to over•… we the wall,
That from far of the ire battryng pellettes 〈◊〉. a king he is that fears nought at all.
〈◊〉 man him self this kingdom geeues at hand. let who so list with mighty mace to •…ygne,
In •…yckle top of court delight to stand. let me the sweet and quiet rest obtain.
So set in place obscure and lowe degree, of pleasant rest I shall the sweetness know•….
My life unknown to them that noble be, shall in the steppe of secret silence go.
Thus when my da•…es at length are 〈◊〉, and time without all troublous tumult spent,
An aged man I shall depart at l•…, In mean estate, to dye •…ull well content.
But grievous is to him the death, that when so far•… abroad the •…ruyte of him is blown,
That known he is to much to other men: departs yet vnt•… him self unknown.
MY country bowers so long wished for, and Argos riches all,
Chief good that unto banish•… me•…, and misers may b•…ll,
The touche of soil where borne I was, and godd{is} of native•… land,
(If godd{is} they be,) and sacred towr•… I see of 〈◊〉 h•…nde:
That represent then all mans work, a greater majesty.
Renowned stadies to my youth, where noble sometime I
Have not so seelde as once, the palm•… in fathers chariot won.
All Argos now to meet with me, and people fast will roon:
But A•…eus to. yet rather lead in woods again thy flight,
And bushes thick, and hyd among the brutish beasts from sight,
Like life to theirs: where splendent pomp of court and princely pride,
May not with flattering fulgent face, allure thine eyes aside.
With whom the kingdom given is, behold, and well regard,
Bese•… but late with such mishaps, as all men count full harde,
I stout and joyful was: but now again thus into fear
I am returned. my mind mysdontes, and backward seeks to bear
My body hens: and forth I draw my pace against my will.
With slothful steppe (what 〈◊〉 this?) my father stands still,
And turns his face and holds him self, in dout what thing to do.
What thing (my mind) consyderst thou? or else so long whert•…
Dost thou so easy counsel wrest? will thou to things unsure
Thy brother and the kingdom trust? fear thou those else tendure
Now overcome, and mield•… made? and travails dost thou flee
That well were placed? it the •…yles, a miser now to bee.
Turn hens thy pace while leefull is, and keep thee from his hand.
What cause the drives (o father dear) thus from thy native land,
Now seen to shrink? what makes thee thu•… from things so good at last
Withdraw thy self? thy brother comes whose •…res be overpassed,
And half the kingdom gives, and of the house •…ylacerate,
Repairs the parts: and thee restores again to former state.
The cause of fear that I know not, thou dost require to hear.
I see nothing that makes me dread, and yet I greatly fear.
I would go on, but yet my limb{is} with we•…y leg{is} doe slack:
And other way then I would pass, I am withholden back.
So oft the ship that driven is with wind and eke with ore,
The swelling surge resisting both, beats back upon the shore.
Yet overcome what ever stays, and thus doth let your mind,
And see what are at your return, prepared for you to find.
You may o father reign.
I may but then when die I mought.
•…hoof thing is power.
nought worth at all, if thou desire it nought.
You shall it to your children leave.
the kingdom takes not twain.
Who may be happy, rather would he miser yet remain?
Believe me well, with titles false the great thing{is} v•… delight:
And heavy hap{is} in vain are feared, while high I stood in sight,
I never styn•…ed then to quake, and self same sword to fe•…re,
That hanged by mine own side wa•…, Oh how great good it were,
With none to strive, but careless food to e•…te and rest to know?
The greater gilts they enter not in cottage set allow:
And safer •…oode is fed upon, at narrow board always,
While droonke in gold the poison is: by proof well taught I say,
That evil happs before the good to love it likes my will.
Of haughty house that stands aloft in tickle top of hill,
And sways aside, the cite lowe need never be affryght:
Nor in the top of roof aboue, there shynes no Iuery bright,
Nor watcheman none defends my sleeps by night, or guards my rest:
With fl•…te I fyshe not, nor the se•… I have not backward pressed,
Nor turned to flight with builded wall: nor wicked belly I
With taxes of the people fed: nor parcel none doth lie,
Of ground of mine beyond the Getes: and Parthians fa•… about:
Nor worshipped with francausence I am, nor (Jove she•… out)
My Aulters decked are: nor none in top of house doth stand
In garden treese, nor kindled yet with help of eche mans hand,
The bathes do smoke: nor yet are days in slothful slumbers led,
Nor nights paste forth in watch and wine, without the rest of bed.
We nothing fear, the house is safe without the hidden knife,
And poor estate the sweetness feels, of rest and quiet life.
Great kingdom is to be content, without the same to live.
Yet should it not refused be, if god the kingdom give.
Not yet desyerd it ought to be.
your brother bydd{is} you rain.
Bydds he? the more is to be feared: there lurks there some train.
From whens it fell, yet piety is wont to turn at length:
And love vnfaynde, repairs again•… his erst omitted strength.
Doth Atreus then his brother love? eche Ursa first on hye,
The seas shall wash, and swelling surge of seas of S•…ylye
Shall rest and all assuaged be, and corn to rypenes grow
In bottom of Ionian seas, and darkest night shall show
And spread the light about the soil: the waters with the fire,
The life with death, the wind with seas, shall friendship first require,
And be at league.
of what deceit are you so dreadful here?
Of every chone: what end at length might I provide of fear?
In all he can he hates me.
to you what hurt can he?
As for my self I nothing dread: you little babes make me
Afraid of him.
dread ye to be beguiled when caught ye are?
To late it is to shoon the train in middle of the snare.
But go we on, this (father) is to you my last request.
I follow you. I lead you not.
god turn it to the best,
That well devised is for good, pass forth with cheerful pace.
Entrapped in train the beast is taught and in the snare doth fall:
Both him, and eke of ha•…d sto•… with him the offspring all,
About the fathers side I •…e: and now in safety stands
And surest ground my wrathful hate: now comes into my han•…
At length Thyestes: ye he comes and all at ones to me.
I scant refrain my self, and scant may anger bridled be.
So when the bloodhound seeks the beast, by steppe and quick of sent
Draws in the lame, and pace by pace to wind the ways he went,
With nose to soil doth hunt, while he the boar aloof hath found
Far of by sent, he yet refrains and wanders through the grounds
With sylent mouth: but when at hand he once perceives the pray,
With al the strength he hath he strives, with voice and calls away
His ling•…ing moister, and from him by force out breaks he.
When Ire doth hope the present blood, it may not hidden be.
Yet let it hidden be. behold, with ugly hear to sight
How yrkesomely defourmde with fylthe his foulest face is dyght,
How loathsome lies his beard unkempt: but let vs friendship fain.
To see my brother me delight{is}: give now to me again
Embracing long desired for: what ever strife there was
Before this time between vs twain, forget and let it pas:
Fro this day forth let brothers love, let blood, and law of kind
Regarded be, let all debate be slakte in eiders mind.
I could excuse my self, except thou werte as now thou art.
But Atreus) now I grant, the fault 〈◊〉 mine in •…very part:
And I offended have in all. my cause the worse to bee,
Your this days kindness makes: in deed a guilty wight 〈◊〉 hee,
That would so good a brother hurt as you, in any whyt.
But now with tears I must entreat, and first I me submit.
These hands that at thy feet doe lye, doe thee beseech and pray,
That ire an•… hate be laid aside, and from thy bosom may
Be scraped out: and clear forgot. for pledges take thou these
O brother dear, these gyltles babes.
thy hands yet from my kneese
Remove, and rather me to take in arms, upon me fall.
And ye o aids of elders age, ye little infant{is} all.
Me clyppe and coll •…bout the neck: this foul •…ire forsake,
And spare mine eyes that pity it, and fresher vesture take
Like mine to see. and you with joy, the half of empery
Dear brother take: the greater praise shall come to me thereby,
Our fathers seat to yield to you, and brother to relieve.
To have a kingdom is but chance, but virtue it to geeue.
A lust reward for such desert{is}, the godd{is} (o brother dear)
Repay to the: but on my head a regal crown to wear,
My loathsome life denies: and far doth from the sceptor flee
My hand unhappy: in the midst let leefull be for me
Of men to lurk•…
this kindome can with •…wayne full well agree.
What ever is (o brother) yours,
I count it mine to bee.
Who would dame fortunes gyfi{is} refuse, if she him raise to reign?
The gifts of his eche man it wotes, how soon they pass again.
ye me depry•… of glory great, except ye th•… •…mpyre take.
You have your praise in offering 〈◊〉, and I it to forsake.
And full persuaded to refuse the kingdom, am I still.
Except your part ye will sustain mine own forsake I will.
I take it then. and bear I will the name thereof alone:
The rights and arms, as well as mine they shall be yours eche one.
The regal crown as you besemes upon your head then take:
And I thappointed sacrifice for gods, will now go make.
Would any man it wean? that cruel wight Atreus, of mind so impotent to see
Was soon astonished with his brothers sight. no greater force then pietee may be:
Where kindred is not, lasts every threat, whom true love holds, it holds eternally.
The wrath but late with causes kindled great all favour brake, and did to battle cry,
When horsemen did resound on every side, the swoordes eche where, then glystred more and more:
Which raging Mars with often stroke did guide the fresher blood to shed yet thirsting sore.
But love the sword against their wills doth swag, and them to peace persuades with hand in hand.
So sudden•… rest, amid so gre•…e a rage what god hath made? throughout Mycenas land
The harnes clinked, but late of civil strife: and for their babes did fearful mothers quake,
Her armed spou•…e to leese much feared the wife. when sword was made the scabbard•… to forsake,
That now by •…est with rust was overgrown. come to re•…ayre the walls that did decay,
And some to strength the •…owres half overthrown, and some the gates with gins of yrne to staye
Full busy were, and dreadful watch by night from turret high did overlook the town.
Worse is then wart it self the fear of fight. now are the threats of cruel sword laid down,
And now the rumour 〈◊〉 of battles sown, the noise of crooked trumpet sylent lies,
And quiet peace returns to loyfull town. so when the waives of swelling surge arise,
While Corus wind the Brutian seas doth smight, and Scylla sounds from hollow caves within,
And shipmen are with waftyng waives affryght, Charybdis casts that erst it had droonke in:
And Cyclops fierce his father yet doth dred, in Actna bank that fervent is with heats,
Lest quenched be with waives that overshot the fire that from eternal fornace beats:
And poor Laërtes thinks his kingdoms all may drowned be, and Ithaca doth quake:
If once the force of winds begin to fall, the sea lythe down more myide then standing lake.
The deep, where ships so wide full dreadful were to pass, with sails on either side out spread
Now fallen down, the lesser boat doth bear: and leisure is to view the fyshes ded
Even there, where late with tempest bett upon the shaken Cyclades were with seas aghast.
No state endures, the payne and pleasure, one to other yields, and joys be soonest past.
One hour set{is} up the things that lowest bee. he that the crowns to princes doth divide,
Whom people please with bending of the knee, and at whose beck their battles lay aside
The Meads, and Indians eke to Phebus ny, and Dakes that Parthians doe with horsemen threat,
Him self yet holds his sceptors doutfullye, and men of might he fears and chances great
(That eche estate may turn) and doubtful hour. o ye, whom lord of land and waters wide,
Of life and death grant{is} here to have the power, lay ye your proud and lofty looks aside:
What your inferior fears of you amiss, that your superior threats to you again.
To greater king, eche king a subject is. whom dawn of day hath scene in pride to reign,
Him over thrown hath seen the evening late. let none rejoice to much that good hath got,
Let none despair of best in worst estate. for Clothos mingles all, and suffered not
Fortune to stand: but fates about doth drive. such friendship find with godd{is} yet no man might,
That he the morrow might be sure to live. the god our thing{is} all tossed and turned quite
Rolls with a whirl wind.
WHat whirlwind my me headlong drive and up in ayre me fling,
And wrap in darkest cloud, whereby it might so heinous thing,
Take from mine eyes? ô wicked house that even of Pelops ought
And Tantalus abhor•…ed be.
what new thing hast thou brought?
What land is this? lythe Sparta here, and Arges, that hath bred
So wicked brethern? and the ground of Corinth lying spread
Between the seas? or Ester ells where wont to take their flight,
Are people wild? or that which wont{is} with snow to shyne so bright
Hircana laud? or else do here the wandering Srythians dwell?
What monstrous mischief is this place then guilty of? that tell,
And this declare to vs at large what ever be the ill.
If once my mind may stay itself, and quaking limm{is} I will.
But yet of such a cruel deed before mine eyes the fear
And Image walks: ye raging storms now far from hens me •…ear
And to that place me drive, to which now driven is the day
Thus drawn from hens.
Our minds ye hold yet still in doubtful stay.
Tell what it is ye so abhorte. The author thereof show.
I ask not who, but which of them: that quickly let vs know.
In Pelopp{is} Turret high, a part there is of palace wide
That to ward the southe erected leanes, of which the utter side
With equal top to mountain stands, and on the city •…es,
And people proud against their prince if once the traitors rise
Hath underneath his battryng stroke: there shines the place in sight
Where wont the people to frequent, whose golden beams so bright
The noble spotted pillars gray, of marble do support.
Within this place well known to men, where they so oft resort,
To many other rooms about the noble court doth go.
The privy Palace vnderlieth in secret place aloe,
With ditch full deep that doth 〈◊〉 the wood of priuetee,
And hidden parts of kingdom old: where never grew no tree
That cheerful bows is wont to bear, with knife or lopped be,
But Tax, and Cypress, and with tree of holm•… full black to se
Doth beck and bend the wood so 〈◊〉 aloft aboue all these
The higher ok doth overlook, surmounting all the treese.
From hens with luck the •…no to take, accustomed are the kings,
From hens in danger aid to ask, and doom in doubtful things.
To this affixed are the gifts, the sounding 〈◊〉 bright,
The Chariots broke, and spoils of sea that now Myrtoon hight,
There hang the wheels once won by craft of falset excel tree,
And every other conquests note: here leefull is to see
The 〈◊〉 tyre of Pelops head: the spoil of enmies here,
And of Barbarian triumph left, the painted gorgeous gear.
A loathsome spring stands under shade, and slothful course doth take,
With water black: even such as is, of •…some Stygian lake
The ugly wave, whereby are wo•…, to swear the gods on hie.
Here all the night the grisly ghosts and gods of death to cry
The fame reports: with clinkyng chains resounds the wood eche where,
The sprights 〈◊〉 out: and every thing that dreadful is to hear,
May there be seen: of ugly shapes from old Sepulchres sent
A fearful flock doth wander there, and in that place frequen•…
Worse things then ever yet were known: ye all the wood full oft
With flame is wont to floss•…e, and all the higher trees aloft
Without a fire do burn: and oft the wood beside all this
With triple barking roars at once: full oft the palace is
Affright with shapes, nor light of day may once the terror quell.
Eternal night doth hold the place, and darkness there of hell
In mid day reigns: from hens to them that pray, out of the ground
The certain answers given are, what time with dreadful sound
From secret place the fates be told, and dungeon roars within
While of the God breaks out the voice: where when entered in
Fierce Atreus was, that did with him his brothers children trail,
Dekt are the •…ultets: who (alas) may it enough bewail?
Behind the infants back{is} anon he knit their noble hands,
And eke their heavy heads about he bound with purple bands:
There wanted there no Frankincense, nor yet the holy wine,
Nor knife to cut the sacrifice, besprinkt with leuens fine.
Kept is in all the order due, least such a mischief grette
Should not be ordered well.
who doth his hand on sword then set?
He is him self the priest, and he him self the deadly verse
With prayer dire from fervent mouth doth sing and oft rehearse.
And he at thaulters stand{is} him self, he them assigned to die
Doth handle, and in order set, and to the knife apply,
He light{is} the fires, no rights were lefts of sacrifice undone.
The wood tken quaked, and all at ones from trembling ground anon
The Palace backed, in doubt which way the payse thereof would fall,
And shaking as in waives it stood: from thayre and therewithal
A blasyng star that foulest train drew after him doth go:
The wynes that in the fires were cast, with changed licourfloe,
And turn to blood: and twice or thryse that tyre fell from his head,
The Iucrie bright in Temples seemed to weep and tears to shed.
The sights amazed all other men, but steadfast yet always
Of mind, vnmoued Atreus stands, and even the gods doth fray
That threaten him, and all delay forsaken by and bye
To thaulters turns, and therewithal a side he looks awry.
As hungry tiger woonts that doth in gangey woods remain
With doubtful pace to range and roam between the bullocks twain,
Of either pray full covetous, and yet uncertain where
She first may bite, and roaring throat now turns the tone to tear
And then to •…hother straight returns, and doubtful famine holds:
So Atreus dire, between the babes doth stand and them beholds
On whom he points to slake his ire: first slaughter where to make,
He doubts: or whom he should again for second offering take,
Yet skills it nought, but yet he doubts, and such a cruelty
It him deligths to order well.
Whom take he first to die?
First place, least in him think ye might no piete to remain
To grandsier dedicated is, first Tantalus is slain.
With what a mind and countnaunce, could the boy his death sustain?
All careless of him self he stood, nor once he would in vain
His prayers leese. But Atreus fierce the sword in him at last
In deep and deadly wound doth hide to hilts, and griping fast
His throat in hand, he thrust him through. The sword then drawn away
When long the body had upheld it self in doubtful staye,
Which way to fall, at length upon the uncle down it falls.
And then to thaulters cruelly Philisthenes he tralles,
And on his brother throws: and straygh•… his neck of cutteth hee.
The carcase headlong falls to ground: apite•…us thing to see,
The morning head, with murmur yet uncertain doth complain.
What after double death doth h•… and slaughter then of twain?
Spares he the child? or gilt on gilt again yet heaps he?
As long maend Lyon fierce amid the wood of Armenie,
The drove pursues and conquest makes of slaughter many one,
Though now defiled be his jaws with blood, and hunger gone
Yet slakes not his Ireful rage, with blood of bulls so great,
But slothful now, with weary tooth the lesser calves doth threat:
None other wise doth Atreus rage, and swells with anger strained,
And holding now the sword in hand•… with double slaughter stained,
Regarding not where fell his rage, with cursed hand vnmilde
He struck it through his body quite: at bosom of the child
The blade god in, and at the back again out went the same.
He falls, and quenching with his blood the aulters sacred flame,
Of either wound at length he dies.
O heinous hateful act.
Abhor ye this? ye hear not yet the end of all the fact,
There follows more.
A fiercer thing, or worse then this to see
•…old nature bear?
why think ye thy•… of gilt the end to bee?
It is but part.
what could he more? to cruel beast•… he cast
Perhaps their bodies to be torn, and kept from tyres at last.
Would god he had: that never tomb•… the dead might over hyde,
Nor flames dissolve, though them for food to fowls in pastures wide
He had out thrown, or them for pray to cruel beasts would fling.
That which the worst was wont to be, were here a wished thing,
That them their father saw •…utombde, but oh more cursed crime
Uncredible, the which deny will men of after time:
From bosoms yet alive out drawn the trembling •…owells shake,
The veins yet breathe, the fearful heart doth yet both pant and quake:
But he the strings doth turn in h•…nde, and destinies behold,
And of the guts the signs eche one doth view no•… fully cold.
When h•… the sacrifice had pleased, his diligence he putts
To dress his brothers banquet now: and straight a s•…onder cuts
The bodies into quarters all, and by the stoompes anon
The shoulders wide, and browns of arms, he strikes of every •…hone.
He la•…es abroad their naked lymms, and cuts away the bones:
The only heads he keeps, and hands to him committed ones.
Some of the gut•… are broached, and in the fires that burn full sloe
They drop: the boiling liccout some doth tomble to and f•…o
In moornyng cawdern: from the fless•… that over stands 〈◊〉
The fire doth f•…. and scatter out, and into chimney of•…e
Up heaped again, and there 〈◊〉 by force to •…ary yet
Unwilling burns: the lyuet makes gre•… noise upon the spit,
Nor easily wot I, if the fless•…, or flames they be that cry,
But cry they doe: the fire like pitc•… it fumes by and by:
Nor yet the smoke it self so sad, like 〈◊〉 mist in sight
Ascends up as wont it is, nor takes his way upright,
But even the Gods and house it doth with filthy fume defile.
O patient Phoebus though from henc•… thou backward flee the while,
And in the midst of heaven aboue dost drown the broken day,
Thou fliest to la•…: the father eats his children well away,
And limb{is} to which he once gave life, with cursed jaw do•…he tear•….
He shynes with ointment shed full sweet all round about his heate,
Replete with wine: and often times so cursed •…inde of food
His mouth hath held that would not down•… but yet this one thing good
In all thy ylls (Thyestes) is, that them thou dost not 〈◊〉.
And yet shall that not long endure, though Titan backward go
•…nd chariots turn against him self, to meet the ways he went,
And heavy night so heinous deed to keep from sight be sent,
And out of time from east arise, so foul a fact to hide,
Yet shall the whole at length be seen: thy ills shall all be spied.
Which way O prince of lands and gods on hie, at whose uprise eftsoon of shadowde night
All beauty fleethe, which way turnst thou awry? and drawste y• day in midst of heaven to flight?
Why dost thou (Phebus) hide from vs thy sight? not yet the watch that later hour bring•… in,
Doth •…esper warn the stars to kindle light. not yet doth turn of Hespers wheel begin
To loase thy chare his well deserved way. the Trumpet third not yet hath blown his blast
While toward the night begins to •…eld the day. great wonder hath of sudden suppers haste
The Ploweman, yet whose oxen are vntierde. from wonted course of heaven what draws thee back?
What causes have from certain race conspi•…de to turn thy horse? do yet from dungeon black
Of hollow Hell, the conquered Giants prove a 〈◊〉 assault? doth Tityus yet assay
With trenched hart and wounded womb to move the former yres? or from the hill away
Hath now Typhoeus wound his side by might? is up to heaven the way •…rected hie
Of phlegrey •…os by mountains set upright? and now doth Ossa Pelion ouerlie?
The wonted turns are gone of day and night. the rise of sun, nor fall shall be no more.
Aurora dewysh mother of the light that woonts to send the horses out before,
Doth wonder much again returned to see her dawnyng light: she wott{is} not how to ease
The weary wheels, nor manes that smoking bee of horse with sweat, to bathe amid the seas.
Him self unwanted there to lodge likewise, doth setting Sun again the morning see,
And now commands the darkness up to rise, before the night to come prepared bee.
About the poale yet glowthe no fire in sight: nor light of Moon the shades doth comfort yet.
What so it be, God grant it be the night. our hart{is} do quake with fear oppressed great,
And dreadful are least heaven and earth and all with •…atoll ruin shaken shall decay:
And least on gods again, and men shall fall disfigurde 〈◊〉: and the land away
The •…eas, and •…yres, and of the glorious 〈◊〉 the wandering lamps, least nature yet shall hide.
Now shall no more with blase of his uprise, the lord of stars that leads the world so wide,
Of Summer both and winter give the marks. nor yet the Moon with 〈◊〉 •…ames that burns,
Shall take from vs by night the dreadful carkes, with swifter course or pass her brothers turns,
While compass less she fetts in crooked race: the Gods on heaps shall out of order fall
And eche with other mingled be in place. the wr•…ed way of holly planets all,
With path a sloop that doth divide the Zones, that bears the signs and years in course doth bryns,
Shall see the stars with him fall down at ones. and he that first not yet with gentle spring,
The temper•…te gale doth give to sails, the Ram shall he•…long fall a down to seas again,
Through which he once with •…atfull helen swam. next him the Bull that doth with horn sustain
The sisters seven, with him shall ou•…rturne the 〈◊〉, and arms of crooked cancer all.
The Lyon what, (that woonts the soil to burn) of Hercul•…s, again from heaven shall fall.
To lands once left the virgin shall be thrown, and leveled payse of balance sway allow,
And drowe with them the stinging Scorpion down. so likewise he that holds in Thassale bow
His swift well fethred arrows Chiron old, shall break the same and eke shall leess his shot.
And Capricorn that brings the winter cold shall overturn, and break thy water pot
Who so thou be: and down with thee to ground, the last of all the signs shall Pisces fall.
And monsters eke in seas yet never drounde, the water gulf shall over whelm them all.
And he which doth between eche Ursa glide, like croaked flood, the slipper serpent twinned:
And lesser Beat by greater Dragons side, full cold with frost congealed harde by kind,
And carter dull that slowly guides his wayne, unstable shall boôtes fall from hie,
We are thought meet of all men whom again, should huge heap of Chaos over lie,
And world oppress with over turned mas. the latest age now falls vs upon.
With evil hap we are begot alas, if wretches we have lost the sight of son,
Or him by fought enforced have to fly. let our complaints yet go, and fear be past:
He greedy is of life, that will not die when all the world shall end with him at last.
Now equal with the starr•… I go, beyond eche other wight, with haugh•…ie h•…d the heavens about, and highest Poi•… I smight.
The kingdom now &amp; •…eat I held, where once my father raynde.
I now let go the gods: for all my will I have obtained.
Enough and well, ye even enough for me I am a•…quit.
But why enough? I will proceed, and fill the father yet
With blood of his: least any shame should me restrain at all,
The day is gone: go to therefore, wh•…e thee the heaven doth call.
•…o 〈◊〉 god I could against their wills 〈◊〉 hold the gods that flee,
•…nd of revenging dish, constrain them witnesses to be:
But yet (which well enough is wrought,) let it the father see.
In spite of all the drowned day, I will remove from thee
The darkness all, in shade whereof doe luck•… thy miseries.
And guest at such a banquet now to long he careless lies,
With merry face: now eat and drunk enough he hath: at last
Tys best him self should know his ylls. ye servant all, in haste
Not•… the temple doors: and let the house be open all:
•…own would I see, when look upon his childrens heads he shall
What countenance he then would make: or in what words break out
Would first his grief, or how would quake his body round about
With spright amassed sore: of all my work the fruit were this.
I would him not a miser see, but while so made he is.
Behold the temple opened now, doth shyne with many a light:
In gly•…ring gold and purple seats he sytt•… him self upright,
And staiyng up his heavy head with wine, upon his hand,
He belches out. now chief of godd{is}, in highest place I stand,
•…nd king of kings: I have my 〈◊〉 and more then I could think:
He tilled is, he now the wine in silver bull doche drink.
And spare 〈◊〉 not, th•… ye•… 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉 woorser draught for 〈◊〉
That sproong out of the bodies late of sacrifices •…ee,
Which wine shall hyde: 〈◊〉 therewithal the boards be •…akin up.
The father (mingled with the wine) his childrens blood shall sup,
That would have droonke of•…. behold, he now begins to 〈◊〉
His voice and syngs, nor yet for •…oy his mind he may refrain.
Obeaten bosoms dullde so lunge with wo•…, 〈◊〉 down you•… 〈◊〉, at l•…gth your greues relēt:
Let sorrow pass, and all your dread let go, and fellow eke of fearful banishment,
Sad po•… and ill in misery the shame of cares. more whense thy •…ll thou haste,
Then whether, skills. 〈◊◊〉 to him, from hye that falls, it is in 〈◊◊〉 be 〈◊〉
Beneth. and great it is to him again that pressed with storm, of 〈◊〉 feels the smart,
Of kingdom lost the poises to sustain with neck vnbowde: nor yet deject of heart
Nor overcome, his heavy happs always to bear upright. but now of careful carkes
Shake of the showers, and of thy wretched days away with all the miserable marks.
To joyful state return thy cheerful face. put fro thy my•…de the old 〈◊〉 hence.
It is the woo•… of wight in woeful case, in state of joy to have no confidence.
Though better 〈◊〉 to them returned be, thafflicted yet to joy it irked sore.
Why call thou me •…back, and hyndrest me this happy day to celebrate? wherefore
Bid thou me (sorrow) weep without a cause? who doth me let with flowers so fresh and gay•…
To deck my hears? it let{is}, and me withdraws. down from my head the roses fall away•…:
My moysted 〈◊〉 with ointment over all, with sudden maze stands up in wondrous wise.
From face that would not weep the streams 〈◊〉 fall. and howling cries amid my words arise.
My sorrow yet tha•…omde tears doth love. and wretches styll delight to weep and cry.
Unpleasant plaints it pleases them to move: and flourished fair it likes with 〈◊〉 die•…
Their robes to rent: to w•…yle it likes them styll. for sorrow, sends (in sign that woes draw ny)
The mind, that wott{is} before of after ill. the sturdy storms the shipmen ouerlye,
When void of wind thasswaged se•…s doe rest. what tumult yet or countenance to see
Makste thou mad man? at length a trustful bre•…t to brother ge•…ue, what ever now it bee,
〈◊〉, or ells to late thou art a dred. I wretch would not so fear, but yet me draws
A trembling terror: down mine eyes do shed their sudden tears, and yet I know no cawse.
Is it a grief, or fear? or ells hath 〈◊〉 great •…oy it self?
LEt vs this day with one cousin•… (o brother) celebrate.
This day my steptor•… may confirm and stablyshe my estate,
And faythf•…ll bond of peace and lo•…e between vs 〈◊〉.
Enough with meat and eke with wine, now satisfied am I.
But yet of all my joys it were 〈◊〉 great increase to me,
If now above•… my side I might my little children see.
Believe that here even in thine arm•… thy children present bee.
For here they are, and shall be here, no part of them fro thee
Shall be withheld: their loved look•… now give to the I will,
And with the heap of all his babes, the father fully fill.
Thou shalt be glutted, fear thou not: they with my boys as yet
The joyful sacrifices make at board where children sit.
They shall be called: the friendly cup now take of courtesy
With wine vpfylde.
of brothers feast I take full willingly
The final gift, shed some to god{is} of this our fathers land,
Then let the rest be droonke. what{is} thy•…? in no wise will my hand
Obeye: the payse incre•…seth sore, and down mine arm doth swaye.
And from my lips the waftyng wined it self doth fi•…e away,
And in deceived mouth, about my jaws it runs round:
The table to, it self doth shake, and leap from trembling ground.
Scant burns the fire: the ayre it self with heavy •…here to sight
Forsook of sun amassed is between the day and night.
What means this? yet more and more of backward beaten sky
The compass falls: and thicker mist the world doth ouerlye
Then blackest darkness, and the night in night it self doth hyde.
•…ll stars be fled: what so it bee, my brother god provide
And soons to spare: the god{is} so grant that all this tempest fall
On this vile head. but now restore to me my children all.
I will, and never day again shall them from the withdraw.
What tu•…ulte tumbles so my gut{is}, and doth my bowels gnaw?
What quakes within? with heavy payse I feel my self oppressed,
And with an other voice then mine •…wails my dole•…ull breast.
Come near my soons, for you now doth th'unhappie father call:
Come near, for you once seen, this grief would soon assuage and fall.
Whence murmur they?
with fathers •…rmes embrace them quickly now,
For here they are lo come to thee: dost thou thy children know?
I know my brother: such a gilt yet can thou suffer well
ô earth to bear? nor yet from hens to Stygian lake of hell
Dost thou both drown thy self and vs? nor yet with broken ground
Dost thou these kingdoms and their king with Chaos rude confound?
Nor yet vprentyng from the soil the bowers of wicked land
Dost thou Mycenas overturn? with Tantalus to stand,
And auncyters of ours, if there in hell be any one,
Now ought we both. now from the frames on either side anon
Of ground, all here and there rent up, out of thy bosom deep
Thy dens and dungeons set abroad, and vs enclosed keep,
In bottom lowe of Acheront: aboue our head{is} aloft
Let wander all the guilty ghosts, with burning fret full oft
Let fyry Phlegethon that drives his sands both to and fro,
To our confusion ouetroon, and violently floe.
O slothful soil unshaken payse, vnmoued yet art thou?
The god{is} are fled.
but take to thee with joy thy children now,
And rather them embrace: at length thy children all, of thee
So long wy•… for, (for no delay there stands now in me,)
Enjoy and kiss, embracing arms divide thou unto three.
Is this thy league? may this thy lous and faith of brother bee?
And dost thou so repose thy hate? the father doth not crave
His soons alive (which might have been without the gilt,) to have:
And eke without thy hate, but this doth brother brother pray:
That them he may ent•…mbe, restore, whom see thou shalt straight way
Be burnt: the father nought requires, of the that have he shall,
But soon forgo.
what ever part yet of thy children all
Remains, he•…e shalt thou have: and what remains not, thou haste.
Lye they in fields, a food out flung for fleeing fowls to waste?
Or are they kept a pray, for wild and brutish beasts to eat?
Thou hast deuou•…de thy soons, and fyld•… thy self with wick•…d meat.
Oh this is it that shamde the godd{is}: and day from hens did drive
Turned back to east. alas I wretch what waylynges may I give?
Or what complaints? what woeful words may be enough for me?
The•…r heads cu•…e of, and hands of torn, I from the•…r bodies see,
And wrenched fe•…te from broken thigh•…, I here behold again.
•…is this that greedy father could not suffer to sustain.
In belly roll my •…owels round, and closed crime so great
Without a passage strives within, and seeks away to get.
Thy sword (o brother) lend to me: much of my blood alas
It has: let vs therewith make way for all my soons to pas.
Is yet the sword fro me withheld? thy self thy bosoms tear.
And let thy breasts resound with strokes: yet wretch thy hand forbear,
And spare the dead. who ever saw such mischief put in proof?
What rude Heniochus, that dwells by ragged coast aloof,
Of Caucasus unapt for men? or frare to Athens, who
Procustes wild? the father I oppress my children do
And am oppressed, is any means of gilt or mischief yet?
A mean in mischief ought to be, when gilt thou dost commit,
Not when thou quytst: for yet even this, to little seems to me.
The blood yet warm even from the wound I should in sight of thee
Even in thy saws have shed, that thou the blood of them might drink
That lived yet: but while to much to haste my hate I think,
My wrath beguiled is. my self with sword the wounds them gave,
I struck them down, the sacred fires with slaugh•…er vowed I have
Well pleased, the carcase cutting th•… and lyutles lymms on ground
I have in little parcels chopped, and some of them I drowned
In boiling cawderns, some to •…yres that burnt full slow I put,
And made to drop: their sinews all and lymms atoo I cut
Even yet alive, and on the spit that thrust was through the same
I harde the liver whale and cr•…e, and with my hand the flame
I oft kept in: but every wh•… the father might of this
Have better done, but now my wrath to lightly ended is.
He rent his soons with wicked gum, him self yet wotyng nought,
Nor they thereof.
ó ye, encloa•… with bending banks abought
All seas me hear, and to this 〈◊〉 ye gods now harken well
What ever ply•… ye fl•…dti are to: •…ear all ye sprights of hell,
•…nd here ye lands, and night so 〈◊〉, that them dost ouerlye
With cloud so black, to my complaints do thou thy self apply.
To thee now left I am, thou dost alone me miser see,
And thou art left without thy starts: I will nut make for me
P•…ions yet. nor ought for me r•…quyre, may ought yet bee
That me should veil? for you shall all my wishes now foe•…esee.
Thou guyder great of skies aboue, and prince of highest might,
Of he 〈◊〉 place, now all with clouds full hortible to sight,
Enwrappe the world, and let the winds on every syd•… break out,
And send the dreadful thunder clap, through all the world about.
Not with what hand thou gyltles house•… and undeserved wall
With lesser volt art wont to beat, but with the which did fall
The three vpheaped mountains once, and 〈◊〉 to hills in height
Stood equal up, the •…yant{is} huge: throweout such weapons straight,
•…nd fling thy •…yres, and therewithal revenge the drowned day.
•…et flee thy flames, the light thus lost and hyd from heaven away,
With flashes fill: the cause, (least long thou should douts whom to hit,)
Of eche of vs is ill: if not at least let mine be it,
Me strike: with triple edged soole thy brand of flaming fire
Beat through this breast: if father I my children do desire
To lay in tomb, or corpses cast to fire as doth be hove,
I must be burnt: i•… nothing now the gods to wrath 〈◊〉 move,
Nor power from skies with thunder bolt none strikes the wished men.
Let yet eternal night remain, and hyde with darkness then
The world about: I (Titan) nought complain, as now it stands,
If still thou hyde thee thus away.
now praise I well my hands,
Now got I have the palm: I had been overcome of thee,
Except thou sorowdst so: but now even children borne to me
I count, and now of brydebed cha•…e the faith I do repeat.
In what offended have my soons?
In that, that thine they wear.
Set thou the soons for fathers food?
I doe, and (which is best)
The certain soons.
the gods that guide a •…infants, I protest.
what wedlock god{is}?
who would the gilt with gilt so •…yght again?
I know thy grief prevented now with wrong, thou dost complain:
Nor this thee yrkes, that fed thou art with food of cursed kind,
But that thou had not it prepared: for so it was thy mind,
Such meates as these to •…ette before thy brother wo•…yng nought,
And by the mothers help, to have likewise my children caught,
And them with such like death to slay: this one thing l•…tted thee,
Thou thoughtst them thine.
the gods shall all of this revenge•…s bee:
•…nd unto them for vengeance due, my vows thee render shall.
But vexed to be I thee the while, •…eeue to thy children all.
O King of Dytis dungeon dark, and grisly ghosts of hell,
That in the deep and dreadful denns, of blackest Tartare dwell,
Where lean and pale diseases lye where fear and famine are,
Where discord stands with bleedyng brows, where every kind of care,
Where furies fight in beds of steel, and hears of crallyng snakes,
Where Gorgon grimm, where Harpies are, and loathsome Limbo lakes,
Where most prodigious ugly things, the hollow hell doth hyde,
If yet a monster more myschapte then all that there doe bide,
That makes his brood his cursed food, ye all abhor to see,
Nor yet the deep Auerne it self, may bide to cover me,
Nor grisly gates of Plutoes place, yet dare them selves to spread,
Nor gaping ground to swallow him, whom gods and day have fled:
Yet break ye out from cursed seats, and here remain with me,
Ye need not now to be afraid, the ayre and heaven to se.
Nor triple headid Cerberus, thou need not be affright,
The day unknown to thee to see, or else the loathsome light.
They both be fled: and now doth dwell none oath•r countnaunce here,
Then doth beneath the foulest face, of hateful hell appear.
Come see a meetest match for thee, a more then monstrous womb,
That is of his unhappy brood, become a cursed tomb.
Flock here ye foulest fiends of hell, and thou O grandsier great,
Come see the glutted guts of mine, with such a kind of meat,
As thou did once for gods prepare let torments all of hell
Now fall upon this hateful head, that has deserved them well.
Ye all be plagued wrongfully, your gilts be small, in sight
Of mine, and meet it were your pangs on me alone should light.
Now thou O grandsier guiltless art, and meeter were for me,
With fleeing flood to be beguiled, and fruit of fickle tree.
Thou slewst thy son, but I my sons, alas have made my meat.
I could thy famine better bear, my panche is now replete
With food: and with my children three, my belly is extent.
O filthy fowls and gnawing gripes, that Tityus bosom reut
Behold a fitter pray for you, to fill your selves upon
Then are the growing guts of him: four wombs enwrapt in one.
This panche at ones shall fill you all: yfye abhor the food,
Nor may your selves abide to bathe, in such a cursed blood:
Yet lend to me your clinchyng claws, your pray a while forbear,
And with your talons suffer me, this monstrous maw to tear.
Or whirling wheels, with swing of which
Ixion still is told, Your hooks upon this glutted gorge, would catch a surer hold.
Thou filthy flood of Limb•… lake, and Stygian poole so dire,
From choked channel belch abroad. thou fearful fret of fire,
Spue out thy flames O Phlegethon: and over shed the ground.
With vomit of thy fyrye stream, let me and earth be drowned.
Break up thou soil from bottom deep, and give thou room to hell,
That night, where day, that ghosts, were gods were wont to reign, may dwell.
Why gapste thou not? Why do you not O gates of hell unfold?
Why do ye thus thynfernall fiends, so long from hens withhold?
Are you likewise afraid to see, and know so wretched wight,
From whom the gods have wryde their looks, and turned are to flight?
O hateful head, whom heaven and hell, have shoonde and left alone,
The Sun, the Starts, the light, the day, the Gods, the ghosts be gone.
Yet turn again ye Skies a while, ere quite ye go fro me,
Take vengeance first on him, whose fault enforces you to f•….
If needs ye must yo•… flight prepare, and may no lenget bide,
But roll ye must with you forth with, the Gods and Sun a side,
Yet slowly flee: that I at length, may you yet overtake,
While wandering ways I after you, and speedy journey make.
By seas, by lands, by woods, by rock{is}, in dark I wander shall:
And on your wrath, for right reward•… to due deserts, will call. ye scope not fro me so ye Gods, still after you I go,
And vengeance ask on wicked wight, your thunder bolt to throe.


THe prudent Prince Solomon, doth say,
He that spares the rod, the child doth hate
He wold youth should be kept in awe always
By correction in time at reasonable rate,
To be taught to fear god and their parents obey
To get learning and qualities, thereby to maintain
An honest quiet life, correspondent always,
To gods law and the kings, for it is certain.
If children be noseled in idleness and ill,
And brought up therein, it is hard to restrain,
And draw them from natural wont evil,
As here in this Interlude, ye shall se plain.
By two children brought up wantonly in play,
Whom ye mother doth excuse, whē she should chastise
They delight in dalliance and mischief always,
At last they end their lives in miserable wise.
The mother persuaded by worldly shame,
That she was the cause of their wretched life,
So pensive, so sorrowful, for their death, she became,
That in despair she would •lea her sell• wi•h a kinfe
Then her son Barnabas, (by interpretation,
The son of comfort,) her ill purpose do stay,
By the scriptures he gives her godly consolation
And to conclude•th, all these parts will we play.
MY master in my lesson yesterday,
Did recite this text of Ecclesiasticus,
man is prone, to evil, frō his youth, did he say
Which sentence may well be verified in vs
My self, my brother, and sister Dalila,
Whom our parents to their cost to scoole do find
I tarry for them here, time passes away,
I loose my learning, they ever loiter behind,
If I go before, they do me threat,
To complain to my mother, she for their sake,
Being her tender tidlynges, will me beat:
Lord, in this perplexit ye, what way shall I take?
What will become of them? grace god them send,
To apply their learning, and their manners amend.
Here we come, and here we louen,
And here we will abide abide ay.
Fie brother fie, &amp; specially you sister Dalila,
Sobrenes becomes maids always
What ye dolt ye be ever in one songe,
yea sir it shall cost you blows ere it be lunge,
Be ye not ashamed the treauandes to play?
Losing your time &amp; learning, &amp; that every day
Learning brings knowledge of god, &amp; honest living to get
Yea mary, I warrant you, master hodypeke,
Learn a pace sister, and after to spyn and sow,
And other honest huswifely points to know.
Spyn quote ha, yea by ye mass, &amp; with your heles up wind
For a good mouse hunt, is cat after king
Lewd speaking corrupts good manners s. Paule doth sai
Come, let vs go, if ye will to scole this day
I shall be shent for taryng so lunge,
Go get the hence, thy mouth full of horse donge.
Now pretty sister, what sport shall we deuyse?
Thus pelting to scole, I think vs unwise
In summer dye for thryst, in winter for cold,
And still to live in fear of a churl, who would?
Not I by the mass, I had rather he hanged were
Then I would sit quaking like a mom for fear
I am son burned in summer, in winter the cold,
Makes my limbs gross, and my beauty decay,
If I should use it, as they would I should,
I should never be fair woman I dare say.
No sister no, but I can tell,
Where we shall have good chiere,
Lusty companions two or three,
At good wine, ale and bier.
Oh good brother let vs go,
I will never go more to to scoole,
Shall I never know,
What pastime means?
yes, I will not be such a fool.
Have with the Dalila,
Fare well our scoole,
Away with book and all,
I will set my heart,
On a merry pynne,
What ever shall be fall.
Lord what folly is in youth?
Howe unhappy be children now a days?
And the more pity, to say the truth.
Their parents maintain them in evil ways:
Which is a great cause that the world decays,
For children brought up in idleness and play,
Unthrifty and disobedient, continue always,
A neighbour of mine hath children here by,
Idle, disobedient, proud, wanton and nice.
As they come by, they do shrewed turns daily,
Their parents so to suffer them surely, be not wise
They laugh me to scorn, whē I tel thē mine advise,
I will speak with their elders &amp; warn thē neighborly
Never in better time, their mother is here by,
God save you gossip, I am very fain,
That you chance now to come this way,
I lunge to talk with you a word or twain,
I pray you take it friendly that I shall say:
Ismael your son, and your daughter Dalila.
Do me shrewd turns, daily more and more,
Chide and beat my children, it grieves me sore.
They swear, curse &amp; scold, as they go by ye way,
Giving other ill ensample to do the same,
To gods displeasure, and their hurt an other day,
Chastise them for it, or else ye be to blame:
Tush tush, if ye have no more then that to say,
Ye may hold your tongue and get ye a way,
Alas poor souls, they sit a scoole all day,
In fear of a churl, &amp; if a little they play,
He beats them like a devil: when they come home
Your mestresship would have me lay on,
If I should beat them so oft as men complain,
By ye mass with in this month, I should make thē lame
Be not offended I pray you, I must say more,
your son is suspect, light fingered to be.
your daughter hath nice tricks three or four,
Se to it in time, least worse ye do see,
He that spares the rod, hates the child truly,
yet Solomon sobre correction doth mean,
Not to beat and bounce them to make them lame:
God thank you mestres, I am well at ease
Such a fool to teach me, preaching as she please,
Dame ye belie them deadly I know plain,
Because they go handsomely ye disdain,
Then on the other as well would I complain,
But your other son is good, and no thank to you
These will ye make nought by sweet Iesu.
Eupliade, my children nought ye lye,
By your malice they shall not set a sly,
I have but one mom, in comparison of his brother
Him the fool praises, and despises the other.
Well Xantippe, better in time, then to late,
Seeing ye take it so, here my leave I take.
Mary good leave have ye, the great god be with you
My children or I be cursed I think,
They be complained on where ever they go,
That for their pleasure they might drink.
Nay by this the poor fowls be come frō ferle weary,
I will go get them meat to make them mercy,
Lo, lo, here I brynger
What is she now ye have her?
A lusty minion lover.
For no gold will I give her
welcome my honey ay.
Oh my heart.
This wench can singe,
And play her part,
I am yours (and you mine) with all my hart.
By the mass it is well songe,
were ye not sorry ye were a maid so lunge?
Fie moister iniquity fie, I am a maid yet,
No sister no, your maiden head is sick:
That knave your brother will be a blab still,
I wise Dalila ye can say as much by him, if ye will.
By him quote ha, he hath whores two or three,
But iche tell your minion doll, by gogs body:
It skylleth not she doth hold you as much
ye lye falsely, she will play me no such touche,
Not she? yes to do your heart good
I could tell you who puts a bone in your hood.
Peace whore, or ye bear me a box an theare,
Here is mine ear knave, strike and thou dare.
To suffer him thus ye be no man,
If ye will not revenge me, I will find one,
To set so little by me, ye were not wont,
Well, it is no matter.
Though ye do coterie nolunt,
Peace Dalila, speak ye latin poor fool,
No no, but a proverb I learned at scoole.
yea sister, you went to scole till ye were past grace
yea, so did thou by thy knaves face.
Well, no more a do, let all this go,
We kinsfolk must be friends, it must be so.
Come on come on come on,
Here they be that will do vs al good,
If ye use it long, your hear will grow throught your
Come on knave with christ's curse.
I must have some of the money,
Thou hast picked out of thy fathers purse,
He, by the mass if he can get his purse,
Now and then he makes it by half the worse.
I defy you both whore and knave
What ye pryncockes, begin ye to rave?
Come on.
Master Iniquity, by your leave,
I will play a crown or two here by your sleue
Then be ye servant to a worshipful mon.
Master Iniquity, a right name by saint Iohn.
What can ye say by master Inquiry?
I love him and his name most heartily,
God a mercy Dalila, good luck, I warrant the,
I will shrive you both by and by,
Come on, but first let vs have a songe,
I am content, so that it be not lunge.
Gold lockes,
She must have knocks,
Or else I do her wrong,
When ye have your will,
Ye were best lye styll,
The winter nights be lunge
¶When I no may,
An other assay,
I will take it for no wrong:
Then by the rood,
A bone in your hood.
I shall put ere it be lunge.
She macheth you sira.
By gogs blood she is the best whore in England.
It is knavishly praised, give me your hand,
I would thou haddes such in other,
By the mass rather then .xl. pound brother.
Here sirs come on seven.
A leaven at all.
Do ye nick vs be knave your noly,
Ten mine
Sire mine,
Have at it, and it were for all my fathers kine,
It is lost by his wounds, and ten to one,
Take the dice Dalila, cast on.
Come on fie•e,
Thryue at fairest,
Gup whore, and I at rest,
Bigogs blood, I wene god &amp; the devil be against me
If the one forsake the, tother will take the,
Then is he a good fellow, I would not pass,
So that I might bear a rule in hell by the mass,
to toss fierbrandes at these penyfathers pates,
I would be porter and receive them at the gates,
In boiling lead &amp; brimstone, I wold sethe thē each one
The knaves have al ye money, good felows have none
Play brother, have ye lost all your money now?
yea, I thank that knave and such a whore as you,
Tic no marter, I will have money or I will sweet,
Bygogs blood I will rob the next I mete.
yea, and it be my father.
Thou boy, by the mass ye will climb the ladder,
Ah sira, I love a wench that can be wily•
She perceived my mind, with a twinke of mine eye,
If we two play booty on any man,
We will make him as bare as Iob anon,
Well Dalila, let se what ye have won,
Sir, I had .x. shillings when I begone,
And here is all, every farryng,
ye lye like a whore, ye have won a pound,
Then the devil strike me to the ground,
I will feel your pocket, by your leave mestres,
A way knave, not mine by the mass,
Yes bi god, &amp; give you this to boot,
Out horizon knave, I beshrew thy heart root
Wilt thou rob me &amp; breat me to?
In the way of correction but a blow or two,
Correct thy dogs thou shalt not beat me,
I will make your knaves flesh cut I warrant the,
Ye think I have no friends, yes I have in store,
A good fellow or two percaunce more.
yea, by the mass they shall box you for this gear,
A knave I found the, a knave I leave the here.
Gup whore, do ye hear this jade?
Loving when is pleased,
When she is angry thus shrewd,
Chief brother, sylter whore,
Two gre•ses of an ill tree,
I will tarry no longer here,
Fare well, god be with ye.
Alas wretched wretch that I am,
Most miserable caitiff that ever was borne,
Full of payne and sorrow, crooked and loom.
Stuffed with diseases in this world forlorn.
My sinews be shronken, my flesh eaten with pose••s
My bones fin of ache, &amp; great payne,
My head is bald, that bare yellow lockes,
Crooked I crepe to the earth again,
Mine eye sigth is dim, my hands tremble &amp; shake
My stomach abhors all kind of meat:
For lack of clothes, great cold I take•
When appetite serves, I can get no meat.
Where I was fair and amiable of face,
Now am I foul and horrible to se,
Al this I have I deserved for lack of grace,
Justly for my sins god doth plague me.
My parents did title me, they were to blame,
In stead of correction, in ill did me maintain:
I fell no nought, and shall dye with shame
Yet all this is not half of my grief and payne.
The worm of my conscience yt shall never dye,
Accuses me daily more and more:
So oft have I sinned wilfully,
That I fear to be damned for evermore.
What woeful wight art thou? tell me,
That here most grievously doest lament,
Confess the truth, and I will comfort the,
By the word of god omnipotent:
Although your time ye have misspent,
Repent and amend while ye have space,
And god will restore you to heatlh and grace.
To tell you who I am I dare not for shame,
But my filthy living hath brought me in this case,
Full oft for my wantonness you did me blame,
yet to take your council I had not the grace,
To be restored to health, alas it is past,
Disea•e hath brought me into such decay,
Help me with your almose, while my life doth last
That like a wretch as I am, I may go my way.
Show me your name sister I you pray,
And I will help you now at your need,
Both body and soul will I fed.
your have named me already, if I dust be so bold
you sister Dalila, that wretch I am,
My wanton nice toys ye knew of old,
Alas brother they have brought me to this shame,
Whē you went to scole, my brother &amp; I wold play
Swear, chide, &amp; scodle weth man and woman,
To do shrewd turns, our delight was always,
Yet were we titled, and you beaten now &amp; than,
Thus our parents let vs do what we would,
And you by correction they kepthe under awe:
When we grew big, we were sturdy and bold
By father and mother we set not a straw,
Small matter for me, I am past,
But your brother and mine is in gread jeopardy:
In danger to come to shame at the last,
He frames his living so wickedly.
Well siker, I ever feared ye would be nought,
your lewd behaviours sore grieve my hart:
to train you to goodness, al means have I sought,
But in vain, yet will I play a brotherly part.
For yt the soul is more precious, most dearly bought
with the blood of Christ, dying therefore:
To save it first, a mean must be sought,
At gods hand by Christ, man only saviour.
Consider Dalila, gods fatherly goodness,
Which for your good, hath brought you in this case.
Scourged you with his rod of pure love doubtless.
that ones knowing your self, ye might cal for grace,
Ye seem to repent, but I doubt whater,
For your sins, or for the misery ye be in:
Earnestly repent for your sin rather,
For these plagues be but the reward of sin,
But so repent that ye sin no more,
And then believe with steadfast faith:
That god will forgive you for evermore,
For Chrystes sake, as the scripture saith.
As for your body, if it be curable,
I will cause to be healed, or during your life:
I will clothe you, and fete you as I am able,
Come sister, go with me, ye have need of relief.
As a judge of the country• here am I come,
Sent by the kings Majesty, Justice to do:
Chiefly to proceed in judgment of a Felon,
I tarry for the verdict of the quest •re I go.
Go bailey, know whether they be all a greed or no
If they be so, bid them come away
And bring their prisoner, I wold hear what they say
I go my Lord, I go, to soon for one,
He is like to play a cast, will break his neck bone,
I beseech your lordship be good to him,
The man is come of good kin•
If your Lordship would be so good to me,
As for my sake to set him free,
I could have .xx. pount in a purse,
Yea, and your Lordship a right fair horse,
Well worth ten pound.
Get the a way thou hell hound,
If ye were well examined and tried,
Perchance a false knave ye would be spied,
Bribes (saith Solomon) blind ye wise mans sight
That he can not se to give judgment right,
Should I be a bribar• nay he shall have the law
As I owe to god and the king obedience and awe.
Ye be tied fair enough for running away
If ye do not after me, ye will be hanged I dare say
If thou tell no tales, but hold thy tongue,
I will •e•the at liberty ere it be lunge.
Though thou be judged to dye anon,
Come on firs, I pray you come on,
Be you all agreed in one?
yea my Lord, every chone, 
Where Ismael was intided by .xii. men,
Of Felony, burglary, and murder,
As thinditement declares, howe, where, and when
ye heard it read to you lately in ordre:
you with the rest, I trust all true men,
Be charged vpō your oaths to give verdict directly,
Whether Ismael thereof be guilty or not guilty,
Guilty (my Lord) and most guilty,
Wilt thou hang my Lord, horizon noddy?
The lord have mercy upon the,
Tush, hold thy tongue and I warrant the
Thou shalt go to the place thou came fro,
Till to morrow .ix. of the clock, there to remain,
To the place of execution then shalt thou go•
There be hanged to death, and after again,
Being dead, for ensample, to be hanged in a chain•
Take him away, and se it be done,
At your peril that may fall thereupon.
Though I be judged to dye, I require respite,
For the kings advantage in things I can recite,
A way with him he will speak but of spyte,
well• we will hear you say what you can.
But se that ye wrongfully accuse no man,
I will be lye no man, but this I may say,
Here stands he that brought me to this way:
My Lord• he lies like a dampned knave,
The fear of death doth make him rave,
His naughty company and play at dice,
Did me first to stealing entice.
He was with me at robberies, I say it to his face,
yet can I say more in time &amp; space,
Thou hast said to much, I beshrew thy horsons face
Hang him my Lord, out of the way,
The thief cares not what he doth say
Let me be hangman, I will teathe him a slight,
For fear of talking. I will strangle him straight,
Tarry here that list, for I will go.
No no my friend, not so,
I thought always ye should not be good,
And now it will prove, I se by the rood,
Take him and lay him in irons strong,
We will talk with you more ere it be lunge,
He that lays hands on me in this place,
Iche lay my brawling iron on his face:
By gogs blood I defy thy worst,
If thou shouldest hang me I were a cursed.
I have been at as low an ebb as this,
And quickly a loft again by gisse:
I have mo friends then ye think I have,
I am entertained of all men like no slave:
Yea, within this month I may say to you,
I will be your servant, and your moister to.
ye, crepe into your breast, will ye have it so?
A way with them both, lead them away,
At his death tell me what he doth say,
For then be like he will not lye,
I care not for you both, no not a sly:
If no man have here, more matter to say
I must go hence some other way.
Ho ha, though I come in rudely be not aghast,
I must work a feat in al the hast.
I have caught two birds, I will set for the dame,
If I catch her in my clutch, I will her tame.
Of all this while know ye not my name?
I am right worshipful moister wordly shame,
The matter that I come now about,
Is even this, I put you out of dought.
There is none Xantippe, a cursed shrew,
I think al the world doth her know,
Such a jade she is, and so cursed a queen,
She would out scold the devils dame I wene.
Sirs this fine woman, had babes three,
Twain the derest darlings that might be,
Ismael and fair Dalila, these two,
With the lout Barnabas, I have nothing to do.
Always good, that these tidlynges do might,
Swear, lye, steal, scold or fight:
Cards, dice, kiss, clip and so furth,
All this our Mommy would take in good worth.
Now sir, Dalila my daughter is dead of y• pockes
And my son hanged in chains, &amp; waueth his lockes
These news will I tel her, and the matter so frame
That she shall be thine own master worldly shame,
Ho ha ha.
Peace, peace, she comweth hereby,
I spoke no word of her, no not I,
Oh Mestres Xantippe, I can tell you needs,
The fair wench your dere daughter Dalila,
Is dead of the pockes, taken at the stews,
And thy son Ismael, that pretty boy
Whom I dare say you loved very well,
Is hanged in chains, ever man can tell.
Every man saith thy daughter was a strong whore
And thy son a strong thief, &amp; a murderer to
It must needs grieve you wondrous s•to,
That they died so shamefully both two:
Men will taunt you and mock you, for they say now
The cause of their death, was even very you•
I the cause of their death?
Will ye sown, the devil stop thy breath?
Thou shalt die (I trow) with more shame
I will get me hence out of the way,
If the whore should dye, men would me blame•
That I killed her, knaves should say.
Alas alas, and weal away•
I may curse the time that I was borne,
Never woman had such fortune, I dare say,
Alas two of my children be forlorn.
My fair daughter Dalila is dead of the pockes,
My dere son Ismael hanged up in chains,
Alas the wind waueth his yellow lockes,
It flees my heart, and breaks my brains.
Why should god punish &amp; plague me so sore?
To se my children dye so shamefully,
I will never eat bread in this world more
with this knife will A sley my self by &amp; by•
Beware what ye do, fie mother fie•
Will ye spiel your self for your own offence
And seem for ever to exclude gods mercy,
God doth punish you for your negligence:
Wherefore take his correction with patience,
And thank him heartily, that of his goodness
He brings you in knowledge of your trespass.
For when my brother &amp; sister were of young age,
You saw they were given to idleness and play,
Would apply no learning, but live in outrage,
And mencomplagned on them every day.
Ye winked at their faults, and titled them always.
By maintenaun•e they grew to mischief and ill,
So at last gods Justice did them both spill.
In that god preseruerued me, small thank to you
If god had not given me special grace,
To avoid evil, and do good, this is true,
I had lived and dyed in as wretched case:
As they did, for I had both suffraunce and space,
But it is an old prouerke, you have herd it I think
That god will have se, shall not wink.
Yet in this we may al take comfort,
They toke great repentance I heard say,
And as for my sister, I am able to report,
She lamented for her sins, to her dyng day:
To repent and believe I exorthed her always,
Before her death she believed that god of his mercy
For Christ's sake, would save her eternally.
If you do even so, ye need not despair,
For god will frely remit your sins all,
Christ hath payed the ransom, why should ye fear.
To believe this and do well, to god for grace call.
All worldly cares let pass and fall,
And thus comfort my father, I pray you heartily,
I have a little to say, I will come by and by.
Right gentle audience, by this Interlude ye mayse
How dangerous it is, for the frailty of youth,
Without good governance, to live at liberty,
Such chances as these, oft happen of truth
Many miscarry, it is the more ruth,
By negligence of their elders, &amp; not taking payne.
In time good learning &amp; qualities to attain.
Therefore exhorting al parents to be diligent,
In bringing up their children, yea to be circumspect
Least they fall to evil, be not negligent,
But chastise them before they be sore infect:
Accept their well doing in ill them reject,
A young plant ye may plate &amp; bow as y• will,
Where it grows strong, there will it abide styll
Even so by children, in their tender age,
Ye may work them like wax• to your own intent
But if ye suffer them lunge to live in outrage•
They will be sturdy and stiff, and will not relent:
O ye children, let your time he well spent,
Apply your learning and your elders obey,
It will be your profit an other day.
Now, for the Queens Royal majesty let vs pray,
That god (in whose hands is ye heart of al Queens,)
May endue her highness with godly puissance always
that her grace may long reign &amp; prosper in al things
In gods word &amp; justice may give light to al Queens
Let vs pray for the honourable council &amp; nobility,
that they may always coūsel in wisdō with trāquility,
¶God save the Queen, the Realm and cominaltie.

