Our heavenly blessing, be with you euerychone
All praise and glory, to your majesty alone.
Here styll to tarry, I think it be your mind.
My office ye know, is to instruct Mankind.
Than God be with you, we leave you here behind.
THe law in effect•, is a teacher general
What is to be done, and what to be laid aside
But as touching me▪ the first law natural
A knowledge I am, whom God in Man doth hyde
In his whole working, to be to him a get
To honour his God, and seek his neighbours health
A great occasion, of peace, and public wealth.
A sore charge I have, Mankind to ouerse
And to instruct him, his lord God to obey
That lord of heaven grant, I may so do my duty
That he be pleased and Man brought to a staye
His bry•tle nature, his slyppernes to way
Much doth provoke me, but if God set to his hand
He shall do full well, for none may him withstand.
¶ He cōmeth in singing.
〈♫〉Brom, brom, brom, brom, brom. Bye brom bye 〈♫〉Bye. bromes for shoes and powchrynges, botes and 〈♫〉busayus for new bromes. Brom, brom, brom.
Mary God give ye good even
And the holy man saint Steven
Send ye a good new year
I would have brought ye the pox
Or else an image of wax
If I had known ye here.
I will my self so handle
That ye shall have a candle
When I come hither again
At this your sudden mooyon
I was i• such devotion
I had ne'er broke a vain.
That might have done ye smart•.
No, no it was but a fart
For pastime of my hart
I would ye had it forsooth
In syrup or in sows
But for noyaunce of the hows
For easement of your toth,
Now have I my dream in dede
God send me wele to speed,
And sweet saint Antony
I thought I should mete a knave
And now that fortune I have
Among this company.
Why dost thou call me knave?
I said I would be your slave
If your grace would me have
And do your work anon.
I would so rub your botes
The rofe should from the rotes
When ye should do them on.
Thou art disposed to mock
Soon may thou have a knock
If thou with me so game.
Your mouth shall kiss my dock
Your tongue shall it unlock,
But I say what is your name?
I am the law of Nature
I thought so by your stature
And by your ancient gature
Ye were of such a •ature
When I first heard ye speak.
Ye commoned with God lately
And now ye are his bailey
Mankind to rule discreetly
Welcome sy• huddyp•ke.
If thou use such villainy.
I shall displease the truly.
By the mass, I the defy
With thy whole Cukoldrye
And all that with the hold.
Why doest thou me blaspheme
And so ungodly deem?
For by this blessed book
I wend ye had ben a Cooke
And that made me so bold,
For a Cooke ones, having age
With a face demure and sage
And ancient to behold.
As you have here in place
With a beard upon your face
What is he but a Cooke old?
Ye are disposed to dally.
To leap and ouersallye
The compass of your wit
I counsel ye yet in season
Somewhat to follow reason
And gnaw upon the bit.
Then after our great madness
Let vs fall to some sadness
And tell me what ye entende.
God sent me unto Man
To do the best I can
To cause him to amend.
Such creatures as want reason
My rules obeye eche season
And that in eueryborder
The son and moan doth move
With the other bodies aboue
And never break their order.
The trees and herbs doth grow
The sea doth ebb and flow
And varyeth not a nail
The floods and wholesome sprynges
With other natural things
Their course do never fail.
The beasts and birds engender
So do the fies•hes tender
According to their kind
Lonely man doth fall
From good laws natural
By a froward wicked mind.
Now will I prove ye a liar
Next cosynto a friar
And on the gall ye rub
Ye say they follow your law
And varye not a straw,
Which is a tale of a tubbe.
The sun ones in the clyppes
Away the clearness slips
And darkened is the day
Of the plants influence
Arises the pestilence.
To many ones decay.
Doth not the sea sorage
That none can it assuage,
And swallow in town and streate
The ayre which gives breath
Someyme infects to death
By his most pestilent heate.
The beasts of vndemure
Which were left to man cure
Will him sometime devour
Thus are you rulers forgot
As things of slendre note
In Creatures day and hour.
It is the will of God
To use them as a rod
Of his just punishment
When Man doth not regard
The lord nor his reward
Nor to his laws consent.
They never are so ronnysh
But when God doth Man ponnysh
For his unhappiness
From God they never fall.
Nor from laws natural
Doing his busynesse.
And you are the same law
That kept them under awe
By your most politic wit?
God hath appointed me
Mankind to ouerse
And in his heart to sit
To teach him for to know
In the Creatures high and lowe
His glorious majesty
And on his name to call,
Or power celestial,
In his necessity.
To think him euerlas•ynge
And wonderful in working
And that he creates all
Both govern and conserve
From them he never swerve
That to such faith will fall.
In dede here is good sport.
But why do you resort
Unto this present place?
Man always to exhort
To seek all health and confort,
Of the only God of grace.
First in the hearts rejoice
And than with open voice
To worship him alone
Knowledgynge his deity
His power and eternity
When he shall make his moan.
I shall keep ye as well from that
As my grandam kept her cat
From licking of her cream.
What will thou keep me fro?
Tell me ere thou farther go
Me think thou art in a dream.
From causing of Mankind
To give to God his mind
Or his obedience.
What is thy name? tell me.
Mary Infydelyte
Which never will agree
To your benyuolence.
Thou can not keep me from man.
Yet I will do the best I can
To trouble ye now and than
That ye shall not prevail
I will cause ydolatrye
And most vile Sodomy
To work so vngracyouslye
Ye shall of your purpose fail.
I defy the wicked find
With thy whole vene mouse kind
God puts now in my mind
To fl thy company.
Ye are so blessed a Saint
And your self so well can paint
That I must me acquaint
With you no remedy.
Avoid thou cruel enemy
I will none of the truly
But shurne thy company
As I would the devil of hell.
And are ye gone indeed?
Small wyttam be your speed.
Except ye take good heed
I will be next of your counsel.
Now will I work such masterye
By crafts and su•yle policy
The law of nature to poison
With pestilent ydolatrye
And with most stinking sodomy
That he shall have no foison
Where are these vyllen knaves?
The devils own kytchyu slaves
That them I can not se
I conjure you both here
And charge ye to appear
Like two knaves as yebe.
Ambo is a name full clean
Know ye not what I mean?
And are so good a clarke.
By Terragramaton
I charge ye appear anon
And come out of the dark
Have in than at a dasshe
With swash merry annetswasshe
Yet may I not be to rash
For my holy orders sake.
Nor I son by my troth
Tha cau••a •orage of sloth
And such a comberouse caught.
Yeah wot not what to do.
At Christmas and at Paske
Ye may dance the devil a mask
While his great cauldron ply•e
you such a pretty minion
And you now in religion
Such two I never saw
Is not thy name Idolatry▪
Yes, an wholesome woman verily,
And w•lls•n• in philosophy
Men fortunes she can tell
She can by saying her Aue mary
And by other charms of sorcery
Ease men of the loath ache by and bye
Yea, and fetch the devil from hell
She an c•nyike the Cow and hunt the fox
And help men of the ague and pox
So they bring money to the box
When they to her make mdne.
She can fetch again all that is lost
And draw drink out of a rotten post
Without the help of the holy Ghost
In working she is alone.
What sometime thou were an he.
Yea, but now yeah am a she
And a good midwife• perde
Young children can Icharme▪
With whisperings and whysshynges
With crossings and with kyssynges
With blessings and with blessings
That sprites do them no harm.
Then art thou like to Clysthenes.
To Clodius and Euclides,
Sardinapalus and Hercules
Which them selves oft transformed
Into a women's likeness
With agylyte and quickens
But they had venus syckenes
As writers have declared.
Let her tell forth her matter.
With holy oil and water
I can so cloyne and clatter
That I can at the latter
Many sutelties contrive
I can work wiles in battle
If I do ones but spittle
I can make corn and cattle
That they shall never thryue.
When ale is in the fat
If the Oruar please me not
The cast shall fall down flat
And never have any strength
No man shall tonne nor bake
Nor meat in inseason make
If I against him take
But lose his labour at length.
Their wells I can up dry
Ca•se trees and herbs to dye.
And slay all pulley
Where as men doth me move
I can make stoles to dance,
And earthen pots to prance
That none shall them enhance
And do but cast my glove.
I have charms for the plough
And also for the cough
She shall give milk •nowghe
So lunge as I am pleased
Apace the myl• shall go.
So shall the cradle do
And the mustard querne also
No man therewith diseased.
Than art thou for me fit.
The woman hath a wit
And by her ger can sit.
Though she be somewhat old?
It is mine own sweet bully
My muskyne and my mullye,
My gelouer and my cullye
Yea mine own sweet hart of Gold.
I say yet not to bold.
Peace fondelinge, tush a button
What will thou fall to mutton?
And play the hungry glutton
Before this company?
Rank love is full of heate
Where hungry dogs lack meat
They will dirty pu•dynges eat
For want of befe and cony.
Heyghe minion for money
As good is draff as honey.
When the day is what and sonnye,
By the blessed rode of kent.
Say forth your mind good mother
For this man is none other
But our own loving brother
And is very well content.
I never miss but paulter
Our blessed ladies psaulter
Before saint Savers alter
With my beds ones a day
And this is my comoncast
To here Mass first or last
And the holy friday fast
In good time mought I it fey.
With blessings of Saint Germyne
I will me so determine
That neither for nor vermin
Shall do my chickens harm
For your gese seek saint Legearde
And for your ducks saint Leonarde
For horse take Moyses yard
There is no better charm.
Take me a napkin folte
With the bias of a bolt
For the healing of a •olte
No better thing can be
For lamps and for bottes
Take me saint Wylfrides knots
And holy saint Thomas lots
On my life I warrant ye.
For the caught take Iudas •are
With the paring of a pear
And drink them without fear
If ye will have remedy
Three syppes are for the hyckocke
And. vi. more for the chyckocke
Thus my pretty pyckocke
Recover by and by.
If ye can not sleep but slumber
Give Otes unto saint Un•umber
And beans in a certain number
Unto saint Blase and saint Blithe
Give onions to saint Cutlake
And garlic to saint Cyryake
If ye will shurne the head ache.
Ye shall have them at queen hythe.
A dram of a shepes tyrdle
And good saint trances girdle
With the hamlet of an her•le
Are wholesome for the pyppe
Besides these charms before
I have feats many more
That I keep styll in store
Whom now I over hyppe.
It is a sport I trow
To heate howe she out blow
Her witchecraftes on a row
By the Mass I must needs smile.
Now I pray the let me know
What sedes that thou can sow
Mankind to overthrow
And the law of nature beguile.
My self I so behave
And am so vile a knave
As nature doth deprave
And utterly abhor
I am such a vice truly
As God in his great •••rye
Did punish most t••ryblye
In Sodomy and in Gomorr▪
In the flesh I am a fire
And such a vile desire
As bring men to the mire
Of foul concupiscence.
We two together began
To spring and to grow in manne,
As Thomas of Equine scan
In the fourth book of his sentence.
I dwelt among the Sodomites
The Beniamytes, and Madyanytes
And now the popysshe hypocrites
Embrace me every where
I am now become all spiritual
For the clergy at Rome and over all
For want of wives to me doth fall
To God they have no fear.
The children of God I did so move
That they the daughters of men did love
Working such ways as did not behove
Till the floude them over went.
With Noes son Cham I was half joined
When he is drunken father scorned
In the Sodomites I also reigned.
Till the hand of God them brent.
I was with Man not unacquainted
When he on the ground his increase shed
For me his bretherne Ioseph accused
As Genesis doth tell
Dauid ones warned all men of vs two.
Do not as mules and horses will do.
Confounded be they, that to images go
Those are the ways to hell.
Both Esaye and Ezechiell
Both H•etemy and Daniell
Of vs the abhominacions tell
With the prophets euerychou
For vs two God struck with fire and water
With battle, with plages, &amp; fearful matter
With painful er•l•, than at the latter
Into Egipt and Babylon.
As Paule to the Romans testify
The gentyles after Idolatry
Fell to such be stiall Sodomy
That God did them forsake
Who followed vs as he confess
The kingdom of God shall never possess
And as the Aparalyps express
Shall sink to the burning lake.
We made Thalon and Sophocles
Thamiras, Narrow, Agathocles
Tiberius and Iristoteles
Themselves to use unnaturally
I taught Aristo and Fuluius
Semiramis and Hortensius
Crathes Hyliscus, and Pontius
Beasts to abuse most monstrously.
Marry thou art the devil him self
If ye knew howe he could pelf
Ye would say he were such an elf
As none under heaven were else.
The fellawe is well decked
Dysgysed and well necked
Both knave bald and pypecked
He lacks nothing but help.
In the first age I began
And so perseuerde with manne
And styll will if I canne
So lunge as he endure
If monkysshe sectes renew
And popysshe pre acts continue
Which are of my retinue
To live I shall be sure.
Clean Marriage they forbid,
Yet can not their ways be hyd,
Men know what hath betide
When they have ben in apparel
Oft have they buried quick
Such as were never sick
Full many a propre trick
They have to help their quarrel.
In Rome to me they fall
Both Bishop and Cardinal
Monk, fryer, priest, and all
More rank they are then antes
Example in hope July
Which sought in his fury
Two lads, and to use them beastly.
From the Cardinal of Nautes.
Well, you two are for my mind
Steppe forth and do your kind
Leave never a point behind
That may corrupt in man
The law writ in his heart
In his flesh, do thy part
And his soul so pernart
Do thou the best thou can.
Here have I pretty gins
Both brouches beads and pynnes
With such as the people wynnes
Unto Idolatry
Take thou part of thē here
Beads, rings, and other ger
And shortly the be•ete
To deceive Man properly
Take this same staff and scrip
With a God here of a chyppe
And good beldam foreword hyppe
To set forth pilgrimage
Set thou forth Sacramentalles
Say dirge, and singe tree••alles
Study the popes Decretals
And mixed them with buggerage
Here is a stole for the
A ghostly father to be
To here, Benedicite
A box of cream and oil
Here is a purse of rellyckes
•eggs, rotten boues, and sticks
A taper with other tricks
Show them in every soil
I will corrupt Gods Image
With moss•e unlawful usage
And bring him into dotage
Of all concupiscence.
Within the flesh thou art
But I dwell in the hart.
And will the soul pervert
From Gods obedience.
Spare none abhomynacion
Nor detestable fashion
That man imagination
By wit may comprehend
To quicken our sprites among
Singe now some metysonge
But let it not be lunge
Least we to much offend.
Omnipotence sempiterne Deus, queen ad imaginem et si∣militudinem nostram formasti laicos, da quesumus, vt sicut corum sudoribus diuimus, ita corū vxoribus filiabus et domicellis perpetuo frui mereamur. Per domin• nostrum Papam,
Now are these horizons forth
It will be somewhat worth
To se howe they will work
The one to poison the hart
The other the outward part
Ingeniously will luck.
The law of Nature they will
Infect, corrupt and spyll
With their abhomynacion
Idolatry with wickedness
And Sodomy with filthiness
To his most utter dampnacion.
These two will him so use
Eche one in their abuse
And wrap it in such evil
That by their wicked cast
He shall be at the last
A morsel for the devil.
Now underneath her wings
Idolatry hath kings
With their No•ylytie
Both dukes, lords, knights and •arles
Fair ladies with their pears
And the whole comynaltie.
Within the bones of Sodomy
Doth dwell the spiritual clergy
Pope, Cardinal and priest
Nonne, Chanon, Monk and fryer
With so many else as do desire
To reign under Antechrist.
Detesting Matrimony
They live abominably,
And burn in carnal lust.
Shall I tell ye farther news?
It Rome for Prelates are stews
Of doth kinds. This is just.
The law of nature I think
Will not be able to wy•ke
Against the assaults of them
They having so high prelates,
And so many gteat es•ates
From hens to Jerusalem.
Pause now a little while
Mine ears doth me beguile
If There not a sound
Y•n folk hath sped I guess
It is to by the Mess
Away now will I round•.
I think ye marvel, to se such altar•ion
At this time in me, whom God left here so pure
O• me it comes not, but of man operation
Whom daily the devil, to great sin doth allure
And his nature is full brittle and unsure
By him have I got this foul disease of body
And as ye se here, am now thrown in a leprye.
I wrought in his hart, as God bad tree•easterly.
Him oft provoking, to love God over all
With the inner powers, but that false Idolatry
Hath him perverted, by slights diabolical
And so hath Sodomy, through his abuses carnal
That he is now lost, offending without measure
And I corrupted to my most high displeasure.
I abhor to tell, the abusyous bestial
That they daily use, which boast their chastity
Some at the alter, to incontyuencye fall
In confession some, full beastly occupied be
Among the close Nonnes, reygneth this enormity
Such children s•eythey, as they chance for to have
And in their preuyes, provide them of their grave.
Ye Christen rulers, se ye for this a way
Be not eluded, by false hypocrisy
By the stroke of God, the world will else decay
Permit prestos rather, Gods lawful remedy
Than they should i•c•r••, most bestial Sodomy
Regard not the pope, nor yet his whorish kingdom
For he is the master, of Gomor and of Sodomy
With Man have I ben, which hath me thus defiled
With Idolatry, and unclean Sodomy
And worthy I am, from God to be exiled
Pity me yet lord of thy most bounteous mercy
I will forth and morn, till thousand remedy
Promise haste thou made, to a glorious lybercie
To bring heuē &amp; earth, thē will thou (I trust) restore me.
THe lord perceiving, his first law thus corrupted
With unclean vices, sent me his law of Moses
To se him for sin, substancyallye corrected
And brought in again, to a trade of godliness
For I am a law of rygout and of hardenes
I straightly command, and if it be not done
I threti•, I curej, and sle in my anger soon.
To God I require a perfyght obedience
Con•empnynge all sache, as do it not in effect
I show what sin is, I but dē sore mānes conscience
To him am I death, when his life is infect
Yet if he take heed, to Christ I him direct
Forgiveness to have, with like health and salvation.
Least he shuloe despair, and fall into dampnacion.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha,
A pastime quoth a, I know not the time nor when
I did laghe so much, sense I was an honest man
Believe me and ye will, I never saw such a sport
I wold ye had ben there, lye might have made the fort.
Where would thou have had me, tell me good brother mine.
At the Mynorasse sir, late yester night at complyne.
At the Mynorasse? why what was there a do?
For such an other, would I to South ampton go
In dede yesterday was their dedycacion
And thythe• in Gods name, came I to se the fashion
An old fryer stood forth, with spectacles on his nose
Begy•nynge this Anteme, a my faith, I do not gloss.
〈♫〉
••pits pr•ciosi.
And what did follow of this?
I shall tell ye by Gods bliss
Then came Dame Isbell an •lt Noune and a cal•e
Crowing like acapon, and thus began the Psalm.
〈♫〉
Sepe expugnauetun• me a i•uent•te 〈…〉
And what includes this mystery?
A simple problem of bytcherye
When the fryer begone, before the Nonne
to singe of precious stones
From my youth saith she / they have comfort me
As it had ben for the nones
I assure the plain, I set not by such gauds
Thy usage show the, to be brought up among bawd•
It was a good world, whā we had such wholesome story•s
Preached in out church, on sondayes and other ferries
With vs was it in•rye
When we went to Berry
And to our lady of grace
To the blou•e of hails
Where no good chere fails
And other holy place.
When the pryestes might walk
And with young wives talk
Than had we children plenty
Then Cuckolds might leap
A score on a heap
Now is there not one to twenty.
When the Monks were fat
And rank as a ratte
With bellies like a Bore.
Then all things were dere
Both beef, bread and bear
Now grudge the iourers sore.
When Bysshoppes might burn
And from the truth turn
The silly simple soul.
Than dut••• no man creak
Open mouth nor speak
Of Christ nor yet of Powle.
No we are the knaves bold
With Scriptures to bold
And teach them every where
The carter, the sowter
The bodger, the clowter
That all will away I fere.
At vs so they pull
Our livings are dull
We are now like to fall
If we do not fight
For the churches right
By the Mess we lose all.
But I pray ye sir, tell me what is your name▪
The law of Moses, to lye were I to blame
In the same parties, what do you intende?
Mankind to reform, that he his life amend
I show what sin is, &amp; what thing pleases God
I comfort the just, and the ill, I ponysshe with rod
The cōmon people, have thought it commodious
Divers Gods to have, with rytes superstitious.
My cōmaundement is, to seek one God alone
And in all their needs, to him to make their moan
Among the Gentyles, was it thought none injury
If a man were hurt, to slay his adversary
This thing I forbid, and say, thou shalt not kill
Law is the revenger, the man may do no ill.
Some persons there are, that inordinately love
Those are persuaded, all things them to behove
Which I inhibit, saying contynuallye
No rape shalt thou do, nor yet cōmyt aduouteye
Thou shalt do no theft, nor coueyte that is not thine
Against thy neighbour, shalt thou not falsely dyffyne.
We may do nothing, if we be pynned in thus
Neither you nor God, to that harde trade shall bring vs
We must have one God, and worship him alone
Matye that in dede, would make a Turk to g••no
If we be stricken, we may not strike again?
Aprope•• •gin▪ and discreetly v•t• r•d •la•no
For companies sake, ye say we may not love
I defy your worst, and to you there is my glove.
What? thou will not fight thy wits are better than so.
In the quarrel of love, I shall prove ye ere I go
By the Mess I think, to put ye to your f•ur.
Thou were much better, to keep thy patience.
Nay by Cocks soul friend, I must lay ye on y• coat
In loves cause to fight, ye may soon have m•a f•• are•
Nay but have at your pie•ch•, defend ye if ye may.
Such a fool art thou, as seeks thine own decay
If I ones meddle, t• the, it will be death
Did thou never here, that law sleeth in his wrath.
By the blessed lord, than will I play Robsons part.
Why what part will thou play?
By cocks sou•e give over, so soon as I feel smart
It will be to late, it I one scupple with the
Then let me a•on•, and we shall soon agree
And I shall be glad to be acquainted with ye.
Acquaint•ce good felaw, thou may soon have of me
The worst fault I have, I am hast•e now &amp; than
But it is soon gone, I toke it of a woman
But what mean those tables, y• ye have in your hand.
Keep silence a while, and thou shalt understand
Three things I declare, the first are y• precepts moral
Next, the laws judicial, and last the rytes ceremonial
The moral precepts, are Gods cōmaundementes ten
Which ought evermore to be observed of all men
The laws of Nature, the moral precepts declare
And y• pleasant works, to God they teach &amp; prepare
They stir man to faith &amp; provoke him also to love
To obey, to serve, and to worship God aboue
Into s•any tables, God wrote them first of all
That they should remain, as things continual▪
The first hath but three, which tend to Gods high honour,
Seven hath the second, &amp; they concern our neybour.
The first doth expound, the first law natural
The •axed the other, making them very formal
Inspryt• i• the first, y• we should God honour and love
To outward working the second doth vs move
For•ydoynge all wrongs preserving just marriage
Norysshynge true peace, and other godly usage.
What is the effect, of your laws Judicial?
Such things to cōmaunde, as are civil or tēporall
From vice to refrain, and outward injury
Quiet to conserve, and public honesty
These are to support, the laws of the second table
Ceremonial rytes are also commendable
In holy days, garmētes, temples &amp; consecta•ions
Sacrifices &amp; vows, with offerings and expi•acions
Which are unto Christ, as figures, types, &amp; shadows
As Paule doth declare, in his Epistle to the Hebrues
These are only figures, and outward testimonies
No man is perfyght, by such dark ceremonies
Only pertain they, unto the third cōmaundement
Of the Sabboth day, till Christ the lord be present.
In his death ending, the whole Judicial presthode.
Good days might ye have, ye speak full well by the rood.
I am a poor lad, and by my troth bent earues•lye▪
To wait upon ye, and to be your very lackey.
What art thou called, I pray the heartily.
Gray fryer am I none, by the Mess I can not flatter.
I am Infidelity, to tell the truth of the matter.
And hast thou so lunge dissembled thus with me?
Yea, for advantage to smellout your subtlety.
Avoid hens I say, thou false Infydelyte.
Nay that I will not, by yngham Trinity.
Will thou not in dede, thā will I fet hither the pour
Of Judges &amp; kings, to subdue the within this hour.
Such knights will I have, as shall cōfounde thē al▪
Is S•dduces &amp; scribes, with the sec• pharysaycal•
By help of my children Idolatry and Sodomy
The law of Nature, I cast ones in a leprye
I have yet two more, Ambition &amp; Coneytousnes
Which will do as much to the law of Moyses
Where are my whorsons, that they come not away.
Yea, whoreson on thy face, even in thy best array
I will thou know it, I am a worshipful Doctor
A Scribe in the law, and a profitable proctor.
Guppe with a vengeance, howe come thou so aloft.
I shall tell the man, if thou will come more solte
By feigned flattery•, and by coloured adulation
Ambition here also, •ose of a like foundation.
Come, are me blessing, pretty boys apace
I will not bow sure▪ to such a follies•he face.
Axe blessing I say, and make me no more ado.
Unseemly were it, we Prelates should do so.
For no compu•zion will I do it by sweet Mary.
I must fetch ye in, there is no remedy
A noughty horsons, have I brought ye up hitherto?
And know not your father, ye shall drink both ere I go
No more at this time, forsooth we cry amercye.
Down on your knees than, &amp; axe me blessing shortly.
Bless me gentell father, for sweet saint charity.
Arise noughtyknaues, God let ye never to the
Though among our selves, we mu•mur•, brag, &amp; face
Sometime for lucre, sometime for the higher place
Yet for advantage, in this we all agree
To blind the rulers, and deceive the com•ynaltie.
Art advised of that, by the Mess we are in dede
Yet of our knaveries, the foe•le &amp; will neuertake heed.
To labour with a spade
Our colour would it fade
We may not with that trade
We love so much our ease
We must live by their sweat,
And have good drink and meat
When they have not to eat
The substance of a peas.
We lead them in the dark
And so their conseyence mark
That stutdye they are and stark,
In every wicked evil
We teach Idolatry
And laughed full merely
To se eche company
Run headlonges to the devil.
Ifwe may have the tidings
And profitable offeryages
We ca•e not to what doings
They customablye fall
We are such mercenaries
And subtle proprietaries
As from the flock all carries
The w•lle, skin, flesh and all.
In our perambulacyons
We look for commendacions
And lowly salutacions
In temple, hows and street.
Our lousy latyne hours
In borrows and in bowers
The poor people devours
And tread them under fete.
I am Ambition, whose bysposycyan
Is honour to appete
I gape for empire, and worship desire
As Mynos did in Crete
I loke up Aloft, and love to lye soft
Not caring for my flock
Have Iones the fleas, with pigs, lambs, and gese
They may go turn a Sock.
Lucifer I made, so highly to wade,
To God he would be equal
Of Adam and Eve, I slew the believe
And caused them to fall
What need I rehearse, the gyauntes most fearce
With the builders of Babel
Nemrod the tyrant, with them there applyaunt,
Agreed to my counsel.
From me would not go, cruel Pharao
No more would Amalech
Saul, Achitophell, Absolo•, Iesabel
Nor Adonisedech.
I made Roboam, and Hierobeam
With Nabuchodouosor
Triphon, Alchmius, and Simon magus
To abuse them evermore.
Inpryde I exceed, and no people fed
But with lies for advantage
As Mantuane tell, to lead men to hell
Is my most common usage.
High things I attempt, and will in exempt
From princes iurisdition
A am such an enyll, as bring men to the devil
Without any contradiction.
Here is a prelate even for mine own toth
Such an other is, not in the whole South
Clap thou somewhat more, as thou hast begun
I like wele your ta•king, by the holy Nun.
I Coutyse am, the beuyll or his dam
For I am insacyate
I ravish and pluck, I draw and I suck
After, a woluys she ra•e.
Father nor mother, Sister nor brother
I spare not in my mood.
I fear neither God, nor his rightful rod
In gathering of good.
But hows and meadow, from the poor widow
I spare not forto take
Right heirs I rob, and as bare as Iob
The fatherless I make.
With me toke Nadab, Nabal and Achab
With all the clergy of Bell
Iudas and Geese, with the sōnes of Hell•
And the sons of Samuel.
Iannes and Iambres, also Diotrephes
Wrought wilful wickedness
So did Menelaus, with false Andronicus
And all for Coueytousnesse.
With vices seven, I close up heaven
And spear up paradise
I oppen hell, by my counsel
Maintaining every vice.
For Silver and gold, with falsehed I hold
Supporting every evil
I have it in awe, for to thoke the law
And bring all to the devil.
By the blessed Trinity, no men more fit for me
To do my busynes.
Ambition to beguile, and Avarice to defile
The law of Moyses.
Tell me first of all, what will thou do Ambition.
I am thine own child, thou know my disposition
I will sure do, as did the Philistines.
Why what did those knaves?
They stopped up Abrahās pits, as Genesis diffynes
With mud and with mire, &amp; l•f•• them full unclean
By the same practyse, tell me what thou dost mean.
With filthy glosses, and dirty exposition,
Of Gods law will I hyde, the pure dysposycions
The key of knowledge, I will also take away
By wresting the text, to the scriptures sore decay.
And what wy•te thou, my fellow Coueytousnes?
A veil will I sprede, upon the face of Moyses
That none shall perceive, the clearness of his coūtenaūce
Which is the law, the meaning &amp; true ordinance.
Wy what will ye say, unto the ten cōmaundemētes
We must poison them, with wylworkes, &amp; good intētes
Where as God doth say, No strange gods thou shalt have
With Saints worshipping, that clause we will deprave.
And though he cōm•unde, to make no graved image
For a good intent, yet will we have pilgrimage
Though he will vs not, to take his name in vain
With tradycions yet, thereunto will we constrain.
No Sabboth will we, with Gods word sanctify
But with lip labour, and yd•e ceremony.
To father and mother, we may owe none obedience
Our religion is, of so so great excellence.
Though we do not slay, yet may we hertyckes burnè
If they will not soon from holy Scripture turn
What though it be said, thou shalt do no fornycacion
Yet will we maintain, much greater abhomynacion
Though theft be forbid yet will we contynuallye
Rob the poor people, through prayer &amp; purgatory
God hath inhy•yted▪ to give false testimony
Yet we will condemn the Gospel for Heresy.
We should not coueyte our neighbours house nor wife
His servant nor b•ast, yet are we therein most rife
Of men make we swine, by the draff of our tradycions
And cause them nothing to regard but supersticions
As Dogs unreasonable, on moss•vile carren fed
So will we cause them, seek idols in their need.
And always their ground, shall be for a goodintent
More mischievous I trow, the devil could not inuēt
Than you two can do, by the Mess ye are alone
Little could I do, were ye ones from m• gone
To the corrupting, of the law of Morses
Go forward therefore, in your deceitful•es
With superstitions, the Jaws ceremonial laws
I will so handle, they shall not be worth▪ ii. straws
The laws Judicial throug•e cawtels and d•lays
I will also drown, to all righteous mēnes decay
To set this forward, we must have sophistry
Philosophy and Logic, as science necessary
The Bysshoppes must hold their priests in ygnoraūee
With long latin hours, lest knowledge to them chaūce
Let them have long matins, lunge even songs &amp; long Masses
And that will make them as dull as ever were asses
That they shall never be able to prophecy
Or yet preach the truth, to our great injury.
Let the Cloister•rs be brought up euerin silence
Without the Scriptures, in pain of disobedience
Se the lay people, pray never but in latyne
Let them have their Cred, and service all in latyne
That a latyne believe, may make a latyne soul
Let them nothing know, of Christ, nor yet of powle
If they have English▪ let it be for advantage
For pardons, for Dirges, for offerings &amp; pilgrimage
I teken to make them, a new Cred in a while
And all in English, their Conscience to beguile.
Rehearse unto me, the Articles of that Cred.
The Articles are these, give ear and take good heed
First they shall believe, in our holy father Pope
Next in his decrees, and holy decretals.
Then holy church, with sencer, cross and cope
In the Ceremonies, and blessed Sacramentals
In purgatory then, in pardons and intrentals
In praying to saints, and in saint Frances whoode
In our lady of Grace, and in the blessed rood
They shall believe also, in relics and religion
In our ladies psalter, in frewyll and good works
In the ember days, and in the popes remission
In b•des and in belles, not used of the turks
In the golden Masses, against such sprites as lurks
With charms and blessings. This cred will bring in money
In English therefore, we will it clarkely convey.
Yea, and burn the knaves, that will not believe ye cred
That into the ditch, the blind the blind may led.
Then I hold it best, that we always condemn
The Bible readers, least they your acts contempue.
Yea, never spare them, but evermore play the bitter
Expressing always, the tropes and types of thy mitre
Why, what doest thou think, my mitre to signify.
The mouth of a wolf, and that shall I prove by &amp; by
If thou s•oupe downward, lo, se how y• wolf doth ga•e
Ready to devour the lambs, least any escape
But thy woluyshnes, by three crowns will I hyde
Making the apope &amp; a captain of all •ride
That when thou dost slay, such as thy laws cōtempne
Thou moist say, not I, but the powers did thē condēpne
The Cabals betoken, the laws of se non &amp; cannon
I trow thou w•ldest say, the. ii. laws Civil &amp; Canon
As I spake I thought, &amp; styll think by saint Iohan
Yea, persecute styll the instructors of the people
And thou Coueytous•es, let no bell ring in Steple
Without a profyght. T•sshe, take money every where
So nigh •lip and shave, that thou leave never a here
I caused the Pope, to take but now of late
Of the gray fryers, to have a canonyzate
Franciscus de pola, three thousand ducats and more
And as much besides / he had not lunge before
For a Cardinal hat, of the same holy ordre
Thus draw we to vs, great goods from every border
Pope Clement the seventh payed ones for his papacy
Three hundred thousād, good ducats of lawful money
I marvel howe he could come to so much good.
Yes, yes, by pollage, and by shedynge Christen blot.
Crosers and Mytars, in Rome are good merchandise
And alto little, to maintain their pomp and vice
The pope for whoredom, hath in Rome and Uiterbye
Of gold and silver, a wonderful substance yearly
Tush they be in England yt much rather wold to dwell
Whores in their dyoceses, than the readers of Chri∣stes Gospel.
They do the better, for by thē they may have profyght
As for the other, do trouble them day and night
Well, now steppe foreword, and go do your busynes
To the corrupting, of the law of Moyses.
Doubt not but we shall, make him a cripple blind.
Singe then at our farewell, to recreate our mind.
Now am I left alone, And these. ii. marchaūtes gone
Their mischief to seclude
I think within a while, they will trap and beguile
The worthy law of Iude.
Ambition first of all, with his rytes bestial
Will make the people swine
In draff will he them led, and with tradycions fed
Where they shall sup or dine
Coueytousnes will work, that many one shall bark
Like dogs against the truth
Some shall gods word defile, and some will it revile
Such beastliness ensue•th.
Ambition hath this hour, al the whole spiritual pour
And may do what him lust
Now coueytousnes doth rule, &amp; hath both horse &amp; mule
All matters by him dyseust
Now bysshopryt•es are •whole•e, &amp; the holy ghost for gold
The pope doth bye and sell
The truth may not be told, under pains manifold
With sendynges down to hell
The people preestes do famish, and their goods frō them ravish
Yea and all the world they blind
All princes do they mock, and rob the sellye flock
Nothing they leave behind
On the face of Moyses, a veil they have cast doubtless
The light of the law to hyde
Least mē to christ should come, frō ceremonies dōme
As to their heavenly get
The law can never be, at any liberty
Where such two enemies rain
Now is it time to walk, of this more will I talk
When I come hither again.
If pity may mou•, your gentle christen hearts
Let it now stir ye, to morn this heavy chance
Two enemies with me, have played most wicked parts
And left me stark blind, God knows to my sore greuaunce.
And I think also to your mouth hynderaunce
To lead you to Christ, sometime a get I was
Now am I so blind, I can not do it, alas.
Most rigorously those enemies now of late
Did fall upon me, and spoil me of my sight
One was Ambition, which ever ought me hate
And Coueyeousnesse, the other enemy hight
Now forsooth and God, iutheyr most cruel spite
The one made me blind, the other made me lame
And whā they had done, thereat they had great game.
Thus a blind cripple, I wander here alone
Abiding the time and grace, of restauracion
By the son of God, to whom I make my moan
My cause to pity, and grant me supportacion
Least I be left here, to utter desolation
And extreme decay without any remedy,
If he did not help of goodness and of mercy.
Ye christen princes, God hath given you the pour
With scepture and sword, allvyces to correct
Let not Ambition, nor Coueytousnesse devour
Your faithful subjects, nor your officers infect
Have to your Clergy, a diligent respect
And se they do not corrupt the laws of God
For that doth require, a terrible heavy• rod.
God gave me to man, and left me intables of stone
That I of hardenes, a law should specify
But the Pharysies, corrupted me anon
And toke from me clean, the quyueru•s of body
With cler•uesse of sight, and other pleasures many
Now will I to Christ, that he may me restore
To more perfection, than ever I had before.
UN faithfulness hath, corrupted every law.
To the great decay, of Adams posterity
were it not for me, which now do hither draw
Al flesh wold perysh, no man should saved be
I am Christ's Gospel, and infallible verytie
Such a power of God, as saves all such as believe
No burden nor yoke, that any man will gr•ue.
In the blood of Christ, I am a full forgiveness
Where faith is grounded, with a sure confidence
I am such a grace, and so high tidings of, gladness
As raise the sinner, and pacify his conscience.
I am spirit and life, I am necessary science
I require but love, for man justification
With a faith in Christ, for his health and salvation.
Gods beneson have ye, it is joy of your life
I have heard of ye, and of my mistress your wife.
If thou hardest of me, it was by the boy•e of God.
Nay, he that spake of ye, was •ellynge of a God
In an Oystre boat, a little beyond queen hythe
A Northern man was he, &amp; he besought ye to be blithe
If he spake of me, he was some godly preacher.
Nay sir by the roo•e, nor yet a wholesome teacher.
After what manner dydhe speak of me? tell.
He swore like a man, by all contents of the Gospel
He swore and better swore, yea, he did swear &amp; swear again.
That speaking is such, as procures eternal payne
Will not the people, leave that most wicked folly?
And it so damnable, to hear it I am sorry
But what did thou mean, when thouspakest of my wife?
Nothing, but I thought it was joy of your life
That ye were so good to your neighbours as ye are
Why, howe good am I? thy fantasy declare.
Ye ease them among, if it be as I hear
When ye are abroad, there is fine merycheare.
As thou art, thou speak after thy hertes abundaun•e
For as the man is, such is his utterance.
My wife is the church, or christen congregacion
Regenerate inspired, doing no vile operation
Both clean and holy, without either spot or wryncle
The lamb with his blood, did her wash &amp; bespryncle.
This is not the church, of disguised hypocrites
Of apish shauelyng•s, or papisticall Sodomites
Nor yet as they call it, a temple of lyme and stone
But a lyuysh building, grounded in faith alone
On the harde rock Christ, which is the sure fosidacion
And of this church, some do reign in every nation
And in all coūtreyes, though their nombre be but small
Their nombre is such, as hath run over all
The same Danes are they, men prophecy of plain
Which should over run this realm yet ones again.
What Danes speak thou of? thy meaning show more clearly.
Da•e Iohan, Dane Robert, Dane Thomas, and Dane Harry.
The same are those Danes, that lay with other men's wives.
And occupied their lands, to the detriment of their lives.
These are acccounted, a great part of the church
For in Gods service, they honourably wurche
Yelling and crying, till their throats are full sore.
That Church was described, of Esaye lunge before
This people (saith God) with their lips honour me
In vain worship, they teaching mēnes fatuyte
Apparent is that church, and open to the eyes
Their worshyppynges are, in outward ceremonies
That coūterfetchurch stands al by mēnes tradycions
Without the scriptures, &amp; without y• hertes affections
My church is secrete, and evermore will be
Adoring the father, in spirit and in verytie
By the word of God, this church is ruled only
And doth not consist, in outward ceremony
This congregacion, is the true Church militant
Those Counterfeit Deserts, are the very Church malignant.
To whom Christ will say, I know none of your sor•
Much are they to blame, that brethren so report
Such are no brethren, but enemies to Christ's blot
As put salvation, in shaven crown mitre, or whoode.
I pray ye how lōge, have your sweet spouse cōtynued
Sens the beginning, and now is in Christ re•ued.
Adam did promise, of Christ's incarnacion
So had Abraham, with his whole generation
Which was unto them, a preaching of the Gospel
Into salvation, and deliverance from hell.
By this time I hope, ye have a fair increase?
She is not ba••en, but bears and never cease
The Corinthes first epistle, hath this clear testimony
In Christo Iesu, per Euangilium vos genui
I have begot you, in Iesu Christ saith Powle
By the Gospel preaching, to the cōfort of your soul.
Than are ye a ouckolde, by the blessed holy mass
As I said before, so cōmeth it now to pass
For I am a prophet, by high inspiration led
Now like I my self, much better than I did
Ye say y• saint Paule, begat your wife with child.
By misunderstanding, thou art vngracyously begylde
An only minister, was paule in that same doing
That he therein did, was by the Gospel preaching
His mind is the Gospel, to have done that operation
And this must thou hold, for no carnal generation.
Mary so they say, ye fellows of the new learning
Forsake holy church, and now fall fast to wiving.
Nay they forsake whoredom, with other dāpnablevsage
And live with their wives, in lawful marriage
While the popes oiled swarm, •aygne styll in their old buggerage
Yeà, poor married men, have very much a do
I count him wisest, that can take a snatch and to go?
Thou semest one of them, that detests matrimony▪
Which is before God, a slate both just and holy.
Of such as thou art, saint Paule did prophecy
By the holy Ghost, that a certain company
In the latter days from the truth of God should fall
Attending to spirits, of error diabolical
Which in hypocrisy, will teach lies for aduaūtage
With marked conseyences, inhabiting marriages
Thou appear by thy fruits, to be Infidelity•
I am none other, but even the very he
And hither now come I, to cōmenthe matter with ye
Avoid cursed fend, and get the out at the gates.
Nay first will I serve ye, as I lately served your mates
And hence will I not, for this place is for me
Who should here remain, but I Infydelyte?
Well, than for a time, I must depart from hens
But this first will I say, before this andyens
Easier will it be, concerning punishment
To Sodom and Gomor, in the day of judgment,
Than to those Cities, that resist the verytie
At the suggestions of Infidelity.
That people will be forever and ever lost
For it is the great sin, against the holy Ghost
In the old law first, the father his mind expressed
Then came his son Christ, &amp; made it more manifest
And now the holy Ghost, is come to close up all,
If he be not heard, extreme dampnacion will fall
No prayer remains, nor expyracion for sin
To them that no profyght, of the word of God will win.
Take good heed therefore, &amp; say that ye have warning
God send your mother, of you to have a fondelynge.
By the mass I think, he is well• out of the way
Now will I contrive the drift of an other play
I must work such ways, Christ's law may not cō∣tynue,
In a while am I like, to have none else of my retinue
Com• anyons I have, to begin this tragedy,
Namely false Doctrine, and his brother Hypocrisy
They will not belong, I suppose now verily
By cocks soul me think, I se such a company
Hem, I say children, will not my voice be heard
As good is a beck, as is adieu vow guard.
By my honesty welcome, mine own companions both
Thou shalt have a livery of the same cloth,
Gramatcyes by God, my old friend Infydelyte.
What brother su•psuap, how go the world with the▪
What, friar ••ypflap, how say ye to, Bendicite?
Marry nothing but well, I cry now aduaūtage
At her purse or arse, tell me good friar fuccage?
By the Mess at both for I am a great penytensar
And sit at the pardon, tush I am the popes own vicar
If thou lackest a piece, I know where thou may be sped
With choice of a score, and brought even to thy be•▪
Art thou not ashamed, to talk so like a knave?
No, for it is such ger, as the holiest of vs will have
Pope, cardinal, bishop, mōke, chanon prist &amp; friar,
Not one of ye all, but a woman will desire.
Our ordres permit vs not, to have them in marriage•
No, but ye fetch them in, by an other carriage.
Ye do even as we do, we both are of one rate.
By the Mess I laugh, to here this whoreson prate▪
What fashion use ye, to vs here intimate.
Ego distingu•, whither ye will have Lyons or Parys.
Of them both to show, it will not be far amiss▪
In Parys we have, the mantle of saint Lewes
Which women seek much, for help of their barēnes.
For be it ones laid, upon a women's belly
She go thens with child, the miracles are scene there daily
And besides all this, ye would marvel in confession
What our fathers do, to assoyle them of transgression
Iohan Thessecelius, assoyled a young woman ones
Behind the high alter, till she cried out of her bones
And as for lyons, there is the length of our lord
In a great pillar, she that will with acorde
Be fast bound to it, and take such chance as fall
Shall sure have child, for within it is hollow all
Tush, I could tell ye, of much more wondre thā this
In course to here them, I think ye would ye bliss.
As thou hast begone, go forward in it and te••.
Such a knave I suppose, is not from hens to hell.
In our religion, was an holy popish patriarch
Which of all bawdry, might be the great monarch.
The Nuns to confess, he went from place to place
And two hundred of them, he broached in that space
Many spices he eat, his courage to provoke
Such a fellow was he, as of that ger had the stroke
Now somewhat will I tel, to confirm thy tale withal
In king f••dināds time, in Spain was a Cardinal
Petrus mendoza, was the very man that I mean
Of lemmans he had, great nombre besides the queen
One of his bastards, was an earl, an other was duke
Whom also he abused, and thought it no rebuke.
Joins Cr•mona an other good Cardinal
For reformation, of the clergy spiritual
Came ones into Englād, to dāpne preestes matrimony
And the next night after, was taken, doing bytcherye
Doctor Eckius also, which fiercely came to dispute
In •psia with luther, minding there him to con•ute.
For marriage of pryestes, three children •ad that year
By this may ye se, that sometime we make merry cheer
Mary that do ye, I shall bear ye record now
But howe will ye answer, for breaking of your vow.
We never break vow, so lunge as we do not mary
Though we in whoredom, be never so bold and busy.
By your ordre than, ye may walk much at large
What hast thou hypocrisy, to lay for thy discharge
Saint Frances habit, with the holy girdle &amp; whoode
Noue can go to hell, that therein dye by the rood
In case saint Frances, be sure upon their side
Else may they fortune, to be of their purpose wide
For I teade of one that should have gone to the devil
But the spirits of hell, could do no him no evil.
Till saint Fracas came, &amp; loke from him this cowl
Then went he to hell, the fryers did here him howl.
I will therefore serve S Frances, with heart and mind
With daily memories, that he may be my friend
And than I care not for all the devils in hell
That I have told you, is more true then the Gospel.
Then are ye more sure, than monks for your heritage
For their lands are here, but ye claim heaven for advantage.
Yet is it to them, a very pleasant thing
Their Abbot at home, tobe called lord and king.
Nay monk and churl, for here •s no king but one,
If he be a king, his mace is a mary bone
And his crown a cowtorde, such knaves as come frō the carte
Must be called kings, for playing a popish par••.
It becomes not the, the Romish pope, so to lurch
Considering he is the highest of the church.
If he be the highest, than is he the ••thercocke
Ah, now I per•eyne, thou art disposed to mock
Of all holy Church, he is the pry•eypall head.
Mary that is true, he sends out bulls under lead
And he hath two ••yes, the one to open hell
The other spea•eth heaven, thus do new here tyekes tell
They report also that Dogs have no devotion
To his holy laws, nor his old instruction.
Why should dogs hate him? make that more evident
They love no p•se portage, nor yet red herrings in lent
Steckfysshe nor oysters, but curse him body and bone
And would his red sprottes, &amp; rotten fish were gone
Tush, I hear them I, and that makes me full sad.
Either thou doest mock, or else thou art sure mad.
Theare the people complayue very much of the.
What is their prattling, I pray the heartily tell me.
They say thou teach, nothing but lousy tradictōs.
And lies for lu••e, with damnable supersticions
And thus they cōclude, that the draff of popish prissies
Is good enough for Swine, by whom they do mean the Papists.
Yea, and they say also, the diet of men is all
To most bile carrion, the dogs will soonest fall
Than do they compare, the papists unto dogs.
Mary that do they, and to such swynys she hogs
As in swyllandsosse, are brought up all their life
Such are the Papists, they say both man and wife
They say also, that thou art a noughty knave
By prowling and lie••ge, ye fryers would all have
Thine ordre they say, is sprung even out of hell
And al this knowledge, they have now of the Gospel.
Why, where is he now, I beseech the heartily tell.
By the mess abroad, &amp; I warrant ye makes revel.
I comoned with him, and he did vs despise
Against him therefore, somewhat we must de uyse.
Mary that must we, or else it will be wrong
He will sure destroy vs▪ if we do suffer him lunge
Needs must we serve him, as we ones served Christ.
Why mad bray•ed whorsons, how did ye handle Christ
As he preached here, we followed frō place to place
To trap him in snare, and his doctrine to deface
Than found we the means, to put him so to death
Least he against vs, should open any more breath
And we set four knights, to kept him down in his grave
That he never more, our living should deprave.
And thus must we serve the Gospel, no remedy
Else will he destroy our livings perpetually.
B•tt•r one were lost, than we should perysshe all
As Cayphas ones said, in Counsel pharisa•call.
By god well said, when ye have him in his grave
Stāpe him down, till he shit, &amp; serve him like &amp; knave•
We must so ordre him, that he go no more at large.
Four knights wyllwe hire, whom we shall straight∣lye charge.
To keep him down harde, the first are ambitious Prelates.
Then Coueytous lawyers, that Gods word spite fuliye hates.
Lords without learning, and justices unrightful
These will keep him down, &amp; rap him on the sc•ll.
Their Somners and their Scribes, I warrant ye shall stere
With baylyurs and catchp•lles, to hold him down every where
I trow Rug &amp; Corbet, at Norwit•h will do their part
With wharton of •ongaye, and for my sake put him to smart.
And I will raise up in the universities
The seven slippers there, to advance the popes decrees
As Dorbell and Duns, Durand &amp; Thomas of Equine
The master of sentence, with Bachon the great deuyue
Hēricus de Gandauo, and these shall read ad cletū.
Aristotle and Albert, de secretes mulierum
With the Cōmentaryes, of Aui•en and Aueroyes
And a Phebo Phebe, which is very good for boys
Yea and let the pope, as Gods own Uicat here
In his hand▪ iii. cro•ses, &amp;. iii. crowns on his head •ere
His power betokening in heaven, in earth, &amp; in hell
That he may comaūde all kings, &amp; subdue the gospel
His self may do that he need command none other
Is not he the head of the holy church out mother
May not be make sayuts &amp; devils at his own pleasure
Which hath in his hādes, the •eyes &amp; churches treasure
So well as he made saint Herman first a saint
And twenty years after, of Heresy him attaint.
First he sent him to heaven, by his canonyzacion
And from thence to bell, by auexcommunycation
We read of formosus, that after he was dead
One pope his fingers, another cut of his head
And threw his Carcass, into the floude of Tyber
With the head and fingers, as Platina doth remēber
In token that he, is judge over quick and dead
And may dampne and save, by his pardons under lead
Syluester the second, to the devil himself ones gave
For that high office, that he might dampne and save
He offered also his stones to Satan, they say
For priests chastity, and so went their marriage away
Here is one cōmynge, enquire what he entende.
Ha? it is the Gospel, from him God vs defend.
Show me brother mine, who did the hither send.
The father of heaven, of his mere beuyu•lence
I desire therefore, of free audience.
Ye mind than to preach before this company?
In the laws of God, would I instruct them gladly
For none other way, there is unto salvation
But the word of God, in every generation
That qayckeueth, that saves, yt brings unto heaven.
As before his death, Christ taught the Apostle eleven.
Preach here thou shalt not, without the Authority
Of pope or bys•hop, or some of their affinity.
Gods word, never takes his auctorytie of man.
Thou shalt not here preach, do thou the best thou can.
Gods blessing on your heart, it is spoken even like a man.
Ye knowethis day sir, we have a full holy feast
And must go procession, with the blessed rood of reast
We have lunge matins, lunge laudes, lunge hours, lunge pryme.
Mass, evensong, complyne, &amp; all must be done in time
Sensing of the Aulters, and casting of holywater
Holy bread making, with other necessary matter.
Have God cōmaunded any such things to be done
What is that to the? go meddle with old shone
Can thou say, but they are good significations?
I say they are fruits of your ymagynacions.
To bring in luere, and darken Gods high glory.
Of you God doth axe, no such vain beggary
Christ never sent his, to she we significations
But his living word, to all the Christen nations
Ye forsake the Lord, as Esaias doth tell
And highly blaspheme, the holy of Israel.
In his first chapter, this horrible sentence is
Quis hec frusteanea quesiuit, be minibus Bestris,
Who hath required, of yousuche sacrifice
In vain offer you, that vntō maunded service
Your incense to me, is great Abhomyuation
I sore abhorte it, and much detest your fashion
When ye pray to me, I give ye none attendance
But avert my face (saith God) &amp; my countenance
By this ye may se, that the lord doth not regard
your mangre muttering, neither graūt it any reward
No man wills Paule, to speak in the congregation
In a strange language, without interpretation.
In your latin hours, the flock do ye not consider
But declare your selves, to be Romys she all together
Be not led about (saith Paule, by any straūge letuyng
What else is your doctrine, but a blind popish thing?
He testifies also, Non enim vt baptizatem
Dis•t tu• Christue, sed vt Euangeliz•rem.
Christ hath not me sent, that I should baptise, saith Paule
But to preach his word, to the cōforte of mans soul
Loo, though baptyme be a thing very necessity
yet must it give place, to Gods word, no remedy
Why than preferreye, your draffys she ceremonies
To the Gospel preachyuge, O dampuable injuries.
Why suffer ye him, to prattle here so lunge?
Get the hence shortly, or with the, it will be wrong.
Peace be here and God, master Doctor by your leave
That I may declare, a pardon here in my slene
Of our Lady of Boston, Ingham, and saint Iohan∣nes Frarye
With the indulgence, of blessed saint Antony
Well, take thy pleasure, and do it hardily.
Sir he doth me wrong, for this day it is my station
To preach my brotherhed, and gather my lymytacion
Who first spake, first speed, steppe forth and rede thy pardon
And when he hath done, your course is, father warden.
What course appoint ye, for preaching of the Gospel
I would thy Gospel, and thou, were both now in hell
Why and shall this baggage, put by the word of God
Thou will not be answered, till thou feel a sharper rod
Good Christen people, I am come hither barely
As a true poctour, of the house of saint An•any
Of clean remission, I have brought ye indulgence
A pena et culpa, for all your sin and •ff•ur
By the Auctorytie of pope Leo and pope Clement
Pope Bonyface, pope Pius, pope Iohan, and pope Innocent.
And here I bless ye, with the wing of the holy ghost
From thundre to save ye, and frō spirits in every coo••
Lo, here is a bell, to hang upon your hog
And save your Cattle, from the biting of a dog
So many as wyllcome, to this holy fritter•ytie
Come paye your money, and ye shall have letters of me
Let me have a letter, for I will be a brother
Then give me a bell, for I will be an other.
O damnble leadyuge, of Babylonicall sodomites
Your selves ye declare, to be shameful hypocrites
Lord pity thy people, and take away these gydes
These scorners, these robbers, these cruel homicides
Such prophets are they, as God did ueuer send
As Hiere my saith, they damnable ways pretend.
Wo Hypocrites wo, for here ye tryfie and mock
With christen people, &amp; the kyngdō of heaven up locke
Ye count it a game, to lose that Christ hath bought
With his precious blot, &amp; here most dearly sought
O ye are wretches, and pestilent Antichrists
Ministers of Dagon, and most deceitful papists.
Like tauenouse Wolves, poor Widows ye devour
By title of prayer▪ eternal dampnacion is your
Your own dreams ye follow, but matter much more weighty
Ye do not esteem, as judgment, faith, and mercy
Wo Pharyses wo, ye make clean outwardelye
But inwards ye are full, of coueytousues &amp; bawdry.
Painted tumbes are ye, apryenge tight beautiful
But within ye stink, &amp; have thoughts very shameful
Ye slew the prophets, your doing yet bear witness.
How think ye to avoid, that point of unrighteousness
Oh raging serpents, and vyperouse generation
Howe can ye escape, the danger of dampnacion
Who made the so bold, to meddle within my cure?
And teach new learning? an heretyke art thou sure
If due search were made, we should find the (I think) no priest
Yes, anointed of God, but no popysshe Antichrist.
Let me se, where are the letters of thy ordres?
Where Christ his self is, &amp; not in the same borders
No such priest am I, as is anointed with oil
But the holy Ghost, for I am none of this soil.
Here I attach the, for a buissy scismatyke
And will the accuse, for an heinous heretyke
Lay hands upon him, &amp; deprive him of this apparel
H•c Best spotiatum sordidiori•us induunt.
Loo, thus will I handle al thē, that shall take thy quarrel
Hold away with this ger, and lay it forth aside.
Nay, tarry brother mine, for away shalt thou not slyde
I am not going, why doest thou slander me?
But no him to ashes and show to him no pity.
Brent shall he not be, if he will nomore do so.
Fellow howe say thou? will th•u here abiute or no?
I will neither abjure, nor yet recant Gods glory.
I offered the reason, and thereto thou will not applied,
Well get the foreword for thou shalt sure dye
The temporal power, shall judge the to the fire
At our Accusement, and holy religious desire.
Thought you for my sake imprison men cruelly
Famish them, stock them, and them with faggots fry
Hurt me ye shall not, for I can never dye
And they for my sake, shall live perpetually•.
Here is a prating, with a very vengeance hēnce.
This horrible hetetycke, now shall we well recompense
Yea, hurne him well friar, and let him no longer reign
Lay on grieve faggots, to put him to more payne
By the mess I laugh, to se howe this ge•e doth wurke
He is like of thē, to have no more gre•r than a turk
For such knaves they are, as a man shall not lightly find.
And take over hell, companions they are to my mind
My busynesse all, is now at good conclusion
That I have brought these. iii. laws to confusion
Now shall I be able, to live here peaceably
And make frowly•e chere, with hey how frysfa Jolly
The law of Nature, I caste first in a leprye
By the secrete help, of ydolatrye and sodomy.
The law of Moyses, I made a cripple blind
Avarice and Ambition, to help me were not behind
And now Christ's law, I have br•ut for heresy•
By help of false doctrine, and my cosyn hypocrisy
On these same three laws, all other laws depend
And can not prenayle, now these are at an end.
If Christen governors, do not these laws uphold
Their Cyuple ordinances, will soon be very cold
Well, this valeaunte George, hath made them all to stoup.
Cheer now may I make, and set cock on the houpe
Fill in all the pots, and bid me welcome hostess
And go cal me hither, mine own sweet minion Bess▪
QUid gloriaris in malicia? queen potens es in iniquitate.
Thou vengeable wretch, replete with poi∣son and vice
Why doest thou thus, rejoice in cruelty and maiyte?
Think thou that God sleeps, &amp; will not his defend
And that thy mischief, shall never have an end
The blot of Innocents, to him for vengeance call
And therefore this hour, must I fiercely upon the fall
Thou spirit of the ayre, I straygtly conjure the here
By Panton &amp; Craton, and charge the to come no ne'er.
Think thou to stop me, with thy foolish cōsuracion
Whom God sends hither, for thy abhomynacion.
What art thou called? thy name to me rehearse.
I am Uindicta Dei, in punishment most fearce,
With water, with sooerde, and with fire I must thee pearce
Be good in thy office, &amp; thou shalt have money &amp; meat
By filthy rewards, thou can not me entreat
But that I will do, as God hath me commanded
For if worldely gifts, my fury might have changed
The buyuetfall world, had ben drowned with water
Nor Sodomy &amp; Gomor, with so fiery fearful matter
Nor yet the Israelyties, with terror of the sword
With hungry &amp; pestilence, in the anger of Gods word
Pharao in Egypt, the plagues had never felt
Might I have been stopped, for silver or for g•l•e
Into Egipte I brought, ten terrible punysshementes
Upon the people, for breaking his cōmaundementes
Their wholesome waters, I turned into blood
I multiplied frogs, to poison therewith their food.
I made wasps and Dranes, them grievously to sting
And all kinds of flies, soon after did I in bring
Upon their cattle, I threw the foul pestilence
Both botch, bile, and blayne, they had for their offence
Lightnings and haylynges, destroyed their Corn and fruit.
A swarm of hungry locusts, their pastors destitute
The space of three days, I gave thē palpable darkness
I slew the first gotten, of mā and beast, for thy rudeness
For I never strike, but for the Infidelity.
Strike for me quoth •? By y• mary Mass I defy thē
What thou will not so, thy brains are not so light
Anger me not to much, for if thou do, I fight
All that will not help, thy wicked workings now
When the stronger come, the weaker must needs bow
The law of Nature, infected thou hast, with a leprye.
Nay, it was not I, but that witch Idolatry
And that bold shorn knave, that men cal Sodomy
Of whom syronge they first? but of Infidelity?
Therefore thou shalt have, that plage of penalty
Which they first tasted, for their Iniquity
For those two vices, I drowned the world with water
In token whereof, I plage the, with the same matter.
Hic Infidelitatem • •••pha perc•tit,
Tush, I defy thy worst, this shall not drive me hē••
For after the floude, with Cham had I residence
And so continued, till Moyses law came in
With his jolly tricks, a new rule to begin
And him thou cortuptest, with Avarice and Ambition
And so did leave him in miserable condition
Thou shalt have therefore, that than to them was due
Most terrible battle, the Israelties untrue
That time did suffer, for their Infidelity
Wherefore with this sword, I justly banish the.
Because thou shalt here, give place to Christ's gospel
Gladio Infidelitatem denuo cadet.
Yet will I not hence, but again ones rebel.
Did not I remain, with Iudas, and other more?
When Christ prea•head here, and taught them to ve•• him sore.
Yes, and after that, was I with Simon Magus
With Saunder Coppersmyth, with Elimas and De∣metrius.
And now I persevere, among the rank rabble of Papists
Teaching their shoe•lingoes, to play the Antichriste••
The Innocent blood, of saints continually
Doth all unto God to revenge their injury▪
Against false doctrine and cursed hypocrisy
Whom thou hast raised the glory of the Gospel
To darken, and his friends most miserably to quell.
Wherefore thou shalt have like as thou hast deserved
For thy wicked doings, thy punysshmēt now doubled.
Ignis ipsum precedet. The Prophet Dauid saith thus.
At{que} inflammabit in citcuitu inimicos eiue.
A consuming fire, shall run before the judge
His enemies consuming, they shall find no refuge.
Obe scesera et culpas hominum, titus{que} nephandes
In cineres ibit tissus, tenuim{que} fauillam
As Mantuan writes, for the wickedness of the
The earth to ashes, by fire, shall turned be.
Ignis flamnia Infidelitatem 〈◊◊〉 coget.
Credo, credo, credo. I say, credo, credo, credo,
To the Denyll of hell, by the Mess I wene I go.
As •e have scene here▪ howe I have stricken with fire
The pestilent vice of Infidelity
Sowyll I destroy, in the fierceness of my•tyre▪
All sectes of error, with their enormity
Which hath risen out of that iniquity
For as it is said, that my hand hath no set
Shall up by the root, no power may it let.
The Apostle Iohan, in the Apo•alyps doth say
He saw • new he even, and a new earth appearing
The old earth and se, were taken clean away
That heaven is man faith, that earth his under∣standing.
Whom we have renewed, by our most sexxet work ynge
The old cauered earth, exiling with the see
Which is supersticion, and Infidelity.
A new Hierusalem, the said Iohn also se
As a beautiful 〈…〉 to her husband
Our ••ue faithful church is that same fair City
Whō we 〈…〉, by the power of our right hand
As a s•ouse to Christ, in every Christen land
〈…〉 the •acres, of Babylonicall poperye
That••• in ••y•yte, may walk to our glory.
〈…〉 three l•was, for you will I •lere also
Of such infections, as by Infidelity
Ye have received, that ye with he• may go
Declaring the ways, of Christen liberty
〈…〉, she may take, 〈…〉
For her only God, and be our people styll
In our laws walking, according to our will.
At your commandment, we are most blessed lord,
Approach nigher than, and ye shall be restored.
Thou law of Naturewe first begin with the
Restoring the again, to thy first purity
Avoid Idolatry, Avoid vile Sodomy.
We charge ye no more, this law to putrefy
Keep styll that same hart for a sign perpetual
That thou were written, in man hart first of all.
Thou law of Moses▪ give me that veil from the
No longer shalt thou, neither blind nor crooked be
Hence thou Ambition, and cut sed Coueytousn•s
I here banysche you, from this law ever doubtless
Lose not those tables, which are a token ture
That thou in the flesh, shalt ever more continue.
Thou law of the Gospel, though thou be last of all
In operation yet, thou art the pryacypall
From the I exile, hypoetysye and false doctrine
With all that depend, upon the papisticall•in
Reserve the came book, for a sign of heavenly pour
For ye book thou art, that Iohn frō headuē did devour.
Everlasting praise, to thy glorious majesty.
Our heavenly governor, great is thy gracious pity,
Of mankind thou art, the eternal felicity.
Now leave thy servants, in thy perpetual peace
To do the service, from hence, will we notcease.
For your eyes have se•e, what thou hast now prepared
For thy peoples health, which hath benhere declared.
A light thou hast sent, which is thy joyous Gospel
To the consolation of the hows of Israel.
In rejoice of this, make we some melody.
The name of our God, to praise and magnify.
I assent thereto, and will singe very gladly.
Hic ad Dei gloria• canta•not. In exitu Israel de Aegipto, ••l aliud simile.
Now have we destroyed, the kingdom of Babylon
And thrown the great whore, into the bottomless pyt
Restoring agayae, the true faith and religion
In the Christen church, as we have thought it fit
Depurynge these laws, so to continue it
Man is our creature, and hath grace in our sight
To dwell with him now, is our whole hearts delight.
Man is our people, his God we are again
With him will we have, continual residence
A way will we wipe, from all sorrow and payne
He shall no longer despair, for his offence
Nor have in his soul, any carefuldoubte of conscience
The old popyshnes is past, which was dampuacion
We have now re•ued, our Christen congregation.
Stand forth Christen faith, and take our aduertismēt
We here appoint the, to govern our congregacion
Se thou do nothing, without the admonysshement
Of these three laws here, Imprint their declaration
Of my sweet promises, and than make thou relation
To my folk again, that they may walk to me
Without popysshe dreams, in a perfyght liberty.
Most heavenly maker, in it thoudoest cōmaunde me
Evermore will I, full prompt and diligent be.
Thou law of Nature, shalt ••ache man God to know
And thatto refuse, whereby any ill may grow.
From this your precept, shall I not varye I crow▪
Teach thou him also, to worship one God about
And his proper neyber, to persecute with love.
I hope blessed lord, to do as me shall behove.
And thou shalt teach him, to love God in his hart.
And those to forgive, by whom he sufferethsmarte.
In your appointments, will I do also my part.
Work thou in the heart, a knowledge necessary
In the flesh, work thou, by outward Ceremony.
Change thou notto the sp•et▪ • workyn•s of these •wo
And cause our people, in a perfyght way to go
Take heed christē faith, to the techynges of these three
And move our people, to walk in the verytie.
The promises we made, in all these three are Gospel
We would thou shouldest so, to our Congregation tell
Our eu•rlastynge b•estynge, be with you ever more.
To thy sweet name lord, be praise &amp; perpetual honour▪
It hath pleased God, to put me in this office
To govern his church, and christen Congregation
And theri• do, as ye shall me entice
Give me I pray you, such wholesome exhortation
As may be to Man, aclere edification
And I will be glad, to take your adurttyshment
As it shall become, any child obedient.
Ye speak it full wele, than mark what shall be said
And diligently, look that it be obeyed.
The effect of me, is for to know the lord
Everlasting, strong, most gracious and godly
And as touching Man, to have fraternal concorde
F〈…〉r to norysshe, and to do non injury
To 〈…〉 ••uenasites made, and love true matrimony
T•es noble effects, so temper you in Man.
That them to fulfil, he do the best he can.
The effect of me, is for to worship the lord
As one God alone, and to fly from Idolat•ye
Not to flee nor steal, nor yet to bear false record
To show what is sin, and to seek the remedy
Public peace to hold▪ and sore to punish the guilty
From these good effects, se that man never so•rue
Thau shall he be sure, that God will him preserve.
The effect of me, is for to worship the lord
In the inward spirit, and to favour friend &amp; eumye
And in all points else, with Gods will to accord
To preach remission, to save and to justify
In Christ all to se•elyfe, justice, peace and mer•y•
These heavenly effects, in man so incorporate
That he may in spirit, be newly regenerate.
More sweet than honey, are your three exhortacions
And registered they be, in my memorial
Now will I forward, to all the Christen nations
And se in effect, these laws observed all
To the abolyshment, of the dreams papisticall
Now the light is come, the darkness dies away
I trust in the lord, men will walk in the day.
Good Christen people, to these three laws apply
First know that ye have, a living God aboue
Than do him honour, and his name magnify
Worship him in spryte, as the Gospel you doth move
Than obey your queen•, like as shall you behove
For she in her life, that lord doth represent
To safeguard• of the just, and fynners punishment.
Se that ye regard, such laws as she doth make
For they are of God, as Solomon doth report
Of these laws doubteles, those laws their groan∣dynges take
To the public wealth, to give aid, strength, and comfort
For preservation, of all the christen sort
In no case follow, the ways of •eygnolde Pole
To his dampnacion, he doubtless plays the fool.
Have • due respect, unto your country native
Which hath brought ye up, and given ye noryshment
Even from your cradles, to these days nutrytyue
Do that ye may do, to her wealth and preferment
Minister to bet, no hateful detriment
A dog to his friend, will never be unloving
Let reason in ye, not lose his natural working.
Who lives without law, shall perysshe without law
And therefore we have, three laws to you described
That after their lives, ye should in your living draw
We have also showed, howe they have ben corrupted
By foul Idolaters, and Sodomites polluted.
By coueytous preestes, and by ambitious prelates
Hypocrytall fryers, false Doetours and false Cutates
Who hath restored, these same thyr laws again
But your late Iosias, and valiant king Henrye
No prince before him, toke ever yet such payne
Frō Englāde to banish, Idolatry &amp; foul Sodomy
Coueytousnes, Ambition, false Doctrine &amp; hypocrisy
It was he that brought, Christ's verytie to light
When he put the pope, with his filthiness to flight.
Frō dāpnable darkness, as my brother here doth say
He hath delivered, this realm of England godly
Bringing his Subjects, into the true path way
Of their souls safeguard▪ if they now follow it wisely
And left them he hath, the same way styll to fortify
His noble son Edward, such a king of God elect
As questionless, while helyued, did perform it in effect
Pray we to the lord, for the lunge continuance
Of Queen Elizabeth, in this worlds habitation
And that of her Nobles, she have true maintenance
In the principles of this most worthy foundation
•hat she may to Christ, bring vs from desolation
And for her noble Counsellours, to god let vs all pray
That in the true faith, their hertes direct he may.
Love thy Lord God. Swear thou no other
Thy sobbeth keep. Please thy friends both.
Witness none ill. Hold no man wife.
Bribe man good. Slay not with knife
Wish no man house. Nor Ox nor Ass
As thou will have. Do thou like case.
BEnedictus domi∣nus, Deus Israel Which hath over thrown, the migh tie Idol Bell
The false God of Rome, by power of the Gospel
And has proper∣red from the deep lake of hell.
Redēptionem ple∣•i• su•.
•t •rexit cornu, of mercy, health and grace
That cruel Tyrant, now clearly to de face
Whose blodye kingdom, diminishes apace
By the word of God, which lately hath take place.
In •omo Dauid, pueti sui▪
Sicut Iocutus est, the Lord celestial
That Romys she Antichrist, is like to have a fall
With his whole rabble, of sectes diabolical
And now the nombre, will flourish over all
Prop•etatum eiu•.
Salutem ex inimicis, now we may daily hear
The enemies of Christ, with him doth witness bear
Saule is become a Paule, and preaching every where
Now may we receive, most heavenly wholesome gear
De menu corum queen •d••••t nos.
Ad faciendam misericodiam
The son of our God, from his high gloryecam
To redeem the sin, of the children of Adam
And to remember, to faithful Abraham
Testamentisui sancti.
Ad iusiurandum, which God hath made before
Unto our fathers he will keep evermore
Promised he hath if we regard his lore
For seeking the Pope, with his damnable store
Daturum se nobis.
Ut sine timore, from Romish tyrants fre
The lord grant vs grace, that we may speakers b•
Of his holy word, and therein to agree
That in the Gospel and Christen liberty
Seruiam•• i••i.
In sanctitate, and pureness of life
Let vs now travail, both maiden man and wife
All tyghtrous doings, in vs be ever rife
That we perseuet, without debate orstryfe
Omnibu• dicbus nostri•.
Tupuer Prophet, elected of the lord
Our Queen Elizabeth, to have Gods law restored
Folowest Iosias, therofto take record
In all thy doings, and in Gods holy word
Potato via••in•.
Ad dandam scicentiam, for men's health and save guard
Christ's holy Gospel, by the is frely heard
Wherein doth cousyst, their life and full reward
With preservation, from dangerous i•oba•dye.
Peccatorum corum.
P•t viscera misericordie
Christ our dere master, vs daily over••
Least we here perysshe, in our iniquity
Our mediator, continually is he.
Ore•ns ex afto.
Illuminare, sweet lord we the desire
To menin darkness, and in the popysshe mire
Let not his baggage, thy faithful servants tyre
But vs deliver, from them and from hell fire.
In viam pacis.

Have in a ruffler forth of the greek land
Called Thersites, if ye will me know
aback, give me rome, in my way do ye not stand
For if ye do, I will soon lay you lowe
In Homer of my acts ye have red I trow
Neither Agamenon nor Ulysses, I spared to check
They could not bring me to be at their beck
Of late from the sege of Troye I returned
Where all my harnes except this club I lost
In an old house there it was quyte burned
While I was preparing vytayles for the host
I must needs get me new, what so euerit cost
I Will go seek adventures, for I cannot be idle
I will hamper some of the knaves in a bridle
It grieves me to hear howe the knaves do brag
But by supreme Iupiter, when I am harnessed well
I shall make the dasters to run in to a bag
To hyde them fro me, as from the devil of hell
I doubt not but hereafter, of me ye shall hear tell
Howe I have made the knaves for to play couch quail
But now to the shop of Mulciber, to go I will not fail
Mulciber must have a shop made in the place and
Thersites cōmethe before it saying a loud
Mulciber, whom the Poets doth call the god of fire
Smith unto Iupiter king over all
Come forth, of thy office I the desire
and grant me my petiction, I ask a thing but small
I will none of thy lightning, that thou art wont to make
for the gods supernal for ire when they do shake
With which they thrust the gyauntes down to hell
That were at a conuention heaven to bye and sell
But I would have some help of Lemnos and Ilua
That of their steal, by thy craft, condatur nuhi gale.
¶ What fellow Thersites, do ye speak latin now?
Nay, then farewell, I make god a vow
I do not you understand, no latin is in my pallet
And then he must do as he would go away.
I say abide good Mulciber, I pray you make me a sallet
¶ Why Thersites hast thou any wit in thy head?
Would thou have a sallet now, all the herbs are dead
Beside that it is not mete for a smith
To gether herbs and sallettes to meddle with
Go get the to my lover venus
She hath sallettes enough for all vs
I eat none such sallettes for now I wax old
and for my stomach they are very could
¶ Now I pray to Iupiter that thou dye a cuckold
I mean a sallet with which men do fight
¶ It is a small tastinge of a man might
That he should for any matter
Fight with a few herbs in a platter
No great laud should follow that victory
¶ Gods passion Mulciber where is thy wit &amp; memory
I would have a sallet made of steal
¶ Why sir▪ in your stomach lunge you shall it feel
For steal is harde for to digest
¶ Mans bones and sides hee is worse then a be
I would have a sallet to were on my head
Which under my chyn with a thong red
Buckeled shall be
Doest thou yet perceive me
¶ your mind now I se
Why thou peuysshe lad
Art thou almost mad
Or well in thy wit
Get the a wallet
Would thou have a sallette
What would thou do with it
¶ I pray the good Mulciber make no mo bones
But let me have a sallet made at ones.
¶ I must do somewhat for this knave
What manner of fillet sir would ye have.
¶ I wold have such a one that another might nor mayne
should perse it thorough, or part it in twain
Which another gonst one, nor sharpe spear
Should be able other to hurt or tear
I would have it also for to save my head
if Iupiter him self would have me dead
And if he in a fume, would cast at me his fire
This sallet I would have to keep me from his ire.
¶ I perceive your mind.
ye shall find me kind
I will for you prepare
Here Thersites do this sallet wear
And on thy head it bear
And none shall work the care
¶ Now would I not fear with any bull to fight
Or with a ramping lyon another by day nor night
O What great strength is in my body so lusty
Which for lack of exercise, is now almost rusty
Hercules in comparison to me was but a boy
When the bandogge Cerberus from hell he bare away
When he killed the lyons, hydra, and the bear so wild
Compare him to me and he was but a child
Why Simpson I say, hast thou no more wit
would you be as strōg as I? come suck thy mothers tytte
Wene you that Dauid that little eluyshe boy
Should with his slinge have take my life away
Nay iwis Golyath, for all his five stones
I would have quashed his little boysshe bones
O howe it would do my heart much good
To se some of the giant before Noes flood
I would make the knaves to cryecreke
Or else with my club their brains I will break
But Mulciber, yet I have not with the do
My head is armed, my neck I would have to
And also my shoulders with some good habergyn
That the devil if he shot at me could not enter in
For I am determined great battle to make
Except my fumishenes, by some means may assake.
¶ Bokell on this habergyn as fast as thou canne
And fear for the metinge of another beast nor manne
if it were possible for one too shot an ok
This habergyn will defend thee from the stroke
Let them throw mylstones at the as thick as hail
yet the to kill they shall their purpose fail
if Maluerue hills should on thy shoulders light
They shall not hurt the, nor suppress thy might
If Beaus of Hampton, Colburne and Guy
Will the assay, set not by them a fly
To be brief, this habergyn shall the save
Both by land and water, now play the lusty knave
¶ When I consider my shoulders that so broad be
When the other parts of my body I do behold
I verily think that none in chrystente
With me to medele dare be so bold
Now have at the lyons on cotsolde
I will neither spare for heate nor for cold
Where art thou king Arthur, &amp; the knights of the round table
Come, bring forth your horses out of the stable
Lo with me to mete they be not able
By the mass they had rather were a babble
Where art thou Gawyn the curtesse and Cay the cravat
Here be a couple of knights cowardishe and scabbed
Appear in thy likeness sir Libeus disconius
If thou wilt have my club light onthy hedibus
Lo ye may see he hears not the face
With me to try a blow in this place
Howe syrray, approthe sir Launcelot de lake
What? run ye away and for fear quake
Now he that did the a knight make
Thought never that thou any battle shouldest take
if you wilt not come thy self, some other of thy fellows send
To battle I provoke them, them self let them defend
To, for all the good that ever they se
They will not ones set hand to fight with me
O good lord howe broad is my breast
And strong with all for hole is my chest
He that should meddle with me shall have shrewd rest
Behold you my hands, my legs and my feet
Every part is strong proportionable and mete
Think you that I am not feared in field and street
Yes yes god wot, they give me the wall
Or else with my club, I make them to fall
Back knaves I say to them, then for fear they quake
And take me then to the tavern and good chere me make
The proctor and his men I made to run their ways
And some went to hide them in broken hays
I tell you at a word
I set not a torde
By none of them al
Early and late I will walk
And London streets stalk
Spyte of them great and small
For I think verily
That none in heaven so hye
Nor yet in hell so lowe
While I have this club in my hand
Can be able me to withstand
Or me to overthrow
But Mulciber, yet I must the desire
To make me briggen irons for mine arms
And then I will love the as mine own sire
For without them, I can not be safe from all harms
Those once had, I will not set a straw
by all the world, for then I will by awe
Have all my mind, or else by the holy rood
I will make them think, the devil carries them to the wood
if no man will with me battle take
A voyage to hell quickly I will make.
And there I will beat the devil and his dame
And bring the souls away, I fully entende the same
After that in hell I have ruffled so
Sreyghte to old purgatory will I go
I will clean that so purge round about
That we shall need no pardons to help them out
if I have not fight enough this ways
I will climb to heaven and fet away Peters kayes
I will keep them my self, and let in a great route
What should such a fisher keep good fellows out
¶ Have here Thersites briggen irons bright
and fear thou no man manly to fight
Though he be stronger then Hercules or Simpson
Be thou pressed and bold to set him upon
Another Amazon nor xerxes with their hole rabble
the to assail shall find it profitable
I warrant the they will fl fro thy face
as doth an Hare from the dogs in a chase
Would not thy black and rusty grym berde
Now thou art so armed, make any man aferde
Surely if Iupiter did see the in this ger
He would run away and hyde him for fear
He wold think that Typhoeus the giant were alive
And his brother Enceladus, again with him to strive
If that Mars of battle the god stout and bold
In this array should chance the to behold
He would yield up his sword unto the
And god of battle (he would say) thou shouldest be
Now fare thou well go the world through
And seek aduenturus thou art man good enough.
¶ Mulciber, while the stars shall shyne in the sky
And Phaetons horses with the sons charret shall fly
While the morning shall go before none
And cause the darkness to vanish away soon
While that the cat shall love well milk
And while that women shalloue to go in silk
While beggars have lice
And cockneys are nice
While pardoners can lye
Merchants can by
And children cry
While all these last and more
Which I keep in store
I do me faithfully bind
Thy kindness to bear in mind
but yet Mulciber one thing I ask more
Haste thou ever a sword now in store?
I would have such a one that would cut stones
And pare a great ok down at once
That were a sword lo, even for the nones.
¶ Truly I have such a one in my shop
that will pare iron as it were a rope
have, here it is, gyrde it to thy side
Now fare thou well, Iupiter be thy guide
¶ Gramercy Mulciber with my hole heart
Give me thy hand and let vs depart
Now I go hence, and put my self in press
I will seek adventures, yea and that I will not cease
If there be any present here this night
that will take upon them with me to fight
Let them come quickly, and the battle shall be pitch
Where is Cacus that knave? not worth a groat
that was wont to blow clouds out of his throat
Which stale Hercules kine and hyd them in his cave
Come hither Cacus, thou lubber and false knave
I will teach all wretches by the to beware
If thou come hither I trappe the in a snare
thou shalt have knocked bread and ill fare
how say you good godfather that loke so stale
ye seem a man to be borne in the vale
Dare ye adventure with me a stripe or two
Go coward go hide the as thou wast wont to do
What a sort of dastards have we here
None of you to battle with me dare appear
What say you hart of gold, of countenance so demure?
Will you fight with me? no, I am right sure
Fie blush not woman, I will do you no harm
Except I had you sooner to keep my back warm
Alas little pums why are ye so sore afraid?
I pray you show how lunge it is? sense ye were a maid
Tell me in mine ear, sirs, she has me told
That gone was her mydenhead, at thrustene year old
Bier lady she was loathe to keep it to lunge
And I were a maid again, now may be here songe
Do after my counsel of maidens the whole beuye
Quickly red your maydehed, for they are vēgeaūce heavy
Well, let all go, why? will none come in
With me to fight that I may pare his skin
¶ What say you my son will ye fight? god it defend
For what cause to war do you now pretend
Will ye commit to battles dangerous
your life that is to me so precious.
¶ I will go, I will go. stop not my way
Hold me not good mother I heartily you pray
If there be any lyons, or other wild be
That will not suffer the husband man in rest
I will go seeche them and bid them to afeest
They shall aby bitterly the coming of such a gest
I will search for them both in busshe and shrub
And lay on a lode with this lusty club
¶ O my sweet son, I am thy mother
Will thou kill me and thou hast none other
¶ No mother no, I am not of such iniquity
That I will defile my hands upon the.
But be content mother, for I will not rest
Till I have fought with some man or wild beast
Truly my son if that ye take this way
This shall be the conclusion, mark what I shall say
Other I will drown my self for sorrow
And fed fyshes with my body before to morrow
Or with a sharpe sword, surely I will me kill
Now thou may save me, if it be thy will
I will also cut my paps away
That gave the suck so many a day
And so in all the world it shall be known
That by my own son I was overthrown
Therefore if my life be to the pleasant
That which I desire good son do me grant
¶ Mother thou spend thy wind but in wast
The gods of battle her fury on me hath cast
I am fully fixed battle for to taste
O how many to death I shall drive in haste
I will ruffle this club about my head
Or else I pray god I never dye in my bed
There shall never a stroke be stricken with my hand
But they shall think yt Iupiter doth thonder in ye land
¶ My own sweet son I knelynge on my knee
And both my hands holding up to the
Desire the to cease and no battle make
Call to the patience and Better ways take
¶ Tush mother, I am deaf I will the not hear
No no, if Iupiter here him self now were
And all the gods, and Iuno his wife
And loving Minerua that abhors all strife
if all these I say, would desire me to be content
They did their wind but in vain spent
I will have battle in wails or in kent
and some of the kuaues I will all to rent
where is the valiant knight sir Isenbrase?
Appear sir I pray you, dare ye not show your face
where is Robin Iohn and little hod
approach hither quickly if ye think it good
I will teach such outlaws with Chrystes curses
How they take hereafter away abbots purses
why will no adventure appear in this place
where is Hercules with his great maze
where is Buspris, that fed his horses
Full like a tyrant, with dead men's corses
Come any of you both
And I make an other
That yer I eat any bread
I will drive a wayne
ye for need twain
Between your body and your head
Thus passes my brains
will none take the pains
To try with me a blow?
O what a fellow am I
whom every man doth fly
That doth me but once know
¶ Son all do you fear
That be present here
They will not with you fight
you, as you be worthy
Have now the victory
without tastynge of your might
Here is none I trow
that proffered you a blow
Man woman nor child
Do not set your mind
To fight with the wind
be not so mad nor wild
¶ I say arise who so ever will fight
I am to battle here ready dyghte
Come hither other swain or knight
Let me see who dare present him to my sight
Here with my club ready I stand
if any will come to take them in hand
¶ There is no hope left in my breast
To bring my son unto better rest
He will do nothing at my request
He regards me no more thē a best
I see no remedy, but styll I will pray
To god, my son to get in his way
That he may have a prosperous iournynge
And to bee save at his returning
Son, god aboue grant this my oration
That when in battle thou shalt have concertacion
with your enemies, other fare or ne'er
No wound in them nor in you may appear
So that ye another kill nor be killed
¶ Mother thy petition I pray god be fulfilled
For then no knaves blood shall be spilled
Fellows keep my counsel, by the mass I doo but croak
I will be gentle enough and no business make
But yet I will make her believe that I am a man
think you that I will fight? no no but with the can
Except I find my enemy on this wise
that he be a sleep or else can not arise
If his arms and his fete be not fast bound
I will not profer a stripe for a thousand pound
Fare well mother and tarry here no longer
For after proves of chivalry I do both thirst &amp; honger
I will hear the knaves as flat as a conger
What how long shall I tarry? be your hearts in your hose
will there none of you in battle me oppose
Come prove me why stand you so in doubt
have you any wild blood, that ye would have let out
A lack that a mans strength can not be knwen
Because that he lacks enemies to be ouerthowen
But what a monster do I see now
Coming hetherwarde with an armed brow
what is it? ah it is a sow
No by gods body it is but a gristle
And on the back it hath never a bristle
It is not a cow, ah there I fail
For then it should have a long tail.
What the devil I was blind, it is but a snail
I was never so afraid in east nor in south
My heart at the first sight was at my mouth
Mary sir fie, fie, fie, I do sweat for fear
I thought I had crooked but to timely here
Hens thou be and pluck in thy horns
Or I swear by him that crowned was with thorns
I will make the drink worse than good ale in yt corns
Haste thou nothing else to doo
But come with horns and face me so
Howe, how my servants, get you shield and sphere
And let vs weary and kill this monster here
¶ Is not this a worthy knight
that with a snail dares not fight
Except he have his servants aid
Is this the champion that makes al mē afraid
I am a pore soldier come of late frō Calice
I trust or I go to debate some of his malice
I will tarry my time tell I do see
Betwixt him and the snail what the end will be
¶ Why ye horizon knauys, regard ye not my calling
why do ye not come and with you weapons bring
why shall this monster so escape killing
No that he shall not and god be willing
¶ I promise you, this is as worthy a knight
as ever shall breed out of a bottle byte
I think he be Dares of whom Uirgyll doth write
That would not let entellus alone
But ever provoked and ever called on
But yet at the last he took a fall
And so within a while, I trow I make the shall
¶ By Gods passion knaves, if I come I will you fetter
Regard ye my calling and crying no better
why horizons I say, will ye not come
By the mass the knaves be all from home
They had better have fette me an etrande at Rome
¶ By my troth, I think that very scant
This lubber dare adventure to fight with an ant
Well saying my servants come to me will not
I must take heed that this monster me spyll not
I will ioparde with it a joint
And other with my club or my sweardes point
I will reche it such wounds
As I would not have for. xl. M. pounds
Pluck in thy horns thou unhappy beast
what facest thou me? wilt not thou be in rest
Why? will not thou thy horns in hold
Think thou that I am a cocklode
Gods arms the monster comes toward me styll
Except I fight manfully, it will me surely kill
O Iupiter Lord doest thou not see and hear
How he fears the snail as it were a bear
Well with my club I have had good-lucke
Now with my sword have at the a pluck
I will make the or I go, for to duck
And thou were as tale a man as friar suck
I say yet again thy horns in draw
Or else I will make the to have wounds raw
Art not thou a ferde
To have thy beard
Pared with my swore
Ah well, now no more
Thou might have done so before
I laid at it so sore
That it thought it should have be lore
And it had not drawn in his horns again
Surely I would the monstet have slain
But now farewell, I will work the no more payne
Now my fume is paste
And doth no longer last
That I did to the monster cast
Now in other countries both far and near
Mo deeds of chyualtye I will go inquere
Thou needs not seek any further for ready I am here
I will debate anon I trow thy bragging chere
Now where is any mo that will me assail
I will turn him and toss him both top and tail
if he be stronger then Simpson was
who with his bare hands killed lyons apas
What needs this boost? I am here at hand
That with the will fight keep the head and stand
Surely for al thy hye words I will not fear
To assay the a towche till some blood appear
I will give the somewhat for the gift of a new year
O mother mother I pray the me hyde
Throw some thing over me and cover me every side
O my son what thing eldyth the?
Mother a thousand horsemen do persecute me
Mary son then it was time to fly
I blame the not then, though afraid thou be
A deadly wound thou might there soon catch
One against so many, is no indyfferente match
No mother but if they had bent but ten to one
I would not have avoided but set them upon
But saying they be so many I ran away
Hyde me mother hyde me, I heartily the pray
For if they come hither and here me find
To their horses tails they will me bind
And after that fashion hall me and kill me
And though I were never so bold and stout
To fight against so many, I should stand in doubt
Thou that doest seek giant to conquer
Come forth if thou dare, and in this place appear
Fie for shame doest thou so soon take flight
Come forth and show somewhat of thy might
Hyde me mother, hyde me, and never word say
Thou old trot, seyst thou any man come this way
well armed and weaponed and ready to fight
¶ No forsooth Moister, there came none in my sight
¶ He did avoid in time, for without doubts
I would have set on his back some clouts
Yt I may take him I will make all slouches
To beware by him, that they come not in my clowches
¶ Come forth my son, your enemy is gone
Be not afraid for hurt thou can have none
¶ iwis thou did wisely who so ever thou be
To tarry no longer to fight with me
For with my club I would have broken thy skull
if thou were as big as Hercules bull
why thou cowardely knave, no stronger then a duck
Dare thou try mistress with me a pluck
which fere another giant nor Iupiters fire bolt
Nor Beelzebub the master devil as ragged as a colt
I would thou would come hither ones again
I think thou hottest rather alive to be flayne
Come again and I swear by my mothers womb
I will pull the in pieces no more then my thumb
and thy brains abroad, I will so scatter
That all knaves shall fear, against me to clatter
what? little Telemachus
what make thou here among vs?
¶ Sir my father Ulysses doth him commend
To you most heartily, &amp; here he hath you send
Of his mind a letter
which show you better
Every thing shall
Then I can make rehearsal
¶ Lo friends ye may see
what great men write to me
As entirely as heart can think
Or scrivener can write with yuck
I send you loving gretynge
Thersytes mine own sweating
I am very sorry
when I cast in memory
The great unkindness
And also the blindness
That hath be in my breast
Against you ever pressed
I have be prompt and diligent
Ever to make you shent
To appal your good name
And To mynysshe your fame
In that I was to blame
But well al this is gone
And remedy there is none
But only repentance
Of all my old greuaunce
with which I did you molest
And gave you sorry reast
The cause was thereof truly
Nothing but very envy
wherefore now gentle esquier
Forgive me I you desire
And help I you beseech
Telemachus to a leche
That him may wisely charm
From the worms that do him harm
In that ye may do me pleasure
For he is my chief treasure
I have heard men say
That come by the way
That better charmer is no other
then is your own dear mother
I pray you of her obtain
To charm away his pain
Fare ye well, and come to my house
To drink wine and eat a piece of sows
And we will have minstrelsy
that shall pipe hankyn boby
My wife penelobe
Doth great you well by me
writing at my house on Candelmasse day
Mydsomer month, the calenders of may
By me Ulissed being very glad
That the victory of late of the monster ye had
Ah syrraye quote he? how say you friends all
Ulisses is glad for my favour to call
well, though we oft have swerued
And he small love deserved
Yet I am well content
Saying he doth repent
To let old matters go
And to take him no more so
As I have do hither to
For my mortal foe
Come go with me Telemachus, I will the bring
Unto my mother to have her charming
I doubt not, but by that time that she has done
Thou shalt be the better seven years agony
Mother Christ thee save and see
Ulysses has send his son to thee
That thou shouldest him charm
From the worms that him harm
¶ Son ye be wife keep ye warm
why should I for Ulysses doo
That never was kind vs to
He was ready in war
Ever the, son, to mar
Then had been all my joy
Exiled cleave away
¶ Well mother all that is past
Wroth may not always last
And saying we be mortal all
Let not our wroth be immortal
Charm that charm will, he shall not be charmed of me
Charm or by the mass with my club I will charm the
¶ why son art thou so wicked to beat thy mother
¶ ye that I will, by gods dear brother
Charm old witch in the devils name
Or I will send the to him, to be his dame
¶ Alas what a son have I
That thus doth order me spitefully
Cursed be the time that ever I him fed
I would in my belly he had be dead
¶ Cursest thou old whore? bless me again
Or I will bless the, that shall be to thy payne
¶ He will kill me
He will spyll me
He will brose me
He will lose me
He will prick me
He will stick me
The devil stick the old wytherde witch
For I will stick another the, nor none such.
But come of give me thy blessing again
I say let me have it, or else certain
With my club I will lay the on the brain
Well saying thou threaten to me affliction
Spite of my heart have now my benediction
Now christ's sweet blessing and mine
Light aboue and beneath the body of thine
And I beseech with all my devotion
That thou may come to A mans promotion
He that forgive Mary Mawdalene her sin
Make the highest of all thy kin
¶ In this words is double intellimente
Would thou have me hanged mother veramente
¶ No son no, but too have you hye
In promotion, is my mind verily
¶ Well then mother let all this goo
and charm this child that you is send to
and loke hereafter to curse ye be not greedy
Curse me no more, I am cursed enough all ready
¶ Well son I will curse you no more
Except ye provoke me to to sore
But I marvel why ye do me move
To do for Ulisses that doth not vs love
¶ Mother by his son he has send me a letter
Promising hereafter to be to vs better
And you and I with my great club
Must walk to him and eat a solybubbe
and we shall make merry
and singe tyrle on the berry
With Simkyn sydnam somner
that killed a cat at comner
There the trifling tabborer trowbler of tunic
Will pike Peter pybaker a pennyworth of prunes
Nycholl never good a net and a night cap
Knit will for kyt whose knee caught a knap
Dauid doughty dyghter of ditties
Gren with godfrey goodale will greatly at the gates
Thom tombler of tewxbury turning at a tryce
will wipe william waterman if he be not wise
Symon sadler of sudeley that served the sow
Hit will Henrye hartlesse he harde not yet how
Iynkyn Eaton that iabbed jolly Ione
Grind will gromellede until he groan
Proud perts pykethancke, that piked pernels purse
Cut will the cakes though Cate do cry and curse
Rough Robin rover ruffling in right rate
bald Bernarde brainless will beat and Denied bate
Foolish frederick furburer of a fart
Dynge daniell dainty to death will with a dart
Mercolfe mouylts moreninge for mad Mary
Tyncke will the tables though he there not tarry
Andrew all knave alderman of Andwarpe
Hop will with holy hockes &amp; harken humfreys harp
It is to to mother the pastime and good chere
That we shall see and have, when that we come there
Wherefore gentle mother I the heartily pray
That thou will charm for worms this pretty boy
Well son, saying the case and matter stands so
I am content all thy request to do
Come hither pretty child
I will the charm from the worms wild
but first do thou me thy name tell
¶ I am called Telemachus there as I dwell
¶ Telemachus lye down upright on the ground
And stir not ones for a thousand pound
¶ I am ready here pressed
To doo all your request
¶ The cowherd of Comertowne with his crooked spade
Cause from the, the worms soon to vade
And jolly Jack iumbler that juggled with a horn
Grant that thy worms soon be all to torn
Good grandsire Abraham godmother to Eve
Grant that this worms no longer this child grieve
All the court of conscience in cockoldst yres
Tynckers and tabberets tipplers taverners
Tyttyfylles, tryfullers, turners and trumpers
Tempters, traitors, travailers and thumpers
Thriftless, thievish, thycke and thereto thynne
the malady of this worms cause for too blynne
The virtue of the tail of Isaackes cow
That before Adam in paradise did lowe
Also the ioyste of Moses rod
In the mount of caluarye that spake with God
Facie ad faciem, turning tail to tail
Cause all these worms quickly to fail
The bottom of the ship of No
And also the leg of ye horse of Trow
The piece of the tongue of Balaams ass
the chawbone of the Ox that at Christ's birth was
the eye to the of the dog that went on pilgrimage
with young Thobye, these worms soon may swag
the butterfly of Bromemycham yt was borne blind
The blast of the bottle that blowed Jealous wind
The buttock of the bitter bought at Buckyngame
the body of the bear that with Beuis came
the backster of Balockburye with her bakinge pele
Child fro thy worms I pray, may soon the heal
The tapper of tauyestocke and the tipsters pot
The tothe of the tytmus, the torde of the got
In the tower of tenysballes tostyd by the fire
the table of Tantalus turned trym in mire
yt tomb of Tom threadbare yt thrusle tyb through yt smock
Make al thy worms child, to come forth at thy dock
Sem Cam and Iaphat and coll the millers mare
the five stones of Dauyd: that made goliath stare
the wing with which seit Michael did fly to his moūt
the counters wherewith cherubyn, did cheristones count
The hawk with which Issuerus killed she wild bore
Help that these worms my child, hurt the no more
the maw of the morecocke that made mewed to mow
when martylmas at moreton morened for the snow
the sphere of spanish spylbery sprint with spiteful spots
the lights of the lauerocke laid at London lots
the shinbone of saint Samuel shining so as the sun
Grant child of the worms that soon thy pains be don
Mother bryce of oxford and great Gyb of hynxey
Also mewed of thrutton and mable of chartesey
And all other witches that walk in dymminges dale
Clytteringe and clattering there your pots with ale
Incline your ears, and hear this my petition
and grant this child, of health to have fruition
the blessing that Iorden to his Godson gave
Light on my child and from the worms him save
Now stand up little Telemachus anon
I warrant the by to morrow, thy worms will be gone
¶ I thank you mother in my most heartily wise
will ye sir to my father command me any service
¶ No pretty boy, but do thou vs two commend
to thy father and mother, tell them that we entende
Both my mother and I
to see them shortly
¶ Ye shall be heartily welcome to them I dare well say
Fare ye well, by your leave, now I will depart away
¶ Son, give me thy hand, fare well
¶ I pray god keep the from apparel
Iwis it is a proper child
and in behaviour nothing wild
Ye may see what is good education
I would every man after this fashion
Had their children up brought
then many of them would not have been so nonghte
A child is better unborn then untaught
¶ Ye say truth mother, well let all this go
and make you ready Ulisses to go to
with me anon, be ye so content
¶ I am well pleased to your will I assent
For all though that I love him but very evil
It is good to set a candle before the devil
Of most part of great men I swear by this fire
Light is the thank but heavy is the ire
Fare well son, I will go me to prepare
¶ Mother God be with you and keep you from care
What soever I say sirs, I think ill might she care
I care not if the old witch were dead
It were an almoys dede to knock bier in the head
And say on the worms that she did dye
For there be many that my lands would bye
By gods blessed brother
If I were not seek of the mother
this totheles trot keep the me harde
And suffered no money in my ward
But by the blessed trinity
If she will no sooner ded be
I will with a coyshiou stop her breath
till she have forgot new makes heth
Ill might I fare
If that I care
Nyr to spare
About the house she hopped
and her nose oft drops
When the wortes she choppeth
When that she doth brew
I may say to you
I am ready to spew
the drops to see down run
By all Christen men
From her nose to her known
Fie Gods body, it makes me to spit
to remember howe that she doth sit
By the fire brallynge
Scratching and scrallynge
and in every place
Leyenge oysters apase
She doth but lack shells
the devil have they white, else
At night when to bed she goys
and pluicketh of her hose
She knappeth me in the nose
with tip, tap
Flyppe, flap
that an ill hap
Come to that tap
that vents so
Where so ever she go
So much she daily drinks
That her breath at both ends stinks
That a horsecombe and an halter
Her soon up talter
till I say Divides psalter
That shall be at neuermas
Which never shall be, nor never was
By this ten bones
She served me ones
A touche for the nones
I was sick and lay in my bed
She brought me a kerchief to wrap on my head
And I pray God that I be dead
If that I lye any white
when she was about the kerchefe to knit
Break did one of the forms fete
that she did stand on
And down fell she anon
And forth withal
As she did fall
She girded out a fart
That me made to start
I think her buttocks did smart
Except it bad be a mare in a carte
I have not harde such a blast
I cried and bid her hold fast
with that she nothing aghast
said to me yt no woman in this land
Could hold fast that which was not in her hand
Now sirs, in that hole pitch and fire brand
Of that bag so fusty
So stale and so musty
So cankered and so rusty
So stinking and so dusty
God send her as much joy
as my nose has always
Of her unsavoury spice
If that I be not wise
and stop my nose quickly
When she lets goo merely
But let all this go, I had almost forget
The knave that here yerewhyles did jet
Before that Telemachus did come in
I will go seeche him, I will not blynne
Until that I have him
Then so god save him
I will so be knave him
That I will make to rave him
With this swore I will shave him
And strypes when I have gave him
Better I will deprave him
That you shall know for a slave him
¶ will thou so in deed?
Hye the make good speed
I am at hand here pressed
Put away tongue shaking
and this foolish crakynge
Let vs try for the best
Cowards make speak a pace
Srypes prouethe manne
Have now at thy face
Keep of if thou canne
Why thou lubber run thou away
and leave thy swore and thy club thee behind
Now this is a sure card, now I may well say
That a coward croaking here I did find
Masters ye may see by this play in sight
That great barking dogs, do not most byte
And oft it is scene that the best men in the host
Be not such, that use to brag most
If ye will avoid the danger of confusion
Print my words in heart and mark this conclusion
Such gifts of god that ye excel in most
Use them with soberness and your self never bow
Seek the laud of God in all that ye doo
So shall virtue and honour come you too
But if you give your minds, to the sin of pride
Uanisshe shall your virtue, your honour away will slide
For pride is hated of God aboue
And meekness soonest obtains his love
to your rulers and parents, be you obedient
Never transgressing their lawefull commandment
Be ye merry and joyful at board and at bed
Imagine no traitourye against your prince and head
Love God and fear him and after him your king
Which is as victorious as any is living
Pray for his grace, with hearts that doth not fain
that lunge he may rule vs without grefe or pain
beseech ye also that God may save his queen
Lovely Lady Iane, &amp; the prince that he hath send them between
to augment their joy and the commons felicity
Fare ye well sweet audiēce, god grant you al prosperity

