A Syrra nay soft, what? let me see,
God morrow to you sir, how do you fare?
Sante a men. I think it will be.
the next day in ye morning, before I com thear
Well forward I will, for to prepare,
Some weapons &amp; armour, ye catiues to quell,
Ille teach the hurchetes, again to rebel.
Rebel? ye sir, how say you there to?
What? you had not best their parts to take:
Hold the content fool, and do as I do,
Or else me chance, your pate for to ache.
Ye and thats more, for fear thou shalt quake,
Before Horestes, when in good south he,
Shall arrive in this land, revenged to bée:
Well forward I will, things to pouruaye,
In good south for the wares, as I shall think good.
Far well good man dotterell, and mark what I say,
Or eels it may chance you, to seek a new houd:
You would eat no more cakbread, I think then by ye roud,
If that, that same poulle from your shoulders were
hent,
You would think you were ill, if so you were shent.
Chyll never nabore hodge, have a glade heart,
Till Egistous the King, hath for his desert:
Received dew punishment, for this well I know,
Horrestes to Crete, with Idumeous did go.
When his father was slain, by his Mother most ill,
And therefore I think, that com heather he will:
And revenge the injury, of his mother most dyare,
wastinge our land with zworde, and with vyare.
Iesu nabor, with vyar and zworde? say you ze?
By gys nabor, chyll zaue one I trow:
For iche have small good, by gise for to lose,
And therefore iche care not, how ever it gos.
But chyll not be zlayne, chyll love nothing worse,
Chyll never be bournt, for the money in my pours.
Iche have small rouddockes, and sodyers I
know,
Will rob the rich chorles, and let the poor knaves go.
A syrre, now steye, and pause their a while,
Be not to hasty, but take all the day:
Be God I am weary, with coming this mile,
And having no money, my horse heyare to paye.
Who how, I rode on my fete, all the way,
Iesu what ground, since yesterday at none,
Have I gut thorough, with this pare of shone.
Nabor hodge, be goge hatche none I bear,
That this little hourchet, the devayaunce doth bear.
Come let vs go, and of him in good south?
We woll conquer out, the verey truth.
Hurchyt, goges oundes gyppe with a wanyon,
Are you so loustey, in faith good man clound:
Oundes, hart, and nails, this is a franion,
Ille teach you to flout me, I hold you a pound.
O that it wear not, in faith for my gound?
It will I be knoc um, yet for all that.
Hold good master, you mare my new hat.
Ha, ha, he, mar his hat quoth he? thear was all his thought
Tout tout, for the bloc he set not a pyn:
That garment is dyer, that with bloc is bought,
Well sieres to in treat me, sith you begin?
I am contentyd, my blade, now shaull in.
But tell me syeres tell me no wherefore of me,
The cause on this sort, your talking should be.
By gis and iche chyll master, for all my great payne,
Of this matter to you to tell the very plain:
My naybor hodge and I, in good south,
Mot hear in the velds, I tell you the truth:
Now as we wear talking, mark what I say,
You came in straight, and of vs crossed the
way.
Which thing for zartyn, when I did espy,
This fancy vlouncht, in my head by and by:
And to hodge I said that, by gys I did veare,
That your masshyp, good master the deviance doth
bear,
And be cause you wear little, and of stature but
small:
Your person a hourchet, in faith I did caull.
But by gis be contentyd, for chyll never more,
Ofvend you a gains, but cham zorey thearuore.
If they wear not twain, I cared not a point,
But two is to meyney, the proverb douth tell:
Else be his oundes, I would iobard this joint,
And teach them against me, again to rebel?
O that I wear abull, the knaves for to quell,
Then would I tryomphe, passing all measure.
Zentyll man zentyll man, at your own pleasure:
In faith we be, and thearuore we pray,
What they name, is to vs for to say.
My name would ye know, marrey you shaull,
Hark friend, forced to the I will it declare:
Master patience master patience, many on doth me caull?
But com heather nabor hodge, thou must have a share.
By gys unto the I will not spare,
The same for to show, wherefore my friend,
My name is patience if thou it perpend.
Past shame? Gods gée naybor past shame?
By gods de naybor thates a tryccom name.
Tell a mare a tall, and shyell gerd out a fart
Se bow the as my words, douth mistake,
Would it not anger a saint at the hart:
To se what a scoff of my name, he douth make?
O oundes of me, as still as a stake.
He stands, nought caring what of him may be tide,
Be his wounds, I wot have a arm, or a side.
Sought let me se, it is best to be styll,
Good slepinge in a hole skin, old folks do say,
Not withstanding I wis, ill have mine own will.
Nay I will be revenged, by his oundes and I may,
Syrra you good man Rustycus, mark what I say:
Hark in thine ear man, this did I see,
A hog of thine wearied to be.
Gods gée moister patience, I pray you me tell,
What whoreson chorles doge, my hog so did quell:
Iche zware by gise, and holy zaynt blyue,
Chyll be zwinge him, and each be a live,
By gods de cham angry, and not well content,
Chould ha wear hear, chould make him repent.
Each had rather given, for strike of corn,
Then to had my hog on this wise forlorn:
But if I knew whose dog chould be,
Revenged well enough iche warrant the.
Ha, ha, he, by god Rusticus, I may say in no game,
I know the person, whose dog so did flay:
Thy hog fie fie man, it was a very shame,
For thy naybor hodge, to let it by this day.
Well I will go to him, and se if I may,
By aney means procure him, to make the amends;
Ille do the best I can, to make you both friends.
Chyll be no friends, chad rather be hanged,
Till iche have that old karl, well and thryfteley banged,
And it were not your friendship, did me with hold,
To swing the ourchet, iche chould be bold,
Ha, ha, he, nay, nay, spare not for me,
Go to it straight, if thear to ye gre,
Hodge I harde say, thou ely, hast wrought,
For my hog unto death, with thy dog thou haste broughgt
Iche bid the thy vaute, to me to amend,
Or chyll zwaddell the, iche zweare in my bat end.
Zwaddell me gods get? chyll care not a point,
Iche have a good bat, thy bones to anoint:
Thou old carl I say, thy hog hurtyd me,
And therefore I will have, a mends now of the.
My rye and my otes, my beans and my peas,
They have eaten up quite, but small for my ease:
And therefore iche say, all thy hogs keep vast,
Or iche will them weary, as lunge as they last.
By gods get, I can never come in my ground,
But that same zwyne, in my peas iche have found.
Tout tout Rusticus, these words be but wind
To him man, to him, and swaddell him well:
Ye never leave him, as lunge as thou can find
Him what, but teathe him, a gain to rebel,
What nededest thou to care, though his words be so
fell,
Tout tout tharte unwise, and follow my mind:
And I warrant the in end, some ease thou shalt find.
Gods gée whoreson hog, paye me for my zwine,
Or eels larne to keep, that cockescome of thine.
Gods de, do thy worst, I care not a point,
Chyll paye the none, chyll iobard a joint.
Nay stand I styll some what, I will lend,
Take this for a reward, now a way I must wend.
O Gods get, cham zwinged so zore,
Iche think chaul never live one hour more.
O gods ge I think, my bones will in zonder,
If each get home by gis, its a wounder:
Farewell Rusticus, for by gis each chaull,
When I mete the again, bezwinge the vorall.
Nay letes be friends, and chyll in good part,
Of browne ale at my house, give the a whole whart:
What hodge shake hondes, mon be merey and laugh,
By gods ge iche had not, the best end of the staff.
Cham content naybor Rusticus, shaull be en so,
Come to they house, I pray the let vs go.
To caull to mind the crabyd rage of mothers ill attempt
 Provokes me now all pyttie
quite, from me to be exempt.
Yet lo dame nature teles me that, I must with willing mind
For give the fault and to pity, some what to be inclined.
But lo be hold thad vlltres dame, on hourdome mortar will
Hath heaped up not contented, her sponsaule bed to fill:
With foreign love but sought also, my fatal thread to
share
As erst before my fathers fill, in sonder she did
pare.
O pattern love why dost thou so, of pytey me
request,
Sith thou to me wast quite denied, my mother being
pressed:
When tender years this corps of mine, did hold alas for wo
Whē friend my mother should have bin thē was she chief
myfo
Oh gods therefore sith you be just, unto whose pour &amp;
will,
All thing in heaven, and earth also? obey and sarue
until.
Declare to me your gracious mind, shall I revenged be,
Of good King Agamemnones death, ye gods declare to
me
Or shall I let the, adulteress dame, styll wallow in her
sin,
Oh gods of war, gide me a right, when I shall war begin.
War quoth he. I war in dede, and try it by the. sword,
God save you sir, the gods to ye: have sent this kind of
word
That in the hast you armour take, your fathers fose to
slay
And I as get with you shall go, to get you on the way.
By me thy mind there wrathfuldome, shall be performed in dede
Therefore Horestes mark me well, &amp; forward do proceed.
For to revenge thy fathers death, for this they all have meant
Which thing for to demonstrate lo, to the they have sent
me.
Are you good sir, the messenger of gods as you do
say
Will they in revenging this wrong, I make not long
delay.
What need you dout, I was in heaven, whē al ye gods did
gre
That you of Agamemnons death, for south revenged
should be,
Tout tout, put of that childish love, could thou with a
good will
Contentyd be? that one should so, they father seem to
kill?
Why waylst you man, leave of I say, pluck courage unto
the.
This lamentation soon shall fade, if thou imbrasydest
me.
What is they name may I in queer? O sacred wight I pray
Declare to me &amp; with this fear, do not my hart
dismay.
Among the gods celestial, I Courage called am,
You to assist in very truth, from out the heavens I
cam
And not without god Marsis his leave, I durst hear show my
face
which thou shalt feel if that there gift thou dost forth with
embrace
And sith it is thear gracious will, welcome thou art to me,
O holy wight for this thear gift, I thank them heartily.
My thinks I feel all fear to fley, all sorrow grief &amp;
payne,
My thinks I feel courage provokes, my will for ward again
For to revenge my fathers death, and infamy so great,
Oh how my hart doth boyle in dede, with firey perching heate.
Courage now welcome by the gods, I find thou art in dede,
A messenger of heavenly gostes, come let vs now
proceed.
And take in hand to bring to pas, reuengyd for to be,
Of those which have my father slain, but soft now let
mes
Idumeus that worthy King, doth com into this
place,
What say you courage: shall I now? declare to him my
case?
Faull to it then and slack no time, for time once past
away,
Doth cause repentance, but to late to com old folks do
say.
When stead is stolen, to late it is to shit the stable
door,
Take time I say, while time doth give a leisure good
therefore
What ever he be that sceptre bears or rules in state full
hie
Is soonest down through fortunes eyar, &amp; brought to
misery,
As of late years the worthy king Agamemnon by
name,
whose prass throughout ye world is bloū, by goldē
trūp of fame
His well won fame in marshall stoure, doth reach unto ye
sky
Yet lo through fortunes blind attempt, be lo in earth doth
lie
He ye had past the fate of war, where chance was equal
set,
Through fortunes spite is caught alack, win old
Morose net
And he which sometime did delight, in clothed coat of
maylle,
Is now constcaynd in Coronas boat; over the broke to
saylle.
That floss upon ye fatal banks, of Plutose kingdom
great
And that in shade of silent wodes, and valeys gréene
do beat.
Where souls of kings &amp; other wights a poyntyd are to
be,
In quiet state there also is, this worthey real
trée.
Of south I joy for to behold, Horestes active cheer,
The which in father sometime was, in son doth now appear,
But where is he that all this day, I never saw his face,
 At hand O King thy
fervent is, which wissheth to thy grace
All hail with happey fate certain, with pleasures many
fouled,
But yet my liege a suit I have, if I might be so bold.
To crave the same my soferayn lord, whereby I might
aspyer
Unto the thing with very much, O king I do requier.
What thing is that if we suppose, it laufull for to be,
On princes faith without delay, at shall be given the.
Tout let him alone now, we may in good south,
I was not so lusty, my pourpose to get:
But now of my honesty, I tell you of truth,
In revenging the wrong, his mind he hath set?
It is not Idumeus that hath pour to let.
Horestes fro sicking his mother to kill,
Tout let him alone, heal have his own will.
Sith that your grace hath willed me, this my defiar to
show,
Oh gracious king this thing it is, I let your grace to know
That long I have request to view, my fathers kingly place,
And eke for to revenge the wrong done to my fathers grace,
Is mine intent wherefore o king, grant that without delay,
My earytage and honour eke, achieve again I may.
Stey their a while Horestes mine, till council do
decrée?
The thing that shall unto your state, most honorabell
bée.
My counciler how do you think, let vs your council have,
How think you by this thīg yt which Horestes now doth
crave
As I do think my solerayne lord, it should be nothing
ill,
A Prince for to revenged be, on those which so did kill.
His fathers: grace but rather shall, it be a fear to
those,
That to the like at any time, their cruel minds
dispose▪
And also as I think it shall, an honer be to ye,
To adiuuate and help him with, some men revenged to be.
This do I think most fittest for, your state and his
also,
Do as you list sis that your grace, my mind herin doth
know.
Sith Council thinks it fit in ded, revenged for to be,
That you Horestes in good south, for to revenge I
grée.
And also to maintain your war, I grant you with good
will,
A thousand men of stomach bold, your enimise to kill.
Take them forth with, &amp; forward go, let slyp no time no
tyd.
For chance to leisure to be bound, I tell you can not bid
Go therefore straight provide your men &amp; like a manly
knight
In place of stouer put forth thy self, assay with all
thy might.
To win the fame, for glory none, it chambering doth rest
Mark what I say to get thy men, I take it for they
best.
Com on Horestes sith thou hast, obtained thy desire.
Tout tout man, seek to destroy, as doth the flaming
fire?
Whose property thou knoest doth gro, as long as any
thing
Is left where by the same may seem, some suckcor for to
bring.
I thank your grace I shall sequest your gratius mind
herin.
Se se I pray you how he ioyse, that he must war begin.
 My council now declare to me,
how think you by this wight
Doth not he seem in south to be, in time a manly
knight.
By all the gods I think in south, a man may easily
know,
Whose son he was, so right he doth his fathers
steppes follow
Undoubtedly my soferaynd lord, he seems unto me,
Not to sequest his fathers steppes, in feats of
cheuallrey:
But rather for to imitate, the flower of great 〈◊〉 land,
I mean A chilles that same knight, by whose one
only hand
The Greaciās have obtained at laingth ye cōquest of old
Troy
For which they did hole x. years space, their labour great
employ
Sith he is gon for to purvey, such things as shall in
dede,
Suffice to sarue his tourn in wares, whereof he shall have
need
Let vs depart and when he shall, return heather a gain,
To sée the must or of his men, we will sure take
the payne.
Far well adieu, that courtlycke life,
To war we tend to you:
It is good sport to se the strife,
Of sodyers on a row.
How mereley they forward march,
These enemies to slay:
With hey trym and tryxey to,
Their banners they display.
Now shaull we have the Golden cheats,
When others want the same:
And sodyares have foul maney feats,
Their enemies to tame.
With cocking hear, and bomynge their,
They break thear fose array:
And loustey lades amid the feldes,
Thear ensines do display.
The droum and flute play lousteley,
The troumpet bloc a mayne?
And venturous knights corragiousley,
Do march before thear train:
With spear in rest so lively dressed,
In armour bright and gay:
With hey trym and tryxey to,
Thear banners they display.
Goges oundes haultersycke, what makes thou hear,
What? Jack hempstringe welcome, draw near?
By his oundes I have sought the some news the to
tell,
Gods blood what news, first the devil in hell?
In faith thou act meaty, but this is the matter,
Doust thou hear haltersicke? each man doth clatter:
Of wars, ye of wars, for Horestes will go,
His erytage to wyn, boy the truth is so.
Nay but Jack Hempstringe seas of this prate,
If thou cavil me boy, then beware thy pate.
What hold thy peace, as far as I se,
We be boys both therefore let vs grée.
Boy nay be god, though I be but small,
Yet Jack hempstringe, a hart is worth all.
And have not I an hart, that to wars dare go,
Yes hempstringe I warrant the, &amp; that thou shouldest
know
If dycke haltersyckes mind, thou move unto eyar,
Colles never bourne, till they be set one fire.
Ye but if they bourne, so that they same,
Yet water dycke halltersycke, the bourning cane same.
But hack thée my master will venture a joint,
And me to wait on him, he all ready doth point.
But hearste thou, thou know my master loves well,
Now and then to be snappinge, at some dainty
mossell.
But by goges blood halltersycke, if thou love me,
Take some prytey wench our laundrar to be,
And be goges blood, I am contentyd to bear,
Half of her charges, when that she comes thear.
As fit for the war, Jack hempstringe thou art,
In faith as abe, is to draw a carte:
He is like to be manned, that hath such a knight,
Under his banner, I swear for to fight.
When Horestes in fight, most busiest shall be,
Then with they gynney, we must seek the.
Goges oundes, hart, and nails, you are a sea man,
Come of with a mischief, my gentell companion.
By your sleue fire haultersicke, I think that a be,
As good a sodyer as ever was ye,
He hath learned his lesson, but of fouth I fear,
He hath quite forgotten, the way for to swear.
Oundes, hart, and nails, nalrey 〈…〉,
And he be not hanged, he will be stark 〈◊〉.
Hang me no hanging, if ye be so quick,
Roube not to hard, lest hempstringe do kick.
 Had better be styll, and
a sléepe in his head,
If a kick me, me chance to break his head,
Goges blood good man haltersycke, begin you to flout me
No not at all he douth but sout ye.
What hempstringe I say, are you angered at jest.
 In faith
goodman lobcocke, your handsomely dressed:
Goges blood so to flout me, thou art much to blame?
Why all that I do man, is but in game.
 Take thou
that for they jest, and flout me no more?
For that same on blow, than shalt have a score:
Draw thy sword vylyne, if thou be a man,
And then do the worst, that ever thou can.
Nay set sword a side, and at •offetes well trey,
Whether of vs both, shall have the masterey.
Goges oundes thou art bigger, yet I care not a point,
If to be revenged, I iobard a joint.
I have coylyd the well, but I hold the a groat?
If thou mettle with me. I will s••inge thy cote.
In dede I must say, I have caught the worst,
But I will be reuengyd, or eyes I shall bourste.
If time did not call me, from hence to depart
I should anger the hempstring, even at the h••t?
Therefore farewell, till an other day,
But h••rste thou take this, to spend by the way.
Goges dundes is he gon, nay after I will,
And of the slave by his oundes, I will have my fill.
Oh gods be prosperous I pray, &amp; eke preserve my
band,
Show now yt ye be gods in ded, stretch out your mighty
hand
And give vs hearts &amp; wills also, where by we may
prevail
And suffer not you gods I pray, our courragis to fayll.
But let our hearts addytyd be, for aye as we pretend,
And of that one adulteress dame, oh gods now make an end.
My hāds do thryst her blot to have, nought can my mīd
cōtent
Till yt on her I have performed, oh gods your just
iudgmēt
Nay stey my child frō mothers blood with draw thy bloody hād
No nought at all oh nature can, my purpose now
withstand,
Shall I for give my fathers death, my hart can not agree
My father slain in such a sort, and vnreuengyd to
be.
Consider first horestes mine, what payne for the she
toke,
And of my fathers death again, o Nature do thou louke.
I do confess awycked fact, it was this is most
plain,
Not wtstandīg frō mothers blood, thou must thy hāds
refrain
Can thou a lack unhappy wight, consent revenged to
be,
On her whose paps before this time, hath given found to
the
In whom I nature for mid the, as best I thought it good,
Oh now requight her for her pain, wtdraw thy hāds frō
blood
Who offendith ye love of god, &amp; eke mans love with willing
hart
Must by ye love have punishment, as duty due for his
desert
For me therefore to pūnish hear as law of gods &amp; mā doth
will
Is not a crime though yt I do, as thou dost say my mother
kill
The cruel beasts ye raūg in feldes whose ease to blot
are whet
Do not consent their mothers paunch, in cruel wise to
eat
The tiger fierce doth not desire, the ruin of his
kind,
And shall dame nature now in the, such tyranny once
find▪
As not the cruel bestes voutsafe, to do in aney case,
Leave now I say Horestes mine, &amp; to my words give
place.
Lest that of men this fact af thine, may judged for to
be:
No law in south, no justice eke, but cruel tyranny.
Pythagoras doth think it lo, no tyranny to be,
When that justice is mynest•yd, as law and gods
decrée.
If that the law doth her condemn, as worthy death to have,
Oh nature would thou will yt I, her life should seem to
save?
To save her life whom law doth slay, is not iustise to
do,
Therefore I say I will not yield, they hestes to com
unto.
If nature cannot bridal the, remember the decay,
Of those which hereto fore in south, their parēts sought
to slay
oedippus fate, caull thou to mind, that slew his
father so,
And eke remember now what fame, of him a broad doth go.
what fame doth blow I force not I, no yet what fame I
have
For this is true yt blood for blood, my fathers death doth
crave
And law of gods, &amp; law of man, doth eke request ye
same.
Therefore oh nature seas to pray, I force not of my
name.
For to lament this heavy fate, I cannot other do.
A lack a lack that once my child, should now consent
unto:
His mothers death wherefore farewell, I can no longer stey.
Farewell dame Nature to my men. I straight will take my way
 To se this monster let vs
go, for I suppose it time,
Where is Horestes why stease he: the truth to me
define:
 Oh soferayne
lord me thinks I here, him for to be at hand
yft please your grace, he is in sight, even now withal his
band.
Com on Horestes we have stayed, your monster for to
se.
And now at hand my men and I, all ready armed be.
Lo mighty king this champions here, agree with me to wend
Oh gracious king that they shall so, will please you
cōdissend
I do agrée and now a while, give ear your king unto,
It doth behoufe corragious knights, on this wise for to
do.
That is to strive for to obtain, the victory and
praise,
That lasts for aye, when death shall end, yt find of these
our dais
Wherefore be bold, &amp; fear no fate, the gods for you shall
fight
For they be just and will not se, that you in case of
right.
Shall be distressed wherefore attend, and do your busy
payne,
The crabyd rage of enymyse, by force for to restrain?
And as to me your trusteynes, hath here to fore be known,
So now to this Horestes here, let eke the same be
shown.
Be to his heists obaydient, be stout to take in hand,
Such enterprise which he shall think, most for his state
to stād
Which if you do the same is yours, the glory and
renoune,
That shall arise of this your facts, throughout ye world
shall soūd
The which you may I pray the gods, your gydes here in to be
And now farewell but not that well, that I have said to
ye.
The gods preserve your grace for aye, &amp; you defend from
wo.
That we have don as you cōmaūd, full well your grace shall
know
Now hark Horestes sith thou must, of men the gyder
be,
And that the will of gods it is, thou must now part from
me.
Take yet my last commandment, &amp; bear it in thy
mind,
Let now they men courragiousnes, in the their captain
find
And as thou art courragious, so like wise let their be,
For safeguard of thy men a brain, well fraught with
policy.
For over rash in doing ought, doth often damage bring,
Therefore take council first before, thou dost any
thing.
For council as Plaato doth tell, is sure a heavenly
thing.
And Socrates a certainty doth say, council doth
bring.
Of things in dout for Lyuy says, no man shall him
repent,
That hath before he worked ought, his time in council
spent
And be thou lybraull to thy men, and gentell be also,
For ye way at thy will thou may, have them through fire to
go
And he that shall at any time, deserve ought well of
the,
Soffer him not for to depart, till well reward he be.
Thus have you hard horestes mine, remember well the same
In doing thus you shall porches, to the immortal fame.
The which I hope you will assay, for to atchife in
dede,
The gods the blis when in ye war, thou forward shalt
proceed.
I thank your grace and now of you, my leave I here do take
 Farewell my son
Horestes I, thy parting ill shall take,
Yet ear thou go let me embrace, the once I the do pray,
A lack alack that now from me, thou must needs part away
Yet whyell thou art in preasent place, receive of me this
kiss,
 Farewell good knight for now I
shall, thy sweet embracings mys
The sacred gods preserve and save, thy state oh king I
pray,
And send the health and after death, to rain with him for
aye.
Come on my men, let vs depart,
 As please
your grace with all our hart.
Ah, ah, how, grievous is his parting now, my council unto me
The Gods him bless &amp; send him health, I pray them
heartily.
Wo worth the time the day and our, now may
Horestes whale
And Clytemnestra may lament, that so she did
assail.
His father dear for now on blood, Horestes mind is set,
And to revenge his fathers death, sure nought their is can
let.
In voiding of a mischief small, they have wrought their
decay
For now nought else in Horestes, but sore revenge bears
sway
For to causes my soferayne lord, reuengment ought to be,
The on least others be in fecte, with that, that they shall
se.
Their princes do, the other is, that those that now be
ill.
May be revoked and may be taught, for to subdue their
will,
Plato a wise philosopher, did think it for to
be,
A Princely fact when as a King, shall punish
seriously.
Such persons as did train their life, to follow yt was
nought
yt which their prīce at any time, shall by mischaūce have
wrought
Protegeus an euell king, a carrayne likeness to,
Which all the place about the same, to stink causes to
do.
Therefore O king if that her fault, should vnreuengyd be,
A thousand evils would ensue, their of your grace should
se.
Her fault is great and punishment, it is worthy for to
have,
For by that mean the good in south, frō duūgers may be
sauf
For lo the universal scoll, of all the world we know,
Is once the palace of a king, where vices chief do flow.
And as to waters from on head, and fountain oft do
spring,
So vice and virtue oft do floe, from palace of a king.
Whereby the people seeing that, the king adycte to be,
To prosecute the like, they all do labour as we se.
Therefore the gods have willed thus, Horestes for to take,
His journey and a recompense, for fatheres death to make.
Sith gods have wild the same to be, good luck ye gods him
send
Com on my council now from hence, we purpose for to wend
ANd was it not a worthy sight,
Of Venus child king Priames son:
To steal from Greece a Lady bright,
For whom the wares of Troye begone.
Nought fearing danger that might faull.
Lady lady.
From Greece to Troye, he went with all,
My dear Lady.
When Paris first arrived there,
Where as dame Venus worship is:
And bloustringe fame abroad did bear,
His lively fame she did not mys.
To Helena for to repair,
Her for to tell:
Of praise and shape so trym and fair,
That did exzell.
Her beauty caused Paris payne,
And bare chief sweye with in his mind:
No thing was abel to restrain,
His will some way fourth for to find.
Where by he might have his despyare,
Lady lady:
So great in him was Cupids fire,
My dear lady.
And eke as Paris did desire,
Fair Helena for to possess:
Her hart inflamed with like fire,
Of Paris love despiard no less,
And found occasion him to mete,
In Cytheron.
Where each of them the other did great,
The feast upon.
If that in Paris Cupids shaft,
O Clytemnestra toke such place:
That time no way he never left,
Till he had got her comely grace,
I think my chance not ill to be
Lady lady.
That ventryd life to purchase ye▪
My dere lady.
King Priames. son loved not so sore,
The gretian dame they brothers wife:
But she his person esteemed more,
Not for his sake saving her life.
Which caused her people to be slain,
With him to fly,
And he requight her love a gain,
Most faithfully.
And as he recompense again,
The fair queen Hellyn for the same:
So while I live I will take payne,
My will always to yours to frame.
Sith that you have voutsafe to be,
Lady lady.
A Queen and lady unto me,
My dear lady.
And as she loved him best while life,
Did last so tend I you to do:
If that devoid of war and strife,
The Gods shall please to grant vs to,
Sis you voutsafest me for to take,
O my good knight:
And me thy lady for to make,
My hearts delight.
As joyful as the warlike god is Venus to behold,
So is my hart replete with joy, much more a thousand
fouled
Oh Lady dear in that I do, posses my hearts delight,
What means this sound for very much, it doth my hart a
flight
Fear nought at all Egistus mine, no hourt it doth
pretend,
But lo me thinks a messenger, to vs heather doth wend.
The Gods preserve your equal state &amp; send you of
their bliss
Welcome good messenger what news, I pray the with the
is
Yft please your grace even now their is, arrived in this
land
The mighty knight Horestes with, a mighty pewsaūt
band
Who purposith for to invade, this Mycoene City
strong,
And as he goese he leyse both tower, and castle all
along.
It bouts no man defence to make, for if he will not yield,
By sodyeres rage he straight is slain, in midst of the
field.
Ah sir is he come in dede, he is welcome by this day,
Egistus now in south with speed, from hence take you your
way.
In to our realm and take up men, our tyghtull to defend,
Till your return this City I, to keep do sure intend.
For all his strength he shall not get, to entter once hear
in,
The walls be strong and for his force, I sure set not a
pyn.
Sith you be abel to defend, this City as you say,
Farewell in south to get men, I now will take my way.
And soon again I will return, his pampered pryd to tame,
Farewell Egistus and in south, I straight will do the
same.
Yield the I say and that by and by,
Or with this sword, in faith thou shalt dye.
Oh with a good will, I yield me to the,
Good master sodier, have mercy on me.
My husband thou hast slain, in most cruell-wyse,
Yet this my prayer, do now not despise.
 Come on then in hast, my pryfoner thou
art,
Come follow me I say, we must needs depart.
A whoreson slave I will teach the in fey,
To handle a woman on, an other way.
To put me in fear, with out my desert
I will teach the in fey to play such a part.
Be contentyd good woman, and thou shalt be,
Never hear after molysted for me.
Nay vyllyn slave, a mends thou shalt make,
In that thou be fore me as prysinor did take.
Now I have caught the, and my prisoner thou art,
By his oundes whoreson slave, this gos to they heart.
Nay save my life, for I will be,
Thy prisoner and lo I yield me to the
Come wend thou with me, and they weapon thou shalt have,
Sith that thou voutsafyste, my life for to save.
STand back ye slepinge jacks at home,
And let me go.
You lye sir knave am I a mom,
Why say you so.
Tout tout, you dare not come in field,
For fear you should the goste up yield.
With bloc, he gos, the gun shot fly,
It fears, it seares, and their doth lye.
A hundred in a moment be,
Destroyed quite:
Sir sauce in faith if you should se,
The gone shot light.
To quake for fear you would not stint,
When as by force of gounshotes dynte:
The ranks in ray, are took away,
As pleases fortune oft to play.
But in this stower who bears the fame,
But only I:
Revenge, Revenge, will have the name,
Or he will dye.
I spare no wight, I fear none ill,
But with this blade I will them kill
For when mine eire, is set on fire,
I rap them, I snap them, that is my desyare.
Farewell a dew to wares I must
In all the hast.
My cousin cut purse will I trust,
Your purse well taste,
But to it man, and fear for nought,
Me say to the it is well fraught.
With ruddockes red be at a beck,
Beware the arse, break not thy neck,
Come on my sodyers for at home, arrived their we be,
Where as we must have our desyare, or else dye manfully.
The walls be hye yet I intend, upon them first to go,
And as I hope you sodierrs will, your captain eke follow
If I forsake to go before then fley you eke be hynde,
And as I am so eke I trust, my sodyers for to find.
Com hither herald go proclaim this mine intēt
straightway
To yonder citite say that I, am come to their decay.
Unless they yield I will destroy, bosh man woman &amp;
child,
And eke their towers that for the war, so strongly they do
bylde
Bid them in hast to yield to me, for nough I do a bide.
But for their answer or else fourth with for thē &amp;
theres prouid
Your gracious mind straight shall be don, cum trōpet let vs
go
That I have don your message well, your grace full well shall
know
Hye the apase and let me have, again an answer
soon,
And then a non thou shalt well se, what quickly shall be
done.
How whow is their yt kepes the gate give ear my words unto
what would thou have harald declare, what hast thou her to
do
My master bids the yield to him, this city out of hand,
Or else he will not leave on stone, on other for to
stand.
And all things else within this town he will have at his
will
As pleases him by any means, to save or else to
spyll,
What you will now, therefore declare, &amp; answer to him
send
This City here against him, and his I will
defend,
Then in his name I do defy, both the and all with in,
By him and his tell him in south, we do not set a pyn.
If it please your grace this word she sends, she will not
yield to ye
But if you com unto your harm, she says that it
shall be.
Sith that my grace and eke good will, they on such sort
despise,
For to destroy both man and child, I surely do
deuyse,
Com on my men, bend now your force, this City for to wyn,
Save no mans life, yt once should make, rysistaunce there
within,
And when you shall posses the town, &amp; have all things
at will,
Loke out my mother but to her, do ye no kind of ill.
Let her not die, though that she would, desire the death to
have
For other wise my fathers death, reuengment doth crave.
We shall your hestes obey with speed, oh captain we
desire,
That we were therefore to revenge, our hearts are set on
fire.
Like men by God, I swear well said, Horestes let vs
you,
Now to thy men like manly hart, I pray the for to
show.
And as thou seiste be first the man, that shall the
City wyn,
How, how, now for to fly, all ready they begin.
With lively hearts my troumpeters, exalt your tubal
sound.
And now my sodyers in your harts, let courage eke be
found.
Com let vs go the gods for vs, shall make an easey
way,
Spare none a live for I am bent, to seek their great
decay.
A lack what heaps of myschefes great, me selly wight
torment.
Now is the time falune me upon, which I thought to prevent
Yet best I seek my life to save, perhaps he will me
here,
A lack reuengment he doth crave, for slaying his father
dere.
If aney spark of mothers blood, remained within thy
breast,
Oh gracious child let now thine ears, unto my words be
pressed
Pardon I crave Horestes mine, save now my corpse frō
death
Let no man say that thou wast cause, I yeldyd
up my breath,
I have offendyd I do confess, yet save my life I
pray,
And to they mother this request, o knight do not denay.
For to repent this fact of thine, now that it is to late,
Can not be thought a recompense, for killing of thy mate.
Go have her hence therefore with speed, &amp; se her
surely kept,
And for ye fact a fore thou did, thou surely
should have wept
Nay, far you well, in faith you have an answer, get you
hence.
Oundes of me I would not be, in her cote for forty pence.
Nay nay, a way far well a dew, now now, it is to late.
When stead is stolen for you in south, to shut the
stable gate.
She should have wept whē first she went, ye king about
to slay,
 It makes
no matter she foul well, did breed her own decay
Ounds of me what mean you man, begin you now to faint
Iesu god how styll he syttes, I think he be a
saint.
Ooooo, you care not for me, nay soon I have don I warrant
ye
By all the gods my hart did fail, my mother for to se,
From hye estate for to be brought, to so great
misery.
That all most I had granted life, to her had not this be,
My fathers death whose death in south, chief causer of was
she.
Even as you say but hark at hand, Egistus draws ny.
Who purposieth the chance of war, Horestes for to try.
And by the gods I purpose eke, my honour to defend,
Com on my men keep your array, for now we do pretend.
Eather to be the conqerer, or else to dye in field,
Lift up your hearts and let vs se, how ye your bloc can
yield.
Like manly men address your selves, to get immortal
fame,
If ye do fly lo what doth rest, behind but foul defame.
Strike up your drūs let trūpets soūd, your boners eke
display,
And I my self as captain, to you will lead the way.
Thou traitor to my father dere, what make the here in
field,
Repent the of thy wickedness, and to me straight do
yield.
Thou pryncoks boy &amp; bastard slave, thinks thou me to
subdue?
It lies not with in thy power, thou boy I tell the true.
But if I take thy corpse, it shall be a foot the birds to
fed.
Strike up your droums &amp; forward now, to wars let vs
proceed.
Oh villain trayghtor now ye gods, no mortal man shall
save
Thy corps frō death for blud for blud my fathers death doth
crave
Oh tyrant fyrse coldest thou voutsafe, my father so to
slay?
But now no force for thou hast wrought, at last thine one
decay
A lack a lack yet spare my life, Horestes I the pray.
Thy life? nay trayghtor vile, that chief I do denay.
For as thou hast deseruyd, so I shall thy fact
requite.
That once could seem to me &amp; mine, for to work such
despite
Therefore com forth and for thy fact, receive dew
punnishmēt
Repent I say this former life, for this is my judgment.
That for my fathers death, the which we find the chief to
be,
The causer of thou shalt be hanged, where we thy death may
se
And as thou for my fathers death, dew punishment receive,
So shall my mother in likewise, for that she gave the
leave.
Him for to slay, and eke to it, with good will
condysende,
Therefore com of and soon dispatch, that we had made an
end.
Ah heavy fate &amp; chance most ill, wo worth this hap of
mine,
For give my fault you sacryd gods, and to my words
incline
Your gracious ear for causer first, I was this is most
plain,
Of Agamemnous death, wherefore I must receive this
pain.
Pardon I crave, voutsafe ye gods, the same to grant it
me,
Now sodier work thy will in hast, I pray the heartily.
Ah heavy fate would god I had, in tormoyle great bin
slain
Sith nothing can Horestes hands, frō sheding blood
restrain
How chance you did not thē lament his father whē you
slew?
But now when death doth you prevent, to late ites for to
few.
Yet hope I that he will me grant, my life that I should
have.
Even as much as thou voutsafest, his fathers life to
save,
Therefore com of we must not stey, all day to wayght on
the.
Lo mighty prince for whom ye sent, lo preasent here is
she.
Have mercy son &amp; quite remit, this fault of mine I
pray,
Be merciful Horestes mine, and do not me denay.
Consider that in me thou had, they hewmayne shape
cōposid
That thou should slay thy mother son, let it not be
disclosyd,
Spare to perse her heart with sword, call eke unto thy
mind,
Edyppus fate and as Narrow, show not thy
self unkind.
Like as a branch once set a fire, doth cause ye
trée to bourne
As Socrates supposes so, a wicked wight doth
turn.
Those that be good and cause them eke, his euell to
sequest,
Wherefore the poet Juvenal, doth think it for the
best:
That those that live licentiously, should brydlyd be with
payne
And so others that else would syn, thereby they might
restrain
For thus he says that Cities are, well governed in dede,
Where punishment for wicked ones, by law is so
decrede.
And not decrede but exersyesd, in punishing of
those,
Which law no pain frō waloing still, in vice their mind
dispose,
And as thou hast bin chiefs cause, of yielding up they
breath,
So call to mind thou wast the cause, of Agamemnons
death.
For which as death is recompense, of death so eke with
the,
For killing of my father thou, now killed eke shalt be.
This thing to se accomplyshyd, revenge with the shall
go,
Now have her hence sis yt you all, my judgment here do
know
A lack a lack with draw thy hand, my son from sheding
blood.
Thou art a foul thus for to prate, this doth Horestes
good,
Com on a way thou doust no more, but him with words
molest
A foolish foul that thou wart ded, he takes it for the
best?
 If ever aney pity was,
of mother plant in the,
Let it appear Horestes mine, and show it unto
me.
What pyttie thou on father mine, did cursedley
bestow,
The same to the at this present, I purpose for to
show.
Therefore Revenge have her a way, and as I judgment gave:
So se that she in order like, her punishment dew have.
Let me alone, com on a way, that thou weart out of sight,
A pestelaunce on the crabyd queen, I think thou do
delight,
Him to molest, com of in hast, and troubell me no more,
Come on com on, ites all in vain, and get you on a fore,
Now sis we have the conquest got, of all our mortal
fose,
Let vs provide that occasion, we do not chance to lose.
Strike up your droumes for enter now, we will the city gate
For now resistance none there is, to let vs in
thereat.
As each man bends him self, so I report his fame in
dede,
If ill, thē ill, through earn trūp, his fame doth straigh
proceed:
If good, then good, through golden trūp, I blo his lively
fame:
through heauēs, through earth, &amp; surgīg seas I bear
abroad ye same
perhaps what wind me heather drives, within your mid̄s you
muse
From Crete I com to you my friends, I bring this kind of
news
That Agamemnons brother is ariuyd in this land,
And eke with him his lady fair, Queen Helen
understand.
Whom for to se a great frequent, of people their arrive,
This news to show at this present, me heather now did
drive.
A New master, a new,
No longer I may:
Abide by this day
Horestes now doth few.
A new master a new,
And was it not ill?
His mother to kill?
I pray you how say you?
A new master a new,
Now ites to late?
To shut the gate?
Horestes gines to few.
Deni{quod} non paruas animo dati gloria verse:
Et foecunda facet pectora laudis amor.
As Ouid says I am in dede, the spur to each
estate,
For by my tromp I often cause the wicked man to hate,
Is filthy life, and eke I stoure, the good more good to
be:
So much the hart and will of man, is linked unto me.
A new master a new, nay I will go,
Tout, tout, Horestes is be com a new man:
Now he sorrows to bad that it is so,
Yet I will ores him, by his oundes and I can.
Who Saint amen. God morrow mistress Nan,
By his oundes I am glad to se the so trick,
Nay may I be so bold, at your lips to have a lycke.
Iesus how coy, do you make the same,
You never knew me before I dare say:
In faith, in faith, I was to blame,
That I made no courchey to you by the way.
Who byr'lady Nan, thou art trym and gay,
Wounds of me, she hath wings also,
Who whother with a mischief, doust thou think for to
go?
To heaven? or to hell? to pourgatorye? or spain?
To Venys? to pourtugaull? or to the eylles Canary?
Nay stay a while for a mile or twain.
I will go with the, I swear by saint marey,
Will thou have a boat Nan, over seay the to carey.
For if it chance for to rain, as the weathers not harde,
It may chance this trym gear of thine, to be mart,
Omnia si perdis, famam seruare memento,
Qua semel amiss, postia nullus eris.
Aboue each thing keep well thy fame, what ever yt thou
lose
For fame once gone they memory, with fame a way it gos.
And it once lost thou shalt in south, accomptyd like to
be,
A drop of rain that faulyth in, the bosom of the
sée,
Me fame therefore as Ouid thinks, no man hath power to
hold,
To those with whom I please to dwell, I am more rich thē
gold
What causid some for countries soil, them selves to
perrell cast
But that the knew that after death, ye fame of theirs shall
last.
Not on, but all, do me desire, both good and bad
likewise,
As may appear if we perpend, of Nerose
enterprise.
Which first did cause his masters death, &amp; eke whereas
he lay
In mothers wound to se in south, his mother did straight
slay.
With this Horestes eke takes place, whose father being
slain,
through mothers gel frō mothers blot, his hāds could not
refraīe
But like as he reuengyd the death, of father in his ever,
So fathers brother in like sort, Revenge hath set on
fire.
For he is gon for to request, the aid of princes great,
So sore his hart is set on fire, throught raging rigorous
heat.
What to detarmayne all the kings, of Greece arrived be,
At Nestores town that Athens highte, their
judgment to decree
Oundes heart and nails, nay now I am dressed,
Is the king Menalaus at Athens arrived?
And I am be hind? to be packinges the best,
Least the matter in south, to soon be contrived.
Auxilla humilia firm, consensus facet, this
always provided
That consent makes suckers most sure for to be,
Well I will be their straight, ways you shall se.
As Publius doth well declare, we ought chefest to
se,
Unto our selves that nought be don, after extremity.
Abalio expects, altar quote feceris.
For loke what measure thou dost meat, ye same again
shall be,
At other time at others hand, repayed again to the.
Therefore I wish each wight to do, to others as he
would,
That they in like occasion, unto him offer would.
Well forth I must some news to here, for fame no where cā
stay
But what she hears throughout ye would abroad she doth
display
Make rome and give place, stand back there a fore,
For all my speaking, you press styll the more.
Give rome I say quickly, and make no
dalliance,
It is not now time, to make aney tarriance:
The kings here do com, therefore give way,
Or else by the gods, I will make you I say.
Lo where my Lord King Nestor doth com,
And Horestes with him Agamemnons
son:
Menelaus a king likewise, of great fame,
Make rome I say, before their with shame.
Now sis we be here King Menalaij
Unto vs we pray you, your matter to say.
For these princes here, after they have perpendyd,
If ought be amiss, it shall be amendyd,
But syrra provision, go in haste and fet,
Good king Idumeus, tell him we are set.
 As your graces have willed, so tend I to do,
I will fetch him straight, and bring him you to.
If ought be amiss, the same soon shall be,
If I have committed amendyd of me:
But so Idumeus the good king of Crete,
Is come to this place, vs for to mete.
The Gods preserve your graces all, &amp; send you health for
aye.
Well com sier king the same to ye, contynewalley we
pray.
Two thīgs there is o kings, ye moves me thus your aids to
pray:
And these be it the which to you, I purpose for to
say.
The one is this where with I find, my self agreuid to
be,
That on such sort my sisters slain, as all your
graces se.
The other is that so her son, without all kind of
right,
Should to his mother in such case, (I say) work such
despite.
These two be they, wherefore I crave, your aids to join with
me:
To the intent of such great ylles, reuengyd I may be.
That thus he did be hold the state, of all my brothers
land,
And se I pray you in what place, the same doth present
stand.
His cruelty is such in south, as nether tower
no town,
That let once his passage, but is brought unto the
ground.
The fatherless he pitied not, where as he ever went,
ye agyd wight whose years before, their youthly pour had
spent
The maid whose parents at the sege, defending of their
right
Was slain, ye same this tyrant hath opressyd through
his might
The wido yt through foreign wars, was left now comfortless,
He spared not, but them &amp; theres, he cruelly did
distress.
Wherefore sith that he thus hath wrought, as far as I can
sée,
From Mycoene land we should prouid, him exylyd to
be.
Sith that you have accusyd me, I must my answer
make,
And here before these kings of Greece, this for my answer
take
O ounckel that I never went, reuengment for to do,
On fathers fose till by the gods, I was command there to.
Whose heists no man dare once refuse, but willingly
obey
That I have slain her wilfully, untruly you do say.
I did but that I could not choose, ites hard for me to
kick,
Sith gods command as on would say, in faith against ye
prick
In that you say, I spared none, your grace full well may
se,
That little mercy they supposyd, in south to show to
me.
When as they bad me do my worst, requesting them to
yield,
It is no jest when sodyares join, to fight within a
field.
Thus I suppose sufficiently, I answered have to end,
Your great complaint, the which you so, mightily did
defend.
In dede as Harms doth declare, no man can once
estew,
The judgment of god most just, that for his fautes is
dew.
And as god is most merciful, so is he just like
wise.
And will correct most suerley those, that his heists
dispysel
As you good King Idumeus, have said so likewise
I,
Do think it true therefore as now, I do him here defy.
That one dare say yt he hath wrought, ye thing yt is not
right
Lo here my glove to him I give, in pledge with him to fight.
I promise here to prove there by, Horestes nought did do,
But that was just &amp; that the gods, commaundyd him there
to▪
That he is king of Mycoene land, who ever do
deney.
I offer here my glove with him, therefore to live and
dye.
If none therebe will under take, his tyghfull to with
say.
Let vs be friends unto him now, my Lords I doye pray.
It was the part of such a knight, reuengyd for to be,
Should Horestes content him self, his father slain to
se.
No, no, a ryghtuous fact I think, the same to be in
dede,
Sis that it was accomplished so, as gods before
decrede.
In dede I must confess that I, reuengyd should have
be,
If that my father had bin slain, with such great
cruelty.
But yet I would for natures sake, have spared my mothers
life
O wretched man, o cruel beast, o mortal blade and knife.
Seas of sir king leave morning lo, nought can it you
avail
Not with standing be ruled now, we pray by our
counsel.
Consider first your one estate, consider what may
be,
A ioyefull mene to end at leyngth, this your calamity.
Horestes he is young of years, and you are somewhat
old,
And sorrow may your grace to soon, within her net in
fold,
Therefore ites best you do forget, so shall you be at
ease,
And I am sure Horestes will, endeavour you to please,
So far as it for him may be, with honour lefe to do,
He will not shrink but will consent, your graces bidding
to
For assurance of your good will, Horestes here doth
crave,
your daughter fair Hermione, in marriage for to
have.
Thereby for to continue styll, true love and amity,
That ought in sought betwixt to such, indifferent for to
be.
As for my friendship he shall have, the gods his helper
be
But for my daughters marriage, I can not grant to be.
She is but young and much unfit, such holy rights to take,
Therefore sir kings at this present, no answer I can
make.
She is a dame of comely grace, therefore king
Menalaye,
Grant this to vs this strife to end, o king we do the
pray.
For each of them a grede be the other for to have,
Good sir grant this that at thy hands, so justly we do
crave
O Nobel king what that it were, I could not you
denay,
I must needs grant whē nought I have, against you to
repley
Horestes here before these kings, my son I the do
make,
And the o king while life doth last, for father I do
take.
Right joyful is this thing to vs, and happey for your
state,
Therefore with speed let vs go hence, the marriage to
seleybrate
And all the gods I pray preserve, &amp; keep you both from
wo,
Com on sir king, shall we from hence, unto our palace
go.
As if shall please your grace in dede, so we consent to
do,
And we likewise oh gracious Prince, do condisend there
to.
I would I were ded, and laid in my grave,
Oundes of me, I am trimly promoted:
Ah, ah, oh, well now for my labour, these trinkets I have?
Whyse you not I pray you, how I am flouted.
A bag and a bottle, thus am I louted?
Each knave now a days, would make me his man,
But chyll master them, I be his oundes and I can.
A begginge, a begginge, nay now I must go,
Horestes is married, god send him much care:
And I Revenge, am driven him fro.
And then ites no marvel, though I be thus bare.
But peace, who better then beggars doth fare.
For all they be beggars, and have no great port,
Who is merrier, then the pooryste sort.
What shall I beg? nay thates to bad,
Is their near a man, that a servant doth lack:
Of mine honesty gentle woman, I would be glad?
You to sarue but for clothes, to put on my back.
A way with these rages, from me the shall pack.
What think you scorn, me your servant to make,
A another will have me, if you me for sake.
Perhaps you all marvel, of this sudden mutation,
How scene I was down, from so hye a degre:
To satisfy your minds, I will use a
perswation.
This one thing you know, that on caulyd amyte,
Is unto me revenge most contrary.
And we twain to gender, could not abide,
Which caused me so soon, from hye state to slyde.
Horestes and his ounckell, King Menalaus,
Is made such sure friends, without peradventure,
Through the policy, of old Idumeus?
That as, far as I can se, it is to hard to enter,
Ye and thates worse, when I sought to venture.
I was driven with out comfort, away from their gate,
I was glad to be packinge, for fear of my pate.
Yet before I went, my fancy to please,
The marriage selebratyd, at the church I did se,
Willing I was, them all to disease:
But I durst not be so bold, for master Amyte.
Sot by Menalaus, and bore him company,
On the other side Dewtey with Horestes bore swaye.
So that I could not enter, by no kind of way?
Well sis from them both, I am bannyshyd so,
I will seek a new master, if I can him find:
Yet I am in good comfort, for this well I know,
That the most part of women, to me be full kind,
If they say near a word, yet I know their mind.
If they have not all things, when they do desire,
They will be reuengyd, or else lye in the myare.
Nay I know their quallytes, the less is my care,
As well as they do know, Reuengys operation,
Ye faull to it good wives, and do them not spare.
Nay Ille help you forward, if you lack but persuasion.
What man a most is frée, from invasion.
For as plainly Socrates declares unto vs,
Women for the most part, are borne malicious.
Perhaps you will say, maney on that I lye,
And other sum I am sure, also will take my part:
Not withstanding what I have said, they will verify,
ye and do it I wis, in spite of thy hart.
If therefore thou will live quietly, after their desert?
Reward then so shalt, thou bridal their
affection,
And unto they will, shall have them in subjection.
In Athens dwelled Socrates, the
philosopher divine,
Who had a wife namyd Exantyp, both devilish and
ill:
Which twain being fallen out, upon a time,
Perhappe cause Exantyp, could not have her will.
He went out of doors, sitting there styll.
She cround him with a piss-pot, and their he
Was wet to the skin, most pitiful to se.
I pray god that such dames, be not in this place,
For then I might chance near a mistress to get,
Nay if ye anger them, they will lay you on the face,
Or else their nails in your chekes, they will set,
Nay like a razor, some of their nails are whet.
That not for to pare, but to cut to the bone,
I count him most happest, that medelles with none.
Well far you well, for I must be packinge,
Remember my words, and bear it in mind?
What suffer the mile, a while to be clackinge,
If that you intend, aney ease for to find.
Then will they be to you, both loving and kind.
Farewell cousin cutpursse, and be ruled by me,
Or else you may chance, to end on a tree.
Sith yt the gods have given vs grace, this realm for to
posses
Which florysheth abundantly, with gold &amp; great
riches.
Let vs now se how much the wilds, &amp; mind of all this
land,
Is unto vs and of their state, likewise to understand.
I deem of them Horestes mine, that they contentyd be,
With humble hart for to submit, o king them selves to
ye,
Wherefore my love inquiare, their state this preasente
time,
And of their hearts good will to vs, o king let them divine.
As I do love the laity bright, so eke I think in dede,
That love for love as equally, shall be reward of mede.
The gods never prolong my life, that day I shall a pear,
To break my faith to the now plight, my loving lord
so dere.
Com on my Lords &amp; commons eke, let me now understand,
Of all your minds for I desire, to know what case this
land
Doth now consist voutsate the same, therefore to show
to me,
And if that ought be now a myse, amendyd it shall be.
Most regal Prince we now are void, of mortal wars
vexatiō
And through your grace we are joined, in love with every
nation.
So yt your nobelles may now live, in pleasant state
certain,
Devoid of wars &amp; civil stryfes, while yt your grace doth
rain
The which you may I pray the god, with happy days and bliss
And after death to send you there, where ioyse shall never
mys.
 As syne of our obedience, lo Duty doth the Crowned,
And Truth also which doth me bind, they subject to be
found.
My Nobels all I give you thanks, for this now showed to
me
And as you have so eke will I, the like show unto ye.
My cōmons how gos it with you, your state now let me
know,
Where as such on as you do rain, there needs must riches
gro
We are o king easyd of the yoke, which we have so
desiard.
The state of this our common wealth, need not to be
inquiard.
Peace, wealth, joy, and felicity, o king it is we have,
And what thing is their yt which, subjects ought more to
crave
Sis all things is in so good state, my commons as you
say
That it may so continue styll, the sacred gods I
pray.
And as to me your trusteynes, shall any ways be found,
So styll to maintain your estate, I surely shall be
bound.
And for your faithful harts, the which you graūted have to
me
Both you my lords, and commons eke, I thank you heartily.
Therefore sith time will have an end, &amp; now my mind you
know
Let vs give place to time, and to our palace let vs go.
We both will weight upon your grace, yft please you to
depart
Even when you please to weigh you on I shall with all my
hart
A kingdom kept in Amyte, and void of dissention,
No deuydyd in him self, by aney kind of way,
Nether provoked by words, of reprehention,
Must needs long continue, as Truth doth say.
For desention and strife, is the path to decay.
And continuing therein, must of nesecttie,
Be quite ruinate, and brought unto misery.
Where I Dewtey am neclected, of aney estate.
Their strife and dyssention, my place do supply:
Cankered malice pride, and debate,
Therefore to rest, all means do try.
Then ruin comes after, of their state whereby,
They are utterly extinguished, leuinge nought behind,
Whereof so much as their, name we may find.
He that leads his life, as his fancy doth like,
Though for a while, the same he may hyde:
Yée Truth, the daughter of Time, will it seek,
And so in a time, it will be descried.
Yet in such time as it can not, be denied?
But receive dew punishment, as god shall se,
For the fault committed, most convenient to be.
As this story here hath, made open unto ye,
Which if it have bin marked, much prophet may arise?
For as Truth saith, nothings written be,
But for our learning, in any kind of wise.
By which we may learn, the ill to despise,
And the truth to imitate, thus Truth doth say:
The which for to do, I beseech God we may.
For your gentle patience, we give you thanks heartily,
And therefore our dewtey weighed, let vs all pray,
For Elizabeth our Queen, whose gracious
majesty:
May rain over vs, in health for aye,
Like wise for her council, that each of them may.
Have the spirit of grace, their doings to direct,
In setting up virtue, and vice to correct.
For all the Nobility, and spirituality, let vs pray,
For Judges, and head officers, what ever they be:
According to our boundaunt dewties, espetially I say,
For my Lord Moire, lyfetennaunt of this noble City.
And for all his brytherne, with the cominualtie.
That each of them, doing their dewties a right,
May after death posses heaven, to their hearts delight.

DIogenes which used a barrel for his house,
Being fled frō his father to ye city of Athēs,
Cōforted him self much in beholding ye mouse
which desired neither castle nor hold for her defēce
Cōcerning sustentatiō, she made no differēce,
But eat what soever to her did befall,
And touching her apparel, she had least care of all.
This poor mouses property noted Diogenes,
Which oftentimes also, he would have in sight,
And though he ware disciple unto Antisthenes,
yet he learned of the mouse as much as he might
In the science of Sophie he had great delight,
But concerning his state, and outward condition
The most can declare, if you make inquisition.
On a time he chanced accumpanied to be
With Alexāder, which stood between him &amp; the son
What require thou to have Diogenes (quote he?)
Is there any thing that by me may be done?
I pray thee stand aside, and make a little rome
(quote Diogenes) that the sun upon me may shine,
Nought else requier I of that that is thine.
He used to say, that as servants be obedient
To their bodily masters being in subjection,
Even so evil men that are not content,
Are subjects and slaves to their lusts and affection,
This lesson unto vs may be a direction,
Which way our inclination to bridle and subdue,
Namely if we labour the same to eschew.
Thus see you howe little this Philosopher esteemed
the abundant possessions of this mūdaine treasure
Which yet notwithstanding at these days is deemed
to be the original and fountain of pleasure,
this causes lust to reign without measure,
to the which men are subjects, Diogenes doth say,
yet both lost and treasure in time wears away.
A Philosopher is he that wisdom doth love,
Which before Pithagoras, wise men ware named
Now Diogenes being wise, this doth approve
that some mē of this age, ought as fools to be blamed
For where the one with treasure lack, his life framed
the other travail, care, and labour with gredines,
the same by all means, to enjoy and possess.
But as Lust with the luster, converts to dust
And leaves of force, his pleasant prosperity,
So treasure in time, is turned to rust:
As S. Iames in his epistle shows the verity
Hereof we purpose to speak without temerity,
Therefore our matter is named, ye trial of Treasure,
Which time doth expel, with all mundaine pleasure.
Both merry and short we purpose to be,
And therefore require your pardon and patience,
We trust in our matter nothing you shall see,
That to the godly may give any offence,
Though ye style be barbarous, not fined with eloquēce
Yet our Author desires your gentle acceptance,
And we the players likewise, with all humiliation.
HEy howe care away let the world pass
For I am as lusty as ever I was,
In flowers I flourish as blossoms in May,
Hey howe care away: hay howe care away.
What the Devil ailed me to singe thus,
I cry you mercy by my faith for entering,
Most like I have ridden on the fleing Pegasus,
Or in Cock Lorrels barge I have been a venturing,
Sing▪ why I would singe if it were to doe again.
With Orpheus and Amphion I went to school,
What, lads must be lively attending on the train
Of lady Delectation, which is no small fool.
Hey rouse▪ fill all the pots in the house,
Tush man, in good fellowship let vs be merry,
Look up like a man or it is not worth a louse.
Hey how troly lowe, hey dairy dairy,
Ha pleasant youth and lusty Iuuentus,
In faith it is good to be merry this may,
For of mans living here, there is no point endentus.
Therefore a little mirth is worth much sorrow some say.
But remember ye not the wise mans sentence,
It is better in the house of mourning to be
Thē in the house of laughter where folly hath residēce,
For lightness with wisdom can not agree
Though many have pleasure in foolish fantasy.
Ensuing their inclination and lust,
Yet much better is the life of one that is just.
Sir, in this you seem against me to inveigh,
Nothing but reason I think I doe say.
Mary you shall have a night cap for making ye reason,
Friend have you not a piece of stockefishe to sell,
I would you had a dish of butterd poison,
By my faith your communication likes me well,
But I beseech you tell me is not your name Just:
Yes forsooth.
And my name thou shalt understand is lust,
And according thereto I am lusty in deed,
But I think thou haste drunk of Morpheus seed,
Thou goosed like a Dromeldory dreaming &amp; drowsy,
I hold twenty pound the knave is lousy.
Mine apparel is not like unto thine,
Disguised and jagged of sundry fashion,
Howe be it, it is not gold always that doth shine,
But corrupting Copper of small valuation
To horrible besides is thy operation,
Nothing more odious unto the Just,
Then the beastly desires of inordinate lust.
It is a shameful thing as Cicero doth say
That a man his own acts should praise &amp; cōmende,
Hypocrites accustom thee like day by day
Checking other men, when they doe offend.
Yea but it is an harde thing says the Philosopher,
For a foolish man to have his manners reprehended,
And even at this day it is come so far,
God grant for his mercy it may be amended.
For tell a man friendly now of his fault
Being blasphemy, pride, or vile fornication,
He will be as presumptuous as Haman the halt
And repay with revenge or else defamation.
Thus few men a friendly monition will bear,
But stoutly persist and maintain their ill,
And in noble men's houses truly I do fear
There are to many have such froward will.
Wounds and hearts who can abide this,
Nay ye vile vylayne I will dress you therefore,
your lasy bones I pretend so to bliss,
That you shall have small lust to prate any more.
Behold the Image of incipient fools,
There are not a few even now of thy property,
Until you be put into poverties schools:
ye will not forsake this foolish insolence.
Nay soft, with thee I have not made an end.
The Just against lust must always contend,
Therefore I purpose to wrestle with thee,
Who shall have the victory, straightway we shall see.
When thou wilt by his flesh: I shall hold the wag
I know that lust uses not little to brag:
Thou shalt find me as mighty as Simpson ye strōg
yea the battle of lust endures long.
Wounds and flesh, I was almost down on my back,
But yet I will wrestle till my bones crack.
The end of thy presumption now doth appear,
yet do what thou can I will not lie here,
No by his wounds you old doting knave,
think thou that lust will be made a slave,
I shall mete you in Smithfield or else other where,
By his flesh and blood, I will thee not forbear.
Not of my power I doe thee expel
But by the might of his spirit that dwells in me,
Inordinate lust with the just may not dwell,
And therefore may not I accompany thee.
Well goodman Just, it is no matter,
But in faith I pretend not with thee to flatter,
Though from thy company depart I must,
I shall live in as much welthynes I trust.
Where most wealth is and most delectation,
There Lust is commonly of most estimation:
For where as wealth wants idleness doth sla
But where idleness is Lust parts the slake.
Thus have you seen the conflict of the Just,
Which all good men ought to use and frequent
For horrible are the fruits of inordinate lust,
Which in some case resemble Hybra the serpent,
Whose head being cut of an other rises incontinent.
So one of Lusts cogitations being cut away
There rises up an other, yea many we may say:
It is requisite therefore that every degree
Against this his lust, both strive and contend,
And though at the first he seem sturdy to be,
The Lord will convince him for you in the end.
Your cause unto him therefore holy commend,
Labouring to avoid all inordinate lust,
And to practise in life, to live after the Just.
I can remember since Noes ship
Was made and builded on Salisbury plain,
The same year ye weathercock of Paules caught ye pip
So that Bow bell was like much woe to sustain,
I can remember I am so old.
Since Paradise gates were watched by night,
And when that Vvlcanus was made a cuckold
Among the great Gods I appeared in sight.
Nay for all your smiling I tell you true,
No no▪ ye will not know me now,
The might on the earth I doe subdue,
tush, if you will give me leave yle tell ye howe,
Howe, in good faith I carenot greatly,
Although I declare my daily increase
But then these gentle women will be angry,
therefore I think best to hold my peace:
Nay I beseech you let the matter staye,
For I would not for twenty poūde come in their hādes
For if there should chance to be but one dalila,
By the mas they would bind me in Samsons bands
But what mean I first with them to begin,
Seeing that in all men I doe remain,
Because that first I remained even within,
And after her Adam and so forth to Caine,
I perceive by your looks my name ye would know,
Why you are not ignorant of that I dare say,
It is I that doe guide the bent of your bow,
And rules your actions also day by day,
Forsooth I am called Natural inclination
Which bred in old Adams fostered bones,
So that I am proper to his generation
I will not away with casting of stones,
I make the stoutest to bow and bend:
Again when I lust I make men stand upright
From the lowest to the highest I doe ascend,
Drawing them to things of natural might.
¶Where is the knave, that so did rave:
O that we could him find,
We would him make, for fear to quake
That lout of lobbishe kind.
My name is lust, &amp; let him trust
That I will have redress,
For thou and I, will make him fly,
Mine old friend Sturdiness.
Where is now that valiant Hercules,
For all his brags he is now run away:
By the guts of Golya, it is best for his ease,
For he was most like for the pottage to paye.
Cocks soul: what bragging knaves have we here,
Come ye to convince the mightiest conqueror,
It was I that before you now doth appear,
Which brought to confusion both Hector &amp; Alexander:
Look on this leg ye prating slaves,
I remember since it was no greater then a tree,
At that time I had a couple of knaves
Much like unto you that weighted on me.
Cocks precious soul, let vs conquer the knave,
By his flesh and sides, a good courage I have,
Stand you therefore a little aside
And ye shall see me quickly abate the fools pride.
Nay I dare not I if thou look so big,
What should such a Bore fight with a pig.
Put up thy sword man we will agree,
So lo: doe so much as bear that for me.
Nay by his heart, then I will you dress.
Be Good in thine office gentle friend Sturnines,
For though thou and I doe seem to contend,
yet we are, and must be friends till the end.
Come give me thy hand I beshrowe thy heart.
Nay you must take all things in good part,
Who stands yonder captain Lust?
Yea mary.
No remedy then to him go I must,
you have forgot I dare say your old friend Inclinatiō
But let vs renew acquaintaūce again for cocks passiō
Why man our acquaintance hath been of old,
I am yours at commandment therefore be bold,
For Lust can doe nothing without Inclination,
Chiefly in matters concerning a pleasant vocation.
In dede Lust may be taken for a thing indifferent
Except Inclination be joined thereunto▪
But when that I once have reaueled my intent,
As I will men to work so commonly they doe,
Ye have harde of the combat between me &amp; Just.
ye mary, I harde say that you lay in the dust.
What say ye.
Neither one word nor other ye may me trust.
Of mine honesty my company he utterly refused,
And in wrestling with me he gave me the foil,
Saying: that I had my self and other abused.
Leading men in perplexity &amp; marvelous toil.
By gogs wounds if we had found him here,
We should by his flesh have abated his chere.
I perceive Sturdiness thou art no fool,
Tell me of fellowship where went thou to school,
What to read or wright.
Nay to swear and fight.
For I think thou can neither write, read, nor spell,
But in swearing and fighting thou doest excel.
Thou know that I am joined with Lust,
And Sturdy by nature I am in like case,
What let the world wag, all can not be Just,
Some must Natural inclination embrace.
All men Just: no, I remember the sentence of Tully
That no man is Just, that fears death poverty or pain,
which I do fear all &amp; that marvelously,
For fortune is variable I doe perceive plain,
And notwithstanding that Flex possessed great gain,
yet when Paule preached of the judgment day,
He trembled for fear and bad him go away.
Doth such passions often trouble your mind?
Nay not often, but sometime I doe them find,
But then to the intent to drive them away,
I either go to sleep, or else to some play.
By gogs precious heart, even so doe I,
But sometime they cumber me pestilently.
Well moister Lust, such dumps to eschew
My advise and request you must needs ensue,
That is to become disciple to doctor Epicurus,
And then you shall have mirth by measure &amp; overplus
Tush, I know a couple companions in store
That ware marvelous mete for you evermore.
I wish you unto them.
Well then call them in.
Here they come each of them in a knaves skin.
With lust to live is our delight,
In high estate and dignity,
Seeing that the Just put vs to flight,
Let them alone in misery.
Nay, they be lusty lads I tell ye.
What Inclination, me thought I did smell thee,
Give me thy hand or we forther go.
Now welcome in faith, and Greedy gut also,
But sirs▪ are none of you both acquainted with Lust.
Yes that they have been both of them I trust,
welcome sirs in faith welcome unto me.
By my troth I am glad your maistership to see
In health and prosperity, as presently you bee.
Bom fey so am I wot all my heart,
This cow bellied knave doth come from the carte,
Ise teach you to speak I hold you a pound,
Curchy Lob curchy, down to the ground.
Che can make curchy well enough.
Lower old knave or yle make ye to bow,
The great bellied lout me think can not bend,
yes so lo, he begins now to amend.
Well sirs, now I remember Esopes advise
which he gave to the Samies against king Crassus,
Therefore it is good to be witty and wise,
And being in liberty to keep me still thus:
I can not abide a life that is dolorous,
And seeing that my name is properly Lust,
I hate the conversation also of the Just.
Well moister Lust, first join you to me Inclinatiō
Next here with Sturdiness you must you acquaint
Turn you about and embrace Elation,
And that wealth may increase without any restraint
Join you with Greedy gut here in our presence,
That all these in you may have prosperous influence.
Out alas, what a sudden passion is this,
I am so taken that I can not stand,
The cramp, the cramp, hath touched me iwis,
I shall die without remedy now out of hand.
By my matens chese, our moister is sick.
Stand back Nycoll noddy with the pudding prick,
More brains in thy skin then wit in thy brain,
Such Greedy guts in faith would be flayne,
This cramp doth signify nothing in effect
But howe he is bowed by me Inclination,
None of all your councels he will now reject,
And therefore fear not to make full declaration.
Then fear not the force of these that be just,
But labour your self to advance and augment,
Be iocound and lively sith your name is lust,
And then you shall easily obtain your entente.
Esteem your self always equal with the best,
And seek for promotion, power, and dignity:
It is good when men may live as they lust,
And unto the just bear hate and malignity.
O sir ye must be greedy to catch and to claw.
Well said Greedy gut, as wise as a dawe,
Eat up at a mouthful, houses and lands.
Theres a vengeable mouth to,
Never fear God nor the governors law,
But gripe gripe greatly all that comes in your hāds.
By the Mass but Hew Howlet is pestilence witty,
What guttishe gredinesse the horizon can teach
That thou art not erected in faith it is pity,
As hie as three trees, and a halter will reach.
Mary sirs, but your councels hath set me on fire.
Hey lusty lad, how fresh am I now,
Lead me Inclination to have my desire,
And then at thy request I will ever bend &amp; bow.
He that bends to follow his own inclination,
Must needs live a wicked and vile conversation,
But go moister Lust, I will lead you to a place
Where you shall have pleasure enough in short space.
yea, but shall not this company go thither.
yes mary we four will all go together,
But Sturdiness shall tarry to face out the matter,
If Just peradventure against you should clatter.
By the mass, and well said, but first let vs sing,
I must tune my pipes first of all with drinking.
Tush what then, I pray thee help vs bear a part.
yes I will sing the trouble with all my heart.
Lust shall be led by inclination
To carnal cogitation,
Where lust is led wholly by me,
He must fall to Cupidite,
For carnal cares shall him assail,
And speedily they shall prevail.
I Sturdiness will face it out,
In his cause, sturdy stiff and stout,
Then Greedy gut shall make him eat,
Both house &amp; lands, like bread &amp; meat.
Elation shall puff him hie
For to aspier aboue the sky,
Then natural and lordly lust,
Shall with his pour despise the Just.
Our songe is ended haste thou other in store,
I shall not have done this half hour and more,
yet I will now I remember, come in Lust
That I go before is but needful and just,
you shall be now led by me Inclination
to reason and talk with Carnal cogitation.
Is there more vanity under neath the son,
Then to be inclined after this sort,
well Lust doth now as other have done,
yea, and doe day by day, esteming it a sport,
this Lust is the Image of all wicked men,
which in seeking the world, have all delectation,
they regard not God nor his cōmaundementes ten
But are wholly led by their own Inclination,
First to inculcate with Carnal cogitation,
And after to the desire of all worldly treasure,
which alone they esteem the fulness of pleasure
with Elation or Pride he is also assotiate,
which puffs up his senses with presumption pestilēt
then Greedy gut makes them continually to grate
On ye mock of this world which he thīketh permanēt,
I sturdiness to bear out all things, am bent:
thus see you howe men that are led by their lust,
Dissent from the virtuous godly and Just.
The advise of Aristippus have in your mind,
which willed mē to seek such things as be permanēt
And not such as are of a vanishing kind
For the one with the other is not equivalent,
Be circumspect therefore, forcing and Sapient,
For treasures here gotten are uncertain and vain,
But treasures of the mind do continually remain.
This is the mind of Musonus also I remember,
Like as presently you have advertised me,
For the which I can not but thankfully render,
Such commendations as is requisite to be,
And as your name is Sapience, thus much I see,
That on heavenly wisdom you doe depend,
And not on as time doth bring to an end.
Truth in deed, &amp; therefore your name being Just,
With me and my documents must be assotiate,
Where contrary such as are led by their lust,
To incline evil are always appropriate,
They have not as you have, battle &amp; combat,
Against the cogitations that inwardly spring,
But rather are obedient unto the same thing,
And this is the occasion that men are so ambitious,
And so foolish led by the lust of their brain,
Sometime to covet, sometime to be vicious,
Sometime the council of the wise to disdain,
Sometime to clime till they fall down again,
Sometime to usurp the possessions of other,
Sometime to disobey both father and mother.
Alas what avails it riches to enjoy,
Though as much in cōparison as Cressus the king,
What helps it to have Helene in Troye,
If the conscience of man continually sting,
Elation and Pride, no commodity doth bring,
But is often known the forerunner of shame,
And the blot of immortal memory and fame.
Now by my hallydome it is alone a,
Better sport in my life I never saw,
It is trim I tel you to daūce with Iohn &amp; Ione a:
We pass not a point for God nor his law,
But Lust is lusty and full of porridge,
Cogitation and he, in one Bed doth lie
When: here is moister Just with his cankered courage,
What an old doting, Sapience then I am dressed I,
So often already Just hath me restrained,
That I dare not entice him any more,
For through Sapience he hath me clearly disdained
That my courage is spent, and I have no more.
Nay soft sir we must talk with you or ye go.
I can not tarry at this time the truth is so.
Nay, there is no remedy with you we must talk.
By the body of me, I hold best that I walk,
Or else learn to speak language another while,
And so I may happen the knaves to beguile.
Turn back or you go, we have somewhat to say.
Non point parley fransois, nonne par ma foy.
To deceive vs now him self he doth prepare.
Ec en can ghana english spreken vorwaer,
Body of me let me go, or else I shall peace,
Iwis moister Just, you have loved me or this,
Therefore now be ruled after my council,
And godly things for your commodity I shall you tel
Let him that is Just not lightly ensue,
His vile inclination and carnal concupicence,
But let him rather contend the same to subdue,
And chiefly those that have knowledge of Sapience,
Therefore to bridle this lust do your diligence,
His crafty provocations utterly to restrain,
That Just may live while life doth remain.
Godd man hoball speak you in earnest:
What doest thou say, shall the Just bridle me,
No, no, brother snappes, doe the worst and thy best,
I will not be bridled of him nor of thee.
Seeing Sapience consists in heavenly document,
And that heavenly document consists in sapience
To bridle this wretch I can not but consent,
Sith I of his purpose have had oft intelligence.
Yet again bridle, it doth not prevail,
I will not be bridled of the best of you both,
See you this ger here is one will make you to quail,
Stand back, to kill you moister just I would be loath
you have been so burned and fried of late,
That it were pity to hurt you any more,
Back I say, or my dagger shall about your pate,
By the mass but I will sir, yle make your bones sore.
I will bridle thee beast for all thy bragging.
In faith good man Just, yle hold ye wagging,
Nay brother, ye shall find me a cursed colt to bridle,
Nay in faith, better yet I will make thee to struggle.
Never leave him but ensue the council of sapience.
Lo now I have brought him under obedience.
Not so obedient as thou think me to have,
Nay brother, ye shall find me a coltish knave,
We he, he, it is good for you to hold fast,
For I will kick and winche while thy life doth last▪
Thou shalt kick in deed but no victory win,
Neither to conquer the Just to ungodliness nor sin,
O yes, O yes, I will make a proclamation.
What shall that be?
If ye will give me leave then you shall see,
O yes, is there any man or woman that hath lost,
A gambolling gelding with a gray tail,
Let him come to the Crier and pay for his cost,
And he will tell him tidings without any fail.
To the intent that you may him sharply restrain,
Let him not enjoy so much of the rain.
Cocks soul, now the sniff•e cutteth my lip,
I would this suberly knave had the pip,
I shall leap no hedges while this bridle is on,
Out alas, I think it will fret me to the bone.
Thus should every man that will be called Just,
Bridle and subdue his beastly inclination,
That he in the end may obtain perfect trust,
The messenger of God to give sight to salvation.
That trust to obtain with him I have struggled,
Then let vs depart and leave this beast bridled.
Mary the devil go with you and his dun dame,
Such horse masters will make a colt quickly tame,
I would he were hanged that this snaffell did make,
It makes my chappes so shamefully to ache▪
ye have no pity on me you I se by your laughing,
I care not greatly if I fall to gambolling,
We he, he, he, he, he, come aloft I say,
Beware the horse heles I auise you, stand away,
The rain of my bridle is tied so short,
That I can not make you any more sport,
But though I be bridled now of the Just,
I doubt not but I shall be unbridled by Lust,
And let not Just think but I will rebel,
Although he bridle me ten times all well,
Though nature saith one dome with a croche,
It will not lie long but incontinent approach,
Even so, though that I be bridled a while,
The Colt will at length the Cursor beguile,
Chill run I as fast as I can,
zures did none of you see a man,
Cham zent in haste from my moister Lust,
So that Inclination needs come to him must.
Where is he now I pray thee tell me.
Why what have we here Iesus benedicite,
I hold twenty pound it is Baalams Ass,
Nay tic a Colt, I see his tail by the mass.
Am I a Colt, nay thou least like a knave,
Somewhat for thy labour now shalt thou have.
Ho ball ho, lousy Jade must ye kick.
Who ever saw such a desperate Dicke,
Why Greedy gut, doest thou not know Inclinatiō?
Body O me, who hath dressed thee of that fashion,
Thou art bridled for biting now in deed,
Syra, moister Lust would have thee make speed.
I am bridled I▪ even as thou doest see,
Therefore desire him to come and help me,
But what is the matter that he for me sent.
Mary to gather with Gredines, now he is bent,
He hath had long talk with Carnal cogitation,
And is set on fire by the means of Elation,
So that he is so lusty he can not abide.
Therefore one or other for him must be spied.
Well Greedy gut, I pray thee go and make haste.
Tush fear not, chill spend no time in waste.
I had rather then .xl. pence that he ware come,
If I be bridled long I shall be undone,
So sharpe is this snaffell called restraint,
That it makes me sweat I am so faint:
Hark, I hear the voice of my moister Lust,
Now I shall be unbridled shortly I trust.
Cocks precious wounds, here hath been villainy▪
Ye, ye they have used me with to much villainy,
That old knave Sapience so counselled Just,
Bu let me be unbridled good moister Lust.
Lo now thou art unbridled, be of good chere▪
By lady I am glad I have gotten thus clear,
But harkē you moister Lust, if I may do you pleasure
She is called Treasure.
O my heart is on fire till she come in place.
O moister Lust, she hath an amiable face,
A tricker▪ a trimmer, in faith that she is,
The gods of wealth, prosperity and bliss.
But think you that this minion long endure shall.
For ever and ever man, she is immortal:
There be many other, but she exceadeth them all.
What be they, have you their names in store,
Yea hark in your ear.
&amp; many other more
Sith that the apple of Paris before me is cast,
And that I may deliver the same where I will,
I would Prometheus were here to help me hold fast
That I might have a fore wit with me ever still,
Pallas I consider in science hath skill,
But Iuno and Venus, good will doe I bear,
Therefore to give the Appull I know not where.
Be conciled by me and give it lady Treasure,
It shall be for your cōmoditie in ye end without measure
For having the company of this minion lass,
you shall never want the society of Pallas,
Iuno, nor yet the armipotent Mars,
Can not resist your strength be they never so fearce
And as for Venus, you shall have at pleasure,
For she is bought and sold always with Treasure,
She of her power hath whole countries conquered
The most noble chāpions by her hath ben murdered
Icon for her sake was stoned to death,
Tush, innumerable at this day spend their breath,
Sum hang or be hanged, they love her so well,
She is the great goddess, it is true that I tell.
Which way should I work of her to have a sight.
I Inclination will lead you thither right,
But we must have Greedy gut and also Elation.
They are at the house of carnal Cogitation.
Whether I would wish that we might depart.
I will lead you thither with all my heart.
So happy is the state of those▪
That walk upright and just,
That thou Lord doest thy face disclose
By perfect hope and trust.
Their Inclination thou doest stay,
And send them Sapience,
That they should serve and eke obey,
Thy high magnificence.
Thou send contentation,
That we in thee may rest,
Therefore all adoration,
To thee perteineth best.
God cares for his as the Prophet doth say,
And preserves them under his merciful wings,
Namely the Just that his will doe obey,
Observing his holy commandment in all things,
Not for our sake, or for our deservinges,
But for his own sake openly to declare,
That all men on earth ought to live in his fear.
Howe God hath blissed you all men may see,
For first at your entrance you conquered Lust,
Not by your power, but by might of the deity,
As all persons ought to doe that be Just,
Then through Sapience which God did you send,
You bridled that brutish beast Inclination,
And also ordered you with Contentation.
Those that are contented with their vocation,
Be thankful to God, this is a true consequent,
And those that be thankful in their conversation,
Can not but please the Lord God omnipotent,
But those that be sturdy, proud, and disobediente,
The Ruler of all Rulers will them confound,
And rote their remembrance of from the ground.
When Solon was asked of Cressus the king,
What man was most happy in this vale terrestrial,
To the end he seems to attriqute that thing,
When men be associate with treasures celestial,
Before the end can no man judge he doth say,
That any man is happy that here bears breath,
But then by his end prettily judge we may,
Thus true happiness coesisteth saith he after death.
If this be a truth as undoubtedly it is,
What men are more foolish, wretched and miserable,
Thē those ye in these treasures accōpt their whole bliss
Being infect with amdition that sickness uncurable,
A wicked Adrastia, thou gods deceivable,
Thus to pluck from men the sense of their mind,
So that no contentation, therein they can find.
The treasure of this world we may well compare
To Circes the witch, with her crafty cautilitie,
Where with many men's minds so poisoned are,
That quite they are carried into all fidelity,
They are conjured in deed, and bewitched so sore,
That treasure is their trust, joy and delight,
True trust is expelled they pass not therefore▪
And against contentation, they continually fight▪
But though wicked men follow their lust,
Crying, on earth is our felicity and pleasure,
yet God doth so guide the hearts of the just,
That they respect chiefly the celestial treasure.
Alas should we not have that estimation,
Which God hath prepared for his dere elect,
Should not our minds rest in full contentation,
Having trust in this treasure, most high in respect:
S▪ Paule, when the Lord so high did erect,
Saith: it passes the sense of our memory and mind,
Much less can our outward eyes the same find.
And as for treasures which men possess here
Through fickelnes of fortune, soon fades away▪
The greatest of renown and most worthy pere,
Sometime falls, in the end to misery and decay,
Record of Dionisius, a king of much fame,
Of the valiant Alexander, and Caesar the strong,
Record of Tarquini{us}, which Superbus had to name,
And of Heliogabolos that ministered with wrong,
If I should recite all, I should stand very long.
But these be sufficient plainly to approve,
Howe soon by vncertentie, this treasure doth remove.
It is true, therefore a mind well content,
Is great riches as the wise king Solomon doth say:
We have seen of late days this cancar pestilent
Corrupting our realm, to our great decay,
Ambition I mean, which chiefly did reign
Among those that should be examples to other,
We saw howe their brethren they did disdain,
And burned with fire the child with the mother,
It is often seen that such monsters ambitious,
As spare not to spill the blood of the innocent,
Will not greatly stick to become seditious,
The determination of God thereby to prevent:
God grant every one of vs earnestly to repent,
And not to set our minds on this fading treasure,
But rather wish and will, to doe the Lords pleasure.
O ye Emperors, Potētates, &amp; Princes of renown,
Learn of Just with trust your selves to associate,
That like as your vocation, by right doth ask ye crown
And also due obediēce, being ye appointed magistrate,
So rule that at the last you may be resuscitate,
And reign with ye almighty with perfect cōtinuāce,
Receiving double crowns for your godly gouernaūce
ye noble men, whom God hath furnished with fame,
Be mindful to walk in the ways of the Just,
Add virtue evermore to your honourable name,
And be not overcome of concupicence or lust,
Fl from love of Treasure, catch hold of me Trust.
And then double felicity, at the last you shall possess,
And in al earthly doings, God shall give good success.
ye poor men &amp; commons, walk well in your vocation
Banish lust and desire, which is not convenient,
Let trust work in you a full contentation,
Considering that it leads to treasures more excellēt
For these are uncertain, but they are most permanēt:
your necessity supply with virtue and trust,
And then shall you enjoy your crown among ye Just.
As I being properly nominate Just,
Am here associate with contentation,
So have I my whole felicity in Trust,
Who ilumineth mine eyes to see my salvation.
Fear ye not, shortly you shall have consolation,
If I were once grown in you to perfection,
Even thus goes it always with ye children of electiō
I will depart now, will ye go with me trust.
yea I must always associate the Just.
A psalm of thanksgiving first let vs sing,
To the laud and praise of the immortal king.
Here if you will: sing the man is blessed
that fears God. &amp;c.
Lust (quote he) now in faith he is lusty,
Lady Treasure and he hath made a match,
He thinks that I wax marvelous trusty,
Because I teach him to claw and to catch,
And now a days amity doth therein consist,
He that can flatter shall be well beloved,
But he that says, thus and thus says Christ,
Shall as an enemy be openly reproved.
Friendship, yea, friendship cōsisteth now in adulatiō,
Speak fair and please the lust of thy Lord,
I warrant thee be had in great estimation,
When those that tell truth, shall be abhorde,
A unhappy lingo, whether wilt thou ren,
Take heed I advise thee, least thou be shent,
If ye chance to tell any tales of these gentlewomen,
With flesh hokes and nails, you are like to be rent,
Nay for the passion of me, be not so moved,
And I will please you incontinent again,
Aboue all treasures you are worthy to be loved,
Because you do no men deride nor disdain,
You doe not contempt the simple and poor,
you be not his minded, proud and presumptuous,
Neither wanton nor wily you be never more,
But gentle, loving, modesty, and virtuous,
Behold howe a lie can please some folks diet,
O pacify their minds marvelous well,
All whist I warrant ye, so they in quiet,
Howe to please you hereafter now I can tell,
Hark, I hear Lust and my lady Treasure.
They are given to solace singing and pleasure.
Ah Amorous Lady of beautiful face,
Thou art heartily welcome into this place,
My heart is inclined to thee lady Treasure,
My love is insatiate, it kepeth no measure.
It is I moister Lust that will you advance,
Treasure, it is that things doth enhance
Upon me set your whole affection and lust,
And pass not a point for the ways of the Just,
Treasure is a pleasure, bear that in mind,
Both trusty and true ye shall me always find.
As trusty as is a quick eel by the tail,
What Lady Treasure welcome without fail,
To be better acquainted with you once I trust,
But I dare not in the presence of my moister Lust,
ye are welcome sir heartily, what be of good courage:
Drawer, let vs have a pynte of white wine &amp; borage.
Wherefore I pray thee tell,
Mary me think you are not well.
Not well, who can a better life crave,
Then to possess such a lady as I have:
Is there any wealth not contained in treasure,
Ah lady, I love thee in faith out of measure,
It is out of measure in deed as you say,
And even so most men love her at this day:
Oh she is a minion of amorous hew,
Her pere in my days yet I never knew,
(Old quote you) I am an old knave I tell ye,
Nay, never laugh at ye matter, for doubtless I smell ye
She passes Iuno, Ceres, and Pallas,
More beautiful then ever dame Venus was▪
Othea in sapience she doth exceed,
And Diana in dignity, of whom we doe read.
What should fair Helene once named be,
She excelled all these moister Lust believe me.
Howe say you, is not this an eloquent lad?
That you have such a servant, truly I am glad.
Ha, ha, now in deed I can you not blame,
For women of all degrees are glad of the same,
They that flatter and speak them fair,
Shall be their sons, and peradventure their ayre.
You told me of a brother you had lady Treasure.
Yea sir that I have, his name is called Pleasure,
And seeing you enjoy me now at your will,
Right soon I am sure he will come you until▪
Truly of him I would fine have a sight,
For because yt in pleasure. I have marvelous delight.
Then honesty and profit you may bid good night
What says thou?
I say he will shortly appear in sight,
I know by his singing, the same is he,
The misbegotten orpheus, I think that he be.
O happy eaies, and pleasant plays,
Wherein I doe delight a
I doe pretend, till my lives end
To live still in such plight a▪
Moister pleasure I perceive you be of good chere.
What Inclination old lad, art thou here.
Yea sir, and lady Treasure your sister also.
Body of me, then unto her I will go,
What sister, I am glad to mete with you here.
Welcome unto me mine own brother dere.
Moister Lust, this is my brother of whom I told,
He is pleasant and lusty, as you may behold.
Gentlemā (I pray you) is your name master Pleasure
yea sir, and I am brother to lady Treasure.
And are you consented to accompany me.
Where as she is resident I must needs be,
Treasure doth Pleasure commonly proceed,
But the one is with ye other, they have both so decreed
Mary now you are well in deed moister Lust,
This is better I trow then the life of the Just,
They be compelled to possess contentation,
Having no treasure but trust of salvation,
But my lady your mistress, my mistress I would say,
She works you may see to keep you from decay.
O madame, in you is all my delight,
And in your brother Pleasure, both day and night,
The trial of treasure this is in deed,
I perceive that she is a true friend at need.
For I have proved her according as Thales doth say
And I perceive that her beauty can not decay.
Always with you I will be resident,
So that your life shall be most excellent.
yea sir and me Pleasure also you shall have,
So that none other thing there needs to crave,
I will replenish your heart with delight,
And I will be always with treasure in sight,
But if you desire to enjoy me at your will,
My sister you must have in reputation still,
And then as her treasure is certain and excellent,
My pleasure shall be both perfect and permanent,
Credit not those sir that talk that and this,
Saying, that in vs two consists no bliss,
But let experience your mind ever move,
And see if all men vs two doe not love.
Love, yes they love you in deed without doubt,
Which shutteth some of thē Gods kingdom without:
They love you so well that their God they do hate,
As time hath declared to vs even of late,
But he that on such things his study doth caste,
Shall be sure to be deceived at the last.
What doest thou say,
Of treasure forsooth ye must ever hold fast,
For if you should chance to lose lady Treasure,
Then fare well in post this gentleman Pleasure.
My love to them both can not be expressed,
And especially my Lady you I love best.
If ye love me as you doe profess,
Be ye sure you shall want no kind of wealthiness.
And if you have wealthiness at your own will,
Then will I pleasure remain with you still.
You are both as constant as snow in the sun.
Which from snow to water through melting doth run
But worldly wise men can not conceive that▪
To honte for such myse they learn of the cat.
My Lady is amorous and full of favour.
I may say to you she hath an ill-favoured savour.
What says thou?
I say she is loving and of gentle behaviour.
And so I will continue still be you sure.
And I in like case while your life doth endure,
Ah trust treasure, ah pleasant pleasure,
All wealth I possess now without measure,
And seeing that the same shall firmly remain,
To help me singe a songe, will you take the pain.
Even with all my heart begin when ye will.
To it, and I will either help or stand still.
Am not I in blissed case
Treasure and pleasure to possess,
I would not wish no better place,
If I may still have wealthiness,
And to enjoy in perfect peace,
My lady lady.
My pleasant pleasure shall increase
My dear lady.
Helene may not compared be,
Nor Creseda that was so bright,
These can not stain the shine of thee
Nor yet Minerua of great might,
Thou possessed Venus far away,
Lady lady,
Love thee I will both night and day
My dere lady.
My mouse my nobs and cony sweet
My hope and joy my whole delight,
Dame nature may fall at thy feet,
And may yield to thee her crown of right
I will thy body now embrace,
Lady, lady
And kiss thy sweet and pleasant face,
My dere lady.
I am Gods minister called Visitation,
Which divers and many ways you may understand
Sometime I bring sickness, sometime perturbation,
Sometime trouble and misery throughout the land,
Sometime I signify gods wrath to be at hand,
Sometime a foreronner of destruction imminent,
But an exectuter of pain I am at this present,
Thou incipient fool that hast followed thy lust,
Disdaining the doctrine declared by Sapience,
In treasure and pleasure hath been thy trust,
Which you thought should remain ever in thy presēce
Thou never remember Thales his sentence,
Who wills men in all things to keep a measure,
Especially in love to incertainty of treasure,
Even now I am come from visiting the Just,
Because God begins first with his elect,
But he is so associate and comforted with trust,
That no kind of impacience his soul can infect,
Contentation in such sort his race doth direct,
That he is contented with Gods operation,
Comfortably embracing me his visitation.
But now I am come to vex thee with pain,
Which make treasure thy castle and rock,
Thou shalt know that both she and pleasure is vain,
And that the almighty thou can not mock,
Anguish and grief into thee I doe caste,
With pain in thy members continually,
Now thou hast pain thy pleasure can not last,
But I will expel him incontinently.
O cocks heart, what a pestilence is this,
Depart from me I say, hence gods Visitation,
Help, help, lady treasure thou gods of blis,
At thy hands let me have some consolation.
I will remain with you be out of doubt.
Will ye be packing you ill-favoured lowte.
Presently in dede from him thou shalt not go,
And why? because Gods will hath not determined so.
But in time thou treasure shalt be turned to rust,
And as for pleasure he shall now attend on the Just.
Gogs wounds these pangs increase ever more.
And my little finger is spitefully sore,
you will not believe how my heal doth ache,
Nay let me alone your part I will take,
Be of good comfort while I here remain.
For pleasure and he shall be parted in twain,
It is not mete that he should be participate with lust
But rather with the virtuous godly and Just.
Remain with me still moister pleasure I say.
Nay there is no remedy I must away,
For where God doth send punition and pain,
I pleasure in no case can not remain.
I could in like case separate thy treasure.
But God doth admonish thee by losing thy pleasure.
Fare well in the devils name old lousy lout,
That my moister will die I stand in great doubt,
Ho, ho, ho, howe is it with you moister Lust,
By the flesh of Goliath, yet Treasure is my trust,
Though pleasure be gone, and I live in pain,
I doubt not but Treasure will fetch him again.
Yea, that I will fear not &amp; with you remain.
The property of rich men undoubtedly he hath,
Which think with money to pacify Gods wrath,
And health at their pleasure to bye and to sell,
Howe is it moister Lust, are you any thing well.
Against this Visitation my heart doth rebel,
Gogs wounds, shall I still in these pangs remain.
Fear you not moister Lust, I will help you again
Treasure in physic exceadeth Gallenus,
Tush there is no physician but we shall have with vs.
To the ease of your body they will you bring,
And therefore I pray you despair in nothing,
Put your trust always in me lady treasure,
And I will restore you again unto pleasure,
For I am the Gods that therein hath power,
Which shall remain perfect unto the last hour.
Yea, yea, moister Lust, be as merry as you may,
Let Treasure be your trust who so ever say nay.
The ancient Greeks have called me Chronos▪
Which in our vulgar tongue signifies time.
I am entered in presently for a certainly purpose,
Even to turn treasure to rust and to slime,
And Lust which hath long disdained the Just,
Ensuing his filthy and vile inclination,
Shall immediately be turned to dust,
To the example of all the whole congregation,
For time brings both these matters to pass,
As experience hath taught in every age,
And you shall behold the same in this glass,
As a document both profitable and sage,
Both Lust and treasure come forth with speed
Into the shop of the most mighty God,
There shall you be beaten to powder in dede,
And for your abusion, feel his scourge and rod.
By saint Mary, then they have made a wise match,
I pretend therefore to leap over the hatche,
Nay let me depart, sirs stop me not I say,
For I must remain though both these decay.
Lust from the beginning frequented hath been
And shall I now turn to nothing for thee.
Treasure in all ages hath been beloved,
And shall she from the earth by thee be removed.
You know that all such things are subject to time
Therefore me to withstand is no reason nor rhyme,
For like as all things in time their beginning had,
So must all things in time vanish and fade.
Gogs wounds, let Treasure remain still with me,
Yea let me continue still in my dignity.
Nay, I must cary you into Vulcans fire,
Where you shall be tried unto the uttermost,
Seeing Lust against Just did daily conspier,
To dust he shall turn for all his great boast,
Both of you shall have one rigorous hoaste,
Come therefore with speed time can not tarry,
To the end of your felicity I will you carry.
If there be no remedy then there is no shift,
He must needs go that is driven by the Devils drift,
A cocks precious sides, what fortune is this,
Whether go I now, to misery or blis.
We, he, he, he, he, ware the horse heles I say,
I would the rain ware lose that I might run away.
Nay fithe thou wilt not spare against me to rebel,
I will not spare by Gods grace thee to bridal,
All men may see howe vile Inclination,
Spares not to put the Just to vexation,
Even so may all men learn of me again,
Thy beastly dossiers to bridle and restrain▪
Mary sir I am bridled in deed as you say,
And shakled I think for running away,
This snafle is sharpe indeed for the nones,
And these shakkels doe chafe my legs to the bones,
And yet will I provoke spurn and prick,
Rebel repugn lash out and kick,
We he, in the Jade name are ye so fresh,
This ger I suppose will pluck down your flesh.
Nay soft, thou shalt have a little more pain,
For somewhat shorter now I will tie thy rain.
Most blissed and happy I say are the Just,
Even because they restrain their own Inclination,
Thou therefore that hast made thy treasure of trust,
Behold, I have brought thee here consolation.
Now blissed be God of his mercy and grace,
With all my heart and soul I doe you embrace.
Consolation is my name even as Trust hath said,
Which is joy or comfort in this life transitory,
He that possesses me, is of nothing afraid,
But hath a most quiet and peaceable memory,
For I through trust doth show thee the glory,
That God hath prepared for them before hand,
Wherein at the last they shall perfectly stand.
Receive this crone of felicity now at this space,
Which shall be made richer in the celestial place.
Bier lady, I would I had such a gay crone.
Now praised be God for this riches of renoune
Felicity in this world the Just doe enjoy,
Namely when the Devil can them not annoy,
The Lords work this is, who be praised for ever,
who grant vs in his laws still to persevere.
Amen, amen, God give vs delight,
In his holy covenant both day and night.
Our matter is almost brought to an end,
Saving that Inclination in prison must be shut,
Just carry him forth that uses to contend,
And see that surely enough he be put.
That shall be done shortly by gods grace.
What soft I say, me think ye go a shameful pace,
Was there ever poor colt thus handled before,
Fie upon it, my legs be onreasonablye sore,
Well yet I will rebel, yea, and rebel again,
And though a thousand times, you shouldest me restrain.
Behold here howe Lust is converted to dust,
This is his Image, his wealth and prosperity,
And Treasure in like case is turned to rust,
Whereof this example shows the verity.
The trial of Treasure this is no doubt,
Let all men take heed that trust in the same,
Considering what things I time bring about,
And quench out the ungodly their memory and fame.
Why, and is Lust and treasure converted to this.
yea forsooth.
What foolish man in them would put trust,
If this be the final end of their bliss,
Much better I commend the life of the Just.
So it is no doubt, for they have consolation,
Possessing felicity even in this place,
I mean through Crust and hope of salvation,
Which sets out unto vs gods mercy and grace.
Let all men consider this good erudition,
And not to put confidence in Lust nor Treasure,
By these two examples receive admonition,
And also of the sudden vanishement of pleasure.
Remember that time turns all things about▪
Time is the touchestone the Just for to try,
But where as lust &amp; treasure in time is come to nought
Just possessing Trust, remains constantly,
So that as I Time hath revealed their infamy,
So have I showed the Consolation and gain,
That the Just shall receive that justly doe reign.
We will now no longer trouble this audience,
Since some what tedious to you we have been,
Beseeching you to bear all things with patience,
And remember the examples that you have seen,
God grant them to flourish lively and grene,
That some of vs the better therefore may be.
Amen, Amen, I beseech the blissed trinity.

