Now forasmuch as in these latter days,
Throughout the whole world in every land
Vice doth increase, and Virtue decays
Iniquity having the upper hand.
We therefore intende, good gentle Audience,
A pretty short Interlude, to play at this present
Desiring your leave and quiet scisence
To show the same, as is mete and expedient.
The sum whereof, matter and argument,
In two or three verses, briefly to declare,
Since that it is for an honest intent,
I will somewhat bestow my care.
In the City of London, there was a rich man
Who loving his son most tenderly,
Moved him earnestly now and than,
That he would give his mind to study.
Saying that by knowledge, science, and learning
Is at the last gotten a pleasant life:
But throng he the want, and lack of this thing
Is purchased ponertie, sorrow, and strife.
His Son notwithstanding, this gentle monition
As one that was clean devoid of grace,
Did turn to a mock, and open derision
Most wickedly with an bushame fast face.
In so much that contrary to his fathers will
Unto a young woman he did consent,
Whereby of lust he might have his fill,
And married the same in continents.
Not lunge after that, the child began
To feel his wyffes great frowardenes,
And called himself unhappy man,
O••ressed with pains and heaviness.
Who before that time, did live blessedly,
Whilst he was under his fathers wing
But now being weddyd, mourning and misery
Did him torment without ending,
But now it is time for me to be going,
And hence to depart for a certain space,
For I do hear the Rich man cōmynge
With the wanton boy into this place.
LAther I beseech you father, show me the way
What thing I were best to take in hand,
Whereby this short life so spend I may
That all grief and trouble, I might withstand.
¶ What is the meaning (my child) I the pray
This question to be maund of me?
For that thing to so, I am glad always
Which should not be grievous to the.
¶ Mary but therefore, of you counsel I take,
Saying now my Childhood, I am clean past,
That unto me ye plainly do make,
What to a young man is best for to taste.
¶ I see nothing truly my Son so mete
And to prove so profitable for the
As unto the School to move thy feet,
With studious Lads, there for to be.
¶ What the Scholeen aye father, nay,
Go to the School is not the best way,
¶ Say what thou list, for I can not invent
A way more cōmodyous in my Judgment.
¶ It is well known howe that ye have loved
Me heretofore at all times most tenderly
But now (me think) ye have plainly showed
Certain tokens of hatred
For if I should go to my Book after your advise
Which have spent my Childhood so pleasantly,
I may then seem driven out of Paradise
To take payne and woe, grief and misery.
All things I had rather sustain and abide
The busynes of the School ones cast aside,
Therefore though ye cry till ye reave asunder
I will not meddle with such a matter.
¶ Why can not I thee thus much persuade
For that in my mind is the best trade.
¶ When all is said and all is done,
Concerning all things both more and less
Yet like to the School none under the Son
Brings to children so much heaviness.
¶ What though it be painful, what thought it be greues,
For so be all things at the first learning,
Yet marvelous pleasure it brings unto vs
As a reward for such pains taking.
Wherefore come of and be of good cheer
And go to thy Book without any fear
For a man without knowledge (as I have read)
May well be compared to one that is dead.
¶ No more of the School, no more of the Book
That woeful work is not for my purpose
For upon those Books I may not look,
If so I did, my labour I should lose.
¶ Why than to me thy fancy express
That the School matters to the are counted werynesse
¶ Even as to a great man, wealthy and rich
Service and bondage is a harde thing
So to a Boy both dainty and nice
Learning and study is greatly displeasing.
¶ What my Child, displeasing I pray the?
That makes a man live so happily.
¶ Yea by my truth, such kind of wisdom
Is to my heart I tell you, very loathsome.
¶ What trial thereof hast thou taken
That the Scole of thee is so ill bespoken?
¶ What trial thereof would ye fain know?
Nothing more easy then this to show:
At other boys hands, I have it learned,
And that of those truly most of all other
Which for a certain time have remained
In the house and prison of a Scholemayster
¶ I dare well say that there is no misery
But rather Joy, pastime, and pleasure
Always with Scholars hoping company,
No life to this, I the wall assure.
¶ It is not true Father which you do say,
The contrary thereof is proved always,
For as the Brute goes by many a one,
Their tender bodies both night and day
Are whipped and scourged, and beat like a stone
That from top to toe, the sayn is away.
¶ Is there not (say they) for them in this case,
Given other while for pardon some place?
¶ None truly none, but that alas, alas
Diseases among them do grow apase.
For out of their back and side doth floe,
Of very goore blood marvelous abundance,
And yet for all that is not suffered to go,
Till death be almost seen in their countenance.
Should I be content then thither to run,
Where the blood from my breech thus should spuane,
So lunge as my wits shall be mine own,
The Scholehouse for me shall stand alone.
¶ But I am sure that this kind of facion
Is not showed to children of honest condition.
¶ Of troth with these Masters is no difference
For alike towards all, is their wrath and violence.
¶ Son in this point, thou art quyte deceived
And without doubt falsely persuaded
For it is not to be judged that any Scholemayster,
Is of so great fierceness and cruelty
And of young Infants so sore a tormentor
That the breath should be about to leave the body.
¶ Father this thing I could not have believed
But of late days I did behold
In honest man son hereby buried
Which through many strypes was dead and cold.
¶ Perauenture the Child of some disease did labour
Which was the cause of his Sepulture.
¶ With no disease surely, was he disquieted,
As unto me it was then reported.
¶ If that with no such thing he were infected
What was the cause that he departed.
¶ Men say, that of this man, his bloody master
Who like a Lyon most cōmonly frowned,
Being hanged up by the heals together▪
Was bealy and buttock grievously whipped.
And last of all (which to speak I trembled)
That his head to the wall he had often crushed.
¶ Thus to think Son, thou art beguiled verily,
And I would wish the to suppose the contrary.
And not for such tales my counsel to forsake
Which only do covet thee learned to make.
¶ If Demesthenes and Tully were present truly
They could not prynt it within my head h•pely.
¶ Yet by thy fathers will and intercession,
Thou shalt be content that thing to pardon.
¶ Command what ye list, that only excepted,
And I will by ready your mind to fulfil,
But where as I should to the School have resorted
My hand to the Palmer submitting styll.
I will not obey ye theri• to be plain,
Though with a thousand strokes I be slain.
¶ Wo is me my Son, wo is me,
This heavy and doleful day to see.
¶ I grant in dede, I am your Son,
But you my Father shall not be,
If that ye mile cast me into that prison,
Where torn in pieces ye might me see.
¶ Where I might see the torn and rent?
O Lord I could not such a dede invent.
¶ Nay by the Mass, I hold ye, a groat
Those cruel tyrants cut not my throat:
Better it were my self did flay,
Then they with the Rod my flesh should flay.
Well I would we did this talk omit,
For it is loathsome to me every whyt.
¶ What trade then (I pray the) shall I deuyse
Whereof thy living at length may arise?
Wilt thou follow Warfare, and a Soldier be pointed,
And so among Troyans and Romaynes be nombred,
¶ See ye not masters my Fathers advise
Haur ye the like at any time harde?
To will me thereto he is not wise
If my years and strength he did regard,
Ye speak worse and worse, what soever ye say
This manner of life is not a good way.
For no kind of office can me please,
Which is subject to wounds and strokes always.
¶ Somewhat to do, it is mete and conueniet,
Will thou then give thy diligent endenoure
To let thy youth vnhonestly be spent
And do as poor knaves, which Iares do scour?
For I do not see that any good Art
Or else any honest Science, or occupation
Thou will be content to have a part
After thy fathers mind and exhortacion.
¶ Ha, ha, ha, a labour in very deed,
God send him that life which stands in need.
There be many fathers that children have
And yet not make the worst of them a •aue,
Might not you of your self be well a shamed
Which would have your son thither constrained?
¶ I would not have the driven to that succour,
Yet for because the Scriptures declare,
That he should not ear, which will not labour
Some work to do it must be thy ear.
¶ Father, it is but a folly with you to strive
But yet notwithstanding I hope to thryue
¶ That this thine intent may take good success
I pray God heartily of his goodness.
¶ Well, well, shall I in few words rehearse,
What thing doth most my Conscience perse?
¶ Therewith I am Son very well contented.
¶ Yea but I think that ye will not be pleased.
¶ In dede peradventure it may so chance.
¶ Nay but I pray ye without any perchance,
Shall not my request turn to your greuannce.
¶ If it be just and lawful, which thou doest require,
¶ Both just and lawful have ye no fear.
Now therefore ask, what is thy petition?
¶ Lo this it is without further Delation,
For so much as all young man for this my Beauty,
As the Moon, the stars, I do far excel,
Therefore out of m•de, with all speed posy•lie,
To have a wife (me think) would do well,
For now I am •onge, lively, and just,
And welcome besides to all men company.
¶ Good Lord, good Lord, what do I here?
¶ Is this your beginning to perform my desire.
¶ It is my child, what means thy doting?
Why doest thou covet thy own un doing?
¶ I know not in the world howe to do the thing
That to his stomach, may be delighting.
¶ Why fooly she I deot, thou goosed about a wife
Which is a burden and yoke all thy life.
¶ Admit she shall as a burden with me remain,
Yet •oil I take one, if your good will I attain.
¶ Son it shall not be thus by my counsel.
¶ I trust ye will not me otherwise compel.
¶ If thou were as wise, as I have judged the
Thou would in this case be ruled by me.
¶ To follow the contrary I can not be turned
My hat thereon is stiffly fixed.
¶ What I say, about thine own destruction?
¶ No, no, but about mine own salvation:
For if I be helped, If were by the Mass,
It is only Marriage that brings it to pass.
It is not the School, it is not the Book,
It is not Science or Occupation,
It is not to be a •arbour or Cooke
Wherein is now set my consolation.
And since it is thus, be father content
For to mary a wife, I am full bent.
¶ Well if thou will not my Son, be ruled
But needs will follow thine own foolysshenes,
Take heed hereafter if thou be troubled
At me thou never seek redress.
For I am certain thou can not abide
Any payne at all, grief, or vexation.
Thy Childhood with me so easily did slyde
Full of all pastime and delectacyon.
And if thou would follow the Book and learning,
And with thy self also, take a wise way:
Then thou may get a gentleman's lining
And with many other bear a great swaye.
Besides this I would in time to come
After my power, and small havylytie,
Help the and further the, as my wisdom,
Should me most counsel for thy Commodity.
And such a wife I would prepare for the
As should be virtuous, wise and honest,
And give the with her after my degree,
Whereby thou might always live in test.
¶ I cannot, I tell ye again, so much of my life
Consume at my Book without a wife.
¶ I perceive therefore. I have done to well
And showed over much favour to the,
That now against me thou doest rebel
And for thine own furtherance will not agree.
Wherefore of my goods thou get not a penny
Nor any succour else at my hands
For such a child is most unworthy
To have any part of his fathers lands.
¶ I do not estéme father your goods or lands
Or any part of all your treasure,
For I judge it enough to be out of bands
And from this day forward to take my pleasure.
¶ Well, if it shall chance the thy folly to repent
As thou art like within short space,
Think none but thy self worthy to be shent,
Letting my council to take no place.
¶ As touching that matter, I will no man blame
Now farewell father, most heartily for the same.
¶ Farewell my Son, depart in Gods name.
¶ Rome I say rome, let me be gone
My father if he list, shall tarry alone.
Now at the last I do my self consider
Howe great grief it is and heaviness,
To every man, that is a Father.
To suffer his child to follow wantonness,
If I might live a hundred years longer
And should have sons and daughters many
Yet for this Boys sake, I will not suffer,
One of them all at home with me to tarry,
They should not be kept thus under my wing
And have all that which they desire,
For why it is but their only undoing
And after the Proverb, we put oil to the fire.
Wherefore we Parents must have a regard,
Our Children in time for to subdue
Or else we shall have them ever untoward,
Yea, spiteful, disdainful, nought, and untrue.
And let vs them chruste always to the School
Whereby at their Books they may be kept under:
And so we shall shortly their courage cool,
And bring them to honesty, virtue and Nurture.
But alas now a days (the more is the pytye)
Science and learning is so little regarded,
That none of vs all doth muse or study
To see our children well taught and instructed.
We deck them, we trym them with gorgeous array
We pampre and fed them, and keep them so gay
That in the end of all this, they be out foes.
We basse them, kiss them, we look round about
We marvel and wonder to see them so leave
We ever anon doe invent and seek out,
To make them go tricksie, gallant, and clean.
Which is nothing else, but the very provoking
To all vnthriftynes, vice, and Iniquity,
It pucteth them up, it is an allutynge
Their fathers and mothers at length to defy.
Which thing mine own Son doth plainly declare
Whom I always entirely have loved,
He was so my Joy, he was so my care
That now of the same I am despised.
And now he is hence from me departed,
He hath no delight with me to dwell,
He is not merry until he be married,
He hath of knauetye took such a smell.
But yet saying that he is my Son,
He doth me constrain •ytterly to weep,
I am not (me think) well, till I be gone
For this place I can no le•ger keep.
Neck hast Blanch Blab it out, &amp; come a way
For we have ynought to do all this whole day,
Why Blanch blab it out, wilt thou not come
And know what busynes there is to be done?
If thou may be set with the pot at thy nose
Thou care not how other matters goes,
Come a way I did the, and tarry no longer
To trust to thy help, I am much the better.
¶ What a Murryn I say, what a noise doest thou make
I think that thou be not well in the wyrtes
I never harde man on this sort to take
With such angry words, and hasty fits.
¶ Why dost thou remember, what is to be bought
For the great Bridal against to morrow?
The market must be in every place sought
For all kind of meates, God guy the sorrow.
¶ What bānyng? what cursing? Longtong is with the
I made as much speed, as I could possibly,
I wis thou might have tarried for me
Until in all points I had ben ready,
I have for thee looked full oft heretofore,
And yet for all that said never the more.
¶ Well for this ones, I am with thee content
So that hereafter thou make more hast,
Or else I tell thee, thou will it repent,
To loiter so lunge, till the Market be past.
For there must be bought Beef, Veale, and Mution,
And that even such as is good and fat
With Pig, Geese, Conies and Capon,
Howe say thou Blanch blab it out unto that?
¶ I can not tell Lontonge, what I should say
Of such good cheer I am so glad:
That if I would not eat all that day
My bealy to fill, I were very made.
There must be also Fesaunte and Sue••e
There must be Herons•er, Parts•e and Quail,
And therefore I must do, what I can,
That of none of all these the Gent••an fail.
I da•e say he looks for many things more,
To be prepared against to worn,
Wherefore I say, hence let vs go,
My feet do stand upon a thorne.
¶ Nay good Long tongue, I pray the ones again
To here yet of m• mind, a word or twain.
¶ Come of them dispa•che, and speak it quickly
For what thing it is, thou cause me t••y.
¶ Of whence is this Gentelman, yt to morrow is matried
Where doth his father and his mother dwell?
A above forty miles be hath travailed
As yester night his Servant did tell.
¶ In very dede, he commas a great way,
With my Master he may not lunge abide,
It hath cost him so much on costly array,
That Money out of his purse apase doth slyde.
They say that his friends be rich and wealthy
And in the City of London have their dwelling,
But yet of them all he hath no penny,
To spends and bestow here at his wedding.
And if it be true that his Servant did say
He hath utterly lost his friends good will
Because he would not their counsel •hay,
And in his •vone Country tarry styll.
As for this woman, which hee shall mary
At Sainet Albones always, hath spent her life
I think she be a shrew, I tell thee plainly,
And full of debate, malice and strife.
¶ Though I never saw this woman before
Whi•he hither with him this Gentelman by•ught,
Yet nevertheless I have tokens in store,
To judge of a woman that is froward and nought.
The typ of her nose, is as sharpe as mine
Her tongue and her tune is very shrill
I warrant her, she commas of an vng•acius •in,
And loneth to much her pleasure and will,
What though she be now so neat and so nice,
And speaks as gentle as ever I heard:
Yet young man which be both wyttie and wise,
Such looks, and such words, should not regard.
¶ Blanch blab it out, thou say very true
I think thou beginnest at length to preach
This thing to me is strange and new,
To hear such a fool young man to teach.
¶ A fool mine own Longtong, why call thou me fool
Though now in the kitchen I waste the day,
Yet in times paste I went to School,
And of my latin Primer I took assay,
¶ Masters this woman did take such assay,
And then in those days so applied her book,
That one word thereof, she carried not away,
But then of a Scholar was made a Cooke.
I dare say she knows not, howe her Primer began,
Which of her master she learned than.
¶ I trow it began with Domino labia operas.
¶ What did it begin with butterde peeas?
¶ I tell the again, with Domino labia operas,
If now to hear, it be thine ease.
¶ How, how, with my Madaine lay in the peeas?
¶ I think thou art mad with Domino labia operas.
¶ Yea mary, I judged it went such ways,
It began with Dor•the lay up the keys.
¶ Nay then God night, I perceive by this gear,
That none is so deaf, as who will not hear,
I spake as plainly, as I could devise,
Yet me understand, thou can in no wise.
¶ Why yet ones again, and I will better listen
And look upon the, howe thy lips do open.
¶ Well mark then, and harken ones for all:
Or else he are it again thou never shall,
My Book I say, began with Domino labia operas.
¶ Fie, fie, howe slow am I of understanding▪
Was it all this while, Domino labia operas?
Belike I have lost my sense of hearing,
With broiling and burning in the kitchen adyes.
¶ I promise the thou semest to have done little bett•
For that I wot in my life I never saw,
One like to thy self, in so easy a matter.
Unless he were deaf, thus play the Dawe.
¶ Come on, come on, we have almost forgotten
Such plenty of victuals as we should bye
It were alms by my troth, thou were well beaten
Because so lunge thou hast made me tarry.
¶ Tush tush, we shall come in very good season,
If so be thou goosed as fast as I,
Take up thy basket and quickly have done
We will be both there by and by.
¶ I for my part will never leave running
Until that I come to the Sign of the Whiting.
WHere is my sweating, whom I do seek
He promised me to have met me here
Till I speak with him, I think it a week
For he is my Joy, he is my chere.
There is no night, there is no day
But that my thoughts be all of him
I have no delight if he be away,
Such toys in my head do euerswym.
But behold at the last, where he doth come
For whom my heart desired lunge,
Now shall I know all a• some,
Orals I would say, I had great wrong
¶ My darling, my Co•ye, my Bird so bright of blue,
Sweet hart I say, all hail to thee
How do our Loves, be they fast a sleep
Or the old lynelynes, do to they styll keep?
¶ Do ye ask and my Love be fast a sleep?
O if a womon may utter her mind,
My love had almost made me to weep
Because that even now I did not you find
I thought it surely a whole hundred year,
Till in this place I saw you here.
¶ Alack, alack, I am sorry for this,
I had such business I might not come
But ye may perceive what my wit is,
How small regard I have and wisdom.
¶ Whereas ye ask me concerning my love
I well assure you, it doth daily augment:
Nothing can make me start or move
You only to love is mine intent.
¶ And as for my love doth never relent,
For of you I do dream, of you I do think:
To die•ner and supper, I never went,
But of Beer and Wine to you I did drink.
Now of such thynhes therefore to make an end
Which pitiful louees do cruelly •orment,
To Marriage in Gods name, let vs discende
As unto this hour we have been bent.
¶ Your will to accomplish I am as ready,
As any woman, believe me truly.
¶ This Ring then I gin you as a token sure,
Whereby our love shall always endure.
¶ With a pure pretence your pledge I take gladly
For a Sign of our love, faith and fidelity.
¶ Now I am safe, now I am glad,
Now I do live, now I do ra•g•••
Me thought till now I was to sad,
Wherefore sadness fly hence again.
I way with those words which my father brought out
A way with his saigenes and exhortacion
He could not make me his fool or his lowte,
And put me vesydes this delectacion.
Did he judge that I would• go to the School,
And might my time spend after this sort▪
I am not his Calse, nor yet his fool,
This Virgin I kiss, is my comfort.
¶ Well than I pray you let vs be married
For me think from it we have lunge tarried.
¶ Agreed my Sweating, it shelve then done,
Since that thy good will I have gotten and won.
¶ There would this day be very good theare
That every one his vealy may fill.
And three or four Minstrels would be here
That none in the house sit idle or styll.
¶ Take ye no thought for abundance of meat
That should be spent at our Bridal,
For there shall be ynought for all men to eat
And Minstrels besides thereto shall not sail.
The Cooks I dare say, a good while a gone
With such kind of flesh as I did them tell
Are from the market both come home
Or else my own Cony they do not well.
I knew before that I come to this place
We should be married together this day
Which caused me then forth with in this case
To send for victuals or I came away.
Where fore then (I pray ye) shall we go to our Inn,
And look that every thing be made ready,
Or else all is not worth a Brass pynne,
Such hast is required in matry money.
¶ I think six a clock it is, not much passed
But yet to the priest we will make hast
That according to custom we may be both coupled
And with a strong knot for ever bound fast.
Yet ere I depart, some songe I will singe,
To the intent to derlare my Joy without fear
And in the mean fyme you may my sweating,
Rest your self in this little chair.
SPyte of his spyte, which that in vain.
Doth seek to force my fantasy,
I am professed for loss or gain,
To be thine own assucedlye:
Wherefore let my father spyte and spurn,
My fantasy wyil never turn.
¶ Although my father •f bus•e wy•te,
Doth babble styll. I care not tho,
I have no fear•, nor yet will flit,
As doth the water to and fro,
Wherefore let my father spyte and spurur,
My fantasy will never turn.
¶ For I am set and will not swerve,
Whom spiteful speech removes nought
And since that I thy grace deserve,
I count it is not dearly bought,
Wherefore let my father spyte and spurn,
My fantasy will never turn.
¶ Who is afraid••let you him fly,
For I shall well abide the brunt:
Mangre to bys lips that lists to lye
Of busy brains as is the wont.
Wherefore let my father s•yte and spurn,
My fantasy will never turn.
¶ Who •ysteth thereat to laugh• or lore
I am not be that •ught doth retche
There is no payue that hath the power,
Out of my orest your love to fetch,
Wherefore let my father spyte and spurn,
My fantasy will never turue.
¶ for whereas he moved me to the School,
And only to follow my Book and learnenynge:
He could never make me such a fool,
With all his soft words, and fair speaking.
Wherefore let my father spyte and spurn,
My f•ned•sye will never turn.
¶ This Minion here, this myneing Trull,
•oath •le•se me wore a thousand fold:
Then all the earth that is so full.
•f precious stones, Soluer and Gold.
Wherefore let my father spyre and spurn,
My fantasy will never turn.
¶ What soever I did, it was for her sak
It was for her some, and only pleasure,
I count it no labour, such labour to take,
In getting to me so high a treasure.
Wherefore let my father spyte and spurn,
My fantasy will never turn.
¶ This day I intended for to be merry,
Although my harde Father be far hence.
I know no cause for to be beuye,
For all this cost and great expense.
Wherefore let my father spyte and spurn,
My fantasy will never turn.
¶ How like ye this songe, my own sweet Rose,
Is it well made for our purpose?
¶ I never harde in all my life a better,
More pleasmante, more meet for the matter,
Now let vs go then, the morning is ny gone
We can not any longer here remain:
Farewell good Masters eueryechone,
Till from the Church we come again.
Sirs, by my truth it is a world to see,
The exceeding negligence of every one.
Even from the highest to the lowest degree,
Both goodness and conscience is clean gone.
There is a youge gentelman in this town,
Who this same day now must be married:
Yet though I would bestow a Crown,
That knave the Clarke can not be spied.
For he is safe if that in the Alehouse,
He may sit tippling of Nut browne Ale:
That oft be commas forth as drunk as Mouse,
With a nose of his own not greatly pale,
And this is not once, but every day,
Almost of my faith, through out the whole year,
That he these tricks doth use to play,
Without all shame, dreable and fear.
He knoweh him self that yester night,
The said young gentelman came to me,
And then desired, that he might
This morning beiymes married be.
But now I doubt it will be hye noon,
Ere that this business be quite ended:
Unless the knauys she fool come very soon,
That this same thing may be dispatched,
And therefore since that this noughty pasha,
Hath at this present me thus served.
He is like hence forward my good will to lack
Orals b•wyss I might be judged.
I am taught hereafter, howe such a one to trust,
In day matter concerning the Church,
For if I should, I perceive that I must,
Of my•e own honesty loose very much.
And yet for all this, from week to week,
For his stipend and wages he never cries,
And for the same continually doth seek,
As from time to time plainly appears,
But whither his wages he hath deserved,
Unto you all I do me report,
Since that his duty he hath not fulfilled,
Nor to the Church will scant resort.
That many a time and oft, I am fain
To play the Priest, Clarke, and all
Though thus to do, it is great payne,
And mire ward but very small,
Wherefore (God willing) I will such order take,
Before thou I be many days elder,
That he shall be glad this town to forsake
And learn evermore to please his better.
And in such wise all they shall be used,
Which in this pacysshe entende to be Clarks,
Great pyt•e it were, the Church should be disordered
Because that such Swylbowles do not their works.
And to say truth, in many a place,
And other great towns beside this same,
The Priests and Parishioners be in the like case,
Which to the Church wardens may be a shame.
Haw should the Priest his office fulfil,
Accordingly as in dede he ought?
When that the Clarke will have a self will
And always in Service time must be sought?
Notwithstanding at this present there is no remedy
But to take time, as it doth fall,
Wherefore I will go hence and make me ready
For it helps not to chafe or brawl.
LOmmynae this day forth of my Chambre,
Even as for water to wasshe I did call,
By chance I espied a certain stranger,
Standing beneath within my Hall.
Who in very deed came from the Inholder
Whereas for a time my Son did lye,
And said that his master had sent me a letter
And bade him to bring it with all speed possibly.
Wherein he did write that as this day
That vnthr•fre my Son to a certain Maid,
Should then be wedded, without further delay,
And bath borrowed more than will be paid.
And since that he harde, he was my Son,
By a Gentelman or two, this other day:
He thought that it should be very well done,
To let me have knowledge thereof by the way.
And willed me if that I would any thing
Of him to be done of me in this matter:
That then he his Servant such word should bring
As at his coming he might do hereafter.
I bade him thank his Master most hattelye
And sent him, by him a piece of Venison:
For that he vouchesaued to write so gentely,
Touching the marrying and state of my Son,
But notwithstanding I sent him no Money,
To paye such Dettes as my Son did owe,
Because he had me forsaken utterly,
And me for his good Father would not know,
And said that with him I would not make,
From that day forward, burynge my life
But as he had brewed, that so be should bake,
Since of l•is own choosing, he gat him a wife.
Thus when• his Servant from the departed
Into my Chambre I went again,
And there a great while I pitterly weeped,
This •ewes to me was so great payne:
And thus with these words I began to moan,
Lamenting and mourning my self all a lone.
O witness, O doting of those young folk
O my ••es without wit, advise, and discretion,
With whom their par•ntes can bear no stroke
In th•se first Matrimonial conjunction
They know not what misery grief and unquietness
Will hereafter ensue, of their extreme foolysshenes,
Of all such labours, they be clean ignorant,
Which in the nourishing and keeping of Children
〈◊〉 their great charges, it is convenient
Either of them henceforth to sustain:
Concerning expenses bestowed in a hows
They per•eyue as little as doth the Mouse.
On the one side, the wife will brawl and scold,
On the other side the Infant will cry in the Cradell:
Anon when the Child wareth somewhat old,
For meat and drink, he begins to babel.
Hereupon comes it, that at markets and fairs
A Husband is forced to bye many wares.
Yet for all this hath my foolish Son
As wise a Wodcocke, without any wit,
Despising his Fathers mind and opinion,
Married a wife for him most vnfyete,
Supposing that mirth to be eueciastynge,
Which then at the first was greatly pleasing.
How they two will live, I can not tell,
Where they may trust, they have nothing
My mind •yueth me, that they will come dwell,
At length by their father for want of livings,
But my Son doubtless, for any thing that I know▪
Shall reap in such wise as he did sow,
True he shall find, that Hippon•rtes did write
Who said with a wife are two days of pleasure
The first is the joy of the Marriage day and night
The second to be at the wife's Sepulture:
And this by experience he shall prove true,
That of his Bridal great euyiles do ensue.
And (as I suppose,) it will prove in his l•fe,
When he shall wish that to him it may chance,
Which unto Eupolis and also his wife,
The night they were wedded, fell for a vengeance
Who with the heavy thine of the Gedde were s•own,
As the Poet Ouid in these two Uerses makes plain,
¶ Si tibi coniugii nox prime, nouissima vite,
Eupolis, hoc periit, &amp; nova nupta modo.
Ouidius writing against one Ibis his enemy
That the first night of his Marriage did wish
The last of his life might be certainly.
For so (quote he) did Eupolis and his wife perysshe.
Yet to my Soon I pray God to send
Because thereunto me Nature doth bind:
Though he hath offended, a better end,
Then Eupolis and his wife did find.
And now I shall lunge ever anon,
Till some of those quarters come riding hither,
Unto the which my Son is gone,
To know how they do live together.
But I am fasting, and it is almost noon
And more than time that I had dined:
Wherefore from hence I will go soon,
I think by this time, my meat is burned.
O My sweet wife, my pretty Cony.
¶ O my Husband, as pleasant as Honey.
¶ O Lord wath pleasures and great commodity,
Are heaped together in Matrimony?
¶ Howe vehement, howe strong a thing love is?
Howe many smyrkes, and dulsome kisses?
¶ What smiling: what laughing?
What sport, pastime, and playing?
¶ What tickling: what toying,
What dalyenge, what joying?
¶ The man with the wife is wholly delighted
And with many causes to laughter enforced.
¶ When they two drink, they drink together
They never eat, but one with another.
¶ Sometimes to their Garden forth they walk
And into the fields sometimes they go,
With merry tricks, and gestures they talk
As they do move their feet to and fro.
¶ Sometimes they ride into the Country
Passing the time with mirth and sport,
And when with their friends, they have ben merry▪
Home to their own house they do resort.
¶ Sometimes abroad they go, to see plays,
And other trym sights, for to be hold:
When often they meet in the hye ways
Much of their acquaintance they knew of old.
¶ Sometimes to the Church, they do repair
To here the Sermon that shall be made:
Though it to remember, they have small care,
For why? they be now, but few of that trade.
¶ Sometimes at home, at cards they play
Sometimes at this game sometimes at that
They need not with sadness to pass the day
Nor yet to sit styll, or stand in one plat.
¶ And as for vs wife's, occasions do moan,
Sometimes with our Gossyppes to make good cheer
Or else we did not, as did vs behove,
For certain days and weeks in the years.
¶ I think that a man might spend a whole day
Declaring the Joys, and endless bliss:
Which married persons receive always,
If they love faithfully, as meet it is.
¶ Wives can not choose, but love earnestly
If that their Husbands do all things well
Or eyes my sweet heart, we shall espy,
That in quietness they can not dwell.
¶ If they do not, it may be a shame
For I love you heartily I you assure:
Or else I were truly greatly to blame
Ye are so loving, so kind, and demure.
¶ I trust that with neither hand or foot,
Ye shall see any occasion by me:
But that I love you even from the heart root
And during my life so intende to be,
¶ Who then merry Marriage can discōmende
And will not with Aristotle in his Ethics agree▪
But will say, that misery is the end
When otherwise I find it to be:
A polite•que man will mary a wife
As the Philosopher makes declaration,
Not only to have children by his life,
But also for living, help, &amp; sustentacion.
¶ Who will not with Herocles playntly confess,
That Mankind to Society is wholly adjoining•
And in this Society nevertheless:
Of worthy Wedlock took the beginning.
Without the which, no City can stand
Nor Household be perfect in any land.
¶ Pythagoras, Socrates, and Crates also
Which truly were men of very small Substance
As I harde my father tell lunge ago,
Did take them wife's with a safe conscience:
And dwelled together, supposing that they
Were unto Philosophy, another stop nor staye.
¶ yea what can be more according to kind
Then a man to a woman him self to bind?
¶ Away with those therefore that Marriage despised
And of dangers thereof invent many lies.
¶ But what is he that comes yonder,
Do ye not think it is our man?
Somewhat there is that he hastes hither,
For he makes as much speed as he can.
¶ Master there is a Stranger at home
He would very fain with you talk:
For until that to him you do come
Forth of the doors he will not walk.
¶ Come on then my wife, if it be so,
Let vs depart hence for a season:
For I am not well till I do know
Of that man coming the very reason.
¶ Let them go both, and do what they will
And with communication fill their bealy:
For I by Saint George will tarry here styll,
In all my life I was never so weary.
I have this day filled so many Pots
With all manner wine, Ale, and Beer:
That I wished their belies full of Bottes
Lunge of whom was made such cheer.
What kinds of meat, both flesh and fyshe
Have I poor knave to the table carried?
From time to time dish after dish,
My legs from going never ceased.
What running had I for Apples and Nuts?
What calling for Biscuits, Cumfettes and Caroweies?
A vengeance said I, light on their guts
That makes me to turn so many ways.
What crying was there for Cards and Dice?
What coystynge, what ruffling made they within?
I counted them all not greatly wife.
For my head did almost ache with din.
What babbling, what jangling was in the house?
What quaffing, what bybbyng with many a Cup?
That some lay along as drunk as a Mouse
Not able so much as their heads to hold up.
What dancing, what leaping, what jumping about
From bench to bench, and stool to stool?
That I wondered their brains did not fall out
When they so out ragiously played the fool.
What juggling was there upon the boards?
What thrusting of knives through many a nose
What bearing of Forms? what holding of Swords?
And putting of Botkyns through leg and hose?
Yet for all that they called for drink,
And said that they could not play for dry
That many at me did nod and wink
Because I should bring it by and by,
How so ever they sported the pot did styll walk
If that were away, then all was lost:
For ever anon the Jug was their talk,
They paste not who bare such charge and cost.
Therefore let him look his Purse be right good,
That it may discharge all that is spent,
Or else it will make his haere grow through his hood
There was such havoc made at this present,
But I am afeared my moister be angry
That I did abide thus lunge behind:
Yet for his anger I pass not greatly,
His words they be but only wind,
Now that I have rested so lunge in this place
Home ward again. I will bye me apase.
WHere is my Husband, was he not here?
I marvel much whither he is gone
Than I perceive I am much the ne'er,
But lo•, where he comes hither alone.
Wot ye what Husband, from day to day,
With dainty dishes, our bodies have been filled:
What meat to morrow• next shall we assay?
Whereby we may then be both refresihed.
¶ Do ye now provide and give a regarve
For Victuals hereafter to be prepared?
¶ But that I know Husband, it lies vs in hand
Of things to come to have a consideration
I would not ones will you to understand
About such busynes my careful provision:
It is needful therefore to work we make hast
That to get both our livings we may know the cast.
¶ To trouble me now, and make me vexed,
This mischievous mean hast thou invented.
¶ What trouble for thee? what kind of vexation?
Have I to disquiet thee, caused at this present?
My only mind is, thou make expedition
To seek for our profit as is convenient.
Wherefore to thee I say ones again,
Because to take pains thou art so loathe,
By Christ it were best, with might and mayne
To fall to some work, I swear a great other.
¶ Yet for a time, if it may thee please
Let me be quit, and take mine ease.
¶ Wilt thou have vs then through hungry he starved:
¶ I would not we should for hungry be killed.
¶ Then I say then, this gear go about,
And look that thou labour diligently:
Or else thou shalt shortly prove without doubt,
Thy sluggishness will not please me greatly.
¶ Begynnest thou even now to be painful &amp; grievous
And to thy Husband, a woman so troublous?
¶ What words have we here thou misbegotten,
Is there not already enough to the spoken?
¶ O mirth, O Joy, O pastime and pleasure,
How little a space, do you endure?
¶ I see my cōmaundement can take no place,
Thou shalt aby therefore, I swear by the Mass.
¶ Alas good wife, good wife, alas, alas,
Strike not so harde, I pray thee heartily,
Whatsoever thou will have brought to pass
It shall be done with all speed possibly.
¶ Lay these Faggots man upon thy shoulder
And carry this wood from street to street:
To sell the same, that we both together,
Our living may get, as is most mete.
Hence Nidiot hence, without more delay
What meanest thou thus, to stagger and staye?
¶ O Lord what howe miserable men be those
Which to their wife's as wretches be wedded
And have them conti nually their mort all foes
Serving them thus, as Slaves that he hired.
Now by experience true I do find,
Which oftentimes unto me heretofore
My father did say, declaring his mind
That in Matrimony was payne evermore,
What shall I do most pitiful Creature?
Just cause I have alas to lament:
That frantic woman my death will procure
If so he this day without gain be spent
For unless for my wood some Money be taken
Like a dog, with a Cudgel I shall be beaten.
Ho thou good fellow which stand so ny
Of these heavy bundelles ease my sore back:
And somewhat therefore give me by and by
Or else I dye, for Silver I do lack.
Now that I have some Money received
For this my burden home I will go:
And lest that my wife be discontented,
What I have take, I will her show.
Wife I am come, I went a lunge way
And here is the profit, and gains of this day.
¶ Why thou Lowte, thou fool, thou whoreson folte,
Is this thy wood money, thou peevish Dolt?
Thou shalt smart for this gear, I make God a vow
Thou know no more to sell wood, then doth the sow
¶ By Gods precious I will not unwisely suffes
To do as I have done, any longer.
¶ Why doest thou rise against me Villain?
Take heed I scrache not out thy eyes twain.
¶ Scratch and thou dare, for I have a knife,
Perchance I will rid the of thy life.
¶ Slay me with thy knife, thou shytten Dastard?
Doest thou think to find me such a Dissarde?
By Cox bones I will make thy skin to retell,
And the brains in thy S•ull more deeply to sattell.
¶ Good wife be content, forgive my this fault
I will never again do that which is nought.
¶ Go to foolish Calfe, go to, and uprise,
And put up thy knife, I the advise.
¶ I will do your cōmaun dementes whatsoever.
¶ Hence away then, and fill this with water.
O merciful God, in what lamentable state
Is he, of whom the wife is the master?
Would God I had been predestinate,
On my Marriage day, to have dyed with a Fever.
O wretched creature, what may I do?
My grievous wife shall I return unto?
Lo wife behold without further delay
The water ye sent for, here I do bring.
¶ What I say• what means this weeping?
What ails the to make all this crying?
¶ I weep not forsooth, not cry not as yet.
¶ No, nor thou wilt not, if thou haste any wye,
It is not thy weeping, that can ought avail,
And therefore this matter no longer be whale.
Come of I say, and run to the River
And wasshe these clothes in the water.
¶ Wife I will thither hye me fast.
¶ Yet I advise the, thou Cullyon make hast.
¶ O howe unhappy and eke unfortunate
Is the most part of married men condition?
I would to death I had been agate
When my Mother in be orange me made lamentation.
What shall I do whither shall I turn,
Most careful man now under the Sky?
In the flamynge fire, I had rather burn,
Then with extreme payne, live so heavily,
There is no wyfte, to my wife I must go
Whom that I did wed, I am full••o.
Where are ye wife, your clothes are washte clean
Is white as a lylly without spot or ueyne.
¶ Thou thief, thou caitiff, why is not this place,
Washed as fair as all the rest,
Thou shalt for this gear now smoke apase
By gys I swear, thou brutish Beast.
¶ Alas, alas, I am almost quyte dead,
My wife so pitifully hath broken my head.
¶ Well I perceive, the rhyme will away
And into the Country to go I have promised
Look therefore thou go not from hence to days
Till home again I am returned.
Take heed I say, this Hows thee retain,
And stir not for any thing out of my door:
Until that I come hither again,
As thou will be rewarded therefore.
¶ The slyinge and fiend go with my wife
And in her Journey ill may she speed:
I pray God almighty to shorten her life
The earth at no time doth bear such a weed.
Although that I be a Gentelman borne
And come by my Ancestors of a good blood,
Yet am I like to wear a Cote torn
And hither and thither go catye wood.
But rather then I this life will abide
To morrow morning I do intende,
Home to my Father again to ride,
If some man to me his Horse will lend.
She is to her Gossips gone to make merry,
And there she will be for three or four days:
She cares not though I do now miscarry
And suffer such payne and sorrow always.
She leaves to me neither Bread nor drink
But such as I iugde no body would eat:
I might by the wails lye dead and stink
For any great holsomnes in my meat.
She walk a broad, and takes her pleasure
Her self to cherish is all her care:
She passes not what griefs I endure,
Or howe I can live with noughty fare:
And since it is so, without further delay
To my father to morrow I will away.
HO, ho, ho, what a fellow am I?
Give row me I say both more and less:
∷ ∷ My strength and power hence to the Sky
No eacthly tongue can well express.
Oh what inuencious, crafts and wiles,
Is there contained within this head?
I know that he is within few miles
Which of the same is thoroughly sped.
Oh, it was all my study day and night
Cōnyngly to bring this matter to pass:
In all the earth, there is no wight
But I can make to cry alas.
This man and wife, that not lunge ago
Fell in this place together by the ears:
It was only I that this strife did sow
And have been about it certain years.
For after that I had taken a small:
Of their good will and fervent love,
My thought I should not tarry in hell
But unto debate them shortly move,
Oh it was I that made him to despise
All wisdom, goodness, virtue and learning
That be afterword could in no wise
Ones in his heart fancy teaching.
Oh it was I, that made him refuse
The wholesome menytion of his Father dere
And caused him styll of a wife to muse
As though she should be his joy and there.
Oh it was I, that made him go hence,
And suppose that his father was very unkind,
It was I, that did oryue him to such expense,
And made him as bare, as an •pe is behind.
And now that I have this busynes ended
And joined him and his wise together:
I think that I have my part well played,
None of you all would do it better.
Ho, ho, ho, this well favoured heads of mine
What thing soever it hath in hand:
Is never troubled with Ale or Wine,
Neither by Sea, nor yet by land.
I tell you I am a marvelous body,
As any is at this day living:
My head doth deuyse eche thing so trimly,
That all men may wonder of the ending,
Oh I have such fetches, such toys in this head
Such crafty deuyses and subtle train:
That whom so ever of you I do wed,
ye are like at my hands to take small gain.
There is no gentelman, knight, or Lord:
There is no Duke, Earl, or king:
But if I list, I can with one word,
Shortly send unto their lodging.
Some I disquiet with Coueitousnes,
Some with wrath, pride and lechery,
And some I do thrust into such distress
That he feels only payne and misery.
Some I allure to have their delight
Always in Glotonye, Envy and murder:
And those things to precise with all their might
Either by land, or else by water.
Ho, ho, ho, there is none to be compared,
To me I tell you, in any point:
With a great sort my self I have tried,
That boldly ventured many a joint.
And when for a lunge time we had wrestled
And showed our strength on either side,
Yet often times a fall they received,
When through my Policy their fief did slyde.
Wherefore (my dere children) I warn ye all,
Take heed, take heed of my temptation:
For cōmenly at the last y• have the fall
And also brought to Desperation.
Oh it is a forye for many to strive
And think of me to get the upper hand:
For unless that God make them to thryue
They can not against me stick or stand.
And though that God on hy• have his dominion
And rules the world every where:
Yet by your leave, I have a portion,
Of this same earth that stands here.
The kingdom of God is aboue in Heaven
And mine is I tell you beneth in Hell:
But yet a greater place if he had dealt even
He should have given me and mine to dwell,
For to my Palace of every Nation
Of what degree or birth so ever they be.
Come running in with such festination,
That other while they amassed me,
Oh all the Jaws, and all the Turks,
Yea and a great part of Christen dome
When they have done my will, and my works
In the end they fly hither all and some.
There is no miunte of the day
There is no minute of the night:
But that in my Palace there is always
Crowding together a marvelous sight,
They come on thicker, then swarms of Bees,
And make such a noise and crying out:
That many a one lies on his knees,
With thousands kept under, and closed about
Not so much as my parlours, halles, and every chamber
By Porches, my galeryes, and my court:
My entries, my kitchen, and my Larder,
But with all manner people be filled throughout.
What shall I say more, I can not tell,
But of this (my children) I am certain,
There comes more in one hour unto Hell,
Then unto Heaven, in a month or twain.
And yet for all this, my Nature is such
That I am not pleased with this company,
But out of my kingdom I must walk much
That one or other I may take tardy,
Ho, ho, ho, I am never ones afraid
With these my Claws you for to touche,
For I will not leave till you be paid,
Such treasure, as is within my Pouch.
The world is my Son, and I am his Father
And also the flesh, is a daughter of mine
It is I alone, that taught them to gather,
Both Gold and Silver that is so fine.
Wherefore I suppose that they love me well
And my Cōmaun dementes gladly obey,
That at the last then unto Hell,
They may come all the ready way.
But now (I know) since I came hither
There is such a multitude at my gate,
¶ That I must agaynt repair down thither
After mine old manner and rate.
HOwe glad am I, that my journey is ended,
Which I was about this whole dare?
∷ ∷ My Horse to stand styll I never suffered,
Because I would come to the end of my way,
But yet I am sorry that I can not find,
My loving Father at home at his place:
That unto him I may break my mind,
And let him know my miserable case.
¶ I have ben wild, I have ben wanton,
I have ever followed my fancy and will:
I have ben to my Father a froward Son
And from day to day continued styll.
I have always proudly disdained those
That in my madness gave me good counsel
I counted them most my mortal foes,
And stoutly against them did rebel.
The thing that was good, I greatly hated
As one which lacked both wit and reason,
The thing that was evil I ever loved
Which now I see is my confusion.
I could not abide of the School to hear
Masters and teachers my heart abborred,
We thought the Book was not fit gear,
For my tendeer fingers to have handled,
I counted it a pleasure to be daintily fed
And to be clothed to costly artaye:
I would most cōmonly slugge in my bed,
Until it were very far forth day.
And to be short, anon after this,
There came such fancies in my brain:
That to have a wife whom I might kiss
I rekened to be the greatest gain.
But yet alas I was quyte deceived
The thing it self doth easily appear:
I would alas I had ben buryeb,
When to my Father, I gave not ear.
That which I had, I have clean spent,
And kept so much riot with the same:
That now I am fain, a Cote that is rent
At as to wear for very shame.
I have not a cross left in my purse,
To help my self now in my need:
That well I am worthy of Gods curse,
And of my Father to have small mede.
But except m••e eyes do we beguile,
That man is my Father, whom I do see:
And now that he comes, without craft or while,
To him I will hende on either knee.
Ah Father, Father, my Father most dere,
¶ Ah mine own child, with the what there?
¶ All such sayings as in my mind,
At the first time ye studied to sattell,
Most true alas, I do them find,
As though they were written in the Gospel.
¶ Those words my Son, I have almost forgotten,
Stand up therefore, and kneel no longer:
And what it was I spake so often,
At two or there words, recyte to thy Father.
¶ If that ye be Father well remembered
As the same I believe ye can not forget:
You said that so soon as I were married,
Much payne and trouble thereby I should get.
¶ Haste thou by proof soon, this thing tried?
¶ Yea, alas to much I have experienced:
My wife, I did wed, all full of frenzy,
My sly poor shoulders, hath now so broused,
That like to a Cripple, I moan me weakly,
Being full often with the staff thwacked:
She spares no more my flesh and bone,
Than if my body were made of Stone,
Her will, her mind, and her Cōmaundement,
From that day hither, I have fulfilled:
Which if I did not, I was bitterly shent,
And with many strokes grenously punished:
That would God the hour when I was married,
In the midst of the Church I might have finked.
I think there is no man under the Son
That here on the earth bears life:
Which would do such drudgery, as I have done,
At the unkind words of such a wife,
For howe I was used, and in what wise
A day to declare will not suffice.
If this be not true, as I have spoken
To my good neighbours I me report,
Who ether while when I was smitten
My wife to be gentle, did then exhort:
For glad I was to abide all labour
Whereby the less might be my dolor.
Wherefore good Father I you humbly desire
To have pity of me and some compassion?
Or else I am like to lye fast in the mire,
Without any succour or consolation:
For at this hour I have not a penny,
My self to help in this great misery.
¶ For so much as by my advise and counsel
In no manner wise thou would be ruled:
Therefore to the I can not do well,
But let the styll suffer, as thou haste deserved
For that thou hast suffered, is yet nothing
To that tribulation which is behind cōmynge.
¶ Alas Father, what shall I do?
My wits of them selves can not deuyse,
What thing I were best to go unto,
Whereof an honest living may arise:
Wherefore gentle Father in this distress,
Somewhat assuage mine heaviness.
¶ What should I do I can not tell,
For now that thou hast taken a wife
With me thy father thou may not dwell,
But always with her spend thy life.
Thou may not again thy wife forsake,
Which during life to the thou did take.
¶ Alas I am not able thus to endure
Though thereunto I were never so willing:
For my wife is of such a crooked nature
As no woman else, is this day living,
And if the very truth I shall confess
She is to me an evil that is endless.
¶ If that thou think thy self alone
Only to lead this irksome life.
Thou majesty learn what grief, sorrow and moan,
Socrates had with Xantippa his wife.
Her Husband full oft she taunted and checked
And as the Book says vnhonestly mocked.
¶ I can not tell, what was Socrates wife
But mine I do know alas to well,
She is one that is evermore full of strife
And of all Scolders bears the Bell.
When she speaks best, then brawleth her tongue
When she is styll she fights apace:
She is an old Witch though she be young,
No mirth with her, no joy or solace.
¶ I can not my Son thy state redress,
Me thy Father thou did refuse:
Wherefore now help thy own fooly shenes,
And of thy wife no longer muse.
¶ My wife went forth n• to the Country
With certain Gossyppes to make good chere,
And bad me at home styll to be,
That at her return, she might find me there:
And if that she do take me from home,
My bones alas she will make to crackell:
And me her Husband as a stark mom,
With knocking and mocking she will handel.
And therefore if I may not here remain,
Yet loving Father, give me your reward,
That I may with speed ride have again,
That to my wife's words, have some regard.
¶ If that at the first thou would have been ordered.
And done as thy Father counselled the:
So wretched a life had never chanced
Whereof at this present thou complain to me.
But yet come on, to my house wee will be going
And there thou shalt see, what I will give:
A little to help thy nedye living:
Since that in such penury thou doest live,
And that once done, thou must hence again
For I am not he, that will the retain.
THis Interlude here good gentle audience,
Which presently before you we have played:
∷ ∷ Was set forth with such care and diligence,
As by vs truly might well be showed.
Short it is I deny not, and full of brevity
But if ye mark thereof the matter,
Then choose ye can not, but see plainly
How payne and pleasure be knit together.
By this little play, the Father is taught,
After what manner his Child to use:
Least that through cockerynge at length he be brought
His Fathers Cōmaundement to refuse,
Here ye may learn a wyttie lesson,
Betimes to correct his Son being tender:
And not let him be lost and undone,
With wantonness of mischief the Mother,
For as lunge as the twig is gentell and pliant
(Every man knows this by experience:)
With small force and strength it may be bent
Putting thereto but little diligence.
But after that it waxes somewhat digger
And to east his branches largely begins,
It is scant the might of all thy power,
That one kowghe thereof▪ easily bends,
This twig to a child may well be applied
Which in his childhood, and age of Infancy:
With small correction may be amended,
Emoracynge the School with heart and body.
Who afterword with over much liberty,
And ranging abrobe with the Bridal of will.
Despyseth all virtue, searnyuge and honestys,
And also his Fathers mind to fulfil.
Whereby at the length it so falls out
That this the young Stripling after that day:
Runs into confusion without any doubt
And like for evermore quyte to decay.
Wherefore take heed all ye that be parents
And solowe a part after my counsel,
Instruct your Children and make them students
That unto all goodness they do not rebel
Remember what writes Solomon the wise,
Oui parcit Virgo, odith filium.
¶ Therefore for as much as ye can deuyse
Spare not the Rod, but follow wisdom.
Further ye young men and Children also
Listen to me and harken a while,
What in few words for you I will show,
Without any slatterye, fraud, or guile.
This Richemans Son whom we did set forth,
Here evidently before your eyes:
Was (as it chanced) nothing worth,
Given to all noughtynes, vice, and lies.
The cause whereof was this for a truth
His time full idly he did spend,
And would not study in his youth,
Which might have brought him to a good end.
His fathers cōmaundement he would not obey,
But wantouly followed his fantasy:
For nothing that he could do or say,
Would bring this Child to honesty.
And at the last (as here ye might see:)
Upon a wife he fired his mind,
Thinking the same to be felicity,
When in dede misery came bebynde.
For by this wife be carefully lived,
Who under his Father did want nothing:
And in such sort was hereby tormented
That ever a none, he went lamenting.
His Father did will him lightness to leave
And only to give him self unto study:
But yet unto virtue he would dot cleave,
Which is cōmodious for soul and body.
You heard that by Sentences ancient and old
He stirred his Son as he best thought:
But he as an vnthryfe stowte and bold,
His bolsome counsel did set at nought.
And since that he despised his Father
God unto him did suddenly then send:
Such poverty with a wife, and grief together
That shame and sorrow was his end.
Wherefore to conclude, I warn you all
By your loving parents, always be ruled:
Or else be well assured of such a fall?
As unto this young man worthily chanced.
Worship God daily which is the chief thing
And his holy laws do not offend:
Look that ye truly serve the king,
And all your faults be glad to amend.
Moreover, be true of hand and tongue,
And learn to do all things that be honest,
For no time so fit, as when ye be young,
Because that age only is the aptest.
I have no more, to speak at this season,
F•• •••ye good will these things I did say.
Because I do see that virtue is geason,
With most men and children, at this day.
And last of all, to make an end,
O God to the we most humbly pray:
That to Queen Elizabeth thou do send
Thy lively path, and perfect way,
Grant her in health to reign.
With vs many years most prosperoustye:
And after this life for to attain,
The eternal bliss, Joy, and felicity.
Our Bysshoppes, pastors, and Ministers also
The true understanding of thy word,
Both night and day, now mercifully show,
That their life and preaching may godly accord,
The Lords of the Counsel, and the Nobility,
Most heavenly Father, we thee desire:
With grace, wisdom, and godly policy,
Their hearts and minds, always inspire.
And that we thy people duly considering
The power of our Queen and great auctorytie,
May please thee and serve her without faynynge,
Living in peace, rest, and tranquillity.
WHy doth the world study vainglory to aff•in
The prosperity whereof is short and transitory
Whose mighty power, doth fall down again,
Like earthen ports, that breaks so daynly.
¶ Believe rather words that be written in Ice
Then the wretched world with his subtility:
Disceytfull in Go•ces, men only to entice,
Destitute of •••sure credence and fidelity.
¶ Gin credit more to men of true Judgements
Then to the worldly renown and joys:
Replenys shed with dreams and vain intents,
Aboun dynge in wicked and noughtye toys.
¶ Where is now Solomon in wisdom so excellence
Where is now Samyson, in battle so strong?
Where is now A•solo•• in Beantie resplendent?
Where is now good Iousthas hyd so lunge?
¶ Where is now Caesar in victory triumphing?
Where is now Tines, in dishes so dainty?
Where is now Tully in Gloquence exceeding?
Where is now Are•••le, learned so deep¦lie?
¶ What Emperoues, kings, and Dukes in times past?
What Earies and Lords, and Captains of war?
What Popes and Bysshoppes, all at the last,
In the twy••king of an eye are fled so far?
¶ Howe short a Feast is this worldly joying?
Even as it shadow 〈◊〉 passes away,
Depry••ge a 〈◊〉 of by•tes everlasting
Leading to da••ed 〈◊〉 not to day.
¶ O meat of worms, O heap of dust,
O like to dew climb not to hye:
To live to morrow, thou can not trust,
Therefore now betyme help the nedye
¶ The fles shely Beauty, whereat thou doest wondre,
In holy Scripture is likened to Hay:
And as a Leaf in a stormy weather,
So is man life blown clean a way,
¶ Call nothing thine that may be lost,
The world doth give and take again:
But set thy mind on the holy Ghost,
Despise the world that is so vain.

Grande Lady mother of every mortal thing:
Nurse of the woorlde conseruatyue of kind
Cause of increase, of life and soul the spring,
At whose instinct, the noble Heaven doth wind,
To whose award all Creatures are assynde,
I come in place, to treat with this my son,
For his avail howe he the path may find,
Whereby his Race in honour he may run:
Come tender Child, vnrype and greene for age,
In whom the parrot sets her chief delete,
Wit is thy name, but far from wisdom sage,
Till tract of time shall work and frame aright,
This peerless brain, not yet in perfect plight:
But when it shall be wrought me thinks I see
As in a glass before hand with my sight
A certain perfect piece of work in the,
And now so far as I guess by signs
Some great attempt is fixed in thy breast:
Speak on my son where thy heart inclines
And let me deal to set thy hart at rest,
He salves the fore that knows the patient best
As I doe thee my son my chiefest care,
In whom my special praise and joy doth rest,
To me therefore these thoughts of thine declare
Nature, my sovereign Queen and parrot passing dere
Whose force I am enforced to know and knowledge every where,
This care of mine though it be bread within my breast,
Yet it is not so ripe: as yet to breed me great unrest,
So run I to and fro, with hap such as I find,
Now fast, now lose, now hot, now cold, vncōstant as that wind,
I feel my self in love yet not inflamed so,
But causes move me now and then, to let such fancies go,
Which causes prevailing sets eche thing else in doubt
Much like the nail that last came in, &amp; drives the former out.
Wherefore my su•te is this, that it would please your grace,
To settle this unsettled head in some assured place:
To lead me through the thyck, to guide me al the way,
To point me where I may achieve my most desired pray,
For now again of late I kindle in desire
And pleasure pricks fourth my youth to feel a greater fire,
What though I be to young to show her sport in bed,
Yet are there many in this land that at my years doe wed,
And though I wed not yet, yet am I old enough
To serve my Lady to my power and to begin to woe.
What is that Ladies son which thus thy hart doth move
A Lady whom it might be seem high Jove him self to love
Who taught the her to love, or hast thou seen her face.
Nor this nor that, but I ha•d men talk of her apace.
What is her name?
Reason is her sire, Experience her dame,
The Lady now is in her flowers and Science is her name
Lo where she dwells, lo where my heart is all possessed,
Lo where my body would abide, lo where my soul doth rest.
Her have I borne good will, these many years tofore,
But now she lodges in my thought a hundred parts the more,
And since I doe persuade my self that this is she
Which ought aboue all earthly wights to be most dear to me
And since I wot not howe to compass my desire,
And since for shame I can not now nor mind not to retire,
Help on I you beseech and bring this thing about
Without your hurt to my great ease, and set all out of doubt.
Thou ask more, then is in me to give,
More then thy cause, more then thy state will bear
They are two things to able thee to live,
And to live so, that none should be thy pear,
The first fromme, procéedeth every where,
But this by tail and practise of the mind,
Is set full far god wot and bought full dear,
By those that séeke the fru•te thereof to find,
To match thee then with Science in degrée,
To knit that knot, that few may reach unto
I tel the plain, it lyethe not in mée,
Why should I challenge that I cannot doe
But thou must take another way to woe,
And beat thy brain and bend thy Curious head,
Both ride and run and travail too and •roe
If thou entend that famous Dame to wed.
You name your self the Lady of this world.
It is true.
And can there be within this world, a thing •o hard for you.
My power it is not absolute in Jurisdiction
For I cognise an other Lord aboue
That hath received unto his disposition
The soul of man which he of special love
To gifts of grace and learning eke doth move.
A work so far beyond my reach and call,
That in to part of praise with him my self to show
Might soon procure my well deserved fall.
He makes the frame and receive it so,
No jot therein altered for my head,
And as I it reciue I let it go,
Causing therein such sparkles to be bred
As he commyttes to me by whom I must be led
Who guides me first and in me guides the rest,
All which in their due course and kind are sped
Of gifts from me such as may serve them best,
To thee son wit he wild me to infpire
The love of knowledge and certain séedes divine
Which ground might be a mean to bring thee hiere,
If thereunto thy self thou wilt incline
The massy gold, the counyng hand makes fine:
Good grounds are tilde, as well as are the worst
The rankest flower will ask a springing time,
So is mans wit vnperfit at the first.
If conning be the key and well of wordly bliss
My thinks god might at ye first as well endue al with this.
As conning is the kay of bliss, so it is worthy praise
The worthiest thīgs are won with pain in tract of time always,
And yet right worthy things there are, you will cōfesse I trow,
Which notwithstanding at our birth god doth on vs bestow.
There are but such as unto you that have the great to name,
I rather that bestow then win thereby ymmortal fame,
Fain would I learn what harm or detriment ensued,
If any man were at his birth with these good gifts endued.
There should be nothing left, wherein men might excel,
No blame for sin, no praise to thē that had defined well
Virtue should lose her price, and learning would abound
And as man wold admire the thing that echewher might be •oūd,
The great estate that have of me and fortune what they will
Should have no need to loke to those, whose heads are fright with skill
The meaner sort that now excels in virtues of the mind,
Should not be once accepted there where now they succour find
For great men should be sped of al &amp; wold have need of none
And he that were not borne to land should lack to live upon
These and five thousand causes more which I forbear to tel,
The noble virtue of the mind have caused there to dwell
Where none may have access, but such as can get in
Through many doble doors, through heat, through cold, through thick and thin.
Suppose I would address my self to séeke her out
And to refuse no pain that lies there about
Should I be suer to speed?
Trust me and have no doubt,
Thou can not Choose but speed with travel and with time
These two are they that must direct thee how to clime
With travel and with time, must they neds join in one?
Nor that nor this can do the good, if they be toke alone.
Time works all with ease, and gyves the great•• dynt
In time soft water dropes can hollow hardest flint
Again. with labour by it self, great matters compaste bée
Even at a gyrde in very little time or none wee sée
Wherefore in my conceit good reason it is
Either this with out that to look, or that with out this.
Set case thou did attempt to climb Pernasus hill
Take time five hundredth thousand years &amp; lōger if thou will
Trow thou to touch the top there of by standing still
Again, work out thy heart and spend thy self with toil
Take time with all or else I dare assure the of the foil
Madame, I trust I have your licence and your leave
With your good will &amp; so much help as you to me can give
With further aid also, when you shall spy your time,
To make a proffe to give attempt this famous hill to clime
And now I here request your blessing and your prayer
For sure before I sleep I will to yonder forte repair
I bless thee here with al such gifts as nature can bestow
And for thy sake I would they were as many hundred more
Take therewith all this child, to wait upon the still.
A bird of mine some kin to thee, his name is Will.
Welcome to me my will, what service can thou doe,
All things forsooth, sir when me list and more to.
But when wilt thou list, when I shall list I trow
Trust not to that, peradventure yea, peradventure no,
When I have néede of thee thou wilt not serve me so,
If yée bid me run, perhaps I will go:
Cock soul this is a boy for the nonce amongst twenty more,
I am plain I tell you at a word and a blue,
Then must I prick you child if you be drowned in sloth
Agrée you twain for I must leave you both,
Farewell my son: farewell mine own good Will,
Be ruled by Wit, and be obedient still,
Force the I cannot but as far as lies in me,
I will help thy master to make a good servant of thée
Farewell.
Adieu Lady mother with thanks for al your pain
And now let me bethincke my self again &amp; eke again
To match with Science is the thing that I have toke in hand,
A matter of more weight I sée, then I did understand
Will must be won to this, or else it will be hard
Will must go break the matter first, or else my gain is mart,
Sir boy are you content to take such part for me
As god shall send, and help it forth as much as lies in thee.
Ye a Master by his wounds or else cut of his head.
Come then &amp; let vs two devise what trace were best to trot,
Nature is on my side and Will my boy is fast,
There is no doubt I shall obtain my joys at last.
What Will I say Will boy come again foolish elf
I cry you mercy sir you are a tall man your self,
Such a cokbraine as thou art I never saw y• like to it
Truth in respect of you that are nothing else but Wit
Cāst thou tel me thy errād because thou art gone so soon,
Can I remember a lunge tale of a man in the moon,
With such a circumstance and such flym flame
I will tell at a word whole servant I am
Wherefore I come and what I have to say,
And cal for her answer, before I come away
What should I make a broad trée, of every little shrub,
And keep her agreat while with a tale of a tubbe.
Yet thou must commend me to be rich, lusty pleasant and wise.
I can not commend you, but I must make twenty lies
Rich quoth you, that appears by the port that you keep,
Even as rich as a new shorn sheep
Of pleasant conceits, ten bushels to the peck,
Lusty like a herringe, with a bell about his neck,
While as a woodcock: as brage as a bodylouse,
A man of your hands, to match with a mouse:
How say you, are not these proper qualities to praise you with.
Leave these mad toys of thine and come to the pythe
One part of the errand should have been,
To give her this picture of mine to be séene,
And to request her the same to accept
Safely until my coming to be kept,
Which I suspense till thy return and then
If it like her Ladyshipppe to appoint me where and when
I will waite upon her gladly out of hand.
Sir let me alone your mind I understand,
I will handle the matter so that you shall owe me thanks,
But what if she find fault with these spindle thanks
Or else with these black spots on your nose.
In faith sir boy this talk deserves blows.
You will not misvse your best servant I suppose
For by his nails, and by his fingers toe.
I will mar your marriage if you do clitter.
I pray the go thy ways and leave this clatter.
First shall I be so bold to break to you a matter.
Tush thou art disposed to spend words in wast,
And yet thou know this business asks hast
But even two words, and then I am gon.
If it be worth the hearing, say on.
I would not have you think that I for my part
From my promise or frō your service will depart,
But yet now and then it goes to my hart,
When I think how this marriage may be to my smar•
Why so?
I would tell you the cause if I durst for shame.
Speak hardly what thou wilt without any blame.
I am not disposed as yet to be tame,
And therefore I am loath to be under a Dame,
Now you are a Bachelor a man may soon win you
Me thinks there is some good fellowship in you,
We may laugh and be méery at board and at bed,
You are not so testy as those that be wed,
Mild in behaviour and loath to fall out,
You may run, you may ride &amp; rove roūd about,
With wealth at your will and all thing at ease,
Frée frank and lusty, esye to please,
But when you be clogged and tied by the toe,
So fast that you shall not have power to let go,
You will tell me another lesson soon after
And cry peccaui too except your luck be the better:
Then farewell goodfellowshyp then come at a call
Then waite at an inch you idle knaves all,
Then sparing and pinching and nothing of gift,
No talk with our moister, but al for his thrift,
Solemn and sower and angry as a wasp,
Althinges must be kept under locke and hasp,
At that which will make me to fare full ill.
All your care shall be to hamper poor will.
I warrant the for that take thou no thought,
Thou shalt be made of, whosoever be set at nought
As dere to me, as mine own dere brother,
Whosoever be one, thou shalt be an other.
Yea but your wife will play the shrew, party it is she that I fear
Thy message will cause her some favour to bear,
For my sake and thy sake and for her own likewise
If thou use thy self discreetly in this enterprise.
She hath a father, a testy sower old man,
I doubt lest he and I, shall fall out now and than,
Give him fair words, forbear him for his age,
Thou must consider him to be ancient and sage,
Show thy self officious and serviceable still,
And then shall Reason make very much of Will.
If your wife be ever complaining, how then?
My wife will have nothing to doe with my men.
If she doe, believe her not in any wise.
And when you once perceive her stomach to arise,
Then cut her short at the first and you shall see
A marvelous virtue in that medisen to bée,
Give her not the bridle for a year or twain
And you shall sée her bridle it without a reine,
Break her betimes and bring her under by force
Or else the gray Mare, will be the better horse.
If thou have done begone, and spend no time in vain.
Where shall I find you, when I come again.
At home.
Good enough take your ease let me alone with this
Surely a treasure of all treasures it is,
To serve such a master, as I hope him to bee,
And to have such a servant as he hath of me,
For I am quick, nimble, proper and nise,
He is full good, gentle, sober and wise,
He is full loath to thide or to check,
And I am as willing to serve at a beck,
He orders me well and speaks me so fair
That for his sake no travail I must spare,
But now am I come to the gate of this Lady,
I will pause a while to frame mine errante finely
And lo where she comes yet will I not come ny her,
But among these fellows will I stand to eye her.
My Parents ye know, howe many fall in laps
That do ascribe to me the cause of their mishaps?
Howe many séeke that come to short of their desire?
Howe many do attempt that daily do retire?
Howe many rove about the mark on every side?
How many think to hit when they are much to wide?
Howe many run to far how many light to lowe?
Howe few to good effect, their travail do bestow,
And howe all these impute their losses unto me.
Should I have joy to think of marriage now trow yée
What doth the world my love alone say they
Is bought so dere that life and goods for it must paye
Strong youth must spend it self, and yet when al is done,
We here of few or none that have this Lady won.
On me they make outcries and charge me with the blood
Of those that for my sake adventure life and good
This grief doth wound my hart so, ye suitors more as yet
I se no cause nor reason why I should admit.
Ah daughter say not so there is great cause and skill,
For which you should mislike to live unmarried thus alone
What comfort can you have remaining thus unknown
How shall the common wealth by you advanced be
If you abide enclosed here where no man may you sée
It is not for your state, your self to take the payne
All strangers that resort to you to entertain
To suffer frée access of all that come and go
To be at eche man cal to travail too and fro,
What thē, since god hath placed such treasure in your breast
Wherewith so many thousand think by you to be refreshed
Néedes must you have some one of hyd and secret trust
By whom these things may be, well ordered and discuste:
To him you must disclose the depth of all your thought
By him as time shall serve all matters must be wrought
To him aboue you must content your self to be at call
Ye must be his, he must be yours, he must be al in all.
My Lord your father tells you truth party
And that in time your self shall find and try.
I could aledge more then as yet I have said,
But I must yield, and you must be obeyed
Fall out as it will there is no help I sée,
Some one or other in time must mary mée,
In time nay out of hand, Madame if it please you,
In faith I know a yonker that will ease you,
A lively young gentleman, as fresh as any flower,
That will not stick to mary you within this hour.
Such haste might happily turn to wast to sum,
But I pray thee my pretty boy whence art thou come.
If it pleace your good Ladyship to accept me so,
I have a solemn message to tel or I go,
Not any thing in secrete your honour to stain,
But in the presence and hearing of you twain.
Speak.
The Lady of this world which Lady Nature hight,
Hath one a peerless son in whom she takes delight,
On him she charge m•n to be antendant styll,
Both kind to her, his name is Wit, my name is Will,
The noble child doth feel the force of cupids flame
And sends now for ease by counsel of his dame,
His mother taught him first to love while he was young
Which love with age increases sore and waxes wondrous strong
For very fame displays your bounty more and more,
And at this pyntch he burns so as never heretofore
Not fanteses force, not vain and Idle toys of love,
Not hope of that which commonly doth other suitors move,
But fixed fast good will that never shall relent,
And virtues force yt shines in you bade him give this attempt,
He hath no neade of wealth, he woos not for your good,
His kindred is such he need not to seek to match with noble blood,
Such store of friends that where he lest he may command,
And none so hardy to presume his pleasure to withstand,
Your self it is, your virtue and your grace,
Your noble gifts your endless prays in every place,
You alone I say the mark that he would hit,
The hoped joy the dearest pray that can befale to wit,
I have not harde a meyssage more trimly done,
Nor I, what age art thou of my good son,
Between eleven and xii, Madame more or less.
He hath been instructed this errand as I guess.
How old is the gentleman thy moister can thou tell?
Seuentene or there about I wot not very well.
What stature of what making what kind of port bears he
Such as your Ladyship can not mislike trust me.
Well grown, well made, a stripling clean and taule,
Well favoured, somewhat black and manly therewithal,
And that you may conceive his personage the better,
Lo hear of him the very shape and lively picture,
This hath he sent to you to view and to behold,
I dare aduouch no Joint therein no Jot to be controlled,
In good faith I thank thy master with my hart,
I perceive that nature in him, hath done her part.
Farther, if it please your honour to know:
My master would be glad to run ride or go,
At your commandment to any place far or near•,
To have but a sight of your Ladyship there,
I beseech you appoint him the place and the hour,
You shall se how readily to you he will scour.
Do so.
Ye in any wise daughter, for here you me,
He seems a right worthy and trim young man to bee.
Commend me then to Wit, and let him understand,
That I accept with all my hart this present at his hand,
And that I would be glad, when he doth see his time,
To hear and se him face to face, within this house of mine
Then may he break his mind and talk with me his fill,
Till then adieu both hee and thou mine own sweet little Will.
Ah flattering Queen, how neatly she can talk
How minionly she trips, how sadly she can walk
Well wanton yet beware that ye be •and and sure,
Fair words are wont oft times, fair women to allure,
Now must I get me home and make report of this:
To him that thinks it lunge, till my return I wis.
Say thou me so boy, will she have me in deed
Be of good cheer sir I warrant you to speed
Did both her parents speak well to her of me•.
As hart can think go on and you shall see,
How toke she the picture, how likes shée my person.
She never had done toting and looking thereon.
And must I come to talk with her my fill.
When soever you please, and as oft as you will.
O my sweat boy, how shall I recompense,
Thy faithful hart and painful diligence,
My hope, my stay, my wealth, the kaye of al my joy.
I pray you sir call me your man, and not your boy,
Thou shalt be what thou wilt all in all.
Promise me faithfully that if your wife brawl
Or set her father to check me out of measure,
You will not se me abused to their pleasure
Give me thy hand take here my faith and troth,
I will maintain thee, how soever the world goes.
What shall we doe? shall we stand lingering here?
If you be a man press in, and go near.
What if there be some other suitor there.
And if there be, yet need you not to fear,
Until I bring his head to you, upon a spear.
I will not loke you in the face, nor in your sight appear.
Nay Wit, advise your self and pause a while,
Or else this hast of yours will you beguile.
No hast but good, take time and learn to fight,
Learn to assault, learn to defend a right:
Your match is monstrous to behold and full of might,
Whom you must vanquish, not by force but by slight:
Madame stand to your promise if I win I am sped,
Am I not?
Yea truly.
Good enough, if we fight not I would we wear dead,
No man shall stay us, that béeres a head.
Young man a word or twain, and then adieu.
Your years are few your practise grene and new,
Mark what I say, and ye shall find it true:
You are the first that shall this rashness rue,
Be ruled here, our coun•ell do thereafter,
Lay good ground, your work shall be the fas•er:
This headlong hast, may sooner miss then hit,
Take heed both of Wits will, and wilful wit,
We have within a gentleman our retainer and our friend,
With servants twain that do on him attend,
Instruction, Study, Diligence these thrée,
At your commandment in this attempt shall be,
Here them in stead of vs, and as they shall deuyse,
So hardly cast our cards in this enterprise
I will send them to you, and leave you for now.
The more company the merrier, boy what say thou?
It is a good fault to have more then enough,
I care not, so as we may pull the knaves down,
I would we were at it, I pass not how soon.
If it shall please you to send those three hither,
We will follow your counsel and go together.
I warrant her a shrew whosoever be an other,
God make the daughter good, I like not the mother,
Yet would not I for no good to have forgone her.
Mary sir in déede she talks and takes on her:
Like a Dame, nay like a Duchess• or a quéene:
With such a solemnity as I have not seen.
She is a quéene I tell thee in her degrée,
Let her be what she list, with a vengeance for me:
I will kéepe me out of her reach if I can.
If this marriage go forward, thou must be her man.
Marriage or marriage not, be shrew me than,
I have but one moister, and I will serve no more,
And if he anger me, I will forsake him to.
She shall not hurt the unless her cause be juster.
By the faith of my body sir, I intend not to trust her.
Why.
Take me this woman that talks so roundly,
That be so wise, that reason so soundly:
That loke so narrow, that speak so shrill:
Their words are not so cursed, but their déedes are as ill.
It is but thy fancy, I sée no such thing in her.
Perhaps you had never occasion to try her.
That were great marvel in so many years.
She hath won the mastery of you it appears.
Well quiet your self thou shalt take no wrong,
Me think our thrée companions tarry very lunge.
Sir we are come to know your pleasure.
You are come in good time, Instruction our treasure,
This Gentleman craves your acquaintance &amp; aid.
What you may do for him let him not be denayed,
Welcome good fellows, will ye dwell with me.
If all parts be pleased, content are we.
Welcome Instruction with al my hart.
What thrée new servant, then farewell my part.
I heartily thank you, and loke what I can doe,
It shall be always ready to pleasure you.
Consider and talk together with these,
And you shall find in your travail great 〈◊〉
Take here of me before I take my leave,
This glass of Crystal clear which I you give
Accept it and reserve it for my sake most sure,
Much good to you in time it may procure,
Be•old your self therein, and view and pry,
Mark what defects it will discover and descry,
And so with indgement ripe, and curious eye,
What is a miss endeavour to supply,
Farewell.
Farewell to you, right honourable sir:
And commend me to my love my hearts desire,
Let her think on me when she sees me not and wish me well.
Farewell master Reason, think upon vs, when you sée vs not.
And in any wise, let not Will be forgot.
Since I must take advise and counsel of you thrée,
I must entreat you all, to dwell in house with me,
And loke what order you shall prescribe as néedefull,
To keep the same you shall find me as héedefull:
Come,
Come,
Go.
Tush tush Instruction, your talk is of no force,
You tell vs a tale of a roasted horse,
Which by his wounds except we set to it,
As fast as we make, this fellows will undo it,
Their talk is nothing but soft and fair and tarry,
If you follow their counsel you shall never mary.
To follow our counsel your charge and promise was,
I would I had never known you by the mass.
Must I look so lunge and spend my life with toil
Nay sure, I will either win it, or take the foil.
The surer is your ground, the better you shall bear it.
Ground vs no ground, let him win it and wear it.
Good sir be ruled and leave this peevish elf.
I had even as leaf ye bad me hang my self,
Leave him: no no I would you all knew,
You be but loiterers to him, my Will tells me true,
I could be cōtent with a weke, yea a month or twain,
But 3. or 4. years, mary that were a payne,
So lunge to keep me, and lye like a hog.
A life withal my hart I would not wish a dog.
Will a weke serve.
No.
A month.
Neither•
No.
Not so.
No nor so many more.
Then farewell all for as I hope to thrive,
I will prove him or I sleep, if I be alive,
And if ye be mine and good fellows all thrée,
Go thither, out of hand and take your chance with me.
For my part, I know I can do you no good.
You are a proper man of your hands by the Rood,
Yet welfare him that never his moister forsakes.
What say thou Study.
My head aketh.
Out upon the coward: speak Diligence,
Against Instructions mind, I am loathe to go hence,
Yet I will make one, rather then you should lack.
Perhaps we may find them at this time in bed.
So much the rather loke you to be sped,
Care for no more, but once to come within her,
And when you have done: then let another win her.
To come within her child, what meanst thou by that.
One mass for a penny, you know what is what.
Hard you ever such a counsel of such a Jack sprot.
Why sir do ye think to doe any good,
If ye stand in a corner like Robin hood,
Nay you must stout it, and face it out with the best.
Set on a good countenaūce, make the most of the lest,
Who soever skip in, loke to your part,
And while you live beware of a false hart.
Both blame and shame, rash boldness doth breed.
You must adventure both, spare to speak, spare to speed,
What tell you me of shame, it is shame to steal a horse.
More hast then good speed, makes many fare the worse.
But he that takes not such time while he may,
Shall leap at a whiting when time is a way.
But he that leaps before he loke, good son,
May leap in the mire, and miss when he hath done.
Me think I hear the voice of Will, Wits boy.
I sée her come, her sorrow and my Joy,
My salve, and yet my sore, my comfort, and my care,
The causer of my wound, and yet the will of my welfare:
O happy wight, that have the saint of your request,
O hopeless hope that holds me frō ye which likes me best,
Twixt hope and fear I stand, to mar or else to make,
This day to be relived quit, or else my death woūd to take.
Here let vs rest a while and pause all thrée:
Daughter sit down, belike this same is hée.
Be of good chere sir be ruled by me
Women are best pleased, till they be used homely,
Loke her in the face and tell your tale stoutly.
O pearl of passing pryse, sent down from god on hye,
The sweetest beauty to entice that hath been scene with eye•
The well of wealth to all, that no man doth annoy:
The kaye of Kingedomes &amp; the steal of everlasting joy.
The treasure and the store, whom al good things began,
The nurse of Lady wisdoms lore, the lincke of mā &amp; mā.
What words shall me suffice, to utter my desire,
What heate of talk shall I devise, for to express my fire
I burn and yet I fréese, I flame and cool as fast,
In hope to wyn and for to léese my pensiveness doth last,
Why should my dulled spryte, apal my courage so.
O salve my sore, or slée me quite, by saying yea, or no,
You are the mark at whom, I shot to hit or miss,
My life it stays on you alone, to you my suit it is,
Amity not much vnmete with you some grief to find,
Dame Natures son, my name is Wit ye fancies you by kind,
And here I come this day, to wait and to attend
In hope to have my hoped pray, or else my life to end.
Good cause there is wherefore I should embrace,
This loving hart which you have borne to me
And glad I am that we be both in place,
Each one of vs eche others looks to sée,
Your picture and your person doth agree,
Your princelike port and ask your noble face,
Wherein so many signs of virtue be:
That I must néedes be moved in your case:
Friend Wit? are you the man in dede which you intēd,
Can you be well content until your life doth end,
To join and knit most sure with this my daughter here,
And unto her alone your fixed faith to bear.
As I am bent to this so let my suite be sped,
If I do fail ten Thousāde plagues &amp; more, light on my head.
There are that promise fair, and mean as well,
As any hear can think, or tongue can tell,
Which at the first are hot, and kindle in desire,
But in one month or twain, quit quenched is the fire.
Such is the trade of youth whom famies force doth led,
Whose love is only at the plonge &amp; cannot lunge proceed.
Credit my words, and ye shall find me true.
Suppose you keep not touch, who should this bargain rue.
I will be sworn here solemnly before you both.
Who breaks promise, will not stick likewise to break his other.
I will be bound in all that ever I can make.
What good were that to vs if we thaduantage take.
Will neither promise serve: nor other nor bands,
What other assurance will ye ask at my hands.
My moister is a gentleman. I tell you and his word,
I would you knew it shall with his deeds accord.
We know not whom to trust, the world is so ill.
In dede sir as you say you may mend when ye will,
But in good earnest Madam, speak of or on,
Shall we speed at your hand, or shall we begone,
I love not this delays, say so if we shall have you,
If not, say no, and let another •rave you.
Soft and fair sir boy, you talk you wot not what?
Can you abide to be driven of with this and that,
Can they ask any more then good assurance at your hands.
All is now to little son, as the matter stands,
If al be to little both goods and lands,
I know not what will please you, except Derbies bands
I have an enemy, my friend Wit a mortal foe to me•
And therewithal the greatest plague that can befall to the.
Must I fight with him,
Can you fight if néede be.
If any such thing •all, count the charge to me,
Trouble not your self.
Hold thy peace elf.
Here out my tale, I have a mortal foe:
That lurks in the wood, hereby as you come and go,
This monstrous Giant, bears a grudge •o me and mine,
And will attempt to keep thee back, from this desire of thine.
The bane of youth• the root of rufne and distress:
Devouring those that sue to me, his name is Tediousness.
No sooner he espies, the noble Wit begin:
To stir and payne it self the love of me to win.
But forth he steppes and with strong hands by might and maine:
He beats and buffets down, the force and liuelynes of brain.
That done in déepe despair, he drowns him villainously,
Ten thousand suitors in a year, are cast away thereby.
Now if your mind be surely fixed so,
That for no toil nor cost, my love you will forgo.
Bethink you well, and of this monster take good héede,
Then may you have with mée, the greater hope to speed.
Herein use good advise, to make you strong and stout,
To send and keep him of a while, until his rage be out.
Then when you feel your self, well able to prevail:
Bid you the battle, and that so coragiously assail.
If you can wyn the field, present me with his head,
I ask no more and I forth with, shall be your own to bed.
Il might I thrive, and lack that likes me best,
If I be not a scourge to him, that bredes your unrest.
Madam assare your self, he lives not in the land,
W•th whom I would not in your cause, encounter hand to hand•
And as for Tediousness that wretch, your common foe,
Let mée alone, we twain shall cope before I sleep I trow.
Lustily spoken, let me claw thee by the back:
Howe say you now sir, here are thrée against twain,
Go that go list, I will at home remain,
I have more néede to take a nap in my bed.
Do so and here you couch a goddess head.
Well since it will none otherwise frame.
Let v• twain Study, &amp; return from whens we came.
Agréed.
And let vs thrée bestir our selves like men.
Unlikely things are brought to pass, by courage now and then•
My will be always pressed, and ready at an inch•
To save thy self to succour me, to help at every pinch.
Both twain on either side, assault him if ye can,
And you shall sée me in the midst, howe I will play the man
This is the deadly den, as far as I perceive,
Approach we near and valiantly let vs the vnset give.
Come forth thou monster fell, in drowsy darkness hid,
For here is wit Dame Natures son, y• doth thee battle bid.
What pryncox have we here, that dares me to assail,
Alas poor boy, and winest thou, against me to prove•le.
Full small was he thy friend, whoever sent the hither,
For I must drive the back with shame, or slay thee altogether.
Great bossed small roast, I warrant thee do thy best,
Thy head must serve my turn, this day to set my hart at rest.
And I must have a leg of the if I can catch it.
First I must quiz this brain o• thine, if I can reach it.
Well shifted Will, now have at thee sir knave.
These friscoles shall not serve your turn for al your haunts so brave
Ho ho, did I not tell thee thou came to thy payne.
Help, help, help, our moister is slain.
Help, help, help &amp;c.
Where are these lust•e blood, that make their match with me?
Here lies a pa•torn for them all, to loke at and to sée.
To teach them to conspire against my force and might,
To promise for their women's love, to vanquish me in fight:
Now let them go and croak, howe wisely they have sped,
Such is the end of those, that seek this curious Dame to wed.
Ho ho ho.
Rub and chafe him.
For gods love hast, see lo where he doth lye.
He is not cold, I warrant him, I.
Go•e a leg, give an arm, arise, arise,
Hold up thy head, lift vs thy eyes,
1 A leg to stand up right•
2 An arm to fight a mayne,
1 The head to hold thy brains in plight,
2 The eyes to loke again.
A wake ye drowned powers.
Ye sprites for dull with toil:
Resin to me this care of yours,
And from dead sleep recoil.
Think not upon your loathsome lu•ke,
But arise and dance with vs a pluck.
2 What though thou hast not hit,
The top of thy desire,
Time is not so far spent as yet
To cause the •o retire,
A rise and ease thy self of payne•
And make thee strong to fight again,
Let not thy foes re•oyse,
Let not thy friends lament,
Let not thy Ladies ruful voice,
In sobs and sighs be spent,
Thy •ayth is plight forget it not,
Twixt her and the to knit the knot.
Give a leg &amp;c.
This is no deadly wound,
It may be cured well.
Se here what Physic we have found,
Thy sorrows to expel.
The way is plain, the marcke is fair,
Lodge not thy self in deep despair.
What noise is this that ringeth in my ears,
Her noise that grieves my mishap with tears,
Ah my mishap my desperate mishap,
In whom ill fortune pours down, all mishap at a clap,
What shall become of me, where shall I hyde my head?
Oh what a death is it to live for him that would be dead?
But since it chances so, what ever wight thou be,
That finds me here, in heavy plight, go tel her this from mée.
Causeless I perish here, and cause to curse I have.
The time that erst I lived to love, and now must die her slave,
The match was over much for me, she understood,
Alas why hath she this delete, to lap in guiltless blot.
How did I give her cause to show me this despite,
To match me where she wist full well, I should be slain in fight.
But go and tell her plain, although to late for me,
Accursed be the time and hour, which first I did her sée.
Accursed be the wight, that wilde me first thereto,
And cursed be they all at once, that had therewith to doe.
Now get the hence in hast, and suffer me to die.
Whom scornful chance &amp; lawless love, have slain most trait∣rouslye
O noble Wit the miracle of God, and eke of Nature:
Why cursest thou thy self, and every other creature.
What causes the thine innocent dear Lady to accuse?
Who would lament it more then she, to here this woeful news.
Why will thou dye, whereas thou may be sure of health?
Whereas thou séeth a plain path way, to worship and to wealth.
Not every foil doth make a fall, nor every soil doth slay,
Comfort thy self be sure thy luck, will mend from day to day.
This gentile news of good Will, are come to make you sound,
They know which way to salve your sore, and how to cure your woūd
Good sir be ruled by her then, a•d pluck your spirit to you:
There is no doubt, but you shall find, your loving lady true.
Ah Will art thou alive, that doth my hart some ease,
The sight of the sweet boy, my sorrows doth appease:
How hast thou escaped, what fortune the befell?
It was no trusting to my hands, my héeles did serve me well
I ran with open mouth, to cry for help amain,
And as good fortune would, I hit upon these twain.
I thank both thee and them, what will ye have me do.
To rise and dance a little space with vs two?
What then.
That done, repair again to Study and Instruction,
Take better hold by their advise, your foe to set upon.
Can any recompense recover this my fall?
My life to yours it may be mended all.
Speak Will.
I have no doubt sir it shall be as you would wish.
But yet this repulse of mine, they will lay in my dish.
No man shall let them know thereof, unless your self do it.
On that condition a gods name, fall we to it.
Nay stand we to it, and let vs fall no more.
Will dance•g serve, and I will dance until my bones be sore,
Pipe vs up a Galliard minstrel, to begin,
Let will call for dances, one after an other.
Come Damsel in good faith and let me have you in•
Let him practise in dancing al things to make himself brethles.
Enough at once, now léeue, and let vs part.
This ex•rcise hath done me good, even to the very hart.
Let vs be bold with you• more acquaintance to take
And dance a round, yet once more for my sake,
Enouge is enough, farewell, and at your néede:
Use my acquaintance if it may stand you in stéede.
Right worthy Damsels both, I know you seek no gains,
In recompense of this desert your undeserved pains.
But loke what other thing my service may devise,
To show my thankful heart in any enterprise.
Be ye as bold therewith, as I am bold on you,
And thus with hearty thanks, I take my leave as now.
Farewell friend Wit, and since you are relieved,
Think not upon your foil, whereat you were so grieved.
But take your hart to you, and give attempt once more:
I warrant you to spéede, much better then before.
One dance for the and me, my boy come on.
Dance you sir if you please, and I will loke upon.
This gear doth make me sweat, and breath a pace.
Sir ease your selse a while, hear is a resting place.
Home Will and make my bed, for I will take a nap.
Sure and it please your mastership here in my Dames lap.
Come come lye down and thou shalt see,
Non like to me to entertain,
Thy bones and thee oppressed with payne,
Come come and •as thee in my lap,
And if it pleace thee take a nap,
A nap that shall delight thee so,
That fancies all will thee forgo,
Bye mu•inge styll what can thou find,
But wants of will and restless mind,
A mind that mars and mangles all,
And breads jars to work thy fall,
Come gentle Wit &amp; thee require,
And thou shalt hit thy chief desire,
Thy chief desire thy hooped pray,
First ease thee here and then away,
My bones are stiff and I am wearied sore,
And still me think I faint and feeble moore and moore,
Wake me again in time for I have things to doe,
And as you will me for mine ease, I doe assent thereto,
Welcome with all my heart: Sir boy hold here this fan,
And softly cool his face sleep soundly gentleman,
This chayer is chared well now ignorance my son,
Thou see all this howe fitly it is done,
But wo•ste thou why?
Nay bumfaye mother not I,
Well I wot tic agaye whorchit trick and tryme,
Choulde reiounce my heart to chance coots with him,
Dost thou remember how many I have served in the like sort,
It doth my hart good to think on this sport
Will thou see this proper fellow served so,
Choulde give twaye pence to see it and tway pence moore,
Come of then, let me sée thee in thy voublet and thy hose.
You shall sée a taule fellow mother, I suppose,
Help of with this sleue softly, for fear of waking,
Wee shall leave the gentleman, in a pretty taking.
Give me thy Cote, hold this in thy hand:
This fellow would be married to Science I vnderstād.
But or we leave him• t•ll me an other tale:
Now let vs make him loke, some what stale.
There lay and there bée, the proverb is verified,
I am neither idle, nor yet well occupied.
Mother must I have his Cote, now mother must?
Chal be a lively lad, with hey testy tosty.
Sleep sound and have no care, to occupy thy head,
As near unto thy body now, as if thou had ben dead.
For Idelnes hath won, and wholly the possessed,
And utterly dishabled thee• from having thy request.
Come on wi•h me my son let vs go coutche again,
And let this lusty ruffling Wit, here like a fool remain.
Up and to go, why sleep I here so sound:
How false it out that I am left upon the naked ground.
God grant that all be well, whilst I lye dreaming here:
Me thinckes all is not as it was, nor as I would it were,
And yet I wot not why, but •o my fancies gives me•
That some one thing or other, is my tryer that gre•es mée.
That are but fancies let them go, to Science now will I,
My suit and business yet once again, to labour and apply.
What is become trow yée, of Wit, our spouse that would be:
Daughter I fear all is not, as it s•old •ée.
Yes yes have ye no doubt, all is and shall be well:
What one art thou? thereof howe can thou tell.
Reason most noble sir, and you my Lady dear:
How have you done in all this time, since first I saw you here?
The fool is mad I wene, stand back and touch me not.
You speak not as you think, or have you me forgot,
I never saw thee in my life, until this time I wot,
Thou art some mad brain, or some fool, or some disguised Scot.
Gods fish hostess and know you not me.
I had been well at ease in déede, to be acquainted with thee.
Hope holiday, mary this is préety cheer,
I have lost my self, I can not tell where
An old said saw it is, and to true I find,
Soon hot, soon cold, out of sight, out of mind.
What madam, what means this sudden change,
What means this scornful look, this countenāce so strange.
It is your fashion so to use, your lovers at the first:
Or have all women this delete, to s•old and to be cursed.
Good fellow whence art thou, what is thy name?
I wéene ye are disposed to make at me some game.
I am the son of Lady Nature, my name is Wit.
Thou shalt say so lunge enough, or we believe it.
Thou Wit? nay thou art some mad brain out of thy wit.
Unto your selves, this trial I remit.
Loke on me better, and mark my personne well,
Thy loke is like to one, that came out of hell:
If thou be Wit, let sée, what tokens thou can tell.
How come thou first acquainted here? what said wée?
How did we like thy suit, what entertainment made wée?
What tokens?
Yea what tokens? speak and let vs know?
Tokens good store I can rehearse a row.
First as I was advised, by my mother Nature:
My lackey Will, presented you with my picture.
Stay there? now loke how these two faces agrée:
This is the very same that you received from mée.
From thée? why loke, they are no more like:
Then chalk to cheese, then black to white.
To put thee out of doubt, if thou think we say not true,
It wear good for thee, in a glass thy face to view.
Well remembered, and a glass I have in deed,
Which glass you gave me, to use at need.
Hast thou the glass, which I to Wit did give.
I have it in my purse, and will keep it while I live.
These marks me muse, howe should he come thereby:
Sir muse no more for it is even I.
To whom you gave the glass, and here it is.
Wee are content thou try thy case by this.
Either my glass is wonderfully spotted,
Or else my face is wonderfully blotted.
This is not my Cote, why where had I this wéede,
By the Mass I loke like a very fool in •éede.
O heaps of hippos, O rueful chance to me,
O Idleness woo worth the time, that I was ruled by thee.
Why did I lay my head, within thy lap to rest?
Why was I not adieu•••d by her, that wished and will me best.
O ten times troble blessed wights, whose corpse in grave do lye:
That are not driven to behold, these wretched cares which die.
On me your furies all on me, have poured out your spite,
Come now and slay me at the last, and rid my sorrows quite.
What coast shall me receive, where shall I show my head:
The world will say this same is hée, that if he list had sped.
This same is he that toke, an enterprise in hand,
This same is hee that scarce one blow, his enemy did withstand.
This same is he that fought, and fell in open field:
This same is he that in the songe, of Idleness did yield.
This same is he that was in way, to win the game
To join himself whereby he should have won immortal fame.
And now is wrapped in woe, and buried in despair,
O happy case for the if death would rid the quite of care.
Shame.
Who calls for shame?
Here is a merchant Shame, for thee to tame.
A shame come to you all• for I am almost lame,
With trudging up and down• to them that lose their game,
And here is one whom thou must rightly blame,
That hath preferde his folly to his fame.
Who? this good fellow, what call you his name?
Wit? that on wooing, to Lady Science came.
Come aloft child let me sée, what friscoles you can •et,
He hath deserved it, let him be well bet.
O spare me with the whip, and sley mée with thy knife:
Ten thousand times more dear to mée, were present death then life
Nay nay my friend, thou shalt not die as yet.
Remember in what case, Dame Nature left thee Wit,
And how thou hast abused the same.
Thou hast deceived all our hope as all the world may sée.
A shame come to it.
Remember what fair words, and promises thou did make,
That for my daughters love, no pains thou would forsake.
Remember in what sort, we had a care of the:
Thou hast deceived all our hope, as all the world may see.
A shame come to it.
Remember how I•struction, should have been followed styll,
And howe thou would be ruled, by none but by Will.
How Idelnes hath crept, and reigns in thy breast,
How Ignorance her son, hath wholly thee possessed.
A shame come to it.
O woofull wretch to whom shall I complain,
What sa•ue may serve to salve my fore, or to redress my payne.
Nay I •an tell the more: remember howe,
Thou was subdued of Tediousness right now.
Remember with what •rakes thou went unto his den,
Against the good advise, and Counsel of thy men,
What Recreation did for the, in these thy rueful hippos,
And howe the second time, thou fell into the lap.
A shame come to thee.
O let me breath a while, and hold thy heavy hand,
My grievous faults with shame enough I understand.
Take ruth and pity on my plaint, or else I am forlorn,
Let not the world continue thus, in laughing me to scorn.
Madame if I be hee, to whom you once were bent,
With whom to spend your time, sometime you were content.
If any hope be left, if any recompense,
Be able to recover this for passed negligence.
O help me now poor wretch in this most heavy plight,
And furnish me yet once again, with Tediousness to fight.
Father be good to these young tender years,
See howe he doth bewail his folly past with tears•
Hold slave take thou his Coofe for thy labour,
We are content at her request, to take you to our favour.
Come in and dwell with vs, till time shall serve:
And from Instruction rule, loke that thou never swerve
Within we shall provide, to set you up once more,
This scourge hath taught you, what default was in you hereto∣fore
Once in my life I have, an od half hour to spare:
To ease my self of all, my travail and my care.
I stood not still so lunge this xx. days I wean,
But ever more sent forth on messages I have been.
Such trudging and such toil, by the mass was never seen,
My body is worn out, and spent with labour clean.
And this it is that makes me loke so lean.
That lets my groth, and makes me seen a squall,
What then although my stature be not •all.
Yet I am as proper as you, so neat and cleanly,
And have my joints at commandment full of activity,
What should a servant do, with all this flesh and bones,
That makes them run with leaden heals, &amp; stir them self like stones
Give me a proper squire much after my pitch
And mark howe he from place, to place will squite•e.
Fair or foul, thick or thin, mire or dusty,
Clouds or rain, light or dark, clear or misty.
Ride or run, to or fro, bad or good,
A neat little fellow, on his busynes will scud.
These great labours are neither active nor wise,
That féede till they sleep, and sleep out their eyes.
So heavy, so dull, so untoward in their doing,
That it is a good sight, to see them leave working.
But all this while, while I stand prating here,
I sée not my master, I left him snorting here,
Mine one dear Wit, the hope of mine avail,
My care, my comfort, my treasure and my trust,
Take hart of grace, our enemy to assail,
Lay up these things, which you have hard discussed.
So doing, vndoubtingly you can not fail.
To win the field to scope. all these unhappy showers,
To glad your friends, to cause your foes to whale,
To match with vs, and then the gain is yours.
Here in this Closet our self, will set and sée,
Your manly feats, and your success in fight:
Strike home courageously, for you and mée,
Learn where and howe to fend, and howe to smite:
In any wise, be ruled by these thrée,
They shall direct both you, and Will aright.
Farewell and let our loving counsel bee
At every hand before you in your fight,
Here in my sight good Madam sit and view:
That when I lift, I may loke up on you.
This face this noble face, this lively hew,
Shall harden me, shall make our enemy rue.
O faithful mates, that have this care of me:
How shall I ever recompense, your pains with gold or •ée.
Come now and as you please, enjoin me how to doe it,
And you shall see me pr•est, and s••u•sable to it.
Why master whither way, what hast am I no body?
What Will, we may not miss thee, for no money.
Welcome good Will, and doe as thou art bid,
This day or never, must Tediousness be rid.
God speed vs well, I will make one at all assays•
Thou shalt watch to take him at certain baize,
Come not in the throng, but save thy self always.
You twain on either side, first with your sword and buckler.
After the first conflict, fight with your sword and daggers,
You sir with a Iaueling and your Targett• in your hand,
See how ye can, his deadly strokes withstand.
Keep at the soyne, come not within his reach,
Until you see, what good advantage you may ketch.
Then hardly leave him not, till time you strike him dead,
And of all other parts, especially save yonr head.
Is this all, for I would fain ha•e done?
I would we wear at it, I care not how soon.
Now when ye please. I have no more to tell,
But heartily to pray for you, and wish you well.
I thank you, go thou and bid the battle Will.
Come out thou monster fell, that hast desire to spill,
The knot and linked love, of Science and of Wit,
Come try the quarrel in the field, and fight with vs a fit.
A dought•e durte these iiii. •oyes will doe,
I will eat them by morsels two and two.
Thou fight for a wife a rod a rod,
Had I wist this, I would have laid on load,
And beat thy bra•no and this my cloobe together,
And made thee safe enough for returning hither,
A foul horizon what a sturdy thife it is?
But we will pelt thee knave until for woe thou peace,
Let me come to that elf.
Nay nay thou shalt have work enough to save thy self, Fight.
Take breath and change your weapons play the men,
Some what it was that made thee come again,
Thou stick some what better to thy takling I see,
But what, no force ye are but Jack sprot to me.
Have hold hear is a morsel for thee to eat,
Here is a pelt to make your knaves hart freete,
There is a blow able to f•ll a hog,
And here is a foin behind for a mad dog,
Hold hold hold the lubber is down,
Oh
Strike of his head while I houde him by the crown,
Thou monstrous wretch, thou mortal foe to me and m•no,
Which evermore at my good luck and fortune did rapine,
Take here thy just desert and payment for thy hire.
Thy head this day shall me prefer unto my hearts desire,
O noble Wit, the praise, the game is thine,
Hove up his head upon your spear, so here a joyful sign.
O valiant knight, O conquest full of pray•.
O blessed of god to sée these happy days.
You you, my faithful Squires deserves no less,
Whose tried trust, well known to me in my distress.
And certain hope of your fixed faith, and •aste good will,
Made me attempt this famous fact most needful to fulfil,
To you I yield great thancks, to me redounds the gain.
Now home a pace, and ringe it out, that Tediousness is slain.
Say all at once, Tediousness is slain.
I hear and sée the joyful news, wherein I take delight,
That Tediousness our mortal foe, is ouerc•me in •ight.
I see the sign of victory, the sign of manliness:
The heap of happy hippos: the joy y• tongue cannot express.
O welcome fame from day to day for ever shall arise.
Avaunt ye griping cares, and lodge no more in me,
For you have lost, and I have won continual joys and sée.
Now let me fréely touche, and fréely you embrace,
And let my friends with open mouth proclaim my blissful case.
The world shall know doubt not, and shall blow out your fame,
Then true report shall send abroad, your everlasting name.
Now let our parents déere, be certified of this,
So that our marriage may forth with proceed as meet it is.
Come after mée all five, and I will lead you in.
My payne is paste, wy gladness to begin,
My task is done, my hart is set at rest,
My foe subdued, my Ladies love possessed.
I thank my friends, whose help I have at need,
And thus you see, howe Wit and Science are agréed,
Wée twain hence forth one soul, in bodies twain must dwell
Rejoice I pray you all with me, my friends and fare ye well.

The silent night, that brings
the quiet pause,
From painful travails of the
weary day,
Prolonges my careful thoughts,
and makes me blame
The slow Juror, that so for love or shame
Doth long delay to show her blushing face,
And now the day renews my griefull plaint.
My gracious lady and my mother dear,
Pardon my grief for your so grieved mind,
To ask what cause torments so your hart.
So great a wrong, and so unjust despite,
Without all cause, against all course of kind!
Such causeless wrong and so unjust despite,
May have redress, or at the least, revenge.
Neither, my son: such is the froward will,
The person such, such my mishap and thine.
Mine know I none, but grief for your distress.
Yes: mine for thine my son: A father? no:
In kind a father, not in kindliness.
My father? why? I know nothing at all,
Wherein I have misdone unto his grace.
Therefore, the more unkind to thee and me.
For knowing well (my son) the tender love
That I have ever borne and bear to thee,
He grieved thereat, is not content alone,
To spoil thee of my sight my chiefest joy,
But thee, of thy birthright and heritage
Causeless, unkindly, and in wrongful wise,
Against all law and right, he will bereave:
Half of his kingdom he will give away.
To whom?
Even to Porrex his younger son,
Whose growing pride I do so sore suspect,
That being raised to equal rule with thee,
Me thinks I see his envious hart to swell,
Filled with disdain and with ambitious hope,
The end the Gods do know, whose altars I
Full oft have made in vain, of cattle slain
To send the sacred smoke to heavens throne,
For thee my son, if things do so succeed,
As now my jealous mind misdemeth sore.
Madame, leave care &amp; careful plaint for me,
Just hath my father been to every wight:
His first unjustice he will not extend
To me I trust, that give no cause thereof:
My brothers pride shall hurt him self, not me.
So grant the Gods: But yet thy father so
Hath firmly fixed his vnmoued mind,
That plaints and prayers can no whit avail,
For those have I assayed, but even this day,
He will endeavour to procure assent
Of all his counsel to his fond devise.
Their ancestors from race to race have borne
True faith to my forefathers and their seed:
I trust they eke will bear the like to me.
There rests all. But if they fail thereof,
And if the end bring forth an ill success:
On them and theirs the mischief shall befall,
And so I pray the Gods requite it them,
And so they will, for so is wont to be.
When lords, and trusted rulers under kings,
To please the present fancy of the prince.
With wrong transpose the course of governance,
Murders, mischief, or civil sword at length,
Or mutual treason, or a just revenge,
When right succeeding line returns again,
By Ioues just judgment and deserved wrath,
Brings them to cruel and reproachful death,
And roots their names and kindredes from the earth.
Mother, content you, you shall see the end.
The end? thy end I fear, Jove end me first.
My lords, whose grave advise &amp; faithful aide,
Have long upheld my honour and my realm,
And brought me to this age from tender years,
Guiding so great estate with great renown:
Now more imports me, than erst, to use
Your faith and wisdom, whereby yet I reign:
That when by death my life and rule shall cease,
The kingdom yet may with vnbroken course,
Have certain prince, by whose undoubted right,
Your wealth and peace may stand in quiet stay,
And eke that they whom nature hath prepared,
In time to take my place in princely seat,
While in their fathers time their pliant youth
Yields to the frame of skilful governance,
May so be taught and trained in noble arts,
As what their fathers which have reigned before
Have with great fame derived down to them,
With honour they may leave unto their seed:
And not be thought for their unworthy life,
And for their lawless swaruynge out of kind,
Worthy to lose what law and kind them gave:
But that they may preserve the common peace,
The cause that first began and still maintains
The lyne all course of kings inheritance.
For me, for mine, for you, and for the state,
Where of both I and you have charge and care,
Thus do I mean to use your wonted faith
To me and mine, and to your native land.
My lords be plain without all wry respect
Or poisonous craft to speak in pleasing wise,
Lest as the blame of ill succeeding things
Shall light on you, so light the harms also.
Your good acceptance so (most noble king)
Of such our faithfulness as heretofore
We have employed in duties to your grace,
And to this realm whose worthy head you are,
Well proves that neither you mistrust at all,
Nor we shall need in boasting wise to show,
Our truth to you, nor yet our wakeful care
For you, for yours, and for our native land.
Wherefore (O king) I speak as one for all,
Sith all as one do bear you eagle faith:
Doubt not to use our counsels and our aides,
Whose honours, goods and lives are whole avowed
To serve, to aid, and to defend your grace.
My lords, I thank you all. This is the case.
Ye know, the Gods, who have the sovereign care
For kings, for kingdoms, and for common weals,
Gave me two sons in my more lusty age.
Who now in my decayeng years are grown
Well towards tipper state of mind and strength,
To take in hand some greater princely charge.
As yet they live and spend hopeful days,
With me and with their mother here in court.
Their age now asks other place and trade,
And mine also doth ask an other change:
Theirs to more travail, mine to greater case.
When fatal death shall end my mortal life,
My purpose is to leave unto them twain
The realm divided into two sundry parts:
The one Ferrex mine elder son shall have,
The other shall the younger Porrex rule.
That both my purpose may more firmly stand,
And eke that they may better rule their charge,
I mean forthwith to place them in the same:
That in my life they may both learn to rule,
And I may joy to see their ruling well.
This is in sum, what I would have ye way:
First whether ye allow my whole devise,
And think it good for me, for them, for you,
And for our country, mother of vs all:
And if ye like it, and allow it well,
Then for their guiding and their governance,
Show forth such means of circumstance,
As ye think meet to be both known and kept.
Lo, this is all, now tell me your advise.
And this is much, and asks great advise,
But for my part, my sovereign lord and king,
This do I think. Your majesty doth know,
How under you in justice and in peace,
Great wealth and honour, long we have enjoyed.
So as we can not seem with greedy minds
To wish for change of Prince or governance:
But if we like your purpose and devise,
Our liking must be deemed to proceed
Of rightful reason, and of heedful care,
Not for our selves, but for the common state,
Sith our own state doth need no better change:
I think in all as erst your Grace hath said.
First when you shall vnlode your aged mind
Of heavy care and troubles manifold,
And lay the same upon my Lords your sons,
Whose growing years may bear the burden long,
And long I pray the Gods to grant it so,
And in your life while you shall so behold
Their rule, their virtues, and their noble deeds,
Such as their kind behighteth to vs all,
Great be the profits that shall grow thereof,
Your age in quiet shall the longer last.
Your lasting age shall be their longer stay,
For cares of kings, that rule as you have ruled,
For public wealth and not for private joy,
Do wast man life, and hasten crooked age,
With furrowed face and with enfcebled lymines,
To draw on creeping death a swifter pace.
They two yet young shall bear the parted reign
With greater ease, than one, now old, alone,
Can weld the whole, for whom much harder is
With lessened strength the double weight to bear.
Your eye, your counsel, and the grave regard
Of Father, yea of such a fathers name,
Now at beginning of their sondred reign,
When is the hazard of their whole success,
Shall bridle so their force of youthful heats,
And so restrain the rage of insolence,
Which most assails the young and noble minds,
And so shall guide and train in tempered stay
Their yet greene bending wits with reverent awe,
As now inured with virtues at the first,
Custom (O King) shall bring delightfulness.
By use of virtue, vice shall grow in hate,
But if you so dispose it, that the day,
Which ends your life, shall first begin their reign,
Great is the peril what will be the end,
When such beginning of such liberties
Uoide of such stays as in your life do lye,
Shall leave them free to random of their will,
An open pray to traitorous flattery,
The greatest pestilence of noble youth.
Which peril shall be past, if in your life,
Their tempered youth with aged fathers awe,
Be brought in ur of skilful staidness.
And in your life their lives disposed so,
Shall length your noble life in ioyfulnesse.
Thus think I that your grace hath wisely thought,
And that your tender care of common weal,
Hath bred this thought, so to divide your land,
And plant your sons to bear the present rule,
While you yet live to see their ruling well,
That you may longer live by joy therein.
What further means behooveful are and meet???
At greater leisure may your grace devise,
When all have said, and when we be agreed
If this be best to part the realm in twain,
And place your sons in present government.
Whereof as I have plainly said my mind,
So would I here the rest of all my Lords,
In part I think as hath been said before,
In part again my mind is otherwise,
As for dividing of this realm in twain,
And lotting out the same in eagle parts,
To either of my lords your graces sounes,
That think I best for this your realms behofe,
For profit and advancement of your sons,
And for your comfort and your honour eke.
But so to place them, while your life do last,
To yield to them your royal governance,
To be aboue them only in the name
Of father, not in kingly state also,
I think not good for you, for them, nor vs.
This kingdom since the bloody civil field
Where Morgan slain did yield his conquered part
Unto his cousins sword in Camberland,
Contains all that meanwhile did suffice
Three noble sons of your forefather Brute.
So your two sons, it may suffice also.
The more, the stronger, if they gre in one.
The smaller compass that the realm doth hold,
The easier is the swey thereof to weld,
The nearer Justice to the wronged poor,
The smaller charge, and yet enough for one.
And when the region is divided so,
That brethren be the lords of either part,
Such strength doth nature knit between them both,
In sundry bodies by conjoined love,
That not as two, but one of doubled force,
Eche is to other as a sure defence.
The nobleness and glory of the one
Doth sharpe the courage of the others mind,
With virtuous envy to contend for praise.
And such an egaluesse hath nature made,
Between the brethren of one fathers seed,
As an unkindly wrong it seems to bee,
To throw the brother subject under fecte
Of him, whose peer he is by course of kind,
And nature that did make this egalnesse,
Oft so repines at so great a wrong,
That oft she raises up a grudging grief,
In younger brethren at the elders state:
Whereby both towns and kingdoms have ben rased,
And famous stocks of royal blood destroyed:
The brother, that should be the brothers aide,
And have a wakeful care for his defence,
Gapes for his death, and blames the lingering years
That draw not forth his end with faster course:
And oft impatient of so lunge delays,
With hateful slaughter he prevents the fates,
And heaps a just reward for brothers blood,
With endless vengeance on his stock for aye.
Such mischiefs here are wisely met withal,
If eagle state may nourish eagle love,
Where none hath cause to grudge at others good.
But now the head to stoup beneth them both,
No kind, no reason, no good ordre bears.
And oft it hath ben seen, where natures course
Hath ben perverted in disordered wise,
When fathers cease to know that they should rule,
The children cease to know they should obey.
And often ouerkindly tenderness
Is mother of unkindly stubbornenesse.
I speak not this in envy or reproach,
As if I grudged the glory of your sons,
Whose honour I beseech the Gods increase:
Nor yet as if I thought there did remain,
So filthy cankers in their noble breasts,
Whom I esteem (which is their greatest praise)
Undoubted children of so good a king,
Only I mean to show by certain rules,
Which kind hath graft within the mind of man,
That nature hath her ordre and her course,
Which (being broken) doth corrupt the state
Of minds and things, even in the best of all.
My lords your sons may learn to rule of you.
Your own example in your noble court
Is fittest guyder of their youthful years.
If you desire to see some present joy
By sight of their well ruling in your life,
See them obey, so shall you see them rule,
Who so obeys not with humbleness
Will rule with outrage and with insolence.
Lunge may they rule I do beseech the Gods,
But lunge may they learn, ere they begin to rule.
If kind and fates would suffer, I would wish
Them aged princes, and immortal kings.
Wherefore most noble king I well assent,
Between your sons that you divide your realm,
And as in kind, so match them in degree.
But while the Gods prolong your royal life,
Prolong your reign: for thereto live you here,
And therefore have the Gods so long forborne
To join you to them selves, that still you might
Be prince and father of our common weal.
They when they see your children ripe to rule,
Will make them rome, and will remove you hence,
That yours in right ensuing of your life
May rightly honour your immortal name.
Your wonted true regard of faithful hearts,
Makes me (O king) the bolder to presume,
To speak what I conceive within my breast,
Although the same do not agree at all
With that which other here my lords have said.
Nor which your self have seemed best to like.
Pardon I crave, and that my words be de??????ed
To flow from hearty zeal unto your grace,
And to the safety of your common weal.
To part your realm unto my lords your sounes,
I think not good for you, no yet for them,
But worst of all for this our native land,
Within one land, one single rule is best:
Divided reigns do make divided hearts.
But peace preserves the country and the prince,
Such is in man the greedy mind to reign,
So great is his desire to climb aloft,
In worldly stage the stateliest parts to bear,
That faith and justice and all kindly love,
Do yield unto desire of sovereignty,
Where eagle state doth raise an eagle hope
To win the thing that either wold attain.
Your grace remembered how in passed years
The mighty Brute, first prince of all this land,
Possessed the same and ruled it well in one,
He thinking that the compass did suffice,
For his three sons three kingdoms eke to make,
Cut it in three, as you would now in twain.
But how much British blood hath since been spilt,
To join again the sondred unity?
What princes slain before their tunely hour?
What wast of towns and people in the land?
What treasons heaped on murders and on spoils?
Whose just revenge even yet is scarcely ceased,
Ruthefull remembrance is yet raw in mind.
The Gods forbid the like to chance again:
And you (O king) give not the cause thereof.
My Lord Ferrex your elder son, perhaps
Whom kind and custom gives a rightful hope
To be your heir and to succeed your reign,
Shall think that he doth suffer greater wrong
Than he perchance will bear, if power serve.
Porrex the younger so vpraised in state,
Perhaps in courage will be raised also.
If flattery then, which fails not to assail
The tender minds of yet unskilful youth,
In one shall kindle and increase disdain,
And envy in the others heart inflame,
This fire shall waste their love, their lives, their land,
And ruthefull ruin shall destroy them both.
I wish not this (O king) so to befall,
But fear the thing, that I do most abhor.
Give no beginning to so dreadful end.
Keep them in order and obedience:
And let them both by now obeying you,
Learn such behaviour as beseems their state,
The elder, mildness in his governance,
The younger, a yielding contentedness.
And keep them near unto your presence still,
That they restrained by the awe of you,
May live in compass of well tempered staye,
And pass the perils of their youthful years.
Your aged life draws on to febler time,
Wherein you shall less able be to bear
The travails that in youth you have sustained,
Both in your persons and your realms defence.
If planting now your sons in further parts,
You send them further from your present reach,
Less shall you know how they them selves demean:
Traitorous corrupters of their pliant youth,
Shall have vnspied a much more free access,
And if ambition and inflamed disdain
Shall arm the one, the other, or them both,
To civil war, or to usurping pride,
Late shall you rue, that you no recked before.
Good is I grant of all to hope the best,
But not to live still dreadlesse of the worst.
So trust the one, that the other be forsene.
Arm not unskilfulness with princely power.
But you that long have wisely ruled the reigns.
Of royalty within your noble realm,
So hold them, while the Gods for our avails
Shall stretch the thread of your prolonged days.
To soon he climb into the flaming carre,
Whose want of skill did set the earth on fire.
Time and example of your noble grace,
Shall teach your sons both to obey and rule,
When tune hath taught them, time shall make the?? place,
The place that now is full??? and so I pray
Long it remain, to comfort of vs all.
I take your faithful harts in thankful part???
But sith I see no cause to draw my mind,
To fear the nature of my loving sons,
Or to mistime that envy or disdain,
Can there work hate, where nature plants love:
In one self purpose do I still abide.
My love extended egally to both,
My land suffices for them both also.
Humber shall part the marches of their realms:
The Sotherne part the elder shall possess:
The Notherne shall Porrex the younger rule:
In quiet I will pass mine aged days,
Free from the travail and the painful cares,
That hasten age upon the worthiest kings.
But lest the fraud, that ye do seem to fear,
Of flattering tongues, corrupt their tender youth,
And writhe them to the ways of youthful lust,
To cl??????yng pride, or to revenging hate,
Or to neglecting of their careful charge,
Lewdely to live in wanton recklessness,
Or to oppressing of the rightful cause,
Or not to wreak the wrongs done to the poor,
To tread down truth, or favour false deceit:
I mean to join to either of my sons
Some one of those, whose long approved faith
And wisdom tried, may well assure my heart:
That ??????ynyng fraud shall find no way to c???epe
Into their ???ensed ears with grave adiuse???
This is the end, and so I pray you all
To bear my sons the love and loyalty
That I have found within your faithful breasts.
You, nor your sons, our sovereign lord shall want,
Our faith and service while our lives do last.
When settled stay doth hold the royal throne
In steadfast place, by known and doubtless right,
And chiefly when descent on one alone
Makes single and vnparted reign to light:
Eche change of course vnioynts the whole estate,
And yields it thrall to ruin by debate.
The strength that knit by fast accord in one,
Against all foreign power of mighty foes,
Could of it self defend it self alone,
Disjoined once, the former force doth lose.
The sticks, that sondred brake so soon in twain,
In faggot bound attempted were in vain.
Oft tender mind that leads the partial eye
Oferring parents in their childrens love,
Destroys the wrongly loved child thereby
This doth the proud son of Apollo prove,
Who rashly set in chariot of his sire.
Inflamed the parched earth with heavens fire.
And this great king, that doth divide his land,
And change the course of his descending crown,
And yields the reign into his childrens hand,
From blissful state of joy and great renown,
A mirror shall become to Princes all,
To learn to shun the cause of such a fall.
I marvel much what reason led the king???
My Father, thus without all my desert,
To reave me half the kingdom, which by course
Of law and nature should remain to me.
If you with stubborn and untamed pride
Had stood against him in rebelling wise,
Or if with grudging mind you had envied
So slow a sliding of his aged years,
Or sought before your time to haste the course
Of fatal death upon his royal head,
Or stained your stock with murder of your kin:
Some face of reason might perhaps have seemed,
To yield some likely cause to spoil ye thus.
The wrekeful Gods power on my cursed head
Eternal plagues and never dying woes,
The hellish prince, adjudge my dampned ghost
To Tantalise thirst, or proud Ixions wheel,
Or cruel gripe to gnaw my growing heart,
To during torments and unquenched flames,
If ever I conceived so foul a thought,
To wish his end of life, or yet of reign.
No yet your father (O most noble Prince)
Did ever think so foul a thing of you.
For he, with more than fathers tender love,
While yet the fates do lend him life to rule,
(Who long might live to see your ruling well)
To you my Lord, and to his other son:
Lo he resigns his realm and royalty:
Which never would so wise a Prince have done,
If he had once mistimed that in your heart
There ever lodged so unkind a thought.
But tender love (my Lord) and settled trust
Of your good nature, and your noble mind,
Made him to place you thus in royal throne,
And now to give you half his realm to guide,
Yea and that half which in abounding store
Of things that serve to make a wealthy realm,
In stately cities, and in frutefull soil,
In temperate breathing of the milder heaven,
In things of needful use, which friendly sea,
Transports by traffike from the foreign parts,
In flowing wealth, in honour and in force,
Doth pass the double value of the part,
That Porrex hath allotted to his reign.
Such is your case, such is your fathers love.
Ah love, my friends? love wrongs not who?? he loves.
No yet he wrongs you, that gives you
So large a reign, ere that the course of time
Bring you to kingdom by descend right,
Which time perhaps might end your time before.
Is this no wrong, say you, to reeve from me
My native right of half so great a realm?
And thus to match his younger son with me
In eagle power, and in as great degree?
Yea and what son? the son whose swelling pride
Would never yield one point of reverence,
When I the elder and apparent heir
Stood in the likelihode to possess the whole,
Yea and that son which from his childish age
Envies mine honour and doth hate my life.
What will he now do, when his pride, his rage,
The mindful malice of his grudging heart,
Is armed with force, with wealth, and kingly state?
Was this not wrong, yea ill advised wrong,
To give so mad a man so sharpe a sword,
To so great peril of so great mishap,
Wide open thus to set so large a way?
Alas my Lord, what griefull thing is this,
That of your brother you can think so ill?
I never saw him utter likely sign,
Whereby a man might see or once mistime
Such hate of you, no such vnyelding pride.
Ill is their counsel, shameful be their end,
That raising such mistrustful fear in you,
Sowing the seed of such unkindly hate,
Travail by treason to destroy you both.
Wise is your brother, and of noble hope,
Worthy to weld a large and mighty realm.
So much a stronger friend have you thereby,
Whose strength is your strength, if you gre in one.
If nature and the Gods had pinched so
Their flowing bounty, and their noble gifts
Of princely qualities, from you my Lord,
And poured them all at ones in wasteful wise
Upon your fathers younger son alone:
Perhaps there be that in your prejudice
Would say that birth should yield to worthiness.
But sith in eche good gift and princely art
Ye are his match, and in the chief of all
In mildness and in sobre governance
Ye far surmount: And sith there is in you
Sufficing skill and hopeful towardness
To weld the whole, and match your elders praise:
I see no cause why ye should loose the half.
No would I wish you yield to such a loss:
Lest your mild sufferance of so great a wrong,
Be deemed cowardishe and simple dread:
Which shall give courage to the fiery head
Of your young brother to invade the whole.
While yet therefore sticks in the peoples mind
The loathed wrong of your disheritaunce,
And ere your brother have by settled power,
By guile full cloak of an alluring show,
Got him some force and favour in the realm,
And while the noble Queen your mother lives,
To work and practise all for your avail,
Attempt redress by arms, and wreak your self
Upon his life, that gains by your loss,
Who now to shame of you, and grief of vs,
In your own kingdom triumphs over you.
Show now your courage meet for kingly state,
That they which have avowed to spend their goods,
Their lands, their lives and honours in your cause???
May be the bolder to maintain your part,
When they do see that coward fear in you,
Shall not betray no fail their faithful hearts.
If once the death of Porrex end the strife,
And pay the price of his usurped reign,
Your mother shall persuade the angry king,
The Lords your friends eke shall appease his rage.
For they be wise, and well they can foresee,
That ere lunge time your aged fathers death
Will bring a time when you shall well requite
Their friendly favour, or their hateful spite,
Yea, or their slackenesse to advance your cause.
" Wise men do not so hang on passing sty??????
" Of present Princes, chiefly in their age,
" But they will further cast their reaching eye,
" To view and way the times and reigns to come.
No is it likely, though the king be wroth,
That he yet will, or that the realm will bear,
Extreme revenge upon his only son.
Or if he would, what one is he that dare
Be minister to such an enterprise?
And here you be now placed in your own,
Amid your Friends, your vassals and your strength.
We shall defend and keep your person safe,
Till either counsel turn his tender mind,
Or age, or sorrow end his weary days.
But if the fear of Gods, and secrete grudge
Of natures law, ripening at the fact,
Withhold your courage from so great attempt:
Know ye, that lust of kingdoms hath no law.
The Gods do bear and well allow in kings,
The things they abhor in rascal routes.
" When kings on slender quarrels run to wars,
" And then in cruel and unkindly wise,
" Command thefts, rapes, murders of innocents,
" The spoil of towns, ruins of mighty realms:
" Think you such princes do suppose them selves
" Subject to laws of kind, and fear of Gods?
Murders and violent thefts in private men,
Are heinous crimes and full of foul reproach,
Yet none offence, but decked with glorious name
Of noble conquests, in the hands of kings.
But if you like not yet so ho???e devise,
No list to take such vantage of the time,
But though with peril of your own estate,
You will not be the first that shall invade:
Assemble yet your force for your defence,
And for your safety stand upon your guard.
O heaven was there ever heard or known,
So wicked counsel to a noble prince?
Let me (my Lord) disclose unto your grace
This heinous tale, what mischief it contains,
Your fathers death, your brothers and your own,
Your present murder and eternal shame.
Hear me (O King) and suffer not to sink
So high a treason in your princely breast.
The mighty Gods forbid that ever I
Should once conceive such mischief in my hart.
Although my brother hath bereft my realm,
And bear perhaps to me an hateful mind:
Shall I revenge it, with his death therefore?
Or shall I so destroy my fathers life
That gave me life? the Gods forbid, I say.
Cease you to speak so any more to me.
No you my friend with answer once repeat
So foul a tale. In silence let it die.
What lord or subject shall have hope at all,
That under me they safely shall enjoy
Their goods, their honours, lands and liberties,
With whom, neither one only brother dear,
No father dearer, could emoye their lives?
But sith, I fear my younger brothers rage,
And sith perhaps some other man may give
Some like advise, to move his grudging head
At mine estate, which counsel may perchance
Take greater force with him, than this with me,
I will in secrete so prepare my self,
As if his malice or his lust to reign
Break forth in arms or sudden violence,
I may withstand his rage and keep mine own.
I fear the fatal time now draws on,
When civil hate shall end the noble line
Of famous Brute and of his royal seed.
Great Jove defend the mischiefs now at hand.
O that the Secretaries wise advise
Had erst been heard when he besought the king
Not to divide his land, nor send his sons
To further parts from presence of his court,
No yet to yield to them his governance.
Lo such are they now in the royal throne
As was rash Phaeton in Phebus carre.
No then the fiery stedes did draw the flame
With wilder rando??? through the kindled skies,
Than traitorous cons?????? now will whirl above???
The youthful heads of these unskilful kings.
But I here of their father will inform.
The reverence of him perhaps shall stay
The growing mischiefs, while they yet are greene.
If this help not, then woe unto them selves,
The prince, the people, the divided land.
And is it thus? And doth he so prepare,
Against his brother as his mortal foe?
And now while yet his aged father lives?
Neither regards he him? nor fears he me?
War would he have? and he shall have it so.
I saw my self the great prepared store
Of horse, of armour, and of weapon there,
No bring I to my lord reported tales
Without the ground of seen and fearched troth.
Lo secrete quarrels run about his court,
To bring the name of you my lord in hate.
Each man almost can now debate the cause,
And ask a reason of so great a wrong,
Why he so noble and so wise a prince,
Is as unworthy rest his heritage?
And why the king, misseledde by crafty means,
Divided thus his land from course of right?
The wiser sort hold down their griefull heads.
Eche man withdraws from talk and company,
Of those that have been known to favour you.
To hide the mischief of their meaning there,
Rumours are spread of your preparing here.
The rascal numbers of unskilful sort
Are filled with monstrous tales of you and yours.
In secrete I was counselled by my friends,
To hast me thence, and brought you as you know
Letters from those, that both can truly tell,
And would not write unless they knew it well.
My lord, yet ere you move unkindly war,
Send to your brother to demand the cause.
Perhaps some traitorous tales have filled his ears
With false reports against your noble grace:
Which once disclosed, shall end the growing strife,
That else not stayed with wise foresight in time
Shall hazard both your kingdoms and your lives.
Send to your father eke, he shall appease
Your kindled minds, and rid you of this fear.
Rid me of fear? I fear him not at all:
No will to him, no to my father send.
If danger were for one to tarry there,
Think ye it safety to return again?
In mischiefs, such as Ferrex now intends,
The wonted courteous laws to messengers
Are not observed, which in just war they use.
Shall I so hazard any one of mine?
Shall I betray my trusty friends to him,
That have disclosed his treason unto me?
Let him entreat that fears, I fear him not.
Or shall I to the king my father send?
Yea and send now, while such a mother lives,
That loves my brother, and that hates me?
Shall I give leisure, by my fond delays,
To Ferrex to oppress me all unwary?
I will not, but I will invade his realm,
And seek the traitor prince within his court.
Mischief for mischief is a due reward.
His wretched head shall pay the worthy price
Of this his treason and his hate to me.
Shall I abide, and treat, and send and pray,
And hold my yelden throat to traitors knife?
While I with valiant mind and conquering force,
Might rid my self of foes: and win a realm?
Yet rather, when I have the wretches head,
Then to the king my father will I send.
The bootless case may yet appease his wrath:
If not, I will defend me as I may.
Lo here the end of these two youthful kings,
The fathers death, the ruin of their realms.
" O most unhappy state of counsellors,
" That light on so unhappy lords and times,
" That neither can their good advise be heard,
" Yet must they bear the blames of ill success.
But I will to the king their father haste,
Ere this mischief come to the likely end,
That if the mindful wrath of wreakful Gods,
Since mighty Ilions fall not yet appeased
With these poor remnants of the Trojan name,
Have not determined by vnmoued fate
Out of this realm to rase the British line,
By good advise, by awe of fathers name,
By force of wiser lords, this kindled hate
May yet be quentched, ere it consume vs all.
When youth not bridled with a guiding stay
Is left to random of their own delight,
And welds whole realms, by force of sovereign sway,
Great is the danger of vnmaistred might,
Lest skilless rage throw down with headlong fall???
Their lands, their states, their lives, them selves &amp; al???
When growing pride doth fill the swelling breast,
And greedy lust doth raise the climbing mind,
Oh hardly may the peril be repressed,
No fear of angry Gods, no laws kind.
No countries care can fired hearts restrain,
When force hath armed envy and disdain.
When kings of fore???ette will neglect the rede
Of best advise, and yield to pleasing tales,
That do their fancies noisome humour feed,
No reason, nor regard of right avails.
Succeeding heaps of plagues shall teach to late,
To learn the mischiefs of misguided state.
Fowie fall the traitor false, that undermines
The love of brethren to destroy them both.
Wo to the prince, that pliant care ???nclynes,
And yields his mind to poisonous tale, that flows
From flattering mouth. And woe to wretched land
That wastes it self with civil sword in hand.
Lo, thus it is, poison in gold to take,
And wholesome drink in homely cup forsake.
O cruel fates, O mindful wrath of Gods,
Whose vengeance neither Simois stained streams
Flowing with blood of Trojan princes slain,
Nor Phrygian fields made rank with corpses dead
Of Asian kings and lords, can yet appease,
No slaughter of unhappy Pryams race,
Nor Ilions fall made level with the soil.
Can yet suffice: but still continued rage
Pursues our lines, and from the farthest seas
Doth chase the issues of destroyed Troye.
" Oh no man happy, till his end be seen.
If any flowing wealth and seeming joy
In present years might make a happy wight,
Happy was Hecuba the woefullest wretch
That ever lived to make a mirror of,
And happy Pryam with his noble sons.
And happy I, till now alas I see
And feel my most unhappy wretchedness.
Behold my lords, read ye this letter here.
Lo it contains the ruin of our realm,
If timely speed provide not hasty help.
Yet (O ye Gods) if ever woeful king
Might move ye kings of kings, wreak it on me
And on my sons, not on this guiltless realm.
Send down your wasting flames fro?? wrathful skies,
To reave me and my sons the hateful breath.
Read, read my lords: this is the matter why
I called ye now to have your good advise.
MY soneraigne lord, what I am loath to write,
But lothest am to see, that I am forced
By letters now to make you understand.
My lord Ferrex your eldest son misled
By traitorous fraud of young vntempred wits,
Assembleth force against your younger son,
No can my counsel yet withdraw the heate
And furious pangs of his inflamed head.
Disdain (saith he) of his disheritance
Arms him to wreak the great pretended wrong,
With civil sword upon his brothers life.
If present help do not restrain this rage,
This flame will wast your sons, your land, &amp; you.
O king, appease your grief and stay your plaint.
Great is the matter, and a woeful case.
But timely knowledge may bring timely help.
Send for them both unto your presence here.
The reverence of your honourage, and state,
Your grave advice, the awe of fathers name,
Shall quickly knit again this broken peace.
And if in either of my lords your sons,
Be such untamed and vnyelding pride,
As will not bend unto your noble hestes:
If Ferrex the elder son can bear no peer,
Or Porrex not content, aspires to more
Than you him gave aboue his native right:
Join with the juster side, so shall you force
Them to agree, and hold the land in stay.
What means this? Lo yonder comes in hast
Philander from my lord your younger son.
The Gods send joyful news.
The mighty Jove
Preserve your majesty, O noble king.
Philander, welcome: but how doth my son?
Your son, sir, lives, and healthy I him left.
But yet (O king) the want of lustful health
Could not be half so griefefull to your grace,
As these most wretched tidings that I bring.
O heavens, yet more? not end of woes to me?
Tinder, O king, came lately from the court
Of Ferrex, to my lord your younger son,
And made report of great prepared store
For war, and saith that it is wholly meant
Against Porrex, for high disdain that he
Lives now a king and eagle in degree
With him, that claims to succeed the whole,
As by due title of descending right.
Porrex is now so set on flaming fire,
Partly with kindled rage of cruel wrath,
Partly with hope to gain a realm thereby,
That he in hast prepares to invade
His brothers land, and with unkindly war
Threatens the murder of your elder son,
No could I him persuade that first he should
Send to his brother to demand the cause,
Nor yet to you to stay this hateful strife,
Wherefore sith there no more I can be heard,
I come my self now to inform your grace,
And to beseech you, as you love the life
And safety of your children and your realm,
Now to employ your wisdom and your force
To stay this mischief ere it be to late.
Are they in arms? would he not send to me?
Is this the honour of a fathers name?
In vain we travail to assuage their minds,
As if their hearts, whom neither brothers love,
Nor fathers awe, nor kingdoms cares, can move,
Our counsels could withdraw from raging heat.
Jove slay them both, and end the cursed line.
For though perhaps fear of such mighty force
As I my lords, joined with your noble aides,
May yet raise, shall repress their present heate,
The secret grudge and malice will remain,
The fire not quenched, but kept in close restraint,
Fed still within, breaks forth with double flame.
Their death and mine must peaze the angry Gods
Yield not, O king, so much to weak despair.
Your sons yet live, and long I trust, they shall.
If fates had taken you from earthly life,
Before beginning of this civil strife:
Perhaps your sounes in their vnmaistered youth,
Loose from regard of any living wight,
Would run on headlong, with unbridled race,
To their own death and ruin of this realm.
But sith the Gods, that have the care for kings???
Of things and times dispose the order so,
That in your life this kindled flame breaks forth,
While yet your life, your wisdom, and your power.
May stay the growing mischief, and repress
The fiery blaze of their kindled heate:
It seems, and so ye ought to deem thereof,
That loving Jove hath tempered so the time
Of this debate to happen in your days,
That you yet living may the same appease,
And add it to the glory of your latter age,
And they our sons may learn to live in peace.
Beware (O king) the greatest harm of all,
Lest by your wailful plaints your hastened death
Yield larger rome unto their growing rage.
Preserve your life, the only hope of stay.
And if your highness herein list to use
Wisdom or force, counsel or knightly aide:
Lo we, our persons, powers and lives are yours,
Use vs till death, O king, we are your own.
Lo here the peril that was erst foresene,
When you, (O king) did first divide your land,
And yield your present reign unto your sons,
But now (O noble prince) now is no time
To wail and plain, and wast your woeful life.
Now is the time for present good advise.
Sorrow doth dark the judgment of the wit.
" The hart vnbroken and the courage free
" From feeble faintness of bootless despair,
" Doth either rise to safety or renown
" By noble valor of vnuanquisht mind,
" Or yet doth perish in more happy sort.
Your grace may send to either of your sons
Some one both wise and noble personage,
Which with good counsel and with weighty name,
Of father, shall present before their eyes
Your hest, your life, your safety and their own,
The present mischief of their deadly strife.
And in the while, assemble you the force
Which your commandment and the spedy hast
Of all my lords here present can prepare.
The terror of your mighty power shall stay
The rage of both, or yet of one at lest.
O king the greatest grief that ever prince did hear,
That ever woeful messenger did tell,
That ever wretched land hath scene before,
I bring to you. Porrex your younger son
With soden force, invaded hath the land
That you to Ferrex did allot to rule,
And with his own most bloody hand he hath
His brother slain, and doth possess his realm.
O heavens send down the flames of your re???avenge,
Destroy I say with flash of wreakful fire
The traitor son, and then the wretched sire.
But let vs go, that yet perhaps I may
Die with revenge, and peaze the hateful gods.
The lust of kingdom knows no sacred faith,
No rule of reason, no regard of right,
No kindly love, no fear of heavens wrath:
But with contempt of Gods, and mans despite,
Through blodie slaughter, doth prepare the ways
To fatal sceptre and accursed reign.
The son so lothes the fathers lingering days,
No dreads his hand in brothers blot to stain.
O wretched prince, no doest thou yet record
The yet fresh murders done within the land
Of thy forefathers, when the cruel sword
Bereft Morgan his life with cousins hand?
Thus fatal plagues pursue the guilty race,
Whose murderous hand imbrued with guiltless blood
Asks vengeance still before the heavens face,
With endless mischiefs on the cursed brood.
The wicked child thus brings to woeful sire
The mournful plaints, to wast his very life.
Thus do the cruel flames of civil fire
Destroy the parted reign with hateful strife.
And hence doth spring the well from which doth flow
The dead black streams of mourning, plaints &amp; woe.
Why should I live, and liuger forth my time
In longer life to double my distress?
O me most woeful wight, whom no mishap
Long ere this day could have bereaved hence.
Mought not these hands by fortune, or by fate,
Have perst this breast, and life with iron rest?
Or in this palace here, where I so long
Have spent my days, could not that happy hour
Once, once have hoped in which these huge frames
With death by fall might have oppressed me?
Or should not this most hard and cruel soil,
So oft where I have pressed my wretched steps,
Sometime had ruth of mine accursed life,
To rend in twain swallow me therein?
So had my bones possessed now in peace
Their happy grave within the closed ground,
And greedy worms had gnawen this pined har???
Without my feeling payne: so should not now
This living breast remain the ruthefull tomb,
Wherein my hart yelden to death is graved:
Nor dreary thoughts with pangs of pining grief
My doleful mind had not afflicted thus.
O my beloved son: O my sweet child,
My dear Ferrex, my joy, my lives delight.
Is my beloved son, is my sweet child,
My dear Ferrex, my joy, my lives delight.
Murdered with cruel death? O hateful wretch,
O heinous traitor both to heaven and earth.
Thou Porrex, thou this damned dede hast wrought,
Thou Porrex, thou shalt dearly bye the same.
Traitor to kin and kind, to sire and me,
To thine own flesh, and traitor to thy self.
The Gods on thee in hell shall wreak their wrath,
And here in earth this hand shall take revenge,
On thee Porrex, thou false and caitiff wight.
If after blood, so eigre were thy thirst,
And murderous mind had so possessed thee,
If such hard hart of rock and stony flint
Lived in thy breast, that nothing else could like
Thy cruel tyrants thought but death and blood:
Wilde savage beasts, mought not their slaughter serve???
To fed thy greedy will, and in the midst
Of their entrails to stain thy deadly hands
With blood deserved, and drink thereof thy fill?
Or if nought else but death and blood of man
Mought please thy lust, could none in Britain land,
Whose hart betorne out of his panting breast
With thine own hand, or work what death thou would,
Suffice to make a sacrifice to peaze
That deadly mind and murderous thought in thee?
But he who in the self same womb was wrapped,
Where thou in dismal hour received life?
Or if needs, needs, thy hand must slaughter make,
Moughtest thou not have reached a mortal wound,
And with thy sword have pierced this cursed womb,
That the accursed Porrex brought to light,
And given me a just reward therefore?
So Ferrex yet sweet life mought have enjoyed,
And to his aged father comfort brought,
With some young son in whom they both might live.
But whereunto waste I this ruthful speech,
To thee that hast thy brothers blood thus shed?
Shall I still think that fro?? this womb thou sprung?
That I thee bare? or take thee for my son?
No traitor, no: I thee refuse for mine,
Murderer I thee renounce, thou art not mine.
Never, O wretch, this womb conceived thee,
Nor never bode I painful throws for thee.
Changeling to me thou art, and not my child,
Nor to no wight, that spark of pity knew.
Ruthelesse, unkind, monster of natures work,
Thou never sucked the milk of women's breast,
But from thy birth the cruel Tigers teates
Have nursed thee, nor yet of flesh and blood
Formed is thy hart, but of hard iron wrought,
And wilde and desert woods bred thee to life.
But can thou hope to scope my just revenge?
Or that these hands will not be wrooke on thee?
Doest thou not know that Ferrex mother lives
That loved him more dearly than her self?
And doth she live, and is not venged on thee?
We marvel much where this lingering stay
Falls out so long: Porrex unto our court
By order of our letters is returned???
And Eubulus received from vs by hest
At his arrival here to give him charge
Before our presence straight to make repair,
And yet we have no word whereof he stays.
Lo where he commas &amp; Eubulus with him.
According to your highness hest to me,
Here have I Porrex brought even in such sort
As from his wearied horse he did alight,
For that your grace did will such hast therein.
We like and praise this spedy will in you,
To work the thing that to your charge we gave.
Porrex, if we so far should swerve from kind,
And from those bounds which law of nature sets,
As thou hast done by vile and wretched deed,
In cruel murder of thy brothers life,
Our present hand could stay no longer time,
But straight should bathe this blade in blood of thee
As just revenge of thy detested crime.
No: we should not offend the law of kind,
If now this sword of ours did slay thee here:
For thou hast murdered him, whose heinous death
Even natures force doth move vs to revenge
By blood again: and justice forces vs
To measure death for death, thy due desert.
Yet since thou art our child, and sith as yet
In this hard case what word thou can allege
For thy defence, by vs hath not been heard,
We are content to staye our will for that
Which justice bids vs presently to work,
And give thee leave to use thy speech at full
If ought thou have to lay for thine excuse.
Neither O king, I can or will deny
But that this hand from Ferrex life hath reft:
Which fact how much my doleful hart doth wail,
Oh would it mought as full appear to sight
As inward grief doth pour it forth to me.
So yet perhaps if ever ruthefull hart
Melting in tears within a manly breast,
Through deep repentance of his bloody fact,
If ever grief, if ever woeful man
Might move regreite with sorrow of his fault,
I think the torment of my mournful case
Known to your grace, as I do feel the same,
Would force even wrath her self to pity me.
But as the water troubled with the mud
Shows not the face which else the eye should see.
Even so your ireful mind with stirred thought,
Can not so perfectly discern my cause.
But this unhappy, amongst so many heaps,
I must content me with, most wretched man,
That to my self I must reserve my woe
In pining thoughts of mine accursed fact,
Since I may not show here my smallest grief
Such as it is, and as my breast endures,
Which I esteem the greatest misery
Of all misschappes that fortune now can send,
Not that I rest in hope with plaint and tears
To purchase life: for to the Gods I clepe
For true record of this my faithful speech,
Never this hart shall have the thoughtful dread
To die the death that by your graces dome
By just desert, shall be pronounced to me:
Nor never shall this tongue once spend the speech
Pardon to crave, or seek by suit to live.
I mean not this, as though I were not touched
With care of dreadful death, or that I held
Life in contempt: but that I know, the mind
Stoups to no dread, although the flesh be frail,
And for my gilt, I yield the same so great
As in my self I find a fear to sue
For grant of life.
In vain, O wretch, thou show
A woeful hart, Ferrex now lies in grave,
Slain by thy hand.
Yet this, O father, hear:
And then I end. Your majesty well knows,
That when my brother Ferrex and my self
By your own hest were joined in governance
Of this your graces realm of Britain land,
I never sought nor travailed for the same,
Nor by my self, nor by no friend I wrought,
But from your highness will alone it sprung,
Of your most gracious goodness bent to me.
But how my brothers hart even then ripened
With swollen disdain against mine eagle rule,
Seeing that realm, which by descent should grow
Wholly to him, allotted half to me?
Even in your highness court he now remains,
And with my brother then in nearest place,
Who can record, what proof thereof was shewde,
And how my brothers envious hart appeared.
Yet I that judged it my part to seek
His favour and good will, and loath to make
Your highness know, the thing which should have brought
Brief to your grace, &amp; your offence to him,
Hoping my earnest suit should soon have won
A loving hart within a brothers breast,
Wrought in that sort that for a pledge of love
And faithful hart, he gave to me his hand.
This made me think, that he had banished quite
All rancour from his thought and bare to me
Such hearty love, as I did owe to him.
But after once we left your graces court,
And from your highness presence lived apart,
This eagle rule still, still, did grudge him so
That now those enumous sparks which erst lay raked
In living cinders of dissembling breast,
Kindled so far within his hart disdain,
That longer could he not refrain from proof
Of secrete practise to deprive me life
By poisons force, and had berest me so,
If mine own servant hired to this fact
And moved by troth with hate to work the same,
In time had not betrayed it unto me.
When thus I saw the knot of love vnknitte,
All honest league and faithful promise broke,
The law of kind and troth thus rent in twain,
His hart on mischief set, and in his breast
Black treason hid, then, then did I despair
That ever time could win him friend to me.
Then saw I how he smiled with slaying knife
Wrapped under cloak, then saw I deep deceit
Lurk in his face and death prepared for me:
Even nature moved me than to hold my life
More dear to me than his, and had this hand,
Since by his life my death must needs ensue,
And by his death my life to be preserved,
To shed his blood, and seek my safety so.
And wisdom willed me without protract
In speed wise to put the same in ur.
Thus have I told the cause that moved me
To work my brothers death and so I yield
My life, my death, to judgment of your grace.
Oh cruel wight, should any cause prevail
To make thee stain thy hands with brothers blood:
But what of thee we will resolve to doe,
Shall yet remain unknown: Thou in the mean
Shalt from our royal presence banished be,
Until our princely pleasure further shall
To thee be showed. Depart therefore our sight
Accursed child. What cruel desrenie,
What froward fate hath sorted vs this chance,
That even in those where we should comfort find,
Where our delight now in our aged days
Sold rest and be, even there our only grief
And depest sorrows to abridge our life,
Most pining cares and deadly thoughts do grow?
Your grace should now in these grave years of yours
Have found ere this y??? price of mortal joys,
How short they be, how fading here in earth,
How full of change, how brittle our estate,
Of nothing sure, save only of the death,
To whom both man and all the world doth owe
Their end at last, neither should natures power
In other sort against your hart prevail,
Than as the naked hand whose stroke assays
The armed breast where force doth light in vain.
Many can yield right sage and grave advise
Of patient sprite to others wrapped in woe,
And can in speech both rule and conquer kind,
Who if by proof they might feel natures force,
Would show them selves men as they are in dede,
Which now will needs be gods. But what doth mean
The sorry chere of her that here doth come?
Oh where is ruth? or where is pity now?
Whether is gentle hart and mercy fled?
Are they exiled out of our stony breasts,
Never to make return? is all the world
Drowned in blood, and sunk in cruelty?
If not in women mercy may be found,
If not (alas) within the mothers breast,
To her own child, to her own flesh and blood,
If ruth be banished thence, if pity there
May have no place, if there no gentle hart
Do live and dwell, where should we seek it then?
Madame (alas) what means your woeful tale?
O filly woman I, why to this hour
Have kind and fortune thus deferred my breath,
That I should live to see this doleful day?
Will ever wight believe that such hard hart
Could rest within the cruel mothers breast,
With her own hand to slay her only son?
But out (alas) these eyes beheld the same,
They saw the dreary sight, and are become??
Most ruthful records of the bloody fact.
Porrex (alas) is by his mother slain,
And with her hand, a woeful thing to tell,
While slumbering on his careful bed he rests
His hart stabde in with knife is rest of life.
O Eubulus, oh draw this sword of ours,
And pearce this hart with speed. O hateful light,
O loathsome life, O sweet and welcome death.
Dear Eubulus work this we thee beseech.
Patient your grace, perhaps he lives yet.
With wound received, but not of certain death.
O let vs then repair unto the place,
And see if Porrex live, or thus be slain.
Alas he lives not, it is to true,
That with these eyes of him a peerless prince,
Son to a king, and in the flower of youth,
Even with a twinke a senseless stock I saw.
O damned deed.
But hear his ruthefull end.
The noble prince, appears with the sudden wound,
Out of his wretched slumber hastily start,
Whose strength now failing straight he overthrew,
When in the fall his eyes even new unclosed
Beheld the Queen, and cried to her for help.
We then, alas, the ladies which that time
Did there attend, seeing that heinous deed,
And hearing him oft call the wretched name
Of mother, and to cry to her for aide,
Whose direful hand gave him the mortal wound,
Pitying (alas) for nought else could we do)
His ruthefull end, ran to the woeful bed,
Despoiled straight his breast, and all we might
Wiped in vain with napkins next at hand,
The sudden streams of blood that flushed fast
Out of the gaping wound, O what a look,
O what a ruthefull steadfast eye me thought
He fixed upon my face, which to my death
Will never part fro me, when with a braid
A deep fet sigh he gave, and therewithal
Clasping his hands, to heaven he cast his sight.
And straight pale death pressing within his face
The flying ghost his mortal corpse forsook.
Never did age bring forth so vile a fact.
O hard and cruel hap, that thus assigned
Unto so worthy a wight so wretched end:
But most hard cruel hart, that could consent
To lend the hateful destinies that hand,
By which, alas, so heinous crime was wrought.
O Queen of adamant, O marble breast.
If not the favour of his comely face,
If not his princely chere and countenance,
His valiant active arms, his manly breast,
If not his fair and seemly personage,
His noble limnies in such proportion cast
As would have wrapped a silly women's thought,
If this mought not have moved thy bloody hart.
And that most cruel hand the wretched weapon
Even to let fall, and kissed him in the face,
With tears for ruth to reeve such one by death:
Should nature yet consent to slay her son?
O mother, thou to murder thus thy child?
Even Jove with justice must with lightning flames
Fro?? heaven send down some strange revenge on thee.
Ah noble prince, how oft have I beheld
Thee mounted on thy fierce and trampling stead,
Shining in armour bright before the tilt,
And with thy mistress sleue tied on thy helm,
And charge thy staff to please thy ladies eye,
That bowed the head piece of thy friendly foe?
How oft in arms on horse to bend the mace?
How oft in arms on foot to break the sword,
Which never now these eyes may see again.
Madame, alas, in vain these plaints are shed,
Rather with me depart, and help to swag,
The thoughtful griefs that in the aged king
Must needs by nature grow, by death of this
His only son, whom he did hold so dear.
What wight is that which saw y??? I did see,
And could refrain to wail with plaint and tears?
Not I, alas, that hart is not in me.
But let vs go, for I am grieved anew,
To call to mind the wretched fathers woe.
When greedy lust in royal seat to reign
Hath re???t all care of Gods and eke of men,
And cruel hart, wrath, treason, and disoaine
Within ambitious breast are lodged, then
Behold how mischief wide her self displays,
And with the brothers hand the brother slays.
When blood thus shed, doth stain the heavens face,
Crying to Jove for vengeance of the deed,
The mightic God even moves from his place,
With wrath to wreak: then sends he forth with speed
The dreadful furies, daughters of the night,
With Serpents girt, carrying the whip of ire,
With hear of stinging Snakes, and shining bright
With flames and blood, and with a brand of fire.
These for revenge of wretched murder done,
Do make the mother kill her only son.
Blood asks blood, and death must death requite.
Jove by his just and everlasting dome
Justly hath ever so requited it.
The times before record, and times to come
Shall find it true, and so doth present proof
Present before our eyes for our behoof.
O happy wight that suffres not the snare
Of murderous mind to tangle him in blood.
And happy he that can in time beware
By others harms and turn it to his good.
But wo to him that fearing not to offend
Doth serve his lust, and will not see the end,
Did ever age bring forth such tyrants harts?
The brother hath bereft the brothers life,
The mother she hath died her cruel hands
In blood of her own son, and now at last
The people lo forgetting troth and love,
Contemning quite both law and loyal hart,
Even they have slain their sovereign lord &amp; queen.
Shall this their traitorous crime unpunished rest?
Even yet they cease not, carried on with rage,
In their rebellious routes, to threaten still
A new blood shed unto the princes kin,
To slay them all, and to vproote the race
Both of the king and queen, so are they moved
With Porrex death, wherein they falsely charge
The guiltless king without desert at all,
And traitorously have murdered him therefore,
And eke the queen.
Shall subjects dare with force
To work revenge upon their princes fact?
Admit the worst that may, as sure in this
The deed was foul, the queen to slay her son,
Shall yet the subject seek to take the sword,
Arise against his lord, and slay his king?
O wretched state, where those rebellious hearts
Are not rent out even from their living breasts,
And with the body thrown unto the fowls
As carrion food, for terror of the rest.
There can no punishment be thought to great
For this so grievous cryine: let speed therefore
Be used therein for it behooves so.
Ye all my lords, I see, consent in one
And I as one consent with ye in all.
I hold it more than need with sharpest law
To punish this tinnultuous bloody rage.
For nothing more may shake the common state,
Than sufferance of uproars without redress,
Whereby how some kingdoms of mighty power
After great conquests made, and flourishing
In fame and wealth, have ben to ruin brought,
I pray to Jove that we may rather whale
Such hap in them than witness in our selves.
Eke fully with the duke my mind agrees,
Though kings forget to govern as they ought,
Yet subjects must obey as they are bound.
But now my lords, before ye farther wade,
Or spend your speech, what sharpe revenge shall fall
By justice plague on these rebellious wights,
Me thinks ye rather should first search the way,
By which in time the rage of this uproar
Mought be repressed, and these great tumults ceased.
Even yet the life of Britain land doth hang
In traitors balance of vnegall weight.
Think not my lords the death of Gorboduc,
Nor yet Videnaes blood will cease their rage:
Even our own lives, our wives and children dear,
Our country dearest of all, in danger stands,
Now to be spoiled, now, now made desolate,
And by our selves a conquest to ensue.
For give once swey unto the peoples lusts,
To rush forth, on, and stay them not in time,
And as the stream that rolled down the hill,
So will they headlong run with raging thoughts
From blood to blood, from mischief unto ???o,
To ruin of the realm, them selves and all,
So giddy are the common peoples minds,
So glad of change, more wavering than the sea.
Ye see (my lords) what strength these rebels have,
What huge nombre is assembled still,
For though the traitorous fact, for which they rose
Be wrought and done, yet lodge they still in field
So that how far their furies yet will stretch
Breat cause we have to dread. That we may seek
By present battle to repress their power,
Speed must we use to levy force therefore.
For either they forthwith will mischief work,
Or their rebellious roars forthwith will cease.
These violent things may have no lasting long.
Let vs therefore use this for present help,
Persuade by gentle speech, and offer grace
With gift of pardon save unto the chief,
And that upon condition that forthwith
They yield the captains of their euterprise,
To bear such guerdon of their traitorous fact,
As may be both due vengeance to them selves,
And wholesome terror to posterity.
This shall, I think, scatter the greatest part,
That now are holden with desire of home,
Wearied in field with cold of winters nights,
And some (no doubt) stricken with dread of law.
When this is once proclaimed, it shall make
The captains to mistrust the multitude,
Whose safety bids them to betray their heads,
And so much more because the rascal routes,
In things of great and perilous attempts,
Are never trusty to the noble race.
And while we treat and stand on terms of grace,
We shall both stay their furies rage the while,
And eke gain time, whose only help suffices
Withoten war to vanquish rebels power
In the mean while, make you in readiness
Such band of horsemen as ye may prepare.
Horsemen (you know) are not the commons strength,
But are the force and store of noble men,
Whereby the vnchosen and unarmed sort
Of skilless rebels, whom none other power
But nombre makes to be of dreadful force,
With sudden brunt may quickly be oppressed.
And if this gentle mean of proffered grace,
With stubborn hearts cannot so far avail,
As to assuage their desperate courages.
Then do I wish such slaughter to be made,
As present age and eke posterity
May be adrad with horror of revenge,
That justly then shall on these rebels fall.
This is my lord the sum of mine advise.
Neither this case admits debate at large,
And though it did, this speech that hath ben said
Hath well abridged the tale I would have told.
Fully with Eubulus do I consent
In all that he hath said: and if the same
To you my lords, may seem for best advise,
I wish that it should straight be put in ur.
My lords than let vs presently depart,
And follow this that likes vs so well.
If ever time to gain a kingdom here
Were offred man, now it is offred me.
The realm is reft both of their king and queen,
The offspring of the prince is slain and dead,
No issue now remains, the heir unknown,
The people are in arms and mutinies,
The nobles they are busied how to cease
These great rebellious tumults and uproars,
And Brittavne land now desert left alone
Amid these broils uncertain where to rest,
Offers her self unto that noble hart
That will or dare pursue to bear her crown.
Shall I that am the duke of Albany
Descend from that line of noble blood,
Which hath so long flourished in worthy fame,
Of valiant hearts, such as in noble breasts
Of right should rest aboue the the baser sort,
Refuse to venture life to win a crown?
Whom shall I find enmies that will withstand
My fact herein, if I attempt by arms
To seek the same now in these times of broil?
These dukes power can hardly well appease
The people that already are in arms.
But if perhaps my force be once in field,
Is not my strength in power aboue the best
Of all these lords now left in Britain land?
And though they should match me with power of me??,
Yet doubtful is the chance of battles ioyued,
If victors of the field we may depart,
Ours is the sceptre then of great Britain???
If slain amid the plain this body lye,
Mine enemies yet shall not deny me this,
But that I dyed giving the noble charge
To hazard life for conquest of a crown.
Forthwith therefore will I in post depart
To Albany, and raise in armour there
All power I can: and here my secret friends,
By secret practise shall solicit still,
To seek to win to me the peoples hearts.
O Jove, how are these peoples harts abused???
What blind fury, thus he adlong caries them?
That though so many books, so many rolls
Of ancient time record, what grievous plagues
Light on these rebels aye, and though so oft
Their cares have heard their aged fathers tell,
What just reward these traitors still receive,
Yea though them selves have scene deep death &amp; blood,
By strangling cord and slaughter of the sword,
To such assigned, yet can they not beware,
Yet can not stay their lewd rebellious hands,
But suffering lo foul treason to distain
Their wretched minds, forget their loyal hart,
Reject all truth and rise against their prince.
A ruthefull case, that those, whom duties bond,
Whom grafted law by nature, truth, and faith,
Bound to preserve their country and their king,
Borne to defend their common wealth and prince,
Even they should give consent thus to subvert
Thee Britain land, &amp; from thy womb should spring
(O native soil) those, that will needs destroy
And tuyne thee and eke them selves in fine.
For lo, when once the dukes had offred grace
Of pardon sweet, the multitude misled
By traitorous fraud of their ungracious heads,
One sort that saw the dangerous success
Of stubborn standing in rebellious war,
And knew the difference of princes power
From headless nombre of tumultuous routes,
Whom common countries care, and private fear,
Taught to repent the error of their rage,
Laid hands upon the captains of their band,
And brought them bound unto the mighty dukes.
And other sort not trusting yet so well
The truth of pardon, or mistrusting more
Their own offence than that they could conceive
Such hope of pardon for so foul misdeed,
Or for that they their captains could not yield,
Who fearing to be yielded fled before,
Stale home by silence of the secret night,
The third unhappy and enraged sort
Of desperate hearts, who stained in princes blood
From traitorous furor could not be withdrawn
By love, by law, by grace, no yet by fear,
By proffered life, no yet by threatened death,
With minds hopeless of life, dreadlesse of death,
Careless of country, and aweless of God,
Stood bent to fight, as furies did them move,
With violent death to close their traitorous life.
These all by power of horsemen were oppressed,
And with revenging sword slain in the field,
Or with the strangling cord hanged on the tree,
Where yet their carrion carcases do preach
The fruits that rebels reap of their uproars,
And of the murder of their sacred prince.
But lo, where do approach the noble dukes,
By whom these tumults have ben thus appeasde.
I think the world will now at length beware
And fear to put on arms against their prince.
If not? those traitorous hearts that dare rebel,
Let them behold the wide and huge fields
With blood and bodies spread of rebels slain,
The lofty trees clothed with the corpses dead
That strangled with the corde do hang thereon.
A just reward, such as all times before
Have ever lotted to those wretched folks.
But what means he that comes here so fast?
My lords, as duty and my troth doth move
And of my country work a care in me,
That if the spending of my breath availed
To do the service that my hart desires,
I would not shun to embrace a present death:
So have I now in that wherein I thought
My travail mought perform some good effect,
Uentred my life to bring these tidings here.
the mighty duke of Albany
Is now in arms and lodges in the field
With twenty thousand men, hither he bends
His spedy marche, and minds to invade the crown,
Daily he gathered strength, and spreads abroad
That to this realm no certain heir remains,
That Britain land is left without a guide,
That he the sceptre seeks, for nothing else
But to preserve the people and the land,
Which now remain as ship without a sterne.
Lo this is that which I have here to say.
Is this his faith? and shall he falsely thus
Abuse the vantage of unhappy times?
O wretched land, if his outrageous pride,
His cruel and vntempred wilfulness,
His deep dissembling shows of false pretence,
Should once attain the crown of Britain land.
Let vs my lords, with timely force resist
The new attempt of this our common foe,
As we would quench the flames of common fire.
Though we remain without a certain prince,
To weld the realm or guide the wandering rule,
Yet now the common mother of vs all,
Our native land, our country, that contains
Our wives, children, kindred, our selves and all
That ever is or may be dear to man,
Cries unto vs to help our selves and her,
Let vs advance our powers to repress
This growing foe of all our liberties.
Yea let vs so, my lords, with hasty speed.
And ye (O Gods) send vs the welcome death,
To shed our blood in field, and leave vs not
In loathsome life to longer out our days,
To see the huge heaps of these vnhappes,
????????? now roll down upon the wretched land,
Where empty place of princely governance,
No certain stay now left of doubtless heir,
Thus leave this guidelesse realm an open pray,
To endless storms and waste of civil war.
That ye (my lords) do so agree in one,
To save your country from the violent reign
And wrongfully usurped tyranny
Of him that threatens conquest of you all,
To save your realm, and in this realm your selves,
From foreign thraldom of so proud a prince,
Much do I praise, and I beseech the Gods,
With happy honour to requite it you.
But (O my lords) sith now the heavens wrath
Hath reft this land the issue of their prince,
Sith of the body of our late sovereign lord
Remains no more, since the young kings be slain,
And of the title of descend crown
Uncertainly the diverse minds do think
Even of the learned sort, and more uncertainly
Will partial fancy and affection deem:
But most uncertainly will climbing pride
And hope of reign withdraw to sundry parts
The doubtful right and hopeful lust to reign:
When once this noble service is achieved
For Britain land the mother of ye all,
When once ye have with armed force repressed
The proud attempts of this Albanian prince,
That threatens thraldom to your native land,
When ye shall vanquishers return from field,
And find the princely state an open pray
To greedy lust and to usurping power,
Then, then (my lords) if ever kindly care
Of ancient honour of your ancestors,
Of present wealth and nobles of your stocks,
Yea of the lives and safety yet to come
Of your dear wives, your children, and your selves,
Might move your noble hearts with gentle ruth,
Then, then, have pity on the torn estate,
Then help to salve the well near hopeless sore
Which ye shall do, if ye your selves withhold
The slaying knife from your own mothers throat.
Her shall you save, and you, and yours in her,
If ye shall all with one assent forbear
Once to lay hand or take unto your selves
The crown, by colour of pretended right,
Or by what other means so ever it be,
Till first by common counsel of you all
In Parliament the regal diadem
Be set in certain place of governance,
In which your Parliament and in your choice,
Prefer the right (my lords) with respect
Of streugth or friends, or what soever cause
That may set forward any others part.
For right will last, and wrong can not endure.
Right mean I his or hers, upon whose name
The people rest by mean of native line,
Or by the virtue of some former law,
Already made their title to advance.
Such one (my lords) let be your chosen king,
Such one so borne within your native land,
Such one prefer, and in no wise admit
The heavy yoke of foreign governance,
Let foreign titles yield to public wealth.
And with that hart wherewith ye now prepare
Thus to withstand the proud muading foe,
With that same hart (my lords) keep out also
Unnatural thraldom of strangers reign,
No suffer you against the rules of kind
Your mother land to serve a foreign prince.
Lo here the end of Brutus royal line,
And lo the entry to the woeful wrack,
And utter ruin of this noble realm.
The royal king, and eke his sons are slain,
No ruler rests within the regal seat,
The heir, to whom the sceptre lunges, unknown,
That to eche force of foreign princes power,
Whom vantage of our wretched state may move
By sudden arms to gain so rich a realm,
And to the proud and greedy mind at home,
Whom blinded lust to reign lead to aspire,
Lo Britain realm is left an open pray,
A present spoil by conquest to ensue.
Who sees not now how many rising minds
Do feed their thoughts, with hope to reach a realm?
And who will not by force attempt to win
So great a gain, that hope persuades to have?
A simple colour shall for title serve.
Who wins the royal crown will want no right,
Nor such as shall display by long descent
A lineal race to prove him lawful king.
In the mean while these civil arms shall rage,
And thus a thousand mischiefs shall unfold,
And far and near spread thee (O Britain land)
All right and law shall cease, and he that had
Nothing to day, to morrow shall enjoy
Great heaps of gold, and he that flowed in wealth,
Lo he shall be berest of life and all,
And happiest he that then possesses least,
The wives shall suffer rape, the maids deflowered,
And children fatherless shall weep and wane,
With fire and sword thy native folk shall perish,
One kinsman shall bereave an others life,
The father shall unwitting slay the son,
The son shall slay the sire and know it not,
Women and maids the cruel soldiers sword
Shall perse to death, and silly children lo,
That play in the streets and fields are found,
By violent hand shall close their latter day.
Whom shall the fierce and bloody soldier
Reserve to life? Whom shall he spare from death?
Even thou (O wretched mother) half alive,
Thou shalt behold thy dear and only child
Slain with the sword while he yet sucks thy breast.
Lo, guiltless blood shall thus eche where be shed.
Thus shall the wasted soil yield forth no fruit,
But dearth and famine shall possess the land.
The towns shall be consumed and burnt with fire,
The peopled cities shall wax desolate,
And thou, O Britain, meanwhile in renown,
Meanwhile in wealth and fame, shalt thus be torn,
Dismembered thus, and thus be rent in twain,
Thus wasted and defaced, spoiled and destroyed,
These be the fruits your civil wars will bring.
Hereto it commas when kings will not consent
To grave advise, but follow wilful will.
This is the end, when in fond princes hearts
Flattery prevails, and sage rede hath no place.
These are the plages, when murder is the mean
To make new heirs unto the royal crown.
Thus wreak the Gods, when that the mothers wrath
Nought but the blood of her own child may swag.
These mischiefs spring when rebels will arise,
To work revenge and judge their princes fact.
This, this ensues, when noble men do fail
In loyal troth, and subjects will be kings.
And this doth grow when lo unto the prince,
Whom death or sudden hap of life bereaves,
No certain heir remains, such certain heir,
As not all only is the rightful heir,
But to the realm is so made known to be,
And troth thereby vested in subjects hearts.
To owe faith there where right is known to rest.
Alas, in Parliament what hope can be,
When is of Parliament no hope at all?
Which, though it be assembled by consent,
Yet is not likely with consent to end,
While eche one for him self, or for his friend,
Against his foe, shall travail what he may.
While now the state left open to the man,
That shall with greatest force invade the same,
Shall fill ambitious minds with gaping hope,
When will they once with yielding hearts agree?
Or in the while, how shall the realm be used?
No, no: then Parliament should have been holden,
And certain heirs appointed to the crown,
To stay the title of established right,
And in the people plant obedience,
While yet the prince did live, whose name and power
By lawful sommons and authority
Might make a Parliament to be of force,
And might have set the state in quiet stay.
But now O happy man, whom speed death
Deprives of life, no is enforced to see
These huge mischiefs and these miseries,
These civil wars, these murders &amp; these wrongs.
Of in??????ice, yet must God in fine restore
This noble crown unto the lawful heir:
For right will always live, and rise at length,
But wrong can never take deep root to last???

AGathon he whose counsel wise, to princes wele extēded:
by good advice unto a Prince iij. things he hath cōmended
First, is that he hath government and rules over men:
Secondly, to rule with laws, eke Justice (saith he) then.
Thirdly, that he must well conceive, he may not always reign:
Lo, thus the rule unto a Prince, Agathon squared plain.
Tully the wise whose sapience, in volumes great doth tel:
Who in wisdom, in that time did many men excel.
A Prince (saith he) is of him self, a plain and speaking law:
The law, a School moister divine, this by his rule I draw.
The sage and witty Seneca, his words thereto did frame:
The honest exercise of Kings, men will ensue the same.
But contrary wise if that a King, abuse his kingly seat:
His ignomy and bitter shame, in fine shall be more great.
¶ In Portion there reignd a king, who Cirrus hight by name:
Who did deserve as I doo read, the lasting blast of Fame.
But he, when sisters three had wrought, to shere his vital thread:
As heir due to take the crown, Cambices did procéed.
He in his youth was trained up, by trace of virtues lore:
Yet (béeing king) did clean forget, his perfect race before.
Then cleuing more unto his will such vice did imitate:
As one of Icarus his kind, for warning then did hate.
Thinking that none could him dismay, no none his fact? could sée
Yet at the last a fall he took, like Icarus to bée.
Else as the fish which oft had take, the pleasant bait from hook:
In safe did spring &amp; pearce the streams whē fisher fast did look.
To hoist up from the watery waives, unto the dried land:
Then scaept, at last by subtle baight, come to the fishers hand.
En so this king Cambices héer, when he had wrought his will:
Taking delight the Innocent, his guiltless blood to spell.
Then mighty Jove would not permit, to procé offence:
But what measure ye king did meat, ye same did Jove cōmence.
To bring to end with shame his race, two yéeres he did not reign:
His cruelty we will dilate, and make the matter plain.
Craving that this may suffice now, your patience to win:
I take my way, behold I see, the players coming in.
MY Counsel grave &amp; sapient with lords of legal train:
Attentive ears towards bend &amp; mark what shall be sain.
So you likewise my valiāt knight whose māly acts doth fly
By brute of fame ye sounding trump doth perse ye azure sky.
My sapient words I say perpend and so your skill delat:
You know that Morse vanquished hath Cirrus that king of state
And I by due inheritance possess that Princely crown:
Ruling by sword of mighty force in place of great renown.
You know and often have heard tel my fathers worthy facts.
A manly Marsis hart he bare appéering by his acts.
And what? shall I to ground let fall my fathers golden praise?
No, no, I mean for to attempt, this fame more large to raise,
In that that I his son succéed his kingly seat as due:
Extend your council unto me in that I ask of you.
I am the king of Persia, a large and fertile soil:
The Egiptians against vs repunge, as varlets slave and vile.
Therefore I mean with Marsis hart, with wars thē to frequent
Them to subdue as captives mine this is my harts intent.
So shall I win honours delight, and praise of me shall go:
My Council speak, and Lordings eke, is it not best doo so?
Oh pusant king, your blifful word{is}, deserves abundant praise
That you in this doo go about, your fathers same to raise.
Oh blifful day that king so young, such profit should conceive:
His fathers praise &amp; his to win, from those that would deceive.
Sure my true and sovereign king, I fall before you pressed:
Answer to give as duty mine, in that your grace request.
If that your hart addicted be, the Egiptians to convince:
Through Marsis and the cōquest wun, then déed of happy prince
Shall pearce the skies unto the throne of the supernal seat:
And merit there a just reward, of Iupiter the great.
But then your grace must not turn back, from this pretenced will
For to procéed in virtuous life, employ endeavour still.
Extinguish vice, and in that cup, to drink have no delight.
To martial feats and kingly sport, fix all your whole delight.
My Council grave a thousand thanks, with hart I doo you ren∣der
That you my case so prosperous, entirely doo tender.
I will not swerve frō those your steps, where you wold me traū
But now my Lord &amp; valiāt knight, with word{is} give answer plain
Are you content with me to go, the Marsis games to try?
Yea péerlesse Prince to aid your grace, my self will live and dye.
And I for my hability, for fear will not turn back:
But as the ship against the rocks, sustain and bide the wrack.
Oh willing harts, a thousand thanks I render unto you:
Strike up your drums with courage great, we will march forth even now.
Permit (O king) few words to héer, my duty serves no less:
Therefore give leave to council thine, his mind for to express.
Speak on my Council what it be, you shall have savour mine
Then will I speak unto your grace, as duty doth me bind.
Your grace doth mean for to attempt of war the manly art:
Your grace therein may bop receive with others for your part.
The dent of death in those affairs, all persons are alike:
The hart courageous often times, his detriment doth séek.
Its best therefore for to permit, a Ruler of your land:
To sit and judge with equity, when things of right are scand.
My grace doth yéeld to this your talk, tobe thus now it shall:
My Knight therefore prepare your self, Sisamnes for to call.
A Judge he is of prudent skill, even he shall bear the sway:
In absence mine, when from the land I doo depart my way.
Your Knight before your grace euē héer, him self hath ready pressed:
With willing hart for to fulfil as your grace made request.
Pleases your grace I judge of him to be a man right fit:
For he is learned in the Law having the gift of wit.
In your graces precinct, I doo not view for it a méeter man:
His learning is of good effect. bring proof thereof I can.
I doo not know what is his life, his conscience hid from me:
I dout not but the fear of God, before his eyes to be.
Report declares, he is a man that to him self is ny:
One that fa••ureth much the world, and to much sets thereby.
But this I say of certainty, if he your grace succeed:
In your absence but for a while, he will be warned indéed:
No injustice for to frequent, no partial Judge to prove:
But rule all things with equity, to win your graces loo.
Of that he shall a warning have, my heasts for to obey:
Great punishment for his offence against him will I lay.
Behold I sée him now egress and enter into place:
Oh puissant Prince &amp; mighty king, ye gods preserve your grace.
Your graces message came to me, your will purporting forth:
With grateful mind I it received, according to mine other.
Erecting then myself with spéed, before your graces eyes:
The tenor of your Princely will, from you for to agnise.
Sisamnes, this the whole effect, the which for you I sent:
Our mind it is to elevate, you to great preferment▪
My grace and gracious coūcel eke hath chose you for this cause:
In judgment you doo office bear, which have the skill in laws,
We think that you accordingly, by Justice rule will deal:
that for offence none shall have cause (of wrōg) you to appeal.
Abundant thanks unto your grace for this benignity:
To you his council in like case, with Lords of clemency.
What so your grace to me permits, if I therein offend:
Such erecution then commence, and use it to this end.
That all other (by that my déed) example so may take:
To admonish them to flée the same, by fear it may them make.
Then according to your words, if you therein offend:
I assure you even from my breast, correction shall extend,
From Persra I mean to go into the Egipt land:
Them to convince by force of arms, and win the upper hand.
While I therefore absent shall be, I doo you full permit:
As governor in this my right, in that estate to sit.
For to detect and eke correct, those that abuse my grace:
This is the total of my will, give answer in this case.
Unworthy much (O prince) am I, and for this gift unfit:
But sith that it hath pleased your grace, that I in it must sit.
I doo avouch unto my death, according to my skill:
With equity for to observe, your graces mind and will.
And nought from it to swerve indéed, but sincerely to stay:
Else let me taste the penalty, as I before did say.
Well then of this authority, I give you you full possession:
And I will it fulfil also, as I have made profession.
By council, then let vs depart, a final stay to make:
To Egit land now forth with spéed, my voyage I will take.
Strike up your drūmes vs to rejoice, to hear the warlike sound
Stay you héer Sisamnes Judge, and look well to your bound.
Even now the King hath me extolled, and set me up aloft.
Now may I were the brodered guard and lye in down bed soft.
Now may I purchase house and land, and have all at my will:
Now may I build a princely place, my mind for to fulfil.
Now may I abrogate the Law, as I shall think it good:
If any one me now offend, I may demand his blood.
According to the Proverb old, my mouth I will up make:
Now it doth lye all in my hand, to leave or else to take.
To deal with Justice to my bound, and so to live in hope:
But oftētimes the birds be gone, while one for nest doth grope.
Doo well or il, I dare avouch, some evil on me will speak:
No truly yet I doo not mean, the kings precept to break,
To place I mean for to return my duty to fulfil.
Stand away, stand away for the passion of God,
Harnessed I am prepared to the field:
I would have been content at home to have bod,
But I am sent forth with my spear and shéeld.
I am appointed to fight against a Snail,
And Welkin Wren the ancient shall bear:
I dout not but against him to prevail,
To be a man my déeds shall declare.
If I overcome him, then a Butter fly takes his part,
His weapon must be a blew speckled Hen:
But you shall sée me over throw him with a fart,
So without conquest he shall go home again.
If I overcame him, I must fight with a fly,
And a black pudding the flies weapon must be:
At the first blow on the ground he shall lye,
I will be sure to thrust him through the mouth to the knée.
To conquest these fellows the man I will play,
Ha, ha, ha, now ye will make me to smile:
To sée if I can all men beguile.
Ha, my name, my name would you so fain know?
Yea iwis shall ye, and that with all speed:
I have forgot it therefore I cannot show,
A, A, now I have it, I have it in déed.
My name is Ambidexter I signify one,
That with both hands finely can play:
Now with king Cambices and by and by gone,
Thus doo I run this and that way,
For while I mean with a Soldier to be,
Then give I a leap to Sisamnes the Judge:
I dare avouch, ye shall his destruction see,
To all kind of estates I mean for to trudge.
Ambidexter, nay he is a fellow if ye knew all:
Gogs flesh and his wounds these wars rejoice my hart:
By his wounds I hope to doo well for my part.
By Gods hart the world shall go evil if I doo not shift:
At some old Carlos budget I mean for to lift.
By his Flesh, nose, Eyes and Ears,
I will venture void of all cares.
He is not a Soldier that doth fear any dout:
If that he would bring his purpose about.
Fear that fear list, it shall not be I:
By Gogs wounds I will make some neck stand awry.
If I lose my share, I swear by Gogs hart:
Then let an other take up my part.
Yet I hope to come the richest Soldier away:
If a man ask ye, ye may hap to say nay.
If a man ask ye, ye may hap to say nay.
Let all men get what they can, not to léese I hope:
Where soever I go in eche corner I will grope.
What &amp; ye run into the Corner of some pretty maid?
To grope there good fellow I will not be a afraid.
Gogs wounds what art thou that with vs dost mel?
T•ou séemest to be a Soldier the truth to tel,
Thou séemest to be harnessed. I cannot tel how:
I think he •am lately from riding some Cow.
Such a deformed slave did I never see:
Ruf dost thou know him? I pray thée tel mée.
No by my troth fellow Huf I never sée him before.
As for me I care not if I never sée him more.
Come let vs run his Arse against the post:
A ye: slaves, I will be with you at the ofts.
A ye knaves, I will teach ye how ye shall me deride,
Out of my sight I can ye not abide.
Now goodman pouchmouth I am a slave with you:
Now have at ye a fresh again even now.
Mine Arsse against the post you will run:
But I will make ye from that saying to turn.
I beséech ye heartily to be content:
I insure you by mine honesty no hurt we meant.
Beside that again we doo not know what ye are:
Ye know that Soldiers their stoutness will declare,
Therefore if we have any thing offended:
Pardon our rudeness and it shall be amended.
Yea Gods pity, begin ye to entreat me?
Have at ye once again by the mass I will beat ye.
Gogs hart let vs kill him, suffer no longer:
Thou slave we will sée if thou be the stronger.
Strike of his head at one blow:
〈◊〉 we be Soldiers, Gogs hart let him know.
O the passion of God, I have done by mine honesty:
I will take your part héeraster verily.
Then content let vs agree:
Shake hands with me, I shake hands with thée.
Ye are full of courtesy, that is the best:
And you take great pain, ye are a mannerly gest.
Why masters doo you not know me? the truth to me tel:
No trust vs, not very well.
Why I am Ambidexter who many soldiers doo love
Gogs hart to have thy cōpany néeds we must prove.
We must play with both hands with our hostess &amp; host
Play with both hands and score on the post.
Now and then with our Captain for many a delay?
We will not stick with both hands to play.
The honester man ye, ye may me trust.
¶ Enter Meretrix with a stiff on her shoulder.
What? is there no lads heer that hath a lust:
To have a passing Trul to help at their néed?
Gogs hart she is come indéed.
What mistress Meretrix by his woūds welcome to me:
What will ye give me I pray you let me sée?
By his hart she looks for gifts by and by.
What moister Ruf, I cry you mercy.
The last time I was with you I got a broken head.
And lay in the stréet all night for want of a bed.
Gogs wounds kiss me my Trul so white:
In thee I swear is all my delight.
If thou shouldest have had a broken bed for my sake:
I would have made his head to ache.
What moister Ambidexter, who looked for you?
Mistress Meretrix I thought not to see you héer now.
There is no remedy at meeting I must have a kiss:
What man? I will not stick for that by gisse.
So now gramercy, I pray thée be gone:
Nay soft my fréend I mean to have one.
Nay soft I swear, and if ye were my brother:
Before I let go I will have an other.
Gogs hart the whore would not kiss me yet:
If I be a whore. thou art a knave then it is quit.
But hearst thou Meretrix, with who this night wilt ye lyee
With him that gives the most money.
Gogs hart, I have no money in purse, no yet in clout:
Then get thée hence and pack like a Lout.
Adieu like a Whore.
Farewell like a knave.
Gogs Nails, Mistress Meretrix now he is gone:
A match ye shall make straight with me:
I will give thee sixpence to lye one night with thée.
Gogs hart slave dost thou think I am a six penny Jug:
No wis ye Jack I look a little more smug.
I will give her xviij. pnce to serve me first:
Gramercy Snuf, thou art not the wurst.
By Gogs hart she were better be hanged, to forsake me and take this
Were she so? that shall we sée.
By Gogs hart my Dagger into her I will thrust.
A ye boy, ye would doo it and ye durst.
Peace my masters ye shall not fight:
He that draws first I will him smite.
Gogs wounds Moister Snuf are ye so lusty?
Gogs sides moister Ruf are ye so crusty?
You may happen to sée:
Doo what thou dare to me.
Gogs sides knaves, séeing to fight ye be so rough
Defend your selves for I will give ye both enough.
I will teach ye how ye shall fall out for me:
Yea thou slave Snuf, no more blows wilt thou bide?
To take thy héeles a time haste thou spied?
Thou Villain séeing Snuf is gone away:
A little better I mean thée to pay.
Alas good mistress Meretrix no more:
My legs, sides, and arms with beating be sore.
Thou a Soldier and loose thy weapon?
Go hence Sir boy. say a woman hath thée beaten.
Good Mistress Meretrix my weapon let me have:
Take pity on me mine honesty to save.
If it be known this repulle I sustain:
It will redound to my ignomy and shame.
If thou will be my man and wait upon mée:
This Sword and Buckler I will give thee.
I will doo all at your commandment:
As servant to you I will be obedient
Then let me sée how before me ye can go:
When I speak to you ye shall doo so.
Of with your cap at place and at board:
Forsooth mistress Meretrix at every word.
Tut, tut, in the Camp such Soldiers there be:
One good woman would beat a way two or thrée.
Well I am sure Customers tarry at home:
Mannerly before and let vs be gone.
O the passion of God, be they héer still or no?
I durst not abide to sée her heat them so.
I may say to you I was in such a flight:
Body of me I sée the hear of my head stand upright.
When I saw her so hard upon them lay on:
O ye passiō of God thought I, she will be with me anon
I made no more a doo but avoided the thrust:
And to my legs began for to trust.
And fell a laughing to my self when I was once gone:
It is wisdom (quoth I) by the mass to save one.
Then into this place I intended to trudge:
Thinking to meet Sisamnes the Judge.
Behold where he comes I will him méet:
And like a gentleman I mean him to gréet
Since that the Kings graces majesty in office did me set:
What abundance of wealth to me might I get.
Now &amp; thē sōe vantage I achieve, much more yet may I take:
But that I fear unto the king, that some, complaint will make
Iesu moister Sisamnes you are unwise.
Why so? I pray ye let me agnise.
What moister Ambidexter, is it you?
Now welcome to me I make God avow.
Iesu moister Sisamnes with me you are well acquainted:
By me rulers may be trimly painted.
Ye are unwise if ye take not time while ye may:
If ye will not now when ye would ye shall have nay.
What is he that of you dare make exclamation:
Of your wrong dealing to make explication?
Can you not play with both hands and turn with the wind?
Beléeue me your words draw déep in my mind.
In colour wise unto this day to bribes I have inclined:
More the same for to frequent of truth I am now minded.
Behold even now unto me Suitors doo procéed.
I beséech you héer good moister judge, a poor mans cause to téder
Condemn me not in wrōgful wise, that never was offender.
You know right well my right it is, I have not for to give:
You take away from me my due, that should my corps reléeue.
The Commons of you doo complain, from them you deuocate:
with anguish great &amp; greeuo{us} words, their harts doo penetrate.
The right you sell unto the wrong, your private gain to win:
You violate the simple man, and count it for no sin:
Hold thy tongue thou prattling knave, and give to me reward
Else in this wise I tel thée truth, thy tale will not be heard.
Ambidexter, let vs go hence, and let the knave alone.
Farewell Small habilitis for help now get ye none.
Bribes hath corrupt him, good Laws to pollute:
A naughty man that will not obey the Kings constitute.
with heavy hart I will return till General redress my pain.
From among ye grisly gosts I come, from tyrants testy train.
Vnséemly shame of sooth I am procured to make plain,
The odious facts &amp; shameless dée vs yt
Cambises king doth use.
All piety and vertuouse life, he doth it clean refuse.
Lechery and drunkenness, he doth it much frequent:
The Tigers kind to imitate, he hath given full consent.
He nought estéemes his council grave, no virtuous briging up
But daily still receives the drink, of damned vices cup.
He can bide no instruction, he takes so great delight:
In working of iniquity, for to frequent his spite.
As Fame doth sound ye royal trump of worthy men and frim:
So shāe doth blow we strained blast, ye trump of shame on him.
My Judge since my departure hence, have you used Iudgemēt right?
If faithful stuart I ye find, the same I will requite.
No dout your grace shall not once hear, that I have done a mis.
I much rejoice to hear, so good news as this.
Alas, alas, how are ye Cōmons oppressed,
By that vile Judge Sisamnes by name?
I doo not know how it should be redressed.
To amend his life no whit he doth frame.
We are undone and thrown out of door,
His damnable dealing doth vs so torment:
At his hand we can find no reléef nor succour,
God grant him grace for to repent.
What doleful cries be these my lord, yt sound doo in mine ear?
Intelligence if you can gived, unto your king declare.
To me it séemeth my Commons all, they doo lament &amp; cry:
Out of Sisamnes Judge most chéef, even now standing vs by.
Even so (O king) it séemd to me, as you rehearsal made:
I dout the Judge culpable be, in some respect or trade.
Redouted king have no mistrust, no whit your mind dismay:
There is not one that can me charge or ought against me lay
Commons complaint I represent, with thrall of dolful state:
By urgent cause erected forth, my gréef for to dilate.
Unto the king I will prepare, my misery to tell
To have reléef of this my gréef, and fettered feet so fell.
Redouted Prince &amp; mighty King, my self I prostrate héer
Vouchsafe (O King) with me to bear, for this that I appéer.
With humble suit I pardon crave, of
〈◊〉 most royal grace
To give me leave my mind to break, before you in this place
Commons cōplaint kéep nothing back, foar not thy tale to tel
What ere he be within this land, that hath not used thee well.
As Princes mouth shall sentence give, he shall receive ye same
Unfold the secrets of thy breast, for I extinguish blame.
God preserve your royal grace, and send you blissful days:
That all your déeds might still accord, to give the God ye praise.
My complaint is (O mighty king) against that Judge you by:
Whose careless déeds, gain to receive, hath made ye cōmons cry
He, by taking bribes and gifts, the poor he doth oppress:
Taking rebeef from Infants young, widows and fatherless.
Vntrustful traitor &amp; corrupt Judge, how likest you this cōplaint
Forewarning I to thée did give, of this to make restraint.
And hast thou done this devilish dée, mine ire for to augment?
I sentence give, thou Iudas judge, thou shalt thy déed repent.
O pusant Prince it is not so, his complaint I deny:
If it be not so (most mighty King) in place then let me dye
Behold that I have brought wine, both Proof &amp; I real true
To stand even heer and sentence give, what by him did ensue.
I Proof doo him in this appeal, he did the Commons wrong:
Unjustly he will them hath dealt, his gréedy was so strong.
His hart did covet in to get, be cared not which way:
The poor did léese their due and right, because they want to pay
Unto him for bribes indéed, this was his wanted use:
whereas you grace good laws did make, he did ye same abuse.
I Trial héerto verify, what Proof doth now unfold:
To stand against him in his wrong, as now I dare be bold.
How likest ye this, thou caitiue vile, can thou the same deny?
O noble king forgive my fact, I yéeld to thy mercy.
Complaints and Proof, redress will I, all this your misery:
Depart with speed from whence you came, &amp; straight cōmaūd by me
The Executiō man to come, before my grace with haste.
For to fulfil this your request, no time we mean to waste.
My Lord, before my grace go call, Otian this Judges Son:
And he shall hear and also sée: what his father hath done.
The Father he shall suffer death, the Son his rome succéed
And if that he no better prove, so likewise shall he spéed.
As your grace hath cōmaundment given, I mean for to fulfil:
Accursed Judge could thou consent, to doo this cursed il?
According unto thy dentaund, thou shalt for this thy gilt:
Receive thy death before mine eyes, thy blood it shall be spilt.
Behold (O King) Sisamnes Son, before you doth appéere.
Otian this is my mind, therefore to me come néer.
Thy father heer for Iudgmēt wrong procured hath his death:
And thou his son shalt him succéed, whē he hath lost his breath
And if that thou dost once offend, as thou séest thy father have:
In likewise thou shalt suffer death, no mercy shall thée save.
O mighty King, vouchsafe your grace, my father to remit:
Forgive his fault, his pardon I doo ask of your as yet.
Alas although my father hath your Princely hart offended:
Amends for miss he will now make▪ &amp; faults shall be amended.
In sted of his requested life, pleases your grace take mine:
This offer I as tender Child, so duty doth me bind.
Doo not entreat my grace no more, for he shall dye the death,
Where is the Execution man, him to bercaue of breath.
At hand and if it like your grace, my duty to dispatch:
In hope that I when déed is done, a good reward shall catch.
Dispatch wc sword this Judges life, extinguish fear and cares:
So done, draw thou his cursed skin, strait over both his ears.
I will sée the office done, and that before mine eyes.
To doo the thing my king commands, I give the enterprise.
Otian my son the king to death (by law hath me condemned
And you in rome and office mine, his graces will hath placed.
Use Justice therefore in this case, and yéeld unto no wrong:
Lest thou doo purchase the like death, or ever it be long.
O father déer, these words to hear, that you must dye by force
Bedews my chéeks wc stilled tears, ye King hath no remorse.
the gréeud{us} gréef{is} &amp; strained sighs, my hart doth break in twain
And I deplore most woeful child, that I should sée you slain.
O false and fickle frowning Danie, that turns as the wind:
Is this the joy in fathers age, thou me assignest to find?
O dole full day, unhappy hour, that loouing child should sée:
His Father déer before his face, thus put to death should bée.
Yet Father give me blessing thine, and let me once embrace:
Thy comely corps in folded arms, &amp; kiss thy ancient face.
O child thou makes mine eyes to run, as rivers doo by stream:
My leave I take of thee my Son beware of this my beam.
Dispatch even now thou man of death, no longer séeme to stay:
Come M. Sisamnes, came on your way, my office I must pay.
Forgive therefore my déed.
I doo forgive it thée my fréend, dispatch therefore with spéed.
smite him in the neck with a sword to signify his death
Behold (O king) how he doth bléed, béeing of life bereft:
In this wise, he shall not yet be left.
Pull his skin over his ears, to make his death more vile:
A wretch he was, a cruel théef my commons to beguile.
What child is he of natures mould, could bide the same to sée
His Father fleaed in this wise? Oh how it gréeueth me.
Otian, thou séest thy father dead, and thou art in his rome:
if thou béest proud as be hath béen, even thereto shalt thou come.
O King, to me this is a glass, with gréef in it I view:
Example that unto your grace, I doo not prove untrue.
Otian, convey your Father hence, to Tomb where be shall lye
And if it please your Lordship, if shall be done by and by.
Good Execution man for néed, help me with him away:
I will fulfil, as you to me did say.
My Lord now that my grace hath séen, that finished is this déed,
To question mine give tentiue ear, &amp; answer make wc speed.
Have not I done a gracious déed, to redress my commons wo?
Yea truly if it please your grace, ye have indéed done so.
But now (O King) in fréendly wise, I council you in this:
Certain vices for to leave, that in you placed is.
The vise of drunkenness (Oh king) which doth you sore infect:
With other great abuses, which I wish you to detect.
Peace my Lord, what néedeth this? of this I will not hear,
To Palace now I will return, and there to make good chéer.
God Baccus he bestows his gift{is}, we have good store of wine:
And also that the Ladies be, both passing brave and fine.
But stay, I sée a Lord now come, and eke a valiant knight:
What news my Lord? to sée you héer my hart it doth delight
Nonewes (O king) but of duty come, to wait upon your grace:
I thank you my Lord &amp; loouing knight, I pray ye with me trace
My Lords and Knight I pray ye tel, I will not be offended:
Am I worthy of any crime once to be reprehended?
The Persians much praise your grace, but one thing discōmēd:
In that to Wine subject you be, wherein you doo offend.
Sith that the might of wines effect, doth oft subdue your brain
My council is to please their harts, from it you would refrain.
No, no, my Lord, it is not so, for this of Prince they tel:
For virtuous proof and Princely facts, Cirrus he doth excel.
By that his grace by conquest great, the Egiptians did cōuince
Of him report abroad doth pass, tobe a worthy Prince.
In persō of Crocus I answer make, we may not his grace com∣pare
in whole respect for to be like, Cirrus the kings father.
In so much your grace hath yet no child, as Cirrus left behind
Even you I mean, Cambises king, in whom I favour find.
Crocus said well in saying so, but
Praxaspes tel me why:
That to my mouth in such a sort, thou should avouch a lye.
Of drunkenness me thus to charge, but thou with spéed shalt sée
Whether that I a sober King, or else a drunkard bée.
I know thou haste a blissful babe, wherein thou dost delight:
Me to revenge of these thy words, I will go wreak this spite.
When I the most have tasted wine, my Bow it shall be bent
At hart of him even then to shoot, is now my whole intent.
And if that I his hart can hit, the King no drunkard is:
It hart of his I doo not kill, I yéeld to thée in this.
Therefore Praxaspes fetch to me, thy yungest son with spéed:
There is no way I tel thee plain, but I will doo this déed.
Redouted Prince spare my sweet Child, he is mine only joy:
I trust your grace to Infants hart, no such thing will employ.
If that his mother hear of this, she is so nigh her flight:
In clay her corps will soon be shrinde, to pass frō worlds delight
No more ado, go fetch me him, it shall be as I say:
And if that I doo speak the word, how dare ye once say nay?
I will go fetch him to your grace, but so I trust it shall not be:
For fear of my displeasure great, go fetch him unto me.
Is he gone? now by the Gods I will doo as I say:
My Lord therefore fill me some wine, I heartily you pray.
For I must drink to make my brain somewhat intoxicate:
When that the wine is in my head, oh trimly I can prate.
Héere is the cup with filled wine, thereof to take repast:
Give it me to drink it of, and sée no wine be waste.
Once again in large this Cup, for I must taste it still:
By the Gods I think of pleasant wine, I cannot take my fill.
Now drink is in give me my bow, and arrows frō sir Knight
At hart of Child I mean to shoot, hoping to cleue it right.
Behold (O King) where he doth come, his infant young in hand
O mighty King your grace behest, with sorrow I have scand.
And brought my Child fro mothers knée, before you to appear:
And she thereof no whit doth know that he in place is héer.
Set him up my mark to be, I will shoot at his hart:
I beséech your grace not so to doo, set this pretence a part.
Farewell my déer and loouing babe, come kiss thy father déer:
A gréeuous sight to me it is, to sée thée slain even héer.
Is this the gain now from the King for giving council good:
Before my face with such despite, to spell my sons hart blood?
O heavy day to me this is, and mother in like case.
O Father, Father, wipe your face.
I sée the tears run from your eye:
My mother is at home sowing of a band:
Alas déer father, why doo you cry?
Before me as mark now let him stand, I will shoot at him my mind to fulfil
Alas, alas, Father will you me kill?
Good master king doo not shoot at me, my mother looues me best of all
I have dispatched him, down he doth fall,
As right as a line his hart I have hit:
Nay thou shalt sée Praxaspes, stranger news yet.
My Knight with spéed his hart cut out, and give it unto me.
It shall be done (O mighty king) with all seleritie.
My Lord Praxaspes, this had not béen, but your tongue must be walking
To the King of correction, you must néeds be talking.
No correction (my Lord) but council for the best:
Héere is the hart, according to your graces behest.
Behold Praxaspes thy Sons own hart, Oh how well ye same was hit
After this wine to doo this déed, I thought it very fit.
Estéeme thou moist right well thereby, no drūkard is the king:
That in the midst of all his cups, could doo this valiant thing.
My Lord and knight on me attend, to Palace we will go:
And leave him héer to take his son, whē we are gone him fro.
With all our harts we give consent, to wait upon your grace:
A woeful man (O Lord) am I, to see him in this case.
My days I déem desires their end, this déed will help me hēce:
To have the blossoms of my féeld, destroyed by violence.
Alas, Alas I doo hear tel, the King hath kilt my Son:
If it be so, wo worth the déed, that ever it was done.
It is even so, my Lord I see, how by him he doth wéep
What meant I yt from hands of him, this child I did not kéep?
Alas husband and Lord, what did you mean,
to fetch this Child away?
O Lady wife I little thought for to háue séen this day.
O blissful babe, O joy of womb, harts comfort and delight:
For Council given unto the King, is this thy just requite?
O heavy day and doleful time, these mourning tunes to make
With blubred eyes into mine arms, frō earth I will thee take.
And wrap thée in mine apron white, but oh my heavy hart:
The spiteful pangs yt it sustains, wold make it in two to part.
The death of this my Son to sée, O heavy mother now?
That from thy swéet and sugared joy, to sorrow so should bow,
What gréef in womb did I retain, before I did thée sée?
Yet at ye last when smart was gone, what joy were thou to mée
How tender was I of thy food, for to preserve thy state?
How stilled I thy tender hart, at times early and late?
With velvet Pap{is} I gave thée suck with issue from my breast:
And danced thée, upon my knee, to bring thée unto rest.
Is this the joy of thée I reap (O king) of Tigers brood?
Oh tigers whelp had thou ye hart, to sée this childes hart blood?
Nature inforseth me alas, in this wise to deplore:
To wring my hāds O wele away, that I should sée this hour.
Thy mother yet will kiss thy lips, silk soft and pleasant white:
With wringing hands, lamenting for to sée thee in this plight.
My Lording deer let vs go home, our mourning to augment:
My Lady déer with heavy hart, to it I doo consent.
Betwéen vs both ye child to bear unto our lordly place, Exeūt
In déed as ye say I have béen absent a long space.
But is not my cousin Cutpurse, wc you in ye mene time?
To it, to it Cousin and doo your office fine.
How like you Sisamnes for using of me?
He plaid with both hands, but he sped il fauouredly.
The King him self was godly up trained:
He professed virtue, but I think it was fained.
He plays with both hands good déeds and il:
But it was no good déed, Praxaspes son for to kill.
As he for the good déed, on the Judge was commended:
For all his déeds else he is reprehended.
The most evil disposed person, that ever was:
All the state of his life he would not let pass.
Some good déeds he will doo, though they be but few:
The like things this tyrant Cambices doth show.
No goodness from him, to none is exhibited:
But still malediction, abroad is distributed.
And yet ye shall sée in the rest of his race:
What infamy he will work against his own grace.
Whist, no more words héer comes the kings brother.
The Kings brother by birth am I, issued from Cirrus loins:
A gréef to me it is to hear, of this the kings ripens.
I like not well of those his déeds, that he doth still frequent:
I wish to God that other ways, his mind he could content.
Young I am and next to him, no mo of vs there be:
I would be glad a quiet Realm in this his reign to sée.
My Lord your good awilling hart, the Gods will recompense:
In that your made so pensive is, for those his great offence.
My Lord, his grace shall have a time to pair and to amend:
Happy is he that can escape, and not his grace offend.
If that wicked vice he could refrain, from wasting wine forbere
A moderate life he would frequent, amending this his square.
My Lord, and if your honour it shall please:
I can inform you what is best for your ease.
Let him alone of his déeds doo not talk:
Then by his side: ye may quietly walk.
After his death you shall be King:
Then may you reform eche kind of thing.
In the mean time live quietly, doo not with him deal:
So shall it redound much to your weal.
Thou say true my fréend, that is the best:
I know not whether he loo me, or doo me detest.
Lean from his company, all that you may:
I faithful Attendance will your honour obey.
If against your honour he take any ire:
His grace is as like, to kindle his fire.
To your honours destruction, as otherwise:
Therefore my Lord take good advise.
And I Diligence, your case will so tender:
That to his grace your honour shall be none offender.
I thank you both entire fréends, with my honour still remain:
Behold where the King doth come with his train.
O Lording déer and brother mine, I joy your state to sée:
Surmising much what is the cause, you absent thus from mée.
Pleases your grace no absence I, but ready to fulfil:
At all assays my Prince and king, in that your grace me will.
What I can doo in true defence, to you my Prince aright:
In readiness I always am, to offer forth my might.
And I the like to you again doo héer avouch the same:
For this your good agréement héer, now praised be Gods name.
But hear ye noble Prince, hark in you ear.
It is best to doo as I did declare.
My Lord and brother Smirdis now, this is my mind and will:
That you to Court of mine return, and there to tarry still.
Till my return within short space, your honour for to gréet:
At your behest so will I doo, till time again wée méet.
My leave I take from you (O King) even now I doo depart.
Farewell Lord and Brother mine, farewell with all my hart.
My Lord, my brother Smirdis is, of youth and manly might:
And in his swéet and pleasant face, my hart doth take delight.
Yea noble Prince if that your grace, before his honour dye:
He will succeed a virtuous King, and rule with equity.
As you have said my Lord, he is chéef heir next my grace:
And if I dye to morrow next he shall succéed my place.
And if it please your grace (O king) I herd him say:
For your death unto the God, day and night he did pray.
He would live so virtuously, and get him such a praise:
That Fame by trump his due deserts, his honour should up raise.
He said your grace deserved had, the cursing of all men:
That ye should never after him, get any praise again.
Did he speak thus of my grace, in such despiteful wise?
Or else dost thou presume to fill my princely ears with lies?
I connote think it in my hart, that he would report so,
How say thou? speak the truth, was it soor no?
I think so if it please your grace, but I cannot tel:
Thou plaist with both hands, now I perceive well:
But for to put all doutes aside, and to make him léese his hope:
He shall dye by dent of Sword, or else by choking Rope.
Shall he succéed when I am gone, to have more praise then I?
Were he Father as brother mine, I swear that he shall dye.
To palace mine I will therefore, his death for to pursue.
Are ye gone? straight way I will follow you.
How like ye now my masters? doth not this géer cotton?
The proverb old is verified, soon ripe and soon rotten.
He will not be quiet, till his Brother be kilt:
His delight is wholly to have his blood spilled.
Mary Sir I told him a notable lye:
If it were to doo again man, I durst doo it I.
Mary when I had done, to it I durst not stand:
Thereby you may perceive I use to play with eche hand.
But how now Cousin Cutpursse with whom play you?
Take héed for his hand is groping even now.
Cousin take héed, if ye doo secretly grope:
If ye be taken Cousin, ye must look through a rope.
I am wandering alone héer and there to walk,
The Court is so unquiet, in it I take no joy:
Solitary to my self now I may talk,
If I could rule I wist what to say.
My coequal partner Murder, come away.
From me, long thou moist not stay.
Yes from thée I may stay, but not thou from me:
Therefore I have a prerogative above thée.
But in this case we must together abide:
Come, come, Lord Smirdis I have spied.
Lay hands on him with all festination:
That on him we may work our indignation.
How now my friends? what have you to doo with me?
King Cambises hath sent vs unto thée.
Commanding vs straightly, with out mercy or favour:
Upon thée to bestow our behaviour.
With Cruelty to murder you, and make you away.
Yet pardon me I heartily you pray:
Consider the King is a tyrant tirannious:
And all his doings be damnable and pernicious.
Favour me therefore, I did him never offend:
No favour at all, your life is at an end.
Even now I strike his body to wound:
Behold now his blood springs out on the ground,
Now he is dead, let vs present him to the King:
Lay to your hand, away him to bring.
O the passion of God, yunder is a heavy Court:
Some wéeps, some wails, and some make great sport.
Lord Smirdis, by Cruelty and Murder is slain:
But Iesus for want of him, how some doo complain.
If I should have had a thousand pound, I could not forbear wéeping
Now Iesus have his blessed soul in kéeping.
Ah, good Lord, to think on him, how it doth me gréeue:
I can not forbear wéeping, ye may me beléeue.
O my hart, how my pulses doo beat:
With sorrowful lamentations, I am in such a heat.
Ah my hart, how for him it doth sorrow:
Nay I have done in faith now, and God give you good morrow.
Ha, ha, wéep nay laugh, with both hands to play:
The king througe his cruelty, hath made him away,
But hath not he wrought, a most wicked déed:
Because king after him he should not procéed.
His own natural brother and having no more:
To procure his death by violence sore.
In spite because his brother should never be King:
His hart béeing wicked consented to this thing.
Now he hath no more Brothers nor kindred alive:
If the King use this géer still, he cannot long thrive.
Gods hat Naibor come away, its time to market to go
Gods Vast Naybor say ye so?
The Clock hath stricken viue each think by liken:
Bum Vii vrom sléep cham not very well waken.
But Naybor Ho, Naybor Hob, what have ye to zel?
Bum troth Naybor Lob to you I i will tel.
Chaue two Goslings, and a Chine of good Pork:
There is no vatter betwéen this and York.
Chaue a pot of Strawberries and a Calves head:
A zennight zinc to morrow it hath béen dead.
Chaue a score of Eggs, and of Butter a pound:
Yesterday a nest of goodly young Rabbits I bound.
Chaue forty things mo, of more and of less:
My brain is not very good them to express.
But Gods Hat Naybor, wotst what?
No not well Naybor. whats that?
Bum vii Naybor, moister king is a zhrode lad
So God help me and holidam, I think the vool he mad.
Some say he deal cruelly his Brother he did kill:
And also a goodly young lads hart blood, he did spell,
Vorbod of God naibor, has he played such a volish déed?
Goodman Hob and goodman Lob, God be your spéed.
As you two towards market doo walk:
Of the Kings cruelty I did hear you talk.
I insure you, he is a King most vile and pernicious:
His doings and life are odious and vicious.
It were a good déed some body would break his head:
Bum vii Naybor Lob. I chousd he were dead.
So would I Lob and Hob with all my hart:
Now with both hands, will ye sée me play my part?
A ye Whoreson traitorly Knaves:
Hob and Lob out upon you slaves.
And thou call me knave thou art an other:
My name is Lob and Hob my next Naybor.
Hob and Lob, a ye country Patches:
A ye fools ye have made wrong matches.
Ye have spoken treason against the kings grace:
For it I will accuse ye before his face.
Then for the same ye shall be martered:
At the least ye shall be hanged, drawn and quartered:
O gentleman ye shall have two Pear pies and tel not of me.
By God a vat Goose i will give thée.
I think no hurt by my Vathers soul I zweare:
Chaue lived well all my life time my naybors among:
And now chould be loathe to come to such wrong.
To be hanged and quartered the gréef would be great:
A foul evil on thée Hob, who bid thée on it treat?
For it was thou that first did him name.
Thou lie like a varlet, and thou zaist the same,
It was such a foolish Lob as thou:
Speak many words and by cods nails I vow:
Upon thy pate my staff I will lay.
By the Mass I will cause them to make a fray.
Yea Lob thou say true, all came through him.
Bum vii thou Hob. a little would make me ye trim.
Give thée a zawp on thy nose till thy hart ache:
If thou dare doo it, else man cry creke.
I trust before thou hurt me:
With my staff i will make a Lob of thée.
O the body of me husband Hob, what mean you to fight:
For the passion of God, no more blows smite.
Neighbours and fréends so long, and now to fall out:
What? in your age to seem so stout?
If I had not parted ye, one had kilt another:
I had not cared I swear by Gods mother.
Shake hands again at the request of me:
As ye have béen fréends, so fréends still be.
Bum troth cham content, and zaist word neigbor
Lob:
I am content agréed neighbor Hob.
So, get you to market, no longer stay.
And with yonder knave let me make a fray.
Content wife Marian, i will doo as thou dost say:
But bus me each pray thée at going away.
Thou whoreson knave &amp; prickeard boy, why did you let them fight?
If one had kilt another héer, could thou their deaths requite?
It bears a sign by this thy déed, a cowardly knave thou art:
Else would thou draw ye weapon thine, like a man them to part
What Marian may be good, are you come prattling?
Ye may hap get a box on the ear, with your talking.
If they had kilde one another, I had not cared a peas:
A villain, my self on thée I must ease.
Give me a box on the ear? that will I try:
Who shall be Moister thou shalt see by and by.
O no more, no more I beseech you heartily:
Even now I yéeld, and give you the mastery.
A thou knave, dost thou throw̄ me down and run thy way?
If he were heer again, oh how I would him pay.
I will after him, and if I can him méet:
With these my nails, his face I will gréet.
Come forth my son, unto my words attentive ears resign
What I pretend sée you frequent, to force this game of mine.
The King a kinswoman hath, adorned with beauty store:
And I wish that Dianas gifts, they twain shall kéep no more.
But use my silver sugared game, their joys for to augment:
When I doo speak to wound his hart, Cupped my son conset.
And shoot at him the shaft of loo, that bears the head of Gold:
To wound his hart in loouers wise, his gréef for to unfold.
Though kin she be unto his grace, that nature me expel:
Against the course thereof he may, in my game please me well.
Wherefore my son doo not forget, forthwith pursue the déed:
Mother I mean for to obey, as you have whole decréed.
But you must tel me mother deer, when I shall arrow draw:
Else your request to be attained, will not be worth a straw.
I am blind and cannot see, but still doo shoot by guess:
The Poets well in places store, of my might doo express.
Cupped my son whē time shall serve, ye thou shalt doo this déed,
Then warning I to thee will give, but sée thou shoot, with speed.
Lady déer to King a kin, forthwith let vs procéed:
To trace abroad the beauty féelds, as erst we had decréed.
The blowing buds whose savoury scents our sense will much
The swéet smell of musk white rose, to please ye appetite.
The chirpig birds whose pleasant tunes, therein shall hear record delight
That our great joy we shall it find, in féeld to walk a broad.
On Lute and Cittern there to play a heavenly harmony:
Our ears shall hear, hart to content, our sports to beauty.
Unto your words most comely Lord, my self submit doo I:
To trace with you in féeld so green, I mean not to deny.
And I your waiting maid at hand, with diligence will be:
For to fulfil with hart and hand, when you shall command me.
Come on my Lord and knight abroad, our mirth let vs employ
Since he is dead this hart of mine, in corps I féel it joy.
Should brother mine have reigned King, when I had yéelded breath
A thousand brothers I rather had, to put them all to death.
But oh, behold where I doo sée, a Lord and Lady fair:
For beauty she most worthy is, to sit in Princes chair.
Shoot forth my sōne now is the time, ye thou must woūd his hart
Content you Mother I will doo my part.
Of truth my Lord in eye of mine, all Ladies she doth excel:
Can none report what dame she is, and to my grace it tel?
Redouted Prince pleases your grace, to you shée is a kin:
Cousin Iarmin nigh of birth, by mothers side come in.
And that her waiting maiden is attending her upon:
He is a Lord of Princes Court, and will be there anon.
They sport them selves in pleasant féeld, to former used use:
My Lord &amp; knight of truth I speak, my hart it cannot choose.
But with my Lady I must speak and so express my mind:
My Lord and Ladies walking there, if you will favour find.
Present your selves unto my grace, &amp; by my side come stand:
We will fulfil most mighty king, as your grace doth cōmaūd.
Lady déer intelligence, my grace hath got of late:
You issued out of mothers stock, and kin unto my state.
According to rule of birth you are, Cousin iarmin mine:
Yet doo I wish that farther of, this kindred I could find.
For Cupped he that eyeless boy, my hart hath so inflamed:
With beauty you me to content, the like cannot be named.
For since I entered in this place and on you fixed mine eyes:
Most burning fits about my hart in ample wise did rise.
The heat of thē such force doth yéeld, my corps they scorch alas:
And burns ye same with wasting heat, as Titan doth the grass
And sith this heat is kindled so, and fresh in hart of me:
There is no way but of the same, the quencher you must be.
My meaning is yt beauty yours, my hart with loo doth woūd:
To give me loo, mind to content my hart hath you out found.
And you are shée must be my wife, else shall I end my days:
Consent to this and be my Quéen, to were ye crown with praise.
If it please your grace (O mighty king) you shall not this re∣quest
It is a thing that natures course, doth utterly detest.
And high it would the God displease, of all that is the wurst:
To grant your grace to marry so, it is not I that durst.
Yet humble thanks I render now unto you mighty King:
That you vouchsafe to great estate, so gladly would me bring.
Were it not it were offence, I would it not deny:
But such great honour to achieve, my hart I would apply.
Therefore (O king) with humble hart, in this I pardon crave:
Mine answer is in this request: your mind ye may not have.
May I not? nay then I will by all the Gods I vow:
And I will mary thée as wife, this is mine answer now:
Who dare say nay what I pretēd, who dare the same wtstand?
Shall lose his head and have report, as traitor through my lād.
There is no nay I will you have, and you my Quéen shall be:
Then mighty King I crave your grace, to hear ye words of me
Your council take of Lordings wit, the laws aright peruse:
If I with safe may grant this déed, I will it not refuse.
No, no, what I have said to you. I mean to have it so:
For counsel theirs I mean not I, in this respect to go.
But to my Palace let vs go, the marriage to prepare:
For to avoid my will in this, I can it not forbear.
O God forgive me if I doo amiss:
The king by compultion, inforseth me this.
Unto the Gods for your estate, I will not cease to pray:
That you may be a happy Quéen. and sée most joyful day.
Come on my Lords with gladsome harts, let vs rejoice with glée:
Your Music show to joy this déed, at the request of me.
For to obey your graces words our honours doo agrée.
O the Passion of me, mary as ye say, yonder is a royal court
There is triumphing and sport upon sport.
Such loyal Lords, with such Lordly exercise:
Frequenting such pastime as they can devise.
Running at tilt, Iusting, with running at the King:
Masking and mumming, with eche kind of thing,
Such dancing, such singing, with musical harmony:
Believe me I was loathe to absent their company.
But will you believe? Iesu what haste they made till they were married?
Not for a Miliō of poūds one day longer they would have tarried
Oh there was a banquet royal and superexelent:
Thousands, and thousands at that banquet was spent.
I muse of nothing but how they can be married so soon:
I care not if I be married before to morrow at noon.
If marriage be a thing that so may be had:
How say you maid? to mary me will ye be glad?
Out of dout I beléeue it is some excellent treasure:
Else to the same belongs abundant pleasure.
Yet with mine ears I have heard some say:
That ever I was married, now cursed be the day.
Those be they, that with curse wives be matched:
That husband for hankes meat, of thē is up snatched.
Head broke with a bedstaf, face all to be scratched.
Knave slave and villain, a coild cote now and than:
Whē the wife hath giuē it, she will say alas good man.
Such were better unmarried my masters I trow:
Then all their life after to be matched with a shrove.
With spéed I am sent all things to prepare:
My message to doo as the king did declare.
His grace doth mean a banquet to make:
Meaning in this place repast for to take.
Well the cloth shall be laid and all things in readiness:
To court to return when done is my business.
A proper man and also a fit.
For the Kings estate to prepare a banquet.
What Ambidexter? thou art not unknown:
A wischéef on all good faces, so that I curse not mine own.
Now in the knaves name shake hands with me.
Well said goodman pouchmouth your reverence I sée.
I will teach ye, if your manners no better be.
A yée slave, the king doth me a gentleman allow:
Therefore I look, that to me ye shall how.
Good Moister Ambidexter, pardon my behaviour:
For this your déeds, ye are a knave for your labour.
Why ye stale counterly vaillain, nothing but Knave?
I am sorry your maistership offended I have.
Shake hands that betwéen vs agréement may bée:
I was over shot with my self, I doo see.
Let me have your help, this furniture to provide:
The King from this place will not long abide.
Content, it is the thing that I would wish:
I my self will go fetch on Dish.
Cleanly moister Ambidexter, for fair on the ground they lye:
I will have them up again by and by.
To sée all in readiness I will put you in trust:
There is no nay to the Court néeds I must.
Have ye no dout but all shall be well:
Mary Sir as you say, this gear doth excel.
All things is in a readiness, when they come hither:
The kings grace and the Quéen both together.
I beséech ye my masters tel me is it not best:
That I be so bold to bid a gest?
He is as honest a man as ever spurt Cow:
My Cousin cutpurse I mean, I beséech ye judge you:
Beléeue me Cousin if to be the Kings gest, ye could be taken:
I trust that offer would not be forsaken.
But Cousin because to that office ye are not like to cōe:
Frequent your exersises, a horn on your Thumb.
A quick eye, a sharp knife, at hand a receiver:
But then take héed Cousin ye be a cleanly conuayour.
Content your self Cousin, for this banquet you are unfit:
When such as I at the same am not worthy to sit.
My Quéen and Lords to take repast, let vs attempt the same
Héer is the place delay no time, but to our purpose frame.
With willing harts your whole behest, we mind for to obey:
And we the rest of Princes train, will doo as you doo say.
Me think mine ears doth wish the soūd, of musics harmony:
Héer for to play before my grace, in place I would them spy:
They be at hand Sir with stick and fiddle:
They can play a new dance called hey didle didle.
By Quéen parpend what I pronounce I will not violate:
But one thing which my hart makes glad. I mind to explicate
You know in Court by trained is, a Lyon very young:
Of on litter two whelps beside, as yet not very strong.
I did request one whelp to see, and this young Lion fight:
But Lion did the whelp convince, by strength of force a might.
His brother welp perceiving that the Lion was to good:
And he by force was like to sée, the other whelp his blood.
With force to Lyon he did run, his brother for to help:
A wunder great it was to sée that fréendship in a whelp.
So then the the whelps betwéen them both ye Lion did cōuince
Which thing to see before mine eyes, did glad yt hart of Prince.
These words to hear makes stilling tears, issue from Crystal eyes
What dost thou mean my spouse to wéep, for loss of any prise
No, no (O King) but as you see, fréendship in brothers whelp:
When one was like to have repulse, the other yéelded help.
And was this favour shout in dogs to shame of royal king:
Alack I wish these ears of mine, had not once heard this thing
Even so should you (O mighty King) to brother béen a stay:
And not without offence to you, in such wise him to slay.
In all assays it was your part, his cause to have defended:
And who so ever had him misused, to have them reprehended.
But faithful loo was more in Dog, then it was in your grace:
O cursed caitiue vicious vile, I hate thée in this place.
This banquet it is an end, take all these things away:
Before my face thou shalt repent, the words that thou dost say
O wretch most vile, did you the cause of brother mine so tēder:
The loss of him should gréeue thy hart, he being none offender
It did me good his death to have, so will it to have thine:
What friendship he had at my hands, ye same even yt shalt find
I give consent and make a vow, that thou shalt dye the death:
By Cruels sword &amp; Murder fell, even thou shalt dye the breath.
Ambidexter, see with spéed, to Cruelty ye go:
Cause him hither to approach, Murder with him also.
I ready am for to fulfil, if that it be your graces will.
Then nought oblight my message given, absent thy self away:
Then in this place, I will no longer stay:
If that I durst, I would morn your case:
But alas, I dare not for fear of his grace.
Thou cursed Eel, by all the Gods, I take an other and sweet:
that flesh of thine these hāds of mine, in péeces small could tere.
But thou shalt dye by dent of sword, there is no fréend no f ee:
Shall find remorse at Princes hand, to save the life of thee.
Oh mightle King &amp; husband mine, vouchsafe to héer me speak:
And licence give to spouse of thine, her patient mind to break.
For tender loo unto your grace, my words I did so frame:
For pure loo doth hart of king, me violate and blame.
And to your grace is this offence, that I should purchase death:
Then cursed time that I was Quéen, to shorten this my breath.
your grace doth know by marriage true, I am your wife &amp; spouse
And one to save āothers health (at troth plight) made our vows
Therefore O king let loouing Quéen, at thy hand find remorse
Let pi••e be a mean to quench, that cruel raging force.
And pardon plight from princes mouth, yéeld grace unto your queen:
That amity with faithful zeal, may ever be vs betwéen.
A caitiue vile to pity thée, my hart it is not bent:
No yet to pardon your offence, it is not mine intent.
Our mighty prince with humbe suit of your grace this I crave:
That this request it may take place, your favour for to have.
Let mercy yet abundantly the life of Queen preserve:
Sith shée in most obedient wise, your graces will doth serve.
As yet your grace but while with her, hath had cohabitation:
And sure this is no desert why, to yield her indiguation.
Therefore (O King) her life prolong, to joy her days in bliss:
Your grace shall win immortal fame, in granting unto this.
She is a Queen whose goodly hue, excels the royal Rose:
For beauty bright dame nature she, a large gift did depose.
For comeliness who may compare? of all she bears the bet:
This should give cause to move your grace, to loo her very well.
Her silver breast in those your arms, to sing the songs of loo:
Fine qualities most excellent to be in her you prove.
A precious pearl of prise to Prince, a Jewel passing all:
Therefore (O king to beg remorse on both my knées I fall.
To grant her grace to have her life, with hart I doo desire:
You villains twain, with raging force, ye set my hart on fire.
If I consent that she shall dye, how dare ye crave her life?
You two to ask this at my hand, doth much enlarge my strife.
Were it not for shame you two should dye, that for her life doo sue
But favour mine from you is gone, my Lords Itel you true.
I sent for Cruelty of late, if he would come away:
I would commit her to his hands, his cruel part to play.
Even now I see where he doth come, it doth my hart delight:
Come Murder, come, let vs go forth with might.
Once again the Kings commandment we must fulfil
I am contented to doo it with a good will.
Murder and Cruelty, for both of you I sent:
With all festination, your offices to frequent.
Lay hold on the Quéen, take her to your power:
And make her away with in this hour.
Spare for no fear I doo you full permit:
So I from this place, doo mean for to flit.
With courageous harts (O King) we will obey:
Then come my Lords let vs depart away.
With heavy harts we will doo all, your grace doth say,
Come Lady and Quéen now are you in our haudling:
In faith with you we will use no dandling.
With all expedition, I Murder will take place:
Though thou be a Quéene, ye be under my grace.
With patience I will you both obey:
No more words but go with vs away.
Yet before I dye some Psalm to God let me sing:
We be content to permit you that thing.
Farewell you Ladies of the Court, with all your masking hew:
I doo forsake these brodered guards, and all the factions new.
The Court and all the courtly train, wherein I had delight:
I banished am from happy sport and all by spiteful spite.
Yet with a joyful hart to God a Psalm I mean to sing:
Forgiving all &amp; the king, of eche kind of thing.
A, A, A. A, I cannot choose but wéep for the Quéene:
Nothing but mourning now at the Court there is séen.
Oh, oh, my hart, my hart, Oh my bum will break:
Very gréef so torments me that scarce I can speak.
Who could but wéep for the loss of such a Lady?
That can not I doo, I swear by mine honesty.
But Lord so the Ladies mourn crying a lack:
Nothing is worn now but only black.
I believe all cloth in walling street, to make gowns would not serve
If I make a lye, the Devil let ye starve.
All Ladies morn both young and old:
There is not one that wears a points worth of Gold
There is a sort for fear, for the King doo pray:
That would have him dead, by the mass I dare say.
What a King was he that hath used such tyranny?
He was a kin to Bishop Boner, I think verily,
For both their delights was to shed blood:
But never intended to doo any good.
Cambises put a Judge to death, that was a good deed:
But to kill the young Child was worse to procéed.
To murder his Brother, and then his own wife:
So help me God and holidom, it is pity of his life
Hear ye? I will lay twenty thousand pound:
That the king him self doth dye by some wound.
He hath shed so much blood that his will be shed:
If it come so to pass infaith then he is sped.
Out alas what shall I doo? my life is finished.
Wounded I am by sudden chance, my blood is m•nished.
Gogs hart what means might I make, my life to preserve?
Is there nought to be my help: nor is their nought to serve?
Out upon the Court, and Lords that there remain:
To help my gréef in this my case, will none of them take pain?
Who but I in such a wise his deaths wound could have got:
As I on horse back up did leap, my sword from scabbard shot.
And ran me thus into the side, as you right well may see:
A marvels chance unfortunate, that in this wise should bée.
I feel my self a dying now, of life bereft am I:
And death hath caught me with his dart, for want of blood I spy.
Thus gasping héer on ground I lye, for nothing I doo care:
A just rowed for my misdeeds, my death doth plain declare.
How now noble King? pluck up your hart:
What will you dye, and from vs depart?
Speak to me, and you be alive:
He cannot speak, but behold how with death he doth strive.
Alas good King, alas he is gone,
The Devil take me, if for him I make any moan.
I did prognosticate of his end by the Masss:
Like as I did say so is it come to pass.
I will be gone, if I should be found héer:
That I should kill him it would appéer.
For fear with
•is death they doo me charge:
Farewell my masters I will go take barge.
I mean to be packing now is the tide:
Farewell my masters I will no longer abide.
Behold my Lords it is even so, as he to vs did tel:
His grace is dead upon the ground, by dent of sword most fell.
As he in saddle would have leapt, his sword from sheath did go:
Coring him up into the side, his life was ended so.
His blood so fast did issue out, that nought could him prolong:
Yet before he yéelded up the ghost, his hart was very strong.
A just reward for his misdeeds, the God above hath wrought:
For certainly the life he led, was to be counted nought.
Yet a •rincely burial he shall have, according his estate:
And more of him heer at this time, we have not to dilate.
My Lord let vs take him up, to cary him away.
Content we are with one accord, to doo as you doo say.
RIght gentle Audience, héere have you perused,
The tragical History of this wicked king:
According to our duty we have not refused,
But to our best intent expressed every thing.
We trust none is offended for this our doing,
Our Author craves likewise if he have squared amiss:
By gentle admonition to know where the fault is.
¶ His good will shall not be neglected to amend the same,
Praying all to bear therefore with his simyte déed:
Until the time serve a
••tter he may frame,
Thus yéelding you
〈◊〉 to end we decreed.
That you so gently
〈◊〉
•••red vs to proceed,
In such patien• 〈◊〉 as to hear and sée:
We can but thank ye therefore, we can doo no more
¶ As duty binds vs for our noble Quéene let vs pray,
And for her honourable Council the truth yt they may b•
To practise Justice and defend her grace eche day,
To maintain Gods word they may not refuse.
To correct all those, that would her grace &amp; graces laws abuse,
Beseeching God over vs, she may reign long:
To be guided by truth and defended from wrong.

I Know that this worshipful Audience,
Is at this time together congregate:
Of our practise to have intelligence,
And with the same them selves to recreate.
God grant vs grace the same well to publicate.
But for them that have slept at Parnassus:
This faculty is more méet for them then for vs
Pandite pierides vestro sacra ostia vita.
¶Open your holy doors O pleasant Muses,
Direct our tungs to speak eloquently:
Virtues to praise and to touch abuses,
Dividing either of them plain and directly.
That it may appéer to all our Audience evidently.
That this matter which we now go about:
By your inspiration was first found out.
¶Oh that with some grace you would vs inspire,
And del with vs as with Orpheus you dealt:
Then should all affections have their desire,
For through his Music he made stones to melt,
No kind of pain in Hell then the souls felt.
For he played so pleasantly with his Harp:
That they forgot their pains gréeuous and sharp.
¶ Tantalus forgot his hunger and thirst,
Sisiphus loft of rolling his Stone:
Ixion tormented among the wurst,
Forgot his whéel that he was hanged on.
The woman Belides left work anon:
Whose labour was continually to fill a Tun:
Whereout by clefts the liquor still doth run.
¶These fables wherefore doo I call to mind?
Truly because I desire with all my hart:
That our English Méeter may be of such kind,
Both to leave all gréeuousnes and smart.
And also to be pleasant in every part.
That those which come for recreation:
May not be void of their expectation.
¶Poets fained Mercurius to have wings,
both on his head and on his heals also:
For lively and swift he was in all things,
Appéering rather to flée then to go:
Of him they fain many goodly things mo.
But for our purpose this shall serve this season:
and why I speak, you shall know the reason.
¶Mercurius is the God of eloquence,
By whom I understand the ministers of talk:
Such must have the wings of intelligence,
In their heads before their tungs to far doo walk.
The danger of rash spéech they must wisely calke.
When, where, and to whom they speak they must note:
Before that any thing pass out of their throat.
¶As Mercurius hath wings upon his head,
So hath he wings on his heals ready to fly:
When affections stands in reasons sted,
Reporters of tales use left soones to lye,
The heals affections doo also signify.
The wings doo always reason comprehend:
Which unto Virtue ought to condescend.
¶Few words to wise men are sufficient,
Without a cause I give not this monition:
Unto good men it is plain and euidient,
That many men have that lewd condition.
By their evil words to bring good men into suspicion.
By their indiscreet talk they doo much harm:
Because they want reason their tungs to charm.
¶Let this pass and go we to the Argument,
Which we will declare in words general:
Now such as have a learned judgment,
Know that among the Poets comical,
In brief sentence it was usual.
To show the whole contents of the Comedy:
In the argument which did well verily.
¶But our tungs hath not so comely a grace,
In that point, as hath the Latin and Gréek:
We cannot like them our sentences eloquently place,
That our Poets to their Orators may be like
As they know well which for such matters doo seek.
But to doo our best, indéed we will not neglect:
Trusting that wise men the same will accept.
¶Our title is Enough is as good as a feast,
Which Rethorically we shall amplify:
So that it shall appéer both to most and least
That our meaning is but honesty,
Yet now and then we will dally merrily.
So we shall please them that of mirth be desirous:
For we play not to please them that be curious.
¶For a Preface I fear I am to long
But I have said that I will say now:
The Worldly man is frolic lusty and strong,
Who will show his qualities before you,
Stowt he is and in any wise will not bow.
Behold yonder he comes into this place:
Therefore thus I finish our simple Preface.
BEcause I am a man endowed with treasure,
Therefore a worldly man men doo me call:
In deed I have riches and money at my pleasure,
Yea, and I will have more in spite of them all.
A common saying better is envy then rues,
I had rather they should spite then pity me:
For the old saying now a days proves truth,
Nought have nought set by as daily we see.
I wis I am not of the mind as some men are,
Which look for no more then will serve necessity:
No against a day to come I doo prepare,
That when age comes I may live merrily.
Oh saith one enough is as good as a feast,
Yea, but who can tel what his end shall be?
Therefore I count him worse then a Beast,
That will not have that in respect and sée.
As by mine own Father an example I may take,
He was beloved of all men and kept a good house:
Whilst riches lasted, but when that did slake,
There was no man that did set by him a Louse.
And so at such time as as he from the world went,
I mene when he dyed he was not worth a groat:
And they that all his substance had spent,
For the value of xij. pence would have cut his throat.
But I trow I will take héed of such,
They shall go ere they drink when they come to me:
It doth me good to tel the chinks in my hutch,
More then at the Tavern or ale house tobe.
God cares for his as the Prophet Dauid doth say,
And preserves them under his merciful wing:
The Heavenly I mene, that his will doo obey,
and observe his holy commandments in all thing.
Yet not for our sakes, nor for our deserving.
But for his own name sake openly to declare:
that all men héer on Earth ought to live in his fear.
This same is one of our jolly talkers,
That prattleth so much of Heaven and Hell:
Oh, I tel you these are godly walkers,
Of many strange things they can tel.
They pass men yea Angels they excel,
Sir, are you not called the Heavenly man?
I have been in your cōpany ere now but I cānot tel when
Yes certainly Sir, that is my name,
Unworthy of any such title I doo confess:
God grant that I may deserve the same,
And that my faults I may amend and redress.
Therefore now the truth doo you héer express,
Is not the Worldly man your name?
Yea in déed Sir, I am the very same.
From the Heavenly man I cannot be long absent,
Which in Gods promises hath his consolation:
Considering that he always is content,
Patiently to suffer Gods visitation.
For understand you? my name is Contentation.
Whom the worldly man doth mock and deride:
And will not suffer him once in his mind to abide.
This same is the Grandsire of them all,
This is he that will through water and fire:
Good reasoning betwixt vs now hear you shall,
For to follow him he will me earnestly require,
But he shall be hanged or he have his desire.
You are welcome Sir, saving my quarrel in déed:
You have reported of me much more then you néed.
Nothing but truth Sir, certainly I have said,
Oft times I have coūcelled you your covetousness to leave
But my words as feathers in the wind you have waid,
And stuck to them as Glue to the water doth cleave.
But take héed the reward thereof you shall receive.
Once again I advertise thée to be content:
And give thanks to God for that he hath thée sent.
I pray you be you content for I am pleased,
And meddle you no more with me then I doo with you:
To be angry without a cause, without mends must be eased
We will be more ernest then ever we were now.
Wo (saith our Saviour) to those that are rich,
Which therein only have their consolation:
He curses them not be cause they have much,
but because they receive it not with contentation.
Building therewith to them selves a good foundation,
That is to lay héer on Earth treasure great store:
to purchase a kingdom that lasts ever more.
Passion of me masters, what would you have me to doo?
You are fond fellows indéed as ever I knew:
If I should not take pains, ride, run and go
For my living, what thereof would ensue?
A beggar should I dye, masters this is true,
Then my wife and children that I leave behind:
I fear me at your hands, small reléef should find.
I have béen young (saith Dauid) and now am old,
Yet the righteous forsaken I never did sée:
Nor their seed begging Bread I did not behold,
Therefore your mind to the Prophets doth not agrée,
Cast all thy burden and care (saith Christ) on me.
And I will provide to kéep thée from danger and strife:
Only seek thou to live a godly and good life.
When Solon was asked of Cressus the King,
What man was most happy in this vale terrestrial:
To the end he séemed to attribute that thing,
When men be associate with treasures selestiall.
By the beginning no man can judge the same Solon doth say,
That any man is happy that bears breath:
But yet by the end partly judge we may,
For true happiness (saith he) consists after death.
If this be true as vndoutedly it is,
What men are more wicked, wretched and miserable:
Then those that in riches account their bliss,
Béeing infected with Ambition that sickness uncurable.
The treasure of this world we may well compare,
To Circes the Witch with her crafty cawtilitie:
Wherewith many men's minds so poisoned are,
That quite they are carried to all infidelity,
They are conjured so in déed and bewitched so sore,
That treasure is their trust, yea, hope and delight:
Enough serves them not till that they have more,
So against Contentation they still strive and fight.
Though the Worldly man doo follow their lust,
Crying on Earth is our felicity and pleasure:
Yet God doth so rule the harts of the Just,
That their study is, chiefly to get Heavenly treasure.
Fréends I take you both for honest men,
I promise you I would be glad to doo for the best:
Mary then I take care which way and when,
I may get treasure therewith to live in rest.
Oh, me thinks it is a very pleasant thing,
To sée a great heap of old Angels and Crowns:
When I have store of money I can be merry and sing,
For money as men say wins both Cities and towns.
Alas why should you not have that in estimation,
Which God hath prepared for his déer elect:
Should not our minds rest in full contentation,
Having trust in that treasure most high in respect,
Saint Paule whom the Lord so high doth erect.
Saith, it passes the sense, our memories and mind:
Much less can our outward eyes the same find.
As for the treasure that you possess héer,
Through fickleness of Fortune soon fades away:
The greatest of renown and most worthy Peer,
Sometime in the end falls to misery and decay.
Record of Dionisius a King of much fame,
Of the valiant Alexander, and Caesar the strong:
Record of Tarquinus which Superbus had to name:
And of Heliogabalus that ministered with wrong,
To resit them all it would be very long.
But these be sufficient plainly to prove:
How soon and uncertainly riches doth remove.
It is true, and therefore a mind well content,
Is great riches as wise king Solomon doth say:
For we have séen of late days this canker pestilent
Corrupting our Realm to our utter decay.
Ambition I mene which chéefly doth reign,
Amongst those who should have béen example to other:
Yea we sée how the Bréethern they did disdain,
And burned with fire, the Child with the mother.
It is often séen that such monstrous Ambition,
As spares not to spell the blood of the innocent:
Will not greatly stick to fall to sedition,
The determinations of God thereby to prevent,
But God I trust shall disappoint their intent.
And overthrow the power of fading treasure:
And cause vs al to wish for the heavenly pleasure.
O you ancient men whom God hath furnished with fame,
Be ye always mindful to walk in the ways of the Just,
And ad ever more virtue to your honest name,
And at no hand be over come with covetous or lust,
But in Gods holy promise put confidence and trust.
And then double felicity at the last we shall possess:
And then in all Earthly doings God shall give good success
Ye poor men and commons walk in your vocation,
Banish fond fantasies which are not convenient:
Settle your minds with enough to have contentation,
Considering that that leads to treasures most excellent,
For these are uncertain, but they are most permanent.
Your necessity apply with treasure, faith and trust:
And you shall have enough always among the Just.
And indéed enough is as good as a feast,
Good Lord how your words have altered my mind:
A new hart me thinks is entered in my breast,
For no thought of mine old in me I can find.
I would to God you would take me in your company,
And learn me how I may be an heavenly man:
For now I perceive this world is but vanity,
Let a man therefore make of it as much as he can.
Doo you speak as you think? and as you mind doo you say?
Could you be content to lead the rules of a godly life?
I doo mean it truly and I will study them night and day,
For I regard neither treasure, Children nor wife.
Give me your hand then together let vs depart:
And I will wait on you sir, with all my hart. 
When Covetous is busy,
Then we three be all merry,
for he doth trimly invent:
To make vs fine frolic chéer
Be vitailes never so déer,
and all our money clean spēt
Therefore we spare for no cost
We cā be trusted of our host
For shillings xx. and one:
Covetous hath a good wit,
He finds a mene to pay it,
whē all our money is gone.
Therefore trole the boule to me,
With huf child &amp; have to thee,
the longest liver pay all:
Our trust is in Covets,
For he is prudent and wise,
therefore money cannot fall.
Oh Covetous prudēt Prince,
All strōg walls you dost cōuince
and rulest them every one:
Thou dost drive many a drift,
And make for vs much shift,
whē all our money is gone.
AT Black heath field where great Golias was slain,
The Moon lying in child bed of her last Son:
The Tiborne at warwick was then King of Spain,
By whom the land of Canaan then was wun.
It happened betwéen Peterborow and Pentecost,
About such time as Ivy was made of Wormwood:
That Childes work in Basil wood with fire was lost,
And all through the treason of false Robin Hood.
That saw Sir Guy of Warwick, and Colebrand,
Which fought against the Sun and stopped his light:
Yea (quoth Hobgoblin) let me take them in hand,
Children, children not able to resist my might
A wunderful bloodshed was in those days,
For Saint Steephen fought against the golden Knight:
In so much that Peeter was fain to give his Keys,
To those God knows that had to them no right.
With the grief of that, all the Saints in Heaven,
Proclaimed open wars at Barnard in the field:
They fought from six of the clock to eleven,
Or ever the Traitors would give over and yéeld.
But to say there was triumph, in faith there was,
Saint Steephen the yunger was made Captain of the Guard:
Wunderful it was to see such things he brought to pass,
As I am sure the like of them ye never heard.
By gisse (quoth Saint Steephen) it was time to trudge,
Fryer Francis took his flight to Paules stéeple:
In faith he was even with them for an old grudge,
For he carried away the Weathercock in spite of the people.
Then was I dubbed Knight at Kinistone,
And made Officer of all Courts and laws:
I gave Offices and livings many a one,
Mary in déed you may say, it was for a cause.
In faith the same day that Midsommer was married,
I never laughed better in my life:
For even suddenly away Saint Vncumber carried,
Both the Bridegroom and the Bride his wife.
No remedy on Gods name but I must bear them cōpany,
Chéer, in faith there was, chéer in holes:
And who was minstrel but Saint Anthony,
He made melody for all Christen souls.
A quarter of a yéer we tarried there in the tent,
Wherein we had Capricorn baked like red Déer:
I tarried so long till I was shent,
Iesu how they cried out of me there.
Well, I must abroad among my fréends,
Every hour till I come they think a day:
I will go among then to fulfil their minds,
Fare ye well Gossip I must needs away.
What brother Covetous? whether away so fast?
I saw you not by the Mass, till I was almost past.
What mine own Brother Temerity:
I rejoice to see you, I swear by the Trinity.
For thée we thrée have taken great thought,
Lord, how far about for you we have sought?
And I pray you where have you thrée sought for mée?
In the Kings bench and in the Marshalsée.
Yea, and in all the Countees, and at Newgate:
For these are places meet for thine estate.
I perceive well it must be my chance:
Above all your kinsfolk you to enhance.
Your place is at Saint Thomas awatrings:
Or else at Wapping beyond Saint Katherins.
There will I dub you Knights of the Halter:
Among your mates there strongly to talter.
You are to blame in faith Precipitation:
For you began this fond communication.
You are Knaves to use such salutation:
Why Brother we speak for your consolation.
Speak what you will, even with you I can make.
Speak you in mirth, and in mirth I doo it take.
But by the mas and if you go about me to flowt:
I will make the better of all you thrée a Lout.
No Sir, no, we came not hither you to molest:
Our business I tel you is very ernest.
By Gods ares true, if now we make not shift:
We are all four like to have a great lift.
If ever Covetous were in danger of punishment:
He stands now at the point of banishment.
Sancte Blaci, you make me much to muse:
Passion of me Sirs, why what news?
I think the day of Judgment be now at hand:
For it was never thus since the world did stand.
The worldly man hath forsaken Covetous clean:
And unto Contentation, and Enough he doth len.
What doth he? Benidicite is this true?
Yea faith, he is quite becommen a new.
More over with the heavenly man he is associate:
Where he studies ye rules of godly life early &amp; late.
Body of me Precipitation, fetch me my gown:
My Cap, and my Chain, I will to the Town.
Mary Sir, in deed it is time to stir Coals:
I will go near to fetch some of thē out of their holes.
Haste makes waste Brother Covetous ye wot:
No loo••e so soon cold, as that is most hot.
I warrant you the worldly man will soon be weary:
For they will not suffer him once to be merry.
And verily he is inclined to be nought:
therefore think not that by thē he will long be taught
Now by the mass, of one that should have sapiēce,
I never heard none utter such a foolish sentence.
Know you not that when so ever a Sinner doth repent:
That God forgives him his wickedness incontinent.
True in déed as héer tofore hath béen séen:
Many have been made heavenly that worldly have béen.
Héer is your Gown, your Chain and your Cap:
Body of me, but for shame thou should bear me a rap.
Whoreson th••f, the Devil in Helthée choke:
What meanest thou foolish knave to bring my Cloak.
Why my brother is blind, I hold you a Crown:
Body of me he knows not a Cloak from a Gown.
Tush masters he was stirring in the morning betime:
At four of the Clock in a S•ller he was saying of Prime.
I blame him not though betimes he stéer:
For he is made Ale cunner in our Parish this yéer.
His pains is so great in tasting o• drink:
That many times his eyes into his head doo sink.
And then he looks prestly as narrow as a Crow:
I tel you he can scarce reed the letters of his Crosrowe.
Body of me, you are Knaves all thrée:
Take Gown, Chain, Cap and all for me.
I will be euē with you all I swear by Gods mother:
Choose you shift how you can one for an other.
I warrant you I shall be able to shift for my self:
Or else you may say I were a foolish elf.
Why brother, you said you would all things well take:
Yea but I would not have you your fool me to make.
For you know well enough that of you all thrée:
I am worthy the governor and Ruler to be.
Covetous (saith the wise man) is the root of all evil:
Therefore Covetous is the chiefest that cōmeth from ye devil.
But this is that Knave I mene Precipitation:
But I will be even with him I swear by the Passion.
I am sorry by my truth that you are so sore offended:
What Sir, if a fault be made it shall be amended.
Nay faith I am an Ale cunner, or some drunken fool:
I am no better but your courage I will cool.
That witless knave to, Inconsideration,
He was beginner of this disputation.
But it is no matter once or Christmas day:
I will be even with you, be as be may.
What worshipful M. Covetous are you angry with me?
I am sorry for it man, what can I more be?
•ang me up by the neck like a strong théef:
If ever I speak any word that shall put you to gréef.
I would doo for you Sirs, for I loo you all thrée,
Mary then I look that as I am you should accept me
By my troth Brother, I dare say none of vs all:
But that to doo as you bid vs, ready find you shall.
Mary then on good feloship let vs like fréends agrée:
Why above all things that desire we.
Will you help then to make me gay?
As you will wish it, so we will you array.
Will you consent to show unto me reverence?
Yea, at all times we will show to you our obedience
Will you take me for your moister and head?
Yea mary Sir, for so it stands vs in sted.
And doo you say as you think in very déed?
Yea, that shall you prove in all time of néed.
First to help on my gown some pains doo you take
And then I will see what curtsy you can make.
It is trim indéed, by the mass in that Gown:
Me thinks you be worthy to be Mayor of a town.
Say you so? then how like you this countenance?
Very comely and like a person of great gouernaūce
Then all is well, come, come doo your duty:
O worthy Prince Covetous we humbly salute ye.
Body of me, that same will mar all:
Whē in cōpany I come if Covetous you doo me call
Therefore it is best for vs all to change our names:
Or else peradventure we shall come to shames.
Well, hold your peace, then let me alone:
And I will devise names for you every one,
Sira, nay you gape at me:
What shall my name be?
You will have it or I have it, will ye?
Sira, thy name shall be.
What I pray you?
A shame take thée unmannerly Lout:
Thou came so hastily thou hast put me out,
Nay, that maid looks on me:
Come hither Inconsideratiō, I have a name for thee
Have you Sir? I pray you what shall it be?
Nay by the mass, it is gone again:
And I would know it I tel you very fain.
Yea, but you must tarry till I have it:
I tel you my Brother hath a brave wit.
A shame take thē I have them now all thrée:
Cōe hither brother I will tel you what your nāe shall be.
You know ye men now a days to reason doo trust:
Therefore Reason, your self frō hence forth name you must.
Temerity, I know well thy quality:
Thou art heady, thou shalt be called Agility.
I study a name for Precipitation if it may hit:
Let me see, by my truth, yt shalt be called Ready wit.
An excellent name in déed, for I am ready &amp; quick with a pen:
For before I see one I can condemn ten.
I pass not for any mans matters or cause:
money and wit shall govern the Laws.
Well masters I have chosen names for eche one of you:
But mine own name I know not I make God a vow.
How if I call my name Wit or Policy?
Mary Sir, that agréeth to your nature excéedingly.
Truth, for what shall the worldly man doo with you thrée?
Except to maintain you, he take in mée.
Little worth is Reason, ready wit and Agility:
Except to maintain them there be a Policy.
Sirs you tel me the worldly man is converted:
Yea faith that for ever from vs he is departed.
For ever (quoth he) ha, ha, ha, no, no I warrāt thée I
What this gear means full well I doo espy.
Tush he purposes to go both to heaven and to hell:
And feth news from thence to the people to tel.
He will be a Prophet that was would to be a devil:
But his prophecy I think will prove but evil.
Well no more words, enough is as good as a feast:
They say it is perilous with edge tools to jest.
Now Sirs I will tel you, this is all my drift,
To get the worldly man hither by some shift.
Temerity thou shalt with him thy self acquaint:
And what thou can doo, to him forth you shalt paint
Virtue is made an error by Temerity:
For stoutly he stands against the verity.
For Temerity learned men doo say:
Is a quality to doo all things without delay.
So that if thou moist get into his habitation:
He will soon be weary of enough and contentation.
Then with him shall work Precipitation:
Who is of this property and inclination.
To see and to doo all with out forecast:
Not thinking of things to come or of things past.
Therefore after that Temerity doth once enter:
Thou shalt put thy service in aduenter.
Then Inconsideration shall get into his mind
Who is a quality much of the same kind.
He waieth neither the time, person nor place:
Neither (as they say) the tail nor the the face
Thus if you three within him once be placed:
You shall see yt Enough of him shall soon be disgraced
Under the name of Policy to enter I doo not dout:
And I béeing entered Enough shall be cast out.
For where Covetous in any place doth remain:
There content with enough cannot abide certain.
So that he shall run hedling into the pit:
Doing all things hedling without modesty or wit.
Lo, heer to you my mind I have disclosed:
All have I said that I have now purposed.
By the faith of my body it is worthily devised:
In all the haste go thou and be thou disguised.
Mary now there comes an other thing to my remēbraunce
Are none of you acquainted with ghostly Ignorance?
What he party? he is my ghostly Father:
I would speak with him so much the rather.
For divers causes that I doo consider:
My brother and thou shall depart hence together.
Look you make you trim as fast as you can:
And then in haste séek to speak with the worldly man.
Inconsideration to ghostly Ignorance, thou shalt resort:
And this message from me to him thou shalt report.
First that he name him self devotion:
And we will help him to dignity and promotion.
Charge him not to be out of the way:
For we porpose to send for him this present day.
For as much as you put your trust &amp; cōfidence in me:
What I can doo for you, or it be long you shall sée.
Where to find ghostly Ignorance I am sure:
Seldom or never at home at his own cure.
No, the Sermons that ghostly ignorance hath made:
Hath almost brought all ye Parishes in England out of trade
Well, hye you a pace, that you were gone:
Precipitation and I will tarry heer alone.
Fare well Covetous till we méet again:
That shall not be long if our purpose we obtain.
Nay hear you? God be with you, will you begone?
Body of me you are no better then knaves every one.
Fare well Covetous? nay fare well good Lob:
You have even as much manners as hath a Dog.
Plain Covetous? this is according to promise is it not?
Well what I intend to doo for it, I wot what I wot.
I cry you mercy right worshipful Moister covets,
Most prudent, politic, sapient and wise.
Pardon vs by my truth, it was but forgotten:
Nay I take it even thus, soon ripe soon rotten.
I am no body with you, but by him I swear:
I look the greatest stroke amongst you to bear.
Enough is as good as a feast, we are warned I trow
From hence forth our duties I warrant ye we will show,
We take our leave of you noble prince Covets:
The King, Emperor, yea the God of all vice.
Oh worthy visage, and body well compact:
Oh goodly man in wit, work and fact.
We simple creatures doo show to you obedience:
Being minded to depart under your patience.
Yea mary, this is some what like the matter:
Crafty knaves, how they can a fool flatter.
Fare ye well both, give me your hands one after an other:
I loo ye as déerly as the Children of my mother.
How say thou Precipitation? how likest thou this matter?
By my truth I will tel the truth, Yea and not flatter.
I perceive well enough what heer in you doo mene:
You will not leave till you have marred him clean.
Not only riches singular and private:
But also public weals you will spolyate.
For I perceive by your former monition:
That through ghostly Ignorance you will destroy devotion.
I mean true faith, in Gods loo and hope:
And cause him in clear Sun shine, for light to grope.
Thou think as truth is in very déed:
I intend no less if my device may likely spéed.
There will I begin and if error once rage in religion:
I warrant thee in public wele will soon be division.
Well, what you intend to me doth not appertain:
My nature is to rage where haste doth reign.
And what causes haste? but only Temerity:
That makes fools hardy with Security.
Precipitation forth doth this worldly man lead:
So that all his affairs be done rudely on head.
Then Inconsideration both night and day:
Shall promp him forward nothing at all to way.
Neither to consider his beginning:
Neither at the end what shall be the winning.
So that if all we doo our proper nature and kind:
He shall not regard who shall the profit find.
Lupus est in fabula, no more words.
I never fear any such kind of burdes.
This is the worldly man I suppose indéed:
To work wisely with him I see we had need:
I find it true as the wise king Solomon doth say,
It is better to have a little with the fear of the Lord
Then to have much treasure and yet go astray,
I mene to decline from Gods holy word.
The proverb saith enough is as good as a feast,
He that hath enough and cannot be content:
In my judgment is worse then a Beast,
For he wants a good conscience mind &amp; intent.
The Chariot of Covetous as Barnard doth write,
On four wheels of vices is carried away:
And these be the four vices that he doth resit,
Contempt of God, forgetfulness of death eche day.
Faint courage, and ungentleness he doth say.
These be the wheels that to adversities cart doth belong:
These have persuasions to beguile men many and strong.
The same Chariot hath two horses which doth it draw,
The one named Rainy and the other nigardship:
Their Carter is Desire to have, who always doth claw,
By fraud or guile one an other to nip,
This Carter hath two cords to his Whip.
The one is Appititite and felicity for to get:
The other is called Dread and fear to forlet.
When this Chariot go•e in the ground of mans mind,
He is not once able to think a good thought:
For Covetous doth the hart so much to lucre bind,
That he judges all things to be vain and nought,
Except some gain or profit thereby be brought.
I my self am able to say it, for I doo it know:
To have gotten money I studied to deceive high and lowe
But thanks be to God the Father of all might,
Which will not the death of Sinners as Scripture doth say
It hath pleased him to open unto me the the true light,
Whereby I perceive the right path from the broad way,
Therefore I am content my self for to stay.
With Enough which brings me to quiet in body &amp; mind:
Yea. and all other commodities there with I doo find,
Godliness is great riches if a man can be content,
When God hath sent him plenty and Enough:
Let vs praise him for our food and raiment,
And live godlyly all our lives through,
For we must tread the paths of death so sharp and rough.
And then shall we be sure to cary as little away:
As we brought with vs thus Saint Paule doth say.
Body of me he is marvelous forgone:
We shall have somewhat to doo with him anon.
It was il luck that he came not alone.
I would that beggarly knave in Hell were.
Well let me alone I will go néer,
To cause him of his company to be weary:
I have done as great acts thrice this year,
I am not to learn to row in Illirans Fery.
I will go to him and thou shalt wait upon me,
Thou shalt hear what a take to him I will tel:
If thou spéed well now I dare promise the,
The Devil will give thée the Crown of hell.
God spéed you Sir, I pray you might I be so bold,
As to have a word or two with you in your ear?
Yea, hardly my fréend say what you would.
Your mind unto me you may boldly declare.
I pray you are you not acquainted with this gentleman?
I would fain speak with him a word or twain alone:
I beseech you help me to my request if you can,
For I have haste on my way I must needs be gone.
If you had required a greater thing of me,
I would have done it for you I tel you certain:
Sir, one of yonder men which you doo see,
Would speak with you alone very fain.
I will go to him and know his mind:
is it you that would speak with me my fréend?
Yea forsooth sir?
What say you to me?
Oh Sir, oh good Sir, oh, oh, oh my hart will break:
Oh, oh, for sorrow God wot I cannot speak.
What is the matter? wherefore wéep you thus?
Pure loo causes him, Sir I wuss.
I am sure that be looues you at the hart.
I thank him truly it is undeserved on my part.
Gentle friend I pray you cease your lamentation:
Sure it is a strange thing to see a man wéep on this fission.
I cannot choose, oh, oh, I cannot choose:
Whow? I cānot choose if my life I should loose.
To hear that I hear, oh well it is no matter:
Oh, oh, oh, I am not he that any man will flatter.
To hear what you héer, why what hear you of me?
Mary sir he hears ye wunderfully changed you be
I am so in déed, for that I give God the glory:
And if you be my fréend for my change you are not sorry.
I trust I have chosen all for the best:
For my former wickedness I hate and detest.
Whow, nay I would to God that were the worst:
But I shall have il will, I think I am accursed.
I judge him not to be of a discrete mind:
That for the truth will be angry with his fréend.
The talk of talkers tungs I doo not much way:
Yet I pray you heartily tel me what they say.
Covetous, covetous, every man saith you be:
A shame take them all prattling knaves for me.
I am of such a nature as no man is but I:
To hear my friend il spoken of I had rather dye.
Yea wise man, you are called even so:
All the country of you speak both shame and wo.
He was would (saith one) to kéep a good house:
but now (saith an other) thereis no liuīg for a mouse
If this be the wurst, for their talk I doo not care:
Let them say so still hardly and doo not spare.
I trust I have chosen with Mary the better part:
Oh yet good Sir, this gréeueth him to the hart.
Yea God wot, it is none other, it is none other:
I loo you as well as mine own borne brother.
Think you yt it gréeueth me not to hear eche boy and Girl:
To say that the worldly man is become a Churl?
He had néed to live very sircumspectly:
That would take upon him to please all men directly
Behold Enough.
Nay hear you, this gréeueth me worst so God me save:
They say you keep company with every beggarly knave
Where I kéep company they have nought to doo:
As near as I can into none but honest company I go.
See you, I pray you Enough.
Nay but hear you, is Enough his name?
Yea in déed, it is even the very self same.
Saint Dunstone, a man would not judge it by his cote:
Now truly I would not take him to be worth a groat,
Hark you, hark you, in faith know you not me?
No truly that I wot of, I did you never sée.
That is marvel in déed the truth for to tel:
I dare say your father knew vs both very well.
Did you never hear him speak of one Policy?
Yes that I have sure an hundred times verily.
I am he verily and this your fréend Ready wit:
With whom to be acquainted for you it is fit.
Truth in déed as Seneca saith wittily:
The wise man and not the rich is void of misery.
Policy and ready wit: now the truth is so,
There is no man living that can spare you two.
I trust God works for me happily in deed:
To send me all such things whereof I have néed.
For without a ready wit, who can answer make?
Without a policy all commodities will slake.
A ready wit will soon gather and conceive:
What he shall forsake and what he shall receive.
Teuely now I remember a saying of Tully the divine:
Where he doth both wisdom and learning define.
Learning makes young men sober (saith he)
And it causes old men of good comfort to be.
Policy is the riches and possession of the poor:
Yea, it garnishes the rich with goodly adore.
So that there is no frate calling or degree:
That may conveniently without you be.
Give me your hands for you are welcome heartily.
I am excéeding joyful of your good company.
Enough, I beséech you bid my fréends welcome hither:
For from hensfoorth we must dwell all together.
Be not rash in taking of a fréend Aristotle doth say:
Nor when thou haste taken him, cast him not away.
Admit not thy fréend either high or lowe:
Except his behaviour to others thou dost know.
For look how before he hath served his other fréend:
Even so will he serve thée also in the end.
Your parables truly I doo not well understand:
Except you mene I should have no friend{is} but you by me to stād
Enough is as good as a feast, well you wot:
More then enough: a man needs not.
Whether it be lands, money, friends or store:
if he have enough: what néedeth he any more?
I perceive that against vs two you doo grutch:
Can a man of policy and ready wit have to much?
The noble king Solomon was rich &amp; had wisdom great store
Yet he seassed not daily to pray to God for more.
Get thée store of fréends (saith Cicero) for it is déemed:
A true friend more then Kinsfolk is to be estéemed.
It is an old proverb and of an ancient time:
Which saith, it is not all Gold, that like Gold doth shine.
No more are all fréends that friendship pretend:
As it approved with many in the end.
Yea enough, but I am sure that this policy:
And this ready wit are my fréends verily.
Are we? ye faith there of you may be sure:
We are they which your wealth shall procure.
Enough is not enough without vs two:
For having not vs, what can enough doo?
Enough is maintained by wisdom and policy:
Which is contained of a ready wit naturally.
Having a ready wit and of polycy the skill:
You need not to care for this enough except you will.
There is another enough which is invisible:
Which enough, to want is impossible.
As for this Enough is enough I cannot deny:
But this enough serves but even competently.
You have no more now then doth your self serve:
So that your poor Bréethern for all you may starve
But enough that comes by vs twain:
Is able your self and many other to sustain.
Your words are even as true as the Gospel:
As one named Reason of late to me did tel.
You may be more heavenly saith he having riches:
Then if you had nothing the truth to express.
&amp; I find his word{is} true for whē alms I wold give
I have not wherewith the néedy to relieve.
Enough I have for my self I cannot say nay:
But I would I had more to succour the néedy always
These words procéed from a covetous mind:
And from a worldly lust which doth you blind.
was not ye poor widow for her offering praised more
Then all they yt offred of their superfluity &amp; store.
The sacrifice of God as the prophet Dauid doth say
Is a broken hart and a good mind always.
He says well by Lady, yea and like an honest man,
But yet Sir, riches to be good, well prove I can.
For every man is not called after one sort:
But some are called to prophecy, some to preach &amp; exhort.
And he by that means Heaven joys to win:
But every man knows not that way to walk in.
Therefore every man (as his vocation is) must walk:
I am sure that against this you will not talk.
The greatest bosters are not the best givers:
Nor the ernest preachers are the best livers.
As sucre increases riches and honour,
So covetous enlarges daily more and more.
I know sōe in this realm which once were cōtent
With poorly enough which God to them had sent.
Wishing of a good conscience as they said verily:
That God would once again restore the verity.
If it please thee good Lord (said they) thy word to vs again send
And then truly our Covetous lives we will amend.
But since it hath pleased God, them to wealth to restore:
They are ten times more Covetous then they were before.
Yea hedling without all consideration:
They for Covetous make some laws in that nation.
Such bying and selling of Leases and benefices:
Such doubling of wares to extreme prices.
So shamefully Gods ministers they poule &amp; shave:
That not half enough to live upon they have.
But it is an old saying and a true certainly:
it will not out of the flesh yt is bred in ye bone verily.
The worldly man will needs be a worldly man still:
Well choose you I will let you alōe doo what you will.
I cannot think but those that of me hold scorn:
Will be glad of me or ever the yéer be half worn.
Mary fare well? adieu to the devil:
Body of me, he would make me his drivel.
You may sée what a trusty friend he is:
A beggarly knave I warrant you by the bliss.
And even so he and they went about me to make:
Within a while I should have gone to the hedge for a stake.
I warrant you that you should have proved shortly:
They would not have lost you one groat nor penny.
I marvel you would tarry with them any time or season:
You are old enough I trow to be ruled by reason.
A shame take them all, I have spent on them xx. poūd:
That I had of money and of mine own good ground.
I am a shamed of my self so God me save:
Because I have sold almost all that ever I have.
My friends and companions when I go in the street:
So God help me, I am a shamed with them to meet.
Passion of me it was time to look about:
They would quite have undone you, or else without dout.
But I trow, I trow, if you will be ruled by me:
What I will doo for you, or ere it be long you shall sée.
A thousand, thousand, thousand ways I can invent:
To fetch in double as much as you have spent.
Be ruled by you? yes héer I doo you both embrace:
As mine own mind to follow all my lives space.
For I tel you plain I am weary of their School:
It is time for you, else they would have made you a fool.
I perceived no less in deed hy the talk of Reason:
But so it should have come to pass in season.
And doo you my brother Reason perfectly know?
Yea, and with him one called Agililitie I trow.
Reason came to me, and mihi flectere mentem he said:
Sola soloed ratio dux sida sophorn est it cannot be denied.
To nature and Reason he doth open injury,
Which of other men council doth seek:
God hath given men Reason and their wits Policy,
To forsake that is il, and to take that he doth like.
And beléeue you not these words to be very true?
Yes, and I have thought on them xx. times since I tel you.
Oh Sirs me thinks if I had money and treasure again:
In faith I would be a lively lad I tel you plain.
Heavenly man (quoth he) let them be heavenly for me:
The best heaven is me thinks is rich for to be.
In faith it shall cost me and my fréends a fall,
But you shall be twice as rich as you were before:
We will doo it to spite them even with all,
Though we doo hundreds wrong therefore.
I have set some aloft in a high place,
Which had rather dye I dare well say:
Then one inch of their state should fall or abace,
But rather to clime up higher if they may.
Whow, of this world I rule the whole state,
Yea faith I govern all laws, rites and orders:
I, at my pleasure raise war, strife and debate,
And again I make peace in all Costs and borders
Nay, yet a much more marvel then that,
Behold, sée you this little pretty hand?
This is an Arm of stéele for it overthrows flat,
The strongest walls and towers in a whole land,
Power I have laws to alter and make,
And all laws made are guided by me:
All that is done, is done wholly for my sake,
What strength I have by this you may see.
More over I have in this little hand,
The harts of all men &amp; women upon Earth:
I rule them both by Sea and by land,
Plenty I make and I make also derth.
Whow, it is wunderful that is done by policy,
While you live take héed strive not against policy:
The best of them all are glad of Policy,
Yea in Westminster hall they use much policy.
Prudentia noset omnia, saith the noble man Tully
Policy knows all things both good and il truly.
Oh Policy, what meant I from reason &amp; thee to stray?
Never will I forsake you nor yours after this day.
Oh help me Policy, help me to some money:
Whose taste I loo better then the taste of honey.
Sith worthy policy you have entertained:
Now none of his instruments must be disdained.
Disdained? no faith let him teach me what he will:
And I will doo it, if it were mine own father to kill.
Say you so? by the mass give me your hand:
Come go with me, let vs no longer idle stand.
Oh how hard a thing and difficult it is,
For them that in their riches doo trust:
To enter into the kingdom of Heaven or blis,
The words of our Saviour to be true grant we must,
it is as easy for a Cammel through an Nedles eye to thrust?
As for him that on riches hath fixed his mind:
The way to eternal salvation to find.
Example héerof you see with your eyes,
Of the worldly man given to vain pleasure:
He promised you heard, from sin to arise.
And said he would not loo neither money nor treasure.
But as he ought to loo it, that is in a due measure.
But behold how quickly his promise he hath broke:
Whereby he kindles Gods wrath against him to smoke.
For now hath he entertained to him Temerity
Precipitation and heady Inconsideration:
These cause him to work all things hotly,
And covet to be had in reputation.
Then covetous disguises him self on such a fashion.
That as Seneca saith, he doth good to no man:
But hurt, &amp; most to him self as time shall prove when.
Alaz, alaz, to whom should I make my moan?
For ever and a day cham quite undone.
My Landlord is so covetous as the devil of hell:
Except i will give him such a shameful rent.
As cham not able, away each must incontinent.
Chaue dwelt there this zix and therty year:
Yea these forty, each may tel you well near.
And each never paid above yéerly viue pound:
And by our Lady, that to be enough chaue wound.
Well, now I must give him even as much more:
Or else each must void the next quarter or before.
Oh masters, is not this even a lamentable dhing?
To see how Landlords their poor tenants doo wring.
And they are not so covetous to ask another, each believe:
But a zorte of fools are as ready to give.
And espetially Strangers, ye a shameful zorte:
Are placed now in England and that in every Port.
That we, our wives and Children, no houses can get:
Wherein we may live, such price on them is get.
Chad thought a while a go my Landlord would not have done thus
For he said he would be a heavenly man I wuss.
But zoule, the Devil is as Heavenly as he:
Three times worse then he was be for as var as I can zée.
Body of me, this would make a man to swear:
A shame take them mary, that ever they came there.
Nay by gisse I thought he would not be heavenly long:
For that to his nature were clean contrary and wrong.
Yonder are such a sort of Ruterkins lively and jolly:
That all that can be gotten is little enough for their belly.
Soul we work, we labour, and that night and day:
Yet can we scant have meat and drink the truth to say.
And that which we have, is il enough for Dogs:
And we are served with all, like a many of Hogs.
What servant? I pray thée what news with thée?
By my truth Father Tenant even as you sée.
Kept like no mans servant, but rather like a slave:
That I am weary of my life I tel you so God me save.
My moister takes on like the Devil of hell:
There was never one so hasty, cruel and fell.
But so covetous Lord, Lord you will not believe:
I think all his mind and study to bribery he doth give.
Now a pestlence take him, vile cankered Churl:
He is neither good to man, women, boy nor girl.
Is this the heavenly man? a shame take him else:
Body of me, in all wickedness he now excels.
And if a thing come in his head be it good or il:
Without all wit or reason, doo it he will.
But so covetous, Lord I think if he might choose:
The dropping of his nole he would not loose.
Every week truly, nay then every day:
He must have accoūt how many Eggs his hens lay
Why? there was never seen such a miser as he:
That the plague cut the throat of him for me.
I have wrought for him this half yéer by the wéek:
And now my work is done my money is to seek.
If I and all mine should starve for money:
Of him I dare say I should not get one penny.
A shame take him, how well the Scripture of him is waid:
Which saith sleep not till the Hireling thou hast paid.
I sée well that I complain not of him alone:
But others as well as I, have good cause to moan.
Well Servant, weeping will not help this gear:
But God will plague him for it, I doo not fear.
I told you Hireling how you should be served:
What Servant, thou look as though thou were starved.
He looks as lustily, freshly and as well:
As all the Servants that with his moister doo dwell.
His moister? why? he is no better then a théef:
For so that he may have it, he cares not who suffer gréef.
Nay by the mass that words is but to true:
So that his riches increases he cares not who rue.
I know the occasion of all this géer:
But I would not for twenty pound it should come to his ear
He saith, that he will never leave his extortion:
Till of riches he have gotten an innumerable portion.
He will build, plant, set, and sow:
Till such a fame of him abroad there grow.
That there is none like to him in all the Country:
And so by that means he shall come to authority.
But lightly those that come to authority after that rate:
Doo end their lives in some miserable and unhappy state.
thou fool (saith Christ) this night will I fetch thy soul frō thée:
And then who shall have the things that thine be?
Well, let him alone, I hope all will prove for the best:
Even as he leads his life so shall he find rest.
Peace, peace for Gods sake, look where the Steward comes:
Body of me Sirs, which way shall I run?
God spéed you, what mean you? would you speak with me?
Yea Sir, even to desire your worship my vréend for to to be.
Each have a zertain petition to your friendship to move:
And each desire you to be my vréend in it for Gods loo.
What is the matter? let me know it at once:
I have somewhat else to doo then hear to tread the stones.
By my truth Sir I beséech you for me to speak a good word:
To your good moister and my Landlord:
Each have dwelt in his house this forty yéeres almost,
And thereupon chaue bestowed much money and cost.
And now each hear say each must double my rent:
Or else void out of it and that incontinent.
I beséech you for Gods sake on me take some pity and bone:
If I be put out for ever I cham undone.
Oh good Sir, I know that you may doo much:
By my truth I can doo nothing héer in:
And so God help me I estéeme no such matters worth a pin.
Ber Lady Sir you have had it a fair season:
And yt a man should make what he can of his own it is reasō
I warrant you, therbe enough that that rent will give:
But they shall never thrive on it then I beléeue.
Each know what he may doo with the house and ground:
He may chance to vinde rent enough of viue pound.
Well, care not you for that, if you he a wise man:
You were best to get one better chepe where you can
For I know that so much for it, have he may:
Yea, if it stood empty even this present day.
Well Sir, yet me thinks there should be a conscience
I think God hates such covetous, sir by your patience.
Thou art a foolish fellow, héer of to me to complain:
For I meddle with no such matters I tel you plain.
Good gentlemā, God save your life I pray to our lord:
May I be so bold to speak with you (gentleman) one word:
Whether the Devil wilt thou? into mouth me think.
Foe Gods ames, how he smells all of drink.
Nay by my truth Sir, I drink none other drink to day:
But a little fléet milk mingled with whey.
For so God help me if for drink or meat I should dye:
I have not one farthing, any therewith to bye.
And by my truth Sir, this is my suit at this time:
I served your moister in making Brick and lime.
Half a year together not missing one day:
And by my truth all my wages is yet for to pay.
And if it please you heerin to show me some pleasure:
The same to my power with like I will measure.
Body of me, what a beggarly knave is here?
Why, can thou not forbere thy money one yéer?
No by my truth Sir, for I have no lands:
Nor nothing to live upon, but only my hands.
I beseech you be good to me.
Why? I meddle not with such things yt dost know
Yes Sir, you are moister Steward I trow.
No faith I am but moister receiver:
I take in all, but by gisse I am no payer.
Your moister hath a great sort of receivers in déed:
But not one to pay the Hireling his true meed.
What worthy policy? what make you héer to day?
About your affairs I have business this way.
And behold Sir as I trailed the Stréet:
With these two fellows I chanced for to méet.
Who told me that they had an ernest suit to you
One for his house that he dwells in now.
Wherein (he saith) you go about to doo him much wrong:
For he saith that he hath dwelt in it very long.
The other said, you owe him a piece of money:
he wrought with you half a year &amp; had never a penny
And thus they took on with me before you did come:
And now have I showed you the whole circumstance &amp; some.
Mary hang them Villains have I nought to doo:
But to stand and reason matters with them two?
Hear you tenāt, in few word{is} you know my mind
According as I have told you, so you shall me find.
Other provide money your lease to renew:
Or else you shall out incontinent this ts true.
Oh Landlord me thinks this is to much extremity:
Alas upon mine age take you some pity.
Cham old &amp; have many Children and much charge:
I trust landlord each shall vinde you better at large.
I cannot tel what I should doo more beléeue me:
Many Landlords would not doo as I doo by thée.
For I am cōtent for money yt should have it before an other:
I can doo no more for thee if thou were my brother.
Thou must be answered father, there is no remedy:
By Saint Anne me think he speaks very reasonably.
This reasonable speaking cōmeth frō an unreasonable mind:
Wo be to him that to such inconveniences shall a man bind.
If it please you Sir, help me to my money if you may:
No by my faith Sir, you get it not to day.
You thall tarry my leisure, I will pay you when I sée cause:
You are happy Sir, in your hands you have the laws.
But by gisse if I had any thing that would doo you pleasure:
You should have it when you would and not tarry my leisure.
Well I beléeue verily that the prayers of the poor &amp; his cry:
Shall ascend into the ears of the Lord God on hye.
And he will plague all those that righteousness withstand:
And as the Prophet saith, root their posterity out of ye land.
Well Hireling, let vs depart this place:
It prevails not vs of him to crave any grace.
No more shall it prevail him the Scripture saith in déed:
To ask mercy of the Lord when he stands in need.
Ha, ha, ha, I must laugh, so God me save:
To see what a sort of suitors now a days we have.
I warrant you if you will be ruled by Reason and policy:
You shall have all the world to sue to you shortly.
A common saying the Fox fares the better and not ye worse:
When that the good wife doth him ban and curse.
So what care I though to curse me the people doo not cease?
As long as by them my riches doth increase.
Oh policy, how glorious my buildings doo shine?
No gentleman's in this country like unto mine.
Sira what shall I doo? I must make my barnes more great:
For I have not room enough to lay in my Rye and whet.
Set men a work with it as soon as ye can:
If you lack room, make more you may than.
By gisse I will, they shall in hand to morrow:
I thank you policy I need nothing to borrow.
Sir, the little tenement that by my house doth stand:
I would I could get that to, even out of hand.
I want a little buttrye to lay in my drink:
And that would serve the turn handsomely I think.
And to say the truth it is not meet that such a beggar as he:
Should dwell so néer under the nose of me.
Who the Devil put that into your mind?
Mary even that did reason my trusty fréend.
I have béen about it my self all this wéek:
Ready wit all the Laws for to delay doth séek.
We will have it I warrant you by hook or by crook:
Tush I warrant you for such od ends daily we look.
O thou Earth, Earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord:
Know thy self to be no better then Clay or dust:
Se that thy life to Gods truth doo always accord:
For from earth thou comes and to earth thou must.
What is the matter? why what ail ye? why look you so about
I heard a terrible noise, surely without dout.
Which pronounced the words of the Prophet Ieremy:
Saying Earth, Earth, turn thee speedily.
Why, and are you afraid, and amassed at that?
I see well you have a hart like a Gnat.
That Servant that diligently doth fulfil,
And watches at all times for the cōming of his moister:
And doth in the mean season apply his will,
Of his masters goods, there be no spoil nor waster.
That servant shall be sure to be a Taster.
Of Gods blessings and joys everlasting:
Where as is all consolation and nothing wanting.
But that servant that lives idly without care,
And looks not diligently upon his Office:
His moister shall come suddenly or he be aware,
And s•all minister to him according to justice.
The portion of Ipocrites shall be his.
Into utter darkness cast him out will he:
Where as weeping and gnashing of téeth shall be.
Oh Sira, mary Gods blessing on his hart:
Full honestly he teaches you Sir, their part.
These be the words of the holy Scripture:
Declaring the difference between ye just and impure
Good Lord I wold know what those word{is} doo mene
Your Chaplain can tel you, for he is very well seen.
I pray you policy, call him to me he••er:
But look that you come again both together.
Yes that we will I warrant, you need not to fear:
We will be heer again or a Horse can lick his ear.
By my truth me thinks I begin to war sick:
In sending away my counsellor, I was somewhat to quick.
Well, I will sit me down and say to sleep heer:
Till they into this place again doo appear. Oh my head.
It is even I that upon thee doth blow,
Filling thee with plagues and sundry disease:
What I am, indéed I will learn thée to know,
For I am not afraid thée to displease.
Thou shalt depart from thy house and land,
Thy wife and Children beggars thou shalt leave:
Thy life thou shalt loose even out of hand,
And after death thy just reward receive.
Thy il gotten goods shall not thée deliver.
Thine costly buildings shall nothing prevail,
Thy odours, thy swéet smells and thou shalt perish together,
Thy rings, thy bracelets, and Gold chains shall fall.
Strangers and those whom thou did never know,
Shall possess that, which by frawd thou hast got:
Thy seed from of thy ground God will overthrow,
Because at his Prophets preaching thou amenddest not.
Thou sleep in death as the Prophet Dauid doth say,
Out of which sléep when thou shalt awake:
Thou shalt perceive thou must needs away,
And that on thée God will no mercy take.
I am the plague of God properly called,
Which comes on the wicked suddenly:
I go through all towns and Cities strongly walled,
Striking to death and that without all mercy.
Heer thou wicked covetous person I doo strike,
Which once on the plow had taken hold:
But willingly again thou rannest in the Dike:
Therefore thy plague shall be doubled seven fold.
Come Sir Nicolas, come sir Nicolas, come Sir Nicolas come
Cham faint by gisse, would each had a little more buni.
A pestilence take thée, haste thou not enough yet?
No, I can drink a Galon and eat never a bit.
Come in ye knaves name you must expoūd a matter
I can expound good ale from fair water.
Tush fellow thou must expound a péece of Scripture
I can doo it as well as any Bishop I am sure.
I have spouted with the Geneuians xx. on a row:
And thou were to good for them all I trow.
Was I? yea faith that I was you shall under stand
With a piece of Latin I set them all one dry land.
And I pray thée heartily what was it? let me hear:
Thou shalt if you wilt promise to give me a pot of béer
Magistrorum clericium inkepe miorum
Totus peruse altus yongus et oldus
Multus knauoribus et quoque fasorum
Pick pursus omnius argentus shauus &amp; polus.
Let me sée what they are all able to say to this.
For out of deuteronomy a worthy piece of learning it is.
A man may as much edifying out of my latin take:
As ye may out of exposiciōs yt many ministers make
Even as thou say, in faith much of a kind:
For they place the scriptures as feathers in ye wind.
Peace body of me, our moister is a sleep:
Mary it was time indeed for vs silence to kéep.
Oh I would if I could, but now it is to late:
Hold thy peace I pray thee and doo me no more rate.
To whom speak you to Sir? to him or to me?
There is no remedy now man, &amp; that thou dost sée.
Passion of me Sira, he dreams me think:
Is there no remedy, but to hell I must néeds sink?
For my life Devotion he is haunted with the Mare:
Nay it is some wurser thing truly I fear.
I hold a Crown he is not very well:
So me thinks for he dreams of going to Hell.
We will wake him out of that troublesome sleep:
Good Lord séest thou not? behold how he doth wéep
How doo you good moister? is he a sléep or a wake?
Oh good Lord, how my hart doth ache.
Oh sick, sick, never so sick in my life berfore:
Good Lord, policy I think I shall never go hōe more.
Mary God forbid, why where is your gréef?
All the parts of my body wants reléef.
Oh Devotion, I have such pains in my head:
That truly, truly, I wish my self even dead.
Me thought you dreamed, for to your self you did talk
In deed Sir, I dreamed I had a great journey to walk.
Oh what great pains and torments I thought my self in:
Lying in fire which to burn did never lin.
And me thought before me the plague of God did stand:
Ready to strike me with a Sword in his hand.
And ever I asked him what was the cause:
He answered that I was a transgressor of Gods Laws.
But Lord how sick I am, and how terrible is my pain:
No place in my body, but sickness therein doth reign.
I like not these foolish dreams, policy my friend:
Tush a straw, upon them never set your mind.
He that to dreams gives any confidence or trust:
Without dout very unquietly live he must.
Oh sick, sick, sick, oh my head, oh my back:
What would you have Sir? tel vs what you lack.
Is it not best that I call hither a Phisicion?
That he may of your sickness declare ye disposition.
Oh yea, yea, doo so good devotion, I pray thée deuotiō
Gods blessing on thy hart, for thy witty motion.
Depart I pray thee with as much haste as may be:
It shall not be long or he be héer, you shall sée.
Oh policy sick, never so sick, oh hold my head:
Oh sira, what shall be come of all my goods when I am dead?
Dead? body of me, doo you rocken to dye this yéer?
Hold your peace I warrant you, ye need not to fear.
Lo, see you not how the worldly man shows his kind?
As sick as he is, on his goods is all his mind.
Oh policy if I might not dye, what a fellow wold I be
In all this country should be none like unto me.
S•ca, what a goodly Warret have I made in my hall?
But yet my banqueting house pleases me best of all.
Oh, oh, alas what a pang is this at my hart?
Body of me Aqua vitae, Vinagre, needs help he will depart.
Saint Vncumber be with vs, and the blessing of S. Anthony:
Help, help our Lady of Walsingham and all her holy cōpany
Why? how now? what is the matter? how doth he Policy?
Body of me help, he is gone else and that verily
Stand away foolish knave and let moister Phisicion come:
Moister Flebishiten, should I say, M. Phisicion, I pray you look in his bum
By your leave my masters, me thinks it is no time to jest:
Stand back I pray you, and doo not me molest.
Passion of me masters, count you this a play?
One of you quickly bring me hither a Key.
Some drink, Aqua vitae, if it may be got:
With speed let vs have some drink that is hot.
Nay, I told you before he was past remedy.
No there is life in him, yet I see verily.
Run I pray you and fetch such things as we lack:
Some drink and a pillow to lay at his back.
Héer is drink and all things ready at hand:
Give me room I pray you, out of my light stand.
Iesu mercy, lo how busy moister Phesicion is:
Heer you Sir? is it not best you look on his pis.
Good fellow be content, I pray thée heartily:
Thou art disposed to jest me think verily.
Good fellow? goodman whoball, I will make you change your note
Before that for your labour you get the value of a groat.
What howe worldly man, in Gods name I say:
Look up for the loo of God, doo not like a beast decay.
Who is there? what art thou that call me?
Mary Sir, moister Flebishiten, Phisicion is come &amp; it was he
Oh sirs, sirs, I fear me all this labour is in vain:
You might have let me go, I was well out of my pain.
Oh moister Phisicion, how think you? what say you to me?
By my truth there is no remedy but one, that I can sée.
You must put your will to Gods will I can say no more:
Why? foolish Phisicion he knew that well enough before.
What say thou? is there no remedy but I must dye?
No Sir by my truth, as far as I can sée or espy.
God may doo much, for he is omnipotent:
But you are past help in this world in mans judgment.
What the devil dost thou héer? then get thée away:
Depart Phisicion, and thou haste no more to say.
I trust then, Sir you will content me for my pains taking:
You shall have a new lofe, at the maids next baking.
Go thy ways I pray thée and trouble not my mind:
For these news, to give thée any thing, in my hart I cannot find
Good Lord have mercy on thée, belike it is to late to amend:
In wickedness thou hast lived, even so thou wilt end.
Gentleman, I trust you will not see me loose my labour:
Gentleman go as you came, you are not so much in my favour
A common saying in déed, that is like unto like:
A wicked M. for wicked servants, God must néeds strike
Oh Sirs, is there no remedy? what shall I say?
Is it not best I set all things at a stay?
Yes make sure work of that while as you be héer:
It is time in déed, for death in you doth appéer.
Once you know that I am greatly in deaf:
And now every one will strive, their own for to get.
Bid my wife therefore get a letter of administration, as soon as she may
And then as she lists, my Creditors she may pay.
In déed I have enough to pay every man his:
But by Lady I cannot tel what mine own shall mis.
Commend me to her, and bid her take no thought:
But in any wise let her (as near as she can) for go nought.
By my truth this is wunderfully well invented:
As you have said, I warrāt you it shall be frequented.
Your mind in this thing vndouted is not il:
Now as for other things it is best you make a will.
It shall be (Devotion) even as thou haste said:
Write quickly for of my life I am afraid.
Oh must I needs dye? oh must I needs away?
Héer is Ink and Paper, what shall I write?
In the name, first of all doo thou in dite.
In the name, in, in, in, in the name, what more?
Of, of, of, of, what more?
Body of me, down with the paper, away with the Ink:
P•ssion of me Covetous he is gone me think.
Hold, hold him, let vs see if any life in him be:
Nay hold him that will, the Devil hold him for me:
Passion of me he is dead, how shall we doo now?
Can thou not tel? no more can I, I make God avow.
Sira heer was a trim end that he did make:
Thou never heard him the name of God in his mouth take.
Tush, God: a straw, his mind was other ways occupied:
All his study was who should have his goods when he dyed.
Indeed all men may perceive his mind to be corrupt and il:
For God would not suffer him to name him in his will.
A strange matter, when men have given over God:
They may be sure to be scurged with his sharp rod.
This is the end always where I begin:
For I am the root of all wickedness and sin.
I never rest to teach and instruct men to evil:
Till I bring them both body and soul to the Devil.
As we have done this worldly man héer as you sée:
Come therefore Ignorance, wait thou upon me.
The Devil and I, thou shalt sée will not leave:
Till we have made the greatest part to vs to cleue.
Come, let vs go hence, heer is no more to be said:
Farewell my masters our parts we have played.
Oh, oh, oh, oh, all is mine, all his mine,
My kingdom increases every hour and day:
Oh, how they seek my magestie divine,
To come to me they labour all that they may.
The worldly man (quoth he) nay the devilish man than,
For more wickedness and mischief then he did use:
I my self indéed never devise can,
Oh at his jolly wisdom I must néeds muse.
How cunningly put he his money to usury?
Yea, and that without offence of any law:
He was not to learn any kind of bribery,
Whereby wicked gains to him he might draw.
An abominable drunkard, a stinking Lecherer,
A filthy Sodomite, a corrupt conscience within:
A privy slanderer, and a subtle murderer,
To be short, a very dunghill and sink of sin.
Oh my boy Covetous, I may thank thee of all this
Thou nousledst him in all mischief and vice:
Therefore shalt thou be sure to have my bliss:
For above all other thou indeed art most wise.
Thou teach the worldly man, a leacemonger to be,
To oppress the poor and of his riches him to defraud:
Wickedly to use the laws he learned of thee,
Therefore indeed thou art worthy of much lawd.
All you worldly men, that in your riches doo trust,
Be merry and iocond, build Palaces and make lusty chéer:
Put your money to Usury, let it not lye and rust,
Occupy your selves in my laws while ye be heer.
Spare not, nor care not, what mischief you frequent,
Use drunkenness, deceit, take other men's wives:
Pass of nothing; one hour is enough to repent,
Of all the wickedness you have done in your lives.
Oh if you will thus after my Laws behave,
You shall have all things as this worldly man had:
Be bold of me, what you will to crave,
And dout you not but with you I will play the loouing lad.
Yea, and after death I will provide a place,
For you in my kingdom for ever to reign:
You shall tare no worse then doth mine own grace,
That is to lye burning for ever in pain.
Come on mine own Boy, go thou with me,
Thou hast served me duly, and hottest me never:
Therefore now for thy pains rewarded shalt thou be:
In ever lasting fire that burns for ever.
He that touches pitch, shall be defiled with the same,
And he that keeps company with those that be vicious:
Shall at the length grow like unto the same,
Working things wicked and pernicious,
Even so it is also to be associate with the righteous.
For he that haunteth and kéepeth honest company:
Cannot choose but live according to the same actually.
Example, the Jaws being conversant with the Heathen,
Drank of their superstition and idolatry:
And by that means fell from the true God of Heaven,
To worshipping of Blocks which was mere blasphemy.
Likewise it is at this day verily,
Christen men are seduced by keeping of il company:
And brought from the very truth to hypocrisy.
And who are those that are thus deceived?
Even such as are not content when to are well:
They be not thankful for that they have received,
But ever they think still more and more to excel,
Contentation from their minds they doo expel.
And under the pretence of reason, wit and policy:
They covet to run to mischief and sin hotly.
Like as Gold and silver is tried in the fire,
So faithful men in the fornace of adversity be proved:
The heavenly must not live as flesh and lust doth desire,
But heavenly things of heavenly men be loved.
With no kind of temptation he must be moved.
Be it sickness or poverty, or what so ever of God is sent:
The heavenly must take it patiently and be therewith cōtent
Enough is as good as a feast, where contentation doth dwell,
For where he remains is the spirit of God with rest:
The unquiet mind of the covetous doth grutch and swell,
And to live with enough he doth abhor and detest.
The greedy gasping of Covetous doth him so molest.
That to be rich he all his whole mind doth set:
Nothing regarding how the same he doth get.
Pithagoras saith, that a man of Covetous desire,
Cannot be contented nether with abundance:
For the more he hath, the more still he doth require,
Wherefore such persons provoke God to vengeance,
Example of the worldly man, late of remembrance.
Whose wicked life offended the Lord so exceedingly.
That his heavy plagues came upon him suddenly.
God grant his end, example may be,
To all men how their riches they shall use:
Make not that thy God, which should be servant unto thée,
For in so doing thou dost it greatly abuse.
I pray God (I say) that our covetous we may refuse,
And one of vs to loo an other, for that pleases God dest:
So shall we be sure to inherit the good land of rest.
By Gods great goodness I am sent unto thée,
Rest is my name wherein the heavenly shall abide:
Happy are those persons that come unto me,
For I being present all troubles I doo divide.
With joys I am adorned, yea on every side,
Which are prepared for the heavenly from the beginning:
And given unto them for a reward of their godly living.
Thanks be given to thée O Father omnipotent,
Thy mercies Lord, and not my deserts truly:
Hath caused those joys to me to be sent,
Grant me grace therefore to praise thy name duly.
Thy goodness appéereth to me every day newly.
Whilst breath and life prolong my days:
My mouth shall not cease thy holy name to praise:
Enough is as good as a feast, heer let vs stay,
We have troubled our audience, that let vs remember:
Let vs conclude therefore, but first let vs pray,
That it will please God in mercy our good mistress to tender,
Our faith to stablish wherein we be slender.
That at the last day when the trump shall blow:
For to be heavenly men the Lord may vs al know
First let vs call to God for Iesu Christ's sake,
Long to preserve Elizabeth our most noble Quéen
Good Lord grant her highness the heavenly path to take,
And that all bye ways, of her highness may be seen.
Increase her wealth, prolong her health, preserve her life:
That long she may rule this realm, without debate or strife.

