ON every side, whereas I glance my roving eye,
Silence in all ears bent I plainly do espy:
But if your eager looks doo lunge such toys to see,
As heretofore in commycall wi•e, were wont abroad to bee:
Your lust is lost, and all the pleasures that you sought,
Is frustrate quite of toying Plays. A soden change is wrought▪
For lo, our Authors Muse, that masked in delight,
Hath forced his Pen against his kind, no more such sports to write.
Muse he that lust, (right worshipful) for chance hath made this change▪
For that to some he seemed too much, in young desires to range:
In which, right glad to please: saying that he did offend,
Of all he humbly pardon tra•es: his Pen that shall amend:
And yet (worwipfull Audience,) thus much I dare aduouche.
In Commodities, the greatest Skill is this, rightly to touche.
All things to the quick: and eke to frame eche person so,
That by his common talk, you may his nature rightly know▪
A Roister ought not preach, that were to strange to hear,
But as from virtue he doth swerve, so ought his words appear:
The old man is sober, the young man rash, the Lover triumphing in joys▪
The Matron grave▪ the Harlot wilde and full of wanton toys.
Which all in one course they no wise doo agree:
So correspondent to their kind their speeches ought to bee.
Which speeches well pronoun•e, with action lively framed,
If this offend the lookers on, let H•race then be blamed,
Which hath our A•thor taught at S•hole, from whom he doth not swerve,
In all such kind of exercise decorum to observe,
Thus much for his defence (he saith) as Poets •arst have donne,
Which heretofore in Commodes the self same rase did ron:
But now for to be brief, the matter to express,
Which here wee shall present: is this Demon and Pithias▪
A rare ensample of Friendship true, it is no Legend lie,
But a thing once donne in deed as Histories doo descry,
Which done of your• in lunge time past, yet present shall be here,
Even as it were in doing now, so lively it shall appear:
Lo h•re in Siracusae thauncient Town, which onceth: Romaines w•nne,
Here Dionisius Palace, within whose Cau••e this thing most strange was donne▪
Which matter mixed with mirth and care, a just name to apply,
As seems most fit wee have it termed, a Tragical Commedie,
Wherein talking of Courtly toys, wee doo protest this flat,
Wee talk of Dionisius Court, wee mean no Court but that,
And that wee doo so mean, who wisely calls to mind,
The time, the place, the Authors here most plainly shall it find,
Lo this I speak for our defence, lest of others wee should be shent:
But worthy Audience, wee you pray, take things as they be meant,
Whose upright Judgment wee doo crave, with heedful ear and Eye▪
To here the cause, and see theffect of this new Tragical Commedie.
TOO strange (perhaps) it séemes to some,
That I Aristippus, a Courtier am become:
A Philosopher of late, not of the meanist name,
But now to the Courtly behaviour my life I frame,
Muse he that list, to you of good skill,
I say that I am a Philosopher styll:
Lovers of Wisdom, are termed Philosophy,
Then who is a Philosopher so rightly as I?
For in loving of wisdom, proof doth this try,
That Frustra sapit, queen non sapit sibi:
I am wise for my self, then tell me of troth,
Is not that great Wisdom as the world goth?
Some Philosophers in the stréete go ragged and torn,
And féedes on vile Roots, whom Boys laugh to scorn:
But I in fine Silks haunt Dionysius Palace,
Wherein with dainty fare my self I do solace:
I can talk of Philosophy as well as the best,
But the strait kind of life I leave to the rest:
And I profess now the Courtly Philosophy,
To crouch, to speak fair, my self I apply,
To féede the Kings humour with pleasant devises,
For which I am called Regius Canis:
But wot ye who named me first the Kings Dog?
It was the Roage Diogenes that vile grunting Hog:
Let him roll in his Tubbe to win a vain praise,
In the Court pleasantly I will spend all my days:
Wherein what to doo, I am not to learn,
What will serve mine own turn I can quickly discern:
All my time at School I have not spent vainly,
I can help one, is not that a good point of Philosophy?
¶I beshrew your fine ears, since you came from School,,
In the Court you have made many a wiseman a fool:
And though you paint out your feigned Philosophy,
So God help me, it is but a plain kind of flattery:
Which you use so finely in so pleasant a sort,
That none but Aristppus, now makes the King sport,
Ere you came hither, poor I was sombody,
The King delighted in me, now I am but a noddy.
¶In faith Carisophus, you know your self best,
But I will not call you noddy, but only in jest,
And thus I assure you, though I came from school,
To serve in this Court, I came not yet to be the Kings fool,
Or to fill his ears with servile squirilitie,
That office is yours, you know it right perfectly,
Of Parasites and Scicophants you are a grave bencher,
The King féedes you often from his own trencher,
I envy not your state, nor yet your great favour,
Then grudge not at all, if in my behaviour:
I make the King merry, with pleasant vrbanitie,
Whom I never abused to any mans injury.
¶ Be cock sir, yet in the Court you doo best thrive,
For you get more in on day then I doo in five.
¶ Why man in the Court, doo you not sée,
Rewards given for virtue, to every degrée?
To reward the unworthy that world is done,
The Court is changed, a good thread hath bin spoon
Of Dogs woll heretofore, and why? be cause it was liked,
And not for that it was best trimmed and picked:
But now men's ears are finer, such gross toys are not set by,
Therefore to a trimmer kind of mirth my self I apply,
Wherein though I please, it comes not of my desert,
But of the Kings favour.
¶ It may so be, yet in your prosperity,
Despise not an old courtier, Carisophus is he,
Which hath lunge time fed Dionisius humour:
Diligently to please, styll at hand, there was never rumour,
•pread in this town of any small thing, but I
Brought it to the King in post by and by,
•et now I crave your friendship, which if I may attain,
•oct sure and unfeigned friendship I promise you again:
•o we two linked in friendship brother and brother,
•ull well in the Court may help one another.
¶ Bear Lady Carisophus, though you know not Philosophy,
•et surely you are a better Courtier then I,
••d yet I not so evil a courtier that will séeme to despise,
•uch an old courtier as you so expert and so wise,
•ut where as you crave mine &amp; offer your friendship so willingly,
•ith hart I give you thanks for this your great courtesy:
Assuring of friendship both with tooth and nail,
Whiles life lasts never to fail.
¶ A thousand thanks I give you, oh friend Aristippus
Oh friend Carisophus.
How joyful am I sith I have to friend Aristippus now?
¶ None so glad of Carisophus friendship as I, I make God a vow,
I speak as I think, believe me.
¶ Sith we are now so friendly joined, it séemeth to mée,
That one of vs help eche other in every degrée,
Prefer you my cause when you are in presence,
To further your matters to the King let me alone in your absence,
¶ Friend Carisophus, this shall be done as you would wish,
But I pray you tell mée, thus much by the way,
Whither now from this place will you take your journey?
¶I will not dissemble, that were against Friendship,
I go into the City some knaves to nip:
For talk with their goods, to increase the kings Treasure,
In such kind of service, I set my chéefe pleasure,
Farewell friend Aristippus now for a time,
¶ A dew friend Carisophus: In good faith now,
Of force I must laugh at this solemn vow,
Is Aristippus linked in Friendship with Carisophus?
Quid cum tanto Asino, talis Philosophus?
They say, Morum similitudo consultat amicitias.
Then, how can this Friendship between vs two come to pass?
We are as like in conditions, as Jack Fletcher and his Bowlt,
I brought up in learning, but he is a very dolt
As touching good Letters: but otherwise such a crafty knave,
If you séeke a whole Region, his like you can not have:
A Villain for his life, a Varlet died in Grain,
You lose Money by him if you sell him for one knave, for he serves for twain:
A flattering Parasite, a Sicophant also,
A come accuser of men: to the good, an open Foe,
Of half a word, he can make a Legend of lies,
Which he will aduouch with such tragical cries,
As though all were true that comes out of his mouth,
Where in dede to be hanged by and by,
He cannot tell one tale but twice he must lie,
He spares no mans life to get the kings favour,
In which kind of seruis he hath got such a savour,
That he will never leave, me think then that I,
Have done very wisely to join in friendship with him, lest perhaps I
Coming in his way might be nipped, for such knaves in presence,
We sée oft times put honest men to silence:
Yet I have played with his beard in knitting this knot,
I promised friendship, but you love few words: I spake it, but I meant it not,
Who marks this friendship between vs two,
Shall judge of the worldly friendship without any more a doo,
It may be a right Patron thereof, but true friendship in déede,
Of nought but of virtue, doth truly proséede,
But why doo I now enter into Philosophy,
Which doo profess the fine kind of courtesy?
I will hence to the Court with all haste I may,
I think the king be stirring, it is now bright day,
To waite at a pinch still in sight I mean,
For wot ye what? a new Broom swéepes clean,
As to hie honour I mind not to clime,
So I mean in the court to lose no time:
Wherein happy man be his dole, I trust that I,
Shall not spéede worst, and that very quickly
ONEPTVNE, immortal be thy praise,
For that so safe from Gréece we have past the seas,
To this noble city SIRACVSAE, where we
The ancient reign of the Romaines may see,
Whose force, Gréece also here to fore hath known,
Whose virtue, the shrill trump of fame so far hath blown.
My Demon, of right high praise we ought to give,
To Neptune and all the Gods, that we safely did arrive,
The Seas I think with contrary winds, never raged so,
I am even yet so Seasick, that I faint as I go:
Therefore let vs get some lodging quickly:
But where is Stephano?
¶Not far hence: a Pockes take these Mariner knaves,
Not one would help mée to carry this stuff, such drunken 〈◊〉
I think be accursed of the Gods own mouths.
¶Stephano, leave thy raging, and let vs enter SIRACVSAE
We will provide lodging, and thou shalt be eased of thy burden by 〈◊〉
¶Good master make haste, for I tell you plain,
This heavy burden puts poor Stephano to much payne.
¶Come on thy ways, thou shalt be eased, and that anon.
It is a true saying that oft hath bin spoken,
The pitcher goes so lunge to the water, that he comes home broke•
My own proof this hath taught me, for truly sith I,
In the City have used to walk very slyly,
Not with one can I méete, that will in talk join with mée,
And to créepe into men's bosoms some talk for to snatch,
By which into one trip or other, I might trimly them catch
And so accuse them: Now not with one can I méete,
That will join in talk with mée, I am shunt like a Devil in ye stréet•▪
My credit is cracked where I am known, but yet I hear say,
Certain straingers are arrived, they were a good pray,
If happily I might méete with them, I fear not I,
But in talk I should trip them, and that very finely,
Which thing, I assure you, I doo for mine own gain,
Or else I would not plodde thus up and down, I fell you plain:
Well, I will for a w•yle to the Court to sée
What Aristippus doth, I would be loath in fauer he should overrun mée,
He is a subtle child, he flattreth so finely, that I fear mée,
He will like all the fat from my lips, and so outwery mée:
Therefore I will not be lunge absent, but at hand,
That al his fine drifts I may understand.
I wonder what my Master Aristippus means now a days,
That he leaves Philosophy, and séekes to please
King Dionisius, with such merry toys,
In Dionisius Court now he only joys,
As trim a Courtier as the best,
Ready to answer, quick in taunts, pleasant to jest,
• lusty companion to devise with fine Dames,
Whose humour to féede, his wily wit he frames.
¶ Be cock as you say, your Moister is a Minion,
• foul coil he kéepes in this Court Aristippus alone
•ow rules the coast with his pleasant devises,
That I fear he will put out of conceit my Moister Carisophus.
¶Fear not that Jack, for like brother and brother
They are knit in true Friendship the one with the other,
They are fellows you know, and honest men both,
Therefore the one to hinder the other, they will be loathe.
¶Yea, but I have heard say, there is falshod in fellowship,
•n the Court sometimes, one gives another finely the slip:
Which when it is spied, it is laughed out with a scoff,
•nd with sporting and playing, quietly shaken of:
•n which kind of toying, thy master hath such a grace,
That he will never blush, he hath a wooden face:
But Will, my moister hath Béees in his head,
•f he find me hear prating, I am but dead:
•e is styll •rotting in the City, there is somewhat in the wind:
His looks betrays his inward troubled mind:
Therefore I will be packing, to the Court• by and by
If he be once angry, Jack shall cry wo the pie.
¶ Bier Lady, if I tarry lunge here, of the same sauce shall I taste,
For my master sent me on an errand, and bad mée make haste,
Therefore we will depart together.
¶Oft times I have heard, before I came hither,
That no man can serve two masters together:
A sentence so true, as most men doo take it,
At any time false, that no man can make it:
And yet by their leave, that first have it spoken,
How that may prove false, even here I will open:
For I Stephano, lo, so named by my father,
At this time serve two masters together:
And love them a like, the one and the other,
I duly obey, I can doo no other,
A bondsman I am so nature hath wrought me,
One Demon of Gréece, a gentleman bought me:
To him I stand bond, yet serve I another,
Whom Demon my Master loves, as his own brother:
A Gentleman too, and Pithias he is named,
Fraught with Virtue, whom vice never defamed:
These two, since at School they fell acquainted,
In mutual friendship, at no time have fainted:
But loved so kindly, and friendly eche other,
As though they were Brothers by Father and Mother:
Pi•hagoras learning, these two have embraced,
Which both are in virtue so narrowly laced:
That all their whole doings do fall to this issue,
To have no respect, but only to virtue:
All one in effect: all one in their going,
All one in their study, all one in their doing:
These Gentlemen both, being of one condition,
Both alike of my service have all the fruition:
Pithias is joyful, if Demon be pleased:
If Pithias be served, then Demon is eased:
Serve one, serve both: so near, who would win them?
I think they have but one hart between them:
In travelling Countries, we thrée have contrived,
Full many a year: and this day arrived
At SIRACVSAE in Sicillia that ancient Town,
Where my Masters are lodged: and I up and down,
Go séekyng to learn what News here are walking,
To hark of what things the people are talking.
I like not this Soil: for as I go plodding,
I mark there two, there thrée, their heads always nodding,
In close secret wise, styll whispering together:
If I ask any question, no man doth answer:
But shaking their heads, they go their ways speaking,
I mark how with tears, their wet eyes are leaking:
Some strangeness there is, that bréedeth this musing.
Well: I will to my Masters, and tell of their using,
That they may learn, and walk wisely together,
I fear, we shall curse the time we came hither.
¶Will, did thou hear the Ladies so talk of mée,
What ails them? from their nippes shall I never be frée?
¶Good faith sir, all the Ladies in the Court, do plainl• report,
That without mention of them, you can make no sport:
They are your Plain songe to singe Descant upon,
If they wear not, your mirth were gone,
Therefore master, jest no more with women in any wise,
If you doo, by cock your are like to know the price.
Bier lady Will, this is good counsel, plainly to jest
Of women, proof hath taught mée it is not best,
I will change my copy, how be it, I care not a quench,
I know the galde horse will soonest winche:
But learn thou secretly what privily they talk
Of me in the Court, among them slyly walk,
And bring me true news thereof.
I will sir, moister thereof have no doubt, for I
Where they talk of you, will inform you perfectly.
Doo so my boy: if thou bring it finely to pass,
For thy good service, thou shalt go in thine old coat at Christmas.
¶Enter Demon, Pithias, Stephano.
¶ Stephano, is all this true that thou hast told me.
Sir, for lies, hitherto ye never controlled mée,
Oh that we had never set foot on this land,
Where Dionisius reigns, with so bloody a hand,
Every day he shows some token of cruelty,
With blood he hath filled all the stréetes in the City:
I tremble to hear the peoples murmuring,
I lament, to sée his most cruel dealing:
I think there is no such tyrant under the Sun,
O my dear masters, this morning what hath he done?
What is that? tell vs quickly.
As I this morning past in the stréete,
With a woeful man (going to his death) did I méete,
Many people foldwed, and I of one secretly,
Asked the cause, why he was condemned to die?
Whispered in mine ear, nought hath he done but thus,
In his sleep he dreamed he had killed Dionisius,
Which dream told abroad was brought to the king in post,
By whom condemned for suspicion, his life he hath lost:
Mercy was his name as the people said.
¶My dear friend Demon, I blame not Stephano.
For wishing we had not come hither, séeynge it is so:
That for so small cause, such cruel death doth ensue.
¶My Pithias, where Tyrants reign, such cases are not new,
Which fearing their own state for great c•••ltie,
To sit fast as they think, doo execute 〈◊〉
All such as any light suspicion have tainted.
¶With such quick Kerr•ers, I list not be •••uainted.
¶So are they never in quiet, but in suspicion styll,
When one is made away, they take occasion another to kill:
Ever in fear, having no trusty friend, void of all peoples love,
And in their own conscience, a continual Hell they prove.
¶As things by their contraries are always best proved,
How happy are then merciful Princes of their people beloved?
Having sure friends every where, no fear doth touch them,
They may safely spend the day pleasantly, at night
(Secure dorm•uatin vtranque aurem
Oh my Demon, if choice were offred mée, I would choose to be Pithias
As I am, (Demons friend:) rather then to be king Dionisius.
¶And good cause why: for you are entirely beloved of one,
And as far as I hear, Dionisius is beloved of none.
¶That state is most miserable, thrice happy are wée,
Whom true love hath joined in perfect Amity:
Which amity first sprung, without vaunting be it spoken, that is true
Of likelines of manners, took root by company, &amp; now is conserved by virtue
Which virtue always through worldly things do not frame
Yet doth she arc•iue to her followers immortal fame:
Whereof if men were careful, for Virtues sake only
They would honour friendship, and not for commodity:
But such as for profit in friendship do lincke,
When storms come, they slide away sooner then a man will think:
My Pithias, the sum of my talk falls to this issue,
To prove no friendship is sure, but that which is grounded on virtue.
¶My Demon, of this thing, there néedes no proof to mée,
The Gods forbid, but that Pithias with Demon in al things should agr•e
For why it is said: Amicus alteripse,
But that tree•• friends should be two in body: but one in mind,
As it w•re one transformed into another, which against 〈◊〉
Though it séeme: yet in good faith, when I am alone,
I forget I am Pithisas, me think I am Demon.
¶That could I never 〈◊〉, to forget my self, full well I know,
Wheresoever I go, that I am PAUPER STEPHANO:
But I pray you sir, for all your Philosophy,
See that in this Cour•e you walk very wisely:
You are but newly come hither, being strangers ye know,
Many eyes are bent on you in the stréetes as ye go:
Many spies are abroad, you can not be too circumspect.
Stephano, because thou art careful of mée thy moister, I do thée praise,
Yet think this for a suertie, no state to displease:
By talk or otherwise, my friend and I entende, we will here
As men that come to sée the soil &amp; manners of al men of every degrée,
Pithagoras said, that this world was like a Stage,
Whereon many play their parts: the lookers on the sage
Philosophers are saith he, whose part is to learn
The manners of all Nations, and the good from the bad to discern.
¶Good faith sir, concerning the people they are not gay,
And as far as I sée; they be Mummers, for nought they say,
For the most part what soever you ask them▪
The soil is such, that to live hear I can not like.
Thou speak according to thy learning, but I say,
Omnis solum fortis patria: A wise man may live every where:
Therefore my dear friend Pithias,
Let vs view this Town in every place,
And then consider the Peoples manners also.
¶As you will my Demon, but how say you Stephano?
As it not best ere we go further, to take some repast?
* In faith, I like well this question, ••r: for all your haste,
To eat somewhat I pray you, think it no folly,
It is hie dinner time, I know by my belly.
¶Then let vs to our lodging depart, when dinner is done,
We will view this City as we have begone.
¶ Once again in hope of good wind, I hoise up my sail,
I go into the city to find some pray for mine avail:
I hunger while I may sée these strangers, that lately
Arrived, I were safe if once I might méete them happily,
Let them bark that lust, at this kind of gain,
He is a fool that for his profit will not take payne:
Though it be joined with other men's hurt, I care not at all,
For profit I will accuse any man, hap what shall
But soft sirs, I pray you buysh what are they that comes here,
By their apparel, and countenance some strangers they appear,
I will shroud my self secretly, even here for a while,
To hear all their talk that I may them beguile.
¶ A shorre horse soon curried, my belly waxes thinner,
I am as hungry now as when I went to dinner:
Your philosophical diet, is so fine and small,
That you may eat your dinner &amp; supper at once, &amp; not surfeit at all.
¶ Stephano, much meat bréedes heaviness, thin diet makes thée light
¶ I may be lighter thereby but I shall never run• the faster.
¶ I have had sufficiently discourse of amity,
Which I had at dinner with Pithias and his pleasant company
Hath fully satisfied me, it doth me good to féede mine eyes on him.
¶ Course or discourse, your course is very course for all your talk,
You had but one b•re course, and that was Pike, rise and walk,
And surely for all your talk of Philosophy,
I never heard that a man with words could fill his belly,
Féede your eyes (quote you) the reason from my wisdom swarueth,
I stared on you both, and yet my belly starueth▪
¶ Ah Stephano, small diet makes a fine memory.
¶ I care not for your crafti• Sophistry,
You two are fine, let me be fed like a gross knave styll,
I pray you license me for a while to have my will:
At home to tarry whiles you take view of this city,
To find some odd victuals in a corner, I am very witty.
¶ At your pleasure sir, I will wait on my self this day,
Yet attend upon Pithias, which for a purpose tarries at home,
So doing, you wait upon me also.
¶With wings on my feet I go.
¶ Not in vain the Poet saith Nature furca expēllas, tamen vsque recurrit.
For train up a bonontan never to so good a behaviour,
Yet in some point of servility, he will savour:
As this Stephano, trusty to mée his Master, loving and kind,
Yet touching his belly, a very bondsman &amp; him find:
He is to be borne withal, being so i•st and true,
I assure you, I would not change him for no new:
But mée thinks, this is a pleasant City,
The Seat is good, and yet not strong, and that is great pity.
¶ I am safe, he is mine own.
The Ayre subtle and fine, the people should be witty
That dwell under this Climate in so pure a Region,
A trimmer Plot I have not séene in my peregrination:
Nothing mislyketh mée in this Country,
But that I hear such muttering of cruelty:
Fame reports strange things of Dionisius,
But kings matters passing our reach, pertain not to vs.
¶Dionisius (quoth you) since the world began,
In Cicely never reigned so cruel a man:
A despiteful Tyrant to all men, I marvel I,
That none makes him away, and that suddenly.
¶ My friend, the Gods forbid so cruel a thing:
That any man should lift up his Sword against the king:
Or seek other means by death him to prevent,
Whom to rule on earth, the mighty Gods have sent:
But my friend, leave off this talk of king Dionisius.
¶ Why sir? he can not hear vs.
¶What then? An nescis lunges Regibus esse manus?
It is no safe talking of them that strikes a far off:
But leaving kings matters, I pray you show mée this courtesy:
To describe in few words, the state of this City?
A travailer I am, desirous to know
The state of eche Country, where ever I go:
Not to the hurt of any state, but to get experience thereby:
It is not for nought that the Poet doth cry,
Dic mihi Muse virum, captae post tempore Troyae,
Multorum hominum mores queen vidit &amp; v•bis.
In which verses, as some Writers do scan,
The Poet describes, a perfec•t wise man:
Even so, I being a stranger, addicted to Philosophy,
To sée the state of Countries, my self I apply.
¶Sir, I like this intent, but may I ask your name without scorn
¶My name is Demon, well known in my Country, a Gentlemen•• borne
¶You do wisely to search the state of eche Country,
To bear intelligence thereof whether you lust: He is a spy,
Sir, I pray you, have patience a while, for I have to do here by:
Uiew this weak part of this City as you stand, &amp; I very quickly
Will return to you again, and then will I show,
The state of all this Country, and of the Court also.
¶I thank you for your curtsy, this chances well that I
Met with this Gentleman so happily,
Which as it séemeth, mislikes some thing,
Else he would not talk so boldly of the king,
And that to a stranger, but lo were he comes in haste.
¶This is he fellow Snap, snap him up: away with him.
¶Good fellow thou must go with mée to the Court.
¶To the Court sir, and why?
Well, we will dispute that before the King, away with him quickl•
¶Is this the courtesy you promised mée? and that very lately.
¶Away with him I say.
• Use no violence, I will go with you quietly.
• Ah Sira, •ire lady, Aristippus likes Dionisius Court very well,
•hiche in passing joys and plasures doth excel:
•here he hath Dapsilae caena•, gemalis lists, &amp; euro.
•gentii turgmani zonam.
••ue plied the Harvest, and stroke when the Iron was hot,
•hen I spied my time, I was not squeamish to crave God wot:
•t with some pleasant tyoe, I •rept into the Kings bosom.
〈◊〉 which, Dionisius gave me Aure talentum magnum,
•arge reward, for so simple services,
•hat then? the Kings praise stands chiefly in bountifulness:
•hiche thing, though I told the king very pleasantly,
• can I prove it by good Writers of great Antiquity:
•t that shall not néede at this time, since that I have abundantly▪
••en I lack hereafter, I will use this point of Philosophy:
•t now, where as I have felt the kings liberality,
〈◊〉 princely as it came, I will sponde it as regallie:
〈◊〉 is currant men say, and currant comes of currendo
••en will I make money run, as his nature requires I trow,
〈◊〉 what becomes a Philosopher best,
•t to despise money aboue the rest:
〈◊〉 yet not so despise it, but to have in store
••ough to serve his own turn, and somewhat more,
••th sundry sports and taunts, yester night I delighted the king,
••at with his load laughter, the whole court did ringe:
〈◊〉 I thought he laughed not merrier then I, when I got this money,
〈◊〉 mumbouget for Carisophus I espy▪
•aste to come hither, I must handle the knave finely:
Carisophus, my dearest friend, my trusty companion,
••at news with you? where have you been so lunge?
• My best beloved friend Aristippus, I am come at last,
•iue not spent all my time in wast,
••e got a pray, and that a good one I tree•w.
• What pray is that? fine would I know.
〈◊〉 a crafty spy I have caught, I dare say,
As never was in Cicely, before this day,
Such a one as viewed every weak place in the City,
Survived the Haven, and each bulwark, in talk very witty:
And yet by some words▪ him self he did bewray.
¶ I think so in good faith, as you did handle him.
¶ I handled him clarkly, I joined in talk with him courteously,
But when wée were entered, I let him speak his will, and I
Sucked out thus much of his words, that I made him say plainly,
He was come hither to know the state of the City.
And not only this, but that he would understand,
The state of Dionisius Court and of the whole land.
Which words when I heard, I desired him to staye,
Till I had done a little business of the way,
Promising him to return again quickly: And so did convey
My self to ye Court for Snap ye Tipstaffe, which came &amp; vpsnatched 〈◊〉
Brought him to the Court and in the porters lodge dispatched him:
After I ran to Dionisius as fast as I could,
And betrayed this matter to him which I have you told:
Which thing when he heard, being very merry before,
He suddenly fell in a dump, and foaming like a Bore:
At last he swore in a great rage that he should die,
By the sword or the whéele, and that very shortly,
I am too shamefaced for my travel and toil,
I crave nothing of Dionisius but only his spoil:
Little hath he about him, but a few motheaten crowns of gold
Cha pouched them up all ready, they are sure in hold:
And now I go in to the City to say s••th▪
To sée what he hath at his lodging, to make up my mouth.
My Carisophus, you have don good serve•e, but what is the spiesna•
¶ He is called Demon, borne in Créece, from whence lately he cam
¶By my troth, I will go sée him▪ and speak with him to if I may
¶Doo so I pray you, but yet by the way:
As occasion serves, commend my service to the King.
Dictum sapienti satest: friend Carisophus, shall I forget that thing,
No, I warrant you, though I say litie to your face,
• will lay one month for you to Dionisius when I am in place:
〈◊〉 I speak one word for such a knave, hang mée.
•ur fine Philosopher▪ out timme learned elf,
• gone to see as false a Spy as himself:
•amon sma•ters as well as he of crafty Philosophy,
•nd can turn Cat in the pan very prettily:
•ut Carisophus hath given him such a mighty check,
•s I think in the end will break his neck:
•hat care I for that, why would he then pry,
••d learn the secret estate of our country and city?
〈◊〉 is but a stranger, by his fall let others be wise,
••are not who fall, so that I may rise:
〈◊〉 for fine Aristippus, I will keep in with him,
〈◊〉 is a shrewd fool to deal withal, he can swim:
••d yet by my troth, to speak my conscience plainly,
• will use his friendship to mine own commodity:
•hile Dionisius favours him, Aristippus shall be mine,
•ut if the king once trowne on him, then good night Tomaline:
〈◊〉 shall be as strange, as though I never saw him before,
•ut I tarry too lunge, I will prate no more:
••cke, come away.
¶ At hand sir.
¶ At Demons lodging if that you sée,
•y stir to arise, be styll at hand by mée,
•ather then▪ I will lose the spoil, I will blade it out.
¶What strange News are these, ah my Stephano?
• my Demon in Prison, as the v•ice doth go?
¶It is true, oh cruel hap, he is taken for a Spy,
•nd as they say, by Dionisius own mouth condemned to die.
¶ To die? alas to: what cause•?
¶ A Sicophant fall•ely accused him: other cause there is none,
That oh Iupiter, of all wrongs the Revenger,
•eest thou this unjustice, and wilt thou stay any longer
From heaven to send down, thy hot consuming fire?
To destroy the workers of wrong, which provoke thy just ire▪
Alas moister Pithias, what shall we do?
Being in a strange country, void of friends &amp; acquaintance too
Ah poor Stephano, hast thou lived to see this day?
To sée thy true Master unjustly made away?
¶Stephano, séeyng the matter is come to this extremity,
Let vs make Virtue our friend, of me are necessity:
Run thou to the Court and understand secretly,
As much as thou can of Demons cause, and I
Will make some means to entreat Aristippus:
He can do much as I hear with king Dionisius.
¶I am gone sir: ah, I would to God, my travail and payne
Might restore my Master to his liberty again.
¶ Ah woeful Pithias, sith now I am alone,
What way shall I first begin to make my moan?
What words shall I find apt for my complaint,
Demon my friend, my joy, my life is in peril, of force I must now fain
But oh Music, as in joyful tunes, thy merry notes I did borrow,
So now lend mée thy yernfull tunes, to utter my sorrow.
AWake ye woeful Wights,
That lunge have wept in wo:
Resign to me your plaints and tears,
my haplesse hap to shoe:
My wo no tongue can tell,
no Pen can well descry:
O, what a death is this to hear,
DEMON my friend must die▪
¶The loss of worldly wealth,
man wisdom may restore,
And Physic hath provided too,
a Salve for every sore:
But my true Friend once lost,
no Art can well supply:
Then, what a death is this to hear?
DEMON my friend must die.
¶My mouth refuse the food▪
that should my limbs sustain:
Let sorrow sink in to my breast,
and ransack every vain:
You Furies all at once.
on me your torments try:
Why should I live, since that I hear?
Demon my friend should die?
¶Gripe me you greedy griefs,
and present pangs of death▪
You Sisters three, with cruel hands,
with speed now stop my breath:
Shrine me in clay alive,
some good man stop mine eye:
Oh death com now, seeing I hear,
Demon my friend must die.
In deign I call for Death, which hears not my complaint,
But what wisdom is this, in such extremity to faint?
Multum iuua in re mala annimas bonus.
I will to the Court my self to make friends, and that presently,
I will never forsake my friend in time of misery:
But do I see Stephano amazed hither to run?
¶ O Pithias, Pithias, we are all undone,
Mine own ears have sucked in mine own sorrow:
I heard Dionisius swear, that Demon should die to morrow.
¶How came thou so near the presence of the king,
That thou might hear Dionisius speak this thing.
¶By friendship I gate into the Court, where in great Audience,
I heard Dionisius with his own mouth give this cruel sentence
By these express words: that Demon the Gréeke that crafty spy,
Without farther Judgment, to morrow should die:
Believe mée Pithias, with these ears I heard it my self▪
¶Then how near is my death also, ah woe is mée.
Ah my Demon, another my self: shall I forgo thée?
¶Sir, there is no time of lamenting now, it behooves vs,
To make means to them which can did much with Dionisius:
That he be not made away ere his cause be fully heard, for we sée
By evil report, things be made to Princes far worse then they bée,
But lo, yonder cōmeth Aristippus, in great favour with king Dionisius
Entreat him to speak a good word to the king for vs:
And in the mean season, I will to your lodging, to sée all things safe there.
¶To that I agrée but let vs slip afide his talk to hear.
¶Here is a sudden change in déede, a strange Metamorphosis.
This Court is clean altered, who would have thought this?
Dionisius of late so pleasant and merry,
Is quite changed now into such melancholy:
That nothing can please him, he walked up and down,
Fretting and chafing, on every man he doth frown:
In so much that when I in pleasant words began to play,
So sternly he frowned on mée, and knit me up so short,
I perceive it is no safe playing with Lyons, but when it please them,
If you claw where it itch not, you shall disease them:
And so perhaps get a clap, mine own proof taught mée this,
That it is very good to be merry and wise:
The only cause of this hurly burly, is Carisophus that wicked man,
Which lately took Demon for a Spy, a poor Gentleman:
And hath incencest the king against him so despightfully,
That Dionisius hath judged him to morrow to die:
I have talked with Demon, whom though in words I found very witty
Yet was he more curious then wise in viewing this City:
But truly for ought I can learn, there is no cause why
So suddenly and cruelly, he should be condemned to die:
How so ever it be, this is the short and lunge,
I dare not gainsay the king, be it right or wrong:
I am sorry, and that is all I may or can doo in this case,
Nought avails persuasion, where froward opinion takes place.
¶Sir, if humble suits you would not despise,
Then bow on mée your pitiful eyes:
My name is Pithias, in Gréece well known,
A perfect friend to that wo••ll Demon,
Which now a poor captive in this Court doth lie,
By the kings own mouth as I here, condemned to die:
For whom I crave your masterships goodness,
To stand his friend in this his great distress:
Nought hath he done worthy of Death, but very fondly,
Being a stranger, he viewed this City▪
For no evil practises, but to féede his eyes,
But seeing Dionisius is informed otherwise,
My suit is to you, when you sée time and place,
To assuage the kings anger, and to purchase his grace,
In which doing, you shall not doo good to one only,
But you shall further too, and that fully.
My friend, in this case I can doo you no pleasure.
Sir, you serve in the Court as Fame doth tell.
I am of the Court in déede, but none of the Counsel.
As I hear, none is in greater favour with the King then you at this day,
The more in favour, the less I dare say.
It is a Courtiers praise to help straingers in misery.
To help an other and hurt my self, it is an evil point of courts•e.
You shall not hurt your self to speak for the innocent.
He is not innocent, whom the king judges nocent.
Why sir? doo you think this matter paste all remedy?
So fare past that Dionisius hath sworn Demon to morrow shall di•
This word my trembling heart cutteh in two,
Ah sir, in this woeful case, what wist I best to doo.
¶ Best to content your self, when there is no remedy,
He is well relived that for knows his misery,
Yet if any comfort be, it rests in Eubulus,
The chiefest counsellour about king Dionisius:
Which pitieth Demons case in this great extremity,
Persuading the king from all kind of cruelty.
¶ The mighty Gods preserve you for this word of comfort,
Taking my leave of your goodness, I will now resort,
To Eubulus that good Counsellor:
But hark, me think I hear a Trumpet blow.
¶The king is at hand, stand close in the press, beware: if he know
You are friend to Demon, •e will take you for a spy also:
Farewell I dare not be séene with you.
¶Gronoo, doo my cōmaundement, strike off Demons Icons by &amp; by,
Then bring him forth, I my self will sée him executed presently.
¶O mighty King, your commandment will I doo spéedely.
¶Eubulus: thou hast talked in vain, for sure he shall die.
Shall I suffer my life to stand in peril of every Spy?
¶That he conspired against your person, his Accuser can not say,
He only viewed your City▪ and will you for that make him away.
What he would have done, the guess is great, he minded mée to hurt
That came so flily to search out the secret estate of my Court:
Shall I styll live in fear? no, no: I will cut off such Imps betime▪
Least that to my further danger, too hie they clime.
¶Yet have the mighty Gods, immortal Fame assigned▪
To all worldly Princes, which in mercy be inclined.
Let Fame talk what she list, so I may live in safety.
¶ The only mean to that, is to use mercy.
¶A mild Prince the people despises.
¶ A cruel king the people hates.
¶Let them hate me, so they fear mée.
That is not the way to live in safety.
¶My sword and power shall purchase my quietness.
¶ That is sooner procured by mercy and gentilnesse.
¶ Dionisius ought to be feared.
¶ Better for him to be well-beloved.
¶ Fortune makes all things subject to my power.
¶ Believe her not she is a light Goddess, she can laugh &amp; lower:
¶ A kings praise stands in the revenging of his enemy
¶ A greater praise to win him by clemency.
¶ To suffer the wicked live, it is no mercy.
¶ To kill the innocent, it is great cruelty,
¶ Is Demon innocent, which so craftily vnderminded Carisophus,
• understand what he could of king Dionisius:
•hich survived the Haven and eche Bulwarcke in the City,
•here battery might be laid, what way best to approach, shall I
•ffer such a one to live, that works me such despite?
〈◊〉, he shall die, then I am safe, a dead dog can not bite.
¶ But yet, O mighty, my duty binds me,
〈◊〉 give such counsel as with your honour may best agrée,
•e strongest pillars of Princely dignity,
•nde this justice, with mercy and prudent liberality,
•e one judges all things by upright equity,
•e other rewards the worthy, flying eche extremity:
〈◊〉 to spare those, which offend maliciously,
〈◊〉 may be called no justice, but extreme injury:
〈◊〉 upon suspicion, of each things not well proved,
〈◊〉 put to death presently, whom envious flattery accused,
〈◊〉 séemeth of tyranny, and upon what fickle ground al tyrants doo stand
〈◊〉 and Lacedemon, can teach you if it be rightly scande:
〈◊〉 not only these Citizens, but who curiously séekes,
〈◊〉 whole Histories of all the world, not only of Romaines &amp; Gréekes
Shall well perceive of all Tyrants the ruinous fall,
Their state uncertain, beloved of none, but hated of all:
Of merciful Princes to set out the passing felicity
I néede not: enough of that, even these days do testify:
They live devoid of fear, their sleeps are found, they dréed no en••
They are feared and loved, and why? they rule with Justice &amp; merc•
Extending Justice to such, as wickedly from Justice have swarued,
Mercy unto those, where opinion, simpleness have mercy deserved:
Of liberty nought I say; but only this thing,
Liberty vpholdeth the state of a king:
Whose large bountifulness ought to fall to this issue,
To reward none, but such as deserve it for virtue:
Which merciful Justice, if you would follow, &amp; provident liberality•
Neither the Caterpillars of all Courts, Et fruges consumer nati.
Parasites with wealth puffed up, should not look so hie,
Nor yet for this simple fact, poor Demon should die.
¶With payne mine ears have heard this vain talk of mercy,
I tell thée, fear and terror, defended kings only:
Till he be gone whom I suspect, how shall I live quietly?
Whose memory with chilling horror, fills my breast day &amp; night violentl•
My dreadful dreams of him, bereaves my rest: On bed I lie
Shaking and trembling, as one ready to yield his throat to Demon sword▪
This quaking dread, nothing but Demons blood can stay,
Better he die, then I to be tormented with fear always:
He shall die, though Eubulus consent not thereto,
It is lawful for kings as they list all things to doo.
¶Oh my Demon.
¶Oh my Pithias, saying Death must part vs, farewell for ever.
¶Oh Demon, oh my swéete friend.
¶Away from the Prisoner, what a press have we here.
As you commanded, O mighty King, wée have brought Demo•
¶ Then go to, make ready I will not stir out of this place,
Till I sée his head stricken off before my face.
¶It shall be done sir: Because your eyes have made such a doo,
〈◊〉 will knock down this your Lantern, &amp; shut up your shop window too.
¶ O mighty king, where as no truth, my innocent life can save,
But that so gréedily you thrust, my guiltless blood to have:
•lbeit, (even for thought) for ought against your person:
•et now I plead not for life, no will I crave your pardon:
But saying in Gréece my Country, where well I am known,
〈◊〉 have worldly things, fit for mine Alliance when I am gone,
〈◊〉 dispose them or I die, if I might obtain leisure,
〈◊〉 would account it (O king) for a passing great pleasure:
•ot to prolong my life thereby, for which I reken not this,
•ut to set my things in a stay: and surely I will not miss,
•pone the faith which all gentylmen ought to embrace,
•o return again at your time to appoynte, to yield my body here in this place:
•rant me (O King (such time to dispatch this injury,
•nd I will not fail, when you appointed, even here my life to pay.
¶ A pleasant request, as though I could trust him absent,
• ho• in no wise I can not trust being present:
•nd yet though I swear the contrary, doo that I require,
•eve me a pledge for thy return, and have thine own desire:
〈◊〉 is as ne'er now as he was before.
¶There is no surer nor greater pledge, then the faith of a Gentleman
¶It was wont to be, but otherwise now the world doth stand,
•herfore doo as I say, else presently yéeld thy neck to the sword,
I might with mine honour I would recall my word.
¶Stand to your word, O King, for Kings ought nothing say,
〈◊〉 that they would perform, in perfect deeds always:
〈◊〉 you did require, when Demon his •ute did méene,
〈◊〉 which, with heart and stretched hands, most humble thanks I give,
〈◊〉 that you may not say, but Demon hath a friend,
〈◊〉 loves him better then his own life, and will doo to his end:
•ache me. Oh mighty King, my life I pawn for his,
•rike off my head, if Demon hap at his day to miss.
¶What art thou, that charge me with my word so boldly here?
¶I am Pithias, a Greek borne, which hold Demon my friend full dear
To dere perhaps, to hazard thy life for him, what fondness moves thée
No fondness at all, but perfect amity.
A mad kind of amity: advise thy self well, if Demon fail at his day
Which shall be justly appin•e•, wilt thou die for him, to me his life •o pay.
Most willingly, O mighty king: if Demon fail, let Pithias die.
Thou séemest to trust his words, that pawnest thy life so frankly.
What Demon saith, Pithias believes assuredly.
Take héede for life, worldly men break promise in many things.
Though worldly men doo so, it never hippos amongst friends.
What call thou friends, are they not men? is not this true?
Men they be, but such men as love one an other only for virtue.
For what virtue, dost thou love this spy, this Demon.
For that virtue, which yet to you is unknown.
Eubulus, what shall I doo? I would dispatch this Demon fain,
But this foolish fellow so charge me, that I may not call back my word again.
The reverent maistie of a King, stands chiefly in kéeping his promise
What you have, said, this whole Court bears witness:
Save your honour what so ever you doo.
For saving mine honour, I must forbear my will, go to,
Pithias, seeing thou took me at my word, take Demon to thée:
For two mounthes he is thine, unbind him, I set him frée,
Which time once expired, if he appear not the next day by noon,
With out further delay, thou shalt lose thy life, and that full soon.
Whether he di• by the way, or lie sick in his bead,
If he return not then, thou shalt either hang or lose thy head.
For this O mighty king, I yield immortal thanks, O joyful day
Groan, take him to thée, bind him, sée him kept in safety.
•f he escape assure thy self, for him thou shalt die,
•ubulus, let vs depart, to talk of this strange thing within,
I follow.
Demon, thou serve the Gods well to day, be thou of comfort,
As for you sir, I think you will be hanged in sport,
You heard what the King said? I must keep you safely,
By cock so I will, you shall rather hang then I:
Come on your way,
My Demon, farewell, the Gods have thée in kepeing.
Oh my Pithias, my Pledge farewell, I part from thée wéeping
But joyful at my day appointed I will return again,
When I will deliver thée from all trouble and pain:
Stephano will I leave behind me to wait upon thée in prison alone,
And I whom fortune hath reserved to this misery, will walk home,
Ah my Pithias, my Pledge, my life, my friend, farewell.
Farewell my Demon.
Loath I am to depart, sith sobs my trembling tongue doth stay▪
Oh Music, sound my doleful plaints when I am gone my way.
I am glad he is gone. I had almost wept to, come Pithias
So God help me, I am sorry for thy foolish case,
Wilt thou venture thy life for a man, so fondly?
It is no venture, my friend is just, for whom I desire to die.
Here is a mad man I tell thée, I have a wife whom I love well,
And if iche would die for her, chould each wear in Hell:
Will thou doo more for a man, then I would for a woman.
Yea, that I will
Then come on your ways, you must to Prison in haste,
〈…〉 repent this folly at last.
That shalt thou never sée: but oh Music as my Demon requested thée
Sound out thy doleful tunes, in this time of calamity.
¶ Wéepe no more Stephano, this is but destiny,
Had not this hoped, yet I know I am borne to die:
Where or in what place, the Gods know alone,
To whose judgment my self I commit, therefore leave of thy moan,
And wait upon Pithias in Prison, till I return again,
In whom my joy, my care and life doth only remain.
Oh my dear Master, let me go with you, for my poor company,
Shall be some small comfort in this time of misery.
Oh Stephano, hast thou ben so lunge with me,
And yet doest not know the force of true amity?
I tel thee once again, my friend and I are but one,
Waite upon Pithias, and think thou art with Demon.
Whereof I may not now discourse, the time passes away,
The sooner I am gone, the shorter shall be my journey:
Therefore farewell Stephano, commend me to my friend Pithias
Whom I trust to deliver in time out of this woeful case.
Farewell my dear Master, since your pleasure is so,
Oh cruel hap, oh poor Stephano:
O cursed Carisophus, that first moved this Tragedy,
But what a noyes is this? Is all well within trow yée:
I fear all be not well within, I will go see:
Come out you Weasel, are you séekinge Eggs in Demons chest,
Come out I say, will thou be packing? by cock you wear best.
How durst thou villain to lay hands on me?
Out sir knave or I will send yée,
Art thou not content to accuse Demon wrongfully,
But wilt thou rebbe him also, and that openly?
The King gave me the spoil, to take mine own wilt thou let me?
Thine own villain: Where is thine authority?
I am authority of my self, doest thou not know?
Bier lady, that is somewhat, but have you no more to show?
What if I have not?
Then for an earnest penny, take this blow.
•hall bombast you, you mocking knave, schil put pro in my purse for this time.
Jack give me my sword and target.
I can not com to you moister, this knave doth me let. Hold moister,
Away Jack napes, tic I will colpheg you by and by,
〈◊〉 slave I will have my penny words of thée, therefore if I die,
•out villain.
O Citizens, help •o defend me.
Nay, they will rather help to hang thée.
Good fellow, let vs reason this matter quietly, beat me no more.
•f this condition I will stay, if thou swear as thou art an honest man
•ou will say nothing to the King of this when I am gone.
I will say nothing, here is my hand, as I am an honest man.
Then say on thy mind: I have taken a wise other on him, have I not trow ye?
•o trust such a false knave upon his honesty,
〈◊〉 he is an honest man (quoth you) he may bewray all to the King,
•o break his oath for this never a whit, but my framon I tell you this one thing▪
〈◊〉 you di•close this▪ I will deuyse such a way,
••at w•ilst thou lives thou shalt remember this day.
You néede not devise for that, for this day is printed in my memory,
warrant you, I shall remember this beating till I die:
•ut seeing of curtsy you have granted that we should talk quietly,
•e thinks, in calling me knave, you doo me much injury.
Why so? I pray thée heartily?
Because I am the Kings man, kéepes the king any knaves▪
He should not, but what he doth it is evident by thée:
And as far as I can learn or understand,
There is none better able to kéepe knaves in all the land.
Oh sir, I am a Courtier, when Courtiers shall hear tell,
How you have used me, they will not take it well.
Nay, all right courtiers will ken me thank, and wot ye why?
Because I handled a counterfeit Courtier in his kind so finely,
What sir: all are not Courtiers that have a counterfeit show,
In a trope of honest men, some knaves may stand ye know:
Such as by stelth créep in, under the colour of honesty,
Which sort under that cloak, doo all kind of villainy:
A right courtier is virtuous, gentile, and full of vrbanitie,
Hurting no man, good to all, devoid of all villainy:
But such as thou act, fountains of squirilitie, &amp; vain delights,
Though you hang by the courts, you are b•t flattering Parasites,
As well deserving the right name of curtsy,
As the coward Knight, the true praise of chivalry:
I could say more, but I will not, for that I am your well willer,
In faith Carisophus, you are no Courtier but a caterpillars,
A Sicophant, a Parasite, a flatterer, and a knave?
Whether I will or no, these names you must have:
How well you decern this, by your déedes it is known,
For that so unjustly thou hast accused poor Demon,
Whose woeful case the Gods help alone.
Sir, are you his servant that you pity his case so?
No bum troth, good man Grumbe, his name is Stephano.
I am called Onaphets, if néedes you will know,
The knave begins to sift me, but I turn my name in &amp; out,
Cretiso cum cretins, to make him a lout.
What mumble you with your self Master Onaphets.
I am reckoning with my self, how I may pay my debts.
You have paid me more then you did owe me.
Nay, upon a farther reckoning, I will pay you more if I know
Either you talk of that is done, or by your Sicophanticall envy,
You prick forth Dionisius the sooner, that Demon may die:
I will so pay thée, that t•y bones shall retell in thy skin,
Remember what I have said, Onaphets is my name.
The sturdy knave is gone, the Devil him take,
He hath made my head, shoulders, arms, sides, and all to ache:
Thou whoreson villain boy, why did thou waite no better?
As he paid mée, so will I not die thy debtor.
Master, why doo you fight with me? I am not your match you sée,
You durst not fight with him yt is gone, &amp; will you wreak your anger on mée
Thou villain, by thee I have lost mine honour,
Betten with a codgell like a Slave, a Uacaboun, or a la••e Lubber,
And not given one blow again, hast thou handled me well?
Moister I handled you not, but who did handle you very handsomely you can tell.
Handsomely thou croak rope.
Yea sir, very handsomely I hold you a groat,
He handled you so handsomely, that he left not one more in your cote.
O I had firck• him trimly thou villain, if thou had given mée my Sword
It is better as it is, Moister believe me at a word:
If he had séene your weapon, he would have ben fiercer,
And so perhaps beat you worse, I speak it with my heart,
•ou were never yet at the dealing of fence blows, bu• you had four away for your part
•t is but your luck, you are man good enough,
But the Wealche Onaphets, was a vengeance knave and rough,
Moister you were best go home and rest in your bed,
Ye thinks your cap wa•eth to little for your head.
What? doth my head swell?
Yea as big as a •odshed, and bleades too.
I am as•amid to show my face with this hew.
No shame at all, men have bin beaten far better then you,
I must go to the Surgeons, what shall I say when I am a dreslyng▪
You may say truly, you met with a knaves blessing.
¶ By mine own experience, I prove true that many men tell,
To live in Court not beloved, better be in Hell:
What crying out? what cursing is there within of Carisophus,
Because he accused Demon to King Dionisius:
Even now, he came whining &amp; crying into the Court for the nonce▪
Showing that one Onaphets had broke his knaves sc•nce:
Which strange name when they heard, every man laughed heartily,
And I by my self scand his name secretly,
For well I knew it was some madheded child
That invented this name, that the logheaded knave might be begilde:
In tossing it often with my self to and fro,
I found out that Onaphets, backward spelled Stephano:
I smiled in my sleue, how to sée by turning his name, he dressed him,
And how for Damō his Masters sake, with a wooden congeal he blessed hi•
None pitied ye knave, no man nor woman, but all laughed him to scorn•
To be thus hated of all better unborn:
Far better Aristippus hath provided I trow,
For in all the Court, I am beloved both of hie and lowe:
I offend none, in so much that women singe this to my great praise▪
Omnis Aristippum docuit colore, &amp; locus &amp; res.
But in all this ioylitie, one thing maseth me,
The strangest thing that ever was harde or known
Is now happened in this Court by that Demon:
Whom Carisophus accused, Demon is now at liberty,
For whose return Pithias his friēd lies in prisō, alas in great ieopard•
To morrow is ye day, which day by noon if Demon return not, earnestly
The king hath sworn that Pithias should die,
Whereof Pithias hath intelligence very secretly,
Wishing that Demon may not return, till he have paid
His life for his friend: hath it ben hear to fore ever said,
That any man for his friend would die so willingly?
O noble friendship, O perfect amity,
Thy force is hear séene, and that very perfectly:
The king him self muses here at, yet is he far out of square,
That he trusts none, to come ne'er him not his own daughters wit he have
•nsercht to enter his chamber, which he hath made harbars his beard to shave:
Not with Knife or •before, for all edge tools he fears,
But with hot burning Nutshales, they senge of his hears.
Was there ever man that lived in such misery?
Well, I will go in with a heavy and •ens•ue hart too,
To think how Pithias this poor gentleman to morrow shall die
¶Will, by my honesty, I will mar your monks face if you so fondly prate
¶ Jack, by my troth, séeing you are without the Court ga•e,
•f you play Jack napes, in mocking my master, and despising my face,
•uen here with a Pantofle, I will you disgrace:
•nd though you have a far better •ace then I,
•et, who is better man of vs two, these sistes shall try,
•nlesse you leave your taunting.
¶ Thou began first, did thou not say even now,
•hat Carisophus my Master was no man but a cow,
〈◊〉 taking so many blows, and gave never a blow again?
¶ I said so in déede, he is but a tame Ruffian,
•hat can swear by his flask &amp; twiche whore &amp; Gods precious lady:
•nd yet be will be beaten with a faggot stick:
•he•e barking when•pes were never good biters,
•e yet great crakers were ever great fighters:
•ut seeing you eg mée so much • will somewhat more resight,
•ay Cari•op•us thy master is a flattering Parisite:
•lening away the sweet from the worthy in all the Court,
•hat tragic•ie hath he moved of late? ye devil take him he doth much hurt.
¶ I pray you what is Aristippus thy master, is not he a Parisite to,
•hat with scoffing and testing in the Court makes so much a doo?
¶ He is no Parisi•e, but a pleasant Gentleman, full of courtesy,
•hy master is a chu•l•th lout the heir of a doung fork, as void of honesty,
〈◊〉 thou art of honour.
¶ Nay if you will needs be prating of my master styll,
〈◊〉 faith, I must cool you my friend Dapper Will.
•ache this at the beginning.
I Praise well your winning, my Pantofle is as ready as yours.
By the Mass I will box you.
By cock I will Fox you
Will, was I with you.
Jack, did I fly?
Alas pretty cockerel, you are to weak.
In faith Dutting Duttell, you will cry creak,
Away you crack ropes, are you fighting at the Court gate?
And I take you hear again, I will swindge you both, what?
I beshrew Snap the Tipstaffe that great knaves hart, y• hither di••com•
Had he not ben, you had cried ere this Victus, vista, victum,
But seeing wée have breathed our selves, if ye list,
Let vs agrée like friends, and shake eche other by the fist.
Content am I, for I am not malicious, but on this condition,
That you talk no more so broad of my master as here you have done,
But who have wée here, is Cobex epi coming yonder.
Will, let vs slip aside and view him well.
What Devil, iche wéene ye Porters are drunk, will they not •uy the gate tooday
Take in Coals for ye Kings own mouth, will no body stir I say?
Each might have lain tway bowers longer in my b•dti,
Cha tarried so lunge here, that my teeth chatter in my head.
Will, after our falling out, wilt thou laugh merrily▪
I mary Jack, I pray thée heartily.
Then follow me, and hem in a word now and then:
What brawling knave is there at the Court gate so early?
It is some brainsick Villain, I durst lay a penny.
It was you sir that cried so load, I trow,
And bid vs take in Coals for the Kings mouth, even now.
It was I indéede.
Why sir? how dare you speak such petie treason?
Doth the King eat Coals at any season?
Here is a gay world, Boys now sets old men to scool•,
I said well enough, what Jack sauce, think chain a fool▪
It Bake house, Buttrie hatch, Ritchin, and Seller;
Doo they not say for the Kings mouth?
What then good man Coliar?
What then? seeing without coals they cannot finely dress ye kings meat,
May I not say, take in coals for ye kings mouth, though coals he do not eat?
Iames Christ, came ever from a Colier an answer so trim?
You are learned, are you not Father Grimm?
Grimm is my name in déed, cham not learned, &amp; yet ye Kings colier
This forty winter cha bin to the King a seruiler,
Though I be not learned, yet cha mother wit enough whole &amp; some
So it séemes, you have so much mother wit, that you lack your fathers wisdom.
Mass, cham well be set: here is is a trim cast of Murleons
What be you my pretty cockerels, that ask me these questions.
Good faith moister Grimm, if such Marlins on your pouch may light
They are so quick of wing yt quickly they can carry it out of your sight
And though we are cockerels now, we shall have spurs one day,
And shall be able perhaps to make you a Capon:
But to tell you troth: we are the Porters m•n, which early &amp; late,
Wait on such Gentlemen as you to open the Caurtegate.
Are ye servants then?
Yea sir, are we not pretty men?
Pretty men ({quod} you) nay, you are strong men, else you could not bear these bri•ches.
Are these great hose? in faith goodman Colier you sée with your nose
By mine honesty, I have but for one lining in one hose, but vij else of Rug▪
That is but a little, yet it makes thée séeme a great Bug.
How say you good man Colier, can you find any fault here?
•ay you should find fault, mary here is trim gear,
•as little knave, doest not sweat, thou goosed with great payne,
These are no hose, but watter bougets, I tell thée plain:
Good for none, but such as have no buttocks.
Did you ever sée two such little Robin ruddockes,
So laden with bréeches? chill say no more, lest I offend,
Who invented these monsters first, did it to a ghostly end:
To have a male, ready to put in other folks stuff,
Wee sée this evident by daily prooffe:
One preached of late not far hence, in no Pulpit, but in Waayne carte,
That spake enough of this, but for my part,
I will say no more, your own necessity,
In the end will force you to find some remedy.
Well, hold this railing knave with a talk when I am gone,
I will fetch him his filling ale for his good sermon.
Go thy way: father Grimm, gaily well you doo say,
It is but youngmens folly that list to play:
And mask a while in the net of their own devise,
When they come to your age, they will be wise.
Bum troth, but few such roisters come to my years at this day,
They be cut off be times, or they have gone half their journey:
I will not tell why, let them guess that can, I mean somewhat thereb•
Father Grimm, because you are stirring so early,
I have brought you a boule of wine to make you merry.
Wine, mary, that is welcome to Colliers, chyl swapped of by &amp; by
Chwas stirring so early that my very soul is dry.
This is stoutly done, will you have it warmed father Grimm.
No, it is warm enough: it is very loustous and trim,
Tic Musselden each wéene, of fellowship let me have an other spurt,
Each can drink as easly now, as if I sate in my shirt.
By cock and you shall have it, but I will begin and that anon•
It bit avow mon companion.
Ihar vow pledge pety Zawne,
Can you speak French? here is a trim colier by this day.
What man? iche learned this when each was a Soldier,
When each was a lusty fellow, and could yarke a whip trimly,
Better then these boy Coliers that come to the Court daily:
When there were not so many captious fellows as now,
That would toruppe men for every trifell. I wot not how:
As there was one Demon, not lunge since, taken for a Spy,
How justly I know not, but he was condemned to die.
This Wine hath warmed him, this comes well to pas,
We shall know all now, for in VINO VERITAS,
Father Grimm, who accused this Demon to King Dionisius?
A vengeance take him, it was a gentleman, one Moister Crowsphus.
Crowsphus, you clip the Kings language, you would have said Carisophus
But I perceive now, either the wind is at the South,
Or else your tongue cleaned to the roof of your mouth.
A murian take thik Wine, it so int••icate my brain,
That to be hanged by and by, I cannot speak plain.
You speak knavishly plain, saying my master you doo mock,
In faith ere you go, I will make you a lobbe cecke:
Father Grimm, what say they of this Demon abroad?
All men are sorry for him, so help me God.
They say a false knave cussed him to the King wrongfully,
And he is gone, and should be here to morrow to die,
Or else his fellow which is in prison, his room shall supply:
I will not be his half for forty shillings, I tell you plain,
I think Demon be to w••e to return again.
Will no man speak for them in this woeful case.
No chill warrant you, one moister Stippus is in place,
Where he may doo good, but he frames him self so,
Whatsoever Dionisius wills to that he will not say no:
Tic a suttell For, he will not tread on thorns for none,
A merry Harecop•e tic and a pleasant companion,
A right courtier, and can provide for one.
Will, how like you this gear▪ your master Aristippus also,
At this Coliers hand hath had a bl•e:
But in faith father Grimm cannot ye Coliers,
Provide for your selves far better then Courtiers.
Yes I trow, black Coliers go in thread bare cotes,
Yet so provide they, that they have the fair white groats:
Each may say in counsel, though all day I moil in dourte,
Chill not change lives with any in Dionisius Court:
For though their apparel be never so fine,
Yet sure their credit is far worse then mine:
And by cock I may say, for all their hie looks,
I know some sticks full déepe in Merchants books:
And déeper will fall in, as fame me tells,
As long as in stéede of Money, they take up Hawk hoods &amp; Belles:
Whereby they fall into a swelling disease, which Coliers doo not know
Tath a mad name, it is called each wéene, Centum pro canto.
Some other in Courts, make others laugh merrily,
When they whale and lament their own estate secretly:
Friendship is dead in Court, Hypocrisy doth reign,
Who is in favour now, to morrow is out again:
The state is so uncertain, that I by my will,
Will never be courtier, but a Colier styll.
It séemeth that Coliers have a very trim life.
Coliers get money styll: Tell me of troth,
Is not that a trim life now as the world goes?
All day, though I toil with mayne and might,
With money in my pouch, I come home merry at night,
And sit down in my chair by my wife fair Alison,
And turn a Crab in the fire, as merry as Pope Iohn.
That Pope was a merry fellow, of whom folk talk so much.
Had to be merry withal, had goulde enough in his hutch:
Can goulde make men merry? they say who can singe so merry a note,
As he that is not able to change a groat?
Who singes in that case singes never in tune I know for my part
That a heavy pouch with goulde makes a light heart:
Of which I have provided for a dear year good store,
And these Banters I trow, shall anon get me more.
By serving the Court with coals you gained all this money.
By the Court only I assure ye.
After what sort I pray thée tell mée?
Nay, there bate me an ace (quote Boulon) I can wear a horn &amp; blow it not
Bier lady the wiser man.
Shall I tell you by what •lite I got all this money
Then each wear a noddy in déede: no, no, I warrant ye,
Yet in few words I tell you this one thing,
He is a very fool that can not gain by the King.
Well said father Grimm, you are a wily Colier &amp; a brave,
I sée now there is no knave to the old knave.
Such knaves have money, when courtiers have none,
But tell me, is it true that a broad is blown?
What is that?
Hath the King made those fair Damsels his daughters,
To be come now fine and trim Barbers.
Yea truly to his own person.
Good fellows believe me, as the case now stands,
I would give one sack of Coals, to be washed at their hands:
If each came so near them, for my wit chould not give three chippes,
If each could not steal one swap at their lips.
Will, this knave is drunk, let vs dress him,
Let vs riffell him so that he have not one penny to bless him,
And steal away his Debenters too.
Content, invent the way, and I am ready.
Faith, and I will make him a noddy:
Father Grimm, if you pray me well, I will wash you &amp; shave you too
E•en after the same fashion as the Kings daughters doo:
In all points as they handle Dionisius, I will dress you trim &amp; fine
Chuld vain learn y•: come on then, i will give thée a whole pint of win•
At Tavern for thy labour, when cha money for my Be•nters hear.
Com mine own Father Grimm, sit down.
Mas to begin withal, hear is a trim chair▪
What man I will use you like a prince: sir boy, fetch me my gear.
Here sir.
Hold up father Grimm.
Me séeme my head doth swim.
My Costly perfumes make that, away with this sir Bay: •e quick▪
Aloyse, aloyse, how how pretty it is, is not here a good face?
A fine Oules eyes, a mouth like an Oven,
Father you have good Butter téeth, full séene,
You wear weaved, else you would have ben a great Calfe▪
Ah trim lips to swéepe a Manger, here is a chin,
As soft as the house of an horse.
Doth the Kings daughters rub so harde?
Hold your head strait man, else all will be mart,
Bier lady, you are of a good complexion,
A right Croydon sanguine, beshrew me,
Hold up father Grimm, Will can you besturre ye?
Me thinks after a marvelous fashion you do• besmoure me.
It is with VNGVENTVM of Daucus Maucus, that is very costly,
I give not this washinge ball to every body:
After you have ben dressed so finely at my hand,
You may kiss any Ladies lips within this land:
A, you are trimly washed, how say you, is not this trim water?
It may be wholesome, but it is vengeance sower.
It scours the better, sir boy, give me my rays•ur,
Here at hand sir.
Gods aims, tic a chopping knife, tic no Raysour.
It is a Raysour and that a very good one,
It came lately from Palarrime, it cost mée .xx. crowns alone
Your eyes dassell after your washing, these spectacles put on?
Now view this Raysour, tell me, is it not a good one?
They be gay Barnikels, yet I sée never the better.
In déede, they be a young sight, and that is the matter,
But I warrant you, this Raysour is very easy.
Go too then, since you begone, doo as please ye.
Hold up father Grimm.
O your Raysour doth hurt my lip.
No, it scrapeth of a pimpell, to ease you of the Pippe,
I have done now, how say you? are you not well?
Cham lighter then each was, the truth to tell.
Will you singe after your shaving?
Mas content, but chill be bold first or I singe.
Nay that shall not néede, you are bold near enough for this time.
Go to then lustily, I will singe in my mans voice,
Chaue a troubling base bus.
You are like to bear the bob, for wée will give it,
Set out your bussyng base, and wée will quiddell upon it.
Too nidden, and too nidden.
Too nidden, and •oodle toadle doo n•dden,
Is not Grimm the Colier most finely shaven.
Why my fellows think iche am a cow, that you make such tooyin
Nay bier lady, you are no cow by your singing,
Yet your wife told me you were an Ox.
Did she so? tic a peslens queen she is full of such mocks▪
But go to, let vs singe out our songe merely.
The Songe at the shaving of the Colier.
¶Such Barbers God send you at all times of néede.
That can dress you finely, and make such quick spéede.
Your face like an Incorne, now shines so gay,
That I with your Nostrils of force must néedes play,
With too nidden, and too nidden.
With too nidden, and todle todle doo nidden,
Is not Grimm the Colier most finely shaven.
With shaving you shine like a pestle of Pork:
Here is the trimmest Hogs flesh from London to Your••▪
It would be trim Baken to hang up a while,
To play with this Hogline, of force I must smile,
With too nidden, and too nidden
With too nidden, and todle &amp;c.
Your shaving doth please me, I am now your debtor.
Your wife now will bus you, because you are sweat•▪
Near would I be poled, as near as cham shaven.
Then out of your Jerkin néedes must you be shaken▪
With too nidden, and too nidden, &amp;c.
It is a trim thing to be washed in the Court.
Their hands are so fine that they never doo hurt.
Me think each am lighter then ever each was.
Our shaueinge in the Court hath brought this to pass.
With too nidden, and too nidden.
With too nidden and todle todle doo nidden.
〈◊〉 not Grimm the Col•er most finely shaven.
THis is trimly done, now chill pitch my coals not far hens,
And then at the Tavern i will bestow whole tway pence.
Farewell cock, before the Colier again doo vs séeke,
••t vs into the Court to part the spoil, share and share like.
Away then.
Out alas, where shall I make my moan?
•y Pouch, my Banters and all is gone,
•her is that villain that did me shave?
•ath robbed me alas of all that I have.
Who cries so at the Court gate.
I, the poor Colier, that was robbed of late.
Who robbed thée?
Two of the Porters men that did shave me.
Why? the Porters men are no Barbers?
A vengeance take them they are quick corners.
What stature wear they of?
As little dapper knaves as they trimly could scoff.
They were Lackeys, as near as I can guess them.
Such Lackeys make me lack, an halter beswenge them,
•am undone they have my Banters too.
Doest thou know them if thou see them?
Yea that I doo?
Then come with me, we will find them out and that quickly.
I follow mast Tipslafe, they be in the Court it is likely.
Then cry no more, come away.
If ever you will show your friendship, now is the time,
Seeing the king is displeased with me, of my part without any crime
It should appear it comes of some euell behaviour,
That you so suddenly are cast out of favour.
Nothing have I done but this in talk I ouerthwarted Eubulus▪
When he lamented Pithias case to King Dionisius,
Which to morrow shall die, but for that false knave Demon:
He hath left his friend in the briers and now is gone.
Wée grew so hot in talk, that Eubulus protested plainly,
Which held his care open to parasiticall fla•tery.
And now in the Kings ear like a bell he rings,
Crying that •latterers have ben the destroyers of kings:
Which talk in Dionisius heart hath made so déepe impression,
That he •rust•s me not as heretofore in no condition:
And some words brake from him as though that hee,
Began to suspect my troth and honesty:
Which you of friendship I know will defend, how so ever the world goes▪
My friend for my honesty, will you not take an other?
To swear for your honesty, I should lose mine own.
Should you so in déede? I would that were known,
Is your void friendship come thus to pass.
I follow the proverb: Amicus Vsque ad auras.
Where can you say, I ever lost mine honesty.
You never lost it, for you never had it, as far as I know.
Say you so friend Aristippus whom I trust so well?
Because you trust me, to you the truth I tell.
Will you not stretch one point? to bring me in favour again▪
I love no stretching, so may I bréede mine own payne.
A friend ought to shone no payne, to stand his friend in stead.
Where true friendship is, it is so in very déede.
Why sir? hath not the chain of true friendship, linked vs two together▪
The chiefest link lacked thereof, it must néedes dissever.
What link is that? fine would I know.
Honesty.
Doth honesty knit the perfect knot in true friendship,
Yea truly, and that knot so knit will never slip.
Belike then there is no friendship but betwéene honest men.
Betwéene the honest only, for Amicitia inter bonus: saith a learned man
•et euell men use friendship in things dishonest, where fancy doth serve
That is no friendship, but a lewd liking, it lastes but a while.
What is the perfectst friendship among men that ever grew?
Where men loved one another, not for profit but for virtue.
Are such friends both a like in joy and also in smart?
They must néedes, for in two bodies they have but one heart.
Friend Aristippus, deceive me not with Sophistry,
〈◊〉 there no perfect friendship, but where is virtue and honesty?
What a Devil then meant Carisophus,
To join in friendship with fine Aristippus?
In whom is as much virtue, truth and honesty,
As there are true feathers in the thrée Craines of the ventrie:
Yet these feathers have the shadow of lively feathers the truth to s•a•
But Carisophus, hath not the shadow of an honest man,
To be plain, because I know thy villainy:
In abusing Dionisius, to many men's injury:
Under the cloak of friendship, I played with his head,
And sought means how thou with thine own fancy might be lead,
My friendship thou sought for thine own commodity,
As worldly men doo by profit measuring amity:
Which I perceiving, to the like my self I framed,
Wherein I know of the wise I shall not be blamed:
If you ask me Qua•e. I answer, Queen prudentis est multu• dis•imul••▪
To speak more plainer, as the proverb doth go,
In faith Carisophus, Cum cretence cretiso:
Yet a perfect friend I show my self to thée in one thing,
I doo not dissemble, now I say I will not speak for thée to the King,
Therefore sink in thy sorrow, I doo not deceive thée,
A false knave I found thée, a false knave I leave thée.
He is gone? is this friendship to leave his friend in the plain fields▪
Well I sée now, I my self have beguiled,
In matching with that false for in amity:
Which hath me used to his own commodity.
Which séeing me in distress, unfeignedly goes his ways,
Lo this is the perfect friendship among men now a days:
Which kind of friendship toward him I used secretly:
And be with me the like, hath requited me craftily.
It is the Gods judgment, I sée it plainly,
For all the world may know, Incide in foe•eam quam fed.
Well I must content my self none other help I know▪
Until a merrier gale of wind may hap to blow:
Who deals with Kings in matters of great weight,
When froward will, doth bear the chefest sue•:
Must yield of force, their néede no subtle ••eight:
No painted speech the matter to convey,
No prayer can move, when kindled is the ire,
The more ye quench, the more increased is the fire.
This thing I prove in Pithias woeful case,
Whose hauuy hap with tears I doo lament:
The day is come when he in Demons place,
Must lose his life the time is fully spent:
Nought can my words now with the King prevail,
Against the wind and striving stream I sail:
For die thou must alas thou sly Gréeke,
Ah Pithias, now come is thy doleful hour:
A perfect friend none such a world to séeke.
Though bitter death shall give thée sauce full sower:
Yet for thy faith enroled shall be thy name,
Among the Gods within the book of fame:
Who knows his case, and will not melt in tears?
His guiltless blood shall trickle down anon.
Alas what hap hast thou poor Pithias now to die,
Wo worth the which man for his death hath given vs cause to cry.
ME think I hear with yellow rented hears,
The Muses frame their notes my state to moan:
Among which sort as one that morned with heart,
In doleful tunes, my self will bear a part.
Who worth the man which for his death. &amp;c.
With yellow rented hears come on you Muses nine,
Fill now my breast with heavy tunes, to me your plaints resign▪
For Pithias I bewail which presently must die,
Wo worth the man which for his death hath given vs cause. &amp;c.
Wo worth the man which for his. &amp;c.
Was ever such a man that would die for his friend,
I think even from the heavens aboue, the Gods did him down sen•
To show true friendshipps power, which forced thée now to die,
Wo worth the man which for thy death, &amp;c.
Who worth the man, &amp;c.
What Tigars whelp was he, that Demon did accuse?
What faith hast thou, which for thy friend, thy death doth not refuse
O heavy hap had thou to play this Tragedy,
Wo worth the man which for thy death, &amp;c.
Wo worth the man, &amp;c.
Thou young and worthy Gréeke, that show such perfect love,
The Gods receive thy simple ghost, into the heavens aboue:
Thy death we shall lament with many a wéepinge eye,
Wo worth the man which for his death, &amp;c.
Wo worth the man which for thy death,
hath given vs cause to cry.
Eternal be your fame ye Muses, for that in misery,
Ye did vouchsafe to strain your notes to walk:
My heart is rent in two, with this miserable case,
Yet am I charged by Dionisius mouth, to se this place,
At all points ready for the execution of Pithias.
Néede hath no law: will I or nil I, it must be done,
But lo the bloody minister, is even here at hand.
Gronno, I came hither now to understand,
If all things are well appointed for the execution of Pithias,
The King him self will se it done here in this place.
Sir, all things are ready, here is the place, here is ye hand, here is the sword▪
Here lacks non but Pithias, whose head at a word,
If he were present▪ I could finely strike of,
You may report that all things are ready.
I go with an heavy heart to report it, ah woeful Pithias▪
Full near now is thy misery.
I m•ruell very much, under what constilation,
All hangmen are borne, for they are hated of all, beloved of none▪
Which hatred is showed by this point evidently,
The Hangman always dwells in the vilest place of the City:
That such spite should be, I know no cause why,
Unless it be for their offices sake, which is cruel and blondye▪
Yet some men must doo it to execute laws?
Me think they hate me without any just cause:
But I must lo•ke to my toil, Pithias must lose his head at one •low,
Else the Boys will stone me to death in the street as I go:
But hark, the prisoner comes, and the King also,
I sée there is no help, Pithias his life must forgo.
Bring forth Pithias that pleasant companion,
Which took me at my word and became pledge for Demon:
It pricks fast upon noon, I doo him no injury,
If now he lose his head for so he requested me.
If Demon return not, which now in Gréece is full merry:
Therefore shall Pithias pay his death, and that by and by,
He thought belike, if Demon were out of the City,
I would not put him to death, for some foolish pity:
But séeing it was his request, I will not be mocked he shall di•▪
Bring him forth.
Give place, let the prisoner come by, give place.
How say you sir? where is Demon your trusty friend?
You have played a wise part I make God a vow,
You know what time a day it is, make you ready.
Most ready I am mighty king and most ready also,
For my true friend Demon this life to forgo,
Even at your pleasure.
A true friend, a false Traitor that so breaks his o•h,
Thou shalt lose thy life, though thou be never so loath.
I am not loath to doo what so ever I said,
No at this present pinch of death am I dismayed:
The Gods now I know, have heard my fervent prayer,
That they have reserved me to this passing great honour,
To die for my friend, whose faith, even now, I doo not mistrust:
My friend Demon is no false traitor, he is true and just:
But fifth he is no God but a man, he must doo as he may,
The wind may be contrary, sickness may let him, or some misaduēture by the way,
Which the eternal Gods turn al to my glory,
That Fame may resound how Pithias for Demon did die:
•e breaks no o•h, which doth as much as he can,
His mind is hear, he hath some let, he is but a man.
That he might not return, of all the Gods I did require,
Which now to my joy, doth grant my desire:
But why do• I stay any longer, seeing that one mans death,
May suffice O king, to pacify thy wrath?
O thou minister of justice, doo thine office by and by,
Let not thy hand tremble, for I ramble not to die:
Stephano the right patron, of true fidelity,
Commend me to thy master my swéet Demon, &amp; of him crave liberty
When I am dead in my name, for thy trusty services,
Hath well deserved a gift far bet•er then this,
Oh my Demon farewell now for ever, a true friend to me most dear
While life doth last, my mouth shall styll talk of thee,
And when I am dead my simple ghost true witness of amity:
Shall hoouer about the place wheresoever thou bée,
Eubulus, This gear is strange, and yet because,
Demon hath falst his faith, Pithias shall have the law:
Gronnoo, despoil him, and eke dispatch him quickly.
It shall be done: since you came into this place,
I might have stricken of seven heads in this space:
Ber lady here are good garments, these are mine by the rood,
It is an evil wind that blows no man good:
Now Pithias knéele down, ask me blessing like a pretty boy,
And with a trise thy head from thy shoulders I will convey.
Stay, stay, stay, for the kings advantage stay,
O mighty king, mine appointed time is not yet fully past,
Within the compass of mine hour lo, here, I come at last:
A life I owe, a life I will you pay:
Oh my Pithias, my noble pledge, my constant friend,
Ah w• is me for Demons sake, how near were thou to thy end:
Give place to me, this room is mine, on this stage must I play,
Demon is the man, none ought but he to Dionisius his blood to pay.
Are you come sir? you might have tarried if you had been wise,
For your hasty coming you are like to know the prise.
O thou cruel minister, why did not thou thine office,
Did not I bid thée make hast in any wise?
Hast thou spared to kill me once that I may die twice:
Not to die for my friend, is present death to me, and alas,
Shall I sée my sweet Demon, slain before my face:
•hat double death is this? but O mighty Dionis•us,
〈◊〉 true justice now, way this aright, thou noble Eubulus:
〈◊〉 mée have no wrong, as now s•andes the case,
••mon ought not to die, but Pithias:
〈◊〉 misadventure, not by his will, his hour is past, therefore I
•ecause he came not at his just time, ought justly to die:
〈◊〉 was my promise, so was thy promise O King,
〈◊〉 this Court can bear witness of this thing.
Not so, O mighty King, to Justice it is contrary,
•hat for an other mans fault, the Inno•ent should die:
〈◊〉 yet is my time plainly expired, it is not fully noon,
•f this my day appointed, by all the Clocks in the Town.
Beléeue no Clock, the hour is past by the Son.
Ah my Pithias, shall we now break the bonds of Amity?
Till you now overthwart mée, which heretofore so well did agrée.
My Demon, the Gods forbid, but wée should agrée,
•herfore agrée to this, let mée perform the promise I made for thée
•et mée die for thée, doo mée not that injury,
•oath to break my promise, and to suffer mée too sée thée di•
•ho•e so dearly I love: this small request grant mée,
〈◊〉 shall never ask thée more, my desire is but friendly:
•oo me this honour, that fame may report triumphantly,
•hat Pithias for his friend Demon was contented to die.
That you were contented for me to die, fame cannot deny,
•et fame shall never touch me with such a villainy:
•o report that Demon did suffer his friend Pithias, for him guiltless to die,
•herfore content thy self, the Gods requi•e thy constant faith,
•one but Demons blood can appease Dionisius wrath:
•nd now O mighty King, to you my talk I convey,
•ecause you gave me leave, my worldly things to stay:
•o requite that good turn ere I die, for your behalf this I say,
•lthough your Regal state, dame Fortune decks so,
•hat like a king in worldly wealth, ab•ndantly ye fl•e:
••et fickle is the ground whereon all Tyrants tread,
• thousand sundry cares and fears, doo haunt their restless head:
•o trusty band; no faithful f•iendes d•d guard thy hateful state,
•nd why? whom men obey for deadly fear, sure them they deadly hate
That you may safely reign, by love get friends, whose constant feet•
Will never fail, this counsel gives poor Tam•n at his death:
Friends are the surest guard, for Kings golden time doo wear away
And other precious things doo fade, friendship will never decay:
Have friends in store therefore, so shall you safely sleep,
Have friends at home of foreign foes, so need you take no kéepe:
Abandon flattering tounges, whose clackes truth never tells,
Abase the ill, advance the good, in whom dame virtue dwells:
Let them your play fellows be, but O you earthly kings,
Your sure defence and strongest guard, s•andes chifely in faithful friēd
Then get you friends by liberal déedes, and here I make an end,
Accept this counsel mighty King of Demon Pithias friend:
Oh my Pithias, now farewell for ever, let me kiss thée or I die,
My soul shall honour thée, thy constant faith aboue the heavens shall fli•
Come Gronno doo thine office now, why is thy colour so dead?
My neck is so is short, that thou will never have honesty in striking o• this hey•
Eubulus, my spirits are suddenly appalled, my limes wax weak
This strange friendship amaseth me so, that I can scarce speak.
O mighty king, let some pity your noble heart méene,
You require but one mans death, take Pithias, let Demon live.
O unspeakable friendship.
Not so, he hath not offended, there is no cause why?
My constant friend my Pithias, for Demons sake should die▪
Alas he is but young, he may doo good to many,
Thou coward• minister, why doest thou not let me die?
My hand with soden fear quivered.
O noble king, show mercy on Demon, let pithias die,
Stay Gronno, my flesh trembles, Eubulus, what shall I doo▪
Were there ever such friends on earth as were these two?
What heart is so cruel that would divide them asunder?
O noble friendship, I must yield, at thy force I wonder:
My hart, this rare friendship hath appears to the root,
And quenched all my fury, this sight hath brought this about:
Which thy grave counsel Eubulus, and learned persuasion could never doo:
〈◊〉 noble gentlemen, the immortal Gods aboue,
•ath made you play this Tragedy, I think for my behove:
•before this day I never knew what perfect friendship meant,
•y cruel mind to bloody déedes, was full and wholly bent:
•y fearful life, I thought with terror to defend,
•ut now I sée there is no guard unto a faithful •riend:
Which will not spare his life at time of present néede,
〈◊〉 happy kings within your courts have two such friends in déed:
〈◊〉 honour friendship now, which that you may plainly sée,
•amon, have thou thy life, from death I pardon thée:
•or which good turn, I crave this honour doo me lend?
Oh friendly heart? let me link with you, to you make me ye third friēde
•y court is yours, dwell here with mée, by my commission large,
•y self, my realm, my wealth, my health, I commit to your charge:
•ache me a third friend, more shall I joy in that thing,
Then to be called as I am, Dionisius the mighty king.
O mighty king, first for my life most humble thanks I give,
•nd no•t, I praise the immortal Gods, that did your heart so move•
That you would have respect to friendships heavenly lore,
•orseing well, he néed not fear which hath true friēds in store
•or my part, most noble king, as a third friend, welcome to our friendly society
But you must forget you are a king, for friendship stands in true equality
Unequal though I be in great possessions,
•et full equal shall you find me in my changed conditions:
•irranie, flattery, oppression, lo, hear I cast away?
•usti•e, truth, love, friendship shall be my joy:
True friendship▪ will I honour unto my lives end,
My greatest glory shall be, to be counted a perfect friend.
For this your déede most noble King, the Gods advance your name
•nd •ince to friendships lore, you list your Princely heart to frame:
With joyful heart, O King, most welcome now to me,
With you will I knit the perfect knot of amity:
Wherein I shall instruct you so, and Demon here your friend,
That you may know of amity the mighty force and eke the joyful end:
•nd how that kings doo stand upon a fickle ground,
Within whose Realm at time of néed, no faithful friends are found
Your instruction will I follow, to you my self I doo commite,
Eubulus, make haste to fet new apparel fit:
For my new friends.
I go with a joyful hart, O happy day.
I am glad to hear this word, though their lives they doo not léese,
It is no reason the Hangman should lose his fées:
These are mine, I am gone with a trise.
Put on these Garments now, go in with mée the Jewels of my Court.
We go with joyful harts.
Oh Demon my dear master, in all this joy remember me.
My friend Demon he asks reason? Dam. Pithias.
Stephano, for thy good service, be thou frée.
O most happy, pleasant, joyful, and triumphant day,
Poor Stephano, now shall live in contintinuall joy:
VIVE LE ROY with Demon and pithias in perfect amity,
VIVE TV STEPHANO, in thy pleasant liberality:
Wherein I joy as much as he that hath a conquest won,
I am a free man, none so merry as I now under the Son:
Farewell my Lords, now ye Gods grant you al ye some of perfect amity
And me lunge to enjoy my lunge deāred liberty.
Away villain, away you flattering Parasite,
Away the plague of this Court, thy filed tongue that forged lies,
No more here shall doo hurt, away false Sicophant, wilt thou not?
I am gone sir, seeing it is the kings pleasure,
Why whip ye me alone? a plague take Demon and Pithias since they came hither
I am driuē to seek relee abroad alas I know not whither,
Yet Eubulus, though I begone, here after time shall try,
There shall be found even in this Court as great flatterers as I:
Well for a while I will forgo the Court, though to my great payne,
I doubt not but to spy a time when I may créepe in again.
The Serpent that eats men alive, Flattery with all her brood,
Is whipped away in Princes Courts which yet did never good,
What force▪ what mighty power, true Friendship may possess?
To all the world Dionisius Court now plainly doth express,
W•o since to faithful Friends he gave his willing ear,
Most sa•e•y sits in his Seat and sléepes devoid of fear,
Pourged is the Court of vice, since Friendship entered in,
Tyranny quails, he studies now with love eche hart to win,
Virtue is had in price, and hath his just reward:
And painted speech that gloseth for gain, from gifts is quite debarred,
One loves another now for virtue, not for gain,
Where Virtue doth not knit the knot, there Friendship cannot reign,
Without the which, no house, no land, no kingdom can endure,
As necessary for mans life, as Water, Ayre, and Fire,
Which frames the mind of man, all honest things to doo,
Unhonest things Friendship no craves, no yet consents thereto,
In wealth a double joy, in woe a present stay,
A swéete compagnion in eche state true Friendship is always:
A sure defence for Kings, a perfect trusty band,
A force to assail, a Shield to defend the enemies cruel hand,
A rare, and yet the greatest Gift, that God can give to man:
•o rare, y• scarce four couple of faithful friends have ben since ye world began
A Gift so strange, &amp; of such price, I wish all Kings to have,
But chiefly yet as duty binds I humbly crave,
True friendship, and true friends full fraught with constant faith,
The giver of friends, the Lord grant her most noble Quéene Elizabeth.

