I Suppose you are assembled here, supposing
to reap the fruit of my travails: and to be
plain, I mean presently to present you
with a Comedy called Supposes, the very
name whereof may peradventure drive into every of
your heads a sundry Suppose, to suppose the mea∣ning
of our supposes. Some percase will suppose we
mean to occupy your ears with sophistical hand∣ling
of subtle Suppositions. Some other will suppose
we go about to decipher unto you some quaint con∣ceiptes,
which hitherto have been only supposed
as it were in shadovves: and some I see smiling as
though they supposed we would trouble you with
the vain suppose of some wanton Suppose. But un∣derstand,
this our Suppose is nothing else but a my∣staking
or imagination of one thing for an other: for
you shall see the master supposed for the servant, the
servant for the master: the freeman for a slave, and
the bond slave for a freeman: the stranger for a well
known friend, and the familiar for a stranger. But
what? I suppose that even already you suppose me
very fond, that have so simply disclosed unto you
the subtilties of these our Supposes: where other∣wise
in deed I suppose you should have heard
almost the last of our Supposes, before you could
have supposed any of them aright. Let this then
suffice.
HEre is no body, come forth Polynesta, let vs
look about, to be sure least any man hear our
talk: for I think within the house the tables,
the planks, the beds, the portals, yea and the
cupbords them selves have ears.
You might as well have said, the windows and
the doors: do you not sée howe they harken?
Well you jest fair, but I would advise you take
héede, I have bidden you a thousand times beware, you
will be spied one day talking with Dulippo.
And why should I not talk with Dulippo as well
as with any other, I pray you?
I have given you a wherefore for this why many
times, but go too, follow your own advise till you over∣whelm
vs all with soden mishap.
A great mishap I promise you: marie Gods
blessing on their heart that set such a brooch on my
cap.
Well, look well about you: a man would think
it were enough for you secretly to rejoice, that by my help
you have passed so many pleasant nights together, and yet
by my troth I do it more than half against my will, for
I would rather you had settled your fancy in some noble fa∣mile,
yea and it is no small grief unto me, that rejecting
the suites of so many nobles and gentlemen, you have cho∣sen
for your darling a poor servant of your fathers, by
whom shame and infamy is the best dower you can look
for to attain.
And I pray you whom may I thank but gentle
nurse, that continually praising him, what for his per∣sonage,
his courtesy, and aboue all, the extreme passions of
his mind, in fine you would never cease till I accepted
him, delighted in him, and at length desired him with no
less affection, than he erst desired me.
I can not deny, but at the beginning I did recom∣mend
him unto you (as in déede I may say that for my
self I have a pitiful heart) séeing the depth of his unbridled
affection, and that continually he never ceased to fill mine
ears with lamentable complaints.
Nay rather that he filled your purse with bribes
and rewards.
Well you may judge of Nurse as you list: In déede
I have thought it always a déede of charity to help
the miserable young men, whose tender youth consumes
with the furious flames of love: but be you sure if I had
thought you would have passed to the terms you now
stand in, pity nor pension, penny nor pater noster should
ever have made Nurse once to opē his mouth in the cause.
No of honesty, I pray you, who first brought him
into my chamber? who first taught him the way to my bed
but you? fie Nurse fie, never speak of it for shame, you
will make me tell a wise tale anon.
And have I these thanks for my good will? why then
I sée well I shall be counted the cause of all mishap.
Nay rather the author of my good hap gentle
Nurse, for I would thou knew I love not Dulipo,
nor any of so mean estate, but have bestowed my love
more worthily than thou déemest, but I will say no more
at this time.
Then I am glad you have changed your mind yet.
Nay I neither have changed, nor will change it.
Then I understand you not, how said you?
Mary I say that I love not Dulipo, nor any
such as he, and yet I neither have changed nor will change
my mind.
I can not tell, you love to lye with Dulipo very
well: this gear is Gréeke to me, either it hangs not well
together, or I am very dull of under standing, speak plain
I pray you.
I can speak no plainer, I have sworn to y• cōtrary.
Howe? make you so dainty to tell it Nurse, least
she should reveal it? you have trusted me as far as
may be, I may show to you, in things that touche your
honour if they were known: and make you strange to tell
me this? I am sure it is but a trifle in comparison of those
things whereof heretofore you have made me privy.
Well, it is of greater importance than you think
Nurse, yet would I tell it you under condition and pro∣mise
that you shall not tell it again, nor give any sign
or token to be suspected that you know it.
I promise you of my honesty, say on.
Well hear you me then: this young man whom
you have always taken for Dulipo, is a noble borne
Sicilian, his right name Erostrato, son to Philogono, one
of the worthiest men in that country.
How Erostrato? is it not our neighbour, which?
Hold thy talking nurse, and harken to me, that I
may explain the whole case unto thée: the man whom to
this day you have supposed to be Dulipo, is (as I say) Ero∣strato,
a gentleman that came from Sicilia to study in this
City, &amp; even at his first arrival met me in the stréet, fell en∣amored
of me, &amp; of such vehement force were the passions
he suffered, that immediately he cast aside both long gown
and books, &amp; determined on me only to apply his study: and
to the end he might the more cōmodiously both sée me and
talk with me, he exchanged both name, habit, clothes and
credit with his seruāt Dulipo, whō only he brought with
him out of Sicilia, and so with the turning of a hand, of Ero∣strato
a gentleman, he became Dulipo a serving man, and
soon after sought service of my father, and obtained it.
Are you sure of this?
Yea out of doubt, on the other side Dulippo took•
upon him the name of Erostrato his moister, the habit,
the credit, books, and all things néedefull to a student,
and in short space profited very much, and is now estée∣med
as you sée.
Are there no other Sicylians héere: nor none that
pass this way, which may discover them?
Very few that pass this way, and few or none
that tarry héere any time.
This hath béen a strange adventure, but I pray
you howe hang these things together? that the student
whom you say to be the servant, and not the moister, is
become an earnest suitor to you, and requires you of your
father in marriage?
That is a policy devised betwéene them, to put
Doctor Dotipole out of conceit, the old dotard, he that
so instantly doth lye upon my father for me: but look
where he comes, as God help me it is he, out upon him,
what a lucky yonker is this? yet I had rather be a Noon
a thousand times, than be encumbered with such a Coistrel.
Daughter you have reason, but let vs go in before
he come any néerer.
WEre there dames héere, or did mine eyes dazzle?
Nay sir héere were Polynesta and his nurse.
Was my Polynesta héere? alas I knew his not.
He must have better eyesight that should marry
your Polynesta, or else he may chance to ouersée the best
point in his tables sometimes.
Sir it is no marvel, the ayre is very misty to
day: I my self knew his better by his apparel than by
his face.
In good saith and I thank God I have mine eye
sight good and perfect, little worse than when I was but
twenty years old.
How can it be otherwise? you are but young.
I am fifty years old.
He tells ten less than he is.
What say thou of ten less?
I say I would have thought you ten less, you
look like one of six and thirty, or seven and thirty at
the most.
I am no less than I tell.
You are like enough to live fifty more, show m•
your hand.
Why is Pasiphilo a Chiromancer?
What is not Pasiphilo? I pray you show me it
a little.
Here it is.
O how straight and infracte is this line of life, you
will live to the years of Melchisedech.
Thou would say, Methusalem.
Why is it not all one?
I perceive you are no very good Bibler Pasiphilo.
Yes sir an excellent good Bibler, specially in a boat∣tle:
Oh what a mount of Uenus here is, but this light
serves not very well, I will behold it an other day, whē
the ayre is clearer, and tell you somewhat, peradventure
to your contentation.
You shall do me great pleasure: but tell me, I pray
thé• Pasiphilo, whom dost thou think Polynesta likes
better, Erostrato or me?
Why you out of doubt: She is a gentlewoman
of a noble mind, and makes greater account of the re∣putation
she shall have in marrying your worship, than
that poor scholar, whose birth and parentage God know∣weth,
and very few else.
Yet he takes it upon him bravely in the country.
Yea, where no man knows the cōtrarie: but let
him brave it, bossed his birth, and do what he can, the virtue
and knowledge that is within this body of yours, is worth
more than all the country he came from.
It becomes not a man to praise himself: but
in déede I may say, and say truly, that my knowledge
hath stood me in better stéede at a pinch, than could all
the goods in the world. I came out of Otranto when the
Turks won it, and first I came to Padua, after hither;
where by reading, counsailing, and pleading, within twen∣tie
years I have gathered and gained as good as ten thou∣sand
Ducats.
Yea mary, this is the right knowledge, Philoso∣phie,
Poetry, Logic, and all the rest, are but pickling sci∣ences
in comparison to this.
But pickling in déede, whereof we have a verse:
The trade of Law doth fill the boisterous bags,
They svvimme in silk, when others royst in rags.
O excellent verse, who made it? Virgil?
Virgil? tush it is written in one of our glosses.
Sure who so ever wrote it, the moral is excellent,
and worthy to be written in letters of gold: but to the
purpose: I think you shall never recover the wealth that
you lost at Otranto.
I think I have doubled it, or rather made it four
times as much: but in déed, I lost mine only son there,
a child of five years old.
O great pity.
Yea, I had rather lost all the goods in the world.
Alas, alas, by God and grafts of such a stock are
very gayson in these days.
I know not whether he were slayue, or the Turks
toke him and kept him as a bond slave.
Alas, I could wéepe for compassion, but there is no
remedy but patience, you shall get many by this young dam∣sell
with the grace of God.
Yea, if I get his.
Get his? why doubt you of that?
Why, his father holds me off with delays, so that
I must néedes doubt.
Content your self sir, he is a wise man, and desirous
to place his Daughter well, he will not be too rash in his
determination, he will think well of the matter, and let
him think, for the longer he thinks, the more good of you
shall he think: whose wealth, whose virtue, whose skill, or
whose estimation can he compare to yours in this City?
And hast thou not told him that I would make his
Daughter a dower of two thousand Ducats?
Why, even now, I came but from thence since.
What said he?
Nothing, but that Erostrato had proffered the like.
Erostrato? how can he make any dower, and his fa∣there
yet alive?
Think you I did not tell him so? yes I warrāt you,
I forgot nothing that may further your cause, and doubt you
not, Erostrato shall never have his unless it be in a dream.
Well gentle Pasiphilo; go thy ways and tell Da∣mon
I require nothing but his daughter, I will none of his
goods: I shall enrich his of mine own: &amp; if this dower of two
thousand Ducats séem not sufficiēt, I will make it five hun∣dreth
more, yea a thousand, or what so ever he will demānd
rather thē fail: go to Pasiphilo, show thy self frēdly in worcester∣king
this feat for me, spare for no cost, since I have gone
thus far, I will be loath to be out •idden. Go
Where shall I come to you again?
At my house.
When?
When thou wilt.
Shall I come at dinner time?
I would bid thée to dinner, but it is a Saints even
which I have ever fasted.
Fast till thou famish.
Hark.
He speaks of a dead mans fast.
Thou hear me not.
Nor thou understand me not.
I dare say thou art angry I bid thée not to dinner,
but come if thou wilt, thou shalt take such as thou find.
What? think you I know not where to dine?
Yes Pasiphilo thou art not to séeke.
No be you sure, there are enough will pray me.
That I know well enough Pasiphilo, but thou
can not be better welcome in any place than to me, I will
tarry for thée.
Well, since you will née•des, I will come.
Dispatch then, and bring no news but good.
Better than my reward by the rood.
O Miserable covetous wretch, he finds an excuse by
S Nicholas fast, because I should not dine with him,
as though I should dine at his own dish: he makes good∣lie
feasts I promise you, it is no wonder though he think
me bound unto him for my fare: for over and besides that
his provision is as scant as may be, yet there is great diffe∣rinse
betwéene his diet and mine. I never so much as s•pp
of the wine that he tastes, I feed at the bords end with
brown bread: Marie I reach always to his own dish, for
there are no more but that only on the table: Yet he thinks
that for one such diner I am bound to do him al the service
that I can, and thinks me sufficiently rewarded for all my
travel, with one such festival promotion: and yet perad∣venture
some men think I have great gains under him:
but I may say and swear, that this dozen year I have not
gained so much in value as the points at my hose (which
are but thrée with codpéece point and al): he thinks that I
may féede upon his favour and fair words: but if I could
not otherwise provide for one, Pasiphilo were in a wise
case. Pasiphilo hath mo pastures to pass in than one, I
warrant you: I am of household with this scholar Erostra∣to,
his riuale, as well as with Domino Cleander, now with
the one, and then with the other, according as I sée their
Caters provide good chéere at the market: and I find the
means so to handle the matter, that I am welcome to
both. If the one sée me talk with the other, I make
him beléeue it is to harken news in the furtherance of his
cause, and thus I become a broker on both sides. Well, let
them both apply the matter as well as they can, for in
déede I will travel for none of them both: yet will I
séeme to work wonders on eche hand. But is not this
one of Demons servants that comes forth? it is, of him
I shall understand where his master is. Whither goes
this ioyly gallant?
I come to séeke some body that may accompany my
master at dinner, he is alone, and would fain have good
company.
Séeke no further, you could never have found one
better than me.
I have no commission to bring so many.
How many? I will come alone.
How can thou come alone that hast continually a
legion of ravening wolves within thée?
Thou doest as servants commonly doe, hate all that
love to visit their masters.
And why?
Because they have too many téeth as you think.
Nay because they have to many tongues.
Tongues? I pray you what did my tongue ever hurt you.
I speak but merrily with you Pasiphilo, go in, my
moister is ready to dine.
What? dyneth he so early?
He that rises early, dyneth early.
I would I were his man, moister doctor never die∣neth
till noon, and how delicately then god knows, I will
be bold to go in, for I count my self bidden.
You were best so.
Hard hap had I when I first begone this unfortunate en∣terprise,
for I supposed the readiest medicine to my misery∣ble
effect•s had been to change name, clothes, &amp; credit with
my servant, &amp; to place my self in Demons service, thinking
that as shivering cold by glowing fire, thirst by drink,
hunger by pleasant repasts, and a thousand such like pas∣sions
find remedy by their contraries, so my restless desire
might have found quiet by continual contemplation. But
alas, I find that only love is unsociable, for as the fly play∣eth
with the flame till at last she is cause of his own decay,
so the lover that thinks with kissing and colling to con∣tent
his unbridled appetite, is cōmonly scene the only cause
of his own consumption: Two yéeres are now paste since
under the colour of Demons service I have been a sworn
servant to Cupped, of whō I have received as much favour
&amp; grace as ever man found in his service, I have frée liber∣tie
at al times to behold my desired, to talk with his, to em∣brace
his, yea (be it spoken in secrete) to lye with his, I reap
the fruits of my desire, yet as my joys abound, even so
my pains increase, I fare like the covetous man, that ha∣uing
all the world at will, is never yet content, the more I
have, the more I desire. Alas, what wretched estate have I
brought my self unto, if in the end of all my far fetches,
she be giuē by his father to this old doting doctor, this bu∣zard,
this bribing villain, that by so many means seeks to
obtain his at his fathers hands? I know she loves me best
of all others, but what may that prevail when perforce she
shall be constrained to marie another? Alas, y• pleasant taste
of my sugared joys doth yet remain so perfect in my remē∣bronco,
that the least sop of sorrow séemeth more sour th•̄
gall in my mouth: if I had never known delight, with bet∣la
contentatiō might I have passed these dreadful dolours.
And if this old .M. impsimus (whom the pockes consume)
should wyn his, then may I say, farewell the pleasant talk,
the kind embracings, yea farewell the sight of my Polynesta,
for he like a ielouse wretch will pen •ir up, that I think
the birds of the air shall not win the sight of his. I ho∣ped
to have caste a block in his way, by the means that
my servant, who is supposed to be Erostrato, and with my
habit and credit is well esteemed, should proffer himself a
suitor, at the least to countervail the doctors proffers: but
my moister knowing the wealth of the one, and doubting
the state of the other, is determined to be fed no longer with
fair words, but to accept the doctor, (whom he right well
knows) for his son in law: well, my servant promised
me yesterday to devise yet again some new conspiracy to
drive moister doctor out of conceit, and to lay a snare that
the fox himself might be caught in, what it is, I know
not, nor I saw him not since he went about it: I will go sée
if he be within, that at least if he help me not, he may yet
prolong my life for this once. But here comes his lackey,
ho Jack hark, where is Erostrato?
ERostrato? mary he is in his skin.
Ah hooresone boy, I say, howe shall I find
Erostrato?
Find him? howe mean you, by the wéeke or by
the year.
You crack halter, if I catch you by the ears, I
shall make you answer me directly.
In déede?
Tarry me a little.
In faith sir I have no leisure.
Shall we try who can run fastest?
Your legs be longer than mine, you should have
given me the advantage.
Go to, tell me where is Erostrato?
I left him in the stréete, where he gave me this
Casket, this basket I would have said, and bad me bear
it to Dalio, and return to him at the Dukes Palace.
If thou sée him, tell him I must néedes speak with
him immediately: or abide awhile, I will go séeke him my
self, rather than be suspected by going to his house.
I Think if I had as many eyes as Argus, I could not
have sought a man more narrowly in every stréete and
every by lane, there are not many gentlemen, scholars,
nor Marsh•ntes in the City of Ferrari, but I have met
with them, except him, peradventure he is come home an
other way: but look where he comes at the last.
In good time have I spied my good moister.
For the love of God call me Dulipo, not master,
maintain the credit that thou haste hitherto kept, and
let me alone.
Yet sir let me sometimes do my duty unto you,
especially where no body hears.
Yea, but so long the Parat uses to cry knap in
sport, that at the last she calls his moister knave in ear∣nest:
so long you will use to call me master, that at the
last we shall be heard. What news?
Good.
In déede?
Yea excellent, we have as good as won the wager.
Oh, how happy were I if this were true.
Hear you me, yesternight in the evening I wall∣ked
out, and found Pasiphilo, and with small entreating I
had him home to supper, where by such means as I v∣sed,
he became my great friend, and told me the whole or∣der
of our adversaries determination: yea and what Da∣mon
doth intende to do also, and hath promised me that frō
time to time, what he can espy he will bring me word of it.
I can not tel whether you know him or no, he is not
to trust unto, a very flattering and a lying knave.
I know him very well, he can not deceive me, and
this that he hath told me I know must néedes be true.
And what was it in effect?
That Demon had purposed to give his daughter in
marriage to this doctor, upon ye dower that he hath proffered.
Are these your good news? your excellent news?
Stay awhile, you will understand me before you
hear me.
Well, say on.
I answered to that, I was ready to make his the
like dower.
Well said.
Abide, you hear not the worst yet.
O God, is there any worse behind?
Worse? why what assurance could you suppose
that I might make without some special consent from Phi∣logono
my father?
Nay you can tell, you are better scholar than I.
In déede you have lost your time: for the books that
you toss now a days, treat of small science.
Leave thy jesting, and procéede.
I said further, that I received letters lately from
my father, whereby I understood that he would be héere
very shortly to perform all that I had proffered: therefore I
required him to request Damō on my behalf, that he would
stay his promise to the doctor for a fourthnight or more.
This is somewhat yet, for by this means I shall be
sure to linger and live in hope one fourthnight longer, but
at the fourthnights end when Philogono comes not,
how shall I then do? yea and though he came, howe may
I any way hope of his consent, when he shall sée, that to foal∣low
this amorous enterprise, I have set aside all study, all
remembrance of my duty, and all dread of shame. Alas,
alas, I may go hang my self.
Comfort your self man, and trust in me: there is
a salve for every sore, and doubt you not, to this mischéefe
we shall find a remedy.
O friend revive me, that hitherto since I first at∣tempted
this matter have been continually dying.
Well, harken a while then: this morning I took
my horse and rode into the fields to solace my self, and as
I passed the ford beyonds S. Anthonies gate, I met at the
foot of the hill a gentleman riding with two or thrée men,
and as me thought by his habit and his looks, he should be
none of the wise••. He saluted me, and I him: I asked him
from whence he came, and whither he would? he answered
that he had come from Venice, then from Padua, now
was going to Ferrari, and so to his country, which is
Scienna: As soon as I know him to be a Scenese, suddenly
lifting up mine eyes, as it were with an admiration I said
unto him, are you a Scenese, and come to Ferrari? why not,
said he: quoth I, half and more with a trembling voice,
know you the danger that should ensue if you be known
in Ferrari to be a Scenese? he more than half amassed, de∣sired
me earnestly to tell him what I meant.
I understand not where this tends.
I beléeue you, but hearken to me.
Go too then.
I answered him in this sort: Gentleman, because
I have heretofore found very courteous entertainment
in your country, béeing a student there, I account my self
as it were bound to a Scenese, and therefore if I knew of
any mishap towards any of that country, God forbid but
I should disclose it: and I marvel that you know not of
the injury that your countrymen offered this other day to
the Ambassadors of County Hercule.
What tales he tells me: what appertain these
to me?
If you will harken a while, you shall find them
no tales, but that they appertain to you more than you
think for.
Forth.
I told him further, these Ambassadors of
County Hercule had divers Mules, Waggons, and Cha∣rettes,
laden with divers costly jewels, gorgeous furniture,
&amp; other things which they carried as presents, passing that
way to the king of Naples▪ the which were not only stayed in
Sciene by the officers whō you cal Customers, but searched,
ransacked, tossed &amp; turned, &amp; in the end exacted for tribute, as
if they had been the goods of a mean merchant.
Whither the devil will he? is it possible that this
gear appertains any thing to my cause? I find neither
head nor foot in it.
O how impaciēt you are: I pray you stay a while.
Go to yet a while then.
I procéeded, that upon these causes the Duke sent
his Chancellor to declare the case unto the Senate there,
of whom he had the most discourteous answer that ever
was heard, whereupon he was so enraged with all of that
country, that for reuēge he had sworn to spoil as many
of them as ever should come to Ferrari, and to send them
home in their doublet and their hose.
And I pray thée how coldest thou upon the sud∣den
devise or imagine such a lye? and to what purpose?
You shall hear by and by a thing as fit for our
purpose, as any could have happened.
I would fain hear you conclude.
You would fain leap over the stile, before you
come at the hedge: I would you had heard me, and séene
the gestures that I enforced to make him beléeue this.
I beléeue you, for I know you can counterfeit well.
Further I said, the duke had charged upon great
penalties, that the Inholders and vitlers should bring
word daily of as many Sceneses as came to their houses:
the gentlemā béeing (as I guessed at the first) a man of small
sapientia, when he heard these news, would have turned
his horse an other way.
By likelihood he was not very wise when he
would beléeue that of his cūntrey, which if it had been true,
every man must néedes have known it.
Why not? when he had not béene in his country
for a month paste, and I told him this had happened within
these seven days.
Belike he was of small experience.
I think, of as little as may be: but best of all for
our purpose, and good adventure it was, that I met with
such an one. Now harken I pray thée.
Make an end I pray thée.
He, as I say, when he hard these words, would have
turned the bridle, &amp; I say•ing a countenance as though I
were somewhat pensive &amp; careful for him, passed a while,
and after with a great sigh said to him: gentleman, for the
courtesy that (as I said) I have found in your country, and
because your affairs shall be the better dispatched, I will
find the means to lodge you in my house, and you shall
say to every man, that you are a Sicilan of Cathanea, your
name Philogono, father to me that am in dede of that coun∣trey
and city, called here Erostrato: and I (to pleasure you)
will (during your abode here) doe you reverence as you
were my father.
Out upon me, what a gross hatted fool am I? now
I perceive whereto this tale tends.
Well, and how like you of it?
Indifferently, but one thing I doubt.
What is that?
Marie, that when he has been here two or thrée
days, he shall hear of every man that there is no such thing
between the Duke and the Town of Sciene.
As for that let me alone, I doe entertain and will
entertain him so well, that within these two or thrée days
I will disclose unto him all the whole matter, and doubt
not but to bring him in for performance of as much as I
have promised to Demon: for what hurt can it be to him,
when he shall bind a strange name and not his own?
What, think you he will be entreated to stand
hound for a dower of two thousand Ducats by the year?
Yea why not, if it were ten thousand, as long as he
is not in déede the man that is bound?
Well, if it be so, what shall we be the nearer to our
purpose.
Why, when we have done as much as we can,
how can we doe any more?
And where have you left him?
At the Inn, because of his horses, he and his men
shall lye in my house.
Why brought you him not with you?
I thought better to use your advise first.
Well, go take him home, make him all the chéere
you can, spare for no cost, I will allow it.
Content, loke where he comes.
Is this he? go méete him, by my truth he looks
even like a go•d soul, he that fishes for him, might be
sure to catch a cods head: I will rest here a while to dis∣cipher
him.
HE that travails in this world passes by many pe∣rilles.
You say true sir, if the boat had been a little more
laden this morning at the ferry, wée had been all drowned,
for I think, there are none of vs that could have swam.
I speak not of that.
O you mean the foul way that we had since wée▪
came from this Pad•a, I promise you, I was afraid twice
or thrice, that your mule would have lien fast in the mire.
Iesu, what a blockehead thou art, I speak of the pe∣rill
we are in presently since we came into this city.
A great peril I promise you, that we were no so•er
arrived, than you found a friend that brought you from the
Inn, and lodged you in his own house.
Yea marie, God reward the gentle young man that
we met, for else we had been in a wise case by this time.
But have done with these tales, and take you héede, and
you also sir, take héede y• none of you say we be Sceneses,
and remember that you call me Philogano of Cathanea.
Sure I shall never remember these outlandish words
I could well remember Haccanea.
I say, Cathaenea, and not Haccanea, with a vengeance.
Let another name it then when néede is, for I shall
never remember it.
Then hold thy peace, and take héede thou name not
Scene.
Howe say you, if I fine my self dum as I did once
in the house of Crisobolus?
Doe as thou think best: but look where comes
the gentleman whom we are so much bound unto.
Welcome, my dear father Philogano.
Gramercy my good son Erostrato.
That is well said, be mindful of your tong, for these
Ferareses be as crafty as the devil of hell.
No, no, be you sure we will doe as you have bidden
vs.
For if you should name Scene they would spoil you
immediately, and turn you out of the town, with more
shame, than I would should befall you for a thousand
Crown•s.
I warrant you, I was giving thē warning as I came
to you, and I doubt not but they will take good héede.
Yea and trust not the servants of my household
to far, for they are F•rareses all, and never knew my father,
nor came never in Sicilia: this is my house, will it please
you to go in? I will follow.
THis gear hath had no evil beginning, if it continue so
and fall to happy end. But is not this the silly doctor
with the side bonnet, the doting fool, that dare presume to
become a suitor to such a péerlesse Paragons? O howe cove∣tousnesse
doth blind the common sort of men: Demon more
desirous of the dower, than mindful of his gentle &amp; gallant
daughter, has determined to make him his son in law
who for his age may he his father in law, and hath greater
respect to the abundance of goods, than to his own natural
child. He bears well in mind to fill his own purse, but
he little remembered that his daughters purse shall be conti∣nually
empty, unless Moister Doctor fill it with double
duck eggs. Alas, I jest and have no joy, I will stand here
aside and laugh a little at this lobcocke.
Moister, what the devil mean you to go séeke guests
at this time of the day? the Majors officers have die•ed
ere this time, which are always the last in the market.
I come to séeke Pasiphilo, to the end he may dine
with me.
As though six mouths and the cat for the seventh,
be not sufficient to eat an harlotry shotterell, a penny∣worth
of chese, and half a score spurlinges, this is all the
dainties you have dressed for you and your family.
Ah gréedie gut, art thou afeared thou shalt want?
I am afeared in déede, it is not the first time I have
found it so.
Shall I make some sport with this gallant? what
shall I say to him?
Thou art afeared belike that he will eat thée and
the rest.
Nay, rather that he will eat your mule, both hear
and hyde.
Hear and hyde? and why not flesh and all?
Because she hath none, if she had any flesh, I think
you had eaten his your self by this time.
She may thank you then, for your good attendance.
Nay she may thank you for your small allowance.
In faith now let me alone.
Hold thy peace drunken knave, and espy me Pa∣siphilo.
Since I can doe no better, I will set such a stance
betwéene him and Pasiphilo, that all this town shall not
make them friends.
Could you not have sent to séeke him, but you must
come your self? surely you come for some other purpose, for
if you would have had Pasiphilo to dinner, I warrant you he
would have tarried here an hour since.
Hold thy peace, here is one of Demons servant,
of him I shall understand where he is: good fellow art not
thou one of Demons servants?
Yes sir, at your knamandement.
Gramercy, tell me then, hath Pasiphilo been there
this day or no?
Yes sir, and I think he be there still, ah, ah, ah.
What laugh thou?
At a thing, that every man may not laugh at.
What?
Talk, that Pasiphilo had with my moister this day.
What talk I pray thée?
I may not tell it.
Doth it concern me?
Nay I will say nothing.
Tell me.
I can say no more.
I would but know if it concern me, I pray thée tel
me.
I would tell you, if I were sure you would not tell
it again.
Believe me I will keep it close: Carrion give vs leave
a little, go aside.
If my moister should know that it came by me, I
were better die a thousand deaths.
He shall never know it, say on.
Yea, but what assurance shall I have?
I lay thée my faith and honesty in pane.
A pretty pane, the fulkers will not lend you a far∣thing
on it.
Yea, but amongst honest men it is more worth than
gold.
Yea marie sir, but where be they? but will you needs
have me to tell it unto you?
Yea I pray thée if it any thing appertain to me.
Yes it is of you, and I would gladly tell it you, by∣cause
I would not have such a man of worship so scorned
by a villain ribald.
I pray thée tell me then.
I will tell you so that you will swear never to tell
it to Pasiphilo, to my moister, nor to any other body.
Surely it is some toy devised to get some money
of him.
I think I have a book here.
If he knew him as well as I, he would never go
about it, for he may as soon get one of his téeth from his
jaws with a pair of pinchers, as a penny out of his purse•
with such a conceit.
Here is a letter will serve the turn: I swear to thée
by the contents hereof never to disclose it to any man.
I will tell you, I am sorry to sée how Pasiphilo doth
abuse you, persuading you that always he labours for
you, where in dé•de, he lies on my moister continually, as
it were with tooth and nail for a stranger, a scholar, borne
in Sicilia they call him Roscus or arskisse, he has a mad
name I can never hit upon it.
And thou recknest it as madly: is it not Erostrato?
That same, I should never have remembered it: &amp; the
villain speaks all the evil of you that can •e devised.
To whom?
To my moister, yea and to Polinesta herself some∣times.
Is it possible, Ah slave, and what saith he?
More evil than I can imagine: that you are the mi∣serablest
and most nigardly man that ever was.
Says Pasiphilo so by me?
And that as often as he comes to your house, he is
like to die for hunger, you fare so well.
That the devil take him else.
And that you are the testiest man, and most divers to
please in the whole world, so that he cannot please you un∣less
he should even kill himself with continual pain.
O devilish tong.
Furthermore, that you cough continually and spit,
so that a dog cannot abide it.
I never spit nor cough more than thus, vho, vho,
and that but since I caught this murre, but who is frée
from it?
You say true sir, yet further he saith, your arm
holes stink, your féete worse than they, and your breathe
worst of all.
If I quite him not for this gear.
And that you are bursen in the cods.
O villain, he lies, and if I were not in the stréete
thou shouldest sée them.
And he saith, that you desire this young gentlewo∣man,
as much for other men's pleasure as for your own.
What means he by that?
Peradventure that by his beauty, you would entice
many young men to your house.
Young men? to what purpose?
Nay, guess you that.
Is it possible that Pasiphilo speaks thus of me?
Yea, and much more.
And doth Demon believe him?
Yea, more than you would think, in such sort, that
long ere this, he would have giuē you a flat repulse, but Pa∣siphilo
entreated him to continue you a suitor for his aduan∣tage.
How for his advantage?
Marie, that during your suit he might still have
some reward for his great pains.
He shall have a rope, and yet that is more than he
deserves: I had thought to have given him these hose when
I had worn them a little nearer, but he shall have a. &amp;c.
In good faith sir, they were but lost on him. Will
you any thing else with me sir?
Nay, I have heard to much of thée already.
Then I will take my leave of you.
Farewell, but tell me, may I not know thy name?
Sir, they call me Foul fall you.
An ill favoured name by my truth, art thou this
country man?
No sir, I was borne by a castle mē cal Scab catch
you, fare you well sir.
Farewell, oh God how have I been abused? what a
spokesman? what a messenger had I provided?
Why sir, will you tarry for Pasiphilo till we die for
hunger?
Trouble me not, that the devil take you both.
These news what so ever they be, like him not.
Art thou so hungry yet? I pray to God thou he no∣for
satisfied.
By the mass no more I shall as long as I am your
servant.
Go with mischance.
Yea, and a mischief to you, and to all such covetous
wretches.
BY that time we come to the house, I trust that of these
xx. eggs in the basket we shall find but very few whole,
but it is a folly to talk to him: what the devil, wilt thou
never lay that stick out of thy hand? he fights with the
dogs, beats the bears, at every thing in the streate he
finds occasion to tarry, if he spy a slipstring by the way
such another as himself, a Page, a Lackey or a dwarf, the
devil of hell cannot hold him in chains, but he will be do∣ing
with him: I cannot go two steppes, but I must loke
back for my yonker: go to halter sack, if you break one
egg I may chance break.
What will you break? your nose in mine ars••
Ah beast.
If I be a beast, yet I am no horned beast.
Is it even so? is the wind in that door? If I were•
vnlodē I would tel you whether I be a horned beast or no.
You are always laden either with wine or with ale.
Ah spitef•ll boy, shall I suffer him?
Ah cowardelie beast, dare thou strike and say no∣for
a word?
Well, my moister shall know of this géere, either
he shall redress it, or he shall lose one of vs.
Tel him the worst thou can by me.
What noise, what a rule is this?
Mary sir, he strikes me because I tell him of his swearing.
The villain lies deadly, he reviles me because I
bid him make hast.
Holla: no more of this. Dalio, doe you make in a
readiness those Pigeons, stock Doves, and also the breast
of Ueale: and let your vessel be as clear as glass against
I return, that I may tell you which I will have roasted, &amp;
which boiled. Crapine, lay down that basket and follow
me. Oh that I could tell where to find Pasiphilo, but look
where he comes that can tell me of him.
What have you done with Philogano your father?
I have left him within, I would fine speak with
Pasiphilo, can you tell me where he is?
He dined this day with my moister, but whether he
went from thence I know not, what would you with him?
I would have him go tell Demon that Philogano
my father is come and ready to make assurance of as much
as he will require. Now shall I feach moister doc•or a school
point, he travails to none other end but to catch Cornua,
and he shall have them, for as old as he is, and as many sub∣tilties
as he hath learned in the law, he can not go beyond
me one ace.
O déere friend, go thy ways seek Pasiphilo, find
him out, and conclude somewhat to our contentation.
But where shall I find him?
At the feasts if there be any, or else in the market
with the poulters or the fishemongers.
What should he doe with them?
Mary he watches whose Caters by the best meat,
if any by a fat Capon, a good breast of Ueale, fresh Samon
or any such good dish, he follows to the house, and either
with some news, or some stale jest he will be sure to make
himself a geast.
In faith, and I will seek there for him.
Then must you néedes find him, and when you
have done I will make you laugh.
Whereat?
At certain sport I made to day with moister doctor.
And why not now?
No it asks further leisure, I pray thée dispatch,
and find out Pasiphilo that honest man.
THis amorous cause that hangs in cōtrouersie between
Domino doctor &amp; me, may be compared to thē that play
at primero, of whō some one peradventure shall léese a great
sum of money before he win one stake, &amp; at last half in an∣ger
shall set up his rest, win it, &amp; after that another, another,
&amp; another, till at last he draw ye most part of the money to
his heap, ye other by little &amp; little still diminish•g his rest, till
at last he be come as néere the brink, as erst ye other was,
yet again peradventure fortune smiling on him, he shall as
it were by péece meal, pull out ye guts of his fellows bags,
&amp; bring him barer than he himself was tofore, &amp; so in play
continue still, (fortune favouring now this way now y• way)
till at last ye one of thē is left with as many crosses as God
hath brethren: O howe often have I thought my self sure
of the upper hand herein? but I triumphed before the vic∣tory:
and then how oft again have I thought the field•
lost? Thus have I béene tossed now over, now under,
even as fortune list to wherle the whéele, neither sure to
win nor certain to loose the wager: and this practise
that now my servant hath devised, although hitherto it
hath not succeeded amiss, yet can I not count my self issue∣red
of it, for I fear still that one mischance or other will
come and turn it topsy tur•ie. But look where my may∣ster
comes.
DVlipo.
Here sir.
Go in and bid Neuola and his fellows come hither
that I may tell them what they shall go about, and go you
into my study, there upon the shelf you shall find a roll
of writings which Iohn of the Deane made to my father,
when he sold him the Grange ferme, endorsed with both
their names: bring it hither to me.
It shall be done sir.
Go, I will prepare other manner of writings for you
thā you are aware of. O fools that trust any mā but them∣selves
now adays, oh spiteful fortune, thou doest me wrōg
I think, that from the depth of Hell pit thou hast sent
me this servant to be the subversion of me and all mine,
come hither sirs and hear what I shall say unto you: go in
to my study, where you shall find Dulippo, step to him all
at once, take him and with a corde that I have laid on the
table for the nonce, bind him hand and foot, carry him into
the dungeō under the steares, make fast the door and bring
me the kay, it hangs by upon a pin ou the wall, dispatch
and do this gear as privily as you can, and thou Neuola
come hither to me again with spéede.
Well sir I shall.
Alas how shall I be revenged of this extreme des∣pit?
if I punish my servant according to his devilish de∣serts,
I shall heap further cares upon mine own head,
for to such detestable offences no punishment can séeme
sufficient, but only death: &amp; in such cases it is not lawful
for a man to be his own carver, the laws are ord•yned,
and officers appointed to minister justice for the redress
of wrongs: and if to the potestates I complain me, I shall
publish mine own reproach to the world: yea, what
should it prevail me to use all the punishments that can
be devised? the thing once done can not be undone. My
daughter is deflowered, and utterly dishonested, howe can I
then wipe that blot off my brow? and on whom shall I
séeke revenge? Alas, alas, I my self have been the cause of
all these cares, and have deserved to bear the punishment
of all these mishaps. Alas, I should not have committed
my dearest darling in custody to so careless a creature as
this old Nurse: for we sée by common proof, that these
old women be either péeuishe, or to pitiful: either easily
inclined to evil, or quickly corrupted with bribes and re∣wards.
O wife, my good wife (that now lie cold in the
grave) now may I well bewail the want of thée, and
mourning now may I bemoan that I miss thée: if thou
had lived, such was thy government of the least things,
that thou would prudently have provided for the preser∣uation
of this pearl: a costly jewel may I well account
his, that hath béen my chéefe comfort in youth, and is now
become the coro••ue of mine age. O Polynesta, full evil hast
thou requ••ed the clemency of thy careful father, and yet to
excuse thée guiltless before God, and to condemn thée guilty
before the world, I can count none other but my wretched
self the caitiff and causer of all my cares: for of all the due∣ties
that are requisite in humane life, only obedience is
by the parents to be required of the child, where on ye other
side the parēts are bound, first to beget them, then to bring
thē forth, after to nourish them, to preserve them from by∣deli
perils in the cradle, from danger of soul by godly e∣ducation,
to match them in comfort inclined to virtue, to
banish them all idle and wanton company, to allow them
sufficient for their sustentation, to cut of excess the open
gate of sin, seldom or never to smile on them unless it
be to their encouragement in virtue, and finally, to provide
them marriages in time cōuenient, lest neglected of vs, they
learn to set either to much or to little by themselves: five
years are past since I might have married his, when by con∣tinuall
excuses I have prolonged it to my own perdition:
Alas, I should have considered, she is a collop of my own
flesh, what should I think to make his a princess? Alas a∣las,
a poor kingdom have I now caught to endue his with:
it is too true, that of all sorrows this is the head source and
chief fountain of all furies: the goods of the world are in∣certain,
the gains to be rejoiced at, and the loss not great∣lie
to be lamented, only the children cast away, cutteth the
parents throat with the knife of inward care, which knife
will kill me surely, I make none other account.
SIr, we have done as you bad vs, and here is the key.
Well, go then Neuola and séeke master Casteling
the jailer, he dwells by S. Antonies gate, desire him to
lend me a pair of the fetters he uses for his prisoners, and
come again quickly.
Well sir.
Hear you, if he ask what I would do with them,
say you cā not tell, and tell neither him nor any other, what
is become of Dulippo.
I warrant you sir. Fie upon the Devil, it is a thing al∣most
unpossible for a man now a days to handle money
but the metal will stick on his fingers: I marvelled always
at this fellow of mine Dulippo, that of the wages he re∣ceiued,
he could maintain himself so bravely apparelled,
but now I perceive the cause, he had the disbursing and re∣ceite
of al my masters affairs, the keys of the granair, Du∣lippo
here, Dulippo there, in favour with my master, in
favour with his daughter, what would you more, he was
Magister face totum, he was as fine as the Crusades, and we
silly wretches as course as canvas: well, behold what it is
come to in the end, he had bin better to have done less.
Thou say true Neuola, he hath done to much in déed.
From whence comes thou in the devils name?
Out of the same house thou came from, but not out
of the same door.
We had thought thou had been gone long since.
When I arose from the table, I felt a rumbling in
my belly, which made me run to the stable, and there I
fell on sléepe upon the straw, and have line there ever
since: And thou, whether goosed thou?
My Master hath sent me on an errand in great hast.
Whether I pray thee?
Nay I may not tell, Farewell.
As though I néede any further instructions: O God
what news I hard even now, as I lay in the stable: O good
Erostrato and pore Cleander, that have so earnestly strouen
for this damsel, happy is he that can get his I promise you,
he shall be sure of mo than one at a clap that catches his, ey∣there
Adam or Eve within his belly: oh God how men may
be deceived in a woman: who wold have beléeued the con∣trary
but that she had bin a virgin? ask the neighbours and
you shall hear very good report of his, mark his behauiors
&amp; you would have judged his very maidenly, seldom seen
abroad but in place of prayer, and there very devout, and
no gazer at outward sights, no blazer of his beauty aboue
in the windows, no stal at the door for the bypassers: you
would have thought his a holy young woman. But much
good doe it you Domino Doctor, he shall be sure to lack no
corn in a dear year, whatsoever he have with his else: I
beshrew me if I let the marriage any way. But is not this
the old scabbed queen that I heard disclosing al this géere
to his master, as I stood in the stable ere now? it is she.
Whither goes Psiteria?
TO a Gossip of mine héereby.
What? to tattle of the goodly stir that thou keptst
concerning Polynesta.
No, no: but how knew you of that géere?
You told me.
I? when did I tell you?
Even now when you told it to Demon, I both saw
you and heard you, though you saw not me: a good part I
promise you, to accuse the poor wench, kill the old man
with care, over and besides the danger you have brought
Dulipo and the Nurse unto, and many more, fie, fie.
In déed I was to blame, but not so much as you think.
And how not so much did I not hear you tell?
Yes, But I will tell you how it came to pass: I have
known for a great while, that this Dulipo and Polynesta
have béene together, and all by the means of the nurse, yet
I held my peace, and never told it. Now this other day the
Nurse fell on scolding with me, and twice or thrice cal∣led
me drunken old whore, and such names that it was
t•o bad: and I called his •aude, and told his that I
knew well enough howe often she had brought Dulipo to
Polynestas bed: yet all this while I thought not that any
body had heard me, but it befell clean contrary, for my
moister was on the other side of the wall, and heard all our
talk, whereupon he sent for me, and forced me to confess
all that you heard.
And why would thou tell him? I would not
for. &amp;c.
Well, if I had thought my moister would have ta∣ken
it so, he should rather have killed me?
Why? how could he take it?
Alas, it pitieth me to sée the poor young woman how
she wéepes, wails, and tears his hear, not esteming his
own life half so dear as she doth poor Dulipoes: and his
father, he wéepes on the other side, that it would pearce an
hart of stone with pity: but I must be gone.
Go that the gone powder consume the old trot.
WHat shall I doe? Alas what remedy shall I find for
my rueful estate? what escape, or what excuse may
I now devise to shift over our subtle supposes? for though
to this day I have usurped the name of my moister, and that
without chec•e or control of any man, now shall I be open∣lie
discyphred, and that in the sight of every man: now shall it
openly be known, whether I be Erostrato the gentleman,
or Dulipo the servant: we have hitherto played our parts
in abusing others, but now comes the man that will not
be abused, the right Philogono the right father of the right
Erostrato, going to seek Pasiphilo, and hearing that he was
at the water gate, behold I espied my servant Litio, and
by and by my old moister Philogano setting forth his first
step on land, I to fuge and away hither as fast as I could to
bring word to the right Erostrato, of his right father Philo∣gano,
that to so sudden a mishap some subtle shift might be
vpō the sudden devised. But what can be imagined to serve
the turn, although we had a months respite to beat our
brains about it, since we are commōly knowē, at the least
supposed in this town, he for Dulipo, a slave &amp; servant to
Demon, &amp; I for Erostrato a gentleman &amp; a student? But be∣hold,
run Crapine to yonder old woman before she get
within the doors, &amp; desire his to call out Dulipo: but hear
you? if she ask who would speak with him, say thy self
and none other.
HOnest woman, you gossip, thou rotten whore, hear
thou not old witch?
A rope stretch your young bones, either you must
live to be as old as I, or be hanged while you are young.
I pray thée loke if Dulipo be within.
Yes that he is I warrant him.
Desire him then to come hither and speak a word
with me, he shall not tarry.
Content your self, he is otherwise occupied.
Yet tell him so gentle girl.
I tell you he is busy.
Why is it such a matter to tell him so, thou crooked
Crone?
A rope stretch you marie.
A pockes eat you marie.
Thou wilt be hanged I warrant thée, if thou live to it.
And thou wilt be burnt I warrant thée, if the canker
consume thée not.
If I come néere you hempstring, I will teach now
to sing sol fa.
Come on, and if I get a stone I will scare crows
with you.
Go with a mischief, I think thou be some devil
that would tempte me.
Crapine: hear you? come away, let his go with a
vengeance, why come you not? Alas loke where my my∣ster
Philogano comes: what shall I doe? where shall I
hide me? he shall not sée me in these clothes, nor before I
have spoken with the right Erostrato.
HOnest man it is even so: be you sure there is no love to
be compared like the love of the parents towards their
children, it is not long since I thought that a very weighty
matter should not have made me come out of Sicilia, and
yet now I have taken this tedious toil and travail upon
me, only to sée my son, &amp; to have him home with me.
By my faith sir it hath been a great travail in de•e
and to much for one of your age?
Yea be you sure: I came in company with certain
gentlemen of my country, who had affairs to dispatch as
far as to Ancona, from thence by water to Rauenna, and
from Rauenna hither, continually against the tide.
Yea, &amp; I think y• you had but homly lodging by ye way.
The worst ye ever man had, but that was nothing to
the stir that ye searchers kept with me whē I came aborde
y• ship, Iesus how oftē they vntrussed my male &amp; ransacked
a little capcase that I had, tossed &amp; turned all that was with∣in
it, searched my bosom, yea my bréeches, that I assure you I
thought they would have flayed me to search between the
fell and the fl•she for fardings.
Sure I have heard no less, and that the merchants
bob them some times, but they play the knaves still.
Yea be you well assured, for such an office is the in∣heritance
of a knave, and an honest man will not meddle
with it.
Well, this passage shall seem pleasant unto you whē
you shall find your child in health and well: but I pray
you sir why did you not rather send for him into Sicilia, thā
to come your self, specially since you had none other busi∣ness?
peradventure you had rather endanger your self by
this noisome journey, than hazard to draw him from his
study.
Nay, that was not y• matter, for I had rather have
him give over his study altogether and come home.
Why? if you minded not to make him learned, to
what end did you send him hither at the first?
I will tell you: when he was at home he did as most
young men doe, he played many mad pranks and did many
things that liked me not very well, and I thinking, that by
that time he had scene the world, he would learn to know
himself better, exhorted him to study, and put in his electiō
what place he would go to. At the last he came hither, and I
think he was scarce here so soon as I felt the want of him,
in such sort, as from that day to this I have passed few
nights without tears: I have written to him very often
that he should come home, but continually he refused still,
beseeching me to continue his study, wherein he doubted not
(as he said) but to profit greatly.
In dede he is very much commended of all men, and
specially of the best reputed students.
I am glad he hath not lost his time, but I care not
greatly for so much knowledge, I would not be without
the sight of him again so long, for all the learning in the
world. I am old now, and if God should call mée in
his absence, I promise you I think it would drive me
into desperation.
It is commendable in a man to love his childrē, but
to be so tender over them is more womanlike?
Well, I confess it is my fault: and yet I will tell
you another cause of my coming hither, more weighty
than this. Divers of my country have been here since he
came hither, by whom I have sent unto him, and some of
thē have been thrice, some four or five times at his house,
and yet could never speak with him: I fear he applies his
study so, that he will not léese the minute of an hour from
his book. What, alas, he might yet talk with his country∣men
for a while, he is a young man, tenderly brought up, and
if he fare thus continually night and day at his book, it may
be enough to drive him into a frenesie.
In dede, enough were as good as a feast: lo• you sir,
here is your son Erostratoes house, I will knock.
Yea, I pray you knock.
They hear not.
Knock again.
I think they be on sleep.
If this gate were your Grandefathers soul, you
could not knock more softly, let me come: ho, ho, is there
any body within?
WHat devil of hell is there? I think he will break
the gates in péeces.
Marie fir, we had thought you had béene on sléepe
within, and therefore we thought best to make you: what
doth Erostrato?
He is not within.
Open the door good fellow I pray thée.
If you think to lodge here, you are deceived I tell
you, for here are guests enough already.
A good fellow, and much for thy masters honesty by
our Lady: and what guests I pray thée?
Here is Philogano my masters father, lately come
out of Sicilia.
Thou speak truer than thou art aware of, he will
be, by that time thou hast opened the door: open I pray thée
heartily.
It is a small matter for me to open the door, but
here is no lodging for you, I tell you plain, the house is
full.
Of whom?
I told you: here is Philogano my masters father
come from Cathanea.
And when came he?
He came thrée hours since, or more, he alighted at
the Angel, and left his horses there: afterword my my∣ster
brought him hither.
Good fellow, I think thou haste good sport to mock
mée.
Nay, I think you have good sport to make me tarry
here, as though I have nothing else to doe: I am matched
with an unruly mate in the kitchen, I will go loke to
him another while.
I think he be drunken.
Sure he séemes so: sée you not how red he is about
the gills?
Abide fellow, what Philogano is it whom thou
talk of?
An honest gentlemā, father t• Erostrato my moister.
And where is he?
Here within.
May we sée him?
I think you may if you be not blind.
Go to, go tell him here is one wold speak with him.
Mary that I will willingly doe.
I can not tell what I should say to this géere, Litio
what think thou of it?
I cannot tell you what I should say sir, the world
is large and long, there may be more Philoganos and
more Erostratos than one, yea and more Ferraras, more Sicili∣as,
and more Cathaneas: peradventure this is not that Fer∣rara
which you sent your son unto.
Peradventure thou art a f••le, and he was another
that answered vs even now. But be you sure honest man,
that you mistake not the house?
Nay, then god help, think you I know not Ero∣stratos
house? yes, and himself also: I saw him here no
longer since thā yesterday: but here cōmes one that will tell
vs tidings of him. I like his countenance better than the
others that answered at the window erewhile.
WOuld you speak with me sir?
Yea sir, I would fine know whence you are.
Sir I am a Sicilian, at your commandment.
What part of Sicilia?
Of Cathanea.
What shall I call your name?
My name is Philogano.
What trade doe you occupy?
Merchandise.
What merchandise brought you hither?
None, I came only to sée a son that I have here,
whom I saw not these two years.
What call they your son?
Erostrato.
Is Erostrato your son?
Yea verily.
And are you Philogano.
The same.
And a merchant of Cathanea?
What néede I tell you so often? I will not tell you
a lye.
Yes, you have told me a false lie, and thou art a
villain and no better.
Sir, you offer me great wrong with these injurious
words.
Nay, I will doe more than I have yet proffered to
doe, for I will prove thée a liar, and a knave to take upon
thée that thou art not.
Sir I am Philogano of Cathenea, out of all doubt, if
I were not I would be loathe to tell you so.
Oh, sée the boldness of this brute beast, what a bra∣sen
face he sets on it?
Well, you may believe me of you list: what won∣der
you?
I wonder at thy impudence, for thou, nor nature
that framed thée, can ever counterfeit thée to be me, ribald
villain, and lying wretch that thou art.
Shall I suffer a knave to abuse my masters father
thus? hence villain, hence, or I will sheath this good few∣chiō
in your paūch: if my moister Erostrato find you prating
here on this fashiō to his father, I wold not be in your coat
for mo cunnie skins than I gat these twelve months:
come you in again sir, and let this Cur bark here till hée
burst.
LItio, how likest thou this géere?
Sir, I like it as evil as may be, but have you not
often heard tell of the falsehood of Ferrari, and now may you
sée, it falls out accordingly.
Friend, you do not well to slander the City, these
men are no Ferrareses you may know by their tong.
Well, there is never a barrel better herring, be∣twene
you both: but in déed your officers are most to blame,
that suffer such faults to escape unpunished.
What know the officers of this? think you they
know of every fault?
Nay, I think they will know as little as may be,
specially when they have no gains by it, but they ought to
have their ears as open to hear of such offēces, as the In∣gates
be to receive guests.
Hold thy peace fool.
By the mass I am afeared that we shall be proved
fools both two.
Well, what shall we do?
I would think best we should go séeke Erostrato him
self.
I will waite upon you willingly, and either at the
schools, or at the convocations, we shall find him.
By our Lady I am weary, I will run no longer a∣bout
to seek him, I am sure hither he will come at the last.
Sure, my mind gives me that we shall find a new E∣rostrato
ere it be long.
Look where he is, whether runs he? stay you a∣while,
I will go tell him that you are here: Erostrato, Ero∣strato,
ho Erostrato, I would speak with you.
Now can I hide me no longer, Alas what shall
I doe? I will set a good face on, to bear out the
matter.
O Erostrato, Philogano your father is come, of
Sicilia.
Tell me that I know not, I have been with him
and séene him already.
Is it possible? and it séemeth by him that you know
not of his coming.
Why, have you spoken with him? when saw you
him I pray you?
Loke you where he stands, why go you not to
him? Look you Philogano, behold your dear son
Erostrato.
Erostrato? this is not Erostrato, this séemeth ra∣there
to bée Dulippo, and it is Dulippo in déede.
Why, doubt you of that?
What saith this honest man?
Mary sir, in déede you are so honourably clad, it is
no marvel if you loke big.
To whom speaks he?
What, God help, do you not know me?
As far as I remember Sir, I never saw you
before.
Hark Litio, here is good géere, this honest man
will not know me.
Gentleman, you take your marks amiss.
Did I not tell you of the falsehood of Ferrari master?
Dulippo hath learned to play the knave indifferently well
since he came hither.
Peace I say.
Friend, my name is not Dulippo, ask you tho∣rough
out this town of great and small, they know me: ask
this honest man that is with you, if you will not beléeue
me.
In déede, I never knew him otherwise called
than Erostrato, and so they call him, as many as know
him.
Master, now you may sée the falsehood of these fell∣lowes,
this honest man your host, is of counsel with
him, and would face vs down that it is Erostrato: beware
of these mates.
Friend, thou doest me wrong to suspect me,
for sure I never heard him otherwise called than Ero∣strato.
What name could you hear me called by, but
by my right name? But I am wise enough to stand prating
here with this old man, I think he be mad.
Ah runagate, ah villain traitor, doest thou use
thy master thus? what hast thou done with my son villain?
Doth this dog bark here still? and will you suffer
him master thus to revile you?
Come in, come in, what wilt thou do with this
pestil?
I will rap the old cackabed on the costerd.
Away with it, &amp; you sir, lay down these stones,
come in at door every one of you, bear with him for his
age, I pass not of his evil words.
ALas, who shall reli•ue my miserable estate? to whom
shall I complain, since he whom I brought up of a
child, yea and cherished him as if he had been mine own,
doth now utterly deny to know me? and you whom I
toke for an honest man, and he that should have brought
me to the sight of my son, are compact with this false
wretch, and would face me down that he is Erostrato. A∣las,
you might have some compassion of mine age, to the mi∣serie
I am now in, and that I am a stranger desolate of all
comfort in this country, or at the least, you should have
feared the vengeance of God the supreme judge (which
knows the secrets of all harts) in bearing this false wit∣ness
with him, whom heaven and •arth do know to be
Dulippo and not Erostrato.
If there be many such witness in this country, mē
may go about to prove what they will in controversies
here.
Well sir, you may judge of me as it pleases you,
and howe the matter comes to pass I know not, but
truly, ever since he came first hither, I have known him
by the name of Erostrato y• son of Philogano a Cathanese,
now whether he be so in dede, or whether he be Dulipo, (as
you aleadge) let that be proved by them that knew him be∣fore
he came hither. But I protest before god, that which
I have said, is neither a matter compact with him, nor any
other, but euē as I have hard him called &amp; reputed of al mē.
Out and alas, he whom I sent hither with my son
to be his servant, and to give attendance on him, hath ey∣there
cut his thr•ate, or by some evil means made him a∣way,
and hath not only taken his garments, his books,
his money, and that which he brought out of Sicilia with
him, but usurps his name also, and turns to his own
commodity the bills of exchange that I have always al∣lowed
for my sons expenses, Oh miserable Philogano,
oh unhappy old man: oh eternal god, is there no judge? no
officer? no higher powers whom I may complain unto
for redress of these wrongs?
Yes sir, we have potestates, we have Judges, and a∣above
al, we have a most just prince, doubt you not, but you
shall have justice if your cause be just.
Bring me then to the Judges, to the potestates, or
to whom you think best: for I will disclose a pa•t of the
greatest knavery, a farthel of the foulest falsehode that
ever was heard of.
Sir, he that will go to the civil law, must be sure
of four things: first, a right and a just cause: then a right∣os
doctor to plead: next, favour Coram Iudice: and aboue
all, a good purse to procure it.
I have not heard, that the law hath any respect to fa∣uour,
what you mean by it I cannot tell.
Have you no regard to his words, he is but a
〈◊〉.
I pray you sir, let him tell me what is favour?
Favour cal I, to have a friend néere about the Judge,
who may so solicit thy cause, as if it be right, spéedie sen∣tence
may ensue without any delays: if it be not good, then
to prolong it, till at the last, thine adversary being weary,
shall be glad be compound with thée.
Of thus much (although I never heard thus much in
this country before) doubt you not Philogano, I will bring
you to an advocate that shall spéede you accordingly.
Then shall I give my self, as it were a pray to the
doctors, whose insatiable jaws I am not able to féede, al∣though
I had here all the goods and lands which I possess
in mine own coūtrey, much less being a straūger in this
misery. I know their cautels of old: at the first time I come
they will so extol my cause, as though it were already won:
but within in seuēnight or ten days, if I do not continually
féede them as the crow doth his brattes, twenty times in
an hour, they will begin to wax cold, and to find ca∣nils
in my cause, saying, that at the first I did not well in∣struck
them: till at the last, they will not only draw
the stuffing out of my purse, but the marrow out of my
bones.
Yea sir, but this man that I tell you of, is half a
Saint.
And the other half a Devil, I hold a penny.
Well said Litio, in déede I have but small confi∣dence
in their smooth looks.
Well sir, I think this whom I mean, is no such
manner of man: but if he were, there is such hatred and
evil will between him and this gentleman (whether he be
Erostrato or Dulippo, what so ever he be) that I warrant
you, he will doe what so ever he can do for you, were it but
to spite him.
Why? what hatred is betwixt them?
They are both in love and suitors to one gentlewo∣man,
the daughter of a wealthy man in this city.
Why? is the villeine become of such estimate•n that
he dare presume to be a suitor to any gentlewomā of a good
family?
Yea sir out of all doubt.
How call you his adversary?
Cleander, one of the excellentest doctors in our city.
For gods love let vs go to him.
Go we then.
WHat a mishap was this? that before I could méete
with Erostrato, I have light even full in the lap of
Philogano, where I was constrained to deny my name, to
deny my moister, and to fine that I knew him not, to con∣tend
with him, and to revile him, in such sort, that hap what
hap can, I can never hap well in favour with him again:
therefore if I could come to speak with the right Erostrato.
I will renounce unto him both habit and credit, &amp; away
as fast as I can trudge into some strange country, where
I may never sée Philogano again. Alas, he that of a little
child hath brought me up unto this day, and nourished me
as if I had been his own: and in dede (to confess ye troth)
I have no father to trust unto but him. But loke where
Pasiphilo comes, the fittest man in the world to go on
my message to Erostrato.
TWo good news have I heard to day already, one that
Erostrato prepared a great feast this night: y• other, that
he séeketh for me, and I to ease him of his travail, least he
should run up and down séeking me, and because no
man loves better thā I to have an errand where good chéer
is, come in post hast even home to his own house: and loke
where he is.
Pasiphilo, thou must doe one thing for me if thou
love me.
If I love you not, who loves you, command me?
Go then a little there, to Demons house, ask for Du∣lipo,
and tell him.
Wot you what? I cannot speak with him, he is in
prison.
In prison? how comes that to pass? where is he
in prison?
In a vile dungeon there within his masters house.
Can thou tell wherefore?
Be you content to know he is in prison, I have told
you to much.
If ever you will doe any thing for me, tell me.
I pray you desire me not, what were you the better
if you knew?
More than thou think Pasiphilo by god.
Well, and yet it stands me upon more than you
think, to keep it secrete
Why Pasiphilo, is this the trust I have had in you?
are these the fair promises you have always made me?
By the mass I would I had fasted this night with
moister doctor, rather than have come hither.
Well Pasiphilo, either tell me, or at few words
never think to bee welcome to this house from hence
forth.
Nay, yet I had rather léese all the gentlemen in
this town, but if I tell you any thing that displease you,
blame no body but your self now.
There is nothing can grieve me more thā Dulipos
mishap, no not mine own, and therefore I am sure thou
can tell me no worse tidings.
Well, since you would néedes have it, I will tell you:
he was taken a bed with your beloved Polynesta.
Alas, and doth Demon know it?
An old trot in the house disclosed it to him, where∣upon
he took both Dulipo and the Nurse which hath been
the broker of all this bargain, and clapte them both in
a cage, where I think they shall have sour soppes to
their swéete meates.
Pasiphilo, go thy ways into the kitchen, command
the cooke to boyle and roast what likes thée best, I make
thée supra visor of this supper.
By the mass if you should have studied this seue∣night,
you could not have appointed me an office to please
me better, you shall sée what dishes I will devise.
I Was glad to rid him out of the way, least he should sée
me burst out these swelling tears, which hitherto with
great payne I have prisoned in my breast, &amp; least he should
hear the Echo of my doubled sighs, which bounce from
the bottom of my heavy heart. O cursed I, O cruel fortune,
that so many dispersed griefs as were sufficient to sub•ert
a legion of Lovers, hast suddenly assembled within my care∣full
carcase to freat this fearful heart in sunder with de∣speration:
thou that hast kept my master all his youth
within the realm of Sicilia▪ reserving the wind and waives
in a temperate calm (as it were at his command) now
to convey his aged limbs hither, neither sooner nor la∣la,
but even in the worst time that may be: if at any time
before thou hottest conducted him, this enterprise had been
cut off without care in the beginning: and if never so little
longer thou had lingered his journey, this happy day might
then have fully finished our drifts and devises. But alas,
thou hast brought him euē in the very worst time, to plunge
vs all in the pit of perdition. Neither art thou content to
entangle me alone in thy ruinous ropes, but thou must al∣so
catch the right Erostrato in thy crooked claws, to re∣ward
vs both with open shame and rebuke. Two years
hast thou kept secret our subtle Supposes, even this day to
decipher them with a sorrowful success. What shall I do?
Alas what shift shall I make? it is too late now to ima∣gin
any further deceit, for every minute séemeth an hour
till I find some succour for the miserable captive Erostrato.
Well, since there is no other remedy, I will go to my ma∣ster
Philogano, and to him will I tell the whole truth of
the matter, that at the least he may provide in time, before
his son féele the smart of some sharpe revenge &amp; punish∣meant:
this is the best, and thus will I do: yet I know, that
for mine own part I shall do bitter penance for my faults
forepassed: but such is the good will and duty that I bear
to Erostrato, as even with the loss of my life I must not
stick to adventure any thing which may turn to his cō∣moditie.
But what shall I do? shall I go séeke my master
about the town, or shall I tarry his return hither? If I
méete him in the stréetes, he will cry out upon me, neither
will he harken to any thing that I shall say, till he have ga∣thered
all the people woondring about me, as it were at an
Owl. Therefore I were better to abide here, and yet if he
tarry long, I will go séeke him, rather than prolong the
time to Erostratos peril.
YEa dress them, but lay them not to the fire, till they will
be ready to sit down: this géere goes in order: but if
I had not gone in, there had fallen a foul fault.
And what fault I pray thée?
Marie, Dalio would have laid the shoulder of mut∣ton
and the Capon both to the fire at once, like a fool, he
did not consider, that the one would have more roasting
than the other.
Alas, I would this were the greatest fault.
Why? and either the one should have been burned
before the other had •en roasted, or else he must have
drawn them off the spit: and they would have been ser∣ued
to the board either cold or raw.
Thou hast reason Pasiphilo.
Now sir, if it please you I will go into the town
and buy oranges, •lives, and caphers, for without such
sauce the supper were more than half lost.
There are within already, doubt you not, there shall
lack nothing that is necessary.
Since I told him these news of Dulipo, he is
clean beside him self: he hath so many hammers in his
head, that his brains are ready to burst: and let them
break, so I may sup with him to night, what care I?
But is not this Dominus noster Cleandrus that comes
before? well said, by my truth we will teach master
Doctor to wear a cornerd cap of a new fashion: by God
Polynesta shall be his, he shall have his out of doubt, for I
have told Erostrato such news of his, that he will none
of his.
YEa, but how wilt▪ ye prove that he is not Erostrato, ha∣uing
such presumptiōs to the cōtrarie? or how shall it be
thought that you are Philogano, when an other takes up∣on
him this same name, and for proof brings him for a
witness, which hath been ever reputed here for Erostrato?
I will tell you sir, let me •e kept héere fast in
prison, and at my charges let there be some man sent into
Sicilia▪ that may bring hither with him two or thrée of the
honestest men in Cath•no and by them let it be proved if
I or this other be Philogano, and whether he be Erostra∣to
or Dulipo my servant: and if you find me contrary, let
me suffer death for it.
I will go salute master Doctor.
It will ask great labour &amp; great expenses to prove
it this way, but it is the best remedy that I can see.
God save you sir.
And reward you as you have deserved.
Then shall be give me your favour continually.
He shall give you a halter, knave and villein that
thou art.
I know I am a knave, but no villein, I am your
servant.
I neither take thée for my seruāt, nor for my friend.
Why? wherein have I offended you sir?
Hence to the gallows knave.
What soft and fair sir, I pray you, I prae se••••,
you are mine elder.
I will be even with you, be you sure, honest man.
Why sir? I never offended you.
Well, I will teach you: out of my sight knave.
What? I am no dog, I would you wist.
Prate thou yet villein? I will make thée.
What will you make me? I sée well the more a man
d•the suffer you, the worse you are.
A villein, if it were not for this gentlemā, I would
tell you what I.
Uillein? nay I am as honest a man as you.
Thou least in thy throat knave.
O sir, stay your wisdom.
What will you fight? marie come on.
Well knave, I will méete with you another time,
go your way.
Even when you list sir, I will be your man.
And if I be not even with thée, call me cut.
Nay by the mass, all is one, I care not, for I have
nothing: if I had either lands or goods, peradventure you
would pull me into the law.
Sir, I perceive your patience is moved.
This villeine: but let him go, I will sée him puny∣shed
as he hath deserved. Now to the matter, howe said
you?
This fellow hath disquieted you sir, peradventure
you would be loathe to be troubled any further.
Not a whit, say on, and let him go with a ven∣geance.
I say, let them send at my charge to Cathanea.
Yea I remember that well, and it is the surest way
as this case requires: but tell me, howe is he your ser∣uaunt?
and howe come you by him? inform me fully in
the matter.
I will tell you sir: when the Turks won Otranto.
Oh, you put me in remembrance of my mishaps.
How sir?
For I was driven among the rest out of the town
(it is my native country) and there I lost more than ever
I shall recover again while I live.
Alas, a pitiful case by saint Anne.
Well, procéede.
At that time (as I said) there were certain of our
country that scoured those costs upon the seas, with a
good bark well appointed for the purpose, and had espial
of a Turkey vessel that came laden from thence with great
abundance of riches.
And peradventure most of mine.
So they boarded them, &amp; in the end overcame them,
and brought the goods to Palermo, from whence they came,
and amongst other things that they had, was this villeine
my servant, a boy at that time, I think not paste five
years old.
Alas I lost one of that same age there.
And I being there, and liking the Childes favour
well, proffered them four and twenty ducats for him,
and had him.
What? was the child a Turk? or had the Turks
brought him from Otranto?
They said he was a Child of Otranto, but what
is that to the matter? once .xxiiij Ducats he cost me, that
I wot well.
Alas, I speak it not for that sir, I would it were he
whom I mean.
Why, whom mean you sir?
Beware sir, be not to lavish.
Was his name Dulippo then? or had he not an∣other
name?
Beware what you say sir.
What the devil hast thou to doe? Dulipo? no sir,
his name was Carino.
Yea, well said, tell all and more to, doe?
O Lord, if it be as I think, how happy were I? and
why did you change his name then?
We called him Dulippo, because when he cried
as Children doe sometimes, he would always cry on that
name Dulippo.
Well, then I sée well it is my own only Child,
whom I lost, when I lost my country: he was named
Carino after his grandfather, and this Dulippo whom he
always remembered in his lamenting, was his foster fa∣there
that nourished him and brought him up.
Sir, have I not told you enough of ye falsehood of Fer∣rara?
this gentlemā will not only pick your purse, but be∣guile
you of your servant also, and make you believe he is
his son.
Well goodfellow, I have not used to lie.
Sir no, but every thing hath a beginning.
Fie, Philogano have you not the least suspect• that
may be of me.
No marie, but it were good he had the most suspect
that may be.
Well, hold thou thy peace a little good fellow. I pray
you tell me Philogano had y• child any remembrance of his
fathers name, his mothers name or ye name of his family?
He did remember them, and could name his mother
also, but sure I have forgotten the name.
I remember it well enough.
Tell it then.
Nay, that I will not marie, you have told him to•
much already.
Tell it I say, if thou can.
Cā? yes by y• mass I cā well enough: but I will have
my tong pulled out, rather thā tell it, unless he tell it first:
doe you not perceive sir, what he goes about?
Well, I will tell you then, my name you know al∣ready▪
my wife his mothers name was Sophronia, the house
that I came of, they call Spiagia.
I never heard him speak of Spiagia but in déede I
have heard him say, his mothers name was Sophronia: but
what of y•? a great matter I promise you, it is like enough
that you two have compact together to deceive my moister.
What needs me more evident tokens? this is my
son out of doubt whom I lost eightéen years since, and a
thousand thousand times have I lamented for him: he should
have also a mould on his left shoulder.
He hath a mold there in déede: and an hole in an o∣there
place too, I would your nose were in it.
Fair words fellow Litio: oh I pray you let vs go
talk with him, O fortune, howe much am I bound to thee
if I find my son?
Yea how small am I beholdē to fortune, that know
not where my son is become, and you whom I chose to
be mine advocate, will now by the means of this Dulipo
become mine adversary?
Sir, let vs first go find mine: and I warrant you
yours will be found also ere it be long.
God grant, go we then.
Since the door is open, I will neither knock nor
call, but we will be bold to go in.
Sir, také you héede, least he lead you to some mis∣chief.
Alas Litio, if my son be lost what care I what
become of me?
Well, I have told you my mind Sir, doe you as
you please.
COme hither you old kallat, you tattling huswife, tha•
the devil cut out your tong: tell me, howe could Pasi∣philo
know of this géere but by you?
Sir, he never knew it of me, he was the first that
told me of it.
Thou least old drab, but I would advise you tell
me the truth, or I will make those old bones rattle in your
skin.
Sir, if you find me contrary, kill me.
Why? where should he talk with thée?
He talked with me of it here in the stréete.
What did you here?
I was going to the weavers for a web of clothe
you have there.
And what cause could Pasiphilo have to talk of it,
unless thou began the matter first?
Nay, he began with me sir, reviling me, because I
had told you of it: I asked him how he knew of it, and he
said he was in the stable when you examined me erewhile.
Alas, alas, what shall I doe then? in at doors old
whore, I will pluck that tong of thine out by the roots one
day. Alas it gréeueth me more that Pasiphilo knows it,
than all the rest: he that will have a thing kept secrete, let
him tell it to Pasiphilo, the people shall know it, and as
many as have ears and no mo: by this time he hath told
it in a hundredth places. Cleander was the first, Erostrato
the second, and so from one to another throughout the city.
Alas, what dower, what marriage shall I now prepare for
my daughter? O poor dolorous Demon, more miserable
than misery it self, would god it were true that Polinesta,
told me ere while: that he who has deflowered his, is of
no servile estate, as hitherto he hath been supposed in my
service: but that he is a gentleman borne of a good paren∣tage
in Sicilia. Alas, small riches should content me, if he be
but of an honest family, but I fear that he has devised
these toys to allure my daughters love. Well I will go ex∣amin
his again, my mind gives me that I shall perceive
by his tale whether it be true or not. But is not this Pasi∣philo
that comes out of my neighbours house? what the
devil ails him to leap and laugh so like a fool in the
high way?
O God, that I might find Demon at home.
What the devil would he with me?
That I may be the first that shall bring him these
news.
What will he tell me, in the name of God?
O Lord, how happy am I? loke where he is.
What news Pasiphilo, that thou art so merry?
Sir, I am merry to make you glād: I bring you joy∣full
news.
And that I have need of Pasiphilo.
I know sir, that you are a sorrowful man for this
mishap that hath chanced in your house, peradventure you
thought I had not known of it: but let it pass, pluck up
you sprites, and rejoice, for he that hath done you this iniu∣rye
is so well borne, and hath so rich parents, that you may
be glad to make him your son in law.
How know thou?
His father Philogano one of the worthiest men in
all Cathanea, is now come to the city, and is here in your
neighbours house.
What, in Erostratos house?
Nay in Dulipos house, for where you have always
supposed this gentlemā to be Erostrato, it is not so, but your
servant whom you have imprisoned hitherto, supposed to
be Dulipo, he is in dede Erostrato, and that other is Dulipo:
and thus they have always, even since their first arrival in
this city, exchanged names, to the end that Erostrato the
moister, under the name of Dulipo a servant, might be
entertained in your house, and so win the love of your
daughter.
Well, then I perceive it is euē as Polinesta told me.
Why, did she tell you so?
Yea: But I thought it but a tale.
Well, it is a true tale: and here they will be with
you by and by, both Philogano this worthy man, and my∣ster
doctor Cleander.
Cleander? what to doe?
Cleander? Why thereby lies another tale, the most
fortunate adventure that ever you heard: wot you what?
this other Dulipo, whom all this while we supposed to be
Erostrato, is found to be the son of Cleander, whom he
lost at the loss of Otranto, and was after sold in Sicilia to
this Philogano, the strangest case that ever you heard: a mā
might make a Comedy of it, they will come even straight,
and tell you the whole circumstance of it themselves.
Nay I will first go hear the story of this Dulipo,
be it Dulipo or Erostrato that I hear within, before I
speak with Philogano.
So shall you doe well sir, I will go tell them that
they may stay a while, but loke where they come.
SIr, you shall not need to excuse the matter any further,
since I have received no greater injury than by words:
let them pass like wind, I take them well in worth,
and am rather well pleased than offended, for it shall both
be a good warning to me another time howe to trust every
man at the first sight▪ yea, and I shall have good game here∣after
to tell this pleasant story another day in mine own
country.
Gentleman, you have reason, and be you sure, that
as many as hear it, will take great pleasure in it, and you
Philogano may think, that god in heaven aboue, hath or∣deigned
your coming hither at this present, to the end I
might rcouer my lost son, whom by no other means I
could ever have found out.
Surely sir I think no less, for I think that not so
much as a leaf falls from the tree, without the ordy∣nonce
of god. But let vs go seek Demon, for me thinks
every day a year, every hour a day, and every minute to
much till I see my Erostrato.
I cannot blame you, go we then, Carino take you
that gentleman home in the mean time, the fewer the bet∣la
to be present at such affairs.
Moister doctor, will you not shewme this favour, to tell
me the cause of your displeasure?
Gentle Pasiphilo, I must néedes confess I have
done thée wrong, and that I believed tales of thée, which in
déede I find now contrary.
I am glad then that it procéeded rather of ignorance
than of malice.
Yea believe me Pasiphilo.
O sir, but yet you should not have given me such
foul words.
Well, content thy self Pasiphilo, I am thy friend
as I have always been: for proof whereof, come sup
with me to night, and from day to day this seven night be
thou my guest: but behold, her•comes Demon out of
his house.
WE are come unto you sir, to turn your sorrow into
joy and gladness: the sorrow, we mean, that of force
you have sustained since this mishap of late fallen in your
house. But be you of good comfort sir, and assure your self,
that this young man which youthfully and not maliciously
hath committed this amorous offence, is very well hable
with consent of this worthy man his father, to make you
s•fficient amends, being borne in Cathanea of Sicilia, of a
noble house, noway inferior unto you, and of wealth (by
the report of such as know it) far excéeding that of
yours.
And I here in proper person, doe present unto you
sir, not only my assured friendship and brotherhood, but do
earnestly desire you to accept my poor child (though un∣worthy)
as your son in law: and for recompense of the
injury he hath done you, I profer my whole lands in dow∣er
to your daughter, yea and more would, if more I might.
And I sir, who have hitherto so earnestly desired
your daughter in marriage, doe now willingly yield up and
quite claim to this young man, who both for his years, and
for the love he bears his, is most méetest to be his husbād:
for where I was desirous of a wife by whom I might have
issue, to leave that little which god hath sent me, now have
I little néede, that (thanks be to god) have found my déere∣lie
beloved son, whom I lost of a child at the siege of
Otranto.
Worthy gentleman, you friendship, your alliance,
and the nobility of your birth are such, as I have much
more cause to desire them of you, than you to request of me
that which is already granted: therefore I gladly, and will∣lingly
receive the same, and think my self most happy
now of all my life past, that I have gottē so toward a son
in law to my self, and so worthy a father in law to my
daughter, yea and much the greater is my contentation,
since this worthy gentleman moister Cleander, doth hold
himself satisfied. And now behold your son.
O father.
Behold the natural love of the child to the the fa∣there,
for inward joy he cannot pronounce one word, in
stéede whereof he sends sobs and tears to tell the effect
of his inward intention. But why doe you abide here a∣broad?
will it please you to go into the house sir?
Pasiphilo has said well, will it please you to go
in sir?
Here I have brought you sir, both fetters &amp; bolts.
Away with them now.
Yea, but what shall I doe with them?
Marie I will tell thée Neuola, to make a right end
of our supposes, lay one of those bolts in the fire, and make
thée a suppository as long as mine arm, God save the sam∣ple.
Nobles and gentlemen, if you suppose that our suppo∣ses
have given you sufficient cause of delight, show some
token, whereby we may suppose you are content.

