Queen cup•• aethereas &amp; sums s•andere sed••
Vim simul ac fraudem discute chare tibi.
•rau• hic nulla 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉 forti• facta i•••b••,
Sola Dei tua te trahat, terse fides.
Queen placate in terris intactae palludis instar,
Viuere Virgin•m nitore virgo sequi,
Quo• tulit &amp; luctus, discas gaudia magna
Vitae, dum p•r•••ci•de• fila pareot.
Huc a••• ô virgo, paritere moritura sepulchre,
Sic ai• &amp; faciem pallida morte mutate.
WHo doth desire the trump of same, to sound unto the Skies,
Or else who seeks the holy place, where mighty Jove he lies,
He must not by deceitful mind, nor yet by puissant strength,
But by the faith and sacred life, he must it win a length,
And what she be that virgins life, on earth wold gladly lead,
The Sluts that Virginia did fall, I wish her read,
Her dollar and fire doleful loss, and yet her wis at death,
Come Virgins pure to grave with mée, quoth she with latest breath,
You Lordings all that present be, this Tragedy to hear,
Note well what zeal and love, herein doth well appear,
And Ladies you that linked are, in wedlock bands for ever,
Do imitate the life you sée, whose same will perish never,
But Virgins you, oh Ladies fair, for honour of your name.
Doo lead the life apparent héere, to win immortal same,
Let not the blinded God of Love, as Poets term him so,
Nor venus with her venery, nor Leehors cause of wo
Your Virgins name to spot or file: dear dames observe the like,
That fair Virginia did observe, who rather wish the knife,
Of fathers hand his life to end, then spot her chastity:
As she did wail, wail you her want you maids of court.
If any by example here, would shun that great annoy,
Our Author would rejoice in hart, and we would leap for joy,
Would Gods that our endeavour may, as well to please your ears,
As is our Actors meaning héere, then were we void of fears:
But patiently wee wish you bear with this our first attempt.
Which surely will to do our best, then yéeld vs no contempt,
And as you please in patient wise, our first for to receive,
Ere long a better shall you win, if god do grant vs leave.
BEfore the time that fortunes lot, did show each fate his dome,
Or Bird, or Beast, or fish, or Foul, or Earth had taken rome
The Gods they did decree to frame, the thing is ended now,
The Heavens, and the Planets eke, and moist from ayre to bow.
Then framed they ye man of mould &amp; clay, &amp; gave him time to reign,
As séemed best their sacred minds, to run and turn again:
They framed aiso after this, out of his tender side,
A péece of much formositie, with him for to abide:
From infancy to lusty you, and so to reign a while,
And well to live, till Etas he unawares, do him beguile.
And sith to see these gifts of them, no grounded cave to view,
Not daintily to deck them up, which after they may few:
Wherefore I thank the Gods aboue, that yéeld to me such fate,
To lincke to ée so just a spouse, and eke so loving mate.
Ey her I have a virgin pure, an imp of heavenly race,
Bosh sober, meek, and modest too, and virtuous in like rase:
To Temple will I wend therefore, to yéeld the Gods their praise,
For that they have thus luckily, anexed with my days.
But stay, behold the peerless sparks whereof my tongue did talk,
Approach in presence of my sight, to church I déeme they walk,
But stay I will, and shroud me secretly a while.
To see what wit or counsel grave, proceeds from their stile.
The perte and pricking prime of youth, ought chastisement to have,
But thou dear daughter neatest not, thy self doth show thee grave:
To se who Phoebus with his beams, hath youth so much insisted,
It doth me wee to see them crave the thing stould be detected.
I draw to grave, and nought can leave of thee to be desired,
As much as duty to thy dear, as reason hath required:
Thy sufferent Lord and friendly fear, Virginius father thine,
To nurse as doth become child, when bones are buried mine.
•e•el your mind of mournig plaints, dear mother rest your mind
For though that duty dainty were, dame nature will me bind,
So much to do, and further force, of Gods that rule the Skies,
The Glop and eke the Clement, they would me else disp•es.
Then if the Gods have granted thée, such grace to love thy syer,
When time shall choose thee out a make be constant I requier:
Love, live, and like him well, before you grant him grace or faith,
So shall your love continue long, experience thus he saith.
I grant dear Dame I doo agree,
When time shall so provide:
But tender youth and infancy,
Doth rather wish me bide,
What should I lose Dianas gift,
And eke the spring to shun:
By which Action fateally,
His final race did run:
Should I as abject be esteemed,
Throughout Pernassus hill,
Or should my Virgins name be filed,
It were to great a skill:
But yet it is unspotted lo,
Right well I doo conceive,
When wedlock doth require the same,
With parents love and leave:
Yet obstinate I will not be,
But willing will me yield:
When you command and not before
Then duty shall me shield.
Ah Gods that rule and rain, in heavens, in seas, in flods and lands,
Two couple such I surely dee me, you never made with hands,
A Gods why doo ye not compel eche Dame the like to show?
And every Imp of her again, her duty thus to know,
I cannot stay my tongue from talk, I needs must call my dear,
Oh spouse well met &amp; Daughter to, what news how do you cheer?
O dear Virginius Joy to me, oh peerless spouse and mate,
In health I praise the Gods I am and joyful for thy state,
Virginia my daughter dear
How stands all with thée?
Like happy state as mother told,
Like joyful sight to me.
By the Gods wife I joy me, that have such a treasure,
Such Gem and such Jewel, surmounting all measure:
Such a happy spouse, such a sortunate dame,
That no blot or stain, can impair her fame,
Against such an Imp, and graffe of my tree,
As clear doth surmount all others that bee.
Nay rather dear spouse how much is my case,
To be now advanced by such happy grace:
Doth daily distill, my husband so loving,
Granting and giving to all thing behouing,
Joying in me, and in the fruit of my womb.
Who would not requite it, the Gods yield their dome
And if it be I, the Gods doo destroy mée,
Rather then sin, so sore should annoy me.
Oh wife refill thy wishing for woe,
My self thy fault rightwell do know:
And rather I wish my self to be slain,
Then thou or thy daughter ought wo should sustain.
Oh Father my comfort, oh Mother my joy,
Oh Dear, and O sufferaigne, do cease to employ
Such dolorus talking, where dangers are none,
Where Joys are attendant, what néedeth this moan,
You matron, you spouse, you Nurse, and you wife,
You comfort, you only the some of his life:
You husband, you heart, you joy, and you pleasure,
You King, and you Kaiser, to her only treasure,
You Father, you Mother, my life doth sustain,
I babe and I bliss, your health am again,
Forbear then your dolor, let mirth be frequented
Let sorrow depart, and be not attempted.
Oh wife, oh spouse, I am content.
Oh Husband.
Oh Father wee doo consent.
The trustiest treasure in earth earth as wée sée,
Is man, wife and children in one to agrée,
Then friendly, and kindly, let measure be mixed
With reason, in season, where friendship is fixed.
When nature nursed first of all, young Alexander learned,
Of whō the Poets mention make, in judgment so deserned,
Oh what did want that love procured his vital end well near,
This is the hope where parents love, their children do not fear,
The trustiest treasure in earth as wée sée,
Is man wife and children &amp;c.
When time King Nisus would not let, his daughter to be taught,
Of any one correcting hand to nurtue to be brought:
She void of duty cut his lockes, and golden tresses clear,
Whereby his realm was overrun, and she was paid her hisr,
The trustiest treasure in earth as we see,
Is man wife and children. &amp;c.
When Dedalus from Create did fly,
With Icaru, his joy:
He nought regarding fathers words,
Did seek his own annoy:
He mounted up into the skies,
Whereat the Gods did frown,
And Phoebus sore his wings did fry,
And headlong flins him down.
The trustiest treasure in earth as we see.
Is man wife and children &amp;c.
Then sith that persualitie, doth partly discord moan,
And hatred often times doth creep where overmuch wee love:
And if we love no whit at all, the foaming trump will sound,
Come wife, come spouse, come daughter dear, let measure bear ye ground.
The trustiest treasure in earth as we see
Is man wife and children in one to agree,
Then friendly, and kindly, let measure be mixed, 
With reason, in season, where friendship is fixed.
VEry well sir, very well sir, it shall be done,
As fast as ever I can prepare,
Who dippes with the Devil, he had need have a long spoon.
Or else full small will be his fare:
Yet a proper Gentileman I am of truth
Yea that may ye see by my long side gown.
Yea but what am I, a Scholar, or a scholemaister, or else some youth.
A Lawyer, a student or else a country clone
A Brumman, a Baskit m••er, or a Baker of Pies,
A flesh or a Fishmon zer, or a sower of lies:
A Louse or a loser, a Leek or a Lark:
A Dreamer a Drommell, a fire or a spark;
A Caitiff, a Cutthrote, a cropper in corners,
A herbraine, a hangman, or a grafter of horners:
By the Gods, I know not how best to denise,
My name or my property, well to disguise:
A Merchant, a May poole, a man or a mackrel:
A Crab or a Crevice, a Crane or a cockerel:
Most of all these my nature doth enjoy,
Sometime I advance them, sometime I destroy,
A maid or a Mussel Boat, a wife or a wilde duck,
As bold as blind bayerd, as wise as a wood cock.
As fine as phippence, as proud as a Peacock,
As stout as a Stockefish, as méeke as a meacock,
As big as a beggar, as fat as a fool,
As true as a Tinker, as rich as an Owl,
With hey trick, how trowel, trey trip, and trey trace,
Trowel hazard in a vengeance I beshrew his knaves face
For trow, and trowel hazard, kéepe such a range
That poor haphazard, was never so strange,
But yet Haphazard, be of good chéere,
Go play and repast thée man, be merry to yéere:
Though vittaile be dainty and hard for to get.
Yet perhaps a number will die of the sweat,
Though it be in hazard, yet happily I may,
Though money be lacking, yet one day go gay.
When Maud, with a pestilence, what make thou no hast?
Of Bayberry incense belike thou would taste,
By the Gods I have stayed a full great while,
My lord he is near hand by this at the Church stile,
and al for Maud mumble turd, that mampodding madge
By the Gods if she hie not, isle give her my badge.
What drake nosed drivel, begin you to flout.
Zle fry you in a faggot stick, by cock goodman lout
You boaster you bragger, you brawling knave:
Zle pay thee thy fortypence, thou brawling slave:
My Ladies great business belike is at end,
When you goodman dawcocke, lust for to wend,
You, codshed you crackerope, you chattering pie,
Have with ye, have at ye, your manhood to try.
What hold your hands masters, what? fie for shame fie,
What culling? What lulling? What stir have wee here?
What tugging? What lugging? What pugging by the ear,
What part and be friends, and end all this strife,
Nay rather I Wish his, the end of my knife:
Draw it, give mée it, I will it receive,
So that for the place it, I might have good leave,
By the Gods: but for losing my land, life, and living,
It should be so placed, he should have ill thriving:
By the Gods how vngraciously the vicksen she chatted,
And he even as knavishly, my answer he patteth,
Here is nought else, but railing of words out of reason,
Now tugging, now tattling, now musling in season,
For shame be contented and leave of this brawling,
Content, for I shall repent it, for this my tongue wralling:
Thou knave, but for thee, ere this time of day,
My Ladies fair Pue, had been strawed full gay:
With Primroses, Couslips, and Violets sweet:
With Mints, and with Marigolds, and Margerum meet,
Which now lies vncleanly and all long of thée,
That a shame recompense thee, for hindering me,
Ah pretty prank parnel, the Coushen and Book,
Whereon he should read and kneel, are present here look:
My Lord when he sees me, he will cast such an eye,
As pinch will my hart near ready to die:
And thus wise, and thus wise, his hand will be walking
With thou precious knave, away get thee packing ¶ Here let him fight.
Nay then by the mass, its time to be knacking,
No words at all but to me he is pointing:
Nay have at you again, you shall have your anointing,
Body of me, hold if ye can,
What will you kill such a proper man?
Nay sure I have done when women do speak,
Why would the knave my patience so break?
Well I must begone, there is no remedy
For fear my tyle makes buttons, by mine honesty.
For reverence on your face, your nose and your chin:
By the Gods have ye hard such an unmannerly villin.
I never heard one so ra•cke of rudeness,
In faith it is but for sack of lewdness:
But here I burn day light, while thus I am talking
A way come Mansipula, let vs be walking,
Contented Mansipulus, have with thee with speed,
Nay stay yet my friends I am not agreed.
Wee dare not tarry, by God wee swear.
Nay tarry take comfort with you for to bear,
It is but in hazard and if you be mist,
And so it may happen you feel not his first:
Perhaps he is stayde by talk with some friend
It is but in hazard, then sing or you wend
Let hope be your helper, your care to defend.
By hap or by hazard, we singe or we cry,
Then singe let vs say so, let sorrow go by.
We can be but beaten that is the worst,
What how Mansipulus, thou knave art thou cursed
My lord stands talking and I gape for thée,
Come away with a wannion, run hast and hie,
Nay hearken Supseruus, stay I pray thée,
Let us have a song and then have with thée:
Content if thou hie thee.
Hope so, and hap so, in hazard of threfninge,
The worst that can hap le, in end is but beating.
What if my Lording, doo chance for to miss me,
The worst that can happen, is Cudgel will kiss me,
In such kind of sweetness, I swear by Gods mother,
It will please me better, it were on some other,
With thwicke thwack, with thump thump,
With bobbing and bum,
Our side saddle shoulders shall sheside that doth come?
Hope so, and hay so, in hazard &amp;c.
¶ If case that my Lady, do threaten my case,
No cause to contrary, but bear his a space,
Until she draw home lo, where so she will use me,
As Doctors doth doubt it, how I should excuse me,
With thwicke thwack, with thump thump,
With bobbing and bum,
Our side saddle shoulders shall shield that doth come.
Hope so, and hap so, in hazard &amp;c.
¶ What if your company cause me have woo,
I mind not companions so soon to forgo:
Let hope hold the Helmet, till brunt it be past,
For bloes are but buffets and words but a blast,
With thwick thwack, with thump thump,
with bobbing and bum,
Our side saddle shoulders shall shield that doth come,
Hope so, and hap so, in hazard &amp;c.
¶ Then let vs be merry, it is but by hap,
A hazardly thaunce may harbour a clap,
Bestur ye, be merry, be glad and be joying,
For bloes are but buffets and small time annoying,
With thwick thwack, with thump thump,
with bobbing and bum,
Our side saddle shoulders shall shield that doth come.
Hope so, and hap so, in hazard &amp;c.
Haphazard farewell, the Gods do thank thee. 
Farewell my friends, farewell gee prick yée:
By the Gods Haphazard, These men have tried thee,
Who said thou wast no man, sure he belied thée,
By love master Merchant by sea or by land,
Would get but small argent, if I did not stand,
His very good master, I may say to you,
When he hazards in hope, what hap will ensue:
In court I am no man, by cock sir ye lie,
A Ploughmen perhaps or ere that he die,
May hap be a Gentleman, a Courtier or Captain,
And hap may so hazard, he may go a begging:
Perhap that a Gentleman, heir to great land,
Which sells his living, for money in hand,
In hazard it is the bying of more,
Perhaps he may ride when spent is the store:
Hap may so hazard the Moon may so change.
That men may be masters, and wives will not range:
But in hazard it is in many a grange,
Lest wives were the Godpeece, and maidens coy strange:
As Peacocks sit perking, by chance in the plomtrée,
So maids would be masters, by the guise of this country
Haphazard eche state full well that he marks,
If hap the sky fall, we hap may have Larks:
Well, fare ye well now, for better or worse,
Put hands to your pockets, have mind to your purse.
THe sorrowed face of Fortunes force, my pinching pain doth move
I settled ruler of my realm enforced am to love:
Judge Apius I the prmeelest Judge, that reigns under son,
And have been so estaeemed long, but now my force is done:
I rule no more, but ruled am, I do not Judge, but am Judged,
By beauty of Virginia, my wisdom all is trudged,
Oh peerless Dame, Oh passing piece, oh face of such a fature,
That never e•st with bower such, matched was by nature:
Oh fond Apelles prattling fool, why boast thou so much?
The famost pee•e thou midst in Greece, whose ••mints were
Or why oldst thou dec•ued man, for beauty of thy work?
In such a sort with fond destre, where no kind life did lurk,
With raging fits thou fool ran mad, oh fond Pigmalion,
Yet sure if that thou saw my dear, the like ye could make none,
Then what may I, oh Gods aboue, bend down to hear my cry,
As once he did to Salmasis, in Pond hard Lyzia by:
Oh that Virginia were in case as sometime Salmasis,
And in Hermafroditus steed, my self might séeke my bliss,
Ah Gods, would I unfold her arms, complecting of my neck?
Or would I hurt her nimble hand, or yéelde her such a check?
Would I gainsay his tender skin, to baath where I do wash?
Or else refuse his soft sweet lips, to touch my naked flesh?
Nay, oh the Gods do know my mind, I rather would requier,
To sue, to serve, to crouch, to kneel, to crave for my dester.
But out ye Gods, ye bend your brows, and frown to sée me fare,
Ye do not force my fickle fate, ye do not way my care,
Unrighteous, and unequal Gods, unjust, and eke unsure,
Woe worth the time ye made me live, to sée this haplesse hour:
Did Iphis hang himself for love, of Lady not so fair?
Or else did Jove the cloudy mists, bend down from lightsome ayre:
Or as the Poets mention make, of Inachs daughter meek,
For love did he to make a Cow, whom Inach long did séeke:
Is love so great, to cause the quick, to enter into Hell,
As stout Orpheus did attempt, as histories do tell?
Then what is it that love cannot? Why love did pearce the skies:
Why Pheb. and famous Mercury, with love had blinded eyes?
But I a Judge of grounded years, shall reap to me such name,
As shall resound dishonour great, with Trump of careless fame:
Oh that my years were youthful yet, or that I were unwedded.
WHy cease sir Knight, for why perhaps, of you she shall be bedded:
For follow my counsel, so may you me please,
That of careful resurging, your hart shall have ease.
Oh thundering Gods that threaten ire,
and Plague for eche offence:
Your selves I déeme would counsel crave,
in this so fit pretence:
And eke your nimble stretched arms,
with great rewards would she,
To purchase farie Virginia,
so dear a wight to me:
And friend, I swear by Iubiter,
and eke by Iunos seat:
And eke by all the mysteries,
where on thou canust entreat:
Thou shalt possess and have,
I will thée grant and give,
The greatest part of all my Realm,
for aye thee to relieve.
Well then, this is my counsel, thus standard the case,
Perhaps such a setch, as may please your grace:
There is no more ways, but hap or hap not,
Either hap, or else haplesse, to knit up the knot:
And if you will hazard, to venture what falls,
Perhaps, that Haphazard, will end al your thralls.
I mean so. I will so, if thou do persuade me,
To hap or to hazard, what thing shall invade me:
I King and I Kaiser, I rule and overwhelm:
I do what it please me, with in this my realm:
Wherefore in thy indgement, see that thou do enter,
Hap life or hap death, I surely will venture.
Then this, and in this sort, stands the matter,
What need many words, unless I should flatter,
Full many there be, will hazard their life,
Happily to case your grace of all your strife,
Of this kind of conspiracy now let vs common,
Some man, Virginius, before you must summon,
And say that Virginia is none of his Daughter.
But that Virginius by night away caught her:
Then charge you the father his Daughter to bring,
Then do you detain his, till proved be the thing:
Which well you may win his, she present in house,
It is but Haphazard, a man or a mouse
I find it, I mind it, I swear that I will,
Though shame, or defame, do happen no skill,
But out I am wounded, how am I divided?
Two states of my life, from me are now glided,
For Consience he pricks me contempned,
And Justice saith, Judgment wold have me condemn ned:
Consience saith cruelty sure will detest me:
And Justice saith, death in the end will molest me,
And both in one sodden me thinks they do cry,
That fire eternal, my soul shall destroy.
Why these are but thoughts man? why fie for shame fie
For Consience was careless, and sailing by seas,
Was browned in a basket and had a disease,
Sore moved for pity, when he would grant none,
For being hard hearted, was turned to a stone:
And sayliing by Sandwitche he sunk for his sin,
Then care not for consience, the worth of a pin:
And Judgment judge Justice to have a reward,
For judging still justly, but all is now mart,
For gifts they are given, where Judgment is none,
Thus Judgment and Justice awronge way hath gone:
Then care not for Consience the worth of a fable,
Justice is no man, nor nought to do able.
And says thou so my sured fréende, then hap as hap shall hit,
Let Constance grope, &amp; judgment crave, I will not shrink one whit
I well persevere in my thought, I will deflower his youth,
I will not sure reverted be, my hart shall have no ruth,
Come on proceed and wayteou me, I will hap woe or wealth,
Hap blunt, hap sharp, hap life, hap death, though Haphazard be of health
At hand (quoth pick purse) here ready am I,
See well to the Cut Purse, be ruled by me.
O clear unspotted gifts of Love,
How haps thou art refused?
Oh Consience clear, what cruel mind
Thy truth hath thus misused?
I spotted am by wilful will,
By lawless love and lust
By dreadful danger of the life.
By faith that is unjust.
Ah gift of Jove, ah Fortunes face,
Ah state of steady life:
I Justice am and Prime of péeres,
The end of Laws and strife:
A guitar of the common weal,
A guerdon to the poor:
And yet hath filthy lust suppressed,
My virtues in one hour,
Well well this is the most to trust,
In end we shall aspire:
To see the end of thess our foes
With sword and eke with fire.
Oh help ye Gods, we members require.
When gain is no gransier,
And gauds nought set by:
Nor Puddings, nor Pie meat,
Poor knaves will come no:
Then hap and Haphazard,
Shall have a new cote:
And so it may happen.
To cut covetousness throat:
Yea then shall Judge Apius.
Virginia obtain:
And Geese shall crack Mussels,
Perhaps in the rain:
Larks shall be Leuerets,
And skip to and fro:
And chourles shall be codsheads,
Perhaps and also:
But peace for mans body,
Haphazard be mum,
Fie prattling noddy,
Judge Apius is come.
THe furies fell of Limbo Lake.
my Princely days doo short:
All drowned in deadly woes I live,
that once did joy in sport,
I live and languish in mylyse,
as doth the wounded Dear:
I thirst, I crave, I call and cry,
and yet am nought the mere:
And yet I have that me so match,
But Tantalus amids my care,
I hunger starve and pine:
As Sissifus I roll the stone,
in vain to top of Hill:
That evermore uncertainly,
revolving slideth still:
Oh, as if to her it were to me,
what labours would I fly?
What raging seas would I not plow,
to her commodity?
But out alas I doubt it sore,
lest drowsy Morpheus:
His slumbry kingdoms granted hath,
with Dews and beauteous:
Oh Gods aboue that rule the Skies,
ye Babes that brag in bliss:
Ye Goddesses, ye Graces you,
what burning brunt is this?
Bend down your Ire, destroy me quick:
or else to grant me grace,
No more but that my burning breast,
Virginia may imbace:
If case your ears be dead and deaf,
the Fiend and sprites beloe:
You careless •earl• of Limbo Lake,
your forced mightes doo shoe.
Thou Caitiff King of darksome den,
thou Pluto plaged knave:
Send forth thy sacred vengeance straight,
consume them to the grave:
That will not aide my case,
Content and if it like your grace,
I will attempt the deed:
I summon will Virginius,
before your seat with spéede,
Do so, my Lord be you not afraid,
And so you may happen to Hazard the maid:
It is but in Hazard, and may come by hap,
Win her, or lose her, try you the trap.
By the Gods, I consent to thee Claudius now
Prepare the in haste Virginius unto,
Charge him, command him, upon his alegeance
With all kind of spéede, to yéelde his obeisance,
Before my seat in my consistory
Subpene of land, life and treasury.
No let, no stay, nor ought perturbraunce,
Shall cause me to omit the furtherance,
Of this my weighty charge: 
Well now I range at large my will for to express,
For look how Torquin, Lucres fair, by force did once oppress,
Even so will I Virginia use:
Judge Apius prince, oh stay refuse,
Be ruled by thy friend:
What bloody death with open shame,
Did Torquin gain in end?
Whence doth this pinching sound defend?
From contrite Conscience pricked on,
By member of thy life,
Enforced for to cry and call,
And all to end our strife.
What art thou thou declare be bréefe?
Not flesh nor filthy lust I am:
But secret consience I,
Compelled to cry with trembling soul,
At point ne'er hand to die.
Why no disease dath me approach, no grief doth make me grudge,
But want of fair Virginia, whose beauty is my Judge:
By his I live, by his I die, for his I wy or woe,
For his my soul doth sink or swim, for his I swear I go.
Ah Gods, what wits doth rame, and yet to you unknown?
I die the death, and soul doth sink, this filthy flesh hath sown.
I force it not, I will attempt, I stay for Claudius hear,
Yet will I go to meet with him, to know what news and cheer.
Hast for a hangman, in hazard of hemp
Run for a riddueke, there is no such imp:
Claudius is knocking, with hammer and stone,
At Virginius gate, as hard as he can lay one:
By the Gods my masters, Haphazard is hardy,
For he will run rashly, be they never so many,
Yea he will singe sowsnowt, and sknap with the best,
But peace, who comes yonder, what Jolly good gest?
WHen men will seem misdoubtfully,
Without an why, to call and cry,
And fearing with temerity, its jeopardy, of liberty,
Wee wish him take to chere his hart, Haphazard,
Bold blind bayarde,
A Fig for his vncourtesie,
That seeks to shun good company.
What if case that cruelty, should bussell me, and iussell mée,
And Holywand should tirkle me, for keeping of good company:
Isle follow by my honesty, hap Haphazard, bold blind bayard,
A fig for his nvrourtesie, that seeks to shun good company.
When men will seem misdoubtfully,
Without an why, to call and cry. &amp;c.
Never was that mistress, so furious nor curious,
Nor yet his bloes so boisterous, nor rosterous, nor dolorous,
But sure I would venturous, hap Haphazard, bold blind bayard
A fig for his vncourtesie, that seeks to shun good company.
When men will seem misdoubtfully,
Without an why, to call and crew. &amp;c.
Then wend ye on and follow me, Mansipula, mansipula.
Let cropping cares be cast away, come follow me, come follow me,
Subseruus is a ioyly lout, brace Haphazard bold blind bayarde,
A fig for his vncourtesie, that seeks to shun good company.
When men will seem misdoubtfully,
Without an why, to call and cry. &amp;c.
I by the Gods my masters, I told you plain,
Who companies with me, will desire me again:
But how did ye spaede I pray ye show me,
Was all well agreed did no body blow ye.
Mass sir, hap did so happen, that my Lord and moister,
Stayed in beholding and viewing the Pasture.
Which when I perceived, what excuse did I make?
I came in the cross way, on the nerside the Forlake,
Hard by Hodges half aker, at gaffers Millers stile.
The next way round about, by the space of a mile,
Andat Sy mkins side ridge, my Lord stood talking,
And angrily to me (quoth he) where hast thou ben walking
Without any staggering, I had ready my lye,
Out at Bridgenredow, and at Benols lease (quoth I)
Your fatlings are feding well Sir, the Gods be praised,
A goodly loom of beef on them is all ready raised,
The outsteps on Frauncis Fabulator that was never my friend,
How past you Carters hay rock, at long meadow end
There might one (quoth he) within this few days,
With a cast net had given, mi knaves great assays:
Under the Hedge with a pair of new Cards both rip and firdge,
Is it true quoth my Lord, will this gear never be left,
This causes swearing, and staring, proling and theft:
Well (quoth my Lord) take heed least I find it,
And so past his way, and did no more mind it.
By the Gods that was sport, ye and sport alone,
Yea, but I was in worse case by Saint Jhon,
My Lady in Church was set full douout,
And hearing my coming she turned about:
But as soon as I heard his snappishly sound,
In this sort I crouched me down to the ground,
And mannerly maude, as though I were sad,
As soon as the Pue then strawed I had,
She gave me a wink, and frowardly frown,
Whereby I do judge, she would cougell my gown:
Then I did devise, a pretty fine prank,
A mean whereby to pick me a thank:
Of Margery Milton the maid of the Milk house,
And stainer the stutter the guide of the store house,
Then was my Ladies anger well gone,
And will be so still, and the truth be not known.
•er lady, barefoot this bakes trimly,
Nay but I escaped more finely,
For I under this badge one while did stay,
Then in this bush, then in that way:
Then slipped I behind them among all the rest,
And séemed to common to, of things with the best,
But so it did happen, that all things were well,
But hazard it is, least time will truth tell.
Tut, tut, that was but by hap, and if it be so,
Well sith it was in hazard then let it goo.
Content by my honesty, then farewell all wo.
Come out dog, ye speak happily of truth if it be so,
Now master Haphazard, fare you well for a season,
Let my council at no time with you be geason.
No by the Gods, be sure not so.
Well sith here is no company have with ye to Jerico. 
What so the Gods they have decreed to work and do by me?
I marvel why Judge Apius he, such gratings lets me see:
I served have his seat, and state, I have maintained his weal,
I have suppressed the rebels stout, I bear to him such zeal,
And now he sends to me such charge, upon my life and lands,
Without demur, or further pause, or ere ought things be scand,
That I in hast, with posting speed, to Court I do repair,
To answer that aleaged is, before his Judgment Chair,
Some Histories they do express, when such mishaps do fall,
They should have tokens many a one, I have not one but all:
My Jewels sometime precious, do vade and bear no hew,
My seuces they do shun there course, my lights do burn as blew:
My willing wights are wared slow, that once were swift in speed
My hart it throbs in wondrous sort, my nose doth often bleed:
My dreadful dreams do draw my woe and hateful hazard hale,
These tokens be of euell hap, this is the old wives tale:
But yet O thou Virginius, whose hoary hears are old,
Did treason never yet commit, of this thou moist be bold:
In Mars his games, in marshall frates, thou wast his only aide,
The huge Carrebd his hazards thou, for him was oft assaide:
Was Sillas force by thee oft shunde, or yet Adrice land,
Laceface child that Minnotaur, did cause thee ever stand:
To pleasure him, to serve thy leach, to keep all things upright,
Thou God aboue, then what is it, that yéeldeth me this spite?
Sith nothing néede misdoubted be, where grounded cause is none,
I enter will Judge Apius gate, rejecting care and moan:
But stay Virginius, lo, thy Prince doth enter into place,
Oh sufferant Lord, and rightful Judge, the Gods do save thy grace,
With tender hart Virginius, thou welcome art to me,
I sorry am to utter out, the things I here of thee:
For Claudius a subject here, a man of mickle fame,
Appeals thee before my Court, in deed of open shame:
And though in deed I love thee so, as thy deserts desirer,
Yet not so but I must Judgment give, as Justice doth require.
My Lord and reason good it is, your servant doth request,
No partial hand to aide his cause, no partial mind or breast:
If ought I have offended you, your Court, or eke your Crown,
From lofty top of Turret hie, persupetat me down:
If treason none by me be done, or any fault committed,
Let my accusers bear the blame, and let me be remitted.
Good reason to Virginius, come Claudius show thy mind,
Let Justice here, if Judgment may, Virginus guilty find
Thou sufferant Lord, and rightful Judge, this stands now ye case,
In tender youth not long agony, ne'er sixteen years of space,
Virginius a thrall of mine, a child and infant young,
From me did take by subtle mean, and keeps by arm full strong
And here before your grace I crave, that Justice be exstended,
That I may have my thrall again, and faults may be amended
Ah Gods that guide the globe aboue what forged tales I here,
Oh Judge Apius, bend your ears, while this my crime I clear:
She is my child, and of my wife her tender corpse did spring,
Let all the country where I dwell, bear witness of the thing.
Nay by the Gods not so my friend, I do not so decrée,
I charge thee here in paiine of death, thou bring the maid to mée:
In chamber close, in prison sound, she secret shall abide,
And no kind of wight shall talk with her, until the truth be tried:
This doo I charge, this I command, in pain of death let see,
Without any let, that she be brought, as prisoner unto me:
Ah fickle faule, vnahppy dome, oh most uncertain rate,
That ever chance so churlishly, that never staide in state:
What Judge is this: What cruel wretch? What faith doth Claudius
The Gods do recompense with shame, his false and faithless mind:
Well home I must, no remedy, where shall my soking tears,
Augment my woes, decrease my joys, while death do rid my fears
Come ventus come, blow forth thy blast,
Prince Eol listen well,
The filthiest fackte that ever was,
I Rumour now shall tell:
You gods bend down to here my cry,
revengement duly show,
Thy Rumour craves did Claudius lay,
and bring Judge Apius lo?
That wicked man, that fleshly Judge,
hath heard Claudius,
To claim a child, the only heir,
of old Virginius.
A virgin pure, a Quéene in life,
whose state may be deplored,
For why the Queen of chaste life,
is like to be deflowered:
By false Judge Apius cruel wretch,
who straightly hath commanded,
That she to keeping his be brought,
Prince Pluto this demanded:
To skies I fly to blase abroad,
the tromp of deep defame,
Revenge yo• Gods this Rumour craves,
this blood and bloddy shame:
Have through the ayre, give place you airs.
this is my duty done,
The Gods confound such lecherers,
lo Rumour this I run.
O man, O mould, oh muck, O clay, O Hell, O hellish hound,
O •aulle Judge Apius wrablinge wretch, is this thy treason found:
Woe worth the man that gave the seed, whereby ye first did spring
Woe worth the womb yt bare the babe, to mean this bluddy thing:
Woe worth the paps that gave ye suck, woe worth the Fosters eke
Woe worth all such as ever did, thy health or liking seek:
Oh that the graved years of mine, were covered in the clay
Let patience dear father mine, your rigour something stay,
Why do you wail in such a sort? why do you weep and moan?
Oh daughter dear and only heir, my life is near forgone,
And all for love of thee
A Gods how may this be?
Dear father do withdraw your dread, and let me know the cause,
My self will aid with life or death, without demur or pause:
Then tender your child, that craves this bound.
Oh harken dear daughter attend thou my sound:
Judge Apius pricked forth with filthy desire:
Thy person as Lemon, doth greatly require:
And no kind of entreaty, no fear nor no shame,
Will he hear aledge, defending the same:
And straight without staying in pain of my death,
I must bring thee thither, wherefore stop my breath,
O Sisters, I search, I seek, and I crave,
No more at your hands, but death for to have,
Rather then see my Daughter deflourde,
Or else in ill sort, so vildely deuourde.
Oh father oh friendship, oh fatherly favour,
Whose dulcet words, so sweetly do savour,
On knees I beseech thee to grant my request,
In all things according, as likes thee best:
Thou know, O my father, if I be once spotted,
My name and my kindred, then forth will be blotted:
And if thou my father, should die for my cause,
The world would account me as guilty in cause:
Then rather dear father, if it be thy pleasure,
Grant me the death, then keep I my treasure?
My Lamp, my light, my life undefiled,
And so may Judge Apius, of flesh be begiled:
This upon my knees with humble behest,
Grant me O father my instant request.
Then rise up my daughter, my answer doo note,
From mouth of thy father, whose eyes do now flote:
O daughter, oh dear, O darling, oh dame,
Dispatch me I pray thee, reg•rde not my name:
But yet, as thou satest fifth remedy none,
But Lemon thou must be, if I were gone,
And better it is to dye with good fame,
Then longer to live to reap vs but shame:
But if thou do dye, no doubt is at all,
But presently after my self follow shall,
Then end without shave so let vs persevere,
With tromp of good same so dye shall we never.
Then tender arms complex the neck, doo dry thy fathers tears,
You nimble hands for wo whereof, my loving hart it wears:
Oh father mine, refrain no whit, your sharped knife to take,
From guiltless sheath, my shame to end, and body dead to make:
Let not the shameless bloody judge, defile my virgins life,
Doe take my head and send it him, upon your bloody knife:
Bid him imbrue his bloody hands, in guiltless blood of me:
I virgin dye, he lecher lives, he was my end you see:
No more delays, so kiss me first, then stretch your strongest arm,
Do rid my woe, increase my joy, do ease your child of harm.
O weary wits of wo, or wealth, oh feeble aged man,
How can thy arm give such a blow, thy death I wish thee than:
But sith that shame with endless trempe, will sound if case thou joy,
By means of false judge Apius he, myself will thee destroy:
Forgive me babe this bloody deed, a no meekly take thy end,
The God forgive thee father dear, farewell, thy blow do bend:
Yet stay a while, o father dear, for flesh to death is frail,
Let first my wimple bind my eyes, and then thy blow assail.
Now father work thy will on me, that life I may enjoy.
Now stretch thy hand Virginius, that loath would flesh destroy.
O cruel hands, or bloody knife, o man what hast thou done,
Thy daughter dear, and only heir, his vital end hath won:
Come fatal blade make like dispatch, come Atropos, come end,
Strike home thou careless arm with sp•ede, of death be not afraid.
Oh noble knight Virginius, do stay, he not dismayed.
I curing Comfort present am, your dollar to aid:
Sith joy is gone, sith life is dead:
What comfort can there be?
〈◊〉 there is but dee•e dis••ire•
I came from Caleed even the same hour,
And Hap was hired to hackney in hempstrid,
In hazard he was of riding on beamestrid,
Then crow crop on thee top hoist up the sail,
Then groaned their necks, by the weight of their tail,
Then did C••m••x, put these three together,
Pays them their passport for •lu•tring thither.
Why how now Haphazard, of what doest thou speak?
Me thinks in mad sort thy talk thou deest break,
〈…〉 all in one.

To scourge the crime of wicked Laius,
And vvrecke the foul Incest of Oedipus,
The angry Gods stirred up their sons, by strife
With blades embrevved to reeve eche others life:
The wife, the mother, and the concubine,
Whose fearful hart foredrad their fatal fine,
His sons thus dead, disdains longer life,
And slays herself with selfsame bloody knife:
The daughter she, surprised vvyth childish dread
(That durst not dye) a loathsome life doth lead,
Yet rather chose to guide his banished sire,
Than cruel Croon should have his desire.
Croon is King, the type of Tyranny,
And Oedipus, mirror of misery.
FIrst, before the beginning of the first
Act, did sound a doleful and strange
noise of violles, Cythren, Bandurion,
and such like, during the which, there
came in upon the Stage a King with an Imp∣real
Crown upon his head, very richly appa∣relled,
a Sceptre in his right hand, a Mounde
with a Cross in his left hand, sitting in a Cha∣riot
very richly furnished, drawn in by four
kings in their Doublets and Hosen, with
Crowns also upon their heads: Representing
unto vs Ambition, by the history of Sesostres
king of Egypt, who being in his time and reign
a mighty Conqueror, yet not content to have
subdued many Princes, and taken from them
their kingdoms and dominions, did in like ma∣ner
cause those Kings whom he had so over∣come,
to draw in his Chariot like Beasts and
Oxen, thereby to content his unbridled ambi∣tious
desire. After he had been drawn twice
about the Stage, and retired, the Music cea∣sed,
and Iocasta the Queen issued out of his
house, beginning the first Act, as follows.
Iocasta the Queen issues out of his Palace,
before his twelve Gentlemen very bravely appa∣relled,
following after his eight Gentlewomen,
whereof four be the Chorus that remain on
the Stage after his departure. At his entrance
the Trumpets sounded, and after she had
gone once about the Stage, she tur∣neth
to one of his most trusty and
esteemed servant, and unto him
she discloses his grief,
as followed.
O Faithful servant of mine ancient sire,
Though unto thée, sufficiently be known
The whole discourse of my recurelesse grief
By seeing me from Princes royal state
Thus basely brought into so great cōtempt,
As mine own sons rapine to hear my plaint,
Now of a Quéene but barely bearing name,
Saying this town, saying my flesh and blood,
Against it self to levy threatening arms,
(Whereof to talk my heart it rends in twain)
Yet once again, I must to thée recompte
The wailefull thing that is already spread,
Because I know, that pity will compel
Thy tender hart, more than my natural child,
With ruthful tears to moan my mourning case.
My gracious Quéene, as no man might surmount
The constant faith I bear my souraine lord,
So doe I think, for love and trusty zeal,
No son you have, doth owe you more than I:
For hereunto I am by duty bound,
With service méete no less to honour you,
Than that renowned prince your déere father.
And as my duties be most infinite,
So infinite, must also be my love:
Then if my life or spending of my blood
May be employed to doe your highness good,
Command (O quéene) command this carcass here.
In spite of death to satissie thy will,
So, though I die, yet shall my willing ghost
Contentedly forsake this withered corps,
For joy to think I never shewde my self
Ungrateful once to such a worthy Quéene.
Thou know what care my careful father took,
In wedlockes sacred state to settle me
With Laius, king of this unhappy Thebs,
That most unhappy now our City is:
Thou know, how he, desirous still to search
The hidden secrets of supernal powers,
Unto Divines did make his oft recourse,
Of them to learn when he should have a son,
That in his Realm might after him succéede:
Of whom receiving answer sharpe and sour,
That his own son should work his wailful end,
The wretched king (though all in vain) did séeke
For to eschew that could not be eschewed:
And so, forgetting laws of natures love,
No sooner had this painful womb brought forth
His eldest son to this desired light,
But straight he charged a trusty man of his
To bear the child into a desert wood,
And leave it there, for Tigers to deuo•re.
O luckless babe, begot in woeful hour.
His servant thus obedient to his hest,
Up by the héeles did hang this faultless Imp,
And piercing with a knife his tender féete,
Through both the wounds did draw the slender twigs,
Which béeing bound about his féeble limbs,
Were strong enough to hold the little soul.
Thus did he leave this infant scarcely borne,
That in short time must néedes have lost his life,
If destiny (that for our greater gréefes
Decréede before to kéepe it still alive)
Had not unto this child sent present help:
For so it chanced, a shepherd passing by,
With pity moude, did stay his guiltless death:
He toke him home, and gave him to his wife,
With homely fare to fed and foster up:
Now harken how the heavens have wrought the way
To Laius death, and to mine own decay.
"Experience proves, and daily is it séene,
"In vain, too vain man strives against the heavens.
Not far fro thence, the mighty Polibus,
Of Corinth King, did keep his princely court,
Unto whose woeful wife (lamenting much
She had no offspring by his noble phéere)
The courteous shepherd gave my little son:
Which grateful gift, the Quéene did so accept,
As nothing séemde more precious in his sight:
Partly, for that, his faitures were so fine,
Partly, for that, he was so beautiful,
And partly, for because his comely grace
Gave great suspicion of his royal blood.
The infant grew, and many years was damned•
Polibus son, till time, that Oedipus
(For so he named was) did understand
That Polibus was not his sire in déede,
Whereby forsaking friends and country there,
He did return to seek his native stock:
And being come into Phocides land,
Toke notice of the cursed oracle,
How first he should his father doe to death,
And then become his mothers wedded mate.
O fierce aspect of cruel planets all,
That can decrée such seas of heinous faults.
Then Oedipus, freight full of chilling fear,
By all means sought t'auoyde this furious fate,
But whiles he wéende to shun the shameful dede,
Unluckily guided by his own mishap,
He fell into the snare that most he feared:
For lo, in Phocides did Laius lye,
To end the broils that civil discord then
Had raised up in that unquiet land,
By means whereof my woeful Oedipus,
Affording aid unto the other side,
With murdering blade unawares his father slew.
Thus heavenly doom, thus fate, thus powers divine,
Thus wicked read of Prophets took effect:
Now only rests to end the bitter hap
Of me, of me his miserable mother.
Alas, howe cold I féele the quaking blood
Pass too and fro within my trembling breast?
Oedipus, when this bloody déede was done,
Forced forth by fatal doom, to Thebes came,
Where as full soon with glory he atchieude
The crown and sceptre of this noble land,
By conquering Sphinx that cruel monster lo,
That erst destroyed this goodly flouring soil:
And thus did I (O hateful thing to hear)
To my own son become a wretched wife.
No marvel, though the golden Sun withdrew
His glittering beams from such a sinful fact.
And so by him that from this belly sprang,
I brought to light (O cursed that I am)
As well two sons, as daughters also twain:
But when this monstrous marriage was disclosed,
So sore began the rage of boiling wrath
To swell within the furious breast of him,
As he him self by stress of his own nails,
Out of his head did tear his griefull eyne,
Unworthy more to see the shining light.
Howe could it be, that knowing he had don•
So foul a blot, he would remain alive?
"So déepely faulteth none, the which unawares
"Doth fall into the crime he can not shun:
And he (alas) unto his greater gréefe,
Prolongs the date of his accursed days,
Knowing that life doth more and more increase
The cruel plagues of his detested gilt,
"Where stroke of grisly death doth set an end
"U•to the pangs of mans increasing payne.
Of others all, most cause have we to moan
Thy woeful smart (O miserable Quéene)
Such and so many are thy gréeuous harms.
Now to the end this blind outrageous sire.
Should reap no joy of his unnatural fruit,
His wretched sons, pricked forth by furious spite,
Adjudge their father to perpetual prison:
There buried in the depth of dungeon dark,
(Alas) he leads his discontented life,
Accursing still his stony hearted sons,
And wishing all the infernal sprites of hell,
To breathe such poysned hate into their breasts,
As eche with other fall to bloody wars,
And so with pricking point of piercing blade,
To rip their bowels out, that eche of them
With others blood might stain his guilty hands,
And both at once by stroke of spéedie death
Be forthwith thrown into the Stigia• lake.
The mighty Gods prevent so foul a déede.
They to avoid the wicked blasphemies,
And sinful prayer of their angry sire,
Agréed thus, that of this noble realm,
Until the course of one full year was run,
Eteocles should sway the kingly mace,
And Polynice as exul should depart,
Till time expired: and then to Polynice
Eteocles should yéelde the sceptre up:
Thus year by year the one succéeding other,
This royal crown should unto both remain.
Oh thunbridled minds of ambitious men.
Eteocles, thus placed in princely seat,
Drunk with the sugared taste of kingly reign,
Not only shut his brother from the crown,
But also from his native country soil.
Alas poor Polynice, what might he doe,
Unjustly by his brother thus betrayed?
To Argos he, with sad and heavy chéere
Forthwith conveyed him self, on whom at length
With fawning face good fortune smiled so,
As with Adrastus king of Argiues there,
He found such favour and affinity,
As to restore my son unto his reign,
He hath besedge this noble city Thebes.
And hence procéedes, my most extreme annoy:
For, of my sons, who ever doe prevail,
The victory will turn unto my grief:
Alas, I fear (such is the chance of war)
That one, or both shall purchase death thereby.
Wherefore, to shun the worst that may befall,
Though comfortless, yet as a pitiful mother
Whom nature binds to love his loving sons,
And to provide the best for their avail,
I have thought good by prayers to entreat
The two brethren (nay rather cruel foes)
A while to stay their fierce and furious fight,
Till I have tried by means for to appease,
The swelling wrath of their outraging wills.
And so with much to doe, at my request
They have forborne unto this only hour.
Small space god wot, to stint so great a strife.
And even right now, a trusty man of mine,
Returned from the camp, informing me
That Polynice will straight to Thebes cōme,
Thus of my woe, this is the wailefull sōme.
And for because, in vain and bootless plaint
I have small néede to spend this title time,
Here will I cease, in words more to bewray
The restless state of my afflicted mind,
Desiring thée, thou go to Eteocles,
Heartily on my behalf beseeching him,
That out of hand according to his promise,
He will vouchsafe to come unto my court,
I know he loves thée well, and to thy words
I think thou know he will give willing ear.
(O noble Quéene) sith unto such affairs
My speed diligence is requisite,
I will apply effectually to doe
What so your highness hath commanded me.
I will go in, and pray the Gods therwhile,
With tender pity to appease my grief.
"THe simple man, whose marvel is so great
"At stately courts, and princes regal seats,
"With gazing eye but only doth regard
"The golden gloss that outwardly appears,
"The crowns bedecked with pearl and precious stones,
"The rich attire embossed with beaten gold,
"The glittering mace, the pomp of swarming train,
"The mighty halles heaped full of flattering friends,
"The huge chambers, the goodly gorgeous beds,
"The gilted roofs, embowde with curious work,
"The swéete faces of fine disdaining dames,
"The vain suppose of wanton reign at lust:
"But never views with eye of inward thought,
"The painful toil, the great and grievous cares,
"The troubles still, the new increasing fears,
"That princes nourish in their jealous breasts:
"He weighs not the charge that Jove hath laid
"On princes, how for themselves they reign not:
"He wéenes, the law must stoop to princely will,
"But princes frame there noble wills to law:
"He knows not, that as the boisterous wind
"Doth shake the tops of highest reared towers,
"So doth the force of froward fortune strike
"The wight that highest sits in haughty state.
Lo Oedipus, that sometime reigned king
Of The•an soil, that wonted to suppress
The mightiest Prince, and keep him under check,
That fearful was unto his foreign foes,
Now like a poor afflicted prisoner,
In dungeon dark, shut up from chéerefull light,
In every part so plagued with annoy,
As he abhors to lead a longer life,
By means whereof, the one against the other
His wrathful sons have planted all their force,
And Thebes here, this ancient worthy town,
With threatening siege girt in on every •id,
In danger lies to be subverted quite,
If help of heavenly Jove uphold it not,
But as dark night succedes the shining day,
So lowering grief comes after pleasant joy.
Well now the charge his highness did command
I must fulfil, though happily all in vain.
O Gentle daughter of King Oedipus,
O sister dear to that unhappy wight
Whom brothers rage hath reaved of his right,
To whom, thou know, in young and tender years
I was a friend and faithful governor,
Come forth, sith that his grace hath granted leave,
And let me know what cause hath moved now
So chaste a maid to set his dainty foot
Over the threshold of his secrete lodge?
Since that the town is furnished everywhere
With men of arms and warlike instruments,
Unto our ears there cōmes no other noise,
But sound of trump, and neigh of trampling stedes,
Which running up and down from place to place,
With hideous cries betoken blood and death:
The blazing sun no shines half so bright,
As it was wont to doe al dawn of day:
The wretched dames throughout the woeful town,
Together clustering to the temples go,
Beseeching Jove by way of humble plaint,
With tender ruth to pity their distress.
The love I hear to my swéete Polynice,
My dear brother, is only cause hereof.
Why daughter, know thou any remedy
How to defend thy fathers city here
From that outrage and fierce repining wrath,
Which he against it, justly hath conceived?
Oh governor might this my faultless blood
Suffice to stay my brethrens dire debate,
With glad consent I could afford my life
Betwixt them both to plant a perfect peace:
But since (alas) I cannot as I would,
A hot desire ins•ames my •eruent mind
To have a sight of my swéete Pollynice.
Wherefore (good guide) vouchsafe to guide 〈…〉
Into some tower about this huge court,
From whence I may behold our enemies camp,
Thereby at least to féede my hungry eyes
But with the sight of my beloved brother:
Then if I die, contented shall I die.
O princely dame, the tender care thou takste
Of thy dear brother, deserves double praise:
Yet crau'st thou that, which cannot be obtained,
By reason of the distance from the town
Unto the plain, where tharmie lies encamped:
And furthermore, besemeth not a maid
To show his self in such unseemly place,
Whereas among such young and lusty troupes
Of harebrainde soldiers marching to and fro,
Both honest name and honour is empairde:
But yet rejoice, sith this thy great desire,
Without long let, or yet without thy pain,
At wish and will shall shortly be fulfillde.
For Palynice forthwith will hither come,
Even I my self was lately at the camp,
Commanded by the Quéene to bid him come,
Who labours still to link in friendly league,
His earring sons (which hap so hoped for,
Eftsoon I pray the gracious gods to grant)
And sure I am, that ere this hour pass,
Thou shalt him here in person safely sée.
O loving friend, doest thou then warrant me,
That Polynice will come unto this court?
Ere thou be ware thou shalt him here behold.
And who (alas) doth warrant his adventure,
That of Eteocles he take no harm?
For constant pledge, he hath his brothers faith,
He hath also the truce that yet endures.
I fear alas, alas I greatly fear,
Some trustless snare his cruel brother lays
To trappe him in.
Daughter, god knows how willing I would be
With swéete relief to comfort thy distress,
But I cannot impart to thée, the good
Which I my self doe not as yet enjoy.
The wailefull cause that moves Eteocles
With Pollinyce to enter civil wars
Is over great, and for this only cause
Full many men have broke the laws of truth,
And topsieturuie turned many towns.
"To greedy (daughter) too too greedy is
"Desire to rule and reign in kingly state.
No can he bide, that swaise a realm alone
To have another ioynde with him therein:
Yet must we hope for help of heavenly powers,
Sith they be just, their mercy is at hand,
To help the weak when worldly force doth fail.
As both my brethren •e, so b•th I bear
As much goodwill as any sister may,
But yet the wrong that unto Pollinyce
This trothlesse tyrant hath unjustly showed,
Doth lead me more, to wish the prosperous life,
Of Pollinyce, than of that cruel wretch.
Besides that, Pollinyce whiles he remained
In Thebes here, did ever love me more,
Than did Eteocles, whose swelling hate
Is towards me increased more and more:
Whereof I partly may assure my self,
Considering he disdains to visit me,
Yea, happily he intends to reeve my life,
And having power he will not stick to doe it.
This therefore makes me earnestly desire
Oftymes to sée him: yet ever as I think
For to discharge the duty of a sister,
The fear I have of hurt, doth change as fast
My doubtful love into disdainful spite.
Yet daughter, must ye trust in mighty Jove,
His will is not, that for thoffence of one
So many suffer undeserved smart:
I mean of thée, I mean of Polinyce,
Of Iocasta thy woeful aged mother,
And of Ismena thy beloved sister.
Who though for this she doth not outwardly
From dreary even distill lamenting tears,
Yet do I think, no less afflicting grief
Doth inwardly torment his tender breast.
Besides all this, a certain jealousy,
Lately conceived (I know not whence it springes)
Of Croon, my mothers brother, appals me much,
Him doubt I more than any danger else.
Dear daughter, leave this foolish jealous•e,
And séeing that thou shalt héere shortly find
Thy brother Polinyce, go in again.
O joyful would it be to me therwhile,
To understand the order of the host,
Whether it be such as have sufficient power
To overthrow this mighty town of Thebs.
What place suppl•es my brother Polynice?
Where found ye him? what answer did he give?
And though so great a care perteineth not
Unto a maid of my unskilful years,
Yet, forbicause my self partaker am
Of good and evil with this my country soil,
I long to hear thée tell those fearful news,
Which otherwise I can not understand.
So noble a desire (O worthy dame)
I much commend: and briefly as I can,
Will satisfy thy hungry mind herein.
The power of men that Polinyce hath brought,
(Whereof he, (being Adrastus son in law)
Takes chiefest charge) is even the flower of Greece,
Whose huge train so mighty séemes to be,
As I sée not, how this our drooping town
Is able to withstand so strong a siege.
Entering the field their army did I find
So orderly in form of battle set,
As though they would forthwith have guien the charge:
In battles seven the host divided is,
To eche of which, by order of the king,
A valiant knight for captain is assigned:
And as you know this city hath seven gates,
So every captain hath his gate prescribde,
With fierce assault to make his entry at.
And further, passing through our frowning foes
(That gave me countenance of a messenger)
Harde by the King I spied Pollinyce,
In golden glistering arms most richly clad,
Whose person many a stately prince enpalde,
And many a comely crowned head enclosed:
At sight of me his colour straight he changed
And like a loving child in clasped arms
He caught me up, and friendly kissed my cheke,
Then hearing what his mother did demand•
With glad consent according to his hest
Gave me his hand, to come unto the court,
Of mutual truce desirous so he séemde,
He asked me of Antygone, and Ismena,
But chiefly unto thée aboue the rest
He gave me charge most heartily to commend him.
The gods give grace he may at length possess
His kingly right and I his wished sight.
Daughter no more, it is time ye now return
It stands not with the honour of your state
Thus to be séene suspiciously abroad:
"For vulgar tongues are armed evermore
"With slanderous brute to blemish the rename•
"Of virtues dames, which though at first it spring
"Of slender cause, yet doth it swell to fast,
"As in short space it fills every ear
"With swift report of undeserved blame:
"You cannot be too curious of your name,
"Fond show of evil (though still the mind be chaste)
"Decays the credit oft, that Ladies had,
"Sometimes the place presumes a wanton mind:
"Repair sometimes of some, doth hurt their honour:
"Sometimes the light and garish proud attire
"Persuades a yielding bent of pleasing youths.
The voice that goes of your unspotted fame,
Is like a tender flower, that with the blast
Of every little wind doth fade away.
Go in déere child, this way will I go sée
If I can méete thy brother Pollinyce.
IF gréedie lust of mans ambitious eye
(That thristeth so for swaye of earthly things)
Would eke foresée, what mischiefs grow thereby,
What careful toil to quiet state it brings,
What endless grief from such a fountain springs:
Then should he swim in seas of swéete delight,
That now complains of fortunes cruel spite.
For then he would so safely shield himself
With sacred rules of wisdoms sage advise,
As no alluring train of trustless pelf,
To fond affects his fancy should entice,
Then wary héede would quickly make him wise:
Where contrary (such is our skilless kind)
We most doe séeke, that most may hurt the mind.
Amid the troupe of these unstable toys,
Some fancies lo to beauty most be bent,
Some hunt for wealth, and some set all their joys,
In regal power of princely government,
Yet none of these from care are clean exempt▪
For either they be got with grievous toil,
Or in the end forgone with shameful fail.
This flitting world doth firmly nought retain,
Wherein a man may boldly rest his trust,
Such fickle chance in fortune doth remain,
As when she lust, she threatened whom she lust,
From high rename to throw him in the dust:
Thus may we sée that eche triumphing joy
By fortunes froune is turned to annoy.
Those elder heads may well be thought to err,
The which for easy life and quiet days,
The vulgar sort would séeme for to prefer.
If glorious Phoebe, withhold his glistering rays,
From such a péere as crown and sceptre sways,
No me•uaile though he hide his heavenly face,
From vs that come of less renounied race.
Selde shall you sée the ruin of a Prince,
But that the people eke like brunt doe bear,
And old records of ancient time long since,
From age to age, yea almost every where,
With proof hereof hath glutted every ear:
Thus by the follies of the princes heart,
The bounden subject still receives smart.
Lo, how unbridled lust of private reign,
Hath pricked both the brethren unto war:
Yet Pollinyce, with sign of less disdain,
Against this land hath brought from countries far,
A foreign power, to end this cruel jar,
Forgetting quite the duty, love, and zeal,
He ought to bear unto this common weal.
But whosoever gets •he victory,
We wretched dames, and thou O noble town,
Shall féele thereof the woeful misery▪
Thy gorgeous pomp, thy glorious high rename,
Thy stately towers, and all shall fall a down,
Sith raging Ma•s will each of them assist
In others breast to bathe his bloody fist.
But 〈◊〉 son of 〈◊〉, and of Jove,
(That tamed the proud attempt of giants strong)
Doe thou defend, even of thy tender love,
Thy humble thralls from this afflicting wrong,
Whom wast of war hath now tormented long:
So shall we never fail no day no night
With reverence due thy praises to resight.
BEfore the beginning of this second Act did
sound a very doleful noise of flutes, during the
which there came 〈◊〉 upon the stage two •offines
covered with hearce clothes▪ &amp; brought in by .viij.
in mourning weed, &amp; accōpanied with .viij. other
mourners, &amp; after they had carried the coffins a∣bout
the stage, there opened &amp; appeared a Grave,
wherein they buried the coffins &amp; put fire •o them,
but the flames did sever &amp; part in twain, sign∣fying
discord by the history of two brethrē, whose
discord in their life was not only to be wondered
at, but being buried both in one Tomb (as some
writers affirm) the flames of their funerals did
yet part the one frō the other in like manner, and
would in no wise join into one flame. After the
Funerals were ended and the fire consumed, the
grave was closed up again, the mourners with∣drew
thē off the stage, &amp; immediately by y• gates
Homoloydes entered Pollinyces accompanied with
vj. gentlemen and a page that carried his helmet
and Target, he &amp; his men unarmed saving their
gorgets, for that they were permitted to come
into the town in time of truce, to the end Iocasta
might bring the two brethrē to a parley, and Pol∣linyces
after good regard taken round about him,
spake as follows.
Lo here mine own city and native soil,
Lo here the 〈◊〉 I ought to nestle in,
Yet being thus entrenched with mine own towers,
And that, from him the safe conduct is given
Which doth enjoy as much as mine should be,
My féete can tread no step without suspect:
For where my brother bides, even there behooves
More wary scout than in an enemies camp.
Yet while I may within this right hand hold
This brond, this blade, (vnyelden ever yet)
My life shall not be left without revenge▪
But here behold the holy sancturie,
Of Bacchus eke the worthy Image lo,
The aultars where the sacred flames have shoe••e▪
And where of yore these guiltless hands of mine
Full oft have offered to our mighty gods.
I sée also a worthy company•
Of▪ Thibane dames, resembling unto me
The trai•d of Iocasta my dear mother:
Behold them clad in clothes of gre•lie black,
That hellish hew that nay for other harms
So well besomed wretched wights to wear:
For why, ere long their selves themselves shall sée
(Gramer•y to there princes tyranny)
Some spoiled of their swéete and sucking babes,
Some less their husband, other some their sire,
〈◊〉 some their friends that were to the• full dere.
But now tic time to lay this sword aside,
And eke of them to know where is the Quéene:
O worthy dames, hey•ie, unhappy ye,
Where rests now the restless quéene of Thebes?
O worthy imp sprung out of worthy race,
Renowned Prince, whom wée have looked for long,
And now in happy hour art come to vs,
Some quiet bring to this unquiet realm.
O quéene, O quéene, come forth and sée thy son,
The gentle fruit of all thy joyful séede.
My faithful friends, my dear beloved maids,
I come at call, and at your words I move
My féebled féete with age and agony:
Where is my son? O tell me where is he,
For whom I sighed have so often sith,
For whom I spend both nights and days in tears?
Here noble mother, here, not as the king,
Nor as a Citizen of stately Thebes,
But as a stranger now, I thank my brother.
O son, O swéete and my desired son,
These eyes they sée, these hands of mine thée touche,
Yet scarcely can this mind beléeue the same,
And scarcely can this bruised breast sustain
The sudden joy that is enclosed therein:
O gladsome glass, wherein I sée my self.
So grant the Gods, that for our common good▪
You fréendly may your sons both friends behold.
At thy depart, O lovely child, thou left
My house in tears, and mée thy wretched dame,
Mirror of martyrdom, waymenting still
Th unworthy exile thy brother thée gave:
No was there ever son or friend far off,
Of his dear friends or mother so desired,
As thy return, in all the town of Thebes.
And of my self more than the rest to speak,
I have as thou may sée, clean cast aside
My princely robes, and thus in worfull wéede,
Bewrapped have these lustlesse limbs of mine:
Nought else but tears have trickled from mine eyes,
And eke thy wretched blind and aged sire,
Since first he heard what war twéene you there was,
As one that did his bitter curse repent,
Or that he prayed to Jove for your decay,
With stretching string, or else with blouddie knife
Hath sought full oft to end his loathed life.
Thou this mean while my son, hast lingered long
In far and foreign coasts, and wedded eke,
By whom thou may, (when heavens appoints it so)
Strange issue have by one a stranger borne,
Which gréeues me sore, and much the more dear child,
Because I was not present at the same,
There to perform thy loving mothers due.
But for I find thy noble match so méete,
And worthy both for thy degrée and birth,
I séeke to comfort thée by mine advise,
That thou return this city to inhabit,
Which best of all may séeme to be the bower,
Both for thy self and for thy noble spouse.
Forget thou then thy brothers injuries,
And know dear child, the harm of all mishap,
That hippos twixt you, must hap likewise to mée:
No can the cruel sword so slightly touche
Your tender flesh, but that the self same wound
Shall déepely bruise this aged breast of mine.
"There is no love may be compared to that▪
"The tender mother bears unto his child:
"For even so much the more it doth increase,
"As their grief grows, or contentations cease.
I know not mother, if I praise deserve,
(That you to please, whom I ought not displease)
Have trained my self among my trustless foes:
But Nature draws (whether he will or •ill)
Eche man to love his natue country soil:
And who should say, that otherwise it were,
His tongue should never with his heart agrée.
This hath me drawn beside my bounden due,
To set full light this luckless life of mine:
For of my brother, what may I else hope,
But trains of treason, force and falsehood both?
Yet neither peril present, nor to come,
Can hold me from my due obedience:
I grant I can not grieflesse, well behold
My fathers palace, the holy aultars,
No lovely lodge wherein I fostered was:
From whence driven out, and chaste unworthily,
I have too long abode in foreign coasts:
And as the growing gréene and pleasant plant,
Doth bear fresh branches one aboue an other,
Even so am•dti the huge heap of my woes,
Doth grows one grudge more gréeuous than the rest,
To sée my dear and doleful mother, clad
In morning tyre, to tyre his mourning mind,
Wretched lonely for my wretchedness,
So likes that enemy my brother best:
Soon shall you see that in this wandering world,
No enmity is equal unto that
That dark disdain (the cause of e•ery evil)
Doth bréede full oft in consangiunitie.
But Jove, he knows what dole I doe endure,
For you and for my fathers wretched woe,
And eke howe déepely I desire to know
What wearre life my loving sisters lead,
And what annoy mine absence them hath given.
Alas, alas, howe wreakful wrath of Gods
Doth still afflict Oedipus progeny:
The first cause was thy fathers wicked bed,
And then (Oh why doe I my plagues recompte?)
My burdein borne, and your unhappy birth:
"But néedes wée must with patient hearts abide,
"What so from high the heavens doe provide.
With thée my child, fain would I question yet
Of certain things: no would I that my words
Might thée annoy, no yet renew thy grief.
Say on, dear mother, say what so you please,
What pleases you, shall never mée disease.
And séemes it not a heavy hap my son,
To be deprived of thy country coasts?
So heavy hap as tongue can not express.
And what may most molest the mind of man
That is exiled from his native soil?
The liberty hée with his country lost,
"And that he lacks fréedome for to speak,
"What séemeth best, without control or check.
Why so? eche servant lacks liberty
To speak his mind, without his masters leave.
"In exile, every man, or bond or frée,
"Of noble race, or meaner parentage,
"Is not in this unlike unto the slave,
"That must of force obey to eche mans will,
"And praise the péeuishnesse of eche mans pride.
And séemed this so grievous unto thée?
What grief can greater he, that so constrained,
Slauelyke to serve against right and reason both,
Yea much the more, to him that noble is,
By stately lyne, or yet by virtuous life,
And hath a heart like to his noble mind.
What helps most in such adversity?
Hope helps most to comfort misery.
Hope to return from whence he first was driven?
Yea, hope that happens oftentimes to late,
And many die before such hap may fall.
And howe did thou before thy marriage son,
Maintain thy life, a stranger so bestad?
Sometime I found (though seldom so it were)
Some gentle heart, that could for courtesy,
Content himself to succour mine estate.
Thy fathers friends and thine, did they not help
For to reléeue that naked néede of thine?
Mother, he hath a foolish fantasy,
"That thinks to find a friend in misery.
Thou might have help by thy nobility.
"Covered alas, in cloak of poverty•?
"Well ought we then that are but mortal héere,
"Aboue all treasure count our country dear:
Yet let me know my son, what cause thée moved
To go to Greece?
The flying fame that thundered in mine ears,
Howe king Adrastus, governor of Greece,
Was ••answered by Oracle, that he
Should knit in links of lawful marriage,
His two fair daughters, and his only heirs,
One to a Lyon, the other to a Boar:
An answer such as eche man wondered at.
And how belongs this answer now to thée.
I toke my guess even by this ensign héere,
A Lyon lo, which I did always bear:
Yet think I not, but Jove lonely brought
These hands of mine to such an high exploit.
And howe yet came it to this strange effect?
The shining day had run his hasted course,
And dewy night bespread his mantle dark,
When I that wandered after weary toil,
To seek some harbrough for mine irked limbs,
Began find at last a little cabin, close
Adjoined fast unto the stately walls,
Where king Adrastus held his royal towers.
Scarce was I there in quiet well ycoucht,
But thither came an other exile eke,
Named Tydeus, who strove perforce to drive
Mée from this sorry seat, and so at last,
Wée settled vs to fell and blouddie fight,
Whereof the rumour grew so great forth with,
That straight the king informed was thereof,
Who séeing then the ensigns that wée bare,
To be even such as were to him foresaid,
Chose eche of vs to be his son by law,
And since did solemnise eke the •am.
Yet would I know, if that thy wife be such
As thou can joy in his? or what she is?
O mother dear, fairer no wiser dame
Is none in Greece, Orgies is his name.
Howe could thou to this doubtefull enterprise,
So many bring, thus armed all at once?
Adrastus swear, that he would soon 〈◊〉
Unto our right both Tydeus, and me:
And first for mée, that had the greater néede,
Whereby the best and bole•est bloods in Greece,
Have followed me unto this enterprise.
A thing both just and grievous unto mée,
Gréeuous I say, for that I doe lament
To be constrained by such open wrong,
To war against mine own dear country féeres.
But unto you (O mother) doth pertain
To stiute this strife, and both duliuer mée▪
From exile now, and eke the town from siege:
For otherwise, I swear you here by heavens,
Eteocles, who now doth me disdain
For brother, shortly shall sée me his lord.
I ask the seat, whereof I ought of right
Possess the half, I am Oedipus son,
And yours, so am I true son to you both.
Wherefore I hope that as in my defence
The world will weigh, so Jove will me assist.
Behold O quéene, behold O worthy quéene,
Unworthy he, Eteocles here cōmes,
So, would the Gods, that in this noble realm
Should never long unnoble tyrant reign,
Or that with wrong the right and doubtless heir,
Should banished be out of his princely seat.
Yet thou O quéene, so fyle thy sugared tongue,
And with such counsel deck thy mothers tale,
That peace may both the brothers hearts inflame▪
And rancour yield, that erst possessed the same.
Mother, behold, your hestes for to obey,
In person now am I resorted hither:
In haste therefore, fain would I know what cause
With hasty spéede, so moved hath your mind
To call me now so causeless out of time,
When common wealth most craves my only aid:
Fain would I know, what quaint commodity
Persuades you thus to take a truce for time,
And yield the gates wide open to my foe,
The gates that might our stately state defend,
And now are made the path of our decay.
"Repress dear son, those raging storms of wrath,
"That so bedimme the eyes of thine intent,
"☞But when disdains shrunk, or set aside,
"And mind of man with l•ysure can discourse
"What séemely words his tale may best 〈◊〉,
"And that the 〈◊〉 unfolds without affects
"Then may proceed• an answer sage and grave,
"And every sentence• 〈◊〉 with soberness:
Wherefore unbend thine 〈◊〉 brows de are •hylde,
And caste thy rolling eyes none other way,
That here dost not Medusaes face behold,
But him, even him, thy blood and brother dear.
And thou behold, my Polinices eke,
Thy brothers face, wherein when thou may sée
Thine own image, remember therewithal,
That what offence thou would to him were done,
The blows thereof rebound unto thy self.
And hereof eke, I would you both fore warn,
When friends or brethren, kinsfolk or allies,
(Whose hasty hearts some angry mood had moved)
Be face to face by some of pity brought,
Who séekes to end their discord and debate:
They only ought consider well the cause
For which they come, and cast out of their mind
For evermore the old offences past:
So shall sweet peace drive pleading out of place
Wherefore the first shall Polinices be,
To tell what reason first his mind did rule,
That thus our walls with foreign foes enclosed
In sharpe revenge of causeless wrongs received,
As he alleges by his brothers doom:
And of this wicked woe and dire debate,
Some god of pity be the equal judge,
Whom I beséeche, to breath in both your breasts
A yielding heart to déepe desire of peace.
"My worthy dame, I find that tried truth
"Doth best beséeme a simple naked tale,
"No néedes to be with painted process pricked,
"That in his self hath no diversity▪
"But always shows one undisguised face,
"Where déepe deceit and lies must séeke the shade,
"And wrap their words in guileful eloquence,
"As ever fraught with contrariety:
So have I often said, and say again,
That to avoid our fathers foul reproach
And bitter curse, I parted from this land
With right good will, yet thus with him agréed,
That while the whirling wings of flying time
Might roll one year about the heavenly sphere,
So long alone he might with peace possess
Our fathers seat in princely diadem,
And when the year should eke his course renew,
Might I succéede to rule again as long.
And that this law might still be kept for aye,
He bound him self by vow of solemn oath
By Gods, by men, by heaven, and eke by earth:
Yet that forgot, without all reverence
Unto the Gods, without respect to right,
Without respect that reason ought to rule,
His faith and troth both trodden under foot,
He still usurps most tyrantlike with wrong
The right that doth of right to me belong.
But if he can with equal doom consent,
That I return into my native soil
To sway with him alike the kingly seat
And evenly bear the bridle both in hand,
Dear mother mine I swear by all the Gods
To raise with spéede the siege from these our walls,
And send the soldiers home from whence they came:
Which if he grant me not, then must I do
(Though loath) as much as right and reason would,
To avenge my cause that is both good and just.
Yet this in heaven the Gods my records be,
And here in earth each mortal man may know,
That never yet my guiltless heart did fail
Brotherly duty to Eteocles,
And that causeless he holds me from mine own,
Thus have I said O mother, even as much
As néedefull is, wherein I me assure,
That in the judgment both of good and bad,
My words may séeme of reason to procéede,
Constrained thus in my defence to speak.
None may deny, O pere of princely race,
But that thy words are honest, good and just,
And such as well be séeme that •ong of thine.
"If what to some séemes honest, good and just,
"Could séeme even so in every doubtful mind,
"No dark debate nor quarrel could arise:
"But look, how many men so many minds,
"And that, that one man judges good and just,
"Some other déemes as déepely to be wrong.
To say the truth (mother) this mind of mine
Doth fléete full far from that farfetch of his,
No will I longer cover my conceit:
If I could rule or reign in heaven aboue,
And eke command in depth of darksome hell,
No toil no travel should my sprites abash,
To make the way unto my restless will,
To climb aloft, nor down for to descend.
Then think you not, that I can yield consent
To yield a part of my possession,
Wherein I live and lead the monarchy.
"A witless fool may every man him guess,
"That leaves the more and takes him to the less.
With this, reproach might to my name redound,
If he, that hath with foreign power spoiled
Our pleasant fields, might reeve from me perforce,
What so he list by force of arms demand.
No less reproof the citizens ensewes,
If I, for dread of Gréekish hosts, should grant
That he might climb to height of his desire.
In fine, he ought not thus of me to crave
Accord or peace, with bloody sword in hand,
But with humility and prayer both.
For often is it séen•, and proof doth teach,
"Sweet words prevail, where sword and fire fail.
Yet this, if here within these stately walls
He list to live, the son of Oedipus,
And not as king of Thebes, I stand content.
But let him think, since now I can command,
This neck of mine shall never yield to yoke
Of servitude: let bring his banners splaide,
Let spear and shield, sharpe sword, and centring flame•
Procure the part that he so vainly claims:
As long as life within this breast doth last,
I nill consent that he should reign with me.
If law of right may any way be broke,
"Desire of rule within a climbing breast
"To break a vow may bear the buckler best.
"Who once hath past the bounds of honstie
"In ernest déedes, may pass it well in words.
O son, amongst so many miseries
This benefit hath crooked age, I find,
That as the track of trustless time hath taught,
"It séeth much, and many things discerns,
"Which reckless youth can never rightly judge.
Oh, cast aside that vain ambition,
That corrosive, that cruel pestilence,
That most infects the minds of mortal men:
"In princely palace and in stately towns
"It crepeth oft, and close with it conuayes,
"To leave behind it damage and decays:
"By it be love and amity destroyed,
"It breaks the laws and common concord beats,
"Kingdoms and realms it topsy turuie turns,
And now, even thée, his gall so poisoned hath,
That the weak eyes of thine affection
Are blinded quite, and sée not to them self
But worthy child, drive from thy doubtful breast
This monstrous mate, in stead whereof embrace
"Equality, which stately states defends
"And binds the mind with true and trusty knots
"Of friendly faith which never can be broke,
"This, man of right should properly possess,
And who that other doth the more embrace,
Shall purchase pain to be his just reward
By wrathful wo or else by cruel death.
"This, first divided all by equal bonds
"What so the earth did yield for our avail:
"This, did divide the nights and days alike,
"And that the veil of dark and dreadful night,
"Which shrouds in misty clouds the pleasant light,
"No yet the golden beams of Phebus rays
"Which clears the dimmed ayre with gladsome gleam•
"Can yet heap hath in either of them both.
If then the days and nights to serve our turn
Content them selves to yield each other place,
Well ought thou with weighty doom to grant
Thy brothers right to rule the reign with thée
Which heavens ordained common to you both:
If so thou nill O son O cruel son,
"In whose high breast may justice build his bore
"When princes harts wide open lye to wrong?
Why likes thée so the tip of tyranny
With others loss to gather gréedy gain?
"Alas howe far he wanders from the truth
"That compts a pomp, all other to command,
"Yet can not rule his own unbridled will,
"A vain desire much riches to possess
"Whereby the breast is burst and bettered still,
"With dread, with danger, care and cold suspect,
"Who séekes to have the thing we call enough,
"Acquaint him first with contentation,
"For plenteousnesse is but a naked name.
"And what suffices use of mortal men,
"Shall best apaye the mean and modest hearts.
"These hoarded heaps of gold and worldly wealth
"Are not the proper goods of any one,
"But pawns which Jove powers out abundantly
"That we likewise might use them equally,
"And as he seems to lend them for a time,
"Even so in time he takes them home again,
"And would that we acknowledge every hour,
"That from his hands we did the same receive:
"There nothing is so firm and stayde to man,
"But whirls about with whéeles of restless time.
Now if I should this one thing thée demand,
Which of these two thou would choose to kéepe,
The town quiet or unquiet tyranny?
And would thou say I choose my kingly cheer?
O witless answer sent from wicked heart,
For if so fall (which mighty Gods defend)
Thine enemies hand should overcome thy might,
And thou should sée them sack the town of Thebes,
The chastest virgins ravished for wreck,
The worthy children in captivity,
"Then shouldest thou féele that sceptre, crown, &amp; wealth
"Yéelde déeper care to sée them tan away,
"Than to possess them yields déepe content.
Now to conclude, my son, Ambition
Is it that most offends thy thought,
Blame not thy brother, blame ambition
From whom if so thou not redéeme thy self,
I fear to sée thée buy repentance dear.
Yea dear, too dear when it shall come too late,
And now to thée my Polinices dear,
I say that silly was Adrastus read,
And thou God knows a simple silly soul,
He to be ruled by thy heady will,
And thou, to war against the Thebane walls,
These walls I say whose gates thy self should guard:
Tell me I pray thée, if the City yéelde,
Or thou it take by force in bloody fight,
(Which never grant the Gods I them beséeke)
What spoils? what Palms? what sign of victory•
Can thou set up to have thy country won?
What title worthy of immortal fam•,
Shall blazed be in honour of thy name?
O son, dear son, beléeue thy trusty dame,
The name of glory shall thy name refuse,
And fly full far from all thy fond attempts.
But if so fall thou should be overcome,
Then with what face can thou return to Greece,
That here hast left so many Greeks on ground?
Each one shall curse and blame thée to thy face,
As him that only caused their decay,
And eke condemn Adrastus simple head,
That such a phéere had chosen for his child.
So may it fall, in one accursed hour,
That thou may loose thy wife and country both,
Both which thou may with little toil attain,
If thou can leave high mind and dark disdain.
O mighty Gods of goodness, never grant
Unto these evils, but set desired peace
Betwéene the hearts of these two friendly foes.
The question that betwixt vs two is grown,
Beléeue me mother, can not end with words:
You waste your breath, and I but loose my time,
And all your travel lost and spent in vain:
For this I swear, that peace you never get
Betwéene vs two, but with condition,
That whilst I live, I will be Lord of Thebes.
Then set aside these vain forewasted words,
And yéelde me leave to go where néede doth press:
And now good sir, get you out of these walls,
Unless you mean to buy abode with blood.
And who is he that séekes to have my blood,
And shall not shed his own as fast as mine?
By thee he stands, and thou standst him before,
Lo here the sword that shall perform his word.
And this shall eke maintain my rightful cause.
O sons, dear sons, away with glittering arms,
And first, before you touch each others flesh,
With doubled blows come pierce this breast of mi•e.
Ah wretch, thou art both vile and cowardlike,
Thy high estate estéemes thy life too dear.
If with a wretch or coward shouldest thou fight,
Oh dastard villain, what first moved thée
With swarms of Gréekes to take this enterprise?
For well I wist, that cankered heart of thine
Could safely keep thy head within these walls,
And flée the field when combat should be called.
This truce assured thée Polinices,
And makes thée bold to give such bosting words:
So be thou sure, that had this truce not been,
Then long ere this, these hands had been imbrued,
And eke this soil besprinkled with thy blood.
Not one small drop of my blood shalt thou spill,
But buy it dear against thy cankered will.
O sons, my sons, for pity yet refrain.
Good Gods, who ever saw so strange a sight?
True love and friendship both be put to flight.
Yield villein, yield my right which thou with-holds▪
Cut of thy hope to reign in Thebane walls,
Nought hast thou here, nor nought shall ever have,
Away.
O aultars of my country soil.
Whom thou art come to spoil and to deface.
O Gods, give ear unto my honest cause.
With foreign power his country to invade.
O holy temples of the heavenly Gods.
That for thy wicked deeds do hate thy name.
Out of my kingdom am I driven by force.
Out of the which thou came me to drive.
Punish O Gods this wicked tyrant here.
Pray to the Gods in Greece and not in Thebes.
No savage beast so cruel nor unjust.
Not cruel to my country like to thée.
Since from my right I am with wrong deprived.
Eke from thy life if long thou tarry here.
O father hear what injuries I take.
As though thy devilish déedes were hid from him.
And you mother.
Have done thou not deserve
With that false tong thy mother once to name.
O dear City.
When thou ariuest in Greece,
Choose out thy dwelling in some musty Moors.
I must depart, and parting must I prays•
Oh dear mother the depth of your good will.
O Son.
Away I say out of these walls.
I can not choose but must thy will obey,
Yet grant me once my father for to sée.
I hear no prayers of my enemy.
Where be my swéete sisters.
And can thou yet
With shameless tong once name thy noble race
That art become a common foe to Thebes?
Be sure thou shalt them never sée again,
Nor other friend that in these walls remain.
Rest you in peace, O worthy mother mine.
Howe can that be and thou my joy in war?
Hence forth n'am I your joy no yet your son.
Alas the Heavens me whelm with all mishap.
Lo here the cause that stirs me by wrong.
Much more is that he proffered unto me.
Well, speak, dare thou come armed to the field?
So dare I come, wherefore dost thou bemaunde?
For néedes or thou must end this life of mind
Or quench my thirst with pouring out thy blood.
Ah wretch, my thirsts all as dry as thine.
Alas and welaway, what hear I sons?
How can it be? dear children can it be
That brethrens hearts such rancour should enrage?
And that right soon the proof shall plainly show.
Oh say not so, yet say not so dear sons.
O royal race of Thebes now take thine end.
God shield.
O slow &amp; sluggish heart of mine,
Why do I stay to embrew these slothful hands?
But for his greater grief I will depart,
And at return if here I find my foe,
This hasty hand shall end our hot debate.
Dear Citizens, and you eternal Gods,
Bear witness with me here before the world,
How this my fierce and cruel enemy,
Whom causeless now my brother I do call,
With threats of death my lingering steps doth drive
Both from my right and from my country soil,
Not as beséemes the son of Oedipus,
But as a slave, an abject, or a wretch:
And since you be both pitiful and just,
Vouchsafe O Gods, that as I part with grief,
So may I yet return with joyful spoil
Of this accursed tyrant, and he slain
I may recover quietly mine own.
O wretched wretch Iocasta, where is found
The misery that may compare to thine?
O would I had nor gazing eyes to sée,
Nor listening ears to hear that now I dread:
But what remains, save only to entreat
That cruel dole would yet so courteous be
To reeve the breath out of this woeful breast,
Before I hearken to some woeful •ewes.
Rest you here dames, and pray unto the Gods
For our redress, and I in that mean while
Will shut my self from sight of loathsome light.
O mighty God, the governor of Thebes,
Pity with speed the payne Iocasta bids,
And eke our néedes, O mighty Bacchus help,
Bend willing care unto our just complaint:
Leave them not comfortless that trust in thée,
We have nor gold nor silver thée to give,
No sacrifice to those thine aulters due,
In steed whereof we confecrate our hearts
To serve thy will, and hestes for to obey.
SInce I have rid mine enmie out of sight,
The best shall be, for Croon now to send,
My mothers brother, that with him I may
Reason, consult, confer, and counsel both,
What shall be best to use in our defence,
Before we venture forth into the field.
But of this travail, lo, he me acquits
That comes in haste towards these royal towers.
O mighty king, not causeless now I come,
To find, that long have sought your majesty.
So to discharge the duty that I owe
To you, by comfort and by counsel both.
No less desire this heart of mine did press,
To send for thée Croon, since that in vain
My mother hath his words and travail spent,
To reconcile Pollinices and me:
For he (so dull was his capacity)
Did think, he could by dread of danger, win
My princely heart to yéelde to him this realm.
I understand, the army that he brings
Against these walls, is such, that I me doubt
Our cities force may scarce the same resist.
Yet true it is, that right and reason both
Are on our side, which bring the victory
Oftetimes: for we our country to defend,
They to subdue the same in arms are come.
But what I would unto your highness show,
Is of more weight, and more behooves to know.
And what is that? oh quickly tell it me.
A Gréeke prisner is come unto my hands.
And what saith he that doth so much import?
That even already be their ranks in ray,
And straight will give assault to these our walls.
Then must I straight prepare our Citizens
In glittering arms to marche into the field.
O Prince (and pardon me) thy youthful years
Nor sée them self, no let thée once discern,
What best behooves in this doubtful case.
"For Prudence, she that is the mighty quéene
"Of all good works, grows by experience,
"Which is not found with few days seeking for.
And were not this both sound and wise advise,
Boldly to look our foemen in the face,
Before they spread our fields with huge host,
And all the town beset bysiege at once?
We be but few; and they in number great.
Our men have yet more courage far than they.
That know I not, nor am I sure to say.
Those eyes of thine in little space shall sée
How many I my self can bring to ground.
That would I like, but harde it is to doe.
I nill pan up our men within the walls.
In counsel yet the victory consists.
And wilt thou then I use some other read?
What else? be still awhile, fir haste makes wast.
By night I will the Camuassado give.
So may you do and take the overthrow.
The vantage is to him that doth assault.
Yet skirmish given by night is perilous.
Let set upon them as they sit at meat.
Sudden assaults affray the mind no doubt,
But we had néede to overcome.
So shall we do.
No sure, unless some other counsel help.
Amid their trenches shall we them invade?
As who should say, were none to make defence.
Should I then yield the City to my foes?
No, but advise you well if you be wise.
That were thy part, that know more than I.
Then shall I say that best doth séeme to me?
Yea Croon yea, thy counsel hold I dear.
Seven men of courage have they chosen out.
A slender number for so great empress.
But they them chose for guides and capitaynes.
To such an host? why they may not suffice.
Nay, to assault the seven gates of the city.
What then behooves so bestad to done?
With equal number sée you do them match.
And then commit our men in charge to them?
Choosing the best and boldest bloods in Thebes.
And how shall I the City then defend?
Well with the rest, for one man sées not all.
And shall I choose the boldest or the wisest?
Nay both, for one without that other fails.
"Force without wisdom then is little worth.
That one must be fast to that other ioynde
Croon I will thy counsel follow still,
For why, I hold it wise and trusty both,
And out of hand for now I will depart
That I in time the better may provide
Before occasion slip out of my hands,
And that I may this Pollinices quell:
For well may I with bloody knife him •le•
That commas in arms my country for to spoil,
But if so please to fortune and to fate
That other end than I doe think may fall,
To thée my friend it rests to procure
The marriage twixt my sister Antygone
And thy dear son Haemone, to whom for dowre
At parting thus I promise to perform
As much as late I did behest to thée:
My mothers blood and brother dear thou art,
No néede I crave of thée to guard his well,
As for my father care I not, for if
So chance I dye, it may full well be said
His bitter curses brought me to my bane,
The Lord defend, for that unworthy were.
Of Thebes town the rule and sceptre lo
I néede nor ought it other wise dispose
Than unto thée, if I dye without heir.
Yet longs my lingering mind to understand
The doubtful end of this unhappy war:
Wherefore I will thou send thy son to seek
Tyresias the divine, and learn of him,
For at my call I know he will not come
That often have his arts and him reproude.
As you command, so ought I to perform.
And last, I thée and city both command,
If fortune friendly favour our attempts,
And make our men triumphant victors al,
That none there be so hardy no so bold
For Pollinices bones to give a grave:
And who presumes to break my hest berein,
Shall dye the death in penance of his pain,
For though I were by blood to him conioynde
I part it now, and justice goes with me
To guide my steppes victoriously before.
Pray you to Jove he deign for to defend,
Our City safe both now and evermore.
Gramercy worthy prince, for all thy love
And faithful trust thou doest in me repose,
And if should hap, that I hope never shall,
I promise yet to doe what best behooves,
But chiefly this I swear and make a vow,
For Pollinices now our cruel foe,
To hold the hest that thou doest me command.
O Fierce and furious God, whose harmful heart,
Rejoices most to shed the guiltless blood,
Whose heady will doth all the world subvert,
And doth envy the pleasant merry mood,
Of our estate that erst in quiet stood,
Why doest thou thus our harmless town annoy,
Which mighty Bacchus governed in joy?
Father of war and death, that dost remove
With wrathful wreck from woeful mothers breast,
The trusty pledges of their tender love,
So grant the Gods, that for our final rest,
Dame Uenus pleasant looks may please thée best,
Whereby when thou shalt all amazed stand,
The sword may fall out of thy trembling hand.
And thou moist prove some other way full well
The bloody prowess of thy mighty spear,
Wherewith thou raisest from the depth of hell,
The wrathful sprites of all the furies there,
Who when they wake, doe wander every where,
And never rest to rang• about the coasts,
T'enriche that pit with spoil of damned ghosts.
And when thou hast our fields forsaken thus,
Let cruel discord bear thée company,
Engirt with snakes and serpents venomous,
Even she that can with red vermilion dye
The gladsome gréene that flourished pleasantly,
And make the gréedie ground a drinking cup,
To suy the blood of murdered bodies up.
Yet thou return O joy and pleasant peace,
From whence thou did against our will depart,
No let thy worthy mind from travel cease,
To chase disdain out of the poisoned heart,
That raised war to all our pains and smart,
Even from the breast of Oedipus his son,
Whose swelling pride hath all this jar begone.
And thou great God, that doth all things decrée▪
And set on high aboue the starry skies,
Thou chiefest cause of causes all that bee,
Regard not his offence but hear our cries,
And speedily redress our miseries,
For what can we poor woeful wretches doe
But crave thy aide, and only cleave thereto?
BEfore the beginning of this .iij. Act did sound
a very doleful noise of cornets, during the
which there opened and appeared in the stage a
great Gulf, immediately came in .vj. gentlemen
in their dublets and hose bringing vpō their shul∣ders
baskets full of earth and threw them into
the Gulf to fill it up, but it would not so close up
nor be filled. Then came the ladies and dames
that stood by, throwing in their chey•es &amp; Ie∣wels,
so to cause it stop up and close it self, but
when it would not so be filled, came in a kinghte
with his sword drawn, armed at all points,
who walking twice or thrice about it, &amp; perusing
if, seeing that it would neither be filled with earth
nor with their Jewels and ornaments, after
solemn reverence done to the gods, and curt∣os
leave taken of the Ladies and standers by,
suddenly leapt into the Gulf the which did close
up immediately, bet•kening unto vs the love that
every worthy person owes unto his native coū∣try,
by the history of Curtius, who for the like
cause adventured the like in Rome. This done,
blind Tyresias the divine prophet led in by his
daughter, and conducted by Meneceus the son of
Croon, entered by the gates Electrae, and saith as
follows.
THou trusty guide of my so trustless steppes
Déer daughter mine go we, lead thou y• way,
That since the day I first did léese this light
Thou only art the light of thee mine eyes:
And for thou know I am both old &amp; weak
And ever longing after lovely rest,
Derect my steppes amid the plainest paths,
That so my fabled féete may féele lest pain.
Meneceus thou gentle child, tell me,
It is far hence, the place where we must go,
Where as thy father for my coming stays?
For like unto the slothful snail I draw,
Dear s•nne, with pain these aged legs of mine,
And though my mind be quick, scarce can I move.
Comfort thy self divine, Croon thy friend
Lo stands here, and came to méete with thée
To ease the payne that thou might else sustain.
"For unto eld eche travel yields annoy:
And thou his daughter and his faithful guide▪
Lo rest him here, and rest thou there withal
Thy virgins hands, that in sustaining him
Doest well acquit the duty of a child.
"For crooked age and hory silver hears
"Still craves help of lusty youthful years.
Gramercy Lord, what is your noble will?
What I would have of thée Tyresias
Is not a thing so soon for to be said,
But rest a while thy weak and weary limbs
And take some breath now after weary walk,
And tell I pray thée, what this crown doth mean,
That sits so kingly on thy skilful head?
Know this, that for I did with grave advise,
Foretell the Citizens of Athens town,
How they might best with loss of little blood,
Have victories against their enemies,
Hath been the cause why I doe wear this Crown,
As right reward and not vnméete for me.
So take I then this thy victorious crown,
For our avail in token of good luck,
That know, how the discord and debat•
Which late is fallen between these brethren twain,
Hath brought all Thebes in danger and in dread.
Eteocles our king, with threatening arms,
Is gone against his gréekish enemies,
Commanding me to learn of thée (who art
A true divine of things that be to come)
What were for vs the safest to be done,
From peril now our country to preserve.
Long have I been within the town of Thebes,
Since that I tied this trusty tongue of mine
From telling truth, fearing Eteocles:
Yet, since thou doest in so great néede desire
I should reveal things hidden unto thée,
For common cause of this our common weal,
I stand content to pleasure thée herein.
But first, that to this mighty God of yours
There might some worthy sacrifice be made,
Let kill the fairest goat that is in Thebes,
Within whose bowels when the Préest shall loke,
And tell to me what he hath there espied,
I trust t'aduyse thée what is best to done.
Lo here the temple, and ere long I look
To sée the holy préest that hither cōmes,
Bringing with him the pure and fair offerings,
Which thou require, for not long since, I sent
For him, as one that am not ignorant
Of all your rytes and sacred ceremonies:
He went to choose amid our herd of goats,
The fattest there: and loke where now he commas.
O famous Citizens, that hold full dear
Your quiet country: Lo where I doe come
Most joyfully, with wonted sacrifice,
So to beséeche the supreme Citizens,
To stay our state that staggringly do stand,
And plant vs peace where war and discord grows:
Wherefore, with heart devout and humble chéere,
Whiles I break up the bowels of this beast,
That oft thy vineyard Bacchus hath destroyed,
Let every wight crave pardon for his faults,
With bending knée about his aultars here.
Take here the salt, and sprinckle therewithal
About the neck, that done, cast all the rest
Into the sacred fire, and then anoint
The knife prepared for the sacrifice.
O mighty Jove, preserve the precious gift
That thou me gave, when first thine angry Quéene,
For déepe disdain did both mine eyes do out,
Grant me, I may foretell the truth in this,
For, but by thée, I know that I no may,
No will no can, out trusty sentence say,
This due is done.
With knife then stick y• kid.
Thou daughter of divine Tyresias,
With those unspotted virgins hands of thine
Receive the blood within this vessel here,
And then devoutly it to Bacchus yield.
O holy God of Thebes, that doest both praise
Sweet peace▪ and doest in hart also disdain
The noisome noise, the furies and the fight
Of bloody Mars and of Bellona both:
O thou the giver both of joy and health,
Receive in grée and with well willing hand
These holy whole brunt offerings unto thée,
And as this town doth wholly thee adore,
So by thy help do grant that it may stand
Safe from the enemies outrage evermore.
Now in thy sacred name I bowel here
This sacrifice.
And what entrails hath it?
Fair and welformed all in every point,
The liver clean, the hart is not inf••t,
Save lo, I find but only one hart string
By which I find somewhat I woten•re what,
That séemes corrupt, and were not only that,
In all the rest, they are both sound and hole.
Now cast at once into the holy flame
The sweet incense, and then advertise mée
What hew it bears, and every other ryte
That ought may help the truth for to coniecte.
I see the flames doe sundry colours cast,
Now bloody sanguine, straight way purple, blew,
Some parts séeme black, some gray, and some be gréene.
Stay there, suffy•eth this for to have séene,
Know Croon, that these outward séemely signs
By that the Gods have let me understand
Who understands al and séeth secrete things,
Betokened that the City great of Thebes
Shall Victor be against the Greekish host,
If so consent be given, but more than this
I list not say:
Alas for courtesy
Say on Tyresias, never have respect
To any living man, but tell the truth.
In this mean while I will return with spéede
From whence I came, for lawful is it not,
That such as I should hear your secretnesse.
Contrary then to that which I have said,
The incest foul, and childbirth monstrous
Of Iocasta, so stirs the wrath of Jove,
This city shall with bloody channels swim,
And angry Mars shall overcome it all.
With famine, flame, rape, murder, dole and death:
These lusty towers shall have a headlong fall,
These houses burned, and all the rest be rasde,
And soon be said, here meanwhile Thebes stood.
One only way I find for to escape,
Which both would thée displease to hear it told,
And me to tell percase were perilous.
Thée therefore with my travel I commend
To Jove, and with the rest I will endure,
What so shall chance for our adversity.
Yet stay a while.
Croon make me not stay
By force.
Why fléest thou?
Sir it is not frō thée
I flée, but from this fortune foul and fell.
Yet tell me what behooves the city doe?
Thou Croon séemest now desirous still
It to preserve: but if as well as I
Thou knew that which is to thée unknown,
Then would thou not so soon consent thereto.
And would not I with eager mind desire
The thing that may for Thebes ought avail?
And dost thou then so instantly request
To know which way thou may the same preserve?
For nothing else I sent my son of late
To séeke for thée.
Then will I satisfy
Thy gréedie mind in this: but first tell me,
Menetius where is he?
Not far from me.
I pray thée send him out some other where.
Why would thou that he should not be here?
I would not have him hear what I should say.
He is my son, no will he it reveal.
And shall I then while he is present speak?
Yea, be thou sure that he no less than I,
Doth wish full well unto this common weal.
Then Croon shalt thou know: the mean to save
This City, is, that thou shalt •lea thy son,
And of his body make a sacrifice
For his Country: lo héere is all you séeke
So much to know, and since you have me forced
To tell the thing that I would not have told,
If I have you offended with my words,
Blame then your self, and eke your froward fate.
cruel words, oh, oh, what hast thou said,
Thou cruel southsayer?
Even that, that heaven
Hath ordained once, and needs it must ensue.
Howe many evils hast thou knit up in one?
Though evil for thée, yet for thy country good.
And let my country perish, what care I?
"Aboue all things we ought to hold it dear.
Cruel were he, that would not love his child.
"For cōmō weal, were well, that one man wail.
To loose mine own, I list none other save.
"Best Citizens care least for private gain.
Depart, for now, with all thy prophecies.
"Lo, thus the truth doth always hatred get.
Yet pray I thée by these thy silver hears,
"The harm that cōmes from heaven can not be escaped.
And by thy holy spirit of prophecy,
"What heaven hath done, that can not I undo.
"That to no more this secrete thou reueals.
And would thou have me learn to make a lye?
I pray thée hold thy peace.
That will I not:
But in thy woe to yéelde thée some relief,
I tell thée once, thou shalt be Lord of Thebes.
Which hap of thine this string did well declare,
Which from the heart doth out lonely grow.
So did the péece corrupted plainly show,
An argument most evident to prove
Thy son his death.
Well, yet be thou content
To kéepe full close this secrete hidden grief.
I neither ought, no will kéepe it so close.
Shall I be then the murderer of mine own?
No blame not me, but blame the stars for this.
Can heavens condemn but him alone to dye?
We ought beléeue the cause is good and just.
"Unjust is he condemns the innocent.
"A fool is he accuses heavens of wrongs.
"There can no ill thing come from heauēs aboue.
Then this that heaven commands can not be ill.
I not beléeue that thou hast talked with God.
Because I tell thée that doth thée displease.
Out of my sight accursed lying wretch.
Go daughter go, oh what a fool is he
That puts in ur to publish prophecies?
"For if he do foretell a froward fate,
"Though it be true, yet shall he purchase hate:
"And if he silence kéepe, or hide the truth,
"The heavy wrath of mighty Gods ensuth.
Apollo he might well tell things to come,
That had no dread the angry to offend:
But hye we daughter hence some other way.
OH my dear child, well hast thou heard with ear
These wéery news, or rather wicked tales
That this divine of thee divined hath:
Yet will thy father never be thy foe,
With cruel doom thy death for to consent.
You rather ought, O father, to consent
Unto my death, since that my death may bring
Unto this town both peace and victory.
"No can I purchase more praiseworthy death
"Than for my countries wealth to lose my breath.
I can not praise this witless will of thine.
"You know dear father, that this life of ours
"Is brittle, short, and nothing else in déede
"But tedious toil and pangs of endless payne:
"And death, whose dart to some men séemes so fell,
"Brings quiet end to this unquiet life.
"Unto which end who soonest doth arrive,
"Finds soonest rest of all his restless grief.
"And were it so, that here on earth we felt
"No prick of payne, nor that our flattering days
"Were never dashed by froward fortunes frown,
"Yet béeing borne (as all men are) to dye,
"Were not this worthy glory and renown,
"To yéelde the country soil where I was borne,
"For so long time, so short a time as mine?
I can not think that this can be denied.
Then if to shun this haughty high bah•st,
Mine only cause, O father, doth you move,
Be sure, you séeke to take from me your son,
The greatest honour that I can attain:
But if your own commodity you move,
So much the less you ought the same allow:
For look, how much the more you have in Thebes,
So much the more you ought to love the same:
Here have you Hemone, he that in my stead
(O my dear father) may with you remain,
So that, although you be deprived of me,
Yet shall you not be quite deprived of heirs.
I can not choose, dear son, but disalow•
This thy too hasty, hot desire of death:
For if thy life thou set all so light,
Yet ought thou thy father me respect,
Who as I draw the more to lumpish age,
So much more néede have I to crave thine aid:
No will I yet, with stubborn tong deny,
"That for his common weal to spend his life,
"Doth win the subject high renowned name.
"But howe? in armour to defend the state,
"Not like a beast to bléede in sacrifice:
And therewithal, if any should consent
To such a death, then should the same be I,
That have prolonged life even long enough,
No many days have I now to draw on.
And more avail might to the country come,
Dear son, to hold that lusty life of thine
That art both young and eke of courage stout,
Than may by me that féeble am and old.
Then live dear son in high prosperity,
And give me leave that worthy am to dye.
Yet worthy were not that unworthy change.
If such a death bring glory, give it me,
Not you, but me, the heavens cal to die.
We be but one in flesh and body both.
I father ought; so ought not you, to die.
If thou son die, think not that I can line:
Then let me die, and so shall he first die,
That ought to die, and yet but one shall die.
Although I, father, ought to obey your hestes,
Yet evil were not to this yield your will.
Thy wit is wily for to work this wo.
Oh, tender pity moves me thereto.
"A beast is he, that kills himself with knife,
"Of pity to preserve an others life.
"Yet wise is he, that doth obey the Gods.
The Gods will not the death of any wight.
"Whose life they take, they give him life also.
But thou dost strive to take thy life thy self.
Nay them to obey, that will I shall not live.
What fault, O son, condemns thée to death?
"Who lives (father) here without a fault?
I sée no gilt in thée that death deserves.
But God it séeth that every secrete séeth.
Howe should we know what is the will of God?
We know it then, when he reveals the same.
As though he would come down to tell it vs.
By divers means his secrets he discloses.
Oh, fond is he, who thinks to understand
The mysteries of •ove his secrete mind:
And for to end this controversy here,
Lo thus I say, I will we both live yet:
Prepare thée then, my hestes to hold and kéepe,
And pull a down that stubborn heart of thine.
You may of me, as of your self dispose,
And since my life doth séeme so dear to you,
I will preserve the same to your avail,
That I may spend it always to your will.
Then▪ thée behooves out of this town to 〈◊〉:
Before the bold and bl•id Tyresias
Doe publish this that is as yet unknown▪
And where, or in what place shall I become?
Where thou may be hence furthest out of sight.
You may command, and I ought to obey.
Go to the land of Th•s•eotia.
Where Dodona doth fit in sacred chair?
Even there my child.
And who shall guide my wandering steps?
high Jove.
Who shall give sustenance for my relief?
There will I send thée heaps of glistering gold.
But when shall I left•soones my father sée?
Cre long I hope: but now, for now depart,
For every lingering let or little stay,
May purchase payne and torment both to me.
First would I take my conge of the Quéene,
That since the day my mother lost his life,
Hath nourished me as if I were his own.
Oh, tarry not my dear son, tarry not.
Behold father, I go. You dames o• Thebes.
Pray to almighty Jove for my return,
You sée howe mine unhappy starr•s me drive
To go my country fro, and if so chance,
I end in woe my pryme and lusty years
Before the course of Nature do them call,
Honour my death yet with your dreary plaints,
And I shall eke, where so this carcass come,
Pray to the Gods that they preserve this town.
WHen she that rules the rolling whéele of chance,
Doth turn aside his angry frowning face,
On him, whom erst she deigned to advance,
She never leaves to galde him with disgrace,
T• toss and turn his state in every place,
Till at the last she hurl him from on high
And yield him subject unto misery:
And as the branch that from the root is reft,
He never wins like life to that he left:
Yea though he do, yet can no taste of joy
Compare with pangs that past in his annoy.
Well did the heavens ordain for our behoof
Necessity, and fa•es by them allowde,
That when we see our high mishaps aloof
(As tho•gh our eyes were muffled with a cloud)
Our froward will doth shrink it self and shroud
From our avail, wherewith we run so far
As none a•ends can make that we do mar:
Then draws evil hap &amp; strives to show his strēgth,
And such as yield unto his might, at length
He leads them by necessity the way
That destiny prepared for our decay.
The Mariner amid the swelling seas
Who séeth his bark with many a billow beaten,
Now here, now there, as wind and waives best please,
When thundering Jove with tempest list to threaten,
And dreads in d•pest gulf for to be eaten,
Yet learns a mean by mere necessity
To save him self in such extremity:
For when he sees no man hath wit nor power
To fly from fate when fortune list to lower,
His only hope on mighty Jove doth caste,
Whereby he wins the wished haven at last.
How fond is that man in his fantasy,
Who thinks that Jove the maker of vs al,
And he that tempers all in heaven on high,
The sun, the moan, the stars celestial,
So that no leaf without his leave can fall,
Hath not in him omnipotence also
To guide and govern all things here below?
O blinded eyes, O wretched mortal wights,
O subject sl•ues to every evil that lights,
To scope such woe, such pain, such shame and scorn,
Happy were he that never had bin borne.
Well might duke Croon driven by destiny,
If tree•• it be that old Tyresias saith,
Redeem our city from this misery,
By his consent unto Meneceus death,
Who of him self wold fine have lost his breath,
"But every man is loath for to fulfil
"The heavenly hest that pleases not his will:
"That public weal must néedes to ruin go
"Where private profit is preferred so.
Yet mighty God, thy only aide we crave,
This town from siege, and vs from sorrow save.
BEfore the beginning of this fourth Act, the
Trumpets sounded, the drums and fifes,
and a great peal of ordinance was shot of, in
the which there entered upon the stage .vj. knights
armed at al points, whereof three came in by the
Gates Electrae, and the other four by the Gates
Homoloides, either part being accompanied
with vij, other armed men: and after they had
marched twice or thrice about the Stage, the
one party menacing the other by their furious
looks and gestures, the .vj. knights caused their
other attendants to stand by, and drawing their
Swords, fell to cruel and courageous combat,
continuing therein, till two on the one side were
slain: the third perceiving, that he only remay∣ned
to withstand the force of .iij. enemies, did po∣litiquely
run aside, wherewith immediately one
of the .iij. followed after him, and when he had
drawn his enemy thus from his company, hee
turned again and slew him: Then the second
also ran after him, whom he slew in like mā∣ner,
and consequently the third, and then trium∣phantly
marched about the Stage with his
sword in his hand. Hereby was noted the income∣parable
force of concord between brethren, who
as long as they hold together may not easily by
any means be overcome, and being once disseue∣red
by any means, are easily overthrown. The
history of the brethren Horatij &amp; Curiatij, who a∣greed
to like combat and came to like end. Af∣la
that the dead carcasses were carried from the
Stage by the armed men on both parties, and
that the victor was triumphantly accompanied
out, also came in a messenger armed from the
camp, seeking the Queen, and to his spake as
follows.
O Sage and sober dames, O shamefaced maids,
O faithful servants of our aged Quéene,
Come lead his forth, sith unto his I bring
Such secrete news as are of great import.
Come forth, O Quéene, furceasse thy wo∣full
plaint,
And to my words vouchsafe a willing ear.
My servant dear, doest thou yet bring me news
Of more mishap? ah weary wretch, alas,
How doth Eteocles? whom heretofore
In his increasing years, I wonted ay
From dangerous hap with favour to defend,
Doth he yet live? or hath untimely death
In cruel fight bereft his flowering life?
He lives (O Quéene) hereof have ye no doubt,
From such suspect my self will quite you soon.
The vētrous Gréekes have happily ta•• the town▪
The Gods forbid.
Our soldiers then, perchance,
Dispersed be•e and yelden to the sword.
Not so, they were at first in danger sure,
But in the end obtained victory.
Alas, what then becōmes of Polinice?
Oh can thou tell? is he dead or alive?
You have (O Quéene) yet both your sons alive.
Oh, how my heart is eased of this pain.
Well, then procéede, and briefly let me hear,
How ye rep•lst your proud presuming foes,
That thereby yet at least I may assuage
The swelling sorrows in my doleful breast,
In that the town is hitherto preserved:
And for the rest, I trust that mighty Jove
Will yield vs aid.
No sooner had your worthy valiant son,
Severed the Dukes into seven several parts,
And set them to defence of several gates,
And brought in brave array his horssemen out,
First to encounter with their mighty foin,
And likewise pitched, the footmen face to face
Against the footmen of their enemies,
But fiercely straight, the armies did approach,
Swarming so thick, as couerde clean the field,
When dreadful blast of braying trumpets sound,
Of doleful drums, and thundering cannon shot,
Gave hideous sign of horror of the fight,
Then began the Greeks to give their sharpe assault,
Then from the walls our stout courageous men,
With rolling stones, with poise of huge beam•,
With flying darts, with flakes of burning fire,
And deadly blows, did beat them back again:
Thus striving long, with stout and bloody fight,
Whereby full many thousand slaughtered were,
The hardy Greeks came underneath the walls,
Of whom, first Capaney (a lusty Knight)
Did scale the walls, and on the top thereof
Did vaunt himself, when many hundred more,
With fierce assaults did follow him as fast.
Then lo, the Captains seven bestirrde themselves,
(Whose names ye have already understood)
Some here, some there, nought dreading loss of life,
With new relief to feed thée fainting breach:
And Polinice, he •ended all the force▪
Of his whole charge, against the greatest 〈◊〉,
When suddenly a flash of lightning flame
From angry skies struck captain Capaney,
That there down dead he fell, at sight whereof
The gazers one were fraught with soden fear.
The rest, that strove to mount the walls so fast,
From ladders top did headlong tumble down.
Herewith our men encouragde by good hap,
Toke hardy harts, and so repulsed the Greeks.
There was Eteocles and I with him,
Who setting first those soldiers to their charge,
Ran straight to tother gates, unto the weak
He manly comfort gave, unto the bold
His lusty words increased courage still,
In so much as the amazed Grecian king
When he did hear of Capaney his death,
Fearing thereby the Gods became his foin
Out from the trench withdrew his weary host.
But rash Eteocles (presuming too too much
Upon their flight) did issue out of Thebes,
And forward straight with strength of chivalry,
His flying foes courageously pursued.
To long it were to make recompt of all
That wounded been, or slain, or captive now,
The cloudy ayre was filled round about
With howling cries and woeful wailing plaints:
So great a slaughter (O renowned Quéene)
Before this day I think was never séene.
Thus have we now cut of the fruitless hope
The Gracious had, to sack this noble town.
What joyful end will happen hereunto
Yet know I not: the gods turn all to good.
"To conquer, lo, is doubtless worthy praise,
"But wisely for to use the conquest got,
"Hath ever won immortal sound of fame
Well, yet therewhile in this we may rejoice,
Sith heaven and heavenly powers are pleased therewith.
This good success was lucky sure, and such,
As for my part I little looked for:
To save the town and eke to have my sons
(As you report) preserved yet alive.
But yet procéede, and further let me know
The final end that they agréed upon.
No more (O Quéene) let this for now suffice,
Sith hitherto your state is safe enough.
Those words of thine, do whelm my jealous mind
With great suspect of other mischiefs hid.
What would ye more, already being sure
That both your sons in safety do remain?
I long to know the rest, or good or bad.
O let me now return to Eteocles,
That of my service greatly stands in néede.
Right well▪ I sée, thou doest conceal the worst.
Oh force me not, the good now béeing past,
To tell the ill.
Tell it I say, on pain of our displeasure.
Since thus ye séeke to hear a doleful tale,
I will no longer stay: wit ye therefore,
Your desperate sons together be agréed
For to attempt a wicked enterprise,
To private ••light they have betrothed themselves,
Of which conflict, the end mus• needs be this,
That one do 〈◊〉, that other die the death.
Alas, alas, this did I ever fear.
Now, sith in sum I have revealed that,
Which you have heard with great remorse of mind,
I will procéede, at large to tell the wh•le.
When your victorious son, with valiant force
Had chaste his foes into their joining tents,
Even there he staide, and straight at sound of trump
With stretched voice the herald thus proclaimed:
You princely Gréekes, that hither be arrived
To spoil the fruit of these our fertile fields,
And vs to drive from this our Native soil,
O suffer not so many guiltless souls
By this debate descend in Stigian lake,
For private cause of wicked Pollinice,
But rather let the brethren, hand to hand,
By mutual blows appease their furious rage,
And so to cease from sheding further blood:
And, to the end you all might understand
The profit that to every side may fall,
Thus much my Lord thought good to profer you,
This is his will, if he be overcome,
Then Polinice to rule this kingly realm:
If so it hap (as reason would it should)
Our rightful prince to conquer Polinice,
That then no one of you make more ado,
But straight to Argos. Isle hast home again.
This, thus pronounced unto the noble Gréeks,
No sooner did the sound of trumpet cease,
But Polinice stepped forth before the host,
And to these words this answer did he make:
O thou, (not brother) but my mortal foe,
Thy profer here hath pleased me so well,
As presently, without more long delay,
I yield my self prepared to the field.
Our noble King no sooner heard this vaunt,
But forth as fast he pressed his princely steppes,
With eager mind, as hoovering falcon wonts
To make his stoop, when pray appears in fight:
At all assays they both were bra•ely armed,
To eiders side his sword fast being girt,
In •ithers hand was put a sturdy lance:
About Eteocles our soldiers cloong,
To comfort him, and put him then in mind,
He fought for safety of his country soil,
And that in him consisted all their hope.
To Polinice the king Adrastus swore,
If he escaped victor from the field,
As his return he would in Greece erect
A golden Image unto mighty Jove
In sign of his triumphing victory:
But all this while séeke you (O noble quéene)
To hinder this your furious sons attempt.
Entreat that Gods it may not take effect,
Else must you néedes ere long deprived be
Of both your sons, or of the one at least.
ANtigone my sweet daughter, come forth
Out of this house, that nought but woe retains,
Come forth I say, not for to sing or dance,
But to prevent (if in our powers it lie)
That thy malicious brethren (swollen with ire)
And I alas, their miserable mother,
Be not destroyed by stroke of dreadful death.
Ah sweet mother, ah my beloved mother,
Alas alas what cause doth move ye now
From trembling voice to send such careful cries?
What painful pang? what grief doth gripe you now?
O dear daughter, thy most unhappy brethren
That sometimes lodged within these wretched loins
Shall die this day, if Jove prevent it not.
Alas what say you? alas what do you say?
Can I (alas) endure to sée him dead,
Whom I thus long have sought to sée alive?
They both have vowed (I quake alas to tell)
With trenchant blade to spill each others blood.
O cruel Eteocles, ah ruthless wretch,
Of this outrage thou only art the cause,
Not Pollinice, whom thou with hateful spite
Hast reaved first of crown and country soil,
And now doest séeke to reeve him of his life.
Daughter no more delay, lets go, lets go.
Ah my swéete mother, whither shall I go?
With me, déere daughter, to the gréekish host,
Alas how can I go? unless I go
In danger of my life, or of good name?
Time serves not now (my well-beloved child)
To way the loss of life or honest name,
But rather to prevent (if so we may)
That wicked déede, which only but to think,
Doth hale my hart out of my heavy breast.
Come then, lets go, good mother let vs go,
But what shall we be able for to doe,
You a weak old woman for worn with years,
And I God knows a silly simple maid?
Our woeful words, our prayers &amp; our plaints,
Port out with streams of overflowing tears,
(Where Nature rules) may happen to prevail,
When reason, power, and force of arms do fail,
But if the glowing heate of boiling wrath
So furious be, as it may not relent,
Then I atwixt them both will throw my self,
And this my breast shall bear the deadly blows
That otherwise should light upon my sons:
So shall they shed my blood and not their own.
Well now déere daughter, let vs hasten hence,
For if in time we stay this raging strife,
Then happily may my life prolonged be:
If ere we come the bloody déede be done,
Then must my ghost forsake this féeble corps:
And thou, dear child, with dolor shalt bewail,
Thy brothers death and mothers all at once.
WHo so hath •elt, what fervent love
A mother bears unto his tender sons,
She and none other sure, can comprehend
The doleful grief, the pangs and secret pain,
That presently doth pierce the princely breast
Of our afflicted Quéene: alas, I think
No martyrdom might well compare with hers.
So oft as I record his restless state,
Alas me thinks I féele a shivering fear
Flit to and fro along my flushing veins.
Alas for ruth, that thus two brethren should,
Enforce themselves to shed each others blood.
Where is the laws of nature now become?
Can flesh of flesh, alas, can blood of blood,
So far forget it self, as slay it self?
O lowering stars, O dim and angry skies,
O guilty fate, such mischief set aside.
But if supernal powers decreed have,
That death must be the end of this debate,
Alas what floods of tears shall then suffice,
To wéepe and wail the near approaching death:
I mean the death of sons and mother both,
And with their death the ruin and decay,
Of Oedipus and all his princely race?
But lo, here Croon cōmes with careful cheer.
It is time that now I end my just complaint.
ALthough I straightly charged my tender child
To fly from Thebes for safeguard of himself,
And that long since he parted from my 〈◊〉,
Yet doe I greatly hand in lingering doubt,
Least passing through the gates, the privy watch
Hath stayed him by some suspect of treason.
And so therewhile, the prophets having skride
His hidden fate, he purchased have the death
Which I by all means sought he might eschew:
And this mischance so much I fear the more,
Howe much the wished conquest at the first,
Fell happily unto the town of Thebes.
"But wise men ought with patience to sustain
"The sundry haps that slippery fortune frames.
Alas, who can direct my hasty steppes
Unto the brother of our woeful Quéene?
But lo where carefully he stands here.
If so the mind may dread his own mishap,
Then dread I much, this man that séekes me thus,
Hath brought the death of my beloved son.
My Lord, the thing you fear is very true,
Your son Meneceus no longer lives.
Alas who can withstand the heavenly powers?
Well, it beséems not me, no yet my years,
In bootless plaint to wast my wailefull tear•s:
Do thou recount to me his luckless death,
The order, form, and manner of the same.
Your son (my Lord) came to Eteocles,
And told him this in presence of the rest,
Renou•ed King, neither your victory,
No yet the safety of this princely Realm
In armour doth consist, but in the death
Of me, of me, (O most victorious King)
So heavenly dome of mighty Jove commands,
I (knowing what avail my death should yield
Unto your grace, and unto native land)
Might well be ••inde a most ungrateful son
Unto this worthy town, if I would shun
The sharpest death to do my country good,
In mourning weed now let the vestal Nymphs,
With fawning tunes commend my faultl•sse ghost
To highest heavens, while I despoil my self,
That afterword (sith •ove will have it so)
To save your lives, I may receive my death.
Of you I crave, O courteous Citizens,
To shrine my corps in tomb of marble stone,
Whereon grave this: Meneceus here doth lie,
For countries cause that was content to die.
This said, alas, he made no more a doe,
But drew his sword and shed it in his breast.
No more, I have enough, return ye now
From whence ye came.
Well, since the blood of my beloved son,
Must serve to s•ache the wrath of angry Jove,
And since his only death must bring to Thebes
A quiet end of his unquiet state,
Me thinks good reason would, that I henceforth,
Of Thebane soil should bear the kingly swaye,
Yea sure, and so I will ere it be long,
Either by right, or else by force of arms.
Of al mishap lo here the wicked brood,
My sister first espoused hath his son
That slew his sire, of whose accursed séede
Two brethren sprang, whose raging hateful hearts,
By force of boiling ire are bolne so sore
As each do thirst to suck the others blood:
But why do I sustain the smart hereof?
Why should my blood he spilt for others gilt?
Oh welcome were that messenger to me
That brought me word of both my nephews deaths,
Then should it soon be scene in every eye,
Twixt prince and prince what difference would appear▪
Then should experience show what grief it is
To serve the humours of unbridled youth.
Now will I go for to prepare with spéede
The funerals of my young guiltless son,
The which perhaps may be accompanied
With thobsequies of proud Eteocles.
Finis Actus. 4.
O Blissful concord, bred in sacred breast
Of him that guides the restless rolling sky,
That to the earth for mans assured rest
From height of heavens vouchsafe down to fly,
In thée alone the mighty power doth lie,
With sweet accord to keep the frowning stars
And every planet else from hurtful wars.
In thée, in thée such noble virtue bids,
As may command the mightiest Gods to bend,
From thée alone such sugared friendship flits
As mortal wights can scarcely comprehend,
To greatest strife thou set delightful end▪
O holy peace, by thée are only found
The passing joys that every where abound.
Thou only thou, through thy celestial might,
Did first of all the heavenly pole divide,
From th'olde confused heap that Chao hight:
Thou •adest the Sun, the Moon, and stars to glide,
With ordered course about this world so wide:
Thou hast ordained Dan Titans shining •ight,
By dawn of day to chase the darksome night.
When tract of time returns the lusty For,
By thée alone, the buds and blossoms spring,
The fields with flowers be garnished every where,
The blooming trées, abundant fruit do bring,
The cheerful birds melodiously do sing,
Thou dost appoint, the crop of summers séede
For mans relief, to serve the winters néede.
Thou dost inspire the hearts of princely péeres
By providence, procéeding from aboue,
In flowering youth to choose their worthy féeres,
With whom they live in league of lasting love,
Till fearful death doth flitting life remove:
And loke how fast, to death man pays his due,
So fast again, dost thou his stock renew.
By thée, the basest thing advanced is,
Thou every where, dost graffe such golden peace,
As fills man, with more than earthly bliss,
The earth by thée, doth yield his sweet increase
At beck of thée, all bloody discords cease,
And mightiest Realms in quiet do remain,
Whereas thy hand, doth hold the royal reign.
But if thou fail, then all things gone to wrack,
The mother the•, doth dread his natural child,
Then every town is subject to the sack,
Then spotless maids, then virgins be defiled,
Then rigour rules, then reason is exiled:
And this, thou woeful Thebes, to our great pain,
With present spoil, art likely to sustain.
Me think I hear the wailful wéeping cries
Of wretched dames, in every coast resound,
Me thinks I sée, how up to heavenly skies
From battered walls, the thundering clappes rebound
Me think I hear, how all things go to ground,
Me think I sée, how soldiers wounded lye
With gasping breath, and yet they can not dye.
By means whereof, oh sweet Meneceus he,
That gives for countries cause his guiltless life,
Of others all, most happy shall he be:
His ghost shall flit, from broils of bloody strife,
To heavenly bliss, where pleasing joys be rife:
And would to God, that this his fatal end
From further plagues, our city might defend.
O sacred God, give ear unto thy thrall,
That humbly here upon thy name doth call,
O let not now, our faultless blood be spilt,
For hot revenge of any others gilt.
FIrst the Stillpipes sounded a very mournful
melody, in which time came upon the Stage
a womā clothed in a white garment, on his head
a pillar, double faced, the foremost face fair &amp; smi∣ling,
the other behind black &amp; louring, muffled
with a white lane about his eyes, his lap full of
Jewels, sitting in a chariot, his legs naked,
his fete set vpō a great round ball, &amp; being drawē
in by .iiij. noble personages, she led in a string on
his right hand .ij. kings crowned, and in his left
hand .ij. poor slaves very meanly attired. After
she was drawn about the stage, she stayed a lyt∣tle,
changing the kings unto the left hand &amp; the
slaves unto the right hand, taking the crowns
from the kings heads she crowned therewith the
ij. slaves, &amp; casting the vile clothes of the slaves
upon the kings, she despoiled the kings of their
robes, and therewith apparelled the slaves. This
done, she was drawn eftsoon about the stage in
this order, and then departed, leaving unto vs
a plain Type or figure of unstable fortune, who
doth oftentimes raise to height of dignity the
vile and unnoble, and in like manner throws
down frō the place of promotiō, even those whō
before she his self had thither advanced: after
his departure came in Duke Croon with four
gentlemen waiting upon him, and lamented the
death of Menec•us his son in this manner.
ALas what shall I do? bemoan my self?
Or rue the ruin of my Native land,
About the which such clouds I sée enclosed
As darker cannot cover dreadful hell.
With mine own eyes I saw my own dear son
All gored with blood of his too bloody breast,
Which he hath shed full like a friend, too dear
To his country, and yet a cruel foe
To me that was his friend and father both.
Thus to him self he gained a famous name,
And glory great, to me redoubted payne,
Whose haplesse death in my afflicted house,
Hath put such plaint, as I no can espy
What comfort might acquiet their distr•sse.
I hither come my sister for to séeke,
Iocasta, she that might in woeful wise
Amid his high and ouerpining cares
Prepare the baynes for his so wretched corps,
And eke for him that now is not in life,
May pay the due that to the dead pertains,
And for the honour he did well deserve,
The give some gifts unto infernal Gods.
My Lord, your sister is gone forth long since,
Into the camp, and with his Antigone
His daughter dear.
Into the camp? alas and what to do?
She understood, that for this realm forthwith
His sons were gréed in combat for to join.
Alas, the funerals of my dear son
Dismayed me so, that I no did receive,
No séeke to know these new unwelcome news.
But lo, behold a plain apparent sign
Of further fears, the furious troubled looks
Of him that comes héere so hastily.
ALas, alas what shall I doe? alas,
What shrieking voice may serve my woeful words?
O wretched I, ten thousand times a wretch,
The messenger of dread and cruel death.
Yet more mishap? and what unhappy news?
My Lord, your nephues both have lost their lives.
Out and alas, to me and to this town
Thou doest account great ruin and decay:
You royal family of Oedipus,
And hear you this? your liege and sovereign Lords
The brethren both are slain and done to death.
O cruel news, most cruel that can come,
O news that might these stony walls provoke
For tender ruth to burst in bitter tears,
And so they would, had they the sense of man.
O worthy young Lords, that unworthy were
Of such unworthy death, O me most wretch.
More wretched shall ye déeme your self, my lord,
When you shall hear of further misery.
And can there be more misery than this?
With his dear sons the quéene his self is slain,
Bewail ladies, alas good ladies wail
This harde mischance, this cruel common evil,
No henceforth hope for ever to rejoice.
O Iocasta, miserable mother,
What haplesse end thy life alas hath he•t?
Percase the heavens purveyed had the same,
Moved thereto by the wicked wedlock
Of Oedipus thy son, yet might thy scuse
Be justly made, that knew not of the crime.
But tell me messenger, oh tel me yet
The death of these two brethren, driven thereto,
Not thus all only by their dreary fate,
But by the banning and the bitter curse
Of their cruel sire, borne for our annoy,
And here on earth the only soursse of evil.
Then know my Lord, the battle that begone
Under the walls, was brought to lucky end,
Eteocles had made his foemen flée
Within their trenches, to their foul reproach:
But herewithal the brethren straightway
Eche other challenge forth into the field,
By combat so to stint their cruel strife,
Who armed thus amid the field appeared.
First Pollinices turning toward Gréece
His lovely looks, began Iuno thus beséeche:
O heavenly quéene, thou séest, that since the day
I first did wed Adrastus daughter dear,
And stayde in Gréece, thy servant have I been:
Then (be it not for mine unworthiness)
Grant me this grace, the victory to win,
Grant me, that I with high triumphant hand,
May bathe this blade within my brothers breast:
I know I crave unworthy victory,
Unworthy triumphs, and unworthy spoils,
Lo he the cause, my cruel enemy.
The people wept to hear the woeful words
Of Pollinice, foreséeing eke the end
Of this outrage and cruel combat tan,
Eche man began look upon his drooping mate,
With minds amazed, and trembling hearts for dread,
Whom pity pierced for these youthful knights.
Eteocles with eyes up cast to heaven.
Thus said:
O mighty love his daughter grant to me,
That this right hand with this sharpe armed lance
Passing amid my brothers cankered breast,
It may eke pierce that coward heart of his,
And so him slay that thus unworthily
Disturbs the quiet of our common weal.
So said Eteocles, and trumpets blown,
To send the summons of their bloody fight,
That one the other fiercely did encounter,
Like Lions two yfraught with boiling wrath,
Both couched their lances full against the face,
But heaven it nolde that there they should them taint:
Upon the battered shields the mighty spears
Are both ybroke, and in a thousand shivers
Amid the ayre flown up into the heavens:
Behold again, with naked sword in hand,
Eche one the other furiously assaults.
Here they of Thebes, there stood the Greeks in doubt,
Of whom doth eche man féele more chilling dread,
Least any of the twain should lose his life,
Than any of the twain did féele in fight.
Their angry looks, their deadly daunting blows,
Might witness well, that in their hearts remained
As cankered hate, disdain, and furious mood,
As ever bred in bear or tigers breast.
The first that hoped to hurt was Polinice,
Who smote the right thigh of Eteocles:
But as we déeme, the blow was nothing déepe,
Then cried the Gréekes, and leapt with lightened harts,
But straight again they held their peace, for he
Eteocles began thrust his wicked sword
In the left arm of unarmed Pollinice,
And let the blood from thin vnfence• flesh
With falling drops distill upon the ground,
No long he stays, but with an other thrust
His brothers belly boweld with his blade,
Then wretched he, with bridle left at large,
From of his horse fell pale upon the ground,
No long it was, but down our duke dismounts
From of his startling steed, and runs in hast,
His brothers haplesse helm for to unlace,
And w•th such hungry mind desired spoil,
As one that thought the field already won:
That at unawares, his brothers dagger drawn,
And griped fast within the dying hand,
Under his side he reckless doth receive,
That made the way to his wide open hart:
Thus falls E•eocles his brother by,
From both whose breasts the bloudfast bubbling, gave
A sorry show to Greeks and 〈◊〉 both.
Oh wretched end of our unhappy Lords.
Oh Oedipus, I must be wail the death
Of thy dear sons, that were my nephews both,
But of these blows thou ought feel the smart,
That with thy wonted prayers, thus hast brought
Such noble bloods to this unnoble end.
But now tell on, what followed of the Quéene?
Whē thus with pierced harts, by there own hands
The brothers fell had wallowed in their blood,
Th one tumbling on the others gore,
Came their afflicted mother, then to late,
And eke with his, his chaste child Antygone,
Who saw no sooner how their fates had fa•no,
But with the doub•ed echo of alas,
Sore dim•de the ayre with loud complaints and cries:
Oh sons (quote she) too 〈◊〉 came all my help,
And all to late have I my succour sent:
And with these words, upon their carcass cold.
She shriched so, as might have stayed the Sun
To morn with his, the woeful sister eke,
That both his chekes did bathe in flowing tears,
Out from the depth of his torment• breast,
With scalding sighs began draw these weary words:
O my dear brethren, why abandon ye
Our mother dear, when these his aged years,
That of themselves are weak and grown with grief,
Stood most in néede of your sustaining help?
Why doe you leave his thus disconsolate?
At sound of such his wéeping long lament,
Eteocles our king held up his hand,
And sent from bottom of his woeful breast.
A doubled sigh, divided with his grief,
In faithful token of his féeble will
To recomfort his mother and sister both:
And in the stead of swéete contenting words,
The trickling tears raynde down his paled chekes:
Then clasped his hands, and shut his dying eyes.
But Pollinice that turned his rolling even
Unto his mother and his sister dear,
With hollow voice and fumbling tongue, thus spake:
Mother, y•u see how I am now arrived
Unto the haven of mine unhappy end,
Now nothing doth remain to me, but this,
That I lament my sisters life and yours
Left thus in everlasting woe and gre•fe:
So am I sorry for Eteocles,
Who though he were my cruel enemy,
He was your son, and brother yet to me:
But since these ghosts of curs must needs go down•
With staggering steppes into the Stigian reign,
I you beseech, mother and sister both,
Of pity yet, that you will me procure
A royal tomb within my native realm,
And now shut up with those your tender hands,
These gre•full eyes of mine, whose dazzled •ight
Shadows of dreadful death b• come to close,
Now rest in pe•ce, thus said, he yielded up
His fainting ghost, that ready was to part.
The mother thus beholding both his sons
Y•one to death, and overcome with dol•,
Drew out the dagger of his Pol•mces,
From brothers breast, and gored his mothers throat
Falling betwéene his sons,
Then with his féebled arms, she doth en•old•
Their bodies both, as if for company
His discontented corps were yet content
To pass with them in Cha•once ferry boat.
When cruel fate had th•s with force berest
The woeful mother and his two dear sons,
All suddenly alarm alarm they cry,
And hot conflict began for to arise
Between our army and our e•emyes:
For either part would have the victory.
A while they did with equal force maintain
The bloody fight, at last the Gréekes do fly,
Of whom could hardly any one escape,
For in such huge heaps our men them slew,
The ground was couerde all with carcases:
And of our soldiers, some began spoil the dead,
Some other were that parted out the pray,
And some pursuing Antigone toke up
The Queen locasta and the brethren both,
Whom in a chariot hither they will bring
Ere long: and thus, although we gotten have
The victory over our enemies,
Yet h•ue we lost much more than we have won.
O hard mishap we doe not only hear
The weary news of their un•emily death,
But eke we must with wailing eyes behold
Their bodies dead, for loke where they be brought.
MOst bitter plaint, O ladies, vs behooves,
Behooves eke not only bitter plaint,
But that our hears dysheuylde from our heads
About our shoulders hang, and that our breasts
With bouncing blows be all be battered,
Our ghastly faces with our nails defaced:
Behold, your Queen twixt both his sons lies slain,
The Queen whom you di• love and honour both,
The Queen that did so tend•rly bring up
And nourish you, eche one like to his own,
Now hath she left you all (O cruel hap)
With his too cruel death in dying dread,
Pining with pensi•enesse without all help.
O weary life, why bid thou in my breast,
And I contented be that th•se mine eyes
Should sée his dye that gave to me this life,
And I not avenge his death by loss of life?
Who can me give a fountain made of moan,
That I may weep as much as is my will,
To sowsse this sorrow up in swelling tears?
What stony hart could leave for to lament?
O Polinice, now hast thou with thy blood
Bought all too dear the title to this realm,
That cruel he Eteocles thée rest,
And now also hath reft thée of thy life,
Alas, what wicked dede can wrath not doe?
And out alas for mée▪
While thou yet lived I had a lively hope
To have some noble wight to be my phéere,
By whom I might be crowned a royal Quéene:
But now, thy hasty death hath done to dye
This dying hope of mine, that hope henceforth
None other wedlock, but tormenting woe,
If so these trembling hands for coward dread
Dare not presume to end this wretched life.
Alas dear dame, let not thy raging grief
Heap one mishap upon another head.
O doleful day, wherein my sorry sire
Was borne, and yet O more unhappy hour
When he was crowned king of sty•ely Thebes,
The Hymen• in unhappy bed,
And wicked wedlock, wittingly did join
The guiltless mother with his gel••e son,
Out of which root we be the braunthes borne,
To bear the scourge of their so foul offence:
And thou, O father, thou that for this fact,
Haste torn chine eyes from thy tormented head,
Give ear to this, come forth, and bend th••e ear
To bloody news, that can not them behold:
Happy in this, for if thine eyes could sée
Thy sons both slain, and even betwéene them both
Thy wife and mother dead, bathed and imbrued
All in one blood, then would thou dye for dole,
And so might end all our unlucky stock.
But most unhappy now, that lack of sight
Shall linger, life within thy luckless breast,
And still tormented in such misery,
Shall always dye, because thou can not dye.
WHy dost thou call out of this darksome den,
The lustleste lodge of my lamenting years,
O daughter dear, thy fathers blinded eyes,
Into the light I was not worthy of?
Or what such sight (O cruel destiny)
Without tormenting cares might I behold,
That image am of death and not of man?
O father mine, I bring unlucky news
Unto your ears, your sons are now both slain,
No doth your wife, that wonted was to guide
So piteously your staylesse stumbling slips,
Now see this light, alas and welaway.
O heap of infinite calamities,
And can thou yet increase when I thought least
That any grief more great could grow in thée?
But tell me yet, what kind of cruel death
Had these three sorry souls?
Without offence to speak, dear father mine,
The luckless lot, the froward frowning fate
That gave you life to end your fathers life,
Have led your sons to reeve eche others life.
Of them I thought no less, but tell me yet
What causeless death hath caught from me my dear,
(What shall I call his) mother or my wife?
When as my mother saw his dear sons dead,
As pensive pangs had pressed his tender heart,
With bloodless cheeks and ghastly looks she fell,
Drawing the dagger from Eteocles side,
She gored herself with wide recurelesse wound:
And thus, without mo words, gave up the ghost,
Embracing both his sons with both his arms.
In these affrightes this frozen heart of mine,
By fear of death maintains my dying life.
This dreary day is cause of many evils,
Poor Oedipus, unto thy progeny.
The Gods yet grant it may become the cause
Of better hap to this afflicted realm.
GOod Ladies leave your bootless vain complaint
Leave to lament, c•t of your woeful cries,
High time it is as now for to provide
The funerals for the renowned king:
And thou Oedipus hearken to my words,
And know thus much, that for thy daughters dower,
Antigo•• with Hemone shall wed.
Thy son our king not long before his death
Assigned hath the kingdom should descend
To me, that am his mothers brother borne,
And so the same might to my son succéede.
Now I that am the lord and king of Thebes,
Will not permit that thou abide therein:
No marvel yet of this my heady will,
No blame thou me, for why, the heavens aboue,
Which only rule the rolling life of man,
Have so ordeynde, and that my words be true,
Tyresias he that knows things to come,
By trusty tokens hath foretold the town,
That while thou did within the wall•es remain,
It should be plagued still with penury:
Wherefore depart, and think not that I speak
These woeful words for hate I bear to thée,
But for the weal of this afflicted realm.
O foul accursed fate, that hast me bred
To bear the burden of the misery
Of this cold death, which we account for life:
Before my birth my father understood
I should him slay, and scarcely was I borne,
When he me made a pray for savage bea•tes.
But what? I slew him yet, then caught the crown,
And last of all defiled my mothers bed,
By whom I have this wicked offspring got:
And to this heinous crime and filthy fact
The heavens have from high enforced me,
Against whose doom no counsel can prevail.
Thus hath I now my life, and last of all,
Lo by the news of this so cruel death
Of both my sons and dear beloved wife,
Mine angry constellation me rommaundes
Withouten eyes so wander in mine age,
When these my wéery, weak, and crooked 〈◊〉
Have greatest néede to crave their quiet rest.
O cruel •reon, wilt thou slay me so,
For cruelly thou dost but murder me,
Out of my kingdom now to chase me thus:
Yet can I not with humble mind beseech
Thy courtesy, no fall before thy féete.
Let fortune take from me these worldly gifts,
She can not conquer this courageous heart,
That never yet could well be overcome,
To force me yield for fear to villainy:
Do what thou can I will be Oedipus.
So hast thou reason Oedipus, to say,
And for my part I would thee counsel eke,
Still to maintain the high and haughty mind,
That hath dene even in thy noble heart:
For this be sure, if thou would kiss•e these knées,
And practise eke by prayer to pr••aisle,
No pity could persuade me to consent
That thou remain one only hour in Th•bes.
And now, prepare you worthy Citizens,
The funerals that duly doe pertain
Unto the Quéene, and to Eteocles,
And eke for them provide their stately tombs.
But Pollynice, as common enemy
Unto his country, carry forth his corps
Out of the walls, no none so hardy be
On pain of death his body to engrave,
But in the fields let him unburied lye,
Without his honour, and without complaint,
An open pray for savage beasts to spoil.
And thou Antigone, dry up thy tears,
Pluck up thy sprites, and chéere thy harmless heart.
To marriage: for ere these two days pass,
Thou shalt espouse Hemone mine only heir.
Father, I sée vs wrapped in endless woe,
And now much more doe I your state lament,
Than these that now be dead, not that I think
Their great missehappes too little to bewail,
But this, that you, you only doe surpass
All wretched wights that in this world remain.
But you my Lord, why banish you with wrong
My father thus out of his own perforce?
And why will you deny these guiltless by•es
Of Polinice, their grave in country soil?
So would not I, so would Eteocles.
He cruel was, you fond to hold his hestes.
Is then a fault to doe a kings cōmaund?
When his cōmaunde is cruel and unjust.
Is it unjust that he unburied be?
He not deserved so cruel punishment.
He was his countries cruel enemy.
Or else was he that held him from his right.
Bare he not arms against his native land?
Offends he that seeks to win his own?
Perforce to thée he shall unburied be.
Perforce to thée these hands shall bury him.
And with him eke then will I bury thée.
So grant the gods, I get none other grave,
Then with my Polinices dear to rest.
Go sirs, lay hold on his, and take his in.
I will not leave this corps unburied.
Can thou undo the thing that is decréed?
A wicked foul decrée to wrong the dead.
The ground no shall no ought to cover him.
Croon, yet I beseech thée for the love.
Away I say, thy prayers not prevail.
That thou did bear Iocasta in his life,
Thou dost but waste thy words amid the wind.
Yet grant me leave to wash his wounded corps▪
It can not be that I should grant thée so.
O my dear Polinice, this tyrant yet
With all his wrongful force can not fordoe,
But I will kiss these cold pale lips of thine,
And wash thy wounds with my waymenting tears.
O simple wench, O fond and foolish girl,
Beware, beware, thy tears do not foretell
Some sign of hard mishap unto thy marriage.
No, no for Hemone will I never wed.
Dost thou refuse the marriage of my son?
I will nor him, nor any other wed.
Against thy will then must I thée constrain.
If thou me force, I swear thou shalt repent.
What can thou casue that I should once repent▪
With bloody knife I can this knot vnknit.
And what a fool were thou to kill thy self?
I will ensue some worthy women's steppes.
Speak out Antigone, that I may hear.
This hardy hand shall soon dispatch his life.
O simple fool, and dare thou be so bold?
Why should I dread to doe so doughty deed?
And wherefore dost thou wedlock so despise?
In cruel exile for to follow him.
What others might befeme, besemes not thée.
If néede require, with him eke will I dye.
Depart, depart, and with thy father dye,
Rather than kill my child with bloody knife:
Go hellish monster, go out of the town.
Daughter, I must commend thy noble heart.
Father, I will never come in company
And you alone wander in wilderness.
O yes dear daughter, leave thou me alone
Amid my plagues: be merry while thou moist.
And who shall guide these aged féete of yours,
That banished been, in blind necessity?
I will endure, as fatal lot me drives,
Resting these crooked sorry sides of mine
Where so the heavens shall lend me harborough.
And in exchange of rich and stately tours,
The woods, the wilderness, the darksome dens
Shall be the bower of mine unhappy bones.
O father, now where is your glory gone?
"One happy day did raise me to renoune,
"One haplesse day hath thrown mine honour down.
Yet will I bear a part of your mishaps.
That sits not amid thy pleasant years.
"Dear father yes, let youth give place to age.
Where is thy mother? let me touche his face,
That with these hands I may yet féele the harm
That these blind eyes forbid me to behold.
Here father, here his corps, here put your hand.
O wife, O mother, O both woeful names,
O woeful mother, and O woeful wife,
O would to God, alas, O would to God
Thou ne'er had been my mother, nor my wife.
But where lye now the paled bodies two,
Of mine unlucky sons, Oh where be they?
Lo here▪ they lye one by an other dead.
Stretch out this hand, dere daughter, stretch this hand
Upon their faces.
Lo father, here, lo, now you touche them both.
O bodies dear, O bodies dearly bought
Unto your father, bought with high mishap.
O lovely name of my dear Pollinice,
Why can I not of cruel Croon crave,
No with my death now purchase thée a grave?
Now commas Apollos oracle of pass,
That I in Athens town should end my days:
And since thou doest, O daughter mine, desire
In this exile to be my woeful mate,
Lend mée thy hand, and let vs go together.
Lo, here all pressed my dear beloved father,
A féeble guide, and eke a simple scout,
To pass the perils in a doubtful way.
Unto the wretched, be a wretched guide.
In this all only equal to my father.
And where shall I set forth my trembling féete?
O reach mée yet some surer staff, to staye
My staggryng pace amid these ways unknown.
Here father here, and here set forth your féete.
Now can I blame none other for my harms
But secrete spite of foredecréed fate,
Thou art the cause, the crooked, old and blind,
I am exiled far from my country soil,
And suffer dole that I might not endure.
"O father, father, Justice lies on sléepe,
"No doth regard the wrongs of wretchedness,
"No princes swelling pride it doth redress.
O careful caitiff, howe am I now changed
From that I was? I am that Oedipus,
That meanwhile had triumphant victory,
And was both dread and honoured eke in Thebes:
But now (so pleases you my froward stars)
Down headlong hurled in depth of misery,
So that remains of Oedipus no more
As now in mée, but even the naked name,
And lo, this image, that resembles more
Shadows of death, than shape of Oedipus.
O father, now forget the pleasant days
And happy life that you did meanwhile lead,
The muse whereof redoubles but your grief:
Sustain the smart of these your present pains
With patience, that best may you preserve.
Lo where I come, to live and die with you,
Not (as sometimes) the daughter of a king,
But as an abject now in poverty,
That you, by presence of such faithful guide,
May better bear the wrack of misery.
O only comfort of my cruel hap.
Your daughters pity is but due to you:
Would God I might as well engrave the corps
Of my dear Pollinice, but I no may,
And that I can not, doubles all my dole.
This thy desire, that is both good and just,
Impart to some that be thy trusty friends,
Who moude with pity, may procure the same.
"Beléeue me father, when dame fortune frowns,
"Be few that find trusty companions.
And of those few, yet one of those am I:
Wherefore, go we now daughter, lead the way
Into the stony rocks and highest hills,
Where fewest trackes our steppings may be spied.
"Who once hath sit in chair of dignity,
"May shame to show him self in misery.
From thée, O country, am I forced to part,
Despoiled thus in flower of my youth,
And yet I leave within mine enemies rule
Ismene my unfortunate sister.
Dear Citizens, behold your lord and king
That Thebes set in quiet government,
Now as you sée, neglected of you all,
And in these ragged ruthful wéedes bewrapt,
Ychased from his native country soil,
Betakes him self (for so this Tyrant will)
To everlasting banishment: but why
Do I lament my luckless lot in vain?
"Since every man must bear with quiet mind,
"The fate that heavens have erst to him assigned.
EXample here, lo take by Oedipus,
You kings and princes in prosperity,
And every one that is desirous
To sway the seat of worldly dignity,
How fickle is to trust in fortunes whéele:
For him, whom now she hoists up on hye,
If so be chance on any side to reel,
She hurls him down in twinkling of an eye:
And him again, that grouleth now on ground,
And lies lowe in dungeon of despair,
His whirling whéele can heave up at a bound,
And place aloft in stay of stately chair.
As from the Sun the Moon withdraws his face,
So might of man doth yéelde dame fortune place,
LO here the fruit of high aspiring mind,
Who wéeues to mount aboue the moving skies:
Lo here the trappe that titles proud do find,
Sée, ruin grows when most we reach to rise:
Swéete is the name, and stately is the reign
Of kingly rule, and sway of royal seat,
But bitter is the taste of Princes gain,
When climbing heads do hunt for to be great.
Who would forecast the bank of restless toil,
Ambitious wights do freight their breasts withal,
The growing cares, the fears of dreadful foil,
The evil success that on such flights do fall,
He would not stain his practise to achieve
The largest limits of the mightiest states.
But oh, what fancies swéete do still relieve
The hungry humour of these swelling hates?
What poison swéete inflames high desire?
How soon the haughty heart is puffed with pride?
How soon is thirst of sceptre set on fire?
How soon in rising minds doth mischief slyde?
What bloody stirs doth glut of honour bréede?
Thambitious son doth oft surprise his sire:
Where natures power unfeigned love should spread,
There malice raynes and reaches to be higher.
O blind unbridled search of Sovereignty,
O tickle train of evil attained state,
O fond desire of princely dignity,
Who climbs too soon, he oft repents too late.
The golden mean the happy doth suffice,
They leave the posting day in rare delight,
They fill (not féede) their discontented eyes,
They reap such rest as doth beguile the might,
They not envy the pomp of haughty reign,
No dread the dint of proud usurping sword,
But placed allow, more sugared joys attain,
Than swaye of lofty Sceptre can afoorde.
Cease to aspire then, cease to soar so high,
And shun the plague that pierces noble breasts:
To glittering courts what fondness is to flée,
When better state in baser Towers rests?

WHat man hath mind to hear a worthy Jest,
Or seeks to feed his eye with vain delight:
That man is much unmeet to be a guest,
At such a feast as I prepare t•…is night.
Who list lay out some pence in such a Mart,
Bellsauage fair were fittest for his purse,
I list not so to misbestowe mine art,
I have best wares, what need I then show worse?
An Interlude may make you laugh your fill,
Italian toys are full of pleasant sport:
Plain speech to use, if wanton be your will,
You may be gone, wide open stands the port.
But if you can contented be to hear,
In true discourse howe high the virtuous climb,
Howe low they fall which live withouten f•…are
Of God or man, and much mispend their time:
What right rewards a trusty servant earns,
What subtle snares these Sycophants can use,
Howe soon the wise such crooked guiles discerns,
Then stay a while: give ear unto my Muse.
A Comedy, I mean for to present,
No Terence phrase: his time and mine are twain:
The verse that pleased a Romaine rash intent,
Might well offend the godly Preachers vain.
Deformed shows were then esteemed much,
Reformed speech doth now become vs best,
Men's words must way and tried be by touche
Of Gods own word, wherein the truth doth rest.
Content you then (my Lords) with good intent,
Grave Citizens, you people great and small,
To see your selves in Glass of Government:
Behold rash youth, which dangerously doth fall
On craggy rocks of sorrows nothing soft,
When sober wits by Virtue climes aloft.
This work is compiled upon these sentences following, set down by me C. B.
Fear God, for he is just.
Love God, for hée is merciful.
Trust in God, for he is faithful.
Obey the King, for his a•…cthoritie is from aboue.
Honour the King, for he is in earth the lieutenant of the most high God.
Love the King, for he is thy protector.
Adventure thy life in defence and honour of thy country, for the quarrel is good.
Be not unthankful to the soil that hath nurished thée, for it is a damnable thing.
Study to profit the common wealth, for it is come∣dable with God and man.
Reverence the minister of God, for his office sake.
Love the minister that preaches the Gospel, for it is the power of God to save thée.
Speak good of the minister, for the Gospels sake.
Think well of the magistrates, for it pleases god well.
Be not disobedient to the magistrates, for they are the •…ies of the King.
Love the magistrates, for they are the bones &amp; s•…nowes of the Common wealth.
Honour thy parents, for God hath commanded it.
Love thy parents, for they have care over thée.
Be assisting unto thy parents with any benefit that God hath endued thée, for it is thy duty.
Give place to thine elder, for it is thy praise.
Let not a gray head pass by thée without a salutation.
Take counsel of an elder, for his experience sake.
Be holy, for thou art the Temple of God.
It is an horrible sin to pollute Gods Temple.
The buyers and sellers were driven out of the Tem∣ple with violence.
SUrely Phylocalus I think my self in∣debted unto you for this fréendly dis∣course, and I do not only agrée with you in opinion, but I most earnestly de sire, that wee may with one assent devise which way the same may be put in executiō, for I delight in your loving neighbourhood, and I take singular comfort in your grave advise.
It were not reason Phylopaes that having so many years contineued so near neighbours, having trafficked (in manner) one self same trade, having sustey∣ned like adventures, and being blessed with like successes, we should now in the end of our time become any less then entire friends: and as it is the nature and property of friendship to séeke always for perpetuity, so let vs séeke to bring up our Children in such mutual society in their youth, that in age they may no less delight in their former fellowship, then wée their parents have taken comfort in our continual cohabitation. It hath pleased Almighty God to bless vs both with competent wealth, and though we have attained thereunto by continual pains and tra•…aisle, rising (as it w•…re) from mean •…state, unto dignity, yet d•…e I thy•…e t•…t it were not a•…isse to bring •…p our children with s•…ch •…tion as 〈◊〉 •…ay ex∣cell in knowledge of liberal 〈◊〉, f•…r if we •…g un∣•…ed
have by industry heaped up sufficient store, not only to serve our own use, but further to provide for our posterity, then may they by learning aspire unto greater promotion, and build greater matters upon a better foundation. Neither yet would I have you conceive hereby that I am ambitious. But if I be not deceived, Al desire of promotion (by virtue) is godly and Lawful, where as ambition is commonly nestled in the breasts of the envy∣os.
I am of your open•…n Phylocalus, and since we have each of vs two Sons of equal age and stature, I would we could be so happy as to find some honest and careful schoolmaster, who might instruct them together: I say honest, because in the house of the virtuous there is seldom any vice permitted, and careful, because the care of the teacher is of no less consideration then his skill: thē do I wish him both honest and careful, because the con∣iunction of two such qua•…ities, may both cause the accom∣plishment of his duty, &amp; the contentations of our desires. Our eldest Sons are near the age of xxi. years, &amp; our younger Sons not much more then one year be∣hind them. So that as they have hitherto been thought toward enough at such common schools as they have fre∣quintet, and therefore will shortly be ready for the vniuer∣city, yet would I think convenient that they spent some time together, with some such honest and careful School∣moister, who might before their departure lay a sure foū∣dation to their understanding.
Although it becomes not a servant to come unto his masters counsel before he be called, yet for that I am no way ignorant of your tender cares, which both of you have always had over your children, and also for that I do now perc•…iue the continuance of the same by this your fatherly conference, I presume to put my self for∣ward upon a dutiful desire to further so godly an enter∣prise
I am a servant, and shall sometimes hear of things before my Moister, the which I speak, because I can pre∣sently 〈◊〉 you of such a schoolmaster as you both do desire to find.
And who is that, gentle fellow Fidus?
Sir his name is Gnomaticus, he dwells in Saint Antlines, a man famous f•…r his learning, of won∣derfull temperance, and highly estéemed for the diligence and careful payne which he takes with his Schoolers.
Then can he not be long without entertain∣meant, since now a days the good wine néedeth none Ivy garland, and more parents there are that lack such Schoolemaisters for their children, then there are to be found such Schoolemaysters which séeke and lack enter∣tainment.
Sir you have reason, and therefore (if I were worthy to counsel you, I would entertain him with spéed, since he came but this other day from the Lord of Barle∣montes house, whose children he hath in small time made excellent Scholars, and now hath dispatched them to the University of Doway.
Doest thou know him Fidus? or can thou tell where to find him?
Yea Sir, and if it so please my Moister and you, I doubt not but to bring him hither immediately.
Surely Phylopaes you shall doe well to send for him.
There is no man more desirous then I, and since it so likes you I am ready to dispatch it, go thy ways Fidus, and tell Moister Gnomaticus, that my neighbour Phy∣localus and I desire to speak with him, and make as much hast as thou can.
It shall be done Sir.
I am not the worst furnished of a servant with this good fellow, for though his capacity be not great,
yet do I find him trusty, and towards my children he is both loving and careful.
Then have you a jewel of him, for I hau•… one in whom I find contrary conditions, I am seldom out of the doors but at my return I find him playing with my Sons at some vain pastimes.
Beware of him then, for such a servant were better payed double wages in your traffic abroad, then allowed barley bread in your shop at home, since no∣thing is more perilous to seduce children or young men, then the consort and council of a lewd servant. But is not this my Fidus which returns so quickly? It is, and he brings with him a grave personage, I hope hée hath found Gnomaticus by the way.
SIr it is to be thought 〈◊〉 Almighty God doth love you, and means to help your 〈◊〉 •…sire in the good adieu∣cation of your children, for it 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 chance to meet Moister Gnomaticus by the way, 〈◊〉 •…as going towards the Bowrce to harken of entertainment, and it is not like that he should have returned from thence vnplaced, where∣fore I would wish that you let not slip this happy occa∣zion.
Sir we have ben so bold as to 〈◊〉 this bea∣rer for you, the cause hath procéeded of an 〈◊〉 desire which this worthy man my neighbour and I have to sée
our children placed with a virtuous instructor, and hey∣ring great fame as well of your integrity, as also of the di∣ligence you have used with the Lord of Barlemontes I will∣drone, we are desirous to entreat you that you will take the like pains with ours, all which shall be recompensed according to our own demand: For as there is no jewel so dear unto man, as the offspring wherewith it pleases God to bless him, so is there no money so well spent as that which is given to a good Schoolmaster.
You shall understand sir that my neighbour here and I have four Sons, of equal age and stature, the eldest excéedeth not twenty years, and the youngest is about ninetéene years old, they have ben already entered in grammar at such schools as we have héere in the City, and if, we be not abused by reports they have show•… themselves forward enough to take instructions: so that we are partly persuaded to send them unto some vniuer∣city, and mine opinion is (as I lately declared unto my neighbour here) that we should do very well yet to retain them a while longer, until they may be perfectly en•…ruse∣ted by some godly teacher, the sum of their duty first towards God, then to their Prince, next to their parents, and consequently as well towards the benefit of their country, as also how to behave themselves to all magic∣trates, and officers in the same. In conclusion whereof they may also learn what they are of themselves, and how they may be most acceptable both to God and man, and for that we have hard very good report of your skill and also of your 〈◊〉, we thought good to require that (if you be not otherwise already entertained) you would take some pa•…nes to •…rust them in these points, and the same shall be 〈◊〉 and deserved by measure of your own contentation, as my neighbour Phylopaes hath before proffered.
Worthy Gentlemen I yéelde you 〈◊〉
humble thanks for your courteous proffers, and I render in•…night thanks unto almighty God that my name hath ben so reported unto you, truly I would be loathe to desire any less, then the name of a faithful and diligent teacher, so far forth as it hath pleased GOD to endue me with knowledge. Touching your proffer and request, I do most willingly embrace the same, confessing even simply, that it was mine errand to séeke such entertainment, having of late dispatched out of my hands, the sons of the Lord of Barlemont towards •…he University•… •…f Doway and if the touch of your zeal be not contrary to the fame which is s•…ed of your estates, I shall think my self well occupied, in teaching or reading to the children of such worthy men as you are.
Well then s•…r, we will be bold to send for the young man, to the end that no time be lost or deferred in bestowing of them. Fidus, go your ways to our houses, and bring hither our Sons.
Most willingly sir I shall accomplish your com∣maundement.
If it please you sir, my servant shall assist him.
It will not be amiss to acquaint him with them.
Sirha, go with this gentleman's servant, and help him to conduct their children hither.
Well Sir it shall be done.
IT shall now bée our parts to understand what stipend may content you for your pains
Sir in that respect take you no care, but let me pray unto almighty God, that he give me grace so to instruct your children, as you may hereafter take com∣fort in my travail, that done, I can no ways doubt of your benevolence, since your inward desire doth already manifestly appear: and furthermore, I would be loathe to make bargains in this respect, as men do at the market or in other places, for grazing of Oxen or féeding of Cattle, especially since I have to deal with such worthy persona∣ges as you séeme and are reported to be.
Well, yet Sir we would be glad to recom∣pence you according to your own demand, but in token of our ready will to please you, we shall desire you to take at my hands these twenty angels as an earnest or pledge of our further meaning, &amp; as I am the first that presume to open my purse in this occasion, so I beseech the Father of Heaven that I may not be the last which may rejoice to sée his children prosper, thou know (O Lord) I mean not hereby my neighbours detriment, but alas, the shadow of a mans self is ever nearest to him, and as I desire to be the first that may hear of their well doing, so yet if they hearken not diligently unto your instruction, but obsti∣nately reject your precepts, then I desire you, and on Gods behalf I charge you, that I may yet be the first that shall thereof be advertised: but behold where they come, these two (I thank the Father of Heaven,) are the tokens of his merciful blessing towards me, the Eldest is named Phylosarchus, and this younger Phylotimus.
And these too sir are mine only children, and God for his mercy grant that they may be mine only comfort, the Eldest is called Phylautus, and the younger Phylomusus.
Sir according to your commandment ex∣pressed by Fidus I am come hither to know your pleasure, and have by warrant of the same cōmission brought with me my Brother Phylomusus.
And I in like manner Sir have brought with me my Brother Phylotimus destring to know your pleasure, and being ready to obey your commandment.
Surely these young men give none evil hope of their •…wardnes, and declare by their séemely ges∣ture and modest boldness to be both of good capacity, and to have been well instructed hither 〈◊〉 in humanity.
The cause that we have sent for you is to commit you unto the government of this godly man, whom we have entreated to take pains with you and to instruct you in some principal points of necessary doc∣trine, to the end that after you have ripely digested the same, you may be the more able to go boldly into some U∣niuersity, and I for my part do here commit you unto him, charging you in Gods name (and by the authority which he hath given mée over you,) to hearken unto him with all attentiuenosse, and to obey him with all humility.
The same charge that my neighbour Phyloca∣lus hath here given to his childrē, the same I do pronounce unto you, and furthermore do charge you that you become gentle and courteous to each other, humble to your betters, and affable to your inferiors in all respects.
Sir I trust we shall deserve your fatherly favour.
And I trust to deserve the continuance of your goodness.
We hope also to imitate the good in all moral examples of virtuous behaviour.
The Father of Heaven bless you with the blessing which it pleased him to pronounce unto Abraham,
Isaac, and Iacob.
Amen, and now let vs depart, leaving here in your custody the choice lambs of our flock, defend them then (for Gods love) from the ravening, and raging lus•…es of the flesh, and vanities of the world.
Sir by Gods power I shall do my best di∣ligence.
My lovely Gentlemen, GOD guide you by his grace, and though I be somewhat romoued from your daily company, yet spare not to command my service, if at any time it may stand you in stéede to use it.
Gr•…mercy gentle Fidus.
MY dearly beloved scholars, since it hath pleased your Parents (as you have heard) to put mée in trust with you for a time, it shall not be amiss before I enter further in instruction, to know how far you have already pro∣céeded in learning, that there upon I may the better deter∣mine what trade or Method shall be most convenient to use in teaching of you: tell me therefore what you have red, and in what manner the same hath been delivered unto you?
Sir, my Brother here, and I have been taught first the rules of the grammar, after that wée had read unto vs the familiar comunications called the Collo∣queen of Erasmus, and next to that the offices of Cicero, that was our last exercise.
It hath been well done, &amp; have you not also
ben taught to ver•…y?
Yes truly sir, we have therein been (in ma∣ner) daily instructed.
And you Phylosarchus how have you passed your time?
Sir: my Brother and I have also been taught our grammar and to make a verse, we have red certain Comedies of Terence; certain Epistles of Tully, and some part of Uirgill, we were also entered into our greek grammar,
Surely it séemeth you have not hitherto lost your time, and the order of your instruction hath been such, that you might presently be able to take further pro∣céedinges in an Uniuersiry, so that it should be (unto me) but labour lost to stand still upon those points, since it see∣meth that you have bin therein perfectly grounded: never∣thelesse wée will continue the exercise of the same, and wée will thereunto join such wholesome precepts, as may be∣come a rule and Squire, whereby the rest of your life and actions may be guided. For alchough Tully in his book of dewtyes doth teach sundry vertuouse precepts, and out of Terence may also be gathered many moral instruct∣once amongst the rest of his wanton discourses, yet the true christian must direct his steppes by the infallible rule of Gods word, from whence as from the head spring, he is to draw the whole course of his life. I would not have you think hereby that I do hold in contempt the books which you have red heretofore but wée will (by Gods grace) take in assistance suc•…ned so many of them as may seem consonant to the holy scriptures, and so joining the one with the other, we shall be the better able to bring our work unto perfectiō. Sirha go you to my lodging, &amp; cause (in the mean time) both bedding, and diet to be provided for these young men, that I may sée them used according to my charge in every respect.
Well Sir it shall be done with diligence.
Now let vs in the holy name of God be∣gin, and he for his mercy give me grace to utter, and you to digest such wholesome lessons as may be for the saluatiō of your souls, the comfort of your life, and the prositte of your Country.
You shall well understand my well beloved scholars, that as God is the author of all goodness, so is it requisite that in all traditions and Moral precepts we begin first to consider of him, to regard his majesty, and search the so∣ueraigne points of his Godhood. The Heathen Philoso∣phers (although they had not the light to understand per∣fact truth) were yet all of them astonished at the incompre∣hensible majesty and power of God, some of them thought the ayre to be God, some other the earth, some the infinite∣ness of things, some one thing, some another, whose open∣nions I shall pass over as things vnméete to be much thought of, but by the way, the opinion of Plato is not un∣worthy here to bee recited unto you, who taught plainly that god was omnipotent, by whom the world was made, and al things therein created and brought unto such per∣fection as they be in. Xenophon affirmed that the true God was invisible, and that therefore we ought not enquire what or what manner of thing God is. Aristo the Stoic, affirmed likewise that God was incomprehensible. To conclude, Simonides being demanded what God was, re∣quarrelled one days respect to answer, and then being again demanded the same question, he required two days re∣spent, at the third appointment of his answer, he came &amp; re∣quarrelled thrée days, and being demanded wherefore he did so break his appointments, and require always further time, he answered, that the more déepely that he did con∣cider the matter, the more infinite he found it, and there∣fore remained always astonished what to answer, and al∣ways craved further time. Truly to leave y• heathen open∣neon•…
and to come unto the very touchestone I think it not amiss if we content our selves to think that God is omni•…otent, and yet his power unsearchable, and his good∣nes unspeakable. And to be brief, I will deliver unto you the sum of your duties in four Chapters, the first cha∣peter shall be of God and his ministers, the second of the King and his Officers, the third shall contain the duties that you owe unto your Country and the Elders thereof, and lastly you shall be put in remembrance of your duties towards your Parents, and what you ought to be of your selves. In these sour chapters I trust (by Gods help) to include•… as much as shall be necessary for the perfect go∣uernment of a true Christian.
Sir wée beseech you that for as much as this order of teaching is both very compendious, &amp; also much different from the lectures which have been red unto vs, you will therefore vouchsafe to stand somewhat the more upon every point, to the end, that as well your meaning may be perspicuous, as also that we may the better bear away the same, and not only learn it without the book, but also engrave it in our minds.
Your request is reasonable, and it shall be by mée as readily granted, as it hath been by you necessa∣rely required. Your first chapter and lesson shall then be, that in all your actions you have an especial eye and re∣guard to almighty God, and in that consideration I com∣mend unto your memory, first God himself, and second∣rely his ministers. As touching your duties unto God him self, although they be infinite, yet shall we sufficiently con∣teine them in thrée especial points to be performed: that is to say, Fear, Love, &amp; Trust. And first to begin with fear, it shall be necessary and aboue all things your bounden duty, to •…ear God and his omnipoten power. Linus that ancient Poet writes, that with God all things are ea∣sie to be accomplished, and nothing is unpossible. Tully in
his Oration Pro Roscio amerino saith, that the commodities which wée use, the light which we enjoy, and the breath which we have and draw, are given and bestowed upon vs by God: then if with God all things be possible (accor∣ding to Linus) he is to be feared, since the least part of his displeasure being provoked, the greatest part of his will is to him right easy to accomplish: and if we have our light, our life, and all commodities of his gift (as Cicero offer∣meth) then is hée to be feared, least with the facility of his omnipotence he take away as fast as he gave, or turn light into darkness, life into death, and cōmodities into dis∣cōmodities. I might recite you many heathen authorities, but it is most néedlesse, since y• very word of God himself, is most plain in this behalf, and yet I have here set down these few, because they are not repugnant to holy Scrip∣tures. Wée find written in the xx. chapter of Exodus, that God is a Jealous God, and doth visit the sins of the Fa∣theirs upon the children unto the third and fourth genera∣tion. Fear him then for he is most mighty. Again: who shall defend me (saith the Psalmist) until thine anger be past? Fear God then, since against his power no defence preuay∣leth. Ago•…, both the heavens and the earth obey the voice of his mouth. Fear him then for althinges are subject unto his mighty power.
And yet with this fear you must also join love, for it is not with God as it is with Princes of the world, which to make themselves feared do become Tyrants, but the goodness of almighty God is such, that he desires no less to be loved, then he deserves to be feared, and though his might and power be universal, and there withal his Ie∣lousy great, and his displeasure soon provoked, yet deligh∣teeth he not in the destruction of mankind, but rather that a sinner should turn from his wickedness and live. Tully in his second book de legibus saith, that God being Lord of al things doth deserve best of mākind, because he b•…holds
what every man is, and with what devotion he worship∣peth the Gods, and kéepeth an account as well of the good as the bad: whereby appears that the heathen confess∣sed yet t•…at the Gods were to be loved, because they cared for mankind, and truly that opinion is neither cōtrary to Gods word, nor dissonant to natural reason. For wée sée by common experience that we love them best of whom we are most favoured, &amp; have received greatest benefits. I mean hereby those that rule their doings by reason, for other•…se wée sée daily wicked men, which (forgetting their duty) do least love where they have most cause. When I my s•…lfe was a scholar in the University, I remember that I did often times defend in Schools this proposition. Ingratitudo (tam versus. 'Deos immortales quam apud homines) peccatum maximum. Ingratitude is the greatest fault that may be either towards god or man. Let vs cōsider the good •…ies of almighty God, who first created vs to his own I∣mage and similitude, endued vs with reason and know∣ledge, preserved vs from innumerable perils, and prove∣ded things necessary for our sustentation, and to consider more inwardly the exceeding love which he bare towards mankind, he spared not his only begotten Son, but gave him (•…uen unto the death of the cross) for our redeem∣ption. Oh what mind were able to conceive▪ or what to•…go able to utter the love and goodness of almighty God towards mankind? And since his love towards vs, hath been and yet doth continue infinite, our love should also be infinite, to r•…nder him thanks for his goodness. But though the causes be infinite which might bind vs to love GOD, yet is there no cause gr•…ater then the manifold mercies which he hath she 〈◊〉 ways to mankind. In the first age when iniquity kindled his wrath to destroy the whole world, he yet vouchsafed to preserve No and his family, Love him then since he preserves the good, though it be but for his mercies sake▪ When the people of Israel provoked
him at sundry times, he did yet at every submission stay his hand from punishment, Love God then since he is ready to forgive, and though he pronounces his Jealousy in the twentieth of Exodus saying, that he visits the sins of the Fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth ge∣narration, yet there withal he adds, that he shows mercy unto thousands in them that love him and kéepe his com∣maundementes. Love him then since his mercy is over all his works. To conclude, when his unsearchable Majesty by his divine foresight did perceive, that by the very sen∣tence of the Law we stood all in state of condemnation, he sent down his own and only Son, to be slandered, buffeted, and cruise•…d for our sins, to the end that all which beléeue in him, should not perish but have lfie ever∣lasting. Love God then since mercy is abundant with him, and he shall redéeme Israel from all his iniquities.
And héere unto this fear and love you must join a sure trust and confidence. The promises of mortal men are of∣ten times uncertain, and d•… fail, but the promises of the Almighty are infallible. For the words of his mouth return not void and without effect. Tully in his offices doth use great art in declaration what sorts of promises are to be obe∣served, and which may be broken. But the divine prove∣dence and foresight doth promise nothing but that which he will most assuredly perform. When he promised unto Abraham that S•…ra his wife should bear him a child, Sara laughed because she was then four score &amp; ten years o•…e, but the almighty remembered his covenant. Trust in him then for his words shall never fail. When he promi∣sed Moyses to conduct his people through the deserts, they began to doubt and murmur, saying: would God that we had dyed in the land of Egypt or in this wilderness &amp;c. and the lord was angry, but yet remembering his promise, at the humble petition of Moyses he performed it. Trust in God therefore, since no displeasure can make him alter
his determination, he performed his holy promise in Is∣mail, although we read not that he prayed unto God there∣fore. I would not have you think hereby that I condemn or contemn prayer, since it is the very mean to talk with God, but I mean thereby to prove, that God is most just and faithful in all his promises, and by repetition I say, Fear God for he is mighty, love God for he is merciful, and trust in God for he is faithful &amp; just. Herewith all you must also learn to perform duty towards the servant and ministers of God. For as you shall only be saved by him, and by cleaving to him in all your actions, so yet are his ministers the mean &amp; instruments of your salvation, and d•… (as it were) lead you by the hand through the waives of this world un to •…ernall •…elicity, unto whom you shall owe •…hree several duties, that is to say, Audience, Reverence, and Love. The Children of Israel by harkening to Moyses, and Aaron, were not only instructed and taught their du∣ties, but were (as it were) made at one with God when they had at any time purchased his heavy displeasure. By harkening unto Phyllip the Apostle, the Eunuch was conuer∣ted. By harkening unto Peter, Cornelius y• captain was con∣firmed &amp; strengthened in the faith. By harkening unto Paule and Silos, Lidia, and the gaylour of Phylippos were baptised, the holy scriptures are full of examples to prove this pro∣position. Harken you therefore unto the ministers of God, for they are sent to instruct you, so shall it also become you to do thē reverence in al places, re mēbring that as he which sent them is in all things to be honoured, so are they to be had in reverence for their office sake. Such was the zeal of Co•…elius the Captain, that he fell down prostrate at Peters féete when he entered into his house, the which though Peter refused saying that he was also mortal, yet did it signify unto vs, that the ministers of God cannot bée too much reverenced. The Priests in the old Testament were exempt from tributes and impositions, they were
not constrained to go into the battle, they were provided for sustenance and all things convenient, and the people were commanded to do them reverence. Do you likewise reverence unto Gods ministers in al places, for it shall become you well. So shall you also love them because they preach the gospel of him which hath power to save you. If the sen∣sual appetite of man be such as engēdreth affection towards thehandmaide because she is of familiar cōuersation with the Mistress: or bréedeth love towards them which are in office with Princes, because they may also procure vs favour: how much more ought the minds of men to be kindled with love towards the ministers of God, which instructs vs diligently, minister unto vs painfully, and pray for vs faithfully? yea how much are we boūd to love them, which by their hole some precepts do make vs worthy (through Gods mercy) of his holy love and favour. To conclude this chapter, you shall fear God for his might, love him for his mercies, and trust in him for he is faithful. You shall also harken unto his ministers because they are sent of God, you shall do them reverence because it becomes you, and for their office sake, and you shall love them by cause they feed you with the bread of life. And this I think sufficient for explanation of this first chapter at this time.
Sir I have done as you commanded, and there is meat ready for your dinner, if it please you that it be set on the table.
Well we will then defer the rest of our la∣bore until dinner be past, go we together, for I think it time.
We follow when it pleases you.
COme on my good friends, for were not your friendly help, I could rather content my self to be buried in my flowing years, then to live in such a miserable and precise world as this is, Oh what Superfinesse are we now grown unto? a gentlewoman may not now adays séeme to speak to her friend at the door passing by, she may not look at him in the window, she may not kiss him if she méete him as a stranger, nor receive his letters or presents, but e∣very prattling minister will record it in the pulpit.
In déed fair Lady Lamia, they are both too curi∣os and too much suspicious, for if they do but sée two in bed together, they will say that it was for to commit some wickedness, fie fie upon such tongues.
Ha ha, by my troth Echo well said, but by your leave, let master minister tattle what he will, for I will take my friends present when it comes, and shall I tell you? if I could have been contented to be so shut up from •…ight and spéech of such as like me, I might have lived gal∣lantly and well provided with my mother, who (though I say it) is a good old Lady in Ualentia, but when I saw that I must wear my good apparel always within doors, and that I must pass over my meals without company, I trussed up my Jewels in a casket, and (being accom∣panyed with my good Aunt here) I bad Ualentia •…arewell, for I had rather make hard shift to live at liberty, then e•…joy gre•… riches in such a kind of imprisonment.
A good Aunt in déede, I would I had such an Uncle.
Content your self niece, it were now but folly to spend time in bootless complaints, nor to lament the thing which may not be remedied, you must rather
learn the way that may maintain your estate, •…or beau∣tie will not always last, and if you provide not in youth, you may be assured to beg in age, take example at me, I tell you I thought my halfepeny good silver within these few years past, and now no man estéemeth me unless it be for counsel.
Counsel quoth you? mary sir and good counsel is much worth now adays.
I pray you Aunt since you are so good a council∣lore, give me some advise how to behave my self.
As for that another time shall serve betwéen you and mée.
Why, and shall I be cast up for a hobler then? I am sure I was never yet untrusty to any of you both.
Well Ladies, and if you look well upon the matter, I think that I am as worthy as one to be of coun∣sell, well I wot if any gentleman offer you the least part of injury, then Dicke must be sent for to swear out the matter, Dicke must bide all brontes, and therefore it were not amiss that he were of counsel in all your conferences.
By mine honesty Aunt to confess a troth, both these are our very approved fréendes, &amp; therefore you may be bold to speak your mind before them.
Well content then, I will tell you mine open∣neon, you take not the way to live, you are too much sub∣jest to your passion, for if you chance to be acquainted with a gentleman that is in déed courtlike and of good deserts, you become straight way more destrous of him, then he is of you, and so •…are you dote upon him, that you do not only sequester your self from all other company, but also you become so frank hearted, that you suffer him not to bestow upon you any more then is necessary for present use, yea 〈◊〉, I pray you learn these thrée points of me to govern your steppes by. First Trust noman how fair so e∣for he speak, next 〈◊〉 no •…an (that hath ought) how evil
favoured so ever he be. And lastely Love no man longer then he gives, since liberal gifts are the glewe of euerduring love.
O noble Dame, why were not you mother of the maids unto the Quéen•… of Hungary? by the faith of a true B•…gondyan you had wrong, for you well descrued the place.
I warrant you if the King our master had store of daughters, such a matron could not live unknown, but was it not therefore (think you) that ambassadors were sent this other day to the old Duchess?
Well Aunt, I were worthy of great reprehension, if I w•…uld reject the good documents of such a friend, and if I have heretofore done contrary, impute it to my youth, but be you sure that hereafter I will endeavour my self to follow your precepts.
And I fair Lady will stand you in some stead, to drive birds to the Net. If I be not much deceived, I saw a frosty bearded scholemaster iustructing of four lusty young men erewhyle as we came in, but if my judgment do not fail me, I may chance to read some of them ano∣there lecture.
Lush, what needs such open talk here in the streate? let vs go to the Lady Pandarinaes house, and there we may devise at better commodity upon these causes.
He speaks reason, let vs go Aunt, for it is not meal that every dancer hear our music before the mas∣cares be ready.
Well, I said so at the first, but when you will, let vs depart.
WHen God ordained the restless life of man,
And made him thrall to sundry greenous cares:
The first borne grief or Sorrow that began,
To show it self, was this: to save from snares
The pleasant pledge, which God for vs prepares.
I mean the séede, and offspring that he gives,
To any wight which in this world here lives.
Few see themselves, but each man séeth his child,
Such care for them, as care not for themself,
We care for them, in youth when wit is wilde,
We care for them, in age to gather pelf:
We care for them, to kéepe them from the shelf
Of such quick sands, as we our selves first found,
When heady will, did set our ships on ground.
The care which Christ did take to save his sheep,
Hath been compared, to fathers care on child,
And as the hen, her harmless chicks can keep
From cruel kite: so must the father shield
His youthful Sons, that they be not beguiled.
By wicked world, by fleshly foul desire,
Which serve the devil, with Fuel for his fire.
First parents care, to bring their children forth,
To breed them then, to bring them up in youth,
To match them eke, with wights of greatest worth,
To see them taught, the trusty tracks of truth:
To bar excess, from whence all s•… ensues.
And yet to give, enough for common néede,
Least loathsome lack make vise for virtue breed.
Let shame of sin, thy Childrens bridle be,
And spur them forth, with bounty wisely used:
That difference, each man may plainly see,
Twéene parents care, and masters bodes abused:
So Terence taught, whose lore is not refused.
But yet where youth is prone to follow ill,
There spare the spur, and use the bridal still.
Thus infinite, the cares of Parents are.
Some care to save their children from mishap,
Some care for wealth, and some for honours care,
Whereby their Sons may sit in fortunes lap:
Yet they which cram them so with worldly pap,
And never care, to give them heavenly crommes,
Shall ss them starve, when hap of hunger comes.
Said Socrates: that man which cares more
To leave his child, much good and rich of rent:
Then he for sees, to furnish him with store
Of virtues wealth, which never can be spent:
Shall make him like, the steed that styll is pent
In stable close: which may be fair in sight.
But seldom serves, such horse in field to fight.
So Xenophon, his friend Dan Tully told,
And so do here, Phylopaes and his fear
Phylocalus, that self same lesson hold:
They rather love to leave their sons in fear
Of God aboue: then wealth to wallow hear.
Which godly care, (O God) so deign to bliss,
That men may sée how great thy glory is.
MY well beloved, as time is the greatest treasure which man may here on earth receive, so let vs not le•…se time, but ra∣there séeke so to bestow the same, that profit may thereof be gathered. I will now return to instruct you what du∣ties you owe unto the King, whose place is next unto Gods place in consi∣deration of your duty. And as I have taught you thrée principal points in service of God almighty, so will I al∣so convey into thrée points, as much as shall be necessary for this tradition: for I fear least I have been over lunge in my first division, but I was drawn thereunto by the re∣quest which you made of your selves, and therefore bear with me.
Sir our desire is such, to bear away perfect∣lie your instruction, that your prolixity séemeth unto vs very compendious.
Well then to return unto the matter, you shall perform unto the King thrée especial duties, that is to say: Honour, Obedience, and Love. Hypodamus in his book of a common wealth, saith that a kingdom is a thing com∣pared to the imitation of gods power. Diotogenes the school∣ler of Pytagoras in his book of government, saith that a king represented the figure of God amongst men. Like∣wise he saith, that as god excelled the most perfect things of nature, so the king excelled amongst men and worldly matters: so that he is to bee honoured as the lieutenant of God here upon earth, both because he hath power of com∣maundement, and chiefly because he represented that hey∣uenly King, who is king of kings, and aboue all Kings to be honoured: Even so is hee also to bee obeyed in all se∣culer constitutions and politic provisions. This obedi∣ence doth consequently follow hono•…re, as the shadow so∣lowes
the body, for whatsoever he be that gives unto his king that honour which to him appertains, will (no doubt) likewise obey him with all humility. Erasmus teaches in his Apophthegms, that obediēce expelled al seditiō &amp; mayn∣teyneth concorde: the which may also appear by natural reason and common experience, neither shall they ever become able to bear rule them selves, which cannot bee content to obey the authority of others. Wherefore it shall be most convenient that you obey the King, since his auc∣thoritie is frō god, &amp; as this obedience depends upon the honour wherewith ye shall reverence the King as Gods lieutenant, so must you also join thereunto an unfeigned love, for as almighty God is to be loved because hee is merciful: so the King being appointed by God must be loved because he is thy protector here on earth. Solomon saith, that the kings indignation is the messenger of death, whereby I would frame mine argument from the con∣trarye, that hee is to be loved, least his indignation being justly kindled, thou bee not able to bear it. Next unto the king we are to consider the Magistrates which are ap∣pointed for administration of justice, and politic gouer∣meant: these Magistrates must also bee honoured, obeyed, &amp; loved: honoured because they are y• substituts of y• king unto whom all honour (on earth) appertains, obeyed because their office is appointed by the Kings authority, and lo∣ued because they are the grave and expert personages, which devise laws and constitutions for continuance of peace and tranquillity. The apostle Paule in his xiii. chap∣la of his Epistle to the Romaines, teaches plainly, that Rulers bear not the sword in vain, saying: Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers, for there is no power but of God. Again, the ruler (saith he) doth not bear the sword in vain. Wherefore you must néedes be subject, not only for fear, but also for conscience▪ And Sanct Peter in his first Epistle and the second chapiter, doth sufficiently•…
teach vs this point, saying▪ Submit your self unto all manner ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it bee unto the king as having the pre-eminence, or unto the rulers as unto them that are sent of him for the punishment of evil dooers, but for the laud of them that do well. Whereby appears, that the magistrates are not only to be feared, because they pu∣nysh offenders, but also to be loved because they cherish the virtuous: and for conclusion of this point, if you desire to be good men, then learn to perform duty towards all magistrates. As Sophocles, well said, it becomes a good man to have due respect unto all magistrates. I might now take your Parents in hand, for the next point of your instruction but I will first touch the duty which you owe unto your country, and that is contained also in three especial points: that is to say, in Thankfulness, Defence, and Proffit. And as ingratitude is the most heinous offence against God, so have I taught you that it is the greatest fault in human actions, amongst the which it shows it self no way more untolerable, then if you should hap∣pen to bee unthankful unto your country. Tully in his offices saith, that wee are not borne only for our own particular cause or profit, but part (saith he) our country challenges, part our Parents think due unto them, and our friends ought likewise to enjoy some part of our travails. There are divers Philosophers, which mayn∣teyne in argument that all countries are frée for a noble mind, and I agrée thereunto, but yet thereby they con∣clude not, that a noble mind by choosing a new country to enhabit, may lawfully forget the country wherein hee was native. Zopirus is condemned in all histories, for the vnthankefulnes he used in betraying his country. The truth of the Trojan history accuses Aeneas, Antenor, &amp; certain others, as most unthankful traitors to their country. Cillicon for betraying of Miletus, Lasthenes for de∣liuering of Whole•…thus, Nilo for selling of Epirus, and Apolloni∣us
for neglecting of his charge in Samos, are generally no∣ted with the names of vnthankeful and untrusty traitors to their cuntreyes: so that you must always remember to become thankful to your country, and mindful to maintain the honour of the same, least neglecting your duties in that behalf, you deserve the opprobrious names of traitors, which are odius to God and man. You must also spare no peril or travail to defend the same, for your country challenges not only that you be thankful un∣to the soil which hath bred you, but further also, that you defend the state, wherein you have béene nourished. Tully, in his Tusculanes questions recyteth one Lascaena, who when he received tidings of his sounes death, whom he had sent into the wars in defence of his country, answered: therefore did I beget him (quoth hee) that hée might be such an one, as would not doubt to dye for his country. In his book entitled the dream of Sipio, he af∣firmeth that there is a certain place appointed and ordei∣ned in heaueu, for all such as defend their country. Euri∣pits warned that we should never bee weary in those travails, which tend to the restitution or defence of our country. Platoes opinion was, that wee are more bound to defend our country, then our own Parents▪ Like argue∣mentes have béene defended by many Phylo•…ophers, say∣ing, that although thy Parents and proper family b•… overthrown, yet (the common wealth of thy country stan∣ding) thou may flourish and rife again: but the state of thy country being overthrown, both thou and thy Pa∣rentes must likewise come to utter subuertion. Then as thou shalt find it thy bounden duty to honour thy country with all gratitude, and to defend it with all thy power, •…o must thou likewise endeavour thy self to be profitable to the same: whereof many notable examples might be rehearsed. Lycurgus,, when he had by extréeme diligence and travail
reduced the Spartans unto civility, by sundry wholesome laws and politic constitutions, and that they began to murmur, saying: that his laws were untolerable, hée feigned that he would go to Delphos, to consult with the God Apollo, whether his laws were to be observed or not promising to abide his sentence, &amp; requiring no more of the Lacedaemonians, but to swear y• they would observe those laws until his return: which when they had so∣lemly sworn, took his iurney without entente to return home again, and ordained before his death, to be enclosed in a great you•… of Lead, and so to be thrown into the sea, to the end that hée never returning, the Laced∣monians might be bound by their other to continue the ex∣ercise of his profitable laws, such care he had to become profitable unto his country. Curtius the Romaine, when there appeared a great gulf in the market place, which could by no means be stopped, and answer was géeuen from the Oracle, that it was only to bee stopped by that which was of most worth unto the city of Room, he dée∣ming that the city had nothing so precious, as stout &amp; valiant men, armed him self, and leapt into the Gulf, which stopped immediately: declaring thereby, howe light men ought to estéeme their life, when as the same may yield profit or commodity to their country. Menace∣us, the Son of Craeon, refused not voluntary death, when he understood that the same might redéeme the city of Thebes from utter subversion. I might trouble you with infinite stories to prove this proposition, but let these few suffice, and in your country have always especial re∣specte to the elders, to whom you must also perform thrée several doubts: that is, Reverence, Love, and Defence. Lycurgus, ordained, that no young man should pass by an elder without reverence first done unto him, namely if he were set, he rose to do reverence unto the elders, and if they were alone, he was bound to proffer them the com∣fort
of his company. Plato, in his ninth dialogue of laws and constitucions doth thus propound: al men must grant (saith he) that age is much to be preferred before youth, as well in the sight of God, as also in the sight of men, which will live orderly: for it is abominable (saith he) that an old man should give place unto an young man, and the Gods them selves do hate it, since youth ought with patient mind to bear even the strypes of their el∣ders. You shall also love them, because of them you may learn good precepts, and of them you may be bold to ask council: for as Euripides, in his tragedy called Phae∣nissae, doth teach, prudence will not be gotten with few days seeking for, and the apostles teach vs our deuty die∣rectly in that behalf, who ordained amongst them elders in every congregation, to decide all matters in contro∣uersie, of whom they were resolved of all doubts in con∣science. It shall also become you to defend the elders from al violence and outrage, since it is a thing as comely and co∣mandible to defend the weak, as it is glorious and try∣umphant to overcome the mighty: whereof I might re∣cite many famous examples out of the Romaine histories, but I will partly include the same in the duties which you owe unto your Parents, which are also, Honour, Love, and Relief. And of the first part, although I might bring in sundry worthy examples, yet because the case is of it self familiar, I will be brief, and use no other persuation then the express commandment of God, who bids you to honour your Father and Mother, that your▪ days may bée long in the land which the Lord your god hath given you. And Sain•…t Paule in the sixth chapiter of his Epistle to the Ephesians, saith. Children obey your Parents in the Lord, for that is right and wellpleasing to the Lord. As he testi∣fieth in the third chapiter to the Colossianes, you shall love them also because you are engendered of their own flesh &amp; blood, as also you may not forget your Mothers pains
in bearing of you, you must always meditate in your mind, first the cares which they have had to preserve you from bodily perils in the cradell, from danger of damp∣nation by Godly education, from néede and hunger by ad∣ministering things necessary, and from utter destruction by vigillant foresight &amp; Godly care: all these with infinite other things considered, you shall find your selves boun∣den by manifold occasions to love your Parents, and to be assistant unto them in the necessities of their age. For well said that Poet, which affirmed that children were tenderly swaddled in their cradels, to the end they might sustain their aged Parents and supply their wants. Marvelous is the nature of the Stork, which féedeth the damme in age, of whom it self received nurture béeing young in the nest. Tully in his book of the answers of soth∣sayers saith, that nature in the beginning hath made an accord betwéene vs and our Parents, so that it were dam∣noble not to cherish them. And to conclude, there is nothing that can worse become a common wealth, then to sée y• youth flourish in prosperity which suffer their parents to perish for lack of any cōmodity. Now that I have rehearsed unto you as much as I think requisite, for the instruction of your duties, first towards god, and his ministers, next to the King and his Magistrates, thirdely to your country and the Elders thereof and lastly towards your Parents: it shall not be amiss that you remenber of your self how you are the Temple of God, kéepe your selves holy there∣fore in your conversation, and undefiled, for if our saviour Christ did rigorously rebuke and expel the buyers &amp; sellers out of the outward Temple, how much more will hée pu∣nishe them which pollute and de•…le the inward Temple of their bodies, and give over their delight to concupiscence and van•…es? thus may you for brevity remember that you.
1 Fear God because he is meg•…le,
2 Love God because he is merciful,
3 Trust in God because he is just.
1 Hear his ministers hecause they are sent to instruct you,
2 Do reverence unto them because of their office,
3 Love them because they feed you with heavenly bread▪
1 Honour the King because he is Gods lieutenant▪
2 Obey him because his power is from aboue,
3 Love him because he is thy protector.
1 Honour his Magistrates because they represent his person,
2 Obey them because they have their authority from him,
3 Love them because they •…inteine peace.
1 Be thankful to thy country that hath bred thee▪
2 Defend it because thou art borne to that end, and
3 Profit it because thou shalt thereby gain honour.
1 Reverence thy elders for their grey hears,
2 Love them because they council thee and
3 Defend them because they are feeble.
1 Honour your Parents base•…se God commands so▪
2 Love them bycanse they tendered you, and
3 Relieve them because it is your duty.
Lastly forget not your selves▪ neither make any le•… account of your selves then to be the Temple of God, which you ought to keep holy and undefiled. I might stand in dilatacion hereof with many more examples and aucthorities, but I trust these (being well remembered) shall suffice, and now I will leave you for a time, besée∣ching almighty God to guide and kéepe you now &amp; ever. So be it.
AH sirha, I sée well the old proverb is true, which saith: so many men so many minds, this order of teaching is far contrary to all other y• ever I have heard, &amp; shall I tell you? it hath in it neither head nor foot.
Truly brother it hath in it great reason &amp; virtue, and though it be at y• first unpleasant in comp∣rison to T•…es Commodities and 〈◊〉 like, yet ought we to h•…e good regard thereunto, since it teaches in effect 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 of our 〈◊〉.
Yea, and that very compendiously.
Surely I am of •…ylautus opinion, for who is ignorant that▪ God is to be feared aboue all things▪ or who knows not that the King is 〈◊〉 of God to rule here on earth▪
Is there any 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 of 〈◊〉, that he knows not that in all 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 must or will) be reverenced? and sée we not daily, that all parents challenge obedience and love?
Yes, and more to, for some parents 〈◊〉 never •…ented what duty soever the child performs, they •…et what they once were themselves: But to the purpose. I l•…ked for some excellent matter at this new Schoolemasters hands, if this be all that he can say to vs, I would for my part that we were in some University, for here we shall but loose our time, I have (in e•…ect) all th•… gear without book already.
And I lack not much of it.
Well said young gentlemen, it is a good hey∣ring when young men are so toward, and much ease is it for the teacher when he finds scollers of quick capacity.
Surely I am not yet so forward, neither can I vaunt that either I have it without book, or do •…us∣ficiently bear away the same in such order as I would.
For my part, I beséech God that I may with all my whole understanding bee able to bear away that which our Master hath delivered unto vs, and that I may so imprint the same in my memory, that in all my life I may make it a glass wherein I may behold my duty▪: wherefore Phylotimus, (if you so think good, you and I will go apart, and medytate the same to our sell∣ues, to the end we ma•… be the perfecter therein when our instructor shall examine vs.
Contented, let vs go where you will.
Let them go like a couple of blockheads, I would we two were at some University, and then let them do what they list.
Even so would I, for at the University we should hear•… other ma•…er of teaching: There be lectures daily read of all the liberal sciences, of all languages, and of all moral discourses. Furthermore, at the University we should have choice company of gallant young gentle∣men, with whom we might acquaint our selves, and pass some times in recreation: yea, shall I tell you? if a man list to play the good fellow and▪ be merry sometimes, hée shall not want there (as I have heard) that will accompany him.
And what University (do you suppose) we shall be sent unto.
I think unto Doway, for that is néerest.
Have you béene in Doway at any time?
No surely, but I have harde it praised for a pr•…per city, and well replenished with courteous people and fair women.
Mar•… Sir there would I be then. Oh what a pleasure it is to behold a fair woman? surely they were created of God for the comfort of man, but behold, I sée a passing fair woman come down the stréete, and if I be not much deceived, Echo is her gentleman usher: it is so in déede.
What is that Echo?
Know you not Echo? why thē you know no man, the best fellow in all this town, and ready to do for all men: I will bring you acquainted with him.
YOu shall sée (Lady Lamia,) how I will work this gear like wax, but is not this Phylosarchus? it is even hée, in good time I have espied him, kéepe your coūtenance in any wise.
Echo doth give you good council, kéepe your co•…ntenance.
As though I were to learn that at these years.
Master Phylosarchus, God save you.
And thée also gentle fellow Echo. whether walk thou?
Hereby Sir with this gentlewoman.
Abide I pray thée, here is a young gentle∣man a friend of mine, which desires to bée acquainted with thée.
Sir I am at your comm•…demeaned and his al∣so, I will be so bold as to kiss his hands, Dyck go thou on with these gentlewomen before, I will overtake you im∣mediatly.
And I pray thée tell mée Echo, what gen∣tlewoman is this?
Sir she is of Valentia, and hath presently some business in this city with her Aunt which accompanies her.
Ha, ha, business in déede, tell mée Echo, here are none but God &amp; good friends, is shée of the right stamp?
Sir, beléeue mée I know no such thing by her, I have not béene long acquainted with her, and (to tell you what likely hoods I have hitherto séene) shée is very demure and modest, neither is there any company razor∣teeth to her lodging, but what for that? all things have a beginning, shée is a woman, and nothing is unpossible.
Trust mée truly she is a gallant wench, &amp; but young, that Fryer which would not cast off his cowl to catch such a soul, shall never be my cōfessor, but I pray thee deal plainly with me: might not a man entreat ma∣ster Echo to carry her a present if néede were?
Sir there is never a gentleman in this city, shall make Echo stretch a string sooner then your self, but of a very truth, hitherto I have séene no such likelihood, but Sir, you are a gallant young man, me thinks you might •…o well to walk sometimes by her lodging, and give her the Albade, or the Bozo las manos, and by that mean you may acquaint your self with her: afterwards if any
thing may be furthered by Echo, command him.
Gramercy gentle Echo, but where a∣bouts is she lodged?
Not far from S. Myghels Sir, at a red house∣I will take leave of you for this time, least she think me very slack in attendance.
Fare well friend Echo. Did I not tell you what he was? there is not such a fellow in a world again, surely it shall go hard but I will have a sling at this dam∣sell: but let vs go in, for our companions are departed long since, and we shall perchance give some cause of suss∣pecte, if we tarry long here▪
Go we.
SUrely these young men are not hitherto to be misliked, and I trust in God they will prove toward scholars.
Yea sir out of dout, &amp; especially the two elder, but the other two are nothing so quick sprited, I came by them earewhile, soon after ye had done reading unto thē, and the two. eldest could even then (in manner) record with∣out book as much as you had taught them.
Yea but what is that to the purpose? the quickest wits prove not always best, for as they are rea∣die to cōceiue, so do they quickly forget, &amp; therewithal, the fineness of their capacity doth carry such oftētimes to de∣light in vanities, since mans nature is such, that with ease it inclyneth to pleasure, and unwilling it is to endure pain
or travel, without the which no virtue is obtained.
This gear goes well, for whereas I was ca∣sting with my self howe to entrap this yonker, he is fallen into the net of his own accord, and desires that of me which I was careful howe to profer cleanly unto him. But is not this the old scholemaster? euē the same, well, we must find some device to blear his eye for a while: let me alone, I know howe to bring it to pass.
Doth this fellow come to me think thou?
It may be sir, but I know him not.
I will salute him. God save you moister school∣moister.
Welcome gentle brother.
Sir, I am sent unto you by the Markgraue, who understanding that two of his kinsemen are lately placed under your government, hath a desire to sée them, and therefore sent me to entreat you that you would give them liberty this afternoon, to the end that he may com∣mon with them.
Surely I did not know that they were the Markgraues kinsemen, and they have yet been but very small time with me, but since it so pleases him, I am con∣tent to grant them liberty, and I will •…end them out un∣to you presently to go where it likes him.
So so, they are as much a kin to the Mark∣grave, as Robin Fletcher and the swéet Rood of Chester, but yet this was a cleanly shift upon the sudden, for by this means shall I take occasion to bring this yonker and the Lady Lami•… better acquainted, &amp; much good do it him, for out of doubt she shall be his, as long as his purse may be mine. But behold where they come altogether, now let me bestir me and use my best wits.
I Am glad that we have liberty this afternoon to take re∣creation, not for that I lacked time to meditate that which hath been read unto vs, but because I take pleasure in walking abroad.
And I hope by this means to have fur∣there communication with my friend Echo, and behold where 〈◊〉 is.
Amongst all that our instructor hath re∣hearsed unto vs, there is nothing sticks better in my re∣membrance, than that which he said of time: for surely as it is the greatest treasure which God hath given unto man, so ought he to be very curious and wary how he be∣stowed the same, wherefore Philotimus I think we can not better do, than to spend some time by the way in me∣ditating &amp; rehearsing these wholesome precepts, which our instructor hath to vs delivered, for I assure you, although he hath been therein very compendious and sententious, yet in my judgment every sentence is suchas requires a ripe deliberation, and weighty consideration of the same.
Surely Philomusus I am of your opinion, and therefore let vs bestow the time therein, although percase our brethren here will use this afternoon in some other exercise.
Sir it is unto you that I address my self, for al∣though
I be not the readiest man on live to deal in such af∣fairs, yet such is the great good liking which I have al∣ways had in you, that since I spake with you earewhile, I have not béen unmindful of you, &amp; surely I suppose that God doth favour your desires, for even now when I depar∣ted from you, and as soon as I overtook the gentlewo∣man, I cast in my brains how to pleasure you, and mea∣ning to have devised some subtlety whereby the thing might be brought into communication, the gentlewoman of her▪ self proffred the occasion, for she demanded of me what young gentlemen those were with whom I stayed, I told her that ye were Sons to two of the wealthiest burghers in this city, and be you sure I left out no commendation which might advance you, whereat she séemed to bite on the bridle, and commended you for your courtesies▪ in that yée saluted her so gently as she passed by, but especially she marked you by sundry things and ges∣tures, and could describe you unto me by your appa∣rell. Short tale to make, I never saw her show so much likelihood of affection, since I first saw her, as shée be∣wrayed presently, and shall I tell you in your ear? if Ec∣cho be any better then a fool, she hath a months mind unto Phylosarchus, wherefore play you now the wise man, &amp; strike the Iron whiles it is hot, she returns this way presently, and thereupon I have adventured to come unto your Scoolemaster, to crave you a liberty in the name of the Markegraue, saying that you were his kynsemen, and this have I done, to the end that you might take occasion to salute her e•…nes as she returns: and if you use the matter wisely (as I know you can) you may take oportu∣nity also to talk with her, yea and to conduct her to her lodging.
Surely Echo thou show plainly what good will thou bear me, but what shall we do with the Markgraue?
Tush, follow you your bu•…nes now that you hau•… liberty, and let me alone with that matter, if ever here∣after the thing come in question, lay all upon me, and I will say, that I mistook both the Scoolemaster and the Skollers unto whom I was sent.
Well friend Echo I know not how to de∣serve thy gentleness, but in token of grateful mind, hold, receive these twenty gildres until I have greater ability, and be sure that if ever I live to inherit Phylocalus, then Echo shall not be unprovided for.
What mean you sir? stay your purse until ano∣there time, well if you will néedes enforce me, I will never refuse the courtesy of a gentleman, but behold where the Lady Lamia comes, Sir me recomandez, I will not be séene to talk with you, for I stale from her to▪ pleasure you privily.
OH my friend Phylautus, behold here a péere∣less péece, doth it not delight your eyes to gaze upon such a shining star? on my•…e honour she hath a swéet face, &amp; by al likelihood she is much to young to have béen hitherto commonly abused, but wherefore am I aba∣shed? I will go and salute her. Fair lady God save you, and send you that your hart most desires.
Worthy gentleman, I thank you most heart∣lie
for your good will, and if God hear 〈◊〉 prayer, he shall do more than he did for me a good while, but it is no 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 hath taken his pleasure of punishing, he will at last have pity on the poor.
Surely mistress, it were great pity that such a one as you, should endure any punishment without great cause, and hardly can I think that any heart is so hard as to see you sorrowful, if remedy may be therefore obtained.
Sir, I could be content that all men were of your mind, but I find courtesy very cold now adays, and many there be which would rather deprive a poor gentlewoman of her right, then •…ue upon her pi•…eous plight: the good king Amadis is dead long since, whose Knights undertook always the defence of Dames and Damsels.
Alas what ails the young gentlewoman to complain?
Sir and not without cause, since she is by great wrong dispossessed of rich Signiories which belong to her by right and inheritance, and complaining here un∣to the magistrates, she receives small comfort, but is ra∣there hindered by malice and detraction.
Fair gentlewoman: although I have hitherto had no great acquaintāce with you, yet if I might crave but to know the cause of your grief, be you sure I would use my best endeavour to redress it, and therefore I conjure you by your courtesy, that you change your opiniō, for all Amadis Knights are not 〈◊〉 dead, only bewray your grief, and praise thereafter as you find.
Sir I have not power to reject your courtesy, you shall understand then, that being &amp;c.
Neyce it séemeth that you have not your ho∣nor in such commendation as I would wish you should, I pray you let vs begone homewards.
Why Mistress, are you offended that •…hée should hearken unto such, as séeke to reléeue her estate.
Sir you are a gentleman well nurtured, and you know this is no place to talk in, without descry∣dyt.
Well Mistress, if it please you we will waite upon you unto your lodging, and there you shall sée what desire I have to comfort this fair Lady.
As for that sir at your pleasure, I pray God send her good friends in her right, for God knows she hath need of such at this present.
BEhold behold, O mortal men behold,
Behold and sée, how soon deceit is wrought:
How s•…no men's minds, of harmful things take hold,
How soon the g•…d, corrupted is with nought.
Behold the cares whereof our saviour spake,
〈◊〉 Matthew tells, in thirtéenth chapter plain,
Such wicked means, malicious men can make,
The frutfull séede, with worthless wéedes to stain.
Behold the devil, whose ministers are pressed:
To stir an ore, in every forward boat:
Behold blind youth, which holds pleasure best,
And 〈◊〉 the payne, which might their state promo•…e.
Great is the care, which gravest men endure,
To sée their Sons, brought up in Godly wise:
And great the pains, which teachers put in ur,
To trade then still, in virtuous qualities:
But oh how great, is gréedie lust in youth?
How much mischief, it swallows up vnséene?
With reckless mind, it castes aside all truth,
And féedeth still, on that which is vncléene.
These parasites, and bawds have quickly caught,
The careless birds, who sée not their deceyptes:
with such vile wares, the world so full is fraught,
As few can scope, their subtilties and sleights:
Yet mighty God, vouchsafe to guide the rest,
That they may sh•…n the bad, &amp; sew the best.
THere there there, this gear goes round as it should go, these young gallants are caught without a net, &amp; shall I tell you one thing? no man gladder then I, for as long as that chimney smoketh, I am sure I shall not go hungry to bed. An Inheritrix quoth you? marie that she is a Meritrix I warrant her, of great bur∣dens, birthrights I would say, no doubt of it, he that marries her shall be sure of great ecclamation, and that good old gentlewoman her Aunt. Why though the young woman had never a great in the world, yet a man might be glad that could match his Son in such an abominable (honourable) stock: these are Aunts of Antwerpe, which can make twenty marriages in one wéeke sor their kinswoman, O noble old girls, I like them yet when they be wise, for it is an old saying, one
shrew is worth two shéep. Well, let me look about me how I prate, and let me espy what is become of their brothers according to their commandment, but are not these two they which come debating of the matter in such ear∣nest? it is even they, and wot you what? their brethren are otherwise occupied, but yet surely they argue as fa•…t as they, when God knows a small entreaty might serve, but I will step aside and hearken to these yonkers.
SUrely Phylotimus, I wonder what is become of our bre∣throne, I pray god they be not enticed to some vanity by some lewd company.
You might have guessed twice &amp; have guessed worse, I beshrew your brains for your busy conjecture.
Truly it may be, but I trust they will bear in mind the last precept which your Master gave vs, at y• least I would we had their company, that we might me∣ditat the matter together.
I perceive it is time to call them, I will be gone.
If our instructor should examine vs, and find them to séeke, it would gréeue me as much for my brother as if the fault were mine own.
Surely and I would also be very sorry if my brother should be found slack in his duty, but in my judge∣meant we need not to cast these doubts, for our brethren séemed unto me to be very perfect and ready in the especial points of our instruction, and could (in manner) make re∣herself thereof immediately after we had received the same.
Yea marie, but I will tel you one thing I know by experience in my brother, he will as soon conceive or
bear away a thing as any that ever I saw, and surely to confess a truth, he hath an excellent ready wit, but doubt∣les he will sometimes forget as fast, as he learned re∣deli, and yet for mine own part, I would to God that my memory were as capable as his is, for then I would not doubt but to retain sufficiently.
It may be that his mind is much given to other pleasures and delights, which do so continually possess his brains, as they suffer not any other conception to be imprinted in his memory: for my brother Phylau∣tus doth in a manner meditat nothing else but setting forth of him self, and in what soever he be occupied or con∣uersaunt, yet shall you perceive him to have a singular re∣guard to his own praise, the which doth sometimes carry him as far beyond all reason, as his deserts might séeme to advance him.
To bee opinionate of h•… self is vicious, but surely I am of opinion, that it is commendable for a young man in all his actions to regard his own ad∣uauncement, and with all to have (reasonably) a good o∣pinion of him self, in exempting of such things as he un∣dertaketh, for if he which covets in the latyne tongue to be eloquent, should so far embase his thoughts as to con∣ceiue that he spake or wrote like old Duns or Scotus, surely (in my judgment) it would bee very hard for him to ex∣cell or to become a perfect Rethoritian, or if hee which em∣ployeth his time in the exercise of riding, should imagine with himself that he sat not comely on his horse back, it would be long before hee should become a gallant horse∣man: for in all human actions we delight so much the more, and sooner attain unto their perfections, when∣as wée think in our minds that in deed the exercise thereof doth become vs: but behold now where our brethren do come.
THis was a proper messenger in déede, hée might have mocked others though he mocked not vs.
O sir you do him wrong, for it séemeth un∣to me that the poor fellow is as sorry for it as we are mis∣contented, and that he rather faulted through ignorance, than of any set purpose, but look where our brethren are▪ Brother where have you bin whilst we were at the Mark∣graves house?
Truly brother I walked on with my com∣pinion here, hoping that we should have followed you to the Markgraues house and we were so earnest in medita∣ting such matter as our instructor delivered unto vs, that mistaking the way, &amp; not marking which way you went, we were constrained to return hither, and to attend your return, to the end we might go altogether.
And you (brother) where have you been?
Where have we been quoth you? why we have been with that good old gentleman the Markgraue, unto whom we were as welcome as water into the ship, the old •…roward •…rowner would scarce vouchsafe to speak unto vs, or to look upon vs, but he shall sit until his hée∣les ache before I come at him again.
O brother, use reverent speech of him, prin∣cipally because he is a Magistrate, and therewithal for his greye hairs, for that is one especial point of our masters traditions.
Tush what tell you me of our masters tra∣ditions? if a Magistrate, or an elder would challendge re∣uerence
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
of a young gentleman, it were good reason also that they should render affability, and cheerful countenance to all such as present them selves before them with good wi•…l. When we came to him he knew vs not, neither would he know vs by any means, but with a grim coun∣tenance turned his back, and desired vs to go ere we drank: a Markgraue quoth you?
That is strange, that having sent for vs, he would seem to use such entertainment when we came.
I will tell you brother, it séemeth unto me that it was rather the fault of the messenger, and yet hee did but ignorantly mistake it neither: For he was (as it should seem) sent by the Markgraue, but he did oyther mi∣stake the scholemaister. or the scholars, or both, and there∣upon I think that the Markgraue was partly offended.
Truly and not without cause, but behold•… where our moister comes.
Let vs say then that we were together▪ least he be offended.
Now my well-beloved, and what saith the honourable &amp; reverend Markgraue unto you? or howe doth he like the manner of your instruction? have you recited or declared any part thereof unto him since your going?
Sir no▪ for it seems that the messenger did mistake his errand, and was sent to some other scho∣lers, and not unto vs.
Is it even so? well then let vs not altoge∣there lose the golden treasure of the time: but tell me, have you perfectly digested and committed unto memory the articles which I delivered unto you, for especial concede∣ration of your duty?
Sir I think that I cā perfectly rehearse them.
And I sir do hope also that I shall not great∣lie •…aisle.
Sir this young man and I do partly bear them in mind, although not so perfectly and readily as we desire.
Well, to the end that you shall the better imprint them in your memory, behold, I have put them briefly in writing as a memorial, and here I deliver the same unto you, to be put in verse every one by himself and in sundry device, that you may therein take the greater delight, for of all other Arts Poetry gives greatest assi∣stance unto memory, since the very terminations and caesuras doe (as it were) serve for places of memory, and help the mind with delight to carry burdens, which else would séeme more grievous: and though it might percase séeme unto you, that I do in manner ouerlode you with les∣sons and enterprises, yet shall you herein rather find com∣forte or recreation, than any •…comberance: let me now sée who can show himself the pleasant•… •…et, in hand∣ling thereof, 〈◊〉 yet you must also therein 〈◊〉 d•…rum, for •…ing allegories or pleasant 〈◊〉 in serious cau∣ses are not most comely. God guide you 〈◊〉 and ever.
OH that I had now the •…own which Uirgill had in wri∣ting of a delectable verse.
God is good and bountiful, yielding unto every man that is industrious the open way to knowledge
and s•…ience, &amp; though at first it séeme difficile, yet with tra∣uell every thing is obtained▪ we see the hardest stones are pierced with soft drops of water, whereby the mind of man may be encouraged to trust, that unto a willing hart▪ nothing is impossible, but to perform the charge which is given vs, we must withdraw our selves from each other▪ since we are enjoined every of vs to devise it in 〈◊〉 •…ortes of poems, wherefore I will leave you for a time.
And I will also assay what I can do.
God be with them, shall I tell you Phylau∣tus, wherefore I desired the excellence of Ui•…gel, in compoun∣ding of a verse? not as they think God knows, to con∣uert our tedious traditions there into: for a small grace in a verse will serve for such unpleasant matter, but it was to furnish me with eloquence▪ for the better obtaining of this heavenly dame, whose remēbrance is swéet unto me, neither yet am I able to express such praises as she doth deserve. Oh how it delights me to behold in mine ima∣gination the counterfeit of her excellent face, me thinks the glimsing of her eyes have in it a reflection, far more vehement than the beams of the Sun it self, and the swéetnesse of her heavenly breath, surpasses the spiceries of Arabia. Oh that I ha•… skill to write some worthy mat∣la in commendation of her rare perfections, surely I will tell you Phila•…us, I doe both rejoice in your doings, and much wonder at your inclination. I wonder because I can not per•… that you are any thing moved with affection of mind towards her, and yet I rejoice therein least the same might have become an hinderance to my desires, oh, howe only love will admit no companion.
Phylo•…us, you may happily be deceived in me, and therefore I would not wish you hereafter to 〈◊〉 your self in any man at the first acquaintance, but in déede to confess a truth unto you, although this gentlewo∣m•…n be beautiful, yet, have I refrained hitherto to be∣come
affectionate on her, as well because I would therein give place unto your desire, as also because I have not per∣ceyued that ever she lent any glance or liking look to∣wards me, and as I can be content to love where I find my self estéemed, so be you sure that I think my halfepe∣ny as good silver as another doth, and she that séemeth not with gréedie eye to behold me, it is very•… likely that I will not be overhasty to gaze at her. But to return unto the purpose, as you do now earnestly desire to get victory o∣for her affection: so doe I every day beseech of God, that our parents may at last determine to send vs unto some University, that there the variety of all delights may yield unto each of vs his contentation.
Alas, and I am of another mind, for though I desire no less than you to be at some university, yet to lose the sight of my Lamia séemeth no less grief un∣to me, than if my heart were torn out of my body. But behold where Ambidexter comes, my mind gives me that I shall hear some news by him. Howe now Am∣bidexter? what news?
Good sir, and such as I dare say you will be glad of.
And what are those? tell me quickly I pray thée.
Sir I will tell you, there came a tattling fellow to your father erewhile, and told him a tale in his ear which séemed to like him but a little, what so ever it was, where upon your Father mumbled a while as the Cade which chews the Cud, and in the •…de with a great sigh he said. Well, then (quoth he) there is no reme∣die but send them with spéede to the University: which words whē I overheard, I smiled to my self and thought, (by God, and so you may dress them) for I dare well say, they will be the most joyful news that they heard this half year, and to gratify you with the same, I came im∣mediatly
to séeke you out, but where 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 brother?
He is gone that way walking, •… pray thée follow him, and make him partaker of these news.
Oh howe much is Ambidexter deceived in me at this present? No no, I can not so content my self to forget the swéete face of that worthy Lady Lamia, neither can I ever hope to rejoice, unless I might be so happy, as to enjoy the continual sight of her heavenly countenance, the vniuer∣sitie is in déede the place where I have of long time been desirous to be placed, especially for the variety of delights and pleasures which there are daily exercised: but alas, what néedeth the rich man to become a théese? or what néede I to wander unto the university for to séeke pastime and pleasurs, when I may even here in Antwerp without further travel, enjoy the daily comfort of such consolation? and if I be not also much deceived, she loves and likes me no less than I desire her, I pray you tell me Phylautus, do you not plainly perceive that she hath an affection to∣wards me?
Surely Phylosarchus, I dare not swear it, although in déede the frankness of her entertainment was much, but when I consider that it was at the very first sight, it makes me think that her courtesy is commō, and may be quickly obtained.
Why did she not then make as fair•… semblant unto you?
Marie, because she perceived you to address your self most directly unto her, and there is no woman so kind, that she can deal with mo than one at once, but be you sure if I had been there alone, she would have lent me as favourable regard as she séemed now to give you, it is the trick of them all, and therefore never set your mind so much thereon, I warrant you, when we come to the University, we shall have store of such there, and I am
glad to understand that your father determines to send•… you thither, for I am sure that my brother and I shall ac∣company you, since our fathers have always been dest∣rous that we should spend our youths together. But be∣hold where our fathers come both together, let vs go in, least they espy vs, and think that we loiter here.
SUrely neyghbor Phylocalus, I can not blame you though you be moved at these tidings, but in things which come contrary to expectation or desire, the wisdom of men is best seen, &amp; therefore I would advise you to forecast in time howe you may prevent such a mischief, for greatest woūds are at the first more easily cured, than if they continue until some abundance of humour or other accident doe hinder the benefit of nature, and surely it grieves me in manner as much, as if the like had been found in mine own son.
So have you great reason to say, for your son Phylautus was there with him also, and though the Harlot séemed not to lend liking unto any but my son, yet be you out of doubt that being in such company, he shall hardly escape the snares of temptation.
Well, howe so ever it be, we shall best doe to consult with their teacher hereupon, and behold where he •…mmeth. Sir we were about to send for you, being ad∣•…tised that my neighbours son Phylosarchus doth haunt
a very dishonest house in this town, and my son Phy∣lautus hath also ben there in company with him, the which gives vs just occasion to lament, &amp; most glad we would be to devise some comfort in time, since the thing hath (as yet) been of no long continuance. Wherefore we beséech you to deal faithfully with vs, and to declare if you have s•…no any such behaviour, or likelihood in them, and fur∣thermore to advise vs, which way we might best redress this mishap betimes.
Sir to declare of your sons behaviour, truly I have never séene any thing to misselyke of them, neither could I ever perceine that they were slow in apprehending mine instructions, but rather more for∣ward then their brethren, true it is that here came one to me in name of the Markgraue, saying that he was their kinseman and very desirous to sée them, whereupon I did willingly give them leave, and when they came there they say that the messenger miss took the matter, and should have gone to some other scholars. But doubtless my mind gives me, that if they have been allured to any evil com∣pany, it hath been by that same fellow which came to mée on that message.
Do you not know him, or what his name is?
I do not know him, but he said that his name was Echo.
Echo? Nay then you have not judged a∣miss, for it is one of the lewdest fellows in this town, a common Parasite and a seducer of youth.
Surely my heart did not greatly like him at the first sight, but since things done cannot be un∣done, I like well that you should (according to your own devise) provide in time before they wade déeper in such enterprises, and to speak mine opinion, you may doe well to send them unto some University, before they have fur∣there acquaintance or haunt in such company, for whether
it be love, or lust that hath infected them, there can be no presenter remedy then to absent them from the things which they desire, and therewithal I promise you (not to flatter) they are already very sufficiently able for the U∣niuersity, and the en•…ructions which I have given them, may serve rather for precepts of their perfect duty to God and man, then for any exercise of the liberal sciences, wherein they are so well entered, and have been so through∣lie traded, as there lacks nothing but convenient place where they might procéede in Logic and such like.
And me thinks we might better doe to en∣form the Markgraue. Who upon such means as we shall make, may banish the harlot with her train out of the City, and may also punish the parasite for so enticing the young men.
I grant you that all this may be done •…ery well but then you are to consider, that the hearts of young men, are oftentimes so stout, that they can not abid publicly to hear of a fault, the which (being privately and gently admonished) they would peradventure will∣lingly amend: and great difference there is betwéene i will∣drone and young men, for in childhood all punishment is terrible, but in flourishing youth every punishment may not be used, but discretion must foresee what kind of punishment will most prevail and best gain reformati∣on in the mind of the offender. Wherefore mine advice shoud be that you send them to some University, and as near as you can forsée to place them with such a Lutor as may always have an eye to their exercises, and may have especial care how they shall bestow their vacant times. For idleness is the cause of many e•…else in youth, whereas being occupied or exercised in any thing that is virtuous or commendable, they shall not have so great oc∣cession to think of vanities.
All that is true, but what University do you
think meetest?
For mine own opinion I like Doway very well, both for that it is near, and from thence you may always within short time be advertised, and also be∣cause I do know very learned and faithful men there, and herewithal it is but a little Town, and the Uniuer∣city but lately erected, whereby the root of evil hath he∣thereto had least skope, and exercise hath béene (and is) th•… more straightly observed.
And could you direct vs unto any such faith∣full Tutor, that we might be bold to think our selves sure of their well doing? and that they should not be suss∣fred to run at large about wanton toys and lewdness?
Truly I can tell you of two or three which are both faithful and careful of their charge, but to assure you in such sort as you require were very hard to do, since no Tutor can use such vygilant industry, but that sometimes he may be deceived, nevertheless I know them to be careful.
Well for my part I can be content to follow your advise, &amp; what think you neighbour Phylopaes.
I do likewise agrée to as much as hath been said.
Well then mark yet a little further mine intent, I would think good that the young men themselves should not know thereof until the Journey were prepared and they ready to depart, and my meaning is this, in so doing you shall antyeypate all occasions that they might have to confer with lewd company, who peradventure would not spare to follow and accompany them whereso∣ever they go.
Surely that is well considered, and therefore neighbour. I pray you give straight charge unto your ser∣uant least he do bewray our intent herein.
Sirha do you hear not one word for
your life of that which we have here communed together.
Sir I trust you have never hitherto found me •…ask to do that which I have ben commanded, nor rash to disclose any thing which I thought might displease you.
Well I pray you let vs go together unto my house, and there let vs more at large debate this mat∣la.
Go we where best likes you.
WOuld God now that I could mete with Phylotimus that unto him I might recount what I have done in the theme which our Master gave vs earwhile, for cō∣ference is comfortable unto scholars, were it no more but to use each others advise and opinion in such things as they shall undertake: and though in compiling of ver∣ses, all company is cumbersome, yet when the same are made and finished, then is it a singular comfort to have a∣companion with whom (as with thy self, (thou moist be bold to confer for judgment. And behold where Phylotimus comes in good time.
Phylomusus I have finished the charge which our instructor gave vs in verse, &amp; I would be glad to have your opinion therein.
Hée tells the tale that I should have told.
I pray you give ear a while, and I will read unto you what I have done therein.
With right good will Phylotimus, read them I pray you.
Give ear then, but first I must thus much declare unto you. I have no more but conveyed in to verse the very brief which our Master delivered vs in prose, adding neither dilatations, allegories, nor examples: and thus it is.
Fear God always whose might is most, &amp; join thy fear with love
Since over all his worthy works, his mercy stands aboue:
In him thou may likewise be bold, to put thy trust always,
Since he is just and promise kéepes, his truth cannot decay.
Give ear unto his Ministers, which do his word profess,
Disdain them not due reverence, their place deserves no less.
And love them eke with hearty love, because they féede thee still,
With heavenly food, whereon thy soul, his hungry hart may fill.
Then next to God true honour give, to Gods anointed king,
For he is Gods lieutenant here, in every earthly thing:
his power comes from heaven aboue, the which thou must obey,
And love him since he doth protect, thy life in peace always.
To Magistrates in their degrées, thou must like duties bear,
Love, honour, and obedience, since they betoken hear,
The majesty: and represent the king him self in place,
And bear his sword, &amp; maintain peace, and déeme each doubtful case.
Be thankful to the country soil, wherein thou hast béene bred,
Defend it always to the death, therefore thy life is led:
And seek by all thy skill and power, to do such deeds therein,
As may thereto some profit yield, so shalt thou honour win.
To elders for their hoary hears, thou shalt do reverence,
And love them since they council thée, in every good pretence:
Defend them eke because they be, as feeble (for their might)
As stout and strong in good advice, against the flesh to fight.
Thy father and thy mother both, with other parents 〈◊〉,
Thou shalt in honour still esteem, for God commands so:
And love them as they tendered thee, in cradle and in kind,
Relieve their age (if it have need) for duty so doth bind.
Thus shalt thou bear thy self always, if y• wilt prosper well
And from thy self if thou desire, all mischief to expel:
Thē keep thy self both chaste &amp; cléen, in déed &amp; eke in thought,
Embrace the good, &amp; leave y• bad, for thou art dearly bought.
Thou art the Temple of the Lord, which must be vnde•…de,
More dere to him thē Tēples are, which mortal mē do build.
And since he cast frō Tēple once, which was but lime &amp; stone
The biers and the sellers both, &amp; bad them thence be gon,
How much more thē will he require, y• y• shuldst keep thy self
Both clean &amp; pure from filthy sin, much worse thē worldly
Be holy thē, &amp; keep thesewords, in mind both night &amp; day (pel•…
For so be sure that god himself, thy stagring steppes will stay.
Thus have you now séene Philomusus, my simple skill in poe∣try, and I pray you tell me your opinion therein.
Surely Phylotimus. I like your verses very well, for they are compendious: and to be plain with you, I have likewise framed a verse or poem upon y• same mat∣la, marie I have some what more dilated and enlarged eve∣rye point, but such as it is, I will likewise crave your opine∣on therein.
With right good will: I pray you read them.
THe man that means, by grace him self to guide,
And so to live, as God may least offend:
These lessons learn, and let them never slide,
•…rome out his mind, what ever he pretend.
Since God is great, and so omnipotent,
as nothing can withstand his mighty power,
he must be feared, least if his wrath be bent:
we perish all, and wither like a flower.
Yet with such fear, we must him love likewise,
Since he hath store, of mercies in his hand:
And more delights, that Sinners should arise,
then still to fall, and neuermore to stand.
In him also, we may be bold to trust,
In him we may, put all our confidence:
For he is true, and of his promise just,
He never fails, the pyth of his pretence.
His Ministers, and such as preach his word,
Because they be, from him (to teach vs) sent▪
We should to them, give ear with one accord▪
And learn their lore, which leads vs to repent.
All reverence, to them shall be but due,
As well because, their office so requires:
As there with all, because there doth ensue,
A just reward, to humble men desires.
And love them eke, with fast and faithful love,
Because they féed, thy soul with heavenly bread:
Which cannot mold, nor from thy mouth remove,
Until thou have, thy fill there on ysed.
Next God the king, doth challenge second place,
And him we must, both honour and obey:
•…ause he hath, (from God aboue) •…is grace,
And is 〈◊〉, on earth to bear the sway.
Yet as with hart, we shall him honour yield,
And must obey, what he commands with fear•…
So love him eke▪ because he is our shield,
And doth protect, our life in quiet here.
Like duties do, to Magistrates belong,
Because they bear, the sword, and represent
The king him self, &amp; righten every wrong,
And maintain peace, with all their whole intent.
Unto the soil, wherein we fostered were,
We must always, be thankeful children found:
And in defence thereof we must not fear,
To venture life, as we by birth •…e bound.
For to that end, our life to vs was lent,
And therewith all, we ought the same to advance.
And do such déedes, as may be pertment.
To profit it, and eke our selves enhance.
The silver hears, of Elders every where,
Claim reverence, as due thereto by right:
Their grave advise, and precepts which we lear▪
Doth challenge love, the same for to requite.
Their weak estate, when force is gon and past,
Doth crave defence, of such as yet be strong:
Since they defend, the force of fortunes blast,
From weakest wits, which harken to their song.
The parents they, which brought vs up in youth,
Must honoured be, since God commands so:
And since thereby, a gracious gift ensewth,
Even lunge to live, in earth whereon we go.
They ought likewise, our hearty loves to have,
As they loved vs, in cradle when we lay:
And b•…ache their sleeps, our sly life to save,
When of our selves, we had no kind of stay.
And if they néede, in age when strength is gone,
We ought r•…ue, the same with all our power:
We should be gréeud, when as wee hear them groan,
And w•…yle their wants, and help them every hour.
And he that thus, can well direct his ways,
And 〈◊〉 himsefe, in chaste and holy life:
Shall please the Lord, &amp; shall prolong his 〈◊〉,
In quiet state, protected still from stry•…e.
Be holy thus, and live in good accord,
Since men one earth, are Temples to the Lord
Thus may you sée Phylotimus, that one self same thing may be handled sundry ways, and now I pray you tell me your opinion, as I have told you mine.
Surely Phylomusus your verses do please me much better then mine own, and very glad I am that wée have eche of vs so well accomplished our duties, nothing doubting but that our instructor will also like the same ac∣cordingly: &amp; now if you think good, let vs go in and present the same, when soever hée shall think good •…o demand it.
With right good will, go you on &amp; I will follow▪
THe Shed is great, and greater then the show,
Which séemes to be, betwéene the good and bad:
For even as wéedes, which fast by flowers do grow•…,
(Although they be with comely colours clad:)
Yet are they found, but seldom swéete of smell,
•…o vices brag, but virtue bears the Bell.
The prancing stéede, can seldom hold his flesh,
The hottest greyhound leaves the course at length:
The finest Silks, do séeld continue fresh,
The fattest men, may fail sometimes of strength:
Such déepe deceiptes, in fair pretence are found,
That vices lurk, where virtue séemes t'abound.
A Spanish trick, it hath ben counted oft,
To séeme a thing, yet not desire to be:
Like humble bées, which fly all days aloft,
And taste the flowers, that fairest are to sée:
But yet at even, when all things go to rest,
A foul cow shard, shall then content them best.
Well yet such bées, because they make great noise,
And are withal, of sundry pleasant hues:
Bee most estéemd, always by common voice,
And honoured more, then Bées of better thewes:
So men likewise, which bear the bravest Show,
Are held for best, and crouched to full lowe.
But virtue she, which dwells in secret thought,
Makes good the séede, what ever be the smell:
Though outward gloss, sometimes do séeme but nought,
Yet inward stuff, (of virtue) doth excel:
For like a stone, most worthy to estéeme,
It loves to be, much better then to séeme▪
Phylautus héere, and Phylosarchus eke,
Did séeme at first, more forward then the rest:
But come to proof, and now they be to séeke,
Their brethren no we, perform their duty best▪
Thus good from bad, appears as day from night,
That one takes pain, that other loves delight.
I Have for my part set al things in re∣dynesse for my Sons departure, and if my neighbour have done the like, they shall depart immediately: but be∣hold where he comes, how now sir? What have you done or dispatched?
Al things necessary for my Sons are in readiness, and you, what have you done?
Doubt you not of my diligence, I am ready were it within this hour, but I would be glad to talk with Moister Gnomaticus, as well to use his advise, as also to have his letters of commendation unto some faithful Tutor at the University: and look where he comes in haste.
Gentlemen I have found you both in good hour, and I would wish you to dispatch the young men your sons with all convenient speed, for the thing which you suspected is doubtless too true.
And how know you?
I will tell you sir, care while as soon as I departed from you, I examined thē al concerning a task which I had given them, and that was to put in verse a b•…iefe memorial of the chief points wherein I did en∣struck them, and I found that Phylomusus and Phylotimus
had done the same very well: on that other side, I found Phil•…us and Phylosarchus to have done there in nothing
of all, and marvelling at their strange and vnaccusto∣med slackenesse, I searched them upon such suspicion as I had conceived, and found that Phylosarchus had spent the time in writing of loving sonnets, and Phylautus had also made verses in praise of Marshiall feats and pol∣lycies.
O God, and have you not punished them accordingly?
As for that sir be you contented, there is time for all things, and presently in my judgment you could devise no punishment which would so much gréeue them as to depart from this City, hereafter I doubt not but to devise the means that both they shall be rebuked as appertains (though they be out of my hands) and the causers of these mischiefs may also chance to hear thereof when they think it quite forgotten, but at this point wée will hold no longer discourse therein, only pre∣pare for your Sons departure to the University.
The chief thing whereupon wée •…tay, hath been both to use your advise, and to desire you that you will take pains to write your letters unto some faithful Tutor there, who may both rebuke them for that which is past, and have care to govern them better in time to come.
Mine advise you have heard already, and touching the letters which you require, they are in manner ready, for I had so determined before you required me, and now if it please you to walk unto my lodging, wée will from thence dispatch them before they hear any fur∣there news of the matter.
Go we with good will.
IT is a wondrous matter to sée the force of love, saving your reverence. I dare say the Lady Lamia since she saw this young gentleman, could never sléepe until her eyes were shut, and there withal she takes such thought, that as soon as ever shée is laid she falls on snorting: and God knows, her chéekes are become as lean as a pistil of pork, and her face as pale as a carnation gilofloure. Fie 〈◊〉, what means shée? Will she cast away her self on this fashion for his sake? She bears but evil in remem∣braunce the good documents of that virtuous old Lady her Aunt. I warrant you it would be long before that 〈◊〉 would dye for love. Tush tush shall I tell you? It is folly to stand meditating of these matters, every man for him self and I for one, these yonkers shall pay for the roast, and Echo by your leave will take part of the cost, but behold where comes doughty Dicke. Howe now Richard what news?
WHat news? mary Phylosarchus hath sent a fat breast of veale, a capon, a dozen of pigeons, a couple of ra∣bets, and a stoup of wine unto the lady Pandarinaes house, and promises to be there at supper to talk more of the matter which you wot of.
And hath he sent no more?
Why is not that well for a footman? By our lady sir, it doth me good to think what cheer I will make with the leauinges, and wot you what? Be you sure hée shall lack no clean trenchers, for as soon as he hath laid
a good morsel before him, Dicke will be at an inch with a clean plate to pro•…er him.
Well said Dicke, and I trow that I will skinke in his cups as fast on the other side, but hear me Dicke, as for these matters neither of vs both will bee to seek, but there are other things to be remembered which are of more weighty con•…oration.
And what I pray thee?
Marie thou must mark whenever he casts a glance at the Lady Lamta, and round him in the ear, saying: beware sir how you look, least her Aunt espy you. And again, if he speak a word wherein he séemeth himsel•… to take pleasure, extol him straight with praise, and say tha•… 〈◊〉 hath to 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 as hee. Likewise 〈◊〉 to whet 〈◊〉 forward, as 〈◊〉 she showed not 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 enough. These and a thousand such other 〈◊〉 must be 〈◊〉 and practised, to make him come off, and whatsoever he gives thee let vs share between vs, for I promise thee Dicke by the faith of a true B•…rgondyance, I will be as true to thee as thy coat is to thy back.
By the mass Echo and that is true enough, for it hath 〈◊〉 so long to my shoulders, that a louse can not well climb the cliffs thereof without a pitchfork in her hand. But I trust moister 〈◊〉 fees will be suf∣•…ient to set both thée and me a float, and make vs as brave as the best.
〈◊〉, as for that matter, if he do not another shall: hee were w•…se enough that would lean altogether unto one 〈◊〉 these days, no no Dicke; be ruled by Echo, and •… warrant thee wée two will •…iue howe soever the world wag•…e, hast thou not often heard, that change of pasture makes fat elves?
Ha ha ha, by God and well said, but who com∣meth 〈◊〉?
Ha? mary it is the old Phylopaes and his neigh∣bore
Phylocalus, what is the matter trow•… 〈◊〉 vs stand aside and hear their talk a while.
Best of all stand close.
SInce time is the greatest treasure which God lends vs, and yet he doth but lend vs the same to the end that we should well employ it, it shall be therefore the boun∣den duty of every man so to bestow the same, as may re∣turn to most commodity and profit. And since your en∣structer héere doth commend your towardness much more, (I fear) then you deserve, it séemeth that wée should have lost time in longer detaining you from the University, &amp; therefore we have prepared (as you sée) to send you thither, trusting that you will there use such diligence, as may be to the profit of your Country and for your own advance∣mentes. The which to perform, I beséech the Father of Heaven that he will always give you the spirit of wise∣dome, and power his grace upon you continually.
Sir it shall become vs to obey whatsoever you command, although in very déed the sudden of our departure séemeth somewhat strange unto me, but it be∣comes me not to be inquisitive thereof, and in déed for mine own part, there is nothing which could better con∣tent me then to go unto the University.
Phylosarchus, you and your Brother shall also accompany my neighbours Sons here to Doway,
for since you have hitherto been brought up together, I think not méete now to part you. Wherefore I charge you that you so behave your self, as I may always hear that you be diligent and studious, since that is the mean to bring you unto estimation.
As touching my diligence, I trust that I have never yet been behind any of my companions, but this sudden of our departure séemeth to procéede of some alteration in your mind, the which I have not deserved. It had been a small matter to have had thrée or four days respitte and leisure to prepare our selves, and to have bid∣den our friends farewell, I think no men's children are thus set out.
As for your preparation, all things are made ready for you, and your friends shall be gladder to sée your return home again learned, then they would have been pensive to depart with you.
My well-beloved, since it pleases your pa∣rentes thus to dispose your journey, I cannot otherwise doe but commend you to the tuition of almighty GOD, whom I beséech now and ever to guide you by his grace, and I exhort you for Gods sake, that you bear well in mind the precepts which I have given you, assuring my self that ruling your actions by that measure, you shall be acceptable to GOD, pleasing to the world, profitable to your selves, and comfortable to your parents.
Sir it is no small grief unto vs to depart from such a loving instructor, but since it becomes vs to obey our parents, we contend not contrary to their commandments, hoping by Gods grace so to employ our time, and so to continue in the trac•…e which you have trodden unto vs, that you shall al∣ways commend our diligence and good will.
Sirha? are the wagons ready? And is their carriage therein placed with all things convenient?
Yea sir all things are dispatched.
Then go your ways with them, and the Father of Heaven be their guide and yours now &amp; ever.
Fellow mine, you must deliver me this let∣la when you come to Doway according to the superscrip∣tion thereof.
It shall be done sir God willing.
The God of peace vouchsafe to bless you now and ever.
And give you grace to become his faith•…ull servants. Amen.
My well beloved, I beséech the Heavenly Father to grant you a prosperous journey, and well to bestow your time now and ever.
Did you not perceive that only the two elder séemed to grudge and repugn? it is a marvelous matter, they two are of an excellent capacity, and able to bear away (in manner) more then can be laid to their charge, but an old saying hath béene Chi tropo abraccia niente teen. Well now, it shall not be amiss if wée consult of our affairs here at home, for as for them take you no doubt, they shall understand at Dowaye, wherefore they were sent so soon from Antwerpe, &amp; because in all things Secrecy is a great furderaunce, it shall be best that we draw our selves apart unto one of your houses, where we may more com∣modiously confer upon that which is to be done here.
I like your counsel well, &amp; when it plea∣seth you let vs go to my house.
With good will, I will accompany you.
FEllow Richard, how like you this gear?
Marie friend Echo, I lykeit but a little.
And why I pray you?
Why quoth you? marie because I am sorry that such a swéete morsel is plucked out of my mouth.
And I am glad that I shall féede my fill on such a swéete morsel, for since there is now no remedy, but these younkers must néeds bee gone, God bee with them. Dyck and Echo, with the Ladies will eat &amp; drink as fréelie for their sake, as if they were here present, and hear me Dyck, if they had béene here, wee should have béene fain to wait on the table, and to bee conten∣ted with their leavings after supper, whereas now wée will be so bold as to sit down with the rest, since we be (as thou well know) of household with that good gen∣tlewoman, and by our Lady, I was never so daintily brought up but I could eat a hot Cap•…n, as well and as sauorly as a cold mess of porage, especially where the bread &amp; drink is good.
All this I confess also to be good &amp; sound doctrine, but yet it gr•…ueth me to think that wee have lost so good customers which might have continued such banquets of∣ten times.
Tush Dyck hold thy peace, if we have not them, we shall have others as good as they, thou may bee sure that as long as Lamia continues beautiful, she shall no∣for be without Suitors, and when the Crows f•…te gro∣weth
under her eye, why then no more ado but ensineuate thy self with such another. Yea and in the mean time al∣so, it should be no bad council, if a man had four or five such haunts in store, that evermore when one house is on sue•…aping, another spit may cry creak at the fire: store is no store as the proverb saith, and now adays the bro∣kerr which hath but one bargain in hand, may chance to wear a thread bare coat.
Say thou so Echo? and I promise thée I had such a liking to this young man, that I was partly in mind to have followed him to Doway.
To Doway? nay get me further from Antwarpe, then I may sée the smoke of the chimneys, and they have good luck. Tush tush, Doway is a pelting town packed full of poor Skollers, who think a pair of cast hosen a great reward, but Antwarp for my money. I tell yée truth, there are not many towns in Europe that main∣teyne more jollity then Antwarpe, but behold where the Markgraue and his officers come. I will be gone, I like not the smell of them.
By the mass neither I, they are going to cast off some bloodhound to séeke a vagabond or some like chase, and let them hunt till their hearts ache, so I bee once out of their sight first.
MUch is the mind of man deceived, which thinks that rulers &amp; officers have the merriest lives, for although it séeme unto some men a swéete thing to cōmaunde, yet whosoever cōpareth the burdē of such cares as are insidēt
unto his 〈◊〉, unto the lightness of the pleasure which cō∣meth by com•…undement, he shall find, that much greater is the payne of that •…no, then the profit of that other. For what pleasure redounded unto an honest mind, to pro∣nounce sentence of death upon an offender? or what pro∣fit arises by punishing of malefactors? but on that other side, what grief wants where a quiet mind is encem∣bred with government? what hour of the day is exempt from toil? in the morning the press of Suitors at the chamber door do break the sweetest sleep, the rest of the forenoon is little enough for the ordinary hours of courts and deciding of contentions, at diner you shall hardly digest your meat without some sauce of com∣plaints or informations, wherein likewise the rest of the day most be occupied: and the night suffyzeth not to fore∣cast what politic constitucions are needful to be devised or renewed, for to meet with the daily practises and in∣uention•…s of lewd versones: So that in fine thine office will neither suffer thee to sléep, nor yield thee contentmēt when thou art awake, neither give thée leave to eat in quiet, nor permit thee to follow thine own profit when thou art fasting. I set a side to declare what trade of other private gains a man must omit when he is in authority: but well said the philosopher, which concluded that we are not borne only for our selves, but part our country also doth challenge. Well goodfellowes, one of you shall go to Saint Mighells, and there at a hows with a red lat∣tic you shall find an old ba•…de called Pandarina, and a young damsel called Lamia, take them both and carry them to the coupe, giving charge that they be safely kept until my further direction be known, and another of you shall s•…ek out Echo the parasite, al men know him well enough, take him and bring him to mée.
IF none other thing were required in a faithful •…∣tor but only that he should teach his s•…hollers grammar or such other sciences, then with lesser travail might wée attain unto perfection, since Gimmal and all the li∣beral Sciences are by traditions left unto vs in such sort, that without any great difficulty the doubt thereof may be resolved: but the School M•…ster which cares •…or none other thing but only to make his scholars learned, •…y in some respect be compared to the horse courser, which one lie cares to féede his horse fat, and never delights to ride him, manage him, or make him handsome: and when such palfryes come to iorneyng, they are commonly so •…∣der proud, that they prance at the first exceedingly, but being put to a long journey or service, they melt they•… own grease and are not able to endure traua•…le. E•…n so y• minds of young men being only trained in knowledge of arts, and never persuaded in points of moral reform∣tion, become often times so proud &amp; so heady▪ that they are carried rather away with a vain imagination of their own excellence, then settled in y• resolutions which might promoote them unto dignity: and wandering so in a vain glorious opinion of their own wit, they do (as it were) foūder and cast them selves in their own halter. Su•…h haw 〈◊〉 philosophers bin in time past, who have so far gone on pilgri•…age in their own pee•…each concei•…s, y• they have not shamed, by a vain show of learning to defend s•…ch pro∣positions, as seem most ridiculous &amp; •…stringed from rea∣son.
Anaxagoras deaf•…ded that snow was black and yet was accounted a philosopher of great gravity &amp; judgment. Pherecydes, prog•…icated y• an earthquake was at hand, because he saw the water drawn out of a fountain, and yet was he the Master of Pythagoras, &amp; accompsed a pro∣•…and philosopher. Protagoras, also affirmed that mē might well affirm all that to bee true, which unto them see∣med true. And infinite others might bee rehearsed, whose opinionate judgements did eclipse the rest of their come∣dable capacity: w•…rupon also hath sprung the damn∣ble opiniō of Atheists. For the mind of man is so heaven∣lie a thing and of such care excellēcie, that it always worcester∣keth and can not be idle. And if with the quickness of con∣ceyt it be tempered by a modest moderation, to have re∣guard unto virtue, and morality, then proves it both goodly &amp; godly: whereas if it run on headlong, only led by natural cō∣siderations of causes, it may prove admirable for some pas∣sing quality, but it seldom is séene commendable or al∣lowed for perfection▪ The consideration whereof hath oftē moved me rather to instruct youth by a pr•…scribed order out of gods own w•…rd, thē to nuzzle thē over déepely in phi∣losophicall opinions. And yet is the mind of young men so prone and prompt to vanity &amp; delight, that all proves not as I would have it. For example behold my late school∣lers, who forgetting their duty and neclecting my pre∣cepts, are fallen into the snares which I least of al 〈◊〉: But surely to confess a truth, I judge that it rather procéeded by the enticements of others, then by their own default. Oh how perilous is lewd company unto young∣men? Well, I have devised yet a mean whereby both the Parasites here may bee punished, and the young man may also be rebuked at 'Doway: In such sort, that their sudden se∣peration may prevent all means to escape it, and yet that one being ignorant of that others punishment, shall never grudge or snuff at the same. And Phylopaes with his neigh∣b•…ur
Phylocalus promised me ear while to put my devise in execution, I long to hear what may be done therein, for still I fear me least the crafty Parasite should get know∣ledge thereof, and so both escape himself and further enfect some other with new devises. But who is this that com∣meth héere in such haste?
Good lord what a world is this? Justice quoth he? mary this is Justice in deed of the new fashion.
And what Justice good fellow I pray thée.
Nay none at all Sir, but rather open wrong, an honest old gentlewoman with her kinswo∣man are commanded to the coupe, only because they suf∣feared an honest young man (and Son to a wealthy Bur∣gher) to sup with them yesternight, and a good fellow which is well known here in the City, and hath dwelt here these seven years past, is also cast in prison because he served them at supper, I have seldom heard of such rigour used, especially since they prosfer good sureties to bée always forth coming until their behaviour be tried.
Well good fellow speak reverently of the Magistrates, peradventure there was some further matter therein then thou art aware of, but when was it done?
Even now sir, I doe but come from thence.
This gear hath been pollitiquely used, and I will go sée how it is come to pass, for these are even those lewd companions which seduced my scholars. Good fellow gramercy for thy tidings.
Why? Do they like him so well? I hold a groat the parties are not half so well pleased therewith, but I will go further until I may declare them unto some pitiful mind, which moved with compassion, may speak unto the Markgraue in their behalf.
THe toiling man which tills, his ground with greatest pain,
Hath not always such crops thereon, as yéeld him greatest gain.
Nor he the fairest house, which lays thereon most cost,
Since many chips of chance may fall, to prove such labours lost.
In vain men build their fortes, with stone with lyme and sand▪
Unless the same be founded first, with Gods own mighty hand.
Though Paule himself did plant, whose travels did not cease,
And then Apollo watered eake, yet God did give increase:
The grace of God it is, whereon good gifts must grow,
And lack of God his grace it is, which makes them lye full lowe.
How often have been séene, both watch and ward well kept,
And yet into the strongest holds, hath treason lightly leapt?
The héediest hen that is, the puttock oft beguiles,
Such wolves do walk in wethers felles, y• Lambs mistrust no wiles▪
The for can preach sometimes, but then beware the géese,
For seldom fails a théeuish hand, but that it takes a fléese.
The devil hath many men, to gather in his rentes,
And every man hath sundry means, to bring vs to their bents.
Some puff vs up with pride, and some set men aloft,
Whereby the most by princely pomp, forget themselves full off.
Some give vs worldly good, and some give beauties grace,
That one bréedes care, y• other lust, which train vs to their trace.
In fine and to conclude, what mind of man desires,
That same the devil can set to sale, which still maintains his fires
Behold Gnomaticus, which learnedly had taught:
His scholars here such good precepts, as were with wisdom
And therewithal did care, to sée them spend their time, fraught:
In exercise that might be good, and clean devoid of crime.
But then behold self love, and sparks of filthy lust,
Which made them straight despi•… his words, &amp; cast thē down in dust.
And now behold he cares, to cure it if he might,
But all too late the water comes, when house is burned quite.
Wherefore who list to learn: Obstaprincipijs.
Since virtue seldom can prevail, where vice so rooted is.
NAy if you play such play fare well altogy∣there, of all weapons I can not abide these silver daggers, I, with a mace quoth you? I will not stand one blow with a mace, they have caught my fellow Echo, but I promise them they shall have good luck if they catch me, you will say that I ought not so to leave Ec∣cho in the briars, in deed we were sworn brethren, but what for that? I know not now how I was advised when I took that oath, but surely as I am now advised my Bro∣there shall dance alone in prison, it is no biding here for me, but to be plain I will trudge after these yenkers to Doway, and try howe the ale tastes in those Coasts, for I like not the drink in Antwerpe, now a days it is ven∣geable bitter, this was a supper in déed, no marvel though Echo and I were so glad of it, but we triumphed before the victory, for whiles we were preparing the banquet, came in an officer and laid hold of the women and Echo all at once: that saw I, and to go. Whether now sirha quote one of the sergeants to me? To buy olives for my M•…stress quote I. T•…e knave catchpole replied nothing but l•…ughed, as who should say, the Supper might be •…ten without sauce well enough, but how mad am I to stand prating here so long? I will be gone, to Dow•…y, to Doway, on mine honesty beheld where the old men come, I mean the Fathers of these yankers, adieu my masters, and say yo•… saw not me.
Even now neighbour Phylocalus I find what it is to be a Father, a Father? Nay a careful father, for I must confess unto you, that since the departure of my Sons I have found no quiet in my thoughts: one while I séeme to doubt least they have been distressed by the way, another while I séeme to doubt least they be eftsoones enticed unto vanities by evil company, and how much the more I think here•…, so much the more I am perplexed with dout. God for his mercy send vs comfortable news, to •…∣fort my sorrowful and doubtful heart.
Truly neighbour, and I am not altogether frée from such imaginations, but whiles I recomfort my self by the hope which I have in those letters that moister Gnomaticus did write, I am straight ways tormented a∣gain with another dout, the which is such, that I may be ashamed to utter it considering mine own solly.
O neighbour kéepe nothing from me for Gods sake.
I will tell you then, I condemn my self of exceeding •…lly, in that I have 〈◊〉 the carriage of those letters to my servant Ambidexter, whose double∣ness I have often tried, and therefore my simple•…city was the greater: and because he is not (long since) 〈◊〉▪ my mind 〈◊〉 some doubt of his •…dellity.
Tree•…lie and not without cause, for he meg•…t have return•…d long 〈◊〉. O what a dolt was I that I sent not Fidus (here) with them also? Surely Phylocalus my mind gives me t•…t he hath 〈◊〉 vs.
Letters, letters, letters.
What cries this good fellow?
Letters from Doway letters from Doway. Hey
Mary this séemeth to be some Carrier which comes from Doway. Comes thou from Doway good fellow?
Yea sir doubtless.
And what letters hast thou?
Nay that can not I tell, there are to many strange names for me to remēber, but here is my register, and so may you know better then I what letters I have in my pack.
Is that the fashion to write in a role a note of their names to whom thy letters are directed?
Yea Sir that is a custom which I and such ignorantfellowes must use, for I cannot read my self. &amp; to show all my letters were folly, but I do always bear such a role in my hand, wherein are written the names of those unto whom my letters (for that time) are directed, &amp; then when I show it, every man can soon tell whether I be for him or not.
A good order surely, and I pray thée let vs sée thy role of names.
Here it is Sir.
To begin with all here is a letter for you neighbour, I trust I shall also find another for my self.
Oh how this comfort my hart, this letter comes from my younger Son, I will break it up.
Lo now I have likewise found one that is directed to me, &amp; it is also ye orthography of my Son Phylotimus, let vs sée what it conteyneth in Gods name.
Who shall pay me for the bringing of them?
Stay a while good fellow, thy pains shall be considered well I warrant thée.
Yea but I may not long tarry, for I must go about and deliver the rest of these letters this night.
All that moist thou doe well enough, they will not be long before they have done, but I pray thée tell me, doest thou not know my Masters Sons?
What should I cal them by their names?
The eldest is named Phylautus, and the youn∣ger called Phylomusus.
I think I know moister Flautus, a tall young gentleman, small in the middle, is he not?
Yes surely he is but slender.
Mary and I saw him in déed at Doway, brave (by the mass) and lusty, there was another gay young gentleman in his company, and a serving man, wot you who? old Ambidexter the best fellow in all Antwerpe, I promise you they are merry and well.
What news neighbour?
Good and bad.
Even so have I in my letter, hold good fellow there is a reward for bringing of these letters, &amp; gramer•…y.
I thank you sir, I return to Doway with in these two days, and if it please you to command me any thing thither I will repair to your house.
I pray thée do, for peradventure I will write by thée.
O God neighbour, how unhappy were wée to send your lewd servant Ambidexter with our Sons? My Son writes unto me that his brother Phyla•…tus &amp; your Son Phylosarchus are seldom from the Bordellos or Taverns, and that Ambidexter is their companion, and means to tarry there with them and to rotor•… no more.
My Son writes so in effect, but hée sée∣meth
to do•…t least they prepare themselves to abandon the University, and to go gadding about the world a little, for he •…teeth that they stay on hope that Echo &amp; certain other of his companions will shortly be with them, other∣myse they had been gone long since. Of himself I have 〈◊〉 news, for he writes unto me that the Palsegraue hath written unto the chancellor of the university for a secretary, and that he stands in clection.
And my Son Phylomusus is entered into the ministry, and hath preached in the University, and means thortly to go unto Geneua, such comfort we have yet unto our calamity. But as every mischief is most case∣lie cured and redressed in the beginning, so if you will foal∣lowe my counsel, we will immediately dispatch Fidus vnfo them, who shall both apprehend Ambidexter and cause him to be punished, and shall also staye our two wandering Somes and bring them home unto vs.
I like your council well, and for the l•…ue of God let it be put in execution immediately, for in such cases nothing is so requisite as expedition.
Hold Fidus take these twenty crowns, and get thee away with all spéede possible, take post horses from place to place, and if they should chance to be gone from Doway before thou come, yet follow them, and never cease until thou have found them, and bring them home unto vs.
Fidus spare for no cost, and hold thée there are twenty crowns more if néede require.
Well Sir you shall sée that no diligence shall want in me to recover them. Will it please you to com∣maund 〈◊〉 any other service?
No, but God send thée good success.
In the m•…an time neighbour let vs go see what is done for the staying of E•…cho, that we may yet prevent all mis∣chief
as much as in vs lies.
I like you well, your wit is very good up∣pone a so•…aine, but behold where moister Gnomaticus com∣meth, by him we shall partly understand what is done.
GNOMATICVS, PHYLOPAES, PHYLOCALVS.
GEntlemen, I have sought you round about the Town, this gear is in manner dispatched, Echo is apprehended with his train and all.
Well, that is some comfort yet to our heavy hearts.
Why have you any cause of heaviness? Tell me I pray you Sir, what mean you to stand thus a∣mased?
My neighbour and I have received news which are both sorrowful and comfortable. Our two elder Sons (by the lewd assistance of my servant whom I sent with them) do bestow their time very wantonly in Doway, and do determine (as séemeth) to be gone from thence very shortly.
To be gon? whether in Gods name?
Nay that hee knows, to seek aduen∣furs abroad in the world by all likelihood, and they stay but for the coming of Echo and his companions.
Well as for their c•…ming thanked be god it is preuen•…ed well enough, but I pray you Sir tell me how know you this to be certainly so?
Why w•… have received letters from our other two Sons, hold•… you here is mine, you may read it.
How now neighbour? what muse you? your wits were good (erewhile) upon the sudden, pluck up your spirits, you shall see by Gods grace Fidus will bring vs good news.
Oh neighbour I am not able to express the sorrows which my heart conceives, alas the goods of the world (although they be gotten with great travail, and kept with great care) yet the loss of them doth never torment a wise man▪ since the same device or brain that could contrive the gathering of them, is able again to renew the like: but the misgouernmēt of a mans children, or to sée them cast away by lack of grace or for lack of vigilant foresight, that only is unto the wisest mind an vnmedicinable wound. Oh that my heart is not able to bear nor to abide the furious assaults of this misfor∣tune.
What man stand up and take a mans heart unto you.
What Sir for the love of God do not take the matter thus heavily, by his grace you shall have no such cause, your neighbour here hath cause of comfort: for I perceive that his Son hath so well spent his time, and so well profited at his book, that •…e stands in elec∣tion to bee Secretary unto Palsegraue.
Yea and his Son Phylomusus is also become a famous preacher, &amp; means shortly to go unto Geneua.
Well then each of you hath some cause of cō∣fort yet, and by the grace of God you shall see that the rest will fall out better then you look for, but if it should not, you must yet arm your self with patience, and give god thanks in all things, since he can send tribulations and vexations when pleases him, and can also send comfort when seems mete to his divine majesty, but what have
you done for the preventing hereof?
Mary we have dispatched my neighbours ser∣uant Fidus to stay both them and Ambidexter, that the one may be punished in example of all others, and that the oath•…r may also be bridled from their headstrong race which they mean to run.
Ambidexter? Why what hath h•… done?
Do you not mark the letter? it séemeth that his only lewdness hath ministered matter unto their misbehaui•…ur, for he is their lodes mate &amp; c•…mpaniō in all places, and hath settled himself with them, meaning never more to turn unto me.
Surely Phylocalus you were not well ad∣uised to sēd such a fellow with your Sons, I pray god he have delivered my letters faithfully, for I did yet never receive answer of them. By whom received you these letters?
By a carrier which trauayleth wéekely to Doway.
And had hee no letters for me? Phylocalus. Surely I cannot tell, for I was •…o glad when I found in his role, letters to me and my neighbour, that I sought no further for any other, but you shall soon find him out if you ask for the Carrier of Doway.
Well by your leave then I will go séeke him, for I long sore to have answer of my let∣ters.
You shall do well, and in mean time my neighbour and I will go unto his house, for I perceive he is not well.
COme on sirha, what acquaintance have you with these Ladies?
Sir I have but small acquaintance with them.
No? What did you there then?
Sir I had waited upon them into the Town that day (as I doe upon divers other for my living) and they prayed me to sup with them in part of recompense for my travail.
Mary sir your fare was good as I understand, and méete for much better personages then either of you. Tell me who provided it? And who paid for it?
I know not Sir, it was enough for me that I knew where it was, I never asked from whence it came for conscience sake.
Well jested fellow Echo, but I must make you sing another note before you and I part. Tell me how came you acquainted with Phylosarchus?
I have known him long since sir, as I know divers other young gentlemen in this Town.
Yea but howe came it to pass that he should have been there at supper that night?
That cannot I tell, neither do I know when∣th•… he should have bin there that night or no.
Yes that you can, did you never sée him there before?
I saw him there once, in other honest company, but what is that to me? Had I any thing to do with his be∣ing there? or doth it follow of necessity that béecause he was there once before, therefore he should have béen there that night also?
No, but you know well enough if you list that he should have béen there, and that the banquet was prepared for him. You were best to confess a truth.
Sir I will not confess that which I know not, neither for you nor for never a man on live. He might have been there for all me, &amp; he might have béene away also if he list, for any thing that I know.
Well, it were but lost labour to talk any longer with you, go take him, and carry him to the mill, and there let him be whipped every day thryse, until he confess the cyrcūstances of al these matters, wee may not suffer the Sons of honest and wealthy Burghers to bée seduced by such lewd fellows, and they to skip skotfrée.
O God how a man may bee deceived (at the first) in a young man? the capacity of this Phylos•…rcus and his yokefellow Phylautus was so quick and so sufficient to re∣ceiue any charge, that a man would have beléeued them to have béene two of the best and towardest young man in this city, and yet behold how 〈◊〉 and vain delight hath carried them to run another race. I have re∣ceyued letters here from my friend Master in Do∣way, who deelareth unto me thereby, that they are suffice∣ently able to conceive any tradition or Science, but there∣withal that they are so geuē over to pleasures &amp; light pas∣times, y• it is in manner unpossible to bridle their •…ādring desires. On that other side he praises the other two f•…r the sobrest young men that ever came under his charge, &amp;
confirms in effect as much as they had writtē for news unto their parents, whereof I have greatly to rejoice, that (having passed through my hands) they are so likely to come unto promotion. And as I rejoice in them, so an•… I most heartily sorry for the two elder, that their misgouern∣meant may become not only a great grief to their parents▪ but also a hinderance to such commendation as I might else have gained by the others: but thus wée may sée, that in every comfort there may grow some •…uiet, and no herb so clean but may be hindered by stinking wéeds that gro•… by it. Well I will go talk with their parents, and if they will be ruled by my council, they shall give them leave a little to see the world, and to follow any exercise that be not repugnant unto virtue, for unto some wits neither correction, nor friendly ad•…tion, nor any other perswasi•…n will serve, until their own rod have beaten them, and then they prove oftentimes (though late) men of excellent qualities. But behold where they come to dis∣charge me of this travail.
HOw now moister Gnomaticus, have you received any letters from Doway?
Yea sir I have received letters from thence.
And what news I pray you?
Even the same in effect that you have re∣ceyued.
Why then I perceive that our two youn∣ger sons have not deceived vs, nor boasted more in their
letters then is true in effect.
No surely, for my friend advertises me that they are two of the towardest young men that ever came in that University, and that he hath great hope to sée them in the end become famous through all the lowe countries.
Well that is some comfort yet, and what writes he of the two •…lder?
Surely he writes as much cōmendation as may be of their capacity, mary there•…al he saith that they bée marvelously bent unto concupiscence, therefore I will tell you mine advise. As soon as they come home, first re∣buke them sharply for the miss bestowing of their excel∣lent wits, and it shall not be a•…e if you add there unto also some correction, that being done, I would wish you to put in their choice what kind of life they will follow, so that it be virtuous, and not contrary to Gods word, and let them sée the world a while: for such fine wits have such an universal desire commonly, that they never prove stayed until the black ox hath trodden on their toes.
Yea mary but how are we sure to recover them again? When as I fear much that they are gone from the University already?
Why doubt you of that?
Because my neighbours Son Phylotimus wrote unto him that he much doubted they would abandon the university, and that they tarried but only to hear from Echo and his accomplices.
Yea, but Echo and the rest are safe enough for coming at them, and behold where comes the ho∣nourable Markgraue with his Officers, you were best to go unto him, and to give him thanks for his great care and diligence.
RIght Honourable, we are bound to yéelde you humble and hearty thanks, for that (as we understand) you have •…sed great pain and diligence in apprehending of a lauds company, who have (as wée sée now) seduced our children, and made them to neglect the wholesome precepts which their faithful instructor had given them.
Surely I have done my best (in discharge of my duty) to apprehend them, and I have examined them also, but truly I can not find hitherto any proof against them, whereby they ought to be punished: and though I desire (as much as you) to sée them condingly corrected, yet with out proof of some offence I should therein commit a wrong. True it is that Echo is known commonly in this Town for a Parasite and a flattering fellow, and the young wo∣man also doth not séeme to be of the honestest, but yet there is no body which will come in and say this or that I have séene or known by her. Shée confesses that Phylosarchus and Phil•…us •…re there one night at a banquet, and that Phylosarchus should have supped there the same night that they were taken, and when I ask her to what end, she an∣swereth that he was a suitor to her for marriage, and for witness brings in her Aunt as good as her self, in the mean time I have no proof of evil wherewith to burden her. And then moister Echo (on that other sid) he 〈◊〉 as stiff as may be, and saith that he knows not whether Phylos•…us should have supped there or not, and for lack
of proof I am able to go no further.
Yea Sir but doubtless that Echo was the first cause of their acquaintance, for the first time that my Son was there, was one afternoon, at which time Echo came to their School Master in your name, and craved liberty for them to come and speak with you.
With me?
Yea Sir doubtless, and when I gave them leave to come unto you, they returned (after two or thrée hours respite) and said that you knew them not when they came there, and that Echo said he had mis∣taken the Scholemaster and the scholars.
Said they thus of me?
Yea truly sir.
And said they that they had béen with me?
Sir I would bée loathe to say so if it were otherwise, and furthermore they séemed angry.
And wherefore I pray you?
For that you gave them no better coun∣tenaunce.
Before God they never came at mée, but this is somewhat yet, for by this means I have good cause to punish Master Echo, and I pray you Master Gnomati∣cus go with me unto him, and you shall •…are what answer he is able to make unto these matters.
With right good will sir I will wait upon you. Worthy gentlemen, you shall do well to consider in the mean time upon that which I last told you as mine opinion.
THe advice which master Gnome•…ticus hath given vs, doth not mislike me altogether, but still my mind is more and more vexed with doubt, least in the mean time (and •…before Fidus can come at them) they fall into some notable mishap by their misgovernment.
You do well to doubt the worst, but if it were so, what remedy but patience? and give god thanks that hath sent to eche of vs such a Son as may become the comfort of our age.
Truly it is in deed a great comfort that either of vs may take in our younger Sons, but if wee have lost the elder (as I fear it much) what a corrosive will that be unto vs? Oh how I feel my fearful heart panting in my restless breast? the Father of heaven vouch∣safe to send me joyful news of Phylautus. O wretched Phylopaes thou are like unto a covetous man, which having abundance is yet never contented, thou art already sure of such offspring as may give thee cause to rejoice, and yet thy mind is not satisfied, unless all things might fall out unto thine own desire, and thou moist be compared to the patiēt which cries out before the Surgeons instru∣meant do •…ouch him, because thou conceiuest in thy imagy∣nation, the dread which torments all thy thoughts. But alas why do I not prepare this wretched corpse of mine, to be a present witness what is become of my Phylautus? I will surely, go provide all things necessary for my jour∣ney, and never give rest unto these bones until I may sée him. I will do so.
What abide Phylopaes, I am a shamed to sée you so imp•…, what man, I am as sorry to hear of
my Sons l•…with behaviour as you are of yours, and 〈◊〉 a truth. I think he will be f•…wnde more fa•…ltie then yours, b•…t be it as God pleases, I have one especial com∣fort, and that is, that I performed my du•…tie in careful∣nes and in foresight (as much as in me lay) so guide him unto promotion, it is commendable in a parent to have a care for his children, but this womanlike tenderness in you deserves reprehention.
Se how every man can give good council, and few can follow it, well I pray you let vs withdraw oureselues to our houses, to see if change of place may al∣so change my melancholic passion.
Go we, I will go to your house for company.
WEll since he is found culpable of thus much, I would but talk with these neighbours of mine (I mean Phylopaes and Phylocalus) and wee will devise such punish∣meant for the malefactors, as may be a terror hereafter to all parasites how they abuse the name of an officer, or en∣tyse the children of any burghers.
Sir I dare say they will be pleased what soever you do therein, and if it so please you I will go un∣to their houses and call them unto you, for mée t•…inkes they are departed since we went. But what is hee that comes here in such haste?
Oh that I could tell where to find my Master.
It is Fidus, God grant he bring good •…idings.
I would rather fie•…d him in any place then at his hows, that he might have some company (yet) which might comfort him, for I dare say these tidings will break his heart with Sorrow.
I will go to him. How now Fidus, what news?
O master Gnomaticus I know no man whom I would rather have presently then you, O Sir I am un∣happy, for I am the messenger of the most woeful news that ever my master received, for gods love accompany me unto him that you might yet by your wisdom assuage the extremity of his grief.
I will willingly bear thée company gen∣tle Fidus, and surely thou deserve great commendation and thanks, as well for thy fidelity, as also for the excée∣ding great spéede which thou hast made, but I pray thée tell vs first (in the presence of the right honourable Mark∣grave) the whole circumstance &amp; effect of these thy news, which thou say are so s•…rowfull.
Sir since you will néedes have it, my master hath lost his eldest Son, and Master Phil•…calus hath lit∣tle better •…en lost his also.
Alas these are heavy news in deed, and must no•…des afflict the poor parents with extréeme grief, for they are unto me (almost) untolerable: but since it be∣comes a christian to bear pa•…ientely what soever God doth provide, I pray thee tell on the whole circum∣stance of every thing as it fell.
I will tell you Sir, I used all the diligence pos∣sible on my way, and yet before I could come at Doway, they were •…rome thence departed.
What all together?
No sir, but Phylomusus was sent by the whole consent of the university unto the Palsgraue to be his se∣cretary, whereas he yet remains in good estimation, and Phylotimus was gone unto Geneua, moved with an earnest zeal and spirit, and there he is in singular commendation and much followed.
and what was become (the mean while) of Phylautus and Phylosarchus? They were still at Doway were they not?
No sir they were gone also, but no man could tell me whether they were gone, and they were gone some∣what before their brethren.
Why then they tarried not for Echo, as the letters imported that they would have done.
O Sir they had advertisement that Echo was apprehended, and that hastened their departure.
And by what means knew they of it?
There was one Dicke Droom a companion of Echoes, which came unto them and told them the whole discourse, whereupon they fled with him immediately.
Such a one was present in déede when Echo was taken, and because mine officers knew him not, nor had any commission to search for him, therefore they suffe∣red him to depart.
Out upon him, I would to God they had made him safe also, for he hath bin the casting away of Phylautus. Phylautus, Phylosarcus, Dick Droom with my friend Ambidex∣la here, went out of Doway together, and because my maize∣ters charge was that I should follow where so ever they went, I followed as fast as I could by enquiry, and with in thrée or four days journey, I heard that Phylosarcus by the help of this good companion Ambidexter had gotten a fair minion for sooth, and stayed with her at Brussels, fron•… whence Phylautus and Dycke Droom departed, and took
their wa•… together up towards Germany, now Phylosarchus and his cari•…ge held their way (as it was said) towards 〈◊〉 W•…n I saw that they were so par•…ed, and that I could not follow both companies at once, I thought best to hold on my way towards the Palsgraues Court, &amp; hoped that by the way I might yet chance to hear of Phy∣•…tus, and in very deed I heard of such a one at sundry places, and at last I heard of him expressedly, for the day before I came to the Palsgraues Court, he was there e•…e∣cuted for a robbery with Dicke Droom, yea even in sight of his Brother, and notwithstanding the favour that hee is in there, such severe execution of justice is there admi∣nistred.
It is a happy common wealth where Iustic•… may be ministered with severity, and where no mediacions or suits may wrest the sentence of the Law.
When I had there recoyued these heavy news, I took letters of dispatch and advertisement from Philo∣mucus to his Father, &amp; crossed over the Country towards Geneua. And long before I came thither Phylosarchus had bin there (for fornication) whipped openly three several days in the market, and was banished the Town with great infamy, notwithstanding that his Brother Phylo∣timus was an earnest suitor unto the congregation for him. When I perceived that none other issue could be had of my travail, I took letters from Phylotimus, and sought no further after Phylosarchus, but thought my duty first to ad∣uertise my moister of the certainty, and by my way home∣wards I overtook this good fellow Ambidexter in such a∣ray as you sée, and have brought him with me to abide such punishment as the worthy Markgraue here and other ma∣gistrates shall think meet for him.
Oh Sir be good unto me and pardon this offence.
Pardon? Nay surely thou rather deserve
death, for it séemeth unto me, that these young men had not so lightly gone astray, had it not bin through the help of thée and such as thou art, such lewd servants as thou art, are the casting away of many toward young persona∣ges, and therefore since thy good hap hath returned thée hither, thou shalt with the rest serve as an example to all servant. But thou can tell what is become of Phylosar∣choose?
He was so sore whipped that I fear hée be dead. I left him in a village five leagues distant from Geneua, so sore that he was not able to stir either hand or foot.
Well Master Gnomaticus, since only this fellow is recovered, I think méete to hold this course of justice, he together with Master Echo shall bee whipped about the Town three several market days, with papers decla∣ring their faults set upon their heads, and afterwards they shall be banished the City, upon payne of death never to return, &amp; Mistress Lamia with her Aunt shall likewise be set on the Cucking stool in public thrée market days, &amp; then to be banished the Town also.
Surely you have well devised, and I beseech you Sir vouchsafe to assist me in comforting the woeful Parents Phylopaes and Phylocalus, who I dare say will be so sorrowful for these tidings, that it shall bee harde to per∣swade them to patience.
It is but a reasonable request, &amp; I will most gladly accompany you, go we together, and thou Fidus hast well deserved thy freedom, with a better turn for thy faithful service in this behalf, and I will be a mean unto thy Moister that thou moist bee considered accor∣dingly.
I thank you Sir. My Masters, the common say∣ing is clap your hands, but the circumstance of this •…∣full tragical comedy considered, I may say justly unto
you wring your hands, nevertheless I leave it to your discretion.
WE live to learn, for so Saint Paule doth teach,
and all that is, is done for our avail:
Both good and bad, may be the wisemans leach,
The good may serve, to make him bear like sail,
The bad to shun, the faults wherein they fail.
Good winds and bad, may serve in sundry sort,
To bring our barks, into some pleasant port.
Who list to learn, what diligence may do,
what humble minds, by studies may attain,
Let him behold, these younger brethren two,
Whose wits at first, did séeme to bee but plain,
Yet as you see, at last they got with payne,
The golden fléese, of grace and cunning Skill,
Before the rest which followed wanton will.
And such as brag, of quick capacity,
Or think the field, is won withouten blows,
Let them behold, the youthful vanity:
O•… th'elder twain, 〈◊〉 •…ncies lightly chose,
To séeke delight, in garish ground that grows.
Yet had by hart, their masters words in hast:
But things soon got, are lost again as fast.
For proof whereof, behold how soon they fell,
From virtues path, to tread in vices tracks,
And therewithal, (I pray you mark it well)
Their falls were foul, they fell upon their backs.
Which gave their bones, so many bruising cracks:
That afterwards, they never rose again•…,
Till shameful death, did end their grievous payne.
Who falls on face, hath elbows hands and all,
To save himself, and therewith eke to rise:
To fall on back, betokens such a fall,
As cannot rise again in any wi•…e▪
For when he falls, his face wide open lies,
To every blow: and cannot fend the same,
Such falls found they, which brought them soon to shame
And in mean while, their Brethren rose as fast,
Much like the snail, which climes the Castle wall,
With easy steppes▪ when soldiers do•…no be cast,
With furious force, and many a headlong fall.
Assaults are hot, but yet if therewithal,
Some temperance, and pollyey be used,
They win those fortes, which hotter heads refused.
I mean but this: you sée the younger twain,
(Because they did in virtue take delight)
They clombe at last (and that with pleasant pain,)
To honours Court, wherein their place was pitch.
You sée again, their Brethren (by delight,
In fi•…thy lust, self love, and such like nio)
Did fall as fast, to shameful death and wo.
You sée the bend, for faithfulness made frée,
You sée the frée, for doubleness disdained:
You sée the whip, the cucke stool, and the trée,
Are thought rewards, for such as vice hath stained:
You s•…e that right, which ever more hath raignd,
And justice both: do kéepe their places still,
To cherish good, and eke to punish ill.
These things my muse, did mean to make you know.
By proof in act, of that which you have séene
These things my muse, thought méete to set in show,
But otherwise, then common wont hath been.
This crystal glass I polished fair and cléene,
For every man, that list his faults to mend,
This was my mind, and t•…s I make an end.

GOd save you every chone both great and
small
Of all degrees: right welcome by you all.
It is now long, at least as seems to me,
Since here such press together I did see.
Would God we might each week through
all the year
See such refort in Churches as is here.
Ye Gentlemen and Ladies, I ye pray
Give ear and harken what I have to say.
To hold your peace alonly I require.
What wean you (some will say) by that desire
We another can nor will away with that.
But yet you must, or else I tell you flat,
That both of vs our labour lose together,
In speaking I, and you in coming hither.
Wherefore I crave but silence at your hand,
My words with patience for to understand.
Both great and small, alonly doe but hear,
And I will tel you strange &amp; wondrous gear.
Wherefore now harken: for the thing is great
Whereof I mind this present time to treat.
You think your selves {per}chaūce to be in place,
Where as you be not, now as stands the case.
For Lausanne is not here, it is far hence.
But yet when need requires, I will dispense
With all of you, that hence within an hour
Eche one may safely be within his bower.
As now this is the land of Palestine.
What? do you wōder at these words of mine?
I say yet further to you, see you well
Yon place? It is the house wherein doth dwell
A servant of the living Gods, whose name
Hight Abraham the righteous man, the same
Whose lively faith hath wō him endless fame.
Anon you shall him tempted see and tried,
&amp; touched to quick with grefs that shall betide.
And lastly you shall see him justified
By faith, for killing (in a certain wise)
Isaac his dearest son in sacrifice.
And shortly, you shall see strange passions:
The flesh, the world his own affections
Not only shall be showed in lively hew,
But, (which more is) his faith shall them subdue
And that it is so, many a faithful wight,
Anon shall bear me record in your sight.
First Abraham, and Sara you shall see,
And Isaac eke shall with them both agree.
Now are not these sufficient witnessings?
Who minds therefore to see so wōdrous thīgs,
We pray him only talking to forbear
And unto vs to give attentive ear,
Assuring him that he shall see and hear
No trifling toys, but grave &amp; wōdrous gear,
And that we will his ears to him restore,
to use them as he lists as before.
ALas my God, and was there ever any,
That hath endured of cōbrāces so many,
As I have done by fleeting too and fro,
Since I my native country did forgo?
Or is there any living on the ground,
Of benefits that hath such plenty found?
Lo how thou make mortal men to see,
Thy passing goodness by calamity.
And as of nought thou made every thing:
So out of ill thou cause good to spring.
Was never wight so blessed at thy hand,
That could thy greatness fully Understand.
Full threescore years and thereto fifteen mo,
My life had lasted now in weal and woe.
According to the course in sundry wise
Appointed by thy heavenly destinies,
Whose will it was I should be bred and borne
Of parents rich in cattle, coin, and corn.
But unto him that richest is in fee,
What joy or comfort could his riches be,
When he compelled, compelled was (I say)
To see, to serve, and worship every day,
A thousand forged gods in steed of thee,
Which midst ye heaven &amp; earth which we do see?
Thou then eftsoones did will me to convey
My self from those same places quite away.
And I immediately upon thy call,
Left Parents, country, goods with gods &amp; all.
Yea Lord, thou know I wist not whither thē
Thou would me lead, nor where me stay again:
But he that follows thee, full well may say,
He goes right: and while he holds that way
He never needs to fear that he shall stray.
In thinking and bethinking me what store
Of benefits I have had erst heretofore,
Of thee my God which ever hast provided
To keep my mind and body undefiled,
And furthermore according to thy word
(Which I took then as spoken but in board)
Hast blist mine aged time aboue all other,
By giving me the happy name of mother.
I am so ravished in my thought and mind,
That (as I would full fain) no mean I find
The least of all the benefits to commend,
Which thou my God doest daily still me send.
Yet sith alone with thee Lord here I am,
I will thee thank at least wise as I can.
But is not yuu my husband whom I see?
I thought he had bin further of from me.
Sara Sara, thy mind I well allow,
Nought hast thou said but I the same avow.
Come on, and let vs both give thanks together
For Gods great mercy since our cōming hither
The fruit thereof as both of vs hath found:
Let praise &amp; thanks from both of us resound.
Contented Sir, how might I better doe,
Than you to please in all you set me too?
And even therefore hath God ordained me.
Again, wherein can time spent better be,
Than in the setting forth of Gods dew praise,
Whose majesty doth show it self always,
Aboue and eke beneath before our eyes?
Of truth no better can a man devise,
Than of the Lord to sing the excellence,
For none can pay him other recompense
For all his gifts which daily he doth send,
Than in the same, his goodness to commend.
Come on then, let vs now begin to sing
with hearts in one accord,
The praises of the sovereign heavenly king
our only God and Lord.
His only hand doth give vs whatsoever
We have, or shall hereafter have for ever.
It is alonly he that doth maintain
the he auen that is so hie,
So large in compass and in space so mayne:
and eke the starry sky,
The course whereof he stablisht hath so sure,
That ay withouten fail it doth endure.
The skorching heate of summer he doth make,
the harvest and the spring:
And winters cold that makes folk to quake,
in season he doth bring.
Both wethers, fair, and foul, both sea &amp; land,
Both night and day be ruled by his hand.
Alas good Lord! and what are we that thou
did choose and entertain
Alonly vs of all the world, and now
doth safely vs maintain
So long a time from all the wicked rowtes
In town &amp; coūtry where we come throughouts
Thou of thy goodness drewest us away
from places that are given
To serve false gods: and at this present day
hast wandringly vs driven,
To travel still among a thousand dangers,
In nations unto whom we be but strangers.
The land of Egypt in our chiefest need
thou midst to have a care,
Thy servants bodies to maintain and feed
with fine and wholesome fare,
And in the end compelledst pharao,
Full sore against his will, to let vs go.
Four mighty Kings that were already gon
away with victory,
I overtook and put to flight anon
before they could me spy.
And so I saw the fields all stained red
With blud of those which through my sword lay dead.
From God received well this benefit:
For he doth mind vs still,
As his dear friends in whom he doth delight,
and we be sure he will,
Perform vs all things in dew time and place,
As he hath promised of his own free grace.
To vs and unto our posterity
this land belongs of right,
To hold in honour and felicity
as God it hath behight,
And we believe it surely shall be so,
For from his promise God will never go.
Now tremble you ye wicked wights therefore,
which sowed are so thick
Throughout ye world, &amp; worship now such store
of gods of stone and stick,
which you your selves with wicked hāds do carve,
To call upon and vainly for to serve.
And thou O Lord whom we doe know to be
the true and living God,
Come from thy place, that we may one day see
the vengeance of thy rood
Upon thy foes, that they may come to nowght
With all their gods devised through wicked thought.
Go to my Sara, that great God of ours
Hath blist vs, to the intent that we all hours
Should for his gifts which he alone doth give,
Him serve and praise as long as we doe live.
Now let vs hence and chiefly take good heed,
We hazard not our son to much in deed,
By suffering him to haunt the company
Of wicked folk, with whom you see we be.
A new made vessel holds long the sent
Of that that first of all is in it pent.
A child by nature ne'er so well disposed,
By bringing up is quite and clean transposed.
Sir, I doe hope my duty for to doe,
Therefore the thing that we must look unto,
Is that Gods will may be fulfild in him.
Right sure I am we shall him weeld so trim,
And that the Lord will bliss him so: as all
Shall in the end to his high honour fall.
I go, I come, I travel night and day,
I beat my brains, that by no kind of way
My labour be in any wise misspent.
Reign God aloft aboue the firmament,
The earth at least to me doth wholly draw,
And that mislikes not God nor yet his law.
As God by his in heaven is honoured:
So I on earth by mine am worshipped.
God dwells in heaven, and I on earth likewise:
God makes peace, and I doe wars devise.
God reigns aboue, and I doe reign below:
God causes love, and I doe hatred sow.
God made the starry skies and earthy clodds:
I made much more: for I did make ye gods.
God served is by Angels full of light:
And doe not my fair Angels glister bright?
I trow there is not one of all my swine,
Whose grooyn I make not goldlike for to shine
These lechours, drunkards, gluttons ouerfedd,
Whose noses shine fair tipped with brazil red,
Which wear fine precious stones upon their
Are my upholders &amp; my Cherubins. (skins,
God never made a thing so perfect yet,
That could the makers full perfection hit.
But I have made, (whereof I glory may)
A thousand worser then my self far way.
For I believe and know it in my thought,
theirs but one God, &amp; that my self am nowght.
But yet I know there are whose foolish mind
I have so turned quite against the kind,
That some (which now is commō long agony)
Had lever serve a thousand gods than one▪
And others have conceived in their brain,
That for to think there is a God is vain.
Thus since ye time ye man on mowld was made,
With happy luck I followed have this trade
And follow will (come loss or come there gain)
So long as I this habit may maintain,
I say this habit wherewithal as now
The world is unacquainted: but I vow
The day shall come it shall be known so rife,
Of every wight, both child, yea man, and wife,
That another town nor village shall scope free
From seeing it to their great misery.
O cowl, o cowl, such mischief thou shalt wurk,
And such abuse shall underneath thee lurk
At high noon days: O Cowl, o Cowl I say,
Such mischief to the world thou shalt convey,
That if it were not for the spitefulness,
Wherewith my hart is frawghted in excess:
Even I my self the wretched world shall few,
To see ye things that shall through thee insew.
For I, than who, of all none worse can be,
Am made yet worse by putting on of thee.
These things shall in their time without all fail
Be brought to pass. As now I will assail
One Abraham, who only with his race
Withstands me, and defies me to my face.
In deed I have him often times assailed:
But ever of my purpose I have failed.
I never saw old fellow hold such tack.
But I will lay such load upon his back,
That (as I hope) ere long I shall him make
A son of mine. I know that he doth take
The true Creator for his only hold
To trust unto: and that doth make him bold.
In deed he hath alliance with the true
Creator, who hath promised him a new
Right wondrous things, according whereunto
He hath already done, and still will doe.
But what for that? If steadfastness him fail
To hold out still: what shall his hope avail?
I trow I will so many blows him give,
That from his hold at length I shall him drive.
His elder son I fear not: and the other
Shall hardly scope these hands of mine: ye mother
Is but a woman: as for all the meynie
That serve him, they be simple sowles as enie
Can lightly be: there is a ragged stowt
Of silly shepherds, another skilled nor stowt
Enough against my wily sleights to stand.
But hence I will and work so out of hand,
To have them, that unless I miss my mark,
Anon I will deceive their greatest Clarke.
What ever thing I doe or say,
I weary am thereof streit way,
How meet so ever that it bee,
So wicked nature reigns in me.
But most of all it me mislikes,
And to the hart with sorrow strikes,
That seeing God is never tired
In helping me, yea vndezyrde:
I also likewise doe not strain
My self, vnweerie to remain,
In dew and true acknowledgment
Of his great mercy to me sent,
As well with mouth as with my hart.
Abraham, Abraham.
Lord here I am.
Go take thine only deerebeloued son,
Even Isaac, and bring him to the place
which hight ye myrrh of God: which being done,
Slay him in sacrifice before my face:
And burn him whole upon a hill which I
Will show thee there, go hye thee by and by.
What! burn him! burn him! well I will do so:
But yet my God, the thing thou putst me to
Seems very strange and irksome for to be:
Lord, I beseech thee, wilt thou pardon me?
Alas, I pray thee give me strength and power,
To doe that thou command me this hour.
I well perceive and plainly now doe find,
That thou art angry with me in thy mind.
Alas my Lord I have offended thee.
O God by whom both heaven &amp; earth made be,
With whom intend thou to be at war?
And wilt thou cast thy servant down so far?
Alas my son, alas, what shall I doe?
This matter as kes advised looking too.
Hie time it is Sirs as I trow
We hie vs packing on a row
To our companions where they be.
Even so thinks me.
For if we all together were
We should the lesser need to fear.
How Sirs, I pray you tarry. Will
You leave me so behind you still?
Good child abide you there,
Or else our moister your father
And our mistress your mother may,
Be angry for your going away:
The time will come by Gods good grace,
That you shall grow and prove a pace:
And then ye shall perceive the charge,
Of keeping flocks in fields at large,
What dangers come from hill and dale,
By ravening beasts that lye in stale,
Among the coverts of the wood,
To kill our cattle for their foodd.
And doe ye think I would,
Go with you though I could,
Before I knew my fathers mind?
In deed a child of honest kind,
And well brought up, ought evermore
His fathers and his mothers lore
In all his doings to obey.
I will not fail it (if I may)
To die therefore: but will ye stay
A while until I run and know
My fathers will?
Yea, therefore go.
O happy is the wight
That grounds him self aright
On God, and makes him his shield:
And lets the worldly wize,
Which look aboue the skies,
Go wander where they list in field.
No rich, no poor estate,
Can puff or yet abate,
The godly and the faithful hart:
The faithful goes free
Although he martred be
A thousand times with woe and smart.
The mighty God him leeds,
In chiefest of his needs,
And hath of him a special care,
To make him to abide,
Even at the point to slide,
When worst of all he seems to fare.
Whereof a proof we see
Our moister well may be:
For why, the more him men assail
And urge on every side:
Less fear in him is spied,
And less his courage doth him fail.
He left his native soil,
Hard famine did him foil,
Which drove him into Egypt land,
And there a king of might,
Took Sara from his sight,
Unjustly even by force of hand.
But streit on suit to God,
The King through Gods sharp rod,
Did yield to him his wife streit way,
And abraham never stayed,
But as the King him prayed,
Departed thence without delay.
And during this his flight,
He grew to so good plight,
That Loath to part away was fine:
Because, as stood the case,
To little was the place,
To keep the flocks of both them twain.
There fell a sudden jar
Between nine Kings through war,
Wherein five kings were put to flight,
And Loath him self, with all
His goods both great and small,
Away was carried clean and quite.
Our faithful Moister streit,
On news of this conceit,
Made fresh pursuit immediately:
And having but as then
Three hundred eighteen men,
Did make the enmies all to fly.
And of the reskewd pray
The tenth to the priest did pay.
And having done each man his right,
Returned home anon,
With commendation,
For putting so his foes to flight.
But another son he had,
Nor daughter him to glad.
Which thing when Sara did perceive,
She put her maid in bed,
To serve her husbands sted,
Because her self could not conceive.
So Agar bare a son
A thirteen years outronne,
Whose name is called Ismael.
And to this present day,
Our masters goods are ay
Increased passing wondrous well.
Then for the covenants sake
Which God him self did make,
Between him and our moister dear,
Our moister and we all,
As well the great as small,
At once all circumcised were.
My fellows: God hath showed himself to vs,
So good, so loving and so gracious,
That I can never any thing yet crave
No small no great, but that I much more have,
Than I desire. I would have gone with you
(As you doe know) to see full fain: but now
Behold my father comes here at hand.
But it behooves vs to understand,
That if God will vs any thing to doe,
We must streyt ways obedient be thereto,
And another strive nor speak against his will.
In deed Sir so I think and purpose still.
But yet I pray you think not strange, that I
Doe take this matter some what heavily.
A good hart (wife) doth show it self at need▪
Thats true: ▪ therefore lets be sure in deed,
It is Gods will and mind we should doe so.
We have but this child only and no mo
Who yet is weak: in him stands all the trust
Of all our hope, with him it falls to dust.
Nay rather in God.
But give me leave to say.
Can ever God his word once said unsay▪
No no, and therefore be you out of dowt,
That God will keep ▪ prosper him throughout.
Yea, but will God have vs to hazard him?
No hazarding it is where God doth guard him.
My hart misgiueth some mishap
I another dread nor dowt of any hap.
There is in hand some secret enterprise.
What ere it be, it doth from God arise,
At least, if what it were you wist.
I shall ere long, if God so list.
So long away the child will near abide.
For that our God will well enough provide.
Yea but the ways now full of dangers are.
Who dyes in following God needs never care.
If he should dies, ē farewell our good days.
God doth foresett men's dying times always.
It were much better here to sacrifice.
What ever you think, God thinks otherwise▪
Well then Sir, sith it must be so
The grace of God with both you go.
Adieu my son.
Good mother eke adieu.
My son obey thy father still,
And God thee save: that if it be his will
Thou may in health return right soon again.
My child I can not me refrain
But that I needs must kiss the now.
Good mother, if it should not trouble you,
I would desire you one thing ere I went.
Say on my son: for I am well content
To grant thee thy request.
I humbly doe you pray
To put this grief away.
These tears of yours refrain,
I shall return again
(I hope) in better plight,
Than now I am in sight:
And therefore stay this grief and wo.
My fellows: we have now to go
Good six days journey ere we rest:
See that your carriages be pressed
And all the things that we shall need.
Sir, as for that let vs take heed.
Doe you no more but only show your will.
On then: and God be with you still.
The mighty God who of his goodness ay,
From time to time even to this present day,
So kind and gracious unto vs hath be,
Be helpful still both unto you and me.
Deal wisely howsoever that you fare:
I hope this journey which we going are
Shall be performed happily.
Alas alas full little wot I
When I shall see you all again.
The Lord now with you all remain.
Good mother God you guide.
Farewell.
God guide, and keep you through his grace.
You on Sirs, let vs hence apace.
But is not this enough to make me mad,
That whereas I make every man to gad,
And all the world to follow after me,
If they my finger doe but hild up see,
And there withal set all things on a roar:
Yet for all that I never could the more
This false old fellow bring unto my lure,
For any thing that yet I can procure?
Behold he is departed from this place
Gods will full bent toby in every case,
Although the matter never be so strange.
But yet it may be that his mind will change,
Or that he shall him sacrifice in deed,
And so he shall if I may help him speed.
For if he doe, then Isaac shall be dead,
Whereby my hart shall be delivered
Of that same fear least God in him fulfil,
The threat whereby he promised me to spill.
And if he change his mind, then may I say
The gold is won. for may I once so play
My part, as for to make him disobey
Almighty Gods commandment, or rapine:
Then were he banished from the grace divine.
That is the mark whereat I always shoot,
Now hye thee Cowl, set forth the better foot:
Lets run apace, and by some cunning drift
Foil him in field, or put him to his shift.
My children: this is now the third day
That we have travelled making little stay.
Here must you tarry: as for me, I will
With Isaac go yet further onward still,
Unto a place from hence yet distant more
Which God almighty showed me before,
Where I must pray and offer sacrifice
As he requires. Wherefore in any wyze
Abide you here, and stir not hence. But thou
Son Isaac shalt go with me as now:
For God requires in this behalf thy presence.
Sir, sith you forbid vs we will not hence.
This bundle unto him betake,
And I the fire and knife will take.
We shall (God willing) come again right soon
But in the mean while, wot ye what to done?
Pray ye to God both for your selves and vs.
Alas, alas, was never wight, ywus.
We will not fail.
That had such need as I.
Well Sirs, I say no more but God be wy.
And with you too.
It greatly mazeth me,
And me likewise.
And me too, for too see
Him so dismayed which hath so stoutly borne
All haps that have befallen him heretooforne.
To say he is afraid of war
Debate, or strife, or any jar
It were no reason: for we know,
Abimelech the king did show
Such honour to our maisterward,
That he not only had regard
To visit him, but eke did knit
A leage with him which lasts yet,
And as for household matters, what
Can he desire which he hath not?
He lives in outward peace and rest:
But age perchance doth work unrest.
Of zunnes he hath but only one
But in the world mo such are none.
His cattle thryue in such great store,
As God doth seem to give him more,
Than he him self can wish or crave.
Nothing ye can so perfect have,
But always somewhat is amiss.
I pray to God him so to bliss,
As soon to cure this his disease.
Amen, say I, if it him please.
Sure I suppose how ere the case doth stand
He hath this time some weighty thing in hand.
As howge as is the world we see
With all the things that in it be,
Yet nothing is so strong and sure,
That can for ever here endure.
Almighty God which all maintains,
Can nothing spy that ay remains,
Except him self: all else each one
Endure short time, and soon are gone.
The sun with bright and burning beams
Goes casting forth his cheerful gleams,
As long as day in sky doth last.
Then darksome night doth over cast,
All kind of things both foul and fair,
With coalblack wings aloft in ayre.
And of the moon what shall we say,
Which never keeps at a stay?
Sometimes with horns she doth appear:
Sometime half 〈◊〉: now thick, now clear:
Anon with round and fulsome face
The night she fro the sky doth chase.
The twincling stars aboue on hye
Run rolling round about the sky,
One while with whether fair and clear,
Another while with lowering cheer.
Two days together match, and ye
Them like in all points shall not see.
The one doth pass more swift away,
The other longer while doth stay.
The one, as though it did vs spite,
Bereaves vs of the cheerful light:
The other with his color bright
Doth joy our hart and dim our sight.
One burns the world with heate from skies,
With frost and cold another dyes.
With purple, greene, blew, white, and red
The earth earwhile is overspread.
Anon a blast of nipping cold
Makes freshest things look sear and old.
The rivers with their waters moist
Aboue their banks are often hoist,
And pass their bounds with rage so far,
That they the plowmans hope doe mar.
And afterword they fall within
Their channels, ronning lank and thin.
And therefore whosoever doth him ground,
On awght that in the world is fownd,
Beneath or in the starry skies,
I say I count him nothing wyze.
What then of him is to be said,
Whose hope on man is wholly stayed?
Each living creature subject is
To endless inconveniences:
And yet among them all, the sun,
In all his course which he doth run,
Beholds not a feebler wight,
Than man is in his chiefest plight.
For he that is most wyze and stowt,
Is so besieged round about,
And so assailed with vices strong,
That often he is thrown along.
What a fool is he, whose hart
Thinks to be free from wo and smart,
So long as he doth live on mowld?
But if that any creature would
Be sure taccumplish that desire:
He must go set his hart more higher.
Whereof our moister rightly may
A good example bee that way.
The best I think that can be now espied,
Is for too draw vs one aside,
That each of vs may by him self alone
Pray God to send our moister which is gone,
A safe return with gladness. you.
I will not be behind I trow.
My father.
Alas a poor father am I.
Sir here is wood, with fire, and knife ready:
But as for sheep or lamb I see none here.
For you to offer.
O my son most dear,
God will provide. Abide thou here I say,
While I to God a little while doo pray.
Good father go: but yet I pray you show
Me whereupon this grief of yours doth grow,
Which doth (I see) so greatly you appal.
At my return, my son, thou shalt know all.
But in the mean time pray thy self here too▪
It is good reason that I should so doe.
And therewithal I will each thing address,
That first this wood may be in readiness.
This billet first shall gin the order here:
Then this, then that shall close together near.
Thus all these things are ready now and pressed.
My father shall provide for all the rest.
And now O God I will aside retire,
To pray to thee, as reason doth require.
The more we live, the more we see, alas,
What life it is that in this world we pass.
Was never woman borne upon the mowld,
That for his husband or his issue could
Herself with me in happiness compare.
But yet I have endured such grief and care
These last three days since they went hence, yt well
I am not able for my life to tell,
Which of the twain hath greater to me been,
The former joy, or present peyne I men
Which I have felt these last 3. days, since they
Have bin away: for another night nor day
Have I tan rest, because my mind doth run
On nothing but my husband and my son.
And of a truth I was to blame as tho,
In that I suffered them away to go,
And went not with them. Of the six days three,
Alas but three my God, yet passed bee,
And yet three mo my patience still must prove.
Alas my God which see me from aboue,
Both outwardly and inwardly always,
Uowtsafe to shorten these three years I say,
For were they much more shorter than they be,
They be not days, but months &amp; years to me
My God, thy promise putts me out of dowt:
But if thou long delay the falling out,
I fear I shall have need of greater strength,
To bear the peyne in holding out at length.
Wherefore my God, now grant thou unto me
I may with joy right soon my husband see,
And eke mine Isaac in mine arms embrace
Returned in health and safety to this place.
O God my God, thou see my open hart,
And of my thoughts thou see each secret part,
So that my case I need not to declare.
Thou see, alas thou see my woeful care.
Thou only can me rid of my disease,
By granting me (if that it might thee pleaze)
One only thing the which I dare not crave.
An other song then this yet must we have▪
What? what? and is it possible that Gods
Behest and deed should ever be at odds?
Can he deceive? even to this present day
He hath kept towche in all that he did say.
And can he now unsay his word? no, no.
But yet it would ensew he should doe so,
If he my son should take away as now.
What say I? O my God, my God, sith thow
Dost bid me, I will doe it. Is it right
That I so sinful and so wretched wight,
Should fall to scanning of the judgements
Of thy most perfect pure commandments?
My case goes ill. O Cowl we must yet find
Some other way tassault this hagards mind.
It maybe that I have imagined
Amiss: the more it is examined,
The more the case seems straūge. It was per∣chance
Some dream or wicked feend that at a glance
Did put this matter in my head for why,
So cruel offerings please not God party.
He cursed Caine for killing of his brother:
And shall I kill mine Isaac and none other?
No no. Never doe so.
Alas alas what meant I so to said?
Forgive me, Lord, and pluck me back again
From this lewd race wherein my sin began go:
O Lord my God deliver me from this wo.
This hand of mine shall certainly him smight.
For sith it is thy will, it is good right
It should be done. Wherefore I will obey.
But I will keep you from it if I may.
So doing I should make my God vntrew.
For he hath told me that there should insew,
So great a people out of this my son,
As over all the earth should spread and run.
And therefore if that Isaac once were kilt,
I see not how this covenant could be hild.
Alas Lord, hast thou made him thē for nowght?
Alas Lord, is it vain that thou so oft
Hast promised me such things in Isaake,
As thou wooldst never doo for others sake?
Alas and can the things repealed be,
Which thou so oft hast promised unto me?
Alas and shall my hope have such an end?
Where should then mans hope &amp; trusting tēd?
The sum of all I minded to have said,
Is that to thee I heartily have prayed,
To give me issue: hoping that when thow
Had granted it, I should have lived now
In joy and pleasure: but I see full well,
The contrary to my desire befell.
For of my sons, which were no mo but twain,
To put away the one my self was fain:
And of the other (O hard extremity)
Both father I, and tormentor must be,
Yea tormentor, yea tormentor, alas.
But art not thou the self same God, which was
Contented for too here me patiently,
When I did pray to thee so instantly,
Even in the mitts of all thy wrath and ire,
When Sodom thou did mind to burn with fire?
Now then my God and King, wilt thou say nay,
When for my self I unto thee doe pray?
Whom I begat him must I now deface.
O God, at leastwise grant me yet this grace.
Grace? in my book that word I never found.
Some other man my son to death may wound
Alas my Lord, and must this hand of mine
To such a stroke against all kind decline?
How will it towch his woeful mother near,
Whē of his violent death she needs shall here?
If I allege thy will for my defence,
Who will believe that thou wilt so dispense?
And if men doe not credit it: what fame
Will fly abroad to my perpetual shame?
I shall be shunt of all men more and less,
As pattern of extremest cruelnesse.
And as for thee, who will unto thee pray,
Or on thy word and promise ever stay?
Alas, may these whore hears of mine abide
The sorrow that is likely to betide?
Have I already past so many dangers,
Have I so travelled countries that are straūgers,
In heate and cold, in thirst and hunger still,
Continewally obedient to thy will:
Have I so long time lived lingringly,
Now in the end to dye unhappily?
O hart of mine, clyue, clyue, asunder clyue:
And linger here no longer time alive.
The speedier death, the lesser is the grief.
Now is he down, if God send no relief.
What said I? what intend I? O my God
Which did create and make me of a clod,
Thou art my Lord, and I thy servant true.
Out of my native country thou me drew.
How oftentimes hast thou assured me,
That unto mine this land should lotted be?
And when thou gave me Isaac, did not thow
Most faithfully and constantly avow,
That out of him such offspring should be bred,
As should this land throughout all overspread?
Then if thou wilt needs take him now away,
What should I thereunto against thee say?
He is thine own, I had him of thy gift.
Take him therefore. Thou know best how to
I know thou wilt to life him rayze again,
Rather than that thy promise should be vain.
Howbeit Lord, thou know I am a man,
No good at all or doo or think I can.
But yet thy power which ay is invincible,
Doth to belief make all things possible.
Hence flesh, hence fond affections every chone:
Ye humane passions let me now alone.
Nothing to me is good or reasonable,
Which to Gods will is not agreeable.
Well, well, then Isaac shall dye: and wee
What will insew thereof shall after see.
O false old hag, thou makste me soft to groan.
See where my son walks up &amp; down alone.
O silie child! O wretched men, death oft
Within our bosoms lodges him full soft,
When furthest of we take him for too be.
And therefore right great need always have we
To lead such life, as if we fain would die.
But wotest thou my son (alas) what I
Intend to say?
What pleases you good father.
Alas, that word doth kill my hart the rather.
Yet must I better courage to me take.
Isaac my son: alas my hart doth quake.
Father, me thinks that fear hath you dismayed.
O my dear child: it is as thou hast said.
Alas my God.
Sir if it may you pleaze,
Be bold to tell me what doth you disease.
Ah my dear child, wist thou what thing it were
Mercy good Lord, thy mercy grant vs here.
My son my son, behold thou this lyne.
This wood, this fire, and eke this knife of mine?
This gear my Isac serves all for thee.
Of God and nature enmie though I bee:
Yet is this thing so hard a case to see,
That even almost it is a grief to me.
Alas my son.
Alas my father dear,
Upon my knees I humbly pray you here,
My youthful years to pity, if you may.
O of mine age the only staff and stay,
My darling, O my darling, fine would I
That I for thee a thousand times might dye:
But God will have it otherwise as now.
Alas my father, mercy I kry you.
Alas alas I want both tongue and hand,
Against you in mine own defence to stand.
But see, but see my tears for natures sake,
None other fence I can or will now make
Against you. I am Isaac, none other
But Isaac, your only by my mother.
I am your son that through your self hath life
And will you let it be bereft with knife?
Howbeit, if you do it to 'hey the Lord,
Then on my knees I humbly doe accord,
To suffer all that ever God and you,
Shall think expedient for too doo as now.
But yet what deeds, what deeds of mine deserve
This death O God, my God my life preserve.
Alas my son, God hath commanded me
To make an offering unto him of thee,
To my great grief, to my great grief and pine,
And endless wo.
Alas poor mother mine▪
How many deaths shall my death give to thee?
But tell me yet, my killer who shall be?
Who? my dear son! my God my God grant grace,
That I may die now presēt in this place.
O father mine.
Alas, no whit that name
Agrees to me. yet should we be to blame
If we obeyed not God.
Sir I am ready.
Who would have thought he would have bin so stedie?
Now then my father, well I see in deed
That I must dye. Lord help me at my need.
My God, my God, now strengthen thou my mind
And at thy hand such favour let me find,
That of my self I may the upper hand
Obtain, against this sudden death to stand.
Now bind me, kill me, burn me, I am pressed
To suffer all, sith God so thinks it best.
Ah what a thing, a what a sight is here!
Mercy good God, now for thy mercy dear.
Thou Lord hast made me and created me,
Thou Lord upon the earth hast lodged me,
Thou hast me given ye grace to knowledge thee:
Yet have I not so well obeyed thee
My Lord and God as duty doth require:
Which me to pardon loud I thee desire.
And whereas I to you my Lord and father
Have not always such honour yielded rather,
As your great kindness did deserve to have:
Therefore forgiveness humbly I doe crave.
My mother: she is now a great way hence,
Wherefore my God vowtsafe his thy defence,
And so preserve his through thy special grace,
As she no whit be trubbled at my case.
Alas, I go to deep and darksome night:
Farewell as now for ay all worldly light.
But sure I am I shall at Gods hand find
Far better things than these I leave behind.
Good father, I am ready at your will.
Was never child that spake with better skill.
I am ashamed, and therefore take my flight.
Alas my son, before thou leave this light
And that my hand doe give thvnkindly blow,
Upon thy mouth let me a kiss bestow.
Isac my son, let this same arm of mine
Which must thee kill, embrace this neck of thine
With right good will and hearty thanks.
Ye skies the great gods work ay glistering
in our eyes
Which well have seen how God (who still is true)
Did me with fruit by Isaac here endow:
And thou O land five times to me behight,
Bear witness that my fingers doo not smight
This child of mine for hatred or for vengeance,
But only for to yield my dew obeisance,
To that great God which hath created me,
And all the things that live or move or be:
Who saves the good that put in him their trust,
And stroyes the bad that serve their wicked lust.
Bear witness that I faithful Abraham,
Through gods great goodness still so steadfast am
As notwithstanding all that humane wit
Can say or think, to make me now to flit:
In one belief I ever doo remain,
That not one word of God doth happen vain.
But now my hand, high time it is that thow
Doo gather strength to execute thy vow.
That by thy killing of mine only son,
Thy deadly stroke may through my hart eke run,
What doe I here?
Alas my father dear!
A, a, a, a.
I am at your will.
Am I now well? your pleasure then fulfil.
Did ever man so piteous case yet find?
Was ever any friendship yet so kind?
And was there ever yet so piteous case.
I dye my son, I dye before thy face.
Away with all this fear of yours I pray.
Will you from God yet longer time me stay?
Alas who ever yet so stowt a mind
Within so weak a body erst did find?
Alas my son I prey thee me forgive
Thy death. It kills me that thou may not live.
Abraham, Abraham.
My God here I am.
Into the sheath put up thy knife,
And see thou doe not take his life,
Nor hurt the child in any wise.
For now I see before mine eyes,
What love thou bear to the Lord,
And honour unto him auord,
In that thou dost so willingly
Thy son thus offer even to dye.
O God.
O God.
O Lord a man may see.
How good it is obedient for to bee
To thee: the case is fitly furnished.
I will go take him tied by the head.
O Abraham.
Lord here I am.
Thus saith the Lord, I promise thee
By my eternal majesty,
And by my Godhood: sith that thow
Hast showed thy self so willing now,
Me to obey, as to forbear
Thine only Isaks life: I swear,
That mawgre Satan to his face,
I will thee bliss and all thy race.
Considrest thou the lighsom sky,
And on the shore the gravel dry?
I will increase thine offspring more,
Than stars in heaven, or sand on shore.
Their enmies they shall overcome,
And of thy body one shall come,
By whom my blissing shall spread forth
On all the nations of the earth.
By him the treasures of my love
And mighty power, shall from aboue
Be sheaded down on all mankind,
Because thou hast obeyed my mind.

AS Gāmer Gurton, with many a wide styche
Sat passing &amp; patching of Hodgher mās briche
By chance or misfortune as shes her grare to••
In Hodge leather bryches her needle she lost▪
When Diccon the bedlam had hard by report
That good Gāmer Gurton was •obe•e in this sort,
He quietly persuaded with her in that stoned
Dame Chat her dear gossip this needle had found,
Yet knew she no more of this matter (alas)
Then knoeth Tom our clarke what the Priest saith at mass
Here of there ensued so fearful a fray,
Mas Doctor was sent for these gossips to staye,
Because he was Curate, and esteemed full wise
Who found that he sought not, by Diccous device,
When all things were tombled and clean out of fassion
Whether it were by fortune, or some other constellation
Suddenly the neele Hodge found by the pricking
And drew it out of his buttock where he felt it sticking
Their hearts then at rest with perfect security,
With a pot of good nale they stroke up their plaudit.
MAny a mile have I walked, divers and sundry wai••
And many a good mās house have I bin at in my days
Many a gossips cup in my time have I tasted
An• many a brooch and spyt, have I both turned and basted
Many a piece of •icon have I had out of their balkes
In ronnyng over the country, with long and were walks,
Yet came my foot n•for, within those door ch•ekes,
To seek flesh or fish▪ Garlic, Onions or Leckes.
That ever I saw a sort, in such a plight
As here within this house ap•er•th to my s•light,
There is howling and sco•ling a•l 〈…〉 adamye,
With whewling and pewling, as though they had lost a trump
Sighing and sobbing, they weep and they whale
I marvel in my mind, what the devil they aisle
The old Trot syts groaning, with alas and alas,
And Tib wrings her hands, and takes on in worse case
With poor Cock their boy, they be driven in such fits
I fear me the folks be not well in their wits,
Ask them what they aisle, or who brought them in this staye?
They answer not at all, but alack and welaway
When I saw it booted not, out at doors I hied me
And caught a slyp of Bacon, when I saw that none spied me,
Which I intend not far hence, unless my purpose fail
Shall serve for a shoinghorne to draw on two pots of ale.
SEe so cham arrayed with dabbling in the dirt
She that set me to ditching, each wold she had the squrt
Was never poor soul that such a life had?
Gogs bones this vylthy glaye has dressed me to bad
Gods soul, see how this stuff tears
Iche were better to bee a Bearward and set to keep Bears
By the Mass here is a gash, a shameful hole in dead
And one stitch tear further, a man may thrust in his head.
¶ By my fathers soul Hodge, if I should now besworn
I can not choose but say thy breech is foul be torn,
But the next remedy in such a case and hap
Is to plaunche on a piece, as broad as thy cap.
¶ Gogs soul man, tic not yet two days fully ended
Since my dame Gurton (•hem sure) these breches amended,
But cham made suce a drudge to trudge at every need
Chwold rend it though it were stitched what sturdy pacthreede,
¶ Hog, let thy breeches go, and speak and tell me soon
What devil ails gāmer gurton, &amp; Tib her maid to frown,
¶ Tush man thart deceived, •is their daily look,
They cor so over ye coals, their eyes be bleared with smoke,
¶ Nay by the mass, I perfectly perceived as I came hither
That either Tib &amp; her dame hath ben by the cares to gether
Or else as great a matter as thou shalt shortly see.
¶ Now iche bes•eche our Lord they never better agree.
¶ By gogs soul there they sit as still as stones in the streite
As though they had ben takē with fairies or else with some il sprite
¶ Gogs hart, I durst have laid my cap to a crown
Chwould learn of some prancome as soon as each came to town.
¶ Why Hodge art thou inspired? or did thou thereof here?
¶ Nay, but each saw such a wonder as each saw not this▪ vii. year
Tome Tankards Cow (be gogs bones) she set me up her sail
And flinging about his half aker fysking with her tail,
As though there had ben in her ars a swarm of Bees,
And chad not cried tphrowh hoore, shed leapt out of his Lees.
¶ Why Hodge lies the conning in Tom tankards cowes tail?
¶ Well each chaue hard some say such tokens do not fail,
But cast you not till in faith Diccon, why she frowns or where at
Hath no man stolen her Ducks or Henes, or gelded gyb her Cat
¶ What devil can I tell man, I cold not have one word
They gave no more heed to my talk then thou would to a lord
¶ Iche can not styll but muse, what marvelous thing it is
Chyll in and know my self what matters are amiss.
¶ Then farewell hodge a while, since thou doest inward hast,
For I will into the good wife Chats, to feel how the ale doth taste.
CHam aghast by the mass, each wot not what to do
Chad need bless me well before each go them to
Perchance some felon spirit may haunt our house indeed,
And then chwere but at noddy to venture where cha no need
¶ Cham worse then mad by the mass to be at this staye
Cham chid, cham blamed, and beat on all thoures on the day,
Lamed and hunger storued, pricked up all in Iagges
Having no patch to hyde my back, save a few rotten rags.
¶ I say Tyb, if thou be Tyb, as I trow sure thou bee,
What devil make a doe is this, between our dame and thee.
¶ Gogs bread Hodge thou had a good turn thou wart not here this while.
It had ben better for some of vs to have ben hence a mile
〈◊〉 Gimmal is so out of course, and trantyke all at ones
That Co•ke our boy•• I poor wench, have felt it on our bones.
•;What is the matter, say on Tib whereat she takes so on.
¶ 〈◊〉 is undone •he saith (alas,) her joy and life is gone
If 〈◊〉 here not of some comfort, she is saith but dead
S•all never •ome within her lips, one inch of meat no bread.
¶ 〈◊〉 La••e cham not very glad, to see her in this dump
Cholde a noble •er stole hath fallen, &amp; she hath broke her rump
• Nay and t•at were the worst, we wold not greatly care
For burst•g of her huckle bone, or breaking of her Chair,
But greater, greater, is her grief, as hodge we shall all feel.
¶ Gogs wounds Tyb, my gimmal has never lost her Neele?
¶ Her Neele.
¶ Her Neele?
¶ Her neele by him that made me, it is true Hodge I tell thee.
¶ Gogs sacrament, I would she had lost, tharte out of her belli•
The Devil or else his dame, they ought her sure a shame
How a murry•n came this chance, (say Tib) unto our dame?
¶ My gāmer sat her down on her pes, &amp; had me reach thy bree∣che•
And •y &amp; by, a vengeāce in it or she had take two stitches
To clap a clout upon thine ars, by chau•ce a side she •ears
And gyb our •at in the milk pan, she spied over head and ears
Ah whore, out these, she cried aloud, &amp; swapped the breches down
Up went her staff, and out leapt gyb, at doors into the town
And since that time was never wight, cold set their eyes vpō it
Gogs malison cha•e Cock and I, b•d twenty times light on it.
¶ And is •ot thē my breches sewid up, to morrow yt I should were
¶ No in faith •odge thy breeches lie for 〈◊〉 this no•er the •ere.
¶ Now a vēg•ance light on al ye sort, y• better should have kept it,
The cat• the house, and t•b our maid, y• better should have swept it
S• where we cōmeth crawling, come on in twenty devils way
Ye have made a fair days work, have you not• pray you say.
ALas h•ge, alas. I may well curse and ban
This day that ever I saw it, with gyb and the milk pan
For these and ill luck to gather, as knows Cock my boy
Have stack away my dear neele, and robbed me of my io•e
My fair lunge straight no•le that was mine only treasure
The first day of my sorrow is, and last end of my pleasure.
¶ Might ha kept it when ye had it, but fools will be fools scyll.
Lose that is vast in your hands, ye need not but ye will.
¶ Go hie thee tib, and run thou hoore, to thend here of the town
Did cary out dust in thy lap seek where thou po••st it down•
And as thou saw me roking, in the ashes where I morned
So see in all the heap of dust, thou leave no straw unturned.
¶ That chal gimmal swythe and tyte, and soon be here again,
¶ Tib stoop &amp; loke down to ye ground to it, &amp; take some pain.
¶Here is a pretty matter, to see this ger how it goes
By gogs soul I thenk you wold loes your ars, and it were loose
Your neele lost, it is pity you should lack care and endless sorrow
Gogs death how shall my breches be sewid, shall I go thus to mo∣row
¶ Ah hodge, hodge, if that each cold find my neele by the reed
Chould sow thy brechee each promise y•, with full good double thread
And set a patch on either knee, should last this months twain
Now god &amp; good Saint Sith I pray, to send it home again.
¶ Where served your hands &amp; eyes, but this your neele to keep
What devil had you else to do• ye kept each wot no sheep
Cham fine a broad to dig and del•e▪ in water▪ mire and clay
Sossing and posing in the durte, styll from •ay to day
A hundred things that b• abroad, cham set to see them weal
And •our of you sit ••le at home, and can not k••pe 〈◊〉.
¶My neele alas each lost it hodge, what 〈◊〉 each m• up h••t •
To save the milk set up for the, which g•b our c•t hath wasted
¶ The Devil •e burst both gibe, and 〈…〉th all the rest
Cham alwa•es sure of the worst end, wh• ever have the b•st
Where ha yo• ben flaging abr•de, since you your •eel l••t
¶ Within the house, and at the door, sat• by this same post
Where I was looking a long hour, before •hese folks came h•re,
But welaway, all was in vain, my neel• is n•for th• n•r•.
¶ Set me a candle •et me seek and grope where eve• it 〈◊〉
Gogs hart ye be so foolish (each think) you kn•w• it n•t when you •• see
¶ Come hither Cock, what Cock I say.
¶ Howe Gimmal.
¶ •o hye thee soon, and grope behind the old brass pan,
Which thing when thou hast done
There shalt thou find an old shoe, where in if thou look well
Thou shalt find lying an inch of a white tallow candle,
Light it, and bring it tight away.
¶ That shall be done anon.
¶ Nay tarry hodge till thou hast light, and then weal seek each one.
¶ Cum away ye whoreson boy, are ye a sleep: ye must have a crier.
¶ Each cannot get the candel light here is almost no fire.
¶ I will hold the a penny i will make yt come if y• each may catch thine ears
Art doff thou whoreson boy• cock I say, why can not hears.
¶ Beat him not Hodge but help the boy and come you two to∣gether.
HOw now Tyb, quick lets here, what news thou hast brought hither.
¶ Chaue tossed and tumbled yonder heap our &amp; over again
And winowed it through my fingers, as mē wold winow grain
Not so much as a hens turd but in pieces I tare it
Or what so ever clod or clay I found, I did not spare it
Looking within and eke without, to find your neele (alas)
But all in vain and without help, your neele is where it was.
¶ Alas my neele we shall never meet, adieu, adieu for aye.
¶ Not so gimmal, we might it find if we knew where it lay.
¶ Gogs cross Gimmal if ye will laugh look in but at the door
And see how Hodge lies tomblynge and tossing amids the flour•
Raking there some fair to find among the ashes dead
Where there is not one spark, so big as a pins head,
At last in a dark corner two sparks he thought he sees
Which where indeed no•light else but Gyb our cats two eyes
Puff quote hodge thinking thereby to have fire without doubt
With that Gyb shut her two eyes, &amp; so the fire was out
And by and by them opened, even as they were before,
With that the sparks appeared even as they had done of yore,
And even as hodge blew the fire as he did think
Gyb as she felt the blast straight way began to wink,
Till Hodge fell of swearing, as cam• h•st to his turn,
The ••er was sure bewitched, and therefore wold not burn:
At last Gyb up the slayers, among the old posts and pins,
And Hodge he hied him after till broke were both his s•innes:
Cursing and swearing oaths, were never of his making,
That Gyb wold fire the house, if that she were not taken.
¶ See here is all the thought that the foolish Urchy• takes,
And Lib me think at his elbow almost as merry makes
This is all the wit ye have when others make their mo•e,
Come down Hodge, where art thou and let the Cat alone.
¶ Gogs heart, help and come up, Gyb in her tail hath fire.
And is like to burn all if shes get a little hier:
Cum down (quoth you,) nay then you might count me a patch,
The •whole comes down on your •eads if it take once yt thatch.
¶ It is the cats eyes fool that shines in the dark.
¶ Hath the Cat do you think in every eye a spark.
¶ •e, but they shyne as like fire as ever man see.
¶ •y the mass and she burn all, you•h hear the blame for me
¶ Cum down &amp; help to seek here our neele that it were found
D•wne •yb on t•o knees I say, down C•ck• to the ground.
•o God I make a vow, and so to good Saint Anne
A can•e• •hall they have a piece, get it where I can,
It I may my neele find in one place or in other.
¶ Now a avenge•nce on 〈◊〉 light, on gyb and gybs mother
And all the generation o• Cats both far and ne'er
Look on the ground •orson think• tho• the neele is here.
¶ •y my t•outh gimmal me thought your no•le here I saw
But when my fingers touched it, I •ell it was a straw.
¶ See Hodge whats tie•, may it no• be withi• it,
¶ Break it •oo•e with thy hand and see and thou can find it.
¶ Nay break it you Hodge according to your word.
¶ •ogs •ydes, fie it styncks▪ it is a Cats to•rd,
•t were well done to make thee ear it by the mass.
¶ This matter amends not my no•le is 〈◊〉 where it wasse
Our candle is at anende let vs all in •u•light
•nd come another time, wh•• we •aue more light
¶Back and side go bare, go bare,
booth foot and hand go cold:
But Belly god send thee good ale enough,
whether it be new or old.
I Can not eat, but little meat,
my stomach is not good:
But sure I think, that I can drytke
with him that wears a hood.
Though I go bare, take ye no care,
I am nothing a cold:
I stuffed my skill, so full within,
of jolly good Ale and old.
Back and side go bare, go bare,
booth foot and hand go cold:
But belly god send the good ale enough
whether it be new or old.
I love no roast, but a nut browne toste
and a Crab laid in the fire,
A little bread, shall do me stead
much bread I not desire:
No frost nor snow, no wind I trow
can hurt me if I would,
I am so wrapped, and throwly lapped
of jolly good ale and old.
Back and side go bare. &amp;c.
And Tyb my wife, that as her life
loves well good ale to seek,
Full oft drinks she, till ye may see
the tears run down her cheeks:
Then doth she trowel, to me the bowl
even as a malt worm should,
And saith sweet hart, I took my part
of this jolly good ale and old.
Back and side go bare. &amp;c.
Now let them drink, till they nod and wink,
even as good fellows should doe
They shall not miss, to have the bliss,
good ale doth bring men to:
And all poor souls that have scoured boules
or have them lustily trolde,
God save the lives, of them and their wives
whether they be young or old.
•ask and side go bare. &amp;c.
WEll done be Gogs malt, well songe and well said,
Come on mother Chat as thou art true maid,
〈◊〉 fresh pot of ale lets see to make an end
Against this cold whether my naked arms to defend,
This ger it warms the so•le, now wind blow on the worst,
And let vs drink and swill, till that our bellies burst
Now were he a wise man, by cunning cold define
Which way my Journey lies or where Dyccon will dine
But one good turn I have▪ be it by night or day
South, East, North or west, I am never out of my way.
¶Chym goodly rewarded, cham I not, do you think?
Chad a goodly dinner for all my sweat and swyncke,
Neither butter cheese, milk onions flesh nor fyshe
Save this poor piece of barley bread, tic a pleasant costly dish.
¶Hail fellow Hodge &amp; will to face, with thy meat, i• you have any!
But by thy words as I thē smelled, thy daintrels be not many.
¶Daintrels diccō (gogs soul mā (save this piece of dry horsbred,
Cha bites no bites this live lunge day, no crome come in my head
My guts they yawle crawl and all my belly rumbleth
The puddings can not lye still, each one over other tumbles
By gogs heart cham so ver•e, and in my belly penned
Chould one piece were at the spittlehouse another at ye castles end.
¶ Why hodge, was there none at home thy dinner for to set:
¶ Godg• bread Diccon each came to late, was nothing there to get
G•b (a •owl fiend might on her light (licked ye milk pan so clean
See Diccon, it was not so well washed this .vii. year as each we•e
A pestilence light on all ill luck, chad thought yet for all •his
Of a morsel of bacon behind the do•• at worst should not miss,
But when each sought a slyp to cut, as each was wont to do
Gogs soul Diccon, gyb our Cat had 〈◊〉 the bacon to.
Which bacon Diccon stole, as is declared before.
¶Ill luck quote he, mary swear it hodge, this day ye truth to tel
Thou rose not on thy right side, or else bl••t thee not well.
Thy milk slopt up, thy bacō fill•ched, that was to bad luck hodge.
¶ Nay, nay, there was a fowler fa••t, my gāmer game y• dog•e
See not how chā rent &amp; torn, my heels, my knees &amp; my breech
Chad thought as each sat by the fire, help here &amp; there a stitch,
But there each was powpte indeed.
¶ Why Hodge?
¶ Boots not man to tell,
Cham so dressed amongst a sort of fools, chad better be in hell,
My gimmal (cham ashamed to say) by god served me not weal
¶ How so Hodge?
¶ Has she not gone trow now and lost her neele.
¶ Her Eel Hodge, who fished of late? that was a dainty dish.
¶ Tush tush, her neele, her neele, her neele man.
(tys neither flesh nor fish.
A little thing with an hole in the end, as bright as any syller,
Small, lunge, sharpe at the point, &amp; straight as any pillar.
¶I know not what a devil you mēest, you bring me more in doubt
¶ Know not with what tom tailers mā, fits broching through a clout
A neele, neele, a neele, my gimmals neele is gone.
¶ Her neele Hodge, now I smell thee, yt was a chance alone,
By ye mass you had a shameful loss, &amp; it were but for th•t 〈◊〉
¶ Gogs soul man chould give a crown chad it but iii. stitches.
¶ How say you Hodge, what should he have, again thy n••le got
¶ Gem vathers soul, and chad it chould give him a new grot.
¶ Can thou keep counsel in this case.
¶Else chwold my thong were out.
¶Do than but then by my advise, &amp; I will fetch it with••t doubt,
¶Chyll run, chyll ride, chyll dig, chyl 〈◊〉,
(chill toil, chill trudge shalt see:
Chill hold i will draw, i will pull, chill pinch
(chill kneel on my bare knee.
Chill scrape, chill scratch, chill sift▪ chyll seek,
(chill bow, chill bend, chill sweat.
I will sto•p, i will stir, i will cap i will kneel, i will crepe on hāds &amp; feet▪
I will be thy bondsman Diccon, each swear by sun and moon
And channot sum what to stop this gap, cham utterly undone
Pointing behind to his torn kreeches.
¶Why, is there any special cause, thou take hereat such sorrow
¶Kirstian Clack Tom simsons maid, bithe mass coms hither to morrow
Cham not able to say, between vs what may hap,
She smiled on me the last sunday when each put of my cap,
¶ Well Hodge this is a matter of weight, &amp; must be kept close,
It might else turn to both our costs as the world now gos,
Shalt swear to be no blab Hodge.
¶ Chyll Diccon.
¶ Then go to,
Lay thine hand here, say after me as thou shalt here me do
Haste no book?
¶ Cha no book I.
¶ Then needs must force vs both,
Upon my breech to lay thine hand, and there to take thine other.
¶ I Hodge breethelesse,
Swear to Diccon rechelesse
By the cross that I shall kiss,
To keep his counsel close
And always me to dispose
To work that his pleasure is.
¶ Now Hodge see thou take heed
And do as I thee bid
For so I judge it meet,
This •eole again to win
There is no shift therein
But conjure up a spreete.
¶What the great devil Diccon I say?
¶Yea in good faith, that is the way,
Fet with some pretycharme.
¶Soft Diccon be not to hasty yet,
By the mass for each begin to sweat
Cham afraid of simon harm.
¶Come hither then and stir the not
One inch out of this Circle plat
But stand as I thee teac•e.
¶And shall each be here safe from their claws:
¶ The master devil with his lunge paws
Here to thee can not reach:
Now will I settle me to this gear.
¶I say Diccon, hear me, hear:
Go softly to this matter.
¶ What devil man, art afraid of nought
¶Can not tarry a little thought
Till each make a courtesy of water.
¶ Stand still to it, why should thou fear him?
¶ Gogs sides Diccon, me think each hear him
And tarry chal mare all.
¶ The matter is no worse then I told it,
¶ By the mass cham able no longer to •old it,
To bad iche must beraye the hall.
¶ Stand to it Hodge, stur not you whoreson,
What Devil, be thine ars strings brusten?
Thy self a while but staye,
The devil I smell him will be here anon.
¶ Hold him fast Diccon, cham gone, cham gone
Chyll not be at that fray.
FIE shytten knave, and out upon thee
Aboue all other louts fie on thee,
Is not here a cleanly prank?
But thy matter was no better
Nor thy pres•nce here no sweter,
To fly I can the thank:
Here is a matter worthy glossing
Of Gimmal Gurtone nedle losing
And a foul piece of work,
A man I think might make a play
And need no word to this they say
Being but half a Clarke.
Soft, let me alone, I will take the charge
This matter further to en large
Within a time short,
If ye will mark my toys, and note
I will give ye leave to cut my throat
If I make not good sport,
Dame Chat I say, where be ye, within?
¶ Who have we there makes such a din:
¶ Here is a good fellow, makes no great danger,
¶ What diccon? come ne'er, ye be no stranger,
We be fast set at trump man, hard by the fire,
Thou shalt set on the king, if thou come a little nyer.
¶ Nay, nay, there is no tarrying: I must be gone again
But first for you in council I have a word or twain.
¶Come hither Dol, Dol, sit down and play this game,
And as thou saw me do, see thou do even the same
There is 5. trumps beside the Queen, ye hindmost you shalt find her
Take heed of Simon glovers wife, she hath an eye behind her,
Now Diccon say your will.
¶ Nay soft a title yet,
I wold not tel it my sister, the matter is so great,
There I will have you swear by our dere Lady of Bullaine,
S. Dunstone, and S. Donnyke, with the three Kings of Kul∣lain,
That ye shall keep it secret.
¶ Gogs bread that will I doo,
As secret as mine own thought, by god and the devil two.
¶ Here is gāmer gurton your neighbour, a sad &amp; heavy wight
Her goodly fair red Cock, at home. was stole this last night.
¶ Gogs foul her Cock with the yellow legs, ye nightly crowed so just?
¶ That cock is stolen.
¶ What was he fet out of the hens-ruste?
¶ I can not tel where ye devil he was kept, under key or locke.
But Tib hath tykled in Gimmals ear, that you should steal the cock
¶ Have I strong hoore? by bread and salt.
¶ What soft, I say be still.
Say not one word for all this gear.
¶ By the mass that I will,
I will have the young whore by the head, &amp; the old trot by ye throat
¶Not one word dame Chat I say, not one word for my cote.
¶ Shall such a begars brawl as ye think you make me a thief
The pocks light on her horse sides, a pestlence &amp; a mischief
Come out thou hungry noddy bitch, o that my nails be short.
¶ Gogs bred womā hold your peace, this ger will else pass sport
I wold not for an hundred pound, this matter should be known,
That I am actor of this tale, or have abroad it blown
Did ye not swear ye wold be ruled, before the tale I told
I said ye must all secret keep, and ye said sure ye would.
¶ Would you suffer your self diccon, such a sort, to revile you
With slanderous words to blot your name, &amp; so to defile you?
¶ No goodwi•e chat I wold be lot• such drabs should blot my name
But yet ye must so order all, ye Diccon hear no blame.
¶Go to then, what is your rede: say on your mind,
(ye shall m•e rule herein.
¶ God a mercy to dame chat, in faith thou must the ger begin
It is twenty pound to a goose turd, my gimmal will not tarry
But hetherward she comes as fast as her legs can her cary,
To brawl with you about her cock, for well &amp; hard Tib say
The Cock was roasted in your house, to briefest yesterday,
And when ye had the carcass eaten, the feathers ye out flung
And D•ll your maid the legs she hid a foot deep in the dung.
¶ Do gracious god my heart is bursts.
¶ Well to•e your self a space
And gimmal gurton when she comes a•on into this place
Then to the Queen lets see tell her your mind &amp; spare not
So 〈◊〉 Diccon blameless bee, and then go to I care not.
¶ 〈…〉 beware her t•rot•, I can abide no longer
In 〈◊〉 old witch it shall be seen, which of vs two be stronger
〈◊〉 Diccon but at your request, I wold not stay one hour,
¶ Well •up it in till she be here and then out let it power,
In the mean• whi•• get you in, and make no words of this
More of this matt•• with in this hour to here you shall not miss
Because I know you are my friend, hide it I cold not doubtless
Ye know your harm, see ye be wise about your own business
So fare ye will.
▪ 〈…〉 Di•con and drink, what Doll I say
Bring here a cup of the best ale, lets see, come quicly a way.
Ye see masters ye one end tapped of this my short devise
Now must wo br•che theter to, hour the smoke arise
And by the time they have a while run.
(I trust ye need not crave it.
But loke what lies in both their harts ye are like sure to have it
¶ Yea gogs soul, art alive yet? what Diccon dare each come?
¶ A man is well hied to trust to thee, I will say nothing but mum
But and ye come any nearer I pray you see all be sweet.
¶ Tush man, is gimmals neele found, that chould gladly weet
¶ She may thāke thee it is not foūd, for if you had kept thy stāding
The devil he wold have fet it out, even hodge at thy cōmaunding
¶ Gogs hart, &amp; cold h• tel nothing where the neele might be found
¶ Ye foolish dolt, ye were to seek, ear we had g•t our ground,
Therefore his tale so doubtful was, that I cold not perceive it.
¶ Then each se well something was said, chop one day yet to have it,
But diccon, diccon, did not the devil cry ho, ho, ho,
¶ If you had tarried where thou stood, thou would have said so
¶ Durst swear of a buke, chard him roar, straight after each was gon
But tel me diccon what said ye knave: let me here it anon.
¶ The whoreson talked to me. I know not well of what
One while his tongue it ran and paltered of a Cat,
Another while he stamered styll upon a Rat,
Last of all there was nothing but every word Chat, Chat,
But this I well perceived before I would him rid,
Between Chat, and the Rat, and the Cat, the nedle is hyd,
Now whether Gyb our cat have eat it in her maw,
Or Doctor Rat our curate have found it in the straw,
Or this dame chat your neighbour have stolen it, god hee know∣weth
But by ye morrow at this time, we shall learn how the matter go¦eth
¶Can not learn to night man, see not what is here,
¶ Tys not possible to make it sooner appear,
¶ Alas Diccon then chaue no shift, but least each tarry to lunge
Hye me to Simon glovers shop, theare to seek for a Thong,
There with this breech to tatche and tie as each may.
¶ To morrow hodge if we chance to meet, shalt see what I will say.
NOw this ger must forward go, for here my gimmal: comes,
Be still a while &amp; say nothing, make here a little romth.
¶ Good lord, shall never be my luck my neele again to spy▪
Alas the while tys past my help, where tic still it must lye.
¶Now Iesus gimmal gurtō, what drives you to this sadne••
I fear me by my conscience, you will sure fall to madness.
¶ Who is that, what Diccon, cham lost man: fie fie.
¶ Mary fie on them yt be worthy, but what should be your troble,
¶Alas the more each think on it, my sorrow it waxes doble
My goodly tossing sporyars neele, chaue lost each wot not where.
¶ Your neele, when?
¶My neele (alas) each might full ill it spare,
As god him self he knows ne'er one bes•de chaue.
¶If this be all good gimmal, I warrant you all is save.
¶ Why know you any tidings which way my neele is gone?
¶ Yea that I do doubtless, as ye shall here anon,
A see a thing this matter touches, within these .xx. hours,
Even at this gate, before my face, by a neighbour of yours,
She stooped me down, and up she toke a nedle or a pyn:
I durst be sworn it was even yours, by all my moth•rs kin.
¶ It was my neele diccon each wot, for here even by 〈◊〉 p•ste
Each sat, what time as each up start, and so my neele it lost:
Who was it le••e son? speak each pray the, &amp; quickly tell me that?
¶ A s•ttle queen as any in this Town,
(your neyghboure here dame Chat.
¶ Dame chat diccon let me be gone, i will thither in post h•ste.
¶ Take my council yet or ye go, for fear ye walk in wast,
It is a murrion crafty drab, and froward to be pleased.
And ye take not the better way, our nedle yet ye lose it:
For when she took it up, even here before your doors
What soft dame chat (quoth I) that same is none 〈◊〉 yours
Avaunt (quoth she) sir knave, what prate thou of that 〈…〉:
I wold yt had kissed me I wot where: (she meant I know 〈◊〉)
And home she went as brag, as it had ben a 〈◊〉,
And I after as bold, as it had ben, the goodman of the 〈◊〉:
But there and ye had hard her, how she began to scold
The tongue it went on patens, by him that Iudas sold,
Each other word I was a knave, and you a bore of horse,
Because I spake in your behalf, and said the neele was yours,
¶Gogs bread, and thinks yt callet thus to keep my neele me fro?
¶Let her alone, and she minds non other but euē to dress you so
¶By the mass i will rather spend the cote that is on my back.
Thinks the false queen by such a slygh, that chill my neele lack
¶Sleep not you ger I counsel you, but of this take good heed
Let not be known I told you of it, how well soever ye speed.
¶ I will in Diccon a clean aperne to take, and set before me,
And each may my neele once see, i will sure remember the
HEre will the sport begin, if these two once may meet.
Their chere durst lay money will prove scarcely sweet
My gimmal sure entends, to be upon her bones,
Which staves, or with clubs, or else with coble stones.
Dame Chat on the other side, if she be far behind
I am right far deceived she is given to it of kind,
He tha• may tarry by it a while, and that but shorts
I warrant him trust to it, he shall see all the sport
Into the town will I, my friends to visit there
And hither straight again to see thend of this ger
In the mean time fellows, pipe up your fiddles, I say take them
And let your friends here such mirth as ye can make them.
Simon glover yet gramercy, cham meetlye well sped now,
Thart e•en as good a fellow as ever kissed a cow,
Here is a thing in dede, by ye mass though each speak it
Tom tankard• great bald cortal, I think could not break it
And when he spied my need, to be so straight and hard,
Hays lent me here his naull, to set the •yd forward,
As for my Gimmals neele, the •lying feyud go we•te,
Chill no• now go to the •oore again with it to meet:
Chould make shift good enough and chad a candels •••e,
The you•e hole in my breech, with these two i will amend.
HOw Hodge, may now be glade, cha news to tell thee
Each know who •ais my neele, each trust soon shalt it see
¶ The devil thou does, hast hard gimmal in deed, or doest but jest
¶ Tys as true as steel Hodge.
¶ Why, know well where did leese it?
¶ Each know who found it, and took it up shalt see or it be lunge.
¶ Gods mother dere, if that be true, farewell both naule an thong
But who hais it gimmal say on: chould fine here it disclosed.
¶ That false fixen, that same dame Chat, that counts her self so honest.
¶ Who told you so:
¶ That same did Diccon the bedlam, which saw it done.
¶ Diccon: it is a vengeable knave gimmal, tic a bonable horsō,
Can do mo things then that else cham deceived evil:
By the mass each saw him of late cal up a great black devil,
O the knave cried ho▪ ho, he roared and he thundered,
And yead been here, cham sure yould murrenly ha wondered.
¶ Was not thou afraid Hodge to see him in this place:
¶ No, and chad come to me, chould have laid him on the face,
Chould have promised him.
¶ But Hodge, had he no horns to push:
¶ As long as your two arms, saw ye never Fryer Rush
Painted on a cloth, with a side long cowes tail:
And crooked cloven feet, •nd many a hoked nail?
For al the world (if I should judge) chould reckon him his brother
Loke even what face Friar Rush had, the devil had such another
¶ New Iesus mercy hodge. did diccon in him bring:
¶ Nay gimmal (hear me speak) i will to• you a greater thing,
The devil (when diccon had him, each hard him wondrous weel)
Said plainly (here before vs, that dame chat had your neele.
¶ They let vs go, and ask her wherefore she minds to keep it,
Seeing 〈◊〉 know so much, it were a madness now to sleep it.
¶ Go to 〈◊〉 •āmer see ye not where she stands in her doors
Bid her give you the neele, tys none of hers but yours.
SAme Chat cholde pray the fair, let me have y• is mine
I will not this twenty years take one fart that is thine
Therefore give me mine own &amp; let me live beside the
¶ Why art thou crept frō home hither, to mine own doors to chide me:
Hence doting drab, avaunt, or I shall set the further.
Intends thou and that •na•e, me in my house to murder:
¶ Tush gape not so no me woman▪ shalt not yet eat me,
Nor all the friends thou hast, in this shall not entreat me:
Mine own goods I will have, and ask the on believe,
What woman: pore folks must have right, though the thing you agree•s.
¶ Give thee thy right, and hang thee up, with al thy beggars brood
What wilt thou make me a thief▪ and say I stole thy good:
¶ I will say nothing (each warrāt thee, but that each cā prove it well
Thou set my good even from my door, cham able this to tel,
¶ Did I (old witch) steal oft was thine:
(how should that thing be known:
¶ Each can not tel, but up thou took it as though it had ben thine own,
¶ Mary fie on thee, thou old gyb, with al my very hart.
¶ Nay fie on thee you ramp, thou rig, with al that take thy part.
¶ A vengeance on those lips yt lays such things to my charge.
¶ A vengeance on those callats hips, whose consciēce is so large
¶ Come out Hog.
¶ Come out hog, and let have me right.
¶ Thou arrant Witch.
¶ Thou bawdy bitch, i will make thee curse this night.
¶ A bag and a wallet.
¶ A carte for a callet.
¶ Why wenest thou thus to prevail,
I hold thee a groat,
I shall patch thy coat.
¶ Thou wart as good kiss my tail:
Thou siut you kut, you rokes▪ y• iakes: will not shau•e make y• •id
¶ •thou shald thou bald, thou to•ten, you glotton, I will no longer chid the
But I will teach the to keep home.
¶ Will thou drunken b••ste.
¶ Stick to her gimmal, take her by the head, i will warrant you this feast.
Sm•te I lay gimmal,
〈◊〉 I lay gimmal,
I trow ye will ••••one:
Where by your ••i'll•? claw her by the jaws, pull me out both her even,
Gogs bones gimmal, hold up your head,
¶ I trow drab I shall dress thee.
Tarry you knave I hold the a gr•te, I shall make these hands bless thee
Take y• this old whore for a mends, &amp; learn thy tongue well to tame
And say thou met at this bickering, not thy fellow but thy dame.
¶ Where is the strong stewed whore, i will gear a horse mark,
Stand out ones way, that each kill none in the dark:
Up gimmal and ye be alive, i will feygh now for vs both,
Come no ne'er me thou •called •allet, to kill the each were loath.
¶ Art here again thou hoddy peke, what doll bring me out my spit.
¶ Chill brooch thee with this, him father soul,
(chyll conjure that foul sprete:
Let der• stand Cock, why come in deed? keep door you whoreson boy.
¶ Stand to it you •astard for thine ears, ise tech y• a fluttish toy.
¶ G•gs wounds whore, i will make the avaunt,
(take heed Cock, pull in the latche,
¶ I faith sir loose breche had ye tarried, ye should have found your match.
¶ Now ware thy throat losel, thouse pray for al
¶ Well said gimmal by my soul,
Hoise her, souse her, bounce her, trounce her, pull out her throat boule
¶ Come behind me thou withered witch, &amp; I get once on foot
Thouse pay for all, you whole• tar leather, isle teach the what longs to it
Take yt this to make up thy mouth, till time thou come by more
¶ Up gimmal stand on your feet, where is the old whore•
Faith would chad her by the face
(choulde crack her •allet crown
¶ A hodge, hodge, where was thy help, when fixen had me down.
¶ By the mass Gimmal, but for my staff
(Chat had gone ny to spiel you
Each think the harlot had not cared, and chad not com to kill you
But shall well cost our neele thus?
¶ No Hodge chwarde loathe doo so.
Think thou chill take that at her hand, no hodge each tell the no
¶ Chold yet this fray were well take up &amp; our own neele at home
Twill be my chance •ls some to kill, where ever it be or whom
¶ We have a parson, (hodge thou knows) a man esteemed wise
Mast doctor Rat, i will for him lend, and let me here his advise,
He will her shrive for all this ger, &amp; give her penance strait
Wese have our neele, else dame that comes ne'er with in heauē gate
¶ Ye mary gimmal, y• each think best: will you now for him •end
The sooner Doctor Rat be here, the sooner was• ha an end,
And here gimmal Dyccons devil, (as iche remember well)
Of Cat, and Chat, and Doctor Rat: a felloneus tale did tell,
Chold you forty pound, that is the way your neele to •et again.
¶ I will ha him strait, call out ye boy, wele make him take the pain
¶ What coke I say, come out what devil can not •e•e.
¶ How now hodge? how does gimmal, is yet the whether cl••re•
What wold chaue me to doe?
¶ Come •ether C•cke anon:
Hence swythe to Doctor Rat, hye the that thou were gone,
And pray him come speak with me, cham not well at ease,
Shalt have him at his chamber, of else at mother Bees,
E•s seek him at Hobfytchers shop for as charde it reported
Th•re is the best ale in al the town▪ and now is most resorted.
• And shall each bring him with me gimmal?
• Yea, by and by good Cock.
¶ Shalt see that shall be here anon, else let me have one the dock
¶ Now gimmal shall we two go in, and tarry for hy• coming
What devil w•man pluck up your hart, &amp; leave of al this glōmīg
Though she were stronger 〈◊〉 first, as each think ye did find her
Yet there ye breast the dronkē •ow, what time ye cam behind her
¶ Nay, nay▪ cham sure she lost not all, for let them to ye beginnīg
And each doubt not, but she will make small bossed of her winning.
SE gāmer, gāmer, gibe our cat, chā afraid what she ails
She stands me gasping behind the door,
(as though her wind her fails:
Now let each doubt what gibe should mean, yt now she doth so dote.
¶ Hold hither, ichould twenty pound, your neele is in her throat
Grope her each say, me thinks each feel it, does not prick your hand?
¶ Each can feel nothing.
¶ No, each know thars not within this land
A muryner Cat then Gyb is, betwixt the tems and Tyne,
Chaise as much wit in her head almost as chaue in mine.
¶ Faith chaise eaten some thing, that will not easily down
Whether she gat it at home, or abroad in the town
Iche can not tell.
¶ Alas each fear it he some crooked pyn,
And then farewell gyb, she is undone, and lost al save the skin.
¶ Tyb, your neele woman, I say: gags soul give me a knife
And i will have it out of her maw, or else chal lose my life.
¶ What nay hodge, fie kill not our cat, tic al the cats we ha now.
¶ By the mass dame Chat bays me so moved,
(iche care not what I kill, ma god a vow:
Go to then Tyb to this gear, hold up har tail and take her,
I will see what devil is in her guts i will take you pains to rake her.
¶ Rake a Cat Hodge, what would thou do?
¶ What thinckst that cham not able?
Did not Tom Lankard rake his Curtal toore day standing in the stable.
¶ Soft be content, le•s here what news
(Cock brings from moist Rat.
¶ Gimmal chaue b•n there as you bad, you wot well about what
Twill not be long before he come, each durst swear of a book
He bids you see ye be at home, and there for him to look.
¶ Where did thou find him boy was he not where I told thea?
¶ Yes, yes even at hob•ilchers house, by him yt bought and sold me
A cup of ale had in his hand, and a crab lay in the fire,
Ch•d much a do to go and come, al was so full of myer:
And Gimmal one thing I can tel, Hobfilchers naule was lost
And Doctor Rat found it again, hard beside the door post,
I chould a p•nny can say something, your neele again to fet.
• Cham glad to hear so much Cock, then trust he will not let,
To help vs herein best he can therefore till time he come
〈1 line〉
A Man were better twenty times be a bandog &amp; bark.
Then here among such a sort, be parish priest or clarke
Where he shall never be at rest, one pissing while a day
But he must trudge about the town, this way, and that way,
Here to a drab, there to a thief, his shoes to tear and rent
And that which is worst of al, at every knaves commaundemēt
I had not sit the space, to drink two pots of ale
But Gimmal gurtons sorry boy, was strait way at my tail,
And she was sick, and I must come, to do I wot not what,
If once her fingers end but ache, trudge, call for Doctor Rat
And when I come not at their call, I only thereby loo•e,
For I am sure to lack therefore, a tithe pig or a goose:
I warrāt you whē truth is known, &amp; told they have their tale
The matter where about I come,
is not worth a half penny worth of ale,
Yet must I talk so sage and smooth, as though I were a gloss•er
Else or the year come at an end. I shall be sure the loser.
What work ye gāmer gurtō? hoow here is your frēd M. Rat.
¶ A good M. Doctor cha troubled, cha troubled you, chwot well •hat
¶ How do ye woman: be ye lus•ie, or be ye not well at ease:
¶ By gys master cham not 〈◊〉, but yet chaue a disease.
Chad a foul turn now of late, chill tell it you by gigs.
¶ Hash your browne cow cast his calfe, or your sandy sow her pigs
¶ No, but chad ben as good they had, as this each wot weel.
¶ What is the matter•
¶ Alas, alas, cha lost my good neele,
My necle I say, and wot ye wh•t: a drab came by and spied it
And when I asked his sor the same, the s••th flatly deemed it.
¶ What was she that:
¶ A dame each warrant you she began to scold and brawl•
Alas, ala•, come hither Hodge: this wretch can tell you all.
〈1 line〉
〈…〉 vs hear.
Thy dame hath said to me, thou kn•west of all this gear,
Lets see what thou can say.
¶ Bym say sir that ye shall,
What matter so ever here was done, each can fell your mashly
My Gimmal gurton hear see now,
sat her down at this door see now:
And as she began to stir her, see now,
her neele fell in the floor, see now,
And whi•e her staff she took, see now,
at Gyb her Cat to fling, see now,
Her neele was lost in the floor, see now
is not this a wondrous thing, see now?
Then came the queen Dame Chat see now
to ask for his black cup, see now:
And even here at this gate, see now:
she took that neele up see now:
My Gimmal then she yeede, see now
his neele again to bring, see now
And was caught by the head see now
is not this a wondrous thing, see now
She tare my Gimmals cote see now
and scratched his by the face, see now
Chad thought shad stopped his throat, see now
is not this a wondrous case, see now▪
When each saw this, each was worth see now
and start between them twain, see now
Else each durst take a book other, see now
my Gimmal had been slain, see now.
¶ This is even the whole matter, as Hodge has plainly told
And chould fine be quiet for my part that chould
But help vs good master, beseech ye that ye doo
Else shall we both be beaten and lose our neele too.
¶ What wold ye have me to doo tel me that I were gone
I will do the best that I can, to set you both at one
But be ye sure dame Chat hath this your neele found:
¶ Here comes the man that see his take it up o• the ground,
Ask him your self master Rat if ye believe not me.
And help me to my neele, for gods sake and saint charity.
¶ Come ne'er diccon and let vs hear, what thou can express.
Wilt y• be sworn y• 〈…〉 have▪
¶ Nay by S. Denied will I not, then might 〈…〉 ra••.
¶ Why did 〈…〉 deny it
¶ I mary gimmal: but I said I 〈…〉 by it.
¶ Will you say a thing, and not stick do it to try it.
¶ Stick to it quoth you master rat, mary •r I de•y it.
Nay there is many an honest man, when he such blasts hath blown
In his friends ears, he would be loath the same by him were known
If such a toy be used oft among the honesty
It may be seem a simple man, if your and my degre•
¶ Then we be never the nearer, for all that you can tell.
¶ Yes mary sir, if ye will do by mine advise and counsel,
If mother chat se al vs here, she knows how the matter goes
Therefore I red you three go hence, and within keep close,
And I will into dame chats house, and so the matter use,
That or you cold go twice to church, I warrant y•u hot now,
She shall look well about his, but I durst •ay a pledge,
Ye shall of gimmals neele, have shortly better knowledge.
¶ Now gentle Diccon do so, and good sir let vs trudge.
¶ By the mass • may not tarry so long to be your judge.
¶ Dys but a little whi•e man, what take so much pain,
If I here no news of it I wi•l come sooner again.
¶ Cary so much good master Doctor of your gentleness.
¶ Then let vs hie •e inward, and Diccon speed thy business.
¶ Now sirs do ye• no more, but keep my counsel just,
And Doctor Rat shall thus catch, some good I trust,
But mother Chat my gossop, talk first with all I must:
For she must be chief captain to lay the Rat in the dust,
God deuen •am Chat in faith, and well met in this place.
¶ God deuen my friend Diccon, whether walk ye this pace?
¶ By my truth even to you, to learn how the world goes,
Hard ye no more of the other matter, say me now by your troth
¶ O yes diccon, here the old hoore, &amp; hodge that great knave.
But in faith I would thou had scene, o lord I dressed them bran
She bare me two or three souses behind in the nape of the neck
Till I made his old wesen, to answer again kick:
And Hodge that dirty dastard, that at his elbow stands,
I• one pair of legs had not been worth two pair of hands
He had had his beard shaven, if my nails wold have served
And not without a cause for the knave it well deserved.
¶ By the most I can the thank wench, 〈…〉 so w•l acquit the
¶ And 〈…〉 him Di•con, it wold have made y• beshite the
For laughter. The 〈…〉 •ast caught up a club,
As though he would have slain the master devil Beelzebub,
But I set him soon in word.
¶ O Lord there is the thing
That Hodge is so offended, that makes him start and dyng
¶ Why? makes the knave any moyling, as ye have scene or hard
¶ Even now I saw him last, like a mad man he •arde,
And swear by heaven and hell▪ he would a wreak his sorrow
And leave you never a hen on li•e▪ by viii. of the clock to morrow,
Therefore mark what I say, and my words see that ye trust
Your hens be as good as dead, if ye leave them on the rust.
¶ The knave dare as well go hang himself, as go upon my groūd
¶ Well yet take heed I say, I must tel you my tale round,
Have you not about your house, behind your furnace or lead:
A hole where a crafty knave, may crepe in for neade?
¶ Yes by the mass, a hole broke down, even within these ii. days.
¶ Hodge, he intends this same night, to slip in there aways.
¶ O christ that I were sure of it, in faith he should have his mede.
¶ watch well, for the knave will be there as sure as is your cred
I wold spend my self a shilling: to have him swinged well.
¶ I am as glad as a woman can be• of this thing to here tell
By gogs bones when he cōmeth, now that I know the matter
He shall sure at the first skip, to leap in scalding water:
Wish a worse turn besides when he will, let him come.
¶ I tell you as my sister, you know what means mum,
Now lack I but my doctor, to play his part again
And so where he comes towards, peradventure to his pain.
¶ What good news Diccon? fellow, is mother chat at home,
¶ She is sir, and she is not, but it please her to whom:
Yet did I take h•r tardy, as s•btle as she was.
¶ The thing that thou wen•st for, hast thou brought it to pass?
¶ I have done that I have done, be it worse be it better.
And dame Chat at her wits end, I have almost set her.
¶ Why hast thou spied the neele quickly I pray thee tell.
¶ I have spied it in faith sir, I handled my self so well,
And yet the crafty queen, had almost take my trump.
But or all came to an end. I set her in a dump:
¶ How so I pray thee Diccon?
¶ Mary sir will ye hear?
She was clapped down on the backside, by cocks mother dere
And there she sat sewing a halter, or a band,
With no other thing save gimmals nedle in her hand,
As soon as any knock, if she filth be in double,
She needs but once puff, and her candle is out:
Now I sir knowing of every door she pin.
Came nicely, and said no word, till time I was within,
And there I saw the neele, even with these tu• •yes,
Who ever say the contrary, I will swear he lies.
¶ O Diccon that I was not there, then in thy stead.
¶ Well, if ye will be ordered, and do by my read.
I will bring you to a place, as the house stands.
Where ye shall take the drab, with the neele in his hands
¶ For Gods sake do so Diccon, and I will gage my gown
To give thee a full pot, of the best ale in the town,
¶ Follow me but a little, and mark what I will say,
Lay down your gown beside you, go to, come on your way:
Se ye not what is here a hole wherein ye may creep
Into the house, and suddenly unawares among them leap,
There shall ye find the Bitchfox▪ and the neele together
Do as I bid you man, come on your ways hither.
¶ Art thou sure diccon, the swell tub stands not here about.
¶ I was within my self man even now, there is no doubt,
Go softly, make no noise, give me your foot sir Iohn,
Here will I waite upon you, till you come out anon.
¶ Help Diccon, out alas, I shall be slain among them.
¶ If they give you not the nedle, tel them that ye will hāg them
Ware that, hoow my wenches, have ye caught the Fox,
That used to make revel, among your hens and Cocks:
Save his life yet for his order, though he sustain some pain
Gogs bread, I am afraid, they will beat out his brain.
¶ Wo worth the hour that I came hear.
And wo worth him that wrought this gear,
A sort of drabs and queens have me blessed,
Was ever creature half so evil dressed?
Who ever it wrought, and first did ••uent it,
He shall I warrant him, err long repent it,
I will spend all I have without my skin
But he shall be brought to the plight I am in,
Master Bailey I trow, and he be worth his ears.
Will snaffle these murderers and all that them bears,
I will surely neither byte nor su•pe
Till I fetch him hither, this matter to take up.
I Can perceive none other, I speak it from my hart
But either ye are in al the fault or else in y• greatest part
¶ If it be counted his fault, besides all his grieves
When a poor man is spoiled: and beaten among thieves?
Then I confess my fault herein, at this season,
But I hope you will not judge so much against reason.
¶ And me thinks by your own tale, of all that ye name.
If any plaid the thief you were the very same.
The women they did nothing, as your words make probation
But stoutly withsto•d your forcible invasion,
If that a thief at your window, to enter should begin,
Wold you hold forth your hand, and help to pull him in:
Or you wold keep him out: I pray you answer me.
¶ Mary keep him out, and a good cause why:
But I am no thief• sir but an honest learned Clarke.
¶ Yea b•t who knows that, when he me•s you in the dark
I am sure your learning shines not out at your nose,
Was it any mar•a•••, though the poor woman arose
And start up, being afraid of that was in his purse
Me think you may be glad th•t you luck was no worse.
¶Is not this •ill enough, I pray you as you think,
Showing his b•oken head.
• Yea but a man in the dark, of chances do wink,
〈…〉 he smites his •ather as any other man.
〈◊〉 for •••ke of •ight, discern him he no can.
〈◊〉 it not have ben your luck, with a spit to have ben slain:
〈…〉 I am little better, my scalp is cloven to the brain,
If there be all the remedy, I know who bears the kockes.
¶ By my troth and well worthy, besides to kiss the stocks
To come in on the back side, when ye might go about,
I know non such, unless they long to •aue their brains knocked out
¶ Well, will you be so good sir, as talk with dame Chat▪
And know what she intended: I ask no more but that▪
¶ Let her be called fellow because of master doctor,
I warrant in this case, she will be his own Proctor,
She will tel his own tale in metter or in prose,
And bid you seek your remedy, and so •o wipe your nose.
SAme Chat, master doctor upon you here complained
That you • your maids should him much misorder.
And takes many an o•h, that no word he fained,
Laying to your charge, how you thought him to murder:
And on his part again, that same man saith further
He never offended you in word nor intent,
To hear you answer hereto, we have now for you sent.
¶That I wold have murdered him, fie on him wretch,
And evil mought be thee for it▪ our Lord I besēch.
I will swear on al the books that opens and shuttes
〈◊〉 fai•eth this tale out of his own guts,
For this seven weeks with me, I am sure he sat not down,
Nay ye have other minions, in the other end of the town,
Where ye were like• to ca•ch such a blow,
•hen any where else, as far as I know.
¶ 〈◊〉 like then master Doctor, you stripe there ye got not?
¶ Think you I am so mad, that where I was bet, I wot not▪
Will ye believe this queen, before she hath tried it?
It 〈◊〉 the first dede she hath done and afterword divide it.
¶ 〈◊〉 at ma•, will you say I broke your head?
¶ 〈◊〉 can thou prove the contrary?
¶ Nay how proves thou that I did the 〈◊〉▪
¶ To plainly, by S. Mary.
This prof I trow may serve, though I no 〈…〉
Showing his broken head.
¶ Because thy head is broken, was it I that it broke?
I saw thee Rat I tel thee, not once within this fortnight,
¶ No mary, thou saw me not, for why thou had no light,
But I felt thee for al the dark, be shrew thy smooth cheeks,
And thou groped me this will declare, any day this six weeks
Showing his head.
¶ Answer me to this M. Rat, when caught you this harm of yours?
¶A while a go sir, god he knows, within les thē these ii. hours.
¶Dame Chat was there none with you:
(confess I faith) about that season.
What woman, let it be what it will, tic neither felony nor trea¦son
¶ Yes by my faith master Bailey, there was a knave not far
Who caught one good Philup on the brow, with a door bar
And well was he worthy, as it seemed to me,
But what is that to this man, since this was not hee.
¶ Who was it then? lets here.
¶ Alas sir, ask you that?
Is it not made plain enough (by the own mouth of dame chat
The time agrees, my head is broken, her tong can not lye,
On•lie upon a bare nay she saith it was not I.
¶No mary was it not indeed ye shall here by this one thing,
This after noon a frēd of mine, for good will gave we warning
And bad mo well loke to my rust, and al my Capo•s pens,
For if I ••ke not better heed, a knave wold have my hens,
Then I to save my goods toke so much pains as him to watch
And as good fortune served me, it was my chaūce hī for to catch
What strokes he bare away, or other what was his gains
I wot not, but sure I am, he had something for his pains
¶Yet tells thou not who it was.
¶ Who it was a false thief,
That came like a false Fore, my •ull•i•e to kill and mischief.
¶ But know thou not his name▪
¶ I know it but what than.
It was that cra•tie cullyon Hodge my gimmal gurtons man.
¶ Cal me the knave hither, he shall sure kiss the stocks.
I shall te•ch him a lesson, for fills••ng hens or cocks.
¶ I maru•isle master bailey, so bleared be your eyes.
An egg is not so full of meat as she is full of lies:
When she hath played this prank, •o excuse al this gear,
She lays the fault in such a one, as I know was not there.
¶ Was he not thear loke on his pate, that shall be his witness.
¶I wold my head were half so h••e, I wold seek no redress,
¶God bless you gimmal Gurton.
¶ God •ylde you master mine.
¶ Thou ha•• a knave within thy house, hodge, a servant of thine.
They tel 〈◊〉 busy knave, is such a filching one,
That Hen. 〈◊〉 goose or capon, thy neighbour can have none,
¶ By go• 〈◊〉 •uch ameued, to bear any such report:
Hodge was not wo•• •ch trow, to have him in that sort.
¶A theenisher knave is not on live, more filching nor more false
Many a truer man then he, ha•e hanged up by the half.
And thou his dame of al his theft, thou art the sole receiver
For hodge to catch, and thou to keep, I never knew none better
¶ Sir reverence of your masterdom, and you were out adoore,
Chold be so bold for al his brags, to cal his arrant whore,
And each knew Hodge so bad as tow, each with me endless sorrow
And chould not take the pains, to hang him up before to morrow?
¶ What ha•e I stolen frō the or thine: thou ilfauored old trot.
¶ A great deal more (by Gods blessed,) then cheuer by the got,
That thou know well I neade not say it.
¶ Stop there I say,
And tel me here I pray you, this matter by the way:
How chance hodge is not here him wold I fine have had.
¶ Alas sir, heel be here anon, h• be handled to •ad.
¶ Master bailey, sir ye be not such a fool well I know,
But ye perceive by this lingering, there is a pad in the straw.
Thinking that Hodge, his head was broke, and that gimmal
Wold not let him come before them.
¶ Ch•l show you his face, each warrant the, lo now where he is.
¶ Come on fellow it is told me thou art a shrew iwysse,
Thy neighbours hens you take, and plays •he two legged fore
Their chikens &amp; their cap•ns to, &amp; now and then their Cocks.
¶ Each defy them al that dare it say, cham as true as the best.
¶ Wart not you take within this hour, in dame •hats hens nest?
¶ Take there? no master chold not dot, for a house full of gold.
¶ Thou or the devil in thy •ote, swear this I dare be bold.
¶ •w••re me no swearing queen, the devil h• 〈◊〉 the sorrow,
Al is not worth a gua•, thou can swear till to morrow,
Where is the harm he hath? show it by gods bread,
Ye beat him with a witness, but the stripes light on my head.
¶ Bet me? gogs blessed body, chold first each trow have burst the
Each think and chad my hands loose callet chould have crust th•.
¶ Thou shittē knave I trow you know ye full wei•ht of my fist
I am foully deceived, onles thy head &amp; my d•ore bar kissed
¶ Hold thy chat whore you cry so loud, 〈◊〉 man else be hard
¶ Well knave, &amp; I had the alone, I 〈◊〉 ••rely rap th• costard.
¶ Sir answer me to this, is thy head whole or broken?
¶ Yea master Bailey, blessed be ever• good token.
¶ Is my head whole? each warrāt you, tic neither scurvy nor sealed
What you foul beast, does think tic either pile• or bald.
Nay each thank god: i will not for al that thou moist sp•nd
That chad one scab on my narc, as broad as thy fingers end.
¶ Come nearer hear.
¶ Yes That iche dare.
¶ By our Lady here is no harm,
Hodges head is hole enough, for al dame Chats charm.
¶ By gogs blessed, how ever the thing he clocks or smolders,
I know the blows he ba•e away, either with head or shoulders,
Came you not knave within this hour, creping into my pens
And there was caught within my house, gropīg among my hens.
¶A plage both on thy hens &amp; the, a carte wh•re, a carte,
Chould I were hāged as hie as a tree, &amp; chware as false as you art
Give my gāmer again her washi•al, you stole away in thy lap.
¶ Yea moister bailey there is a thing, you know not on may hay
This drab she kepes away my good, ye devil he might her snare
Each pray you that each might have, a right action on her.
¶ Have I thy good old filth, or any such old •owes?
I am as true, I wold thou knew, as skin between thy brows
¶ Many a truer hath bē hanged, though you escape the danger
¶ Thou shalt answer by gods pity, for this thy foul slander.
¶ Why, what cā ye charge his withal• to say so, ye do not well.
¶ Mary a vēgeance to his hart, y• whore has stolen my neele.
¶ Thy nedle old witch, how so? it were al•nes thy skull to knock
So did thou say, the other day, that I had stolen thy Cock
And roasted him to my breakfast, which shall not be forgotten,
The devil pull out thy lying tong, and teeth that be so rotten.
¶Give me my neele, as for my cock, chould be very loath
That chuld here tel he should h••g, on thy false faith and trow•h.
¶ Your talk is such, I can ••arse learn• who should be most in f•ult
¶Y•t shall ye ••nd no other wight, save ••e, by bred &amp; salt
¶ Keep ye content a while▪ se that your songs ye hold,
Me thinks you should remember, this is no place to scold▪
How know thou gāmer gurton, dame Chat thy nedle 〈◊〉
¶ To name you sir the party, chould not be very glad.
¶Yea but we must needs hear it, &amp; therefore say it boldly.
¶ Such one as told the tale, full soberly and coldly,
Even he that looked on, will swear on a book:
What time this drunken go••ip, my fair ••ng neele up took
Diccon (master) the Bedlam, cham very sure ye know him.
¶ A false knave by Gods pity, ye were but a fool to trow him,
I durst adventure well the price of my b•st cap,
That when the end is known, all will turn to a iape,
Told he not you that besides, she stole your Cock that tide▪
¶ No master no indeed, for then he should have lied,
My cock is I thank Christ, safe and well a fine.
¶ Yea but that ragged colt, that whore that tyb of thine
Said plainly thy cock was stolen, &amp; in my house was eaten,
That lying cut is lost, that she is not swinged and beaten,
And yet for al my good name, it were a small amends
I pick not this gear (hearst thou) out of my finger• •nde•
But he that hard it told me, who thou of late did name
Diccon whom al men knows, it was the very same.
¶ This is the case, you lost your nedle about the doors
And she answers again, she has no cock of yours,
Thus in you talk and Action, from that you do intend,
She is whole five mile wide, from that she doth defend:
Will you say she hath your Cock?
¶ No me•y sir that i will not,
¶ Will you confess his neele?
¶ Will I••o si• will I not.
¶ Then there lies all the matter.
¶ Soft ••i•er by the way,
Ye know she could do li•le, and she c•lt not say nay.
¶ Yea b•t he that made one lie about your Cock stealing,
Will not stick to make another, what time lies be in dealing
I wean the end will prove, this brawl did first arise,
Upon no other ground, but only Diccons lies.
¶ Though some be lies as you belike have espied them.
Yet other some be true, by proof I have well tried them.
¶ What other thing beside this dame Chat.
¶ Mary sir even this,
The tale I told before, the self same tale it was his,
He gave me like a friend, warning against my lo••e,
Else had my hens be stolen, eche one, by Gods cross:
He told me Hodge wold come, and in he came indeed,
But as the matter chance•d, with greater hast then speed,
This truth was said, and true was found, as truly I report.
¶If Doctor Rat be not deceived, it was of another sort.
¶ By Gods mother thou and he, be a cople of subtle foxes,
Between you and Hodge. I bear away the bores,
Did not diccō appoint the place, where you shuldst stād to mete him.
¶Yes by the mass, &amp; if he came, bad me not stick to speet him.
¶ Gods sacrament the villain knave hath dressed vs round about,
He is the cause of all this brawl, that dirty shitten lout:
When gimmal gurton here complained, &amp; made a ruful moan
I heard him swear yt you had gotten, his ned•e that was gone,
And this to try he further said, he was full lo•h how be it
He was content with small ado, to bring me where to see it.
And where ye sat, he said full certain, if I wold follow his read
Into your house a privy way, he wold me guide and lead,
And where ye had it in your hands, sewing about a clout,
And set me in the back hole, thereby to find you out:
And whiles I sought a quietness, creping upon my knees,
I found the weight of your door bar, for my reward and fees,
Such is the luck that some men gets, while they begin to mel
In setting at one such as were out▪ minding to make al well.
¶ Was not well blessed gāmer, to scope ye •cor▪ &amp; chad ben there
Thē chad ben dressed be like, as ill by the mass, as ga••are vicar.
¶ Mary sir, here is a sport alone, I looked for such an end
If diccon had not played the knave, this had ben soon amend
My gimmal here he made a fool, and dressed his as she was
And good wife Chat he set to scole, till both parts cried alas,
And D. Rat was not behind, whiles Chat his crown did pare,
I wold the knave had bē stark blind, 〈◊〉 hodge had not his share.
¶ Cham meetly well sped already among, cham dressed like a coult
And chad not had the better wit, chad been made a •whole•.
¶ Sir knave make hast diccon were here, fetch him where ever he bee
¶ Fie on the villain, fie, fie, yt makes vs thus agree,
¶ Fie on him knave, with al my hart, now fie, and fie again.
¶ Now fie on him may I best say, whom he hath almost slain.
¶Lo where he comes at hand, belike he was not fare
Diccon hear be two or three, thy company can not spare.
¶ God bless you, and you may be blessed so many al at once
¶ Come knave, it were a good deed to geld the by cocks bones
See not thy handiwork▪ sir Rat can ye forbear him?
¶ A vēgeance on those hands lite, for my hāde cam not ne'er him
The whoreson priest hath lift the pot, in some of these alewyues chairs
That his head would not serve him, belike
to come down the stayres.
¶ Nay soft, thou moist not play ye knave, &amp; have this language to
If thou thy tong bridle a while, the better moist thou do,
Confess the truth as I shall ask, and cease a while to fable.
And for thy fault I promise the, thy handling shall be reasonable
Hast thou not made a lie or two, to set these tu• by the ears?
¶ What if I have▪ five hundred such
have I seen within these seven years:
I am sorry for nothing else but that I see not the sport
Which was between them whē they met, as they thēselues re∣port
¶ The greatest thing master rat, ye se how he is dressed.
¶ What devil need he be groping so deep, in good wife Chats hēs nest
¶ Yea but it was thy drift to bring him into y• briers.
¶ Gods bread, hath not such an old fool, wit to save his ears?
He shows himself herein ye see, so very a cox,
The Cat was not so madly alured by the Fox,
To run into the snares, was set for him doubtless,
For he leapt in for mice, and this sir Iohn for madness.
¶ Well and ye shift no better, ye local, lither, and la•••,
I will go near for this, to make ye leap at a Daisy.
In the kings name master Bailey, I charge you set him fast.
¶ What fast at cards, or fast on sleep? it is the thing I did last.
¶ Nay fast in fetters false varlet, according to thy deeds.
¶ Master doctor there is no remedy, I must entreat you needs
Some other kind of punishment,
¶Nay by all Halowes.
His punishmēt if I may judge, shall be nought else but the gallous.
¶ That were to sore, a spiritual man to be so extreme.
¶ Is he worthy any better, sir how do ye judge and deame?
¶ I grant him wort punishment, but in no wise so great.
¶ It is a shame each tel you plain, for such false knaves entreat
He has almost undone vs al, that is as tree•e as steel▪
And yet for al this great a do'cham never the ne'er my neele.
¶ Can you not say any thing to that diccon, wish least or most▪
¶ Yea mary sir, thus much I can say well, the nedle is lost.
¶ Nay can not thou tel which way, that nedle may be found
¶ No by my fey sir. though I might have an hundred pound.
¶ Thou lier lickdis•, did not say the neele wold be gitten?
¶ No hodge, by the same token, you where that time be s•itten?
For fear of Hobgobling, you wot well what I mean,
As long as it is sense, I fear me yet ye be scarce clean.
¶ Well master rat, you must both learn, &amp; teach vs to forgive
Since Diccon hath confession made, • is so clean shreue,
If ye to me conscent, to amend this heavy chance.
I will enjoin him here, some open kind of penance:
Of this condition, where ye know my fee is twenty pence
For the bloodshed, I am agreed with you here to dispense,
Ye shall go quite, so that ye grant, the matter now to run,
To end with mirth among vs al, even as it was begun.
¶ Say yea master vicar, &amp; he shall sure confess to be your dotter
And al we that be hear present, will love you much the better
¶ My part is the worst, but since you al here on agree.
Go even to master Bailey▪ let it be so for me,
¶ How says thou diccon, art content this shall on me depend
¶ Go to M. Bailey say on your mind, I know ye are my friend▪
¶Then mark ye well, to recompense this thy former action
Because thou hast offended al, to make them satisfaction,
Before their faces, here kneel down, &amp; as I shall the teach.
For thou shalt take on other, of hodges leather breach
First for master Doctor, upon pain of his cu•sse,
Where he will pay for al▪ thou never draw thy pur••e.
And when ye m•ete at one pot, he shall have the first pull,
And thou shalt never offer him the cup, but it be full.
To good wife ch•t thou shalt be sworn, even on the same wise
If •he refuse thy money once, never to offer it twice.
Thou shalt be bound by the same here, as thou dost take it
When thou moist drink of free cost, thou never forsake it:
For gimmal gurtons sake, again sworn shalt thou bee
To help his to his no•le again if it do lie in thee
And likewise be bound: by the virtue of that
To be of good abering to Gibe his great Cat:
Last of al for Hodge, the other to scan,
Thou shalt never take him, for fine gentleman.
¶ Come on fellow Diccon chalbe even with thee now.
¶ Thou wilt not stick to do this Diccon I trow.
¶ No by my fathers skin, my hand down I lay it?
Lo•e as I have promised, I will not deny it,
But Hodge take good heed now, thou do not beshite me.
And gave him a good blow on the buttock.
¶Gogs hart thou false villain dost thou bite me•
¶ What Hodge doth he hurt the or ever he begin.
¶ He thrust me into the buttock, with a bodkin or a pin,
I say Gimmal, Gimmal?
¶ How now Hodge, how now:
¶ Gods ma•t Gimmal gurton.
¶ Thou art mad each trow.
¶ Will you see the devil Gimmal.
¶ The devil son, god bless vs.
¶ Chould iche were hanged Gimmal.
¶ Mary se ye might dress vs.
¶ • have it by the mass Gimmal
¶ What not my neele Hodge?
¶Your Neele Gimmal, your neele.
¶ No fie, dost but dodge.
¶ Cha •and •our neele Gimmal, here in my hand be it.
¶ For al the loves on earth Hodge, let me see it.
¶ Soft Gimmal.
¶ Good Hodge.
¶ Soft each say, tarry a while.
¶ Nay sue•e Hodge say truth, and do not me beguile.
¶ Cham sure on it each warrant you: it goes no more a stray
¶ Hodge when I speak so fair: wilt still say me na•:
¶ Go near the •ight gimmal this well in faith good luck:
Chwas almost undone: it was so far in my buttock
¶ Tic min own dear neele Hodge, sykerly I wot
¶ Cham I not a good son gimmal, cham I not,
¶ Christs blessing light on thee, hast made me for ever
¶ Each knew that each must find it, else choud a had it never
¶ By my troth Go••pie gurton, I am even as glad
As though I mine own self as good a turn had:
¶And I by my concience, to see it so come forth,
Rejoice so much at it, 〈◊〉 three nedles be worth.
¶ I am no whit sorry to see you so rejoice.
¶ Nor I much the gladder for al this noise:
Yet say gramercy Diccon, for springing of the game.
¶ Gramercy Diccon twenty times, • how glad cham,
If that chould do so much, your masterdom to come hither,
Master Rat, good wife Chat, and Diccon together:
Cha but one half penny, as far as iche know it,
And i will not rest this night, till each bestow it.
If ever ye love me, let vs go in and drink.
¶ I am content if the rest think as I think▪
Mas•er Rat it shall be best for you if we so doo,
Then shall you warm you and dr••se your self too.
¶ Soft sirs, take vs with you, the company shall be the more,
As proud coms behind they say, as any goes before,
But now my good masters since we must be gone
And leave you behind vs, here all alone:
Since at our last ending, thus merry we bee,
For Gimmal Gurtons nedle sake, let vs have a plaudit•.

