THose things which at their coming are joyful, when they depart are the more sorrowful. For what (ô mighty God) could this Sun at any time be∣hold more happy, than we did seem to our selves, either whē first (ô most merciful Prince) the bright∣ness of thy Majesty did here shine out, or else in all the time we rested in your presence, as in a paradise or most happy abundance of all things. But woe to that changeable course of hue∣maine things, which suffered nothing incorrupt, nor any thing eter∣nil▪ so pleasure brings after it sadness, and grief doth not only sòdainly take away our delights, but most bitterly cut of the same. So that we that lately received thee approaching with all joys: should follow thee departing (if the renown of your highness and train would suffer it) with mourning garments. If you demand the cause of so great sorrow, I know not what part of his Majesty God hath in∣duet your person withal, which doth stir up great reverence of thee, but full of a certain wonderful love, whereby it comes to pass that we hardly suffer our selves to be severed from your presence. Add moreover, that we seem after a sort unto your highness (such is your clemency) to have satisfied every point of gratefulness: yet have we not, nor ever shall we satisfy our selves in that behalf. We would wish a longer use of time (if it were profitable) that we might express, if not a greater, yet a more continual show of our love and obedience. But we must both yield to your pleasure, and to the com∣mon wealth, for that we know assuredly to our great and singular ad∣u•uncement, you never cease to seek out and afoord the same to all your subjects. Go now therefore, go with lucky steppe thither, when∣there thy virtue calls thee. And for vs, this shall comfort vs aboun∣dantly (which deserves both immortal thanks and perpetual me∣mori) that thou so renowned a Prince, hast vouchsafed so courteously to visit our dwellinges. And finally, we here before thee, whom God hath anointed, and before all this famous assembly, take God (which now beholds vs) to our witness, that we will keep our faith and o∣bedience in him to thee only for ever. Thou Nurse of religion, Mo∣there of the Common Wealth, Beauty of Princes, Solace of thy Sub∣jest•, most happily (oh how I rue to speak it) Farewell.
GEllius in his Noctibus Atticis (most excellent Princess) doth write, that it was the saying of Phae∣uorinus the Philosopher, that the day was one while a mother, another while a stepdame: and that hee used this verse, long time allowed, a∣mong men, in his accustomed communication, 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉. Which verse Gellius in this man∣ner expounded: That of sorrows &amp; pleasures there be changes, that it cannot be well every day with vs, but this day well, and that day i'll. And surely, that nothing hath bin at any time more gallantly or truly spoken, both the continual course of mans uncertain estate, and the often alterations where he is subject, manifestly declare, beside that, this present day gives evident proof thereof. For, the most joyful coming of your high∣ness, did not so much recreate and comfort vs in our daily desire and longing, as we are discouraged by this your depar∣ting, whereto we see preparation made on al hands. And as all ages and degrees received your Majesty, with joy and gladness at your coming: so there is not one but lamented and more∣neth at your graces going. And doubtless for my part, because mine own hart is best known to my self, I protest that I no∣for took upon me a greater charge, then that, wherewith at this present I am burdened: not only to speak face to face with a most learned lady and princess, which notwithstanding is, of it self, a harde and a busy matter: but, which is much more, that to me is befallē the sad and sorrowful office of leave taking. For, who would not be exceedingly grieved, to see the thing which he principally desired, in a very short time, and as it were 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, at an instant taken away, before he might have thereof full fruition? How lamentable a thing is it, to pull away sucking babes from the breasts and bosoms of their most lo∣uing
mothers? That sons and fathers, through some miserable misfortune, should be sundered? Yet I notwithstanding am of opinion, that nature hath not engendered in any mā, such large love, and so great good will, no not toward them whom they have begotten, or of whom they themselves have been begot∣ten, as is the love and good will wherewith we advance, obey, and reverence your Majesty, being the mother and nurse of this whole Common wealth, and Country. Great is the force of friendship and familiarity, which oftentimes brings to pass, that they, which either by some kind of fellowship, or by an accustomed condition of life, in tract of time have bin closely knit, and so become both of one mind, and as it were grown together, that hard and scant they may be separated, &amp; set in sunder. Hereof sprang the faithfulness of Theseus, commē∣ded by the mouth and monuments of all men: and the entire friendship of innumerable more, whō no dangers, nor la∣bours, either by sea or land, could sequester from their sweet society &amp; comfortable company, with whom they long had li∣ued. And what desires, or what delights have any where bin found, that may be compared with the sincere affection, and unfeigned good will, which we bear to your Highness, most excellent Princess? These are not sufficient shows of our faith and benevolence, which is much greater, than that the e∣loquence of any learned man, or that the slenderness of my wit and capacity may make it manifest. Nature at no time tied any thing with a straighter knot, or set several things at greater agreement, than the soul and the body: a declaration whereof is, the incredible consent and concorde of thē both, the mutual care and regard of succouring each other resting in thē both: and the grievous departing, at the hour of death, the one frō the other remaining in them both. But we which profess Christian religion and godliness, have learned this lesson, not only to love our country, but also his highness, in whom the health and safety of our country consists, far aboue the valiant Decij, the Scaeuolae the Curtij, which ventured their lives for the Common wealth of Rome: yea, to love his grace much
better than our own lives. For, what is he that would doubt to dye for his sake, who if she were not, he should be constrey∣ned to abide a bondage much more bitter than death? Neither is this faithful love of vs your subjects (most excellent Queen) lightly laid up in our hearts, and scarcely covered as it were in the ground, but deeply rooted, so that by no storms nor tempests of Fortune it can be shaken, by no engines over∣thrown, by no force or violence vndertroden. For how much makes it for the establishment of faith and love, in that we know your Majesty hath obtained regiment and rule, not at the pleasure and appointment of wavering Fortune, but by right of inheritance, that is to say, 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉: nor that the Homericall Iuppiter 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, but that the maker and Creator of all things delivered it into your Highness hands? And therefore a singular noses∣sitie of obedience is laid upon vs, even by God himself, least in Giant guise as it is feigned, we set shoulder against God, and being at defiance with him most wickedly, bid him battle. When we behold those excellent and divine benefits, which your grace has bestowed upon the common wealth, in so much that among many, yea innumerable Countries, and nations under the Sun, none (I will not say may bee pre∣ferred before vs) but not so much as one may be compared with vs. Ought not then a singular love and good will to be lens∣ked with that law, and necessity of obediēce? For what should I make rehearsal of full twenty years, wherein we have lived in such peace and tranquillity, as not only this our age hath no∣for seen the like, but as in old records and ancient Chro∣nicles of all ages and people, is no where mentioned? What should I call to memory hurlyburlies foreseen a far off, as from an espial: exceeding great dangers, not only perceived by wisdom, but also prevented by counsel: secrete snares, and privy practises disappointed, not to much by violence, as by policy: finally, all Treacherous attempts, and Rebellious en∣terprises, with great gladness and reioicing extinguished, with∣out any tumult at all, or very little (doúbtlesse) ensuing among
the people? These things might make vs (although your Grace were otherwise than you are) perform all duty of faith and love, with most willing minds to your Majesty. Now, for so much as we have your highness, our merciful and bountiful Sovereign, who possessing principality and royal regiment, doest not swerve an hears breadth from justice and equity, what is he for a man so savage and obstinate, whom these so singular and rare virtues may not allure to all love and allege∣ance? Wherefore, if the surest safety of Princes is the faith of their subjects (as we have heard very wise men hold opinion) what can be more safe, what can be more sure, than your excel∣lencie, which the studies and endeavours of your people, being so great, have fenced and fortified? I have made mine Oration the longer (most noble Queen) to the intent we might the lone∣ger enjoy your comfortable presence, from the which, to our great grief and sorrow, we shall depart. But because luck must be borne, which can not be avoided, least I might seem more than is meet to delay your Graces progress, whiles I am in hand to please mine own humour, I will make an end. Con∣corning your Majesty, whose presence this day will shut from our sight, we will notwithstanding in your absence behold and reverence, we will love your Highness with all our hearts, minds, and endeavours: we will most dutifully obey your Graces Laws and Commandments. Finally, your May∣sties good estate (whereupon likewise our safety depen∣death) we will commend to Almighty God in our daily Prayers, that the same a long time may bee continued, and also pre∣served. Amen.
IN shadowing clouds why art thou closed? ò Phoebus bright retire:
Vnspoused Pallas present is, ô Phoebus bright retire.
The threatening spear is flung far off, doubt not grim Gorgons ire:
Unarmed Pallas present is, ô Phoebus bright retire.
Perhaps thou art afraid: And why? at this so large a light:
Least that a Woman should excel, thy beams (ô Phoebus) bright.
Let not a Queen, a Virgin pure, which is, and ever was,
O fair Apollo, make thee blush: you both in beauty pass.
O Phoebus safe and sound return, which, banishing the nigh•,
Bring back the day: in all the world nothing of like delight.
She, only she, the darkness drove of Poprye quite away:
And, by Religion, hath restored the bright and lightsome day.
O Phoebus, with thy beams, which foylst the clouds both blind and black,
The world, in manner all, a thing of like delight doth lack.
A thousand dangers and delays, the Papists had devised,
To the end our Princess should abridge, his progress entreprisde:
Yet this our bright and shining sun, cast light through every cloud:
Although in clouds thou art content, Apollo, oft to shroud.
Thou see our Sun in comely course, cuts off each stop &amp; stay:
Do thou the like, and by thy light drive every cloud away.
In shadowing clouds why art thou closed? ô Phoebus bright retire:
Vnspoused Pallas present is: ô Phoebus bright retire.
His kingdom all by providence, Queen Iuno doth uphold:
And of Minerua Lady learned, is learned lore extolled:
And Venus fair of countenance, hath beauty uncontrolled.
These sundry gifts of Goddesses three, Elizabeth possesses:
By providence his peoples peace, and comfort she increases:
His learning, learning amplifies: his beauty never ceases.
I did but jest, of Goddesses to give them three the name:
This Lady may thou Goddess call, for she deserves the same:
Although she will not undertake, a title of such fame.

BOnum opus laudabila, which is as much to say,
Good works though plain are worthy praise, and so have been always.
Then though with Bullus Tully style, our Author doe not frame,
This his first work which you shall hear, yet do accept the same,
For why the Story being good, the matter also true,
Doth but declare a matter old, as it were done anew.
And shows forth how prone God is, to help such as are just,
And in that God before all men, doe put assured trust,
Of Susans life the story is, what trouble she was in,
How narrowly she scoped death because she would not sin,
How wondrously she was provoked, how virtuously she fled,
The strong assaults of wicked men, that lecherous lusts had led,
To ravish her, and to pollute, her chaste and wifely view,
This is the sum of all that shall be showed unto you,
And though perchance some wanton word, doe pass which may not séeme
Or gestures light not méete for this, your wisdoms may it déeme,
Account that nought delights the hart of men on earth,
So much as matters grave and sad, if they be mixed with mirth,
Of both which here I trust you shall, as in a mirror sée,
And that in such a decent sort as hurtful shall not be,
And for because ensample good, is méete in these our days,
This hath he done to shorten time, to God give all the praise.
Thus craving quiet silence now, my spéeche I mean to spare,
Behold when Satan enters place, his mind he will declare.
¶Among the plagues of thée O God,
Wherewith thou plaguest man,
Plague such as I would have thée plague,
Or let me if I can.
I wallow now in worldly wealth,
And have the world at will,
Into eche hart I créepe by stealth,
Of blood I have my fill.
But yet there is a wight,
In thée O Babilon,
Whose flesh or fleece if I may get,
How well were I begone,
To seek her out my self,
Or to attempt her grace,
I might perchance have had my pray,
So ugly is my face.
Well, well, I have a crafty child,
His name is Ill Report,
A blessed Babe that I have trained,
To talk in such a sort.
That were she never so just or true,
Or liver never so chaste,
By hook, or crook, by trace or pace,
He brings her home at last.
¶What Evil Report thou crooked Knave,
What can thou not hear thy Dad,
Come with a proper pestilence,
I think the théefe be mad.
¶What quoth hée, now by this day,
I think thée mad to be,
How say you all, within this Hall,
What Knave more crookte then he,
Why you shitten slave, you crookte nose knave,
What are thy wits now past,
What moved thée with Ill Report,
To call in such a haste.
¶O Son.
¶O Théefe.
¶O Boy.
¶O Knave.
¶I have a Cheer for thée to doe,
¶Gogges wounds more Cheers yet.
I must cheer abroad, and you in Cheer must sit,
¶O loving Boy, and dainty Child,
As ever thou did me good,
Let me now crave thy good aduyce,
To help me in this mood,
Thou séest I have what I desire,
In all the Country here,
Yet is there one in Babilon,
That never had no péere,
She serves God and on him sets,
Her study and her care.
¶Gogges wounds thou lie I trow,
Such gifts be very rare,
¶O Son it is true in déede,
I would it were a lye:
I would sing, I would dance,
Oh I would skip full hye,
¶How say you now my masters all,
Think you my Dads not light,
If you mark him, he is indéede,
To dancing trimly plight,
I dare now swear a thousand oaths,
And eake as many more,
You never saw such a one behind,
As my Dad is before.
But Dad what would you have me to doe herein.
¶Why Knave thou wilt not hear me how I begin,
¶Why slave beginnest thou to rail,
Farewell with a pestilence, I would thou had kissed my tail,
¶Why come again son art thou grown so short,
¶Gogges wounds who would be used after such a sort.
Without my help thou sit like a Whelp,
And know not what to doe,
And yet like a slave thou call me slave, and crooked villain to,
¶O Son, O Boy, O Lord, O Child,
Thou art my ground on thée I doe build,
Be not displeased I pray thée with all my heart,
And look what thou get thou shalt have thy part,
If thou can compass Suzanne to overthrow,
Thou shalt have my blessing wheresoever I go.
Because I have trusted thée long time before,
I yéelde it to thy policy, and I say no more.
But if thou shouldest want any part of my aid,
I will be at thy hand then be not afraid,
And let vs sée if God with all his might,
Can defend this soul from our ancient spite.
¶Dad doest thou put the matter to my ordering?
¶Yea Son that I do with all my blessing,
Knéele down and thou shalt have it in way of good spéede,
And all the Devils in Hell to help thée at thy néede.
The blessing given to the Serpent which tempted Eve,
And all manner extremities thée to reléeue.
And that which God gave for Abels sake to Caine,
Light upon thée with might and mayne.
That which Ionise threatened unto Niniuie,
Light on thée and all thy posterity.
And I use to be short, and in few words to tell,
God send thée a thousand plagues more then ever were found in hell,
These and ten thousand when thou art laid in thy bed,
To recompense thy travail light upon thy head.
¶Who there Dad we have blessings ynow,
And ten thousand mo then I give unto you,
And when it shall please you, ye may be packing,
For in me I warrant you nought shall be lacking.
¶Then farewell Boy with a pestilence,
¶And farewell Dad with a vengeance.
¶Am I not a jolly fellow, it is séene by my progeny,
That my ancient stock is of great antiquity,
How old it is none of you all can tell,
Seven years elder at the least then is th• Devil of Hell,
Evil Report mary he is a jolly man, and had in such a price,
That no man lives now adays, but will him exercise.
Well the charge I have, eche one of you doe know,
In accomplishing of the same, my diligence I will show,
The policy of the Devil, the envy he doth bear,
The man he séekes to overthrow, all such as God doth fear,
Is marvelous in faith, think you his foresight is not strange,
Mark well my tale and you shall sée, how his deuyse doth change
There is in all this Babilon, but one that he doth spy,
That fears God, and eke my Dad in all his works defy.
Her hath he sought by pride at first to blind her youthful hart,
Tush, tush, she was and is so méeke, he sped not in that part,
Then did he séeke by gluttony to blind her fancies to,
Her sober diet him deceived, and did that quyte subdue,
Then knowing that all women are given much to envied string,
To force her have an envious hart, right many cause did bring,
But she like one not of this world, but like a very fool,
Did arm her self with patience, till every cause did cool,
But here you wives, I would not wish that you should take her part,
But if your husbands anger you, beshrew their crooked hart,
Well to my matter yet again, he sets his servant sloth,
To follow her with sugared steps, in every place she goes.
But busy Susan envies the Devil and all he doth,
As she withstands sloth and his steps, in despite of his tooth.
And that you Maids full well doe know, sloth with his drowsy head,
Is able to doe much with you, when you are laid in bed,
For you had rather serve the Devil, or what he will deuyse,
Then leave your bed in winter morn, when hory frosts arise,
He gave her Gold then at her will, to make her covetous,
She takes it but for néedefull use, or else doth it despise,
And yet with Gold my Dad hath got, a thousand old men's souls,
As well of them wear bloody gowns, as such as shear their noules,
But now my Dad nor all these things, are able to prevail,
With filthy lusts of fleshly men, means her to assail,
And such they be shall her intise, to doe that pleasant deed,
As shall prevail I tell you true, by force or else by méede,
And when that they have got their wills, and so have wrought her shame
My self will blow the leaden Trump of cruel slanderous fame,
Lo thus my Dad I please I trow, and thus my nature show,
Thus shall each man my power and might in every corner blow,
And say that though the Devil himself, could not tempt Susans grace
The wit of Master Ill Report hath her and it defect,
Oh goodly wit, oh noble brain, whence comes this deuyce.
¶Come in Master Sensualitas I pray thee,
Reche me thy hand and I will help thée.
¶By my truth Voluptas I have néede of thy aid,
Such is my secrete sorrow, my senses are dismayed.
¶Though you judge me scant worth to be a proctor,
Mark me well now, and I will play the Doctor.
Amor vincit omnia, I nose cedamas Amori,
Love overcomes every thing, love can eche Mount remove,
The Gods of old, and every man are subject unto love▪
¶Mark his tale.
¶Trouble him not.
¶Res est Solicia, Plane ten ores amor,
How say you my masters this is good clamour▪
Love hath a pleasure in it self, yet love is full of fear,
Love helps and it doth harm a man, love is not this good gear,
Love from the Senses of a man can steal away the might,
Love can make mad the mind of man, and love can blind the sight,
But is not he a jolly man that love can so subdue,
As he can lose it when he list, and it again renew,
¶My friend God spéede,
¶Soft swift not friends so soon,
¶Why sir I never gave you cause of offence,
¶Nor to doe it is our pretence,
¶You lye like crafty knaves boeth,
God spéede so carterly to him ye never sée before,
For you and your speed, a stinking turd for you both,
Gogges blood were ye brought up at the cart,
To break a mans tale in such sort, now I beshrew your hart,
¶Oh blame vs not sir I pray you, your talk I trow was of love,
And hearing your arguments your wits did vs move,
To speak to you bree•ely for feeling that payne,
Your Arguments said you could help vs again.
¶And though I can, what is that to thée,
¶That you will sir I hope verily.
¶Nay soft masters a while, it is a condition,
That never yet was used, by expert Physician,
His Patient or Cure to practise to heal,
Before his disease he know very well,
And therefore I say your secretes descry,
Or else for your help I cannot apply.
¶Mary sir love is my sickness.
¶And what is the cause of your weakness,
¶Love to good Gentleman.
¶And for thy fair words, I will help thée if I can,
But those that stand by will think it to strange,
That I unto health your sickness should change.
And busynesse at this time doth call me away,
And therefore farewell till another day.
¶Nay good Master Doctor let vs have your help.
¶•o shall you sir but I must first provide,
Such things as the cause of your groefes doe decide.
And since you will not pack I must be gone,
For my confections I always make alone,
And none of you both to provide my trumpery,
Have not the wit to offer me money,
And I being shamefaste the same cannot crave,
Lo you will have help, and I nought shall have.
¶Yes Master Doctor here is five pound.
¶And here is as much sée it falls to the ground,
Take it up Master Doctor, to provide your drugs,
And to buy the same I would you would trudge.
¶At your commandment sir, first I must stoop for my reward,
And then run at a beck, no that were to harde.
You know where to have me, get you hence for a space,
And within a day or two return to this place,
And then for your health here shall nothing be lacking,
Tarry no longer, go hence and be packing.
¶Alas Sir will it be two days first.
¶Yea.
¶I think sure we are both accursed.
¶Yet will we follow your counsel,
¶And in so doing, you doe but well,
¶God be with you.
¶And with you to.
¶God be with you with all my hart,
¶And with you to, with all my fart.
¶Ah syrra, I think this hour well splendid,
The lining of my purse is very well amended.
I might doe little if I could not talk,
Seeing how liberally their hands do walk.
Judge what I will doe for this ten pound,
Teach them a way themselves to confound.
For these are the two that Susan shall prove,
By all manner means to cool their hose love,
And if they obtain what get they than,
A Tabernacle forsooth with my Dad Satan.
and if they doe not, but she it descry,
The rigour of Law shall force them to dye.
Lo thus you doe sée I have gone the device,
That Mistress Susan shall sore entice.
Send them good luck Dad be thou their spéede,
And grant that with shame they may end for their méede,
And thus because things doe grow fast upon,
Farewell my masters I will be gone.
¶The weighty charge that God hath given, to such as doe live here,
And joined are the pore to guide, doth fret my hart with fear,
The charge we have to help the just, and vice to punish to,
O Lord thou know it is to great for mortal men to do.
The Princes thought to live at ease, the pore man to take payne,
But dangerous is the Princes life, and dangerous once again,
O God let it not séeme to thée that I would change my fate,
But if it be thy will good Lord, rid me from Rulers state.
¶God save your goodness worthy sir, God still augment your days,
¶God send you Nestors time to reign, with help in all assays,
¶In froth right 〈◊〉 pity are you come, I thought your absence long,
For when I am in place alone, my passions séeme full strong,
I cannot rid out of my brain the charge of our degrée,
How rightly we should rule the world, which crooked is to sée,
I promise you if I might speak without offence of God,
There is no sharper punishment, then is the Rulers rod.
Yea let vs doe even what we can to rule each thing aright,
Thou know Lord the weight is such it passes much our might.
¶Why Sir me thinks you doe offend, because you thus rapine,
Against the doings of that God, whose works are all divine,
He hath placed you for chiefest here, and vs to be your aid,
We may not shrink like fearful ones, but bear the burden laid,
We may not think the burden great, nor yet the time to long,
That God shall keep vs in this state, but sée we doe no wrong.
〈…〉 (alas) who lives now and doth the people guide,
But that against his will, O Lord, his foot shall sometime slyde,
The matters are so croockt and vile, that comes forth each day,
As how to end without some▪ wrong, I know not well the way.
¶A Judges state is straight indéede, and to be looked upon,
But if so straight as you doe fear, then were we wo begone.
But this I think if evidence our matters doe decide,
Our ground is sure, our path is straight, our sentence cannot slyde.
¶Your if doth well, but if your if, do miss in any case,
How should we end our journey straight, and have a crooked race.
But reply on words with words, doth vainly spend the time,
And time ill spent you know right well, is eake a grievous crime,
What things we have to do you know, what matters to discuss,
The number of them Lord thou know, I think to much for vs,
Well it is our charge you know, and therefore doe you two,
Peruse eche plaint with such effect, as Judges ought to do,
And when you have with dil•igence, done it with good aduyce,
I will you aid to cut of doubts, if any doe arise.
¶O God when thou midst man of nought, thou framdste him in such bliss,
As he should still •isy thy grace, and feel no heaviness.
Unto thy likeness him thou midst, among thy works of wonder,
And s•ttest him in Paradise, where is no thirst 〈◊〉 hunger.
This joyful life did he lead still, till death the Devil and Hell,
By disobeying of thy doom did spite his state so well,
He fell from that and now is come, into such weakness Lord,
As what a love of him doth come, by thée it is abhorde.
Therefore good Lord since thou haste placed, me for a Ruler here,
Grant that no word may pass my mouth, without thy love and fear
¶I cannot but must marvel much, of Ioachim my Lord,
And why he comes not home to dine, according to his word.
Was it not at 〈◊〉 a Clock that he said he would dine,
How think you both in faith is it not, a little past that time.
¶Not much Madam he is not soont to break his promise just,
¶No, no, Madam, he will ere long be with you, you may trust.
¶What yonder he is me thinks.
¶It is he in very deed.
¶I will not say unto you now, what you did cause me think,
In déede I will conceal it now, and at the matter wink.
¶What Susan doest thou chide me now, I will fell thée my mind,
That women there be none at all, but shrews they are by kind,
¶Well, well, to avoid this controversy, I will confess that crime,
And I pray you heartily to arise, and let vs home to dine.
¶What is it dinner time so soon, me thinks it scantly noon,
¶Yes good my Lord I pray you now, make ready and go we soon.
¶Lo now my masters you may sée, the state of married men,
My wife is come, I must be gone, I must yéelde to her when,
¶And reason good forsooth it is, for every man to doe,
In some thing as his wife shall will, his willing hart unto.
¶Ye speak it well in very déede, but it were harde to find,
If both your words and hart did gre in uttering this your mind,
¶If he speak not his thought Madam, I dare beshrew his heart,
For as he said I think in déede, and shall doe for my part.
¶Your conclusion now I sée, is that I should obey,
〈◊〉 wise in this her small request, well, well, I say not nay,
But Susan come let vs go home, the sooner shall we dine,
As I doe you, so shall you me, obey another time.
¶And reason good in faith my Lord, both now and always to,
That I should follow your behests, as reason wills me do.
¶Well farewell my Masters till after noon,
I trust you will dine, and be here again soon.
¶I warrant you we will not be long,
¶If we should, we should do you wrong.
¶Now Master Sensuality I would master Doctor were here▪
¶I had rather talk with him, then hear of this gear.
¶Oh Venus that hath suffered me, to quench my youthful fire,
With love of those from time to time, that I did most desire.
And Cupped to that never erst did séeke to quench the hart.
Of her to whom thou gave might to mitigate my smart,
Continue still your friendly guise, to me your ancient man,
And now with point of piercing dart, doe cause that fair Susan,
May love again those that love her, grant this you Gods to me,
and pull away even what you will, I crave no more but she.
¶Or if you Gods have any power, as ancient Poets fain,
Mark well my words which from the hart procéede I tell you plain.
If any man in all the world have cause for to reply,
I must confess and thank you to, the same is very I,
I never yet did fancy her, I thank you of your grace,
But you vouchsafed to give her me, with time as méete as place.
Now those which in felicity by your good grace have been,
That you will here thus cast them of, let not those days be séene,
Grant to vs now that Susan may grant love for love again,
Thrice happy then shall be our days, we shall be void of payne.
¶What wight in all this world hath fortune so found on,
As she hath done on Ioachims side, in truth I think of none,
A wife quoth a: No, no, I think an Angel sure she be,
Why all this world, nor ten worlds mo, have any such as she.
The fewter of her formed face, the glistening of her eyne,
Her shoulders that are quadrant to, her nose that is so fine.
Her chéekes that are so cheri red, her lips so red and thin,
Her smiling cheer which often shows the pits upon her chin.
Her breasts that are so round and fair, her arms that are so long,
Her fingers straight with veins beset, of blew and white among.
Her middle small, her body long, her buttocks broad and round,
Her legs so straight, her foot so small, the like treads not on ground
I think that Nature which made her, cannot make like again,
Or else that she a Goddess is, I think I tell you plain,
A Judge quoth a: A Juggler Lord, I would thou midst of me,
So that I had to Iugle with, such juggling staff as she.
¶Why Sir are you a Juggler now, I pray you answer me,
What is the juggling staff you crave, if granted it may be.
¶You know your self no Necromancy, but yet of Leg•rdimayne,
A cast or two but secretly would right well please vs twain,
¶By God I would spend my best cote to fish within her poole,
And yet my father in fishers art was never but a fool.
But what for that it forces not, if we might spy a place,
And time that well may serve the turn, I will put forth the case,
But we are counted Elders here, and doe the people guide,
And that we doe must secrete be, least that we be espied,
For God, or for his threatenings, I pass it not a straw,
But for mine honour in this world, is it I stand in awe.
¶You say I doe issue•e you, as I my self doe think,
The time that we have here to live, it lasts but a wink,
And when that we are dead and gone, then rest we in the ground,
And out of doubt beside this life, none other life is found,
Therefore I doe assure you, I mente and doe mean still,
By right or wrong, by force or fraud, to live and have my will,
To eat and drink to quaff and play, I care not in what sort,
To lead my life full merrily in every kind of sport.
And for to have the company of such a one as she,
I will oppress a thousand fools to give her gold and fée.
Mar• always in our Garments sad and grave we must vs show,
And that shall still our lightness hyde, that no man shall it know,
But yet our enterprise seems great, that we doe mean to doe,
For Susan is a secrete Dame, report me unto you.
And eake her credit is so great, that if she doe deny,
The most and least in all the world, believe her by and by.
And therefore let vs séeke and know eche danger still before▪
And so our ship shall safely sail▪ and we may keep on shore.
And therefore if we could by craft, some slander on her raise,
It might help well our credit when, we seek our lust to please.
¶I promise thee I must account, thy wits to be divine,
Thy senses are of such effect, how f•r do they pass mine.
I know a ma•e full meet for this, if I knew his resort,
A fellow for this to• alone, his name is Ill Report
Why see how good our fortune is, see how he comes yond
And we to see his entrance now, in Corner here will stand.
¶Twixt Dover and Kent,
Except I misu•ned,
Is miles five and dirty,
Twixt London and Powles,
Are goddess headed nowles,
A shameful company,
Twixt Freshingfield &amp; feuershā,
And Norwich and Ludham,
A mile and a half,
Twixt Dunington and Dawbny
If you will believe me,
Is a Cow and a Calfe,
At •ramlingtowne Stéeple,
Amongst all the people,
Are Oysters to sell.
At the sign of the Plow,
Is a very fair Sow,
I know her by the smell.
At Baddingham Kay,
A woman harde say,
Lay ships at an Anchor:
The best red wine.
That ever drank swine,
at the sign of the Tanker,
On shooters hill,
Is such a Windmill.
To grind Gonpowder withal
as old women's bones,
Are saved for the nones,
To kéepe work withal.
Who Robin who,
How far wilt thou go,
From Rommey to Rome,
Well it makes no matter,
Who can lye and flatter,
May come again soon.
Why what kind of weather,
Did bring me hither,
Or what make I here:
Examine me well,
For I cannot tell,
Is not this good gear,
Well even like a mom,
I must pack and be gone,
To one place or other,
My Dad is so black,
That what I doe lack,
I ask of my mother.
¶Why friend know you not me?
¶Why man I know not my self.
¶No, art not thou a Physician?
¶No by my troth Sirs in no condition,
¶No, I trow we two gave thee ten pound,
¶Mary sir and I am glad that such go•s•es I have found,
For the law saith plainly thus, look what a man doth give,
Is irrecompensible sure, so long as God doth live.
But you shall have your come again so soon as God is dead,
Or else take all my Lands and goods, and also take this head,
Till then my masters record bear, what you doe hear and sée,
These gentlemen doe both confess, that they did give it me.
¶Why friend shall we lose our Money?
¶Why fool though I know not Physic I know a conny.
¶Master Uoluptas for the Money force not, he is a good fellow,
And will otherwise deserve it, I doe right well know,
¶I will say no more of it, but doe remit the same,
But I pray thee tell me what is thy name?
¶Mary Sir a woman.
¶What act thou a man, and haste a women's name?
¶Why sir are you a woman, and have a man to your Dame.
¶Nay I pray thee jest not but tell me thy name.
¶In faith sir she can doe you no pleasure, for she goes with crooches.
¶〈◊〉 go•th upon crooches I pray thee tell,
¶Mary my Dame sir her A•se is not well.
For she had a vengeance boat payne betwéene her legs,
And her Surgeon hath magmed her with driving in pigs.
¶Thou art a merry fellow, I ask thée thy name?
¶B• my Fathers soul sir I know not the same,
But yet I will talk like a master of art,
Though my chief erudition hath been at the Carte,
Twert I•fa•de Redding any Portsmouth,
You shall find my name I tell you forsooth.
¶If thou werte gentle, thou would not send me so far,
But f•iendly declare and show what you are.
¶Why whether I be friendly or no, in faith thou art foolish,
And mad to I think, that understand not English,
Take the first Syllable of these Towns thrée,
A•d what my name is thou shalt plainly see.
¶I will rid the strife, and tell in plainer sort,
His name as I told you, is Ill Report,
¶What plain Ill Report, no master at all,
in faith for all your bloody gown, I will ray you on the scale.
¶Why gentle Master Ill Report it is a friendly part,
With plain words to salute a friend, proceeding from the heart,
And I dare speak in your behalf, although you seem to swear,
That friendly you do take his words, as we doe friendship bear.
¶Give me thy hand my friend, I swear by my Dad and Lord,
Thou art arse honest a man, as is in the un•arshole world.
Thou l•uest me, and thou love me, and I love thée, and I love thée,
And is not Ill Report Voluptuousness, and Sensuality,
A glorious and blessed trinity, a pestilence on you both,
¶Let vs leave now master Ill Report,
¶Why Knave dost thou check me in such a sort.
¶No sir, but we have weighty masters to discus,
And for your wisdoms sake we account you chief of vs,
And because it concern•h women's kind,
I know you as good as any man may find.
¶In women's gear I am alone, it is my whole delight,
And I will help you in that case, be it wrong or right,
¶Well then I will be short unto thée man,
We burn both with lust to Susan.
¶And Ue•us with Bacchus for wine, and Ceres for Corn,
Is always cold, and thou burnest after a horn.
¶Why sir, why say you so,
¶Thine own words in such sort go.
Did not thou say to me even now man,
That thou waste in love, and could not get thy shoes on.
¶No sir, no, I speak of Suzanne.
¶Who sir, the country hath no pear a,
And is not a Neates feather I pray thée a,
Better to pull on thy shoes a,
Then to pull them on with thy fingers end a.
¶We talk of Ioachims wife, whose name in Latin is Susan
¶Oh oh, Est nomen Mulieris,
And you would have, tactus ipsius ventris.
You love well Salmon of the meses,
For a women's belly your diet doth please,
But if you mean to have my help, to fortify your forte,
All that I can doe is, to give her an ill Report▪
By which means if you prove, and cannot speed,
That she desires you, the peoples cares I will •eede,
Whereby, and by your demure countenance•,
You shall by love or fear, obtain your desired d•lyaunce.
¶Oh excellent wit, and friendship irrecompens•ble,
We will requite you with the like, i• ever we be able.
¶By my troth you say very well, for so do the common sort,
in recompense of a good turn, give an ill report.
Well g•t you packing to dinner, and when you find her alone,
Spéede your purpose if you may, and let me alone.
For I will cloak your doings, and hers shall be the blame,
You shall doe the fault, and she shall have the shame,
Well once again adieu.
¶And to be short as much again to you.
¶Must not a common wealth,
Be néedes in good health,
That have such Rulers,
They are sick of the sweat,
And to avoid their heat,
They must have coolers,
They must néedes spéede well,
That know I come from hell,
And seek mine aduyce,
Well doe them not blame,
For to open shame,
I will them entice.
And so at the last,
I shall bring to pass
My Fathers desire,
For Susan or the Judge,
To please his old grudge,
Shall burn in his fire,
What seace Knave seace,
Hold thy tongue and be peace,
What is he comes here,
It is Ioachim alas,
I will be gone by the Mass,
It is he that I fear.
¶Seven times is said that in one day, the just man doth offend,
Then seven times seven doe I alas, good Lord doe it amend,
And grant that what I take in hand, or what I shall begin,
May guided be by thy good grace, and so I shall not sin.
Well to sée what my mates have done, to help each pore mans case,
I will absent my self a while, and get me from this place,
But yet before that I go hence, Lord shield me with thy might,
And grant me by thy wonted grace, to judge eche thing aright,
I pass not of this pomped world, nor might that is therein,
I séeke good Lord by thy good grace, in heaven a place to win.
And therefore I assure my self, my hope shall be no less,
That if thou guide me with thy grace, I shall obtain thy bless.
And so shall all that virtue séekes, and live here on the ground,
And they that doe the contrary, God will them sure confound.
Well weighty busynesse calls me hence, to God I leave you all,
Who grant vs all to stand upright, and not in sin to fall.
¶When first I came into the Court, where we doe serve and dwell,
What I did think would move you laugh, if I that tale should tell.
¶To laugh sometime is medsonable, therefore thou may do well,
Thy merry thought to utter now, that time doth serve to tell.
¶I heard once in my fathers house, a Gentleman declare,
The worthy customs of the court, and •ache the Princely fare,
The gorgeous Garments of eche Dame, their tyne and famous life,
The noble works of amorous Knights, their stout and loving strife,
The pleasure of eche worthy Dame, how they doe hunt and hawk,
And wearied with eche pastime thus, the streets how they did walk
The noble masks that were showed forth in every winters night,
The Revels and the revelling cheer, that did eche heart delight,
Musicians how they did deuyse, with songs to please the ear,
And Musickes art by instrument that gladded hearts to hear,
And sometime the pore mans child, that there is placed to be,
To honour climes for virtues sake, and brought to hye degrée,
Tush, then was I on fire set, till I could get the grace,
Of Fathers and of mothers grant, to dwell in such a place,
They granted me, and I was glad, thus came I here to dwell,
But now I think both you and I, another tale can tell,
And yet can none of vs deny, but that his words were true,
But that pertains not to my state, nor yet belonges to you.
For we but waiters are on them, that lead these happy days,
We trudge and travail and take payne, they do possess the praise,
Thus when I think how wide I shot, when I shot at this mark,
I laugh to sée how ready youth is still to change his work,
I leapt from ease and quiet state, within my native soil,
And came into a stranger ayre, to travail and to toil.
¶And can you laugh at this conceit, then I will make make you smile
When time and place shall serve again, for vs to talk a while,
But now let vs be packing hence, our Dame may think vs long,
She will forsooth give vs the right, if we give her the wrong.
¶Hark Serua, hark, the clock strikes one, tic time for vs to go,
It is a point of policy, to love and fear a throw.
¶Heu mihi quote nullis amor est medicabilis herbs,
Wo to me wretch, wo once again, wo to this day and hour,
Wherein my heate of art•n• love, will cool with herb nor flower,
Wo to the God that sends the love, wo to him 〈◊〉 the Dart,
And can so strike as will not heal, by herb or medicines art,
Wo to my self that fixed my hart, where I cannot revoke,
Wo to that blind boy once again, that gave my hart the stroke.
if I may find a time and place, to cool this my desire
I will doe it to spyte the Gods, I care not for their ire.
¶Sensualitas my friend, you know as well as I,
How first we found by secrete means Susannas haunt to spy,
Shée goes each day when she hath dynde, unto a certain spring,
Within here Orchard her to wash, which is a wholesome thing.
There were we sure at the least, our eyes to fill and please,
Be quiet then, that may perhaps, our sorrows partly ease.
¶Ye say full well, and I think sure, if we could closely hyde,
Our selves within some covert place, a time there might be spied,
Wherein we might take her alone, and then through love or might,
We would have both our pleasure there, to void this sorrowful plight
¶Well let vs go and hyde our selves, within that Orchard then,
For after dinner she comes there, I know her wonted when,
And Ill Report vs promised, what so we say or doe,
That he would sense vs of the fault, and blame Suzanne to.
¶Have with you then with all my hart, O Lord that the were there,
Away apace, go on before, me think she comes here.
¶If any woman in this world, my God may justly praise.
It is I good Lord aboue the rest, that lives in these days.
Thou blessest me my Lord my God, and •ache my loving Spouse,
My Cattail in the field abroad, my servants in the house.
My Corn both in the Barn and field, doth yield full great increase,
And thus O Lord thy benefits, towards vs doth never seace.
O Lord doe grant that these thy gifts doe not our hearts so sill,
That if thou lay thy hand on vs, we take that part for ill.
But as by this thy providence, we live and take our rest,
We may if any storm doe fall, account it for the be•t.
Once•la have you warned the Cooke, his busynesse so to end,
As sl•cknesse in the sam• his act, my Lord doe not offend.
¶Yea Madam each thing is pr•st, and shall be in good hour,
He is right careful for his part, I doe it you assure.
¶And Serua have you for your part done that I bid you doe,
¶Those things which you gave me in charge,
My self have done them to.
¶Well then will I go wash my self, to the Orchard let vs go.
Me thinks the whether very warm▪ the season very hot,
And yet there is a thing or two, that both you have forgot.
¶What is that Madam?
¶Neyth•r of you both I think, have brought me soap and oil,
To wash the sweat of from my skin, or rid away the soil.
Well go you both together hence, I think you know wherefore,
And spéede again, but here you hoe, make fast the Orchard door,
¶Ye forsooth.
¶Prone with your foot, if that the Door, as we were had he locked,
¶I warrant him that must come here must stand awhile and knock.
¶How say you friend and fellow both, did we not go hence well,
Gods blessing have his honest heart, that first did found that bell.
You s••d if you remember well▪ when I did tell my tale,
To recompense the same with like, you said you would not fail.
¶You say but true▪ and to it then, for losing of the time,
My Mother is a Farmers wife, her maids doe serve her swine,
But here you what, if I again were at my country home,
I would not leap thus to the court, to sit there like a mom.
For pleasure more is in one hour, there with our Gill and Jack,
Then here is in five hundred years, for nothing there doth lack,
There had I for to run abroad my frée and youthly will,
Here may we not once péepe for fear, our mouths are shut up still,
I nothing doubt but when I shall, to mother make my moan,
For lack of talk my tongue and lips together will be grown,
Well change I would this my straight life, I tell you for my part,
And he that brought me to the court beshrew his naked heart.
¶Not long ago I heard one say, I think he meant by vs,
A latin sense, and this it was, Nemo sua sort contentus,
Women are inquisitive, I asked him what he meant,
He said not one in all this world, was with his chance content,
¶Well we must now, and therefore peace, and let vs go our way,
For we it is that must account which way we spend the day.
¶The greatest scourge that may be given, to any living wight,
I feel it now, alas, alas, that she is in my sight.
Why Cupids flames doe burn my heart, why sée my torments here,
And ye• to ease my huge smart, I dare not prove for fear.
Now is the time and let it go, we never find the léeke,
And yet to heal my secrete wo, my hart is now to seek.
¶Peace friend, consider well your state, and let your sorrow slake,
For I it is that must and will this matter on me take,
if you do this with languishing our presence here descry,
Before that we lay hands on her then were we near the ny.
Peace I say. I say be still, I will to her alone,
And follow you as you sée time, as soon as I am gone,
¶I will.
¶Fair Lady be you not afraid that you doe sée vs hear,
We both be come to doe you good, and not to yield you fear,
You sée the Orchard doors are fast, the wails are close and just,
In all this world none can vs see, we may do what we lust,
I say again in all this world▪ none can see what we do,
We burn toward thee with fervent lust consent vs therefore to,
We are but men, and of that kind, that thou thy self art made▪
Come lye with vs, we love thée well, Susan be not afraid,
For if thou wilt not then we shall, a testimonial lay,
Against thee of a maruai•os force, and thus both we will say,
A young man with thée here we found, in very secrete sport,
Which caused thée away to send thy maids in such a sort.
¶Alas me thinks your thoughts and words together do not gr•e,
You are of age, and know right well, that no such sin should be,
You know also God doth it curse, and •ache our law on earth,
Doth recompense such sinners to, with sharpe and cruel death.
And therefore good my friend I say, doe leave as you begone,
And I will hold me so content, and hyde that you have done.
¶Nay, nay Madame, we mean not so, we mean• to have our will,
Doe you consent you shall• vs find both sure and secrete still,
And so we may have company, no wigh• can vs correct,
And this I know assuredly, no man will vs suspect,
This doe, or else I swear for troth we shall declare at large,
as this my friend hath said before, which were to great a charge,
Therefore consent we might have done, while we have used this talk
If not doe you assure you, our evidence shall walk.
¶Oh Lord, o• God, oh King of bliss, what storms doe stop my breath,
If I fulfil your filthy lust, I know it breeds my death,
And if I doe not, then ah, alas, •ou trap me in your bands,
And thus can I pore Innocent, by no means scope your hands.
Well better it is without the act, your danger to fall in.
Then to attempt my Lord my God with this so vile a sin.
¶Help, help, help.
¶What is the matter?
¶It was our chance in ending things, which we have for to end,
Secretly to common here, where none should here our mind,
And lying close and secrete still, we shame to much to show,
But what we saw, we kéepe it close, till Ioachim may it know.
¶There is but one that lives for aye, and séeth every thing,
He knows the fruit of every trée, before the branch doe spring,
I leave to him in this my néede, that which I have to do,
I am but one, thou know my God, these wicked men are two.
¶Me thinks this matter very strange, and sounds not like a truth
My Mistress virtue all the world have noted from her youth.
¶Our Mistress, yea she doth her life, in such sort still direct,
As fickle fame at no time durst, her honest life suspect,
I tell thée true Seruus my friend, I flatter not for méede,
It shall be found that they them selves have wrought this wicked déede
And cause that she would not consent, to serve their filthy lust,
They have wrought this to scuse themselves, Seruus thou may me trust,
¶Come away, come away, in faith Madame, you are a secrete whore
Full long have I mistrusted it, though I took you not before.
¶A whore, yea vile and filthy whore, fie on it filthy act,
I think a thousand of her toys, the vyldest whore doth lack.
¶Why God if I most sinful wight, might reason once with thée,
Can thou permit and suffer still, these wicked thus to lye?
My sorrows all and some I send, them to thy heavenly throne,
Receive my sobbing tears oh Lord, and ease me that do moan.
¶Harde you not my fellow dear, I thought her hart had broke,
And eke my soul did sorrow much, to here the words she spoke,
But I know this assuredly, that if she guiltless bée,
God will defend the innocent, from cruel destiny,
¶Guiltless man, yes assuredly, and mark what I doe tell,
Thou shalt sée them dye shamefully, and she shall doe full well,
Why God himself hath spoken this, the fruit shows every trée,
And mark if since thou kn•west her first, where is one such as shée▪
She serves God devoutly still, she helps eke the pore,
And to aid them that want reléefe, she goes from door to door,
And now in this her greatest néede, she doth upon God call,
I promise thée I trust in God, he will not let her fall,
¶Oh Lord that never did refuse, a sinners just complaint,
With tears I ask reléefe of thee, in this her great constraint,
That if she guiltless be good Lord, as I doe hope full well,
Doe strength her Lord, and teach her tongue, which way her tale to tell.
Not Lord that thou haste néede of vs, but for to heap thy praise,
Which thy desert shall herein get, for now and eake always,
The world shall wonder at thy work, and always in thée trust,
Because thou doest deliver her, from those that are unjust.
¶Rise up Seruus, for I have heard, ear this some men to say,
The sore that sudden taken is, doth soonest wear away.
And oft the painter in his works, to show the fairer white,
Doth set the blackest black of all, against it over right.
And I have heard, and so have you, our mistress often say,
Why Lord doest thou love me so well, that live in wealth always,
Grant to me God once in my life, a little péece of thrall,
But stand by me good Lord I say, let me not sink nor fall.
And this hath God I warrant thée, done for to show his might,
And though her case doe now séeme crookte, he will set it aright.
You sée that time wears fast away, and we have much to do,
Let vs go home and nothing say, as nought at all we knew.
¶Are not the Judges yet come here, alas what is their care,
They wa•gh at all no pore mans case, but ply their dainty fare,
I heard of late, I trust not true, they care not who doe curse,
Or who doe bless they force it not, so they may fill their purse,
Oh Lord thou know how thou doest hate, ye wicked bribing wight,
And I know Lord not one at all, can hyde him from thy sight,
And if they be such wicked men, as Fame hath spread for true,
Doe teach them Lord to mend their fault, &amp; frame themselves anew.
Thou gloriest not in sinners seat, which from thy laws remove,
Thou grant them time of thy grace, for to repent and live,
I speak but as the common brute, hath filled every ear,
I hope my self oh Lord my God, they do thée love and fear,
Well since they are not come in déede, I will go home again,
Where till they come in viewing things, my self will take some payne
And God preserve and bless you all, I speak to eche degrée,
And he always remain with you, and also go with me.
¶Sorrow oft times doth try a man, it is a manly part,
When sorrows doe oppress a man, to show a manly heart,
Where weeping will not veil nor help, nor courtesy will serve,
What vayieth then a manly hart, his courage to let swerve,
Well wife she is our daughter dear, and we her parents eke,
U•rtuous ever me thought the wench, gentle, wise, and méeke.
And for our parts thou know O Lord, it was our chiefest awe,
Our Daughter to instruct and teach▪ the trade of Moyses l•we,
And therefore Lord if our offence, or else her own desert,
Have been the cause of this her fall, yet qualify her smart,
And grant that with her life, her fame may also dye,
And that we hear no more her fault, this only bowne ask I.
¶The loss of goods sometime doth move, a man his hart to break,
But of his child: Ah, me alas▪ my sobs nill let me speak,
These breasts my Spouse, with tender milk, procéeding from my hart
Did give her suck, did nourish her, alas most gréeuous smart,
And from my breast until you gave, her to be made a wife,
I nourished her in God his fear, and loved her as my life.
And sure I am those wicked men that doe accuse her still,
Doe it because that she her self, would not obey their will.
Then Lord of thy hye majesty, this only bowne ask I,
By guilty means thou wilt not let, an innocent to dye.
¶Peace wife, attempt not God, thou know all flesh is frail.
¶I know also where is Gods fear, such lust cannot prevail.
¶Peace fie, I know as well as you, that God can well withstand
All kind of ill that may befall, but who can scope his hand.
If God to sh•w vs what we are, doth suffer vs to fall,
What flesh can that O Lord withstand, not one amongst vs all,
And yet he shall not think by this, that I doe judge it true,
That this is laid unto her charge, and both we thus doe rue.
¶True▪ no, no, alas, not true I trust it be,
And yet that she shall dye therefore, both our two eyes shall sée.
¶Fie wife how oft ha••e thou, thy neighbours gréefe relieved,
And why in this thy own distress, are all thy senses méeued,
Doest thou not know our Lord and God is able to make right,
The weakest part of simple men, against all Tyrants spite,
Doest thou not know how God himself did Toby always aid,
And sent him home his son again, for whom he was dismayed,
And know not eake, how that that God, the more to show his might
When Toby had long time been blind, he gave to him his sight,
Remember how the children thrée for serving God aright,
Were thrust into the burning Oven, with Terror and with spite,
And how that he defended them, amidst the flaming fire,
And made the Prince praise him by them, and mitigate his ire,
These and a thousand samples mo, Gods goodness still doth show,
That God will guiltless let her dye, good wife doe not think so.
¶Gods goodness and his power and might, all living creatures sée,
And therefore Lord even as thou wilt, we leave it unto thée,
¶You say right well, and in distress, friends comfort every man,
We will go sée her heaviness, and ease her if we can.
¶In my best petticoat,
Is there a hole,
My sister burnt it with a cole
A skein of silk
Will not make it whole,
will ye by any sand mistress.
Now I desire
The pox and wild fire,
And all the plagues of Hell,
May recompense his méede
That first wrought this déede
To give me this bell.
Ill Report is a crier,
And a common liar.
As every Knave saith now:
In faith I was an honest man,
But I cannot tell when,
Come sport me to you.
is it not pretty gear,
That I must spend and wear,
My Shoes in this sort,
And trot about the country,
Upon my ten toed Palfrey▪
It is a pretty sport.
Know you not Ioachims wife,
it is a péece with a mischéefe,
She must have two at ones:
There is never a wench here.
But in her best gear,
Would have flesh without bones
Why, why, do you wink,
Shame to you that shame think,
it is but your kind:
So you may do it covertly,
And cloak it honestly,
You care not where you find.
well I wold moister gailer would come
Then shall all and some,
Know the cause of my coming:
it is as I fear,
For other manner of gear,
Then for masking or mumming.
¶What Ill Report how do ye?
¶I come to séeke a Knave I think it be ye.
¶What swear not fellow, it is not an hour ago,
Since we were both Knaves, the people says so.
But what busynesse haste thou to do?
¶Why you shitten Knave, what is that to you,
¶The cause why I come hither now, is my masters will to done
And to tell thée that Suzanne shall be here arraigned soon.
¶And worthy to I make God avow, but what ill luck had I,
That could not get grant, to hunt in her haunt before that she dye.
Dispatch I pray thée, for yonder I sée, the Judges are coming,
And therefore take payne, I say once again, let vs doe something.
¶We néede not since we are here ready.
¶Who lives in this world, and hath to guide the people to,
Have work enough I warrant you, and more then he can do
Here have I now a busynesse, that is of marvelous weight,
The way to find the truth thereof, is also very straight.
But yet in doing of the same, I would we had begone,
The sooner that we do begin, the sooner is it done.
What Bailey have ye here the cry, that I wilde you to make?
¶Yea my Lord.
¶Then let the Crier here an O yes make,
And you your self doe to him make the order of the cry,
And let him speak it after you, come of and do you hye.
¶Ill Report make an O yes here.
¶Help me up.
¶O yes.
All manner creatures,
That have human features,
And dwell within this Land,
Come in and disclose,
What you hear and suppose,
By this woman Susan,
And what you can tell,
Shall now be heard well;
As reason it is,
Your work shall be good,
In saving her blood,
If she did not amiss,
But if she be guilty,
Then is it necessity,
That she die for her sin,
Then what you can say,
Let vs know straight way,
For the Court doth begin.
¶ O yes.
All manner traitors,
That are yeomen f•utours,
That lead Dogs in band,
Doe stop well your nose,
For fear of the pose,
And give me your hand.
And if you cannot smell,
Then are you not well,
For reasons by gis:
Will doe you small good,
But change your good blood,
To stinking iwis.
But if you be guilty,
With order of necessity,
By shitting so thin:
Then get you away,
And that straight way,
And to cleanse you begin.
¶Crier call Suzanne.
¶Suzanne.
¶Here my Lord.
¶Stand forth and hold up thy hand,
¶If any here within this court there is that can detect,
This woman guilty of that crime, whereof she is suspect,
Come forth and say your minds at large, and all that you know true
For now is time and other time, you have not that to do,
¶My Lord Suzanne is the wight, whose fault we must accuse,
And what she is that stands there, we can do nought but muse.
She is so muffled about the face, we think it is not she,
A crafty Dame may compass so to have vs go awry.
¶Thou say as well as hart can think, for though we could not touch
Yet pleasing our eyes with this her sight shall serve our lust as much.
¶What peace horizon.
My Lord under correction, I mean to sée her face,
And know if it be she or no, before I speak in place.
¶Discover her face Bailey.
¶I will my Lord.
Come on fair Lady you here your self, what I am bid to do.
¶I pray thee Gayler hold thée still my self will do it to,
O living God that all thing séeth, what means this cruelty,
Doe not I feel enough good Lord, but all the world must sée,
I morn the less, O Lord thou know an innocent to dye,
But yet my gréefe is to to great▪ to end with infamy.
Yet Lord I leave me to thy will, and I will say no more,
Thou a••e my strength in thée I hope, I have none other power.
¶Now Crier hold them a Book.
Lay on you hands and mark well what I shall say,
•he evidence that you shall give against this woman here,
Is for trothes sake, and not for mead, for hatred nor for fear.
Ye shall declare the truth of all, and there from s•all not slyde,
Nor any part of it at all from vs you shall not hyde.
This is your charge I charge you with, sée thereto you doe look,
You swear by God who knows all, and also by this Book.
¶As we two in the Orchard walked, and none but we alone,
In came this woman with two maids, but straight she sent them home.
And weighty charge she gave them both, we could but muse wherefore
In any case that they should shut, and spar the Orchard door,
With that a young man straight slept forth, that hidden secrete lay.
And came to her right shamefully, and found her Uenus play.
For vs to see the end of this, in secrete corner stood,
The open sight of this foul deed, appalde our ancient blood.
And when we saw with both our eyes, that they had lain together,
Pretending for to take the wretch, our selves we did discover.
But when we laid our hands of him, we could not hold him still,
His strength was of much fortitude, and ours very ill,
This done, he hyde him to the gate, and so from thence away,
For reason saith one •usty blood, two weak men cannot stay.
Now when this woman thus we took, Dame (quoth we) what is he,
That thus your husbands bed hath fyld, as we with sorrow sée,
But she because that time would help, to frame a lye full well,
And craftily then could hold her peace, and spared that to tell.
So this the matter is in déede, and both we witness be,
And as we mean to answer it, we say but what we sée.
¶How say you sir, I charge you now, by the oath that you did take,
Is this conclusion but the truth, that this your friend doth make.
¶True Sir, yea true in deed, I would there were no cause,
For Ioachim her husbands sake, to punish her with laws.
¶Suzanne now thou see here the evidence of these men,
Speak for thy self it is high time, what haste thou to say then,
Wherefore thou ought not to dye, for I must sentence give,
Speak forth or else I know not how, that longer thou should live.
¶Oh God, oh King, oh mighty one, oh euerliuing Lord,
What secretes is there thou séest not, what sin is not abhorde,
Before eche thing doe come to pass, thou know what it will be,
Thou know good Lord these wicked men, have falsely blamed me.
Because I would not to their lust, most shamefully consent,
Against me Lord thou know they doe, this matter thus invent.
Behold my God I dye therefore, through malice of their heart,
Th•refore my God receive my soul, none else can ease my smart.
¶Suzanne hold thée still a while, and harken to my talk,
Thy earthly days are almost past, now must thou change thy walk
Thou séest here before thy face, how plain thy fault is seen,
For as I doe I must néedes doe, although thou werte a Quéene,
Be thou therefore attentive to, and harken to thy doom,
Repent the life is gone and past, think on the life to come.
Know that there is a God in déede, on whom I heard thée call,
That were thy sins ten times as great, he would forgive them all,
Well hence thou must and to the place, where then shalt end thy life,
Lo, thus I end my sentence now, and thou shalt end thy s•rife.
¶Oh foolish folk of Israel, that know not ill from good,
I am you sée an innocent, and guiltless of this blood.
¶I pray thee friend what mean thy words, which séeme of such a weight
Disclose the secretes of thy mind, and tell vs thereof straight,
¶That I mean speak, I tell you true, shall straight be plainly said,
Why? are you fools O Israel, or are your wits dismayed.
Or have you not the policy, the truth to know and try,
Why have you now condemn•• here, this Israelite to die.
And that which worst is yet of all, and fills her heart with ruth,
You have done this (oh foolish men) and have not known the truth.
Go sit in judgment once again, the witness they have borne,
Is false, and yet their gravity, your senses doth suborn.
¶Mary child with all my hart, we will return vs soon,
And also what thou think meet, it shall straight way be done,
And since that God by thée hath given, a warning to vs all,
Come sit with vs in judgment seat, least we again should fall.
¶Is Mustard good for sick folks reléefe?
¶Yea Sir, Vinegar and Mustard both is good for béete.
¶Why Lord my God, my King and joy, what have I done for thée,
That in the midst of all my woes, thus thou should succour me,
I as touching filthy flesh, nought but a lump of clay,
Yet thou O Lord I find it still, wilt always be my stay,
What can I doe for recompense unto thy heavenly grace,
Nought else good Lord but praise thy name while I have living space
And I shall be a witness still, to those that cleave to thee,
Thou wilt not suffer them to fall but wilt their ayder bée.
Now Lord while life and days shall last, and till my breath be spent,
I will set forth thy glorious praise, which is so permanent.
¶Danyell I pray thee with all my hart,
Sit down and in this weighty charge,
Doe help to take our part.
¶Cause that silence be proclaimed.
¶Bailey cause the Crier to make an O yes.
¶How many in this court doth stand, to hear what God hath done,
I charge them in that God his name, their silence to use soon,
And Bailey undo Suzanne, and rid her from her bands,
And bind those wicked Elders two, both by their séete and hands.
¶See here good people, unto you all I speak,
How God doth help the innocent, and eake their sorrows break,
Let mine example comfort you, in all kind of distress,
That if you suffer for his sake, he will your ca••s •••case.
And let not fear of any man your constant that 〈◊〉,
From him that thus most constantly, his 〈◊〉 doth true,
You sée I am at liberty, that erst hath been in thrall,
And thus will God deal with all such, as end is mercy call.
¶Where be these wicked people two, that would have s•ed the blood,
Of guiltless Susan, for that she▪ their filthy lust withstood.
¶Uoluptas and Sensualitas, hold up your hands.
¶Here my Lord.
¶Amongst each things that bears life, there is nothing so excellent
Then man, nor yet there is nothing more pestilent.
God made of man an Innocent, thereby to show his power,
Man made himself a wicked wight, as you sée at this hour.
God also did make Magistrates, the pore to help and stay,
Yet some doe vile examples show, which now doe bear a sway,
I speak it not I will you know, the worst man to offend,
But for that such as guilty be, their guilt may soon amend.
And you that wicked are in déede, have you none other trust,
God will confound your acts and deeds, &amp; turn your selves to dust
And then for your just desert, he will place you to dwell,
In Plutoes Pit a fiery Lake, the déepest dyke in Hell.
And therefore I advertise you, doe learn your selves to know,
And read Gods books where you shall find, I nought but truth doe show
And let these wicked Elders two, be sample to you all,
Uiew well their lofty state of late, and now doe mark their fall.
¶What witness shall we have to try, that they would do this act,
So closely twixt themselves they have, this filthy crime compact.
¶Cōmaund that these two wicked men may straight be put asunder,
And how they shall accuse themselves, it will make you to wonder.
¶Crier take aside Uoluptas, while Sensualitas be examined.
¶Come on you Knave, thou bawdy wretch, I hope to have thy cote,
And for exchange thereof thou shalt be strangled in a rope.
Mary sir a bloody gown upon my back, will make me look a hye,
And then that I am Ill Report, no worldly man can spy.
¶Well friend I would not have thée prate, nor place thy words awry
For all the world doth know right well, thou art as ill as I.
¶Gogs woūds knave thou shittē slave, hast thou none to check but me
I am an honest man, prove it he that can, I will not be judged by thee
¶No God shall judge thée.
¶What haste thou learned that Lesson now?
Had you learned it sooner, it had been better for you.
¶What say thou now Sensualitas, now that thy mate is gone,
And no man is to help thée here, but thou art left alone.
Oh old and crooked cankered Carl, whose ancient wickedness,
And rape and rigour thou haste done, now thus det•cted is.
What false decrées hast thou decreed, what Innocents oppressed,
What guilty folk haste thou set frée, which good folk doe detest,
Thou haste forgot what God doth say, O wicked thou know when
Thou shalt not hurt the Innocent, nor yet the righteous man.
Well if that thou the truth haste spoke, then tell under what tree,
The mutual talk between these two, in Orchard thou did see?
¶Under a Mulberry trée I saw their conference,
And under that trée she committed her offence,
And meaning not for to conceal that fault, but it to tell,
We mark the order and the trée, we also marked it well.
¶Oh now thou lie thou wicked man, unto thy head I speak,
And look that God his vengeance will with shame upon thee wreak.
And lo thy sentence he hath heard, and thus he means to doe,
according to thy due desert, to cut thy life in two,
And hearst thou Bailey take thou aside, this vile and wicked wight,
And so he comes not to his mate, nor once within his sight.
¶Now that this man is gone, I beséech you here me speak,
Me thinks he tells still the tale, that he at first did break.
¶Yea one man may still in one tale, in only order tell,
But yet his Mate will not agrée, doe therefore mark him well.
¶Hoe Crier bring in Uoluptas there.
¶Anon my Lord, see how he comes here.
¶Stand forth Uoluptas, and answer for thy self,
¶Thou must stand forth, and show thée like an elf,
¶Oh wicked séede of Canaan, and not of Iuda kind,
Fairness hath thine eyes deceaude, and lust hath made thée blind
With Israels daughters thus you dealt, and they for fear consent,
But Iuda Daughter would not bide, your po••es •o 〈◊〉,
Now if such thing thou saw by her, as thou haste made report,
What kind of tree I pray thée waste, where under they did sport.
¶Under a pomegranate tree, she used filthy sport,
And take her part that takes it list, it was in shameful sort.
¶Lo now thou lie naughty man, thy tongue hath thee betrayed,
And calls thy fellows talk before, your filthy lust betrayed,
And now your filthy lust is spied, we see it very well,
Oh wicked wight, oh devilish deed, oh act that sounds to hell.
Gods Angel stands with his sword, even pressed to spill thy blood,
And to dismember both your corpse, which erst was never good.
¶Crier call in the Bailey with Sensualitas.
Now God be praised, and thanks I give, to thée oh Danyell,
And for this act I am most bound, Gods glory forth to tell,
He hath saved here the innocent blood, which in him put her trust,
And by the words of their own mouth, hath cast down the unjust,
Now praise be to his name therefore, both now and eake always,
Let all the world that know his might, Amen with vs here say▪
¶Here my Lord, here is Sensualitas.
¶Set him by Uoluptas.
Shall it please you Danyell now, their Sentence for to give,
For all the world must néedes confess, they are not meet to live.
¶No Iudex, I have done Gods will, proceed you in your charge,
And give them sentence to the death, doe you your self discharge.
¶Sensualitas and Uoluptas to, I speak unto you twain,
How falsely you accused her, all men doe now see plain.
And God him self to save her blood, hath wonderfully wrought,
And you that sought to spill the same, are also come to nought.
Well God forgive your wicked déede, and give your selves to pray,
For of your course of mortal life, this same is the last day.
For hence you shall unto the place, where such doe use to dye,
As doe transgress the Princes laws, even forthwith by and by.
And there with stones you shall be st•nde▪ while life and 〈◊〉 doth last
Hoe there away with them I say, let it be done in haste.
¶Come of with the mischief,
Is it now more gréefe,
For you two to dye:
Then other you thought,
Whom you accused for nought,
Mary fie for shame fie.
Be of good cheer,
You shall be past fear,
Within this half hour:
Much good do your hearts,
That thus doe take parts,
In every stower.
They that shall spy,
You Judges to dye,
For transgressing the law,
Shall say that by might,
In stéede of good right,
You kept men in awe.
Now hold up your hands,
And receive your bands,
Now throw on your stones,
And there is for me,
One as much as thrée,
Shall break all their bones.
¶Soft I pray thée yet a while, I pray thée hold thy hands,
And suffer vs to call on God, upon vs now it stands.
And Lord receive vs yet at last, that erst did never know,
Thy goodness nor thy mighty hand, our wealth did blind vs so,
I have been given in all my time, my flesh to follow still,
Now Lord forgive my senses all, I leave me to thy will.
My sins are more then I can tell, my sorrows passing great,
The shivering passions of my bones, doth cause my flesh to sweat.
Now Lord into thy hands I leave, my sobbing sorrowful spirit,
Receive it Lord and from the Fiend defend me with thy might.
¶And to me Lord doe not account, the number of my sins,
Reject the same and hear me now, for now my plaint begins.
And though the falsehood of the flesh, in wealth would let me know,
Yet in this my extremity, doe thou thy mercy show.
The whole doe néede no medicine, it is bought for thée sick,
So mercy Lord doe help the froward, and those against the kick.
Not justice Lord, but mercy we doe crave to ease our bands.
And by thy mercy both we yéelde our souls into thy hands.
¶Are ye ready yet?
¶Yea when you will.
¶Now the world is rid of a couple of Knaves we sée,
¶And yet one to much alive by thée.
¶Nay, nay, my friend and brother,
A Knave is one, and you 〈◊〉 another.
I could but marvel of the words they did speak.
Before they did dye, and whence they did break.
¶Why fool know thou not yet, that nature will teach,
Thee when thou goosed to hanging how thou should preach.
¶Hanging quoth a, mary I trust or I dye,
To see thy good face hang full hye.
¶I promise you I fear me much that Ill Report is fled,
If not I have commission, to hang all but his head.
¶Who, who, Devil who,
How doth the world go,
Must Ill Report dye:
No no, I trow,
The world goes not so,
Then all were awry.
For neither of Prince nor King,
Nor of any other thing,
But my tongue shall walk,
The proudest of them all,
Shall not give me such a fall,
Or shall let me to talk.
¶Except I be deceived much, that same is Ill Report,
That stands in yonder scarlet gown, and prates in such a sort,
Come no•• and we will sée in déede, whether it be he or no,
For if it be, I ••ll thee true, he shall no further go.
For why the Judge hath given in charge, where so we could him spy,
We should for his demerits sake, hang him by and by.
¶It is he in déede I think, I will ask him the question.
¶Sir what is your name.
¶A Judge Knave thou see, I am the very same.
I am had in great price, both in City and in town,
I am a Magistrate, doest not sée by my gown.
¶By my troth I think more gravity consists in your co•e,
Then abides in your hart, or goes thorough your throat,
You may be honest and sober, but your countenance doth give,
That you will grow worse and worse, so long as you do live.
¶Gogs wounds knave, &amp; wild knave to, doest thou speak blasphemy
I am as honest a man, as is in all this country.
And for the antiquity of the house I was borne in,
Was a famous house before thou was heard of, or any of thy kin.
And thou doest not well to use me in this sort.
¶Why sir is not your name Ill Report.
¶My name is master Ill Report in déede,
¶Hearst thou True Report, this is the man we loke for,
¶Mary then is it he that I come for.
¶My good fellow, why what is thy name,
¶True Report, I am the very same.
¶Gogs wounds, Cousin Hugh Report, how the Devil met we here,
I think thou saw not William Report this seven year,
Me thought by thy spéeche, we should be acquainted,
Though prolixity of time thy Uisage had tainted.
Oh Cosyn Hugh why good Cousin Hugh take it in good part,
That I fawn thus on thée, for I love thée with all my hart.
¶Thou art a false wretch, and not my Cousin I swear,
He would have Ill and true to be Cousins, is not this good gear,
¶Oh Cousin Hugh it gréeues me thou want learning, &amp; art so pretty a man
I will tell thée fool, how thy name is Hugh, and mine William,
Though thou know it not thy self, I may not much blame thée,
It is so long ago since thou waste in my country.
His no Letter, but an aspiration,
Which may be left out in many a fashion.
Helen with an H, hark and be attentive,
Or Elin without an H, is not offensive.
So whether the H be put in, or the H be left out,
The word stands indifferent, this is no doubt,
Now take the H from thy name, then it stands like an Ewe,
And some friend hath put in Tree, and so calls thée true,
As by a familiar example, I know a false knave or two,
That are Hostlers in Innes, yet men call them true,
Therefore leave of Tragayne, fie man for shame,
And be called Hugh again, for that is thy Christen name,
And now to my own name, first we are children &amp; then grow to men
And Will for William is heard often then,
And Children at first when they learn to prattle,
In stéede of Will, doe ill often tattle,
Thus being young, and called Ill for Will,
Men for a custom doe call me so still,
And it contents me well to hear the same,
Because for my purpose it often doth frame,
And I my self did never séeke it to amend,
Because by good learning I can it defend,
Aphaeresis is a figure which Latinestes use,
And Apocope another which they will not refuse.
The one from the beginning of a word a syllable may cut,
The other from the end, another may shut.
Now twixt Aphaeresis and Appocope you may sée full plain,
That Ill for William is used without shame,
Lo thus doe you sée that we both have take maims,
By figurative calling of our Christen names,
But as for that kindreds doe not always agrée,
In their christen names, as every man doth sée.
But in the sir name consanguinity doth grow,
And so every kinseman his kinseman doth know,
As Thomson to Thomson, and so in in like sort,
• gentle master William, thou Hugh Report.
¶Such a diffinition heard you never I trow,
Sir you can make a Silligismus in Buccardo.
¶I beshrew your hart, you smell of learning,
This Knave hath been at Oxford, I give you warning,
In Buccardo (quoth you) I swear by saint Megge.
Once was I there a year fast tied by the leg,
And at my coming forth I scoped a check,
That had not héeles helped hands, my are•• had break my neck.
¶Exore tuo te iudeco, thou hast been an old théefe,
¶Now shalt thou be hanged in sign of relief,
Lo True Report for all his great cunning,
Himself hath betrayed his knavery in something.
¶Ill Report troth will be troth whosoever say no,
And thou must be hanged before thou doe go.
¶Nay by the mass then have I ill luck,
If words will not serve I will fight a pluck.
¶Nay then let me come and help,
For though my tongue be ill and I cannot use talking,
Yet I love to be where fists are walking.
¶Why Knave wilt thou choke me?
¶No not yet sir, but I will by and by.
¶Yet for pity sake, let me first say my Pater noster.
¶Content I faith, we will bear with him till than.
¶Now by my Fathers soul thou art an h•nest man,
And since thou doest so gently that time to me give,
I will not say my Pater noster, while I have a day to live,
And if you shall at any time hear that I so do,
Then hang me hardly and draw me to.
¶Fie on him Knave, away with the villain,
¶Sée the Knave himself can now call me William.
I faith Cosyn True, I shall but prepare your way,
Your self will be hanged to another day.
¶How long have I with toiling payne, sought Susans blood to get,
What engines, snares, and other crafts, about that have I set,
And yet that God still doth me wrong, he doth my force withstand,
And them that I doe seek to get, he keeps them in his hand.
He suffers some to lean to me, as they would come alone,
And when I think with them to méete, by him my pray is gone,
Oh God wilt thou not yet thy spite leave of, wilt thou yet still,
Seem for to offer as thou doest, and yet deny my will.
Well Ill Report thou villain boy, thy bones I mean to gnaw,
Because of that I gave thée charge, I am no whit in awe.
Why stand I hear and suffer him, all this while to take rest,
His soul, his bones, his flesh and all, by me shall be possessed.
And what there is in Hell to harm, or punish him withal,
Or what I may deuyse anew, his flesh shall séele it all.
Oh Boy, oh Knave, oh foolish Sot, should thou be put in trust,
And haste not wit to bring to pass, that thing I after lust.
Well, well thou villain Boy and wretch, I joy thy self art come,
And what I would have done to her, thou shalt have all and some.
From hence therefore even presently, my journey I will take,
And hye me fast for time it is, to mine infernal lake.
¶Whē stormy clouds doth show their force, &amp; boisterous winds work care
Then each man saith when these are past, ye whether will be fair.
And semblably my Lord my God, amidst my heavy cheer,
I hopte at length, as now it doth, my quiet would appear,
I have to thank thy majesty for every kind of gift,
But chéefely for mine honest wife, my heart to thée I lift.
How did thou Lord against her foes her simpleness defend,
How did thou clean deliver her, even at her latter end.
I thank thée Lord yet once again, thou haste deserved so,
That from thy praise my hart nor lips shall hence forth never go.
¶Nay then am I good Lord most bound, to yéelde thée hearty praise.
That haste by helping this my child, prolonged these my days.
Sorry I was to hear her fault, more sorry for her death,
Her fault was none, and she lives still, what joy like this on earth,
To serve thée still as I have done, it is my whole pretence,
Thou art my strength, my hope, my aid, I séeke no other defence.
¶Mine are the joys, and yours none, God hath given all to me,
For greater joys then I doe féele, there surely none can be.
My Daughter was given to the death, thou kepst her with thy might,
Thou helpest her for thy mercy sake, because her cause was right,
Thus I confess and will doe still, while life in me doth reign,
Thou only God haste strength enough, to rid each wight from payne.
¶No, no, good Lord aboue the rest, to praise thee I am bound,
That me doest help miraculously, and eake my foes confound▪
I was but dead, and thou to life, restoredst me silly wight,
What is she then that bears breath, that more can show thy might,
And this thine act shall so increase, within me evermore,
And from thy laws I will not slyde, although I dye therefore,
¶Also good Lord amongst thy gifts, which every day are seen,
We have to praise thy mighty grace, for our most noble Queen.
Defend her Lord in all affairs, give passage to thy word.
And cut them short that will her wo, grant this O living Lord.
¶And to her noble counsel Lord, give wisdom and good health,
Grant that they doe may glory thée, and mend the common wealth.
¶And for the commons of this realm, O Lord grant my request,
But what thou and the Prince doth will, they judge it for the best.
¶And for this company gathered here, doe I my prayer make,
God grant them their life in quietness, and then their souls do take.
¶Hear have you heard good Audience, the end of this our work,
Wherein we trust no cause of gréefe in any point doth lurk,
And though we cannot bewtify the same with musickes song,
Bear with our rudeness in that part, we troubled you not long,
And if our Author may perceive you take this in good part,
To doe the like you comfort him, again with all his hart.
If any thing hath been amiss, inform him if you please,
If every thing doe like you well, to God give all the praise,
To whom I leave you every one, and eke my self withal,
Who grant vs all eternal life. Amen now say you all.

YOu Officers which now in Iulio staye,
Know you our leadge, the King of Hungarie:
Sent me Promos, to join with you in sway:
That styll we may to Justice have an eye.
And now to show, my rule &amp; power at lardge,
Attentively, his Letters Patents hear:
Phallax, read out my Soueraines chardge.
As you command, I will: give héedefull ear.
Lo, here you sée what is our Sovereigns will,
Lo, bear his wish, that right, not might, bear swaye:
Lo, hear his care, to weed from good the ill,
To scoorge the wights, good Laws that disobey.
Such zeal he bears, unto the Common weal,
(How so he bids, the ignorant to save)
As he commands, the lewd doo rigour féele.
Such is his wish, such is my will to have:
And such a Judge, here Promos vows to be.
No wilful wrong, sharpe punishment shall miss,
The simple thrall, shall be judged with mercy,
Each shall be doomed, even as his merit is:
Love shall not staye, nor hate revenge procure,
No yet shall Coin, corrupt or fester wrong:
I doo protest, whilst that my charge endure,
For friend nor foe, to singe a partial song.
Thus have you heard, howe my Commission goes,
He absent, I present our Sovereign styll:
It answers then, each one his duty shows,
To me, as him, what I command and will.
Worthy Deputy, at thy chardge we joy,
We doe submit our selves, to work thy heast:
Receive the sword of Justice to destroy,
The wicked imps, and to defend the rest.
Our City keys, take wished Liftenaunt hear,
We doe commit our safety to thy head:
Thy wise foresight, will kéepe vs void of fear,
Yet will we be assistant still at néede.
Both Sword and Keys, unto my Princes use,
I doo receive and gladly take my chardge.
It rests now, for to reform abuse,
We point a time, of Council more at lardge,
To treat of which, a while we will depart.
To work your will, we yéelde a willing hart.
AL a flaunt now vaunt it, brave wench cast away care,
With Lays of Love chant it, for no cost see thou spare:
❧ Sith Nature hath made thee, with beauty most brave,
Sith Fortune doth lade thee, with what thou would have.
Ere Pleasure doth vade thee, thy self set to sale:
All wantons will trade thee, and stoup to thy stale.
All a flaunt, Ʋt Supra.
❧ Young Ruflers maintains thee, defends thee and thine,
Old Dottrels retains thee, thy Beauties so shine:
Though many disdains thee, yet none may thee tush:
Thus Envy refrains thee, thy countenance is such.
All a flaunt, Ʋt Supra:
Triumph fair Lamia now, thy wanton flag advance,
Set forth thy self to bravest show, bossed thou of happy chance:
Girl, account thou thy self the chéefe, of Lady Pleasures train,
Thy face is fair, thy form cōtent, thy Fortunes both doth strain.
Even as thou would, thy house doth stand, thy furniture is gay,
Thy wéedes are brave, thy face is fine, &amp; who for this doth paye?
Thou thy self no, the rushing Youths, ye bathe in wanton bliss,
Yea, old and dooting fools sometimes, doo help to paye for this.
Frée cost betwéene them both I have, all this for my behove,
I am the sterne, yt gides their thoughts, look what I like, they love
Few of them stir, that I bid stay, if I bid go, they fly:
If I on foe pursue revenge, Alarm a hundred cry.
The bravest I their harts, their hands, their purses hold at will,
Ioynde with the credit of the best, to bolster me in ill.
But see where as my trusty man, doth run, what news brings he?
Good people, did none of you, my mistress Lamia see?
Rosko, what news, that in such haste you come blowing?
Mistress, you must shut up your shops, &amp; leave your occupy∣ing.
What so they be, foolish knave, tell me true?
Oh ill, for thirty? besides you.
For me good fellow, I pray thee why so?
Be patient Mistress, and you shall know,
Go too, say on:
Marry, right now at the Sessions I was,
And thirty must to Trussum corde go.
Among the which (I weep to show) alas:
Why, what's the matter man?
O Andrugio,
For loving too kindly, must loose his head,
And his sweet hart, must we are the shameful weeds:
Ordained for Dames, that fall through fleshly deeds.
Is this offence, in question come again?
Tell, tell, no more, it is time this tale were done:
See, sée, howe soon, my triumph turns to pain.
Mistress, you promised to be quiet,
For Gods sake, for your own sake, be so
Alas poor Rosko, our dainty diet,
Our bravery and all we must forgo.
I am sorry.
Yea, but out alas, sorrow will not serve:
thou must néedes provide thée else where,
My gains are past, yea, I my self might starve:
Save that, I did provide for a dear year.
They reward fair (their harvest in the stack,)
When winter coms, that bid their servant pack.
Alas Mistress, if you turn mée off now,
Better then a Rog, none will me allow.
Thou shalt have a Passport,
Yea, but after what sort?
Why, that thou wart my man.
O the Judge, sylde shows the favour,
To let one théefe, bail another:
Tush I know, ere long you so will slyp away,
As you, for your self, must séeke some testimony
Of your good life.
Never fear: honestly
Lamia now means to live, even till she dye.
As jump as Apes, in view of Nuts to dance,
Kite will to kind, of custom, or by chance:
Well, howe so you stand upon this holy point,
For the thing you know, you will ieobarde a joint.
Admit I would, my hazard were in vain.
Perhaps I know, to turn the same to gain.
Thou comforts mée, good Rosko, tell mée howe?
You will be honest, it were fyn to hinder you.
I did but jest, good swéete servant tell mée.
Swéete servant now, and late, pack sir, god buy ye.
Tush, to try thy unwillingness. I did but jest.
And I doo but try, how long you would be honest.
I thought thy talk was too sweet to be true.
Yea, but meant yon, to bid honesty adieu?
No, I did so long since, but enforced by need,
To bid him welcome home again, I was decréede.
Very good, Mistress, I know your mind,
And for your ease, this remedy I find:
Prying abroad, for play fellows and such,
For you Mistress, I heard of one Phallax,
A man estéemde, of Promos very much:
Of whose Nature, I was so bold to axe.
And I smelt, he loved lase mutton well.
And what of this?
Marry of this, if you the way can tell
To towel him home, he of you will be fain:
Whose countenance, will so excuse your faults.
As none for life, dare of your life complain.
A good device, God grant vs good success:
But I pray thee, what trade doth he profess?
He is a paltry pettifogger.
All the better, suspicion will be the less.
Well, go thy ways, and if thou him espy,
Tell him from me, that I a cause or two.
Would put to him, at leisure willingly.
His case is so common, that small pleading will serve,
I go (nay run) your commandment to observe.
Aye me alas, less Phallax help, poor wench undone I am:
My foes now in the wind, will lye to work my open shame:
Now envious eyes will pry abroad, offenders to entrap,
Of force now Lamia, must be chaste, to shun a more mishap.
And wanton girl, how wilt thou shift, for garments fine and gay?
For dainty fare, can crusts cōtent? who shall thy houserent pay?
And that delights thee most of all, thou must thy dalliance leave?
And can then the force of law, or death, thy mind of love bereave?
In good faith, no: the wight that once, hath taste the fruits of love,
Until his dying day will long, Sir Chasers jests to prove.
Forsooth Mistress your thraule stays for you at home,
Were you borne in a mile, curtole? you prate so hye:
The gentelman, that came the last day with Captain Pry:
What young Hipolito?
Even he.
Least he be gone, home hye:
And will Dalia pop him in the nether room,
And kéepe the falling door close till I come
And tell my thraule his fortune will not staye?
Will you ought else?
Prating vixen away.
Gallants adieu. I venture must Hipolito to sée.
He is both young and wealthy yet, the better spoil for mée.
My hazard for his sake I true, shall make him pray and pay:
He: he: shall prank me in my plumes, and deck me brave and gay,
Of Courtesy, I pray you yet, if Phallax come this way,
Report to put a case with him, hear Lamia long did stay.
Aye me, unhappy wench that I must live the day,
To see Andrugio timeless dye, my brother and my stay.
The only mean, God wot. that should our house advance,
Who in the hope of his good hap, must die through wanton chance:
O blind affects in love, whose torments none can tell,
Yet wantous will hyde fire, and frost, yea hazard death, nay hell:
To taste thy sour swéete fruit, digested styll with care,
Foul fall thee love, thy lightning joys, hath blasted my welfare
Thou fyerst affection first, within my brothers breast.
Thou made Polina graūt him (erst) even what he would request:
Thou made him crave and have, a proof of Venus mead,
For which foul act he is adiudgd, ear long to lose his head.
The law is so severe, in scourging fleshly sin,
As marriage to work after mends doth seldom favour win.
A law first made of zeal, but wrested much amiss
Faults should be measured by desert, but all is one in this,
The lecher fyerd with lust, is punished no more,
Then he which fell through force of love, whose marriage salves his sore:
So that poor I despair, of my Audrugios life,
O would my days might end with his, for to appease my strife.
My good Sister Cassandra?
Who calls Cassandra?
Thy woeful brother Andrugio.
Andrugio, O dismal day, what gréefes, doe mée assail?
Condemned wretch to see thee here, fast fettered now in Jail,
Now haps thy wits were witched so, ye knowing death was mead
Thou would commit (to stay vs both) this vile lascivious deed.
O good Cassandra, leave to check, and chide me thraule therefore
If late repentance, wrought me help I would doe so no more.
But out alas, I wretch, too late, doe sorrow my amiss.
Unless Lord Promos grant me grace: in vain is body wist,
Wherefore sweet sister, whilst in hope, my dāpned life yet were,
Assault his hart, in my behalf, with battering tyre of tears.
If thou by suit doest save my life, it both our joys will be,
If not it may suffice thou soughst, to set thy brother free:
Wherefore speed to proroge my days, to morrow else I dye.
I will not fail to plead and pray, to purchase the mercy,
Farewell a while, God grant me well to speed.
Sister adieu, till thy return, I live, twene, hope, and breed.
Oh happy time, see where Lord Promos coms?
Now tongue address thy self, my mind to wray.
And yet least haste work waste, I hold it best,
In covert, for some advantage, to stay.
Tic strange to think, what swarms of unthrifts live,
Within this town, by rapine spoil and theft:
That were it not, that Justice oft them gréeue,
The just mans goods, by Ruflers should be reft.
At this our Syse, are thirty judged to dye,
Whose falls I sée, their fellows smelly fear:
So that the way, is by severity
Such wicked weeds, even by the roots to tear:
Wherefore Shriefe, execute with spéedy pace,
The dampned wights, to cut of hope of Grace.
It shall be done.
O cruel words they make my hart to bleed,
Now, now, I must, this dome seek to revoke,
Least grace come short, when starved is the steed:
Most mighty Lord, &amp; worthy Judge, thy iudgemēt sharpe abate,
Veil thou thine ears, to hear the plaint, that wretched I relate,
Behold the woeful Sister here, of poor Andrugio,
Whom though that law awarded death, yet mercy do him show:
Way his young years, the force of love, which forced his amiss,
Way, way, that Marriage, works amends, for what committed is,
He hath defiled no nuptial bed, nor forced rape hath moved,
He fell through love, who never meant, but wive ye wight he loved.
And wātons sure, to keep in awe, these statutes first were made,
Or none but lust full lechers, should, with rygrous law be paid.
And yet to add intent thereto, is far from my pretence,
I sue with tears, to wyn him grace, that sorrows his offence.
Wherefore herein, renowned Lord, Justice with pity payse:
Which two in equal balance waide, to heauē your fame will raise.
Cassandra, leave of thy bootless suit, by law he hath been tried,
Law found his fault, Law judged him death:
Yet this may be replied,
That law a mischief oft permits, to keep due form of law,
That law small faults, with greatest dooms, to keep men still in axe:
Yet Kings, or such as execute, regal authority:
If mends be made, may over rule, the force of law with mercy.
Here is no wilful murder wrought, which axes blood again,
Andrugios fault may valued be, Marriage wipes out his stain.
Fair Dame, I see ye natural zeal, thou bear to Andrugio,
And for thy sake (not his desert) this favour will I show:
I will reprive him yet a while, and on the matter pause,
To morrow you shall license have, a fresh to plead his cause:
Shriefe execute my chardge, but staye Andrugio,
Until that you in this behalf, more of my pleasure know.
I will perform your will:
O most worthy Magistrate, my self thy thrall I find.
Even for this little lightning hope, which at thy hands I find.
Now will I go and comfort him, which hangs twixt death &amp; life.
Happy is the man, that enjoys the love of such a wife,
I do protest, his modest words, hath wrought in me a maze.
Though she be far, she is not decked, with garish shows for gaze,
His beauty lures, his looks cut off, fond suits with chaste disdain.
O God I feel a sudden change, that doth my fréedome chain.
What did thou say? fie Promos fie: of his avoid the thought,
And so I will, my other cares will cure what love hath wrought,
Come away.
My trusty friends about your business straight,
With simple shows, your subtle meanings bait:
Promote all faults, up into my office,
Then turn me lose, the offenders to fleece.
Tush, to find law breakers let me alone,
I have eyes, will look into a Millstone.
God a mercy Gripax.
And I am so subtle sighted I trow,
As I the very thoughts of men doo know:
I faith Rapax, what thought thy wife when she,
To lye with the priest, by night stole from thee?
Marry she knew, you and I were at square,
And least we fell to blows, she did prepare.
To arm my head, to match thy horned brow.
Go and a knave with thée.
I stay for you:
No harm is done, here is but blow for blew,
Birds of a feather, best fly together,
Then like partners, about your market go,
Marrowes adieu, God sent you fair whether.
Fare you well, for vs take no care,
With vs this broad spéeche seldom breeds square.
Marry sir, welfare an office, what some ever it be,
The very countenance, is great, though slender be the sée,
I thank my good Lord Promos now, I am an officer made,
In sooth more by hap then desert, in secret be it said:
No force for that, each shift for one, for Phallax will doo so,
Well fare a head can take his time nay watch for time I trow.
I smile to think of my fell▪ was; how some brave it, some weight,
And think reward, there service just, with offred shifts will bayght
When they (poor souls) in troth do fall a mile upon account,
For flattery and fervent plesing, are means to make men mount:
I speak on proof, Lord Promos, I have pleased many a day,
Yet am I neither learned, true, nor honest any way.
What skyls for that, by wit or while, I have an office got,
By force whereof every license, warrant, patent, passport,
Leace, fine, fee, et cetera, pas and repas, through Phallax hands,
Disorored persons bribe me well, to escape from Justice bands,
And wealthy churls for to promote, I now have set a work,
Such hungry lads, as soon will smell, where statute breakers lurk,
And if they come, within our Grype, we mean to stripe them so,
As (if they scope from open shame) their bags with vs shall go.
And trust me this, we officers, of this mild mould are wrought,
Agrée with vs, and sure your shame by vs shall not be sought:
But soft a while, I see my Lord what makes him lower so▪
I will intrude into his sight, perhaps his grief to know.
Well met Phallax. I long have wished to show.
A cause to thee which none but I yet know.
Say on my Lord, a happy man wear I:
If any way, your wish I could supply:
Fine would I speak, but oh, a chylling fear,
(The case is such) makes me from speech forbear.
These words my Lord (whom ever have been just)
Now makes, me think, that you my truth mistrust.
But cease suspect, my will with yours shall gre,
What so (or against whom) your dealing be.
Against a wight of small account it is,
And yet I fear, I shall my purpose mys:
Fear not my Lord, the old Proverb doth say.
Faint harts doth steal fair Ladies seld away.
Fair Ladies O, no Lady is my love,
And yet the sure, as coy as they will prove.
I thought as much, love did torment you so.
But what is she that dare say Promos no?
Doe what one can. fire will break forth I sée,
My words unawares, hath shown what gréeueth me:
My wound is such, as love must be my leach.
Which cure will bringing Gravity in spéeche,
For what may be, a folly of more note,
Then for to see, a man gray beard to dote.
No my Lord, Amor omnia vincit.
And Ouid saith, Form numen habit.
And for to prove, loves service séemes the wise,
Set Solomon and Simpson, before your eyes:
For wit, and strength, who won the chiefest prise.
And both lived by the laws love did devise,
Which proves in love, a certain godhed lies.
And Gods rule yearly, by wisdom from the skies:
Whose wills (think I) are wrought best by the wise.
In déede divine, I think loves working is,
From reasons use, in that my senses swerve,
In pleasure pain, in payne I find a bliss,
On woe I féede, in sight of food I starve:
These strange effects, by love are lodged in mée,
My thoughts are bound, yet I my self am free.
Well my Good Lord, I axe (with pardon sought)
Who she may be, that hath your thraldom wrought?
The example is such, as I sigh to show,
Sister she is, to dampned Andrugio.
All the better for you the game doth go.
The proverb saith, that kyt will unto kind,
If it be true this comfort, then I find:
Cassandras flesh is as her brothers, frail,
Then will shée stoup, (in chéefe) when Lords assail.
The contrary (through fear) doth work my payne,
For in her face, such modesty doth reign,
As cuts of loving suits, with chaste disdain.
What love will not, necessity shall gain,
Her brothers life, will make her glad and fain.
What is it best, Andrugio frée to set,
Ere I am sure, his sisters love to get?
My loving Lord, your servant means not so.
But if you will, elsewhere in secret go:
To work your will assist I hope to show.
With right good will, for such my sickness is.
As I shall dye, if her good will I mys.
THe wind is i'll, blows no mans gain, for cold I néede not care,
Here is nyne and twenty suits of apparel for my share:
And some byr'lady very good, for so stands the case,
As neither gentelman, nor other Lord, Promos shows Grace.
But I marvel much poor slaves, that they are hanged so soon,
They were wont, to staye a day or two, now scarce an after noon:
All the better for the hangman, I pardons dreaded sore,
Would cutters save, whose clothes are good, I never feared the poor:
Let mée see, I must be dapper in this my faculty,
Hear are new ropes, how are my knots, I saith fyr slippery.
At fast or loose, with my Giptian, I mean to have a cast:
Ten to one I read his fortune by the Marymas fast,
A way, what a stir is this, to sée men go to hanging?
 Hark▪ god buy ye, I must begone, the prisners are a cōming.
WIth heart and voice to thee O Lord,
At latter gasp, for grace we cry:
Unto our suits, good God accord,
Which thus appeal, to thy mercy.
Forsake vs not, in this distress,
Which unto thee, our sins confess:
Forsake vs not, in this distress,
Which unto thee, our sins confess.
Al sorts of men beware by vs, whom presēt death assaults,
Look in your conscience what you find, &amp; sorrow for your faults:
Example take by our fresh harms, see here the fruits of pride,
I for my part deserved death, long ere my theft was spied.
O careless youth, lead, lead awry, with every pleasing toy,
Note well my words, they are of worth, ye cause though my annoy.
Shun to be pranckt, in peacocks plumes, for gaze which only are.
Hate, hate, the dice, even as the devil, of wanton Dames beware:
I was intist by lawless men, on thievish spoils to feed.
And nusled once in wicked deeds, I feared not to offend,
From had, to worse, and worst I fell, I would at leisure mend.
But oh presuming over much, styll to escape in hope,
My faults were found, and I adiudgde, to totter in a rope:
To which I go with these my mates, likewise for breach of laws.
For murder some, for thievery some, and some for little cause.
¶ Bewared are friend of quarrelling, thirst spoil of no mās breaths
Blood, areth blood, I sheeding blood, untimely catch: y death.
Maids &amp; women, shun pride, &amp; sloth, the roots of every vice,
My death ere lōg, will show their ends, God graūt it make you wise.
How now Giptian? All a mort knave, for want of company?
Be crusty man, ye Hangman straight, will read Fortunes with thée.
With this thy scoffing speech, good friend offend him not,
His faults are scorged, thine scope (perhaps) that do deserve his lot?
Iesus save me, I am cast, for a purse with three halfepence.
Dispatch prating knave, and he hanged, yt we were jogging hēce.
❧ Our secrete thoughts, thou Christ dost know,
Whom the world, doth hate in thrall.
Yet hope we that, thou wilt not so,
On whom alone, we thus do call.
Forsake vs not, in this distress,
Which unto thee, our sins confess,
Forsake vs not, &amp;c.
Do what I can, no reason cools desire,
The more I strive, my fond affects to fame:
The hotter (oh) I feel, a burning fire
Within my breast, vain thoughts to forge and frame.
O straying effects, of blind affected Love,
From wisdoms paths, which doth astray our wits:
Which makes vs haunt, that which our harms doth move,
A sickness like, the Fever Attic fits:
Which shakes with cold, when we do burn like fire.
Even so in Love, we freeze, through chilling fear,
When as our hearts, doth fry with hot desire:
What said I? like to Attic fits, nothing near:
In sourest Love, some sweet is ever sucked.
The Lover finds peace, in wrangling strife,
So that if pain, were from his pleasure plucked,
There were no Heaven, like to the Lovers life.
But why stand I to plead, their joy or woe?
And rest unsure of his I wish to have.
I know not if Cassandra love, or no?
But yet admit, she grant not what I crave,
If I benyce, to his brother life to give:
His brothers life, too much will make his yield,
 A promise then, to let his brother live:
Hath force enough, to make his fly the field.
Thus though suit fail, necessity shall wyn,
Of Lordly rule, the conquering power is such:
But (oh sweet sight) see where she enters in,
Both hope and dread, at once my heart doth tush.
I see two thralls, sweet seems a little joy,
For fancies free, Andrugios breast hath scope:
But least detract, doth raise a new annoy,
I now will seek to turn, to hap his hope.
See, as I wished, Lord Promos is in place,
Now in my suts, God grant I may find grace.
¶ Renowned Lord, whilst life in me doth last,
In homage bonds, I bind my self to thee:
And though I did thy goodness lately taste,
Yet once again, on knees I mercy seek:
In his behalf, that hanges twene death and life;
Who styll is preast, if you the mends do leek:
His lawless love, to make his lawful wife.
Fair Dame, I well have weighed thy suit, &amp; wish to do thée good,
But all in vain, al things conclude, to have thy brothers blood:
The stricknes of the law condempnes, an ignorant abuse,
Then wilful faults are hardly helped, or cloaked with excuse:
And what may be more wilful, then a Maid to violate.
The force was small, when with his will, he wretch ye conquest gate.
Law ever at the worst, doth construe evil intent.
And law even with the worst, awards them punishment:
And sith that rigorous law adiudgd him to dye,
Your glory will be much the more, in showing him mercy.
The world will think, how ye you do, but graūt him grace on cause,
And where cause is, there mercy should abate the force of laws.
Cassandra in thy brothers half, thou hast said what may be
And for thy sake, it is, if I doe set Andrugio frée:
Short tale to make, thy beauty hath, surprised me with love,
That maugre wit, I turn my thoughts, as blind affections move.
And quite subdued by Cupids might, néede makes mée sue for grace
To thée Cassandra, which doest hold, my fréedome in a lace.
Yéelde to my will, and then command, even what thou wilt of mée,
Thy brothers life, and all that else, may with thy liking grée.
And may it be, a Judge himself, the self same fault should use:
For which he domes, an others death, O crime without excuse.
Renowned Lord, you use this speech (I hope) your thrall to try,
If otherwise, my brothers life, so dear I will not bye.
Fair Dame my outward looks, my inward thoughts bewray,
If you mistrust, to search my heart, would God you had a kaye.
If that you love (as so you say) the force of love you know,
Which fealt, in conscience you should, my brother favour show.
In doubtful war, one prisoner still, doth set another frée.
What so war séekes, love unto war, contrary is, you sée.
Hate fostered war, love cannot hate, then may it covet force.
The Lover oft sues to his foe, and finds no remorse:
Then if he hap to have a help, to wyn his froward foe,
Too kind a fool, I will him hold, that lets such vantage go.
Well, to be short, my self will dye, ere I my honour stain,
You know my mind, leave off to tempt, your offers are in vain.
Bethink your self, at price enough I purchase sweet your love,
Andrugios life sufficed alone, your strangeness to remove:
The which I grant, with any wealth that else you will require,
Who buys love at such a rate, pays well for his desire.
No Promos, no, honour never at value may be sold,
Honour far dearer is then life, which passes price of gold:
To bnie this Jewel at the full, my wife I may thée make:
For unsure hope, that péereles pearl, I never will forsake:
These suits seems strange at first I see, where modesty bears sway, 
I therefore will set down my will, &amp; for his answer staye.
Fair Cassandra, the jewel of my joy,
Howe so in show, my tale, seems strange to thee:
The same well waide, thou need not be so coy,
Yet for to give thee respite to agree.
I will two days hope styll of thy consent,
Which if thou grant (to clear my clouds of care)
Clothed like a Page (suspect for to prevent.)
Unto my Court, some night, sweet wench repair.
Till then adieu, thou these my words, in works performed shalt find.
Farewell my Lord, but in this suit, you bootless wast your wind:
Cassandra, O most unhappy, subject to every woe,
What tōgue can tel, what thought cōceiue, what pen thy grief can show?
Whom to scourge, Nature, heauē &amp; earth, do heaps of thral ordain,
Whose words in waste, whose works are lost, whose wishes are in vain.
That which to others cōfort yéelds, doth cause my heavy chéer,
I mean my beauty bréedes my bale, which many hold so dear.
I would to God that kind else where, bestowed had this blase,
My virtues then had wrought regard, my shape now gives ye case:
This form so Promos fierce with Love, as wisdom can not quench,
His hot desire, till he lust, in Venus seas hath drenched.
Mistress Cassandra, my Master lōgs to hear of your good spéed,
Poor Ganio his death-alas, fierce Fortune hath decréed:
His death: God forbid, all his hope should turn to such success,
For Gods sake, go and comfort him, I sorrow his distress.
I néedes must go, although with heavy chéere.
Sir, your sister Cassandra is here.
My Cassandra what news, good sister show?
All things conclude thy death Andrugio:
Prepare thy self, to hope it ware in vain.
My death, alas what raised this new disdain?
Not Justice zeal, in wicked Promos sure:
Swéete, show the cause, I must this dome endure?
If thou dost live I must my honour lose,
Thy ransom is, to Promos fleshly will
That I do yield: then which I rather chose,
With torments sharpe, my self he first should kill:
Thus am I bent, thou séest thy death at hand,
O would my life, would satisfy his ire,
Cassandra then, would cancel soon thy band.
And may it be a Judge of his account,
Can spot his mind, with lawless love or lust?
But more, may he doom any fault with death?
When in such fault, he finds himself unjust.
Sister, that wise men love we often sée,
And where love rules, against thorns doth reason spurn.
But who so loves, if he rejected be,
His passing love, to péeuish hate will turn.
Dear sister then, note how my fortune stands,
That Promos love, the like is oft in use:
And sith he crave, this kindness, at your hands,
Think this, if you his pleasure do refuse.
I in his rage (poor wretch) shall sing Peccaui.
Here are two evils, the best harde to digest,
But where as things are driven unto necessity,
There are we bid, of both evils choose the least:
And of these evils, the least, I hold is death,
To shun whose dart, we can no mean devise,
Yet honour lives, when death tath done his worst,
Thus fame then life is of far more empress:
Nay Cassandra, if thou thy self submit,
To save my life, to Promos fleshly will,
Justice will say, thou dost no crime commit:
For in forced faults is no intent of ill.
How so th'intent, is construed in offence,
The Proverb says that ten good turns lye dead,
And one ill deed, ten times beyond pretence,
By envious tounges, report abroad doth spread:
Andrugio so, my fame, shall valued bee,
Despite will blase my crime, but not the cause:
And thus although I fain would set thée free,
Poor wench I fear, the grype of slanders paws.
Nay sweet sister more slander would insawe,
Your spotless life, to reeve your brothers breath:
When you have power, for to enlarge the same,
Once in your hands, doth lye my life, and death,
Way that I am, the self same flesh you are,
Think I once gone, our house will go to wrack:
Know forced faults, for slander need not care:
Look you for blame, if I quail through your lack.
Consider well, my great extremity,
If other wise, this doom I could revoke:
I would not spare, for any ieberdye:
To free thee wench, from this same heavy yoke.
But ah. I see, else, no way saves my life.
And yet his hope, may further thy consent,
He said, he may percase make thee his wife,
And it is likely, he can not be content
With one nights joy: if love he after seeks,
And I discharged, if thou aloof then be,
Before be lose thy self, that so he leekes.
No dought but he, to marriage, will agree.
And shall I stick to stoup, to Promos will,
Since my brother enjoys life thereby?
No, although it doth my credit kill,
Ere that he should, my self would choose to dye.
My Andrugio, take comfort in distress,
Cassandra is won, thy faunsome great to paye,
Such care she hath, thy thraldom to release:
As she consents, her honour for to slay.
Farewell, I must, my virgins weeds forsake:
And like a page, to Promos lewd repair.
My good sister to God I thee betake,
To whom I pray, that comfort change thy care.
Tic more then strange to see Lord Promos plight,
He fryskes abought, as birds ware in his breech.
Even now he seems (through hope) to taste delight,
And straight (through fear) where he claws it doth not ytch.
He muses now, straight ways the man doth sing.
(A sight in sooth, unseemly for his age:)
He longing looks, when any news shall bring,
To speak with him, without there waits a page,
O worthy wit (fit for a Judges head)
Unto a man to change a shiftless maid,
Wink not on me, it was his, and not my deed:
His, nay, his rule, this Metamorphose made,
But Holla tongue, no more of this I pray,
Non bonus est, ludere cum sanctis.
The quietest, and the thriftiest course they say,
Is, not to check, but praise great men's amiss,
I find it true, for soothing Promos vain:
None like my self, is lykte in his conceit,
While favour last, then good, I fist for gain:
(For Grace will not byte always at my bait)
And as I wish, at hand, good Fortune, see:
Here coms Phallax, and Gripax, but what's this,
As good, as fair handsel, God grant it bee:
The knaves bring a Woman, Coram nobis.
Tear not my clothes my friends, they cost more thē you are a ware,
Tush, soon you shall have a blew gown. for these take you no care
If she took thy offer poor knave, thy wife would starve we cold:
Well sir, whipping shall kéepe you warm.
What means these knaves to scold.
Moister Phallax, we find you in good time,
A Woman here, we have brought before you:
One to be charged with many a wanton crime.
Which trial will, with proof enough find true:
A knave of hers, we have stayed likewise,
Both to be used, as you shall vs advise.
What call you his name?
Lamia.
Fair Dame, hereto what do you say?
Worshipful Sir, my self I happy reek,
With patience that my answer you will hear:
These naughty men, these words on malice speak,
And for this cause, ill will to me they bear.
I scorned to kéepe, their minds with money play,
I mean to kéepe, my life from open shame,
Yea, if I lived, as lewdlie as they say:
But I that knew, my self unworthy shame:
Shrunk not, to come unto my trial now.
My tale is told, conceive as likes you.
My friends, what proof have you against this dame?
Speak on sure ground, least that you reap the shame:
The wrong is great, and craves great recompense.
To touch her honest name, without offence.
All Iulio Sir doth ring of her lewd life:
In deed she is known for an idle huswife.
He lies, she is occupied day and night.
To swear against her is there any wight?
No, not present, but if you do detain her.
There will be found by oath, some that will stain her,
I see she is then on suspicion stayde:
Whose faults to search, upon my charge is laid,
From charge of her I therefore will set you frée,
My self will search her faults if any be,
A Gods name you may depart.
God buy Sir.
In such shares as this, henceforth I will begin,
For all is his, in his claws, that comes in.
Fair Lamia, since that we are alone,
I plainly will discourse to you my mind,
I think you not to be so chaste a one,
As that your life, this favour ought to find:
No force, for that, since that you scot free go,
Unpunished, whose life is judged ill:
Yet think (through love) this grace the Judge doth show,
And love with love ought to be answered styll.
Indeed I grant (although I could reprove,
Their lewd Complaints, with goodness of my life)
Your courtesy, your detter doth me prove,
In that you took▪ my honest fame in strife,)
My answer for discharge of their report:
For which good turn, I at your pleasure rest,
To work amends, in any honest sort:
Away with honesty your answer then in sooth,
Fits me as jump as a pudding a Friars mouth,
He is a crafty child, dally, but do not.
Tush, I warrant thee, I am not so what,
Your words are too harde Sir, for me to construe.
Then to be short, your rare beauty my hart hath wounded so,
As (save your love, become my leach) I sure shall die with woe.
I see no sign of death, in your face to appear,
Tic but some usual qualm you have, pitiful Dames to fears.
Fair Lamia, trust me I fine not, betimes bestow some grace.
Well, I admit it so, only to argue in your case.
I am married, so that to set your love on me were vain:
It suffices me, that I may your secrete friend remain.
A holy Hood, makes not a Friar devout,
He will play at small game, or he sit out.
Though for pleasure, or to prove me, these proffers you do move,
You are to wise, to hazard life, upon my yielding love:
The man is pained with present death, that uses wanton pleasure.
To scope such pain, wise men, these joys, without suspect cā measure,
Furthermore, I have ben (my Girl) a Lawyer to too lōg:
If at a pinch, I cannot wrest the Law from right to wrong.
If law you do profess. I gladly crave,
In a cause or two, your advise to have.
To resolve you, you shall command my skill,
Wherefore like friends, lets common in good will,
You are a merry man, but leave to jest,
To morrow night, if you will be my Geast:
At my poor house, you shall my causes know,
For good cause, which I mean not here to show.
Willingly, and for that, haste calls me hence,
My suit till then, shall remain in suspense:
Farewell Client, to morrow look for me:
Your good welcome Sir, your best cheer will be.
I told you erst, the nature of Phallax,
Money, or fair Women, works him as wax:
And yet I must commend your sober cheer,
You told your tale, as if a Saint you were.
Well (in seeréete, be it said) how so I séemd divine,
I feared once, a blew gown, would have been my shrine.
But now that pain is flayed, and pleasure kéepes his hold,
I know that Phallax will, my Fame henceforth uphold:
To entertain which Geast, I will some dainty chéere prepare,
Yet ere I go, in pleasant Song, I mean to purge my care.
❧ A due poor care, adieu,
Go, cloy some helpless wretch:
My life, to make me rue,
Thy forces do not stretch.
Thy harbour, is the heart,
Whom wrong, hath wrapped, in woe:
But wrong, doth take my part,
With cloak of right in shoe.
My faults, inquiry scope,
At them the Judges wink:
Those for my fall that gape,
To show my lewdness shrink.
Then silly care go pack,
Thou art no Geast for me:
I have, and have, no lack,
And lack, is shroud for thee.
Unhappy wretch, I blush my self to sée,
Apparelled thus monstrous to my kind:
But oh, my weeds, will with my fault agrée,
When I have pleased, lewd Promos fleshly mind.
What shall I doo, go proffer what he sought?
Or on more suit, shall I give my consent?
The best is sure, since this must néedes be wrought:
I go, and show, need makes me to his bent.
My fluddes of tears, from true intent which floe.
May quench his lust, or op his musled even,
To sée that I deserve to be his wife:
Though now constrained to be his Concubine.
But so, or no, I must the vent er give,
No danger fears the wight, pricked forth by néede:
And thus like one more glad to dye, then live,
I foreword set, God grant me well to speed.
With my Mistress, the world is changed well,
She feared of late, of whipping cheer to smell:
And now again, both gallant, fresh and gay.
Who in Iulio flauntes it out, like Lamia?
A lucky friend (yea, one that bears swaye)
Is now become, a prop, of such a staye▪
To his good name, as who is he dare say:
That Lamia doth offend, now any way?
This, his good friend, will be his Geast this night,
And that he may in his welcome delight.
To market I. in haste, am sent to buy,
The best cheer, that, I fasten on my eye.
By proof I find, no reason cools desire,
Cassandraes suit, sufficed to remove
My lewd request, but contrary, the fire,
His tears inflamed, of lust, and filthy Love.
And having thus, the conquest in my hands,
No prayer served to work restraint in me:
But needs I would untie the precious bands,
Of this fair Dames spotless Virginity.
The spoil was sweet, and won even as I would,
And yet vngainde, till I had given my troth,
To marie his, and that his brother should
Be free from death, all which I bound with oath:
It rests now (unless I wrong his much)
I keep my vow: and shall Andrugio live?
Such grace would me, with vnindifferencie tush.
To pardon him, that did commit a Rape,
To set him free, I to Cassandra swear:
But no man else, is privy to the same,
And rage of Love, for thousand oaths nil spare,
More then are kept, when gotten is the game.
Well, what I said, then Lover like I said,
Now reason says, unto thy credit look:
And having well, the circumstances wayde,
I find I must, vnsweare the oath I took:
But double wrong, I so should do Cassandra.
No force for that, my might, commands right,
His privy manne, his open cries will staye:
Or if not so, my frowning will his fright,
And thus shall rule, conceal my filthy deed.
Now forthwith, I will to the Gayler send,
That secretly Andrugio he behead,
Whose head he shall, with these same words commend.
〈1 page missing〉
〈1 page missing〉
Andrugio, as you love our lives, forthwith post you away.
For Gods sake to no living friend, your safety yet bewraye:
The proverb saith, two may kéepe counsel if that one be gone.
Assure thy self, most faithful friend, I will be known to none:
To none alas, I sée my scope yéeldes me but small reléefe,
Cassandra, and Polina will destroy themselves, with grief:
Through thought yt I am dead: they dead, to live what helps me?
Leave of these plaints of small avail, thank God yt you are free,
For God it was, within my mind, that did your safety move,
And that same God, no doubt will work for your and their behove:
Most faithful friend, I hope that God, will work as you do say,
And therefore, to some place unknown, I will my self convey.
Gayler, fare well: for thy good deed, I must remain thy debtor,
In mean while yet receive this gift, till fortune sends a better:
God buy sir, but keep your money, your need you do not know.
I pas not now for fortuns threats, yea though his force she show
And therefore stick not to receive this small reward in part.
I will not sure, such proffers leave, tys time you doe depart.
Since so thou wilt, I will be gone adieu till fortune smile.
Sir, fare you well, I will not fail to pray for you the while.
Well. I am glad, that I have sent him gone,
For by my faith, I lived in perlous fear:
And yet God wot, to see his bitter moan,
When he should dye, would force a man forbear,
From harming him, if pity might bear sway:
But see how God hath wrought for his safety?
A dead mans head, that suffered the other day,
Makes him thou'ht dead, through out the city.
Such a just, good and righted is God is he:
Although awhile he let the wicked reign,
Yet he relieves the wretch in misery,
And in his pride, he throws the tyrant down.
I use these words, upon this only thought,
That Promos long his rod can not escape:
Who hath in thought, a wilful murder wrought,
Who hath in act performed a wicked rape,
Gods will be done, who well Andrugio speed,
Once well I hope, to hear of his good luck,
For God thou know my conscience did this déede,
And no desire of any worldly muck,
In good sweet sooth, I fear I shall be shent,
It is so long: since I to market went,
But trust me, wildfowl are such costly gear,
Specially, woodcoks, out of reason dear,
That this hour, I have the market bett,
To drive a bargain to my most profit:
And in the end I chanced to light on one,
Hit me as pat as a pudding Pope Ione,
Other market maids▪ pay down for their meat,
But that I have bought, on my score is set.
Well fare credit when money runs low,
Marry yet, Butchers, the which do credit so.
(As much Good meat, as they kill) may perchance,
Be glad and fain at hearing cobs to dance.
What force I that? every man shift for one,
For if I starve, let none my fortune moan,
Soft Dalia, a word with you, I pray.
What friend, Grimbal, welcome as I may say:
Say thou me so, then kiss me for acquaintance.
If I like your manhood, I may do so perchance.
Bate me an as, quoth Bolton, Tush, your mind I know:
Ah sir, you would, be like, let my Cock Sparrows go.
I warrant thee Grimball.
Lay off hands Dalia.
You pout me, if that you got, my Pudding away:
Nay good sweet, honey Grimball, this Pudding give mée.
Iche were as good geete his, for she will hate, I see.
Well, my noun good heart root, I freely give thee this,
Upon condition, that thou give me a kiss.
Nay, but first wash your lips, with sweet water you shall,
Why ych was ryte now, for my Pudding, honey sweet Grimbal:
Well Dalia, you will flout so long, till (though I say)
With kindness you will cast a proper handsome man away,
Wherefore soot Conny, even a little spurt:
Lay off hands Sir:
Good do not byte, for ych mean thee no hurt:
Come off Pyggesnie, prefarre me not a jot,
What would the good fool have,
Why, you wooed what.
Hark in your ear:
You shall command, so proper a man ye are.
That for your sake, I will not stick to ware:
A blew Cassock, during my life for soothe,
Mary for my sake, I would be very loathe:
So goodly a handsome man, should lose his head.
Nay, for my head, care not a Tinkers torde,
For so God judge me, and at one bare word:
Yle lose my death, yea, and my great browne Cow,
I love you so filthy: law ye now.
Thou say valiantly, now sing, as well too:
And thou shalt quickly know, what I mean to doo.
Yes by Gogs foot, to pleasure thee, ych shall,
Both sing, spring, fight and play, the duel and all.
O lustily:
Come smack me, come smack me, I long for a smouch,
Go pack thee, go pack thee, thou filthy fine slouch.
Lord howe I love thee,
This can not move me:
Why pretty Pygsney, my heart, and my honey?
Because goodman Hogsface, you woe without money.
I lack money, chy grant,
Then Grimball avaunt.
Cham young sweet hart, and feat, come kiss me for love,
Crokeshanke, your Jowl is to great, such liking to move.
What mean you by this?
To leave thee by gys.
First smack me, first smack, I dye for a smouch,
Go pack thee, go pack thee, thou filthy fine slouch.
Dalia, art thou gone? what wolt serve me so?
O God, cham ready to ray my self for woe:
Be valiant Grimball, kill thy self man?
Nay, hum Lady, I will not by Saint Anne.
Each have beard my great Grandsier say:
Maid will say nay, and take it: and so she may,
And therefore chyll, to Mistress Lamia,
With these Puddings, and Cock Sparrows, by and by:
And in the dark, again, ych will his try.
I marvel much what works so my Lord Promos unrest,
He fares as if a thousand Devils, were gnawing in his breast:
There is sure some worm of grief, that doth his conscience nip,
For since Andrugio lost his head, he hath hung down the lip.
And truth to say, his fault is such as well may grieve his mind,
The Devil himself could not have used, a practise more unkind.
This is once. I love a woman, for my life, as well as be,
But (fair dames) with her that loves mée. I deal well with, trust mée.
Well, leave I now my Lord Promos, his own deeds to answer,
Lamia I know looks, and double looks, when I come to supper:
I thought as much: sée, to séeke mée, hear coms her Apple squire.
O that I could find Master Phallax. the meat burns at ye fire:
And by your leave. Andrugios death, doth make my mistress sweat.
How now Rosko?
First you sir? my Mistress doth entreat,
That with all speed, you worship will come away to supper:
The meat and all is ready to set upon the board sir.
Gramercy for thy pains, I was even. coming to her.
You are the welcomst man alive to her I know,
And trust me at your commandment ren: ayneth poor Rosko.
It is honestly said, but now tell mée,
What quality hast, that I may use thee?
I am a Harbour, and when you please sir,
Call (and spare not) for a cast of rose water.
But hear me, can thou heal a gréene wound well?
Yea, gréene and old.
Then thy best were to dwell,
In some usual place or stréete, where, through frays,
Thou may be set a work with wounds always.
I thank my Mistress I have my hands full,
To trym gentlemen of her acquaintance:
And I trust Sir, if that your worship chance.
To have néede of my help, I shall earn your money.
Before an other.
That thou shalt truly:
But syrra, where dwells Lamia?
Even hear sir, enter I pray.
That I will sure, if that my way be clear.
Yes sir, her doors be open all the year.
Polina cursed, what dame a live hath cause of grief like thée.
Who (won by love) hast yield the spoil of thy virginity?
And he for to repair thy fame, to marry thée, that vowed,
Is done to death for first offence, the second mends not load.
Great shame redounds to thée, O Love, in leaving vs in thrall:
Andrugio and Polina both, in honouring thée did fall.
Thou so did witch our wits, as we from reason strayed quite,
Prouockt by thee, we did refuse, no vantage of delight:
Delight, what did I say? nay death, by rash and foul abuse,
Alas I shame to tell thus much, though love doe work excuse,
So that (fair dames) from such consent, my accidents of barm,
Forewarned you, to kéepe aloof though love your harts do arm,
But ah Polina, whether runs thy words into advise,
When others harms, enforced by love, could never make thée wise.
The cause is plain, for that in love, no reason stands in stude,
And reason is the only mean, that others harms we dread.
Then, that the world hereafter may, to love infer my ill,
Andrugios Tomb with daily tears, Polina worship will.
And further more I vowed, whilst life in mée doth foster breath,
No one shall vaunt of conquered love, by my Andrugios death,
These shameful weeds, which forced I were that men my fault may know:
Whilst that I live, shall show I morn for my Andrugio,
I will not bide the sharpe assaults, from sugared words I sent.
I will not trust to careless oaths, which often wyn consent:
I will cut off occasions all, which hope of mirth may move,
With ceaseless tears yle quench each cause, ye kindles coals of love:
And thus till death Polina will estrange her self from joy,
Andrugio, to reward thy love which did thy life destroy.
A Sir, in faith, the case is altered quite,
My mistress late that lived in wretched plight:
Bids care adieu and every cause of woe,
The fe••e is fled, which made her sorrow so,
Mas••• Phallax so under props her fame,
As none for life dare now her lewdness blame,
I fear (nay hope) she hath bewitched him so,
As half his bribes, unto her share will go:
No force for that, who others doth deceive,
Deserves himself, like measure to receive.
Well, leave I Lamia, for her self to pray,
Better then I can show, who knows the way:
It stands me on, for my poor self to shift,
And I have found a help at a dead lift:
My old friend Grimbals purse, with pence is full,
And if I empty it not, Dalia will.
The slavering fool, what he can rap and rend,
(He loves her so) upon the filth will spend:
But bye your leave, yle bar her of this match,
My net and all is set, the fool to catch.
Forsooth before his amorous suit he move,
He must be trimd to make her more to love.
And in good sooth, the world shall hardly fall,
But that he shall be washed, bold, shau'd and all:
And sée the luck, the fool is fast I know,
In that with Rowke he doth so sadly go.
God bores, as say, when somewhat handsome ch'am,
I faith she will come off for very shame:
Yea without doubt for I swear by saint Anne:
My self loves you, you are so clean a young man.
Nay, thou woult say so, when my face is fair washed,
Good luck a Gods name, the wodcocke is masht.
And who Barbs ye Grimball.
A dapper knave, one Rosko.
Well letherface, we shall have you Ass ere you go.
I know him not, is he a deft barber?
O, yea, why he is Mistress Lamias powler.
And look syrra, yen is the little knave.
How dost Rosko?
Whope, my eye sight God save,
What old Grimball, welcome, sit you down hear, Boy?
Anon.
Bay leaves in warm water, quick, bring clean gear,
Straight.
As thou said Grymball, this is a feat knave indeed.
How say'syr? ointments for a scab▪ do you need?
Scab, scurvy Jack, isle set you a work Sir.
Nay gogs foot, good now, no more of this stir.
I faith Barber, I will pick your teeth straight.
Nay, to pick my purse, I fear thou dost wayght,
Yea, gogs hart,
Nay, gogs foot,
Now come Ruffen.
Leave, if you be men,
Hear ye me now? be friends, and by my troth,
Chill spend a whole quart of Ale on you both.
Well, mass Grimball, I little thought I wuss,
You would a brought a knave, to vie me thus.
Why, know him not? why it is lusty Rowke.
A strong thief, I warrant him by his look.
Go to Barber, no more, least Copper you catch.
What? wilt give thy nose away? beware that match.
For chy see no Copper, vnlest be theare.
Master, here is delicate water, &amp; clean gear.
Well, to quiet my house, and for Grimbals sake,
If it pleases you, as friends, we hands will shake.
I, I, do so:
And for his sake I agrée.
Well then, that we may drink, straight ways wash mée.
Good sir, here's water as sweet as a Rose,
Now while I wash, your eyes harde you must close.
Thus?
Harder yet:
O, thus:
Yea marry, so.
Howe syrra, you know what you have to doe:
Wink harde. Grimball.
Yes, yes, I shall.
Heare's the tooth pick, and all.
Depart then till I call?
Very will sir, your face, is gaily clean,
Were your teeth now picked, you may kiss a queen.
Say thou me so? Good now dispatch and away?
I even fyssell, until I smouch Dalia.
O doo you so? I am right glad you tell.
I else had thought, tad been your teethe did smell.
O Lord, gogs foot, you pick me to the quick:
Quiet your self, your teeth are furred thick.
O, oh no more, O God, I spattell blood.
I have done, spyt out, this doth you much good: Boy?
Anon.
Bring the drink in the Porringer.
To gargalis his teeth.
It is here sir.
Wash your feeth with this, good moister Grimball.
I am poisoned, ah, it is bitter gall:
Eat these Comfyts, to sweeten your mouth with all.
Yea mary sir, these are gay sugared gear.
Their sweetness straight, will make you stink I fear:
Well now, what must I paye, that chy were gone?
What you will.
Say me so? O cham undone.
Howe now Grimball?
O Lord, my Purse is cut.
When? where?
Now, here.
Boy, let the door be shut,
If it be here, we will straight ways see,
Whore's he, that came with you?
I can not tell.
What is hee?
I know not.
Where doth he dwell?
O Lord, I ken not I.
You have done well.
This knave, your pence, in his pocket hath pursed:
Let's seek him out.
Nay hark, I must neades first:
O Learde, Learde, cham sick, my belly aches, too, too:
Thou look ill: well, yle tell thee what to doo.
Since thou art so sick, straight ways, get thée home,
To find this Jack, my self abroad will rome.
The rather, for that he played the knave with mée,
Cham sick in déede, and therefore ych thank thée:
I sée sometime, the blind man hits a Crow,
He may thank me, that he is plagued so:
Well, well, Dalia, the Lone ych bare to thée,
Hath made me sick, and picked my purse from mée.
A, is he gone? a fool company him,
In good soothe Sir, this match fidget frim:
Well, I will trudge, to find my tellewe Rowke,
To share the price, that my devise hath took.
The heavy chardge, that Nature binds me too,
I have performed, engraved my Brother is:
O would to God (to ease, my ceaseless woo)
My wretched bones, entombed were with his.
But O in vain, this bootless wish, I use,
I, poor I must live in sorrow, ioynde with shame:
And shall he live? that did vs both abuse?
And quench through rule, the coals of just revenge?
O: no, I will now hye me to the King:
To whom, I will, recount my wretched state,
Lewd Promos rape, my Brothers death and all:
And (though with shame, I may this tale relate)
To prove that force, enforced me to fall:
When I have shown, Lord Promos foul misdeeds,
This knife forthwith, shall end my woe and shame,
My gored heart, which at his feet then bleeds,
To scourge his faults, the King will more inflame.
In déedes to doo, that I in words pretend,
I now advise, my journey, to the King:
Yet ere I go, as Swans sing at their end,
In solemn Song, I mean my knell to ring.
SIth fortune thwart, doth cross my joys with care,
Sith that my bliss, is changed to bale by fate:
Sith froward chance, my days in woe doth wear,
Sith I alas, must moan without a mate.
I wretch have vowed, to sing both day and night,
O sorrow slay, all motions of delight.
¶ Come grisly grief, torment this heart of mine,
Come deep despair, and stop my loathed breath.
Come wretched woe, my thought of hope to pine:
Come cruel care, prefer my suit to death.
Death, end my wo, which sing both day and night,
O sorrow slay, all motions of delight.
PRomise is debt, and I my vow have past,
Andrugios Tomb, to wash with daily tears:
Which Sacrifice (although God wot in waste)
I will perform, my Alter is of cares.
Of fuming sighs, my offering incense is,
My piteous plaints, in steed of Prayers are:
Yea, would to God in penance of my mys.
I with the rest, my loathed life might share.
But O in vain, I wish this welcomed end,
Death is to slow, to slay the wretched wight:
And all to soon, he doth his forces bend,
To wound their hearts, which wallow in delight.
Yet in my care, styll goes, my passing Bell,
So oft as I. Andrugios death doo mind:
So oft as men, with pointed fingers tell,
Their friends, my faults, which by my weeds they find.
But O the cause, with Death, which threats me most,
I wysh to dye, I dye through wretched woe,
My dying heart, desires to yéelde the ghost,
My trances strange, a present death foreshowe.
But as the reed doth bow at every blast.
To break the same, when roughest storms lacks might,
So wretched I, with every woe doe waste,
Yet care wants force, to kill my hart out right.
O gracious God and is my gilt so great.
As you the same, with thousand deaths must wreak?
You will it so, else care I could entreat?
With half these woes, my thryd of life, to break.
But what meanst thou Polina, most accursed,
To muse, why God, this penance joins thée to
Whose correction, although we take at worst,
To our great good he doth the same bestow.
So that, sith grése can not relyue my friend,
Sith scorching sighs my sorrows cannot dry:
Sith care himself, lacks force my life to end.
Sith styll I live that every hour doe dye:
Sith mighty God appoints my penance so,
In mornefull song I will my patience show,
A Mid my bale, the lightning joy, that pining care doth bring,
With patience cheers my heavy hart, as in my woes I sing,
I know my Gilt, I feel my scourge: my ease is death I see:
And care (I find) by piecemeal vveares, my hart to set me free.
O care, my comfort and refuge, fear not to work thy will,
With patience I thy corfiues bide, feed on my life thy fill.
Thy appetite with sighs and tears, I daily vvyl procure.
And wretched I, will veil to death, throw when thou wilt thy Lure.
I Have at length (though wéery come in troth)
Obtained a fight of Iulios stately walls,
A Kings message, can not be done with floth:
Whom he bids goé, must run through mire and dirt,
And I am sent to Lord Promos in post.
To tel him that the king will sée him straight.
But much I fear that Promos néedes not bossed:
Of any gain by his sovereigns receipt,
But Holla tongue of lavish spéeche beware,
Though subjects oft in Princes meaning pry,
They must their words, and not their minds declare.
Unto which course I will my tongue apply,
Lord Promos shall my princes coming know.
My prince himself, the cause thereof shall show.
 First possible that my Mistress Lamia,
Over the shoes should b•in love with Phallax?
Why by Ies•• as she her self doth say,)
With pure good ioyll, her heart doth melt like wax:
And this I am sure, every hour they themselves,
By their sweet selves, or by their letters greet,
But the sport is to see the loving elves,
Bill together when they in secret meet.
She lours, he lauffes she sighs threw pure love.
Nay, nay, says he (good pugges) no more of this:
Well, says she, and wéepes, my grief you do not prove.
Then straight this storm is cheered with a kiss,
And then a both sides, three words and a smouch:
Within his ear, then whispered this slouch,
And by the way he stumbles on her lips,
Thus either strives most loving signs to show,
Much good doo it them, sith they are both content,
Once I am sure, how so the game doth go,
I have no cause their liking to repent:
I seldom doe between them message bear,
But that I have an Item in the hand,
Well, I must trudge to doe a certain chare,
Which, take I time, cock for my gain doth stand.
Dispatch Dowson, up with the frame quickly,
So space your rooms, as the nyne worthyes may,
Be so instauld, as best may please the eye.
Very good, I shall:
Nay soft Dowson, stay:
Let your man at saint Annes cross, out of hand,
Ereckt a stage, that the Weights in sight may stand.
Will you ought else?
Soft awhile, let mée sée,
On Iesus gate, the four virtues I trow,
Appointed are to stand:
I sir, they are so.
Well, then about your charge, I will fore sée,
The Confort of Music, well placed to be.
I am gone sir.
Hear you moister Phallax?
The Wardens of the Marchantaylers are.
Where (with themselves) they shall their Pageant place?
With what strange shows, doo they their Pageant graces
They have Hercules, of Monsters conquering,
Huge great Grants, in a forest fighting,
With Lyons, Bears, VVolues, Apes, Foxes, and Greys,
Baiards, Brockes. &amp;c.
O woudrons frays,
Marry sir since they are provided thus,
Out of their ways, God kéepe Moister Pediculus.
You are pleasant sir, but with spéede I pray,
You answer mée, I was charged not to stay.
Because I know, you have all things currant,
They shall stand where they shall no viewers want:
How say you to the end of Duck Alley?
There all the beggars in the town will be.
O, most attendance is, where beggars are,
Farewell, away.
I will your will declare.
This gear fadgeth now, that these fellows pear,
Friends where weight you?
In Iesus stréete to keep a passadge clear,
That the King and his train, may pass with ease.
O, very good,
Ought else Sir, do you please?
No, no: about your charge.
We are gone:
A sir, hear is short knowledge, to entertain a king,
But O, O, quid non pecunia? yea, at a days warning?
The king in provision that thought to take vs tardy,
As if we had a year been warned, shall by his welcome sée:
I have yet one chare to do: but soft, hear is Rotko,
I must néedes deliver him a messadge before I go.
I saith, I have noble news for Lamia,
Nay soft, friend Rosko, take mine in your way.
Master Phallax, Osyd I cry you mercy.
Rosko with speed tell thy Mistress from mée,
The King straight ways will come to the City:
In whose great train there is a company,
Within her house with more shall merry be,
Therefore, for my sake, will her to foresée,
To welcome them, that nothing wanting be,
This is all I will, for want of leisure.
I will not fail sir, to show your pleasure:
Mary, in faith, these news falls jump with the rest,
They shall be welcome and fare of the best:
But although they well fill their bodies thus,
Their purses will be driven to a non plus:
No force a whyt, each pleasure hath his payne,
Better the purse then body starve of wayne.
Well, I will trudge, my welcome news to tell,
And then abroad, good company to smell.
Cassandra, we draw near unto the Town.
So that I will that you from vs depart:
Till further of our pleasure you doe hear.
Yet rest assured, that wicked Promos,
Shall abide such punishment, as the world,
Shall hold mée just, and clear thee of offence.
Dread sovereign, as you will, Cassandra goes hence.
I plainly see, it tends to great behove,
That Princes oft doo veil their ears to hear,
The Misers plaint: for though they doe appoint,
Such as they think will Justice execute,
Authority is such a commander,
As, where as men by office bears sway,
If they their rule by conscience measure not,
The poor mans right is overcome by might.
If love or hate from Justice lead the Judge,
Then money sure may over rule the case.
Thus one abuse is cause of many more:
And therefore none in Judges ought to be,
How Rulers wrong, few tales are told the King:
The reason is, their power keeps in awe
Such men as have great cause for to complain.
If Cassandra her goods, nay, life preferred,
Before revenge of Promos treachery:
I had not known, his detestable rape,
The which he forced to save her brothers life.
And furthermore, Andrugios ransom paid,
I had not known be put him unto death:
For when (good soul) she had this treason told.
Through very shame her honour so was spoiled:
She drew her knife to wound her self to death.
Whose pysious plight, my hart prouockt to wrath,
At Promos wiles:
So that to use undifferency to both,
Even in the place where all these wrongs were none:
My self am come, to sit upon the cause.
But see where Promos and the Mayor weight,
To welcome me with great solemnity:
With cheerful show I shadow will the hate,
I bear to him for his insolence:
Perhaps I may learn more of his abuse,
Whereby the more his punishment may be.
Come my Lords to the Town haste we apace:
We all are pressed, to wayght upon your Grace:
Renowned King, lo here your faithful subjects preast to show
The loyal duty, which (in right) they to your highness owe.
Your presence, cheers all sorts of vs: yet ten times more we joy,
You think vs stoarde, our warning short, for to receive a Roy.
Our will, is such, as shall supply, I trust in vs all want,
And where good will the welcome gives, provision silt is scant.
Lo, this is all: yea, for vs all, that I in words bestow,
Your Majesty, our further zeal, in ready deeds shall know.
And first, dread King, I render you, the sword of Justice hear,
Which as your Lieutenant I trust, uprightly I did hear.
Promos, the good report, of your good government I hear,
Or at the least, the good conceit, that towards you I bear.
To encourage you the more, in Justice to persevere,
Is the chéefe cause. I did address, my Progress heather.
I thank your Highness.
Renowned King, our ready wills to show,
In your behalf, our goods (nay lives) to spend:
In all our names, I fréelie here bestow
On your Highness, this Purse: unto this end,
To po•• 〈◊〉 your most Royal Majesty,
In all our wealth, thereto bound by duty.
Your great good wills, and gifts with thanks I take:
But kéepe you styll, your goods, to do you good.
It is enough, and all that I do crave,
If néedes compels for your and our safety,
That you in part your proffers large perform:
And for this time as outward shows make proof,
It is enough (and all that I desire)
That your harts and tongues (alike) bid me welcome.
Lord preserve your Majesty.
Forewords my Lords.
The match goes harde, which raises no mans gain,
The virtue rare, that none to vice may wrest:
And sure, the Law, that made me late complain:
Allures me, many a wanton geast:
Dames of my Trade, shut up their shops for fear,
Their stuff proved Country formam Statute,
Then I, which lycenst am, to sell fine ware:
Am like to be well customed party:
And now Time serves, least custom after fail,
At highest rate, my Toys I value must:
Let me alone, to set my Toys to sale:
Young Ruflers I, in faith, will serve of trust.
Who ways me not, him will I fain to love,
Who loves me once, is limed to my heast:
My colours some, and some shall wear my glove,
And he my heart, whose payment likes me best.
And here at hand are customers I trow,
These are the friends, of Phallax, my swéete friend:
Now will I go, and set my wares to show,
But let them laugh, that wins in the end.
Come on good friend: where dwells Lady Lamia?
Even by Sir.
Well then, go thy way,
Show who sent vs, and what our meaning is:
Least she not knowing vs, doo take amiss.
That thus boldly we come to visit his.
No bolder then welcome, I warrant you Sir.
Well, thy Message doo:
I go.
IF pleasure, be treasure,
Hark.
The golden world is here, the golden worlds is here.
Refuse you, or choose you:
But welcome who draws near, but welcome who draws near.
They be the Muses sure,
Nay, Sirens lure.
Here lives delight,
Here dyes despite:
Desire here, hath his will.
Here Loves relief,
Destroys grief:
Which careful hearts doth kill.
Attend them styll.
That, as you will.
Here wysh in will, doth care destroy,
Play here your fill, we are not coy:
Which breeds much ill, we purge annoy,
Our lives here styll, we lead in joy.
If pleasure, be treasure,
The golden world is here, the golden world is here:
Refuse you, or choose you,
But welcome, who coms near, but welcome, who coms near.
VVantons draw near.
Taste of our cheer:
Our Cates are fine and sweet.
Come be not coy,
To work your joy:
We fall will at your feet.
A, good kind worms:
Hark.
Lo, here we be, good will which move,
We live you see, for your behove:
Come we agree, to let you prove.
Without a fee, the fruits of Love.
If pleasure, be treasure, the golden world is here, &amp;c.
Upon this large warrant, we may venture,
The door ops alone, come, let vs enter.
Agreed.
Crier, Make a noise.
O yes. And so thrice.
All manner of persons, here present,
All manner of persons, here present.
Be sylent, on payne, of imprisonment,
Be sylent, on payne, of imprisonment.
First, if any person, Officer, or other: hath wronged any of his true subjects, by the corruption of bribes, affecting or not favouring, of the person: through Usury, extortion, wrong imprisonment: or with any other unjust practise: His Majesty wills the party so grieved, to repair to Sir Vlrico, one of his highness privy Counsel: who (fin∣ding his, or their injuries) is cōmaunded, to certify them, and their proof, unto the Kings majesty: where inconti∣nentlie, he will order the controversy, to the release of the party grieved, and the punishment of the offenders.
Further, if any of his faithful subjects, can charge any person, Officer, or other, with any notable or heinous of∣fence
as Treason, Murder, Sacrilege, sedition: or with any such notorious crime: for the safety of his Royal per∣son, benefyte and quiet of his Realm, and subjects. On Friday next, his most excellent Majesty (with the advise of his honourable Counsel) will in open Court sit, to hear and determine, all such offences. Therefore he straightly charge all and every of his subjects, that know any such heinous offenders: one the forenamed day, that he present, both the offender, and his fault.
Sée howe we are croft: we thought the King for pleasure,
Came to visit vs: when to his pain,
And our plagues, I fear he bestows his leisure.
To hear the wrongs, of such as will complain
Of any man: But the sport is to sée
Vs Officers, one look of another:
I at Lord Promos, Lord Promos at mée,
The Lawyers, at the Shriefe and Mayor.
They case as much on the ruling Lawyer.
For to be plain, the clearest of all,
Peccaui sing, to hear the grievous call,
Against Usury, brybrie, and berating,
Suborning, extortion, and boulstring.
Some faults are heard, some by Proclamation staye,
Before the King, to be heard on Friday.
I yet have escaped, and hope to go scotfrée:
But so, or no, whilst leisure serves mée.
To have my a answers fresh if I be cauld,
Of merry mates, I have a meeting stauld,
To whom my senses, to refresh I wend,
Who gets a pace as merrily may spend.
As thou complaynst, against all equity,
Holds Phallax thy house, by this extremity?
Yea sure, and he hath bound me so subtly,
As less you help, law yields me no remedy.
Well, what say you? is Phallax money paid?
Save five pound Sir:
For which your bend is stayde.
Nay mary, the same I would gladly pay,
But my bond for the forfeit he doth stay.
Summum Juice, I sée, is Sum Imuria:
So these wrongs must be salved some other way.
Yea, more then this, most men say:
What?
To be plain, he kéepes Mistress Lamia.
Admit be doe, what help have you by this?
Yes mary, it proves, a doudle knave he is:
A covetous churl, and a lecher too.
Well, well, honest men, for your witness go,
And as on proof, I find your injuries.
So I will move, the king for remedies.
We thank your honour.
Tys more then strange, to sée with honest show,
What foul deceits, lewd officers can hyde:
In every case, their craft, they colour so,
As styll they have, strict law upon their side.
These cunning Théeues, with law, can Lordships steal,
When for a sheep, the ignorant are trust:
Yea, who more rough, with small offenders deal,
Then these false men, to make themselves seem just?
The tyrant Phallaris, was praised in this,
When Perillus the brazen torment made:
He found the wretch, straight ways in some amiss,
And made him first, the scourge thereof taste:
A just reward for such as doe present
An others fault, himself, the guiltiest man.
Well, to our weal, our gracious king is bent,
To taste these thieves, to use what means he can.
But as at Chests, though skilful players play,
Skilless viewers, may see, what they omit:
So though our king, in searching Judgment may,
Guess at their faults, which secret wrongs commit:
Yet for to judge, by truth, and not by am,
My self in chief, his highness doth auctorise,
On proof for to return who merits blame,
And as I find, so he himself will punish:
So that to use, my charge indifferently,
My Clients wrongs, I will with witness try.
Sir Vlrico, I humbly crave to know,
What good success: my honest suit ensues?
Master Pimos, in breete, the same to show,
I fear, you both, my order will refuse:
Lyros, that thinks he gives more then he should,
And you, for that, you have not, what you would,
It shall go hard, if that your award mistikes mée.
Well, go with me, and you the same shall see:
I weight on you.
My troubled hart with guiltiness agreu'd,
Like fire doth make my ears and cheeks to glow:
God Grant I scope this black day vnrepreu'd,
I care not how the game go to morrow.
Well, I will set a face of brass on it,
And with the rest, upon the King attend:
Who even anon will hear in Judgment sit,
To heaven or hell some officers to send.
But soft, a pryze, Gripax and Rapax I sée,
A share of their venture belonges to mée.
Nay, good honest Promoters let mée go.
Tush Iohn Adroines, we must not leave you so:
What? an old hobclunch a wanton knave?
You shall to the King.
Marry Iohn Adroynes God save:
The king? why he will not look of poor men.
Yes, yes, and will spy a knave in your face.
Will he so? then, good you he gone apace.
And why?
Least in my face, he spy you too,
Have you séene a dawe, bebob two crows so?
Well, come away sir patch.
Leave, or by God yle scratch.
What wilt thou so?
Yea, and byte too.
Help Rapax, play the man.
Nay, do both what you can.
If that in bobs, their bargain be,
In faith they share alone for me.
What bytest thou hobclunch,
Yea, that chull, and punch.
O Lord God, my hart.
Knaves, isle make you fart.
Hold thy hands Lob,
First, take this bob.
To part this fray, it is bye time, I can tell, My Promoters else of the roast will smell.
O, my neck thou will break.
Yea, Gods ames, cry thou creak?
How now my friends? why what a stir is this?
Marry.
What?
Care they part, yle make them pys.
Hold, no more blows.
Knaves, this honest man thank,
That you scope so well.
Friend be not to crank,
I am an officer, and mean to know
The cause, why you brauld thus, before I go:
Your bobs show, that the same, you best can tell.
I would your worship, felt the same as well,
I then am sure, this blockhedded slave,
For both his faults, double punishment should have.
What faults?
Marry,
He will lye like a dog.
How now you churl, your tongue, would have a clog, Say on:
To show his first, and chiefest fought:
His Fathers maid, and he are nought.
What I?
I.
By my Grandsires soul, you lye.
Peace: Friend, for this fault, thou must dye.
Dye, Learde save vs: you sqawde know, yle 〈◊〉 yée: For reforming a lye, thus against mée.
Tush, tush, it helps not: if they can prove this.
For some proof, I saw him and the Maid kiss.
Can not foke kiss: but they are nought by and by?
This presumption friend, will touch thee shroudly:
If thou scope with life, be thou sore of this,
Thou shalt be terriblie whipped, for this kiss.
Whipped, mary God shield, chy had rather be hanged•
Grout nowle, come to the King.
Art not well hanged.
Well, good fellows, lets take up this matter.
Nay, first Iohn Adroines, shall be trust in a halter.
Why? helps it you, to sée the poor man whipped?
I pray you friends, for this time let him go.
Stand styll, and chull, whether they will or no:
Nay, but we charge him, in the Kings name, staye thée.
Hark honest man, I warrant thée set frée?
Grease them well, in their hands, and speak them fair:
O Lord God, our tallow pot is not here.
Tush, claw them with money:
Why so my nails are sharpe.
I see, for Clowns, Pans Pipe, is méeter, thē Apolles Harp. They can skill of no Music, but plain Song.
I pray lets go, we trifle time too long:
Straight. Cocks soul knave, stop his mouth with money.
O, I ken you now sir, chy cry you mercy.
Come on slouch, will please you be jogging hence?
Here is all, ten shillings, and thyrtene pence.
Hark ye my friends.
We must not let him go.
Hark once more.
Give them the money.
It shall be so.
Well, although he deserves great punishment,
For your sake, for this time we are content:
farewell, henceforth be honest,
And for this fault, will pass it ore in jest.
Then gives our money.
Why?
Why, they did but jest:
Yea, but they took thy money in earnest.
Art gone, now the Dewle choke you all with it:
Howe chy kiss again, the knaves have taught me wit.
But by Saint Anne, chy do see her lady:
Men may do what them woll, that have money.
Each surely had been whipped, but for my gold,
But chull no more, with smouches be so bold.
Yea, and ych wysh all Lovers to be wise,
There be leering knaves abroad, have Cattes eyes:
Why, by Gods bores, they can both see and mark,
If a man steal, but a smouch in the dark.
And now the world is grown, to such jolly spy:
As if foke doo kiss, the'are nought by and by.
Well, ych will home, and tell my Father Droyne:
Howe that, two thieves robbed me of my Coin.
Sir Gonsago, if that we henceforth hear,
With will, or wealth, you doe our subjects wrong:
Look not again, this favour for to find,
We use thie grace, to wyn you to amend:
If not, our wrath shall fear you to offend.
God spade you.
I see by proof, that true the prouer be is,
Might masters right, wealth is such a canker,
As wounds the conscience, of his Moister,
And devours the hart of his poor neighbour.
To cure which sore, Justice his pride must pyue,
Which Justice ought in Princes most to shine:
And sith subjects live by their princes law,
Whose laws in chief, the rich should keep in awe:
The poor in wrouges, but seldom doth delight,
They have enough, for to descent their right:
It much behooves the maker of these laws,
(This money finds in them, so many flaws)
To see his laws, obser'd as they are meant:
Or else good laws, will turn to evil intent.
Well, ere I leave, my poorest subjects shall,
Both live, and like: and by the richest stawll.
Regarded and most mighty Prince, your clemency herein,
Those harts, your rule, cōmands through fear to faithful love shall win.
Renowned king, I am for to complain,
Of Phallax, Lord Promos secondary,
Whose heinous wrouges many poor men doth pain,
By me, who pray, your highness remedy.
My Lord Promise, it seems you rule at large,
When as your clarks are officers unjust.
Dread king, I think, he can these wrong discharge.
Doe you but think sir: a sure spear to trust?
A dum death, and blind Judge, can do as much:
Well, well, God grant, your own life, bide the tutch.
Sir Vlrice, your complaint continue:
Gracious King, his wrouges be these insew:
First Phallax, is a common Barriter,
In office, a lewd extortioner:
The crafty man, oft puts these wrongs in ur,
If poor men have, that likes his searching eye,
He shows gould, the needy souls to lure:
Which if they take, so taste he doth them tie,
That by some bond, or covenant forfeited.
They are enforced (far beneath the value)
To let him have what his eye coueyted:
And for to prove, that this report is true,
I show no more, then witness proved by oath,
Whose names and hands, defends it hear as troth,
How now Promos? how think you of your man?
Use both your wits, to clear him if you can.
Dread King, my hart to hear his faults doth bleed.
Howe far'de it then, to suffer it indéede?
It died, I trow, or now you speak in jest:
Thy Master's mute Phallax, I hold it best
That thou speak, for thy self.
I humbly crave,
Of your grace, for answer, respite to have.
Why? to devise a cloak to hyde a knave?
Friend, veritas non queried angulos,
And if your self, you on your truth repose,
You may be bold, these faults for to deny,
Some, little care, upon their oaths to lye:
Sée if any in your behalf will swear.
O Lord God, is there no knights of the post hear?
Well, then of force, I must sing Peccaui.
And cry out right, to the king for mercy.
O King, I am, in fault, I must confess,
The which I will with repentance redress.
Thy confession, doth merit some favour,
But repentance pays not thy poor neighbour:
Wherefore, Sir Vlrico, his goods seas you,
And those, he wronged, restore you, to their due.
Look what he gettes, most think, he wastes straight way,
Upon a lewd harlot, named Lamia:
So that his goods, will scarce pay every wight.
Where nought is left, the king must lose his right.
Pay as you may, I hold it no offence,
If each pay somewhat for experience:
But by the way, you rule the city well,
That suffer, by your nose, such dames to dwell.
And now Phallax, thy further penance is,
That forthwith, thou do resign thy office.
Vlrico, to his account likewise, sée.
It shall be done.
Phallax, further hear mée:
Because thou did, thy faults at first confess,
From punishment▪ thy person I release:
I most humbly, do thank your majesty.
Ah, out alas, Cassandra hear I see.
O would ye tears, might tel my tale, I shame so much my fall,
Or else, Lord Promos lewdness shown, would death would end my thrall.
Welcome my sweet Cassandra.
Murdrous varlet, away.
Renowned King, I pardon crave, for this my hold attempt,
In preasing thus so near your grace, my sorrow to present:
And least my foe, false Promos hear, doe interrupt my tale,
Grant gracious King, that uncontrolled, I may report my bale,
How now Promos? how like you, of this song?
Say on fair dame, I long to hear thy wrong.
Then know dread sovereign, that he this doom did gene,
That my Brother, for wantonness should lose his head:
And that the maid, which sind, should ever after live
In some religious house, to sorrow her misdeed:
To save my brother judged to dye, with tears I sought to move
Lord Promos hart, to show him grace but he with lawless love,
Was fired by and by▪ and knowing necessity,
To save my brothers life, would make me yéeld to much,
He craned this ransom, to have my virginity:
No tears could work restraint, his wicked lust was such,
Two evils here were, one must I choose, though bad were very best,
To sée my brother put to death, or grant his lewd request:
In fine, subdued with natural love, I did agree,
Upon these two points: that marry me he should,
And that from prison vile, he should my brother free.
All this with moustrous oaths, he promised he would.
But O this periurd Promos, when he had wrought his will,
First cast me of: and after caused the Gailer for to kill
My brother, raunsomde, with the spoil of my good name:
So that for companing, with such a hellish fiend,
I have condemned my self to wear these weeds of shame:
Whose cognisance doth show, that I have (fleshly) sind.
Lo thus, hie and renowned king, Cassandra ends her tale,
And this is wicked Promos that hath wrought her endless bale.
If this be true, so towel a deed, shall not unpunished go,
How say thou Promos, to her plaint? art guilty? yea, or no?
Why speak thou not? a faulty heart, thy silence sure doth show.
My guilty hart commands my tongue. O king, to tell a truth,
I doe confess this tale is true, and I deserve thy wrath.
And is it so? this wicked deed, thou shalt ere long buy dear,
Cassandra, take comfort in care, be of good cheer:
Thy forced fault, was free from evil intent,
So long, no shame, can blot thee any way.
And though at full, I hardly can content thee,
Yet as I may, assure thy self I will.
Thou wicked man, might it not thee suffice,
By worse then force, to spoil her chastity,
But heaping sin on sin against thy oath,
Haste cruelly, her brother done to death.
This over proof, no can but make me think,
That many ways thou hast my subjects wronged:
For how can thou with Justice use thy sway?
When thou thy self dost make thy will a law?
Thy tyranny made me, this progress make,
How so, for sport till now I coloured it
Unto this end, that I might learn at large,
What other wrongs by power, thou hast wrought,
And héere, I hear: the Rich suppress the poor:
So that it séemes, the best and thou art friends:
I placed thée not, to be a partial Judge.
Thy Officers are covetous I find,
By whose reports, thou over culest suits.
Then who that gives, an Item in the hand,
In right, and wrong, is sure of good success.
Well, Varlet, well: too slow I hither came,
To scourge, thy faults, and salve the sores thou made:
On thée vile wretch, this sentence I pronounce.
That forth with, thou shalt marry Cassandra,
For to repair his honour, thou did waste:
The next day thou shalt lose thy hated life.
In penance, that thou made his Brother dye.
My faults were great, O King, yet grant me mercy,
That now with bloody sighs, lament my sins too late.
Hac facias altar, quote tibi vis fieri:
Pity was no plée Sir, when you in judgment sate,
Prepare your self to dye, in vain you hope for life.
My Lords, bring him with mée: Cassandra come you in like case▪
My self will sée, thy honour salu'd, in making thée his Wife,
The sooner to shorten his days.
We wait upon your Grace.
Sir Vlrico, I wyld, Commission should be made,
To Sir Anthony Alberto, and Justice Diron,
To hear and determine, all suits to be had
Between Moister Prostro, and this poor man: is it done?
Renowned King, it is ready:
Repair to Sir Ʋlrico, for thy Commission:
God preserve your Majesty.
Bones of me, a mā were better speak to great Lords chy sée,
Then to our proud, Iustlers of peace, that bin in the country:
He that is rich, as my dame saith, goes away with the Hare.
This two yéere, they have hard my matter, &amp; yet cham ne'er ye néere.
And at first dash, a good fat Lord, God in heaven save his life.
Faith, for nothing, teld the King of Mas Prostros, and my strife.
O Lord, ych thought the King could not bide, on poor men to look,
But God save his Grace, at first dash, my Supplication he took:
And you hard, how gently, he called mée poor man, and wild me go,
For my Passport, I ken not what, to good sir Vlrico.
Well, chull go fort, and hope to be with Master Prostros to bring:
But ere ych go, chul my Ballat, of good King Corvine sing.
YOu Barons bold, and lusty Lads,
Prepare to welcome, our good King:
Whose coming so, his Subjects glads,
As they for joy, the Belles doo ring.
They frisk, and skip, in every place,
And happy he, can see his face.
Who checks the rich, that wrong by might,
And helps the poor, unto his right.
¶The love that rigour gettes through fear,
With grace and mercy, he doth wyn:
For which we pray thus, every where,
Good Lord preserve, our King Corvin.
His favour reigns, in every place:
And happy he, can see his face.
Come loitering knaves, spéede about your business.
Fetch me in, all idle vacaboundes.
Yes sir yes:
Search Duck alley, Cock lane, and Sc•uldes corner,
About your charge, lets see, howe you can stir.
Yes, I have wings in my heals to flee.
Who gives two pence, a strange Monster to sée.
What Monster?
A horned Beast, with wings upon his heals.
Out drunken dreule?
What? runs your heads a wheels?
Be packing both, and that betimes you are best.
We are gone Sir, we did but speak in jest.
The King, I saith, hath set vs all a work,
To search odd holes, where idle varlets lurk.
He so nipped, our Mayor for ill rule:
As ever since, he hath been like to whule.
And in a rage, the man is now so what,
As lewd persons, tag, and rag, goes to pot.
But in chief, he storms, at fine Mistress Lamia.
She drinks, for all, come she once in his way.
And least she scope, my self forsooth he wills,
Worshipfullie to fetch his, with forty Bills.
Well, I must go, and work our Majors beast,
No force, for once, she will never be honest.
This savage life, were hard to brooke, if hope no cōfort gave:
But I (whose life, frō Tyrants wrath, Gods prouidēce did save,
Do take in worth this misery, as penance for my mys:
Still fed with hope to chaūge this state, when Gods good pleasure is.
A hollow Cave for house, and bed, in worth Andrugio takes,
Such sorry food, as fortune sends, he seldom now forsakes.
I am my self forsooth, now Butcher, Cooke, Cater and all:
Yea, often times I fall to sléepe, with none, or supper small.
Then in my Den, I call to mind, the life I lived in bliss:
And by the want I fréedome judge, the greatest joy that is.
The fréeman is in view of friends, to have release in néede:
The exile, though he have no lack, yet lives he styll in dréede
That his mysdéedes, will hardly scope, the punishment of law:
And living, he were better dead, that lives in this awe,
Besides this fear, which never fails, the banished man in want,
As oft he is, is sure to find his succor's very scant.
Then who is he so mad, that friends, and fréedome doth enjoy?
That will adventure breach of law, to live in this annoy?
And not annoy to him alone, but to his friends and kin:
Great be the cares, Cassandra, and Polina lives in.
Through thought, of me, whom long agony, beheaded they suppose,
For my offence, thus are they scorgde, yet dare I not disclose
My safety, for their help: but hark, who comes here?
This chance séemes strange: God grant good news, I hope, and yet I fear.
If che could find my Mare, che would be rusty by the rood,
And cham sure the hoorechup, is peaking in this wood.
Thy will séeke every corner, but che will find her.
This clown can hardly mée bewray, and yet such dunghill churls,
Such news, as is in market tounes, about the country whorls.
What séekes thou good fellow?
My sqawde Mare, dost her know?
No.
Then scummer mée not, in haste ych go,
Séeke my Mare, to sée the sport at Iulio.
What sport?
A little sport.
What?
Nay skill not a whit?
What means this Ass?
T'wyll teach the hoorecup wit.
H'yll hang, handsome young men for the foot sin of love,
When so his knavery, himself, a bawdy jack doth prove.
His words séemeth strange, somewhat is a wry.
Well, chyll sée his shoulders, from his jowl to fly.
Whose shoulders friend?
As though you did know.
Whom?
Lord Promos.
Yes: my most accursed foe: But what of him?
Thou kenst.
No.
Say not, yes,
Yes:
So,
But friend thou took my words amiss,
I know nothing, in what state Promos is.
Thou know, and thou know not: out whoreson fool,
Leave stealing Cunnyes, and get thee to scoole,
Farewell.
Soft.
O to art no fool good théefe:
Save my money take my life.
Tush be brief.
Some news, of lewd Lord Promos tell mée,
And with life and money, yle set thee free.
I will thou know the King now at Iulio.
Very well.
Thou can tel as well as I.
Let me go:
Nay yle see if thou dost lye.
If thou dost yle whip thee, when thou hast done.
Kissing and lying, each see is all one:
And chaue no money, chul tell true therefore.
Dispatch then.
Then, lying Promoter, this more:
Casgandra scusde, Promos of honesty:
And killing Ramstrugio for bawdry.
What more?
The king at Promos, great pleasure did take,
And Casgandra, an honest woman to make:
The King maunded him, her straight to marry,
And for killing her brother, he must dye.
Is this true?
Why? how say you? doe I lye?
Well, so or no, for thy news have this connie.
Gods boors, give it me, to be sweet, tic to cheap,
But Lady yet, till sunday it will keep:
Well, now god buy, Mas lying Promoter,
Wees see at the soort.
I peradventure.
Since can not find my Mare, on foot chull go:
Ych think, each day a never, to be at Iulio.
Strange are the news, the Clown hath shown to me:
Not strange a whyt, if they well scanned be.
For God we see, styll throws the Tyrant down:
Even in the height, and pride of his renown,
Lord Promos rule, nay, tyranny in deed,
For Judges is a mirror, worthy héede.
The wretched man, with show of Justice zeal,
Thoroughly did, with poor offenders deal.
The wicked man, both, knew, and judged, abuse:
And none so much, as he her faults did use.
He felons hanged, yet by extortion, stole:
He wantons plag'd, himself a doting fool.
He others checked, for suing for their right:
And he himself, maintained wrongs by might.
But sée the rule of mischief, in his pride:
He headlong falls, when least, he thought to slide.
Well, by his fall, I may perhaps arise:
Andrugio yet, in climbing be thou wise.
What? styll unknown, shall I live in this wood?
Not so.
Go wraye these news, no doubt, unto my good.
Yet ere I go, I will my self disguise,
As in the Town, in spyte of Lynxes eyes.
I will unknown, learn howe the game doth go,
But ere I go, sith eased is my woe:
My thanks to God, I first in song will shoe.
TO thee O Lord, with heart, and voice I sing,
Whose mercy great, from moan to sweet delight▪
From grief to joy, my troubled soul doest bring,
Yea, more thy wrath, hath foiled my foe in sight.
Who sought my life (which thou O God did save)
Thy scourge hath brought, untimely to his grave.
Whose grief will gaul, a thousand Judges more,
And will them see, them selves, and sentence just:
When black reproach, this thundering shame shall shoe,
A Judge condemned for murder, theft, and lust.
This scourge, O God, the lewd in fear will bring,
The just for joy, thy praises load will sing.
Come on fair Dame, since fair words, works no héede,
Now foul means shall: in you repentance bréede.
Moister Gresco, where you may help, hurt not.
And nothing but chastment, will help you to amend,
Well, I will not hurt you, your lewdness to defend.
My lewdness Sir: what is the difference,
Betwixt wantons, and hoorders of pence?
Thou hast wind at will, but in thy eyes no water:
Though art full of Grace, howe she blushes at the matter.
Howe sample I, your wife and daughter Sir?
Are me, when whipping hath changed thy Nature.
What whipping? why? am I a Horse, or a Mare?
No, but a beast, that méetelie well will bare.
In déede (as) now, perforce, I bear this flowt:
But use me well, else I faith, get I out,
Look for quittance.
Bind his to the Peace Sir,
So may your Worship be out of danger.
Bring his away, I know howe to tame his.
Perhaps Sir, no: the worst is but shame his.
Come ye drab.
Howe now scab? bands of my Gown.
Care not for this, use have a blew one soon.
Unhappy Wench, the more I séeke, for to abandon grief,
The further off, I wretched find, both comfort and relief.
My Brother first, for wanton faults, condemned was to dye:
To save whose life, my suit, wrought hope of Grace, but hapless I.
By such request, my honour spoiled, and gained not his breath:
For which deceit, I have pursued, Lord Promos unto death.
Who is my Husband now become, it pleased our Sovereign so,
For to repair, my crazed Fame: but that now works my wo.
This day, he must (oh) léese his head, my Brothers death to quite,
And therein Fortune hath alas, shown me his greatest spyte.
Nature wyld mée, my Brother love, now duty commands mée,
To prefer before kin, or friend, my Husbands safety.
But O, aye mée, by Fortune, I, am made his chiefest foe:
T'was I else, even only I. that wrought his ouerthroe.
What shall I doo, to work amends, for this my heinous déede?
The time is short, my power small, his succours axes spéede.
And shall I séeke, to save his blood, that lately sought his life?
O, yea I then was sworn his foe: but now as faithful Wife,
I must and will, prefer his health, God send me good success:
For now unto the King I will, my changed mind to express.
Was ever man, set more fréer then I?
First went my goods, then my Office did fly?
But had the King, set me frée from flattrie,
The next dear year, I might have starved, party.
But Lord Promos, hath a far more fréer chance:
He free from Lands, goods, and Office doth dance:
And shall be free from life, ere long, with a Lance.
The Officers, and chief men of Iulio:
Vengeance liberal, themselves likewise shoe.
Poor knaves, and queens, that up and down do go,
These horesen kind crusts, in houses bestoe.
But yet, poor chéere, they have: marry for heate,
They whip them, until very blood they sweat.
But see, their cost bestowed of fine Lamia,
To save his féete, from harde stones, and cold way,
Into a Carte, they did the queen convey.
Apparelled, in colours very gay:
Both Hood, and Gown, of greene, and yellow Say.
His Guard wear Typstaues, all in blew array.
Before his a noise of Basins did play.
In this triumph, she rid well ny a day.
Fie, fie, the City is so purged now:
As they of none, but honest men allow,
So that farewell my part, of thriving there:
But the best is, flattrers live every where.
Set cock on hoop, Domini est terra.
If thou can not where thou would, live where thou may.
Yes, yes Phallax, knows whether to go:
Now, God buy ye all, bonest men of Iulio
As the Devils likes, the company of Friars,
So flattrers loves as life, to join with liars.
These two days, I have been in Court disguised:
Where I have learned, the scourge that is deuis'd,
For Promos fault, he my Sister spowsed hath,
To salve his Fame, cracked by his breach of faith.
And shortly he, must lose his subtle head:
For murdering me, whom no man thinks but dead.
His will, was good: and therefore beshrew me,
If (moved with ruth) I seek, to set him free.
But softly, with some news, these fellows come:
I will stand close, and hear both all and some.
Marshall, hear you warrant is: with spéede,
The king commands, that Promos you behead.
Sir, his highness will, shall be forthwith done.
The king well-nigh to pardon him was won,
His heavy wife, such storms of tears did shower,
As might, with rues, have moist a stony hart.
But Promos guylt, did soon this grace devour.
Our gracious king, before his wretched smart,
Preferred, the health, of this our common weal:
But see again, to sue for him she comes,
Her ruthful looks, her gréefe, doth force mée féele.
With hope, I must, his sorrows néedes delay:
Till Promos be dispacht out of the way.
Sir Vlrico, if that my unknown gréefe,
May move good minds, to help me to relief,
Or bitter sighs, of comfort clean dismayed,
May move a man, a shiftless dame to aid:
Rue of my tears, from true intent which flow,
Unto the king, with me, yet once more go.
Sée if his grace, my husbands life will save,
If not, with his, death shall my corps engrave.
What shall I doe, her sorrows to decrease?
Feed her, with hope: fair dame, this moan surcease,
I see the king to grace is somewhat bent,
We once again thy sorrows will present:
Come we will wayght for time, thy suit to show.
Good knight, for time, doe not my suit foreslow.
Whilst grass, doth grow oft starves the seely stéede.
Fear not, your Lord, shall not dye with such spéede.
Lord God, how am I tormented in thought?
My sisters woe, such rues in me doth grave:
As fain I would (if ought save death I caught)
Bewray my self, Lord Promos life to save.
But life is sweet, and nought but death I eye,
If that I should, my safety now disclose:
So that I choose, of both the euels, he dye:
Time will appease, no dought, Cassandras woes,
And shall, I thus acquit Cassandras love?
To work her joy? and shall I fear to dye?
Whilst, that she live, no comfort may remove
Care from her heart, if that his husband dye?
Then shall I stick, to hazard lym? nay life?
To salve his grief, since in my cure it rests.
Nay first, I will be spoiled, with bloody knife,
Before, I fail, her, plunged in distress.
Death, is but death, and all in fine shall dye
Thus (being dead) my fame, shall live always:
Well, to the king, Andrugio now will hye,
Hap life, hap death, his safety, to bewray.
Room friends, what mean you thus to case on vs,
A comes behind, makes all the sport I wuss.
Farewell, my friends, take warning by my fall,
Disdain my life, but listen to my end,
Fresh harms, they say, the viewers so apall,
As oft they win, the wicked to amend.
I need not hear, my faults at large resyte,
Untimely death, doth witness what I was:
A wicked man, which made each wrong seem right,
Even as I would, was wrested every case.
And thus long time, I lived and rule by will,
Where as I loved, their faults, I would not sée:
Those I did hate, ten times beyond there ill
I did pursue, vile wretch, with cruelty.
Yea daily I, from bad, to worse did slyde,
The reason was, none durst, control my life:
But sée the fall, of mischeeue, in his pride.
My faults, were known, and lo with bloddy Axe,
The headseman straight, my wrongs with death will quite:
The which, in worth I take, acknowledging,
The doom, was given, on cause, and not on spyte,
Wishing my end, might serve for a warning.
For such as rule, and make their will a law,
If to such good, my fainting tale might tend,
Wretched Promos, the same would longer draw:
But if that words prevail, my woeful end
From my huge faults, then ten times more will warn.
Forgiveness now, of all the world I crave,
Therewith that you, in zealous prayer, will
Beseech of God, that I the grace may have:
At latter gasp, the fear of death to kill.
Forwards my Lord, me thinks you faintly go.
O sir, in my case, your self would be as slow.
Aye me, alas: my hope is untimely.
Whether goes my good Lord?
Swéete wife, to dye.
O wretched wench, where may I first complain?
When heaven, and earth, agrees upon my payne?
This moan good wife, for Chrystes sake, forsake:
I late resolved, through fear of death, now quake.
Not so much, for my heinous sins forepast:
As for the grief that present thou dost taste.
Nay, I vile wretch, should most agréeued be,
Before thy time, thy death which hastened have:
But (O sweet husband) my fault forgive mée.
And for amends, Isle help to fill thy grave:
Forgive thee, ab: nay, for my souls reléefe,
Forget swéete wife, this thy most guiltless gréefe.
My Lord Promos, these plaints, but move his moan,
And your more gréefe, it is best you ware gone:
Good Madam way, by law, your Lord doth dye,
Wherefore make virtue of necessity:
Delay, but works your sorrows, and our blames,
So that now, to the comfort of these dames:
And your wisdom, enforced, we leave you:
My Lord Promos, bid your wife and friends adieu.
Farewell, farewell, be of good cheer dear wife:
With joy for woe, I shall exchange this life.
Andrugios death, Polina forgive mée:
I doe, and pray the Lord, to reléeue yée.
Yet ere we part, sweet husband let vs kiss,
O, at his lips, why fails not my breath?
Leave moan, sweet wife. I doe deserve this death.
Farewell, farewell.
My loving Lord, farewell,
I hope ere long, my soul with thine shall dwell.
Now, good Madame, leave of this bootless grief.
O Polina, sorrow is my relief.
Wherefore, sweet wench, help me to rue my woe,
With me vile wretch, thy bitter plaints bestow:
To hasten lingering death, who wants might:
I sée, alone, to sley, the wretched wight.
Nay, first power forth your plaints, to the powers Divine,
When hate, doth cloud, all worldly grace, whose mercies styll do shine.
O, so or no, thy motion doth well,
Swan like, in song, to towel my passing Bell.
¶ Dear Dames divorce, your minds frō joy, help to bewail my wo,
Condole with me, whose heavy sights, the pangs of death do shoe;
Rend heirs, shed tears, poor wēch distressed, to hast the means to dye,
Whose joy, annoy: relief, whose grief, hath spoiled with cruelty.
My brother slain, my husband ah, at point to lose his head,
Why live I then unhappy wench, my suckers being dead?
O time, O crime, O cause, O laws, that Judged them thus to dye:
I blame, you all, my shame, my thrall, you hate that harmless try.
This Tragedy they have begun, conclude I wretched must,
O welcome care, consume the thread, thereto my life doth trust:
Sound bell, my knell, away delay, and give me leave to dye,
Les hope, have scope unto my hart, a fresh for aid to fly.
O swéete news, for Polina and Cassandra. Andrugio lives:
What doth poor Ganie say?
Andrugio lives: and Promos is reprieved.
Vain is thy hope, I saw Andrugio dead.
Well, then from death, he is again revived.
Even now, I saw him, in the market stead.
His words are strange.
Too swéete, God wot, for true.
I pray you, who are these here in your view?
The King.
Who more?
O. I see Andrugio.
And I my Lord Promos, adieu sorrow.
My good Andrugio?
My swéete Polina:
Lives Andrugio, welcome swéete brother.
Cassandra?
I.
Howe fare, my dear Sister?
Andrugio, you shall have more leisure.
To gréete one another: it is our pleasure,
That you forthwith, your Fortunes here declare,
And by what means, you thus preserved wear.
My faull, through love, and judgment for my fault.
Lord Promos wrongs, unto my Sister done.
My death supposed, dread King, were vain to tell.
Cassandra hear, those dealings all hath shown.
The rest are these.
When I should dye, the Gayler moved to ruth,
Declared to mée, what Promos pleasure was:
Amazed whereat, I told him all the truth,
What, between Cassandra, and him did pass.
He much aggrieved, Lord Promos guylt to hear,
Was very loathe, mée (woeful man) to harm:
At length, just God, to set me (wretched) clear,
With this defence, his willing mind did arm.
Two days before, to death, were divers done,
For several faults, by them committed:
So that of them, he took the head from one,
And to Cassandra, the same presented:
Affirming it, to be bear brothers head.
Which done, by night, he sent me post away,
None but supposed, that I in déde was dead:
When as in truth, in uncouth haunts I lay.
In fine, a Clown, came peaking through the wood,
Wherein I lived, your Graces being here:
And Promos death, by whom I understood,
Glad of which news, howe so I lived in fear.
I ventured to sée his wretched fall:
To free suspect, yet stranger like arrayed,
I hither came: but lo, the inward thrall
Of Cassandra, the hate, so sore dismayed.
Which I conceived against my brother Promos,
That lo, I choosed, to yield my self to death,
To set him free: for otherwise I knew,
His death ere long, would sure have stopped her breath.
Lo gracious king, in brief I here have shown,
Such adventures, as wretched I have past:
Beseeching you with grace to think upon,
The wight that wails, his follies at the last.
A strange discourse, as strangely come to light,
Gods pleasure is, that thou should pardoned be:
To salve the fault, thou with Polina made,
But marry her, and hear I set thee frée.
Most gracious Prince, thereto I gladly grée:
Polina, the happiest news of all for thee.
Most gracious King, with these my joy to match,
Vouchsafe, to give my dampned husband life.
If I doo so, let him thank thée his Wife:
Cassandra, I have noted thy distress,
Thy virtues eke, from first, unto the last:
And glad I am, without offence it lies,
In me to ease, thy grief, and heaviness.
Andrugio saved, the jewel of thy joy,
And for thy sake, I pardon Promos fault.
Yea let them both, thy virtues rare commend:
In that their woes, with this delight doth end.
God preserve your Majesty.
Cassandra, howe shall I discharge thy due?
I did, but what a Wife, should do for you.
Well, fince all parts are pleased, as they would,
Before I part, yet Promos, this to thee:
Henceforth, forethink, of thy forepassed faults,
And measure Grace, with Justice evermore.
Unto the poor, have evermore an eye,
And let not might, out countenance their right:
Thy Officers, trust not in every tale.
In chief, when they are means, in strifes and suits,
Though thou be just, yet coin may them corrupt.
And if by them, thou dost unjustice show,
Tys thou shalt bear, the burden of their faults.
Be loving to good Cassandra, thy Wife:
And friendly to thy brother Andrugio,
Whom I command, as faithful for to be
To thée, as beseems the duty of a brother.
And now again, thy government receive,
Enjoy it so, as thou in Justice joy.
If thou be wise, thy fall may make thee rise.
The lost shéepe found, for joy, the feast was made.
Well, here an end, of my advise I make,
As I have said, be good unto the poor.
And Justice join, with mercy enermore.
Most gracious King, I will not fail my best,
In these precepts, to follow your behest.

TO wright of the recei∣uing
of his highness into Suffolk
and Norffolke in every point, as
matter may move me, would con∣teyne
a great time, in making a just
rehearsal thereof: wherefore I will
but briefly recite it, and commit
the circumstance and manner of the
same, to your discretion and judge∣meant.
The troth is, albeit they had but small warning cer∣taynely
to build upon, of the coming of the Quéenes May∣sty
into both those Shéeres, the Gentlemen had made such
ready provision, that all the veluets and silks were taken up
that might be laid hand on, and bought for any money, and
soon converted to such garments and suits of robes, that the
show thereof might have beautified the greatest triumph that
was in England these many years: for (as I heard) there
were two hundred young Gentlemen, clad all in white vel∣uet,
and thrée hundred of the graver sort apparelled in black
velvet coats, and fair chains, all ready at one instant and
place, with fiftéene hundred serving men more on Horseback,
well and bravely mounted in good order, ready to receive the
Quéenes highness into Suffolk, which surely was a comely
troupe, and a noble sight to behold: and all these waited on
the Sheriff Sir William Spring, during the Quéenes May∣sties
abode in those parties, and to the very con•ynes of Suf∣folk.
But before his highness passed to Norffolke, there was
in Suffolk such sumptuous feasting and banquets, as seldom
in any part of the world hath bin séene before. The moister of
the rolls, Sir William Cordall, was one of the first that
began this great feasting, and did light such a Candle to
the rest of the Shéere, that many were glad bountifully and
frankly to follow the same example, with such charges and
cost, as the whole train were in some sort pleased therewith.
And néere Bury, Sir William Drury for his part at his house,
made the Queens highness a costly and delicate dinner, and
Sir Robert Iermyne of Roeshbroke feasted the French Em∣bassadoures
two several times, with which charges and
curtsy they stood marvelously contented. The Sheriff Sir
William Spring, Sir Thomas Kidson, Sir Arthur Higham, &amp;
divers other of worship, kept great houses, and sundry either
at the Quéenes coming, or return, solemnly feasted his
highness, yea and deffrayed the whole charges for a day or
twain, presented gifts, made such triumphs and devises,
as in déede was most noble to behold, and very thankfully
accepted. The Norffolke Gentlemen hearing how dutiful∣lie
their neighbours had received the Prince, prepared in like
sort to show themselves dutiful, and so in most gallantest
manner, assembled and set forward with five and twenty hun∣dred
Horsemen, whereof as some affirm, were six hundredth
Gentlemen•n, so bravely attired, and mounted, as in déede was
worthy the noting, which goodly company waited on their
Sheriff a long season: but in good sooth (as I have heard cre∣dibly
spoken) the banquets and feasts began héere afresh, and
all kind of triumphs that might be devised, were put in prac∣tise
and proof. The earl of Surrey did show most sumptu∣os
•héere, in whose Park were spéeches well set out, &amp; a
special Device much cōmended: and the rest, as a number of
Gentlemen, whose names I have not, were no whit behind
to the uttermost of their abilities, in all that might be done
and devised. But when the Quéenes highness came to Nor∣which,
the substance of the whole Triumph and feasting, was
in a ma•ner there new to begin, for order was taken
there, that every day, for six days together, a Show of some
strange Device should be séene, and the Mayor and Aldermē,
appointed among themselves and their bré•throne, that no one
person, retaining to the Quéene, should be vnfea••ed, or un∣bidden
to dinner and supper, during the space of those six
days: which order was well and wisely observed, and gained
their City more same and credit, than they wot of: for that
curtsy of theirs shall remain in perpetual memory,
whiles the walls of their City stands. Besides the money
they bestowed on divers of the train, and those that took
pains for them (albeit my self but slenderly considered) will
be a witness of their well doing and good will, whiles the re∣port
of these things may be called to remembrance. I can not
nor ought not, considering their great charges (and discrete
government in these causes) but give them due la•de and
reputation, as far as my pen or report may doe them
good, and stretch out their credit. For most assuredly,
they have taught and learned all the Towns and Ci∣ties
in England a lesson, howe to behave themselves in
such like services and actions.
Now to return to the Shows and purposed matter pen∣ned
out by me (to shorten the season, and move pastime to the
Prince) I thought it convenient to print them in order,
as they were invented: for I was the first that was
called, and came to Norwich about that business, and
remained there thrée long wéekes before the Court came
thither, devising and studying the best I could for the
City, albeit other Gentlemen, as Moister Goldingham,
Moister Garter, and others, did seeppe in after, and brought
to p•sse that already is set in Print in a Book, where the
Orations and spéeches of divers are set out plainly and true∣lie:
and for that my meaning was orderly to procéede, I have
héere plainly drawē out my Device, not that I think it me∣ritz
any great memory, nor claims credit, but only
that mine honest intent may bée thereby expressed, and my
friends may sée how glad I am to honour God, my Prince,
and my Country, trusting to set sorth other works as time
will permit, and that right shortly, that shall hold you longer
tack, and better please you. In the mean while I pray you
take in worth and good part my little pains and great good
will, and read (as your fancy favours) the Uerses and De∣uises
that follow.
THe deavv of heaven drops this day
on dry and barren ground,
Wherefore let frutefull hearts I say
at Drum and Trumpet sound
Yield that is due, show that is meet,
to make our joy the more,
In our good hope, and his great praise,
we never saw before.
The Sun doth shine where shade hath bin,
long darkness brought vs day,
The Star of comfort now coms in,
and here a while will stay.
Ring out the belles, pluck up your sprightes,
and dress your houses gay,
Run in for flowers to stravv the streets,
and make what joy you may.
The dew of Heaven. &amp;c.
Full many a Winter have we seen,
and many storms withal,
Since here we saw a King or Queen
in pomp and Princely pall.
Wherefore make feast, and banquet still,
and now to triumph fall,
With duty let vs show good will,
to glad both great and small.
The dew of Heaven. &amp;c.
The Realm throughout will ring of this,
and sundry Regions more
Will say, full great our fortune is,
when our good hap they know.
O Norvvich, here the well spring runs,
whose virtue still doth floe,
And lo this day doth shine two Suns
within thy vvalles also.
The dew of Heaven. &amp;c.
This Song ended, his highness passed towards his lod∣ging,
and by the way in a Church-yarde, over against My∣ster
Peckes door (a worthy Alderman) was a Skaffold set up
and bravely trimmed. On this Skaffolde, was placed an ex∣cellent
Boy, well and gallantly decked, in a lōg white robe of
Taffeta, a Crimson Scarf wrought with gold, folded on the
Turkish fashion about his brows, and a gay Garland of
fine •lours on his head, which Boy was not séene, till the
Quéene had a good season marked the Music, which was
marvelous swéete and good, albeit the rudeness of some rin∣ger
of belles did somewhat hinder the noise and harmony:
and as soon as the Music ended, the Boy stepped reverently
before the Quéene, and spake these words that follow.
GReat things were meant to welcome thee (ô Queen,)
If want of time had not cut off the same:
Great was our wish, but small is that was seen,
For vs to show, before so great a Dame.
Great hope we have it pleased our Princes eye,
Great were the harms that else our pains should reap:
Our grace or foil, doth in your judgment lie,
If you mislike, our griefs do grow on heap:
If for small things, we do great favour find,
Great is the joy, that Norwich feels this day:
If well we waid the greatness of your mind,
Few words would serve, we had but small to say.
But knowing that your goodness takes things well
That well are meant, we boldly did proceed:
And so good Queen, both welcome and farewell,
Thine own we are, in heart, in word, and deed.
The Boy thereupon flang up his Garland, and the Queens
Highness said, This Device is fine.
Then the noise of Music began again, to hear the
which, the Quéene stayed a good while, and after departed to
the Cathedral Church, which was not far from thence.
And the next day after, which was Sunday, when Princes
commonly come not abroad (and time is occupied with
Sermons, and laudable exercises) I was to watch a conueni∣ent
season, where and how might be uttered the things that
were prepared for pastime. And so upon Monday before sup∣per,
I made a Device, as though MERCVRIE had bin sent
from the Gods, to request the Quéene to come abroad, and
behold what: was devised for his welcome, the whole matter
whereof doth follow.
THe Coatch that MERCVRIE came into 〈◊〉
Quéene, was closely kept in secret a long sea∣son,
and when the time came it must pass to∣wards
the Court, it had a Trumpeter with
it, and the Coatchman was made to drive so
fast, as the Horses should séeme to fly, which
was so well observed, as the people wondered at the swift∣ness
thereof, and foal•owed it in such flocks and multitudes,
that scarce in a great gréene (where the Preaching place is)
might be found room for any more people. And when the
Coatch approached in the hearing of a Trumpet, the Trum∣petter
sounded, and so came in to the gréene sounding, until
the Coatche was full placed before a window at the which
the Quéene stood, and might be plainly séene, and openly
viewed. When MERCVRIE had espied his highness, he
skipped out of the Coatche, and being on the ground, gave a
n••p or two, and advanced himself in such a sort, that the
Queen smiled at ye boldness of the Boy. Thus MERCVRIE
beholding the Quéene with great courage and audacity, at
the length bowed down his head, and immediately stood
bolt upright, and shaked his rod, and so began his spéeche
with a most assured countenance, and bravely pronounced it
in déede.
MVse not good Queen at me that message brings
From love, or just 〈◊〉, Lord of might,
No earthly God, yet governs mortal things,
And sprites divine, and shining Angels bright.
This Lord o• late to show his mighty power,
Hath wonders wrought, when world looked least therefore:
For at his beck, this day, and present hour,
The Heavens shook, the thunder bolts did roar.
The earth did move, the dead therein did rise,
And out of grave, the Ghosts of men are gone,
The wandering Sprites that hovered in the Skies
Dropped down from ayre, for world to wonder on.
The Saints thems•lues, that sate in glory great,
Were sent in hast, to work Iehouas will,
And I that oft my restless wings do beat,
Was called, to use my wings and office still.
A common post is Mercury you know,
When he commands that made the world of nought,
And flies as fast, as arrow out of bow,
When message may express Iehouas thought.
Whose power divine full long ere this hath seen,
That in this place should lodge a sacred Queen.
And weighing well, the Prince• whereof I speak,
Might weary wax of common pastimes here,
(For that he knows his judgment is not weak,)
Devised aboue, below there should appear
(To welcome his) some sights that rare should seem,
And careless stood, what world thereof did deem:
So that good Queen, you take them well in worth.
No sooner had Iehoua meant these things,
But Clouds clapped hands, and souls of men came forth
Of Heaven gates, yea goodly crowned Kings
Were flown abroad, from blessed Abrams breast:
Some in the ayre, and tops of trees did rest,
Some fell on 〈…〉 houses high,
Some sunk in Seas, 〈…〉 were drowned now,
And some did light on land where every eye
May them behold, and note their manners throw.
And therewithal, the black infernal spreetes
Ran out of Hell, the earth so trembling than,
And like young lads they hopt about the streets.
The Satyrs wilde, in form and shape of man
Crept through the woods, and thickets full of briers,
The water Nymphs, and Fairies straight appears
In uncouth forms, and fashion strange to view:
The hags of Hell that hateful are of kind,
To please the time, had learned a nature new,
And all those things that man can call to mind,
Were glad to come, and do their duty throw.
I seeing this, called for my Coatch in hast,
Abide sir Boy, then said Iehou• now,
Thou goosed not yet, until • Prince be placed
Where I appoint, thou hast nothing to say.
Then still I stood, to know what should be done.
With that, a swarm of people every way
Like little Antes, about the fields began run,
Some to provide for pomp and triumph great,
Some for good fare, yea household cates and meat,
And some they ran to seek where Poets dwell,
To pen forth shows, and paint out tri••es well,
Some haled and pulled, to bring the carredge in,
Some ran to gaze on triumph near at hand,
And some stood mute, as they amazed had bin
To see a Court, and Princely noble band
Come marching on, and make here their abode:
But when I saw the carredge here vnlode,
And well had weighed the wonders I have told,
O mighty God (quoth I) now give me leave
To go from thee, some message to unfold,
That by my speech the hearers may conceive
Thy Godhood great, hath brought this Princess here.
It shall be so (quoth he) disp•tch and 〈◊〉,
And tell his, that she is to me so 〈◊〉.
That I appoint by mans device and art,
That every day she shall see sundry shoe•,
If that she please to walk and take the air•:
And that so soon as out of door she goes
(If time do serve, and weather wareth fair)
Some odd device shall meet his highness straight,
To make his smile, and ease his burdened breast,
And take away the cares and things of weight
That Princes feel, that finds greatest rest.
When I had thus received my charge at full,
My golden rod in lively hand I took,
And bad in hast my flying Horses pull.
But ear I past, I began about me look
To see that Coatch, and each thing gall•n• were•:
So down I came, all winged as you see.
And since I have espied that Princess there,
That greatest Kings do sue to by degree,
And many mo that sues no whit, do fear,
I kiss his steppes, and show my masters will,
And leave with his such graces from aboue,
As always shall command his peoples love,
(Uphold his reign, maintain his regal state,
Find out false harts, and make of subjects true,
Plant perfect peace, and root up all debate)
So with this grace, good Queen now here 〈◊〉,
For I may now on earth no longer stey,
Than Servants must to Masters will obey.
MERCVRIE having thus spoken to the Quéen (whose
gracious inclination is such, as will not have any
thing dutifully offred to pass unregarded) was well heard,
his Highness standing at a window, and (as I know,) the
Spéech very well taken and understood. MERCVRIE as he
came, passed away, at whose Coatch the people (that had sell∣dome
séene such a Device) marvelled, and gazed very much:
for it had horses to draw it finely painted as winged, to as
great show and order of that it presented, as wit might i∣magine:
the Coatchman suitable to the same: and a Trum∣peter
in right good garments, as decente for that purpose as
could be devised. But the Coatche was made and framed on
such a fashion, as few men have séene: the whole whereof was
covered with Birds, and naked Sprites hanging by the hée∣les
in the air and clouds, cunningly painted out, as though
by some thunder crack they had been shaken &amp; tormented, yet
stayed by power divine in their places, to make the more wō∣der
and miraculous Show. And on the middle of that Coatch
stood a high compassed Tow•r, bedecked with golden and gay
jewels, in the top whereof was placed a fair plume of white
feathers, all to bespangde and trimmed to the most bravery:
MERCVRIE himself in blew Satin lined with cloth of gold,
his garments cut and slasshed on the finest manner, a pea∣ked
hat of the same colour, as though it should cut and
sever the wind asunder, and on the same a pair of wings,
and wings on his héeles likewise. And on his golden rod
were little wings also, about the which rod, were two
wriggling or scrawling Serpents, which séemed to have
life when the rod was moved or shaken. So in this sort
and form was MERCVRIE and his Coatch set forth, and
in déede at such a season, as a great number looked not for any
show, nor things were ready, as some thought, to perform
that was necessary and expected. Yet hap was so good, and
the gracious favour of the Prince, that all was well taken,
and construed to the best meaning of the Deuisor. So ended
that days Device, which offered occasion to further matter.
AT this season, although I was not well pro∣uided
of things necessary for a Show (by
mean of some crossing causes in the City)
yet hearing the Quéene road abroad, de∣termined
as I might (and yet by help of
friends and hap) very well to venture the
hazard of a Show, and to be full in the way where his high∣ness
should pass towards his dinner, in which determinate∣on
many doubts were to be cast, and many men persuaded to
tarry a better time, but considering how time rolled on, and
days and hours did wast (without doing any thing promi∣sed,
and not performed) I hastily prepared my Boys and
Men, with al their furnitures, and so set forward with two
Coatches, handsomely trimmed. The cōmon people beholding
the manner thereof, and gréedie to gaze on that should bée
done, followed, as their fancies did lead them: so that when
we came into the open field, there was as great a train and
press about the Show, as came with the Court at that in∣stant,
which graced much the matter, and gave i• s•me expos∣ted
hope of good success: and for that you shall (and please you)
imagine you sée the thing, I have héere set down the whole
manner of the Show, and after that every part as they were
played, shall be héere expressed.
First, there is a feigned device, that VENVS and CUPID
were thrust out of Heaven, and walking on the earth, met a
Philosopher, who demanded from whence they came, they
told the Philosopher what they were, and he replied, and be∣ganne
with troth and ta••tes to tickle thē so néere, that VE∣NVS
fell in a great anger, and CUPID ran away, and left
his mother and the Philosopher disputing together, but CV∣BID
because he would be nourished some where, ran to the
Court, and there sought for succour, and encountering the
Queen, began to complain his state and his mothers,
and told howe the Philosopher had handled them both: but
finding neither answer nor aid, returned again, but not
to his mother, for she was fallen mad (upon a conceit that
she was not made of) and CUPID wandering in the world,
met with Dame Chastity and his maids, called Modesty,
Temperance, Good exercise, and Shamefastness, and she
with his four maids encountering CUPID in a goodly
Coatche, and without any honest guard wa•ting on him, set
upon him, threw him out of his golden seat, trod on his
pomp, spoiled him of his counterfeit Godhood and cloak,
and took away his bow and his qu•for of arrows, (the one
headed with lead, and the other with gold) and so sent him
like a fugitive away, and mounted up into the Coatche his
self and his maids, and so came to the Quéene, and rehear∣sed
what had happened (although this was done in his view)
and because (said Chastity) that the Quéene had chosen the
best life, she gave ye Quéene CUPIDS •ow, to learn to shoot
at whom she pleased, since none could wound his highness
hart, it was méete (said Chastity) that she should do with CV∣PIDS
how and arrows what she pleased: and so did Chastity
depart as she said to the powers divine. CUPID in ye mean
while wandering in the world, had found out Wantōnesse and
Riot, who soon fell in beggary &amp; ruin (a spectacle to be loo∣ked
into) and felt such daily misery with Wantōnesse &amp; Riot,
that CUPID was forced to ••ing away once again, and ha∣zarde
himself to fall into the hands of naughty people, or
where Fortune assigned, and coming abroad, happened
upon the Philosopher, who talked with him again, and told
him his errors, and other points of pride and presump∣tion,
declaring it was a great blaspheme and abuse, to re∣port
and beléeue that in Heaven were any other Gods but
one, and he had the only rule of all, that made all of naught.
In which reasoning and discourses, CUPID waxed warm,
and yet in his greatest heate knew not howe nor where to
cool himself, at which time came Wantonness and Riot,
and persuaded CUPID to play 〈◊〉 longer the fool (in stri∣uing
with Philosophers) and go away with them, so CUPID
dep•rted, and went away with Wantonness and Riot, a•d
the Philosopher remained, and declared that all abuses and
follies should come to no better end, than presently was ex∣pressed
by the misery of Wantonness, Riot, and CUPID.
Then Modesty and his fellows, leaving their Mistress
Dame Chastity, with the powers Divine, came •oft and fair
in their Mistress Coatch, singing a Song of chaste life, &amp; whē
the Song was ended, Modesty sent, as she said she was, from
his Mistress, spake to the Quéene a good season, and so the
matter ended, for the which Show, I had gracious words of
the Quéene openly and often pronounced by his Highness.
Now• before you read the parts, you must thoroughly note
what my discourse thereof has bin, and carrying that care
and good will with you, the matter shall séeme to have the bet∣la
life, and I shall think my labour &amp; ••udie well bestow•d.
A•as poor boy, where shalt thou wander no•,
I am thrust out of Heaven in despite,
My Mother too begins to bend the brow,
For both we walk, as we were banished quite.
She mourns and weeps, and blubbers like a child,
By which great grief, in rage now may she fall,
And I have leave to walk the wood so wild,
To houle, to cry, and •ore complain with•ll.
For lo of late, where she and I did go,
A man we met, a father grave and wise,
Who 〈…〉 you the troth will know)
We were the dro••e, 〈…〉 of earth and 〈◊〉
Fond 〈…〉,
A leavvd delight, a flying f•nsie light,
A shadow fond, that 〈◊〉 no shape, but name.
The whole abuse of each good wit or wight,
An idle ground, whereon vain Poets walk,
A cause of •are, a spring where folly ••os
A wicked mean, to nourish wanton talk,
And to conclude, sharp •atlas under Rose
We were: thus said the Father that we me•.
My Mother bl•sh•, these thundering words to hear,
And from them both, away in hast • get,
To see if I in Court find better cheer•,
But if no friend, no• fauo•re I may find,
Nor answer have of that which here I speak,
Farewell, I seek my fortune in the wind,
For Cupped hath in head 〈…〉.
If Heaven• 〈…〉
In earth below, I 〈◊〉 to hide my face.
TO strive with boys that stands on brags and brave•
I thought great scorn, till Cupped I espied,
But that proud lad, that makes so many 〈◊〉,
Must needs find one, to daunt his Peacocks pride.
Dame Chastit•e is she that wins the field,
Whose breast is armed with thoughts of virtues 〈◊〉,
Who to the fight doth bring no glittering shield,
But c•eane conceits, which pure and bl•ssed are,
That strikes down lust, and tames the wilful mind,
Maintains the just, and holds up learning both;
And wisdom great, through me the Sages find,
Philosophers, the lovers of the troth.
Yea Kings and Queens by me work wonders still,
Do conquer Realms, and Wisdom do attain.
The studious minds, whose knowledge, wit, and skill,
And all the world doth fame and glory gain
That chastely lives, it talks with God aboue,
It climbs the Clouds from pomp and pleasures vain.
It is a thing that shining Angels love,
And in the world to come shall live and reign.
It triumph makes of fickle fond desire,
It breeds great force and courage still in men,
It quenches sparks and flames of fancies fire,
It quickes the wits, and helps the art of pen,
Yea all good gifts from Chastity doth rise
That worthy are of honour under Skies.
Then sith (ô Queen) chaste life is thus thy choice,
And that thy heart is free from bondage yoke,
Thou shalt (good Queen) by my consent and voice,
Have half the spoil, take either bow or cloak.
The bow (I think) more fit for such a one
In fleshly form, that bears a heart of stone
That none can wound, nor pearce by any mean.
Wherefore take here the bow, and learn to shoot
At whom thou wilt, thy heart it is so clean,
Blind Cupids bolts therein can take no root.
Now will I say in this poor Coatch of mine,
To mount the Skies, and see the Gods divine.
CUPID commas running afoot like a vagabond towards
the Queen, from Wantonness and Riot where he was
succoured, and méetes again in open show the Philoso∣pher,
whose habitation was in a Rock, and the Philoso∣pher
demands of CUPID where he has bin, and what
is the cause he commas abroad in such disorder.
HOw now my friend, where hast thou 〈◊〉 other plight I trow
Thou wast, when lately I thee met, hath Cupped lost his bow?
His cloak? his Coatch• his wit and all? and fled from mothers face?
Or else hath Cupped gone to School, to learn some pretty Grace?
To play the God, fie foolish boy, leave of these toys in time,
Thy Mother (as the Poets fain,) when beauty was in prim•
A st•umpet was, it may be so, as well appears yet,
Thou art not of the race of Gods, thou art some Beggars chitte.
Nay doting fool, that still dost pore on Books,
Though Coatch be gone, and golden cloak be lost,
Yet like a God, I tell thee Cupped looks,
When old grey beard shows like a rotten post.
It ill becommes an aged man to rail
On women thus, that are not now in place,
But sure thy words are spent to small avail,
They can not blot my mother, nor my race.
But dost thou think thou art • God• then show some proof thereof.
That can I do, but you old men, with boys will jest and scoff,
And either laugh to scorn our words, or taunt vs past the nick.
Believe not that, but when in deed we enter near the quick,
Ye wink like Colts, and fling away from wit and feeling seen,
Well Cupped, prove thou art a God, and show some good defence,
To this thy talk, I will give ear, and silence keep a while,
Until thy w••ds have g•no so far, thy folly makes me smile.
The greatest Clarks that erst have bin, three thousand years ago,
When they on Venus talk or treat, takes Cupids part ye know.
T•eir books, their scrolls, their pāphlets large, makes mētiō of my name,
You need no furred•er search for proof, to try out Cupids fame.
Boast not of book•, for books they be, that plainly witness bears
How Cupids art infects good minds, and canckers honest ears.
And though fond men in liables show on you a flourish fine,
Such geegawes grees not with good rules, nor holds on gifts divine.
Why Sir, you will believe, that Jove and many more
Of other Gods in Heaven are, where I have bin before?
In Heaven? there you trip, why boy how came you thence?
You went abroad to take the ayre, and have bin walking senc•
Like daws along the coast, O boy, thy proof is bare,
In Heaven is but one that rules, no other Gods there are.
And doth not Jove and Mars bear sway? 〈◊〉 that is true•.
Then put in Tom and Tibbe, and all bears sway as much as yo•.
I told you Sir before, your taunting tong would bite.
I come too near the sore, and please not your deligh•.
But since you 〈◊〉 for nought, and can not hear the truth,
I will not shame my hoary hears, to strive with wanton youth.
This Cupped, Venus son, as men suppose to bee,
Is neither God nor Man in form, nor monster as you see,
But such a kind of shade, as can no substance shoe,
Begot by braynelesse blind delight, and nursed with natures foe.
Fed up with faithless food, and trained in trifling toys,
Awaked with vice, and luld asleep again with irksome joys.
ARt thou so fond to talk with doting age,
This Man did bring thy mother in a rage,
And told his plain, a Goddess faynd she was,
Most leavvd of life, and brittle as the glass,
I VVa•tonnes know well that tale is true,
To this my friend now R••tte what say you?
I could say much, but I will hold my peace,
Foul is that bird that his own nest defiles.
If Riot should not speak, that Ven•• knows so well,
(With whom since Cupped bare a name, did wantō Ven•• dwell)
Much pity were it sure, that Riot life should bear,
For I am father of delight and pleasure every where.
Without the help of whom, Dame Ven•• can not live,
For unto Lust and Riot both, doth Venus honour give.
And Lust is Riots joy, a spright that pleads for place
In every soil, since world began to boast of Adams race.
And now to tell you plain, from me, or from my stock,
(An endless swarm of idle of folk, a merry careless flock)
As prating Poets fain, at first did Ven•s spring,
But Venus was no strumpet sure; she was some finer thing
That always furthers Love, in French a 〈◊〉 • plain,
A be•la of good barg•ynes oft, and root of fancies vain.
Though Goddess were she not, yet fair and fine was she,
As I have heard good Clarks report, and you in Books shall 〈◊〉
Of his great Stories made, and great account this day
We make of Venus darlings still, wherefore in brief to say,
Both I and thousands more, with 〈◊〉 needs must hold.
It was she, to whom King Pri••s son• did give the apple of gold
That cost so many 〈◊〉 but r••de the siege of Tree•y,
And you shall see what pretty pranks the mother and this boy
Hath played in many parts, my knowledge is but small,
I tell by heeresay many things, but am not learned at all
Good Wanto•ness thou know, but p•sse ore that awhile
I could tell tales of Ven•• yet, would make the hearers smile.
O speak no more, come comfort Cupped now▪
Let Venus go, that •ate and saw with eye
The order great, and all the manner how
Dame C•astitie did mount to Starry Sky
With such a Coatch, and such a noble spoil,
As seldom h•th in Heaven oft bin seen.
She said, when she had Cupped put to foil,
She gave his bow and shaftes unto a Queen.
And Cupped straight came running unto me.
I saw him bare, a•d sent him bare away,
And as we are in deed but bare all three,
So must we part as poorly as we may.
No reasoning here with him that learned is,
Philosophers knows more than wanton fools,
If we had once bin beaten well ear this
And lovd our Books, and truly plied our Schools,
We had bin learned, yea livd, and felt no lack,
Where now our wealth is all upon our back.
By sweet Saint Iohn we are in goodly weed•,
To dance with belles a Morris• throu•h the Streets.
If any here, three idle people need•s,
Call vs in time, for we are finefor sheets:
Yea, for a shift, to steal them from the hedge,
And lay both sheets, and linen all to gage.
We are best be gone, least some do hear allege
We are but Roages, and clap vs in the Cage.
Come Cupped come, if thou wilt hear a song,
Dame Chaste•ti• hath sent his Coatch along,
To comfort those, that daily lives in wo.
NAy Cupped will, go hang himself I trow•.
Much better were, to fall on p•ynt of knife,
Than from rich state, to lead a beggars life.
NOw world may judge what fables are, &amp; what vain gods there b•,
What names and titles foundlings give, to thē, likewise you see,
And that one God alone doth rule, the rest no virtue show,
Vain Venus and blind C•bid both, and all the ragment row
And rabble of Gods, are feigned things, to make the season short,
As wisdom knows that well cā way, the worth &amp; weight of sport.
Through trifles light, sad things are scene, through vice is virtue foūd,
By hollow ways, and crooked paths, app••res the plainest ground.
Thus leaving unto wisdoms reach, the things that here are done,
And fearing foil, if here we should, in further folly run,
We stay, save that, some Music commas, to knit in order due,
The substance of this 〈◊〉 Show, that we present to you.
DAme Chastity we serve, and wait upon his still,
Save now, that she is called to Clouds, to know 〈◊〉 will.
She bad vs walk abroad, and search, where might be seen
In stately troupe, and royal Court, a worthy noble Queen.
Salute his in my name, and l•ok in secret sort
(Quoth she) you do with al your force, maintain his princely port.
Good exercise as chief, thy humble duty doo,
Let Shamefastness, and Modesty, and sober Temprance too,
Attend as handmaids still, upon that sacred dame.
We hearing what our mistress said, &amp; marking well the same,
Did hast vs hither straight, but ere we went at large,
Ieb•us sent vs Graces great, and gave vs power and charge,
(When pomp is most in place) to creep in princely hart,
And gide the mind, &amp; thoroughly search, the soul &amp; every part.
That still the fear of God, be burning in his breast,
There is the only house O Queen, where we four maids will rest,
There we will service show, there shall our 〈◊〉 bud,
There is the plot, the seat, the soil, and place to do most good.
Yea under richest robes, we have a power to go,
In fair•st weeds are cleanest thoughts, &amp; purest minds I know.
The earlish Country cloyne, yea clad in smeared cloak,
With cāckred hart, &amp; currish looks, sits grinning in the smoke.
The comely clean attire, doth carry mind aloft,
Makes mā think Seo••e to stoup to vice, &amp; loke to Virtue oft.
The Sun that s••neth bright, hath virtues manifold,
A gallant flower hath pleasant smell, great goodness is in gold.
So gay and glittering Dame, thy graces are not small,
Thy heavenly gifts in greatest press, in deed surmoūts thē all.
THE Wensday his highness 〈◊〉 at my Lord
of Surreys, where were the French Embassy∣dours
also, and a most rare and delicate Din∣ner
and Banquet. At which season I did
watch with a Show (called MANHOOD and
DESERT,) at my Lord of Surreys back door, going to
the Quéenes Barge: but the row•e was so little, that ney∣there
the Shot, the Armed men, nor the Players, could have
place convenient: Whereupon we toke Boats, and convey∣ed
our people down the water, towards a landing place that
we hoped the Quéene would come unto. And there having
all things in a readiness, hoouered on the water thrée long
hours, by which mean the night came on, and so we were
fine to withdraw• our selves and go homeward, trusting
for a better time and occasion, which in déede was offred the
next day after by the Quéenes Majesties own good motion,
who told me she would sée what pastimes were prepared, as
hereafter you shall perceive by the discourse of these matters
that I mean to make, and by this Show of MANHOOD,
and the Show of the NYMPHS, which I mind fully and
truly to treat of.
THe Thurseday in the morning, my Lord
Chamberlain gave me warning ye Quéenes
highness would ride abroad in the after
noon, and he commanded me to be ready,
dutifully to present his with some Show.
Then knowing which way the Quéene
would ride (by conjecture and instructions given) I caused a
place to be made and dug for the Nymphs of the water,
the manner and proportion whereof, was in this form and
fashion. First, there was measure taken for thréescore foot
of ground every way, the hole to be made déepe and four
square, which ground was covered with a Canvas painted
gréene like the grass, and at every side on the Canvas, ran
a string through Curtain rings, which string might easily
be drawn any kind of way, by reason of two great pools
that lay along in the ground, and answered the Curtain
or Canvas on each side so, that drawing a small corde in the
middle of the Canvas, the earth would seem to open, and so
shut again, as ye other end of the cord was drawē backward.
And in the same cave was a noble noise of Music of al kind
of instruments, severally to be sounded and played upon, and
at one time they should be sounded all together, that might
serve for a consort of broken Music. And in the same cave
likewise was placed twelve water Nymphs, disguised or
dress•d most strangely, each of them had either upon white
Silk, or fine linen, gréene segges, stitched cunningly on a
long garment, so well wrought, and set on, as scarce 〈◊〉 whit
might be perceived. And every Nymph had in his hand a great
bundell o• bulrushes, and had on his head a Garland of Ivy∣under
the which Ivy was a Coif of Moss, and under the
Moss was there long goodly hear like golden tresses that
covered his shoulders, and in a manner, raughte down unto
his middle. And touching the beauty of the Nymphs, they
•rmed to be the chosen children of a world, and became their
attire so well, that their beauty might have abused a right good
judgment, for divers of those that knew them before, (albeit
they were bare faced) could scarce know them in their gar∣mints,
and sundry took them to be young girls and wenches,
prepared for the nonce, to procure a laughter. These Nymphs
thus apparelled, and all things in very good plight and ready∣ness,
there was devised, that at the Quéenes coming néere
the water side (as this cave stood at the brim of the River)
one Nymph should poppe up out of the cave first, and salute
the Quéene with a spéech, and then another, and so till four of
them had finished their spéeches, there they should remain,
and when they retired into their cave, the Music should be∣gin,
which sure had bin a noble hearing, and the more me∣lodious,
for the variety thereof, and because it should come se∣cretely
and strangely out of the earth. And when the Music
was done, then should all the twelve Nymphs have issued to∣gender,
and danced a dance with Timbrels that were tree•m∣med
with belles, and other •angling things, which Timbrels
were as broad as a Séeue, having bottoms of fine parchment,
and being sounded, made such a confused noise, and pastime,
that it was to be wondered at, besides the strangeness of the
Timbrels (yet known to our forefathers) was a matter of
admiration to such as were ignorant of that new found toy,
gathered and borrowed from our elders. So in order and readi∣ness
stood that Show for the time. And to kéep that Show
cōpany (but yet far off) stood the Show of Manhood &amp; Desert,
as first to be presented, and that Show was as well furnished
as the other, Men all, saving one Boy, called Beauty, for the
which Manhood, Favour, and Desert, did strive (or should
have contended) but good Fortune (as victor of all conquests)
was to come in, and overthrow Manhood, Favour, Desert,
and all their powers, and only by fine force (upon a watch∣word
spoken) should lay hand on Beauty, and carry or lead
his away. The other suitors troubled with this kind of dea∣ling,
should talk together, and swear to be in one mind, for
an open reuēge, &amp; upon that Fortune should cry arm, arm.
The other side called for their friends, at which 〈◊〉 should
appear both their strengths: but good Fortune should fair
in pow•r excéede his enemies: And yet to show that Destiny,
(and who best can co•quer) shall govern all, Fortune should
make an offer, that sir to six with sword and target should
end the brawl and business: then six Gentlamen on either
side with rebated swords and targets (only in doublet and hose,
and Morion on head) approached, and would claim the com∣bat,
and deal together twelve blows a piece, and in the end
Fortune should be victor: and then the Shot, and Armed men
should fall at variance so sharply (upon mistaking of the
matter) that Fortunes side should triumph and march over the
bellies of their enemies: in which time was legs and arms
of men (well and lively wrought) to be let fall in numbers on
the ground, as bloody as might be. Fortune regarding no∣thing
but victory, marches so away in great triumph, and
then should have come into the place a doleful song for the
death of Manhood, Favour, and Deserts, and so the Show
should have ended. But now note what befell after this great
business and preparation, for as the Quéenes highness was
appointed to come to his Coatch, and the Lords and Court∣ers
were ready to mount on Horseback, there fell such a
shower of rain (and in the neck thereof came such a terrible
thunder) that every one of vs were driven to seek for covert
and most comfort, in so much, that although some of vs in
Boat stood under a Bridge, we were all so dashed and wa∣shed,
yt it was a greater pastime to sée vs look like drowned
•attes, than to have beheld the uttermost of the Shows re∣hearsed.
Thus you sée, a Show in the open field is always
subject to the sudden change of weather, and a number of
more incoveniences than Ierpresse. But what should I say
of that which the City lost by this cause, Ueluets, Silks,
Tinsels, and some cloth of gold, being cut out for these pur∣poses,
and could not serve to any great effect after. Well, there
was no more to say, but an old Adage, yt Man doth purpose,
and God doth dispose, to whose disposition and pleasure I
••mmitte the guide of greater matters. So this 〈◊〉
took his leave from vs, and left vs looking one upon another,
and he that thought he had received most injury, kept gre∣test
silence, and lapping up, among a •undle of other mysfor∣tunes
this evil chance, every person quietly passed to his lod∣ging.
The next day was the Quéene to depart the town,
and I fearing that all my labour should be lost, devised to
convert the Nymphs of the water, to the Fairies on the land,
as hereafter shall appear: In the meanewhile I have set
down the four spéeches that four Nymphs should have
spoken at the Waterside, where the Quéene was looked for:
And withal, I have written the order and parts of the Show
of MANHOOD and DESERTS, that no one thing that
was well meant, should sléepe in silence. And first and for∣m•st
you must conceive, that the Show of MANHOOD was
invented to be played in a Garden, or wheresoever had been
•and a convenient place, the Prince then being in presence.
And unto his Highness should there have come a Lady cal∣led
Beauty, humbly on knées, requiring aid and succour,
or else judgement, in a matter disputable, and in great con∣trouersie,
upon whose suit and humble intercession, the dispu∣tation
was to begin in order as follows, in manner of a
Dialoge, the parts whereof are héere for you to read at your
leisure, and after the same, as the Show of the Nymphs
should have bin, shall their parts follow in like sort.
MOst royal Prince, speed on thy comely pace,
Make hast in time, to do thy subjects good,
Go r•nne with me, to stay this heavy case,
Take p•ynes good Queen, to gain the guiltless blood.
In one mans life, save lives of many more,
Save him in whom, the state of others stays,
For I poor wretch, God knows am minded so,
With him to live, with him to end my days.
Who now in force, of Tyrants hands doth lye,
And vainly strives, to scope his helpless fate,
Who sees his death, and doleful date so nigh,
Go hast to help, and yet perhaps too late.
YEt were I best, to kill this peevish Boy,
Whom now she makes, his chief and sole delight,
In whom she finds, such pleasure and such joy,
That causeless I, am clean defaced quite.
Such gaudyes gay, are in his Peacocks face,
And skin smooth• up, with show of idle hue,
That I do lodge, and languish in disgrace,
Though she of me, hath proof of promise true.
Well, make thy choice▪ and see what likes thee best,
View he ere the death, of this thy darling now,
Or yield thy love, to fancy my request,
Whose manly force, shall win the conquest throw.
Nought shalt thou win, by that which I shall lose,
Thou ge•st no gains, though I be thus bereft,
And though that I, between two mischiefs goes,
Where nought but bale, and wretched woe is les•▪
Yet thy reward, which doest assault my friend,
(In whose delight, my heart was fed long while•)
Shall be disdain, and hated in the end,
A guerdo• •it, for such a Tyrant vile.
THis wretch is he, by whom I am annoyed,
He hath thy heart, though I deserve the same,
If wisely then, I do my harms avoid,
Why stey I sword, I can not purchase blame,
By cutting off, the cause of my distress,
When he is gone, my let shall be the less.
HOw can thou say, thou doest deserve my heart,
Which kilst my heart, and cause all my woe,
SInce that thou take, my dealing in such part,
I will delight, to wreak my wrath on •o.
In grieving thee, most glad to hear me groan,
And art most pleased, when Manhood makes his moan•.
O Gracious Prince, to thee my moan I make,
And prostrate fall, O Prince before thy foot,
With wonted grace, on me some pity take,
O salve my sore, let sorrow find some boot.
I swelt in sighs, and sure shall dye to see
My friend dispatcht, and murdered in this wise,
O bid the wretch, come thrust his sword in me,
For from my love, the cause of grief doth rise.
I made the fault, then punish me therefore,
Shall silly Lamb, be led to slaughter thus?
Do either help, with death my endless sore,
Or with remorse, and ruth the case discuss,
If he do dye, by Mighty Jove• I swear
I will not live, if sword or knife be found,
With scratched face, 〈…〉▪
I know at first, my 〈…〉,
And then ad••, my 〈…〉, steal away
O Queen, in hast, 〈…〉
SInce 〈◊〉 O Prince, forbidst revenge to take,
〈◊〉 wilst that men▪ should lose their time in love,
Then mark my case, and give me leave to make
Mine• own defence, and 〈◊〉 allea•ge and prove,
And I will show 〈◊〉 right and title good,
And that I do, des•rue the 〈…〉.
Though this fond wretch, always my suit withstood,
As one who long, 〈…〉,
Whom leavvd delight, hath led out of the way,
(Which good Advise, and ord•ed Judgment keep)
Whom Beauties blast hath •ounst against the 〈◊〉,
Where eraggy tockes, and sands lye •idde in deep,
A fond device to trust to pay•ted face,
And fasten faith upon so fickle •l•y,
To whom D•me H•be, lends often gui•efull grace,
Which every year and day doth pluck away,
Whom sickness spoils, and 〈…〉,
Whom time doth eat and age 〈…〉,
Whom •ares of mind do shake and alter so,
As Winter winds defaces 〈…〉▪
A snare for wit, a b•yte for wanton youth,
A false conceit, an error of the mind,
A fond delight, wherein there is no truth,
A poisoned dish, th•• doth the reason bli•d▪
A colour cast on things that are but 〈◊〉,
A glorious show, to shroud a homely part,
A rule to run, a leavvd and retchlesse 〈◊〉,
A deep deceit, which daunts oft the heart.
In rage of youth, these pricking thy•tles grows,
While Riot •aynes, and Folly bear•s the sway
In hoary age, 〈…〉,
Where 〈…〉.
The weaker •exe, in 〈…〉
The infant hath, the, 〈…〉▪
The hurtful weed, which 〈…〉,
To view of eye, doth 〈…〉.
In outward shower, in deed• the trust in small,
They are but cloaks, and 〈…〉,
The virtuous mind, and 〈…〉,
Which gains 〈…〉.
Dame Ven•• loves, the 〈◊〉 and warlike Knight,
Though once alas, she loud 〈…〉.
And Ladies which, do love 〈…〉,
Love such as can, their 〈…〉.
What could this 〈…〉▪
Whom could this 〈…〉
Judge thou O Queen, which of vs two could make
The better shift, and force the worst to yield.
YEt let me plead, my cause before my Queen
As thou hast done, and sentence after crave,
Then shall the truth, of our two 〈◊〉 be seen,
I crave no spoil, but wish the thing I have.
Why should my beauty, purchase my 〈◊〉▪
Why should my praise, become 〈…〉▪
Why should Dame Natures gifts be thought so bass,
Which heretofore have bin in greater name?
Who ever could, enforce the Gods with might,
To yield themselves, as conqured with his strength?
Yet Beauty hath, subdued them with his sight,
And made them •end, and bow to him at length.
Whom force subdues, with sad unwilling heart,
Submits themselves, and grieve at every stroke•:
Who beauty wins, and gains unto his part,
They gladly grant, to take the pleasant yoke.
Thy strength thou may, full many a Winter ••id,
Till time doth serve, to show the same in place,
Sweet Beauty can, no moment be vnspide,
But doth delight, each one with gladsome grace.
Dame Natures show, and Retches Beauty is,
A Heavenly gift, to ravish every eye,
A perfect Pear•e, wherein is nought but bliss,
Delight of men, delight of Gods on high.
Apollo pleased, himself with Golden hear,
H•a•e delights, the Gods with comely ••ue,
God Venus oft, his tender breast did tear,
When she Ado•i• death was fain to 〈◊〉.
P•••bus did morn, when his delight was slain,
With great mishap, and error of his hand,
But Gannimed, aboue with Jove doth reign.
And waiting on, his Nectars cup doth stand.
What should I speak, of him who at the brooke,
The wanton Nymphs, in love suppressed away,
Or him whom Ph•eb, in to his Chariot took,
Or him, whose beauty di•d the morning grey,
The Gods in beauty, pass each mortal wight,
And men surmount, in form the fairest beast,
And yet of them, some are more brave in sight,
Whose natures are, more fined than the rest.
The ugly Tod, swell• out his poison cold,
A crabbed corpse, commas of a churlish kind,
No ragged mold, the virtue rare can hold,
A seemly face, declares a modest mind.
The fairest Horse will swiftest run his race,
The gallantst Hound, will soonest wind his game,
What need I more, to treat upon this case,
The hearers shall, be iudgers of the same,
If Beauties gifts, and favour you exile,
Then Manhood must, be here preferred the while.
STay judgment Prince, and let my case be know
Whose friendly toil, deserves to rea•e his gain
Mine earnest •ute, may not be thus orethrowen,
So long employed, in hope and endless payne.
I see these men, press boldly here in place,
Unfolds great words, and long deb•tes the case:
And braves it out, with goodly gallant Shows,
Which I will not, eclipse nor blot at all,
My claim is good, and that just God he knows,
What need I then, my right in question call.
I have no force, nor skill in marshiall field,
I boast not of my fresh and flouring hue,
Nor yet need not, in any point to yield,
That can allege, Deserts and service true.
My travel then, and truth may not be l•st,
Nor my good will, be recompensed with wrong▪
Nor he that hath, with tempests sore bin tossed▪
And tasted griefs, and bitter torments long,
May not so soon, be shaken off for nought,
I take fine terms▪ to show my secret thought:
The Gods accepts, our duty in good part,
The Prince rewards, the bills of our request,
The greatest men, consider but the heart,
The friendly means, can •am the wildest beast.
And Women who, in softest moulds be cast,
Whose tender hearts, rues on our careful cries,
Must needs be won, with loving means at last,
To ease our plaints, and wipe our watered eyes.
True love of right, must recompensed be,
Desert must needs, fly far beyond the rest,
Then grant O Prince, this precious prise to me,
Whose loyal love, claims place aboue the b•st.
MVch words are spent, where speech shall not prevail,
Long time is lost, in threats and fond dispute,
Though I good Hap, have borne but simple •aisle,
And went aloof, tic I must end this suit,
And reason bring, as victor of the field,
Unto whose troth, your weak• discourse shall yield.
Fair Beauty here, for whom you foundlings strive,
May move, I grant, a God to like his well,
But though she were•, the fairest thing alive,
(As sure indeed, his beauty doth excel)
Is that a proof, that you in love must fall,
With that which nought pertains to you at all?
Admit his mind, by mean of some conceit,
With sweet delight, of fancy may be led,
Your eager eyes, most greedy of such bait,
In forward hope, a season hath bin fed.
Shall she be spoiled, for favour she bestow•
In friendly sort, and not in faithful wise?
Nay sure, she shall, no fame nor freedom lose,
For frailties faults, or use of gracious eyes.
But to the point, and purpose of your stri•e,
One pleads good will, by shape and favour got,
(A gallant Boy, to please a pleasant wife)
Another tells a penned •ale by rote,
Bedecked and fylde with ink•o•no terms ynow.
The third commas in, and calls himself Desert,
And each of them are seen in Stories throw,
And finely seeks to conquer Love by art.
Great slight is used, and Clarkly cunning both,
To force a right, and judgment in this case,
Desert, •e tells a trim discourse of troth,
The 〈◊〉 wig makes boast of shining face.
And Courage he, by Manhood claims all.
Great points they are, that pleaded are this day,
And unto whom, the Lady now should fall,
Some doubts may rise, if reason bore the sway.
But to be brief, fair Shape and comely port,
The wise men hold, but outward blossoms vain,
And Manhoods force, may here be knit up short,
Stout hearts may not, alone the glory gain:
Nor yet Deza•t, that nearest goes the gole,
May win the prise, and thrust his better back,
For he it is, that hath the greatest dole,
That doth in deed, no piece of Fortune lack.
Good Fortune still, a Lord of worldly chance
Is only judge, himself, of all is done,
Bid Strength stand back, good Fortune leads the Dance,
Fine shape likewise, with Fortune dare not run.
Desert is dead, where Fortune men advance.
So here I prove, since I good Fortune have,
This Dame is mine, his destnie wills it so,
In Mothers womb, the Gods this gift me gave,
She ordained was, with me away to go.
Each worldly grace, and rule with Fortune flies,
A wife must needs, then sto•pe to destnyes lot.
Wherefore I here, possess this noble prize,
As Jewel rich, by hap and Fortune got.
Who strives to take, his now from me by force,
Shall have withal, my breath and vital corse.
ME thinks most fond, and weakly commas bee here
Alone to three, if we together stood:
And though in deed, we buy the quarrel dear,
And pay therefore, the sweetest of our blood,
Yet let vs show, the noble hearts of men,
For since he saith, we all our labour lose,
Not one of vs, shall need to sorrow then,
Nor care a fig, how ere the matter goes.
A Gre•, though I Desert have double wrong,
I will revenge the same by dint of sword,
And you shall see, I will not dally long
To do my best, sith I have spoke the word.
Despaired men, dare fight with Fortune still,
And scratch for life, as long as breath will last,
When hope is gone, I know no better skill,
But bide the brunt, till all the broil be past.
Let love and life, together make an end,
The heart shall feel, and hand shall head defend.
THough I speak last, that first found special grace,
In foremost •ight, look you for tender years,
And judge him not, a Milksop by his face,
That stoutly like a Man at need appears.
Great scorn I think, good Fortune should have all,
And reap the right, that labour long hath sown,
Yea, Favour hath perhaps more friends at call,
Than you would think, or to the world is known.
WE Water Nymphs have time to sport, &amp; skip in every place,
VVhē days are lōg, &amp; nights be short, &amp; Phoebus hides his face▪
And hearing that there came a Queen, along this water side,
So long as we poor silly Nymphs, on land dare well abide,
We dance, we hop, and bounce it up, in honour of his name,
To whom Diana and his train, doth give immortal fame.
WE shun the Sun, yet love the Moan, &amp; hate the open light,
We hide our heads amid the Reeds, in blustering stormy night.
In calmest weather do we play, yet seldom seen we are,
We watch our times, and flee from those, that still doe on vs stare.
We harm no wight, yet fearful be, to those that have no spreete,
We are some hold of VVomēs sex, and glad with mē to meet.
THe Phayri•s are another kind, of el•es that dance in dark,
Yet can light Candles in the night, and vanish like a spark,
And make a noise and rumbling great, among the dishes oft,
And wake the sleepy sluggish Maids, that lies in Kitchen loft.
And when in field, they tread the grass, from water we repair,
And hop and skip, with thē sometime, as weather waxes fair▪
what rule is this, what tales tel you, what babble do you make▪
Will you tel secrets out of School? beware, if bugs awake
You will be shent, come hye you hence, can ye abide the view,
The gaze, and staring such a while, of all this noble crew?
Though that we came to honour his, that Gods on high have blessed,
It is a shame for water Nymphs, on earth so long to rest.
ON the Friday, the Court upon remove, the
City troubled with many causes, and some
séeking to do service like my self, moved me
to doe somewhat of my self, because mine
aids (as many tunes they were before) were
drawn frō me, each one about his own bu∣sinesse,
and I left to mine own inventions and policy, at
which erigente, or casual things of Fortune, I drew my
Boys unto me, that were the Nymphs on the water, and
so departed the City, with such garments and stuff necessa∣rye
as fitted my purpose and the matter I went about. Then
chose I a ground, by the which the Quéene must pass, enclo∣sing
my company in the corner of a field, being defenced with
high and thick bushes, and there some parts I made, which
the Boys might miss, because the time was short for the
learning of those parts. But I being resolved to do some what
might make the Quéene laugh, appointed that seven Boys
of twelve, should pass through a hedge from the place of our
abode (which was gallantly trimmed) and deliver seven spée∣ches,
which follow in the next leaf. And these Boys (you
must understand) were dressed like Nymphs of the water,
and were to play by a device and degrées the Phayries, and
to dance (as néere as could be imagined) like the Phayries.
Their attire, and coming so strangely out, I know made
the Quéenes highness smile and laugh withal. And I hey∣ring
this good hope, being apparelled like a water Sprite,
began to sound a Timbrell, and the rest with me, all the
twelve Nymphs together (when the seven had repaired in)
sounded Timbrels likewise. And although I had no great
harting, yet as I durst, I led the young foolish Phayries a
dance, which boldness of mine bred no disgrace, and as I
heard said, was well taken. The Quéene vpō our retiring in,
hasted to his Highness lodging, which was seven Miles
off, and at that present, when the Show ended, it was past
five• of the cl•cke.
Thus have you truly heard the report of mine own
works and inventions, with the which did no any o•e deal
but my self. And as I have made a recital of matters done
in Norwich, so mean I a little to treat of the Quéenes re∣turn
from thence, in as short and brief order as I may, and
the briefer, because I have not all the Gentlemen's names,
in whose houses the Quéene lay, and who bestowed some en∣tertaynemente
on the train, but those, in whose houses I
was (and where I saw or heard any thing worthy memory)
I mind to speak of, and touch, praying you that shall read
the same, to pardon me, where I omit any matter or men
that merits commendation, for it is not want of good will
that shall make me forget any good entertainments besto∣wed
on the Court, but it is want of knowledge that shall
cause me so slightly run over the causes, and make a brief
report there•of, as knows God, who grant and send our
Quéene often to such pleasant Progresses, and increase good
people and loving subjects to show the like duty and order, as
has been orderly séene in this season, and time of tri∣umph.
THough clean against the Phayries kind, we come in open view•,
(And that the Queen of Phayries here, presents herself to you)
Some secret cause procures the same: the Gods at first, ye know,
In field to honour thee good Queen, did make a gallant show:
Should we that are but sprites of thaire, refuse to do the same?
No sure, for Gods and mortal men, shall serve thee noble Dame.
when Mercury came first in Coatch, a message to unfold,
(And Mask of Gods amid the night, in chāber secrets told)
We warned were to shape our selves, to do what Jove assigned,
But water Nymphs stepped in the while, and so expressed their mind,
And thrust poor Phayries out of place, yet we: •or fear of soil,
Watched here our time, &amp; for our sports, did chose this certain soil.
YEa out of hedge we crept in deed, where close in caves we lay,
And knowing by the brute of fame, a Queen must pass this way,
To make his laugh, we clapped on cotes, of Segges and Bulrush both,
That she should know, &amp; world should say, lo there the Phayries goth,
Like Furies mad, and Satyrs wild yet lo, we have in store
Fine Timbrels, that the Ancients use, to make the show the more.
WHē saints &amp; souls, &amp; sprites of mē, frō Heauē down did fling▪
(And Ieboua spake, and Clouds did shake, &amp; many a crowned King.
Crept out of grave, to honour thee, we ready were to wait,
But Hags of Hell, &amp; damned Feends, that feeds on false desayt
Did blush to see thy presence Queen, but we that harmless were,
Kept love in store, to show at length our duty void of fear.
But when that Cupped was condemned, and Venus fell in rage,
And VVantonnesse &amp; Riot rude, for knackes were clapped in cage,
And all the ragment row of Gods, to one great God gave place,
We silly Phayries were afraid, therewith to show our face.
Yet when we saw a Mask well liked, and Gods condemned appear,
We did consult, at last farewell, the Phayries should be here.
But with Orations good and great, to wall the weak was thrust,
Yet whē the strongest did their best, of force yet speak we must.
For Jove that all commands, and doth, bade vs to watch the hour,
And show no more at this adieu, than was in Phayries power.
So keeping course of Ioues command, we speak that is in breast,
And leave the Queen and all the train, with wit to judge the rest.
WIth Gods, yea kings &amp; Queens, begās your entry to this place,
With gētle Gosts &amp; merry sprites, we mind to end the case.
So in good sign of happy chance, to thee O sacred Queen,
To knit up all, we mean to dance with Timbrels on this greene.
And then farewell, we can no more, salute thee in our gise,
All that is done, by great good will, is offered to the wise.

