COndemned soul Ate, from lowest hell,
And deadly rivers of the infernal 〈◊〉,
Where bloodless ghosts in pains of endless date
Fill ruthless ears with never ceasing cries,
Behold I come in place, and bring beside
The bane of Tree•ie: behold the fatal fruit
Roughed from the golden tree of Pr•s•rpi••.
Proud Troy must fall, so bid the gods aboue,
And stately Iliums lofty towers be racet
By conquering hands of the victorious foe:
King Priams palace waste with flaming fire,
Whose thick and foggy smoke piercing the sky▪
Must serve for messenger of sacrifice
Tappeaze the anger of the angry heavens,
And Priams younger son, the shepherd swain,
Paris th'unhappie organ of the Greeks.
So loath and weary of her heavy load
The Earth complains unto the hellish prince,
Surcharged with the burden that she nill sustain.
Th'unpartiall daughters of Necessity
Bin aids in her •ute: and so the twine
That holds old Priams house, the thread of Tree•••
Dame Atrops with knife in sunder cut•.
Done be the pleasure of the powers aboue,
Whose hestes men must obey: and I my part
Perform in Ida vales: Lordinges adieu,
Imposing silence for your task, I end,
Till just assembly of the goddesses
Make me begin the Tragedy of Tree•i•.
SILVANUS, 〈…〉
O 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 all to 〈◊〉
For by this morning 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 should appe•••
The 〈◊〉 or the goddesses be 〈◊〉
My 〈◊〉 was nimble, Pan, and whipped apace
It was 〈◊〉 that he •aught him up at last.
The fattest 〈…〉
I wonder how 〈…〉 so fast.
And I have brought a twagger for the nonce
A bunting lamb: nay, pray you feel no bones.
Believe me now, my cunning much I miss,
If ever Pan 〈…〉 then this.
Sirs, you may boast your flocks &amp; herdes that 〈◊〉 both fresh &amp; fair,
Yet hath Siluanus walk•• 〈◊〉 is that stand in wholesome ayre.
And lo the honour of the woods, the gallant Oken-bowe,
Do I bestow laden with Acorns &amp; with mast enough.
Peace man for shame, shalt have both lambs &amp; •a•es &amp; flocks and herdes &amp; al,
And all my pipes to make the glee, we meet not now to brawl.
Theres no such matter, Pan▪ we are all friends assembled hither▪
To bid Queen Iuno and 〈◊〉 •hears most humbly welcome hither.
Diana mistress of our woods, her presence will not want,
Her courtesy to all her friends 〈◊〉 wot is nothing scant.
Ye Par, no farther yet, &amp; had the start of me,
Why then Pomona wit •her fruit comes time enough I see:
Come on a while▪ with country store like friends we vent forth,
Think Faunus that these goddesses will take our gifts in worth.
Yea doubtless, for shall tell thee dame, it were better give a thing,
A sign of love, unto a mighty person, or a king:
Then to a rude and barbarous swain 〈…〉 borne,
For gently takes the 〈…〉 the clow•e will scorn.
Say true••• Faunus, I my self have given good ••die •ambes,
To Mercury may say to thee, to Ph••bus and to •ove:
When to a country mops for•ooth, cha•e offred all their dames,
And piped and prayed for 〈◊〉 worth and ra•nged about the grove.
God Pan that makes you• flock •o thin, &amp; makes 〈◊〉 look •••eane,
To kiss in corners. Pan. wel-sed w•ch some other thing you mean.
Yea •est it out till it go alone, but maru••• where we 〈◊〉
Fair Flora all this merry morn. Faun. some news see where she is.
Flora well met, and for thy taken pay•••,
Poor• country gods 〈◊〉 debtors we remain.
Believe me, Pan, not all thy lambs and yoes,
Nor, F••nus, all thy lusty bucks and does,
(But that I am instructed well to know,
What 〈◊〉 to the hill•• and dal•• •owe,)
Could have enforce•• 〈◊〉 to •o strange a toil,
Thus to enrich this gaudie gallant •oil.
But tell me wench 〈◊〉 don't so trick in deed,
That heave• it self may wonder at the deed.
No• Iris in her pride and brevity,
Adorns her arch with such variety:
Nor doth the milk white way in frosty night,
Appear so fair and beautiful in •ight:
As done these fields, and groves, and sweetest bowers,
Bestrewed and decked with party collord flowers.
Along the •ubling brookes &amp; silver glide,
that at the bottom doth in •ylence slyde,
The watery flowers and 〈◊〉 on the banks,
Like blazing comets burgen all in ranks:
Under the Ha•h••no and the Poplar tree,
Where •••red Phoebe may delight to be:
The Pr•m•rose and 〈◊〉 purple 〈◊〉,
The dainty Vi•let 〈…〉 Minth•.
The dooble Daisy, and the 〈…〉
Of summer ••our▪ do 〈…〉
And round about the valley as ye pass,
Ye may no 〈…〉 peeping flowers the grass:
That well the mighty 〈◊〉 and the rest,
May boldly think to be a welcome guest
On Ida h•lls, when to approve the thing,
The queen of flowers prepares a second spring.
Thou gentle Nymph•, what thanks shall we repay•
To thee, that ma•est our •••ldes and woods so gay?
〈◊〉, when it is thy hap to see,
My workmanship, in portraying all the three,
First stately 〈◊〉 with her port and grace,
Her roobes, her lawns, her crounet and her mace:
Would make thee 〈◊〉 this picture to behold,
Of yellow Ox•tips bright as bur•shed gold.
A rare device, and Fl•ra, well party,
Did paint her yellow for her jealousy.
Pallas in flowers of hue and collowers red,
Her plumes, her helm, her 〈◊〉, her 〈◊〉 he••,
Her trailing tres•es that hang ••aring round,
Of Iulie-flowers so grassed in the ground,
That trust me 〈◊〉, who did the cunning see,
Would at a blush suppose it to be she.
Good Flora, by my flock it were very good,
To d•light her all in red resembling blood.
Fair Venus of sweet Violets in blue.
With other flowers infixt for change of hue,
Her plumes, her pendants, bracelets and her rings,
Her dainty fan and twenty other things:
Her lusty mantle waving in the wind,
And every part in collor and in kind:
And for her wreath of roses she nil dare,
With Floras cunning counterfeit compare.
So that what living whight shall chance to see,
These goddesses, eche placed in her degree,
Portrayed by Floras workmanship alone,
Must say that Art and nature met in one.
A dainty draught to lay her down in blue,
The colour commonly betokening true.
This piece of work compact with many a flower,
And well laid in at entrance of the bower,
Where Phoebe means to make this meeting royal.
Have I prepared to welcome them withal.
And are they yet di•mounted, Flora, s•ie:
That we may wend to meet them one the way.
That shall not need: they are at hand by this,
And the conductor of the train hight The••is.
Iuno hath left her chariot lunge ag•e,
And hath returned her Peacocks by her rain bow.
And bravely as becommes the wife of Jove▪
Doth honour by •er presence to our grove.
Fair Venus she hath let her sparrows fly,
To tend on her and make her melody:
Her turtles and her swans vnyoked bee,
And flicker near •er side for company.
Pallas •ath set her Tigers loo•e to feed,
Commanding them to waite when she hath need.
And Hitherward with proud and stately pace,
To doe vs honour in the Sylvan chase
T•ey marc•e like to the pomp of heaven aboue,
Iuno t•e wife and sister of king Io•e,
The warlike Pallas, and the Queen of love.
Pipe Pan f•r joy and let thy shepherds sing,
Shall never•age forget this memorable thing.
Cl•o the sagest of the sisters nine,
To do •b•eruaunce to this dame divine,
〈◊〉 ad•e of learning and of chivalry,
〈◊〉 ere arrived in fair assemble•e,
And wandering up and down th'unbeaten ways,
Ringe through the wood sweet •onges of Pallas praise.
Ha•ke Flora, Fa•nus, here is melody,
A charm of birds and more then ordinary.
The silly birds make mirth, then should we doe them wrong,
Pomona, if we nil bestow an Echo to their songe.
O Ida, o Ida; 〈…〉
This honour do•• 〈…〉
Ye country 〈…〉
Bring down your 〈◊〉 of welcome:
For honour 〈◊〉 Ida▪
Behold in sign of 〈…〉
And signs of joyful well come bring.
For honour done to Ida.
The Muses give you melody to gratulate this chance,
And Phoebe chief of sylvan chase command• you all to d••nce.
The route in a circle our •pore•a••ce must m•st be▪
Hold hands in a hornepype all gallant in glee.
Reverence, reverence, most humble reverence.
Most humble reverence.
The God of shepherds and his mate•,
With country chere salutes your states▪
Fa•re, wise, and worthy as you bee,
And thank the gracious Ladies three,
For honour done to Id•▪ The birds singe.
Venus, what shall I say, for though I be a dame divine,
This welcome and this melody exceeds these wits of mine.
Believe me, In••, as I hight th•• foueraigne of Love,
These rare delights in pleasures pass the banquets of king Jove.
Then▪ Venus, I conclude, it 〈◊〉 may be seen,
That in her chaste and pleasant walks fair Phoebe is a Queen.
Divine Pallas, and you sacred dames,
Iuno and Venus, honoured by your names:
Iuno, the wife and sister of king Jove▪
Fair Venus, Lady president of •ove:
If any entertainment in this place,
That can afford but homely, rude and ba•e,
It pleaze your godheads to accept in gre,
That gracious thought our happiness shall be.
My mistress Dian, this right well I know,
For love that to this presence she doth owe,
Accounts more honour done to her this day,
Then ever meanwhile in these woods of Id•.
And for our country god•, I dare bee bold,
They make such cheer, your presence to behold,
Such iouysaunce, such mirth and merry meant,
As nothing else their mind might more co••••:
And that you doe believe it to bee so,
Fair goddesses, your lovely looks doe show.
It rests in fine, for to confirm my talk,
Ye deign to pass along to Deans walk:
Where she among her troupe of maids attend•.
The fair arrival of her welcome friends.
And vvee will wait with all observance due,
And doe just honour to this heavenly crew.
The god of shepherds, Iuno, ere thou go,
Intends a lamb on thee for to b•stovve.
Faunus, high ranger in Di••as chase,
Presents a favvne to lady Venus grace.
Syluanus gives to Pallas deity,
This gallant bow ••ught from the Oken tree.
To them that doth this honour to our fields,
Her mellovve apples poor Po•one• yields.
And gentle gods, these signs of your goodvvill
Wee take in worth, and shall accept them still.
An• Flora, this to thee among the rest,
Thy vvorkmanship comparing with the best,
Let it suffice thy▪ cunning to have,
To call king Jove from forth his heavenly bovvre:
Had thou a lover, Flora, •readied me,
I think thou vvouldst beedecke him gallantly.
But vvende we on, and, Rhanis, lead the way,
That kens the painted paths of pleasunt Ida.
O•none, while 〈…〉,
Tell me what shall 〈…〉
Thou hast a sort of 〈…〉
Dare say no Nymph in 〈…〉
Again, beside thy 〈…〉
In telling them thou 〈…〉
Then prithee sweet, afford 〈…〉 thing,
Some toy that from thy 〈…〉.
Paris, my hearts contentment, and my choice▪
Use thou thy pipe, and I will use my 〈◊〉,
So shall thy just request 〈◊〉 be denied.
And time well •pent and 〈…〉
Well gentle Nymph although •thou do me wrong,
That can 〈…〉 pipe 〈◊〉 a songe,
Me lift this once, 〈…〉
This idle ta•ke 〈…〉.
And whereon then shall be my Roundetay:
For thou hast harde my store long since, dare say,
How Saturn did divide his kingdom tho,
 To Jove, to Neptune, and to Dis below.
 How mighty me• made 〈…〉,
Against the gods and 〈…〉
 How Phorcias imp 〈…〉,
That tangled Neptune in he• gold•n hair,
Became a Gorgo• for her lewd misdeed,
A pretty fable Paris for to 〈◊〉.
A piece of cunnig trust me 〈◊〉,
That wealth and beauty alter men to stoone•.
 Howe Salmacis resembling idleness,
Turns men to women all through wantonness.
 How Pluto roughed Queen 〈◊〉 daughter thence▪
And what did follow of that love offence.
 Of 〈◊〉 turned into the 〈◊〉 tree▪
That shev•es a my• or of virginity.
 How fair Narcissus too•ing on his shade,
Reproues disdain, and 〈…〉.
 How cunning Philo••la•s 〈…〉,
What force in love, what wit 〈…〉.
 What pains unhappy souls abide in 〈◊〉,
They say because on earth they lived not well.
Ixio•s wheel, proud T•ntals paining woe.
Prometheus torment, and a many 〈◊〉.
 How Danaus daughter• •lie their endless 〈◊〉.
 What toil the toil of 〈◊〉 doth ask.
All these are old and known I know, yet if thou wilt have any,
Choose some of these, for trust me else 〈◊〉 hath not many.
Nay what thou wilt: but sith my cunning not compares with thine,
Begin some Toy, that I can play upon this pipe of mine.
There is a pretty sonnet then, we call it Cupped• curse:
They that do change old love for new, pray gods they change for worse.
The note is fine and quick withal, the 〈◊〉 will agree,
•••is, With that same vow of 〈◊〉 upon our Poplar tree:
No better thing, begin it then, 〈◊〉 tho• shalt see
Our music, figure of the love that grows twixt thee and me.
Fair and fair and twice so fair,
As fair as any may be:
The fairest shepherd on our gre•e,
A love for any Lady.
Fair and fair and twice so fair,
As fair as any may bee:
Thy love is fair for •hee alone,
And for no other Lady.
My love is fair, my love i•gay,
As fresh as bine the flowers in May,
And of my love my roundylaye,
My merry merry merry roundelay
Concludes with Cupids curse:
They that do change old love for new,
Pray Gods they change for worse.
They that do change, &amp;c.
Fair and fair, &amp;c,
Fair and fair, &amp;c. Thy love is fair &amp;c.
My love can pipe, my love can sing,
My love can many a pretty thing,
And of his lovely praises ring
My merry merry roundelays: Amen to Cupids curse:
They that do change, &amp;c.
They that do change, &amp;c.
Fair and fair, &amp;c.
Sweet she epeherd, for Oenones 〈◊〉 be cunning in this songe▪
And keep thy love, and love thy choice, or else thou doest her wrong.
My vow is made and witnessed, the Poplar will not start,
Nor shall the nymph Oenones love from forth my breathing hart.
I will go b•ing the one thy way, my flock are here behind,
And I will have a love•s fee: they say, unkissed, unkind.
But pray you tell me, Iuno, was it so,
As Pallas told me here the tale of Ecch•.
She was a nympe indeed, as Pallas ••ls,
A walker, such as in these thickets dwell•:
And as she told what subtle juggling pranks
She played with Iuno, so she told her thank•:
A tattling true•l to come at every call,
And now foresooth nor tongue nor life at all.
And though perhaps she was a help to Jove,
And held me chat, while he might court his love▪
Believe me, dames, I am of this opinion,
He took but little pleasure in the minion.
And what so ere his scopes have been beside,
Dare say for him a never strayed so wide:
A lovely nutbrowne lass, or lusty true•l,
Have power perhaps to make a god a bull.
Gramercy gentle Iuno for that jest,
I faith that item was worth all the rest.
No matter, Venus, how so ere you scorn,
My father Jove at that time wa•e the horn.
Had every wanton god aboue, Venus, not better luck,
Then heaven would be a pleasant parcke, &amp; Mars a lusty buck.
Tut Mars hath horns to butte withal although no bull a shows.
A never needs to mask in nets, a fears no jealous froes.
Forsooth the better is his turn, for if a speak to loud,
Must find some shift to shadow him, a net, or else a cloud.
No more of this, fair goddesses, unrip not so your shames,
To stand all naked to the world, that been such heavenly dames.
Nay, Pallas, that's a common trick with Venus well we know,
And all the Gods in heaven have seen her naked, long ago.
And then she was so fair and bright, and lovely and so t••m,
As Mars is but for Venus tooth, and she will sport with him.
And but me list not here to make comparison with Jove,
Mars is no ranger, Iuno, he in every open grove.
To much of this: we wander far, the skies begin to skowle,
Retire we to Dianas bower, the weather will be •whole.
Pallas, the storm is past and gon, and Phoebus clears the skies,
And lo, behold a ball of gold, a fair and worthy prize.
This posy wills, the apple to the fairest given be,
Then is it mine: for Venus hight the fairest of the three.
The fairest here as fair is meant, am I, ye do me wrong:
And if the f•y•est have it must, to me it doth belong
Then Iuno may it not enjoy, so every one says no,
But I will prove my self the fairest, er I lose it so.
The brief is this, 〈…〉.
Let this unto 〈◊〉 fairest given 〈◊〉,
The fairest of the three▪ and •am she.
Detur Pulche 〈…〉
The fairest 〈…〉.
Detur Pulcherrimae. 〈…〉
The fairest of the three, and I am 〈◊〉.
My face is fair, 〈…〉
That all the gods in heaven 〈…〉,
Ha•e made them choose 〈◊〉 of the 〈◊〉,
To bee the wife of I••e, and Queen of heaven.
Y• then this prize be 〈…〉 to beauty,
The only she that wins this prize am I.
That Venus is the fairest▪ this doth prove,
That Venus is the lovely Queen of love.
The name of Venus is in deed but beauty,
And men me fairest call, per excellency.
If then this prize be but bequeathed to beauty,
The only she that wins this prize, am I.
To stand on terms of beauty as you take it,
Beeleue me, Ladies, is but to mistake it:
The beauty that this subtle prize must win,
No outward beauty highte, but dvvels within.
And f•yfte•• as you please, and you shall find,
This beauty, is the beauty of the mind.
This fairness, Virtue highte, in general,
That many branches has in special:
This beauty wisdom hight, whereof am I,
By heaven appointed, goddess worthily.
And look how much the mind, the better 〈◊〉,
Doth overpass the body in desert:
So much the mistress of those gifts divine,
Excels thy beauty, and that state of thine.
Then if this prize bee thus bequeathed to beauty,
The only she that wins this prize, am I.
Nay, Pallas▪ by your leave, you vvander clean,
Wee must not construe hereof as you mean:
But take the sense as it i• plainly meant,
And let the fairest hate, I am content.
Our reasons •ilbe infinite, I trow,
Unless unto some other point we grow.
For fi•st here is none me thinks disposed to y•eld,
And none but will with words maintain the field.
Then if you will to avoid a tedious grudge,
Refer it to the sentence of judge,
Who ere he be that comes next in place,
Let him bestow the ball, and end the 〈◊〉.
So can it not go wrong with me not at al.
I am agreed how ever it befall.
And yet by common doom, so may it bee,
I may be said the fairest of the three.
Then yonder lo that shepherd swain is he,
That must be 〈◊〉 in this controversy.
Iuno, in happy time, I do accept the man,
It seems by his looks, some skill of love he can.
The nymph is gone, and I all solitary,
Must wend to tend my charge, oppressed with melancholy.
This day (or else me fails my shepherds skill)
Will tide me passing good, or passing ill.
Shepherd, abash not, though, at sudden thus,
Thou be arrived by ignorance among vs,
Not earthly but divine, and goddesses all three,
June•, Pallas, Venus, these our titles be.
Nor fear to speak, for reverence of the place,
Chosen to end a harde and doubtful case.
This apple lo (nor ask thou whence it came)
Is to be given unto the fairest dame.
And fairest is, nor she, nor she, but she,
Whom, shepherd, thou shalt fairest name to be.
This is thy charge, fulfil without offence,
And she that wins shall give thee recompense.
D•eade not to speak for we have chosen thee,
Sith in this case, we can no judges be.
And, shepherd, say that I the fairest am,
And thou shalt win good guerdon for the same.
Nay, sheph•••e, look upon my ••a•ely grace,
Because the pomp that longs to 〈…〉
They may not see▪ and think Queen Iuno•s name,
To whom old shepherds title works of fa•e,
Is mighty, and may easily suffice,
At Phebus hand to game a golden p•ize.
And for thy mead, since I am Queen of riches,
Shepherd, I will r•vvarde thee with gre•e monarchies,
Empires, and kingdoms, heaps of massye gold,
Scepters and diadems, curious to behold,
Rich robes, of •umpteous vvorkmanship and cost,
And thovvsand things whereof I make no by•st
The mold whereon thovve treads shall be of Tagus sands,
And Xanthus shall run liquid gold for the to wash thy hands:
And if thou like to tend thy flock, and not from them to she,
Their fleeces shall be curled gold to please their masters eye.
And last, to set thy heart one fire, give this one fru•te to me,
And, s•epherd, lo this Tree of Gold will I bestow on thee.
The grovvnde whereon it g•o•s, the grass, the root of gold,
The body and the bark of gold, all 〈◊〉 to behold,
The leaves of burnished gold, the fruits that thereon grow
Are diadems set with pearl in gold in gorgeous glistering show:
And if this Tree• of Gold, in lue may not suffice,
Require a grove of golden trees, so▪ Iuno▪ bear the prize.
Me l•st not tempt thee with decayinge wealth,
Which is e•ba•et by want of lusty health:
B•t if thou have a mind to fly aboue,
Y crovvned with fame near to the •e•te of Jove:
If thou aspire to vvy• domes vvorthines.
Whereof thovv may 〈◊〉 see the brightness
If thou desire honour of chivalry,
To bee renowned for happy victory,
To fight it out, and in the champain feilde,
To shrovvde thee 〈◊〉 pallas vvarlike shield,
To prance on barbed steeds, this honour lo,
My self for guerdon shall on thee bestow.
And for encouragement, that thou may see,
What famous knights dame Pallas warriors be,
Behold in Pallas honour here they come,
Marching along with found of thundering drom.
Come shepherd, come, sweet shepherd look on me,
These been to hoot alarams these for thee:
But if thou wilt give me the golden ball,
Cupid my boy shall hate to play withal,
That when so ere this apple he shall see,
The god of love himself shall think on the,
And bid thee look and choose, and he will wound,
Whereso thy fancies object shall be found,
And lightly when he shoots he doth not miss:
And I will give the many lovely kiss,
And come and play with thee on Ida here,
And if thou wilt a face that hath no peer,
A gallant girl, a lusty minion trull,
That can give sport to thee thy bellyful,
To ravish all thy beating veins with joy,
Here is a lass of Venus court, my boy,
Here gentle shepherd, here is for thee a piece,
The fairest face, the flower of gallant Greece.
SI Diana nel cielo è una stella
Chiara, è lucente piano di splendour
Che porge luc' all' affanato cuore:
Si Diana, nel ferno è una dea,
Che deconforto all' anime donate,
Che per amor son morte desperate:
Si Diana ch' in 〈◊〉 è dell nymph
R•ina, imperatiue d• dol•• f•ore
Tra by•c•'e Selue da morte a pastori.
Io son un Diana dolce e rara
Chle con Le guardi Io posso far guerra
A Dian' infern' in ciel•, et in terra▪
Most heavenly dames, was never man as I
Poor shepherd swain, so happy and unhappy:
The least of these delights, that you deuyse.
Able to wrap and dazzle human eyes.
But since my silence may not pardoned bee,
And I appoint which is the fairest she,
Pardon, most sacred dames, since one not all,
By Paris doom must have this golden ball.
Thy beauty, stately June•, dame divine,
That like to Phoebus golden beams doth shine,
Approves it self to bee most excellent,
But that fair face that doth me most content,
Since fair, fired•mes, is neither she nor she,
But she whom I shall fairest deem to bee.
That face is hers that hight the Queen of Love,
Whose sweetness doth both gods and creators move.
And if the fairest face deserve the ball,
Fair Venus, Ladies, bears it from ye all.
And in this ball doth Venus more delight,
Then in her lovely boy fair Cupids sight.
Come shepherd comme, •weet Venus is thy friend,
No matter how thow other gods offend.
B•t he shall rue, and ban the dismal day
wherein his Venus bare the ball away:
And heaven and earth just witnesses shall bee,
I will revenge it on his progeny.
well Iuno, whether wee bee leys• or loathe,
Venus has got the apple from vs both.
O gentle love, ungentle for thy deed,
Thou make my heart
A bloody mark
With piercing shot to bleed.
Shoot soft sweet love, for fear thou shoot amiss,
For fear too keen.
Thy arrows been,
And hit the heart, where my beloved is.
To fair that fortune were, nor never I
Shall be so blessed
Among the rest
That love shall cease on her by sympathy.
Then since with love my prayers bear no boot,
This doth remain
To cease my payne,
I take the wound, and dye at Venus foot.
Poor Colin woeful man, thy life forespoke by love,
What uncouth fit, what malady is this, that thou dost prove.
Or love is void of physic clean, or loves our common wrack,
That gives vs bane to bring vs lowe, and let vs medicine lack.
That ever love had reverence among silly sheepeheed swains,
Be•eke that humour hurts thē most that most might be their pains.
Hobin, it is some other god that you•isheth her sheep,
For su•e thy• love doth nothing else but make our herdmen weep.
And what a hap is this I pray, when all our woods rejoice,
For Colin thus to be denied his young and lovely choice.
She hight in deed so fresh and fair that well it is for thee,
Colin and kind hath been thy friend, that Cupped could not see.
And whether wends you thriueles swain, like to the stricken dear,
Seeks he Dictamum for his wound within our forest here.
He wends to greet the Queen of love, that in these woods doth won,
With mirthless lays to make complaint to Venus of her son.
A Colin thou art all deceived, she dally• with the boy,
And winckes at all his wanton pranks, and thinks thy love a toy.
Then leave him to his luckless love, let him abide his fate,
The •ore is ranckled •ll to fa•re, our comfort coms to late.
Though Thestilis the Scorpion be that breaks his sweet assault,
Yet will Rhamnusia vengeance take, on her disdainful fault.
Lo yonder co••es the lovely Nymph, that in these Ida vales,
Plays with Amintas lusty by•e, and coyes him in the dales.
The •ot, me thinks her cheer is chāged, her mirthful looks are laid,
She frolics not: pray god the lad have not beguide the maid.
Beguiled, disdained, and out of love: live lunge thou Poplar-tree,
And let thy letters grow in length, to witness this with me.
A Venus, but for reverence, unto thy sacred name,
To steal a silly maidens love, I might account it blame.
And if the tales be true I hear, and blush for to receipt,
Thou dost me wrong to leave the plains, and dally out of sight.
False Paris, this was not thy vow, when thou and I were one,
To raung &amp; change old love for new: but now those days be gone.
But I will find the goddess out, that she thy vow may read,
And fill these woods with my laments, for thy unhappy deed.
So fair a face, so foul a thought to harbour in his breast,
Thy hope consumed, poor Nymph, thy hap is worse then all the rest.
A shepherds, you bin full of wiles, &amp; whet your wits on books,
And wrap poor maids with pypes and songs, and sweet alluring looks.
Mispeake not al, for his amiss, there bin that keepen flocks,
That never chose but once, nor yet beguiled love with mocks.
False Paris he is none of those, his trothles doble deed,
Will hurt a many shepherds else that might go nigh to speed.
Poor Colin, that is ill for thee, that art as true in trust
To thy sweet smart, as to his Nymph Paris hath bin unjust.
A well is she hath Colin won, that nill no other love:
And woo is me, my luck is l•sse, my pains no pity move.
Farewell fair Nymph, sith he must heal alone that gave the wound.
There grows no herb of such of•ect upon dame natures ground.
Here is a Nymph that sadly sits, and she belike
Can tell some news, Pyracmon, of the i•lly swain we seek.
Dare wage my wings the lass doth love, she looks so bleak &amp; thin,
And tic for anger or for grief: but I will talk begin.
Break out poor ha•te, &amp; make complaint the mountain flocks to move,
What proud repulse &amp; thankless scorn thou hast received of love.
She sings, nires, be hushed awhile.
Melponie, the muse of tragic songs,
With moornefull tunes in stole of dismal hue,
Assist a silly Nymph to whale her woe,
And leave thy lusty company behind.
Thou luckless wreath, becomes not me to wear
The Popl•r tree for triumph of my love.
Then as my joy my pride of love is left,
Be thou vncloathed of thy lovely greene.
And in thy leaves my fortune written bee,
And them some gentle wind let blow abroad,
That all the world may see how false of love,
False Paris hath to his Oenone been.
Good-day fair maid, weary belike with following of your game,
I wish thee cunning at thy will, to spare or s•rike the same.
I thank you sir, my gain is quick and •ids a length of ground,
And yet I am deceived or else a had a deadly wound.
Your hand perhaps did swerve awarie. Oen. or else it was my heart.
Then sure a plied his fotemanship.
a played a ranging part.
You should have given a deeper woūd.
I could not that for pity.
You should have eyd him better thē.
blind love was not so witty.
•hy tell me sweet, are you in love.
or would I were not so.
Ye mean because a doe sye wrong.
party the more my woe.
Why mean ye love, or him ye loved?
well may I mean thē both.
Is love to blame?
the queen of love hath made him false his troth.
Mea•e ye indeed the queen of love.
euē wanton Cupids dame.
Why was thy love so lovely then?
his beauty hight his shame,
The fairest shepherd one our greene.
is he a she•p•herd thā.
And sometime kept a bleating flock.
enough, this is the man.
Wh•re woons he thā?
about these woods: far from the Poplar tree.
What Poplar mean ye?
witness of the vows betwixt him &amp; me.
And come and wend a little way and you shall see his skill.
Sirs tarry you.
nay let them go.
nay not unless you will.
Stay Nymph, and hark what I say of him thou blame so,
And credit me, I have a sad discourse to tell thee ere I go.
Know then, my pretty mop•, that I hight Mercury,
The messenge• of heaven, and hither fly
To cease upon the man whon thou dost love,
To summon him before my father Io•e,
To answer matter of great consequence,
And Jove himself will not be lunge from henc•.
Sweet Mercury, and have poor Oenons cries,
For Paris fault, •peircest th'unpertiall skies.
The same is he, that jolly shepherds swain.
His flock do gre•e upon Auroras plain,
The colour of his coat is lusty greene,
That would these eyes of mine had never seen,
His tycing curled •ayre, his front of yvor•e,
Then had not I poor I bin unhappy.
No marvel wench, although we cannot find him,
When all to late the queen of heaven doth mind him.
But if thou wilt have physic for thy •ore,
Mind him who list, remember thou him no more:
And find some other game, and get thee gon.
For here will lusty suitors come anon,
To hoot and •ustie for thy dyeing vain,
Such as were monte to make their suits in vain.
I will go sit and pine under the Poplar tree,
And write my answer to his vow, that every eye may see.
Shepherds, I am content, for this sweet shepherds sake,
A strange revenge upon the maid and her disdain to take.
Let Colins corps be brought in place, and burned in the plain,
And let this be the verse. The love whom Thestilis hath slain.
And t•used me I will chide my soon for parciallitie,
That gave the sue•no so deep a wound, and let her scope him by.
Alas that ever love was blind, to shoot so far ami••e.
Cupped my son was more to blame, the fault not mine, but his.
O madam, if your self would deign the handling of the bow,
Albeit it be a task, your self more skill, more justice know.
Sweet shepherd▪ did thou ever love.
Lady, a little once.
And art thou changed.
fair queen of love I loved not al att•ce.
Well wanton, were thou wounded so deep as some have ben,
It were a cunning cure to heal and rueful to be seen.
But tell me, gracious goddess, for a •la•e and fall•e offence,
Hath Venus or •er son the power, at pleasure to dispense.
My boy, I will instruct thee in a piece of poetry,
That happily erst thou hast not heard: in hell there is a tree,
Where once a day doe sleep the souls of false foresweren lovers,
With open hearts, and there about in swarms the number •ouers
Of poor forsaken ghosts, whose wings from of this tree d• bear
Round drops of fiery Phlegiton to scorch false hearts with heate.
This payne did Venus and her son, entreat the prince of •ell,
T'impose to such as faithless were, to such as loved them well.
And therefore this, my lovely boy, fa•re Venus doth advise thee,
Be true and steadfast in thy love, beware thou doe disguise thee.
For he that makes but love a jest, when pleases him to start,
Shall feel those firye water drops consume his faithless heart.
Is Venus and her son so full of justice and feuerytye.
Pity it vveare that love should not be linked with indifference.
Howe ever lovers can exclaim for harde success in love,
Trust me, some more then cōmon cause that painful hap doth move.
And cupids bow is not alone his triumph, but his rod,
Nor i• he only but a boy: he hight a mighty god.
And they that do him reverence, have reason for the same,
His shaf•s keep heauē and earth in avve, and shape revvardes for 〈◊〉.
And has he reason to mantayne why Colin died for love.
Yea reason good I warrant thee, in right it might beehoue.
Then be the name of••ove adored, his bow is f•ll of might.
His wounds are all but for desert, his lavves are all but right:
well for this once me list apply my speeches to thy sense,
And The stiles shall feel the pain for loves supposed offence.
VVelladay VVelladay: Poor Colin thow art going to the ground.
The love whom Thestis has slain,
Harde heart, fair face fraught with disdain:
Disdain in love a deadly wound.
Wound her sweet love so deep again,
That she may feel the d•eng pain
Of this unhappy shepherds swain,
And dye for love as Colin died. is Colin •ied finis Cam••n••.
Shepherds ab•de, let Colins corps bee witness of the pain
That Thestilis endures in love▪ a plague for her dysdaine.
Behold the organ of ourvvrathe▪ this rusty churl is hee,
She dotes on his y••favoured face, so much accursed is she.
A poor unhappy Thistles, unpitied is thy pain.
Her fortune not unlike to his whom cruel thow hast slain.
The strange effects of my tormented heart,
Whom cruel love has woeful prisoner caught,
Whom cruel hate has into bondage brought,
Whom wit no way of safe escape hath taught,
Enforce me say in witness of my smart,
There is no pain to foul disdain in hardy suits of love.
There is no pain &amp;c.
Cruel, farewell. Shep Cruel, farewell.
Most cruel thow, of all that nature framed.
Most creull &amp;c.
To kill thy love with thy disdain.
To kill thy love with thy disdain.
Cruel disdain so li•e thow named.
Cruel disdain &amp;c.
And let me dye of Iphis pain.
A life to good for thy disdain.
Sith this my stars to me allot,
And thow thy love hast all forgot.
And thou &amp;c.
Now shepherds, bury Colins corps, perfume his herce with flowers,
And write what justice Venus did amid these woods of yours.
How now, how cheers my Lovely boy, after this dump of love.
Such dumps, sweet Lady, as bin these are deadly dumps to prove.
Cease shepherd, these are other nues, after this melancholy.
My mind presumes some tempest toward upon the speech of Mercury
Fair lady Venus, let me pardoned bee
That have of lunge bin well-beloved of thee,
If as my office bid 〈◊〉 self first brings
To my sue•e Ma•am these unwelcome tidings.
What n•es, what tidings, gentle Mercury,
In mid•• of my deletes to troble me.
At Iunoes suit, Pallas assisting her,
Since both did join •n suit to Iupiter,
Action is entered in the court of heaven,
And me, the swyf•est of the Planets seven,
With warrant they have thence despatcht away,
To apprehend and find the man, they say,
That gave from them that selfsame ball of gold,
Which I presume I do in place beeholde,
Which man, unless my marks bee taken wide,
Is hee that sytts so near thy gracious •yde.
This being so, it rests •e go from hence.
Before the gods to answer his offence.
What tale is this, doth Iuno and her mate
Pursue this shepherd with such deadly hate.
As what was then our general agreement,
To stand unto they nil be now content.
Let Iuno jet, and Pallas play her part,
What here I have, I won it by desert:
And heaven and earth shall both confounded bee,
Ere wrong in this be donne to him or me.
This little fruit, if Mercury can spell,
Will send I fear a world of soul▪ to hell.
What mean these Ciclops, Mercury, is vulcan waxed so •in,
To send his Chim•issue•pers forth, to fetter any fro••de of mine.
Abash not shepherd at the thing, my self thy bail will be,
He shall be present at the court of Jove I warrant thee.
Venus, give me your pledge▪
my Cestone, or my fan, or both.
Nay this shall serve: your word to me as sure as is your other,
At Dianas bower▪ and Lady, if my wit or policy
May profit him for Venus sake, let him make bold with Mercury.
Sweet Paris, whereon doest thow muse?
The angry heavens for this fatal jar,
Name me the instrument of dire and deadly war.
Why nymph, what need ye run so f•st? what though but black I be?
I have more pretty knackes to please, then every eye doth see▪
And though I go not 〈◊〉 upright, and though I am a 〈◊〉,
To make me gracious you may have some other thing therewith.
Ye Volcano, will ye so in deed may turn and tell him, trull,
He hath a mistress of his own to take his belly full.
Why sir, if Phoebes dainty nymphs please lusty Vulcans tooth,
Why may not Vulcan tread awry, as well as Venus doth?
Ye shall not taint your troth for me: you wot it very well,
All that be Deans maids are vowed to halter apples in hell.
In faith In faith, my gentle mops, but I do know a cast,
Lead apes who list, that we would help t'unhaltar them as fast.
Fie fie, your skill is wondrous great, had thought the god of wine,
Had tended but his tubbs and grapes, and not ben haulse so fine.
Gramercy for that quirk, my girl. Bac. Thats one of dain•i•s frūpes.
I pray sir take it with all amiss, our cunning comes by lumps.
Sh'ath capt his answer in the Q.
how says, a, has she so?
As well as she that kept your head to keep you warm below.
Yea then you will be cursed I see. Bac. best let her even alone.
Yea gentle gods, and find some other str•nge to harp upon.
Some other string, agreed Ifay•h, some other pretty thing,
It were shame fair maids should idle be, how say you, will ye sing.
Some rounds or merry roundy lays, we sing no other songs,
Your melancholic notes not to our country mirth belonges.
Here comes a crew will help vs trim.
Yea now our task is done.
Then merry Mercury more then time, this round were well begone.
A harlotry I warrant her.
a p•••sh eluish shrew.
Have seen as far to come as near, for all her ranging so.
But, Bacchus, time well spent I wot, our sacred father Jove,
With Phoebus and the god of war•e are met in Deans grove.
Then we are here before them yet, but stay the earth doth swell,
God Neptune to, (this hap is good) doth meet the prince of hell.
What jars are these, that call the gods of heaven and hell beloe.
I• is a work of wit and toil to rule a sustie shrew.
Bring forth the man of Troy that he may hear,
Whereof he is to be arraigned here.
Lo where a comes prepared to plead his case,
under conduct of lovely Venus grace.
I have not seen a more alluring boy.
So beauty hight the wrack of Priams Troy.
Lo• sacred Jove, at Iunoes proud complaint,
As e•st I gave my pledge to Mercury,
I bring the man whom he did late attained,
To answer his indictment orderly:
And crave this grace of this immortal senate,
That ye allow the man his advocate.
That may not be, the laws of heaven deny,
A man to plead or answer by attorney.
Pallas, thy doom is all too peremptory.
Venus, that fauou• is denied him flatly,
He is a man and therefore by out laws,
Him self, without his aid, must plead his cause.
Then bash not, shepherd, in so good a case,
And friends thou hast as well as foes in place.
Why, Mercury, why doe ye not indite him.
Soft gentle, Iuno, I pray you do not bite him.
Nay, gods, I trow you are like to have great silence,
Unless this parrot be commanded hence.
Venus, forbear, be still: speak, Mercury.
If Iuno jangle Venus will reply.
Paris, king Priams son, thou art arraigned of parciallitie,
Of sentence partial and unjust, for that without indifference,
Beyond desert or merit far, as thine accusers say,
From them, to Lady Venus here, thou gave the pryze away.
What is thine answer?
Sacred and just, thou great and dreadful Jove,
And you thrice reverend powers, whom love nor hate,
May wrest awry, if this to me a man,
This fortune fatal bee, that I must plead,
For safe excusall of my guiltless thought,
The honour more makes my mishap the less,
That I a man must plead before the gods,
Gracious forbearers of the worlds amiss,
For her, whose beauty how it hath enticet,
This heavenly senate may with me aver.
But sith nor that, nor this may doe me boot,
And for my self, my self must speaker bee,
A mortal man, amidst this heavenly presence▪
Let me not shape a lunge defence, to them,
That ben beholders of my guiltless thoughts.
Then for the deed, that I may not deny,
Wherein consists the full of mine offence,
I did upon command: if then I erde,
I did no more then to a man belonged.
And if in verdict of their forms divine,
My dazzled eye did swerve or surfeit more
On ••nus face, then any face of their•:
It was no partial fault, but fault of his
Belike, whose eysight not so perfect was,
As might decern the brightness of toe rest.
And if it were permitted unto men
(Ye gods) to parley with your secret thoughts,
There ben that sit upon that sacred seat,
That would with Paris err in Venus praise.
But let me cease to speak of error here:
Sith what my hand, the organ of my heart,
Did give with good agreement of mine eye,
My tongue is void with process to mainta•no.
A jolly shepherd, wise and eloquent.
First then arraigned of parciallitie.
Paris replies unguilty of the fact▪
His reason is, because he knew no more
Fair Venus Ceston, then dame Iunoes mace,
Nor never saw wise Pallas crystal shield.
Then as I looked I loved and likte attonce,
And as it was referd from them to me,
To give the pryze to her, whose beauty best
My fancy did commend, so did I praise
And judge as might my dazzled eye decern.
A piece of art, that, cunningly pardie,
Refers the blame to weakness of his eye.
Now (for I must add reason for my deed)
Why Venus rather pleased me of the three:
F••st, in the entrails of my mortal ears,
The question standing upon beauties blaze,
The name of her that height the queen of love,
My thought in beauty should not be exceld.
Had it been destined to majesty,
(Yet will I not rob Venus of her grace,)
Then stately Iuno might have borne the ball.
Had it to wisdom bine entitled,
My human wit had given it Pallas then.
But sith unto the fairest of the three,
That power, that threw it for my father ill,
Did dedicate this ball: and safest durst
My shepherds skill adventure, as I thought,
To judge of form and beauty, rather then
Of Iunos state, or Pallas worthiness,
That learned to ken the fairest of the flock,
And praised beauty but by natures aim:
Behold to Venus Paris gave this fruit,
A dayesman chosen there by full consent,
And heavenly powers should not rep•ned their deeds.
Where it is said, beyond desert of hers,
I honoured Venus with this golden prize:
(Ye gods) alas what can a mortal man
Decern, betwixt the sacred gifts of heaven.
Or, if I may with reverence reason thus:
Suppose I gave, and judged corruptly then,
For hope of that, that best did please my thought,
This apple not for beauties praise alone:
I might offend, sith I was pardoned,
And tempted, more then ever creature was,
With wealth, with beauty and with chivalry:
And so preferred beauty before them all,
The thing that hath enchanted heau•n it self.
And for the one, contentment is my wealth:
A shell of salt will serve a sheep•e•de swain,
A slender banquet in a homely skrip,
And water running from the silver spring.
For arms, they dread no foes that sit so lowe,
A thorne can keep the wind from off my back,
A sheepe-coate thatched, a shepherds palace high•▪
Of tragic Muses shepherds •on no skill,
Enough is them, if Cupped ben displeased,
To sing his praise on slender oaten pipe.
And thus, thryse reverend, have I told my tale,
And crave the torment of my guiltless soul
To be measured by my faultless thought.
If warlike Pallas, or the queen of heaven
Sue to reverse my sentence by appeal,
Be it as please your majesties divine,
The wrong, the hurt not mine, if any be,
But hers whose beauty claimed the prize of me.
Venus, withdraw your shepherd for a space,
Till he again be called for into place.
Iuno, what will ye after this reply
B•t doom with sentence of indifference.
And if you will but justice in the cause,
The man must quited be by heavens laws.
Yea gentle Jove, when Iunoes suits are moved,
Then heaven may see how well she is beloved.
But, Madam, fits it majesty divine,
In any sort from justice to decline?
Whether the man be guilty yea or no,
That doth not hinder our appeal, I trow?
Phoebus, I wot, amid this heavenly crew,
There be that have to say as well as you
And Iuno, I with them, and they with me,
In law and right, must needefully agree:
I grant ye may agree, but be content
To doubt upon regard of your agreement.
And if ye marked, the man in his defence.
Said thereof as a might with reverence.
And did ye very well I promise ye.
No doubt, sir, you could note it cunningly.
Well, Iuno, if ye will appeal ye may,
But first dispatch the shepherd hence away.
Then Vulcans dame is like to have the wrong.
And that in passion doth to Mars belong.
Call Venus and the shepherd in again.
And rid the man that he may know his payne.
His payne, his payne, his never dying payne,
A cause to make to many more complain.
Shepherd, thou hast ben harde with equity and law,
And for thy stars do thee to other calling draw.
We here dismiss thee hence, by order of our senate:
Go take thy way to Troy, and there abide thy fate.
Sweet shepherd, with such luck in love while thow dost live,
As may the Queen of Love to any Lover give.
My luck is loss howe ere my love do speed,
I fear me Paris shall but rue his deed.
From Ida woods now wends the shepherds boy,
That in his bosom caries fire to Troy.
Venus, these Ladies do appeal you see,
And that they may appeal the gods agree,
It rests then that you be well content
To stand in this unto our final indgment:
And if king Priams son did well in this,
The Law of heaven will not lead amiss.
But, sacred Iupiter, might thy daughter choose,
She might with reason this appeal refuse:
Yet, if they bee vnmoued in their shames,
Bee it a stain and blemish to their names:
A deed to far unworthy of the place,
Unworthy Pallas Lance, or Iunoes mace:
And, if to beauty it bequeathed be,
I doubt not but it will return to me.
Venus, there is no more ado then so,
It restethe where the gods doe it bestow.
But, Ladies, under favour of your rage,
How ere it be, you play upon the vantage.
Then d•mes, that wee more freely may debate,
And here th'indifferent sentence of this senate,
Withdraw you from this presence for a space,
Till wee have through•lie questioned of the cac•:
Dian shall be your guide, nor shall you need
Your selves to enquire how things do here succeed,
Wee will▪ as wee resolve give you to know,
By general doom, how every thing doth go.
Thy will, my wish, fair Ladies, will ye wend?
Beshrew her whom this sentence doth offend.
Now Jove be just, and gods you that bee Venus friends,
If you have ever donne her wrong, then may you make amends.
Venus is fair, Pallas and Iuno toe.
But tell me now without some more ado,
Who is the fairest she, and do not flatter.
Vulcan, upon comparison hanges all the matter:
That donne the quarrel and the strife were ended.
Because tic known, the quarrel is pretended.
Mars. you have reason for your speech party:
My dame (I t•o) is fairest in your eye.
Or (Vulcan) I should do her doble wrong.
About a toy wee tarry here so lunge.
Give it by voices, voices give the odds:
A trifle so to to troble all the gods.
Believe me, Saturn, be it so for me.
For me. Pluto. for me Mars. for me, if Jove agree.
And gentle gods, I am indifferent:
But then I know whoose likely to be shent.
Thryse reverend gods, and thow immortal Jove.
If Phoebus may, as him doth much behove,
Be licensed, according to our Laws,
To speak uprightly in this doubted cause,
(Since women's wits work men's unceasing woes)
To make them friends, that now bin frendles foes,
And peace to keep with them, with vs, and all
That make their title to this golden ball:
(Nor think ye gods my speech doth derogate
From sacred power of this immortal senate,)
Refer this sentence where it doth belong,
In this say I fair Phoebe has the wrong.
Not that (I mean) her beauty bears the prize:
But that the holly Law of heaven denies,
One god to meddle in an others power.
And this befell so near Diana• bower,
As for thappeazinge this unpleasant grudge,
(In my conceit) she hight the fittest judge.
If Jove control not Plutoes hell with charms,
If Mars have souraigne power to manage arms:
If Bacchus bear no rule in Neptune sea
Nor Vulcans fire doth Saturnes since obey:
Suppress not then, against law and equity,
Dianas power in her own territory:
Whose regiment, amid her sacred •owers,
As proper height as any rule of yours.
Well may we so wipe all the speech away,
That Pallas, Iuno, Venus hath to say,
And answer that by justice of our laws,
We were not suffered to conclude the cause.
And this to me most eagle doom appears,
A woman to be judge among her pheeres.
Apollo hath found out the only mean,
To rid the blame from vs and trouble clean.
We are beholding to his sacred wit.
I can commend and well allow of it.
And so derive the matter from vs all,
That Dian have the giving of the ball.
So Jove may clearly excuse him in the case,
Where Iuno else would chide and brawl apace.
And now, it were some cunnning to divine,
To whom Diana will this pryze resign.
Suffizeth me, it shall be none of mine.
Vulcan, though thou be black, thart nothing fine.
Go bathe thee, Bacchus, in a tub of wine,
The balls as likely to be mine as thine.
Lo, Ladies, far beyond my hope and will, you see,
This thankless office is imposd to me:
Wherein if you will rest as well content,
As Dian will be judge indifferent,
My eagle doom shall none of you offend,
And of this quarrel make a final end:
And therefore, whether you belief of loath,
Confirm your promise with some sacred other.
Phoebe, chief Mistress of this sylvan chase,
Whom gods have chosen to conclude the case,
That yet in balance vndecyded lies.
Touching bestowing of this golden prize.
I give my promise and m•no other withal,
By S•ix, by heavens power imperial,
By all that lunges to Pallas deity,
Her sh•lt, her lance, ensigns of chivalry,
Her sacred wreath of Olive, and of Bay,
Her crested helm, and else what Pallas may,
That where so ere this ball of purest gold,
That chaste Diana here in hand doth hold,
Vnpartially her wisdom shall bestow,
Without mislike o• quarrel any more,
Pallas shall rest content and satisfied,
And say the best desert doth there ab•de.
And here I promise and protest withal,
By Styx, by heavens power imperial,
By all that lunges to Iunoes deity,
Her crown, her mace, ensigns of majesty:
Her spotless mariage-rites, her league divine,
And by that holy name of Proserpine,
That wheresoever, this ball of purest gold,
That chaste Diana here in hand doth hold,
Vnpartially her wisdom shall bestow,
Without mislike o• quarrel any more,
Iuno shall rest content and satisfied,
And say the best desert doth there abide.
And lovely Phoebe, for I know thy dome
Will be no other then shall thee become,
Behold I take thy dainty hand to kiss,
And with my solemn other confirm my promise,
By Styx, by Ioues immortal empery,
By Cupids bow, by Venus mirtle-tree,
By Vulcans gift, my Ceston, and my fan,
By this red rose, whose colour first began,
When erst my wanton boy (the more his blame)
Did draw his bow awry and hurt his d•me,
By all the honour and the sacrifi•e,
That from Cithaeron and f•om Paphos rise:
That wheresoever, &amp;c.
Venus shall rest, &amp;c.
It is enough, and goddesses attend:
There one within these pleasant shady woods,
Where neither storm nor Suns distemperature
Have power to hurt by cruel heate or cold,
Under the climate of the milder heaven,
Where seldom lights Ioues angry thunderbolt,
For favour of that sovereign earthly peer:
Where whistling winds make music among the trees,
Far from disturbance of our country gods,
Amids the Cypress springes a gracious Nymph,
That honour Dian for her chastity,
And likes the labours well of Phoebes groves:
The place Elizium hight, and of the place,
Her name that governs there Eliza is,
A kingdom that may well compare with mine.
An ancient seat of kings, a second Troy,
Ycompast round with a commodious sea:
Her people are ••leeped Angeli▪
Or if I miss a litre is the most.
She gives laws of justice and of peace,
And on her head as fits her fortune best,
She wears a wreath of laurel, gold, and palm:
Her robes of purple and of scarlet die,
Her veil of white, as best befits a maid.
Her ancestors live in the house of fame,
She gives arms of happy victory,
And flowers to deck her lyons crowned with gold.
This peerless nymph whom heaven and earth beloues,
This Paragon, this only this is she,
In whom do meet so many gifts in one,
On whom our country gods so often gaze,
In honour of whose name the Muses singe.
In state Queen Iunos peer, for power in arms,
And virtues of the mind Mineruaes 〈◊〉▪
As fair and lovely as the queen of love:
As chaste as Dian in her chaste desires.
Th• •am is she, if Phoebe doe no wrong,
To whom this ball in merit doth belong.
If this be she whom some Zabeta call,
To whom thy wisdom well bequeaths the ball
I can remember at her day of birth,
Howe Flora with her flowers strewed the Earth,
How e•erie power with heavenly majesty,
In person honoured that solemnity.
The lovely graces were not far away,
They threw their balm for triumph of the day.
The fates against their kind began a cheerful songe,
And vowed her life with favour to prolong
Then first began Cupids eysight waxen dim,
Belike Elisas beauty blinded him.
To this fair Nymph, not earthly but divine:
Contents it me my honour to resign.
To this fair Queen so beautiful and wise,
Pallas bequeaths her title in the prize.
To her whom Iunoes looks so well become,
The queen of heaven yields at Phoebus doom.
And glad I am Diana found the art,
Without offence so well to please desert.
Then mark my tale the usual time is no,
When wont the d•niece of life and destiny,
In robes of cheerful colours to repair,
To this renowned Queen so wise and fair,
With pleasant songs this peerless nymph to greet,
Clotho lays down her distaste at her feet.
And Lachesis doth pull the thread at length,
The third with favour gives it stuff and strength
And for contrary kind affords her leave,
As her best likes her web of life to weave
This time we will attend, and in the mean while
With some sweet songe the tediousness beguile.
Humane vitae filum sic voluere Parcae.
Humane vitae filum sic tender Parcae.
Humane vitae filum sic scindere Parcae.
Clotho colum baiulat.
Lachesis trahit.
Atropos occat.
Viue dive foelix votes hominúmque deûmque:
Corpora, mente, libro, doctissima, candid, casta.
Clotho colum pedibus.
Lachesis tibi pendula fila.
Et fatal tuis minibus forum Atropos offered.
Viue dive foelix, &amp;c.
Gracious and wise, fair Queen of rare renown,
Whom heaven and earth beloues amid thy train,
Noble and lovely pe•eres: to honour thee
And doe thee favour, more then may belong,
By natures law to any earthly wight,
Behold continuance of our yearly due,
Th'unpartiall dames of destiny we meet,
As have the gods and we agreed in one,
In reverence of Elizas noble name,
And humbly lo her distaff Clotho yields.
Her spindle Lachesis and her fatal reel,
Lays down in reverence at Elizaas feet.
Te tamen in terris vnam tria n•min• Diuam
Inuita statuunt nature leg sor•res,
Et tibi non alijs didicerunt p•rcere Parcae.
Dame Atrops according as her 〈◊〉
To thee fair Queen •assign• her f•tall knife:
Live lunge th• •oble Phoeni• of our age,
Our fair Eliza our Zabeta fair.
And lo beside this rare solemnity,
And sacrifice these dames are wont to doe,
A favour far in deed contrary kind,
Bequeathed is unto thy worthiness.
She delivers the ball of gold to the Queens own hands
This prize from heaven and heavenly goddesses,
Accept it then, thy due by Deans dome,
Praise of the wisdom, beauty and the state,
That best becomes thy peerless excellence.
So fair Eliza, Venus doth resign,
The honour of this honour to be thine.
So is the queen of heaven content likewise,
To yield to thee her title in the prize.
So Pallas yields the praise hereof to thee▪
For wisdom, princely state, and peerless beauty.
Viue dive foelix votes hominúmque Deûmque.
Corpor•, mente, libro, doctissima, candi••, casta.

IVno the Wife and sister of Iupiter, hating his bastard bro•de, comes
down from heaven, complaining of all his injuries done to her, deui∣sing
also by what despite she may vex his base Son Hercules. And
having by experience proved, no toils to be to hard for him, finds the
means to make his own hand his own vengeance. Hercules therefore
returning now from Hell (from whence he was enjoined to fet Cerbe∣rus)
and finding that the Tyrant Lycus had invaded his coūtrey, destroy∣eth
the tyrant. For the which victory as hee sacrifices to his Goddess,
vvrathfull Iuno strikes him into a sudden frenzy: Wherewith he being
sore vexed, thinking to slay the Children and Wife of Lycus, in steed of
them, kills his own Wife and Children in his madness. This done hee
sleeps. Iuno restores to him again his Wits. He being vvakt, seeing his
Wife and Children slain by his own hand, at last also would kill him∣self.
I Sister of the Thunderer,
(for now that name alone
Remains to me) Jove evermore
as though divorced and gone,
And temples of the highest ayre
as widow shunned have,
And beaten out of skies aboue
the place to Harlots gave.
I must go dwell beneath on ground, for Whoores do hold the sky.
From hence the Bear in part aboue of ycy peal full hy,
A haughty star the greekish shyps by Seas doth gurde about:
From this way, whence at spring time warm the day is loosed out,
Euro•aes bearer through the waives of Tyria shyues full bright.
From thence, their stormy fearful flock to Ships, and seas affright,
The wandering daughters here and there of Atlas upward sway.
With staring bush of hair from hens Orion Gods doth fray:
And Perseus eke his glittering stars of golden gloss hath here.
From hence the twynnes of Tyndars stock do shine, a sign full clear:
And at whose birth first stood the ground that erst went to and fro.
Nor only Bacchus now himself, or Bacchus mother lo,
Have climbed to Gods: least any part should from rebuke be free,
The skies the Gnossian strumpets crowns do bear in spite of me.
But I of old cōtemptes complain: me, one dire, fierce, and shrewd
Thebana land with wicked brood of Ioues base daughters strewed,
How oft hath it a stepdame made? though up to heaven should rise,
The conquering drab Alcmena now, and hold my place in skies,
And eke her son to promised stars obtain the worthy way,
At birth of whom the staying world so long deferd the day,
And Phoebus slow from morning sea began to glister bright,
Commanded long in the Ocean waives to hyde his drowned light.
Yet shall my hates not leave them so, a wrathful kindled rage
His mind in madness shall stir up, and ire that may not swag
Shall evermore (all peace laid down) wage wars eternally.
What wars? what ever hideous thing the earth his enemy
Begets, or what soever sea or ayre hath brought to sight
Both dreadful, dire, and pestilent, of cruel fiercest might,
It is tierd and tamed: he passes all, and name by ills doth raise,
And all my wrath he doth enjoy, and to his greater praise
He turns my hates: while tedious toils to much I him behest,
He proves what father him begot: both thence where light oppressed
Hath sea, and where it shout again, where Titan day doth train,
And with his brand approaching ne'er doth dye those Aethiops twain,
His strengh vntamde is honoured: and God eche where is hee
Now called in world, and now more ••ore of monsters want to me,
And labour less to Hercles is t'acomplish all my will,
Then me to bid: at ease he doth mine imperies fulfil.
What cruel hestes of tyrant now so fierce a young man may
Prevail to hurt? for lo he bears for weapons now away
What once he feared, and put to flight: he armed comes at side
With Lyon fierce and Hydra both: nor land suffices wide,
But broke he hath the threshold lo of that infernal Jove.
And spoils with him of conquered king he draws to Gods aboue.
But thats but light, broke is the league of sprites that there do dwell.
I saw my self, I saw him lo (the night now gone, of hell
And Ditis tamed) throw out abroad before his fathers sight
His broth••s spoils. Why draws he not oppressed and bound by might
Himself in chains that equal things to Jove by lot doth hold?
And bear the rule of captive hell, and way to Styx unfold?
Up opened is from lowest ghosts the backward way to sky,
And sacred secrets of dire death in open sight do lye.
But he (the dreadful den of sprites brake up full fierce and stout
Even over me doth triumph lo, and with proud hand about
The foul black dog by Grekish towns he leads frō hell away.
When seen was ugly Cerberus I saw the fading day,
And fearful sun: even me likewise a trembling dread oppressed,
And looking on the filthy necks of conquered monstrous beast,
I feared much mine own behests: but light things I complain,
For heaven I may be frayed, lest he may get the highest rain,
That lowest won, the sceptors from his father will he take,
Nor hee to stars (as Bacchus did) his way will gently make:
The way with ruin will he seek, and hee in empty skies
Will reign alone with force displayed his haughty hart doth rise,
And he that heaven it self by force of his might gotted bee,
It bearing learned: quite underneath the world his head set hee.
Nor once his shoulders bowed the praise of suth a mighty •as:
And midst of heaven on Hercles neck alone (lo) settled was.
His neck vnwryde the stars aboue and skies did only stay:
And me likewise oppressing him, to Gods he seeks the way.
Go ire, go on, and beat him down that great things doth invent
Match thou with him, and with thy hands now thou thy self him rent.
Such hates why dost thou meditate? let all wyld beasts now go:
And weary Euristheus now be free from geeuing charges mo.
The Titans daryng once of Jove to break the empery
Send out: let loase the den abroad of mount of Sicily.
The Doric land that with the turn of giant quakes afraid,
Let it bring forth the dreadful necks of monster under laid.
Let yet the haughty moon about some other beasts beget,
But these he overcame. Seeks thou a match t'Alcides yet?
Theirs none, except himself: let him against himself rebel.
Let present be from bottom deep vpraysd of lowest hell
Th'Eumenides, let flaming lockes of theirs the fires out fling,
And furious hands bestow about the strokes of vipers sting.
Go now full proud, and scale the skies to s•ates of gods make way.
Now must thy battles wages be full clear lo shynes the day.
Despise mans works think thou fierce wight y• hell and souls allow
Thou hast escaped? nay here I will another hell thee show.
In deep mist hid I will call up from bottom low of hell
Beyond the ways of guilty ghosts debateful goddess fell.
Whereas the roaring dreadful den resounds with cries about.
From depest bond of Ditis reign beneath I will fet out,
What so is left. Let hateful hurt now come in anger wood,
And fierce impiety imbrew himself with his own blood.
And error eke, and fury armed against it self to fight.
This mean, this mean, let wrath of mine now use to show my might.
Begin ye servants now of hell: the fervent burning tree
Of Pine shake up: and set with snakes her dreadful flock to see.
Let now Megaera bring to sight, and with her mournful brand.
For burning rage bring out of hell a huge and direful brand.
Do this, require you vengeance due, and pains of hell his spoil,
Strike through his breast, let fiercer flame, within his bosom boyle.
Then which in Aetna fornace beats, so suriously to see.
That mad of mind and witless may Alcides driven bee
With fury great through pierced quite, my self must first of all
Be mad. Wherefore doth Iuuo yet not into raging fall?
Me, me, ye Furies, sisters three thrown quite out of my wit
Toss first, if any thing to do, I do endeavour yet
For stepdame meet: let now my hates be turned another way,
Let him (returned) his babes behold in safety I you pray.
And strong of hand come home, I have now found the day at length.
In which may greatly me avail the hated Hercles strength.
Both me and eke him self let him subdue and wish to die
Returned from hell, yea let it here be my commodity,
That he of Jove begotten is: here present will I stand,
And that his shaftes go straight from how, I will direct his hand,
The mad mans weapons will I guide, even Hercles fighting, lo,
At length Isle aid. This gilt once done then leefull is that so
His father may admit to says those guilty haades of his
THe fading stars now shyne but seelde in sight
In stipye sky, night overcome with day
Plucks in her. fires, while sprung again is light.
The day star draws the cleresome beams their way.
They cye sign of haughty poale again,
With seven stars marked, the Bears of Arcadye,
Do call the light with overturned wayne.
With marble horse now drawn, his way to hye
Doth Titan top of Oath over spread
The bushes bright that now with berries bee
Of Thebes strewed, by day do blush full red.
And to return doth Phabus sister flee.
Now labour harde begins, and every kind
Of cares it stirs, the Shepherd doth unfold:
His flocks vnpende, do grase their food to find,
And nippes the grass with hoary frost full cold.
At will doth play in open meadow fair
The Calfe whose brow did damme yet never tear,
The empty Kine their vdders doe repair.
And light with course uncertain here and there,
In grass full soft the wanton kid hee flings.
In top of bough doth sit with chanting songe,
And to the Sun new rose to spread her wings,
Bestirs her self her mourneful nests among
The Nightingale. and doth with birds about
Confuse resound mith murmur mixedryfe
To witness day; his sails to wind set out
The shypman doth commit in doubt of life.
While gale oswynde the slack sails filles full strait,
He leaning over hollow rock doth lye,
And either his begiled hooks doth bait,
Or else beholds and feels the pray from hye
with poised hand.
The trembling fish he feels with line extent.
This hope to them to whom of hurtles life.
Is quiet rest, and with his own content,
And little, house, such hope in fields is rife
The troblous hopes with rolling whirlwind great,
And dreadful fears their ways in cities keep.
He proud repair to prince in regal seat,
And hard court gates without the rest of sleep
Esteems, and endless happiness to hold
Doth gather goods, for treasure gaping more,
And is full pore amid his heaped gold.
The peoples favour him (astonished sore)
And commons more inconstant then the sea,
With blast of vain rename lifts up full proud.
He selling at the brawling bar his plea,
Full wicked, sets his yres and scolding loud
And words to sale, a few hath known of all
The careless rest, who mindful how doth flit
Swift age away, the time that never shall
Return again do hold: while fares permit,
At quiet live: the life full quickly glides
With hastened course, and with the winged day
The wheel is turned of year that headlong slides,
The sisters hard perform their tasks always,
Nor may again vntwist the thread once spoon.
Yet mankind lo unsure what way to take
To meet the greedy destinies dothronne
And willingly wee seek the Stigian lake.
To much Alcides thou with stomach stout
The sorry sprites of hell dost hast to see.
With course prefixed the fares are brought about
To none once warned to come may respite bee
To none to pass their once appointed day,
The tomb all people called by death doth hyde
Let glory him by many lands away
Display, and fame throughout all cities wide
Full babbling praise, and even with sky to stand
Advance and stars: let him in chariot bright
Full haughty go: let me my native land
In safe and secrete house keep close from sight.
To restful men hoar age by course doth fall,
And low in place, yet safe and sure doth lye,
The poor and base estate of cottage small:
The prouder pomp of mind doth fall from hye.
But sad here comes with lost lockes of hear
Lo Megara with little company,
And stowe by age draws Hercles father near
OGuider great of heaven, &amp; of the world O Judge full hie,
Yet now at length apoinct a mean of careful misery.
And end of our calamity. To me yet never day
Hath careless shin' de: the end of one affliction past away
Beginning of an other is: an other enemy
Is forthwith found, before that hee his joyful family
Return unto an other fight hee takes by behest:
Nor any respite given is to him nor quiet rest:
But while that he commanded is: straight him pursues she
The hateful Iuno. Was yet once from toil and labour free
His infants age? the monsters (lo) he vanquished hath and slain,
Before he knew what monsters meant. The skaled serpents twain
Their double necks drew on toward him, against the which to rise,
The infant crept to meet with them, the serpents glittering eyes
Like fire, with quiet careless breast he looking last upon,
With coūtnance clear, hard wrested knots of them he caught anon:
And strangling then the swelling throats of them with tender hand,
To Hydra prelude made. the beast so swift of Maenale land.
That with much Gold bare up full bright his beautifled head,
Is caught in course. of Nemey wood likewise the greatest dread
The Lyon pressed with Hercles arms hath roared with dreadful cry.
What should I speak of stables dire, of steeds of Bystonye?
Or King cast out himself for food his horses fierce to fill?
And bristled beast in thick tops wont of Erymanthus hill?
The boar of Maenalye, the woods of Arcady to shake?
And Bull that did no little dread to hundred peoples make?
Among the flocks of Hesper land that hence far distant bee,
The shepherd of Cartesian coast of triple shape to see
Is slain, and driven is the pray from farthest part of weast,
Citheton quak't when by him past to sea the well known beast.
He being bid to make by coasts of summer sun his way,
And parched lands which sore with heate doth boyle the middell day,
The mountains brake on either side and rampires all undone,
Even unto swift and raging sea hath made a way to roon.
Then entering in of plenteous wood, the pleasant gardens gay,
The waking dragons golden spoils with him he brought away.
The Lerna monsters numerous ill what need to tell have I?
Hath he not him with fire at length subdewde, and taught to dye?
And which were wont with wings abroad to hyde the day from sight,
Even from the clouds he sought &amp; brave the Stimphale birds to flight.
Not him subdewde who ever lies in bed vnmacht at night
The widow queen of them that took to Thermodont their flight.
Nor hands that well durst euterprise his noble travails all
The filthy labour mad• to shrink of foul Augias hall.
What veil all these? he wants the world which oft defended he.
And th earth well knows the worker of his quietness to be
Away from earth: the prosperous gilt that bears happy swey.
Is virtue called, and now the good to wicked doe obey.
The right doth stand in might of arms, fear treads down the law.
Before my face with cruel hand, even presently I saw
Revengers of their fathers reign, the sons with sword down cast,
And of the noble Cadmus eke himself the offspring last
Then slain: I law his regal crown at once from him away
With head bereft. Who Thebes alas enough bewail now may?
The fertile land of Gods, what lord now quakes it for to know?
Out of the fields of which sometime, and fruitful bosom lowe,
The youth vpsprong with swarde in band prepared to battle stood:
And walls of which Amphion one of mighty Jove his brood,
Hath built with sounding melody in drawing to the stones:
To town of whom the parent chief of Gods not only ones
Heaven being left hath come. this land that Gods aboue always
Received, and which hath made them Gods, and (leefull beete to say)
Perhaps shall make, with loathsome yoke of bondage is pressed down.
O Cadmus stock, and citizens of old Amphions town,
Whereto are ye now fallen? dread ye a cowardly exull thus,
His coasts to dwell in, lacking, and to ours injurious?
W•o through the world pursues the gilts and wrong by sea and land,
And cruel sceptors broken hath with just and rightful hand,
Now absent serves, and what he eal'de in other doth sustain:
And now doth banished Lycus hold of Hercles Thebes the rain.
Yet shall he not: he shall come home, and him with vengeance quite,
And sudden rise to stars: he will soon flude the way to light,
Or make it ells. return thou safe, repair to thine in haste:
And conqueror to conquered house yet come again at last.
Rise up my spouse, and darkness vecye repelled of helly shade
Break up with hand, if no way may for thee kept back bee made,
And passage be shut up, return with world vprent by might.
And whatsoever is the possessed byneath in darkest night,
Send dut with thee, as when the tops of haughty hills undone
A headlong passage making through for hasty floude to roon
Thou sometime stood, whā with great might of thine a sunder broke
The Tempye woods wide open lay: and beaten with thy stroke
The mount, now here, now there fell down: and rampire tent of stay,
The raging brooke of Thessaly did roon a new found way.
Thy parents so, thy sons, thy land repairing home to see,
Break out, and lowest bond of things out bringing thence with thee,
And what soever greedy age in all these long years race
Hath hid, show forth, &amp; ghosts that have forgot their former case,
And people up before thee drive that fearful are of light.
Unworthy spoils for thee they are, if thou but bring to sight
What bidden is. great things, but far to much I speak for me,
Vnwotting of mine own estate. when shall I hap to see,
The day when thee, and thy right hand, I may embrace again,
And slow returns, nor yet of me once mindful, may complain?
To thee for this O guide of Gods, untamed Bulls shall bring
Their hundred necks: to thee O Queen of fruits on earth that spring
I'll give thee secret sacrifice: to thee with much faith lo
Long fire brands at Eleusis town full silent will I throe.
Then to my brethren shall I think to bee restored de again
Their souls, and eke himself alive and guiding of his reyne
My father for to flourish yet. If any greater might
Dor keep thee shet, we follow thee: with thy return to fight
Defend vs all, or else to hell draw down vs all to thee.
Thou shalt vs draw, no God shall raise, vs up that broken bee.
O Faithful fellow of our blood, with chaste true faithfulness
The Bridebed keeping, and the son of haughty Hercules,
Conceive in mind some better things, and take good heart to thee:
He will come home, as after all his labours wonted hee,
Of more renown
What wretches doe most chiefly wish of all.
They soon believe.
Nay what they fear to much lest it may fall,
They think it never may bee shoon'de, nor rid by remedy.
Belief is ready still to dread the woorser misery.
Deep drown▪de, &amp; whelmed, &amp; farthermore with all ye world full lowe
Oppressed down, what way hath he to light again to go?
What way I pray you had he then whē through the burning cost,
And tumbling after manner of the troubled Sea up toste
He went by sands: and fret that twice with ebb away doth slip,
And twice vpflowe: and when alone with his forsaken ship,
Fast caught he stuck in shallow fords of shelfye Syrtes sand,
And (now his ship on ground) did pass throught seas a foot to land?
Injurious fortune virtue most of men most stout and strong
Do•h seldom spa•e: no man alive himself in safety long,
To perils great and dangers may so often times out cast,
Whom chance doth often overslip, the same it finds at last.
But cruel lo, and grievous threats even bearing in his face,
And such as he of stomach is, doth come even such of pace,
Proud Lycus who the sceptors shakes in hand of other king,
The plentuous places of the town of Thebes governing,
And every thing about the which with fertile soil doth go
Sloop Phocis, and what ever doth Ismenus ouerfloe,
What ever thing Cithaeron sees with haughty top and hye,
And slender Isthmos Isle, the which between two seas doth lye.
NOt I of native country hours possess the ancient right
Unworthy heir, nor yet to me are noble men of might
The grandfathers, nor stock renownd with titles hie of name,
But noble virtue: who so boafles of kindred whence he come,
Of others virtue makes his vaunt, but got with fearful hand
My sceptors are obtained: in sword doth all my safety stand.
What thee thou worst against the will of cytesyns to get,
The bright drawn sword must it defend▪ in foreign country set
No stable kingdom is. But one my pomp and princely might
May ratify once joined to me with regal forche full bright,
And chambers Megara: of stock of such nobility
Let upstart state of mine take shape. I do not think that she
Refuse it will, or in the bed with me despise to lye.
But if with proud unbridled mind she stubburn do deny,
Then quite I purpose to destroy the house of Hercules
The hate of men will then my pride, and peoples speech oppress.
Chief knack of kingdom is to bear thy subjects hates eche one.
Lets prove her then, chance given hath to vs a place alone.
For she her head in fold of veil full sad and woefully
Enwrapt the Gods that are her guides for succour stands fast by,
And at the side of her doth lean Alcides father true.
What thing doth this destroyer of our stock again anewo
Prepare? what proves he?
O Queen that name renowned hye
And title takste of regal stock full gentle and easily
A little while receive and hear my words with patient ear,
If always men eternal hates should one to the other bear,
And rage be gone out of the hart should never fall away,
But th'happy still should armour hold, th'vnhappy still obey,
Then shall the battles nothing leave: with wide fields then the land
Shall lie vntild, with vnderlayd to houses fiery brand
Then ashes deep shall overwhelm the buried people all.
Expedient is to conqueror to wish that peace befall:
To conquered needful partner of the kingdom come to me:
Let's toyne our minds, take here this pledge of saith and truth to thee.
My right hand touch. Why whishtest thou with cruel face and mood?
Should I abide, that I the hand sprinkt with my fathers blood,
Should •ouch, and double death imbrewd of both my brethren? nay
First shall sun rise extinguish quit, and West shall bring the day:
First faithful peace between the snows and fierce there shall be tried,
And Scilla shall to Ausonius first join his Sicilian side:
And first, the fleeting flood that with swift turns of course doth flow
Euripus with Euboik wave shall stand full still and slow.
My father, th'empire, bretherne, house, thou. hast me clear bereft,
My country to: what may be more? one thing to me is left,
Then brother, father, kingdom, house, that dearer is to me
The hate of thee, the which to me with people for to be
In commune woe I am: how great is mine alonly part?
Rule on full proud, bear up full hye thy sprites and haughty hart:
Yet God the proud behind their backs doth follow them to wreak.
I know the Thebane kingdoms: what should I the mothers speak,
Both suffering, and aduentring gilts? what double mischief done?
And mixed name of spouse at once, of father and of son?
What brether as double tents? or what as many roages also?
The mother proud of Tantals brood congeald in mourning I•e,
And sorry stone yet flows with tears in Phrygian Sipylye.
Himself like wise erected up his sealed head awry.
Even Cadmus measuring throughout th'Illyrian lands in flight,
Behind him left of body drawn long slimy marks in sight.
All these examples wait for thee: rule thou as likes thy will,
While thee our kingdoms wonted fates do call and oft hap ill.
God to, these fierce and furious words thou woman mad refrain,
And imperyes of princes learn of Hercles to sustain.
Though I the scepters gotten by the force of war do bear,
In conquering hand &amp; all do rule without the law his fear.
Which arms subdue, a few words yet to thee now speak I shall
For this my cause thy father did in bloody battle fall:
Thy brethren fell, the weapons keep no measurable stay.
For neither easily tempered be, nor yet repressed may
The drawn swords ire, the battles doth the blood delete out shed.
But he yet for his kingdom fought, wee altogether led
With wicked lust: yet th'end of war is now complained, lo,
And not the cause, but now let all remembrance thereof go:
When conqueror hath weapons left, the conquerds part should be
To leave his hates. Not I that thou with lowly bended knee
Me reigning worship should, require: even this doth me delight.
That thou thy miseries dost bear with mind so stout upright.
Thou for a king a spouse art meet, let's join our beds anon.
A trembling cold doth run throughout my bloodless limbs each one.
What heinous thing comes to mine ears? I feared not then at all,
When (all peace broke) the noise of war did by the city wall
Resound about, I bare all that vnfearefully to see,
I fear the wedding chambers: now I captive seem to me.
Let heavy chains my body grieve, and eke with hunger long
Let lingering death be slowly brought, yet shall no force full strong
My truth subdue: for even thine own Alcides will I dye.
Doth then thy husband droun'de in hell give thee this stomach hic?
The hells allow he touched, that he the height again might get.
The heavy paise oppresses him of all the earth full great.
Hee with no burdein shall be pressed, that heaven it self sustained.
Thou shalt be forced.
He wots not how to die, that is cōstrain'd.
Speak, what may rather I prepare then wedding new for thee.
More royal gift?
Thine own death else, or else the death of me.
Thou shalt mad woman die.
I shall then to my husband go.
More then my Sceptors is to thee a servant loved so?
How many hath this servant slain of kings with handy stroke?
Why doth he yet a king then serve, and still sustain his yoke?
Take once away the hard behests, what's virtue then at last?
Dost thou it virtue count, to bee to beasts, and monsters cast?
It is virtues part, to tame the things, that all men quake to know.
Him great things braggīg, darkness deep of tartare press full low.
There never may from ground to stars an easy passage be.
Of whom begot, the houses then of Gods through pierces he?
O wretched wife of Hercles great, thy words a while now spare.
My part it is, the father of Alcides to declare.
And his true stock, yet after all of man so stout as this
So famous deebes, and after all appeased with hand of his
What ever Titan risen up, doth see, or else at fall,
And after all these monsters tam'de, and Phlegrey sprinkled all
With wicked blood, and after Gods defended all on hye,
Is not his father yet well known? or Jove doe we beelye?
Believe it yet by Iunoes hate.
Why dost thou sclaunder Jove?
No mortal kindred ever may be mixed with heaven aboue.
To many of the Gods in skies is this a common trade.
But were they ever servants yet, before they Gods were made?
Of Delos Isle the shepherd lo the flocks of Pherey fed.
But through all coasts he wandered not abroad as banished.
Whō straying mother first brought forth wādring loud to sight.
Yet Phoebus did no monsters fear, or beasts of cruel might.
First Dragon with his blood imbrewed the shalts of Phoebus lo.
Howe grievous ills even yet full young he bare, doe you not know?
From mothers womb ye babe out thrown with lightning flame frō hie,
Even next his lightning Father stood forthwith aboue in sky.
What? he him self that guides the stars, &amp; shakes the clouds at will,
Did not that Infant lurk in Den of hollow caued hill?
The byrthes so great full troublous price to have lo always ought:
And ever to be borne a God, with cost full great is bought.
Whom thou a miser see, thou mai'st know him a man to bee.
A miser him deny ye may, whom stout of heart ye see.
Call we him stout, from shoulders hye of whom the Lyon thrown
A gift for maiden made, and eke his Club from hand fell down,
And painted side with purple weed did shyne that he did wear?
Or may we him call stout of heart, whose staring lockes of hear
With ointmēt slowde? who hands renownde &amp; known by praises hye
To sound unmeet for any man of timber did apply,
With barbarous mitre cloasting in his forehead round about?
The tender Bacchus did not blush abroad to have laid out
His braided hears, nor yet with hand full soft the Thyrsus light
For to have shook, what time that he with pace vnstout in sight
His long trained batbarous garment drew with gold full fair to see.
Still virtue after many works is wont releast to bee.
Of this the house of Euritus destroyed doth witness bear,
And virgins flocks that brutishly by him oppressed wear.
No Iuno did command him this, nor none Eurystheus lo.
But these in deed his own works are.
Yet all ye doe not know,
His work it is, with weapons of his own hand vanquished
Both Eryx, and to Eryx joined Antaeus Lybian ded:
And aulters which with slaughter of the strangers flowing fast,
Busyris well deserved blood likewise have drunk at last.
His deed it is, that he that met the wound, and sword is slain
Constrained to suffer death before those other Geryons twain.
Nor en all only Geryon doth with one hand conquered lye.
Thou shalt among these be which yet with none adultery
Have wedlock hurt.
What is to Jove, to king is leefull thing:
To Jove thou gau'ste a wife, thou shalt now give ove to a king.
And even of thee she shall it learn to bee a thing not new,
Her husband even approving it the better man t'ensewe.
But if she stubborn to be matched with me deny it still,
Then even by force a noble child of her beget I will.
O Croons ghosts and all ye Gods of th house of Labdacus,
And wedding forches blazing bright, of wicked Oedipus.
To this my wedding give ye now our wonted destinies.
Now, now ye bloody daughters all of Aegypts king likewise,
Bee here whose hands defiled are with so much blood out spilt:
One daughter lacks of Da•aus, I will fill up the gilt.
Because that stubburnely thou dost refuse my wedding so,
And fear a king, thoushatt know what the Scepters now may do.
Embrace thine aulters, yet no God shall ever take away
Thee from my hands: no not although with world vpturned, may
Alcides victor yet again to Gods aboue return.
The woods on heaps together cast, let all their temples burn
Even thrown upon their heads: his wife, and all his flock at last
With vnderlayed fire, let one wood pile consume and waste.
This only bowne I father of Alcides ask of thee,
Which well may me beseem to crave, that I fryst slain may hes.
Who all appoyncts with present death to have their punishment,
He tyrunt wats not how to be: more sundry grieves invent.
Restrain the wretched man from death, command that th'happy dye.
I, while with beams prepared to burn the pile increases hye,
Will him with vowing sacrifice that rules the seas entreat.
Oh chiefest power of Gods, and oh of heavenly things so great
The guide, and parent eke, with whose thrown thunderbolts do shake
All things humane throughout the world of king so cruel slake
The wicked hand: but why do I to Gods in vain thus cry?
Where ever thou be, hear me soon. why start so suddenly
The temples thus with mooing shook? Why roars out the graūd?
The noise of Hell from bottom deep byueathe hath made a sound:
Wee herd are, lo it is the sound of Hercules his pace.
O Fortune hating men of stoutest breast,
How ill rewards dost thou to good divide?
Eurystheus raynes at home in easy rest,
Alcmendes son in every battle tried,
To Monsters turns his hand that Skies did stay:
And cruel Necks cuts of, of hydous Snake,
And Apples brings from Sisters mokt away,
When once to sleep his watchefull Eyes beetake,
Did Dragon set rich fruit to oversee.
Hee past the Scythian bowers that straye abroad,
And those that in their countries strange ers bee
And hardened top of frozen fret hee trod,
And sylent Sea with banks full dumme about.
The Waters hard want there their floods to sloe.
And there before the Shyps full Sails spread out
Is worn a path for Sarmates wild to go.
The Sea doth stand to move in course again.
Now apt to bear the Ship, now horsemen bold
The Queen that there doth over Widows rain,
That gyrds her Womb with gyrth of glittering gold,
Her noble spoil from body drawn hath she
And shield, and bands of breast as white as snow,
Acknowledging the Conqueror with Knee.
With what hope drawn to headlong Hell allow,
So bold to pass the vnreturned ways
Saw thou Proserpines rain of Sicily?
With Southern wind, or Western there no seas
Arise with wave and swelling Surges hye.
Not there of Tyndars stock the double brood
Two stars the fearful Shyps doe aid and guide.
With gulf full black doth stand the slothful flood
And when pale death with greedy teeth so wide.
Vnnumbred Nations hath sent down to sprightes
With one Boateman all over ferried bee.
God grauut thou moist of Hell subdue the rights
And vnreuoked webs of Sisters three.
There king of many people raygneth hee.
Who when thou did with Nestors Pylos fight,
Pestiferous hands applied to match with thee
And weapon bare with triple mace of might:
And pricked with little wound he fled away,
And lord of death himself did fear to dye.
Break Fate by force: and let the sight of day
To sorry sprightes of Hell apparent lye
And porch vnpast show way to Gods aboue.
The cruel lords of sprightes with pleasant song
And humble bowne full well could Orpheus move,
While he Eurydicen them craves among.
The Art that drew Woods, Birds, and stones at will:
Which made delay to Floods of flitting flight
At sound whereof the savage Beasts stood still
With tunes vnwont doth Ghosts of hell delight
And clearer doth resound in darker place:
And weep with tears did Gods of cruel breast:
And they which faults with to severe a face
Doe seek, and former gilt of Ghosts out wrest:
The Thracian Daughters wails Eurydicen.
For her the Judges weeping sit also.
Wee conquered are, chy efe king of death said then
To Gods (but under this condition) go,
Behind thy husbands back keep thou thy way,
Look thou not back thy Wife before to see.
Than thee to sight of Gods hath brought the day
And gate of Spartan Taenare present bee.
Love hates delay, nor could abide so long.
His gift, hee lost, while hee desires the sight.
The place that could be thus subdew'de with song
That place may soon bee overcome by might.
O Comfortable guide of light, and honour of the sky,
That cōpasting both Hemispheres with flaming chariot hye
Thy radiāt head to joyful lāds about y• world dost bring,
Thou Phoebus pardon give to me, if any unlawful thing
Thine eyes have seen: (cōmaūded) I have here to light out set
The secretes of the world: and thou of heaven to guitar great,
And parent eke, in flash out thrown of lightning hide thy fight.
And thou that gouernest the seas with second sceptors sight.
To bottom sink of deepest waives: who so from hye doth see,
And dreading yet with countnaunce new the earth desil'de to bee,
Let him from hence turn back his sight, and face to heaven uphold,
These monstrous sights to shun: let twain this mischief great behold,
Hee who it brought, and she that bad. for painful toils to me,
And labours long, not all the earth thought wide enough may bee
For Iunoes hate: things vncome to all men I did see,
Unknown to soon, and spaces wide that dark and shadefull bee
Which woorser poale gives direr Jove to reign and rule therein.
And yet if third place pleased more for me to enter in,
I there could reign. the Chaos of eternal night of hell,
And worse then night, the doleful Gods I have that there doe dwell,
And Fates subdued, the death contemned I am returned to light.
What yet remains? I saw and show'de the spryghts of hell to sight:
Appoint, if ought be more, dost thou my hands so long permit
Iuno to cease? what thing bid thou to be subdued yet?
But why doe cruel soldiers hold the holy temples wide?
And dread of armour sacred porch beset on every side?
DOo either else my great desires delude and mock mine eyes?
Or hath the tamer of the world and Greeks renown likewise,
Forsook the silent hows, beset with cloud full sad to see?
Is this my son? my members lo for joy amassed bee.
Oh son, the sure and safeguard late of Thebes in misery,
See I thy body true indeed? or else deceived am I
Mocked with thy sprite? art thou y• same? these browns of arms I know
And shoulders, and thy noble hands from body hie that grow.
Whens (father) hippos this ugliness, and why in mourning clad
Is thus my wife? how hippos it that with filth so foul bestad
My children are? what misery doth thus my house appresse?
The father in law is slain: the kingdom Licus doth possess.
Thy sons, thy parent and thy wife to death pursues hee.
Ungrateful laud, doth no man come that will an ayder bee.
Of Hercles house? and this beheld so great and heinous wrong
Hath th'ayded world? but why were, I the day in plaint so long?
Let then my dye and this rename let strength obtain in haste,
And of Alcider enmies all let Lycus be the last.
I driven am to go to shed the blood of enemy out.
Watch Theseu that no sudden strength beset vs here about:
Me wa•res require, embracing yet defer O father dear,
And wife defer them: Lycus shall to hell this message bear
That I am now returned. The, Shake of O Queen ont of thine eyes
This weeping face, and thou since that thy son is safe likewise
Thy drupping tears refrain: if yet I Hercles ever knew
Then Lycus shall for Croon paye the pains to him full due.
It is light, he shall, he doth and that's to light he hath it done.
Now God that can them bring to pass, speed well our wishes soon,
And come to help our weary woes. O noble hearted mate
Of my stout son, of his renown declare vs all the rate:
How long away doth lead to place where sorry sprites doth dwell,
And how the hard and heavy bonds the dog hath borne of hell.
The deeds thou dost constrain to tell, that even to mind secure
Are dreadful yet and horrible, scant yet the trust is sure
Of vital ayre, sore blunted is the sharpness of my sight,
And dulled eyes do scant sustain to see th'vnwoonted light.
Yet Theseus thoroughly overcome what ever fear remains
In bosom deep, nor do thou not of best fruit of thy pains
Beguiled thy self. What thing hath once to suffer been a care,
To have remembered it is sweet. those dreadful haps declare.
All right of world, and thee likewise I pray y• bear the rayns
In kingdom wide, and thee, for whom all round about in vain
Thy mother throughout Aetna sought, that secret things allow
And hid in ground, it freely may bee lawful for to show.
The Spartan land a noble top of hill advances hye,
Where Taenarus with woods full thick the Sea doth ouerly.
The house of hateful Ditis here his mouth doth open set,
And rock of hill aboue doth gape, and with a den full great
A huge and gaping cleft of ground with Jaws full wide doth lye,
And way full broad to people all doth spread to pass thereby.
Not straight with darkness doth begin the way that blinds the sight.
A little lingering brightness lo behind of late left light,
And doubtful glittering yet of son afllicted falls allow,
And mocks the sight: such light is wont undoubtedly to show
The dawn of day, or twilight else at edge of evening tide.
From hence to hollow places void are loaste the spaces wide,
To which needs peryshe must all kind of men that once are thrown.
Nor it a labour is go, the way it self leads down.
As oft the ships against their wills doth toss the swelling surge,
So downward doth that headlong way, and greedy Chao• urge:
And back again to draw thy pace thee never doe permit
The spritz who what they catch hold fast. allow within doth flit
In channel wide with silent ford the quiet lake of lethe.
And cares doth rid: and that there may to scope again from death
No mean be made, with many turns and windings every way
Folds in his floude. in such sort as with wave unsure doth play
Maeander wandering up and down, and yields himself unto,
And doubtful stands, if he toward bank, or back to spring may go.
The foul and filthy poole to see of slow Cocytus lies.
On th'one the Grype, on the other side the mournful Howlet cries,
And sad luck of th'unhappy Strix likewi•• •lands there.
Full vglily in shady bows black Locks of loathsome hear,
Where Taxus tree doth over lean, which holds slothful sleep,
And hunger sad with famished Jaw that lies his place to keep,
And shame to late doth hide his face that knows what crimes it hath,
Both fear, and quaking, funeral, and fretting raging wrath,
And mourning dire doth follow on, and trembling pale disease,
And boisterous battles set with sword: and hid beyond all thease
Doth slothful age his lingering pace help forth with staff in hand.
Of corn and wine in hell allow is any fertile land?
No joyful Meads do there bring forth with face so greene &amp; fair,
Nor yet with gentile Zephyrus wags ripened corn in the air.
Nor any tree hath there such bows as doe bring apples out.
The barren compass of deep soil full filthy lies about,
And withered with eternal drought the loathsome land doth waste
And bond full sad of things, and of the world the places last:
The ayre vnmoued stands, and night sits there full dark to see
In slothful world, all things by dread full horrible there bee.
And even far worse then death it self, is place where death doth bide.
What? he that doth those places dark with regal sceptor guide,
In what seat set, doth he dispose and rule those peoples light?
A place there is in turn obscure of Tartarus from sight?
Which mist full thick with fearful shade doth hold and overgo.
From hence a double parted stream from one wellspring doth floe:
The tone, much like a standing poole (by this the gods doe swear)
The which the sacred Stygian lake with silent floude doth bear:
The t'other fierce with tumult great is drawn his course to go,
And Acheron with raging flood the stones drives to and fro
Vnsaylable. with double ford is round about beset
Against it Ditis palace dire, and manston house full great
In shadefull wood is covered: from wide den here the posts
And thresholds of the tyrant hang, this is the walk of ghosts:
This of his kingdom is the gate: a field about it goes,
Where sitting with a countnaunce proud abroad he doth dispose
New souls, a cruel majesty is in the God to know:
A frowning forehead, which yet of his brethren bears the show,
And so great stock: there is in him of Jove the very face,
But when he lightens: and great part of cruel kingdoms place,
Is he himself the lord thereof: the sight of whom doth fear,
What ever thing is feared▪
Is fame in this poynet true, ye there
Such rigours are, and guilty •hosts of men that there remain
Forgetful of their former fault, have their deserved payne?
Who is the rector there of right, and judge of equity?
Not only one extorter out of faults in seat set hye
The judgements late to trembling souls doth there by lot award:
In one appointed judgment place is Gnossian Minos harde,
And in an other Radamanthe: this crime doth Eec hear.
What eche man once hath done, he feels: and guilt to th'author the are
Returns, and th'hurtfull with their own example punished bee.
The bloody cruel captains I in prison she did see,
And back of tyrant impotent even with his peoples hand
All torn and cut. what man of might with favour leads his land,
And of his own life lord reserues his hurtles hands to good,
And gently doth his empire guide without the thirst of blood,
And spares his soul, he having long led forth the lingering days
Of happy age, at length to heaven doth either find the ways,
Or joyful happy places ells of fair Elysius wood.
Thou then that here must be a judge abstain from man his blood,
Who so thou be that reign king: our gilts are there acquit
In greater wise.
Doth any place preseript of limit shit
The guilty Ghosts, and as the fame reports, doth cruel payne
The wicked men make tame that in'eternall bonds remain?
Ixion rolled on whirling wheel is tossed and turned hye:
Upon the neck of Sisyphus the mighty stone doth lye.
Amid the lake with thirsty Jaws old Tantalus therein
Pursues the waives, the water stream doth wet and wash his chin,
And when to him now oft deceived it doth yet promise make,
Straight flits the flood: the fruit at mouth his famine doth forsake.
Eternal food to fleeing foul doth Tytius hart give still:
And Danaus daughters doe in vain their water vessels fill.
The wicked Cadmus daughters all go raging every way:
And there doth greedy ravening bird the Phiney tables fray.
Now of my son declare to me the noble worthy fight.
Brings he his willing uncles gift, or Plutocs spoils to sight?
A dire and dreadful stone there is the slothful fords fast bye,
Where sluggish freat with wave astonished full dull and slow doth lye:
This lake a dreadful fellow keeps both of attire and sight,
And quaking Ghosts doth over bear and aged ugly wight:
His Beard unkempt, his bosom foul deformed in filthy wise
A knot binds in, full loathsome stand in head his hollow eyes:
He Feary man doth steer about his Boat with his long Ore.
He driving now his lightened Ship of burden toward the Shore,
Repairs to waives: and then his way 〈◊〉 doth require,
The flock of Ghosts all giving place: aloud cries Charon dire,
What way attemptest thou so bold? thy hastening pace here stay.
But Nevertheless Alcmenaes son abiding no delay,
Even with his own poale bet he doth full tame the shipman make,
And climes the ship: the bark that could full many peoples take,
Did yield to one: he sat, the boat more heavy like to break
Whi•h shivering joints on either side the lethey flood doth leake.
Then tremble all the monsters huge, the Centaurs fierce of might,
And Lapithes, kindled with much wine to wars and bloody fight.
The lowest Channels seeking out of Stygian poole a down,
His Lerney labour sore affright his fertile heads doth drown.
Of greedy Ditis after this doth then the house appear.
The fierce and cruel Stygian dog doth fray the spirits there,
The which with great and roaring sound his heads vpshaking three,
The kingdom keeps his ugly head with filth full foul to see
The serpents like: his hairs be foul with vipers set among,
And at his crooked wrested tail doth hysse a Dragon lunge:
Like ire to shape, when him he wit his pace that way to take,
His bristle hairs he lifts up with fierce up bended snake:
And sound sent out he soon perceives in his applied ear,
Who even the spritz is wont to sent as soon as stood more near
The son of love, the doubtful dog strait couched down in den,
And eche of them did fear. behold with doleful barking then
The places dumme he makes a dred, the threatening serpent stout
Through all the fields about doth hysse: the bawling noise sent out
Of dreadful voice from triple mouth, even spritz that happy bee
Doth make afraid. from left side then strait way vndoeth hee
The cruel Jaws, and Lyons head once slain in Cleon field
Against him sets, and cover doth himself with mighty shield.
And bearing in his conquering hand a sturdy club of Ok,
Now here, now there he rolls him about with often stroke:
His stripes he doubles: he subdew'de his threats assuaged all,
And all his heads the weary dog at once full lowe let fall,
And quite out ot the denn he fled, full greatly feared (set
In regal throne) both king and queen, and bad him to bee fet.
And me likewise they gave for gift to Hercles craving m•e.
The monsters heavy necks with hand then stroking down all three,
In linked chain he binds fast forgetting then his strength
The dog the watchefull keeper of the kingdom dark at length
Layth down his ears •ull •ore affray'de: and suffering to be led,
And eke acknowledging his lord, following with lowly head,
With tail that snakes thereon doth bear he both his sides doth smight.
But after that to Taenare mouth we came, and clearness bright
Had struck his eyes of light vnoknwne, good stomach yet again
He takes although once overcome, and now the happy chain
He raging shakes: he had almost his leader plucked from place,
And headlong backward drawn to hell, and moved from his pace.
And even to my hands Hercles then his eyes did backward cast,
Wee both with double joined strength the dog out drawn at last
For anger wood, and battles yet attempting all in vain,
Brought up to world, as soon as he the clear ayre saw again,
And spaces pure of bright fair poale had once beheld with eye,
The night arose: his sight to ground he turned by and by,
Cast down his eyes, and hateful day forthwith he put to flight,
And backward turned away his look, and straight with all his might
To the earth he falls: and underneath the shade of Hercles then
He hyd his head. therewith there came a great resort of men
With clamour glad, that did the bay about their forheads bring:
And of the noble Hercules deserved praises sing.
EVrystheus borne with swiftned birth in hast,
Did bid to bottom of the World to go:
This only lacked of labours all at last,
To spoil the King of third estate also.
The dongeons dark to enter ventured hee,
Where as the way to spritz far of doth bring
Full sad, and wood so black and feared to bee:
But full with flock full great him following.
As great a press as flock in cities streets,
To see the Plays of Theatre new wrought:
As great as at Eléus thundrer meetcs,
When Summer fifth the sacred game hath brought:
As great as when comes hour of longer night,
And willing quiet sleeps to bee extent,
Holds equal Libra Phoebus Char•••• light,
A sort the secrete Ceres doe frequent,
And from their houses left doe hast to comme,
The Attic priests the night to celebrate:
Such heap is chaste beneath by fields so dumme.
With age full slow some taking forth their gate
Full sad, and filled with life so long now led:
Some yet doe run the race of better years,
The virgins yet vnioynde to Spouses bed,
And yonglings eke on whom grow yet no hears
And Infant lately taught his mothers name.
To these alone, (that they the less might fear)
Is granted night to ease with foreborne flame.
The rest full sad by dark doe wander theare:
As is our mind, when once away is fled
The light, when eche man sorry feels to bee
Deep over whelmed with all the earth his head.
Thick Chaos stands, and darkness foul to see,
And colour ill of night, and slothful state
Of silent World, and divers Clouds about.
Let hoary age vs thither bring full late.
No man comes late to that, whence never out,
When once hee is come, turn again he may.
To hast the hard and heavy Fate what veils?
This wandering heap in wide lands far away,
Shall go to Ghosts: and all shall give their sails
To slow Cocytus all is to thee inclined,
Both what the fall, and rise of son doth see:
Spare vs that comme, to thee wee death are signed:
Though thou be slow, our selves yet haste doe wee.
First hour, that gave the life, it loosed again.
TO Thebes is come the joyful day,
Your Aulters touch ye humbylly,
The fat fair Sacrifices slay.
Maids mixed with men in company
Let them in solemn Flocks go roil:
And now with yoke laid down let c•as
The Iillers of the fertile Soil.
Made is with hand of Hercles peace
Between the morn and Hespers Glade,
And where Son holding middle seat,
Doth make the Bodies caste no Shade.
What ever ground is ouerweate
With compass lunge of Seas abought,
Alcydes labour taemde full well.
Hee over fords of Tartare brought
Returned appeased being Hell.
There is remaining now no fear,
Nought lies beyond the Hell to see.
O Priest thy staring Lockes of hear
Wrap in with loved Poplar tree.
WIth my reuēging right hād slain now Lycus lo the groūd
With grovelling face hath smite: thē who soever fellow foūd
Of Tyrant was, partaker of his pains did also lye.
Now to my father sacrifice and Gods victor will I,
And aulters that deserve it, with slain offerings reverence.
Thee, thee O mate of all my toils I pray and my defence
O warrefull Pallas, in whose left hand thy clear shield Aegis shakes
Fierce threats, whead that eche thing stone that look upon it makes.
Let tamer of Lycurgus now, and of red Sea be hear,
That point of spear with Ivy greene in hand doth covered bear:
And two Gods power, doth Phoebus, and his Sister to I pray
The sister meeter for her shaftes, but hee on th'harpe to play:
And what so•for brother ells of mine doth dwell in sky,
Not of my stepdame brother, bring ye hither by and by
Your plentuous flocks, what ever have all the Indians fruicts brought out,
And what sweet odours the Arabickes doe get in trees about,
To the aulters bring: let vapour fat and fume smoke up full hye,
Let round about the Poplar tree my hairs now beautifye
Let th'oliue bow thee hyde with branch accustomed in our land
Theseu: for forthwith reverence the thundrer, shall my hand,
O Gods the builders of the town, and which of Dragon fell,
The wilde woods vans, and noble waives likewise of Dirces well,
And Tyrian house inhabit eke of stranger wandering king.
Cast into fires ye frankincense.
Son first thy hands flowing
With bloody slaughter, and the death of enemy purify.
Would God the blood of hateful head even unto Gods on hye
I might out shed, for liquor lo more acceptable none
Might the aulters stain: nor sacrifice more ample any one
Nor yet more plentiful may bee to Jove aboue down cast,
Then king unjust.
Desire that now thy father end at last
Thy labours all: let quietness at length yet gieuen bee,
And rest to weary folk.
I will thee prayers make, for me
And Jove full meet in this due place let stand the haughty sky,
And land, and ayre, and let the stars drive forth eternally
Their course unstaid: let restful peace keep nations quietly,
Let labour of the hurtles land all iron now occupy,
And swords lye hyd: let tempest none full violent and dire
Disturb the sea: let from the skies no flash of lightning fire
Fall down while Jove full angry is: nor yet with winter snow
Increased flood the ground vpturnde, and field quyte overthrow,
Let poisons cease: and from hensforth let up from ground arise
No grievous herb with hurtful sap: nor fierce and fell likewise
Let tyrants reign but if to sight some other mischief bring
The ground yet shall, let it make hast: and any monstrous thing
It it prepare let it be mine, but what means this? mid day
The darkness have incloas'd about lo Phoebus goes his way
With face obscure without a cloud who drives the day to flight,
And turns to east? from whence doth now his dusky head the night
Unknown bring forth? whence fill the poale so many round about
Of daytime stars? lo here behold my labour first full stout
Not in the lowest part of heaven the Lyon shines bright,
And fervently doth rage with ire, and byttes prepares to fight.
Even now lo he some star will take, with mouth full wide to see
He threatening stands, and fires out blows and mane up rustleth he
Shaking with neck the harvest sad of shape, what ever thing,
And what soever winter cold in frozen time dothbring,
He with one rage will overpass, or spring time bull he will
Both seek and break the necks at once.
what is this sudden ylle?
Thy cruel countenance whether son dost thou cast here and there?
And see with troubled daseld sight false shape of heaven appear
The land is tam'de the swelling feas their surges did assuage,
The kingdoms lowe of hell likewise have felt and known my rage,
Yet heaven is free, a labour meet for Hercules to prove.
To spaces high I will be borne of haughty skies aboue
Let the ayre be skaeld, my father doth me promise stars to obtain.
What if he it denied? all the earth can Hercles not contain,
And geeues at length to gods, me calls of one accord behold
The whole assembly of the gods, and doth their gates unfold,
While one forbyddes, receyu'st thou me, and openest thou the sky,
Or else the gate of stubburne heaven draw after me do I?
Do I yet doubt? I even the bonds from Saturn will undo,
And even against the kingdom proud of wicked father lo
My grandsire loase. let Titans now prepare again their fight
With me their captain raging: stones with woods I will down smight
And hye hills tops with Centaurs full in right hand will I take.
With dauble mountain now I will a stayre to Gods up make.
Let Chyron under Ossa see his Pelion mountain great:
Olympus up to heaven aboue in third degree then set
Shall come it self, or ells be cast.
Put far away frour thee
The thoughts that ought not to be spoke: of mind unsound to see,
But yet full great, the furious rage assuage and lay away.
What means this? the Gyauntes doe pestiferous arms assay,
And Tityus from the sprights is fled, and bearing torn to see
And empty bosom, lo howe near to heaven it self stood hee?
Cythaeron falls, the mountain hie Pollen shakes for fear,
And torn are Tempe. he the tops of Pindus caught hath here,
And Octhen he, some dreadful thing threatening doth rage about
Eryn•is bringing flames: with stripes she sounds now sharken out,
And burned brands in funerals, lo yet more near and near
Throws in my face: fearce Tisyphone with head and ugly hear
With serpents set, now after dog fet out with Hercles hand,
That empty gate she hath shut up, with bolt of fyry brand,
But lo the stock of enmious king doth hidden yet remain,
The wicked Lycus seed: but to your hateful father slain
Even now this right hand shall you send let now his arrows light
My bow out shoot: it seems the shaftes to go with such a flight
Of Hercles.
Whether doth the rage and fury blind yet go?
His mighty Bow he drew with horns together driven lo,
And quiver loaste: great noyese makes with violence sent out
The shaft, and quite the weapon flew his middle neck throughout,
The wound yet left.
His other brood I overthrow will quite,
And corners all. What stay I yet? to me a greater fight
Remains then all Mycenes lo, that rocky stones should all
Of Cyclops being overturned with hand of mine, down fall.
Let shake both here, and there the house, with all stays overthrown,
Let break the posts: and quite let shrink the shaken pillar down:
Let all the Palace fall at once. I here yet hidden see
The son of wicked father.
Lo his flattering hands to thee
Applying to thy knees doth crave his life with piteous moan.
O wicked gilt, full sad, and eke abhorde to look upon,
His humble right hand caught he hath, and raging round about
Him rolled twice, or thryse hath cast. his head resounds out,
The sprinkled houses with the brain of him thrown out are wet.
But she poor wretch her little son in vosome hiding yet
Lo Megara, like one in rage doth from the corners flee.
Though runagate in bosom of the thundrer hid thou bee,
This right hand shall from every where thee seek, and bring to sight.
Where goosed thou wretch? what lurking dens, seekst thou to take, or flight?
No place of safeguard is if once bee Hercles stirred with ire:
But doe thou rather him embrace, and with thy meek desire
Assay t'asswage him.
Husband spare vs I beseech thee now,
And know thy Megara, this son thy countenance doth show,
And bodies pitch: behold thou howe his hands up lyfteth hee?
I hold my stepdame: follow on due penance paye to me,
And bounden Jove from filthy bond deliver free away:
But I before the mother will this little monster slay.
Thou mad man whither goosed thou? will thou thine own blood sheade?
Th'infant with fathers fyry face astonnted all for bread,
Died even before the wound: his fear hath took away his life.
And now likewise his heavy club is shaken toward his wife:
He broken hath the bones, her head from blocklyke body gone
Is quite, nor any where it stays, dare thou this look upon
To long lived age? If mouruing doe the grieve, thou hast then lo
The death prepared. Doe thou thy breast upon his weapons throe,
Or ells this club with slaughter stained of monsters slain that bee,
Now hither turn. thy parent false, unfit for name of thee
Rid hence away, least he should be to thy reuowne a let.
Which way the father toward thy death dost thou thy self cast yet?
Or whither goosed thou mad man? flee and lye thou cloasely hid,
And yet from hands of Hercules this only mischief rid.
It is well, the house of shameful king is now quite overthrown.
To thee O spouse of greatest Jove I have lo beaten down
This offred flock: I gladly have fulfilled my wishes all
Full meet for thee, and Argos now give other offerings shall.
Thou hast not son yet all performed, fill up the sacrifice.
Lo th'offring doth at th'aultars stand, it waits thy hand likewise
With neck full prone: I give my self, I roon, I follow lo.
Me sacrifice. what means this? his eyes roll to and fro,
And heaviness doth dull his sight. see I of Hercules
The trembling hands? down falls his face to sleep and quietness,
And weary neck with bowed head full fast doth downward shrink,
With bended knee: now all at once he down to ground doth sink,
As in the woods wild Ash cut down, or Bulwark for to make
A Haven in Seas. Liu'ste thou? or else to death doth thee betake
The self same rage, that hath sent all thy family to death?
It is but sleep, for to and fro doth go and come his breath.
Let time bee had of quietness, that thus by sleep and rest
Great force of his disease subdew'de, may ease his grieved breast.
Remove his weapons servants, least he mad get them again.
LEt the air complain, and eke the parent great
Of haughty Sky, and fertile land throughout,
And wandering wave of ever moving freat.
And thou before them all, which lands about
And train of Sea thy beams abroad dost throe
With glittering face, and make the night to flee,
O fervent Titan: both thy lettinges lo
And rising, hath Alcides seen with thee:
And known likewise hee hath thy houses twain.
From so great ills release ye now his breast,
O Gods release: to better turn again
His righter mind, and thou O tamer best
O sleep of toils, the quietness of mind,
Of all the life of man the better part,
O of thy mother Astray winged kind,
Of hard and pining death that brother art,
With truth mingling the false, of after state
The sure, but eke the worst foreteller yet:
O Father of all things, of Life the gate,
Of light the rest, of night and fellow fit,
That come to King, and servant equally,
And gently cherysshest who weary bee,
All mankind lo that dreadful is to dye,
Thou dost constrain long death to learn by thee.
Keep him fast bound with heavy sleep oppressed,
Let slumber deep his Limbs untamed bind,
Nor sooner leave his vnright raging breast
Then former mind his course again may find.
Lo laid on ground with full fieree hart yet still
His cruel sleeps he turns: and not yet is
The plague subdued of so great raging ill
And on great club the weary head of his
He wont to lay, doth secke the staff to find
With empty hands his arms out casting yet
With moving vain: nor yet all rage of mind
He hath laid down, but as with Sowthwind great
The wave once v•xt yet after kepeth still
His raging long, and though the wind now bee
Assuaged swells, shake of their mad and ill
Tossinges of mind, return let piety,
And virtue to the man, else let be so
His mind with moving mad toste every way:
Let error blind, where it begun hath, go,
For nought elsnow but only madness may
Thee gyltles make: in next estate it stands
To hurtles hands thy mischief not to know.
Now stricken let with Hercules his hands
Thy bosom sound: thine arms the world allow
Were wont to bear, let grievous strypes now smite
With conquering hand, and load complaying cries,
Let the air now hear, let of dark pole and night
The Queen them hear, and who fulfyercely lies
That bears his necks in mighty chains fast bound,
Low lurking Cerberus in deepest cave.
Let Chaos all with clamour sad resound,
And of broad sea wide open wafting wave.
And the air that felt thy weapons better yet,
but felt them though.
The breasts with so great yls as these beset,
With little stroke they mnst not beaten bee.
Let kingdoms three sound with one plaint and cry,
And thou necks honour and defence to see,
His arrow strong lunge hanged up on hye,
And quivers light the cruel stripes now l'myte
On his fierce back his shoulders strong and stout
Let oken club now strike and post of might
With knots full hard his bre••ee load all about.
Let even his weapons so great woes complain
Not you pore babes mates of your fathers praise,
With cruel wound revenging kings again:
Not you your limbs in Argos barriers plays,
Are taught to turn with weapons strong to smie
And strong of hand yet even now daring lo
The weapons of the Scithian quiver light
With steady hand to paise set out from bow.
And stags to pierce that save them selves by flight
And backs not yet full maend of cruel beast.
To Stigian havens goeye of shade and night
Go hurtles souls, whom mischief hath oppressed
Even in first porch of life but lately had,
And fathers fury go unhappy kind
O little children, by the way full sad
Of journey known.
Go see the angry kings.
WHat place is this? what region? or of the world what coast?
Where am I? under rise of sun or bond else uttermost.
Of the•cy bear or else doth here of sea of He•pery
The fardest ground appoint a bond for th'ocean sea to lye?
What ayre draw we? to weary wight what ground is underset?
Of truth we are returned from hell whence in my house down bet
See I these bloody bodies? hath not yet my mind of cast
The infernal shapes? but after yet returned from hell at last
Yet wander doth that belly heap before mine eyes to see?
I am ashamed to grant, I quake, I know not what to me,
I cannot tell what greeuou ill my mind before doth know.
Where is my parent? where is she with goodly childrens show
My noble harly stomached spouse why doth my left fit lack
The lyons spoil? which way is gone the cover of my back?
And self same bed full soft for sleep of Hercules also?
Where are my sha•tes? where is my bow? then from my living who
Could pluck away? who taken hath the spoils so great as these
And who was he that feared not even sleep of Hercules?
To see my conqueror me likes, yt likes me him to know
Rise victor up, what new son hath my father gotten now
Heaven being left? at birth of whom might ever stayed bee
A longer night then, was in mine? what mischief do I see?
My children lo do lye on ground with bloody slaughter slain?
My wife is kilt: what Lycus doth the kingdom yet obtain?
Who durst so heinous gilts as these at Thebes take in hand
When Hercles is returned? who so Ismenus waters land,
Who so Actions fields or who with double seas beset
The shaken Pelops kingdoms dost of Dardan dwell on yet
Help me: of cruel slaughter show who may the author bee.
Let rage my ire and all: my foe he is who so to me
Shows not my foe dost thou yet hyde Alcides victorly?
Come forth, even whether thou revenge the cruel chariots hye
Of Bloody Thracian king or if thou Gerions cattle quite
Or lords of Lybia, no delay there is with thee to fight.
Behold I naked stand, although even with my weapons lo
Thou me unarmed set upon. Wherefore flees Theseus so,
And eke my father from my ••light? their faces why hyde they?
Defer your weepings, and who did my wife and children sley
Thus all at once, me tell. Wherefore O father dost thou whush•?
But tell thou Theseu, but Theseu with thy accustomed trust.
Each of them sylent hydes away their bashefull count•naunces,
And privily they shed their tears in so great else as these,
Of what ought wee ashamed to be? doth ruler yet of might
Of Argos town, or hateful band of soldiers apt to fight
Of Lycus dying, vs oppress with such calamity?
By praise of all my noble acts I do desire of thee
O father, and of thy great name approved to me always
The prosperous power declare to me, who did my household flay?
Whose pray lay I?
Let thus thine ylles in silence overpass.
That I should unrevenged bee? Am, Revenge oft hurtful was.
Did ever man so grievous yls without revenge sustain?
Whose ever greater feared.
Then these O father yet again
May any greater thing, or else more grievous feared be?
How great apart is it thou wo•st of thy calamity?
Take mercy father, lo I lift to thee my humble hands.
What means this? my hand flees back, some privy go•t their stands
Whence comes this blood? or what doth mean flowing with death of child
The shaft imbrewd with slaughter once of Lerney monster kilde?
I see my weapons now, the hand I seek no more to wit.
Whose hand could bend this bow but mine? or what right at me but it▪
Could string the bow that unto me even scantly doth obey?
To you I turn: O father dear, is this my gilt I pray?
They held their peace: it is mine own.
Thy grievous woe is there•,
The crime thy stepdames: this mischance no fault of thine hath here.
From every part now father throw in wrath thy thunders might,
And of thy son forgetful now with cruel hand requighte
At least thy nephews, let the world that bears the stars sound out.
And let both th'one and the other poale, fling down thy flames about:
And let the banks of Caspyan sea my bounden body tear,
And greedy foul. Wherefore do of Prometheus lack hear
The rocks? with huge and haughty top let now prepared be,
Both feeding beasts and fowls, the side of Caucas turn to see,
And bare of woods, the yle that bridge of Scythe that thereby stands
Simplegas joins, both here and there let it my bounden hands
Stretch out abroad: and when with course returned accustomd'ly
They shall together drive, and shall the rocks toss up to sky
With banks together being thrust, and eke the middle seay,
Let me bet wean the mountains lye unquiet restless stay
But building up with wood thrown on a heaped ply on h•e
My body thus with wicked blood •esprinct, why but•e not I?
So, so yt mus be done: to hell I Hercles will restore.
Not yet his hart astonted lacks his raging 〈◊〉 sore,
But wrath •hath turned: and which of rage is prop•rty and ire
Against himself he rages now
The furies places dire
And dungeon deep of sprites in hell and place of tormentry
To guilty ghosts and banishment if any yet do lye
Beyond Erebus, yet unknown to Cerberus and me,
There hyde me ground to farthest bond of Tartarus to see.
To tarry there Isle go. O breast of mine to fierce and stout:
Who you my children thus dispersed through all my house about,
May worthily enough bewail? in all my evils yet
This countnaunce hard can never weep, a sword now hither set:
My shaftes reach hither, hither reach my mighty club also:
To thee my weapons break I wi•, to thee my son a two
Isle knap my bows, and eke my club, this block of heavy weighty
Shall to thy sprites be burned lo: this self same quiver freight
With Lerney shaftes to funeral of thine shall like wise go.
Let all my weapons penance pay and you unhappy to
Even with my weapons burn I will, O stepdames hands of mine.
Who ever yet to ignorance hath given name of crime?
Full oftentimes did error great the place of gilt obtain.
It is need to be a Hercles now, this heap of ill sustain.
Not so, hath shame yet given place with fury drowned quite:
But peoples all I rather should drive from my wicked sight.
My weapons, weapons
I quickly crave to me
Withdraw to be restoard again: if sound my mind now bee,
Restore to me my weapons: if yet last my rage of mind,
Then father flee: for I the way to death my self shalfynde.
By sacred holy •ynreds rights, by force and duty all
Of both my names; if either me thy brynger up thou call.
Or parent else, and (which of good men reverenced are)
By these hoar ••yres, I the beseech my desert age yet spare,
And weary years of house salne down the one alonly stay,
One only light to me, with yls afflicted every way
Reserve thy self: yet never hath there hap•ned once of thee
Fruit of thy toils: still either I the doubtful sea to see
Or monsters feared: who ever yet hath been a cruel king
In all the world to ghosts allow, and aulters both hurting,
Of me is feared: the father of thee absent still to have
The feuite, the touching, and the sight of thee at length I crave.
Wherefore I longer should sustain my life yet in this light,
And linger here no cause there is, all good lost have I quite,
My mind, my weapons, my rename, my wife, my sons, my hands,
And fury to no man may heal and lose from guilty hands
My mind defyeld: needs must with death he heald so heinous ill.
Wilt thou thy father IIay?
Least I should do it die I will.
Before thy fathers face?
I taught him mischief for to see.
Thy deeds marking rather that should of al remembered bee,
Of this one only crime I do a pardon of thee crave.
Sall he give pardon to himself, that to none else it gave?
I being bidden praise deserved, this deed mine own doth prove.
Help father now, if either else thy piety thee move,
Or else my heavy fate, or else the honour and renown.
Of stained strength, my weapons bring, let fortune be thrown down.
with my right hand.
The prayers which thy father makes to thee
Are strong enough, but yet likewise with weeping lo of me
By moved yet: arise thou up, and with thy wonted might
Subdue thine yls: now such a mind ••meet to bear upright
No evil hap, receives again lo now with manhood great
Thou must prevail. even Hercules forbid with ire to fret.
Alive, I hurt: but if I dye I take the gilt also.
I hast to rid the world of crime even now before me lo
A wicked monster cruel, and untamed fierce and flout
Doth wander: now with thy right hand begime to go about
A great affair, yea more then all thy twice six labours long.
Yet stayst thou wretch, that late against the children wast so strong,
And fearful mother now except restoard my weapons •ee,
Of Thracian Pindus either I will fear down every tree,
And Bacchus holly woods and tops of mount Cythaeron hye
Burn with myself, and al 'at once with all their houses I
And with the Lords thereof the roofs with gods of Thebes all
The Thebane temples even upon my body will let fall:
And will be hyd in to wne vpturnd: if to my shoulders might
The wall•s themselves all cast there•• shall fall a burden light,
And covered with seven gates I shall not be enough oppressed,
Then all the wayght whereon the world in middle part doth rest,
And parts the Gods upon my head Isle turn and overthrow
My weapons give.
This word is meet for Hercles father lo
With this same arrow slain behold thy son is tombled down,
This weapōs cruel Iuno lo from hands of thine hath thrown,
This same will I now use, lo see how leaps with fear affright
My wretched heart, and how it doth my careful body smight.
The shaft is set thereto thou shalt a mischief lo do now
Both willing it and wotting: tel, what thing command thou?
I nothing crave my dolor let in saf'ty stands now.
To keep my son alive to me that only do can thou
O Theseu, yet I have not escaped greatest fear that happen can
Thou can me not a miser make, thou may a happy man
So order every thing thou dost, as all thy cause in hand,
And fame thou may well know in straight and doubtful ca•e to stand
Thou liu'st, or die: this slender soul that light is hence to flee,
Wearied with age and no less bet with grievous else to see,
In mouth I hold so slowly to a father with such slay
Doth any man give life? I wilno longer bid delay,
The deadly sword throughout my breast to strike I will apply,
Here, here the gilt of Hercules even sound of mind shall lye.
Forbear O father now forbear, with draw thy hand again.
My manhood yield thy fathers will, and empery sustain.
To Hercles labours now like wise, let this one labour go,
Let me yet live, lift up from ground th'afflicted limbs with woe
O The•eu of my parent: for from Godly touch doth flee
My wicked hand.
I gladly do this hand embrace to me.
By this I being slayed will go, this moving to my breast
Isle slake my woes,
what place shall I seek ronnagate for rest?
Where shall I hyde my self? or in what land my self engrave?
What Tanais, or what Nilus else, or with his Persian wave
What Tygris violent of stream, or what fierce Rhenus flood,
Or Tagus troublesome that flows with Ibers treasures good
May my right hand now wash from gilt? although Maeotis cold
The waives of all the Northern sea on me shed out now would,
And al the water there of should now pas by my two hands,
Yet will the mischief deep remain▪ alas into whet lands
Wilt thou O wicked man resort? to East or western cost?
Each where well known, all place I have of banishment quite lost
From me the world doth flee a back, the stars that sidling rove
Do back ward drive their turned course, even Cerberus the some
With better countenance did behold O faithful friend I say,
O Theseu seek same lurking place, far hence out of the way
O thou a warder of men's gilts what ever Judge thou hee
That hurtful men dost love, repay a worthy thank to me:
And my deserts. I thee beseech, to ghosts of hell again
Send me that once escaped them: &amp; subject to thy rain
Restore me yet to those thy bands, that place shall me well hyde:
And yet even that place knows me well
Our land for thee doth bide
There Mars his hand ac•ui•e again and made from slaughter free
Restoard to armour, l•e that land (Alcides) 〈◊〉 for thee,
Which wontes to quite the gods, and prove them Innocent to be.

MEGAERA ONE OF THE
Hellish furies raising up Tantalus frō
Hell, incited him to set mortal hatred
between his two nephews Thiestes, &amp;
Atreus being brothers, and raining as Kings over
Mycenae by interchangeable turns, that is to wit
Thiestes to rain the one year, and Atreus the other.
Now Atreus enraged with fury against his brother
partly for defiling and deflouring his wife Aerope by
policy, and partly for taking from him a Ram with
a golden flees, practised with his seruāt how to be re∣uēged
of his brother. This Atreus therefore dissēblīg
a reconciliation &amp; inviting Thyestes to Mycenae se∣cretly
&amp; vnknowē to him, set before hī at a banquet
the flesh of his own childrē to eat. Afterword Atreus
hauīg also geuē to his said brother ye blood of his i will∣drē
in a goblet to drink, did lastly cōmaūd the heads
also to be brought in, at the doleful sight whereof Thy∣acts
greatly lamēting knowīg ye he had eatē his own
childrē, was wonderfully anguished. But Atreus for
that he had thus revenged himself, toke therein great
pleasure and delectation.
WHAT fury fell enforces me
to fl, th'unhappy seat,
That gay and gasp with greedy law,
the fleeing food to eat
What GOD to Tantalus the bowers
where breathing bodies dwell
Doth show agayue? is ought found worse, then burning thirst of hell
In lakes allow? or •et worse plague then hunger is there one,
In vain that ever gapes for food? shall Sisyphus his stone,
That slipper restless rolling payse upon my back be borne.
Or shall my limbs with swifter swinge of whirling whele be torn?
Or shall my pains be Tytius pangs th'encreasyng liver still,
Whose growing guts the gnawing gripes and tylthy fowls do fill?
That still by night repairs the paunch that was deuourd by day,
And wondrous womb vnwasted lies a new prepared pray
What ill am I appointed for? O cruel judge of sprites,
Who so thou be that torments new among the sowles delights
Still to dispose, ad what thou can to all my deadly woe,
That keeper even of dungeon dark would fore abhor to know.
Or hell it self it quake to se: for dread whereof likewise
I tremble wold, that plague seek out: lo now there doth arise
My brood that shall in mischief far the grandsyers gilt out go,
And gyltles make: that first shall dare vnuentred else to do.
What ever place remains yet of all this wicked land,
I will fill up: and never once while Pelops house doth stand
Shall Minos idle be.
Go forth thou detestable sprite
And vex the Gods of wicked house with rage of furies might.
Let them contend with all offence, by turns and one by one
Let swords be drawn: and mean of ire procure there may be none,
Nor shame: let fury blind inflame their minds and wrathful will,
Let yet the parents rage endure and longer lasting ill
Through childrens children spread: nor yet let any leisure be
The former few•s to hate, but still more mischief new to see,
Nor one in one: but ere the gilt with vengeance be acquit,
Increase the crime: from brethren proud let rule of kingdom flyt
To runagates: and swaruing state of all unstable things,
Let it by doubtful dome be toste, between thuncertaine kings.
Let mighty fall to misery, and miser clime to might,
Let chance turn thempyre vpsydowne both give and take the right.
The banished for gilt, when god restore their country shall.
Let them to mischief fall a fresh as hateful then to all,
As to themselves: let Ire think nought unlawful to be done,
Let brother dread the brothers wrath, and father fear the soon,
And eke the soon his parents power: let babes be murdered ill,
But worse begot? her spouse betrapped t• treasons train to kill,
Let hateful wife a wait, and let them bear through seas their war,
Let bloodshed lye the lands about and every field a far•:
And over conquering captains great, of countries far to see,
Let lust triumph: in wicked house let whoredom counted he
The light'st offene: let trust that in the breasts of brethren breeds,
And truth be gone: let not from sight of your so heinous deeds
The heavens be hyd, about the poale when shyne the stars on hye,
And flames with wonted beams of light doe deck the painted skyls.
Let darkest night bee made, and let the day the heavens forsake.
Disturb the gods of wicked house, hate, slaughter, murder make.
Fill up the house of Tantalus with mischiefs and debates,
Adorned be the pillars high with bay, and let the gates
Be garnished greene: and worthy there for thy return to sight.
Be kindled fire: let mischief done in Thracia once, their light
More many fold, wherefore doth yet the uncles hand delay?
Doth yet Thyestes not bewail his childrens fatal day?
Shall he not find them where with heat of fires that under glow
The cawderne boils? their limbs eche one a pieces let them go
Dispersed: let fathers fires, with blood of children filed bee:
Let dainties such be dressed: it is no mischief new to thee,
To banquet so: behold this day we have to thee releast,
And hunger starved womb of thine we send to such a feast.
With foulest food thy famine fill, let blood in wine be drowned,
And drunk in sight of thee: lo now such dishes have I found,
As thou would shone, stay whither dost thou headlong way now take
To pools and floods of hell again and styll declining lake,
And flight of tree full freight with fruit that from the lips doth flee,
To dungeon dark of hateful hell let leeful be for me
To go: or if to light be thought the pains that there I have,
Remove me from those lakes again: in midst of worser wave
Of Phlegethon, to stand in seas of fire beset to bee.
Who so beneath thy pointed pains by destinies decree
Dost still endure who so thou bee that vnderliest allow
The hollow den, or ruin who that fears and overthrow
Of falling hill, or cruel cries that sound in caves of hell
Of greedy r•iring Lyons throats or flock of furies fell
Who quakes to know or who the brands of fire in dyrest payne
Half burnt throws of hark to the voice of Tantalus: again
That hastes to hell, and whom the truth hath taught believe well me
Love well your pains, they are but small when shall my hap so bee
To flee the light?
Disturb thou first this house with dire discord
Debates and battles bring with thee, and of th'unhappy sword
Ill love to kings: the cruel breast str•ke through and hateful hart,
With tumult mad.
To suffer pains it seems well my part,
Not woes to work: I am sent forth like vapour dire to rise,
That breaks the ground or poison like the plague in wondrous wise
That slaughter makes, shall I to such detested crimes, apply
My nephews hearts? • parents great of Gods aboue the sky
And mine (though shamed I be to grant) although with greater pain
My tongue be vexed, yet this to speak I may no whit refrain
Nor hold my peace: I war•e you this least sacred hand with blood
Of slaughter dire, or frans•e fell of fran•ke fury wood
The aulters stain, I well resist: And guard such gilt away.
With strpes why dost thou me affryght? why threatst thou me to fray
Those crallyn g snakes? or famine fixed in empty womb, wherefore
Dost thou revive? now fries within with thirst enkmdled sore
My heart: and in the bowels burnt the boiling fl•me• do glow.
I follow thee: through all this house now rage and fury throw
Let them be driven so, and so let either thirst to see
Each others blood full well hath felt the coming in of thee
This house, and all with wicked touch of the degune to quake.
Enough it is, repair again to dens •nd loathsome lake,
Of flood well known, the sadder soil with heavy foot of thine
Aggrieved is, see thou from syringes how waters do decline
And inward sink? or how the banks lye void by drughty heate?
And hooter blast of fiery wind the fewer clouds doth beat?
The treese be spoiled, and naked stand to sight in withered woods,
The barren bows whose fruits are fled: the land between the floods
With surge of seas on either side that wonted to resound,
And •earer fords to separate sometime with lesser ground,
Now broader spread, it hears how aloof the waters rise.
Now Lerna turns against the stream Phoronides likewise
His poares be stopped, with customed course Alphéus drives not still,
His holly waives, the trembling tops of high Cithaeron hill,
They stand not sure: from height down they shake their silver snow,
And noble fields of Argos fear, their former drought to know.
Yea Titan doubts himself to role the world his wonted way,
And drive by force to former course the backward drawing day.
THis Argos town if any God be found,
And Pisey boures that famous yet remain,
Or kingdoms else to love of Corinthes ground,
The double havens, or sundried seas in twain
If any love of Taygetus his snows,
(By Winter which when they on hills be cast:
By Bores blasts that from Sarmatia blows,
With yearly breath the summer meltes as fast)
Where clear Alphéus runs with floude so cold,
By plays well known that there Olimpiks hight:
Let pleasant power of his from hens withhold
Such tunes of strife that here they may not light:
Not nephew worse then grandsier spring from vs,
Or direr deeds delight the younger age.
Let wicked stock of thirsty Tantalus
At length leave of, and weary be of rage.
Enough is done, and nought prevailed the just,
Or wrong: betrayed is Mirtilus and drowned,
That did betray his dame, and with like trust
Borne as he bare, himself hath made renound
With changed name the sea: and better known
To mariners thereof no fable is.
On wicked sword the little infant thrown
As ran the chide to take his fathers kiss.
Vnrype for thaulters offering fell down dead:
And with thy hand (O Tantalus) was rent,
With such a meat for Gods thy boards to spread.
Eternal famine for such food is sent,
And thirst: nor for those dainty meats vnmilde,
Might meeter payne appointed ever bee
Vith empty throat stands Tantalus begylde,
Aboue thy wicked head their leanes to thee,
Then Phineys fowls in flight a swifter pray.
With burned bows declined on every side,
And of his fruits all bent to bear the sway,
The tree deludes the gapes of hunger wide
Though hee full greedy feed thereon would fain.
So oft deceived neglects to touch them yet:
He turns his eyes, his jaws he doth refrain,
And famine fixed in closed gummes doth shet.
But then each branch his plenteous retches all,
Lets lower down, and apples from an hie
With lither leaves they flatter like to fall
And famine stir: in vain that bids to try
His hands: which when he hath roughed forth anon
To be beguiled, in higher ayre again
The harvest hanges and fickle fruit is gone,
Then thirst him grieves no less then hungers payne:
Wherewith when kindled is his boiling blood
Like fire, the wretch the waives to him doth call,
That meet his mouth: which straight the fleeing flood
VVithdrawes, and from the dried ford doth fall:
And him forsakes that follows them. He drinks
The dust so deep of gulf that from him shrinks.
O Dastard, court, O wretch, and (which
the greatest yet of all
To Tyrants check I count that may
in weighty things befall)
O unrevenged: after guyltes
so great and brothers guile.
And trewth trod down dost thou provoke
with vain complaints the while
Thy wrath? already now to rage all Argos town throughout
In armour ought of thine, and all the double seas about
Thy fleet to ride: now all the fields with fervent flames of thine,
And towns to flash it well beseemde: and every where to shyne,
The bright drawn sword: all vuder foot of horse let every side
Of Argos land resound: and let the wounds not serve to hyde
Our •os, nor yet in haughty top of hills and mountains hye,
The builded towers. The people all let them to battle cry
And clear for sake Mycenas town who so his hateful head
Hides and defends, with slaughter dire let blood of him be shed.
This princely Pelops palace proud, and bowers of high renown,
On me so on my brother to let them be beaten down,
Go to, do that which never shall no after age allow,
Nor none it wished: some wishes great there must be ventured now,
Both fierce and bloody: such as would my brother rather long
To have been his. Thou never dost enough revenge the wrong.
Exept thou pass. And fiercer fact what may be done so dire,
That his exceeds? doth ever he lay down his hateful ire?
Doth ever he the modest mean in time of wealth regard
Or quiet in aduerslty? I know his nature harde
Untractable, that broke may be, but never wilit b•nd.
For which are he prepare himself, or force to fight entend,
Set first on him, least while I rest he should on me arise.
He will destroy or be destroyed in midst the mischief lies,
Prepared to him that takes it first,
Doth fame of people nought
Adverse thee fear?
The greatest good of kingdom may be thought
That still the people are constraynd their princes deeds as well
To praise, as them to suffer all.
Whom fear doth so compel
To praise, the same his foes to bee, doth fear enforce agoyne:
But who indeed the glory seckes of favour true to obtain
He rather would with hates of each be praised, then tounges of all
The trewer praise full oft hath hoped to meaner men to fall:
The false but unto mighty man what nill they let them will.
Let first the king will honest things and none the fame dare nill.
Where leeful are to him that rules but honest things alone,
There raynes the king by others leave.
And where y• shame is none,
Nor care of right, faith, piety, nor holiness none stays,
That kingdom swarues.
Such holiness, such piety and faith.
Are private goods: let kings run one in that that likes their will.
The brothers hurt a mischief count though he be ne'er so ill.
It is but right to do to him, that wrong to brother were▪
What heinous hurt hath his offence let pass to pr•ue? or where
Refraynd the gilt, thy spouse he sty•e away for lechery,
And reign by stelth: the ancient note and sign of empery,
By fraud he got: my house by fraud to vex he never ceased:
In Pelops house there fostered is a noble worthy beast
The close kept Ram: the goodly guide of rich and fairest flocks.
By whom throughout on every side depend a down the lockes
Of glittering gold, with fleece of which the new kings wonted were
Of Tantals stock their sceptors gilt, and mace of might to beat.
Of this the owner raygneth he, with him of house so great
The fortune flees, this sacred Ram aloof in safety shet
In secret mead is wont to grase, which stone on every side
With rocky wall inclosethe round the fatal beast to hyde.
This beast (aduentryng mischief great) adjoining yet for pray
My spoused mate, the traitor false hath hence conveyed away
From hence the wrongs of mutual hate, and mischief all vpsyreng:
In exile wandered he throughout my kingdoms all along:
No part of mine remains safe to me, from trains of his.
My fear deflourde, and loyalty of empire broken is:
My house all vexed, my blood in doubt, and nought that trust is in,
But brother foe What stayst thou yet? at length lo now begin.
Take hart of Tantalus to thee, to Pelops cast thine eye:
To such examples well beseems, I should my hand apply.
Tell thou which way were best to bring that cruel head to death.
Through perst with sword let him be slain &amp; yield his hateful breath.
Thou speak of th'end: but I him would oppress with greater payne.
Let tyrants vex with torment more: should ever in my rain
Be gentle death?
Doth piety in thee prevail no whit?
Depart thou hence all piety, if in this house as yet
Thou ever were: and now let all the flock of furies dire,
And full of strife Erinnis come, and double brands of fire
Megaera shaking: for not yet enough with fury great
And rage doth burn my boiling breast: it ought to bee replete,
With monster more.
What mischief new dost thou in rage provide?
Not such a one as may the mean of wonted grief abide.
No guilt will I forbear, nor none may be enough despite.
What sword?
To little that.
what fire?
And y• is yet to
What weapon then shall sorrow such find fit to work thy will?
Thy acts self.
Then ire it self yet that's a greater ill.
I grant: a tombling tumult quakes, within my bosoms lo,
And round it rolls: I moved am and wot not whereunto.
But drawn I am: from bottom deep the roaring soil doth cry
The day so fair with thunder sounds, and house as all from hy
Were rent, from roof, and rafters crakes: and lares turned abought
Have wryde their sight: so be it, so be it, let mischief such be sought,
As ye O Gods would fear.
What thing seek thou to bring to pas
I note what greater thing my mind, and more then wont it was
Aboue the reach that men are wont to work, begins to swell:
And stayth with slothful hands. What thing it is I cannot tell:
But great it is. Be it so, my mind now in this feat proceed,
For Atreus and Thyestes both, it were a worthy deed.
Let eche of vs the crime commit. The Thracian house did see
Such wicked tables once: I grant the mischief great to bee,
But done ere this: some greater guilt and mischief more, let ire
Find out. The stomach of thy son O father thou inspire,
And sister eke, like is the cause: assist me with your power,
And drive my hand: let greedy parents all his babes devour,
And glad to rent his children bee: and on their limbs to feed.
Enough, and well it is deuis'de: this pleases me in deed.
In mean time where is he? so long and innocent wherefore
Doth Atreus walk? before mine eyes already more and more
The shade of such a slaughter walks: the want of children cast,
In fathers Jaws. But why my mind, yet dreadst thou so at last,
And faiut'st before thou enterprise? it must bee done, let bee,
That which in all this mischief is the greatest guilt to see,
Let him commit.
but what disceit may wee for him prepare,
Whereby betrapped he may be drawn, to fall into the snare?
He wotes full well we are his foes.
He could not taken bee,
Except himself would take: but now my kingdoms hops hee.
For hope of this he would not fear to meet the mighty Jove,
Though him he threatened to deistroy, with lightning from aboue.
For hope of this to pass the threats of waives he will not fail,
Nor dread no whit by doubtful shelves, of Lybike seas to sail,
For hope of this (which thing he doth the worst of all believe,)
He will his brother see.
Who shall of peace the promise geeue?
Whom will he trust?
His evil hope will soon believe it well.
Yet to my sons the charge which they shall to their vuckle tell,
We will commit: that whom he would from exile come again,
And miseries for kingdom change, and over Argos reign
A king of half: and though to hard of heart our prayers all
Him self despise, his children yet nought woting what may fall,
With travels tier'de, and apt to be entys, de from misery,
Requests will move: on th'one side his desire of Empery,
On the other side his poverty, and labour hard to see,
Will him subd•e and make to yield, although full stout he bee.
His travails now the time hath made to seem to him but small.
Not so: for day by day the grief of ill increases all.
It is light to suffer miseries, but heavy them t'endure.
Yet other messengers to send, in such affairs procure,
The younger sort the wrose precepts do easily harken to.
What thing against their uncle now, you them enstruckt to do,
Perhaps with you to work the like, they will not be a dread.
Such mischief wrought hath oft returned upon the workers head.
Though never man to thē the ways of guile &amp; guilt have taught,
Yet kingdom will. Fear thou they should be made by coūsel nought?
They are so borne. That with thou car, ste a cruel enterprise,
And dyrely deem done to be, and wickedly likewise,
Perhaps is wrought against me there.
And shall your sons of this
Disceipt beware that work you will? no secretnes there is
In their so greene and tender years: they will your trains disclose,
A privy counsel close to keep, is learned with many woes.
And will ye them, by whom ye would he should beguiled bee,
Them selnes begull'de?
May let thē both from fault &amp; blame be free.
For what shall need in mischiefs such as I to work entende,
To mingle them? let all my hate by me alone take end.
Thou leave thy purpose ill my mind: if thou thine own sorbeare,
Thou sparest him. Wherefore of this let Agamemnon hear
Be minister: and Client eke of mine for such a deed,
Let Menelâus present bee: truth of th'uncertayne seed,
By such a pracktise may be tri'de: if it refuse they shall,
Nor of debate will bearers be, if they him uncle call,
He is their father: let them go. But much the fearful face
Betrays it self: even him that faynes the secret weighty case,
Doth oft betray: let them therefore not know, how great a guile
They go about. And thou these things in secret keep the while.
I need not warned bee, for these within my bosom deep,
Both faith, and fear, but chiefly faith, doth shet and closely keep.
THe noble house at length of high renown,
The famous stock of ancient Inachus,
Apeasd &amp; laid the threats of brethrē down
But now what fury stirs &amp; drives you thus
Eche one to thirst the others blood again,
Or get by guylt the golden Mace in hand?
Ye little wot that so desire to reign,
In what estate or place doth kingdom stand.
Not retches makes a king or high renown,
Not garnished weed with purple Tyrian die,
Not lofty looks, or head encloasde with cr•wne,
Not glittering beams with gold and turrets hie.
A King he is that fear hath laid aside,
And all affects that in the breast are bread:
Whom impotent ambition doth not guide,
Nor fickle favour hath of people led.
Nor all that west in metals mines hath found,
Or channel clear of golden Tagus shows,
Nor all the grain that thresshed is on ground,
That with the heate of libyk harvest glowes.
Nor whom the flasshe of lightning flame shall be ate,
Nor eastern wind that smightes upon the seas,
Nor swelling surge with rage of wind replete,
Or greedy Gulf of Atria displease.
Whom not the prick of Soldiers sharpest spear,
Or poyncted pike in hand hath made to rue,
Nor whom the glimpse of sword might cause to fear,
Or bright drawn blade of glittering steel sub due.
Who in the seat of safety sets his feet,
Beholds all haps how under him they lye,
And gladly runs his fat all day to meet,
Nor ought complains or grudges for to dye.
Though present were the Princes euerychone,
The scattered Dakes to chase that vvonted bee,
That shining seas beset with precious stone,
And red sea coasts doe hold, like blood to see:
Or they which else the Caspian mountains hye,
From Sarmats strong with all their power vvithholde:
Or hee that on the floude of Danubye,
In frost a foot to travail dare bee bold:
Or Seres in what ever place they lye,
Renownde with fleece that there of silk doth spring,
They never might the truth here of deny,
It is the mind that only makes a king.
There is no need of sturdy steeds in war,
No need with arms or arrows ells to fight,
That Parthus woonts with bow to fling from far,
While from the field hee falsely fayneth flight.
Nor yet to siege no need it is to bring
Great Guns in Carts to overthrow the wall,
That from far of their battring Pellets slyng.
A king hee is that fears nought at all.
Eche man him self this king dome geeues at hand.
Let who so list with mighty mace to reign,
In tickle top of court delight to stand
Let me the sweet and quiet rest obtain.
So set in place obscure and lowe degree,
Of pleasant rest I shall the sweetness know.
My life unknown to them that noble bee,
Shall in the steppe of secret silence go.
Thus when my days at length are over past,
And time without all troublous tumult spent,
An aged man I shall depart at last,
In mean estate, to dye full well content.
But grievous is to him the death, that when
So far abroad the bruit of him is blown,
That known hee is to much to other men:
Departs yet unto him self unknown.
MY country bowers s• long wished for, and Argos riches all,
Cites good that unto banished then, and Misers may befall,
The touch of suyle where born I was, a gods of native lād,
(If gods they be,) a sacred towers I see of Cycolps hād:
That represeat then all mans work, a greater majesty.
Renowned stad•s to my youth, where noble sometime I
Have not so seelde as once, the palm in fathers chariot won.
All Argos now to meet with me, and people fast will roon:
But Atreus to. yet rather lead in woods again thy flight,
And bushes thick, and hid among the brutish beasts from sight,
Like life to theirs: where splendent pomp of court a princely pride,
May not with flattering fulgent face, allure thine eyes aside,
With whom the kingdom given is, behold, and well regard,
Beset but late with such mishaps, as all men couate full harde,
I stout and joyful was: but now again thus int fear
I am return. my mind misdoubtes, and backward seeks to bear
My body hence: and forth I draw my pace against my will.
With slothful step (what means this?) my father stādeth still,
And turns his face and holds him self, in doubt what thing to do.
What thing (my mind) con•dressed thou? or else so long whereto
Dost thou so east counsel wrest? wilt thou to things unsure
Thy brother and the kingdom trust? fear thou those ills t'endure
Now overcome, and mielder made? and travails dost thou flee
That well were placed? it thee avails, a miser now to bee.
Turn hence thy pace while leefull is, and keep thee from his hand.
What cause thee drives (O father dear) thus rō thy native land,
Now seen to shrink? what makes thee thus frō things so good at last
Withdraw thy self? thy brother comes whose tres be overpassed,
And half the kingdom gives, and of the house Die•acerate,
Repairs the parts: and thee restores again to former state.
The cause of fear that I know not, thou dost require to hear.
I see nothing that makes me dread, and yet I greatly fear.
I would go on, hut yet my limbs with weary legs doe slack:
And other way then I would pass, I am withholden back.
So oft the ship that driven is with wind and eke with Ore,
The swelling surge resisting both beats back upon the shore.
Yet overcome what ever stays, and thus doth let your mind,
And see what are at your return, prepared for you to find.
You may O father reign.
I may but then when die I mought.
Chief thing is power.
nought worth at al, if thou desire it nought.
You shall it to your children leave.
the kingdom takes not twain,
Who may be happy, rather would he myfer yet remain?
Believe me well, with titles false the great things vs delight:
And heavy haps in vain are feared. while high I stood in sight,
I never stinted then to quake, and self same sword to fear,
That hanged by mine own side was. Oh how great good it were,
With none to strive, but careless food to cate and rest to know?
The greater gilts they enter not in cottage set allow.
And safer food is fed upon, at narrow board always,
While drunk in gold the poison is by proof well taught I say,
That evil haps before the good to love it likes my will.
Of haughty house that siandes aloft in tickle top of hill,
And sways aside, the city lowe need never be affright:
Nor in the top of roof aboue, there shynes no Iuery bright,
Nor watchman noue defends my sleeps by night, or guards my rest:
With fleet I fish not, nor the sees I have not backward pressed,
Nor turned to flight with builded wall: nor wicked belly I
With taxes of the people fed: nor parcel none doth lie,
Of ground of mine beyond the Getes: and Parthians far about:
Nor worshipped with frankincense I am, nor (Jove shet out)
My Aulters decked are: nor none in top of house doth stand
In garden treese, nor kindled yet with help of eche mans hand,
The bathes doe smoke: nor yet are days in slothful siumbers led,
Nor nights past forth in watch and wine, without the rest of bed.
Wee nothing fear, the house is safe without the hidden knife,
And poor estate the sweetness feels, of test and quiet life.
Great kindome is to be content, without the same to live.
Yet should it not refused be, if God the kingdom give.
Not yet desierd it ought to be.
your brother bids you rain.
Bids he? the more is to be feared: there lurks there some train.
From whence it fell, yet piety is wont to turn at length:
And love vnfaynde, repairs again his erst omitted strength.
Doth Atreus then his brother love? eche Vrsa first on his.
The Seas shall wash and swelling surge of Seas of Sicily
Shall rest and all assuaged be: and corn to rypenes grow
In bottawe of Ionian seas, and bark night shall show
And spread the light about the soil: the waters with the fire,
The life with death, the wind with seas, shall friendship first require,
And be at league.
of what deceit are you so dreadful here?
Of euerychone: what end at length might I provide of fear?
In all he can he hates me.
to you what hurt can he?
As for my self I nothing dread you little Babes make me
Afraid of him.
dread, ye to be deguilde when caught ye are:
To late it is to shoon the traytie in middle of the snare.
But go we on this (father) is to you my last request.
I follow you. I lead you not.
God turn it to the best
That well devised is for good: pass farth with cheerful pace.
Entrapped in train the beast is caught
and in the snare doth fall:
Both him, and eke of hated stock
with him the offspring all,
About the fathers side I see:
and now in safety stands
And surest ground my wrathful hate:
now comes into my hands
At length Thyestes: yea hee comes
and all at once to me.
I scant refrain my self, and scant may anger bridled bee.
So when the Bloudhound feekes the beast, by step and quick of sent
Draws in the lame, and pace by pace to wind the ways hee went,
With nose to soil doth hunt, while he the Boar aloof hath found
Far of by sent, he yet refrains and wanders through the ground
With silent mouth: but when at hand he once perceives the pray,
With all the strength he hath he strives, with voice and calls away
His lingering moister, and from him by force out breaks hee.
When Ire doth hope the present blood, it may not hidden bee.
Yet let it hidden be. behold with ugly hair to sight
How yrkesomely deformed with filth his foulest tace is dight,
How loathsome lies his Brarde unkempt: but let vs friendship fain.
To see my brother me delights: give now to me again
Embracing long desired for: what ever strife there was
Before this time between vs twain, forget and let it pas:
Fro this day forth let brothers love, let blood, and law of kind
Regarded be, let all debate be slakte in eiders mind.
I could excuse my self, except thou were as now thou art.
But (Atreus) now I grant, the fault was mine in every part:
And I offended have in all, my cause the worse to bee,
Your this days kindness makes: in deed a guilty wight is hee,
That would so good a brother hurt as you, in any whit.
But now with tears I must entreat, and first I me submit.
These hands that at thy feet doe lye, doe thee beseech and pray,
That ire and hate be laid aside, and from thy bosom may
Be scraped out: and clear forgot. for pledges take thou these
O brother dear, these guiltless babes.
thy hands yet from my kneese
Remove, and rather me to take in arms, upon me fall
And ye O aids of elders age, ye little infants all,
Me clyp and coll about the neck: this foul attire forsake,
And spare mine eyes that pity it, and fresher vesture take
Like mine to see. and you with joy, the half of empery
Dear brother take: the greater praise shall come to me thereby,
Our fathers seat to yield to you, and brother to rel•eve.
To have a kingdom is but chance, but virtue it to geeue.
A just reward for such deserts, the Gods (O brother dear)
Repay to thee: but on my head a regal crown to wear,
My loathsome life denies: and far doth from the sceptor flee
My hand unhappy: in the midst let leefull be for me
Of men to lurk.
this kingdom can with twain full well agree.
What ever is (O brother) yours, I count it mine to bee.
Who would dame fortunes gifts refuse, if she him •eyes to reign?
The gifts of his eche man it wotes, how soon they pass again.
Ye me deprive of glory great, except ye th'empyre take.
You have your praise in offering it, and I it to forsake.
And full persuaded to refuse the kingdom, am I still.
Except your part ye will sustain mine own forsake I will.
I take it then. and bear I will the name thereof alone:
The rights and arms, as well as mine they shall be yours eche one.
The regal crown as you beseems upon your head then take:
And I th'appoyncted sacrifice for Gods, will now go make.
Would any man it wean? that cruel wight
Atreus, of mind so impotent to see
Was soon astonished with his brothers sight,
Mo greater force then piety may bee:
Where kindred is not, lasts every threat,
Whom true love holds, it holds eternally.
The wrath but late with causes kindled great
All favour brake, and did to battle cry,
When horsemen did resouude one every side,
The swoordes eche where, then glystred more &amp; more:
Which raging Mars with often stroke did guide
The fresher blood to shed yet thirsting sore.
But love the sword against their vvills doth swag,
And them to peace perswads with hand in hand.
So sudden rest, amid so great a rage
What God hath made? throughout Mycenas land
The harness clinked, but late of civil strife:
And for their babes did fearful mother quake,
Her armed spouse to leese much feared the wife,
When sword was made the scabbard to forsake,
That now by rest with rust was overgrown.
Some to repair the vvalles that did decay,
And some to strength the towers half overthrown,
And some the gates with gins of Yrne to stay
Full busy were, and dreadful watch by night
From turret high did overlook the town.
VVocrse is then war it self the fear of fight.
(Now are the threats of cruel sword laid down,
And now the rumour whists of battles sown,
The noise of crooked trumpet silent lies,
And quiet peace returns to joyful town.
So when the waxes of swelling surge arise,
While Corus wind the Brutian seas doth smight,
And Scylla sounds from hollow Caves within,
And Shipmen are with wafting waives affright,
Charybdis casts that erst it had drunk in:
And Cyclpos fierce his father yet doth dred,
In AEtna bank that fervent is with heats,
Least quenched be with waives that overshot
The fire that from eternal Fornace beats:
And poor Laërtes thinks his kingdoms all
May drowned be, and Ithaca doth quake:
If once the force of winds begin to fall,
The sea lyth down more mild then standing lake.
The deep, where Ships so vvyde full dreadful were
To pass, with sails on either side out spread
Now fallen down, the lesser Boat doth bear:
And leisure is to view the fyshes ded
Even there, where late with tempest bet upon
The shaken Cyclades were with Seas aghast.
No state endures the payne and pleasure, one
To other yields, and joys be soonest past.
One hour sets up the things that lowest bee.
Hee that the crowns to princes doth divide,
Whom people please with bending of the knee.
And at whose beck their battles lay aside
The Meads, and Indians eke to Phebus ny,
And Dakes that Parthyans doe with horsemen threat,
Him self yet holds his Sceptors doubtfully.
And men of might he fears and chances great
(That eche estate may turn) and doubtful hour.
Oy, whom lord of land and vvaters wide,
Of Life and death grants here to have the power,
Lay ye your proud and lofty looks aside:
What your inferior fears of you amiss.
That your superior threats to you again.
To greater king, eche king a subject is.
Whom dawn of day hath seen in pride to reign,
Him overthrown hath seen the evening late.
Let none rejoice to much that good hath got,
Let none despair of best in worst estate.
For Clotho mingles all, and suffered not
Fortune to stand: but Fates about doth drive.
Such friendship find with Gods yet no man might,
That he the morrow might be sure to live.
The God our things all tossed and turned quite
Rolls with a whirl wind.
WHat whirlwind may me headlong drive
and up in ayre me fling,
And wrap in darkest cloud, whereby
it might so heinous thing,
Take from mine eyes? O wicked house
that even of Pelops ought
And Tantalus abhorred bee.
what new thing hast thou brought?
What land is this? lythe Sparta here
and Argos, that hath bred
So wicked brethern? and the ground of Corinth lying spread
Between the seas? or Ester else where wont to take their flight,
Are people wild? or that which woonts with snow to shyne so bright
Hircana land? or else doe here the wandering Seythians dwell?
What monstrous mischief is this place then guilty of? that tell,
And this declare to vs at large what ever be the ill.
If once my mind may stay it self, and quaking limbs I will.
But yet of such a cruel deed before mine eyes the fear.
And Image walks: ye raging storms now far from hence me bear
And to that place me drtue, to which now driven is the day
Thus drawn from hence.
Our minds ye hold yet still in doubt: full stay.
Tell what it is ye so abhor. The author thereof show.
I ask not who, but which of them that quickly let vs know.
In Pelops Turret high, a part there is of Palace wide
That toward the south erected leanes, of which the utter side
With equal top to mountain stantes, and on the City lies,
And people proud against their prince if once the traitors rise
Hath underneath his battering stroke: there shynes the place in sight
Where wont the people to frequent, whose golden beams so bright
The noble spotted pillars gray, of marble doe support,
Within this place well known to men, where they so oct resort,
To many other rooms about the noble court doth go.
The privy Palace vnderlieth in secret place alos,
With ditch full deep that doth enclose the wood of priuiter,
And hidden parts of kingdom old: where never grew no tree
That chereful bows is wont to bear, with knife or lopped be,
But Tax, and Cypress, and with tree of Ho•me full black to see
Doth beck and bend the wood so dark: aloft aboue all these
The higher ok doth over look, surmounting all the treese.
From hens with luck the reign to take, accustomed are the kings,
From hens in danger aid to ask, and doom in doubtful things.
To this affixed are the gifts, the sounding Trumpets bright,
The Chariots broke, and spoils of sea that now Mirtôon hight,
There hang the wheels once won by craft of falser excel tree,
And every other conquests note, here leefullis to see
The Phrygian tyre of Pelops head: the spoil of enmies here,
And of Barbarian triumph left, the painted gorgeous gear.
A loathsome spring stands under shade, and slothful course doth take,
With water black: even such as is: of irksome Stygian lake
The ugly wave whereby art wont, to swear the gods on hye.
Here all the night the grisly ghosts and gods of death to erie
The fame reports: with clinkyng chains resoūds the wood each where
The sprights cry out and every thing that dreadful is to hear,
May there bee seen: of ugly shapes from old Sepulchres sent
A frarefull slocke doth wander there, and in that place frequent
Worse things then ever yet were knowwne: ye all the wood full afce
With flame is wont to flash, and all the higher trees aloft
Without a fire do burn: and oft the wood beside all this
With triple barking roars at once: full oft the palace is
Affright with shapes, nor light of day may on the terror quell.
Eternal night doth hold the place, and darkness there of hell
In mid day reigns: from hens to them that pray out of the ground
The certain answers given are, what time with dreadful sound
From secret place the fates be told, and dungeon roars within
While of the God breaks out the voice: whereto when entered in
Fierce Atreus was, that did with him his brothers children trail,
Dekt are the aulters: wh• (alas) may it enough bewail?
Behind the infants backs anon he knit their noble hands,
And eke their heavy heads about he bound with purple bands:
There wanted there no Frankenfence, nor yet the holy wine,
Nor knife to cut the sacrifice, besprinkt with leuens fine,
Kept is in all the order due, Icast such a mischief great
Should not be ordered well.
who doth his hand on sword then set?
He is him self the priest, and he himself the deadly verse
With prayer dire from fervent mouth doth sing and oft rehearse.
And he at th'aulters stands himself, he them assigned to dye
Doth handle, and in order set, and to the knife apply,
He lights the fires, no rights were left of sacrifice undone.
The wood then quaked, and all at once from trembling ground anon
The Palace backed, in doubt which way the payse thereof would fall,
And shaking as in waives it stood: from the air and therewithal
A blazing star that foulest train drew after him doth go:
The wynes that in the fires were cast, with changed liquor floe,
And turn to blood: and twice or thryse th'attyre sell from his head,
The Iuerye bright in Temples seemed to weep and tears to shed.
The sights amas'de all other men, but steadfast yet always
Of mind, vnmoued. Atreus stands, and even the Gods doth fray
That threaten him and all delay forsaken by and by
To the aulters turns, and there withwall a side he looks awry.
As hungry Tiger wonts that doth in gangey woods remain
With doubtful pace to range &amp; roam between the bullocks twain,
Of either pray full-couetous and yet uncertain where
She first may byte, and roaring throat now turns the tone to tear
And then to the other straight returns, and doubtful famine holds:
So Atreus dire, between the babes doth stand and them beholds
On whom he points to slake his ire: first staughter where to make,
Hee doubts: or whom he should again for second offering take,
Yet skills it nought, but yet he doubts and such a cruelty
It him delights to order well.
Whom take he first to die?
First place, least in him think ye might no pier to remain
To graundsier dedicated is, first Tantalus is slain.
With what a mind &amp; count'nace, could ye boy his death sustain?
All careless of him self he stood, nor once he would in vain
His prayers leese. But Atreus fierce the sword in him at last
In deep and deadly wound doth hide to hilts, and griping fast
His throat in hād, he thrust him through. The sword thē drawn away
When long the body had upheld it self in doubtful stay.
Which way to fall, at length upon the uncle down it falls.
And then to th'aulters cruelly Philisthenes he tralles,
And on his brother throws: and straight his neck of cutteth hee.
The Carcase keadlong falls to ground: a piteous thing to see.
The mourning head with murmur yet vucertayne doth complain.
What after double death doth he and slaughter then of twain?
Spares he the Child? or gilt on gilt again yet heayeth he?
As long mind Lyon scarce amid the wood of Armenie,
The drove pursues and conquest makes of slaughter many one,
Though now defiled be his tawes with blood and hunger gone
Yet slakes not his yreful rage with blood of Bulls so great,
But slothful now with weary tooth the lesser Calves doth threat:
None other wise doth Atreus rage, and swells with anger strained,
And holding now the sword in hand, with double slaughter stayud,
Regarding not where fell his rage, with cursed hand vnmild
He struck it through his body quite, at bosom of the Child
The blade goes in, and at the back again out went the same,
He falls and quenching with his blood the aulters sacred flame,
Of either wound at length he dies.
O'heynous hateful act.
Abho•re ye this? ye hear not yet the end of all the fact,
There follows more.
A fiercer thing, or worse then this to see
Could Nature bear?
why think ye this of gilt the end to be?
It is but part.
what could he wore? to cruel beasts he cast
Perhaps their bodies to be torn, and kept from fires at last.
Would God he had: that never tomb the dead might over hyde,
Nor flames dissolve, though them for food to fowls in pastures wide
He had out thrown, or them for pray to cruel beasts would fling.
That which the worst was wont to be, were here a wished thing,
That them their father saw vntowbd: but oh more cursed crime
Uncredible, the which deny will men of after time:
From bosoms yet alive out drawn the trembling bowels shake,
The veins yet breath, the scareful hart doth yet both pant and quakes
But he the strings doth turn in hand, and destinies behold,
And of the guts the signs each one doth view not fully cold.
When him the sacrifice had pleaso, his diligence •ē puts
To dress his brothers banquet now: and straight a fonder cuts
The bodies into quarters all, and by the stoompes anon
The shoulders wide, and browns of arms be strikes of euerythune.
He lays abroad their naked limes, and cuts away the bones:
The only heads he kepes and hands to him committed once.
Some of the guts are broached. and in the fires that burn full •o
They drop, the boiling Itcour some doth tomble to end fro
In moorning cawderne: from the flesh that ouerstandes alorft
The fire doth fly, and skatter out and into chimney oft
Up heat again, and there constraynd by force to tarry yet
Unwilling burns: the liver makes great nopse upon the spit,
Nor easily wot I, if the flesh, or fla•ies they be that bry,
But cry they do: the fire like pitch it fumes by an by:
Nor yet the smoke it self so sad, like flithy mist in sight
Ascends up as wont it is, nor takes his way upright,
But even the Gods and house it doth with fylithy turn defise.
O patient Phoebus though from hence thou backward flee the while,
And in the midst of heaven aboue dost drown the broken day,
Thou fleest to late: the father eats his children, well away,
And limbs to which he once gave life, with cursed iaw doth tear.
He shynes with ointment shed full sweet all round about his hear,
Replete with wine; and oftentimes so cursed kind of food
His mouth hath held, that would not down. but yet this one thing good
In all thy yls (Thyestes) is that them thou dost not know,
And yet shall that not long endure, though Titan backward go
And chariots turn against himself, to meet the ways be went,
And heavy night so heinous deed to keep from sight be sent,
And out of time from East arise, so foul a fact to hyde,
Yet shall the whole at length be seen: thy ylles shall all be spied.
WHich way O Prince of lands and Gods on hie,
At whose uprise eftsoon of shadowd night
All beauty flees, which way turnst thou awry?
And draw the day in midst of heaven to flight?
Why dost thou (Phoebus) hide from vs thy sight?
Not yet the watch that later hour brings in,
Doth Vesper warn the Stars to kindle light.
Not yet doth turn of Hespers whele begin
To loase thy chare his well deserved way.
The trumpet third not yet hath blown his blast
While toward the night begins to yield the day:
Great wonder hath of sudden suppers hast
The Ploughmen yet whose Oxen are vntierd.
From wonted course of Heaven what draws thee backs?
What causes have from certain race conspierd
To turn thy horse? do yet from dungeon black
Of hollow hell, the conquered Gyantes prove
A fresh assaut? doth. Tityus yet assay
With trenched hart, and wounded womb to move
The former yres? or from the hill away
Hath now Typhoeus wound his side by might?
Is up to heaven the way erected hie
Of phlegrey foes by mountains set upright?
And now doth Ossa Pelion ouerlye?
The wonted turns are gone of day and night,
The rise of Sun, nor fall shall be no more,
Au•ore dowish mother of the light
That wontes to send the horses out before,
Doth wonder much again return to see.
Her dawning light: she wots not how to case
The weary wheels, nor manes that smoking be
Of horse with sweat to bathe amid the seas.
Himself unwonted there to lodge likewise,
Doth setting son again the morning see,
And now commands the darkness up to rise.
Before the night to come prepared bee.
About the Poale yet glowth no fire in sight.
Nor light Moon the shades doth comfort yet
What so it be, God grant it be the night.
Our hearts do quake with fear oppressed great.
And dreadful are least heaven and earth and all
With fatal ruin shaken shall decay:
And least on Gods again, and men shall fall
Disfigurde Chaos: and the land away
The Seas, and Fires, and of the glorious Skis
The wandering lamps, least nature yet shall hide.
Now shall no more with blase of his uprise,
The Lord of stars that leads the world so wide,
Of Summer both and Winter give the marks.
Nor yet the Moon with Phoebus flames that burns,
Shall take from vs by night the dreadful carkes,
With swifter course or pass her brothers turns,
While compass less she fets in crooked race:
The Gods on heaps shall out of order fall,
And each with other mingled be in place.
The wried way of holy planets all,
With path a slope that doth divide the Zones.
That bears the signs, and years in course doth bring,
Shall see the stars with him fall down at ones.
And he that first not yet with gentle spring,
The temperate Gale doth give to sails, the Ram
Shall headlong fall a down to Seas again,
Through which he once with fearful Helen swam.
Next him the Bull that doth with horn sustain
The sisters seven with him shall overturn
The twins and arms of crooked Cancer all,
The Lyon hoot that wontes the soil to burn
Of Hercules again from heaven shall fall.
To lands once left the Virgin shall be thrown,
And leveled payse of balance sway allow,
And draw with them the stinging Scorpion down.
So likewise he that holds in Thessale bow
His swift well fethred arrows Chiron old,
Shall break the same and eke shall less his shot
And Capricorn that brings the winter cold
Shall overturn and break the water pot
Who so thou be: and down with thee to ground,
The last of all the signs shall Pisces fall
And monsters eke in seas yet never drounde,
The water gulf shall overwhelm them all.
And he which doth between each vrsa glide,
Like crooked flood the slipper serpent twinned:
And lesser Bear by greater Dragons side,
Full cold with frost congealed hard by kind,
And carter dull that slowly guides his wane
Unstable shall Boòtes fall from hye.
We are thought meet of all men whom again
Should huge heap of Chaos ouerly.
And world oppress with overturned mass
The latest age now falls vs upon.
With evil hap we are begot alas
If wretches we have lost the sight of son,
Or him by fraught enforced have to fly
Let our complaints yet go and fear be pasts
He greedy is of life, that will not die
When all the world shall end with him at last.
Now equal with the Stars I go.
beyond each other wight,
With haughty head the heavens aboue,
and highest Poale I smite,
The kingdom now, and seat I hold,
where once my father raynd:
I now let go the gods: for all
my will I have obsaynde
•aoughe and well, ye even enough for me I am acquit
But why enough? I will proceed and fill the father yet
With blood of his least any shame should me restrain at all,
The day is gone, go to therefore while thee the heaven doth call
Would God I could against their wills yet hold the Gods that flee
And of revenging dish constrain them witnesses to bee:
But yet (which well enough is wrought) let it the father see.
In spite of al the drowned day I will remove from thee
The darkness all, in shade whereof do lurk thy miseries.
And guest at such a banquet now to long he careless lies,
With merry face: now eat and drunk enough he hath at last
It is best him self should know his ylls ye servants, all in hast
Undo the temple doors: and let the house bee open all:
Fain would I see, when loke upon his childrens heads he shall
What countenance he then would make, or in what words break out
Would first his grief, or how would quake his body round about
With spright amassed sore: of all my work the fruit were this
I would him not a miser see, but while so made he is,
Behold the temple opened now doth shyne with many a light:
In glittering gold and purple seat he sitees himself upright,
And staying up his heavy head with wine upon his hand.
He belches out, now chief of gods in highest place I stand,
And king of kings: I have my wish, and more then I could think.
He filled is, he now the wine in silver volle doth drink
And spare it not: there yet remains a worser draught for thee
That sprung out of the bodies late of sacrifices three,
Which wine shall hyde let the• withal the hoards be taken up.
The father (mingled with the wine,) his childrens blood shall sup.
That would have bronke of mine. Behold he now begins to strain
His voice, and synges, nor yet for joy his mind be may refrain,
OBeaten bosoms dullde so lunge with woe,
Lay down your cares, at length your greues relē•
Let sorrow pass, and all your dread let go,
And fellow eke of fearful banishment,
Sad poverty and ill in misery
The shame of cares, more whense thy fall thou haste,
Then whether skills, great hap to him, from hye
That falls, it is in ferety to be placed
Beneath, and great it is to him again
That pressed with storm, or evils feels the smart,
Of kyngedome lost the poises to sustain
With neck vnbowde: nor yet detect of heart
Nor overcome, his heavy haps always
To bear upright but now of careful carkes
Shake of the showers, and of thy wretched days
Away with all the miserable marks.
To joyful state return thy cheerful face.
Put fro thy mind the old Thyestes hence.
It is the wont of wight in woeful case,
In state of joy to have no confidence.
Though better haps to them returned be,
Thafflicted yet to joy it irked sore.
Why call thou me aback, and hyndrest me
This happy day to celebrate? wherefore
Bid thou me (sorrow) weep without a cause.
Who doth me let with flowers so fresh and gay,
To deeke my hairs? it lets and me withdraws.
Down from my head the roses fall away:
My moysted hair with ointment over all,
With sudden maze stands up in wondrous wise,
From face that would not weep the streams do fall.
And howling cries amid my words arise.
My sorrow yet thaccustomd tears doth love
And wretches still delight to weep and cry.
Unpleasant plaints it pleases them to move:
And flourished fair it likes with Tyrian die
Their robes to rent, to wail it likes them still
For sorrow sends (in sign that woes draw nic)
The mind that wots before of after ill.
The sturdy storms the shipmen over lye.
When void of wind thasswaged seas do rest.
What tumult yet or countenance to see
Makste thou mad man? at length a trustful breast
To brother gene, what ever now it be,
Causeles, or else to late thou art a dred.
I wretch would not so fear, but yet me draws
A trembling terror: down mine eyes do shed
Their sudden tears and yet I know no cause,
Is it a grief, or fear? or else hath tears
• great joy it self.
Let vs this day with one consent
(O brother celebrate)
This day my sceptors my confirm,
and stablish my estate.
And faithful bond of peace and love
between vs ratify.
Enough with meat and eke with wine,
now satisfied am I.
But yet of all my joys it were a great increase to me,
If now about my side I might my little children see.
Believe that here even in thine arms thy children present be.
For here they are; and shall be here, no part of them fro thee
Sal be withheld: their loved looks now give to thee I will,
And with the heap of all his babes, the father fully fill.
Thou shalt be glutted fear thou not: they with my boys as yet
The joyful sacrifices make at board where children sit.
They shall be called, the friendly cup now take of courtesy
With wine vpfylde.
of brothers feast I take full willingly
The fynal gift, shed some to gods of this our fathers land,
Then let the rest be drunk, what's this? in no wise will my hand
Obeye: the payse increases sore, and down mine arm doth sway.
And from my lips the wafting wine it self doth fly away,
And in deceived mouth, about my jaws it rūneth round.
The table to, it self doth shake and leap from trembling ground.
Scant burns the fire: the ayre it self with heavy chere to slght
Forsook of son amassed is between the day and night.
What means this? yet more and more of backward beaten sky
The compass falls, and thicker mist the world doth ouerly
Then blackest darkness, and the night in night it self doth hyde.
All stars be fled, what so it bee my brother God provide
And soones to spare: the Gods so grant that a•l this testmpest fall
On this vile head: but now restore to me my childreu all,
I will, and never day again shall them from thee withdraw,
What tumult tumbles so my guts, and doth my bowels gnaw?
What quakes within, with heavy payse I feel my self oppressed,
And with an other voice then mine bewayses my doleful breast:
Come ne'er my sons, for you now doth thun happy father call:
Come ne'er, for you once seen, this grief would soon assuage &amp; fall
Whence murmur they? 〈◊〉 fathers at 〈◊〉 embrace them quickly now
For here they are lo come to thee: dost thou thy children know?
I know my brother: such a gilt yet can thou suffet well
O earth to bear? nor yet from hence to Stygian lake of hell
Dost thou both drown thy sell and vs? nor yet with broken ground
Dost thou these kingdoms and their king with Chaos rude confound?
Nor yet vprenting from the soil the bowers of wicked land.
Dost thou Micenas overturn with Tantalus to stand,
And aunciters of ours, if there in hell be any one,
Now ought we both: now from the frames on either side anon
Of ground, all here and there rent up out of thy bosom deep:
Thy dens and dungons set abroad, and vs enclosed keep,
In bottom low of Acheront aboue our heads aloft
Let wander all the guilty ghosts, with burning fret full oft
Let fyry Phlegethon that drives his sands both to and fro
To our confusion over roon not violently flow
O slothful soil unshaken payse un•••• yet art thou?
The Gods are sled:
but take to thee with joy thy children now,
And rather them enbrace: at length thy children all of thee
So long wished for (for no delay there stands now in me)
Enjoy and kiss embracing arms divide thou unto three.
Is this thy league? may this thy love and faith of brother bee?
And dost thou so repose thy hate? the father doth not crave
His sons alive (which might have been without thy gilt) to have
And eke without thy hate, but this doth brother brother pray:
That them he may entoom be restore, whom see thou shalt straight way,
Be burnt: the father nought requires of thee that have he shall,
But soon forgo
what ever part r•t of thy children all
Remains, here shalt thou have: and what remains not thou host.
Lye they in fields, a food out fleng for fleerug sowles to wast•
Or are they kept a pray, for wyld and brutish beasten to eat?
Thou hast deaourd thy sons and fyld thy self with wicked meat.
Oh this is it that shamed the Gods and day from hence did drive
Turned back to east, alas I wretch what waylinges may I give?
Or what complaints? what woeful words may be enough for me?
Their heads cut of, and hands of torn, I from their bodres see,
And wrenched seete from broken thighs I here behold again
Tys this that greedy father could not suffer to sustain.
In belly roll my bowels round, and closed crime so great
Without a passage strives within and seeks away to get.
Thy sword (O brother) lewd to me much of my blood alas
It hath: let vs therewith make way for all my sons to pass.
Is yet the sword from me withheld? thy self thy bosoms tear,
And let thy breasts resound with strokes: yet wretch thy hand forbear
And spare the dead: who ever saw such mischief put in proof?
What rude Heniochus that dwells by ragged coast aloof,
Of Caucasus unapt for men? or fear to Athens,, who
Procustes wyld? the father I oppress my children do
And am oppressed, is any mean of gilt or mischief yet?
A mean in mischief ought to be when gilt thou dost commit,
Not when thou quytst: for yet even this to little seems to me.
The blood yet warm even from the wound I should in sight of these
Even in thy laws have shed, that thou the blood of them might drink
That lived yet: but while to much to hast my hate I think
My wrath beguiled is my self with sword the wounds them gave
I struck them down, the sacred fires with slaughter vowed I have
Well pleaso, the carcase cutting then, and liveless limbs on ground.
I have in little parcels chopped, and some of them I brounde
In boiling cauderns, some to fires that burnt full slow I put,
And made to drop: their sinews all, and limbs a two I cut
Even yet alive and on the spit, that thrust was through the same
I harde the liver whale and cry, and with my hand the flame:
I otf kept in: but every whit the father might of this
Have better done, but now my wrath to lightly ended is.
He rent his sons with wicked gum, himself yet wotting nought.
Nor they thereof
O ye encloas'd with bending banks abought
All seas me hear, and to this gilt ye Gods now harken well
What ever place ye fled are to here all ye sprites of hell,
And here ye lands, and night so dark that them dost ouerly
With cloud so black to my complaints do than thy self apply.
To thee now left I am, thou dost alone me miser see,
And thou art left without thy stars: I will not make for me
Petitions yet, nor ought for me require may ought yet bee
That me should veil? for you shall all my wishes now foresee.
Thou guyder great of skies aboue, &amp; prince of highest might,
Of heavenly place now all with clouds full horrible to sight,
Enwrap the world, and let the winds on every side break out:
And send the dreadful thunder clap through al the world about
Nor with what hand thou gilts house and undeserved wall
With lesser bolt are wont to beat, but with the which did fall
The three vnheaped mountains once and which to hills in height
Stood equal up, the gyantes huge: throw out such weapons straight,
And fling thy fires: and therewithal revenge the drowned day.
Let flee they flames, the light thus lost and hid from heaven away,
With flashes fill: the cause (lest long thou should doubt whom to hit)
Of each of vs is ill: if not at least let mine be it.
Me strike with triple edged tool thy brand of flaminge fire.
Beat through this breast: if father I my children to desire
To lay in tomb or corpses cast to fire as doth behove,
I must be burnt if nothing now the gods to wrath may move,
Nor power from skies with thunder bolt none strikes the wicked men
Let yet eternal night remain, and hyde with darkness then
The world about: I, Titan nought complain as now it stands
If still thou hyde thee thus away.
now praise I well my hands.
Now got I have the palm. I had been overcome of thee,
Except thou sorrow'dst so but now even children borne to me
I count and now of bridebed chaste the saith I do repair,
In what offended have my sous:
In that, that thine they were
Set thou the sons for fathers food?
I do &amp; (which is best)
The certain sons,
The gods that guide all infants I protest.
What wedlock gods?
who would the gilt with gilt so quite again?
I know thy grief prevented now with wrong thou dost complain:
Nor this thee yrkes, that sed thou art with food of cursed kind,
But that thou had not it prepared for so it was thy mind,
Such meates as these to set before thy brother wotting nought,
And by the mothers help to have, likewise my children caught:
And them with such like to slay: this one thing let thee,
Thou though them thine.
the gods shall al of this revengers be
And unto them for vengeance due my vows thee render shall
But vexed to be I thee the white, geeue to thy children all.
O King of Dytis dungeou dark,
and g•ysty Ghosts of hell,
That in the deep and dre adfull Den,
of blackest Terrace dwell.
Where lean and pale diseases lye
where fear and samyne are,
Where discord stands with bleeding brows,
where every kind of care,
Where furies fight in beds of steel, and hears of crauling snakes,
Where Gorgon grimm, where Harpies are, &amp; loathsome Limbo lakes,
Where most prodigious ugly things, the hollow hell doth bide.
If yet a mouster more mishapped then all that there doe hyde,
That makes his brood his cursed food, ye all abhor to see,
Nor yet the deep Auerne it self, may bide to cover me,
Nor grisly gates of Putoes place, yet dare them selves to spread,
Nor gaying ground to swallow him, whom Gods and day have sled:
Yet break ye out from cursed seats, and here remain with me,
Ye need not now to be afraid, the Ayre and Heaven to see.
Nor triple headed Cerberus, thou need not bee affryght,
The day unknown to thee to see or else the loathsome light.
They both be sled: and now doth dwell none other countenance here,
Then doth beneath the foulest face, of hateful hell appeete.
Come see a meetest match for thee, a more then monstrous womb,
That is of his unhappy brood, become a cursed tomb.
Flock here ye foulest flendes of hell, and thou O grandsire great,
Come see the glutted guts of mine, with such a kind of meat,
As thou did once for Gods prepare. Let torments all of hell
Now fall upon this hateful head, that hath deserved them well.
Ye all be plagued wrongfully, your guiltes be small, in sight
Of mine, and meet it were your pang on me alone should light.
Now thou O graundster guiltless art, and meeter were for me,
With fleeing flood to be beguiled, and fruit of fickle tree.
Thou slewst thy son, but I my sons, alas, have made my meat.
I could thy famine better bear, my paūch is now replete
With food: and with my children three, my belly is extent.
O filthy fowls and gnawing gripes, that Tytius be some rent
Behold a fitter pray for you, to fill your selves upon
Then are the growing guts of him: four wombs enwrapt in one.
This paūche at once shall stll you all: if ye abhor the food,
Nor may your selves abide to bathe, in such a cursed blood:
Yet lend to me your clinching claws, your pray a while forbear,
And with your talons suffer me, this monstrous maw to tear.
Or whirling wheels, with swinge of which Ixion still is told,
Your books upon this glutten gorge, would catch a surer hold.
Thou filthy flood of Lym by lake, and S•ygian poole so dire,
From chocked channel belch abroad. Thou fearful fret of fire,
Spue out thy flames O Phlegethon: and overshot the ground.
With vomit of thy fyry stream, let me and earth be drowned,
Break up thou soil from bottom deep, and give thou room to hell,
That night, where day, y• ghosts, where Gods were woōt to reign, may dwell.
Why gapst thou not? Why do you not O gates of hell unfold?
Why do ye thus thinfernall stands, so long from hence withhold?
Are you likewise afraid to see, and know so wretched wight,
From whom the Gods have wryde their looks, &amp; turned are to flight?
O hateful head, whom heaven and hell, have shoonde and left alone,
The Sun, the stars, the light, the day, the Gods, the ghosts be goue.
Yet turn again ye Skies a while, ere quite ye go fro me,
Take vengeance first on him, whose fault enforces you to flee.
If needs ye must your flight prepare, and may no longer bide,
But roll ye must with you forthwt, the Gods and Sun a side,
Yet slowly flee: that I at length, may you yet overtake,
While wandering ways I after you, and speedy journey make.
By seas, by lands, by woods, by rocks, in dark I wander shall:
And on your wrath, for right reward to due des•rts, will call.
Ye scope not fro me, so ye Gods, still after you I go,
And vengeance ask on wicked wight, your thunder bolt to throe.

LAIVS King of Thebes, had by his Wife and
Queen IOCASTA, a Son named OEDI∣PVS:
Who being yet in his Mothers Womb,
APOLLO his Oracle pronounced, that by the
hands of that child, King LAIVS the father should bee
murdered. The fear whereof caused the King to commaūd
him to be put to death. The Kings herdsman, who had the
charge to see this done, on the one side moved with compass∣on
over a tender weakeling: and on the otherside, afraid to in∣cur
the King his masters displeasure, contented himself
only to boar two pools through the Infants two feet, and
with certain pliable Twigs being thrust through the
same, hong him up on a tree by the Heals: supposing that
hereby hee should cōmit a less crime in suffering the child
to perish by famine, then in playing the Butcher himsefe. It
fortunate, that one PHORBAS herdsman to POLYBI∣VS
King of Corynth, passing by that way &amp; hearing a young
Child cyre, went and cut him down, and carrying him to
Corynth, it so fell out that at length hee was given for a pre∣sent
or gift to MEROPE, Wife to the said King POLY∣BVS.
This OEDIPVS afterword going to Thebes, in
a certain sedicious hurly burly in the country there, una∣wares
and unwitting slew King LAIVS his Father. About
which time the City of Thebes, and Country there about
was marvelously infested with a monster called Sphinx: who
propounding a certain Riddle, or obscure question to such as
passed that way, and devouring as many, as could not
assoyle the same. To him that could assoile it and so rid
the Country from that so ugly and daūgerous a monster, the
marriage of Queen IOCASTA, and the kingdom of The∣bes
was promised as a recompense: OEDIPVS after ma∣ny
others, taking the matter in hand, assoyled the Riddle, &amp;
slew the mōster. Whereupō marrying the Queen, not know∣ing
her to bee his own Mother, had by her four Children:
ETHEOCLES, POLYNICES, ANTIGONE, &amp;
ISMENE. In the end, having knowledge, how first hee had
killed his Father, and then incestuously married his Mother,
hee forsook his kingdom being continually infested with
the plague, &amp; (as one ashamed to loke any man in theface) pull∣led
out his own Eyes, and hid himself in corners and solitary
places. His Sons ETHEOCLES &amp; POLYNICES
agreed to reign interchangeably, that is to wit, ETHE∣OCLES,
one year, and POLYNICES the other. E∣THEOCLES
having reigned his year, refused according
to the articles of agreement, to resign the Crown to his bro∣there
for the next year. Whereupō they fell to mortal wars,
and in the end meaning by combat to end the matter, they
mutually slew one the other. And note that this Tra∣giddy,
was left by the Author imperfect, because it ney∣there
hath in it, Chorus, no yet the fifth Act.
Dear Daughter, unto Father blind
a Staff of steady stay,
To weary Sire, a comfort great,
and Guide in all his way:
And whom to have begotten, I
may glad and joyful bee:
Yet leave me now, thy haplesse Sire,
thus plungde in misery.
Why seekst thou means, still to direct
my stalking steppes aright?
Let me I pray thee headlong slyde
in breakneck tumbling plight.
I better shall and sooner find a way my self alone
To rid me out of all the thrall wherein I now am thrown.
Whereby both heaven shall eased bee, and earth shall want the sight
Of me vile wretch, whom, guilt hath made a most abhorred wight.
Alas, what little trifling trick hath hitherto been wrought
By these my hands? what feat of worth or maistry have I sought?
In deed, they have me helped to pull mine eyes out of my head:
So that no Sun, no Moon I see, but life in darkness lead.
And though that I can nothing see, yet is my guilt and crime
Both seen and known, &amp; poyneted at, (woe worth the cursed time.)
Leave of thy hold, let lose thy hand, good daughter, let me go:
Let foultring foot light where it will, let it (this once) be so.
Isle trudge, and run, Isle skudde, and range, Isle hasten to the hill
Of craggy steep Cytheron, there I hope to work my will.
Where erst Actaeon lost his life by strange, and uncouth death,
Whom vawling Dogs, and hunting Hounds bereft of vital breath:
Where once Agave (bedlemlike) raungd up and down the wood
With Sisters hers, inspired all with Bacchus raging mood.
And pleasing well her self in that her fact and mischief donne,
Pitched on a Poale the grisly head of him that was her Son.
Where Zethus with his ruffling Crew of Gallants young and stout
Dragd, hald, and pulled, the hateful corps of Dirce, all about.
Where bushy bloudied brambles show which way the Bull her drew:
Ne'er where dame Ino from a Rock her self in Sea down threw.
So that poor mother though she meant t'auoyde one fault by flight:
Yet she thereby a worse procu•'d, while like a s•rly wight
She bother self and eke her son from Scyron hurled down
Intending both her self and him in foaming Sea to drown.
Oh happy, yea thryse happy they, that had so good an bop:
And whom such mothers pitiful carst daudled in their lap.
Yea yet there is in these same woods an other place to me
Thats due by right, and rightly may me challenge as his fee.
Where I am Infant out was laid, al Fortunes to abide:
I thither will direct my course of try what may betide.
Isle neither stop no stay till that I be arrived there,
For guide I reck not, neither force for Stumbling any where.
Why stay I thus like dastard drudge to hasten unto it?
Sith well I know it lotted is to be my grave and Pit?
Let me mine own Cytheron mount enjoy in quiet state,
It is mine old and ancient bower, appointed me by fate.
I pray thee be not discontent that I should (aged) die,
Even there, where life I should have lost in pueling infancy.
I yield me here with willing hart unto those tortures all
That erst to me were due, and which to others have befall:
To thee I speak O bloody mount, fierce, cruel, steep and fell,
As well in that thou sparest some, as that thou some dost quell.
This c•rton corps, this sinful soul, this carcass here of mine
Long time agony by right good Law and property is thine.
Now yet at length perform the hest that erst enjoined was
To thee by those my parents both, now bring their doom to pass.
My hart even longs till I may s• fully sati••y
By this my death that their decree, that glad I am to die.
Ah Daughter, Daughter, why would thou thus keep me against my mind?
In this so vile incestuous love? thou art but now to kind.
Oh stay me not I thee desire, behold, behold, I hear
My Fathers ghost to bid me come apace, and not to fear.
O Father mine I come, I come, now father cease thy rage:
I know (alas) how I abused my Fathers hoary age:
Who had to name King Laius: how hee doth fret and fry
To see such lewd disparagement: a•d none to blame but I.
Whereby the Crown usurped is, and he by murder slain.
And Bastardly incestuous brood in Kingly throne remain.
And lo•, dost thou not plainly see, how he my panting Ghost
With raking paws doth hale and pull, which grieves my conscience most?
Dost thou not see how he my face bescratcheth tyrant wise?
Tel me (my Daughter) hast thou seen Ghosts in such grisly guise?
Antig I see &amp; mark each thing full well. Good father leave this mind.
And take a better if you can: from this your self unwind.
O what a beastly cowardice is in this breast of mine?
Was I so stout and venturous in pulling out mine Even?
And shall all courage be employed against one only part
Of Body, and from other parts shall valour wholly start?
Let none of all these puling tricks nor any faint excuse
Thus daunt thy sprites, let no delay to baseness thee induce:
Dispatch at once, why lingre I, as one thats loath to dye?
Why live I? first because I can no longer mischiefs try?
Yes that I can, wretch though I be: and therefore tel I thee,
Dear Daughter, that the sooner thou might hence depart from me.
Depart a maid and Virgin hence, for fear of after claps:
Since villainy to Mother shewde, its good to doubt mishaps.
No force, no power, no violence, shall make me to withdraw
My duty unto thee my Sire, to whom I vow mine awe.
I will not be dissevered, no pulled from thy side.
I will assist thee, while that breath shall in this Breast abide.
My Brothers twain let them contend, and fight for Princely swaye
Of wealthy Thebes: where meanwhile raignd King Labdacke many a day.
The greatest share and portion that I do loke to have
Out of my Fathers Kingdom, is my Fathers life to save.
Him neither shall Etheocles my elder brother take
Away from me, who now by force the Thebane realm doth rake.
No Polynices, who as now is Mustering men apace.
From Argos Land: with full intent his brother to displace.
No, though y• world went all on wheels: though Jove should frō aboue
Hurl flashing flakes upon the Earth, all shall not quail my love.
No, though his thumping thunderbolt (when wee together stand)
Should light between vs, where as we are plighted hand in hand)
Yet will I never thee forsake, but held my handfast still:
Therefore its bootless father dear, to counter•aund my will
In this my full resolved mind. Forbid me if you please.
But surely I will be your guide in weal, woe, dole, &amp; case.
And maugre al your sharpe reprofes (though much against your mind)
I will direct your steppes and gate, that you your way may find:
Through thick &amp; thin, through rough and smooth I will be at an inch
In hill and dale, in wood &amp; grove, Isle serve at every pinch.
If that you go where danger lies, and seek your own annoy,
You shall well prove, that I to lead the dance will not be coy.
Advise your self therefore, of twain to which I guide shall be:
My count is cast, I am full bent with you to live and die.
Without me perish can you not: but with me, well you may,
It boots not, in other sort to move me ought to say.
Here is an huyge Promontory that elboes into Sea
Let vs from thence throw down our selves, and work our last decay,
If that ye will. Here also is a flinty Rock beside,
Which if you please shall serve our turns: Here beaten with the tide
Bee craggy Cliffs, let's go to them: Here runs a gulphy stream
With force before it driving stones as big as mountain beam.
What say you? shall wee drench our selves within this fomy Flood?
Go where you will, take which you list, do as you deem it good.
Conditionally that I may first receive the wound of death:
I reck no whit, I ready stand to yield up vital breath.
I neither draw you to nor fro: but even as best you think
So doe, so deal. Would you so fain Deaths bitter cup to drink?
My lord and Father, take you death so great a boon to bee?
If that you dye (this I assure) die first you shall me see.
If life in show more pleasant seem, if so you rather choose,
I am to wait upon you still and never will refuse.
But change this mind wherein you rest, take hart a grace, and show
The noble magnanimity that erst in you did flow:
Resist these pangs, subdue these dumps by valour of the mind,
Let manly courage qualify these your affections blind.
Tic great dishonour thus to yield your self to dolor thrall,
No storm of adverse hap thus ought a Princes hart t'appall.
This gear surmounted far the reach of my capacity:
I am astonn'd, I feel my self rapt with an ecstasy,
Is this not wonder of so lewd, and of so cursed a tree
Such fruit to grow? of graceless Sire so good a child to see?
Is it not strange that in a house distained in villainy
Such noble show of towardness and virtuous gifts should lye?
Let me some speech to thee direct, dame Fortune: how haps this
That here my daughter so unlike to wretched father is?
Degenerating from his steps, and with such virtue fraught,
As in her Fathers cursed house she never yet was taught?
Is it (I pray thee) credible, that out of •ie should s•ring
Such issue, as should given be to any honest thing?
No truly, no: it cannot bee (my fates full well I know)
None such, (unless to doe me scart and mischief) would be so.
T'encrease the heap of mine annoy no strange effect shall want.
Dame Nature in her Creatures will new affects implant.
The River shall return his course to Fountain back again,
Dan Phoebus Lamp shall bring the Night, and Night shall day remain,
So that my grievous miseries with surplusage may grow.
But be as tic: I for a while will play my part also,
And show some spark of piety, my fault to counteruayle:
With murtdroue knife, my woeful days to end I will not fail.
The only help for Oedipus, the only safe•y is
To rid himself, and so redeem that Hellish fact of his.
Let me take vengeance on my self for wrongs to father donne,
Whose Death is yet vnexp•ate, by me his cursed son.
Why dost thou shake and tremble thus thou hand, not good for ought?
Why flaggrest thou to stab him in, who Sire to spoil hath brought?
That punishment which hither •o by pulling out mine eyes
Thou hast inflicted on me, is but as a sacrifice,
Or guerdon due for villainy which I committed have
With mother mine. Now Daughter sloute, leave of pretences brave,
Allege no g•oses: but with speed let go thy Fathers hand:
Thou make me die a lingering death within this loathed land.
Thou think I am alive, but I am dead long while ago:
To this my hateful Corps at length the rytes of Burial show.
Thou meanest well, (I know) but yet therein thou dost offend:
Though colour for thy piety I see thou dost pretend.
But piety it cannot be, to drag thus up and down
Thy Fathrs Corpse unburied through City, Field, and Town.
For bee that doth enforce a man against his will to dye:
And he that stays him that would fain dye, most willingly,
Are both alike in equal fault, and stand in eagle plight.
To hinder one that would be dead is m•••h bring h•n•ou•right.
Yet not so great as tother is. I would be more content
To have my death commanded me, then from me to be •ent.
Desist from this thy purpose (Maid) my life and death both are
To dispose at my liberty, with choice to spill or spare,
I willingly res•gnd the Crown of Thebane soil: yet I
Do still retain upon my self the entire Sovereignty▪
If I may make account of thee as of a trusty fear,
And true compagnion at assays: deliver even here
Into thy Fathers hand a Swore: but tell me, dost thou reach
The Sword embrewd in fathers blood, wherewith my sons impeach
The course of Law, possessing it and kingdom all by force?
Where so it is doubt is there none, but clean without remorse
There bee the F•••dgates opned wide, to al licentious lust.
And thriftless trades: I al my claim therein do rake in dust,
And clean forsake. Let both my Sons by Legacy enjoy
The same, wherewith they surely shall contrive non small annoy.
For me pile rather up a stack of wood set all on fire,
That I therein may thrust my self: that is my chief desire:
And make an end at once of all this carrion Tarkasse vile.
Where is the surging wau••s Sea? why stay I all this while?
Bring me to some steep breakneck fall: bring me where Ismene flood
With swift and horned course doth run••, bring me whereas my blood.
With goaryng push of savage beasts may out be let at once.
To some Gulf bring me, where the fall and tide may crush my Bones.
If needs thou wilt my guide remain, as oft thou dost me tell)
Bring me that am disposed to dye, where Sphiox that Monster fell
With double shape opposed them that passed by the way,
Propounding Riddles intricate, and after did them slay.
There would I bee, that place I seek: thy Father thither bring
Into that Monsters Cabin dire thy Monstrous Father fling.
That though that Monster be dispatcht, the place may bee supplied
With one as bad or worse then bee: there will I far and wide
In terms obscure report and tell my heavy luckless lot.
The mysteries whereof the bearers, v•derstandeth not.
Give ear to that which I shall speak, mark thou Assyrian borne,
Consider this thou Thebane, where Duke Cadmus men were torn
And slain in wood by Serpents rage: where Dirce seely trull
In humble sort at Alter lies: aduert my tale at full
Thou, that in Lacedaemon dwells, and honorst Castors grace,
And Pollux eake, two brethren twynnes. Find out this doubtful case.
Or thou that dwelst in Elis town or by Parnassus hill,
Or thou that tell Baeotia ground, there reaping gain at will.
Hark, listen well, and flatly say, if ever heretofore
That murdrous monster Sphinx of Thebes that men in pieces tore,
In all his riddles asked the like, or of so strange a sort?
Or whether so insolubly his terms he cold report?
The Son in Law to Grandfather, the Rival of his Sire:
The Brother of his little Babes: to Brethren, father dire:
The Grandmother at every birth to Husband (graceless Elf)
Brought forth a Son or Daughter, which was Nephevv to her self.
How say you Sirs, in Riddle dark, who hath so good insight,
That able is the sense hereof t'vnfold and tell aright?
As for my self, although the Sphinx I meanwhile put to foil:
Yet mine own heavy destiny I scarcely can assoyle.
Why dost thou (Daughter) labour loose in using further speech?
To alter this my stony hart why dost thou me beseech?
I tel thee plain. I fully mean this blood of mynt to spill.
That long with Death hath struggling kept: and thereupon I will
Descend to dark infernal Lake: for this same darkness blind
Of both mine eyes is nothing such, as fact of mine should find.
It were my Bliss to bee in Hell in deepest dungeon fast:
Now that which should long since have been, I will perform at last.
I cannot be debarred from Death: wilt thou deny me glove
Or Sword, or knife? wilt thou no tool for mischief let me have?
Wilt thou both watch and ward each way, where daūger lies in wait?
Shall such a sinful Caitiff wretch as I, be keep so strait?
Wilt thou not suffer me with Cord to break my hateful Neck?
Can thou keep me from poisonous herbs? hast thou them al at beck?
What shall it thee prevail to take for me such earnest care?
Death each where is: and ways to death in thousand corners are.
Herein hath God good order tan, that every felie Foe,
May take away an others life, but Death hee cannot so.
I seek not any tool to have: this desprate mind of mine
Can use the service of my hand, my thread of life t'vntwine.
Now hand, thy moister at a pinch assist to work his feat,
Help him with all thy power and strength, t'exployt his purpose great.
I point thee not in this my Corps unto one place alone:
Alas, each part of me with guilt is plaunch and overgrown.
In which soever part thou wilt, thy Massacre begin,
And seek to bring me to my death which way thou may it win.
In pieces crush this body all, this hart that harbors sin
Pluck out, out all my entrails pull, proceed, and never linne
To gash and cut my wezand pipe. My veins asender scratch,
And make the Blood come spouting out, or use that other match,
Which heretofore thou used haste: dig where mine eyes erst stood:
And let these wounds gush out apace much mattry filth and blood.
Hale o•t of me this loathed soul that is so hard and stout:
And thou dear father Laius stand up and look about:
Behold where ever that thou standst: I Umpire doe the make,
And eyed Judge of all my plagues that justly here I take.
My Fact so lewd, so horrible, so loathsome to bee told
I never thought with any price or torments manifold
Could have full expiation: no thought I it enough
To die this death: or in one part to be beslasshed through.
By piecemeal I am well content to suffer torments all
And even by piecemeal for to die: for plagues to plague me call.
Exact the punishment that's due: I here most ready stand
To satis•e with any death that law and right hath scand.
My former smarts, when as mine eyes I raked out with paws,
Were but as tastes of sacrifice, somewhat to help my cause.
Come therefore (Father) near to me, and thrust this hand of mine
More nearer into every wound. It sue•ru'de and did decline
For fear, when first it took th'assay mine eyes to ransack out.
I bear it still in memory, my eyes then star'de about
And seemed to dissuade the hand from doing of the charge
Whereto it was enjoined tho, and had Commission large.
Thou shalt well think that OEdipus dissembles not a whit•
But what his word hath warranted, his deed hath firmly quit.
Thy stoutness then, was not so great when eyes thou pulledst out
As was thy man a•oaten, when thou threwst them from thee round about.
Now, by those Gyeholes thrust thy hand into the very brain:
That part where death attempted was, let death be sought again.
Undaunted Prince, must noble Sire, with humble mind. I sue
That I your Daughter may be bold to use some s•each to you:
And that you would with patience digest my poor •dues:
My suite is not to draw your mind to things, that erst in price
You highly 〈◊〉, me to the view of glittering Palace old▪
No bravery of your noble Realm, scarce able to •ee told:
But that you would these ireful fits, by trace of time now quaild,
W•th patient mind sustain and bear: this virtue never faylde
I• any Prince of such a spright as in your noble Grace
Appears bright: it s••th not that such should once abase
Themselves as thralls to Sorrows check 〈◊〉 the conquest yield
To a•uerse 〈…〉 like 〈…〉
It is no praise, sir, though perhaps you so your reckoning cast
To make of life so small account, and thus to bee aghast
At every wagging of a leaf, and cumbersome mischance:
No, no, tic virtue in such case high courage to advance.
And when things are at worst, to show true magnani••itie:
Not like a Meycocke, cowardly at eche alarm to flee.
Hee that hath tried all fortunes spite and worldly wealth despised,
And constantly hath borne all brunts that are to be devised,
Me thinks no cause hath, why he needs to end his b•eating •ayes
O• wish himself in grave: for why, starcke cravens use such ways.
But as for him, thats drenched in dole and wrapped in corking care,
Whose pensius plight can be no worse, nor taste of sowrer fare,
That man hath cause well pleas•• to be: sith hee in safety stands,
And pikes hath past, and now is free from fear of further bands.
Put case the Gods would wra•e the web of further woe to thee,
What more can any of them doe thy grieves to amplify?
Nay, thou thy self, (although thou would) can add thereto no more,
Unless thou think thy self, to have deserved death therefore.
And yet, thou art not worthy death: my reason is, because
Through ignorance thou did a fact contrary to the laws.
And therefore Father think your self most guiltless in the case,
And (maugre Gods) stand on your guard, my counsel sound embrace:
For doubtless you an innocent are deem'de and thought to bee,
And are in deed: what makes you thus in dumps and doleful glee?
What cause so great should so enchant your conscience, and your wits,
To seek your own decay and spoil? what mean faint hearted fits?
That thus in hast you would so fine abandon this your life
And go to hell, where torment dwells and grisly ghosts be rife.
You would not see Sun, Moon, no Star: no more you can: your eyes
Are blind: you fine would leave your Court, and Countries miseries.
Why so you may, and so you doe. These all are put to sack,
That now alive, as well as dead you feel of these the lack.
You flee from Mother, Wife, and C•ylde, you see no man •live:
What more can death dispatch away but life doth now deprive?
your lords, your knights, your courtly train, your kingly state &amp; crown
Your grand Affairs, your weighty charge is gone &amp; brought abowne.
From whom, frō what, do you thus flee.
Frō none but frō my self
Who have a breast full fraught with guilte: who, wretched caitiff Elte
Have all imbrued my hands with blood. From these apace I flee
And from the heavens and Gods therein: and from that villainy
Which I most wicked wretch have wrought. Shall I tread on this ground?
Or am I worthy so to doe, in whom such tricks abound?
Am I to have the benefit of any Element?
Of Ayre for breath, of water moist, or Earth for nourishment?
O Slave forlorn, O beastly wretch, O Incestmonger vile,
O Varlet most detestable, O Peysaunte full of guile.
Why doe I with polluted Fist, and bloody paws presume
To touch thy chaste and comely hand? I foam, I fret, I fume
In hearing any speak to me. Ought I hear any tell
Or once of Son or Father speak, sith I did Father quell?
Would God it were within my power my Senses all to stop,
Would God I could these Ears of mine, even by the stumps to crop.
If that might bee, then (daughter) I should not have heard thy voice.
I, I thy Sire, that thee be got by most incestuous choice.
Beegetting of thee, makes my crimes more then they were before:
Remorse thereof both gnaw and grype my conscience more and more.
Ofttymes that which mine Eyes not see, with Ears that doe I hear,
And of my Facts before time done the inward wound I bear.
Why is there stay made of my doom? Why am I spared so long?
Why is not this blind head of mine thrown damned ghosts among?
Why rest I on the Earth, and not among infernal Sprightes?
Why pester I the company of any mortal Wights?
What mischief is there more behind? to aggravate my care?
My Kingdom, Parents, Children, Wit and Virtue quailed are
By sturdy storms of froward Fate: nothing remained but tears,
And they bee dryde, and Eyes be gon: my hardened heart forbears
Such signs of grace: leave of therefore, and make no more add:
A mind so mated with despair no suytes will slowpe unto.
I practise some strange punishments agreeing to my deed:
But what proportion can bee found of plagues unto my mead?
Whose Fortune ever was so bad? I was in sooner borne,
But seely Infant Judged I was in pieces to be torn.
My mother in whose womb I lay, forth had not me yet brought
And yet even then I feared was: and straight my death was sought.
Some Babes soon after they bee borne, by stroke of death depart:
But I poor soul, before my birth adjudged was to dart
Of death: some yet in Mothers womb, ere any light they see
Doe taste the dint of hasty Fate, while Innocents they bee.
Apollo by his Oracle pronounced sentence dire
Upon me being yet unborn, that I unto my Sire
Should breastly parricide commit: and thereupon was I
Condemned straight by Fathers doom. My Feet were by and by
Launcde through, &amp; through with yrō Pins: hanged was I by ye Heals
Upon a Tree: my swelling plants the print thereof yet feels:
As pray to Beasts, cast out also, to cram their greedy Jaws
In Mount Cythaeron, and to fill the griping Vultures Mawes.
Such Sauce to taste full like was I, was others heretofore
Descended of the royal Sangue, with smart (perforce) have bore.
But see the chance: I thus condemn'de by Dan Apollos hest
And cast to beasts by Fathers doom, and every way distressed,
Could find no death: no death on me durst seize his lordly Paw,
But fled from me, as though I had not been within his Law.
I verified the Oracle, with wicked hand I kilde
Mine own dear Father, and unawares his guiltless blood I spilde.
Shall any satisfaction redeem so vile an Act?
May any kind of Piety purge such a shameful fact?
I rested not contented thus. For Father being slain,
I fell in links of lawless Love with Mother: Oh what payne
And grudge of mind sustained I there? in thinking on the same,
To tell our wicked wedlock Yoke, I loath, I blush, I shame.
I may not well this gear conceal, Isle tell it: out it shall:
Though to my shame it much redound, it may augment my thrall.
I will display strange villainies, and them in number many,
Most beastlike parts, most lewd attempts, to bee abhorred of any.
So filthy, and so monstrous, that (sure I think) no Age
Will them believe to have been done: so cruel was my rage,
That even each cutthroat Partrcide thereat may be ashamed
To hear it named: and with disdain straight ways will be inflamed.
My hands in Fathers blud emb•rude to Fathers Bed I brought.
And have with Mother mine, his Wife, incestuous practyse sought.
To mischief adding mischief more: I wis my fault to Sire,
Is slender in comparison: my graceless fond desire
Could not bee staide, till solemnly the marriage Knot was knit
Twixt me and Mother mine, alas for want of grace and wit.
How plungde am I in mischief still? how is the measure full
Of horrors vile, which doe my mind and heart asunder pull?
And least the heap of these my woes might seem to bee too scant,
My Mother (she my Wife that is) young issue doth not want.
Can any crime in all the World more heinous be surmisde?
If any may: by wicked Imps the same I have devised.
My Realm and Crown I have resignde, which I received as hire
For murdering most vunaturally the king, my Lord, and Sire,
Which Crown now since, twixt both my sons hath kindled mortal war.
And all the country by the ears remains at deadly jar.
I know full well what destinies to this same Crown belonges.
None without Blood the same shall wear, and most accursed wrongs.
This mind of mine (who Father am) presages many ills:
And gloomy days of slaughter dire: the plot that murder wills.
Already is co••u's and cast: all truth of word and deed
Is quite exiled, al promise broke of pactes before decreed.
Etheocles, the one of my sons who now in princely throne
Beats all the sway, means still to keep the Diadem alone.
Poor Polynices th'o other son, thus being dispessest,
And kept by force from Kingly rule his humble suit addressed
Unto the Gods this wrong to wreak, this breach of league and ot∣h
T'auenge and plague: he Argos soil end Greekish Cttyes both
Persuades t'assist him in this wary, this quarrel to maintain:
That he in Thebes (as promise was) might have his turn to reign.
The ruin that to wearied Thebes shall grievously befall
And bring the pompous state thereof down, shall not be small.
Fire, sword, glove, woūds, &amp; thwackīg thūps, shall light unto their share,
And that ere long: and mischiefs worse (it any worse there are)
And this shall hap, that all the world may know it is the rac•
And issue of a curried Sire that darraygnes such a case.
Though other causes none there were to move you (sic) to live,
Yet is this one sufficient, that you by awe may drive
Your sons my Brethren tarring thus to unity and peace:
For you their Father only may their furies cause to tease.
You and none else may turn away thoccassons of this war:
These bransicke youths from further rage you only may debar.
By this your means the country shall their quiet peace enjoy
And Brethren jointly reconcild shall work no more annoy.
If you therefore this mortal life thus to your self •any:
You many thousands shall vndge, whose states on you rely.
What? can thou make me to believe, that any spark of greece
Or love to Sire, or honesty in them hath any place,
Which thirst for one on others blood, which after kingdoms gape,
Whose whole delight is villainy, werre, wurther, guile and rape?
Such hateful ympes on mischief set, such wicked Termagosites,
As to be sons of such a Sire with shame may wake their vaunts.
At one bare word to tel thee all: thy brethren two are bent
Upon all mischief, weighing not what looseness they frequent.
When flingbrayne rage ensots their heads, they care not they a rush
Upon what Devilish vile attempts they give the desprat push.
And as they are conceived and borne in most abhorred sort,
So still devoid of Grace they think all villainy but sport.
Their Fathers shame and wretched state moves them no whit at all,
To Country they no reckoning make what massacre befall.
Their minds are ravished with desire ambitiously to reign.
I know their drifts, and what they hope at length by shifts to gain.
And therefore sith the case so stands I leyser had to die
With posting speed while in my house there is none worse then I.
Alas, dear Daughter what ado dost thou about me make?
Why least thou prostrate at my knees? why dost thou travail take,
To conquer my resolved mind with this thy spiced phrase
Of fair entreaty? these thy words my flinty hart amaze.
Dame Fortune hath none other bait to bring me to her lure
Then this alone: till now I still vnbanquisht did endure.
No Creatures words but thine alone could pearce this hart of mine,
No from a purpose resolute my settled mind butwyne.
Thou conquer can thaffections fond that in my breast do boyle,
Thou teach grace to fathers house, and zeal to native soil.
Each thing to me delightful is which jumped with thy will:
Command me (Daughter) I thy hestes am ready to fufill.
Old Oedipus if thou enjoin, will pass the Aegaean Sea:
And flashing flakes of Aetna Mount, with mouth he dare assay.
He boldly dare object himself to ramping Dragons claw
Which raged, &amp; swelled and venom spit apace, when as he saw
Dan Hercules away to steal his golden Apples all
In Gardens of Hesperides. At thy command, he shall
His Entrails offer unto iobbe of greedy Vultures Bill:
At thy command, content he is in life to linger still.
Renowned Prince, of royal Race
and Noble lygne yspronge:
The Thebans dreading much the drife
of this your childrens throng,
And warlike garble now in hand,
most humbly pray your Grace
For Countries safety, down to set some order in the case.
They bee not threats and menaces that thus their minds affright:
The mischief is more near then so: the Enemy is in sight.
For Polynices he that is your younger son of twain,
Doth claim the crown, and in his turn in Thebes requires to reign
According unto covenants made: which quarrel to decite
Hee purposes the dene of sword, and mar•tall force t'abide.
With him he brings a mighty Troupe from every part of Greece,
Sir, seven Du••ce, hesieging Thebes are minded it to flees.
Help noble King, else are wee like to perish man and child,
These bloody broils of civil war from vs protect and shield.
Am I one like to stop the rage of any wicked act?
Am I one like to cause these Youths to leave their bloody fact?
Am I a moister like to teach what laws of love do mean?
Should I not then from former quiz digress in nature elaine?
They tread their Fathers steps aright, they play my lawless pranks:
Like Sire, like Sons, like Tree, like fruit: I con thē hearty thanks:
By this I know them for my Sons, and praise their towardness:
I would they should by peevish parts, whose Sons they be, express.
Show forth you noble Gallant ympes, what mottled minds you bear,
Show forth by deeds your valour great, let lofty sprights appear.
Surmount and dim my praises all, Eclipse my glory quite:
Attempt some enterprise in which your Sire may have delight
To have till now remained in life: hereof I have no doubt:
For well I know your practise is strange feats to bring about.
Your birth and ligne from whence you sprung, assures me of no less
Such noble Bloods must needs achieve some doughty worthiness.
Your Weapons and Artillery for war bring out with speed,
Consume with flame your native Soil, and desolation breed
In every house wirhin the Land: a hurly burly make
Confusedly of every thing. Make all the Realm to quake,
And in exile their days let end make level with the ground
Eche fenced Fort and walled Town: The Gods and all confound,
And throw their Temples on their heads: Their Images deface,
And melt them all: turn vps• down eche house in every place.
Burn, spoil, make havoc, leave no jot of City free from fire,
And let the flame begin his rage within my Chamber dire.
Sir, banish these vnpatient pangs, let plagues of Cōmon wealth
Entreat your Grace, sith upon you stayth all their hope and health.
Procure your sons to reconcile themselves, as brothers ought,
Establish peace between them both, let means of love be sought.
Oh daughter, see and well behold howe I to peace am bent?
And how to end these garboils all I seem full well content?
My mind (I tell thee) swells with ire: within my entrails boils
Abundant stoare of Choler fell: such restless rage turmoils
My inward Soul, that I must yet some greater matter brew:
Which may the Realm enwrap in bale, and cause them all to rue.
That which my rash and heady sons have hitherto begone
Is nothing in respect of that which must by me be don.
This civil war is nothing like to that which I devise:
These trifling broils for such a Sea of harms cannot suffice.
Let brother cut the brothers throat with murthrous knife in hand:
Yet is not this enough to purge the mischiefs of this lend.
Some heinous Fact, unheard of yet, some detestable deed
Must practiced hee: as is to me. and mine by Fates decreed.
Such custom haunts our cursed race: such guise our house hath caught:
My vise incestuous Bed requires, such pageants to be wrought.
To me your Father Weapons reach, my self here •et me shroud
In covert of these queachy woods: and let me be allowde
To lurk behind this Craggy Rock, or else my self to hyde
On backside of some thickset hedge: where lying vnespide,
I hearken may what marketfolkes in passing to and fro
Do talk: and what the country Clowns speak, as by way they go.
There (sith with eyes, I cannot see) with ear • yet may I bear
How cruelly my Sons by war do one the other tear.
A fortunate and happy Dame Agave may be thought,
Who (though with bloody hands) her son to fatal death she brought,
And from the shoulders chopped his head, and bore the same about
In b•oudy hand, at Bacchus feast withau th'inspired rout
Of sacrificers, quartering poor Penthouse mangled limbs:
Though this her cruel fact, somewhat her commendation dymmes:
Yet even in these her frantic fits she stayde her self in time
From further harm, not adding more to aggravate her crime.
My guilt were light, if I had not some others guilty made:
And yet is this but matter light: I took a biler trade.
For, Mother I am unto those that in all vice excel,
And who in most abhorred sins condignly bear the bell.
To all my woes and miseries there wanted only this,
That I should love my Countries foe, who Polynices is.
Three snowy Winters passed are, and Summers three be gone,
Since be an exiled wretch abroad hath lead his life in moan:
And sought his bread among the fremmd: till now compelled perforce.
Hee craves relief of Greekish Kings, on him to have remorse.
Hee married hath the Daughter of Adrastus, who at beck
Rules Argiue people, swaying them with awe of Princely check:
And he to advance his son in law to his most lawful right
Hath with him brought from seven Realms a warlike Crew to fight.
What doom I should in this case give, which side I wish to win,
I cannot tell: my mind amazed, yet doubtful rests therein.
Th'one of my Sons (as right it is) requires the Crown as due:
I know it so accorded was: his cause is good and true.
But in such sort, by force of Arms to rely maund the same,
Is ill and most unnatural, herein he is to blame.
What shall I doe, what may I say? I mother am to both:
And thus my Sons at deadly fewde to see I am full loath.
Without the breach of mother zeal I can no way devise:
For what good had I wish to th'one, thence th'others harm doth rise.
But though I love them both alike, yet sure my heart inclines
To him that hath the better cause: though wronged thus, he pines:
As one by frowning fortune thrilde from pillar unto post:
His Credit, Country, friends, and wealth, and treasure being lost.
The weaker side I will support, and further al I can,
Most mercy always should vt shewde unto th'oppressed man.
While (Madame) you waymēting here your heavy plaints declare
And waste the time, my Lords your Sons in taunged battle are:
Eche Captains bright in Armour stands, the Trumpet sounds amain,
And Standard is advanced, amid the throng of either train.
In marshall ray full pressed to fight stand seven worthy Kings:
And eche of them a warlike troupe of valiant Soldiers brings.
With courage not behind the best, the Thebanes marche apace:
And like right ympes of Cadmus brood, do slash at Enmies face.
The Soldiers force and willingness on either side to fight,
Appears: in that they nothing less pretend them shameful flight.
See how their trampling to and fro, the dust to Skies doth rear,
And what a Cloud of Smoke in Camp the horses make t'appeare.
And if my fear dismay me not: It all be true I see:
Me thinks I view their glittering glaues begoard with blood to bee.
Me thinks I see the Voward thrill and shake their Pikes in hand:
Me thinks I see the Gydons gay, and Streamers where they stand:
Wherein is wrought by curtous skill, in Letters all of Gold
The Scotchion, Post, Name and Arms of every captain bold.
Make hast, be gone, dispatch. (Madame) Cause Brethren to agree:
Betwixt them stay this quarrel, least a slaughter great ye see.
So shall you to your Children love, to each side peace restore:
The mothers mediation may heal up all the Soar.
Post, post, be gone, and trudge for life:
Queen mother make no stay:
That twixt my Brothers, perfect league
and truce continue may.
You that be Mother to them both,
use your auctority:
Out of their hands their weapons wrest,
and make them wars defy.
Your bared Breasts which once they sucked,
hold out amid their Swords:
Bear of the brunt of all their blows, or end this war with words.
Thy talk I like, I will be gone: Isle go with might and mayne:
This head of mine I ieoperd will, between them to be slain.
In thickest throng of all the Troupes I purposd am to stand,
And try what grace, or courtesy remains in either Bond.
If Brothers bear malicious minds each other to subdue,
Let them first onset give on wee, and me to death pursue.
If either of them be endued with any spark of grace,
Or Natures laws or Filial awe doth any whit embrace,
Let him at mothers suite lay down his Pikes and glaues of war,
And weapons of hostility let him abandon far.
And he that cancard stomach bears his Brother there to quell,
Forgetting Nature, let him first with me his Mother mell.
These heady youths from further rage I seely Trot will staye:
I wittingly will not behold such mischief cary sway.
Or if I live to see the same, it shall not bee alone.
The Standards are displayed in field, the Enemies are prone
To fall to fight: the clashing noise of weapons hear you may.
Much murder, death, and dreadful dule, cannot be far away.
Their stony hearts go mollify, with sugared terms persuade
Their wilful minds O Oueene, before they f•riously invade
The one the other: yonder see how they in armour bright
Bestir themselves from place to place: (O dire and dismal sight.)
My trickling tears, my blubbering Eyes, may put you out of doubt
That all is true which I have said: look, look, how al the route
O• either part doth slowly march as loath (belike) to try
By dent of Swerd so strange a case: But both my brothers hie
Apace, to grapple force to force, and join with handy blows:
This day will breeede the bitter smart of ever during woes.
What whirlwind swift might I procure to bear me through the ayre?
What monstrous flying Sph••• will help, that I were quickly there?
Of all the Birds Stimphalides (with wings so huge and large
That Phoe bur rays they shadowed quite) will any take the charge
To cary me to yonder place? what ravenous Harpy Bird
With ugly talents all with fled, and dirty dung befurde,
(Which hungrestarud King Phineus, that had put out the Eyes
Of children his) will at this pinch a mean for me deuyse,
That I aloft may hoised bee, and with al speed be set,
Where yonder cruel armies two in open field be met?
She runs apace, like one of wit and senses all distract:
No Arrow swifter out of Bow: no Ship with Sail full thwacked
With wind at will more way can make with motion such sh•e flies
As gliding Star whose looms do draw a Furrow lunge in Skies.
As much aghast she trots apace: and now in Camp she stands:
Her presence and arrival there hath parted both the Bands.
At mothers great entreaty made, the bloody broil is hushed:
And where before with goring Glove the one at tother pushed,
With full intent to kill and slay, appeased is now their ire
And they well pleased to bend to peace, as she doth them require.
The Sword again in sheath is put, that lately out was drawn
To posh out Brains of Brothers Scull: she ceases not to fawn
Upon them both, their strife to stint: her gray and hoary hairs,
Her Snow white lockes with tears besprent in ruthful sort she •eats.
She Motherlike seeks how to link their hearts in one assent,
With brinish tears she wettes the cheeks of him thats malcontent.
That Child that staggryng lunge doth stand, with mother to dispute,
May seem unwilling mind to bear to yield to Mothers suit.
Against me only turn the force
of wreckful Sword and Fire:
Let all the Youths with one accord
repay to me that hire,
That earnde I have by due desert:
let both the gallant Band
Of them that come from Argos soil,
and them of Thebane Land
Come run upon me all at once: let neither friend no foe
Refrain a whit his bloody blade at this my womb to throw.
This womb, this womb, wherein I bare these wilful Brethren here
Beget by him that was my son, and eke my wedded fere.
Dismembre this my Body vile: cast all my limbs abroad:
I am their mother: child wife throws for them I once abode.
You two, my sons, need I to speak, to will you leave your ire?
First not your parts, in such a case t'accomplish my desire?
Will you not plight the faithful league of true and perfect love?
Will you not royntly quarrels all at Mothers suit remove?
That this shall be as I request, come, give me both, your hands
While yet they vndystayned be, and clean from murder stands.
What crime you heretofore have done, against your will it was.
And al that spot which stains your same, by Fortune came to pass.
This haynons Act, this frantic coil you can no wise excuse▪
But wittingly and willingly sound counsel ye refuse.
It rests free within your choice: of these take which ye list:
If peace delight for mothers sake this brabbling broil vntwist.
If such a lewd outrage as this more pleasant seem to bee:
Behold, the same and greater too ye may commit on me.
Who being mother, here oppose my self between you twain:
Ere you do one an other kill, I needs must first be slain.
Take either therefore quite away this strange ungodly jar.
Or if you will not: me dispatch, who stay your wished war?
Alas in this my pensive plight to whom should I direct
My piteous plaint, and earnest suit? to whom might I detect
Mine inward grief and throubed heart? which of them were I best
T'encounter first and fast embrace, to breed my surest rest?
I love them both even equally, affection like I bear
To either party: mother fond and partial else I wear.
The one of them these three years space bath lived in banishment.
But it all covenants may be kept, as at the first was meant,
The other now as turn doth fall, must trudge an otherwhile,
And learn to know what tic to live so long in like exile.
Woe worth this hapiesse heavy hap: shall I not live the day,
To see my sons together once in one self place to stay?
Shall never I behold them both to better concord bent?
Is all affection natural within them both so spent?
Then, Polynices, come thou first, embrace thy Mother dear?
Thou that hast trauaild many amyle, and languished many a year.
That many a storm abidden haste, and many a brunt sustained,
And wearied long with sharpe exile, from Mothers sight been wai•de:
Come unto me, and nearer stand, put up thy Sword again
Into thy shred: thy shivering Spear (that out of hand so fine
Would be discharged at Brothers throat) within this groūd stick fast.
This Shield of thine lay also down. It makes me sore aghast.
It is so big, it will not let this loving breast of mine.
To join and debonairely meet with that sweet heart of thine:
Take of thy he•met from thine head, the Thong thereof vuty.
That I thy Vifuge may behold, and all thy face descry.
Why dost thou backward turn thy head? and glauncest still thine Eye,
And takèst keep of brothers hand for fear of villainy?
Thy body all with these mine Arms I will defend and hyde?
If hee attempt thy 〈◊〉 to spill, his murthrdus blade shall glide
First through these tender sides of mine: why standst thou so amazed?
Dost thou distrust thy Mothers love? think thou her kindness razd?
Poly. I fear in deed, distrusting sore, Sire, Damme &amp; all my kin:
And think that truthles treachery in hearts of all hath bin.
Dame Natures lewes are flung at heel, and nought esteemed be:
No faith in kindred planted is, no true sincerity.
Since I by proof have seen and felt what hurly burly grows
Betwixt vs Brethren: and from thence what Sea of mischief flows:
I may suspect no faster faith in Mother to remain:
Its not unlike, but she likewise will pranks as bad maintain.
Thy sword in hand fast clasped keep: On head thy Basnet tie:
On Left Atme hold thy Target sure, and on thy Guard rely.
At all points armed prepared stand: all future doubts prevent:
Be sure to see thy Brother first t'vnarme himself content.
And now to thee Etheocles some speech I am to use:
Thou first wast cause of all this war, doe not therefore refuse
Down first to lay thy brawling Blade, and yield to Reasons lore:
If name of peace so hateful be, if that thou any more
Entendst this war to prosecute, in this so savage sort,
Let mother yet this courtesy from thee (her son) extort
That some small time of trusty truce thou wilt with willing mind
Consent unto: till I my Son thy Brother most unkind
May after flight go kiss end oil, now first or last of all.
While I for peace entreaty make, you men unarmed I call
To listen unto that I say: thy Brother fears thee:
And thou fear him: and I fear both. But this my fear you see
Is nothing for my self at all, but for th'auayle of both.
Why seem thou thy naked sword to put in sheath so loath?
Be glad to take the benefyte of any little stay:
In matters lewd tic wisdom good to stand upon delay.
You enter into such a war, wherein he speeds best
That vanquished is: both of you fear to be by fraud distressed
Through practiced means and subtle plois of Brothers spiteful drift,
Or ouerteacht by policy of some devised shift.
But if deceive or be deceived by him that is our Friend
Wee needs must be: in such a case wee shall the less offend
In suffering wrong then doing harm: But fear thou not a whit,
You both from ambushed treacheries your Mother will acquit.
What say you Sons: shall this request of mine with you prevail•.
Or shall I curse my luckelesse fey, and on my Fortune rail▪
And judge your Sire an happy man, in that he lives blind
And cannot see the thing which I behold with pensive mind?
In coming unto you, did I bring with me this intent,
To end these broils? or did I come to see some dire event?
Etheocles, some what appeasde, hath pitched his Spear in ground,
And not a weapon blood to shed, in hand of his is found.
Now Polynices, unto thee my former suite I bring,
Regard thy Mothers mournful plight, and yield unto the thing
That she with tears entreats to have. O Son, at length I see,
I hold with hands, I kiss with mouth, I touch with joyful glee
This Face of thine, the sight whereof I wanted have so lunge:
And have more often wished for, then can bee told with tongue.
Thou hast from native Soil been ch•sde to Coast of foreign king,
And crossed been with trouncing force of frowning Fortunes sting.
Thou many a Storm, and many a brunt in many a foaming Sea,
In Wandering sort and banished guise, did oftentimes assay.
Thy Mother at thy Spousal• feast was absent far away,
And could not doe such nuptial Rytes as tell for such a day.
Into thy wedding Chamber she brought thee, no yet thy Bride,
No yet in solemn sort the house with herbs and odours plied:
No yet did with a Ribbon white the wedding Torches tie,
As use and custom wills to bee at such solemynitie.
Adrastus, Father to thy Wife, and father in law to thee,
With Daughter his, hath not defraide much store of gold or Fee.
No Dower hath he bestowed on her, her wealth was very small,
Of Cities, Lands, and Revenues hee gave her none at all.
War, War: is it thou only had, by taking her to Wife:
In lieu of other gifts, hee helps to kindle all this Strife.
Thou Son in law art unto him, that is our Countries Foe:
Thy Native soil thou leave, and to foreign Courts dost go.
Thou feed now at Strangers board, and make more account
Of new acquaintance got abroad; as though it did surmount
The friendship of thy country here: thou art a banished wight,
And liu'st in exile, for no fault, but through thy brothers spite.
In thee appears resemblance plain of all thy Fathers Fate,
In which there •acketh not so much as thoyse of wedded Mate.
Whom with as ill mischance and hap as ever Fathers was,
Thou haste in luckless hour and time of marriage brought to pass.
O Son, thy mothers only hope, for whom such care I take:
Whose sight, now after many years, doth me most •oyfull make.
For whom I have full many a time to Gods devoutly praide:
Whereas in deed, thy new return to me, may well bee said
To take away as great a joy, and bring as great a grief,
As it to these mine aged years is comfort and relief.
I prostrate at the Oracle, besought Apollos Grace
To tell me, when I should not need to further fear thy case.
Who flouting this my fond demand, anon did flatly tell,
And spake these words, which yet (I trow) I doe remember well.
Thou fear thy son, least harm he take, as is a mothers guise:
But thou I say more cause shalt have, to fear him otherwise.
For if this war vnraisde had been I should thy presence lack:
And if thou were not, Thebane Land might free remain from Sack.
The sight of the doth cost vs all a hard and nipping price,
Yet doth it like thy mother well: so that her sound advice
In this one thing thou follow will. Dispatch these Armies hence:
Even presently, while yet of blood there hath not been expense.
So foul a Fact to bee so near, is heinous out of doubt:
I shake, I quake to think thereon, in every Joint throughout.
My hair stands upright even for fear, two brethren thus to see
Aloof, and ready one to chop at the other, cruelly.
Howneere was I (poor Mother theirs, a bloudier act t'haue seen.)
Then father blind yet ever saw, or ever yet would wean?
And though my fear be overpassed and you have vnbrought to pass:
My self yet doe I wretched think, that done so near it was.
By all the throws for ten months space, in womb whē I thee bare,
And for thy Sisters sake both twain, which shine in very•e rare:
And by those Eyehoales of thy Sire▪ for which with wreakful Paw
Hee pulled his Eyes, because (unawares) hee stained Natures law,
I thee beseech from Thebane Walls sent back these armed Bands,
Which threatening all our throats to cut, against our Country stands:
Yea though you presently depart: yet are you much to blame,
And there is due unto you both, a lot of during shame:
Because this Country round about hath pestered been with power,
And troupes of Soldiers stout and brave, it ready to devour.
With pensive hearts a mourning minds, these Eyes of ours have seen
Your praūcing couriers with their Feet, spoil Theban Meadows greene.
Wee oft have seen your houlty Peers in warlike Chariot ride:
And oft our houses to have brunt with wildfier have been spied.
And last of all▪ An act wee saw (which even to Thebes is strange.)
Two Brethren warring mortally, all Natures bonds to change.
Each one in th'Army saw this sight, the people witness bee.
Your Sisters two, and Mother I this all did plainly see.
Your Father, hee may thank himself: that he did not behold
This lamentable spectacle and hauockes manifold.
Call now to thy remembrance here, thy Father OEdipus,
Whose doom, did Facts (by error done) even plague, &amp; punish thus.
With Fire, &amp; sword subvert not clean (good Son) thy coūtrey dear,
And Thebes whereof thou would be king) surcease with force to tear.
What Bedlam pang enchants thy mind? what might thy meaning bee?
Thou claymst a Realm, which to subvert thou geeuest license free.
In seeking thus a countries rule: a country thou destroy:
Which thou thine own would make, thou marr'st, &amp; (as it were none) an∣noyesto.
Hereby thou hindrest much thy self, in yt thou make spoil,
And burnest up doth Corn and Grass, and keep a shameful coil,
In cha•ing men out of their homes: (O desprate witless part)
What man alive, to waste his own, can thus find in his heart?
These things that thou cōmaundest thus by rage of sword &amp; flame
To bee consumed: an other man thou think doth owe the same.
If thus for princely Chair you twain by th'Eares your title try:
The state of Realm and Commonwealth will totter soon awry.
Seek it, while ye• your Country stands unblemished by decay:
It so t'enioy, and so to reign, I count the better way.
Ah, can thou f••de in heart to burn, and spoil these houses brave?
The like whereof in all the world besides, thou can not have:
Can thou destroy and ruinate the noble Thebane wall,
To whose first building stones apace at Dan Amphions call
Came dancing of their own accord, through tunes of warbling harp:
And •oucht themselves in order right upon the Turrets sharpe,
Without all help of worckmans hand, or Pulley up to draw
Such pieces as most weighty were? Wilt thou by lawless law
Throw down these worthy Monuments? wilt thou from hence convey
And cary with thee all these spoils? wilt thou such pageants play?
Thy Fathers old acquainted mates, wilt thou by force surprise
And lead as captive where thou goosed in proud triumphing wise?
Shall these thy cutthroat Soldiers drag and ••le 〈◊〉 mothers old?
Shall they, graūd Matrons ried in chains, frō 〈…〉 unfold?
Shall Thebane Maids, &amp; Damsels chaste of fresh and lusty Age,
Bee mingled with the raskal rout, and hamperd bee in Cage?
Shall they as presents, forced bee in dabbling dirt to toil
Unto the mincing Mistresses, and Trulls of Argoa Soil?
Shall I thy seely Mother trudge with Pinyond hands behind?
Shall I this triumph of my Chiled to furnish bee assigned?
Can thou with grudgelesse mind, behold thy Countreyfolkes arrow,
Slain, mangled, spoiled, in pieces hewn, thus to their deaths to got?
Can thou bring in a deadly Foe, thy Country to subdue?
Shall streets of Thebes run all with blood? shall all ye Coūtrey rue
Thy coming home with flame and fire? hast thou an heart so hard?
A breast so tipped with flint? a mind to rage so well prepared?
If thus thou fare, and swell with ire whiles yet thou art no King:
What wilt thou bee in Princely throne, if thou should win the Ring?
Surcease therefore and qualify this outrage of thy mind:
In thee let all thy Country, grace and Princely mildness find.
Would you me have, my self so much to loyal duties yield,
As that I should a Pilgrims life like wandering Beast in field
Skud up and down from place to place, without both house &amp; home,
And fleeing native soil, bee forced in foreign Lands to roam?
What other plagues, could you award in justice unto me,
If I my faith or sacred Oath had broken caytifly?
Shall I bear all the punishment for that vile villains guile?
And shall hee false deceitful wretch at my misfortunes smile?
Shall hee in wealth still flaunt it out, and keep this jolly coil?
Shall hee for sins rewarded bee? and I still put to foil?
Well, well, go to, bee as bee may: you bid me wander hence:
I am content: your hard decree to obey is my pretence.
But tell me whither shall I go? Assign me to some place:
Bylike, you would that brother mine should still with shameless face
Possess my stately Palaces, and revel in his ruff,
And I thereat to hold my peace, and not a whit to snuff,
But like a Country Mom to dwell in some poor thatched Cot:
Allow me poor Exile such one: I rest content, God wot.
You know, such Noddyes as I am, are wont to make exchange
Of Kingdoms, for poor thatched Cots, bee like this is not strange.
Yea more: I, matched now to a Wife of noble ligne and race
Shall like a seely Dottipoll live there in servile case,
At beck and check of queenely Wife, and like a kitchen drudge
Shall at Adrastus lordly heals, (my Wives own Father) trudge.
From Princely Port to tumble down into poor servile state,
Is greatest grief that may betide by doom of frouncing fate.
If that thou gape so greedily a Kingly Crown to wear:
And that thou can not rest content, till thou a Sceptre bear:
Behold each quarter of the world affords Kingdoms store.
No doubt thou may win some of them, if that thou seek therefore.
On one side here, lies Tmolus mount, a soil bethwact with Vines:
There runs Pistol•s noble stream with golden Send and mines.
On that side crooked Maeander glides through midst of Phrygia fields:
On this side Hebrus swift of course much fruit to Thracia yields.
Ne'er thereunto lies Gargarus, renoumd each where for Corn,
And Trojan Xanthus swelling flood, that prick and price hath borne.
There Sestos and Abidus stand in mouth of Ionian Sea,
Which now is called Hellespont: and here an other way
Are countries, which more Eastward lye. There Lycia full of Creeks
And Havens strong is situate: these kingdoms, he that seeks,
Is like to win: these would I have thee conquer with thy Sword:
These, these to win let King Addressed to thee his aid afford.
In some of these, let him thee make a King: in Thebes as yet,
Suppose thy father Oedipus in seat of King to sit.
Thy banishment much better is to thee, then this return,
Sith all thy drift is cruelly to wast, to spoil, and burn.
Thy banishment reputed is to grow through others crime:
This thy return, in such a sort to Kingly state to climb,
Is ill and faulty every way: with this thy warlike crew
Thou shalt do better Realms to seek, where bloody guilt no grue.
Yea, this thy Brother, whom thou dost pursue with deadly hate
Whose life, whose health, whose house thou dost with curses dire rahate
Will aid thee with all p•wre he canne: himself will also go
And serve in field for thine avail, against him that is thy foe.
Advance thy power, march boldly forth to take this war in hand.
Wherein thy parents wish thee good, and will thy helpers stand.
A Kingdom got mischievously, and snatched with grudge of mind,
More grievous is then exiles al, of what soever kind.
Of war, the doubtful hazards all set down before thy sight,
And thoroughly weigh thuncertayne chaūce, that lunges to martial •ight.
Though al the power of Greece thou bring thy quarrel to maintain,
And though great armed multitudes of Soldiers thou re•own:
Yet chance of war still doubtful hanges, and hard it is to know,
Who cary shall the victory, thou or thy vowed foe.
Mars to no party tied in: what he decrees, shall be,
As chance allots, so falls it out: this dome abides free.
Sword, hope and fear makes equal those, betw en whom otherwise
Great odds there is: blind Fortunes lot the case between them tries.
Thy rash attempt with crime begone, gropes after doubtful gain:
And fond deuyses enterprisd oft reap deserved payne.
Admit that all the God s in heaven did further thy request,
And to promote thy hoot desire both willing were, and pressed:
Yet al thy friends are fled away, and al recoiled back,
And Soldiers here and there in Fields are come to deadly wrack.
Although thou joy hereat receive, although the spoils thou take
Of vanquished Brother, yet the palm of victory must slake,
And not to thee be given whole. What kind of war (alas)
Is this, think thou? first not more strange then ever any was?
Wherein if he that victor is, joy therein any whyt,
Most execrable wickedness he (doubtless) doth commit.
This Brother thine, whō now so fine thou would bereave of breath,
I wis, if he were once dispatcht, thou would bewale his death.
And therefore make no more ado, but cease from wicked bral,
Rid country out of trembling fear, and parents dole forestall.
What, shall my Brother for this vile and shameful breach of pacie
Go skotfree thus? shall he receive no guerdon for his fact?
Fear not my Son, he shall be paid, and paid again, I trow:
He shall be King and reign in Thebes, his payne shall even be so.
A payne in grain I warrant him. And if thou doubtful be,
Let Grandsire Laius and thy Sire examples be to thee.
Sir Cadmus will the same display, and Cadmus offspring all
Can witness be that none in Thebes yet raygnd without a fall.
None yet the Theban Sceptre swayed, that hath not felt the whip.
And promise breach made most of them from regal Crown to skip.
Now if thou wilt, thou may insert within this bedroll here
Thy Brother.
Mary, that I will, in shame hath he no peer.
And unto me it seems a world of bliss to bee a king
And dye with Kings.
Thy case doth thee in rank of exiles bring.
Reign King, but yet a loathed wight unto thy Subjects all.
For that I neither reck no care what shall to me befall.
That Prince that fears disdainful hate, unwilling seems to raynge.
The God that sways the Golden Globe, together hath these twain
Conioynd and coupled Hate and Rule: and him do I suppose
To be a noble King indeed, that can supplant his foes,
And Subjects cankered hate suppress. A King is often stayed
From doing many things he would, when Subjects love is weighed.
But unto them that do rapine to se him sit aloft,
He may more rigour boldly show, and pare their p•tes more oft.
He that will love of Subjects win, with Elemency must reign:
A King that's hated, cannot long in Kingly seat remain.
For Kingdoms Kings can best describe, what precepts needful are.
Mell thou in cases of Exile: for Kingdoms take no care.
To be a King, I would engage to force of flaming Fire,
Both Country, house, land, Wife, and Child, to compass my desire.
No Fee, to purchase Princely seat, no labour count I lost:
A Kingly Crown is never dear, what ever price it cost.

HIPPOLYTVS, the Son of THE∣SEVS
&amp; ANTIOPA Queen of the
Amazons, renouncing al Worldly plea∣sures,
and carnal delights, lived a Bat∣choler,
forbearing all Women's company,
and amorous allurements: and only vow∣ed
himself to the service of chaste DIA∣NA,
pursuing the Gentlemanly pastime
of hunting. In the absence of THESEVS his Father, it
chanced that his Stepmother PHAEDRA ardently ena∣mored
with his beauty and lusty age, inveigled him by all
means she could, to commit with her filthy, and mon∣struous
adultry. Which her beastly, unchaste, and undue∣tifull
practise, hee dutifully loathing, she turned his for∣mer
love into extreme hatred, and told her husband THE∣SEVS
at his return home, that his Son HIPPOLY∣TVS
would have unlawfully lain with her. THESE∣VS
believing his Wives most untrue accusation, meant to
have put his son to death. HIPPOLYTVS vnderstā∣ding
thereof, got up into his Chariot and fled. THESEVS
being therewith tickeled, and after some pursuit, not over∣taking
him, went to his Father AEGAEVS being a God of
the Sea, desiring him to grant him three Wishes: the last
whereof was, the destruction and Death of HIPPOLY∣TVS:
whereupon AEGAEVS sent out certain great Sea-monsters,
or Whirlpools, which affrighting the Horses in
HIPPOLYTVS Chariot, made them to overturn the
Chariot, and to run through thick and thin till they had
dismēbred true HIPPOLYTVS in pieces. The remorse
of which villainy so struck PHAEDRA in Conscience, that
with a Sword she stabbed herself into the Entrails, &amp; died
upon the body of HIPPOLYTVS.
Go range about the shady Woods,
beset on every side
With Nets, with Hounds, &amp; toils, &amp; rū∣ning
out at random ride
About, about, the craggy crests
of high Cecropes hill,
With speedy foot about the Rocks,
with coursing wander still.
That under Carpanetus Soil,
in Dale below doth lurk,
Whereas the Rivers running swift, their flapping waives doe work,
And dash against the beaten Banks of Thrias valley low,
And clamber up the slimy cliues, besmeared with whore• Snow,
(That falls, when y• Western wind frō Riphes Moūts doth blow.)
Here, here away, let other wend, whereas with lofty head,
The Elm displays his branched arms, the wood to overspread.
Whereas the Meadows greene doe lye, where Zephyrus most mild
Out brays his baumy breath so sweet, to garnish up the field
With lusty springtide flowers fresh whereas Elysus slow
Doth fleet upon the Yste flakes, and on the Pastures low.
Maeander sheds his straggling stream, and shears the fruitless sand
With wrackful wave: ye whom the path on Marathons left hand,
Doth lead unto the leauened lands, whereas the heirde of beast
For Evening forage go to graze, and stalk unto their rest.
The rascal Dear trip after fast, you thither take your way,
Where clottered hard Acarnan forced warm Southern winds to obey
Doth slake the chilling cold, unto Hymetus Ysie cliue
To Alphids little Villages, now let some other d••ue:
That plot where Sunion surges high doe beat the sandy banks,
Whereas the marble Sea doth fleet with crooked compassed cranks,
Unhaunted lies too long, withoutten race of any wight.
Who set agog with hunting brave, in woods doth take delight,
Philippic him allures: her haunts a fomy bristled Bore
That doth annoy with ghastly dread the husbandmen full sore:
We know him well: for he it is foiled with so many wounds,
But ere they do begin to op, let slip▪ let slip your Hounds.
But in your leashes Sirs keep up your eiger Mastifs yet,
Keep on their Collers still; that doe their galled neekes yfret:
The Spartayne Dogs eiget of pray and of courageous kind,
That soon can single out their game, where they be assigned,
Tie shorter up within your leash: to pass time shall it bring,
That with the youlping noise of hounds the hollow rocks shall ring.
Now let the Hounds go find of it with Nosthrell good of sent,
And trace unto the ugly de•ere dawning •ay be spent.
While in the dewish stabby ground the prick of cleaze doth s•icke.
One bear the toil on cumbred neck, and some with nets full thick
Make speed: some with the arming cord by pencil painted red
By slight, and subtle guileful •ear shall make the Beasts adred:
Loke thou to pitch thy thirling 〈◊〉 and •thou to try thy might,
Shalt cope him with broad 〈…〉 with hand both left &amp; right.
Thou standing at receipt shalt chase the 〈…〉 awayne.
With hallowing: thou with limere sharpe vndee him being slain.
Grant good success unto thy mate, Virago, thou Divine,
That secret deserts chosen hast for noble Empire thine:
Whose thirled Darts with level right do gore the Beast with Blood
That laps the lukewarm liquor of roxis fleeting Flood.
And eke the Beast that sports it self on frozen First•s straud.
The romping Lyons eake of Geate are chased by thy hand.
And eke the windy heeled Hart in Ca•die thou dost chase.
Now with more gentle lance thou strikst the Do• that trips apace.
To thee the Tygar fierce his divers spotted breast doth yield,
The rough shaghairy Bugle turns on thee his back in field.
Eke salvage Buffs with branch &amp; horns: all things thy quarrels fear,
That to the needy Garamas in Africa doth appear.
Or eec the wyld Arabian enriched by his wood,
Or what the Brutish roches of Pyrene understood,
Or else what other Beasts do lurcke in wyld Hyrcanus grove,
Or else among Sarmatians in desert fields that rove:
It that the Ploughman come to field, that stands in thy grace,
Into his 〈◊〉 the •oused beast full sure he is to chase.
No feet in sunder break the 〈◊〉 and home he brings the Bore
In i•tting wayne, when as the hounds with gubs of clottered gore,
Besmeared have their g•ymed 〈◊〉 and then the Country rout
To Cottages repair in ranks, with triumph all about.
Lo, Goddess grant vs grace: the hounds already opened have,
I follow must the Chase: this gainer way my pains to save,
I take into the woods.
O Country Crete that bears the sway,
upon the Seas so vast.
Whose Ships so thick in every Shore,
the Seas doe overcast,
What ever coast as far as is
Assyria land doth lye,
Where Nereus doth the piked Stem
to cut his course deny,
Why force ye me that yielded am, a pledge to those I hate?
And gieuen in Bridal bed to bee my enmies Spousal mate,
To languish out my time in tears, in woe to lead my life?
My husband lo, &amp; runagate is gon from me his Wife,
Yet Theseus still performs his O the alike unto his Spouse.
As erst to Ariadne, when hee falsifide his Vows:
Hee champion stout dare enterprise the darkness deep to pass
Of loathsome Lake, whence yet found out, no way returning was.
A soldier of the Wooer bold Pros•rpin home to bring,
Out pulled perforce from grisly throne of Dire infernal King.
Accompanide with fury fierce hee marches forward still,
Whō neither dread nor shame could force forbear his wicked will.
With lawless wedlocks ravishments Hippolytus his Sire
Doth in the boiling bottom deep of Acheron require,
But yet another greater grief sways on my pensive breast,
No silent night, nor slumber deep can set my heart at rest.
My sorrow still is nourished, and still entreaseth it,
And rankles in my boiling breast, as out of Aetnaes pit.
The stifling vapour upward sties and Pallas Web, it stands
At rest, my dropping distaff down doth drop between my hands.
My luskish mind it hath no lust my vowed gifts to pay
Unto the Temples of the Gods that live my Theseus may:
Nor rigging with Th'athenian Dames among the aulters proud
To toss the fiery brands, unto the sacrifice aloud,
Nor yet devoutly praying at the Aares with godly guise
To Pallas president in earth to offer sacrifice:
It doth delight me to pursue the chased beasts in flight,
And toss my flashing Falcon fierce with nimble hand full light.
What ails thou mind this mad to take conceit in freight and fell?
My wretched mothers fatal vice a breeding now I smell:
To cloak our crime, our lust doth know, woods are the fittest place,
Alas good Mother, I lament the heavy luckless case:
Thou rash attained with loathsome lust enamoured is thy breast.
Even with the cruel head of al the herd of salvage beast,
That churlish angry roaring Bull no yoke can bee sustain.
And hee among the wilde, and eke untamed Neat doth reign.
Yet was inclined to love: what God can grant me my desire?
Or Dedalus with curious craft can ease my flaming fire?
Not if hee might return, whom Ariadne hath iustruct
From crooked compassed Labyrinth by thread that out hee plucked
Among the lurcking corners close, and wily winding way,
To grope his footing back again, and did deprive of day
Our monstrous Minotaur enclosed in Maze and Dungeon blind:
Although hee promise to our sore, no salve yet can hee find:
Through me Apollos Progeny doth Venus quite again▪
The filthy shame that she and Mars together did sustain.
Whom Phoebus taking at their task all naked in the Sky,
Hung up in Nets, a laughing stock to every gazing Eye:
For this all Phoebus stock, with vile and foul reproach she stains,
In some of Minos family still loathsome lusting reigns:
One mischief brings another in.
O Theseus wife, and Child
Of Jove, let vice be soon out of thine honest breast exiled:
And quench the raging heat: to dire despair doe not up yield,
Who at the first repulses love, is safe and wins the field,
Who doth by flattering fancy fond feed on his vicious vain,
To late doth grudge against the yoke which erst hee did sustain:
Nor yet doe I forget how hard, and void of reason clean:
A Princes stately stomach yields unto the golden mean:
That end I will accept, whereto by Fortune I can lead
The neighbours weal great comfort brings unto the whore head.
The first redress is to withstand, not willingly to slide,
The second is to have the fault by mean and measure tried:
O wicked wretch what wilt thou doe? why dost thou burden more
The stained stock and dost excel thy mothers fault before?
More heinous is thy guilt than yet thy mothers Monster was:
For monsters may thou think are brought by destiny to pass:
But let the cause of sin, to blame of manners lewd redound:
And if because thy husband doth, not breath aboue the ground.
Thou think thou may defend thy fault, and make thy matter good
And free from fear? thou art beguiled, yet think the Stygian flood
In grisly gaping gulf for aye hath drenched Theseus deep,
But yet thy Sire, whose kingdoms large the Seas at will do keep:
Whose dreadful doom pronounces pangs, and due deserved payne,
Two hundredth wailing souls at once. Will he think thou maintain
So heinous crime to couch? the care of tender Parents breast
Full wise, and wary is to bring their children to the best.
Yet shall we think by subtle mean by craft and devilish guile,
In hugger mugger close to keep our treachery so vile.
What shall thy mothers father Phoebe, whose beams so blazing bright,
With fiery gleede o• every thing, doth shed his golden light?
Or Jove the Grandsire great of Gods that all the world doth shake,
And brandishes with flaming Fist, his fiery lightnings flake:
That Volcano doth in Fornace hoate, of dusky Aetna make
Think thou this may be brought to pass, so heinous crime to hide?
Among thy Grandsire all that have eche privy thing espied?
But though the favour of the Gods conceal the second time
Thy loathsome lust (unworthy name) and to thy bawdy crime,
Sure faithfulness annexed be, that ever barred was.
Each great offence, what will this work? a present plague, alas
Suspicionlest the guilty night bewray thy deed unjust:
And conscience burdened sore with sin that doth it self mistrust.
Some have commit offence full safe from any bitter blame,
But none without the stinging pricks of conscience did the same:
Assuage the boiling flames of this thy lewd ungracious love,
Such monstrous mischief horrible from modest mind remove.
Which never did Barbarian commit unto this day.
No not the Gadding Gothes that up and down the fyel•es do stray:
Nor craggy crested Taurus mount whose hoary and frosty face
With 〈◊〉 cold abandons all inhabitors the place.
Nor yet the scattered Scithian, thy mother have in mind,
And fear this foreign venery, so strange against thy kind:
The Fathers wedlock with the sons thou seckst to be defiled,
And to conceive in wicked womb a Bastard Mongrel Child:
Go too, and turn thy Nature to the flame of burning breast.
Why yet do Monsters cease? why is thy Brothers cave in reast.
That Mynotaurus hideous hole and ugly couching den
Without an other greedy fiend to mounch up flesh of men?
Misshapen, lothly monsters borne so oft the world shall bear,
So oft rebels against her self confused Nature dear,
As love entangles Nymphs of Crere.
I know the truth ye teach
O Nurse, but fury forces me at worser things to reach:
My mind even wittingly to vice falls forward prone and bent
To bolesome counsel back again in vain it doth relent:
As when the Norman tugs and toils to bring the freighted Bark
Against the striving stream, in vain he loses al his cark
And down the shallow stream perforce the Ship doth headlong yield,
Where reason preaseth forth, there fighting fury wins the field,
And bears the swinging sway, and crank Cupidoes puissant might
Tryumpheth over all my breast this flighty win•ed wight
And puissant potestate throughout the world doth hear the stroke,
And with unquenched flames doth force Io•es kindled breast to smoke,
The Battelbeaten Mars hath felt these bitter burning brands,
And eke the God hath tasted these whose fervent fiery hands,
The thumping thunder bouncing bolts three forked wise doth frame,
And he that ever busted is about the furious flame,
In smoltring Fornace raging hoot on dusky top so 〈◊〉
Of foggy A•tna mount: and with such slender heat doth fry,
And Phoebe himself that weldes his dart upon his twanging string,
With aimed shaft directly driven the wimpled Lad doth sting.
With power he scores along the Earth and Marble Sky awayne.
Lust favouring folly filthtly did falsely forge and 〈◊〉
L•ue for a God: and that he might his freedom 〈…〉
Ascribes the name of feigned God to shittel bed lame rage.
Erycina about the world doth send her roving page,
Who gliding through the Azure skies with slender jointed arm
His perlous weapons wields at will, and working greece uous harm.
Of bones and stature being least great might he doth display
Upon the Gods, compelling them to crouch and him obey.
Some Brainsick head did attribute these things unto himself,
And Venus Godhood with the bow of Cupped little elf.
Who cockred is, triumphing much in fau•ing fortunes lap.
And flotes in wealth, or seeks and sues for things that seldom hap,
Lust (mighty fortunes mischeous mate) assaulteth straight his breast,
His tooth contempneth wonted fare and victuals homly dressed.
Nor handsome houses pleases him, why doth this plague refuse.
The simple sort, and to annoy doth stately bowers choose?
How haps it matrimony pure to bide in Cottage base?
And honest love in middle sort of men doth purchase place?
And things that be of mean estate themselves restrain full well,
But they that wallow in their lust whose stately stomachs swell,
Puffed up and boistred big with trust of Kingly sceptre proud
Do greater matters enterprise then may be well aloud.
Hee that is able much to do, of power will also bee
To do these things he cannot doe. Now Lady dost thou see
What things do thee beseem thus sty•d on stately throne on hie?
Mistrust the sceptre of thy spouse returning by and by.
In me I bear a violent and mighty payse of love,
And no mans coming home again to terror may me move.
He never stepped back again, the welkin sky to touch,
That swallowed once and sunk in gulf and glummy cave did couch
Shut up in shimering shade for ay.
Yet do not thou suppose,
Though dreadful Ditis lock with bars, and bolt his dungeon close:
And though the hideous hellicke hound do watch the grisly gates.
Not Theseus alone shall have his passages stopped by fates,
Perhaps he pardon will the crime of loves procuring heate
Nay churlishly hee would of old his honest wife entreat.
Antiope his bobbing bu••ets felt and heavy cuff:
Suppose, yet thou can qualify thy husbands raging ruff:
Yet who can mo•e Hippoly•us most s•any stubborn mind?
He will abhor the very name detesting woman kind,
And faring frantically, will give himself to single life,
And shun the hated spousal bed of every marred wife,
Then shall ye plainly understand his brutish Scithian blood
To follow him even through the hills, the Forest thycke &amp; wood,
That keeps among the clottred cliues besmeared with silver Snow,
Whose nimble heals on craggy rocks are frisking to and fro:
I wysh.
He will resist and not be dalyed with nor coyd,
Nor change his chaste estate, for life of chastity devoid,
And turn perhaps his cankered hate to light on thee alone,
That now he bears to all.
will not he moved be with moan?
Stark wilde he is,
and I have learned wilde things by love to tame
He will run away.
if by the Seas have•ie, I on the same
Will follow him.
Remember then thy father may thee take.
I may remember mine offence, my mother eake will slake.
Detesting womankind, he drives and courseth them away.
No strūpets bashful fear against my breast doth hold at bay:
Thy husband will be here.
I wis he comes I warrant him
Pyrothous companion in hellicke dungeon dim.
Thy Father also he will come,
A gentle hearted Sire
Forgiving Ariadnes fault, when she did him require.
For these my silver shining lockes of whore drooping age,
And breast be••lt with cloying cares restrain thy furious rage.
I humbly thee beseech even by these tender tears of mine,
Succour thy self, much health it is, if will to health incline.
Not every jot at honesty exiled is my breast,
I yield me Nurse, love that denies thus under rule to rest
In quietness, let him, let him perforce be battered down.
I will not let my fleeting fame and glorious bright rename
With stain to be dishonoured, this only is the gap,
To shun the perlous path that leads to vices training trap.
My spouse let me ensue with death this strive I shall subvert.
Dear daughter slake the romping rage of thy unruly heart.
Pluck down thy stomach stout, for this I judge thee worthy breath,
In that thou dost confess thy self to have deserved death.
Condemned I am to die, what kind of death now would I know,
As either strangled with a rope shall I my life forgo?
Or run upon a bloody blade, with gory wound to dye?
Or tops•e turuy headlong hurled down Pallas turret hie,
In quarrel just of Chastity.
Now strengthen we our hand,
Alas shall not my feeble age thy despret death withstand,
Forbear the sway of fury fierce.
No reason can restrain
Him that destreth death▪ when death he hath determind plain
And ought to die,
Sweet Lady mine (thou comfort of my age
And feeble years) if in thy breast prevails such mighty rage
Have not regard what sounding blast in tromp of fame be blown
Whereby thy name in stained stock of black reproach be sown,
Or graft in spotless honesty: for fame doth favour small
The most upright, to better worse, to worse shoe's best of al,
Let vs assay the froward mind of yonder stubborn Child
It is my part to set upon the clubbish young man wilde
And to compel the sturdy lad with stony hart to yield.
O Goddess great that art the wondrous seed
Of frothie surge in stormy raging seas
Whō flamy Cupped armed with scorching gleed,
And Shaftes, to call his Mother it doth please:
This wanton Elf forth putting sappy might
From steadfast Bow how surely doth he throw
His venimd shaftes, through all thy marrow right
The foystring fire doth rankle in and glovve
The secret flame that boils in each vain
The strype laid on shevves not in open mark•:
But invvard marrovv he sucks out amain,
This boy to sound of peace doth never hark.
His scattered shaftes full nimble every where
He darts about, the East that doth behold
The davvning sun himself aloft to rear,
From purple bed, and whether late he told.
With ruddy lamp, in Western wade doth glide:
If any coastlye under scorching clavves
Of burning Crab, or people do abide,
Beneath the climb of Isy frozen pavves,
Of ugly gargle faced bigger Bear,
That wandering still from place to place doth go
The fervent Fumes, and stouing heate eche where
That issues out from CUPIDS burning bow,
The flashing flames of Yongmens burning breast,
Hee stirs up, enkindling new the heate
Of quenched coals, that vvonted was to rest
In drooping age: and virgins hearts doe beat
With strange untasted brands: and doth compel
The Gods descending down from starry Sky,
With counterfeited Visages, todwell▪
Upon the Earth to blind the Lovers Eye.
Sir PHOEBVS vvhilome forced in Thessail Land
To Shepherds state ADMETVS Heirdes did drive,
His mourning Harp deprived of heavenly Hand
With ordered Pipe his Bullocks did revive.
Even hee that trails the dusky riding rack,
And wields the swaying Poles with swinging swift
How oft did hee faint forms put on his back
And heavenly Face with baser countenance shift.
Sometime a Bird with silver shining wings,
He fluttering flushed, and languishing the death
With sweet melodious tuned voice hee sings,
When silly Cygnus gave up gasping breath.
Sometime also with curled for head grim
A dallying Bull, he bent his stouping back
To maidens sport, through deepest Seas to swim
While horny hove made shift like Ore slack
Through waters wyld his brothers perlous cost
With forward glancing breast the stream he brake,
And least he should his tender pray have lost,
Her troublus thought did cause his heart to quake
DIANA bright that sways in circle murk,
Of darkened Sky, with frying fits did burn,
And leaving of the Evening watch her work
Her fulgent Chariot bright, eke did she turn.
To PHOEBVS charge, to weelde it otherwise
Her Evening Wayne APOLLO learned to guide,
And take his turn in lesser compassed sis:
The da•pish nights watched not their vvonted tide
And late it was ere that AVRORA fair
Set forth the morning Sun with gold array,
While that the Marble excel tree in the air
The shogging Carte made croak with swagging sway,
ALCMENAS boisterous Imp did lay aside
His clattering shafts, and also did refuse
To vveare the romping Lyons hairy Hyde
And Emraudes for his fingers did hee choose,
And braided kept his rufled staring Locks,
Ware Garters wrought on knee with seames of Gold
And on his feet his dirty dabled Socks,
And with the hand where vvhilome hee did hold
His Clubbish bat, a thread hee nimbly spun:
Both Persia and fertile Lidia knew
(Where golden sanded Pactolus doth run)
ALCYDES bid the Lyons case adieu
And thunder propping brawny shoulderd sier
That heaved and bolstred up the Welkin throne,
In slender Kirtell wrought by Web of Tyre
Did jet about to please his Love alone.
This flame (believe the heart that feels the wound)
Enspirde with holiness excels in might,
Whereas the Land by Seas embraced round,
Where twinkling Stars doe start in Welkin bright
This peevish Elf the Conntreyes all doth keep,
Whose quarrels sting the Marble faced rout
Of water Nymphs, that with the Waters deep
The brand that burns in breast cannot quench out,
The flying foul doth feel the foystring flames.
What cruel Skirmish doe the Heyffers make?
rickt up by lust that nice Dame VENVS frames.
In furious sort for all the Cattels sake?
If fearful Hearts their Hinds doe once mistrust,
In love disloyal then gladly dare they fight,
And bellowings out, they bray to witness just
Their angry mood, conceived in ireful spright.
The painted coast of India then doth hate
The spotty Hyded Tygar, then the Bore
Doth vvhet his Tusks to combat for his mate,
And fomes at mouth: the romping Lyons roar
And shake their Manes, when CUPIDS corsies move
With grunts and groans the howling frythes doe murn
The Dolphin of the raging Sea doth love:
The Elephants by CUPIDS blaze doe burn:
Dame nature all doth challenge as her own,
And nothing is that can escape her laws:
The rage of wrath is quenched and overthrown,
When as it pleases Love to bid them paws:
Black hate that rusting frets in cankered breast,
And all old grudge is dashed by burning love.
What shall I make discourse more of the rest
Stout Stepdames doth this gripe to mercy move.
DEclare what tidings bring thou Nurse,
where is Hippolitus?
To cure this puissant breach of ills
no hope there is in vs:
Nor yet to quench his flashing flame:
his furies fretting ire,
Doth fry in secret boiling breast,
and though the smothrering fire
Be covert close, yet bursting forth in walked face it fries:
The sparkling flakes doe glowing flash from bloudred rolling eyes
She hanging down her pouched groin, abhors the loathsome light,
Her skittish wits and wayward mind can fancy nothing right:
Her faltering legs doe fail her now, down squatting on the ground
With sprauling limbs her shittell grief doth cast her in aswound:
Now scant she on her lithy neck holds up her giddy head,
Nor can commit her self to couch in rest upon her bed.
Nor harbring quietness in heart with dreary dewle and plaint
She languishes through out the night, and now her body faint
She bids them up to lift: and now her down again to lay,
And now his crispen locks undone abroad she bids display:
And strayt to wrap them up again. Thus fickle fanse still
Doth fleet, nor is contented with his wayward wandering will.
No care she casts on her health nor eats one crum of bread,
With feeble fumbling foot upon the floor eke doth she tread,
Her strength alas is quite consumed, her favour sweet doth faint:
Nor ruddy sanguine purple they her cherry checks doth paint:
With greedy gripes of gnawing grief her pinched limbs doe pine:
Her foltring legs doe stagger now: the gloss of beauty •in
In body Alabaster bright is shronke away and wast
Those Crystal Eyes that wonted were resemblance clear to cast
Of radiant Phoebus gold arrays, now nothing gentry shyne:
Nor bear a spark of Phoebus bright her fathers beams divine:
The trickling tears tril down her chekes, dew dampish dropping still,
Doth wet her warrye plants, as on the top of Taurus hill
The warry snows with lukewarm shores to moisture turned do drop
But lo the Princes palace is set open in the top:
She lying down upon her golden bed of high estate
Hurls of his wonted royal robes which wounded hart doth hate:
Maids, have our purple garments hence, &amp; vestures wrought with gold▪
These crimsō robes of scarlet red let not mine eyes behold.
And damask weeds, whereon the Seres embraudet branches brave,
Whose Silken substance gatherd of their trees aloof they have,
My bosom shall be swaddled in with cuttied gabardine,
No golden collar on my neck nor Indian jewels fine▪
The precious pearls so white shall hang no more now at mine ears,
Nor sweet perfumes of Siria shall poulder more my hears.
My flaring ruffled lockes shall dagling hang my neck about
And shoulder points: then then apace t•••attring in and out.
Let winds even blow it where it list, in left hand will I take
A quiver of shaftes, and in my right a Boorespere will I shake,
To cruel child Hippolitus such one his mother was,
As fleeting from the frozen Seas those country costs did pass,
And drove her herds that bet with trampling feet The Athenian soil
Or like the trull of Tauais, Or like her will I toil,
Of Meotis that on a knot wound up her crispen lockes▪
Thus will I trot with moon like targe among the wodes and rocks.
Leave of thy bitter languishing unto the sell•• sort
(That walter thus in waives of woe) grief gives not testing port
Is any measure to be found in thy tormenting fire.
Some grace at wyld Dianae▪ hand with sacrifice require.
O Goddess great of Woods, in hills that only set thy throne,
And Gods that of the craggy clyues at worshipped alone,
Thy wrathful threatenings on vs all now turn to better plight
O Goddess that in forests wyld and groves obtaynest might,
O shining lamp of heaven, and thou the Diamon of the Night,
O threefold shapen Heccate that on the world his face
Dost render light with torch by turns, vouchsafe to graūt thy grace
To further this our enterprise and help our piteous case,
O mollify Hippolytus his stubborn hardued hart,
And let him learn the pangs of love and taste like bitter smart:
And yield his light allured ears: entreat his bru••sh breast,
And change his mind, in Venus bounds compel him once to rest.
So froward and untoward now so crabbed cursed and mad:
So shalt thou be with blandishing and smiling countnaunce clad.
Thy shimering cloud clean fading hence then brightly shalt thou bear
And glistering horns, then while by night upon the whirling sphere,
Thy cloudy heeled steeds thou guides, the raging witches charm
Of Thessal, shall not draw thee from the heavens nor do thy harm
No Shepherd purchase shall rename. Thou come at our request:
Now favour dost thou grant unto the prayers of our Breast:
I do espy him worshipping the solemn Sacrifice,
Both place and time convenient by Fortune doth arise:
We must go craftily to work for fear we quaking stand,
Full hard it is the buysy charge of guylt to take in hand:
But who of Princes stands in awe, let him defy all right,
Cast of the care of honesty from mind exiled quite,
A man unfit is for the hest of King a bashful wight.
O Nurse, how chaūce thy limping limbs do crepe into this place?
With blubbered Cheeks, &amp; leaden looks with sad and mourning face?
Doth yet my Father Theseus with health enjoy his life?
Doth Phaedra yet enjoy her health my stepdam and his wife.
Forgo these fears, and gently come thy blessed hap to take,
For care constrains me to morn with sorrow for thy sake,
That hurtfully thou looudes thy self with pangs of plūging payne:
Let him rub on in misery whom destny doth constrain:
But if that any yield himself to waives of wilful woe,
And doth torment himself, deserves his we•le for to forgo
The which he knows not how to use: tush, be not so demure,
Considering how thy years do run, take part of sport and play,
Let merry Bacchus cause thee cast these clogging cares away,
And reap the fruit of sweet delight belonging to thy years,
For lusty youth with speedy foot full fast away it wears.
Erst tender love, erst Venus feeds the young man appetite,
Be blithe my Boy, why Widow like least thou alone by night?
Shake of thy solemn sadness man that h•rty youth doth spill:
Huff, royst it out courageously, take bridle at thy will
Let not the flower of plooming years all fru•tles fade away.
God poynteth every time his task, and leads in dus array
Each age by order lust, as mirth the sappy youthful years,
A forehead frayte with gravity becomes hoary hairs.
Why dust thou bridle thus thy self, and dulls thy pregnant wit?
The corn that did but lately sprout aboue the ground, if it
Be rank of root, yet in the luck, with interest at large
Unto the hoping husbandman shall travel all discharge.
With branched bough aboue the Wood the tree shall raise his top,
Whom rusty hand of canckred hate, did never spill nor lop.
The pregnant Wits are evermore more prone to purchase praise,
If noble hearts by freedom franckt be nourished from decays.
Thou churlish country Clown Hodgelike not knowing Courtly life,
Delight in drowsy doting youth without a loving wife.
Dost thou suppose that to this end Dame Nature •id vs frame,
To suffer hardness in this world and to abide the same?
With courses and kerereyes fet the prancing Steeds to tame?
Or bicker else with battles fierce, and broils of bloody war?
That sovereign Sire of heaven and earth, when fates do vs deter,
With signs and plagues prognosticate provided hath with heed,
For to repair the damage done with new begotten seed.
Go to, let bedding in the world be used once no more
(That still mankind from age to age upholds and doth restore)
The filthy world deformd would lie in irksome ugly stay,
No floe•ing ships on rambling Seas should hoisted Sails display.
No Foul should skoare in azure Sky, no Beast to woods repair,
And only whisking winds should whirl amid the empty ayre.
What divers dreary deaths drive one mankind to dumpish grave?
The Seas, the sword and traitorous trains whole countries wasted have:
Yet for to limit forth our league there is no destny think,
So down to blackefast Stigian dampes we of our selves do sink.
Let youth that never felt the joys, in Venus lap which lie,
Allow the solitary life, what ever thou espy,
An hut liburly shall become for term of one mans life.
And work it one destruction by mutual hate and strife.
Now therefore follow natures course, of life the sovereign guide,
Resort unto the town: with men delight thee to abide.
No life is more devoid of sin, and free from grievous thralls,
And keeping fashions old, then that which leaving Townish walls,
Doth take delight in pleasant Woods, he is not set on fire,
Enraged sore with burning Bile of covetous desire.
Who hath addict himself among the mountains wilde to live,
Not pricked with prattling peoples bruit, no credit doth he give.
Toth Vulgar sort disloyal still, unto the better part
Nor cankered rancour pale doth gnaw his black and fretting hart.
Nor fickle favour forces he, he bound doth not obey
The payse of Sceptre proud: but wields the massy sceptre sway,
At •bbing honours gapes he not, nor moyles for fleeting muck,
Removed far from hovering hope and dread of backward luck,
Not bitter gnawing Envy rank tears him with tooth unkind,
Not quaynted with the mischief that in Cities and in mind
Of people presses thick: nor quakes at every blast that flies
With guilty conscience to himself, nor frames himself to lies.
Nor covets rich with thousand pillars close his head to shroud,
Nor guilds his beams with glistering gold for fancy fond and proud
Nor gushing streams of blood upon his innocent Alters flow.
Nor Bullockets bright their hundred heads as white as flakie Snow,
Do yield to Axe, while scattered is on thaulter sacred grain,
But al the quiet country round at will he doth obtain.
And harmless walk too and fro amid the open ayre,
And only for the brutish Beast contrives a trapping snare.
Another while upon the swift Alpheus banks he walks
Now up and down the breary Brakes of bushy woods he stalks
Where luke warm Lernas crystal flood with water clear doth shine,
And changing course his Channel out another way doth twyne:
And hear the piteous plaining Birds with chirping charms do chide.
And Branches trembling shake whereon soft windye puffs do glide,
And spreading Beches old do stand, to fast and shake my shanks:
To stamp and dance it doth me good on running Rivers banks:
Or else upon a withered clod to steal a nap of sleep,
Whereas the fountain flows amain with gushing waters deep.
Or else among the balmy flowers out braying savours sweet,
Whereas with pleasant humming noise the bubbling brooke doth fleet.
The Apples beaten of the tree do ravening hunger staunch,
And Strawberries gathered of the bush soon fill with hungry paunch.
He shoons assaults, that doth himself from regal royal hold.
Estates do quaff their dreadful drink in Bolles of massye Gold:
How trim it is water to lap in palm of naked hand:
The sooner drowsy Morpheus binds thy Brows with sleepy band:
The careless corpse doth rest at ease upon the hardest Couch:
The Cabin base haunts not by Nookes, to prig and filch a pouch:
In house of many corners blind his head he doth not hyde,
He loves to come abroad and in the light to be espied:
The Heavens bear witness of his life, they lived in this wise.
I think, that scattred did of Gods in 〈…〉 arise.
No doting covetous blind destre of Gold in them was found:
No stones nor s•aches set up in field did stint the parted ground:
The sailing Ship with brazen St•• cut not the weltering wave,
But every man doth know his coast and how much he should have.
No huge 〈◊〉 ta•sed w•re, nor Ditches delved deep,
Nor countermured Cast•e strong the walled Towns to keep.
The Soldier was not busied his blun•ed Tools to whet,
Nor rapping Pellets▪ Cannon shot the barred Gates down bet,
Nor soil with yoked Ox was strained to bea•e the eueting share,
The field even 〈◊〉 of it self did feed the World with fare,
The plentiful abundant Woods great wealth by nature gave:
A house of nature take they had a dim and darksome Cave:
The covetous mind to scrape up wealth, and despret furious ire,
And greedy Lust (that •ggeth on the mind all set on fire.)
First brake the bands, and eager thirst of bearing sway stepped in,
To be the strongers ravening pray the weaker did begin,
And might went for oppressed right: the naked Fist found out
To scratch and cuff, to box and bum, with dealing blows about.
The knarrie Logs, and snaggie 〈◊〉 were framed weapons strong,
The ga••en Tree vngrayned was with Pikes of Iron long.
No nor the rusty Fawcho• then did hang along the side,
Nor Helmet crest upon the head stood pe•••ing up for pri•e,
Pale spiteful grief 〈…〉 Tools, and 〈…〉 Mars his brain
Contrived new sleights a thousand kind of •eathes he did ordain:
By means hereof eche Land is filled with clot•red gore yshed,
With streams of blood the Seas are died to hue of sanguine red,
Then Mischief 〈◊〉 measure began through every house to pass,
No kind of vicious villainy that pra•••se wanted was.
By Brother, Brother reft of Breath, and •ache the Fathers Life
By hand of Child, •ache murdered was the husband of his Wife.
And Mother lewd on mischief set destroyed their bodies seed,
I overpass the Stepdame with her guilt and heinous deed,
And no where pity planted is, as in the brutish beast:
But womankind in mischief is ringleader of the reast,
The insrument of wickedness enkindling first desire,
Whose vile vncesteous whoredom see so many Towns on fire.
So many Nations fall to war, take Kingdoms overthrown,
And raised from the ground, to crush so many people down.
Let other pass: by Iasons Wife Medea may wee find
By her alone, that Women are a plaguy crabbed kind.
Why, for one women's fault of blame shall every one have part?
I hate, detest, abhor, I loath, I curse them from my heart.
Be it reason, right, or Natures law, or vengeance fury fell,
It likes me to abhor them still: the burning fire shall dwell,
And bide with quenching water first, the dangerous quick Sand
Shall promise Ships with safetinesse upon the should to land,
And Western Thetis soonke aloof and branched in deepest nook,
Shall force the ruddy Morning Sun from scarlet Skies to look,
The Woolfe shall yield his flooring Chaps to suck the Tet of Do
Ere won by women's love, to her I crouch and stoup allow.
Love bridles oft with snaffling bits the stubborn wayward heart,
Behold thy Mothers native land in Scythia every part,
The salvage women feel the force of Venus yoking band.
Thou only Child thy Mother had dost this welt understand.
This only comfort of my Mother must I keep behind,
That leefull unto me it is to hate all Womankind.
Even as the stiff and sturdy Rocks have weltering waives with∣stood,
And dashes back from shore aloof the fomy flapping flood:
So lightly be contemns my talk: but Phaedra runs mad
Because of this my long delay with crushing cares y•lad:
What will she doe? Aye me alas how shall she now be spead?
Her breathless body to the ground drops suddenly down dead.
A sallow hue like ghastly death ouerstrikes her frenzy Face,
Look up and speak behold thy dear sweet heart doth thee embrace.
ALas to flote in Waives of woe
who me reuines again?
To pinch my mind with pining pangs
and bitter drunts of nayne.
What ease to me it was, when as
I lay in trance at rest?
Why dost thou thus the pleasure of
renewed life detest:
O heart be bold, assay and seek thy purpose to attain,
Be not abashed, nor faced out with churlish words again.
Who faintly craves any boo•e, gives courage to deny:
The greatest portion of my crime dispacht ere now have I:
Shame seeks to late to purchase place within our bashful brow,
Sith that in foul and loathsome love wee have delight ere now,
If I obtain my will, then shall our wedlock cloak the crime:
Success corrupts honesty with wickedness sometime:
Behold this secret place is void from any witness bye.
My faltering tong doth in my mouth my tale begun deny.
Great force constrains me to speak, but greater hold my peace,
O heavenly Ghosts I you protest, tic this that doth me please.
Cannot the mind that covers talk in words at will out burst?
Light cares have words at will. but great doe make vs sore aghast.
Mother the grief y• galls your heart come whisper in mine ear.
The name of Mother is to proud a name for me to bear,
Importing puissant power too much: the fancy of my mind
It doth 〈◊〉, a baser name of less renown to find.
Me (if thou please) Hippolytus thy Loving Sister call.
Or waiting Maid, and rather so: no drudgry spare I shall,
If thou through thick and thin in snows to travail me desire,
Or else command me for to run through Coals of flaming fire,
Or set my foot on Pi•dus frozen Rocks, it yrkes me not.
Or if thou will me rashly run thorough scorching fire hot,
Or ravening routes of salvage beasts I will not slowly rest,
With gory Lance of naked blade my bowels to vnbrest.
These Ringdomes left to me in charge wield thou of them the sway,
And take me as thy humble Mate, it fits me to ••ay,
And thee to give commandment, it is no women's seat,
To claim her Title to the Crown, to reign in Parents seat.
Thou flourishing amid the pride of lusty youthful race
Supply a valiant Prynees room with Fathers golden Mace,
Protect thy humble suppliant, defend thy lowly Maid
Embraced in mercies bosom, at thy Feet so meekelylayde.
Take pity on a stely Widows wo, and wretched plight.
The God that reigns aloft, forbid such luckless lot to light.
My Father Theseus safe in health will straight return again.
The lowering Lord that deep in strōg infernal Gail doe reign,
And damned up always to pass from Stygian Puddle glum,
Whereby to breathing bodies left alone the ground to cum,
Shall he let scope the Cloyner of his joys from spousal bed,
Unless that Plutos fancy fond by doting love be led:
The righteous Gods will make for him a right returning way.
But while through fear our wavering wills in hovering Baliāce sway,
Upon my brethren will I cast a due and earnest care,
And thee defend: believe not that in Widows plight ye are:
And I my self will unto the supply my Fathers place,
O Love (alas) of credit light, O Love of flickring Face,
Is this enough that hee hath said? entreatance will I try,
Dear child •ue on my wretched woe, doe not my suite deny,
That lurcking close doth couch in secret mourning breast of me,
Fine would I speak: yet loath I am.
What mischief may this bee?
Such mischief as ye would not think, could light in Mothers mind.
With mūbling voice perplexed ye waste your words against y• wind.
A vapor hoate, and Love doe glow within my bedlam breast:
It raging rank no inward juice untried leaves in rest:
The ser sonk in skalded guts through every vain doth fry,
And smothering close in seething blood as flashing flame doth fly,
With egar sweeping sway along up burning beams on hie.
Enamorde thus with Love entire of Theseus dost thou rage?
Even so it is: the lovely looks of Theseus former age
Which hee a sweet welfauorde Boy did bear with comely grace,
When pretty dapper cutted Beard on clear complexio•de Face
Began sprout, on naked Chin, when hee the kennels clottred blood
Beheld of mongrel Minotaur, and crooking Maze withstood
By groping long vntwined thredes the beams of beauty bright
That shone th•• 〈◊〉 his Face, his •rispen lockes with labels bight,
Smooth stroked lay, his scarlet Cheeks by nature paincted bright
Pouldred with spots of golden gloss, and sharpe assaults of Love
Prevailed in his fleshly arms: what grace doth shine aboue
In the Dianaes Face, or fiery crested Phoebus mine,
Or else in comely countenance of this lovely face of thine,
Such Theseus had when Ariadnaes Eye he did delight:
Thus portly pacing did he biare his noble head upright.
It is no counterfeited gloss that shines in thy Face,
In thee appears thy manly Fathers starve and lowering Grace.
Thy Mothers crabbed countenance cake resembled in some part
Puts in full well a seemelynesse, to please the Lookers hart.
The Scythian awful Majesty with Greekish favour sweet
Appears: if thou had with thy Sire attempt the Seas of Create,
(One of those seven from Athens sent elect by luckless lot
To pay such bloody tribute, which King Minos of them got.
The ravening and bloudthirsty Minotaurus foul to feed)
My Sister Ariadne would, for thee have spun the thread.
Therewith in crafty compassed Maze to lead thee to and fro,
In ugly Laberynthus long returning from thy Foe.
Thee, thee O Sister dear whereso in all the Heaven thou are,
And shine bright with blazing beams transformed into a Star,
I thee beseech come succour me with like distress now cloyed:
Alas vs stely Sisters twain one kindred hath desroyde.
The Sire thy smart, the son hath brewd the bane that me doth lees.
Behold an Imp of royal race laid humbly at thy Knees,
Yet never stained, and vndefilde, an harmless innocent,
To thee alone of all the World my crouching Knees are bent,
And for the nones my haughty heart, and Princely courage stout
I did abate, that humbly thee with tears entreat I mought.
O sovereign Sire of Gods, dost thou abide so long to hear
This vile abomination? so long dost thou forbear
To see this heinous villainy? if now the Skies be clear,
Wilt thou henceforth at any time with furious raging hand
Dart out thy cracking thunder dint, and dreadful lightnings brand?
Now battered down with bouncing bolts the rumbling Skies let fall
That foggy Clouds with dusky drooping day 〈◊〉 cover all,
And force the backward starring starts to slide a slope withal
Thou starry crested crown, and Titan prankt with beamy blase
Come out, with staring bush upon thy kindreds guilt to case.
Dash out and drown thy looming lamp eclisde in glummy Skies,
To shrink in shimmering shape: why doth thy right hand not arise
O guide of Gods and men? how haps the world yet doth not burn,
Kindled with three forked brand? on me thy thunder turn,
Dash out on me thy bobbing bolt, and let thy fiery flake
Whirlde out with force, burnt Cinders of my wasted Carcass make:
For guilty (Jove) I guilty am, deserved death I have,
My Stepdames Fancy I have fed: shall I most sinful slave,
Be worthy thought to blot my Fathers honourable Bed?
Can thou for mischief such through me alone be lightly sped?
O Caitiue thou of womankind for guilt that hears the bell,
Whose enterprised heinous evil doth passingly excel,
Thy Monster breeding Mothers fault with whoredom she alone
Deaf••de her self, when storming sighs with sorrow began she groan,
Through beastly lust of Bull: till it the Minotaurus ster
In act of generation, had quenched her •whole desire:
And yet the time concealed long, the grim twishaped seed
At length betrayed with Bullike brows, thy Mothers naughty deed,
The doubted Infant did disclose: that wicked womb she bare.
With thrice, yea, four times blessed Fate of life deprived ye are,
Whom swollen of weltering Seas have sonck, me cankered hate of breath
Despoiled ha•h, and traytrous trains have quilt by daunting death.
With Stepdames banes and sorcery O Father, Father mine,
I rue thy lot, not to be slain of milder Stepdame thine.
This mischief greater, greater fair the wickedness doth pass
That by Medea despret Dame of Colchis practiced was.
And I doe know, what uncouth luck upon our stock hath light,
The thing that we should shun, we seek, it is not in my might
To rule my self: through burning fire june after the• I shall,
Through raging Seas, &amp; craggy Rocks, through fleeting Rivers all,
Which boiling waters ruffling raise, what way so go thou will,
I bedlam Wight with frantic fits will follow, follow still.
O stately Lord before thy feet yet fall I once again.
Doe not with shameless fawning Paws my spotless body stain.
What means this? with housing me to embrace she doth begin:
Draw, draw my sword, with stripes deserved Isle pay her on the skin:
Her hair about my left hand wound, her head I backward wri•e,
No blood Diana better spent thine Alter yet hath died.
Hippolytus, now dost thou grant to me mine own desire,
Thou cools my romping rage, this is much more than I require,
That saving thus mine honesty I may be given to death,
By bloody stroke received of thy band to loose my breath.
Avaunt, avaunt, preserve thy life, at my hand nothing crave,
This field Sword that thou hast touched no longer will I have.
What bathing lukewarm Tanais may I defiled obtain,
Whose cleansing watery Channel pure may wash me clean again?
Or what Meotis muddy m•are, with rough Barbarian wave
That boards on Pontus roaring Sea? not Neptune grandsire grave
With all his Ocean folding flood can purge and wash away
This dunghill foul of sin: O wood, O salvage beast I say:
Thy crime detected is: O soul, why droupes thou all aghast?
Let vs appeach Hippolytus with fault upon him cast:
And let vs lay unto his charge, how he by might unjust
Deflower would his Fathers Wife with mischief, mischief must
Concealed bee: the best it is, thy foe first to invade,
Sith that the crime is yet unknown who can be witness made,
That either first wee enterprisde, or suffered of him then?
Come, come, in hast Athenians, O troupes of trusty men
Help, help, Hippolytus doth come, hee comes, that Villain vile,
That Ravisher, and Lecher foul, perforce would vs defile.
Hee threatens vs denouncing death, and glittering Blade doth shake,
At her who chastely doth withstand, and doth for terror quake:
Lo headlong hence for life and death hee took him to his flight,
And leaves his Sword in running rash, with ghastly fear affright:
A token of his enterprise detestable wee keep,
Sirs cherish her, that storming sighs with pensive breast doth weep.
Her ruffled hair, and shattred Locks still let them daggle down,
This witness of his villainy so bear into the Town.
(O Lady mine be of good cheer. Pluck up your sprights again,)
Why dost thou tearing thus thy self abhor all peoples sight?
Not blind Mischance but fancy wont to make ashamelesse Wight.
HIPPOLYTVS even as the rage∣ing
storm away doth fly,
More swift than whirling Western wind
vptumbling clouds in Sky,
More swift then flashing flames, that catch
their course with sweeping sway,
When Stars ytost with whisking winds
long fiery Drakes display.
Fame (wondering at of aldertime our Ancestors renown)
Fare well with thee, and bear away old worship from our Town.
So much thy beauty brighter shines, as much more clear and fair,
The golden Moon with glorio•s Globe full furnished in the Ayre
Doth shine, when as her fiery tips of waning horns doe close,
When lifting up her fulgent face in ambling Wane she goes,
Upon her nightwatch to attend, the Stars of lesser light
Their darckned Faces hide, as hee the Messenger of night
That watchword gives of th'euening tide and Hesperus hee hight,
That gliding erst was bathed in Seas, and hee the same again
When shedes be shrunk. doth then the name of Lucifer obtain.
Thou Bacchus blessed barn of Jove in warlike India borne,
Thou Lad that evermore dost wear thy hairy bush unshorn,
Whose Iaueling tuft with Ivy bunch, the Tigers makes adred,
And dost with labelde Mitre use to prank thy horny head,
Hippolytus his staring Locks thou Bacchus shalt not stain,
To wonder at thy loving looks too much doe thou refrain,
Whom (as the people doe report) the Ariadne bright,
For beauties name preferde before Bacchus that Bromius hight.
A brittle Jewel beauty is on mortal men employed,
Thou gift that for a season short of Mankind art enjoyed,
How soon alas with feathered foot hence dost thou fading slide?
The partching Summers vapour hoate in Verse most pleasaūte pride
So withers not the Meadows greene, (when as the scorching Sūne)
In Tropic ligue of burning Crab full hoate at Noon doth run,
And on her shorter cloudy Wheels vnhorseth soon the night.
With winnie Leaves down hang the heads of withered Lilies whight
The balmy blooms and sprouting floe•re do leave the naked •ed
As beauty bright whose radiant beams in corauld Cheeks is spread,
Is dashed in the twincke of Eye: no day as yet did pass,
In which not of his beauty reft some pearls person was.
For Favour is a fleeting thing: what wight of any wit
Will unto frail and fickle joy his confidence commit?
Take pleasure of it while thou may, for Time with stealing steps
Will under mint, on hour past straight in a worser leps:
Why fliest thou to the wilderness, to seek thy succour there?
Thy beauty bids not safer in the waylesse woods then here.
If Titan hoist his tottering Cart on point of full midday,
Thee shrouded close among the brakes the Needs will assay,
A gadding troupe that beauties B•yes do locke in fountains fair.
To frame their seat then unto thee in senseless s•up repair,
Shall wanton Fairies, Nymphs of Friends, y• on the Hills do walk,
Which Dryade mountain Goblins haunt, that use on hills to stalk:
Or when from high Starbearing poale Diana down did look
On thee that next old Arcades in heaven thy seat hast took,
She could not weilde her weltering wayne, and yet no foggy cloud.
Eclipsed her gleaming Globe, but we with •incking Pans aloud,
Began make a noise, agrised at her dead and glowing light
We deemed his char•id with Magic verse of Thessant witches spright
But thou did cause his business, and made her in a maze,
While at thy pleasant lovely looks the Goddess stood in gaze,
That rules the rain of cloudy night she stopped her rue•ning race,
God grant that seldom biting frost may pinch this comely face.
Let seldom scorching Sunny beams thy Cheeks with freckles die:
The Marble blue in quarry pits of Parius that doth lie,
Bears not so brave a glimsyng gloss as pleasant se••ues thy face
Whose brows with manly majesty support an awful grace.
And forehead fraught with gravity of Fathers countnaunce old:
His Ivory coloured neck although compare to Phoebe ye would,
His lockes (that never lacking knew) it self displaying wide
On shoulder points doth set them out, and also doth them hyde.
Thy curled forehead seems thee well, and eake thy not•ed hair,
That crumpled lies vndight in thee a manly grace doth bear.
Thou Gods (though fierce and valiant) perforce dost chase, and far
Dost overmatch in length of limbs, though yet but young thou are.
Thou hears as big &amp; boisterous browns as Hercules: thy breast,
Then Champion Mars more bourly bolstred out with broader chest:
On back of horn•toofed Steeds if vawting thou do ride,
With Bridle in thine arrive hand more handsome can thou guide.
The trampling Cellar horse of Spart, then Princely Castor could,
Thy Leathern loop amid thy dart with former fingers hold,
And drive thy lance with all thy pith, the active men of Create,
That with their pitched darts afar do learn the mark to bit.
They shall not hurl a slender Reed, but after Parthian guise
To shoot an arrow if they list into the open Skies,
Vnsped without some Bird attaint it shall not light on ground,
Vnbath'd with lukewarm blood of guts in gory smoking wound,
And from amid the lofty Clouds down shalt thou fetch thy pray:
Few men (mark well the time) have borne beauty vnplagude away.
God send thee better luck, and grant thy noble personage
May pass unto the happy steps and stretch to dumpish age.
What mischief vnattempt escapes a Women's witless rage?
Most heinous crimes she means to lay to guiltless youngmās charge
And thinks to make her matter good with hair thus rent at large,
She towseth eake the pranking of her head with watered plants,
Her sly deuyse no crafty kind of women's fetches wants.
But who is this that in his face such princely port doth bear?
Whose lofty looks with stately pace hie vauntst his head doth rear?
Like lusty young Pyrithous, he looks in the face,
But that a fainting fallow pale his bleakish Cheeks disgrace,
And filthy baggage hangs on his hash hair raised upright,
Lo Theseus, it is again restoard to earthly light:
AT length I escaped the glowing glades
of grim eternal Night,
And eake the vnderpropping poale,
that each infernal Spright
Doth muffie in, shut up in shades
lo how my dazzled eyes
Can scant abide the long dess∣red
light of Marble Skies.
Eleusis now four offerings of Triptolemus divides,
And counterpoised Day with Night now four times Libra hydes.
I earnest in my Parlous toil in doubt what luck to have
Twixt dread of ghastly Death, and hope my feeble life to save,
Some spark of life still in my breahles limbs abiding was,
When as embarked on irksome Styx Alcides down did pass,
To succour me in dire distress, who when the hellicke hound
From Tartars grisly gates in Chains he dragd aboue the ground,
And also me he carried up into the World again
My tyred limbs doth fappy pith of former strength restrain,
My feeble faltering legs do quake, what lugging toil it was
From bottom deep of Phlegethon to world aloof to pass?
What dreary dole &amp; mourning noise is this that beats mine ears?
Let some declare it unto me: who blubbered so with tears
Lamenting loud and languishing within our gates appears?
This entertainment sit is for a guest that comes from Hell.
A stubburne heart and obstinate in Phaedras breast doth dwell,
With despret mind to slay her self our tears she doth despise,
And giving up the gasping Ghost, alas my Lady dyes.
Why should she kill herself? why die, his spouse being come again
For this (my Lord) with hasty death she would her self have slame.
These troblous words some perlous thing I wot not what to tell
Speak plain: what lump of glutting grief her laded heart doth queen
She doth complain her case to none, but pensluely and sad
She keeps it secrete to his self, determind thus she had,
To bear about with her the bane, wherewith she means to die.
Hie, hie thee fast, I pray thee now, now have wee need to hye.
Our Palace locked with stately stoulpes set open by and by.
O Madame Mate of Spousal bed
thus dost thou entertain
The coming of thy loving Spouse?
and welcome home again
Thy long desired Hosbandes face?
why takes thou not away
My Sword out of my hand, and dost not cheer my Sprites (I say)
Nor show me what doth the breath out of the body chase?
Alas my valiant Theseus even for thy royal mace,
Wherewith thy Kingdom thou dost wield, and by the noble reign
Of thy belo'ud posterity, and coming home again,
And for the worship that is due unto my fatal grave,
O let me die and suffer me, deserved death to have.
What cause compels thee to die?
If I the cause of death
Disclose, then shall I not obtain the loosyng of my breath:
No worldly wight (save I my self alone) the same shall hear,
Art thou afraid to tel it in thy husbands bashful ear?
Speak out, thy secretes shroud I shall within my faithful breast.
What thou would other to conceal, keep thou it first in rest.
Thou shalt not suffered be to die:
From him that wishes Death,
Death never can be separate.
The crime that loss of breath
Ought to revenge, show it to me.
Forsooth because I live.
Alas do not my trilling tears thy stony stomach grieve?
It is the sweetest death, when one doth loathsome life forsake,
Bereft of such as should for him most woeful weeping make.
Still stands she mum? ye crooked, old, ilfauord, hobbling Trot,
His Nurse for stripes and clogging bands shall utter every jot,
That she forbid her hath to tell: in iron chains her bind,
Let tawing whips wring out perforce the secrets of her mind:
Now I my self will speak: stay yet.
Why dost thou ••no as•i•s
From me thy weeping Countenance? thy tears why dost thou hide
That gushing sudden frō thine eyes stream down thy cheeks apace &amp;
Why hide thou thy flowing floods with Coat before thy Face?
Thee, thee, Creator of the Neauens to witness I doe call,
And thee O glittering fiery glede of Crystal Sky with all,
And Phoebus thou from whom at first our royal Race hath roon.
With fawning face &amp; flattering words in suite I was not won.
For naked sword, &amp; thundering three•s, appalled was I not:
My bruised bones abode the blow, and stripes when sore he smote:
This blemish black of foul defame my blood shall purge again.
Declare what villain is he y• our honour so doth slain?
Whom least ye would mistrust.
To know who tic, full sore I long▪
This Sword will tel, which sore affright when people thick in thrōg
Resorted fast, the Lecher vile for hast did leave behind,
Because the people preasing fast he dreeded in his mind:
Ah out alas, O woe is me, what villainy see I?
Alas what uncouth Monster foul of mischief I espy?
Behold the royal Ivory engraved and purired fine,
Emboast with golden studdes, upon th'enameld Hast doth shine,
(The Jewel of Act land) but whither fled is hee?
With light Heel running sore dismayed these sruants did him see?
O sacred holiness, O Jove between whose mighty hands
The Marble Poale with weltering sway in course directed stands,
And thou that second Scep•er wields in fomy fighting wave,
Why doth this cursed brood with such this wicked vengeance rave?
Hath he been fostered up in Greece? or craggy Taurus wilde
Among hard rugged Rocks, and Caves, some savage Scythian Child?
Or else in brutish Colchis Isle by Desert Phases flood?
Cat after kind hee is, and will th'unkindly Bastard blood
Return unto his kinreds course, whence first his ligne hee clames.
This frantic fury up and down comes of the warlike Dames,
To hate the loyal leagues of love, and shunning long the use
Of Cupids camp, with tag, and rag, her body to abuse,
Become as good as ever twangd: O detestable kind,
No better Soil by any means can change thy filthy mind.
The brutish beasts themselves doe Ioath th'abuse which Venus draws,
And simple shamefastness it self obserueth Natures laws:
Where is the brag of Majesty, and feigned portly grace
Of manly mind, that hates new, and old things doth embrace?
O double dealing life, thou cloaks deceiptful thoughts in breast,
And settestout a forehead fair where frounced mind doth rest:
The saucy Jack with bashful brow doth malipiertnes hide:
The rashness of the despret Dicke by stillness is vnspide.
With show of right religion knaves villainy maintain,
And guileful mealemouthd Gentlemen do hold with speaking plain:
The dainty wanton Carpet Knights of hardness boast and prate,
That Woodraunger, that brainsick beast who lived in chaste estate
An undefiled Bachelor thou rude and homely clown,
Thus dost thou watch thy time, to breed this blot in my renown?
To make me Cuckold first of all did it delight thy mind,
First falling to thy spousal sport with mischief most unkind,
Now, now, to thee supernal Jove most hearty thanks I yield,
That with my first Antiope to dreary death I quilt,
That gone to dampish Stygian Dens I left thee not behind
Thy Mother: go, go Vagabond range, range, about to find
Strange foreign soils, and outcast lands aloof at world his end,
And Isles enclosed with th'Ocean flood to hell thy soul shall send:
Beneath among th'Antipodes thy self of harbring sped,
Though in the utmost lurking nook, thou shroud thy meshing head,
Aboue the grisly Palaces thou climb of lofty Poale,
Or moist aboue the clottring Snow advance thy cursed Soul,
Beyond the brunt of Winter flaws and threatening rigour pass
And stormy wrath with rumbling rough of ysse Bores,
With pengeance, vengeance violent fast hurling after thee,
With daunting plagues and pestilence thy sins shall scourged bee.
For life and death, about the world in every lurking whole.
O fugitive I shall not cease still to pursue thy soul.
But seek and search for thee I shall in lands that lye a far,
Al corners blind and caves shut up, Dens locked with bolt and bar▪
A thousand ways unpassable no place shall me withstand.
My cursinges black shall light on thee there where revenging hand
With weapon cā not work y• harm: thou know that Neptuue great
My Sire who flotes on floods, &amp; waives, with forked Mace doth beat
Give licence freely unto me three boons to choose and crave,
Which willingly the God hath grant, and sworn I shall it have
Protesting vgsome Stygian Lake, and hallowed hath his vow:
O breaker of the wrestling waives, avouch thy promise now.
Let never more Hippolitus behold th'eclipsed light,
And for the Fathers wrathful rage the cursed child down smight,
To wa•le among the ghastly s•rites o Father bend thy might,
To give (alas) this loathsome aid unto thy needy Son,
I of thy Majesty divine exact not to be donne.
This chiefest bone, till puissant payse of ylles do vs oppress:
In bottom deep of boiling Tartar pit, and sore distress•,
In grisly Limbo Jaws nigh garglefaced Ditis dim,
Amid the crumpled threatening brows of Hellick Pluto grim,
To claim thy promise made to me, as then I did refrain,
Now Sire thy faith by promise due perform to me again.
Yet dost thou stay• why rumble not the weltering waives yet bushed,
Through foggy cloud in dusky skits with stormy blasts •utrusht.
Unfold the mantel black of Night, and roll away the Skies,
Enforce the fighting floods burst out with mounting waives to rise▪
And conjure up the water hags that in the Rocks do keep,
The Ocean surges swelling hi• cast up from bottom deep.
O Nature Grandam great of Heavenly Sprites,
Eake Jove that guides Olimpus mighty sway,
That rakes the race of twinkling heauēly lights
On spinning Sphere and order dost for aye
The straggling course of roaming planets hie,
And wields about the whirling Axeltree
The weltering Pools, th'eternal course of Sky
To keep in frame, what works such care in thee
That erst the cold which hoary winter makes
Vnclothes the naked wood, and now again
Thesh ades return unto the breary brakes
Now doth the star of Summer Lion reign,
Whose scalded neck with boiling heate doth fry,
Perbraking flames from fiery •oming jaws:
With scorching heate the parched corn do dry:
Each season so his kindly course in draws.
But thou that wields these things of massy might,
By whom the huge world with egal payse
Even Balanced doth keep in compass right,
Each Sphere by measurd weight that justly swaise,
Alas why dost thou bear a retc les breast
Toward mankind? not casting any care
That wicked men with mischief be oppressed,
And eake to see that goodman well do fare
Dame Fortune topsieturuy turns at will
The world, and deals her dole with blinded hand,
And fosters vice maintaining mischief ill.
Foul lust triumphs on good men brought in band
Deceit in stately Court the sway doth wield,
In Lordinges levvde the vulgar sort delight,
With glee to such the Mace of might they yield.
Some magistrates they do both love and spite,
And pen•iue virtue brought to bitter bale,
Receives reward that doth of right arise,
The continent to Prison need doth hale,
The Lecher reigns enhanced by his vice.
O fruitless shame, O counterfeited port.
But what news may this messenger now bring,
Who with maine pace comes posting in this sort,
And stays with mourning countnance at the King.
O Heavy hap and cruel chance
of Servants slavish state,
Why am I Post to bring the news
of this il fa•ord fate?
Be not abashed the ruthful wrack
with courage to declare:
My breast against the brunt of broils
still armed I prepare,
My foltring tongue doth speech vnt•
my glutting grief deny.
Our stock with sorrow shuken sore what cares do crush escrie.
Hippolytus (ay woe is me) is slain by doleful death.
Now Father do I know my Son bereaved of his breath,
For why the Lecher life is lost: show in what sort he did.
In all post hast as fugitive to shun the Town he hyde
Once having caught his cutting course apace he scuddes away,
His prancing Palfreys strait he doth with Collers close array:
With curbed bittes their s•affled heads at will he bridles in,
Then talking much unto himself to curse he doth begin▪
His native soil: alas dear Father, Father still he cries:
And angry lasheth with his whip, while loose his Bridle lies:
Then suddenly a huge swolue began swell amid the deep,
And started up into the stars no pipling wind doth sweep
Along the Seas in Heaven so lith no noise at all there was:
The Seas full calm even as their kindly Tide doth drive them, pass.
Nor yet no boisterous Southern wind the Sycill sand turmoils.
Nor yet with some romping surge the raging gulf up boils,
Heaude up by Western puffs: when as the rocks with flappyng flash
Do shake and drowned Lucates cliue the hoary some doth dash.
The tombling waives together tossed on hills are heaped hie,
The swelling swolue with Monster much to land alofe doth fly,
Nor only shaken ships in Seas do su••er wrack hereby:
The land in hazard lies of storms a weltering wave is •old
In •ot•ring wise a wallowing gulf with winding compass fold,
Drives down I know not what withal: a flat uprising new
An head aboue the water brim doth raise the Stars to view.
In foggy cloud eclipsed is Apollos dusky gleede,
And Scyros Rocks whom Trump of Fame advanced by dreary deed
Corynthus eake whom double Sea on either side assail:
While greatly we agriesh▪ these things do languishing bewail,
The belking Seas yell out the grunting Rocks with all do roar▪
The slabby Cliue doth •eke, fro whence the water ebde before,
It froths, and keeping course by course it sp•was the waters out,
As doth Physeter fish (that flits the Ocean Coast about)
And gulping doth from yawning throat his floods of water spo•te.
The shaken surge did tottre strait and brake it self in twain:
With wrack (more violent then wee did fear) it rushed awayne
Against the shore, beyond the banks it breaks into the land:
And hideous Monster follows: these for fear did quaking stand
What shape that uncouth Monster had and body vast declare.
A boasting Bull, his marble neck advanced hye that bare,
Vpraysd his lofty bristled Mayn on curled forehead greene
With shaggy ears pricked up his divers speckled horns were seen.
(Whom Bacchus erst possessed had, who tames the Cattle wyld,
And eake the God that horn in floods was bred a water Child)
Now puffing he perbraketh flames, and now as looming light
With sparkling beams his goggle eyes do glare and glister bright.
His greasy larded neck (a mark for to be noted well)
With rough and knobby curnels hie out bumping big do swell.
His snorting Nostrils wide do grunt and yawning gulphes they sosse,
His breast and throtebag greenishly are daw•d with clammy moss
His side along begrymed is with Lactuse red of hue,
On snarling knots his wrinkled rumps toward his face he drew,
His scaly haunch, and lagging tail most ugly drags hee up,
As Pristis in the deep of Seas the swallowed Keel doth sup,
Or else perbraketh out again the vndigested pup.
The earth did quake, the Cattle feared about the field do ramp,
The hunter stark with chilling fear begins to stare and stamp,
The he••dman had no mind his scattrynge Heifers to pursue,
The Dear amazed brake the pale and bad the Lands adieu.
But only yet Hippolytus. devoid of fainting fear
His neyng horses with the raynes of Bridles hard doth bear,
With w•nted words he cheareth up his nimble Nagges afraid:
A st•epe hie way at Argos lies with stony cliues deceit,
That nodding ouerhangs the Sea, which vnderfleetes that ways:
That ugly Roil here heats him self, and rag•ng wrath doth raise,
And kindling courage hoate, him force with burning breast assays,
And chauflag left himself before began fret with angry hart.
Lo then into a scouring course on sudden doth hee start,
With whirl••g pace he girding forth doth scarcely touch the ground,
Lighting a front the trembling Ea•t with glaring Eyes hee glow•d.
Then also doth thy threatening Son with lowering brows upstart,
Nor changes Count•ounce, but speaks with stout courageous hart.
This foolish fear doth not appal my bold and hardened breast,
It comes to me by kind, that B•lls by me should •ee oppressed.
His Steeds defying strait the R•ynes plonge forward with the Cart,
As rage did prick them, sore affright bestoe the way they start.
This bias way among the Rocks they range, and wander wide,
But as the Pilot (least the Bark should totter to one side)
Doth bear it even in wrestling waives: so while his horses skip,
He rules them, now rains them hard, and now with winding whip
Free lashes on their buttocks lays: his Foe doth him pursue,
Now step by step, now meeting full against his face hee flue.
Provoking terror every where. No further fly they might:
The horned beast with butting Brow•s began run upon them right.
The trampling Gannets straught of wits doe straight way break their ray,
The struggle striving hard to slip the Collar it they may.
And prancing on their hinder Feet, the burden hurl on ground:
Thy Son flat falling on his Face, his body fast was bound,
Entangled in the winding ropes, the more he strives to loose
The slipping knots, he faster •ticks within the s•ding noose.
The Horses doe perceive the broil: and with the Waggon light.
While none there is to rule the Raynes, with ski•tech fear affright
At random out they romping run, (even as the Welkin hye
The Cart that mist his wonted weight, disdaining in the Sky
The dreary day that falsely was commit unto the Sun,
From off the fiery Marble Poale that down a skew doth run,
Flang Phaeton tops•e toruey tossed) his blood begdres the ground:
And dingd against the r•gged Rocks his head doth oft rebound:
The brambles rent his haled hair▪ the edged flinty stones,
The beauty batter of his Face, and break his crashing bones:
At Mouth his blaring tongue hangs out with squeezed eyne out dashed,
His Jaws &amp; Skull doe crack, abroad his spurting Brains are poshed,
His cursed beauty thus defoylde with many wounds is spent:
The iotting Wheels do grind his guts, and drenched sims they rent.
At length a Stake with Trūchion burnt his ripped Paūch hath caught,
From riued Grin toth• Navel stead within his womb it roughed:
The Cart upon his Moister pawsde against the ground ycrusht,
The Fellies stuck within the wounds, and out at length they rush•:
So both delay and Masters limbs are broke bystresse of Wheels:
His dragling guts then trail about the wincing horses heals.
They thumping with their horny Hooves against his Belly kick,
From burst Paunch on hey•es his bloody bowels tumble thick:
The scratting Briars on the Brakes with needle pointed pricks
His gory Carcass all to race with spells of thorny sticks
And of his flesh each ragged shrub a gub doth snatch and rent,
His men (a mourning troupe God knows) with brackish tears •esprēt
Doe stray about the field, whereas Hippolytus was tore:
A piteous sign is to bee seen by tracing long of gore:
His howling Dogs their Masters limbs with licking follow still:
The earnest toil of woeful Wights can not the coars up fill,
By gathering up the gobbets sparst and broken lumps of flesh.
Is this the fla•nting bravery that comes of beauty fresh?
Who in his Fathers Empire erst, did reign as princely Pear
The Heir apparent to the Crown, and shone in honour clear,
Like to the glorious Stars of Heaven, his Limbs in piec•s small
Are gathred to his fatal Grave, and swept to funeral.
O Nature that preuaylste too much, (alas) how dost thou bind
Whyth bonds of blood the Parents breast? how love wethe• by kent?
Maugre our Teeth whom gullty ask we would have rest of breath?
And yet lamenting with my tears I doe bewail thy death.
None can lament with honesty that which he wished destroyed.
The huge•st heap of woes by this I think to be enjoyed,
When flickering Fortunes cursed wheel doc cause vs cry alas,
To rue the wrack of things which carst wee wished brought to pass.
If still thou keep thy grudge, why is the Face with seats bespre•
Because I slue him, not because I lost him, I repent.
WHat heap of hippos do tumble upside down
Th'estate of man? less raging Fortune flies
On little things: less looming lights are thrown
By hand of Jove, on that which lower lies.
The homely couch safe merry hearts do keep:
The Cottage base doth give the Golden sleep.
The lofty Turrets top that cleaves the cloud
VVithstandes the sturdy storms of Southren wind,
And Bores boisterous blasts with threatening loud
Of blustering Corus shedding showers by kind.
The r••ing Dales do seldom noiance take,
Biding the brunt of Lightnings slashing flake.
Th'aduaunced crest of Caucasus the great
Did quake with bolt of lofty thundering Jove:
When he from clouds his thunder dintes did beat,
Dame Cybels Phrygian fryth did trembling move:
King love in haughty heaven full sore affright
The nighest things with weapons doth he smyght.
The ridges low of Vulgar peoples house
Stricken with storms do never greatly shake:
His Kingdoms coast Ioues thundering thumps do souse:
With wavering wings that hour his fligth doth take
Nor flitting Fortune with her tickle wheel
Lets any wight assured joy to feel.
Who in the World beholds the Statr•s full bright,
And chereful day forsaking ghastly Death,
His sorrowful return with groaning spright
He rewes, sith it deprived his Son of breath
He sees his lodging in his court again,
More doleful is then sharpe Auernus payne.
O. PALLAS unto whom all Athens land
Due homage owes, because that THESEVS thine
Among vs worldly Wights again doth stand,
And sees the Heavens upon himself to shine.
And passed hath the parlous miry Mud
Of stinking Stygian Fen, and filthy Flood.
Unto thy ravening Uncles dreary Gail
O Lady chaste not one Ghost dost thou owe,
The Hellick Tyrant knows his perfect tale.
Who from the Court this shrieking shrill doth throw?
What mischief comes in frantic PHAEDRAS brain
With naked Sword thus running out amain.
THrough pierced with pangs of penstuenesse
what fury pricks thy brain?
What means this bloody blade? what means
this shrieking out amain?
And langishing upon the Corps
which was thy malice made?
O tamer of the wrestling waives
me, me, doe thou invade.
The Monstrous hags of Marble Seas to ramp on me send out,
What ever Thetis low doth keep with folding arms about,
Or what the Ocean Seas aloe•fe embrace with winding wave:
O Theseus that to thine alies dost still thy self behave
So Currishly, O thou that for thy loving Friends avail
Dost never yet return: thy Son and Father doe bewail
Thy passport brought by death, and blood, thy s•ooke thou dost destroy,
By love or hatred of thy wife thou workest still annoy:
O sweet Hippolytus thus I behold thy battered face,
And I it is, I wretch (alas) that brought thee to this case.
What Scinis forced thy limbs so torn his snatching boughs to feel?
Or what Procrustes racked and rent thee streacht on bed of Steel?
Or else what Minotaur of Crete that grim twishaped Bull
With horny head (that Dedalls ••ues with lo••ing s••leth 〈◊〉
Hath thee in fitters torn? (ay me) where is thy beauty fled?
Where are our twinkling stars thine eyes? alas, and art thou ded?
Appear a while, receive my words, for speak I shall none ill.
This hand shall strike the stroke, wherewith thy bengeance quite I will.
And sith that I, I Ca•ife, I, abridged have thy life,
Lo here I aut content, 〈◊〉 thee mine with bloody knife.
If ghost may here be given for ghost, and breath may serve for breath,
Hippolytus take thou my soul, and come again from death.
Behold my bowels yet are safe my limbs in lusty plight.
Would God that as they serve for me, thy body serve they might,
Mine eyes to render kindly light unto thy Carcass ded,
Lo for thy use this hand of mine shall pluck them from my head,
And set them in these empty cells and vacant holes of thine.
Thy weal of me a wicked Wight to win, do not rapine.
And if a women's woeful heart in place of thine may rest,
My bosom straight break up I shall, and tear it from my breast.
But courage stout of thine doth loath •aint women's heart to have
Thy Noble mind would rather go with manly heart to grave.
Alas be not so manly now, this manliness further,
And rather choose to live a man with women's sprite and fear,
Then as no man with manly heart in darcknesse deep to sit:
Have thou thy life, give me thy death that more deserves it.
Can not my profer purchase place? yet vengeance, shall thou have,
Hell shall not hold me from thy side nor death of dompish grave.
Sith fates will not permit thee life, though I behest thee mine,
My self I shall in spite of fate my fatal twist untwine.
This blade shall rive my bloody breast, my self I will despoil
Of soul, and sin at once: through floods and▪ Tactor gulphes y• boyle,
Through S•yx and through the burning Lakes I will come after thee:
Thus may we please the lowering shades, receive thou here of m•e
The parings of my Poll, and Locks cut off from forehead torn,
Our hearts we could not join in one, yet wretches now forlorn.
We shall together in one day our fatal hour close:
If thou be loyal to thy spouse, for him thy life then lose:
But if thou be vncestuous, dye for thy lovers sake.
Shall I unto my husbands bed again my corps betake,
Polluted with so heinous crime? O death the chiefest joy
Of wounding shame: Death only ease of stinging Loves annoy:
We run to thee: embrace our sowles within thy gladsome breast:
Hark Athens, hark unto my talk, and thou aboue the rest,
Thou Father worse unto thy Child than bloody stepdame I.
False forged tales I told with shame, I feigning that did lye,
Which I of spite imagined, when raging breast did swerve.
Thou father falsely punished hast him that did not deserve.
The young man chaste is cast away for mine vncestuous vice,
Both bashful he and guiltless was, now play thy wonted guise.
My guilty breast with bloody Lance of Sword deserved is riuen,
The Dirge toth• dead to purge my spouse shall with my blood be given.
Thou father of the stepdame learn, what things thy Sōne should have
Of life deprived, as to lay his carcass in a grave.
O winnie Jaws of black Auerne, •ache Tartar dungeon grim,
O Lethes Lake of woeful Souls the joy that therein swim,
And eake ye glummy Gulphes destroy, destroy me wicked wight
And still in pit of pangs let me be plunged day and night.
Now, now, come up ye Goblin grim from water creeks allow,
What ever Proteus huge swolue aloof doth overflow,
Come dowse me drowned in swallows deep, that triumph in my sin:
And father thou that evermore full ready pressed hath bin
To wreak mine ire, aduentring In deed deserving death
With new found slaughter have bereft mine only Son of breath.
His tattred limbs I scatred have the bloody field about,
While th'innocent I punish doe, by chance I have found out▪
The truth of al this wickedness: heaven, stars, and sprites of hell
I p•ster with my treachery that me doth ouerquell.
No mischiefs hap remains more: iii. kingdoms know me well:
We are returned to this World. For this did Hell unfold
His gates that burials twain I might and double death behold?
Whereby I both a wyueles Wight andeak• a Sonles Sire,
May with one brand to wise and Son inflame the funeral fire.
O •emir of blackefaced light Alcides, now restore
Thy booty brought from Hell, redeem to me, to me therefore
These Ghosts that now be gone, ah sinful wretch to death in vain
I sue, most indiscreet by whom these wretched Wights were slain.
Imagining destruction sore about it will I go,
Now with thine own hands on thy self due vengeance do bestow:
A Pine tree bough down strained perforce unto the ground allow,
Let slip into the open ayre shall cut my corpse in twain.
From top of Scyrons Rocks I will be tumbled down amain.
More grievous vengeance yet I have in Phlegethon River found,
Tormenting guilty Ghosts enclosed with fiery Channel round.
What pit and pangs shall plunge my soul already have I known,
That tyring toil of Sisyphus that retchles rolling stone,
Let yield unto my guilty Ghost, and being laid on
These shoulders, these, these lifting hands of mine down let it sway:
And let the fleeting flood about my lips deluded play.
Yea let the ravening grype come hear and Tytius paunch forsake,
Forglutting food with grasping Cleaze my liver let him take,
Increasing still to feed the Foul, and for my torments sake.
And pause thou my Pyrothous Sire, and eke the snackle Wheel
That whirleth still enforce my limbs thy swinging swift to feel.
Gape, gape, thou ground and swallow me thou cruel Chaos blind,
This passage to thinfernall Sprightes is fit for me to find:
My Son I will ensue, thou Prince of ghastly ghosts in hell,
Dread not for chaste wee come to thee: give thou me leave to dwell
Among thy dreadful dens for aye, and not to pass again.
Alas, my prayer at the Gods no favour can obtain,
But if that mischief crave I should how ready would they bee?
O Theseus to thy plaint eternal time is granted thee:
Provide thy Son his O•it rytes, and shroud in dompish grave
His broken limbs, which Monsters foul dispersed and scattered have.
The shreadings of this dear beloved carcass bring to me,
His mangled members hither bring on heaps that tombled be:
This is Hyppolytus, I do acknowledge mine offence,
For I it is, that have deprived thee of life and sense.
Least that but once, or only I should be a guilty Wight,
I Sire attempting mischief have besought my Fathers might.
Lo I enjoy my fathers gift, O solitariness,
A grievous plague when feeble years have brought vs to distress,
Embrace these limbs, and that which yet doth of thy son remain,
O woeful wight in baleful breast preserve and entertain.
These scattred scraps of body torn O Sire in order fet,
The straying gobbetts bring again, here was his right hand set:
His left hand here instructed will to rule the raynes must be.
His left side ribs (full well I know to be •ewayld of me
With bittter tears) as yet alas are lost and wanting still,
O trembling hands behold this woeful business to fulfil,
And withered Cheeks forbid your streams of flowing tears to run
While that the father do account the members of his Son.
And eke patch up his body rent, that hath his fashion lost,
Disfigured foul with gory wounds, and all about betost:
I doubt, if this of thee be piece, and piece it is of thee:
Here, lay it here, in th'empty place, here let it laid be,
Although perhap it lye not right: (aye me) is this thy face?
Whose beauty twinkled as a star, and eake did purchase grace,
In sight of F••procured to ruth. Is this thy beauty lost?
O cruel will of Gods, O rage in sin prevailing most.
Doth thus the Sire that great good turn perform unto his son?
Lo let thy fathers last fare well within thine ears to run,
Mychild whom oft I bid farewell: the whilst the fire shall burn
These bones, set op his burial bower, and let vs fall to morn
With loud lamenting Mopsus wise for both the coerces sake:
With Princely Pomp his funeral fire see that ye ready make.
And seek ye up the broken parts in field dispersed round,
Stop his up hurled into a Pit, let heavy clodds of ground
lie hard upon his cursed head.

THis sixtenth year of mine age (right
honourable) renews a grateful memo∣rye
of your great goodness towards me:
(for at Baptism your honour vouchsafed
to answer for me): and causes me
thus boldly to present these greene and
vnmelowed fruicts of my first truailes unto you: as signs
and testimonies of a well disposed mind unto your honour.
Albeit when first I vndertoke the translation of this pre∣sent
Tragoedy, I minded nothing less, than that at any
time thus rudely transformed it should come into the
Printers hands. For I to none other end removed him,
from his natural and lofty style, to our corrupt and base,
or as some men (but untruly) affirm it, most barbarous
Language: but only to satisfy the instant requests of a
few my familiar friends, who thought to have put it to the
very same use, that SENECA himself in his Inuen∣tion
pretended: Which was by the tragical and Pom∣pose
show upon Stage, to admonish all men of their fic∣kle
Estates, to declare the inconstant head of wavering
Fortune, her sudden interchanged and soon altered
Face: and lively to express the just revenge, and fear∣full
punishmēts of horrible Crimes, wherewith the wret∣ched
world in these our miserable days piteously swear∣meth.
This caused me not to be precise in following the Au∣thor,
word for word: but sometimes by addition, sometimes
by subtraction, to use the aptest Phrases in giving the Sēse
that I could invent. Whereat a great number (I know)
will be more offended than Reason or Wisdom would
they should bee. Thus as I framed it to one purpose:
so have my friends (to whom I can not well deny any thing
that Frendshyps right may seem justly to require) wre∣sted
it to another effect: and by this means blown it a∣broad,
by ouerrash and unadvised printing. By which
fond deed I know undoubtedly I shall receive the poyso∣ned
infamies, of a number of venomous tongues, Where∣fore
(right honourable) as I give these the first Fruicts of
my travail unto you: declaring therein the great good∣will
and duty that I owe unto your Honour, for the no∣ble
disposition of your virtuous mind: so am I driven
humbly to require your strong aid, and assured defence a∣against
the sclaunderous assaults of such malicious mouths,
which obtained: I shall be the better encouraged against
an other time, to bestow my travail in matters of far
greater weighte and importance. In the mean season
(desiring your Honour to take these simple Attempts of
mine in good part:) I leave you to the tuitiō of the right
high and mighty God: Who keep you long in health, &amp;
grant you many happy years: with increase of Honour.
BEHOLD HERE BEFORE THY
Face (good Reader) the most lamentable Tra∣giddy
of that most Unfortunate Prince O Edipus,
for thy profit rudely translated. Wonder not
at the grosenesse of the Style: neither yet
account the Inuentours Diligence dys∣graced
by the Translators Negligence: Who though
that he hath sometimes boldly presumed to err from his Au∣thor,
roving at random where he list: adding and subtracting
at pleasure: yet let not that engender disdainful suspicion
with in thy learned breast. Mark thou rather what is meant
by the whole course of the History: and frame thy life free
from such mischiefs, wherewith the World at this present
is universally ouervvhelmed, The vvrathfull vengeance of
God provoked, the Body plagued, the mind and Conscience
in midst of deep devouring daūgers most terribly assaulted.
In such sort that I abhor to write: and even at the thought
thereof I tremble and quake for very inward grief and fear
of mind: assuredly persuading my self that the right high
and immortal God, will never leave such horrible and de∣testable
crimes unpunished. As in this present Tragoedy, and
so forth in the process of the whole history, thou moist right
well perceive. Wherein thou shalt see, a very express and
lively Image of the incōstant change of fickle Fortune in the
person of a Prince of passing Fame and Renown, midst whole
fluds of earthly bliss: by mere misfortune (nay rather by the
deep hidden secret Iudgemēts of God) piteously plunged in
most extreme miseries. The whole Realm for his sake in
strangest guise grievously plagued: besides the apparent de∣struction
of the Nobility: the general death and spoil of the
Cōminalty: the miserable transformed Face of the City, with
an infinite number of mischiefs more, which I pass over un∣rehearsed.
Only wish I all men by this Tragical history (for
to that intent was it written) to beware of Sin: the end
whereof is shameful and miserable. As in the most infortu∣nate
fall of this unhappy Prince right plainly appears.
Who by inward gripe of fearful cōsuming Cōscience wret∣chedly
tormented: beholding the lamētable state of his vile
infected Realms, wasted by the burning rage of privy spoil∣ling
Pestilence, finds himself in tract of time, to be th'onely
plague &amp; misery of the almost quite destroyed City. Where∣upon
calling together his Priests and Prophets, &amp; asking coū∣sail
of the Gods by them, for present remedy in those evils,
wherewith the Realm was than universally ouerflowen: aū∣swear
was made that the Plague should never cease, till king
LAIVS death were thoroughly revenged: and the bloody
Murderer driven into perpetual exile. Which answer re∣ceiued,
OEDIPVS, far more curious in bolting out the
truth, than careful of his own Estate: suddenly slides into an
innumerable company of dreadful miseries. For as soon as he
had once the perfect view of his own detestable deeds, and
wicked misdemeanour cast before his eyes, together with the
unnatural killing of his Father LAIVS, the incestuous Ma∣riage
of his Mother IOCASTA, the preposterous order of
his ill misguided life, with a hundred more like mischiefs,
which chaste &amp; undefiled ears abhor to hear: fretting Few∣rye
cōmon enemy &amp; tormētor to corrupted cōsciēces pricking
him forward, all inflamed with Frenzy and boiling in in∣vvard
heate of vile infected mind, hee roots out his wret∣ched
eyes unnaturally, bereaves his Mother her life (though
earnestly requested thereto) beastly, &amp; in the end in most ba∣sest
kind of slavery, banished, dies miserably. Leaving behind
him unto all posterities, a dreadful Example of Gods horrible
vengeance for sin. Such like terrors as these requires this
our present Age, wherein Vice hath chiefest place, &amp; Virtue
put to flight, lies as an abject, languishing in great extremity.
For the which cause, so much the rather have I suffered this
my base trāslated Tragoedy to be published: frō his Author in
word &amp; verse somewhat trāsformed, though in Sense little al∣tered:
and yet oftentimes rudely increased with mine own
simple invention: more rashly (I cōfesse) than wisely, wishing
to please all: to offend none. But whereas no man lives so
uprightly, whom slaundring tongues leave vndiffamed, I re∣far
my self to the Judgment of the wisest, little esteeming
the prejudicial mouths of such carping Marchaūts, which
suffer no men's doings almost to scope undefiled. In fine, I be∣seech
all to gether (if so it might be) to bear with my rude∣nes,
&amp; consider the grosenes of our own Country language,
which cā by no means aspire to the high lofty Latinists stile.
Mine only intent was to exhort men to embrace Virtue
and shun Vice, according to that of the right famous &amp; ex∣cellent
Poet Virgil
This obtained: I hold my self thoroughly cōtented: In the
mean season I end: wishing all men to shun Sin, the plain
(but most perilous) pathway to perfect infelicity.
THe Night is gon: and dreadful day
begins at length t'appeere:
And Phoebus all bedim'•e with Clouds,
himself aloft doth rear.
And gliding forth with deadly hue,
a doleful blase in Skies
Doth bear: Great terror &amp; dismay
to the beholders Eyes.
Now shall the houses void bee seen, with Plague devoured quite?
And slaughter that the night hath made, shall day bring forth to light.
Doth any man in Princely throne rejoice? O brittle Joy,
How many ills? how fair a Face? and yet how much annoy
In thee doth lurk, and hidden lies? what heaps of endless strife?
They judge amiss, that deem the Prince to have the happy life.
For as the Mountains huge and by, the blustering wiudes withstand.
And craggy Rocks, the belching fluds do dash, and drive fro land:
Though that the Seas in quiet are, and calm on every side:
So kingdoms great all Winds and Waives of Fortune must abide.
How well shunt I my Father dear Polybius Scepters late?
Exiled, bereft of careful fear, in Pilgrims happy state:
I call the Gods to witness this, and Stars that glide in Skies.
A Kingdom is befallen to me. I frare least thereof rise
A mischief, (mighty Jove,) to great I fear, alas I fear
Least these my hands have re•t the life, or thee my Father dear.
Apollo bids me this beware, and yet a mischief more Foretells.
Can any greater bee than that you told before?
Of Father slain by sons own hand?
(O thrice unhappy state.)
With horror all dismayed I stand in dred of threatened fate.
I am ashamed my destinies foul (O Queen) to thunder out,
And openly to blase my fear my trembling mind doth dout:
Yet out it goes. Phoebus me bids my Mothers Bed to fly.
As though that I her Son, with her incestuously should lie.
This fear, and only this me caused my fathers kingdom great
For to forsake. I fled not thence when fear the mind doth beat.
The restless thought still dreds the thing, it knows can never chance.
Such fancies now torment my heart, my safety to advance,
And eke thine ever sacred laws (O Nature) for to keep
A stately Sceptre I forsook, yet secret fear doth creep
Within my breast: and frets it still with doubt and discontent,
And inward pangs which secretly my thoughts a sunder rent.
So though no cause of dred I see, yet fear and dred I all,
And scant in credit with my self, my thoughts my mind appal
That I cannot persuaded be though reason tell me no,
But that the Web is weaving still of my decreed wo.
For what should I suppose the cause? a Plague that is so general,
And Cadmus country wholly spoils, and spreds it self through all?
Should me, amongst so huge a heap of plagued Bodies spare?
And we alone amongst the rest reserved to mischiefs are?
O heavy hap. And bide I still alone the spoil to see?
Of Cities great, of men, of beasts, by plague that wasted bee?
And thou amongst so many else, a happy life to lead,
Could once persuade thy self (O wretch) without all fear or dread.
Of Phoebus secret Judgements to, and that in Kings estate?
Thou, thou, infected hast the ayre, in such a filthy rate.
Thou art the only cause of woe: by thee these evils rise,
By thee to grave on such a sort, this wretched people plies.
The fiery flaming frying heate, afflicted hearts that wastes,
Is not relieude as wont it was by cold and pleasant blasts.
The gentle western winds have left with healthful puffs to blow,
And now the fiery Dog with blase of boiling heate doth glow.
The Sun in Leo burns so hoate, and so the earth doth broil,
That fluds and herbs are dried up, and nought remains but soil,
So thoroughly schorcht and stewed with heate, that moisture all is gone,
And now amongst so many fluds, remains alas not one.
The places dry are only seen the streams are drunken up.
And water that doth yet remain: the soaking Earth doth sup.
The Moon with clouds quite over cast, all sadly 〈◊〉 she glides,
And doleful darksome shades of night the who• world over hides.
No Star on high at all doth shine, but black and 〈◊〉 hue
Hath ouershaded all the Skies, whence deadly mists ensue.
The corn that wonted was to grow and fruitfully to spring,
Now to the voided Barnes nought else, but empty stalks doth bring.
No part of all our kingdom is free from destruction:
But all together run and rush, to utter confusion.
The old men with the young (alas:) the 〈◊〉 with the child
The plague consumes. Both man &amp; wife, all beasts both tame &amp; wild
Are spoiled by the Pestilence. No pomp at all remains,
That wonted was in Funerals, to ease the mourners pains.
Alas this spoil of people made, by plague hath dryde mine eyes:
And secretly within my breast, the grief it boiling fries.
And that, that wonted is to hap, in most extremest ills:
My tears are dry and glutting grief my wretched breast it fills.
The crazed father bears the son, unto their dampish graves:
And after him with burden like, the Mother comes and raves:
And even lamenting as they stand, 〈…〉 both they fall,
And mourners new in like estate, for them 〈…〉 they call.
Who likewise in the midst of all their •oil and painful payne
Do drop into the grave they digd, and so the place doe gain
That was prepar' de for others erst. A hell it were to here
The horror, and the miseries that every where appe•re.
A Tomb is made for noble men, fast on the people die,
And in, their burdens fling. Great Pieres all unregarded lye.
For lack of Graves, to Ashes clean their bodies some doe wast▪
And some half burnt doe leave them there, and home away for hast
They run, &amp; more they fetch, and then wood, fire, grave, and all
Doth want. And down for very grief the wretched misers fall.
No prayers avail. No Art can help this raging Plague t'appease:
For none almost is left alive each others woe to ease.
Before thine aulters here O God my feeble hands I hold,
Requiring all my destinies, at once with courage bold.
And that by death I may prevent, my Country pressed to fall.
For this, and only this (O God) upon thy name I call.
Let me not be the last that dies: The last that goes to Grave.
Grant this, and then (O mighty Jove) my full request I have.
O cruel Gods unkind: O more than thrice unhappy Fates:
That only me denied is, that lights on all Estates.
I mean a speedy death (alas) these evils to prevent
And deadly woe 〈…〉 rage itorment.
Leave of thy blubb•ring 〈…〉 kingdoms foiled
With rotten plagues &amp; 〈◊〉 bile, and graves each where dispoylde.
All which diseases thou unhappy guest did bring with thee
Dispatch. Away. Gp hence. At least, unto thy parents flee.
What boots it 〈…〉, great with piteous plaints to ag∣gre•ate.
Stoutly to bear adverse••, 〈…〉 estate.
When dred and danger most assay•▪ when cruel Cares doe crush
Thy princely breast, •spent thou most to bear and bide the push.
It is no poin•• of courage slout to yield to fortunes frown.
Nay, Fear•• could n•u• cause me sloupe nor Fortune cast me down.
My manly winds was never thraule to vain and pea••h fears,
But evermore in each 〈…〉 courage bears.
No not a thousand glister••g swords, nor Mars himself in field.
Can once dismay my Continuance, or cause my heart to yield.
The very Giants fierce and huge in fight withstand I dare.
That Monster Sohinx whose riddels through the world renowned are▪
Could not dismay my doodles heart, nor cause my courage slide
For all the terrors I behold. I did that Fury bide.
I saw him belching G•bs of blood, I v••with full well the field
That all to 〈◊〉 lay with blood, and bones quite ouerheelde.
And when y• he on Mountains top with mouth full huge to see.
Stood gaping all with greedy Jaws to feed and pray on me,
Oft fluttering with his fearful wings and shaking oft his raise,
Began full like a Lyon 〈◊〉 with threats me to assail.
Of whom straight way the Riddell I, it rush• into mine •ares
With roaring sound His wings he claps, the Rock for hast hee tears.
Destring with my Bowels still his greedy Jaws to glue•:
But I full soon assoyled had the question that he put.
And all the subtle poincts there of, and twisted know•s vntwinde.
What makes you wish for death to late, and wave your words in wind.
You might have died than (you know) for Sphinx so nobly slain.
This kingdom unto you, and yours for ever shall remain.
The ashes of that Monster vile, against vs doth rebel.
That vile misshapen loathsome Beast, that raging Feend of Hell.
Is cause of all the plague that doth this mournful City smight.
Now only this remains alone, if Phoebus heavenly might,
Can any means invent for vs, or way of mercy make:
Whereby these burning Plagues at length may happily chasice to slake.
O More then thrice renow•ied Stock
of ancient Cadmus Race.
O mighty Thebes City grear,
O heavy ruthful Case.
Lo now you lye all desolate,
with Plague devoured quite.
Both you and all your Husbandmen.
(Oh miserable sight.)
O foul and fearful Fate (alas) what causes all this aid?
O God whence springs this Pestilence that vs 〈◊〉 so?
No age, no shape, no form is spared, but all confounded lye.
Thus happiest now y• man I count, whose chance was first to dye.
For hee hath shunt a thousand •else, which wretched Eyes have seen:
And mischiefs great that vs doe pr•sse from him are taken clean.
O God withhold thy fury great, thy Plagues from vs re•du•.
Cease of afflicted Souls to scourge, who thee, 〈◊〉 •nd •ove.
Power down on them diseases foul, that them deserved have.
A Guerdon just for sin (Oh God) this this of thee wee ••aue,
And only this. We ask no more, the cause and all is thine,
A thing not used of Gods it is, from pity to decline.
My heart doth vant, and trembling cold through all my limbs doth run,
As oft as I remembering, count the noble Stocks v••un,
By death and dolfull destinies that overwhelmed lye,
And yet alas the people still to Grave doe faster hye.
In long Array all in a rank by thousands on a•o•,
On every side, in every streate to burial fast, they go.
The seven broad wide open Gates, are not 〈◊〉 forway,
But thronged the people pestered stand still in a fearful stay,
And in the midst of all their toil with corses on their backs,
The number that before doth post the hinder number slackes▪
The corses in the streets doe lye and Grave on Grave is made.
But all in vain. For nought it boots the plague 〈◊〉 bestayde.
The sacrifices don to Gods ha•e to to ill success.
And such strange sights &amp; signs doe rise that nought else I can guess,
But that at hand with ghastly paws, is utter destruction,
With thousand ills accompanied and extreme confusion.
The sheep of rot by heaps as thick, as dogs doe fall and d•e▪
And belching out their wasted lunges, on ground doe sprawling lye.
And I my self of late did see: (a sight unseen before,)
As our high priest stood sacrificing at the Temple door,
And struck with grievous bloody wound the golden horned Bull
When down with liveless lump he drop• and members made full dull.
And all the woude wide bleeding gapes &amp; black goars blood out spues.
And yet the blade vnsprinckled was. The blood it buying 〈◊〉
And bubbles on the ground. Alas what do these things pore•end?
Oh mighty Jove at length vouchsafe some good and ha••y end.
At length withhold thy h••d (O God) and health unto vs send.
Nothing (alas) remains at all, in wo••ed old estate,
But all are tu•ed to p••t down, quite void and desolate
The famting horse for 〈…〉 bank his burden tats.
And after on 〈…〉:
Who cries for help 〈…〉 that bide
Unkept: unknown ways and path do range and ouerstride.
The Bull 〈…〉 and me a•e in field all fainting lies.
And, all his flock 〈…〉, folly Shepherd dyes.
The 〈…〉 his zatal breath expiers
And to the 〈…〉 hisfast •esters.
The 〈…〉 do live in aretched peace.
The rage, and wrathful 〈◊〉 founds of romping Lions cease.
The vengeance 〈…〉 Bears are now as •am as sheep
The ugly Serpent that was wont▪ the Rocky Den•es to keep.
Oft quaffing poisoned 〈…〉 in inward hey•. she boils,
〈…〉 for longer lie•e she toils.
The woods are 〈…〉 withfresh and lively hue▪
The wonted shades are gon. All things are quite out of their Que:
No greenish grass on ground doth grow, the earth no moisture soupes.
The Vine without• 〈◊〉 •ap, his drowsy head down drowpes.
What shall I say? all 〈…〉 but of course,
And as they 〈…〉 worse and worse.
O mighty 〈…〉 yls?
When cease 〈…〉 •loud thus fierce and raging spells?
I think but we almost alive, there do no men remain:
Whom 〈◊〉 Darrs 〈…〉 on earth have left unslain.
I think 〈…〉 shades of hell where filthy fluds do flow,
Where plages and vile diseases too, where dreadful horrors grow,
And 〈…〉 mischiefs on vs throw,
With Botch &amp; bla•e of sundry kinds which sother• blasts do blow,
And wrekful vexed hags of hell do dreath and on vs bring:
The angry fits of hell I think their avenge••ce, on vs fling
And out their mortal poison spue which they against vs bear.
Lo see how greedy death on vs with scowling eyes doth lear.
See, see. Oh Jove how fast hee throws his Darts. Not one he spares
But all confounds. His threatening force, withstand no Creature dares.
No doubt the loathsome Feryman the sinful souls that trains
Through stinking fluds, his labour loths that he for vs sustains.
Such press by plūps to him is made which still renews his pains.
But hark yet mōsters more thē these, the Fame abroad doth fly
That hellish Dogs with bawling sound were heard to howl and cry,
And y• the ground with trembling shook, and under feel did move.
And dreadful blazing Comets bright were seen in Skies aboue.
And ghastly shapes of men besides, to wander on the ground.
And wood, and trees on every side, did fearfully resound.
Besides all this straūg Ghosts were seen in places where they stood.
And Rivers more then one or two, that ran all black goorb blood.
O cruel plague, O vile discos, far worse then speedy death.
O wee unhappy thrice and more, who doe prolong our breath.
In these accursed days and times. But hark to me a while.
When first this Iothsome plague begins these Misers to defile,
It takes them thus. A fearful Cold through al their bones doth r•n,]
And Cold and Heate together mixed, their se•es all benome.
Than little loathsome marks appear, and all their bodies spot.
And all their members slaming glow, and burning fast doe rot.
The Lights, the Lungs, the heart, the Guts, and all that inward lies.
And all the secret parts iscorcht, with deadly, I fire fries.
The blood all clotterd in their Cheeks, in cluster lies by lumps.
And it and heate together makes, great, strange, and ruddy bumps.
And blood and flesh congealed stands, in Face as stiff as stake.
And Eyes in head fast fixed set, and often trickling make.
And down apace whole fluds they steam, and clots &amp; drops doe trill,
And all the skin from of their Face, by flakes and scales doth pill.
A thousand fearful sounds at once, into their ears doe rush.
And loathsome blood out of their Nose, by stilling streams doth gush.
The very anguish of their heart doth cause them for to shake.
And what with payne &amp; heal, and fear, their wearied limbs doe quake.
Then some the rūning Rivers haunt, and some on gro•nd •ce 〈◊〉.
And some again their thirst to slake, cold water gulping 〈◊〉.
Thus all our country •oct with plague in Griefy it weltering 〈◊〉.
And still desiring for to dye, a thousand deaths it dyes.
But God to hear them then is pressed: and death to none 〈◊〉.
Besides al this, the church some do frequent: but not to pray,
But only for to glut the Gods, with that that they do say.
But who is this that comes to Court in hast with posting pace?
What? first Croon that noble Prince (for deeds and stately race?)
Or doth my mind oppressed with care things false for true contrive?
Croon it is long looked for, his sight doth me revive.
FOr fear my body chilles, alas,
and trembling all I stand
In quaking dread. I seek and toil,
these mischiefs to withstand.
But al in vain I spend my thoughts
it will not be, I see,
As long as all my senses thus
by cares distracted bee.
My mind desirous still (Oh God,) the truth for to unfold,
With doubtful Dread is daunted so, that it can scant uphold
It self. O Brother bear, if way or mean of health thou know,
Declare it out and stick not all the truth to me to show.
The Oracle (most noble king) is dark, and hidden lies.
Who doubtful health to sick men brings, all health to thē denies.
Apolloes use yt is the troth in darksome dens to hold.
And Oedipus of Gods it hath things hidden to unfold:
Speak out, tell all, and spare not man: all doubts I can discus.
Apollo then (most noble King) himself commands thus.
By exile purge the Princes seat, and plague with vengeance due
That hapless vvretch, whose bloody hands of late King Laius slue:
Before that this performed bee, no hope of milder air:
Wherefore do this (O King) or else All hope of help despair.
Durst any man on earth attem pte, that noble Prince to slay?
Show me the man that I may him dispatch out of the way.
God grant I may it safely tel: the hearing was to terrible,
My senses all amassed are: it is a thing so horrible,
That I abhor to utter it (oh God) for fear I quake
And even at the very thought my limbs begin to shake.
As soon as I Appollos Church, had entered in afraid,
Upon my face flat down I fell, and thus to him I prayed.
Oh God if ever thou did rue, on wretched misers state,
If ever men oppressed thou easd, or did their cares abate,
If ever thou in present need did present help declare,
If ever thou afflicted Hearts with cares consumed did spare:
Show now thy wonted elemency and pity known of yore.
Scant had I said: Refounding all the mountains thondring roar:
And filthy fiends spout out their flames out of their darksome caves.
And woods do quake, and hills do move, and up the surging waives
Do mount unto the skies aloft, and I amassed stand.
Still looking for an answer at Apollos sacred hand.
When out with ruffled hair disguised•th: Prophet comes at last:
And when that she had felt the heate of mighty Phoebus blast.
All puffing out she swells in rage, and pattring still she raves,
And scant she entered had into Apollos shining caves,
When out a thundering voice doth burst that's far aboue mans reach.
So dreadful seemed then to me the mighty Phoebus speech.
Than thus he spake and thus at length into mine cares he rushed
While sprawling still the Prophet lay before the doors in dust.
The Thebane City never shall be free frō plagues (quoth he,)
Except from thence the Kingkiller forthwith expulsed bee:
Unto Apollo known he was, or ever he was borne.
Do this: or else no hope of health, to this, the gods have sworn.
And as for thee, thou shalt not long in quiet state endure,
But with thy self wage war thou shalt &amp; war thou shalt pro∣cure
Unto thy children dear: &amp; crepe again thou shalt into thy mothers womb.
Loke what the Gods commanded have accomplished shall be.
Nor never shall these eyes of mine abide the day to see,
A King of kingdom spoiled by force, by guile or crast suppressed.
A king to kings the prop ought be, and chiefest cause of rest:
No man regards his death at all whom living he doth fear,
Great cause makes me my Princes death conceal and closiy bear
Ought any cause of fear or grief, the duty for to let?
The threatening of the prophesyes, do still my breast beset.
Let vs (sith God cōmaunds) forthwith some good atonement make
If any way, or means there be their wrathful rage to slake.
Thou God that sits on seat on high, and al the world dost guide,
And thou by whose commandment the Stars in Skies do glide:
Thou, thou that only ruler art of Seas, of Floods, and all.
On thee and on thy Godhood great, for these requests I call.
Who so hath slain king Laius, oh Jove I do thee pray.
Let thousand else upon him fall, before his dying day.
Let him no health no comfort have, but al to crushed with cares,
Consume his wretched years in grief, &amp; though that death him spares
Awhile. Yet mischiefs all, at length upon him light.
With all the evils under Sun, that ugly monster smight.
In exile let him live a Slave, the rated course of life.
In shame, in care, in peuury in danger and in strife.
Let no man on him pity take, let all men him revile.
Let him his Mothers sacred Bed incestuously defile.
Limb him his father kill. And yet let him do mischiefs more.
What thing more heinous can I wish then that I wished before?
Let him do all those ills I say, that I have shunt and past.
All those and more (if more may be) oh God upon him cast.
Let him no hope of pardon have: but sue and all in vain.
All hellish Furies on him light, for to increase his payne.
O Jove power down thy fury great, thy thūdring thumps out throw
Let Bores boisterous blasts and stormy plagues upon him blow
Consume him quite. Fre• out his guts with pockes and botches vile
Let all diseases on him light that wretched bodies fyle.
Let these and more (if more may be) upon that Monster fall.
Let Harpies paws and greedy paunch deu•ur his members all.
Let no man him regard: or seek his limbs in grade to lay:
But let him dye ten thousand deaths before his dying day.
By this my Kingdom I do swear, and Kingdom that I left
By al my Country Gods that been in Temples closely kept,
I swear, I vow, I do protest, and thereto witness take:
The Stars, the Seas, the Earth and all that ere thy hand did make.
Except that I my self forthwith this bloody monster find,
To wreak the wrath of God some way with solemyne oath I bind.
And so my father, Polybius his happy days out live.
And so my mother Merope, no marriage new contrive:
As he shall dye that did this deed, and none shall him excuse.
Whosoever he be here I protest for that he shortly rues:
But where this wicked deed was don Croon now tell me plain:
Both by what means? &amp; where: and how Ring Laius was slain.
Croon. Passing through Castalia woods &amp; mountains heaped with suoe
Where groves and scrubs, and bushes thick &amp; brambles sharp do groe.
A threepathd crooked way there is that diversely doth go.
One unto Bacchus city bends that Phoce doth hight,
The other to Olenius, forth stretches out aright:
The third that reaches through the vales and by the rivers lies
Tends down unto the Banks whereby Eel•a, water plies
There unawares (O piteous chance) a troup of thieves entraps
The noble prince, and murders him hence spring these great mishaps
which heap you realms with hideous woes and plagues on every side,
By just decree of heavenly powers which can no murder bide.
But see Tiresias where he coms with old and trembling pace.
I think Apolloes heavenly might have brought him to this place.
See where he comes▪ and Manto too, his steps directing stays
Tic he who for your grace (O king) and for your country prays
COme holy priest (to Phoebus next)
these doubtful answers Iose:
And whom that destnies will to dye,
Straightwayes to me disclose.
Renowned Prince, though still I stand
in silence dūme dismayed:
And though by inward fear of mind
my lingering tongue is stayde:
Yet pardon me (O noble Prince,) and give me leave a while.
From lack of sight springs Ignorance which power hath to exile
Unspotted Truth frō doubtful breasts. This thing full well you knows,
But whither God and Country calls, with willing mind I go.
Let deadly fatal destentes, be bolted out at length.
O King if I of greener years had now my wonted strength:
This matter soon discussed should be, and I would take in hand,
My self in presence of the Gods, in temple for to stand.
A mighty Ox all coloured white, up on the Aulters rear,
Which never yet on wearied neck, the crooked yoke did bear.
And Manto thou, O daughter mine, mine only prop and stay:
The secret hidden mysteries, and sacred signs out say.
M A. The beast before the Alter stands.
To Gods a prayer make,
And on the holy Aulters cke, some pleasant odors shake.
Tic done. And all the fierce fieice, with incense bright doe flame.
O Manto now what signs see thou? how doe thy matters frame?
What? doth the fire, the Sacrifice encompass round about?
Not so. But first it mounts alost, and straight it flashes out.
Well Yet, how doth the sacred flame all shining bright and clear
It self on high unto the Sktes, with sparkelting flakes v•rear?
Or doeh it oft rebounding back, it self, from Skies unfold?
Or all with rumbling roaring noise, about the place first rolled?
Or dim'd with smoke, first tossed from place, to place, now here, now theare?
Not one. But diverse, colours mixed the flame doth with it bear.
Much like unto the Rainbow, which with sundry painted hues
Foreshewes unto the husbandmen the weather that ensues.
What colour it wants, or what it hath, to me is like uncertain.
Now is it black, now blue, now red, and even now again
Quite out it is. Yet once again, all fierce it flashing flames:
But lo, yet mischiefs more then this, unluckily it frames.
The fire quite a sunder parts, and flame with flame doth fight.
O father I abhor to see, this ugly loathsome sight.
The Wine to blud is turned quite, and all the Princes head,
With thick black clouds encōpast is, with smoke all overspread.
O father tell what this portends?
What should I tell alas?
My mind for fear astonished stands, and trembling cold doth pas
Through all my limbs. What shall I say? or where shall I begin?
O cruel Plagues, O wreakful Gods, O vengeaūce due for sin.
Some dire and bloody deed (Alas) these hideous signs declare.
Whats that the Gods would have reveled, and yet doe bid beware
To utter it? By certain signs their wrath is oft descried:
Such signs appear, and yet they seem their fury great to hide.
They are ashamed: I wot ne'er what. Come hither, quickly bring
Some salt with thee, and it upon the sacrifice go fling.
What? are their looks pleasant and mild, and doe they gently bide
The touching of thy sacred hands?
What may this thing betide?
The Bull (a wonder great to see) his head on hie he lifts
And turned still unto the East, from thence it always shifts,
Still loathing as hee seems to me, of heaven to see the light,
Oft scowling with his blearing eyes with gastely ruthful sight.
But doth one blow thē drive to groūd, or more the one they have?
The Heifer as it seemed, inflamed with courage stout and brave
Upon the mortal Blade did rush, and there herself destries:
When out the blood it foaming spouts, and mounts unto the Skies.
The brawny Bull twice stroke or thrice, with grovelling groaning tyres,
And toiling up and down he moyles. And still to live desires.
And yet at length with much ado, his brutish breath expiers.
What? doth the wound wide open gape, or is it closed up?
Or doth the deepness of the hole, the blood in soking sup?
Out of the wounded Heifers breast Black bluish waters rush.
As for the Bull, but little blood, out of his wounds doth gush.
•t back rebounds, and from his Mouth &amp; Eyes by streams •oath flow.
But what these dreadful signs portend the Gods aloane doc know.
By this unhappy Sacrifice, great fears within me rise.
But tell me now: In the inner parts, what secret hidden lies?
O Father what means this (alas) that more then wonted guise
The Inwards stir? and shake my hands, and heaving oft arise,
The blood by streams out of the veins, full strangely skips aloft.
The heart all schorcht and hidden lies, and strikes are seen full oft,
Of Colour very wan and pale: The chiefest parts doe want.
The Liver bla•kish gall out spurts, and somewhat rising pants.
And that, that mischiefs great, to kingdoms doth foreshow:
Tu• heads are seen, and yet both heads one skin doth ouerg•ow
And ouerheales them quite, But yet the skin, it is so thin
That easily one may discern what lies hid therein.
And that which horror doth increase, a man may plainly see
How both the heart, the Lights, and Lungs, and all disturbed bee.
The fearful noise and sound you here is not of beasts, but fire
That roaring on the Alters makes, presaging wreakful ire
Of angry Gods who doe foretell some purpose that they have,
For to revenge some foul misdeed that vengeance just doth crave.
No part his proper place observes, nor keeps his order due:
But altogether quite disguised, with an unwonted hue.
Misshapen, out of frame, transformed, displaced quite (alas)
What thing is that the Gods entend ere long to br•ng to pas?
Why than declare from whēce, and why these deadly signs arise,
With courage stout I will it hear, it shall not once aggrise
By valiant mind. Extremest else have power to banish fear.
You will wish that vnhard which you so much desire to hear.
Yet sense the Gods will have him known tell me (I say) his name
That sieve your King.
Nor wing, nor womb of Bird or beast ye same
Can tell (O king) new sacrifice, new means we must invent.
From dreadful dark infernal damps some Fury must be sent
These mischiefs great for to unfold. Or else King Ditis hee,
That Empire keeps on gre•sly Ghosts, entreated needs must bee
These things forthwith for to disclose. Tell who shall have the charge,
A King thou art, than moist not thou go through those kingdoms large.
Than noble Croon thou shalt go, this payne is first for thee:
Who must this crown and kingdom great enjoy after me.
THough that thy Face where sadness sits
in heavy mourning guise,
Nought else portend, but deadly griefs,
and mischiefs still to rise:
Yet tel some means whereby at length
the Gods we may appease,
And purchasē to our Kingdoms wast,
some hope of health and ease.
Alas you bid me that disclose which fear doth bid me hyde.
It that the Thebane Cities great, by doleful plagues destryde.
Pierce not thy hart a: et ought thou▪ these Kingdoms for to rue,
Which were unto thy brothers house, of ancient title due.
You wish y• thing to know, which you will wish unknown at length.
Why so? a simple remedy of little force and strength
Is ignorance of our estate when dangers vs betide.
But what? wi•t thou so great a good for common safety hide?
Irksome Medcines and perilous in s•cknes I abhor▪
And I likewise at Subjects hands disdain to take a door,
Speak out with speed, or else by proof of torment thou shalt find
How dangerous a case it is to gaul a Princes mind.
Kings often use to wish untold, which they bad tel before.
Go to, dispatch and cease in time to vex me any more.
Except that thou forthwith to me this •einous deed •isclose:
The gods I do protest, to death for al thou only goes.
O pardon me most noble king. O let me hold my pes,
Of al the graces Princes grant, what favour may be less?
As though y• silence hurts not more both king and countries weal:
Then speech oft times: which subjects thoughts to Prices both reveal?
Dispatch at once, stir me no more thou know my guise of old.
Silence denied, what privilege may s•lly Subject hold?
A iraytor he is, who stlēce keeps, whē king cōmaunds to speak.
Then pardon my constrained speech, slth silence for to break
You me compel. A doleful tale (O king) my tongue must tell,
And which I fear your majesty will not interpret well.
Was ever man rebuked for that, that he was bid to say?
Well than since needs I must: I am contented to obey.
A wood there is from City far, enhanced with stately trees:
Where many a plant, and her be doth grow, which Phoebus never sees:
With ever during bushes greene, the Typresse there doth rise,
And puts his alde and leffty had withing the cloud Skies.
The ancient Time eaten Ok with crooked be•ded limbs.
The Te•l tree flue: The Alder which in Neptunes kingdoms swims,
The Baize with bitter beries eke the Elms dear f•iends to Vyn••
And many a noble tree besides, as M•rtels, 〈…〉
Amidst them all, one tree there is with large out 〈…〉
Whose roaring sound, &amp; croaking noise the lesser woods 〈…〉
And ouershades them all: a Tree of monstrous huge 〈◊〉,
Beset with fearful woods: there is that dire, and dreadful gate,
That leads to loathsome Limbo Lake, and pits that ever flow.
Where choked merry mud doth stream with slimy course full flow.
Here when the priest was entered in with comely 〈◊〉 pace,
He stayed not: No need there was, for night was still in place.
Than all the ground wide open gapes, &amp; smooth ring •apours rise,
And fire and smoke, &amp; stifling stink, mounts up unto the Shies.
The Priest with wailing werde •clad, his fatal red out •ooke:
And entering in, in black Array, full often times it shook.
With heavy cheer and dolful pace: his hoary ha•re was twinned
With bows of mortal Ewe. A tree wherewith the mourners wind,
Their mourning heads, &amp; Garlands make. In this guise all arrayed,
The sacred Priest doth enter in, with trembling limbs dismayed:
Than in the Sheep and Oxen black, by backward course are drawn▪
And odours sweet, &amp; Frankincense, on flaming fires are thrown.
The beasts on burning, Altars cast, do quake with schorched limbs:
And bloody streams with fire mixed, about the Aultars 〈◊〉.
Than on the dark internal Gods, and him that rules them all:
With deadly shrieking voice aloud, the Prophet gins to call.
And rolls the Magic verse in mouth, and hidden Arts doth prove:
Which either power have to appease or else the Gods to move,
Thair bloody streaming Lycours black, with broiling heate doe boyle:
And all the Beasts consume and burn. The Prophet than to toil
Begins▪ And mixed wine and Milk upon the Aultars throws.
And all the Dungeon dark, and wide with streamin• bl•od it flows.
Than out with thundering voice again the Prophet calls and cries.
And straight as much with mumbling mouth he champs in secret wise
The trees do turn▪ The Rivers s•ā•. The ground with roaring shakes.
And all the world as seems to me, with fearful trembling quakes.
I am heard, I am heard, than out aloud the Priest began to cry:
When all the damp•ed foe••les by heaps abroad outrushing fly.
Then woods with rumbling noise, doe oft resounding make.
And Heaven, and Earth together go. And bows and trees do croak.
And Thūders roore. And Lightnings flash. And waives aloft doe fly.
And ground retires: and Dogs doe bawl: and Beasts are heard to cry.
And whither long of Acheron, that loathsome Flood that •lowes
All stinking streams: or of the earth, that out her Bowels throws,
Free place to Sprights to give: or of that fierce infernal Hound,
That at such times doth bustling make with chains, &amp; railing sound.
The Earth al wide it open ga•es. And I did see on ground,
The Gods with colour pale and wan, that those dark kingdoms keep.
And very night I saw in deed, and thousand shapes to creep,
From out those filthy stinking Lakes, and loathsome pits of Hell.
Where all the evils under Son, in darksome shades doe dwell.
So quaking all for fear I stood with mind right sore apalde,
Whilst on those Gods with trembling mouth the Priest full often called.
Who all at once, out of their dens did skip with gre•lie Face.
And Monsters grim, and stinging Snakes seemed wander in that place.
And all the foulest Fiends of Hell, and Furies all were theare.
And all trāsformed Ghosts &amp; sprights, that ever Hell did bear.
With Cares, and all Diseases vile, that mortal minds doe crush,
All those, and more I saw out of those Dangeons deep to rush,
And Age I saw, with rivaled Fa•e, and Need, &amp; Fear, and Death.
And Fire, and flames, &amp; thousand ills out fro those Pits to breath.
Then I was gon: and quite amazed. The wench in worser case.
And yet of old, acquainted with her Fathers Arts she was.
The Priest himself vnmooued stood, and boldly cited owt:
Whole Armies of king Ditis men, who clustering in a Rowt:
All flittring thin like Clouds, dispersed abroad in Ayre doe fly.
And bearing sundry shapes and forms doe sc•d above• in Sky,
A thousand woods I think have not so many leaves on trees.
Ten thousand meadows fresh have not so many flowers for bees.
Ten hundred thousand rivers not so many Foul can show:
Nor all the drops and streams, and gulphes that in the Seas do flow▪
If that they might be weighed, can sure so great a number make
As could those shapes and forms that flew from out of Limbo lake.
Both Tantalus and Zetus too, and pale Amphions Ghost:
And A gave, and after her ten thousand Sprightes do post.
Than Penthouse, and more and more, in like estate ensue:
Till out at length comes Laius with foul and grisly hue:
Uncomely breast in wretched plight with filth all overgrown:
All perst with wounds, (I loath to speak) with blood quite overflown
A Miser right as seemed to me, and most of Misers all:
Thus in this case, at length he spake, and thus began to call.
O Cadmus cruel City v•le, that still delightste in blood,
O Cadmus thou, which kinsmens death, accountst as chiefest good▪
Tear out the bloody Bowels of your Children, learn of me,
Do that, and rather more, then you would bide the day to see
Like ills as late on me are light. Lo mothers love (alas)
Hath caused the greatest misery that ere in Theba was.
The Country with the wrath of Gods at this time is not tossed.
Nor earth nor ayre infect is not the cause that all been lost.
No No. A bloody King is cause of all these mischiefs great:
A bloody wretch: A wretched child that sits in Fathers Seat:
And Mothers bed defiles (O wretch) and entered in again,
In places whence he came from once and doubles so her payne,
Whilst that hee •else the hapless womb where in himself did lie
With graceless seed and causes her twice childbirths pangs to try:
Unhappy Son, but Father worse and most unhappy hee,
By whom the laws of sacred shame so sore confounded bee.
For that that very bestes (almost) do all abh•rre to do,
Even of his mothers body he hath brothers gotten two.
O mischief great: O dreadful deed, then Sphinx, O mōster more:
Example unto ages all of Gods foretold before.
But I thee, thee, that Sceptre boldst, thy Father will pursue,
And wreck my self on thee and thine with plagues &amp; vengeance due.
All restless rage of spite and paiue I will upon thee blow,
And all the furies foul of hell upon thee I will throw.
I will subvert thy Houses clean, for this thy loathsome lust:
I will do this thou wretch: And thee, and thine consume to dust.
Wherefore dispatch at once (I say) into exile drive your King.
That ground y• first of all he leaves, with fresh grene grass shall spring.
And sweet, and pleasant Ayre, and healthful blasts shall rise,
And all the evils under Sun, that mortal men surprise:
The Pocks, the Piles, the Botch, the blaine, &amp; death with him shall fly.
And with him mischiefs all shall pass, and Monsters under Sky.
And as for him I know hee would depart with willing mind:
But I will clog his Face••, and hands, hss way he shall not find.
But groping with his aged staff, shall pass from place to place.
This shall he doe. And none shall rue upon his ruthful case.
Rid you the Monster from the Earth, for Heaven let me alone.
No sooner said, but straight away, his dreadful Ghost was gone.
And fast by thousands after him, the other Sprights in hyde:
Than Cold &amp; trembling fear began through all my bones to glide.
The thing I always feared, I see upon me now is laid:
But slender props they are (God wot) whereby your Treason is stayde.
Meropa my Mother dear, shall me from this defend:
Polybius eke shall purge me quite, from Actions all, that tend
To murder, or to incest vile, they both shall me excuse.
In such a case no means at all of trial I refuse.
Lay what you can unto my charge. No fault in me remains.
The Thebanes long or I came here, of Laius death complains.
My Mother yet alive, my Father still in like estate.
No, no, this is some dol•ishe drift, of yo• false Prophets pate.
Or else some mighty God aboue, doth bear me no good will,
And seeks by Plagues on me to wreak, his wrathful vengeance still.
Ah Sir I am glad at length I smell your drifts and fetches fine.
I know the whole confederacy your sleights I can untwine.
That beastly Priest, that blearayed wretch beelyes the Gods and me:
And thee thou Traitor in my place hath promised king to bee.
Alas would I my Sister of, her lawful kingdom spoil?
Think you such treason may have place in brothers breast to boyle?
If that mine Oath could me not keep content with my degree:
But that contemning mean estate, I would cl•me aloft to bee.
Yet should ill Fortune me deter, from such attempts I trow:
Whose guise it is on Princes heads, huge heaps of Ca•es to throw.
I would advise your grace betimes this charge from you to cast:
Least lingering long all unawares, you be oppressed at last.
Assure your self, in baser state, more safer you may live:
And shun a thousand Cares, &amp; G••ess: which Princes hearts doe rive.
And dost thou me exhort thou •lave my kingdom for to leave?
O saythlesse head. O shameless heart, y• could such treasons weave?
Dare thou attempt thou villayae vile this thing, to me to break?
And fear thou not in such a cause so boldly for to speak.
I would persuade them so (O King) who freely might possess
Their Realms such piteous cares I see, do Princes hearts oppress:
But as for you of force you must your Fortunes chainge abide.
The surest way for them that gape for kingdoms large, &amp; wide,
Is first things mean, and rest, and peace, and base estate to praise:
And yet with Tooth and Nail, to toil to mount aloft always.
So often times, most restless beasts doe chiefly rest commend.
Shall not my service long suffice my truth for to defend?
Time is the only means for such, as thou to work their will.
It is so sir, but as for me, of goods I have my fill.
A great resort. A pleasant life: from Princely cares exempt.
All these might (surely) me dissuade from such a foul attempt.
There is no day almost (O King) the whale year thorough out,
Where in some royal gifts are not from countries round about
Unto me sent, both Gold, and pearls, and things of greater cost,
Which I let pass, least I should seem but vainly for to bossed.
Besides the life of many a man hath bin preserved by me.
In such a blis•ull state (O King) what can there wanting bee?
(Good Fortune can no mean observe, but still she preaseth higher.)
Shall I than guiltless die (alas,) my cause and all untried?
Were unto you at any time my life, my deeds discride?
Did any man defend me yet? or else my causes plead?
And guiltless yet I am condemn'de to this you doe me lead,
And me express example give, which I entend to take.
What measure you doe meat to me, like measure must I make.
The mind which causeless dred appals, true cause of fear be∣wraies
That cōsciēce is not guiltless sure, which every blast dismates.
Hee that in midst of perils deep, and daūgers hath been cast,
Doth seek all means to shun like ills as hee hath overpassed.
So hatreds rise.
Hee that to much doth use ill will to fear,
Unskilful is: and knows not how, hee ought him self to bear
In kings estate. For fear alone doth Kingdoms chiefly keep.
Than hee that thus doth arm himself from fear all free may sleep.
Who so the cruel tyrant plays, and guiltless men doth smight,
Hee dreads them that him doe dread, so fear doth chiefly light
On causers chief. A just revenge for bloody minds at last.
Come take this traitor vile away, In dungeon deep him fast
Enclose. There for his due deserts, let him abide such payne
And scourge of mind (as meet it is) false traitors to sustain.
SEt, see, the miserable State,
of Princes careful life.
What raging storms? what bloody broils?
what toil? what endless strife
Doe they endure? (O God) what plagues?
what grief do they sustain?
A Princely life: No. No. (No doubt)
an ever during payne.
A state en fit for men on whom Fortune would wreak her will.
A place for Cares to couch them in. A door wide open still
For griefs and dangers all that ben to enter when they list.
A king these Mates must ever have, it boots not to resist.
Whole fluds of privy pinching fear, great anguish of the mind:
Apparent plagues, &amp; daily griefs. These playfayres Princes find.
And other none, with whom they spend, and pass their wretched days.
Thus hee that Princes lives, and base Estate together ways:
Shall find the one a very hell, a perfect infelicity:
The other eke a heaven right, exempted quite from misery.
Let OEdipus example bee of this unto you all,
A Mirror meet. A Pattern plain, of Princes careful thrall.
Who late in perfect Joy as seemed, and everlasting blis,
Triumphantly his life out led, a Miser now hee is,
And most of wretched Misers all, even at this present time,
With doubtful waives of fear Itost, subject to such a Crime
Whereat my tongue amassed stays, God grant that at the last,
It fall not out as Croon told. Not yet the worst is past,
MY mind with doubtful waives of dread,
is tossed to and fro,
I wot not what to say (Alas)
I am tormented so.
For all the Gods on me doe cry,
for pains and vengeance due.
They say that these my guiltless hands.
king Laius lately slue.
But this my conscience void of crime
and mind from mischief free:
To Gods untried, to me well known denies it so to bee:
Full well I doe remember ••ce▪ by chance I did dispatch,
A man who sought by force with me presumptuously to match.
His purpose was (a fond attempt) my Chariot for to stay,
This I remember well enough, the strife was in the way.
And he a man well steeped in years, and I a lusty blood,
And yet of mere disdain and pride in vain hee me withstood.
But this from, Thebes far was done, a crooked three pathd way,
That was the place in which we fought: it hard by Phocis lay.
Dear Wife resolve my doubts at once, and me expressly tell.
How old was Laius the King when this mischance befell?
Was he of fresh and lusty years? or stricken well in age
When he was kilde? O ease my thoughts of this tormenting rage.
Betwixt an old man an a young: but nearer to an old.
Were there great Bands of men with him his Person to uphold?
Some by the way deceived were, and some deterd by payne.
A few by toil and labour long, did with their Prince remain.
Were any slain in his defence?
Of one report is rife,
Who co•stant in his princes cause full stoutly lost his life.
It is enough, I know the man that hath this mischief done.
The number and the place agrees. The time untried alone
Remains: Than tell what time hee died, and when that he was slain.
Tic ten years since: you now revive my chifest cares again.
THe Corinth people all (O King)
in Fathers place to rain
Doe call your Grace: Polybius doth
eternal rest obtain.
O God what Fortune vile doth me
oppress on every side?
How doe my sorrows still increase?
Tell how my Father did.
No sickness (sir) but very age did of his life him reeve.
And is hee dead: in deed? not slain? what joy may I tonceaue?
How may I now triumph? the Gods to witness I doe call,
To whom are known my hidden thoughts and secret workings al:
Now may I li•• to skies my hands, my hands from mischief free.
But yet the chiefest •a•se of fear remains still to me.
Your Fathers kingdom ought al dred out of your mind to drive.
That I cōfesse. But secret thoughts my trembling heart do rive
With inward doubt of deep distress, my Mother I do fear.
This grudge is that continually my heart doth rent and tear.
Do you your Mother fear? on your return that only slays.
I fear not her: but from her sight, a godly zeal me frays.
What will you her a Widow leave?
Now, now, thou w•fi•st 〈◊〉 heart.
This, this, and only this (alas,) is cause of all my smart.
Tell me (O king) what doubtful fear? doth press thy princely breast:
Kings coūcels I can well cōceale that •en with Cares oppressed.
Least as Apollo hath forefolde, I should a Marriage make
With mine own Mother: only this foul fear doth make me quake.
Such vain &amp; peevish fears, at length from out your breast exile.
Meropa your Mother is not in deed, you do your self beguile•.
What vantage should it be to her adopted Sons to have?
A kingdom she shall gain thereby. Her Husband laid in grave.
The chiefest prop to s•ay her Realms from present confusion,
In children for to have: and hope of lawful succession.
What are the means whereby thou dost these secrets vnderstād.
My self (your grace) an Infant gave into your fathers hand.
Did thou me to my Father give? Who than gave me to thee?
A Shepherd str; that w•nted on Cytheron Hills to bee.
What made thee in those woods to raūge? what had thou there to do?
Upon those Hills my Beasts I kept, sometime a Shepherd to.
What notts, what privy marks hast thou, whereby thou dost me know?
The holes y• through your feet are board frō whēce your name did gro.
Declare forthwith what was his name y• gave me unto thee.
The kings chief Shepherd than that was, delivered you to me.
What was his name?
O king old men's remēbrance soon doth fail:
Obliuton for the cheat part, doth boary heads assail.
And drowns their former memory of things long out of mind.
What? can thou know y• man by sight?
Perhaps I should him find,
And know by Face. Things over whelmed by time, and quite oppressed.
A small mark oft to mind revokes, and fresh renues in breast.
Sirs bid the Herdmen forth with drive their Beasts to Aulters all.
Away with speed, make hast, the Master Sheepherds to me call.
Sith that your des•ny this doth hyde, and Fortune it detayue
And closely keep▪ let it be so, from opening that refrain.
That long concealed hath hidden lain, that seek not to disclose▪
Such things outsercht and foūd oftimes against the searcher goes.
Can any mischief greater be? than this that now I fear.
Advise you well remember first what weight this thing doth bear:
That thus you go about to scorch, and slit with Tooth and Nail,
Observe the golden mean: beware bear still and equal sail.
Your Coūtreys wealth (O King) your life, and all upon this lies.
Though you stir not, bee sure at length your Fortune you escryes.
A happy state for to disturb doth nought at all behove.
When things be at the worst, of them a man may safely move.
Can you have ought more excellent? than is a Princes state?
Beware least of your Parents found it you repent to late.
No (father) no I warrant that: repent not I (I trow.)
I seek it not to that intent. I have decreed to know,
The matter at the full. Wherefore I will it now pursus.
Lo Phorbas: where hee trembling coms, with comely aged h••.
To whom of all the kings flack than, the care and charge was due.
Dost thou his name, his speech his Face, or yet his person know?
Me thinks I should have seen his Face, and yet I cannot show
The places where I have him seen, small time brings such a chainge,
As well acquainted Faces oct, to vs appear still strange.
This look is neither thoroughly known, nor yet unknown to me,
I cannot tell: I doubt it much, and yet it may bee hee.
In Laius time long since when hee these Kingdoms great did keep?
Wast thou not on Citheron hills chief Shepherd to his sheep?
SOmetime a charge of sheep I had,
unworthy though I weer.
And did upon those hills chief rule
on other Shepards bear.
Know thou not me.
I cannot tell.
Did thou once give this man
A Child. Speak out, why dost thou stay?
if so, declare it than.
Why dost thou blush and doubting stand,
troth seeks no delay?
Things out of mind you call again, almost quite worn away.
Confess thou slave, orals I swear, thou that constrained bee
In deed I doe remember once, an Infant young by me,
Delivered was unto this Man: but well I wot in vain,
I know he could not long endure, nor yet alive remain.
Long since he is dead (I know it well) hee lives not at this day.
Eo? God sorbet, he lives no doubt, and long may live I pray.
Why dost thou say the child is dead, that thou this man did give?
With Irons sharp his feet were board, I know he could not live,
For of the sore a swelling rose, I saw the blood to gush
From out of both the wounds: and down by pouring streams to flush.
Now stay (O king) •p farther now, you know almost the troth.
Whose child was •••tell ••e forthw.
I dare not for mine Other.
Thine Oath thou slave? Some fire here. Isle charm thine Other and thee,
With fire &amp; flames: except forthwith thou tell the troth to me.
O pardon me, though rade I seem, I seek nor to withstand name?
Your graces mind: (most noble king.) My life is in your hand.
Tell me y• troth, what child, &amp; whose, What was his Mothers
Born of your wife.
O gaping earth devour my body quite:
Or else thou God that 〈◊〉 art of houses void of light,
To Hell my Saule with thunder bolts to Hell my Soul down drive.
Where grisly Ghosts in dark ness deep, and endless payne do live.
For thee alone, these Plagues doe rage. For thee these mischiefs rise.
For thee, the Earth lies desolate. For thee thou wretch the Skies
Infected are. For thee, for thee, and for the slithy lust,
A hundred thousand guiltless men, consumed are to dust.
O people throw: cast heaps of stones upon this hateful Head:
Bath all your swords within my breast: you furies overshot
My restless thoughts, with raging woes and plungde in seas of pain.
Let me those hōrrors still endure, which damned souls sustain.
You citizens of Stately Thebes vex me with torments dile.
Let Father, Son, and Wife, and all with vengeance me ••rsue.
Let those that for my sake alone with plagues 〈◊〉 bee
Throw dar•s, cast stones, fling f•er▪ and slames, and tortures all on me.
O shame: O slander of the World: O hate of Gods aboue.
Confounder O of Nature thou to laws of sacred love,
Even from thy birth an open Foe. Thou did deserve to dye
As soon as thou wast born. Go, go, vnt• the Court thee hye,
There with thy Mother (slave) triumph rejoice as thou moist do.
Who hast thy house increased with unhappy children so.
Make haste with speed, away, some thing thy mischiefs worthy find.
And on thy self wreck all the spite of thy revenging mind.
FOrtune the guide of human life doth al things chaūge at will.
And stirrīg still, with restless thoughts our wretched mīdes doth fill.
In vayn men strive their stats to keep whē hidrous tēpests rise:
And blustering winds of dangers deep sets death before their eyis.
Who saith he doth her fawning feel? &amp; chaūgeth not his mind,
When fickle fight of Fortunes wheel doth turn by course of kind.
These grievous plagues frō private house to princely Thrones do flow,
And oft their minds with cares they souse and thick upon thē strew.
Whole heaps of grief and dire debate, a woeful thing to see:
A Princely life to misers state, converted for to bee.
O OEdipus thy fatal fall, thy dreadful mischiefs right.
Thy dolfull state, thy misery, thy thrice unhappy plight:
These things shall blase through all y• world: what heart may thē rejoice
At thy distress? I can no more: my tears doe stop my voice.
But what is he that yonder stamps? and raging puffs and blows.
And often shakes his vexed head, some mischief great hee knows.
Good sir your countnaunce doth import some great and fearful thing,
Tell vs therefore (if that you may) what news from Court you bring.
When OEdipus accursed wretch,
his fatal false had spied,
To hell be damned his wretched soul
and on the Gods he cried
For vengeance due. And posting fast
with frantic mood grisly hue,
Unto his dole full Court hee went,
his thoughts for to pursue.
Much like a Lion romping wild, his furtous head that shakes.
And roars with thundering mouth asowd, and often gnashing makes,
None otherwise this miser fared. A loathsome sight to see.
Besides himself for very rage, he still desires to dye.
And rolling round his wretched Eyes with visage pale and wan:
Ten thousand Cursors out he powers. Himself the unhappiest man
Of all that live, he doth account: as justly he may doe.
A wretch, a slave, a said•se vile. The cause of all our woe.
And in this case inflamed with spite he crtes, he stamps, he raves.
And boiling in his secret thoughts, he still desires to have
All torments under sun that may his Cares conceived increase.
O wretched wight, what should hee doe? What man may him release?
Thus foaming all for rage at mouth, with sighs, and sobs, &amp; groans,
His damned head ten thousand times, as oft his wearied bones
He beats. And often puffing makes, and roars, and swells, &amp; sweats.
And on the Gods for death hee calls, for Death hee still entreats,
Three times he did begin to speak: and thryse his tong did stay.
At length he cried out aloud: O wretch. Away, away.
Away thou monstrous Beast (he said:) wilt thou prolong thy life?
Nay rather some man strike this breast with struck of bloody knife.
Or all you Gods aboue on me your flaming fierce outcast:
And dints of Thunderbolts down throw. This is my prayer last.
What greedy vile devouring Gripe, upon my guts will gnaw?
That Tiger fierce my hateful limbs will quite a lunder draw?
Lo, here I am you Gods: Lee, here, wreak now on me your will.
Now, now you fyry Fiends of Hell, of vengeance take your fill.
Send out some wilde outrageous beast send Dogs me to devour.
Or else all else you can devise, at once upon me power.
O woeful soul. O sinful wretch. Why dost thou fear to dye?
Death only rids frō woes thou know. Than stoutly Death defle.
With that his bloody fatal Blade, from out his sheath he draws.
And loud he rores, with thūdring voice. Thou beast why dost thou pause?
Thy Father cursed caitiff thou, thy Father thou hast slain
And in thy Mothers bed hast left an euerduring slain.
And Brothers thou hast got: nay Sons thou least: thy Brothers all
They are. Thus for thy monstrous lust thy Country down doth fall.
And think thou than for all these else enough so short a payne?
Think thou the Gods will be apeasde, if thou forth with be slain?
So many mischiefs don: and first enough one stroke to bit?
Account'ste thou it sufficient pains, that once thy sword should glide
Quite through thy guilty breast for all? why than dispatch and dye.
So moist thou recompense thy Fathers death sufficiently.
Let it be so: what mends unto thy Mother will thou make •
Unto thy children what? these plagues (O wretch) how wilt thou slake?
That thus for thee thy country mastes? Ohe push shall end them all.
A proper fetch. A fi•e devise. For thee a worthy fall.
Invent thou monstrous beast forthwith: a fall even worthy for
Thy self invent: whom all men hate and loath, and doe abhor.
And as dame Natures lawful course is broke (O wretch) by thee.
So let to such a mischief great, thy Death agreeing bee.
O that I might a thousand times, my wretched life renew.
O that I might revive and dye by course in order dew.
Ten hundred thousand times &amp; more: than should I vengeance take
Upon this wretched head. Than I perhaps in part should make
A meet amends in deed, for this my foul and loathsome Sin.
Than should the proof of payne reprove the life that I live in.
The choice is in thy hand thou wretch, than use thine own discretion.
And find a means, whereby thou moist come to extreme confusion.
And that, that oft thou moist not doe, let it prolonged bee.
Thus, thus, moist thou procure at length an endless death to thee.
Search out a death whereby thou may perpetual shame obtain:
And yet not dye. But still to live in everlasting payne.
Why stayst thou man? Go to I say: what mean these blubbering tears?
Why weepst thou thus? Alas to late. Leave of thy foolish fears.
And first enough to weep think thou? shall tears and wailing serve?
No wretch it shall not be. Thou dost ten thousand deaths deserve.
Mine ey•es doe dally with me I see, and tears doe still out power.
Shall tears suffice? No, no, not so I shall them better scour,
Out with thine Eyes (he said:) and than with fury fierce inflamed.
Like to a bloody raging Feend and monstrous beast vntam, de.
With fiery flaming spotted Cheeks his breast he often beats.
And scratch, and tear his Face hee doth and Skin a sunder frets.
That scarce his eyes in head could stand so sore he them besets.
With furious fierce outrageous mind hee stamps and cries aloud:
And roars &amp; rails, with romping rage. Thus in this case he stood,
Perplexed, and vexed sore in mind, with deadly sighs and tears.
When suddenly all franticklike himself from ground hee reares.
And roots out his wretched Eyes, and sight a sunder tears.
Than gnasheth bee his bloody Teeth, and bites, and gnaws, &amp; champs,
His Eyes all bathd and brute in blood, for fury fierce he stamps.
And raging more than needs (alas,) his Eyes quite rooted out:
The very holes in vain hee scrapes so sore the wretch doth dout:
Least sight should chance for to remain he rents and mangels quite
His Face, his Nose, his Mouth, and all whereon his hands do light
Hee rigs and ryues. Thus foully rayd (alas) in piteous plight:
At length his head aloft he lifts, and therewith gives a shright.
And when he sees that all is gone, both light, and sight, and all.
Than screeching out: he thus begins upon the Gods to call.
Now spare you Gods, now spare at length my country pressed to fall.
I have done that you did cōma•nd: Your wraths revenged bee.
This wretched look, this mangled face, is fittest now for me.
Thus speaking, down the blackish blood by streams doth gushing flow
Into his mouth. And clottred lumps of flesh the place doth strew
Wherein hee stands.
Beware betimes, by him beware, I speak unto you all.
Learn Justice, truth, and fear of God by his unhappy fall.
MAns life with tumbling fatal course of fortunes wheel is rolled,
To it give place for it doth run all swifily vncontrowld.
And Cares &amp; tears are spent in vayn, for it cannot be slayed:
Sith hi• decree of heavenly powers perforce must be obeyed.
What mankind bidet or does on earth it cōmeth from aboue,
Then wailing groans poured out in grief do nought at all behove.
Our life must have her pointed course, (alas) what shall I say.
As fates decree, so things do run, no man can make them stay.
For at our birth to Gods is known our latter dying day.
No Prayer, no Art, not God himself may fatal fates resist.
But fastened all in fixed court, unchanged they persist.
Such end them still ensues as they appointed were to have,
Than fly all fear of Fortunes c•ng, leek hot to live a slave
Enthrald in bondage vile to fear. For fear doth often bring
Destnies that dreaded ben and mischiefs feared upon vs fling.
Yea many a man hath come unto his fatal end by fear.
Wherefore set peevish fear aside, and worthy courage bear.
And thou that subject art to death. Regard thy latter day.
Think no man blessed before his end. Advise thee well and stay.
Be sure his life, and death, and all, be quite exempt from misery:
Ere thou do once presume to say: this man is blessed and happy.
But out alas, see where he coms: a wretch withouten Guide,
Bereft of sight. Half spoiled of life: without all Pomp, and Pride
(That unto Kings Estate belong.)
WEll, well, tic done: more yet? No, no,
no mischiefs more remain.
My Fathers Rytes performed are.
What God on Misers pains
That rues within this Cloud hath told,
and wrapped my wretched Pate.
Ah sir: this is a life alone.
This is a happy State.
This is a case en fit for thee,
for thee thou wretch, for thee.
From whose accursed sight the Sun, the Stars and all doe flee.
Yet mischiefs more, who gives to doe? The dreadful day I have
Escaped. Thou filthy Parricide: thou vile mischievous Slave.
Unto thy right hand nought thou oust, all things performed bee.
O woe is me that ever I lived this luckless day to see.
Where am I now? Alas, alas, the light and all doth me
Abhor: O wretched OEdipus this look is first for thee.
See, see, where Iocasta coms, with fierce and furious mood,
Quite past her self. For very rage she frets and waxes wood.
Much like to Cadmus daughter mad, who late his Son did kill.
Fain would she speak her mind: for sear (alas) she dares not: still
She stays, and yet from out her breast these ills have quite exiled
All shame fastness. See how she looks, with coū•'naunce fierce &amp; wilde.
Fain would I speak, I am afraid. For what should I thee call
My Son? doubt not. Thou art my Son. My Son thou art for all
These mischiefs great: alas, alas I shame my Son to see.
O cruel Son. Where dost thou turn thy Face? Why dost thou slay
From me. From me thy Mother dear? Why dost thou shun my sight?
And leave me thus in misery, with Cares consumed quite.
Who troubles me? Let me alone. I thought not to be found:
Who now restores mine Eyes to me, Mother? or Mothers sound?
Our labour all is spent in vain, now may wee meet no more.
The Seas divide those meetings vile that wee have had before.
The gaping earth divide vs both, th'one from the other quite.
Still let our feet repugnant bee. So shall I shun the light
That most of all me grieves. So shall I space obtain to whale
These bleeding woes on every side, that doe my thoughts assail.
The Destentes are in fault. Blame them, Alas, alas, not wee.
Spare now. Leave of to speak in vain, spare now O Mother me,
By these Relics of my dismembered body I thee pray.
By mine unhappy Children pledges left. What shall I say?
By all the Gods I thee beseech. By all that in my name
Is good or bad, let me alone. Alas you are to blame
To trouble me. You see what hell my haplesse heart doth payne.
You see that in my Conscience ten thousand horrors rain.
O dying heart: O sindrownd soul. Why dost thou faint alas?
Why dost thou seek and toil in vain these ills to overpass?
What mean these sighs, &amp; scalding tears? why dost thou death refuse?
Thou mate of all his mischiefs thou, by whose means only rues
The law of nature all: by whom, Ah, Ah, confounded lies,
Both God, and man, and beast, and all that either lives or dies.
Die thou, dispatch at once thrust through thy vile incestuous breast:
Thou hast none other means (alas) to set thine heart at rest.
Not thou, if God him self, if he his flaming fierce should throw
On thee, or mischiefs all by heaps upon thy body strew
Could once for thy deserved ills due pains or vengeance pay:
Some means therefore to wreak Gods wrath upon thy self assay.
Death, death now best contents me, then seek a way to dye.
So moist thou yet at length find end for all thy misery.
O Son lend me thy hand: sith that thou art a Parricide.
This labour last of all remains, this labour thee doth bide.
Dispatch rid me thy mother dear from all my deadly woe
It will not be: no prayers avail. Thy self this deed must doe.
Take up this sword. Go to, with this thy husband late was slain.
Husband? thou term'st him false: hee was thy syer: O deadly payne.
Shall I quite through my breast it drive? or through my throat it thrust?
Can thou not choose thy wound? away: die, die, (alas) thou must.
This hateful womb then woūd (O wretch) this, this with thine own hand
Strike, strike it hard: (O spare it not) sith both a husband, and
(The same a Son it bare.)
Alas, alas, she is slain, she is slain, dispatched with a push:
Who ever saw the like to this: see how the blood doth gush.
O heavy doulfull case: who can this direful sight enduer
Which for the hideousness thereof might tears of stones procuer.
Thou God, thou teller out of Fates. On thee, on thee, I call,
My Father only I did owe, unto the Destnies all.
Now twice a Parricide, and worse than I did fear to bee:
My Mother I have slain. (Alas) the fault is all in me.
O OEdipus accursed wretch, lament thine own Calamity,
Lament thy state, thy grief lament, thou Caitiff borne to misery.
Where wilt thou now become (alas?) thy Face where wilt thou hyde:
O miserable Slave, can thou such shameful torments bide?
Can thou which hast thy Parents slain? Can thou prolong thy life?
Wilt thou not dye? deserving Death: thou cause of all the grief,
And Plagues, and dreadful mischiefs all that Thebane City press.
Why dost thou seek by longer life, thy sorrows to increase?
Why dost thou toil and labour thus in vain? It will not bee.
Both God, and man: and beast, and all abhor thy Face to see
O Earth why gapst thou not for me• why doe you not unfold
You gates of hell me to receive? why doe you hence withhold?
The fierce Infernal Feends from me, from me so wretched wight?
Why break not all the Furies lose this hateful head to smight
With Plagues? which them deserved hath (alas) I am left alone,
Both light, and sight, and comfort all from me (O wretch) is gone.
O cursed head: O wicked wight, whom all men deadly hate.
O Beast, what meanst thou still to live in this unhappy state?
The Skies doe blush and are ashamed, at these thy mischiefs great
The Earth laments, y• Heavens weep, the Seas for rage doe freat.
And blustering rise, and storms doe stir, and all thou wretch for thee.
By whose incest, and bloody deeds all things disturbed bee.
Quite out of course, displaced quite, O cursed fatal day.
O mischiefs great, O dreadful times, O wretch, away, away.
Exile thy self from all men's sight, thy life half spent in misery,
Go end consume it now outright in thrice as great calamity.
O lying Phoebe thine Oracles my sin, and sheme surmount:
My Mothers death amongst my deeds; thou never did recount.
A meet Exploict for me that a• to Nature deadly Foe.
With trembling fearful pace go forth, thou wretched monster go,
Grope out thy ways on knees in dark thou miserable Slave.
So moist thou yet in tract of time due pains, and vengeance have,
For thy mischievous life. Thus, thus, the Gods themselves decree.
Thus, thus, thy Fates: thus, thus, the skies appoint it for to bee.
Then headlong hence, with a mischief hence, thou caitiff vile away.
Away, away, thou monstrous Beast. Go, Run. Stand, stay,
Least on thy Mother thou doe fall.
All you that wearied bodies have, with stickiness overpressed.
Lo, now I fly: I fly away, the cause of your unrest.
Lift up your heads: a better state of Ayre shall straight ensewe
When I am gone: for whom alone, these dreadful mischiefs grew.
And you that now, half dead yet live in wretched misers case.
Help those whō present torments press forth, hye you on apace.
For lo, with me I cary hence, all mischiefs under Skies.
All cruel Fates, Diseases all that for my sake did rise,
With me they go: with me both grief, Plague, Pocks, Botch, &amp; all
The ills that either now you press, or ever after shall.
With me they go, with me: these Mates bin meetst of all for me.
Who am the most unhappiest wretch that ever Sun did see.

ALTHOUGH (GENTLE
Reader) thou may perhaps think
me arrogant, for that I only a∣mong
so many fine wits and to∣wordly
youth (with which Englād
this day flourished) have enterprised
to set forth in english this present
piece of the flower of all writers,
Seneca, as who say, not fearing what graver heads might
judge of me, in attempting so hard a thing, yet upon well
pondering what next ensues, I trust both thy self shalt
clear thine own suspicion, and thy changed opinion shall
judge of me more rightful sentence. For neither have I
taken this work first in hand, as once intending it should
come to light (of well doing whereof I utterly despaired)
and being done but for mine own private exercise, I
am in mine opinion herein blameless, though I have
(to prove my self) privately taken the part which pleased
me best of so excellent an author, for better is time spent
in the best then other, and at first to attempt the hardest
writers, shall make a mā more prompt to translate the ea∣sier
with more facility. But now since by request, &amp; frēd∣ship
of those, to whom I could deny nothing, this work
against my will extorted is out of my hands, I needs must
•rave thy patience in reading, and facility of judgment:
when thou shalt apparently se my witless lack of learning,
praying thee to consider how hard a thing it is for me to
touch at full in all points the authors mind, (being in ma∣ny
places very harde and doubtful, and the work much
corrupt by the default of evil printed Books) and also how
far aboue my power to keep that Grace and majesty of
stile, that Seneca doth, when both so excellent a writer
hath past the reach of all imitation, and also this our En∣glish
tongue (as many think, and I here find) is far un∣able
to compare with the Latin: but thou (good Reader)
if I in any place have swerued from the true sense, or not
kept the royalty of speech, meet for a Tragedy, impute the
one to my youth and lack of judgment: the other to my
lack of Eloquence. Now as concerning sondrye places
augmented and some altered in this my translation. First
for as much as this work seemed unto me in some places
vnperfite, whether left so of the Author, or part of it
lost, as time devours all things, I wot not, I have
(where I thought good) with addition of mine own
Pen supplied the want of some things, as the first
Chorus, after the first act beginning thus. O ye to whom
&amp;c. Also in the second Act I have added the speech
of Achilles Spright, rising from Hell to require the Sa∣crifyce
of Polyxena beginning in this wise. Forsaking
now. &amp;c. Again the three last staves of the Chorus
after the same Act: and as for the third Chorus
which in Seneca begins thus, QVE LA SE∣DES?
For as much as nothing is therein but a heaped
number of far and strange Countries, considering
with my self, that the names of so many unknown
Countries, Mountains, Deserts, and Woods,
should have no grace in the English tongue, but bee a
strange and unpleasant thing to the Readers (except
I should expound the Histories of each one, which would
be far to tedious,) I have in the place thereof made ano∣there
beginning, in this manner. O Jove that leadst. &amp;c.
Which alteration may be borne withal, saying that Cho∣rus
is no part of the substance of the matter. In the rest
I have for my slender learning endeavoured to keep touch
with the Latin, not word for word or verse for verse,
as to expound it, but neglecting the placing of the
words, observed their sense. Take Gentle Reader this
in good worth with all his faults, favour my first be∣ginninges,
and amend rather with good will such things
as herein are amiss, then to deprave or discommend my
labour and pains, for the faults, saying that I have
herein, but only made way to other that
canne far better doe this or like, desi∣ring
them that as they can, so
they would. Farewell gen∣tle
Reader and ac∣cept
my good
will.
THe ten years siege of Troy, who list to hear,
And of thaffayres that there befell in fight:
Read ye the works that long since written were,
Of all Thassaultes, and of that latest night,
When Turrets tops in Troy they blazed bright
Good Clerks they were that have it written well
As for this work, no word thereof doth tell.
But Dares Phrygian, well can all report,
With Dictis eke of Crete in Greekish tongue
And Homer tells, to Troye the Greeks resort
In scanned verse, and Maro hath it song
Each one in writ hath pend a stoary long,
Who doubts of ought, and casts care to know
These antique Authors, shall the story show,
The ruins twain of Troy, the cause of each,
The glittering helmes, in fields the Banners spread,
Achilles yres, and Hectors fights they teach.
There may the jests of many a Knight be read:
Patroclus, Pyrrhus, Aiax, Diomed,
With Troylus, Parys, many other more,
That day by day, there fought infield full sore.
And how the Greeks at end an engine made:
A huge horse where many a warlike Knight
Enclosed was: the Troians to invade
With Sinons craft, when Greeks had feigned flight,
While close they lay at Tenedos from sight,
Or how Ones else as other say,
And false Antenor did the town betray.
But as for me I nought thereof endight,
Mine Author hath not all that story pend:
My pen his words in English must resight,
Of latest woes that fell on Troy at end,
What final fates the cruel God could send.
And how the Greeks when Troy was burnt began wreak
Their ire on Troians, thereof shall I speak,
Not I with sphere who pierced was in field,
Whose throat there cut, or head ycorued was
No bloodshed blows, that rent both targe and shield
Shall I resight, all that I overpass.
The work I wright more woeful is alas,
For I the mothers tears must here complain,
And blood of babes, that guiltless have been slain.
And such as yet could never weapon wrest,
But on the lap are wont to dandled bee,
No yet forgotten had the mothers breast,
How Greeks them slew (alas) here shall ye see
To make report thereof ay woe is me,
My song is mischief, murder, misery,
And hereof speaks this doleful tragedy.
Thou fury fell that from the deepest den
Could cause this wrath of hell on Troy to light,
That worckest woe guide thou my hand and pen,
In weeping verse of sobs and sighs to wright,
As doth mine author them bewail aright:
Help woeful muse for me besemeth well
Of others tears, with weeping eye to tell.
When battered were to ground the towers of Troy
In writ as ancient authors do resight,
And Greeks again repayrde to Seas with joy,
Up rises here from hell Achilles Spright,
Vengeance he craves with blood his death to quite.
Whom Paris had in Phoebus temple slain,
With guile be trapt for love of Polyxeine.
And wrath of hell there is none other price
That may assuage: but blood of her alone
Polyxena he craves for sacrifice,
With threatenings on the Gracious many one
Except they shed her blood before they gone.
The Sprightes the hell, and depest pits beneath,
O Virgin dere, (alas) do thrust thy death.
And Hectors son, Astyanax (alas)
Pore seely fool his Mothers only joy,
Is judged to die by sentence of Calchas
Alas the while, to death is led the boy,
And tumbled down from Turrets tops in Troy.
What ruthful tears may serve to whale the woe
Of Hectors wife that doth her child forgo.
Her pinching pang of hart who may express,
But such as of like woes, have borne a part?
Or who bewail her ruthful heaviness
That never yet hath felt thereof the smart?
Full well they wot the woes of heavy hart.
What is to leese a babe from mothers breast,
They know that are in such a case distressed.
First how the Queen laments the fall of Troy,
As hath mine author done, I shall it wright
Next how from Hectors wife they led the boy
To die, and her complaints I shall resight,
The maidens death then I must last endight.
Now who that list the Queens complaint to here.
In following verse it shall forthwith appear.
WHo so in pomp of proud estate,
or Kingdom sets delight:
Or who that joys in Princes court
to bear the sway of might.
No dreads the fates which from aboue
the wavering Gods down flings:
But fast affiance fixed hath,
in frail and fickle things:
Let him in me both se the Face,
of Fortunes ftattering joy:
And eke respect the ruthful end of thee (Oruinous Troy)
For never gave she plainer proof, then this ye present see:
How frail and brittle is the state of pride and high degree,
The flower of flowering Asia, lo whose fame the heavens refund,
The Worthy work of Gods aboue, is ba•ered down to ground.
And whose assaults they sought afar, from West with Banners spread
Where Tanais cold her branches seven, abroad the world doth shed.
With huge host and from the East, where springes the newest dea,
Where Luke warm Tygris channel runs, and meets the ruddy sea.
And which frō wandering land of S•ythe, the band of widows sought:
With fire and sword thus battered be her Turrets down to nought.
The walls but late of high renown lo here their ruinous fall:
The buildings burn, and flashingflame, swepes through the pallas al.
Thus every house full hie it smokes, of old Assarackes land:
No yet the flames withholds from spoil, the greedy Victors hand.
The surging smoke, the asure say, and light hath hid away:
And (as with cloud beset) Troys Ashes stains the dusky day.
Through appears with ire and greedy of hart, the victor from a far.
Doth vtew the long assaulted Troy, the gain of ten years war,
And eke the miseries thereof abhors to look upon,
And though he se it yet scant himself, believes might be won,
The spoils thereof with greedy hand, they snatch and bear away:
A thousand ships would not receive aboard so huge a pray
The yreful might I do protest of Gods adverse to me,
My countries dust, and Trojan King I call to witness thee,
Whom Troy nowhydes, and underneath the stones art ouertrode:
With al the Gods that guides the Ghost, and Troy that lately, stood.
And you also you flocking Ghosts of al my children dere:
Ye lesser Sprightes what ever ill, hath happened to vs here.
What ever Phoebus waterish face, in fury hath foresaid:
At raging rise from seas when erst, the monsters had him frayed.
In childbed bands I saw it yore, and wist it should be so:
And I in vain before Cassandra told it long ago.
Not false Vlysses kindled hath these fires, nor none of his:
Nor yet deceyptful Sinons craft, that hath been cause of this.
My fire it is wherewith ye burn, and Parys is the brand
That smoaketh in thy towers (O Troy) the flower of Phrygian sand.
But ay (alas) unhappy age, why dost thou yet so sore,
Bewail thy Countries fatal fall thou knew it long before:
Behold thy last calamities, and them bewail with wares:
Account as old Troys overturn, and past by many years,
I saw the slaughter of the King, and how he lost his life:
By The alter s••e (more mischief was) with stroke of Pyrrhus knife.
When in his hand he wound his lockes, and drew the King to ground,
And hid to hilts his wicked sword, in deep and deadly wound.
Which when the •ored King had took, as willing to bee slain,
Out of the old mans throat he drew his bloody blade again.
Not pity of his years (alas) in mans extremest age:
From slaughter might his hand withhold, no yet his ire assuage:
The Gods are witness of the same, and eake the sacrifyes,
That in his kingdom holden was, that flat on ground now lies.
The father of so many Kings Pryam of aunient name,
Vntombed lies and wants in blase of Troy: his funeral flame.
No yet the Gods are wreaked, but lo his Sons and daughters all,
Such Lords they serve as doth by chance of lot to them befall.
Whom shall I follow now for pray? or where shall I be led
There is perhaps among the Greeks that Hectors wife will wed.
Some man desires Helenus spouse some would Antenors have,
And in the Greeks their wants not some, that would Cassandra crave
But I (alas) most woeful wight whom no man seeks to choose,
I am the only refuge left, and me they clean refuse
Ye careful captive company, why stints your woeful cry?
Beat on your breasts and piteously complain with voice so hye,
As meet may be for Troys estate, let your complaints rebound
In tops of Trees: and cause the hills to ring with terrible sound.
NOt folk unapt, nor new to weep (O Queen)
Thou vvilst to vvayle by practise are vvee taught,
For all these years in such case have we been,
Since first the Trojan guest, Amiclas sought
And sailed the Seas, that led him on his way
With sacred ship, to Cibell dedicate
From whence he brought his vnrepyning pray,
The cause (alas) of all this dire debate,
Ten times now hid the hills of Idey bee,
With snovve of Silver hevv all over laid.
And bared is, for Trojan rages each tree,
Ten times in field, the harvest man afraid,
The spikes of Corn hath reaped, since never day
His wailing wants new cause renews our woe
Lift up thy hand, (O Queen) cry well away:
We follow thee, we are well taught thereto.
¶Ye faithful fellows of your casualty,
Untie thattyre, that on your heads ye wear,
And as behooves state of misery.
Let fall about your woeful necks your hair.
In dust of Troy rub all your arms about,
In slacker weed and let your breasts be tied
Down to your bellies let your limbs lye out,
For what wedlock should you your bosoms hyde?
Your garments loose, and have in readiness
Your furious hands upon your breast to knock
This habit well beseems our distress,
It pleases me, I know the Trojan flock
Renew again your lunge accustomed cries,
And more then erst lament your miseries.
We bewail Hector.
¶Our hair we have untied, now euerychone,
All rent for sorrow of our cursed case,
Our lockes out spreads, the knots we have undone
And in these ashes stained is our face.
¶Fill up your hands and make thereof no spare,
For this yet lawful is from Troy to take
Let down your garments from your shoulders bare.
And suffer not your clamour so to slake.
Your naked breasts wait for your hands to smight
Now dolor deep now sorrow show thy might:
Make all the coasts that compass Troy about
Witness the souude of all your careful cry
Cause from the Caves the echo to cast out:
Rebounding voice of all your misery:
Not as she wontes, the latter word to sound
But all your woe from far let it rebound
Let al the Seas it hear, and eke the land
Spare not your breasts with heavy stroke to strike
Beat ye your selves, each one with cruel hand
For yet your vvonted cry doth me not like
We bevvayle Hector.
Our naked arms, thus here we rent for thee,
And bloody shoulders, (Hector) thus we tear:
Thus with our fistes, our heads lo beaten bee
And all for thee, behold we hale our hear.
Our dugs alas, with mothers hands be torn
And where the flesh is wounded round about
Which for thy sake, we rent thy death to morn
The flovving streams of blood, they spring thereout.
Thy countries shore, and destinies delay.
And thou to wearied Troians wast an aid,
A vvall thou wast, and on thy shoulders Troy
Ten years it stood, on thee alone it staide,
With thee it fell: and fatal day alas
Of Hector both, and Troy but one there was.
Enough hath Hector: turn yonr plaint and moan
And shed your tears for Pryame every chone.
Receive our plaints, O lord of Phrigian land
And old tvvise captive king, receive our fear,
While thou vvert king. Troy hurtles then could stand
Though shaken tvvise, with Grecian sword it wear,
And twice did shot of Hercles quiver bear,
At latter loss of Hecubes sons all
And roges for kings, that hgih on piles we rear:
Thou father shut stour latest funeral.
And beaten down, to Jove for sacrifies.
Like liveless block, in Troy thy carcass lies.
Yet turn ye once your tears, another way,
My pryams death, should not lamented be.
O Troyans all, full happy is Pryame say.
For free from bondage, down descended hee,
To the lowest Ghost: and never shall sustain
His Captive neck with Greeks to yoked bee.
Hee never shall behold the Atrids twain
Nor false Vlisses ever shall he see▪
Not hee a pray for Greeks to triumph at
His neck shall subject to their conquests bear
No give his hands to tie behind his back,
That to the rule of Scepters wonted wear,
Nor following Agamemnons chare, in band
Shall he bee pomp, to proud Mycenas land.
¶Full happy Pryame is, each one wee say
That toke with him his Kingdom then that stood
Now safe in shade, he seeks the wandering way,
And treads the paths of all Elizius wood,
And in the blessed Sprightes, full happy hee,
Again there seeks to meet with Hectors Ghost.
Happy Pryam, happy whosoever may see,
His Kingdom all, at once with him be lost.
O Ye to whom the Lord of Land and Seas,
Of Life and Death hath granted here the power
Lay down your lofty looks, your pride appease
The crovvned King flees not his fatal hour.
Who so thou be that leadst thy land alone,
Thy life was limit from thy mothers vvombe,
Not purple robe, not Glorious glittering throne,
No crown of Gold redeems thee from the tomb:
A King he was that waiting for the veil,
Of him that slew the Minotaure in fight:
Begilde with blackness of the wonted sail
In seas him sonke, and of his name they hight.
So he that wild, to win the golden spoil
And first with ship, by seas to seek renovvne,
In lesser vvaue, at length to death began boyle,
And thus the daughters, brought their father down:
Whose s•nges, the woods hath drawn, and rivers held,
And birds to hear his notes, did theirs forsake,
In piece meal thrown, amid the Thracian field,
Without return hath sought the Stigian lake.
They sit aboue that hold our life in line▪
And what we suffer down they fling from hie,
No cark, no care, that ever may untwine
The thirds, that wood are aboue the sky,
As witness he that sometime King of Greece,
Had Iason thought, in drenching seas to drovvne
Who escaped both death and gained the Golden fleece,
Whom fates advance, there may no power pluck down
The highest God somety me that Saturn hight
His fall him taught to credit their decrees
The rule of heavens: he lost it by their might,
And Jove his son now turns the rolling Skies.
Who vveneth here to win eternal vvelth,
Let him behold this present perfect proof.
And learn. the secrete stop of chances stelth,
Most ne'er alas, when most it seems aloof.
In slipper joy let no man put his trust:
Let none despair that heavy haps hath past
The sweet with sovvre she mingles as she lust
Whose doubtful web pretends nought to last.
Frailty is the thride, that Clothoes rock hath spoon,
Now from the Distaff drawn now knapt in tvvaine
With all the world at length his end he won,
Whose works have wrought, his name should great remain
And he whose travels twelve, his name display,
That feared nought the force of worldly hurt,
In fine (alas) hath found his fatal day,
And died with smart of Dianyraes shirt,
If prowes might eternity procure,
Then Priam yet should live in liking lust,
Ay portly pomp of pride thou art unsure,
Lo learn by him. O Kings ye are but dust.
And Hecuba that wayleth now in care,
That was so late of high estate a Queen,
A mirror is to teach you what you are
Your wavering wealth, O Princes here is seen.
Whom dawn of day hath seen in high estate
Before Suns set; (alas) hath had his fall
The Cradels rock, appoints the life his date
From settled joy, to sudden funeral.
The Spright of Achilles added to the tra∣giddy
by the Translator.
FOrsaking now the places tenebrouse,
And deep dens of thinfernall region
From all the shadows of illusious
That wāder there the paths full many one
Lo, here am I returned al alone,
The same Achil whose fierce and heavy hand
Of al the world no wight might yet withstand.
What man so stout of al the Gracious host,
That hath not sometime craved Achilles aide,
And in the Troyans, who of prowes most
That hath not feared to see my Banner splaide
Achilles lo, hath made them all afraid.
And in the Greeks hath been a pillar post,
That stvrdy stood against their Trojan host.
Where I have lacked the Gracious went to wrack,
Troy proved hath what Achills sword could doe
Where I have come the Troyans fled a back,
Retiring fast from field their walls unto,
No man that might Achilles stroke fordoe
I dealt such stripes amid the Trojan route,
That with their blood I stained the fields about.
Mighty Memnon that with his Persian band,
Would Pryams part with all might maintain,
Lo now he lies and knows Achilles hand
Amid the field is Troylus also slain.
Ye Hector great, whom Troy accounted plain
The flower of chivalry that might be found,
All of Achilles had their mortal wound.
But Paris lo, such was his false deceit,
Pretending marriage of Polixeine,
Behind the alter lay for me in wait
Where I unawares have fallen into the train
And in Appolloes church he hath me slain
Whereof the Hell will now just vengeance have,
And here again, I come my right to crave.
The deep Auerne my rage may not sustain,
Nor bear the angers of Achilles spright
From Acheront I rent the spoil in twain,
And though the ground I grate again to sight:
Hell could not hide Achilles from the light,
Vengeance and blood doth Orcus pit require,
To quench the furies of Achilles ire.
The hateful land, that worse then Tartare is
And burning thrust excites of Tantalus,
I here behold again, and Troy is this
O, travel worse, then stone of Sisyphus
And pains that pass the pangs of Tityus
To light more loathsome fury hath me sent
Then hooked wheel, that Ixions flesh doth rent.
Remembered is allow where sprites do dwell
The wicked slaughter'wrought by wily way▪
Not yet revenged hath the deepest hell,
Achilles blood on them that did him slay
But now of vengeance come the ireful day
And darkest dens of Tartare from beneath
Conspire the fautes, of them that wrought my death.
Now mischief, murder, wrath of hell draws ne'er
And dire Phlegethon flood doth blood require
Achilles death shall he revenged here
With slaughter such as Stygian lakes desire
Her daughters blood shall slake the spirits ire,
Whose sonue we slew, whereof doth yet remain,
The wrath beneath, and hell shall be their payne.
From burning lakes the furies wrath I threat,
And fire that nought but streams of blood may slake
The rage of wind and seas their ships shall beat,
And Ditis deep on you shall vengeance take,
The spirits cry out, the earth and seas do quake
The poole of Styx, ungrateful Greeks it seath,
With slaughtered blood revenge Achilles death.
The soil doth shake to bear my heavy foot
And fearth again the sceptors of my hand,
The pools with stroke of thunderclap ring out,
The doubtful stars amid their course do stand,
And fearful Phoebus hides his blazing brand
The trembling lakes against their course do flit,
For dread and terror of Achilles spright.
Great is the ransom ought of due to me,
Wherewith ye must the sprightes and hell appease,
Polyxena shall sacrificed be,
Upon my tomb, their yreful wrath to please,
And with her blood ye shall assuage the seas
Your ships may not return to Greece again
Till on my tomb Polyxena be slain.
And for that she should then have been my wife,
I will that Pyrrhus render her to me,
And in such solemn sort bereave her life,
As ye are wont the weddings for to see,
So shall the wrath of Hell appeased bee,
Nought else but this may satisfy our ire,
Her will I have and her I you require.
ALas how long the lingering Gre•kes
in haven do make delay,
When either war by seas they seek
or home to pass their way.
Why, show what cause doth hold your ships?
and Grecian navy stays,
Declare if any of the Gods
have stopped your homeward ways.
My mind is mai'd, my trembling sin∣no
was quake and are afraid,
For stranger news of truth then these
I think were never heard.
Lo I my self have plainly seen in dawning of the day,
When Phoebus first began to approach and drive the stars away.
The earth all shaken suddenly and from the hollow ground:
My thought I hard with roaring cry a deep and dreadful sound:
That shoke the woods, and al the trees •ong out with thunder stroke,
From Ida hills down fell the st•kes, the mountain •oppose were broke.
And not the earth hath only quaked, but all the Sea likewise▪
Achilles presence felt and knew, and high the surges rise.
The cloven ground Erebus pits then showed and deepest dens,
That down to Gods that guide beneath, the way appeared from hence.
Then shoke the tomb from whence anon in flame of fiery light,
Appears from the hollow ca•es Achilles noble spright.
As wonted he his Thracian arms and banners to disploy
And wield his weighty weapons well against thassaultes of Troy,
The same Achilles seemed he than that he was wont to bee
Amid the hostess and eas•y could I know that this was hee.
With carcass slain in furious fight, that stopped and filled each floude.
And who with slaughter of his hand made Xanthus r••no with blood,
As when in Chariot high he sate with lofty stomach stout.
While Hector both and Troy at once he drew the walls about.
Aloud he cried, and every coast rang with Achilles sound,
And thus with hollow voice he spake, from bottom of the ground.
The Greeks shall not with little price redeem Achilles ire,
A princely ransom must they give, for so the fates require
Unto my ashes Polyxene spoused shall here be slain
By Pyrrhus hand, and al my tomb her blood shall ouerstayne.
This said, he straight sank down again to Plutoes deep region,
The earth then cloasd, the hollow caves were vanished and gon
Therewith the whether waxed clear, the raging winds did slake,
The tombling seas began to rest and al the tempest brake.
WHat time our sails we should have spread,
upon Sygeon Seas,
With swift return from long delay,
to seek our homeward ways.
Achilles rose whose only hand,
hath given Greeks the spoil.
Of Troia sore annoyed by him,
and leveled with the soil,
With speed requiting his abode
and former long delay▪
At Scyros yle, and Lesbos both amid the Aegaeon sea.
Till he came here in doubt it stood of fall or sure estate,
Then though ye hast to grant his will ye shall it give to late.
Now have the other captains all the price of their manhood,
What else reward for his prewesse then her al only blood?
A•e his deserts think you but light, that when he might have fled,
And passing Pelyus years in peace, a quiet life have led,
Detected yet his mothers crafts, forsook his women's weed,
And with his weapons proved himself a manly man indeed:
The King of Mysya, Telephus that would the Greeks withstand,
Coming to Troy, forbidding vs the passage of his land:
To late repenting to have felt. Achilles heavy stroke
Was glad to crave his health again where he his hurt had took
For when his sore might not be salute as told Appollo plain.
Except the spear that gave the hurt, restoared help again.
Achilles plasters cured his cuts, and saved the King alive:
His hand both might and mercy knew te slay and then ravine.
When Thebes fell. Eetion saw it and might it not withstand,
The captive King could nought redress the ruin of his land.
Lyrnesus little likewise felt his hand and down it fill,
With ruin overturned like from top of haughty hill.
And taken Bryseps land it is and prisoner is she caught
The cause of strife between the Kings is Chryses come to nought.
Tenedos yle well known by fame and fertile soil he took
That fostered fat the Thracian flocks and sacred Cello shook
What boots to blase the brute of him whom trump of fame doth show,
Through all the coasts where Caicus flood with swelling stream doth flow?
The ruthful ruin of these realms so many towns bet down,
Another man would glory count and worthy great renown.
But thus my father made his way and these his journeys are,
And battles many one he fought whylewarre he doth prepare.
As wished I may his merits more shall yet not this remain.
Well known and counted praise enough that he hath Hector slain
During whose life the Gracious al might never take the town,
My father only vanquist Troy, and you have pluct it down.
Rejoice I may your parents praise and brute abroad his acts,
It seems the son to follow well his noble fathers factts,
In sight of Priam Hector slain, and. Memnon both they lay.
With heavy theere his parents wayld to moutne his dying day.
Himself abhord his handy work in fight that had them slain,
The Sons of Gods Achilles knew were borne to die again
The woman queen of Amazons that greu'd the Greeks full sore.
Is turned to flight then ceased our fear wee dread their bows no more.
It ye well weigh his worthiness Achilles ought to have
Though he from Argos or Mycenas would a Virgin crave,
Doubt ye herein? allow ye not that straight his will be done.
And count ye cruel Pryams blood to give to Peleus son?
For Helen sake your own childes blood appeasd Dianas ire
A wonted thing and done ere this it is that I require.
The only fault of youth it is not to refrain his rage
The Fathers blood already stirs in Pryams wanton age:
Sometime Achilles grievous checks I bare with patient hart,
The more thou may the more thou oughtst to suffer in good part
Where would ye with slaughtered blood a noble spirit stain?
Think what is meet the Greeks to do, and Troyans to sustain.
The proud estate of tyranny may never long endure.
The King that rules with modest mean of safety may be sure.
The higher step of princely state that fortune hath vs signed
The more behooved a happy man humility of mind
And bread the change that chaūce may bring, whose gifts so soon be lost
And chiefly then to fear the Gods, while they the favour most.
In beating down that war hath won, by proof I have ben taught,
What pomp and pride in twinke of eye, may fall and come to nought.
Troy made me fierce &amp; proud of mind, Troy makes me frayd withal.
The Greeks now stand where Troy late fell, each thing may have his fall.
Sometime I grant I did my self, and Sceptors proudly bear,
The thing that might advance my hart makes me the more to fear
Thou Priam perfect proof presentst thou art to me eftsoon:
A cause of pride, a glass of fear a mirror for the nones,
Should I account the sceptors ought, but glorious vanity
Much like the borrowed braided hair, the face to beautify.
One sudden chance may turn to nought, and maim the might of men
With fewer then a thousand ships, and years in less then ten.
Not she that guides the slipper wheel of fate, doth so delay:
That she to al possession grants, of ten years settled stay.
With leave of Greece I will confess, I would have won the town
But not with ruin thus extreme to see it beaten down.
But lo the battle made by night and rage of fervent mind,
Could not abide the bridling bit that reason had assigned.
The happy sword once slaind with blood unsatiable is,
And in the dark the servant rage doth strike thee more amiss.
Now are we wreaked on Troy so much let all that may remain.
A Virgin borne of Princes blood for offering to be slain
And given be to slain the tomb and ashes of the ded,
And under name of wedlock see the guiltless blood be shed,
I will not grant for mine should bee thereof both fault and blame.
Who when he may, forbids not offence: doth will the same.
And shall his sprights have no reward their angers to appeyse?
Yes very great, for all the world shall celebrate his praise,
And lands unknown that never saw, the man so praised by fame,
Shall heate and keep for many years the glory of his name.
If bloodshed veil his ashes ought strike of an Oxes head,
And let no blood that may be cause of mothers tears, be shed.
What furious frenzy may this be that doth your will so lead,
This earnest careful sutte to make in travail for the dead?
Let not such envy toward your father in your heart remain,
That for his sacrifice ye would procure an others payne,
Proud tyrant, while prosperity thy stomach doth advance,
And cowardly wretch that shrinks for fear in case of fearful chance.
Is yet again thy breast inflamed, with brand of Venus might?
Wilt thou alone so oft deprive Achilles of his right?
This hand shall give the sacrifice, the which if thou withstand.
A greater slaughter shall I make, and worthy Pyrrhus hand.
And now to long from Princes slaughter doth my hand abide,
And meet it were that Polyxene were laid by Priams side.
I not deny, but Pyrrhus chief renown, in war is this,
That Pryam slain with cruel sword, to your father humbled is.
My fathers foes we have them known, submit themselves humbly,
And Pryam presently ye wot, was glad to crave mercy.
But thou for fear not stout to rule, least close from foes up shit:
While thou to Aiax, and Vlysses, dost thy will commit.
But needs I must, and will confess, your father did not fear:
When burnt our fleet with Hectors brands, &amp; Greeks they slaughtered wear.
While loitering then a aloof he lay, unmindful of the fight.
In steed of arms with scratch of quill, his sounding harp to smight.
Great Hector then despising thee, Achilles songs did fear:
And Thessale ships in greatest dread, in quiet peace yet wear.
For why aloof the Thessale fleet, they lay from Troyans hands,
And well your father might have rest, he felt not Hectors brands.
Well seems a noble king to give an other king relief.
Why hast thou then a worthy king bereaved of his life?
A point of mercy sometime is, what lives in care to kill.
But now your mercy moves you a virgins death to will.
Account ye cruel now her death whose sacrifice I crave.
Your own dear daughter once ye know, your self to th'aulters gave.
Nought else could save the Greeks frō seas, but th'only blood of her:
A king before his children ought, his country to prefer.
The law doth spare no captives blood nor wild their death to stay
That which the law doth not forbid, yet shame doth oft say nay.
The conqueror what thing he list, may lawfully fulfil.
So much the less he ought to list, that may do what he will.
Thus boast ye these as though in all ye only bare the stroke
When Pyrrhus loosed hath the greeks, from bond of ten years yoke.
Hath Scyros yle such stomaks bred?
No bretherns wrath it knows.
Beset about it is with wave.
The seas it do enclose.
Thyestes noble stock I know and A•reus eke full well,
And of the bretherns dire debate, perpetual fame doth tell.
And thou a bastard of a may de, deflowered privily.
Whom (then a boy) Achilles gat, in filthy lecher.
The same A chill that doth possess, the reign of Gods aboue,
With Therys seas: with Oecus sprights, the starred heaven with Jove
The same Achilles that was slain, by stroke of Par•s hand.
The same Achilles, whom no god, durst ever yet withstand.
The stoutest man I rather would his checks he should refrain
I could them tame but all your brags, I can full well sustain.
For even the captives spares my sword: let Calchas called be.
If destyntes require her blood, I will thereto agree
Calchas whose counsel ruled our ships, and navy hither brought,
Vnlookst the poale and hast by art the secretes thereof sought,
To whom the bowels of the beast, to whom the thunder clap,
And blasyng star with flaming train, betokened what shall hap.
Whose words with dearest price I bought, now tell vs by what mean
The will of Gods agrees that we return to Greece again.
The fates apoint the Greeks to buy their ways with wonted price.
And with what cost ye came to Troy, ye shall repair to Greece
With blood ye came, with blood ye must from hence return again,
And where Achilles ashes lies, the virgin shall be slain,
In seemly sort of habit, such as maidens wont ye see,
Of Thessalie, or Mycenas else, what time they wedded be.
With Pyrrhus hand she shall be slain, of right it shall be so
And meet it is that he the son, his fathers right should do.
But not this only stays our ships, our sails may not be spread,
Before a worthier blood then thine, (Polixena) be shed,
Which thirst thirst the fates, for Praimes nephew. Hectors little boy:
The Erekes shall tumble headlong down, from highest tower in Troy.
Let him there die, this only way ye shall the gods appease,
Then spread your thousand sails with joy ye need not fear the seas.
MAy this be true, or doth the Fable fain,
When corps is dead the Sprite to live as yet?
When Death our eyes with heavy hand doth strain,
And fatal day our looms of light hath shet,
And in the Tomb our ashes once be set,
Hath not the soul likewise his funeral,
But still (alas) do wretches live in thrall?
Or else doth all at once together die?
And may no part his fatal hour delay.
But with the breath the soul from hence doth fly?
And eke the Clouds to vanish quite away,
As dinky shade flees from the poale by day?
And may no jot escape from destiny,
When once the brand hath burned the body?
What ever then the rise of Sun may see,
And what the West that sets the Sun doth know.
In all Neptunus reign what ever bee,
That restless Seas do wash and overflow,
With purple waives still tombling to and fro.
Age shall consume: each thing that liuth shall die,
With swifter race then Pegasus doth fly.
And with what whirl, the twice six signs do fly,
With course as svvift as rector of the Spheres,
Doth guide those glistening Globes eternally.
And Hecate her changed horns repairs,
So drauth on death, and life of each thing vveares,
And never may the man, return to sight,
That once hath felt the stroke of Parses might.
For as the fume that from the fire doth pass,
With turn of hand doth vanish out of sight
And swifter then the Northern Bores
With whirling blast and storm of raging might,
Driuth far away and puts the clouds to flight,
So flees the sprighte that rules our life away,
And nothing tarries after dying day.
Swift is the race we run, at hand the mark
Lay down your hope, that wait here ought to win,
And who dreads ought, cast of thy careful cark:
Wilt thou it wot what state thou shalt be in,
When dead thou art as thou had never bin.
For greedy time it doth devour vs all,
The world it sways to Chaos heap to fall.
Death hurts the Corpse and spares not the spright,
And as for all the dens of Taenare deeepe.
With Cerberus kingdom dark that knows no light,
And straightest gates, that he there sits to keep,
They Fancies are that follow folk by sleep
Such rumours vain, but feigned lies they are,
And fables like the dreams in heavy care.
O dreadful day, alas, the sorry time▪
Is come of al the mothers ruthful woe,
Astianax (alas) thy fatal line
Of life is worn, to death straight shalt thou go,
The sisters have decreed it should be so,
There may no force (alas) escape there hand,
There mighty love their will may not withstand,
To se the mother, her tender child forsake,
What gentle hart that may from tears refrain
Or whosoever fierce that would no pity take,
To see (alas) this guiltless infant slain,
For sorry hart the tears mine eyes do stain
To think what sorrow shall her hart oppress,
Her little child to leese remediless,
The double cares of Hectors wife to whale,
Good Ladies have your tears in readiness.
And you with whom should pity most prevail.
Rue on her grief: bewail her heaviness.
With sobbing hart, lament her deep distress,
When she with tears shall take leave of her son,
And now (good Ladies) hear what shall be done.
ALas ye careful company
why hale ye thus your hairs?
Why beat you so your boiling breasts
and stain your eyes with tear?
The fall of Troy is new to you
but unto me not so,
I have foreseen this careful case
ere this time long ago
When fierce Achilles Hector slew and drew the Corpse about
Then then me thought I wist it well, that Troy should come to nought
In sorrows sonke I senseless am and wrapped (alas) in woe,
But soon except this babe me held, to Hector would I go
This seely fool my stomach tames amid my misery,
And in the hour of heaviest hippos permits me not to die,
This only cause constrains me yet the gods for him to pray
With tract of time prolonges my payne, delays my dying day:
He takes from me the lack of fear the only fruit of ill.
For while he lives yet have I left whereof to fear me still.
No place is left for better chance with worst wee are oppressed
To fear (alas) and see no hope is worst of all the rest.
What sudden fear thus moves your mind, &amp; vexes you so sore?
Still still (alas) of one mishap there rises more and more,
Nor yet the doleful destinies of Troy be come to end.
And what more grievous chances yet prepare the Gods to send?
The caves and dens of hell be rent for Troyans greater fear
And from the bottoms of their tombs the hidden sprightes appear.
May none but Greeks alone from hell return to life again?
Would God the fates would finish soon the sorrows I sustain.
Death thankful were, a common care the Troyans all oppress,
But me (alas) amaseth most the fearful heaviness.
That all astonished am for dread, and horror of the sight:
That in my sleep appeared to me by dream this latter night.
Declare what sights your dream hath showed, &amp; tell what doth you fear
Two parts of al the silent night almost then passed were.
And then the clear seven clustered beams of stars: were fall to rest
And first the sleep so long unknown my wearied eyes oppressed.
If this be sleep the astonished ma•e of mind in heavy mood,
When suddenly before mine eyes the spright of Hector stood.
Not like as he the Greeks was wont to battle to require:
Or when amid the Gracious ships, he threw the brands of fire.
Nor such as raging on the Grees, with slaughtering stroke had slain
And bare indeed the spoils of him that did Achilles fain.
His countenance not now so bright, nor of so lively cheer,
But sad and heavy like to owres and clad with ugly hair
It did me good to see him though when shaking then his head:
Shake of thy sleep in hast he said, and quickly leave thy bed:
Convey into some secrete place our son (O faithful wife)
This only hope there is to help find mean to save his life.
Leave of thy piteous tears he said, dost thou yet whale for Troy?
Would God it lay on Ground full flat so ye might save the boy.
Up stir he said thy self in hast convey him privily.
Save if ye may the tender blood of Hectors progeny
Then straight in trembling fear I waked and told mine eyes about
Forgetting long my child pore wretch, and after Hector sought.
But straight (alas) I wist not how the Spright away did pass,
And me forsook before I could my husband once embrasse.
O child, O noble fathers brood and Troians only joy,
O worthy seed of thauncient blood, and beaten house of Troy.
O image of thy father lo, thou lively bear his face,
This countnaunce lo my Hector had, and even such was his pace.
The pitch of all his body such, his hands thus would he bear.
His shoulders high his threatening brows▪ even such as thine they were
O son: begot to late for Troy, but borne to soon for me,
Shall ever time yet come again, and happy day may be,
That thou may once revenge and build again the towers of Troy,
And to the town and Troyans both restore their name with joy?
But why do I (forgetting state of present destiny),
So great things wish? enough for captives is to live only:
Alas what privy place is left my little child to hide?
What seat so secret may be found where thou moist safely bide?
The tower that with the walls of go•s so valiant was of might,
Through all the world so notable, so flourishing to sight,
Is turned to dust: and fire hath al consumd'e that was in Troy,
Of all the town not so much now is left to hide the boy.
What place were best to choose for guile, the holy tomb is here,
That then mies sword will spare to spoil where since my husband dear.
Which costly work his father built, king Pryame liberal:
And it up raised with charges great, foe Hectors funeral.
Herein the bones and ashes both of Hector (lo) they lie,
Best is that I commit the son to his fathers custody.
A cold and fearful sweat doth run, through o•t my members all,
Alas I careful wretch do fear, what chance may thee befall,
Hide him away: this only way hath saved many more,
To make the enmies to believe, that they were dead before.
He will be sought: scant any hope remains of safeness,
The paise of his nobility doth him so sore oppress:
What way were best to work: that none our doings might bewray
Let none bear witness what ye do remove them all away.
What if the enmies ask me: where Astianax both remain?
Then shall y• boldly answer make that he in Troy was slain.
What shall it help to have him hid? at length they will him find.
At first the enmies rage is fierce, delay doth slake his mind.
But what prevails, since free from fear we may him never hide?
Let yet the wretch take his defence, me careless there to bide.
What land unknown out of the way what unfrequented place
May keep thee safe? who aids our fear? who shall defend our case?
Hector, Hector that evermore thy friends did well defend
Now chiefly aid thy wife and child and vs some succour send.
Take charge to keep and cover close the treasures of thy wife,
And in thy Ashes hyde thy son preserve in tomb his life.
Draw near my Child unto the Tomb, why fliest thou backward so?
Thou takst great scorn to lurk in dens thy noble hart I know.
I see thou art ashamed to fear shake of thy princely mind,
And bear thy breast as thee behooves as chance hath thee assynd.
Behold our case: and se what flock remains now of Troy
The tomb: I woeful captive wretch and thou a seely boy,
But yield we must to sorry fates thy chance must break thy breast,
Go to, creep underneath thy fathers holy seats to rest.
If ought the fates may wretches help thou hast thy safeguard there,
If not: already then pore fool thou hast thy sepulchre.
The tomb him closely hides: but least your fear should him betray
Let him here lie and far from hence go ye some other way.
The less he fears that fears at hand, and yet if need be so,
If ye think meet a little hence for safety let vs go.
A little while keep silence now refrain your plaint and cry,
His cursed foot now hither moves the Lord of Cephalie.
Now open earth, and thou my spouse frō Styx rend up y• ground,
Deep in thy bosom hyde thy son that he may not be found.
Vlysses comes with doubtful pace and changed countenance
He knits in hart decetptful craft for some more grievous chance.
Though I be made the messenger of heavy news to you,
This one thing first I shall desire that ye take this for true.
That though the words come from my mouth, and I my message tell
Of truth yet are they none of mine ye may believe me well.
It is the word of al the Greeks, and they the authors be,
Whom Hectors blood doth yet forbid their countries for to see.
Our careful trust of peace unsure doth still the Greeks detain,
And evermore our doubtful fear yet drawth vs back again.
And suffered not our wearied hands, our weapons to forsake,
In child yet of Andromacha, while Troyans comfort take.
And saith your Augur Calchas so?
Though Calchas nothing said
Yet Hector tells it vs himself, of whose seed are we frayed.
The worthy blood of noble men oft times we se it plain,
Doth after in their heirs succeed and quickly springes again.
For so the hornless youngling yet, of high and sturdy b•ste,
With lofty neck and branched brow, doth shortly rule the rest.
The tender twig that of the lopped stock doth yet remain,
To match the tree that bare the bough, in time starts up again
With equal top to former wood the rome it doth supply,
And spreads on soil allow the shade, to heaven his branches hye.
Thus of one spark by chance yet left it happens so full oft.
The fire hath quickly caught his force and flames again aloft.
So scare we yet least Hectors blood might rise er it be long,
Fear castes in all thextremity and oft interprets wrong.
If ye respect our case ye may not blame these old soldiers
Though after years and months twice flue, they fear again the wars.
And other travails dreading Troy, not yet to be well won,
A great thing doth the Grecyans move, the fear of Hectors son.
Rid vs of fear, this stays our fleet, and plucks vs back again,
And in the haven our navy sticks, till Hectors blood be slain.
Count me not fierce for that by fates I Hectors son require,
For I as well if chance it would Orestes should desire.
But since that needs it must be so, bear it with patient hart:
And Suffer that which Agamemnon suffered in good part.
Alas my child would God thou were yet in thy mothers hand.
And that I knew what destentes thee held or in what land.
For never should the mothers faith her tender child forsake:
Though through my breast the enmies al, their cruel weapons struck.
Nor though the Greeks with pinching bands of iron my hands had bound,
Or else in fervent flame of fire beset my body round.
But now my little Child (pore wretch alas) where might he bee?
Alas, what cruel destiny what chance hath hoped to thee?
Art thou yet ranging in the fields and wander there abroad?
Or smothered else in dusty smoke of Troy: or ouertroad?
Or have the Greeks thee slain (alas) and laughed to see thy blood?
Or torn art thou with jaws of beasts? or cast to fowls for food?
Dissemble not, hard is for thee Vlisses to deceive,
I can full well the mothers crafts and subtlety perceive.
The policy of Goddesses Vlisses hath undone.
Set al these feigned words aside, tel me where is thy son?
Where is Hector? where al the rest that had with Troy their fall
Where Priamus? you ask for one but I require of all.
Thou shalt constrained be to tell the thing thou dost deny.
A happy chance were Death to her that doth desire to dye.
Who most distress to die, would fainest live when death drawth on,
These noble words with present fear of death would soon be gone.
Vlisses if ye will constrain Andromacha with fear,
Threaten my life for now to dye my chief desire it were.
With stripes with fire tormenting death we will the truth out wrest
And dolor shall thee force to tel the secrets of thy breast.
And what thy hart hath depest hid for payne thou shalt express,
Oft times thextremity prevails much more then gentleness,
Set me in midst of burning flame with wounds my body rent,
Use al the means of cruelty that ye may al invent.
Prove me with thirst and hunger both, and every torment try,
Pearce through my sides with burning irons in prison let me lie.
Spare not the worst ye can deuyse (if ought be worse then this)
Yet never get ye more of me. I wot not where he is.
It is but vain to hyde the thing that straight ye will deteckt
No fears may move the mothers hart, she doth them al neglect.
This tender love ye bear your child, wherein ye stand so stout,
So much more circumspectly warnth, the Greeks to look about.
Least after ten years tract of time and battle borne so far,
Some one should live that on our children might renew the war,
As for my self, what Calchas saith, I would not fear at all
But on Telemachus I dread, the smart of wars would fall
Now will I make Vlisses glad and all the Greeks also,
Needs must thou woeful wretch confess declare thy hidden woe.
Rejoice ye sons of Atreus there is no cause of dread.
Be glad Vlisses tell the Greeks that Hectors son is dead.
By what assurance proves thou that? how shall we credit thee:
What ever thing the enmies hand may th•ea •en hap to me
Let speedy fates me slay forthwith, and earth me hyde at ones
And after death from tomb again, remove ye: Hectors bones,
Except my son already now, do rest among the dead.
And that except Astianax into his tomb be led.
Then fully are the fates fulfild with Hectors childes decease.
Now shall I bear the Gracious word, of sure and certain peace.
Vlisses why what dost thou now• the Greeks will every chone,
Believe thy words, whom creditst thou? the mothers tale alone.
Think thou for safeguard of her child the mother will not lye?
And dread the more the worse mischance to give her son to die?
Her faith she binds with bond of oath, the truth to verify,
What thing is more of weight to fear, then so to swear and lye?
Now call thy crafts together al, bestir thy wits and mind,
And show thy self Vlisses now, the truth herein to find.
Search well thy mothers mind: behold she weeps and wayleth out,
And here and there with doubtful pace, she ranges al about,
Her careful ears she doth apply to harken what I say,
More frayd she seems then sorrowful. Now work some wily way.
For now most need of wit there is and crafty policy,
Yet on•e again by other means I will the mother try.
Thou wretched woman moist rejoice, that dead he is: (alas)
More doleful death by destiny for him decreed there was.
From Turrets top to have been cast and cruelly been slain.
Which only tower of all the rest doth yet in Troy remain.
My spright failth me, my limbs do quake, fear doth my wits cō∣found
And as the Ise congeals with frost, my blood with could is bound.
She trēbleth lo: this way, this way I will the truth out wrest,
The mothers fear detecteth all the secrets of her breast:
I will renew her fear go sirs bestir ye speedily
To seek this enemy of the Greeks where ever that he lie.
Well done he will be found at length, go to still seek him out,
Now shall he dye. what dost thou fear why dost thou look about?
Would God that any cause there were yet left that might me fray,
My hart at last now all is lost hath laid all fear away.
Sins that your child now hath ye say already suffered death,
And with his blood we may not purge the hostess as Caschas saith.
Our fleet pass not (as well inspired doth Calchas prophecy)
Till Hectors ashes cast abroad the waives may pacify.
And tomb be rent now sins the boy hath skipped his destiny.
Needs must we break this holy tomb where Hectors ashes lie.
What shall I do••y mind distracted is with double fear.
On the one my son, on tother side my husbands ashes dear,
Alas which part should move me most, the cruel Gods I call
To witness with me in the truth, and Ghosts that guide thee all
Hector that nothing in my son is else that pleases me.
But thou alone God grant him life he might resemble thee:
Shall Hectors ashes drowned bee•hide I such cruelty,
To see his bones cast in the Seas? yet let Astyanax die,
And can thou wretched mother bide, thine own childes death to see?
And suffer from the hie towers top that headlong thrown he be?
I can and will take in goad part, his death and cruel payne,
So that my Hector after death be not removed again.
The boy that life and senses hath may feel his payne and dye,
But Hector lo his death hath placed at rest in tomb to lie
What dost thou stay? determine which thou w•lt preserve of twain.
Art thou in doubt? save this: •o here thy Hector doth remain,
Both Hectors be, the one quick of spright &amp; drawing toward his strēgth
And one that may perhaps revenge his fathers death at length.
Alas I cannot save them both: I think that best it were,
That of the twain I saved him that doth the Gracious fear.
It shall be done that Calchas words to vs doth prophecy,
And now shall all the sumptuous work be thrown down utterly
That once ye sold?
I will it all from top to bottom rend.
The faith of Gods I call upon Achilles vs defend,
And Pyrrhus aid thy fathers right.
This tomb abroad shall lye:
O mischief, never durst the Greeks show yet such cruelty.
Ye strain the temples and the Gods that most have favoured you,
The dead ye spare not, on their tombs your fury rages now.
I will their weapons all resist my self with naked hand,
The ire of hart shall give me strength their armour to withstand.
As fierce as did the Amazons beat down the Greeks in fight,
And Menas once enspierd with God, in sacrifice doth smyght,
With spear in hand, and while with furious pace she treads the groūd
And wood as one in rage she strikes, and feels not the wound:
So will I run on midst of them and on their weapons dye,
And in defence of Hectors tomb among his ashes lie.
Cease ye: doth rage and fury vain of women move ye ought?
Dispatch with speed what I command, &amp; pluck down al to nought.
O slay me rather here with sword rid me out the way,
Break up the deep Auern, and rid my destinies delay.
Rise Hector and beset thy foes, break thou Vlisses ire,
A spright art good enough for him, behold he casts fire.
And weapon shakes with mighty hand do ye not Greeks him see?
Or else doth Hectors spright appear but only unto me
Down quite withal.
What wilt thou suffer both thy sons be slain,
And after death thy husbands bones to be removed again?
Perhaps thou may with prayer yet aprease the Gracious all.
Else down to ground the holy tomb of Hector, straight shall fall.
Let rather die the child pore wretch and let the Greeks him kill,
Then father and the son should cause the tone the others ill.
Vllisses, at thy knees I fall, and hm•bly ask mercy,
These hands that no mans feet else knew, first at thy feet they lye.
Take pity on the mothers case and sorrows of my breast,
Vochsafe my prayers to receive and grant me my request.
And by how much the more the Gods have thee advanced hie,
More easily strike the pore estate of wretched misery.
God grant the chaste bed of thy godly wife Penelope,
May thee receive and so again Laerta may thee see,
And that thy son Telemachus may meet thee joyfully.
His graundstres y•ares, a•d fathers wit, to pass full happily.
Take ptty on the mothers tears, her little child to save,
He is my only comfort left, and th'onely to• I have.
¶Bring forth thy son and ask.
COme hither child out of the dens to me,
Thy wretched mothers lamentable store,
This Babe Vlisses (lo) this Babe is hee.
That stays your ships and fears you so sore.
Submit thy self my son with humble hand,
And worship flat on ground thy masters feet,
Think it no shame as now the case doth stand:
The thing that Fortune wilth a wretch is meet,
Forget thy worthy stock of Kingly kind,
Think not on Priams great nobility,
And put thy father Hector from thy mind,
Such as thy Fortune let thy stomach bee,
Behave thy self as captive bend thy Knee,
And though thy grief pearce not thy tender years,
Yet learn to wa•le thy wretched state by me,
And take ensample at thy mothers tears.
Once Troy hath seen the weeping of a child,
When little Priam turned Alcides threats,
And he to whom all beasts in strength did yield,
That made his way from hell, and brake their gates
His little enmies tears yet overcame,
Priam he said receive thy liberty,
In seat of honour keep thy Kingly name,
But yet thy Sceptors rule more faithfully.
Lo such the conquest was of Hercules.
Of him yet learn your hearts to mollify,
Do only Hercles cruel weapons please,
And may no end be of your cruelty?
No less then Pryam, kneels to thee this boy,
That lies and asks only life of thee.
As for the rule and governance of Troy
Where ever •ortune will there let i• bee.
Take mercy on the mothers ruthful tears
That with their streams my cheeks do overflow,
And spare this guiltless insantes tender years
That humbly falls at thy feet so lowe.
OF truth the mothers great sorrow,
doth move my hart full sore.
But yet the mothers of the Greeks,
of need must move me more,
To whom t•ts boy may cause in time
a great calamtie.
May ever he the burnt ruins
of Troy reedify?
And shall these hands in time to come, ereckt the town again?
If this be th only help we have, there doth no hope remain
For Troy, we stand not now in case to cause your fear of mind,
Doth ought avail his fathers force, or stock of noble kind?
His fathers heart abated was, he drawn the walls abought.
Thus evil haps, the haughttest heart at laugh they bring to nought,
If ye will needs oppress a wretch what thing more grievous were
Then on his noble neck he should the yoke of bondage bear?
To serve in life doth any man this to a King deny?
Not Vlisses with his death, but Calchas prophecy.
O false inuentor of deceit and heinous cruelty,
By manhood of whose hand in war no man did ever dye.
But by disceipt and crafty train of mind that mischief seeks,
Before this time full many one dead is, yea of the Greeks,
The Prophets words and guilties Gods say thou my son require,
Nay: mischief of thy breast it is, thou dost his death desire.
Thou night soldier, and stout of hart a little child to stay.
This enterprise thou takste alone and that by open day.
Vlisses manhood well to Greeks to much to you is known,
I may not spend the time in words, our Navy will be gone
A little stay, while I my last farewell give to my child,
And have with oft embracing him my greedy sorrows filled.
Thy grievous sorrows to redress, would God it lay in me,
But at thy will to take delay of time I grant it thee.
Now take thy last leave of thy Son, and fill thy self with tears.
Oft times the weeping of the eyes, the inward grief out weeks.
O dear, O sweet, thy mothers pledge, farewell my only joy,
Farewell the flower of honour left of beaten hows of Troy.
O Troyans last calamity and fear to Gracious part
Farewell thy mothers only hope, and vain comfort of hart.
Oft wish I thee thy fathers strength and half thy graundstres years
But all for nought the Gods have all dispoynted our desires.
Thou never shalt in regal court thy sceptors take in hand,
Nor to thy people give decrees nor lead with law thy land.
Nor yet thine enmies overcome by might of handy stroke.
Nor send the conquered nations all under thy servile yoke.
Thou never shalt beat down in fight, and Greeks with sword pursew,
Nor at thy Chariot Pyrrhus pluck, as Achill Hector drew
And never shall these tender hands thy weapons wield and wrest,
Thou never shalt in woods pursue the wyld and mighty beast.
Nor as accustomed is by guise and sacrifice in Troy,
With measure swift: between the aulters shalt thou dance with joy.
O grievous kind of cruel death that doth remain for thee,
More woeful things then Hectors death the walls of Troy shall see.
Now break of al thy mothers tears I may no more time spend.
The grievous sorrows of thy hart will never make an end.
Vlisses spare as yet my tears and grant awhile delay,
To close his eyes yet with my hands er he depart away.
Thou die but young: yet feared thou art thy Troy doth wait for thee,
Go noble hart thou shalt again the noble Troyans see.
Help me mother?
Alas my child why take thou hold by me?
In vain thou call where help none is I can not succour thee.
As when the little tender beast that hears the Lyon cry,
Straight for defence he seeks his damme, &amp; crouching down doth lye,
The cruel beast when once removed is the damme away,
In greedy •awe with ravening bit doth snatch the tender pray
So straight the enmies will thee take, and from my side thee bear.
Receive my kiss and tears pore child, receive my rented hair.
Depart thou hence now full of me, and to thy father go,
Salute my Hector in my name and tel him of my woe
Complain thy mothers grief to him if former 〈◊〉 may move,
The sprightes: and that in funeral flame they leese not all their love.
O cruel Hector suffrest thou thy wife to be oppressed?
With bond of Gracious heavy yoke and least thou still at rest?
Achilles rose: take here again my tears and rented hear,
And (al that I have left to send) this kiss thy father bear.
Thy coat yet for my comfort leave, the tomb hath touched it
If of his ashes aught here lye Isle seek it every whit.
There is no measure of thy tears I may no longer stay,
Defer no further our return break of our ships delay.
O Jove that leadst the lamps of fire,
and deckst with flaming stars the sky.
Why is it ever thy desire
to care their course so orderly?
That now the frost the leaves hath vvorn•
&amp; now the sprīg doth close the tree.
Now fiery Leo rypes the corn,
and still the soil should changed be?
But why art thou that all dost guide,
between whose hands the poale doth svvay,
And at whose will the Orbs do slyde, careless of mans estate always?
Regarding not the goodmans case, nor caring how to hurt the ill.
Chance bears rule in every place and turns mans estate at will.
She gives the wrong the upper hand the better part she doth oppress,
She makes the highest low to stand, her Kingdom all is orderlesse.
O perfect prof of her frailty, the princely tovvres of Troybeat down,
The flower of Asia here ye see with turn of hand quite ouerthrovvne.
The ruthful end of Hectors son, vvhō to his death the Greeks have led,
His fatal hovvre is come and gone, and by this time the Child is ded:
Yet still (alas) more cares increase, O Troyans doleful destiny,
Fast doth approach the maids decease, and now Polixena shall die.
WHat ever woeful wedding yet,
were cause of funeral,
Of wailing, tears, blood, slaughter else
or other mischiefs all,
A worthy watch for Helena,
and meet for me it ware,
My wedding torch hath been the cause
of al The Troyans care.
I am constraynd to hurt them yet,
after their overthrow,
The false and feigned marriages of Pyrrhus must I show.
And give the maid the Greeks attire and by my policy:
Shall Paris sister be betrayed and by disceypt shall die.
But let her be beguiled thus, the less should be her payne
If that unwary without the fear of death: she might be slain.
What ceasest thou the will of Greeks, and message to fulfil?
Of hurt constraynd the fault returnth to th'auter of the ill.
O noble Virgin of the famous house and stock of Troy,
To thee the Gracious have me sent I bring thee news of joy,
The Gods rue on thy afflicted state more merciful they bee,
A great and happy marriage lo, they have prepared for thee.
Thou never should if Troy had stood, so nobly wedded be,
Nor Priam never could prefer thee to so hie degree.
Whom flower of all the Gracious name the prince of honour hie,
That bears the Scepters over all, the land of Thessaly
Doth in the law of wedlock chose, and for his wise require.
To sacred rights of lawfu bed, doth Pyrrhus thee desire:
Lo Thetis great with al the rest, of Gods that guide by sea.
Each one shall thee account as theirs and toy by wedding day.
And Peleus shall thee daughter call when thou art Pirrhus wife,
And Nereus shall account thee his the space of all thy life.
Put of thy monrning garment now, this regal vesture wear
Fogret henceforth thy captive state and seemly broyd thy hair.
The fall hath lift thee higher up, and doth thee more advance
Oft to be taken in the war doth bring the better chance
This ill the Troyans never knew in all their griefs and payne
Before this time ye never made vs to rejoice in vain.
Troy towers give light, O seemly time for marriage to be made,
Who would refuse the wedding day that Helayne doth persuade?
The Plague and ruin of each part behold dost thou not see,
These tombs of noble men, and how their bones here scattered bee?
Thy brydebed hath been cause of this for thee all these be ded
For thee the blood of Asia both and Europe hath been shed.
When thou in joy and pleasure both the fighting folk from far,
Hast viewed: in doubt to whom to wish the glory of the war.
Go to, prepare the martages, what need the Torches light?
Behold the Towers of Troy do shine with brands that blase full bright.
O Troyans all set to your hands, this wedlock celebrate:
Lament this day with woeful cry and tears in seemly rate.
Though care do cause the want of wit, and reasons rule deny,
And heavy hap doth ofttymes hate his mates in misery
Yet I before most hateful judge dare well defend my part,
That I of all your grievous cares sustain the greatest smart.
Andromacha for Hector weeps, for Priam Hecuba,
For only Paris privily bewails Helena.
A hard and grievous thing it is captivity to bear,
In Troy that yoke I suffered long a prisoner whole ten year.
Turned are the fates, Troy beaten down, to Greece I must repair,
The native country to have lost is ill, but worse to fear.
For dread thereof you need not care your evils all be past,
On me both parts will vengeance take al lights to me at last.
Whom each man prisoner takes God wot she stands in slipper stay,
And me not captive made by lot yet Paris led away.
I have been cause of all these wars, and then your woes were wrought,
When first your ships the Spartayn Seas &amp; land of Grecia sought.
But if the Goddess wild it so that I their pray should be,
And for reward to her beauties judge she had appointed me,
Then pardon Paris: think this thing in wrathful judge doth lie,
The sentence Menelaus gives, and he this case shall try.
Now turn thy plaints Andromacha, and weep for Polyxeyne
Mine eyes for sorrows of my hart their tears may not refrain.
Alas, what care makes Heleyn weep? what grief doth she lament?
Declare what crafts Vlisses castes, what mischief hath he sent?
Shall she from height of Idey hill be headlong tombled down?
Or else out of the turrets top in Troy shall she be thrown?
Or will they cast her from the clieues into Sygeon seas?
In bottom of the surging waives to end her ruthful days?
Show what thy countnaunce hides and tell the secrets of thy breast.
Some woes in Pyrhus wedding are far worse then all the rest.
Go to, give sentence on the maid, pronounce her destiny:
Delude no longer our mishaps, we are prepared to die.
Would God the'xpoūder of the Gods would give his dome so right
That I also on point of sword might leese the loathsome light,
Or at Achilles tomb with ••ache of Pyrrhus hand be •apne:
And bear a part of al thy fates O wretched Polixeyne.
Whom yet Achilles woes to wed, and where his ashes lie,
Requires that thy blood be shed, and at his tomb to die.
Behold lo how her noble mind of Death doth gladly hear,
She decks her self? her regal weed in seemly wise to wear,
And to her head she sets her hand the broyded hair to lay,
To wed she thought it Death, to die she thinks a wedding day
But help (alas) my mother sounds to hear her daughters death,
Arise pluck up your heart and take again the panting breath.
Alack good mother how slender stay, that doth thy life sustain?
A little thing shall happy thee thou art almost past payne.
Her breath returns: she doth revive, her limbs their life do take.
So see when wretches fain would die, how death doth them forsake.
Doth yet Achilles live (alas) to work the Troyans spite?
Doth he rebel against vs yet? O hand of Paris light.
The very tomb and ashes lo▪ yet thirsts for our blood,
A happy heap of children late on every side me stood.
It wearied me to deal the mothers kiss among them al.
The rest are lost, and this alone now doth me mother call.
Thou only child of Hecuba, a comfort left to me.
A stayer of my sorry state and shall I now leese thee?
Depart O wretched soul, and from this careful carcass fly,
And ease me of such ruthful fates, to see my daughter die.
By weeping wets (alas) my eyes, and staines them over al,
And down my cheeks the sudden streams and showers af tears do fall.
But thou dear daughter moist be glad, Cassandra would rejoice,
Or Hectors wife thus wed to be if they might have their choice.
We are the wretches Hecuba in cursed case we stand.
Whom straight the ship shall toss by seas into a foreign land.
But as for Heleyns grieves be gone and turned to the best,
She shall again her native country se and live at rest.
Ye would the more envy my state if ye might know your own,
And grouth there yet more grief to me that erst I have not known?
Such masters must ye serve as doth by chance of lots befall.
Whose servant am I then become whom shall I moister call?
By lot ye fall to Pyrhus hands you are his prisoner.
Cassandra is happy, fury saves perhaps and Phoebus her.
Chief king of Greeks Cassandra keeps and his captive is she.
Is any one among them all that prisoner would have me?
You chanced to Vlysses are his pray ye are become.
Alas what cruel▪ dire and ireful dealer of the dome.
What god unjust doth so divide, the captives to their lords?
What grievous arbiter is he? that to such choice accords,
What cruel hand to wretched folk, so evil fa•es hath caste?
Who hath among Achilles armour, Hectors mothers placed?
Now am I captive, and beset with all calamity.
My bondage grieves me not, but him to serve it shames me.
He that Achilles spoils hath won, shall Hectors also have:
Shall barren land enclosed with seas receive my bones in grave?
Lead me Vlysses where thou will, lead me. I make no stay,
My master I, and me my fates, shall follow every way.
Let never calm come to the seas, but let them rage with wind,
Come fire and sword, mine own mischance and Priams let me find.
In mean time haps this deep distress my cares can know no calm:
I ran the race with Priamus, but he hath won the Palm,
But Pyrrhus comes with swiftned pace &amp; threatening brows doth wrest.
What stayste thou Pyrrhus? strike thy sword now through this woeful breast.
And both at ones the parents of thy fathers wife now slay,
Murderer of age, likes thee her blood? he draw my daughter away
Defile the gods and stain the sprights, of hell with slaughtered blood,
To ask your mercy what avails? our prayers do no good.
The vengeance ask I on your ships, that it the gods may pleas,
According to this sacrifice, to guide you on the seas.
This wish I to your thousand sails, Gods wrath light on them all,
Even to the ship that bears me, what ever may befall.
A Comfort is to mans calamity
A doleful flock of fellows in distress.
And sweet to him that mourns in misery
To here them whale whom sorrows like oppre•
In deepest care his grief him bites the les,
That his estate bewails not all alone,
But sees with him the tears of many one.
For still it is the chief delight in woe,
And joy of them that sonke in sorrows are,
To see like fates by fall to many more,
That may take part of all their woeful fare,
And not alone to be oppressed with care.
There is no wight of woe that doth complain,
When all the rest do like mischance sustain.
In all this world if happy man were none,
None (though he were) would think himself awretch.
Let once the rich with heaps of Gold be gone,
Whose hundred head his pastors ouerretch,
Then would the poor mans hart begin to stretch.
There is no wretch whose life him doth displease,
But in respect of those that live at ease.
Sweet is to him that stands in deep distress,
To see no man in joyful plight to bee,
Whose only vessel wind and wave oppress,
Full sore his chance bewails and weeps hee,
That with his own none others wrack doth see
When he alone makes shipwreck one the sand,
And naked falls to long desired land.
A thousand sail who sees to drench in Seas,
With better will the storm hath overpassed
His heavy hap doth him the less displease
When broken boards abroad be many cast,
And shipwrecked ships to shore they flit full fast,
With doubled waives when stopped is the flood,
With heaps of them that there have lost their good.
Full sore did Pirrhus Helens loss complain,
What time the leader of his flock of sheep,
Upon his back alone he bare them twain,
And wet his Golden lockes amid the deep,
In piteons plaint (alas) he began to weep.
The death of her it did him deep displease,
That shipwreck made amid the drenching seas.
And piteous was the plaint and heavy mood
Of woeful Pyrrha and eke Deucalion
That nought beheld about them but the flould,
When they of all mankind were left alone
Amid the seas full sore they made their moan
To see themselves thus left alive in woe
When neither land they saw, nor fellows more.
Anon these plaints and Trow•ans tears shall quail,
And here and there the ship them toss by seas:
When trumpets sound shall warn to hoise up sail,
And through the waives with wind to seek their ways
Then shall these captives go to end their days
In land unknown: when once with hasty ore
The drenching deep they take and shun the shore.
What state of mind shall then in wretches bee?
When shore shall sink from sight and seas arise?
When Idey hill to lurk aloof they see?
Then point with hand from far where Troia lies,
Shall child and mother: talking in this wise:
Lo yonder Troy, where smoke it fumes hie,
By this the Troyans shall their country spy.
ODyre, fierce, wretched, horrible,
O cruel fates accursed,
Of Mars his ten years bloodshed blows
the woefullest and the worst.
Alas which should I first bewail?
thy cares Andromacha?
Or else lament the wretched age
of woeful Hecuba?
What ever mans calamities
ye whale for mine it is.
I bear the smart of al their woes each other feels but his
Who ever he, I am the wretch all hippos to me at last.
Slain is the maid, and from the walls of Troy the child is cast.
But voth (as them became) they toke their death with stomach stout.
Declare the double slaughters then, &amp; tell the whole throughout.
One tower of all the rest ye know doth yet in Troy remain,
Where Pryan wonted was to sit, and view the armies twain.
His little Nephew eke with him to lead▪ and from a far,
His fathers fights with fire and sword to show on feats of war.
This tower, sometime well known by fame, and Troyans honour most.
Is now with captains of the Greeckes, beset on every coast.
With swift recourse and from the ships, in clustred heaps anon.
Both tag and rag they run to case what thing should there be done
Some clime the hills to seek a place where they might see it best,
Some one the rocks a tiptoe stand to ouerloke the rest.
Some on their rēples wear the pine, some beech, some crowns of bay,
For garlands torn is every tree, that stands in they way,
Some from the highest mountains top aloof beholds all.
Some scale the buildings half thurne, and some the ruinous wall.
Yea some there were (O ••tichtee lo) that for the more despite.
The tomb of Hector sits upon beholders of the sight.
With princely pace Vlisses then past through the preased band
Of Greeks, King Priams little nephew leading by the hand.
The Child with vnrepyning gate past through his enmies hands,
Up toward the walls, and as anon in turrets top he stands,
From thence down his lofty looks he cast on every part,
The nearer death more free from care he seemed▪ and fear of hart.
Amid his foes his stomach swells. and fierce he was to sight.
Like Tiger whel•e, that th•rats in vain with tu les chap to bight.
Alas, for pi••y then each one, few on his tender years,
And al the route that present were, for him they fhed their tears,
Yea not Vlisses them restraynd, but trickling down they sal,
And only he, wept not (poor fool) whom they bewailed al.
But while on Gods Vlisses called, and Calchas▪ words expound,
In midst of Pryams land (alas) the child leapt down to ground.
What cruel Calchas could or scythe such slaughter rake in hand
Or by the shore of Caspyan Sea, what barbarous lawless land.
Busyridis to th'aulters yet no infants blood hath shed
Nor never yet were children slain for feast of Diomed.
Who shall alas in tomb thee lay, or hyde thy limbs again?
What limbs from such a headlong fall could in a child remain,
His bodies payse thrown down to ground, hath batred al his bones.
His face, his noble fathers marks are spoiled against the stones.
His neck anointed is: his head so dashed with flint stoane stroke▪
That scattered is the brain about, the skull is al to broke.
Thus lies he now dismembered corpse, deformd and all to rent.
Lo herein doth he yet likewise, his father represent.
What time the Child hath headlong fine thus from the walls of Troy,
And at the Greeks the selves bewaild y• slaughter of the Boy,
Yet straight return they back, and at Achilles tomb again
The second mischief go to work the death of Polixeine.
This tomb the waives of surging seas, beset the utter side,
The other part the fields encloase about, and pastors wide.
In vale environed with hills, that round about do rise,
A sloop on height erected are the banks in Theatre wise.
By al the shore then swarm the Greeks, &amp; thick on heaps they press
Some hope that by her death they shall their ships delay release.
Some other •oy their enmies stock thus beaten down to bee:
A great part of the people, both the slaughter hate, and see.
The Troyans eke no •esse frequent their own calamities
And all afraid, beheld the last of all their miseries.
When fi•st proceeded torches bright as guise of wedlock is.
And author thereof led the way the Lady Tindaris.
Such wedlock •ray the Troyans then, God send Hermiona
And would God to her husband so▪ restoard were Helena.
Fear mas• each part, but Polixe•no her bashful look down cast:
And more then erst her glittering eyes and beauty shyn'd at last.
As sweetest seems then Phoebus light, when down his beams do sway,
When stars again with night at hand oppressed the doubtful day.
Astonnted much the people were, and all they her commend,
And now much more then ever erst, they praised her at her end.
Some with her beauty moved were, some with her tender years:
Some to behold the turns of chance, and how each thing thus wears
But most them moves her valiant mind, and lofty stomach hie,
So strong, so stout, so ready of hart and well prepared to dye.
Thus pass they forth an• bold before King Pirrhus goes the maid,
They pity her, they marvel her, their hearts were all afraid.
As soon as then the hard hill top (where die she should) they trod,
And hie upon his fathers tomb the youthful Pyrrhus stood.
The manly maid she never shronke one foot, nor backward drew,
But boldly turns to meet the stroke, with sloute unchanged hew,
Her courage moves eche one, and lo a strange thing monstrous like.
That Pyrbus even himself stood still, or dread, and dur•st not strike.
But as he had, his glittering sword in her to hills up done,
The purple blood, at mortal wound, then gushing ou• 〈◊〉 spoon.
No yet her courage her forsook, when dieng in that ••and,
She fell as the'rth should her revenge with lieful rage to groūd.
Each people wept the Troyans first with privy fearful cry,
The Grectans eake, each one bewayld her death apparently.
This order had the sacrifice, her blood the tomb up drunk,
No drop remaynth aboue the ground, but down forthwith it sonke.
Now go, now go ye Greeks, and now repair ye safely home.
With careless ships and hoisted sails now cut the salt sea some.
The Child and Virgin both be slain, your battles finished are.
Alas where shall I end my age? or whether bear my care?
Shall I my daughter, or my nephew, or my husband moan?
My country else, or all at once? or else my self alone?
My wish is death that children both and virgins fiercely takes
Where ever cruel death doth hast to strike, it me forsakes,
Amid the enmies weapons all, amid both sword and fire,
All night sought for, thou fleest from me, that do thee most desire.
Not flame of fire, not fall of tower, not cruel enmies hand
Hath rid my life, how near (alas) could death to Priam stand?
Now captives all with swift recourse repair ye to the says,
Now spread the ships their sails abroad, &amp; forth they seek their ways.

CAre sore did grype Medeas heart to see
Her Iason, whom she tendered as her life,
And rescued had from plunge of perils free,
Renouncing her, to take another wife.
Love spent in vain breeds hate &amp; malice rife
Enkindling coals, whose heate and greedy flame
(Save streams of blood,) nought else can quench the same.
Medea mad in troubled mind doth muse,
On vengeance fell, to quit her grievous wrong.
Rough plagues at length entendeth she to use:
Ill venomous things she charms, with charming song
Seeks out a Bane made of their poison strong,
In Traitorous gifts a Robe, and chain of Gold,
Nicely she doth the hidden poison fold.
Sent are the Gifts to Creuse and her Sire,
They taking them that brought their dole to pass,
Unwary are burnt by means of charmed fire,
Due vengeance yet for Iason greater was,
Life first on child by Mothers hand (alas)
Expired hath, which though it him aggryse,
Yet his other child she slays before his eyes.
O Gods whose grace doth guide their ghosts
that joy in wedlock pure,
O Iuno thou Lucina hight,
on whom the chary cure
Allotted is of those, that groan
in painful chyldhed bands,
O Pallas by whose heavenly art,
Sir Typhis cunning hands
Have learned to bridle with his helm his newly framed boat,
Wherewith the force of fighting fluds hee breaking rides a float.
O God whose forked Mace doth storms in rigour rough appease,
And cause the ruffling surges couch amid the romping Seas:
O Titan who upon the swift and werling Hemisphaer
Divides the cheerful day and night by eagle turns t'appere,
O threefold shapen Hecate that send forth thy light,
Unto thy silent Sacrifice that offered is by night,
By whom my Iason swear to me O heavenly powers all,
And ye on whom Medea may with safer conscience call,
O Dungeon dark, most dreadful den of everlasting night,
O dampned Ghosts: O kingdom set against the Gods aright:
O Lord of sad and lowering lakes, O Lady dire of Hell,
(Whom though that Pluto stale by force yet did his troth excel
The ficle faith of Iasons love, that hee to me doth beave,)
With cursed throat I conjure you, O grisly Ghosts appear.
Come out, come out, ye hellish hags, feuenge this deed so dire,
Bring in your scrauing pours a burning brand of deadly fire.
Rise up ye hiddeous devilish Fiends, as dreadful as ye wear,
When unto me in wedlock state ye did sometime appear.
Work ye, work ye, the doleful death of this new wedded Wife.
And martyr ye this Father in law: deprive of breath and life
King Croons ruthful family: in plunge of passing payne
Torment ye me, that on my spoule doe wish this woe to reign:
Preserve my Iasons life, but yet let him be baited out
A myching, roging, rūnagate, in foreign towns about.
To pass from door to door, with care to beg his needy bread,
Not knowing in what harbring place to couch his cursed head:
A banished wretch, disdained of all, and still in fear of life,
Then let him wish ten thousand times for me again his Wife:
This famous gest whom every man will entertain and have,
Let him be driuē at strangers gates the table ctūmes to crave.
And that my bitter bannings may with mischief most abound,
God grant in gulf of like distress his children may be drounde,
To sink in sorrows storms, that doe their mother overflow:
Now, now, I have, I have the full revenge of all my woe,
I have dispatcht: my piteous plaint and words in vain I lose:
What shall not I with violence get up against my foes?
And wring out of their wrested hands the wedding torch so bright?
Shall I not force the firmament to lose his shrinking light?
What doth my Graundsirs Phoebus face this heavy hap behold?
And standing gasyng at this gear yet westward is he told,
On glistering chariot hoisted high, and keeps his beaten Race,
Amid the crystal coloured sky, why turns hee not his Face,
Retiring fast into the East back up the day to twyne?
O Father Phoebe to me, to me, thy Chariot reins resign,
That I advanced up, about the marble skies may ride,
Bequearh thy bridle unto me, and give me grace to guide
Thy yoked prancing team, with yerking lash of burning whip,
That with thy fervent fyry beams on purple poale doe skip.
Let Corynth country burnt to dust by force of flame and fire
Give place, that both the jumbled seas may join: whom to retire
It doth compel, and dassheth of from bank on either side,
Least meet in one their channels might, whose streams hee doth divide,
No way to work their deadly woe I have but this at hand,
That to the wedding I should bear a ruthsull bridal brand,
Anoying Croons careless Court: when finished I have
Such solemn service, as that right of sacrifice doth crave,
Then at the Aulters of the Gods my children shall be slain,
With crimson coloured blood of Babes their Aulters will I stain.
Through Liners, Lungs, the Lights &amp; Heart, through every gut, &amp; gal,
For vengeance break away perforce, and spare no blood at all:
If any lusty life as yet within thy soul doe rest,
It ought of ancient courage still doe dwell within my breast,
Exit all foolish Female fear, and pity from thy mind,
And as th'untamed Tigers use to rage and rave unkind,
That haunt the croaking combrous Caves, and clumpred frozen cliues,
And craggy Rocks of Caucasus, whose bitter cold deprives
The soil of all Inhabitours, permit to lodge and rest,
Such salvage brutish tyranny within thy brazen breast.
What ever hurly burly wrought doth Phases understand,
What mighty monstrous bloody feat I wrought by Sea or Land:
The like in Corynth shall be seen in most outrageous guife,
Most hyddious, hateful, horrible, to hear, or see with eyes,
Most devilish, desperate, dreadful deed, yet never known before,
Whose rage shall force heaven, earth, and hell to quake and tremble sore,
My burning breast that rolls in wrath, and doth in rancour boyle,
Sore thrysteth after blood, and wounds with slaughter, death, &amp; spoil,
By renting racked limbs from limbs to drive them down to grave:
Tush, these be but as Fleabytings, that mentioned I have:
As weighty things as these I did in greener girlish age,
Now sorrows smart doth rub the gall and frets with sharper rage.
But sith my womb hath yielded fruit, it doth me well behove,
The strength and parlous puissance of weightier ills to prous.
Be ready wrath, with all thy might that fury kindle may,
Thy foes to their destruction bee ready to assay:
Of thy divorcement let the Price to match, and counterpoise
The proud &amp; precious princely pomp of these new wedding days.
How wilt thou from thy spouse depart? as him thou followed hast
In blood to bath thy bloody hands and traytrous lives to wast.
Break of in time these long delays, abandon now again,
This lewd alliance, got by guilt, with greater guilt refrain,
WHo hath not wist that windy words be vain,
And that in talk of trust is not the ground,
Here in a mirror may hee see it plain,
Medea so by proof the same hath found.
Who being blind by blinded Venus Boy,
Her bleared Eyes could not behold her bliss:
Nor spy the present poison of her Joy,
While in the grass the Serpent lurked is,
The shaft that flew from Cupids golden bow,
With feathers so hath dimd her daseld Eyes,
That cannot see to shun the way of woe:
The ranckling head in dented heart that lies,
So dulls the same, that can not understand
The cause that brought false Iason out of Greece,
To come unto her fathers fertile Land,
Is not her love, but love of golden Fleece.
Yet was his speech so pleasant and so mild,
His tongue so filed, his promises so fair,
Sweet was the fowlers Song that hath beguiled
The seely bird, brought to the limed snare.
Faith, in his Face, trust shined in his Eyes,
The blushing brow plain meaning seemed to show.
In double heart black treason hidden lies,
Dissembling thoughts that weave the web of woe.
The honeyed Lips, the tongue in sugar dept
Doe sweet the poison rank within the breast,
In subtle show of painted sheath is kept,
The rusty knife of treason deemed least:
Life seems the bait to sight that lies brim,
Death is the hook that vnderlies the same,
The Candle blase delights with burning trim,
The Fly, till she bee burned in the flame.
Who in such shows least deemed any ills.
The hungry fyshe fears not the bait to Brooke,
Till up the lyne doe pluck him by the gills,
And fast in throat hee feels the deadly hook.
Woe Iason, woe to thee most wretched man,
Or rather wretch Medea woe to thee,
Woe to the one that thus dissemble can,
Woe to the other that trained so might bee.
Thoughtst thou Medea his eyes to bee the glass,
Wherein thou might the Face of thoughts behold?
That in his breast with words so covered was,
As cankered brass with gloss of yellow gold?
Did thou suppose that nature (more then kind)
Had placed his heart his lying lips between,
His looks to be the mirror of his mind?
Faith in fair Face hath seldom yet ben seen.
Who listened to the flattering Mermaids note,
Must needs commit his tyred eyes to sleep,
Yielding to her the taking of his boat,
That means unwary to drown him in the deep.
What boots thee Medea to betray
The golden Fleece, to fawning Isasons hand,
From Dragons teeth him safely to convey,
And fyry Bulls the warders of the land?
Why for his sake from father hast thou fled,
And thrust thy self out from thy native soil?
Thy brothers blood what ailed thee to shed,
With Iason thus to travel and to toil?
Behold the mead of this thy good desert,
The recompense that hee to thee doth give.
For pleasure, payne, for joy, most eager smart,
With clogging cares in banishment to live.
Thou, and thy Babes, are like to beg and starve.
In Nation strange, (O miserable life)
While Iason from his promises doe swerve,
And takes delight in his new wedded Wife,
O Ground vngrate; that when the husband man
Hath tilled it, to recompense his toil
No Corn, but Weeds, and Thistles render can,
To sting his hands, that Fruit seeks of his Soil.
Such venom grows of pleasant coloured flower:
Lo, Princes lo, what deadly poison sup
Of Bane, erst sweet, now turned into sower,
Medea drank out of a golden Cup,
AYe me, (alas) I am undone,
For at the Bridal cheer,
The warble note of wedding songe
resounded in mine ear.
Yet for all this scant I my self,
yet scant believe I can,
That Iason would play such a prank,
as most vnthāckfull man,
Both of my Country, and my Sire, and kingdom me to spoil,
And yet forsake me wretch forlorn, to stray in foreign soil.
O hath he such a stony heart, that doth no more esteem,
The great good turns, and benefits that I employed on him?
Who knows, that I have lewdly used enchantments for his sake,
The rigour rough, and stormy rage, of swelling Seas to slake.
The grunting fiery foaming Bulls, whose smoking guts were stuffed,
With smoltring fumes, that frō their Jaws, &amp; nostrils out they puffed.
I stopped their gnashīg moūching mouths, I quēcht their burning breath,
And vapors hot of stewing paunch, that else had wrought his death,
Or feeds hee thus his fancy, fond, to think my skill of charm,
Abated is, and that I have no power to doe him harm?
Brstract of wits, with wavering mind perplexed on every part,
I tossed, and turmoiled am, with wayward crazy hart.
Now this, now that, and neither now, but now another way,
By divers means I toil, that so my wrong revenge I may,
I would the wretch a brother had: but what? he hath a Wife.
Go cut her throat, with ghastly wounds bereave her of her life.
On her isle work my deadly spite: her, her alone I crave,
To quit such bitter sousing storms, as I sustained have.
If any grand no•orious guilt in all Pelasga Land
Be put in practise, yet unknown unto thy harming hand,
Thereof to get experience the time doth now begin:
Thy former feats doe bid thee take good hope, to thryue herein:
Let all thy guilts with thronging thick assemble thee to aid,
The golden Fleece (the chief Novel) of Colchis Isle betrayed.
My tender Brother eke, that with my Syer did me pursue,
Whom with his secret parts cut of, I wicked Virgin slew,
Whose shredded and dismembered corps, with sword in gobbits hewd,
(A woeful Coarse to the Fathers heart) on Pontus ground I strewd.
How hory headded Polios his withered age to shift
To greener years, for longer life: his daughters by my drift
His members all and mangled flesh with liquor scalding hot
Ysodden, and parboiled have, in seething brazen pot.
How oft in heinous blood have these my cruel hands been dyed?
And never any guilt as yet by wrath inflamed I tried.
But now the parlous poysning wound of Cupids piercing dart,
Doth boyle and rage within my breast, it ranckles at my hart.
But how could Iason it redress, whom fortunes froward will
Hath yield unto another hand, at lust to save or spill?
O rage of rusty cankered mind, this sclaundrous talk amend,
If Fortunes grace will grant it thus, let him unto his end
Live still my Iason as he was: but if not Iason mine,
Yet caitiff suffer Iason live, though Iason none of thine:
Who being mindful still of vs some favour let him show,
For these good turns that our good will could erst on him bestow:
King Croon is in all the fault, and only worthy blame,
Who puffed up with Sceptre proud, unable for to frame
His tickle mind to modesty, made breach twixt vs again,
Whom Hymens bands, and link of love had made but one of twain,
By whom eke from her tender brats the mother (wretch) is drawn,
Hee breaks the vow, that gaged is with such a precious pawn.
Seek after such a villains blood, in daunting pangs of smart
Let him alone bee surely dowst, such is his due desert,
A dunghill hept of Cinders burnt his Palace make I shall,
That Malea where in winding strights, the lingering ships due crall,
Shall case on smolthring turrets tops turmoylde in crackling flame.
For godsake (Madame) I you pray your tongue to silence frame.
Eke hyde your privy languishing and grief in secret vain:
Who with a modest mind abides the Spurs of pricking payne,
And suffered sorrows patiently, may it repay again.
Who bears a privy grudge in breast, and keeps his malice close,
When least suspection is thereof, may most annoy his Foes.
He leases opportunity who vengeance doth require,
That shows by open sparks the flame the heate of kindled fire.
Small is the grype of grief that can to reasons lore obey,
And sneking down with stealing steps can slyly slip away.
But they that thoroughly soused are with showers of greater payne,
Can not digest such corsyes sharpe, but cast it up agaye:
Fain would I give them trouncing girds.
Good daughter dear assuage
Th'unbrydled sway, and boiling heate of this thy giddy rage:
Scant moist thou purchase quietness, although thou hold thy tongue.
The valiant heart dame Fortune yet durst never harm with wrōg,
But dreading dastards down she drives.
It any courage dure,
And harbred be in noble breast, now put the same in ur.
The show of sturdy valiant heart, at any time doth shyne.
No hope doth in adversity thy way to scope assign.
Hee that hath none affiance left, nor any hope at all.
Yet let him not mistrust the luck of ought that may befall.
Thy Country clean hath cast thee of, to let thee sink or swim,
As for thy husband Iason bee, there is no trust in him:
Of all the wealth, and worldly muck wherewith thou did abound:
No portion remains at all, whereby some help is found.
Medea yet is left, (to much) and here thou may espy
The Seas to succour vs in flight, and lands aloof that lie:
Yea prone tools, with burning brands we have to work them woe,
And Gods that with the thunder dint shall ouerquell our foe:
Who wears y• goldēcrested crown him dred with awe ye should.
My Father was a King, yet I betrayed his Fleece of gould.
Can not the deadly violence of weapons make thee fear?
No, though such grisly Lads they were, as meanwhile did appear,
That bred of gargell Dragous teeth in hollow gaping ground,
When mutually in bloody fight eche other did confound.
Thē wilt thou cast thy self to death.
Would God ye I were dead.
Fly, fly to save thy life.
Woe worth the time that once I fled.
What O Medea.
Why shall I fly?
A mother dear art thou,
Fly therefore for thy childrens sake.
Ye see by whom, and how,
A wretched Mother I am made.
Thy life by flight to save
Dost thou mistrust?
Nay, fly I will, but vengeance first isle have.
Then some shall thee at heals pursue, to wreck the same again.
Perhap isle make his cōming short.
Be still, and now refrain
O despret dame thy thundering threats, and slake your raging ire.
Apply, and frame thy froward will as time and tides require.
Full well may fortunes welting wheel to begging bring my state,
As for my worthy courage, that she, never shall abate.
Who bouncing at the Gates, doth cause the creaking doors to Jar?
It is the wretch (Croon his self,) whom princely power far
Hath lift aloft, with lordly look, puffed up with pouncing pride,
That hee may Corinth country, with the sway of Sceptre guide.
NEdea that ungracious Imp, king Aetas wicked child,
Yet hath not frō our careful realm her lingering foot exiled.
Some naughty drift she goes about, her knacks of old we know
Her juggling arts, her harming hāds are known well long ago.
From whō will she withhold her harm? whom will this cruel beast
Permit to live, from peril free, in quietness and rest?
Clean to cut of this parlous plague it was our purpose bent,
But Iason by entreating hard, did cause vs to relent.
At his request we granted have, her life she shall enjoy,
Let her acquit our country free from fear of all annoy:
Yea safely let her pack her hence, in eager giddy fit,
With lumpish lowering look she comes in talk with me to knit:
Sirs keep her of and set her hence, least vs she touch perhap,
And drive her back from cōming nigh command her keep her clap.
And let her learn at length, how that her self submit she may,
The puissant payse and majesty of Princes to obey.
Run, hie thee quickly, trudge apace, have hence out of my sight
This horrible, most odious queen, this monstrous wicked wight.
My sovereign liege, what greater crime have I or less offence
Commit against thy majesty, to be ex•led hence?
Alas, the guiltless woman doth demand a reason why:
If thou be Judge indifferent, ordained my cause to try,
Consider then my doubtful case, and way the ground of it:
If thou be king, cōmaund a Judge for such a matter fit.
The princes power thou shalt obey, b'it either right or wrong.
The prosperous pride of wronging crowns cannot endeavour long.
Avaunt, &amp; yell out thy complaints at Colchis, get thee hence.
Full gladly will I get me home, if he that brought me thence,
Vouchsafe to bear me back again.
Alas, to late arise
Entreating words, when as decree is taken otherwise.
He that not hearing either part, pronounces his decree,
Unrighteous man accounted is, though right his sentence bee.
While Pclias trusted to thy talk, from life to death hee fell.
Go to, begin, we give you leave your goodly tale to tell.
That type of Regal majesty, that erst by Fortunes hand,
Advanced to I did attain, hath taught me understand,
How hard a thing it is of wrath the rigour to assuage,
When burning heate of boiling breast in flames begins to rage.
Eke for th'aduan̄cement of their power more to display in sight
Their kingly courage bolstred out with majesty of might.
They deem it doth import asway, and hath a greater grace,
Whom stately sceptre caused to climbs aloft to prouder place.
To persevere with fancy fond, in that to reasons spite,
Whose greedy choice attainted first his mind with vain delight.
For though in pireous plight I lye, thrown down to great decay,
With heavy hap, and ruthful chance, to miserable stay,
Thus hunted out from place to place, forsook and left alone,
A widow while my husband live, with cause to whale and moan,
Perplexed in maze of misery, with cloying cares so rife,
Yet meanwhile I in golden trone have led in happy life.
By high and noble parentage my bright renown doth shyne.
From Phoebus take my Grandsire great derived is my ligue.
Where silver streamed Phases flood his washing waives doth shed,
Or with contrary croaking ways his bathing channel spread,
What ever wandering coast stretched out is •left aloof behind,
From whence the roaming Scithyan Sea his channel forth doth find,
Where as Maeotis fenny plashy with pure fresh water sprynges,
Doth season sweet the briny Sea, that tide in thither brings.
Eke all the coasts enuyroued and kept within the banks
Of Thermodon, where warlike troupes, &amp; armed widows ranks,
With painted bucklers on their arms hold all the land in fear,
With rigour rough of threatening sword, with force of denting spear.
So far to all these wandering coasts and countries round about,
My Fathers ample regiment at large is stretched out.
I being thus of noble Race, and in an happy plight,
With glorious gloss of princely pomp in honour shining bright,
Then peerless Pears my Spousal bed did seek and sue to have,
But those to be their loving Feeres, now other Ladies crave:
Rash, tickle, peevish, indiscreet, and wavering Fortunes wheel,
Hath cast me out, the crushing cares of banishment to feel.
In Sceptre proud and haughty Crown fix thine affiance fast.
Sith vpsidowne with welkin wheel, whole mounts of wealth is cast.
This Princes doe possess, that should their royalty display,
Whose fame shall never razed be, with storm of lowering day,
To succour those whom misery in pit of pains doth souse,
To shield and harbour suppliants in roof of loyal house.
This only brought I from my Realm, the precious golden Fleece,
That Jewel chief, and eke the flower of Chivalry in Greece,
The sturdy prop, the Rampter strong the bulwark of your wealth,
And Hercules the boisterous Imp of Jove I kept in health.
It was by means of my good will that Orpheus did escape,
Whose harmony the lifeless Rocks with such delight did rape,
That forced even the clottred lumps with hobbling pricked to prance,
And eke the iocond nodding woods with footing fine to dance.
And that these heavenly twins Castor, and Pollux did not by,
My dew desert is doubled twice, sith them preserved I.
Of Bores blustering out with puffed Cheeks, his blasting Breath,
His winged Sons I kept alive both Calais, and Zeath.
And Linceus that with piercing beams, and sharper sight of Eye,
Could Navies on the farther bank of Sicill shore espy.
And all the Minions that did come the golden Fleece to win.
As for the Prince of Princes all, I will not bring him in.
With silence Iason will I pass, for whom though him I save,
Yet is not Greece in debt to me, no recompense I crave.
To no man him I doe impute, the rest I brought again
For your ••aisle, that you thereby some profit might attain.
But only on my Iason dear, him for my own loves sake
I kept in store, that hee of me his wedded Wife should make.
None other fault (God wot) ye have to charge me with but this,
That Ergo Ship by means of me returned safely is.
If I a shamefaced maid had not with Cupids bait been caught,
If more my Fathers health to have then Iasons I had sought,
Pelasga land had been v•done, and fine to great decay,
Th• lusty valiant Capitaynes, had clean been cast away:
And jolly Iason first of all this now thy son in law,
The Bulls had rent his swalowed limbs in fiery chomping jaw.
Let Fortune fight against my case as list her eluish will,
Yet never shall it grieve my heart, repent my deed I nill,
That I should for so many kings their reling honour save,
The guerdon due that I for this my crime commit must have,
It lies Crecon in thy hand, if thus it likes thee,
Condemn my guilty ghost lo death, but render first to me,
My fault that forced me offend, then Croon grant I this,
Receiving Iason (cause of crime) I guilty did amiss.
Thou know that I was such an one when couring low I lay,
Before thy feet in humble wise and did entreating pray,
Thy gracious goodness me to grant some succour at thy hand.
For me a wretch and wretched Babes I ask within this land
Some cottage base, in outcast hole, some couching corner vile,
If from the town thou drive vs out to wander in exile,
The some by place aloof within this realm let vs obtar•e.
How I am none that tyrant like with churlish Sceptre reign,
Nor proudly or disdainfully, with haughty courage hie,
With vaūting foot doe stamp them down that vndertroden lye,
And daunted are in careful bale, this plainly doth disclose,
In that to me of late I such a son in law have chose,
Who was a wandering pilgrim poor, with sore afflictions freight,
Dismayed with terror of his foe, that lay for him in wayght.
Because Acastus having got the crown of Thessail land,
Requires in thy guilty blood to bath his wreackfull hand.
He doth bewail that good old man his feeble father slain,
Whom weight of years with bowing back to stoup allow constrain
The godly minded sisters, all yblinde with misty vale
And cloking colour of thy craft durst ventrusly assail.
That mount of mischief marvelous, to mangle heaw, and cut▪
Their Fathers dere anointed limbs in boiling Cauldron put.
But for thy open guiltiness if thou can purge the same,
Straight Iason can discharge him self from blot of guilty blame.
His gentle hands were never stained with gore of any blood.
Aloof from your conspiracy refraining far hee stood.
His harmless hands put not in ur with goary tools to mell.
But thou that set on fire first these mighty mischiefs fell,
Whom shameless women's wily brain and manly stomach stout
Doe set a God, for to attempt to bring all else about.
And no regard at all thou hast, how sounding trump of fame
With ringing blast of good or ill doe blow abroad thy name:
Get out and cleanse my filed realm, away together bear
Thine herbs un•eld of sorcery, my Lieges rid fro fear.
Transport thee to some other land, whereas thou may at ease
With odious noise of devilish charm, the troubled Gods disease.
If needs thou will have me avoid my ship to me testore,
Or else my mate with whom I first arrived on this shore:
Why dost thou bid that by my sell•e I only should be gone?
I came not heather at first without my company alone.
If this do thee aggryese, that brunt of wars thou shalt sustain,
Command vs both the cause thereof to shun thy realm again:
Sith both are guilty of one art, why dost thou part vs twain?
For Iasons sake not for mine own, poor Polios was slain.
Annex unto my traytrous flight the conquered booty brave,
My hoary headded natural sier, whom I forsaken have,
With brothers bloody flesh that mangled was with carving knife,
Or ought of Iasons forged lies he gabbes unto his wife.
These dreary deeds are none of mine, so oft as I offend,
Not for mine own cōmodity, to come thereby in the end.
Time is expierd, by which thou ought to have been gone away,
With keeping such a chat, why dost thou make so long delay?
Yet of thy bounty ere I go, this one boon will I crave.
Although the mother banished, so sore offended have,
Let not the vengeance of my fault through wrathful deadly hate,
Mine innocent and guiltless Babes torment in wretched state.
Away: with loving friendly grype thy children I embrace,
And as a father natural take pity on their case.
Even for the prosperous good increase of fertile spousal bed,
Of Glauce bright thy Daughter dear, whom Iason late hath wed.
And by the hope of fruitful seed, whose flower in time shall bloom.
By th'onour of thy glistering crown, ythralde to fortunes doom,
Which she so full of chop and change, with tickle turning wheel
Whirls up and down, in staggring state makes to and fro to reel.
I thee beseech, sith to exile I am departing now
O Croon but a little pause for mercy me allow,
While of my mourning br•ts with kiss, my last farewell I take.
While gasp of failing breath perhap my shivering limbs forsake.
With craft intending some deceit thou craves this delay.
What falshode for so little time be cause of terror may?
No tot of time is short enough displeasure to prevent.
Can not one io• to weeping Eyes, and trilling tears be lent?
Although against thy ernest suite unlucky dread do strive,
One day to settle thee away, content I am to give.
This is to much, and of the same somewhat abridge ye may.
Make speed apace if from our land thou get thee not away,
Ere Phoebus horse with golden gleede their streaming beams doe shed,
Of dawning lamp, thou art condemned to leese thy wretched head.
The holy day, and bridal both doe call me hence away:
And wills me at the sacred aare of Hymeneus to pray.
Lavish of life and dreadlesse was the wight,
Attempting first in slender tottring Barge
With sliuing Ore theslyced wave to smite,
And durst commit the dainty tender charge
Of hazered life to inconstant course of wind,
That turns with change of chances evermore,
To view the land forsook aloof behind,
And shoouing forth the Ship fro safer shore,
And glancing through the fomy Channel deep
On sunder cut with slender Stem the wave,
Twixt hope of life, and dread of death to sweep,
In narrow gut him self to spill or save:
Experience yet of Planets no man had,
They needed not the wandering course to know
Of Stars, (wherewith the painted sky is clad,)
Not Pleiads, (which return of sailing show)
Nor Hyads (that with showrs the Seas doe beat)
No nor the sterne Amaltheas horned head
(Who gave the lips of sucking Jove the Teat)
Were wont to put the blundering ships in dread.
They feared not the northern Isy wayne,
Which lazy old boots wields behind,
And twynes about, no name yet could they fain
For Bores rough, nor smother western wind.
Yet Typhys bold on open seas durst show
His hoisted sails, and for the winds decree
New laws: as now full gale aloof to blow,
Now tackle turride to take side wind alee,
Now up to farle the crossayle on the mast,
There safe to hang, the topsail now to spread,
Now missel sail, and drabler out to cast,
When dagling hanges his shottring tackle red
While stearsman stir, and busy never blin,
With pyth to pull all sails eke to display,
With tooth and nail all foree of wind to wyn,
To shear the seas, and quick to scud away.
The golden world our fathers have possessed,
Where banished fraud durst never come in place,
All were content to live at home in rest,
With horye head, gray beard, and surrowed face.
Which tract of time within his country brought.
Rich having little, for more they did not toil,
No vent for wares, nor Traficque far they sought,
No wealth that sprang beyond their native soil,
The Thessail ship together now hath set,
The Thessail ship together now hath set,
The World that well with Seas dissevered lay,
It bids the fl•uds with Oars to be bet,
And streams unknown with shipwreck vs to fray
That wicked Keel was lost by ruthful wrack
Ytossed through such perils passing great,
Where Cyan• Rocks began roar as thunder crack,
Whose bouncing bolt the shaken soil doth beat.
The sousing Surges dasshed every star,
The pesterd seas the clouds aloft berayde,
This scuffling did bold TYPHIS mind deter,
His helm did slip from trembling hand dismayed.
The ORPHEVS with his drowping Harp was mum
Dead in her dumps the flaunting ARGOS glee,
All hushed in rest with silence waxed dum,
What hardy heart astound here would not bee?
To see at once eche yawning mouth to gape,
Of Syllas gulf compact in wallowing paunch,
Of dogs, who doth not loath her mongrel shape,
Her visage, breast, and hyddeous ugly haunch:
Whom irked not the scold with barking still?
To here the Mermaids dire who doth not quail,
That lure the Ears with pleasant singing shrill
Of such as on Ausonius Sea doe sail:
When ORPHEVS on his t•inkling Harp did play,
That erst the Muse Callio• gave to him
Almost those Nymphs that wonted was to stay
The shyps, he caused fast following him to swim.
How dearly was that wicked journey bought?
MEDEA accursed, and eke the golden F•eece,
That greater harm then storm of seas hath wrought
Rewarded well that voyage first of Greece.
Now seas controlled doe suffer passage free,
The Ergo proud erected by the hand
Of PALLA• first, doth not complain that she,
Conveyed hath back, the kings unto their land
Eche whirry boat now scuddes about the deep,
All stints and wars are taken clean away,
The Cities frame new walls themselves to keep,
The open world lets nought rest where it lay:
The Hoyes of End Arexis lukewarm leake,
The Perseans stout in Rhine and Albis stream
Doth bath their Barks, time shall in fine out break
When Ocean wave shall open every Realm.
The wandering World at will shall open lye.
And TYPHIS will some new found Land survey
Some trailers shall the Countries far escrye,
Beyond small Thule, known furthest at this day.
WHy trotst thou fisking in and out
so rash from place to place?
Stand styll, and of thine eager wrath
suppress the ruthful race,
The rigour rough of romping rage
from burning breast out cast,
As Bacchus bedlam priests that of
his spryte have felt the blast,
Run frantic, hoyting up and down
with scitish wayward wits,
Not knowing any place of rest, so pricked with froward fits,
On cloudy top of Pindus Mount all hyd with Snow so chyll:
Or else upon the lofty riddge of branched Nice hill:
Thus starting still with frounced mind she walters to and fro,
The signs pronouncing proof of pangs her frenzy Face doth show
With glowing cheeks, and blood red Face with short &amp; gasping breath,
She fetches deep ascending sighs from sobbing heart beneath,
Now blithe she smiles, each rūbled thought in pondering brain she beats,
Now stands she in a mammering, now mischief sore she threats.
With chafing fume she burns in wrath, and now she doth cōplayne,
With blubbering tears a fresh believe she weeps &amp; wails again.
Where will this lumpish load of cares with headlong sway alight?
On whom entendeth she to work the threats of her despite?
Where will this huge tempestuous surge slake down it self again?
Kindled fury new in breast begins to boyle a mayne.
She secretly entendes no mischief small nor mean of s•se
To pass her self in wickedness her busy brains devise.
The token old of pinching ire full well ere this know I:
Some heinous, huge, outrageous great, and dreadful storm is ny:
Her fiery, scowling, steaming Eyes, her hanging Groin I see,
Her powling, puffed, frowning Face, that signs of fretting bee.
O mighty Jove be guile my fear.
O wretch if thou desire,
What measure ought to payse thy wrath then learn by Cupids fire,
To hate as sore as thou did love, shall I not them annoy
That doe unite in spousal bed, their wanton lust t'enioy?
Shall Phoebus fiery footed horse go lodge in western wave
The drowping day, that late I did with humble crouching crave,
And with such ernest busy suite so hardly granted was?
Shall it depart ere I can bring my devilish dryst to pass?
While hovering heaven doth counterpoised hang with eagle space,
Amid the marble Hemispheres, while round with stinted race,
The gorgeous Sky aboue the Earth doth spinning roll about,
While that the number of the sands, lies hid unsearched out,
While dawning day doth keep his course with Phoebus blase so bright,
While twinkling stars in golden trains doe guard the slūbry night,
While Isle under propping poale with whirling swyng so swift,
The shining Bears vnbathde about the frozen Sky doe lift,
While flushing floods the frothy streams to rustling Seas doe send,
To gird them gript with plonging pangs my rage shall never end.
With greater heate it shall reboyle, like as the brutish beast,
Whose tyranny most horrible, exceeds all the rest,
What greedy gaping whirl poole wide what parlous gulf vnmilde,
What Sylla couched in roaring Rocks, or what Charybdes wild,
(That Sicill, and Ionium Sea by frothy waives doth sup)
What Aetna bolking st•fling flames, and dusky vapours up,
(Whose heavy payse with stewing heate doth smoldring crush beneath
Encelades, that fiery flakes from choked throat doth breath)
Can with such dreadful menaces in sweating fury fry?
No river swift no troubled surge of stormy Sea so hye,
Nor sturdy seas (whom ruffling winds with raging force to roar)
Nor puissant flash of fire, whose might by boisterous blast is more,
May bide my angers violence: my fury shall it foil:
His court Isle over hourle, and lay it level with the soil.
My Iasons heart did quake for fear of Croon cruel king.
And least the king of Thessaly would war upon him bring.
But loyal love that hardens hearts makes no man be affright.
But beete, that he convict hath yield himself to Croons might.
Yet once hee might have visited, and come to me his wife,
To talk, and take his last farewell, if danger of his life
In doing this (hard hearted wretch most cruel) he should fear,
He being Croons son in law, for him it •efull were,
To have prorogued somewhat yet my heavy banishment,
To take my leave of children twain one only day is lent:
Yet doe I not complain, as though the time to short I thought,
As proof shall plain pronounce, to day, to day, it shall bee wrought,
The memory whereof no tract of time shall wipe away.
With malice bent against the Gods my wrath shall them assay:
And rifling every thing, both good, and bad, I will turmoil.
Madame thy mind that troubled is, and tossed with such abroyle
Of swarming ills▪ thy vexed breast now set at rest again,
The penish fond affections all of troubled mind refrain.
Then only can I be at rest, when every thing I see
Thrown headlong topste turuey down to ruthful end with me.
With me let all things clean decay: thy self if thou doe spill,
Thou m•first drive to destruction what else with thee thou will:
It in this folly stiff thou stand, behold what after clappes
Are to bee feared, none dare contrive for Princes training trips.
O Luckless lot of froward Fates, O cruel Fortunes hap,
Both whē she list to smite, or spare, in woe she doth vs wrap
A like, the salve y• God hath given so oft, to cure our grief,
More noyeth then the sore it self, and sends less relief:
If for her good deserts: o me, amendment I should make,
I hazard should my venturous life to leese it for her sake.
If I will shun my dismal day, and will not for her die,
Then want the love of loyalty, O wretched man must I.
No dastards dread my stomach stout can cause to droop &amp; shrink,
But mere remorse appaulleth me, when on my babes I think.
For why? when careful parents are once reft of life and breath,
Some after them their wretched seed are drawn to doleful death.
O Sacred righteousness (if thou enjoy thy worthy place
In perfect bliss of happy heaven) I call upon thy grace,
And thee for witness here allege, how for my childrens part
With pity pricked I have commit these things against my hart.
And so I think Medea her self the Mother rather had,
(Though frantically as now she •ares with rage of heart so mad
And doth abhor with painful yoke of combrous cares to toil)
Her spousal bed, then that her seed should take the plunging foil.
I did determine in my mind, to go her to entreat
With gentle words, &amp; pray her cease, in fervent wrath to fret.
And lo, on me when once she caste the beams of glancing Eye,
Full blithe she leaps, she tumpes for joy, in fi•s she gins to fry.
Deep deadly blackish hate she seems in outward brow to bear,
And wholly in her frowning face doth glutting grief appear.
I packing, packing, Iason am: this still to chop, and change
The fleeting soil of my abode, to me it is not strange.
The cause of my departure yet (to me is strange) and new.
I wonted was in following thee all places to eschew:
I will depart, and get me hence, to whom for helping hand
Intend thou to send vs forth, whom hence to fly the land
Thou dost compel with thine alies? shall I repair again▪
To Phases flood, to Colchis Isle, or to my fathers reign?
Or goary sweating fields, that with my brothers blood do reeke?
What harbring lands aloof dost thou command vs out to seek?
What seas appoint ye me to pass? shall I my journey drive,
Upon the parlous hateful jaws of Pontus to arrive,
By which I did sauf conduct home kings valiant armies great,
Where roaring rocks with thundering noise the flapping waives do beat
Or on the narrow wrackful shore, of Simplegades twain?
Or else to small Hiolcos town can I return again?
Or toil, the gladsome pleasant lands of Tempe to attain?
All places that I opened have unto thy passage free,
I shut them up against my self, now whether sendste thou me?
A banished wretch to banishment thou would have incline,
Yet to the place of her exile, thou can not her assign.
Yet for all that without delay I must depart and go:
And why? forsooth the king his son in law commands so.
Well: nothing will I stand against, with gripes of passing payne
Let me be scourged, of my deserts such is the gotten gain.
Let Croon in his princely ruff lay to his heavy hands,
To whip an whore in torments sharp, with iron gives, and bands
Let her be chaynd, in hideous hole of night for aye her locke:
Let her be cloyed with pestring payse of restless rolling rock.
Yet less than I deserved have, in all this shall I find:
O thou discourteous Gentleman, consider in thy mind
The flamy puffs, and fiery gasps of ghastly gaping bull,
And Aetas cattle rich with Fleece of gorgeous golden wool,
That went to graze amid so great and mighty fears in field,
Of uncontrolled Nation, whose soil doth armies yield.
Revoke to mind the deadly darts of sudden starting foe,
When ghastly warrior (Tellus brood) to ground again did go,
Through slaughter red of mutual lance, to this yet further pass,
The lurched Fleece of Phrixes Ram, that all thine errand was.
And vgsome Argos slumberlesse, whom fast I caused to keep
His weary watching winking eyes with unacquainted sleep.
My brother eke, whose fatal twist of feeble life I shred,
And guilt that wrought so many guiltes when as with thee I fled.
The daughters whom I set on work entrapped in wily train,
To slay their sire, that shall not rise to quickened life again.
And how to travel other realms, I set mine own at nought.
By that good hope which of thy seed conceived is in thought,
Eake by thy stable Mansion place, and mighty monsters, that
Down beaten for thy health, I caused before thy feet to squat,
And by these drudging hands of mine vnspared for thy sake,
For dread of dangers over past that caused thee to quake,
By heavens aboue, and seas below, that witness bearers bee,
To knitting of our marriage up, thy mercy veil to me.
Of all the heaps of treasure great so far of being fet,
Which Aetas savage Scythians did travel for to get,
From End, where Phoebus scorching blase doth dye the people black.
Of all this gold which in our dowers wee could not well compacke.
But trick and trym wee garnished our groves with gold so gay,
I banished wretch of all this stuff gat nought with me away,
Except my brothers slaughtered flesh, yet I employed the same
On thee: the cares of countries health, my honesty and shame.
My Father, and my brother both hath yielded place to thee,
This is the dowry that thou had my wedded spouse to bee.
To her whom thou dost abrogate restore her goods again▪
When Croon in malicious mood had thought thee to have slain,
Entreated with my tears, exile and life he gave to thee.
I took it for a punishment, but surely as I see
This banishment is now become a friendly good reward.
While thou hast time to go, be gone, for most seueare, and harde
The kings displeasure ever is.
thus would thou dodge me out?
Thy hated trull cast of thou dost, that please Creuse thou mought.
Dost thou Medea upbraid me with the breach unkind of love?
And slaughter vile, with treachery, whereto thou did me move.
When all is done what can thou say my guiltiness to stain?
Even whatsoever I have done.
Yet more this doth remain:
That thy ungracious wickedness of harm should me accuse.
Thine, thine, they are, they are all thine what ever I did use,
Who that of lewdness reapes the fruit, is grafter of the same.
Let every one with infamy thy wretched Spouse defame,
Yet doe thou only take her part, her only doe thou call
A just and undefiled wight, without offence at all.
If any man shall for thy sake polute his hand with ill,
To thee let him an innocent yet be accounted still,
The life is loathsome that doth work his shame who hath it chose.
The life whose choice doth work thy shame thou ought again to lose.
Let reason rule thy eager mind so vexed with crabbed ire,
And for thy tender childrens ease to bee at rest require.
I doe defy it, wholly I detest it, I forswear,
That brethren bred unto my barnes Creusas womb shall bear.
It will be trim, when as a Queen of majesty and might
Hath issue, kin unto the seed of thee a banish wight.
So cursed day shall never on my wretched children shine,
To mingle base borne bastards with the blood of noble Lygue.
Shall Phoebus stock (that bears the lamp of heaven in starry throne)
Be mashed with drudging Sisiphus that roules in hell the stone?
What meanest thou wretch, both thee &amp; me in banishment to yoke?
I pray then hence.
When humbly I my mind to Croon broke,
Hee gave an ear unto my suite.
What lies in my might
To doe for thee?
If no good turn, then doe thy worst despite.
On this side with his swerd in hand king Croon doth me •carre:
On other part with armed host Assist doth me deter.
Medea eke to coape with these, that more opal vs may:
Go to, to skirmish let vs fall, let Iason be the pray:
I yield whom sore adversities have tyerd with heavy sway.
Learn thou to dred thy luclesse lot that oft doth thee assay.
I evermore have ruled the swinge of fortunes wavering will.
Achastus is at hand, and nigh is Croon thee to spyll:
Take thou thy heals to scope them both, I doe not thee advise,
That thou against thy father in law in traytrous arms should rise.
Nor in Achast thy cousins blood thy wounding hands to gore,
The vows unto Medea made, doe trouble thee so sore.
While yet thou hast not spilt there blood, yet fly with me away.
When armies twain their banners of defiance shall display,
And marching forth in field to fight seek battle at my hand,
Who then for vs encounter shall their puissance to withstand?
If Croon and Achastus king encamp together shall.
Admit that these in one with them should join their powers all
My Countrymen of Colchis Isle, and AEtas lusty king,
Suppose the Scythians join with Greeks, to ground I will thē bring,
Clean put to foil.
The puissant power of haughty mace I fear.
Take heed, least more thou do affect the same, then for to clear,
Thy self of Croons servile yoke.
Least some suspicion grow,
Of this our tattling long here let vs make an end and go.
Now Jove hurl out thy flames &amp; force thy thundering bolts to fly,
With fiery drakes bright brandishing dispersed in burning sky:
Strain forth thy dreadful threatening arm, dispose in due array
The rossing dint of lightning flash, that wreck our quarrel may.
With rumbling crack of renting cloud cause all the world to quake,
And Ieuell not thy hovering hand to strike with fiery flake
Upon my poshed and crushed corpse, or Iasons Carcass slain:
For whether of vs thou smight to death his due reward shall gain,
Thy thumps of thwacking bolts on vs amiss they cannot light.
Fie, let thy mind on matters run that seem a modest wight.
And use to have more cheerful talk, if any thing thou crave,
Within my fathers house to ease thy flight, thou shalt it have.
Thou know my mind bath can, &amp; eke is wont, to doe no less,
Then to contemn the brittell wealth that Princes doe possess.
This, this shall be the only boon that at thy hand I crave,
As mates with me in banishment, my children let me have,
That resting on their sighing breasts my careful mourning head,
I may my crystal teary streams into their bosoms shed.
But as for thee, new gotten sons of wife new wed doe stay.
I grant that unto thy request I wish I might obey:
But nature me with pity pricks, that needs I must deny.
For though both Croon and Achast, in torments force me lye,
I could not yield unto their wills: on this my life doth rest:
In times of tears, this is the joy of dull afflicted breast
For better far I can abide the want of vital breath,
And succour of my limbs, or loose, the light of world by death.
What Jove unto his seely Babes is deeply graft in him?
This works well I have him tripped, lo now there lies brim.
An open place whereby receive a venue soon hee may.
Let me or I depart, unto my seely children say.
These lessons of my last adieu, and grant to me the space,
With tender grype of colling last their loving limbs to embrace:
This will be comfort to my heart: yet at the latter word
I ask no more but only that you should me this afoorde.
If eager anguish cause my tongue to cast out words unkind,
Let all thing fly, let nothing be engraved in your mind
But let remembrance otherwhyle of me to touch your thought,
Let other things be wiped away that bile of wrath hath wrought.
I have forgotten every whit God grant thou may of shake,
These surging qualms of frounced mind &amp; milder may it make:
For quietness doth work their ease that dented are with woe:
What is he silly slypt and gon? falls out the matter so?
O Iason dost thou sneak away, not having mind of me,
Nor of those former great good turns that I have done for thee?
With thee now am I clean forgot: but I will bring about
That from thy careful sighing mind shall not bee banished out:
Apply to bring this to effect, call home thy wits again,
And all thy wily fetches far, each artificial train.
This is the perfect fruit that may to thee of mischief spring,
To presuppose that mischief is not graft in any thing.
Scant have I opportunity for my pretensed guile,
Because wee are mistrusted sore: but try I will the while
To set upon them in such sort, as none can deem my sleyght:
March forth, now venture on, fall to, both what lies in thy might.
And also what doth pass thy power. O faithful nurse and mate
Of all my heavy heart breaking, and divers cursed fate.
Come help our simple mean device. Remaining yet I have
A robe of Pall the present that our heavenly Grandsire gave,
Chief monument of Cholchis Isle, which Phoebus did beslow
On Aetas for a pledge, that him his father he might know.
A precious fulgent gorget eake, that bravely glitters bright,
And with a seemly shining seam of golden thirds is dight,
Through wrought between the row of pirles doe stand in borders roūd,
Wherewith my golden crispen Locks is wonted to be croūd.
My little children they shall bear these presents to the Bride,
That first with slibber slabbar sosse of chauntments shall be tried.
Request the aid of Hecate in readiness prepare
The lamentable sacrifice, upon the bloody Aare.
Enforce the fierce catching hold upon the rafters hye
With crackling noise of flamy sparks rebound in azure sky.
NOffers force, nor rūbling rage of boistrus blustering wind,
No dart shot whirling in the skies, such terror to y• mind
Can drive, as when y• ireful wife doth boil in burning hate
D•priued of her spousal bed, and comfort of her mate,
Nor where the stormy southern wind with dank dabby face,
Of hoary winter sends out the gushing showers apace.
Where veighment Esters rambling stream comes weltering down a∣mayne,
Forbidding both the banks to meet, &amp; cannot oft contain
Him self within his channels scope, but further breaks his way,
Nor Rodanus whose rushing stream doth launch into the sea,
Or when amid the floured spring with hotter burning sun,
The winters snows dissolute with heate down to the rivers run:
The clottred top of Haemus hill to water thin doth turn,
Such desperate gogin flame is wrath that inwardly doth burn,
And modest rule regards not, nor brydeis can abide,
Nor dreading death, doth wish on dint of naked blade to slyde.
O Gods be gracious unto vs, for pardon we do crave,
That him who tamed the scuffling waives, vouchsafe ye would to save.
But Neptune yet the Lord of Seas with frowning face will lower,
That over his second Sceptre men to triumph have the power.
The boy that rashly durst attempt that great unwieldy charge
Of Phoebus everlasting Carte, and roving out at large,
Not bearing in his reckless breast his fathers warnings wise,
Was burned with the flames which hee did scatter in the Skies.
None knew the costly glimsing glades, where straggling Phaëton rode,
Pass not the path, where people safe in former time have trod.
O fondling, wilful, wanton boy, doe not dissolve the frame
Of heaven, sith Jove with sacred hand hath halowed the same.
Who rowed with valiant Oars tough, that were for Ergo made,
Hath powled naked Pelion mount of thycke compacted shade.
Who entered hath the fleeting rocks and searched out the toil
And tyring travels of the seas, and hath on salvage soil
Knit fast his stretched Cable rope, and going forth to land.
To cloyne away the foreign gold with greedy snatching hand.
Unto the seas (because that hee transgressed their laws divine)
By this unlucky end of his, he pays his forfeit fine.
The troubled seas of their unrest for vengeance howl and weep.
Sir Typhis who did conquer first the danger of the deep,
Hath yielded up the cunning rule of his unwieldy sterne,
To such a guide, as for that use hath need as yet to learn.
Who giving up his Ghost aloof from of his native land,
In foreign more lies buried vile with dirty soddes in sand.
He sits among the flitiring souls that strangers to him wear.
And Aulis Isle that in her mind her masters loss doth bear,
Held in the Ships, to stand and whale in croaking narrow neck:
That Orpheus Calliops son who stayde the running Brooke,
While he records on heavenly Harp with twinkling finger sine,
The wind laid down his pipling blasts: his harmony divine
Procured the woods to stir them selves, and trees in trains along
Came forth with birds that held their lays and listened to his song.
With limbs on sunder rent in field of Thrice he lies dead.
Up to the top of Heber floude, eke haled was his head.
Gone down he is to Stygian dampes, which seen hee had before,
And Tartar boiling pits, from whence return hee shall no more.
Alcydes banging hat did bring the Northern lads to ground.
To Achelo of sundry shapes he gave his mortal wound.
Yet after he could purchase peace both unto sea and land,
And after Ditis dungeon black rent open by his hand,
He living spread himself along on burning Oats hill:
His members in his proper flame the wretch did thrust to spill:
His blood he brewd with Nestors blood, and lost his loathsome life
By traytrous gift that poisoned shirt received of his wife.
With tusk of bristled groyning Bore Anceus limbs were torn.
O Meleagar (wicked wight) to grave by thee were borne
Thy mothers brethren twain, and she, for it with ruthful hand,
Hath wrought thy doleful destiny, to burn thy fatal brand.
The rash attempting Argonantes deserved all the death
That Hylas whom Alcides lost bereft of fading breath.
That springall which in sousing waives of waters drowned was:
Go now ye lusty bloods, the Seas: with doubtful lot to pass.
Though Idmon had the calking skill of destentes before,
The serpent made him leave his life in tomb of Liby shore.
And Mopsus that to other men could well their fates escry,
Yet only did deceive him self uncertain where to die,
And he that could the secret hap of things to come unfold,
Yet died not in his counrey Thebes. Dame, Theris husband old
Did wander like an outlawde man Our Palimedes sire
Did headlong whelm him self in seas. Who at the Greeks retire
From Troy, to rush on rocks did them allure with wily light,
Stout Aiax Oleus did sustain the dint of thunder bright,
And cruel storm of surging seas, to quite the heinous guilt,
That by his country was commit, in seas he lies spilt.
Alceste to redeem her husbands Phereus life from death,
The godly Wife upon her spouse bestowed her panting breath.
Proud Polios that wretch him self who bad them first assay
The golden Fleece that booty brave by ship to fetch away,
Perboylde in glowing cauldron hoate with fervent heate hee fries,
And flooring piece meal up and down in water thin he lies.
Enough, enough, revenged are O Gods the wrongs of seas,
Be good to Iason, doing that hee did, his Eame to please.
MY shivering mind amazed is, aghast, and sore dismayed:
My chillish limbs with quaking cold do tremble all afraid,
Such plague•s &amp; vengeāce is at hand, in what exceeding wis•
Do sharp assaults of greedy grief still more &amp; more arise,
And of it self in smothering breast enkindlesse greater heate?
Oft have I seen how romping rage hath forced her to fret.
With frantic fits, mad, bedlam wise, against the Gods to rail,
And eke bewitched ghosts of heaven in plunging plagues to trail:
But now Medea beats her busy brain to bring to pass
A mischief greater, greater far, then ever any was.
Erewhile when hence she tripped away astonished so sore,
And of her poison closet close she entered had the door:
She powers out her Jewels all, abroad to light she brings
That which she dreading •athed long▪ most irksome ugly things:
She mumbling conjures up by names of ills the rabble rout,
In hugger mugger couched long, kept close, unsearched out:
All pestlent plagues she calls upon, what ever Libie land,
In frothy boiling stream doth work, or muddy belching sand:
What tearing torments Taurus breeds, with snows vnthawed still
Where winter flaws, and hory frost knit hard the craggy hill,
She lays her crossing hands upon each monstrous coniurde thing,
And over it her magic verse with chat ming doth she sing:
A mowste, rowste, rusty route with cankered Scales Éclat
From musty, fusty, dusty dens where lurked long they had,
Doe craull: a wallowing serpent huge, his cōbrous Corps out drags,
In fiery foaming blaring mouth his forked tongue hee wags.
He stares about with sparkling eyes, if some he might espy,
Whom snapping at with stinging spit he might constrain to die:
But hearing once the magic verse he hushed as all a gast,
His body boalne big, wrapped in lumps on twining knots hee cast.
And rambling to and fro his tail in links he rolls it round.
Not sharp enough (quoth she) the plagues &amp; tools that hollow groūd
Engenders for my purpose are, to heaven up will I call,
To reach me stronger poison down, to frame my feat with all.
Now is it at the very point, Medea thou assay,
To bring about some farther fetch, then common Witches may.
Let down, let down, that sprawling Snake that doth his body spread,
As doth a running brooke abroad his mighty channel s•ed.
Whose swelling knobs of wondrous ••se &amp; buystrous bobbing bumps
Doth thumpe the great &amp; lesser bear that feet his heavy lumps.
The bigger bear with golden gleede the greekish fleet doth guide:
But by the less the Sidon ships their passage have espied.
He that with pinch of griping fist doth bruise the adders twain,
His strening hard &amp; clasping hand, let him vnknit again.
And crush their squeezed venom out, come further thou our charm
O flymy serpent Python, whom Dame Iuno sent to harm
Diana, and Apollo both, (those heavenly spirits twain)
With whom Latona travelling did groan with pinching payne.
O Hydra whom in Lerna poole Alcides gave the foil,
And all the noisome vermin vile that Hercules did spoil.
Which when on sunder they were cut with slicing deadly knife,
Can knit again their sodred parts, and so recover life.
Help wakeful Dragon Argos, whom first magic words of mine
Made Morpheus locke thy sleepy lids, and shut thy slugring eyne.
Then having brought aboue the ground of Serpents all the rout,
Of filthy weeds the ranckest bane she pyckes, and gathers out,
That spring on knotty Eryx hill where passage none is found,
Among the ragged Rocks, or what on Caucasus his ground
Doth grow that still is clad in Coat of hoary moary frost.
That evermore vnmelt abides, whose spattred fylde is soste
With gubbs of blood, y• spowteth from Prometheus gaping maw,
Whose guts with twitching talent out the ghastly gripe doth draw.
Or any other venomous herb among the Medes that grows,
That with their sheaf of arrows sharp in field do scare their foes.
Or what the light held Parthian to serve her turn can send,
Or else the rich Arabians, that dyp their arrows end
In poison strong: the juice of all Medea out doth wring,
That underneath the frozen poale in Svveuia land doth spring.
Whose noble state Hircinus wood doth high enhance and rear▪
Or what the pleasant soil doth yield in pryme of smiling veare,
When nature bids the bird begin her shrouding nest to build,
Or when the churlish Bores blast sharpe winter hath exiled,
The trym array of branch and bough to cloth the naked tree,
And every thing with bitter could of Snow congealed bee.
In any pestilent flower on stalk of any herb doth grow,
Or noisome juice doth lye in rotten wrythen roots allow,
Hath any force in breading bane, those takes she in her hand.
Some plaugy herbs did Ethos yield that mount of. Thessayle land.
And other Pindus roches hye and some upon the top
Of Pingeus, but tender twigs the cruel Since did lop:
These Tigris river nourished up, that chokes his whyrlpoale deep
With stronger stream. Danubius those in fostring wave did keep.
Those did Hidaspus minister, who by the parching zone
With lukewarm silver channel runs, so ryth with precious stone.
And Bethis son, who gave the name unto his country great,
And with his shallow •oarde against the Spanish seas doth beat
This herb abode the edge of knife in dawning of the day
Ere Phoebus Face began peep, bedect with glittering golden spray
His slender stalk was suepped of in deep of silent night,
His corn was cropped, while she with charm her poysned nails did dight.
She chops the deadly herbs, &amp; wrings the squeezed clottered blood
Of Serpents out: and filthy birds of irksome merry mud:
She tempers with the same and eake: she brays the heart of Owl
Foreshewing death with glaring Eyes, and moaping Visage foul,
Of shryke Owl hoarse alive she takes the dirty stinking guts,
All these the framer of this feat in divers parcels puts.
This hath in it devouring force of greedy spoiling flame,
The frozen ysle dulling could engenders by the same.
She chants on those the magic verse, that works no lesser harm,
With bustling frantickely she stamps, and cease not to charm.
O Flittring Flocks of grisly. ghosts
that sit in silent seat
O ougsome Bugs, O Goblins grym
of Hell I you entreat:
O lowryng Chaos dungeon blind,
and dreadful darkened pit,
Where Ditis muffled up in Clouds
of blackest shades doth sit,
O wretched woeful wawling souls your aid I doe implore,
That linked lye with jingling Chains on wailing Limbo shore,
O mossy Den where death doth couch his ghastly carrayne Face:
Release your pangs, O spryghts, and to this wedding hye apace.
Cause ye the snaggy wheel to pause that rentes the Carcass bound,
Permit Ixions racked Limbs to rest upon the ground:
Let hungry bitten Tantalus with gawnt and pined panche
Soup up Pirenes gulped stream his swelling thirst to stanch.
Let burning Croon •yde the brunt and girds of greater payne,
Let payse of slippery sliding stone type over back again
His moylyng Father Sisyphus, amongst the craggy Rocks.
Ye daughters dire of Danaus whom pierced Pychers morckes
So oft with labour lost in vain this day doth long for you
That in your life with bloody blade at once your husband slew.
And thou whose aares I honoured have, O torch and lamp of night,
Approach O Lady mine with most deformed visage dight:
O three fold shapē Dame that knitst more threatening brows then one,
According to the country guise with dagling locks undone
And naked foot, the secrete grove about I halowed have,
From dusky dry vnmoysty clouds the showers of rain I crave.
Through me the chinked gaping ground the soked seas hath drunk.
And mayner stream of th'ocian flood beneath the earth is sunk,
That swelteth out through hollow gulf with stronger gushing rage.
Then were his suddy rambling waives whose power it doth assuage
The heavens with wrong disturbed course and out of order quite,
The darkened son, &amp; glimmering stars at once hath showed their light,
And drēched Charles his straggling wayne hath duty in dasshing wave,
The framed course of roaming time racte out of frame I have.
So my enchantments have it wrought, that when the flaming sun
In summer bakes the parched soil then hath the twigs begun,
With sprouting blossom fresh to blome, and hasty winter corn
Hath out of harvest seen the fruit to barnes on sudden• borne.
Into a shallow ford his stur distreame hath Phase• wast,
And Esters channel being in so many branches cast,
Aba•ed hath his wrackful waives, on every silent shore
He lies calm: The tumbled floods with thundering noise did roar,
When couched clo•• the wind• were not moving pippling soft,
With working wave the prancing seas have swollen &amp; leapt aloft,
Whereas the wood in alder time with thick and branched bow
Di• spread his shade on gladsome soil no shade remains now.
I rolling up the magic verse at noon time Phoebus stay,
Amid the darkened Sky, when fled was light of drowsy day.
Eke at my charm the watery flocks of Heyaeds went to glade.
Time is it Phoebe to respect the service to thee made:
To the• with cruel bloody hands these garlands greene were twinned
Which with his folding circles nyne the serpent rough did bind.
Have here Tiphoias flesh, that doth in Aetnas Foruace groan,
That shoke with baitery violent king Ioues assaulted trone.
This is the Centaurs poisoned blood which Nessus villain vile
Who made a rape of Dianire intending her to fyle,
Bequeathed her when newly wound he gasping lay for breath,
While Hercles shaft stack in his Ribs, whose laūce did work his death:
Behold the Funeral cinders here which up the poison dried
Of Hercules who in his fire on Oeta mountain dyed:
Lo here the fatal brand, which late the fatal sisters three
Conspired at Meleagers birth, such should his des•ny bee,
To save alive his brethyng corpse, while that might whole remain,
Which sauf his mother Althe kept, till he his uncles tu•in,
(That from Atlanta would have had the head of co•quarrelled Bore,)
Had reft of lie•e whose spiteful death Althea took so sore,
That both she showed her feruentnesse in sisters godly love,
When to revenge her brothers death mere nature did her move,
But yet as mother most unkind, of nature most vnmylde,
To hasten the untimely grave of her beloved child,
While Meleagers fatal brand she wasted in the flame,
Whose swelting guts and bowels moult consumed as the same,
These plumes the Harpies ravening fowls for hast did leave behind,
In hidden hole whose close access no mortal wight can find.
When fast from Zeds chasing them with speedy flight they fled.
Put un•o these the feathers which the S•ymphal bird did shed,
Whom ducking Phoebus dymned light sir Hercules did sting,
And galied with the shaft, that he in Hydras hyde did fling.
You Aares have yield a clattring noise I know, I know of old,
How unto me my Oracles are wonted to bee told,
That when ye trem•l•ng flower doth shake then hath my Gods great,
Vouchsafe to grant me my request as I did her entreat,
I see Dianas waggon swife, not that whereon she glides,
When all the night in darkened Sky with Face full op she rides:
With countnaunce bright and blandishing but when with heavy cheer,
With dusky shimmering winnie globe, her lamp doth pale appear.
Or when she trots •bout the heavens with horsecheade rayned strait,
When Thessayle Witches with 〈◊〉 threats of charming her doe bait.
So with thy dumpish dulled blase, thy cloudy fainting l•light,
Send out, amid the lowering sky, the heart of people smyght
With agonies of sudden dread, in strange and fearful wise,
Compel the precious brazen pannes with iarri•g noise to rise
Through Corinth country •very where, to shield the• frō t•ie harm,
Least headlong •rawne thou be from heaven to earth by force of charm.
An holy solemn sacrifice to worship thee wee make,
Imbrewed with a bloody turphe the kindled Torch doth take
Thy sacred burning night fire at the dampishe mori grave.
Sore charged with thy troubled ghost my head I shaken have,
And ducking down my Neck allow with shrieking load have shrigh
And grovelling flat on floor in trance have lain in deadmans plight.
My ruffled Lockes about mine ears down dagling have ben bound.
Tuckt up about my temples twain with gladsome garland crowned▪
A dreary branch is offred thee from filthy Stigis flood.
As is the guise of Bacchus priests the Coribanthes wood,
With naked breast and dugs laid out Isle prick with sacred blad•
Mine arm, that for the bubbling blood an issue may bee made,
With trilling streams my purple blood let drop on Th'aulter stones.
My tender Childrens crushed flesh, and broken broosed bones
Learn how to brooke with hardened heart: in practise put the trade
To flourish fearce, and keep a coil, with naked glittering blade:
I sprinkled holy water have, the lance once being made,
If tyred thou complain that my cries thee ouerlade,
Give pardon to my ernest suite, O Perseus sister dear,
Still Iason is the only cause that urges me to rear
With squeaking voice thy noisome beams, that sting like shot of by
So season thou those sawced robes to work Creusas woe,
Whert with when she shall prank her self the poison by and by
To rot her inward mary out, within her bones may fry,
The secret fire bleares their eyes with gloss of yellow gold,
The which Prometheus gave to me that fire fylcher bold.
On whom for robbery that he did in heavens aboue commit,
With massy payse great Caucasus th'unweldy hill doth sit.
Where under with vnwasted womb he lies, and pays his payne,
To feed the crāming foul with gubs of guts that grows again.
He taught me with a pretty sleyght of conning, how to hyde
The strength of fire close kept in, 〈◊〉 may not be espied,
This lively tinder Mulciber hath forged for my sake,
That tempered is with brimstone quick at first touch and take.
Eke of my Cousin Phaëton a wyldefyer flake I have
His flames the monstrous staghard rough Chimera to me gave,
In head and breast a Lyon grim, and from the Rump behind
He sweeps the flower with lagging Tail• of Serpent fearce by kind
In Ribs, and Loins along his paunch yshaped like a Goat.
These Fumes that out the Bull perbrakte from fyry spewing throat•
I gotten have and braid it with Medusas bitter gall
Commanding it in secret sort to dusk and co•er all:
Breath on these venoms Hence•e with deadly might inspire,
Preserve the touching poulder of my secret covert fire,
O grant that these my cloaked crafts so may bewitch their Eyes,
That likelihood of treason none they may herein surmise:
So work that they in handling it may feel no kind of heate:
Her stewing breast, her seathing veins, let servant fire fret
And force her roasted pining limbs, to drop and melt away,
Let smoke her rotten broiling bones: inflame this bride to day
To cast a light with gr•ater gleede on fryseled blazing hear
Then is the shining flame that doth the wedding torches bear.
My suite is harde, thryse Hecare a dreadful barking gave
From doleful cloud a sacred flash of flamy sparks she drove.
Eche poisons pride fulfilled is: call forth my children dear,
By whom unto the cursed Bride these presents you may bear:
Go forth, go forth my little Babes, your mothers cursed fruit,
Go, go, employ your pains with bribe and earnest humble suite
To purchase grace, and eke to earn you favour in her sight.
That both a mother is to you, and rules with Ladies might.
Go on, apply your charge apace, and hye you home again,
That with embracing you I may my last farewell attain.
WHat sharpe assaults of cruel CUPIDS flame
With giddy head thus tosses to and fro,
This bedlam Wight, and devilish despret dame
What roving rage her pricks to work this woe?
Rough rancours vile congeals her frozen face,
Her haughty breast bombasted is vvyth pride,
She shakes her head, she stalks vvyth stately pace.
She threats our king more then doth her betide.
Who would her deem to bee a banished wight,
Whose scarlet Cheeks doe glow with rosy red?
In fainting Face, with pale and winnie whyght
The sangayne hew exiled thence is fled
Her changing looks no colour lunge can hold.
Her shifting feet still trauasse to and fro.
Even as the fearce and ravening Tiger old
That doth unwary his sucking whelps forgo,
Doth ramp, and rage, most eager ferce and wood,
Among the shrubs and bushes that doe grow
On Ganges stronde that golden sanded flood,
Whose silver stream through India doth flow.
Even so MEDEA sometime vvantes her wits
To rule the rage of her unbridled ire,
Now VENVS Son, with busy froward fits,
Now Wrath, and Love enkindle both the fire.
What shall she doe? when will this heinous wight
With forward foot bee packing hence away,
From Greece? to ease our Realm of terror quite,
And princes twain whom she so sore doth fray:
Now Phoebus lodge thy Chariot in the West,
Let neither Raynes, nor Bridle stay thy Race,
Let grovelling light with Dulcet night oppressed
In cloking Clouds wrapped up his muffled Face,
Let Hesperus the loadesman of the night,
In Western flood drench deep the day so bright.
ALl things are topsy turuy turned,
and wasted clean to nought.
To passing great calamity
our Kingdom State is brought.
The Sire, and Daughter burnt to dust
in blendred Cinders lye.
What train hath them entrapped?
Such as
are made for Kings to dye,
False traitrous gifts.
What privy guile could wrapped be in those?
And I doe marvel at this thing and scant I can suppose
That such a mischief might be wrought by any such device
Report how this destruction and ruin should arise
The fizzing flame most eagerly doth scour with sweeping sway
Each corner of the Princes court, as though it should obey.
Commanded thereunto so flat on flower the Palace falls:
Wee are in dread least further it will take the townishe walls.
Cast quenching water on it then to slake the greedy flame.
And this that seems very strange doe happen in the same,
The water feeds the fire fast, the more that wee doe toil
It to suppress, with hotter rage the heate begins to boyle:
Those things that wee have gotten for our help it doth enjoy.
Medea thou that doest so sore king Pelops land annoy,
Twine hence in hast thy forward foot, at all assays depart
To any other kind of coast.
Can I find in my hart
To shun this land? if hence I had first fallen away by flight,
I would have trailed back again, to case at such a sight.
To stand and see this weddiug new, why stayst thou doting mind?
Apply, apply, thy sore attempt, that good success doth find.
What great exploit is this, that thou of vengeance dost enjoy?
Still art thou blinded witless wench with vale of Venus boy?
Is this suffisaunce for the grief? is root of rancour ded,
If Iason lead a single life in solitary bed?
Some nettling, thorny, stinging plagues unpractised devise:
Prepare thy self in redines and fall to on this wise:
Let all bee fish that commas to Net, have no respect of right,
From mind on mischief fixed fast let shame be vanished quyte:
The vengeance they received at my little childrens hand,
Is nothing worth: in earnest ire intent must thou stand.
When heate of wrath begins to cool, cheer up thy self again:
Raise up those touches old that wonted were in thee to reign,
That buried deep in breast doe lye: and as for all the same
That yet is wrought: Of godliness let it usurp the name:
Doe this, and I shall teach them learn, what trifling cast it was,
And common practiced flimflam trick that erst I brought to pass.
By this my raging malady a preamble hath made,
To show what howgier heaps of harms shall shortly them invade
What durst my rude unskilful hand assay that was of wayght?
When• could the malice of a Girl invent her foes to bait?
Still conversant with wicked feats Medea am I made.
My blunt and dulled brains hath so ben beat about this trade.
O so I joy, I joy, that I smote of my brothers head,
And slashed his members of: eake that from parents had I fled:
And filched have the privy fleece, lo Mars that sacred was.
It glads my heart that I to bring old Polios death to pass:
Have set his daughters all on work: O grief pick out a way
Not any guilt thou shalt with unacquainted hand assay
Against whom wrath intend thou to bend thine Ireful might?
Or with what weapon dost thou mean thy traitorous foes to smight?
I know not what my wrathful mind consulted hath within,
And to be wray it to himself, I dare not yet begin.
O rash and unadvised fool, I make to hasty speed:
O that my Foe had gotten of his Harlots body Seed:
But what so ever thou by him enioyest, suppose the same
To bee Creusas Babes, of them let her enjoy the name.
This vengeance, this doth like me well good reason is there, why,
The last attempt of i•s, thou must with stomach stout apply.
A•as ye little seely fools that erst my children were,
The plaguing price of Fathers fault submit your selves to bear.
O, horror huge with sudden stroke my heart doth overcome:
With icy dulling cold congealde my Members all benun•.
My shivering limbs appalled sore for ghastly fear doe quake,
And banished rage of malice hoate begins it self to slake:
The hateful heart of wife against her Spouse hath yielded place,
And piteous mothers mercy mild restores natures face.
O shall I shed their guiltless blood? shall I the frame unfold
Of that, which loving natures hand hath wrought in me her mold?
O doting fury change thy mind, conceive a better thought,
Let not this heinous savage deed by means of me be wrought.
What crime have they (poor fools) cōmit, for which they should aby?
Upon their Father Iason right all blot of blame should lye.
Medea yet their Mother I am worser far then hee.
Tush let them frankly go to wrack no kith nor kin to me
They are: dispatch them out of hand: hold, hold, my babes they be
God wot, most harmless lambs they are, no crime nor fault have they
Alas they bee mere innocents, I doe not this deny:
So was my brother whom I slew: O false revolting mind,
Why dost thou staggring to and fro such change of fancies find?
Why is my Face be sprint with tears, what makes me falter so,
That wrath &amp; love with striving thoughts doe lead me to and fro?
Such fighting fancies bickringe storms my swaruing mind deter,
As when between the wrestling winds is raised wrangling war,
Eche where the tumbling wallowing waives, are hoist and reared hye
Amid the jostling swolues of seas, that hot in fury fry:
Euē so my hart with struggling thoughts now sinks, now swells amain,
Wrath sometime chase virtue out, and virtue wrath again.
O yield thee, yield, a grising grief, to virtue yield thy place:
Thou only comfort of our stock in this afflicted case,
Come heather, come dear loved Imp, with colling me embrace,
While that by me your mother dear sweet Boys ye are enjoyed,
So long God grant your Father may you keep from harm vncloyed.
Exile and flight approach on me, and they shall by and by
Be pulled perforce out of mine arms, with vapourde weeping Eye,
Sore languishing with mourning heart, yet let them go to grave
Before their fathers Face, as they before their mothers have:
Now rancorus grief, with fiery fits begins to boyle again,
The quenched coals of deadly hate do fresher force attain.
The rusty rancour harbred long within my cankered breast
Starts up, and stirs my hand anew in mischief to bee pressed.
O that the rabblement of brats which swarmde about the side
Of Niobe that scornful Dame, who perished by her pride
Had taken life out of his limbs, O that the fates of heaven
A fruitful mother had me made of children seven and seven.
My barren womb for my revenge hath yielded little store:
Yet for my s•re and brother, twain I have, there needs no more:
Whom seek this ruffling rowt of Fiends with gargell Visage dight•
Where will they deal their stripes, or whō with whips of fire smight?
Or whom with cruel scorching brand and Stygian faggot fell,
With mischief great to cloy, entendes this army black of hell?
A chopping Adder began to hiss with wrethings wrapped round,
As soon as did the lashing whip flirt out with yerking sound.
Whom bumping with thy rapping post Megaera wilt thou crush?
Whose ghost doth hear mishapped from hell with scattered members rush?
My slaughtered brothers ghost it is that vengeance coms to crave:
According to his dire request due vengeance shall hee have.
But flap thou fearce the fierbrandes full dassahed in mine Eyes,
Dig, rent, scrape, burn, and squeeze them out, lo op my breast it lies,
To fighting furies bobbing strokes, O brother, brother bid
These roils, that press to worry me, them selves away to rid.
Dawn to the s•lent souls allow not taking any care:
Let me be left hear by my self alone, and doe not spare,
To bast, and capperclaw these arms that drew the bloody blade:
To quench the furies of thy sprite, that thus doe me invade,
With this right hand the sacrifice on thaulter shall be made.
What means this sudden trampling noise? a band of men in Arms
Come bustling toward vs, that me will cloy with deadly harms.
To end this slaughter set upon I will my self convey
Up to the garrets of our house, come Nurse with me away,
Bestow thy body hence with me from danger of our foes.
Now thus my mind on mischief set thou must thy self dispose,
Let not the flickering fame and praise in darkness bee exiled
Of stomach stout, that you did use in murdering of thy child.
Proclaim in peoples ears the praise of cruel bloody hand.
If any faithful man here bee, whom ruin of his land,
And slaughter of his Prince doe cause in pens•ue heart to bleed,
Step forth that ye may take the wretch that wrought this deadly deed.
Here, here, ye jolly champions lay load with weapons here,
Have now, hoist up this house, from low Foundation up it rear.
Now, now my Sceptre guilt I have recovered once again:
My Fathers wrongs revenged are, and eke my brother slain:
The gouldens cattels Fleece returned is to my native land,
Possession of my realm I have reclaimed to my hand:
Come home is my virginity, that meanwhile went astray.
O Gods as good as I could wish, O joyful wedding day,
Go shroud thy self in darkness him, dispacht I have this feat:
Yet vengeance is not done enough, to cool our thristy heate.
O soul why dost thou make delay? Why dost thou doubting sty•de?
Go foreword with it yet thou may, while doing is thy hand:
The wrath that might should minister doth qualify his flame:
The pricks of sorrow twitch my heart attaint with blushing shame:
Through rigour of thy heinous gore, O wretch, what hast thou done?
Though I repent a caitiff vile I am, to sle a my son:
Alas I have committed it, importunate delight,
Still egged on my froward mind that did against it fight:
And lo the vain coniect of this delight increases still,
This only is the thing, that wants unto my wicked will,
That Iasons eyes should see this sight as yet I doe suppose,
Nothing it is that I have done, my travel all I lose,
That I employed in dyry deeds, unless hee see the same.
Lo here she looks out, and leanes upon the houses frame,
That pitchlong hanges with falling sway: here heap your fierce fast,
Whereby the flames that she her self kindled, may her wast.
Go Iason, go the obit rights the windinge sheet and grave
Make ready for thy son, as last behooves him to have,
Thy spouse and eke thy father in law that are entomde by me
Received have the duties that to dead men's ghosts agree.
This child hath felt the deadly stroke and lance of fatal knife,
And this with wailesome murder like shall lose her tender life.
By all the sacred ghosts of heaven, and by thy oft exile,
And spousal bed, which breach of love in me did not defile,
Now spare, and save the life of him my child and also thine:
What ever crime committed is, I grant it to be mine:
Make me a bloody sacrifice to dew deserved death,
Take from my sinful guilty head the use of vital breath.
Nay sith thou wilt not have it so as grieves thy pinched mind,
Here way to wreck my vengeance fell, my burning blade shall find.
Avaunt, now hence thou peasant proud employ thy busy payne,
To reap the fruits of virgins bed, and cast them of again
When mothers they are made.
Let one for dew revenge suffice.
If greedy thirst of hungry hands that still for vengeance cries.
Might quenched bee with blood of one, then ask I none at all,
And yet to stanch my hungry grief the number is to small,
If only twain I slay, if pledge of love lye secrete made,
My bowels Isle vnbreast, and search my womb with poking Blade.
Now finish out thy deadly deed, that enterprised is,
No more entreataunce will I use, yet only grant me this,
Delay awhile his doleful death, that I may take my flight.
Least that mine eyes with bleeding heart should view that heavy sight.
Yet linger eager anguish yet to slay this child of thine.
Run not to rash with hasty speed, this doleful day is mine:
The time that wee obtained have of
wee enjoy.
O vile malicious minded wretch my loathsome life destroy.
In craving this thou speak, that I should show thee some relief,
Well goodinough, all this is done: O ruthful giddy grief,
This is the only sacrifice that I can thee provide,
Unthankful Iason hither cast thy coyesh looks aside.
Lo hear dost thou behold thy wife? thus every wonted I,
When murder I had made, to scope, my way doth open lye
That I may spring into the skies: the flying serpents twain
Subm•ted have their scaly Necks to yoke of rattling wayne,
Thou Father have thy sons again, I in the wandering Sky
In nimble wheeled Waggon swift, will ride advanced hye,
Go through the ample spaces wide, infect the poisoned Ayre,
Bear witness, grace of God is none in place of thy repair.

AGAMEMNON, General of
that Noble Army of the Greeks,
which after ten years siege wāne
Troy, cōmitted the entire Govern∣meant
of his Country &amp; Kingdom
(during his absence) to his Wife
CLYTEMNESTRA. Who
forgetting all Wifely loyalty, and
Womanly chastity, fell in lawelesse
love &amp; used adulterus cōpany with
AEGYSTHVS, son to THYESTES, whom before∣time
ATREVS being his own natural Brother, and Fa∣there
to this AGAMEMNON, in revenge of a former
adultry had, caused to eat his own two Children.
At length, understanding by EVRYBATES, that
Troy was wonnë, &amp; that her husbād AGAMEMNON
was coming homeward with a young Lady named CAS∣SANDRA,
daughter to king PRIAMVS: partly enra∣general
with jealousy, &amp; disdain thereof, &amp; partly loath to loose
the company of AEGYSTHVS her Coadulterer, practy∣zed
with him how to murder her husband. Which accor∣dingly
they brought to pass: &amp; not resting so cōtented, they
also put CASSANDRA to death, imprisoned ELECTRA
Daughter to AGAMEMNON, and sought to have
slain his Son ORESTES. Which ORESTES flee∣ing
for safeguard of his life to on STROPHILVS, his
dead Fathers dear friend: was by him secretly kept a lunge
time, till at length, coming privily into Mycene, and by
his Sisters means cōducted where his Mother CLYTEM∣NESTRA
and AEGYSTHVS were, in revenge of his
Fathers death, killed them both.
Departing from the darkened dens
which Dices low doth keep,
Lo here I am sent out again,
from Tartar Dungeon deep,
Thyestes I, that whether coast
to shun doe stand in doubt,
Th'internall fie•des I fly, the foalke
of earth I chase about.
My conscience lo abhors, that I should heather passage make,
Appalled sore with fear▪ and dread my trembling sinews shake:
My fathers house, or rather yet my brothers I espy,
This is the old and antique porch of Pelops progeny.
Here first the Greeks on princes heads doe place the royal crown,
And here in throne aloft they lye, that ietteth up and down,
With stately Sceptre in their hand, eake here their courts doe lie,
This is their place of banqueting, return therefore will I.
Nay: better were it not to haunt the loathsome Limbo lakes,
Where as the Stygion porter doth advance with lusty crakes
His triple gorge be hong with Mane shag hatry, rusty black:
Where •xions Carcass linked fast, the whirling wheel doth rack,
And rolled still upon him self: where as full oft in vain
Much toil is lost, (the tottring stone down tumbling back again)
Where growing guts the greedy gripe do gnaw with ravening bits.
Where parched up with burning thirst amid the waives he st•s,
And gapes to catch the flecting flood with hungry chaps beguiled,
That pays his parnefull punishment, whose feast the Gods defiled:
Yet that old man so stepped in years at length by trace of time,
How great a part belonges to me and portion of his crime?
Account wee all the grisly ghosts, whom guilty found of ill,
The Gnosian Judge in Plutoes pits doth rosse in torments still:
Thyestes I in dreary deeds will far surmount the rest,
Yet to my Brother yield I, (though I gorged my bloody breast)
And stuffed have my pampered paunch even with my children three,
That crammed lye within my Ribs and have their Tomb in me,
The bowels of my swallowed Babes, devoured up I have,
Nor fickle Fortune me alone the Father doth deprave,
But enterprising greater guilte then that is put in bre,
To file my Daughters bawdy Bed, my lust she doth allure.
To speak these words I doe not spare, I wrought the heinous deed,
That therefore I through all my stock, might parent still proceed.
My Daughter driven by force of Fates and destinies divine,
Doth breed young bones, &amp; lades her womb with sinful seed of mine.
Lo, nature changed upside down, and out of order tornde
This mingle mangle hath she made, (O fact to be forlornde)
A Father and a Grandsire lo, confusedly I am,
My daughters husband both become, and Father to the same.
Those babes yt should my Nephews bee, when nature rightly runs▪
She being tumbled doth confound, and mingle with my sons.
The crystal clearness of the day, and Phoebus beams so bright,
Are mixed with the foggy clouds, and darkness dim of night.
When wickedness had wearied vs, to late truce taken was,
Even when our detestable deeds were done and brought to pass.
But valiant Agamemnon hee grand captain of the Host,
Who bare the sway among the Kings, and ruled all the roast,
Whose flaunting Flag, and Banner brave, displayed in royal sort,
A thousand sail of sousing ships did guard to Phrygian part,
And with their swelling shatling sails the surging seas did hide▪
That beats on the banks of Troy, and flows by her side:
When Phoebus Carte the Zodiac ten times had aver run,
And waste the battered Walls doe lye of Troy destroyed and won,
Returned he is to yield his throat unto his traitoress Wife.
That shall with force of bloody blade bereave him of his life.
The glittering Swerd, the hewing Axe, and wounding weapons more,
With blood for blood new set abroche shall make the floor to flow.
With sturdy stroke, and boisterous blow, of pithy Pollaxe given
His beaten brains are posh• abroad, his cracked Skull is reuen.
Now mischief marches on a pace, now falsehood doth appear,
Now Butchers slaughter doth approach, and muriher draws near.
In honour of thy native day Aegisthus they prepare
The solemn feast with •uncketing▪ and dainty tothsome fare.
Fie, what doth shame abash thee so, and cause thy courage quail?
Why doubts thy righthand what to doe? to smite why doth it fail?
What he forecasting might suspect, why should thou take advise?
Why freteest thou, demanding if thou may it enterprise?
Nay: if a mother it beseem, thou rather may surmise.
What now? how happens it that thus the sm••ing summers night,
When Phoebus from Th'antipodes should render son the light,
On sudden change their turns with nights that last and linger lunge,
When winters Bores bitter blasts, doth puff the trees among?
Or what doth cause the gliding stars to stay still in the sky?
Wee wayght for Phoebus: to the World bring day now by and by.
O Fortune, that dost fail the great estate of kings,
On slippery sliding seat thou placest lofty things
And set on tottring sort, where perils do abound
Yet never kīgdome calm, nor quiet could be foūd:
No day to Scepters sure doth shine, that they might say,
To morrow shall wee rule, as wee have done to day.
One clod of crooked care another brings in,
One hurly burly done, another doth begin:
Not so the raging Sea doth boyle upon the Sand,
Where as the southern wind that blows in Africa Land,
One Wave upon another doth heap with sturdy blast:
Not so doth Euxine Sea, his swelling waives up cast:
Nor so his belching stream from shallow bottom roll,
That borders hard upon the ysyfrosen pool:
Where as Boots bright doth twyne his Wayne about,
And of the marble seas doth nothing stand in doubt.
O how doth Fortune toss and tomble in her wheel
The staggring states of Kings, that ready bee to reel?
Fain would they dreaded bee, and yet not settled 〈◊〉
When as they feared are, they fear, and live 〈◊〉 woe.
The silent Lady night so sweet to man and beast,
Can not bestow on them her safe and quiet rest:
Sleep that doth overcome and break the bonds of grief,
It cannot ease their hearts, nor minister relief:
What castle strongly built, what bulwark, tower, or town,
Is not by mischiefs means, brought topsy turuye down?
What rampart walls are not made weak by wicked war?
From stately courts of Kings doth justice fly afar:
In princely Palaces, of honesty the lore,
And wedlock vow devout, is set by little store.
The bloody Bellon those doth haunt with gory hand,
Whose light and vain conceit in painted pomp doth stand.
And those Erinnys wood turmoils with frenzies fits,
That ever more in proud and haughty houses sits,
Which ficle Fortunes hand in twinkling of an eye,
From high and proud degre drives down in dust to lye.
Although that skirmish cease, no banners be displayed
And though no wiles be wroughe, and policy be stayed,
Down poised with their weight the massy things do sink,
And from her burden doth un••able Fortune shrink▪
The swelling Sails puffed up with gale of westren wind,
Doe yet mistrust thereof a rempest in their mind:
The threatening tops (that touch the clouds) of lofty towers
Bee soonest paid, and bet with south wind rainy showers:
The darksome wood doth see his tough and sturdy Ok,
Well waynde in years to be clean over thrown and broke:
The lyhhtnings flashing flame out breaking in the Sky,
First lights on the mounts, and hills that are most hy.
The bodies corpulent and of the largest syse
Are rifest styll to catch diseases when they rise.
When as the flock to grase, in pasture fat is put,
Whose Neck is larded best▪ his throat shall first be cut:
What Fortune doth advance and hoists up on hye,
She lets it up to •all again more grievously.
The things of middle sort, and of a mean degree,
Endure aboue the rest and longest days do see:
The man of mean estate most happy is of all,
Who pleased with the lot that doth to him befall,
Doth sail on silent shore with calm and quiet tide,
And dreads with bruised barge on swelling Seas to ride:
Nor lancing to the deep where bottom none is found,
May with his rudder search, and reach the shallow ground.
O Drowsy oreaming doting soul,
what comes in thy brain
To seek about for thy defence
what way thou may attain?
What ayels thy skittish wayward wits,
to waver up and down?
The fittest shift prevented is,
the best path overgrown
Thou might once maintained have
thy wedlock chamber chaste,
And eake have ruled with majesty, by faith conjoined fast:
Now nurtures lore neglected is, all right doth clean decay
Religion and dignity with faith are worn away:
And ruddy shame with blushing cheeks so far god wot is past,
That when it would it cannot now come home again at last.
O let me now at random run with bridle at my will:
The safest path to mischief is by mischief open still
Now put in practise, seek about, search out and learn to find
The wily trains, and crafty guiles of wicked womankind:
What any devilish traitorous dame durst do in working woe,
Or any wounded in her wits by shot of Cupids bow.
What ever rigorous stepdame could commit with desperate hand,
Or as the wench who flaming fast by Venus poisoning brand,
Was driven by lewd incestuous love in ship of Thessail land,
To f••t away from Colchos yle, where Phases channel deep.
With stiuer stream down from the hills of Armenie doth sweep.
Get weapons good, get bylbowblades or temper poison strong,
Or with some yonker trudge from Greece by theft the seas along:
Why dost thou faint to talk of theft, exile or pr•ute flight?
These came by hap, thou therefore must on gre•la mischief light.
O worthy Oueene among the Greeks that bears the swinging sway.
And borne of Ledas royal blood, what muttring dost thou say?
What fury fell enforces thee, bereaved of thy wits.
To rage and rave with bedlam brains, to fret withfranticke fits?
Though madam thou do counsel keep, and not complain thy case,
Thine anguish plain appears in thy pale and winnie face.
Reveal therefore what is thy grief, take leisure good and stay,
What reason could not remedy, oft cured hath delay.
So grievous is my careful case which plunges me so sore,
That deal I cannot with delay, nor linger any more.
The flashing flames▪ and furious force of fiery fervent heate,
Outraging in my boiling breast, my burning bones doth beat:
It sucks the sappy marow out the juice it doth convey,
It frets, it tears, it routs, it gnaws, my guts and gall away.
Now feeble fear still eggs me on (with dolor being pressed)
And cankered hate with thwacking thumps doth bounce upon my breast
The blinded boy that lovers hearts doth reeve with deadly stroke,
Entangled hath my linked mind with lewd and wanton yoke:
Refusing still to take a foil, or clean to be confound:
Among these broils, and agonies my mind beseging round,
Lo feeble, weary, batred down, and under trod• shame,
That wrestled, strives, strugleth hard, and fights with the same.
Thus am I driven to divers shores and beat frow bank to bank,
And tossed in the fomy floods that strives with courage crank.
As when here wind, and their the stream when both their force will try,
From sands allow doth hoist and rear the seas with surges hye.
The wall•ring wave doth staggering stand not weting what to do,
But (hovering) doubts, whose furious force he best may yield him to▪
My kingdom therefore I cast of, my sceptor I forsake
As anger, sorrow, hope, me lead, that way I mean to take.
At all adventure to the seas I yield my beaten Barge,
At random careless will I run, now will I rove at large
Whereas my mind to fancy fond dath gad and run astray,
It is the best to choose that chance, and follow on that way.
This desprat dotage doth declare, and rashness rude and blind,
To choose out chance to be the guide and ruler of thy mind.
He that is driven to utter pinch and furthest shift of all,
What need he doubt his doubtful lot or how his luck befall?
In silent shore thou saylest yet thy trespass we may hyde,
If thou thy self detect it not, nor cause it be descried.
Alas it is more blasd abroad, and further it is blown,
Then any crime that ever in this princely court was sown.
Thy former feet with pensive hart and sorrow thou dest few.
And fondly yet thou goosed about, to set abroch a new,
It is a very folishnes to keep a mean therein.
The thing he fears he doth augment who heaps sin to sin.
But fire and sword to cure the same the place of salve supply.
There is no man who at the first extremity will try.
In working mischief men do take the readiest way they find.
The sacred name of wedlock once revoke and have in mind.
Ten years have I been desolate, and led a widows life.
Yet shall I entertain a new my husband as his wife?
Consider yet thy son and heir whom he of thee begot.
And eake my daughters wedding blase as yet forget I not.
Achilles eke my son in law to mind I do not spare,
How well he kept his vow that he to me his mother swear.
When as our navy might not pass by wind nor yet by stream,
Thy daughters blood in sacrifice their passage did redeem:
She stirred and brake the sluggish seas, whose water still did stand,
Whose feeble force might not hoise up, the vessels from the land.
I am ashamed here withal, it makes me rapine.
That Tyndaris (who from the Gods doth fish her noble ligne
Should give the ghost t'asswage the wrath of Gods and them appease,
Whereby the Grekish navy might have passage free by seas.
My grudging mind still harps upon my daughters wedding day,
Whom he hath made for Pelops stock the bloody ransom pay.
When as with cruel countenance embrewd with gory blood,
As at a wedding alter side th'unpitiful parent stoodt,
It irked Calchas woeful hart, who did abhor the same.
His Oracle he rowed, and eke the back reflecting flame
O wicked and ungracious stock that winnest il with ill,
Triumphing in thy filthy featse ncreasyng lewdness still.
By blood we win the wavering winds, by death wee purchase war
But by this means a thousand ships at once released are:
With lucky fate attempt the seas did not the lost rout?
For Aulis Isle, th'ungracious fleet from port did tumble out:
As with a lewd unlucky hand the war he did begin,
So Fortune favoured his success to thrive no more therein.
Her love as captive holds him whom captive he did take
Not moved with the earnest suite that could Achilles make,
Of Phoebus prelate Sminthicall he did retain the spoil:
When for the sacred virgins love his furious dreast doth boyle:
Achilles rough and thundering threats could not him qualify.
Nor he that doth direct the fates aboue the starry sky.
To vs he is an Augur just, and keeps his promise due,
But while he threats his captive truls of word he is not true.
The savage people fierce in wrath once might not move his spright,
Who did purloin the kindled tents with fire blazing bright:
When slaughter great on Greeks was made in most extremest fight
Without a foe he conquered, with leanes pines away,
In lewd and wantōn chamber tricks he spends the idle day,
And freshly still he fedes his lust, least that some other while
His chamber chaste should want a stews, that might the same defile.
On Lady Brises love ag aine his fancy fond doth stand,
Whom he hath got, that wrested was out of Achilles hand.
And carnal copulation to have he doth. not shame,
Though from her husbands bosom he hath snatched the wicked dame,
Tush, he that doth at Paris grudge, with wound but newly stroke
Eflamd with Phrygian Prophets love, his boiling breast doth smoke.
Now after Trojan boties brave, and Troy orewhelm'd he saw,
Returned he is a prisoners spouse, and Pryams son in law.
Now heart be bold, take courage good, of stomach now be stowt,
A field that easily is not fought, to pitch thou goosed about.
In practise mischief thou must put, why hopst thou for a day,
While Priams daughter come from Troy in Greece do bear the sway.
But as for the poor sly wreth, a wayteth at thy place
Thy widow, virgins, and Orest his fatherlyke in face,
Consider their calamities, to come, and cake their cares,
Whom all the peril of the broil doth threat in thy affairs.
O cursed captive, woeful wretch why dost thou loiter so?
Thy little brats a stepdame have whose wrath will work their wo•.
With gashing sword (and if thou can none other way provide),
Nor thrust it through another ribs then launch thy gory side,
So murder twain with brewed blood, let blood immixed be,
And by destroying of thy self destroy thy spouse with thee.
Death is not saw with soppes of Sorrow if some man else I have,
Whose breathless corse I wish to pass with me to deadly grave.
Queen, bridle thine affections, and wisely rule thy rage,
Thy swelling mood now mitigate, thy choler •ache assuage.
Way well the weighty enterprise that thou dost take in hand,
Triumphant victor he retur•es of mighty Asia land
Avenging Europes injury with him he brings away.
The spoils of sacked Pargamy a huge and mighty pray.
In bondage eake he leads the foalke of long assaulted Troy,
Yet dare thou by policy attempt him to annoy?
Whom with the dynt of glittering sword Achilles durst not harm,
Although his rash and desperate dickes the froward Knight did arm:
Nor Aiax yet more hardy man up yielding vital breath,
Whom frantic fury fell enforced to wound himself to death:
Nor Hector he whose only life procured the Greeks delay,
And long in war for victory enforced them to stay:
Nor Paris shaft, whose conning hand with shot so sure did aim:
Nor mighty Memnon answered and black, had power to hurt the same:
Nor Xanthus flood, where to and fro dead carcasses did swim,
With armour hewd and therewith all some maimed broken limb:
Nor Symois, that purple wawmes with slaughter died-doth steer.
Nor Cygnus lily white, the Son of fenny God so dear:
Nor yet the mustering Thrasian host: nor warlike Rhesus king:
Nor Amazons, who to the wars did painted Quivers bring,
And bare their hatches in their hands with Target and with shield,
Yet had no power with ghastly wound to foil him in the field.
Sith he such scouringes hath escaped and plungde of perils past
Intend thou to murder him returning home at last?
And sacred alters to profane with slaughters so impure?
Shall Greec thaduenger let this wrong long unrevenged endure
The grym and fearce coragious horse, the battles, shouts, &amp; cries,
The swelling seas which bruised barks do dread when storms arise,
Behold the fields with streams of blood oreflòwne &amp; deeply dround,
And al the chivalry of Troy in servile bondage bound,
Which Greeks have writ in registers. Thy stubborn stomach byud,
Suddue thy fond affections, and pacify thy mind.
THe cursed time that evermore
my mind did most detest,
The days that I abhorred have
and hated in my breast,
Are come, are come, that mine estate
will bring to utter wrack:
Alas my hart why dost thou fail.
and fainting fliest back?
What dost thou mean at first assault
from armour thus to fly,
Trust this, the cruel Gods entend my doleful destiny,
To wrap thee in with perils round and catch thee in a band?
Endeavour drudge with all thy power their plagues for to withstand:
With stomach stout rebellious to fire and sword appeal
It is no plague, if such a death thy native destnies deal.
(O partners of my perils all begot of Leda thou)
Direct thy doings after mine, and unto thee I vow.
This drosel sluggish ringleader, this stout strong hearted fire,
S•l pay thee so much bldud again as she• he bath in fire
How haps it that his trembling cheeks to be so pale and whight,
Lying aghast as in a trance with fainting face upright.
His conscience wedlock vow doth prick &amp; brings him home again
Let vs return the self same trade a new for to retain,
To which at first we should have stuck and ought not to forsake,
To co•enaunt continent a new let vs our selves betake:
To take the trade of honesty at no time is to late:
He purged is from punishment whose hart the crime doth hate.
Why whither wilt thou gad (o rash and unadvised dame?)
What dost thou earnestly believe, and firmly trust the same,
That Agamemnons spousal bed will loyal be to thee?
That nought doth underprop thy mind which might thy terror bee?
His proud success puffed up to high with lucky blast of wind,
Might make so crank, and set aloft his haughty swelling mind:
Among his pears he stately was ere Trojan turrets torn,
How think ye then his stomach stout by nature given to scorn,
In haughtiness augmented is more in himself to joy,
Through this triumphant victory and conquest got of Troy?
Before his voyage Miceane King most mildly did he reign,
But now a Tyrant truculent returned he is again.
Good luck and proud prosperity do make his hart so rise.
With what great preparation prepared solemn wis•,
A rabblement of strumpets come that clong about him al?
B•t yet the Prophetess of Thebe (whom God of truth we call)
Appears aboue the rest: she keeps the King, she doth him guide:
Wilt thou in wedlock have a mate and not for it provide?
So would not she, the greatest grief this is unto a wife,
Her husbands mimon in her house to lead an open life.
A Queens estate cannot abide her peete with her to reign,
End jealous wedlock will not her companion sustain.
Aegist in desprat mood again why see thou me a flote?
Why kindlest thou the sparks of ire in embers covered hot
If that the victors own free will •eels his captives care,
Why may not. I his Lady spouse have hope as well to fare?
One law doth rule in royal throne, and po• pose princclye Towers,
Among the vulgar sort, another in private simple bowers.
What though my grudging fancy force that at my husbands hand,
Sharpe execution of the law I stubbornly withstand?
Recording this that heinously offended him I have:
He gently will me pardon grant who need the same to crave?
Even so on this condition thou may with him compound.
To pardon him if he again to pardon th• be bound.
The subtle science of the law, the statutes of our land,
(That long ago decreed were) thou dost not understand.
The Judges be malicious men, they spite and envy vs,
But he shall have them partial his causes to discus.
This is the chiefest privilege that doth to Kings belong.
What laws forbid•th other men, they doe, and doe no wrong.
He pardned Helen, she is wed to Menela again
Which Europe all with Asia did plunge alike in payne.
No Ladies Lust hath ravished yet Atrides in his life,
Nor privily purloynd his hart betrothed to his wife.
To pick a quarrel he begins and matter thee to blame,
Suppose thou nothing hast commit that worthy is of shame?
What boteth him whom Princes hate an honest life to frame?
He never doth complain his wrong, but ever bears the blame.
Wilt thou repair to Spart and to thy country trudge aright?
Wilt thou become a ronnagate from such a worthy wight?
Divorcement made from Kings will not so let the matter scope.
Thou easest fear by fickle hope, that falsely thou dost shape:
My trespass is disclosed to none, but to a trusty wight:
At princes gates fidelity yet never enter might.
I will corrupt and feed him so with silver and with gold.
That I by bribing bind him shall no secrets to unfold:
The trust that hired is and bought by bribes and monies fee,
Thy counsel to bewray again with bribes enticed will be
The remnant left of shamefastness of those ungracious tricks,
Wherein of late I did delight, my conscience freshly pricks.
Why kep'st thou such a busy stir and with thy flattering speech,
Instructing me with lewd advise dost wicked counsel preach
Shall I forsooth of royal blood with al the speed I can
Refuse the King of Kings, and wed an outcast banished man•
Why should you think in that Thiest was father unto me.
And Agamemnon Atreus son he should my better be?
If that be but a trifle small, and nephew to the same.
I am of Phoebus linage borne, whereof I do not shame.
Why makste thou Phoebus author of thy wicked pedagrew,
Whom out of heaven ye forced to fly when bridle back he drew,
When Lady Night with mantel black did spread her soden shade,
Why make thou the Gods in such reproachfulnes to wade?
Whose father hath thee conning made by slight and subtle guile
To make thy kinsman Cockold while his wife thou do defile.
What man is he whom we do know to be thy fathers mate,
Abusing lust of Lechery in such unlawful rate?
Avaunt, go pack thee hence in hast, dispatch out of my sight
This infamy, whose blemish stains this blood of worthy wight.
This is no new exile to me that wickedness do hint,
But if that thou (O worthy Queen) command me to avaunt,
I will not only straight avoid the house the town and field
My life on sword at thy request I ready am to yield
This heinous dede permit shall I (most churlish cruel drab)
Against my will though I offend, the fault I should not blab:
Nay, rather come apart with me, and let vs join our wits
To wrap our selves out of this woe and parlous threatening fits.
NOw chant it lusty lads,
Apollos praise suborn,
To thee the frolic flock
their crowned heads adorn.
To thee King Inachs stock
of wedlock chamber void,
Brayd out their virgins lockes
and thereon have employed
Their savoury garlands greene Itwist of laurel bow.
Draw near with vs O Thebes our dancing follow thou.
Come also ye that drink of Ismen bubbling flood,
Whereas the Laurel treeful thick on banks doth boot.
Eake ye whom Mando mild, the Prophetess divine,
(Foreseing fate) and borne of high Tiresias lygne,
Hath stirred to celebrate with sacred use and right.
Appollo and Dian borne of Latona bright.
O Victor Phoebe vnbend thy noked bow again.
Sith queen tnes and peace anew we do retain.
And let thy twinkling harp make melody so shrill,
While that thy nimble hand strike quauers with thy quill.
No curious descant I nor lusty music crave,
No jolly rumbling note, nor trouling tune to have.
But on thy treble Lute (according to thy use)
Strike up a playnsong note as when thy learned muse
Thy lessons do record, though yet on baser string
It likes thee to play the song that thou did singe:
As when from fiery heaven the dint of lightning flue,
Sent down by wrath of Gods the Titans overthrew
Or else when mountains were on mountains heaped hie
That raise for Giant fell their steppes into the sky,
The mountain Ossa stood on top of Pelion laid,
Olymp (whereon the Pines their budding branches braid)
Down poised both: draw ne'er O Iuno noble dame,
Both spouse of mighty Jove and sister to the same.
Thou that dost rule with him made jointer of his mace,
Thy people we of Greece give honour to thy grate.
Thou only dost protect from per ills Aigos land,
That ever careful was to have thine honour stand,
Most suppliant thereunto thou also with thy might
Dost order joyful peace and battles fearce of fight
Accept O conquering Queen these branches of the baize
That Agamemnon here doth yield unto thy praise:
The hollow boxen pipe (that doth with holes abound)
In synging unto the doth give a solemn sound:
To thee the Damsels eake that play upon the strings,
With conning harmony melodious music singes.
The matrons eke of Greece by ryper years more grave,
To thee the Taper pay that vowed oft they have,
The Heyferd young and white companion of the Bull.
Unskilful yet by proof the painful plow to pull.
Whose neck was never worn nor gald with print of yoke,
Is in thy temple slame receiving deadly stroke.
O Lady Pallas thou of most renowned hap
Bred of the brain of Jove that smites with thunder clap.
Thou lofty Trojan towers of craggy knotty flint
Hast bet with battring blade, and stroke with iaueling dint:
The elder matrons with the dames that younger be
Together in mingled heaps do honour due to thee,
When thou approaching nigh thy coming is espied,
The priest vnbarres the gate, and ops the Temple wide:
By clustering thronges the flocks thine altars haunt apace,
Bedecked with twisted crowns so trim with comely grace.
The old and ancient men well stepped and grown in years,
Whose feeble trembling age procures hory hairs
Obtaining their request crave de of thy grace divine,
Do offer up to thee their sacrify sed wine,
O bright Dian whose blase sheds light three sundry ways
VVemyndful are of thee, and render thankful praise,
Delon thy native soil thou did firmly bind,
That to and fro was wont to wander with the wind:
Which with foūdation sure mayn ground forbids to pass
For Navies (after which to swim it wonted was)
It is become a road defying force of wind,
The mothers funerals of Tantalus his kind.
The daughters seven by death thou victresse dost account.
Whose mother Niobe abides on Sipil mount
A lamentable rock and yet unto this hour
Her tears new gushing, out the marble old doth power.
The Godhood of the Twins in sumpteous solemn wise,
Both man and wife adore with savoury sacrifice,
But thee aboue the rest O father great and guide,
Whose mighty force is by the burninglightning tried:
Who when thou gave a beck and d•dst thy head but shake
At once thextremest pools of heaven and earth did quake,
O Iupiter the root that of our lynage art.
Accept these offered gifts and take them in good part:
And thou O grandsire great to thy posterity.
Have some remorse, that do not swerve in chivalry.
But yonder lo with stiuing steps the soldier comes amain
In all post hast, with token that good news declares plain
A Laurel branch, that hangs on his spear head he doth bring
Eurybates is come, who hath ben trusty to the king.
SOre tyred after many years
with travail and with toil
Scant crediting my self, the Gods
of this my native soil,
The temple, and the alters of
the saints that rule the sky,
In kumble sort with reverence
devoutly worship I.
Now pay your vows unto the Gods▪
returned is again
Unto his country court, where wont he was to rule, and reign,
Prince Agamemnon, victor he, of Greece the great rename.
The tidings of a message good unto mine ears is blown.
Where stays my spouse whō longing for ten years I have out scand?
What doth he yet sail on the seas, or he is come a land?
Yet hath he fixed and set his foot bauck stepping home again.
Upon the sandy shore, that lunge he wished to attain•
And doth he styll enjoy his health enhauncte in glory great,
And painted out in pomp of prays whose fame the sky doth beat?
Bless we with burning sacrifice at length this lucky day
And eke the Gods though gracious, yet dealing long delay:
Declare if that my brothers wife enjoy the vital ayre
And tel me to what kind of Coast my sister doth repair.
God grant, &amp; give vs better news then this that thou dost crave
The heavy hap of fighting floods forbiddes the truth to have,
Our scattred fleet the swelling seas attempts in such a plight,
That ship from ship was taken clean out of each others sight.
Atrides in the waters wide torwoyld and straying far
More violence by seas sustained then by the bloody war
And as it were a conquered man escaping home al weet
Now brings in his company of such a mighty fleet,
A sort of bruised broken barks, beshaken, torn, and rent.
Show what unlucky chance it is that hath our navy spent.
What storm of seas dispersed hath our Captains hear and there
Thou willest me to make report of heavy woeful gear.
Thou bid me most grievous news with tidings good to part:
For uttering of this woeful hap my feeble mind doth start.
And horribly appalled is with this so monstrous ill.
Speak out and utter it: himself with terror he doth fill,
Whose hart his own calamity and cark doth loath to know:
The hart whom doubted damage dulls with greater grief doth glow
When Trojan buildings blazing bright did burn away and broil,
Kindled first by Grekish brand, they fall to part the spoil:
Repairing fast unto the seas again we come aboard,
And now the soldiers weary loins were eased of his sword,
Their bucklers cast aside, upon the hatches lie aboue.
Their warlike hands in practise put, and Oars learn to move:
Each little hindrance seems to much to them in hasty plight,
When of recourse the Admiral gave watchword by his light,
And trumpet blast began to cal our army from delay,
The painted Pup with gilded snout did first guide on the way:
And cut the course, which following on a thousand ships did rive,
Then first a wind with pipling puffs our lancing ships did drive,
Which glided down upon our sails the water being calm
With breath of western wind so mild scant moved any walme.
The shining seas bespred about with ships doth glister bright,
And also covered with the same lay hid from Phoebus light:
It doth vs good to case upon the naked shore of Troy:
The desert Phrygian plots so bare to view w•e hop for joy:
The yeuth each one besturres themselves, and striking altogether,
They tough their oars &amp; with their toil they help the wind &amp; weather
They •ug and cheerly row by course, the spir•ing seas up dash,
Against the •atling •ibs of ships the flapping floods do flash
The hory froth of wrestling waives which ores aloft doth raise,
Do draw and trace a furrow through the marblefaced seas.
When stronger blast with belly swollen our h•ysted sails did fill,
They row no more, but let the Pup to go with wind at will,
Their sheryng oars laid aside our Pilot doth espy,
How far from any land aloof our sails reculing fly,
Or bloody battles doth display the threats of Hector stout,
Or of his rattling waggings tells, wherein he rode about.
Or how his gashed carcass slain and trained about the field
To funeral flan es and obit rights for coin again was yield.
How Iupiter embathed was al in his royal blood.
The frolic fish disposed was to mirth in Tyrant flood,
And fetching friskes both in and out plays on the waters brim,
And on his broad and finny back about the seas doth swim,
With gambols quick in rings around and s•de to side inclined,
Erwhyle he sports afront the pup, and whips again behind,
Now fiddling on the snout before the dalying wanton route
With iocundary jolly tricks doth skip the fleet about.
Sometime he stands gazing on and eyes the vessels bright,
Now every shore is covered clean, and land is out of sight,
The parlous point of Ida rock in sight doth open lye,
And that alone espy we could with firmly fixed eye,
A dusky cloud of stifling smoke from Troy did smolter black,
When Titan from the weary necks the heavy yokes did slack.
The fading light did grovelling bend, and down the day did shroud,
Against the Stars amounting up a little misty cloud
Came belching out in irksome Iompe, and Phoebus gallant beams
He spout upon, bestayning them duct down in Western streams.
The Sun set swaruing in such sort with divers change of face,
Did give vs cause to have mistrust of Neptunes doubted grace.
The evening first did burnish bright, and paint with stars the sky.
The winds were laid, and clean forsook our sails that quiet lie.
When cracking, rattling, rumbling noise, tushed down with thundering sway
From top of hills, which greater stir doth threaten and bewraye.
With bellowinges, and yellinges load, the shores do grunt &amp; groan,
The craggy clyues and roaring rocks do howl in hollow stone.
The bubbling waters swells vpreard before the wrestling wind,
When suddenly the lowering light of Moan is hid and blind.
The glymsing stars do go to glade, the surging seas are tossed
Even to the skies among the clouds the light of heaven is lost.
More nights in one compacted are with shadow dim and black,
One shadow upon another doth more darkness heap and pack,
And every spark of light consumed the waives and skies do meet,
The ruffling winds range on the seas, through every coast they fi•t.
They heave it up with violence, oreturnde from bottom low,
The western wind flat in the face of Eastern wind doth blow.
With hurly burly Bores set op his blasting mouth,
And girds out his boysteous breath against the stormy south,
Each wind with al his might doth blow, and works dangers deep,
They shake the floods, a sturdy blast along the seas do sweep.
That rolls and rumbles wave on wave, a northern tempest strong,
Abundance great of flacky snow doth hurl our ships among.
The southwynd out of Libia, doth rage upon a should,
And with the puissant force thereof the quicksands up be told,
Nor bids in the south which doth with tempest lump and lower,
And force the flowing floods to rise by pouring out a shower.
The stubborn Eurus, Earthquakes made, and shoke the coūtries East,
And Eos cost where Phoebus first arises from his rest.
How violent Corus stretched and tare his yawning breast full wide?
A man would sure have thought the world did from his center slyde,
And that the frames of Heaven broke up the Gods down would fall
And Chaos dark confused heap would shade and cover all.
The stream strove with the wind, the wind did beat it down again.
The springing sea within his banks can not it self contain,
The raging shower his trilling drops doth mingle with the seas,
And yet in all this misery the find not so much ease,
To see and know what ill it is, that works their decay.
The darkness dim oppresses still and keeps the light away:
The blackfa•st night with Hellicke hue was clad of Stygian lake
And yet full oft with glimsing beams the sparkling fire out brake,
The cloud doth crack, and being rent the lightning leaps out,
The wretches like the same so well it shining them about,
That still they wish such light to have (although God wot but ill)
The navy swaying down it self doth cast away, and spill.
One side with other side is cracked, and helm is rent with helm,
The ship it self the gulping seas do headlong overwhelm.
Erwhyle a greedy gaping gulf doth sup it up amain,
Then by and by •oct up aloft it spewes it out again,
She with her swagging full of sea to bottom lowe doth sink
And drenches deep aside in floods her totring broken brink.
That underneath a dozen waives lay drowned out of sight,
Her broken planks swim up and down, spoiled is her tackle quite,
Both sail and Oars clean are lost, the mayne mast eke is gone.
That wonted was to bear upright the sail yard thereupon,
The timber and the broken bordes lye on the waters brim,
When cold and shivering fear in vs doth strike through every limb,
The wisest wits entocksicate dare nothing enterprise,
And cunning practise nought avails when fearful storms arise,
The mariners letting duty slip stand staring all aghast,
Their scoping ores suddenly out of their hands are wrast.
To prayer then apace we fall, when other hope is none,
The Greeks and Troyans to the Gods alike do make their moan.
Alack what succour of the fates may wee poor wretches find?
Against his father Pyr•hus bears a spiteful cankered mind,
At Ayax grudge Vlisses doth, king Menela doth hate
Great Hector: Agamemnon is with Priam at debate.
O happy man is he that doth lye slain in Trojan ground,
And hath deserved by handy stroke to take his fatal wound,
Whom same preserves, taking up his tomb in conquered land
Those moms whose melting cowards hart durst never take in hand
Or enterprise no noble act, those force of f•oods shall drown
But fate forbearing long, will take stout Brutes of high rename,
Full well we may ashamed be, in such a sort to dye,
If any man his spiteful mind yet can not satisfy,
With these outrageous plunging plagues that down frō Gods are sēt,
Appease at length thy wrathful God again and take relent.
Even Troy for pity would have wept, to see our woeful case,
But if that in thy boiling breast black rancour still have place,
And that the Greeks to ruin run, it bee thy purpose bent,
Why doe these Troyans go to wrack? for whom thus are wee spent?
Assuage the rigour of the sea that threarning hills up reares:
This drenched Fleet the Trojan folk and Greeks together bears.
Then from their prayers are they put, their foultring tongues doe stay,
The roaring seas doth drown their voice and caryes their cries away.
Then mighty Pallas armed with the lepping lightning sire,
That teasty Jove doth use to hurl provoked to swelling ire,
With threatening Iaueling in her hand, her prowess means to try.
And eke her force whose boiling breast with Gorgon fits doth fry,
Or what with Target she can doe, and with her Fathers fire.
Then from the Skies another storm begins abroad to spyre,
But Aiax nothing yet dismayed all force withstands stout,
Whom when hee spread his swelling sails with Cable stretched out,
She lighting down did wring him hard, and wrapped him in her flame,
And slang another flashing dint of lightning on the same,
With all her force and violence her hand brought back again,
She tossed him out, as late that feat her father tought her plain.
Both over Aiax and his Pup she flies overthwart,
And renting man and ship, of both she bears away a part,
His courage nought abated yet hee all to singde doth seem,
Even like a slubberne ragged Rock amid the striving stream,
Hee trains along the roaring seas and eke the weltering wave
By shouing on his bourly breast in sunder quite he drove,
The Bark with hand he caught, and on it self did ripe it over,
Yet Aiax fhyneth in the flood which darkness blind doth cover.
At length attaining to a rock his thundering crakes were these,
I conquered have the force of fire and rage of fighting seas,
It doth me good, to master thus the anger of the sky,
With Pallas wrath, the lightning flames and floods tumulting hye.
The terror of the warlike god once could not make me fly,
The force of Mars and Hector both at once sustained have I.
Nor Phoebus darts could me constrain, from him one foot to shoon,
All these beside the Phrygians subdued we have, and won.
When other Mecocks flings his darts shall I not them withhis stand?
Yea, what if Phoebus came himself, to pitch them with his hand?
When in his melancholy mood he boasted without mean.
Then father Neptune lift his heat about the waters clean.
The beaten rock with for led m•ce he undermining plucked
From bottom loose, and sunk it down, when down himself he duck.
There Aiax lay, by land, by fire, and storm of seas destroyed
But we by suffering shipwreck; are with greater plagues a•oyd.
A subtle shallow flood there is flown on a stony should,
Where crafty Caphar out of sight the lurking rocks doth hold,
Upon whose sharpe and ragged tops the swelling side doth flow,
The boiling waives do beat thereon still sweaing to and fro:
A turret nodding over it doth hang with falling sway,
From whence on either side from height prospect espy wee may
Two seas: and on this hand the coast where Pelops once did reign,
And Isthmus flood in narrow creek, reculing back again,
Doth stop Ionian sea, least into Hellespont it run,
On the other part is Lemnon flood that fame by bloodshed won.
On the other side Calcedon to one doth stand against this forte,
And Aulis Isle that stayde out ships that thither did resort.
This Castle here inhabit doth our Palimedes sier,
Whose cursed hand held in the top a brand of flaming fire.
That did allure our fleet, to turn on lurking rocks a right,
Enticing them with with blaze to come unto the light.
All into fitters shaken are the vessels on the should,
But other some doe swim, and some upon the rocks are roulde.
And other •lipping back again so to eschew the Rocks,
His bruised Rib•, and rattling sides against eche other knocks,
Whereby the other hee doth break, and broken is himself,
Then would they lane into the deep, for now they dread the shelf,
This perk of troubles thau•ct to hap in dawning of the day.
But when the Gods (be•ought of vs) began the rage to stay,
And Phoebus golden beams began a fresh to render light,
The doleful day descried all the damage done by night.
O whether may I now lament, and weep with wailing sad?
Or shall I else in that my Spouse returned is bee glad?
I doe rejoice, and yet I am compelled to bewail
My countries great calamity that doth the same assail.
O Father great whose majesty doth thundering Scepters shake,
The souring Gods unto the Greeks now favourable make,
With garlands greene let every head rejoicing now be crounde.
To thee the pipe in sacrifice melodiously doth sound,
And on thine alter lies slain an Heyferd lily whight,
Before the same doe present stand with hanging lockes vndight,
A careful Trojan company in heavy woeful plight,
On whom frō high the Laurel tree with spredding branch doth shyne,
Whose virtue hath inspired them with Phoebus grace divine,
ALas the cruel sting of love
how sweetly doth it taste,
A misery is mortal man
annexed while life doth last?
The path of mischief for to fly,
now sith there is a gap,
And wretched souls be frankly called
From every woeful hap,
By death, a pleasant port, for aye in rest them selves to shroud,
Where dreadful tumults never dwell nor storms of Fortune proud:
Nor yet the burning fiery flakes of Jove the same doth doubt,
When wrongfully with thwacking thumps be raps his thunder out:
Here Lady Peace th'inhabitours doth never put in flight,
Nor yet the victors threatening wrath approaching right to fight,
No whirling westernwynde doth urge the romping seas to prance,
No dusty cloud that raised is by savage Dimilaunce,
On horseback riding rank, by rank no fearce and cruel host,
No people slaughtered, with their towns clean ropsie turuey tossed:
While that the foe with flaming fire doth spoil and waste the wall,
Untamed and unbridled Mars destroys and batters all:
That man alone who forces not the fickle fates a straw,
The visage grim of Acheront whose eyes yet never saw,
Who never vewd with heavy cheer the vgsome Limbo lake,
And putting life in hazard, dare to death him self betake.
That person is a Princes pear, and like the Gods in might,
Who knows not what death doth mean is in a piteous plight
The ruthful ruin of our native country wee beheld:
That woeful night, in which the roofs of houses ouerquelde,
In Dardans City blazing bright with flashing fiery flames.
When as the Greeks with burning brands enkindle did the frames,
That: Troy whom war &amp; beedes of arms might not subdue and take.
As once did mighty Hercules, whose Ouyuer caused it quake,
Which neither he that 〈◊〉 son, and son to Thetis was,
Nor whom Achilles loved to well, could ever bring to pass,
When glytesing bright in field he ware •al•e armour on his back,
And counterfeiting fears Achill the Troyans drove to wrack.
Nor when Achilles he him self his mind from sorrow wrast,
And Trojan women to the walls did scudding leap in hast.
In myserte she lost her proud estate, and fast rename,
By being stoutly overcome, and hardly pulled down.
Years five &amp; five did Troy resis•e, that yet 〈…〉 must,
In one nights space by destiny he laid in the dust.
Their fained gifts well have we tried that huge and fatal gin,
We light of credit, with our own right hand have haled in,
That fatal gift of Greeckes: what •yme at entry of the gap
The huge horse did shivering stand, where in the in selves did wrap
The captains close, in hollow vats with bloody war y•reight.
When lawfully we might have tried, and searched their deceit:
So by their own contrived snares the greeks had bin confound:
The brazen bucklers being shook did give a clattring sound.
A privy whispering often times came tickling in our ear.
And Pyrrhus (in a murreynes name so ready for to hear.
The crafty council picked out of false Vlifsses brain,)
Did •angle in the hollow Vaut•• that range thereof again.
But fearing and suspecting nought the hey•die youth of Troy
Laid hands upon the sacred ropes, to hale and pull with joy,
On this side young Astyanax came guarded with his train,
On the other part Pollixena disponsed to bee slain
Upon Achilles tomb, she coms with maids, and hee with men,
A jolly flock with equal years as young as they were then.
Their vowed oblations to the gods in holy day attire,
The matrons bring and so to church repairs euecry sire.
And all the city did alike, yea Hecuba our queen
(That since the woeful Hectors death or now was never fene)
She merry is: O grief accursed, of all thy sorrows deep
For which that first, or last befell intend thou to weep?
Our battered walls which heavenly hands •cected have and framed?
Or else the burning temples which upon their Idols flamde?
Lamenting these calamities wee have not time and space,
O mighty parent Pryam we poor Troyans whale thy case.
The old mans throttling throat I saw, (alas) I saw yborde
With cruel Pyrrhus blade, that scante with any blood was gored:
Refrain your tears yt down your cheeks should tricle evermore
With woeful wailings piteously your private friends deplore
My miseries refuse a mate, so much accursed as I:
To few my careful case, refrain your lamentable cry.
As for mine own distress to moorne, I shall suffice alone.
To mingle tears with other tears it doth vs good to moan:
In those the burning teary streams more ardently doe boyle,
Whom secret thoughts of lurking cares in privy breast turmoil:
Though that thou were a Gossop stout, that brooke much sorrow may
I warrant thee, thou might well, lament this sore decay,
Not sad and solemn Aedon that in the woods doth singe
Her sugared Ditties finely tunde on sweet and pleasant string:
Recording Iris woeful hap in divers kind of note,
Whom Progne though he were her child and of her womb begot,
For to revenge his fathers fault, she did not spare to kill:
And gave his flesh and blood for food the fathers Maw to fill.
Nor Progne who in Swallows shape: upon the ridges hye,
Of houses sits in Biston town bewailing piteously,
With chattering throat, of Tereus her spouse the cruel act,
(Who did by strength and force of arms a shameful brutish fact.
Defile the sister of his wife, fair Philomel by name,
And eke cut out her tongue, least she should blab it to his shame)
Though Progne this her husbands rape lamenting very sore
Doe whale, and weep with piteous plaint, yet can she not deplore
Sufficiently, though that she would, our countries piteous plight:
Though he himself among the Swans sir Cygnus lily whight.
Who dwells in stream of Ester flood, and Tanais channel could,
His weeping voice most earnestly though utter out her would:
Although the morning Halcyons with doleful sighs doe whale,
At such time as the fighting floods their Cyex did assail,
Or rashly waxing bold attempt the Seas now laid at rest,
Or being very fearful feed their brood in tottring nest,
Although as squeamish hearted men those priests in bedlam rage,
Whom mother Cyble being borne on high in lofty stage,
Doth move, to play on shalmes, Atys the Phrygian to lament,
Yet can not they this lot bewail, though brawn frō arms they rent.
Cassandra, in our tears there is no measure to refrain,
Those miseries all measure pass, that plunged vs in payne.
The sacred fillets from thy heads, why dost thou hale and pull?
They chiefly ought to worship God, whose hearts with grief be dull.
My fear by this affliction is clean abaled all,
Nor praying to the heavenly Ghosts for mercy will I call.
Although they were disposed to cha•e and fret in fus•ten fumes,
They nothing have me to displease, Fortune her force consumes.
Her spyte is worn unto the stumps, what country have I left?
Where is my Sire? am I of all my sisters quite bereft.
The sacred tombs and alter stones our blood have drunk &amp; swylde,
Where are my brethren blessed knor? destroyed in the fylde.
All widow Wives of Priams sons may easly now behold,
The Palace void and cast of court of silly Priam old.
And by so many marriages so many Widows are,
But only Helen coming from the coast of Lacon far.
That Hecuba the mother of so many a princely wight,
Whose fruitful Womb did breed the brand, of fire blazing bright:
Who also bare the swinge in Troy, by practise now doth learn,
New laws and guise of destiny in bondage to discern.
On her she takes heart of grace with looks so sterne and wild,
And barks as a bedlam bitch about her strangled child
Dear Polidor, the remnant left, and only hope of Troy,
Hector, and Priam to revenge, and to restore her joy.
The sacred Phoebus Prophet is with sudden silence hushed:
A quaking trembling shivering fear throughout her Isms hath rushed:
Her Face as pale as Ashes is, her Fillets stand upright,
The soft and gentle goldilockes start up of her affright.
Her panting breathing breast stuffed up within doth grunt and groan.
Her glaring bryghe and steaming Eyes are hither and thither thrown.
Now glancing up and down they roll: now standing stiff they stare.
She stretches up her head more straight then commonly she bare,
Bolt up she goes, her wrestling Jaws that fast together clinge,
She doth attempt by divers means, on sunder how to wring.
Her mumbling words in gabling mouth shut up she doth assuage,
As Menas mad that Bacchus aares doth serve in furious rage.
How doth it hap (O sacred tops of high Parnassus hill)
That me berapt of sense, with pricks of fury fresh ye feel?
Why doe you me with ghost inspire, that am beside my wits?
O Phoebus none of thine I am, release me from the sits:
Infixed in my burning breasts the flames extinguish out,
Who forces me with fury fell to gad and trot about?
Or for whose sake inspyrde with spryte mad mumbling make must I?
Why play I now the Prophet cold, sith Troy in dust doth lie?
The day doth shrink for dread of war, the night doth dim mine eyes.
With mantle black of darkness deep clean covered is the skies:
But lo two shining Suns at once in heaven appears bright,
Two Grecian houses muster doe their armies twain to fight.
Among the mighty Goddesses in Ida woods I see,
The fatal shepherd in his throne as vmpier placed to bee:
I doe advise you to beware, beware (I say) of kings,
(A kindred in whose cankered hearts old privy grudges springes)
That country clown Aegisthus he this stock shall overthrow,
What doth this foolish despret dame her naked weapons show?
Whose crown entendeth she to crack in weed of Lacon land,
With Hatchet (by the Amazons invented first) in hand?
What face of mighty majesty be witched hath mine eyes?
The conqueror of salvage beasts Marmarick Lyon lies,
Whose noble neck is wurried with currish fang and tooth
The curlish snaps of eager Lyonesle abide hee doth.
Alack ye ghosts of all my friends why should ye say that I,
Among the rest am only safe, from perils far to lie?
Fain father follow thee I would, Troy being laid in dust.
O brother terror of the Greeks, O Troyans aid and trust.
Our ancient pomp I doe not see, nor yet thy warmed hands,
(That fearce on Greekish flaming fleet did fling the fyry brands)
But mangled members, schorched corps, and sake thy valiant arms,
Hard pimond and bound in bands sustaining grievous harms:
O Troyolus, a match unfit encountering with Achill
(That mighty man of arms) to soon come unto thee I will.
I doe delight, to sail with them on stinking Siygian flood.
To view the churlish mastiff cur of hell, it doth me good.
And gaping mouthed Kingdom dark of greedy Ditis reign.
The Barge of filthy Phlegethon this day shall entertain,
Me conquering, and conquered, and Princes souls with all.
You flitering shades I you beseech, and cake on thee I call,
O Stygian poole (whereon the Gods their solemn oaths doe take
Vnbolt a while the Brasne bars of darksome Lymoo lake.
Whereby the Phrygian folk in hell may Mic•an state behold.
Look up ye silly wretched souls, the fates are backward roulde.
The sqally sisters doe approach, and deal their bloody strokes,
Their smultring taggots in their hands half bru•ie to ashes smokes.
Their visages so pale doe burn, with fyry flaming eyes:
A garment black their g•awed guts doth gyrde in mourning g•ise.
Dire dread of night begins to howl, the bones of body bast
With lying long doe rot corrupt in merry puddle cast.
Behold, the weary aged man his burning thirst forgot▪
The waters dalying at his lips to catch endeavours not:
But mourns for the funeral, that shall ensue anon.
The Trojan Prince his royal robes triumphant puts on.
The furious rage clean overpassed begins it self to slake.
And slyps away, even as a Bull that deadly wound doth take
On gashed neck afront the aares: come let vs ease at last
Her limbs, that of the spryte of God hath felt the mighty blast.
Returning home again at length and crounde with Laurel bow
(A sign of worthy victory) is Agamemnon now.
The Wife to meet her Husband, doth her speedy passage ply,
Returning hand in hand, and foot by foot most lovingly.
AT length I doe arrive again
upon my native soil:
God save thee O dear loved Land,
to thee so huge a spoil
So many barbarous people yield:
the flower of Asia. Troy:
To bear thy yoke submits her self,
that lunge did live in joy.
Why doth this Prophet (on the ground her sprawling body laid)
Thus reel and stagger on her neck, all trembling and dismayed?
Sirs, take her up, with Liquor warm let her bee cherished.
Now peepes she up again, with drooping eyes sonke in her head:
Pluck up thy spryte, here is the port wished for in misery:
This day is festival.
At Troy so was it wont to bee.
Let vs to Th'alters worship give.
At Th'alters died my sire:
A, Pray wee to Jove.
To love whose grace divine doth me inspire?
Dost thou suppose that Troy thou see?
And Priam eke I see.
Troy is not here.
where Helen is there take I Troy to bee,
Fear not as maid to serve thy dame.
Nay freedom draws ny.
Take thou no thought how thou shalt I•ue.
All cares for to defy,
Death gives a courage unto me.
Yet say I once again
There is no danger left, whereby thou might hurt sustain.
But yet much troublous daūger both hang over thy head I wot.
What mischief may a victor dread?
Even y• hee dreads not.
Ye trusty meny of my men come cary her away,
Till of the spryte she rid her self, least fury force her say
That may be prejudicial, her tongue she cannot frame.
To thee O Father flinging forth the lightnings flashing flame,
That dost disperse the clouds, and rule the course of every star,
And guide the Globe of Earth, to whom the boots won by war
With triumph victors dedicate: to thee O Iuno hight
The sister dear of doughty Jove, (thy husband full of might)
Both I and Greece with flesh and blood, and eke our vowed beast,
And gorgeous gifts of Arabia, give worship to thy hest.
O GREECE by noble Gentlemen
in honour shining clear,
O GREECE to wrathful IVNO thou
that art the darling dear,
Some jolly worthy lusty blood
thou fosters evermore,
Thou hast made even the Gods, that were
a number odd before.
That puissant mighty Hercules a noble Imp of thine
Defer•ed by his travels twelve, rapt up in heaven to shyne.
For whom the heavens did alter course, and Iupiter with all
Did iterate the hours of night, when dampishe dew doth fall.
And charged Phoebus chariot swift to trot with slower pace,
And leisurely bright lady Moon thy homwarde Wayne to trace,
Bright Luci•er that year by year his name a new doth change,
Came back again, to whom the name of Hesper seemed strange.
Aurora to her common course her reared head addressed,
And couching backward down again the same she did ares•,
Upon the shoulder of her spouse, whose years with age are worn
The east did feel, so felt the west, that Hercules was borne.
Dame nature could not clea•e dispatch, to utter in one night,
That boystous lad: the whirling world did wayght for such a wight.
O babe whose shoulders underprop, the ample spactous sky,
In clasped arms thy prewesse did the crushed Lyon try.
Who from his fyry yawning throat sp•was out his broiling brand,
The nimble hynde in Menall mount hath known thy heavy hand▪
The Bore hath felt thy fist, which did Arcadia destroy.
The monstrous conquered Bull hath rorde that Creta did annoy.
The Dragon dire that breeding beast in Lerna poole he slew,
And chopping of one head forbad thereof to rise anew.
With clubbed bruising battring bat he crinkly did subdue.
(The brethren twins y• tewde un Teat) whereof three monsters grew.
Of triple formed Gerion the spoil into the east,
A drove of ECttell Hercules did fetch out of the weast.
Away from tyrant Diomede the Thracian horse he led,
Which neither with the grass that grew by Styrmon flood he fed,
Nor yet on Heber banks, but them the v••lain did refresh
His greedy mounching cramming tades with aliaunts blood and flesh.
Their rawfed Jaws imbrewde were with the carmans blood at last,
The spoils and shaftes Hipolyte saw from her bosom wrast
As soon as he with clattring shaft the dusky cloud did smite,
The Stymphall bird that shadowed the sun, did take her flight.
The fertile tree that apples bears of gold, did fear him sore,
Which never yet acquaintance had with Tasters •ooth before.
But whipping up with lively twigs into the ayre she fly•s,
And while the chinking plate doth found then Argos full of eyes,
The watchman shrinking close for cold that sleep yet never knew,
Doth hear the noise while Hercules with mettle of yellow hew
Well laden packs away, and left the grove befliched clea•e.
The hound of hell did hold his tongue drawn by in triple cheane,
Nor bark with any boughinge throat, nor could abide the heme,
Or colour of the heavenly light, whose beams hee never knew.
When thou were captain General, and did conduct our Host,
(They that) of Dardans Lygne, to come their Stock doe falsely boste,
Were vanquished by force of arms and since they felt again
Thy Gray goose wing, whose bitterness to fear might thē constrain.
WIthin a revel rex is kept,
as sore as ever was,
Even at the ten years siege of Troy:
What thing is this? (alas)
Get up my soul, and of the rage
auengmeent worthy crave:
Though Phrygians wee bee vanquished,
the victory we have.
The matter well is brought about:
up Troy thou rysest now,
Thou flat on floor hast pulled down Greece, to lie as low as thou.
Thy Conqueror doth turn his Face: my prophesying spright
Did never yet disclose to me so notable a sight:
I see the same, and am thereat, and busied in the broil,
No vision fond fantastical my senses doth beguile:
Such fare as Prygians feasts with on last unhappy night
At Agamemnons royal court full daintily they dight:
With purple hangings all adorned the brodred Beds doe shyne,
In old Assaracks goblets gilt they swincke and swill the wine.
The King in gorgeous royal robes on chair of State doth sit,
And pranckt with pride of Pryams pomp of whom he conquered it.
Put of this hostile weed, to him, (the Queen, his Wife began say,)
And of thy loving Lady wrought wear rather this array.
This garment knit. It makes me loath, that shivering here I stand.
O shall a King be murdered, by a banished wretches hand?
Out, shall Th'adulterer destroy the husband of the Wife?
The dreadful destinies approached, the food that last in life
He tasted of before his death, their masters blood shall see,
The gubs of blood down dropping on the wind shall powered bee.
By traytrous trick of trapping weed his death is brought about,
Which being put upon his head his hands could not get out▪
The stopped poake with mouth set op his muffled head doth hyde,
The mankind dame with trembling hand the swe•d drew from her side,
Nor to the utmost of her might it in his flesh she thrast,
But in the gieuing of the stroke she stayed all aghast,
Hee as it were a bristled Bore entangled in the net
Among the briars in bushy woods yet tries out to get.
With struggling much the shrinking bands more straightly he doth bind.
He strives in vain, and would sl•y of the snare that doth him blind.
Which catches hold on every side. But yet th'entangled wretch
Doth grope about, his subtle foes with griping hand to catch.
But furious Tyndaris prepared the Pollaxe in her hand,
And as the priest to sacrifice at Th'alter side doth stand,
And views with eye the Bullocks neck, ear that with Axe he smite,
So to and fro she heaves her hand to strike and level right.
He hath the stroke: dispatcht it is: not quite fhopt of the head
It hangs by a little crop: here from the Carcass dead
The spouting blood came gushing out: and there the head doth lye,
With wallowing, bobling, mumbling tongue: nor they do by and bye
Forsake him so: the breathless coarse Aegist doth all to coil:
And mangled hath the gashed corpse: while thus hee doth him spoil,
She puts to her helping hand: by detestable deed
They both accord unto the kind, whereof they doe proceed.
Dame Helens sister right she is, and hee Thyestes son:
Lo doubtful Titan stands still the day now being donne,
Not knowing whether best to keep still on his wonted way,
Or turn his wheels unto the path of dire Thyestes day.
O Thou whom of our Fathers death
the only help wee have,
Fly, fly, from force of furious foes,
make hast thy self to save:
Our house is •opsey turuey tossed,
our Stock is cast away,
Our ruthful realms to ruin run, our kingdoms doe decay.
Who comes here in Chariot swift thus galloping a mayne?
Brother, disguised in thy weed let me thy person fain.
O Buzzard blind, what dost thou mean from foreign folk to fly?
Whom dost thou shun? it doth behove to fear this family.
Orestes now bee bold, and set all shivering fear a side,
The certain succour of a trusty friend I have espied.
WIth solemn Pomp I Strophilus
forsaking Phocis land,
Bearing a branch of Palm, that grows
at Eli•, in my hand,
Returned back I am, the cause
that wild me heather wend,
Is with these gifts to gratify
and welcome home my friend,
Whose valiant army shall•e, and shook
the tattred Trojan walls,
Who wearied with the ten years war, now flat on floor she falls.
What woeful wight is this that stains her mourning face with tears,
And drowned deep in drousp dumps oppressed is with •ears?
I know full well this damsel is of Princes lynage borne.
What cause Electra hath this joyful family to morn?
By treason that my mother wrought, my Father lies slain,
And drincking of their fathers cup the children doe complain.
Aegist engroceth Caste•s got by fornication.
A lack that of so lunge a time, felicity is none.
I thee request even for the Jove my father thou doest owe,
And for the honour of the crown, whose brute abroad both grow
In every coast: and by the Gods that diversely doe deal,
Take into thy tuition, convey away, and steal,
This poor Orest: such kind of theft is piety in deed.
Although that Agamemnoas death doth teach me to take heed,
Yet will I undertake the same, and with all diligence
Orestes shall I go about with strength to have thee hence.
Prosperity requires faith, but trouble exacts the same,
Have here a price for those that doe contend and wage in game.
An Ornament with comely grace ordained to deck the brow,
And let thy head be couerde with this greene and pleasant bow.
And cary this victorious triumphant branch in hand.
God grant this Palm that planted was in fertile Pisa land,
(Where solemn games were celebrate Ioues honour to express)
May both a safeguard bee to thee, and bring thee good success.
Thou that bestryds thy fathers steeds, as he before hath done,
Go strike a league of amity with Pylades my son.
Now nimble Nagges let Greece hereof recording testify,
With headlong scouring course amain this traytrous country fly.
Hee is escaped a•d gone, and with unmeasurable might
The Chariot horse with rain at will doe scud out of my sight.
Now free from peril on my foes attendance will I make.
And offer willingly my head the deadly wound to take.
The cruel conquers of her spouse is come, whose spotted weed
With sprinkels (sign of slaughter) doe bear record of her deed.
Her goary hands new bathed in blood as yet they bee not dry,
Her rough and churlish rigorous looks the fact doe notify.
Unto the Temple will I trudge. Cassandra suffer me,
Oppressed with eagle grief, take part of sacrifice with thee.
O Thou thy Mothers Enemy,
ungracious saucy face.
After what sorre dost thou a maid
appear in public plate?
I have with my virginity
the bowers of Bawds forsook.
What man is het, that ever thee to bee a virgin took?
What your own daughter?
With thy mother more modest should,
Doe you at length begin to preach, such godliness to me. thou be.
A marily stomach stout thou bast with swelling haughty hart.
Subdued with sorrow learn thou shall to play a women's part.
A swerd and buckler very well a woman doth beseem,
(Except I dote.)
Thy self dost thou haylefellowe with vs esteem?
What Agamemnoon new is this, whom thou hast got of late?
Hereafter shall I tame, and teach thy girlish tongue to prate.
And make thee know, how to a Queen thy taunting to forbear.
The whilst (thou Widow) aūsware me directly to this gear.
Thy husband is bereaved quite of breath, his life is donne.
Enquter where thy brother is, so seek about my son.
Hee is departed out of Greece.
Go fetch him out of hand.
Fetch thou my father unto me.
Give me to understand,
Where doth he lurking hyde his head? where is he shrunk away?
All plunge of perils past hee is, and at a quiet stay,
And in another Kingdom where no harm hee doth mistrust,
This answer were sufficient, to please a Parent tust.
But one whose breast doth boyle in wrath, it cannot satisefy.
To day by death thou shalt receive thy fatal destiny.
On this condition am I pleased, the Alter to forsake,
If that this hanc shall doe the deed, my death when I shall take.
Or else if in my throat to bath thy blade, thou doe delight,
Most willingly I yield my throat, and give thee leave to smite.
Or if thou will chop of my head in brutish beastly guise,
My neck a waiting for the wound out stretched ready lies.
Thou hast committed sinfully a great and grievous guilt.
Go purge thy hardened hands, the which thy husbands blood have spilt.
O thou that of my perils all dost suffer part with me,
And in my realm dost also rule with eagle dignity,
Aegisthus, art thou glad at this? (as doth her not behove,)
With checks and taunts y• daughter doth her mothers malice move.
She keeps her brothers counsel close conveyed out of the way.
Thou mal•pert and w•tlesse wench, thine cluishe prating stay,
Refrain those words unfit thy Mothers glowing cares to vex.
What shall the breeder of this broil control me with his checks,
Whose fathers gutit hath caused him to have a doubtful name,
Who both is to his sister, son, and Nephew to the same?
To snap her head of with thy swerd Aegist dost thou refrain?
Let her give up the ghost: or bring her brother straight again:
Let her be locked in dungeon darck, and let her spend her days,
In Caves &amp; Rocks, with painful pangs, torment her every ways.
I hope him whom she hidden hath she will again descry,
Through being clapped in prison strong and suffering poverty
With irksome and unsavoury smells on every side annoyed,
Enforced to wear a widows weed, er wedding day enjoyed:
Put in exile and banishment when eche man doth her hate:
So shall she bee by misery compelled to yield to late,
Prohibited of wholesome ayre fruition to have.
Grant me my dome by means of death to pass unto my grave.
I would have granted it to thee, if thou should it deny.
Unskilful is the tyrant, who by suffering wretches die
Doth end their pains.
what after death doth any thing remain?
And if thou doe desire to dye, the same see you refrain.
Lay hands s•is on this wondrous wretch, whom being carried on,
Even to the furthest corner of my jurisdiction.
Far out beyond Mycoenas land in bonds let her be bound,
With darkness dive in hiddeous hold let her be closed round.
This captive Spouse and wicked Queen, the Trull of Princes bed
Shall pay her pains, and suffer death by so••ng of her head.
Come, hale her on, that she may follow, that way my spouse is gon,
Whose love from me enticed was.
Doe not thus hale me on.
I will before you take the way, these tidings first to tell
Unto my country men of Troy beneath in lowest hell.
How ouerquelmed ships each where are spread the seas upon:
And M•coene country conquered, is brought in subjection.
He that of thousand captains was grande captain general,
Come to as great calamity as Troy it self did fall,
Entrapped was by traytrous train, and whoredom of his Wife,
And by a gift received of her, deprived of his Life.
Let vs not linger: on with me, and thanks I doe you give.
I •oy, that it might be my hap, thus after Troy to live.
Go to, prepare thy self to dye thou frantic raging wight.
The frenzy fits of fury fell on you shall also light.
ALas ye hateful hellish Hags,
ye furies foul and fell,
Why cause ye rusty rancours rage
in noble hearts to dwell?
And cankered hate in boiling breasts
to grow from age to age?
Could not the graundstres painful pangs
the childrens wrath assuage?
Nor famine faint of pining paunch, with burning thirst of hell,
Amid the blackest stream of Sticks where poysning breathes do dwell.
Where vapors bile parbraking out from dampishe miry mud,
Increase the pains of Tantalus deserved by guiltless blood,
Could not thine own offence suffice Thyestes in thy Life,
To file thy brothers spousal Bed, and to abuse his Wife?
But after breath from body fled, and Life thy Limbs hath left,
Can not remembrance of revenge out of thy breast be reft?
What, yet hast thou not laid thy lips, taiaste of Lethes floude?
Now afte death why dost thou come to move thy son to blood?
Could cruel Ditis grant to thee thy passport back again?
To work this woe upon the world, and make such rigour reign,
That Clytemnestra is become the fifty sister dire
Of Danaus daughters, that did once their husbands death conspire.
Lo here how fickle fortune gives but brittle fading joy.
Lot, hee who late a Conqueror triumphed over Troy,
Enduring many srtudy storms with mighty toil and payne
To sow the seed of fame, hath reaped small fruit thereof again.
When as his honour budding forth with flower began to bloom,
(Alas) the stock was hewed down and sent to deadly doom.
And they that of his victory and coming home were glad,
To sudden mourning change their mirth with heaviness bestad.
The lusty pomp of royal court is dead: (O doleful day)
The people moan their princes death with woe and weal away:
With howling crying, wringing hands, with sobs, with sighs, &amp; tears,
And with their fists they beat their breasts, they pull &amp; hale their hears.
And as the sheep amassed run, and ramp about the field,
When as their shepherd to the Wolf his goary throat doth yield
Even so as mad they rage and rave throughout Micoenas land,
Deprived of their Prince, they fear the bloody Tyrants hand.
While thus were woeful wailings hard in every place about,
The good Cassandra (come from Troy) to death is haled out.
Like as the Swan, who when the time of death approaches ny,
By nature warned is thereof, and pleased well to dye,
Doth celebrate her funeral with dirge and solemn songe:
Even so the noble virgin who in woe hath lived lunge,
Most joyful goes she to her death with mild and pleasant face,
Stout bouistring out her burly breast with princely port and grace.
Nothing dismayed with courage bold, and cheerful countenance,
On stage ordained for her death she began her self advance:
As though she had not thither come, to leave her loathsome life,
As though she had not come, to taste the stroke of fatal knife.
But even as it in bridal bed her journey were to meet
Corebus dear, not having mind of death, nor winding sheet,
When looking round on every side she took her leave of all,
From vapourde eyes of young and old the trickling tears doe fall.
The Greeks them selves to grief are moude to see this heavy sight,
So pity appears the headmans heart, that thrice about to smite
He stayde the smote: with shivering hand yet once again he tried.
And from her shoulders stroke her head. And thus the virgin dyed.
But now the Greeks another cause of mourning have in hand:
Oresters, Agamemnon• some, is forced to fly the land.
Among old rotten ragged Rocks there lies an ugly place.
A Dungeon deep, as dark as hell, unknown to Phoebus face.
An hollow huge wide gaping hole, with way still bending down,
Whose mouth with venonous withered weeds is hid and overgrown,
Where stinking smells come belching out from filthy dirty dyke.
Where Verment vile doe creep and craule, in hell is not the like.
Ilfauourde, foul misshapen bugs, doe luck about this cave,
With dreadful sounds, and roaring noise withing the pit they rave.
Even heather is Electra sent, in darckenesse deep to lye,
In poverty, and comfortless without the light of sky,
Fast clogde with Iron bolts and Chains, thus by her mother laid
In torments, till by her to death Orestes be betrayed:
Who (as Cassandra tells) shall revenge his fathers death,
Deprive with swerd th'adulterour, and Mother both of breath.
So after all these bloody broil, Greece never shall bee free:
But blood for blood, and death by turns, the after age shall see.

OCtauia daughter to prince Claudius grace,
To Narrow espousd, whom Claudius did adopt
(Although Syllanus first in husbands place
She had received, whom she for Narrow chopped)
Her parent both, her Make that should have been,
Her husbands present. Tyranny much more,
Her own estate, her case that she was in,
Her brothers death (pore wretch) lamented sore.
Him Seneca doth persuade his latter love,
Dame Poppy, Crispynes wife that some time was,
And eake Octauias maid for to remove.
For Senecks counsel he doth lightly pass▪
But Poppy joins to him in marriage rites,
The people wood into his palace run,
His golden formed shapes which them sore spytes,
They pull to ground: this uproar now begun,
To quench, he some to grisly death doth send▪
But her close cased up in dreadful barge,
With her unto Companion coast to wend,
A band of armed men, he gane in charge.
NOw that Juror with glittering streams,
The gliding stars from sky doth chase,
Sir Phoebus pert, with spouting beams,
From dewy nest doth mount apace:
And with his cheerful looks doth yield,
Unto the world a gladsome day.
Go to, O wretch, with ample Field
Of heavy cares oppressed aye,
Thy grievous wonted plaints recount:
Do not alone with sighs and howls,
The Seaysh Aloyones surmount,
But also pass the Pandyon fowls:
More irksome is thy state then theirs▪
O Mother dear whose death by fits,
I nil lament but still shed tears,
My ground of grief in thee it sits.
If that in shade of darksome den,
Perceiving sense at al remain,
Hear out at large, O mother then,
My great complaints, and grievous payne
O that immortal Clothos wrist,
Had torn in twain my vital thread:
Ere I unto my grief had wist
Thy wounds, and face of sanguine red.
O day which aye doth me annoy:
Since that time did I more desire,
The fearful darkness to enjoy,
Than Phoebus fresh with fair attire.
I have abode the bitter hest
Of stepdame dire, in mothers place,
I have abode her cruel breast,
His stomach stout, and fighting face.
She, She, for spyte unto my case,
A doleful, and a grave Eryn,
To Bridegrooms chamber spousal space,
The Stygian flashing flames brought in.
And thee, (alas) most piteous Sire,
With traytrous trains hath she bereft
Of breathing soul with poisoned mire:
To whom ere while, the world all left
Unvanquished from the Ocean Seas
By martial feats did freely yield:
And did subdue with wondrous ease,
The Britain brutes that fled the field:
Whom living at their propre swaye:
No Romaine power did erst invade.
Now lo (full well lament I may)
Thy Spouse deceit thy prowes hath lade •
And now thy court and child of yore,
With homage serve a Tyrants lore.
WHom so the glistening pomp of royal place,
With soden sight ynumd doth quite disgrace,
Who so at courtly fleeting ebbing blase,
Astonished sore, himself doth much amass:
Lo see of late the great and mighty stock,
By lurking Fortunes sudden forced knock,
Of Claudius quite subvert and clean extinct:
Tofore, who held the world in his precinct:
The Britain Ocean coast that long was free,
He ruled at will, and made it to agree,
Their Romaine Galleys great for to embrace.
Lo, he that Tanais people first did chase,
And Seas unknown to any Romaine wight
With lusty sheering ships did ouerdight,
And safe amid the savage freakes did fight,
And ruffling surging seas hath nothing dread,
By cruel spouses gilt doth lye all dead.
Her son likewise more fiend then Tiger fierce,
Of natural mother makes a funeral her se,
Whose brother drenched deep with poisoned cup.
Pore Britannic, his senseless soul gave up
Octauia sister and unhappy make,
Doth sore lament her case for Britons sake,
No can her ruthful piteous sorrow slake,
Though Neros wrath do sore constrain her grace
She nil esteems the secrete closet place:
But boiling still with equal peysd disdain.
With mutual hate against him doth burn again.
My true and trusty love that I do bear,
In vain I see doth strive to comfort her,
Revenging greedy grief doth straight reprive,
T'appease her smart the counsel that I give,
Nor flame of worthy breast doth once relent
But heaps of grief, her courage do augment.
Alas, what griesely deeds for to ensue
My fear foreseeth: God grant it be not true.
O Staggering state, O peerless ill:
With ease Electra I repeat,
And call to mind thy mourning will.
With watered eyes like smartīg sweat
Thou might lament thy father slain,
Still hoping that thy brother might,
That deadly deed revenge again.
Whom thou O tender loving wight
Did safely shield from bloody foe,
And natural love did closely keep:
But Neroes dreaded visage lo,
Doth fear me that I dare not weep,
Nor whale my parents ruchful case,
By cruel lot this slaughter caught:
No suffers me this genial face,
To dash with tears to dearly bought
With brothers blood: who only was
Mine only hope in all my grief,
And of so many mischiefs, as
My comfort great, and sole relief.
Now lo reserved for greater care,
And to abide more lingering payne,
Of noble famous lineage bare,
A drooping shade I do remain.
My Ladies heavy voice me thought
Within my listening ears can sound,
And snaylish age in going soft,
Unto her thews in not ybounde.
O Nurse our dolours witness sure
By curroll cheeks distilling rain,
And heavy hearts complaint endure.
Alas, what day shall rid of payne,
With care your well-nigh wasted heart?
That sends this guiltless ghost to grave
This talk (good madame) set apart.
In rule my state their destinies have,
And not thy prayers, (O matron) just.
The down soft easy God shall give,
Your troubled mind a time I trust,
More sweet then ever you did live.
With feuell fair as one content,
And glossed face, but only please
Your man, and make, he will relent.
The Lyon fierce I shall appeal,
And sooner tame the Tiger stout,
Then mankind Tyrants brutish breast,
He spytes the noble raced •out,
Contemmes high powers, disdains the least:
No can well use that princely weed,
Which venomous parent wrapped him in
By huge unspeakable grisly deed.
Although that wight unthankful, grynne,
In Kingly throne that hee doth reign,
Through cruel cursed mothers aid:
Although hee pay with Death again
So great a gift, it shall be said
And after fates in long spent age,
That woman wight shall have always,
This elegy yet and saying sage,
That he by her doth bear the sway,
Let not your ragious mind so walk,
But doe compresse your moody talk.
THough much I bear that boiling breast do beat
And tolerably take diuor cements threat,
Deaths only deadly dart, I see an end,
Of al my broil and pinching payne can send,
What pleasant light to me (O wretch) is left,
My natural Mother slain, and Sire be reft,
Of breathing life, by treason, and by gilt:
Of Brother eake deprived: with miseries spilt:
And wailing overcome: kept down with care,
Envied of Make, which I dare not declare.
To maiden subject now, and now defied:
What pleasant light can me (O wretch) abide,
With fearful hart suspecting always ought:
Because I would no wicked deed were wrought:
Not that I fear Deaths grisly gyrning face,
God grant I do not so revenge my case,
A better deed to dye: for to behold
The Tyrants visage gre•••e, with brows vprolde
And with soft tender lips my foe to kiss,
And stand in awe of beckes and notts of his,
Whose will to please my grief with cares yfirde
Since brothers death by wicked while conspired,
Could never once vouchsafe for to sustain,
Less grief to die, then thus to live in payne.
His Empire Narrow rules and joys in blood:
The cause and ground of death that Tyrant wood.
How oft (alas) doth Fancy fondly fain.
Whē slumber sweet in pensive parts doth reign,
And sleep in eyes, all tired with tears doth rest,
I apprehend dear Britons lively breast:
Ere while me thinks his feeble shivering hands
He fenseth sure with deadly blazing brands,
And fiercely on his brother Neros face,
With sturdy stinging strokes he flies apace.
Ere while thilke wretch recoiled back▪ again,
And to my thewes for aide retires amain:
Him foaming foe pursues with hast to have:
And while my brother I desire to save,
And in my clasped arms to shield him free,
His goary bloudied falchion keen I see.
The boisterous ramping fiend to •ugge, &amp; hale
Through out my •hiuering limbs, as ashes pale.
Forthwith a mighty trembling chattering quake
From weary limbs all souple sleep doth shake,
And makes me woeful wretch for to recount,
My wailing sobbing sorrows that surmount.
Hereto, put to that gorgeous stately 〈◊〉 ouse,
All glistering bright, with spoils of Claudius house
His parent dear in bubbling boat did douse,
That wicked son, this fisking dame to please.
Whom yet escaping dangers great of Seas.
He fiercer freak than waives that scantly rest,
With bloody blade his bowels did vnbrest.
What hope of health, can me, O wretch, abide,
That after them thilke way I should not ride?
My special foe, triumphant wise doth weight,
With naked nates to press by lovers slight,
Our spousal, pure, and clean vnspotied bed:
Against whom, she burns, with deadly food blood red.
And, for a mead of filthy strumpets sport,
She causes Make from spouse for to diuort.
O ancient Sire, step forth from Limbo lake,
Thy daughters heavy troublous cares to slake:
Or your twygated hellish porch unfold,
That down through gaping ground I may bee told.
O piteous wretch, in vain, (alas) in vain
Thou call upon thy fathers senseless sprite:
In whom, God wot, there doth no care remain
Of mortal brood, that here doth take delight.
Shall he, think you, assuage your sorry cheer,
Or shape you forth some slight, t• appal your pain,
That could prefer, before his Briton dear,
Th'imperiall throne, a strange begotten swain?
And with incestiall love benumbed quyte
His brother Germanicks daughter that could plight,
And join to him in solemn marriage rites,
With woeful, and unlucky lovers lights?
Here sprang the roil of hurly burly great,
Here beastly veuomous slaughter began to sweat,
Here wily treasons trains appeared first,
Here rules desire, and brutish bloody thirst.
Syllanus first Prince Claudius son in law,
A bloody mangled offering fall we saw,
That in our graces Hymaenea• bed,
Ymatcht with you, he might not couch his head.
O monstrous slaughter, worthy endless blame•:
In stead of gift unto that wanton dame,
A Carcass cold pore soul, and cureless corse,
Sillane was given against his will perforce.
And falsely then attached of traitors crime,
As one conspiring death in Claudius time,
With loathsome streakes spewde out upon the wall,
He all bedasht your fathers princely hall.
Left stepped into servile Palace stroke,
To filthy vices lore, one easly broke.
Of Devilish wicked with this Princocks proud:
By stepdames while prince Claudius Son auoude.
Whom deadly damme did bloody match ylight:
And thee, against thy will, for fear did plight.
Through which success this Dame of courage fine,
Durst venture, mighty Jove to undermine.
Who can so many cursed kinds report
Of wicked hopes, and acts in any sort,
Or such a women's glossed guiles can name,
That ramps at rule, by all degrees of shame?
Then holy sacred zeal put out of grace,
Her stagring steppes, directed forth apace,
And sterne Erinnis in with deadly steps,
To Claudius Court, all desert left yleps.
And with his dririe drakes of Stygian fort,
Hath quite distained the sacred princely port.
And raging riuen in twain both natures lore,
And right to wrongs misshapen form hath tore.
That haughty minded dame first gave her make,
A deadly poisoned cup, his thirst to slake.
Straight ways again through vise unkindly touch,
Her Narrow caused with him in hell to couch.
And thee, unhappy Britt, in all that broil,
Till that of breath, and life he did despoil,
Thilk greedy bloody tyrant never stent:
Whose doleful death for aye we may lament.
Ere while, unto the world the star that shone,
And was the stay of princely court alone,
Now lo, light ashes easly puffed aforne,
And grisly goast to grave with torch yborne.
Whom blessed Babe, thy stepdame did lament:
Nor from his gushing tears, did scarce relent,
When as she gave eche trim appointed part,
And goodly portrait limbs with natures art,
Of flaming stack to be devoured quite,
And saw the scorching fervent fire in sight
Thy naked joints to rauin up a pace
And like the flittring God thy comely face.
Dispatch he me least with this hand he fall.
That power you, nature granted not at all.
But wondrous dolor, great and wrathful ire,
And miseries will it grant without desire.
Nay rather cause your angry moody make,
With souple cheer his fury for to slake.
What, that he will by guilt once slain before,
Alive again my brother me restore?
Nay, safe that you may live and issue bear:
Your fathers ancient court for to repair.
That court doth wait another brood they say.
And poor Brits death tugs me another way.
Yet let the cities love unto your grace,
Your troubled mind confirm but for a space.
Their minds so pressed to pleasure me, I know
Great comfort brings: but do not slake my wo.
Of mighty power the people have been aye.
But princes force doth bear the greater sway.
He will respect his lawful wedded wife,
His minion brave can not so lead her life.
Of no man she esteemed.
But dear to make▪
She can not truly yet of wifehood croak.
Ere lunge she shall a mother eke be made.
So far therein I dare most boldly wade.
His youthful heate at first in filthy love,
With lusty, crusty pangs doth boyle aboue:
Thylke courage quickly cold in lust apace
As vapour soon extinct in flame gives place.
But holy, loving, chaste unspotted spouse,
Her love endures aye with sacred vows.
That wanton first that there durst couch his head,
And tumbling stained quite your spousal bed,
And being but your maid hath ruled lunge,
His sovereign Lord, with beauties grace bestong,
That pranked Paramour pert shall crotch with pain,
When she your grace shall see preferred again.
For Poppy subject is, and meek of spright,
And now begins her goastly tombs to dight:
Whereby she closely granting doth bewray,
His secret hidden fear eche other day.
That swift, inconstant, double winged lad
With clout, before his blinded eyes, yclad,
That fickle brained God, thunhappy boy,
Shall leave his in the midst of all his joy:
Although for beauty bright the bell she bear,
And goodly glistering garments new she wear,
And now do vaunt her self in gorgeous gear,
She shall not long enjoy this gladsome cheer.
Be not dismayed, Madame, for such like pain,
The queen of gods was forced to sustain,
When to each pleasant shape the heavenly guide,
And sire of Gods y•urnde, from skies did glide.
The swans white wings, to se how they could fadge
He did on him, and ruckoldes bullish badge,
That God shone bright in Golden rainy shower
To Danes breast through top of fortred tower.
The twinkling stars the twins of Laeda bright,
Whom Pollux, some, and Castor, call aright,
In large and ample space of starry scope,
With crystal glimering faces shyne wide op.
And Similes son, whom Bacchus we do call,
In heavenly birthright doth himself ystall.
And Hercules that puissant Champion stout,
His sturdy browns, his Hebe winds about.
Nor once regards how Goddess Iuno fare:
Whose lowering stepdame now she is yframde,
That while on earth his prowes he did declare,
Against that marriage, aye, was sore inflamed.
Yet lo her wise, and closly couched grief,
Debonair face, obeisance to her leefe,
Caused him at length his mind for to remove,
Through mortal feeres estraundge from Iunos love.
And now that mighty heavenly Goddess great,
No more adred of mortal strumpets feat,
Aloft alone in cloudy bower contents
The thundering Lord, which now to her relents.
Nor now with earthly Ladies beauty bright
Yfyred, leaves his starry specked right.
Now madam sith on earth your power is pitch
And have on earth Queen Iunos princely place,
And sister are, and wife to Neroes grace,
Your wondrous restless dolours great appease.
Nay, sooner shall the roaring froathy seas,
And mounting flashing flaws ymatch the sky,
And smoking, stifling parching fire dry
With dank pools agree and watery fen:
And grisly Plutoes filthy feltred den,
With starbright heaven shall sooner coupled be,
And shining light with glomy shades agree,
And with the clear dry day the dewy night,
Than unto servile lore of husband wight,
That brutish wise in blood takes his delight,
My heavy woeful mind can I address,
While brothers death my heart doth still possess.
O that of heavenly powers the prince and sire,
That shogges and shakes the earth with thūdring fire,
And with his wondrous, fearful, cursed cracks,
And strange misshapen monsters which he makes,
Our fearful musing minds doth sore amass,
Would coin some cureless burning wildfire blase,
To pelt and posh with thumping fire bright,
That devilish pate, that cruel cursed wight.
We saw from heaven, with beams forthshoting far
Doubtless a dreadful heary, blazing star:
That spouted out a mortal fiery flake,
Whose force a princes blood can only slake:
Even where that hayting carman sloe Boot
With chilling cold al starcke of frozen pole,
Doth guide aright Charles whirling running rote,
In stead of night that never away doth role.
Lo now the open ayre in every streate,
With doggish tyrants breath, is poisoned, quite,
And dreadful stars some sudden death do threat.
To people ruled, by wicked Neroes spright.
So sterne a freak, or mankind tyrant stout,
Not Tellus with the Gods displeased brought out,
When mighty Jove neglected she vphorlde
Huge, ugly, monstrous Typhon to the world.
A sorer plague, a cleaner scouring scourge,
With bloody paws that cities bounds doth purge,
Is Narrow dire, this cruel cursed wight.
That doth himself against God and man ydyght:
And thrusts from sacred shrines their quiet port,
And goodly temples gay •he sancted sort:
That cities dwellers puts from countries fort:
That hath bereft his brother of his life,
And launched his mothers sides with goary knife:
Yet doth this present lightsome day enjoy
And leads his life, that doth vs sore annoy.
O Father of heaven, in vain why dost thou throw
Thy great vnuanquisht rattling thundering blow
Upon the whistling woods and ample seas,
With force of princely power thy wrath t'appease?
Ou such an hurtful and pernicious freak,
Thy due and just conceived ire to wreak.
Why stay thy mighty puissant brands so long,
Ere thou fling down thy rattling cracking throng?
O Lord, that Narrow once might pay the price,
Of all his devilish deeds, and every vice,
Th'whole wide worlds tyrant sterne where he a stroke
Doth bear: which he ouerlades with burdnous yoke
Of princely sire yborne, but doth defame,
With beastly manners vile his princely name:
Vnworth he is your spousal chamber place:
But yet your destnies force, you must embrace,
And well, abide your fortunes crooked race:
Nor move unkindly Neroes gauly ire.
One day perchance, there will as I desire,
Some God revenge your lamentable case:
And once I trust a gladsome day shall be,
When you shall joy a fresh in wonted place.
Ah. no, now, long this court (alas) we see
With heavy wrath of Gods displeased ire
Hath overcharged been: which Venus dire
With Messalinas monstrous romping lust,
She first hath brought down into the dust.
Who madly married to prince Claudius grace,
But little mindful then of that same case,
And not regarding much thappoynted payne,
With cursed cressets married once again.
To which unlucky incestuall bridal bed,
That drosell dire that furious slut Erin,
With hanging hair about her hellish head,
And girt with snakes with deadly step went in.
And flaming brands from spousal chamber caught,
In both their bloods ybathd, hath quenched clean:
And hath incensed prince Claudius burning thought
In bloody throttling stroke to pass all mean.
My mother first of wretches all the most,
With stripe of deadly sword gave up her ghost.
And now extinguished quite, left me forlorn,
With dolours pining pangs and mourning worn.
And after her in hellish team doth hail,
Unto the senseless souls of Plutoes jail
Her make, and Britannic her son that way:
And first this ruinous court did she betray.
Let be, Madame, with tears your face to dight:
No so renew your bitter wailing just:
Cease troubling now your parents piteous spright,
That payed hath the price of raging lust.
God grant the talk wee heard of late,
To rashly trusted every where,
And blown abroad through each estate,
No badge of truth that it may bear.
And that no fresh espoused dame,
Our Princes thewes do enter in,
But that OCTAVIA keep the same,
And that the seed of GLADIV Skin,
May once bringforth some pledge of peace:
That to the world rest may redowne,
And wrangling strife may easly cease,
And Rome retain her great renown.
The peerless Princess Iuno hight,
Her brothers wedlock yoke retains:
Why is AVGVSTVS sister bright,
Where like betrothed league remains,
From stately pomp of court reject,
What doth deuoutnes her avail?
To sayncted sire who hath respectt?
What doth her Virgins life prevail?
And CLAVDIV Snow in ground ylayed,
Even wee to much unmindful be:
Whose worthy steme we have betrayed
Throught fear that made vs to agree.
In breast our elders did embrace,
The perfect Romaine puissance,
The true unstained worthy race,
And blood of Mars they did advance.
The proud and lofty stomached train
Of lusty haughty minded Kings,
They could not suffer to remain
Within this noble Cities wings.
And justly they revenged thy death,
O Virgin chaste, VIRGINIA pure,
Deprived by sire of vital breath,
That bondage thou might not endure:
And that his shameless brutish lust,
So good a mead might not enjoy:
Although by filthy force unjust
Thy chastity he would annoy.
Thee likewise whom thine own right hand,
With sword did pearce, LVCRETIA true,
Who tyrants rape could not withstand,
Did bloody broils and wars ensue▪
ANd with her proud disdainful Make
Lord TARQVIN imp of cursed seed,
Correction due doth TVLLIA take
For her unkindly shameless deed,
Who on her Fathers mangled corse,
To mischief bent, and wicked bane,
The Carman she to drive did force,
His cruel bruising wombling wane.
And quite against all natures law,
Even from her own dismembered •ire,
The sacred rytes she did withdraw,
Denaying wonted burial fire
This grief our woeful age doth feel,
Through monstrous act against all kind,
When as in deadely crafty keel,
To TYRRHEN seas, and wrestling wind,
The proud presuming Prince did put,
His mother trapt in subtle sort▪
The Mariners appointed cut,
The swelling Seas from pleasant port.
The clash resounds with stroke of Ores,
The Ship out launched apace doth spin,
In surging froth aloof from shores,
And ample course of seas doth win.
Which gliding forth with leusned planks,
In pressed streams with poised weight,
The rifts do open closed cranks,
That hidden were with secrete slight:
And gulped up the leaking wave
The woeful roaring noise and cry,
With women's shrikes themselves to save▪
Do reach and beat the starry sky.
Then gre•lie present death doth dance
Before their eyes with pining Cheeks:
Whose deadly stroke and heavy chance
For to avoid, then each man seeks:
On ryuened ribs some naked lie,
And cut the beating waives in twain:
And some their skilful swimming try,
To get unto the shore again.
The greatest part that sailed there,
By destnies dire to men prefixed,
In whirling swallows drowned were,
The brinkes of Seas and ground betwixt.
Queen AGRIPPYNE her garments rends,
She tears her ruffled lockes of hair
Abundant blubbering tears she spends,
Through deep distress of fainting fear.
Who when no hope of health she spies,
Inflamed with wrath, which woes appeasde,
O son, for so great gifts, she cries,
Hast thou with such reward me pleased?
This keel I have deserved sure,
That bare and brought thee first to light:
Who empire witless did procure,
And CAESARS title for thy right.
Show forth thy fearful spritish face,
O CLADIVS now from Limbo lake,
And of thy wife in wretched case,
Revenge and due correction take.
Thy death I causeles did conspire,
Which now I rue with woeful heart:
I dressed eake a funeral fire
Unto thy son by deadly smart.
Lo now as I deserved have,
Vntombde go to thy guiltless Ghost,
Encloasd in seas in stead of grave,
And wrestling waives of Romaine coast.
The flashing flaws do flap her face,
And on her speaking mouth do beat,
Anon she sinks a certain space,
Depressed down with surges gre:
Anon she fleets on weltering brim,
And pattes them of with tender hands
Through fainting fear then taught to swim
Approaching death, and fates withstands
At length on troubled Seas displayed
She giving over working vain
And tired with streams is weary laid,
Not able toiling strength to strain
In close and secrete silent breasts,
Of mates with her to sea that yode,
In whom no fear of death there rests
True faith unto their Queen abode.
Their Ladies weather beaten limbs
To help, some freely venture dare,
Some in the combrous waters swims
And desperate danger do not spare.
With cheerful voice they comfort her,
Though drawling dragling limbs she drew,
To lift her up with help they stir,
And numbed corpse to strength renew.
What bootesit thee the death to shone
Of roaring raging ravening waives.
From deadly sword of wicked son,
Alas pore wretch thee nothing saves?
Whose huge and heinous cursed rage,
Against all course of natures lore,
Our after slow believing age,
Will scarce baleen it done before,
The devilish man repynde with grief
When he is mother saved saw,
From swallowing seas have safe relief,
And that she vital breath did draw,
He grudgde with grief and in his heate,
He huger mischief heaps to this:
He doth not once delay his feat,
But headlong rashly carried is
Upon her death. A soldier sent,
Dispatches that he had in charge,
His Ladies breast his blade doth rent:
She yielding up her sold at large,
From wretched corpse for to entomb
Her slaughter man she then besought,
That bloody blade within her womb,
That first this woe to her had brought,
This, this accursed breast (quoth she)
Which this unkindly monster bare,
From pinching payne may not be free:
Dig, slash the same, no mischief spare.
When this with foltring tongue was said,
At last her sad and trembling ghost,
With latter sobbing sighs unstaid,
Through goryd wounds leaves vital coast.
ON me with like consent why did thou smile,
With glossed looks deluding me a while,
O fortune much of might and princely power?
To lift aloft to noble royal bower?
To the'nde that I to honours court extolled,
From stately seat might have the greater fall,
And round about in every place behold,
Such dreadful, threating dangers to vs all,
I safer lay aloof from envies knocks,
Removed among the craggy corsicke rocks:
Where as my mind there free at proper sway,
With leisure did repeat my studies aye.
A gladsome joy alone it was to view,
And earnestly to mark the heavens so blew:
And sacred Phoebus double wheeled wayne:
And eake the worlds swift whirling motion mayne.
The Sun so even his second course to keep:
And Phoebes gliding globe so swiftly sweep:
Whom wondrous starting stars encompass round.
And to behold that shynes in every stoned,
The glistering beauty bright of welkin wide:
Than which in al the world nothing beside.
Of all this huge and endless work the guide,
More wondrous nature framed that Iespyde,
For all the bumping bigness it doth bear;
Yet waxing old is like again to wear,
And to be changed to an vnwyldy lump.
Now pressed at hand this worlds last day doth jump,
With boisterous fall, and tumbling rush of sky.
To squeeze and make this cursed kind aby.
That springing once again, it may yield out
An other strange renewed virtuous route,
As once before it did, new sprung again,
What time Saturnus held his golden reign.
That blameless, chaste, unspotted Virgin clear
A goddess much of might clept Justice here,
With sacred sooth sent down from heavenly space,
At ease on earth did rule the mortal race.
That people plain knew not of warlike feats.
Nor trembling trumpets tunes that rends and beats▪
The soldiers ears: nor chashing armont bright,
That warring wights defend in field and fight.
Nor wonted was with walls to rampart round,
Their open cities set in any stoned.
To each man passage free lay open than:
Nothing there private was to any man.
And then the ground it self and fertile soil,
His fruitful bosom baard all void of toil,
Into such bounden barnes a Matron good,
And peaceable unto so just a brood.
But then an other second race arose,
Perceived not to be so meek as those.
A third more wise and witty sort up starts,
Of nature forged fit, t'inuent new arts:
As yet unspotted quite with filthy vice.
Soon after thoe, they raung•d with new deuyce,
That boldly venture dare in scudding race,
Unwieldy beasts for to pursue apace.
And mighty weighing struggling fishes great,
With watery coats yclad with fishers feat,
With net in window wise draw forth, and streeke
With craft of quill, the nibbling fishes cheek.
And silly birds begylde with pining train:
And light foot dear for life that fling amain
Entangling gins entrapped, that safely hold.
And sturdy scowling visage bulls controlled,
On fleshye fillet necks, make wear the yoke:
And earth ere that vngrubbed up that broke:
Which then turned up with Plowmans shining share,
In sacred bosom deep, her fruits kept their.
But now this age much worse then all the rest,
Hath leapt into her mothers broken breast:
And rusty lumpish iron and massye Gold,
Hath dug out, that was quite hid with mold.
And fighting fistes have armed without delay:
And drawing forth their bonds for rule to stay,
Have certain several jolly kingdoms made,
And cities new have raised now ruled with blade,
And fenseth either with their proper force
Straūge stoundes or them assaults the which is worse.
The Starry specked virgin flower of skies.
Which Justice hight, that guilty folk descries,
Now lightly esteemed of mortal people here,
Each earthly stoned is fled, and comes not near
The savage mannerd route, and beastly rude,
With dabbed wristes in goary blood imbrued.
The great desire of grisly war is sprung:
And raping thirst of gold, it is not young.
Throughout the world a mighty monstrous vice,
Foul, filthy, monstrous lust hath got the price,
A pleasant tickling plague, whom longer space,
And error deep have fostered up apace.
The heaps of vice rakte up in years long past,
Abounding flow in these our days at last.
And this same troublous time, and combrous age,
Oppresses all men sore, both young and sage.
Wherein those wicked ways that be do reign,
And cruel, ramping woodnes boils again.
Lust strong in filthy touch, doth bear a sway.
And Princes, riot, now doth catch away
With greedy paws, to bring it to decay.
Th whole worlds uncredible wealth, without delay.
But lo, which staggring steppes where Narrow flings,
And visage grimm, I fear what news hee brings.
DIspatch with speed that we commanded have:
Go, send forthwith some one or other slave,
That Plautius cropped scalp and Sillas eke,
May bring before our face: go some man seek.
I nill protract your noble graces hest:
But to their camps to go am ready pressed.
Against lynage nought should rashly pointed bee.
A light thing tic for to be just, I see
For him, whose heart is void of shrinking fear.
A sovereign salve for fear is for to bear
Your self debonair to your subjects all.
Our foes to slay, a cheftaynes virtue call.
A worthier virtue tic in countries sire,
His people to defend with sword and fire.
It well beseems such aged wights, to teach,
Unbridled springolles young, and not to preach,
Both to a man and prince of ryper years.
May, rather frolic youthful blood appears,
To have more need of counsel wise and grave
This age sufficient reason ought to have.
That heavenly powers your doings may allow.
A madness it were to Gods for me to bow,
When I my self can make such Gods to be:
As Claudius now ycounted is we see.
So much the more because so much you may.
Our power permits vs all without deny.
Give slender trust to Fortunes flattering face:
She topsy turuy turns her wheel apace.
A patch he is that knows not what he may.
A Princes praise I counted have always,
To do that same which with his honour stood,
Not that which frantic fancy counts good.
If that I were a meacock or a slouch,
Each stubborn, clubbish daw would make me couch.
And whom they hate, with force they ouerquell.
Then dynt of sword the prince defended well.
But faith more sure defence doth seem to me.
Full meet it is that Caesar dreaded be.
More meet of subjects for to be beloved
From subjects minds, fear must not be removed
What so by force of arms you do wring out,
A grievous work it is to bring about.
Well hardly then our will let them obey.
Will nothing then, but that which well you may.
We will decree what we shall best suppose.
What peoples voice doth jointly bind or lose.
Let that confirmed stand.
Swords bloody dynt,
Shall cause them else at me to take their hint.
God shield, and far that fact from you remove.
What then, why Senec do you that approve,
That we contemnde, despised and set at nought,
With finger put in hole (full wisely wrought)
Our bodies blood to seek should them abide,
That they might vs sometime destroy vnspyde?
Their native country bounds to banished bee,
Nor Plautius breast nor Scillas eake we see
Hath broke or combed: whose cankered churlish ire,
Shapes bloody freakes to quench our bodies fire.
And chiefly when these traitorous absent clones,
Such wondrous favour find in cities bones,
Which those same exiles lingering hope doth feed:
Suspected foes with sword we will out weed.
And so Octauia shall that jolly dame,
Continue after them their bloody game.
And wend that way her noun white brother went,
Such hye mistrusted things must needs be bent.
It is (O Prince) a worthy famous thing,
Amids redoubted Lords alone to ring:
And wisely work your countries praise to save:
And well your self to captive folk behave:
From cruel brutish slaughter to abstain,
And void of mood to wreak your angry payne:
And to the world a quiet calm to give,
That al your age in peace their lives may live.
This is a Princes praise without al crime:
This is the path to heaven whereby we climb.
So is Augustus prince and father called
Of country first in starbright throne ystald.
Whom as a God in minsters we adorn,
Yet troublous fortune tossed him beforne,
A great while long on lands and ruffling seas,
Until his fathers foes he could appease,
And throught wars diverse course could qual them quite.
To you did fortune yield her power, and might,
And raynes of rule without all blood, and fight.
And to your beck both land, and seas hath bent.
Grim deadly envy daunted doth relent.
The Senate Lords gave place with free consent:
The battaylous route of knights with willing hearts
(That same decree from sager sires departes)
Unto the lay men's choice do well agree.
Your grace the spring of peace they count to bee.
And chosen Judge, and guide of mortal stock.
Your grace, your countries sacred sire, doth rock
And rule with princely gorgeous title bright,
The cyrcled world in rundel wise ydight.
Which mighty mounting name to keep so great,
This noble city Rome doth you entreat:
And doth commend unto your royal grace
Her lively limbs in charge for your lives •pace.
The gift of Gods it is, as we discus,
That Rome with Senafe sort doth honour vs,
And that the fear of our displeasure great,
From cankered envious stomachs makes sweat
Both humble talk and supplications meek.
And were not fear all these would be to seek.
Unwieldy, combrous cities, members ill,
That Prince and country both do seek to spill,
To leave alive (which swell, and puffed bee,
Because of lynage great. and high degre)
What madness mere is it when as we may,
Even with a word, such freakes dispatch away▪
Sir Brutus sterne, his browns and arms did dight,
His sovereign liege to slain by force and might,
That erst had helped him, and given him health,
And had endued him with princely wealth,
In brunt of raging war undaunted out,
That vanquished many people strong and stout,
Prince Caesar matched by great degrees of power
To love, in stately chair of starry bower,
By devilish citizens wicked while was slain.
What store of bloody stiffling streams on mould.
Did tatred Rome, of her own limbs, behold?
He by his noble virtues worthy praise,
Whō peoples, common bruit to heauē doth raise.
August among the Gods ysayncted well,
How many noble breasts did he compel,
How many springoldes young, and hoary heads,
Each where dispersed to leg in molded heads?
How many men did he bereave of breath
Tofore proscript that were condemned to death?
When for the grisly fear of deadly dart
From propre home they were constrained to part
And fly Octauius force, and Lepidus might,
And not abide sterne Mark Antonius sight,
Which then the ample world at once did guide,
That into kingdoms three they did divide,
To dumpish sadded syres, with heavy cheer,
Their childrens gre•lie cropped pates appear,
Hong out beforne the Senates judgment seat,
For each man to behold in open streate:
No durst they once lament their piteous case,
Nor inward seem to morn to Claudius face,
The market stead with blood from bodies spued,
And loathsome mattrie streams, is all imbrued:
And quite throughout their faces foul arrayed,
The piteous gubbes of blood drop down unstaid.
Nor here did this same slaughterous bloodshed stay.
Phillyps Pharsalia ghastly fields each day,
The cromming ravening fowls, and cruel beasts
Long fed, with gob•s big of manly breasts,
Beside all this, the cost he scoured quite▪
Of Sicill sea and ships to ware ydyght
With force of arms did win, and havoc made
Of proper snbiectes slain with his own blade.
The rundle round of lands with mighty mayne
Of noble Chieftains stroke reboyles again.
Antonius overcome in Naval fight,
To Egipt posts in ships prepared to flight:
Not looking long to live nor hoping life.
Incesteous Egipt (through Antonius wife)
That worthy Romaine princes blood did suck▪
And covered lye their ghosts with dirty muck.
Long wicked, waged civil war there stayed,
In Marcke Antonius grave with him ylayed.
Augustus at the last of conquest great
His dulled swords that wounded souls did beat,
In peaceable sheathes repose•d hath laid at rest:
And fear doth rule, and guide his kingdom best
By ready force of arms at all assays,
And Captains faith he shields him self always
Whō now his sōnes most worthy virtuous praise,
To heaven a consecrated God doth raise,
And causes all, in Churches for to place
The sacred Picture of Prince Claudius grace,
And vs the starry reign of Gods shall bide
If first with dreadful sword about vs wide
We wipe away what so our person stain:
And found our court with worthy stem again.
Your noble spouse, sprung forth of saincted peer
Of Claudius stock, the starbright diamond clear,
That Goddess Iuno wise her brothers bed▪
Partaking, pressed down with buttocks red,
Your graces princely court shall garnish gay,
With wondrous heavenly fair descended stay.
Incestuous married dames, from stock &amp; stem,
Detract all hope, that we should have of them.
Nor vs, could she once love that we could see,
Nor with our person once at all agree
In tender budding years, when love suppressed
With blushing hydes the flames of burning breast,
Scant plain appears the love they bare indeed.
Thus wee our selves with hope in vain did feed:
Although undoubted signs, as body wried,
And frowning looks, which we have oft espied,
Her spiteful hating stomach did bewray
Which she doth bear, whom duty binds to obey.
Which yet at last, big, boiling, grievous payne,
With death determind hath t•avenge again,
Wee have found out, for birth and beauties grace.
A worthy make for such an Empress place:
To whom that lovely goddess Venus bright,
And mighty Jove his spouse that Iuno hight,
and goddess fierce in boisterous warlike arts,
Gives place for bodies seemly portrayed parts.
Faith, meekness, manners mild, &amp; bashful shame▪
Of spouse, those ought an husband to reclaim.
The perles of judging mind, alone remain,
Not subject once to any rulers reign.
The passing pride of beauties numming grace
Each day appals, and bleamisheth apace.
What praises woman wights have in them closed▪
All those in her alone hath God repo•de,
And such a peerless peer, the guides of life,
The destnies would have borne to be our wife,
O noble prince such blind unlawful love,
(Do rashly credit nought) from you remove.
Whom Jove can not repell that rules the clouds,
And piercing raging floods, therein him shrouds,
And ranges through the reign of Plutoes pit,
And pulls down in welkin hie that sit
The mighty powers of heaven, the God of love?
And can I then his force from me remove?
Swift winged love, men's fancy fond, in vain
A mercy wanting God to bee, doth fain:
And arms his hands with wounding weapons keen
And bows with burning brondes, for lovers greene:
Of Venus to be sprung they al accord,
and blindly forgde of thunders limping Lord.
Bland love the minds great torment sore appears,
And buddeth first in frolic youthful years.
Who while we drink of Fortunes pleasant cup,
With laysie pampring riot, is nes•led up:
Whom if to toster up you leave at length
It fleeting, falls away with broken strength.
This is in all our life (as I suppose)
The greatest cause how pleasure first arose.
Which sith mankind by brooding bids aye,
Through gladsom love y• fierce wild beasts doth sway
It never can from manly breast depart.
This self same God I wish withal my hart
The wedlock lights to bear before our grace,
And fasten Poppy sure in our bed place.
The peoples grief might never yield to it:
Nor ver•ue can the same at all permit.
Shall I alone to do, forbidden be
That every patch may do? that grieves me
No trifling toys the people looks to have
Of him, that ought to rule with wisdom grave.
It pleases vs with daunted power to try,
If peoples rash conceived rage will fly.
Seek rather for to please and calm their mood.
Ill ruled is that reign where people wood,
Their subject Pri•ce doth weld, as they think good
When nought that they require they can obtain,
They justly then aggrieved are again.
That gentle prayers cannot win with ease,
By force to wring it out, it doth vs please.
An hard thing tic the people not to have
That of their Prince, which they do justly crave.
And horrible it is a Prince to be constraynd.
Let not your subjects then so sore be raynd.
Why then the common brute abroad will be.
How that the people have subdued me.
That no man trusts that is of credit light.
Be it so, yet many it marks with deadly spite.
With country peers to meddle it is afraid,
To quip and frump, it is nothing less dismayed.
Your grace may easly couch that budding bruit
Let Sayncted sires deserts with pliant suit,
Your graces mind remove: let spouses age,
And courteous bashful shame disrumpe your rage.
Leave off (I say) that we entend to grutch.
For now your talk our patience moves much:
I pray you let it lawful be to do,
That Senec gives not advise unto.
And we our peoples wishes do defer,
While Poppy feel in wombling womb to sterre,
The pledge of faithful love to me and her.
Why do we not appoint the morrow next,
When as our marriage pomp may be context?
THrough paunch of riuened earth, from Plutoes reign
With ghostly steps, I am returned again.
In writhled wristes, that blood do most desire,
Forguyding wedlock vile with Stygian fire.
Let Poppy, which these cressets coupled sure,
Unto my son be joined in marriage pure:
Whom mothers grief, and hand revenging wrackes,
Shall send with heave and hoe to funeral stackes
I always do remember well beneath
Where piteous, ghostly, crauling souls do breath,
Th'unkindly slaughterous deed, which to our spright
Yet unrevenged is grievous and of right:
And for the good I did a cruel prise,
That deadly framed ship in crafty wise:
And due reward that he gave me again,
For helping him to rule of Empires reign:
And eake that night, when as I did bewail,
Both loss of ship wherein we then did sail,
And mates unhappy death, and while I thought,
For this accursed deed to have besought
The Gods to trickling tears he gave scant time
But twice increased hath his devilish crime.
Quite slain with sword, thrust through my bodies bounds
And silthy laid through goary mattring wounds,
Delivered safe from seas, devouring sup,
In antique court my ghost I yielded up.
Nor yet his cankered, and unsatiate hate.
For all this blood doth Narrow once abate.
That Tyrant dire doth rage at mothers name.
And seeks ways my deeds for to defame.
Who threating death to them that doe withstand,
My shapes he dingeth down in every land:
My princely tytles large hee scrapeth out
In every place, the whole wydeworld about,
Which my unlucky parents love did give,
To much unto my pain while I did live,
Unto a boy to guide, which now I rue.
My poisoned make, my Ghost doth oft pursue:
And in my face with burning brondes doth fly.
He stays a space with earnest talk hard by,
And threatened sore, and doth impute his death
And tomb he should have had to me beneath.
And now desires to have some factious wight,
That dare despoil my son of breathing spright.
Let be you shall have one to work this crime,
I do require no long delayed time.
Revenging spright Erin, a death doth coin,
Of life, that wicked tyrant to purloin.
Sore smarting leaden strypes and shameful flight,
And pining pangs with thirst and hunger dight:
That Tantalus spungelike thursty mouth befurde,
And Sisyphus toil shall pass, and Tityus bird,
And Ixions painful wombling wheel about,
That tears all his bodies parts throughout.
Although that Tyrant proud and scornful wight,
His court with marble stone do strongly dyght,
And princelike garnish it with glistering gold:
Though troupes of soldiers shielded sure, uphold
Their chieftains princely porch: and though yet still
The world drawn dry with tasks even to his will,
Great heaps of riches yield themselves to save,
Although his bloody help the Parthians crave,
And Kingdoms bring, and goods al that they have,
The time and day shall come, when as he shall
Forlorn, and quite undone, and wanting all.
Unto his cursed deeds his life and more,
Unto his foes his bared throat restore.
Alas, unto what end is all my payne?
Or in what case do now my vows remain?
Where doth now thy rage and destnies spyte?
Draw thee O Son, with brain benumbed quite?
That to such monstrous heaps of ylles thy dame
(Whom thou with cursed mischief overcame)
His wrath should yield? O that ere to the light
A sucking babe I brought thee forth in sight,
And fed thee fine with pap as princely borne,
The fierce, wild, savage beasts had rent and torn
My womb and bloody entrails all beforne.
Without all crime, and wanting reasons pride,
Mine own dear dādling child thou should have did.
And fastened sure to me should aye behold,
The quiet place, where Ghostly souls be told:
And see thy graundsyres great of worthy fame,
And sire Domitius eake of princely name,
Whom now both shame and wailing doth abide,
That while they dure, from them shall never slyde.
For which both thee, O cursed Barn, they may,
And me, that thee have borne geeue thanks for aye.
But why cease I, with hell to hyde my face,
Wife, stepdame, mother dire, in my life space?
DO not, alas, thus sore lament,
But rather yet your mourning stay,
Sith that the city whole is bent
To celebrate this joyful day:
Least your great love and favour both,
Which I do count to be most sure,
The more cause Narrow me to loath,
And eake his bitter wrath procure:
And I fall out to be the ground
To you of many mischiefs vile,
This same is not the first deep wound,
That I have felt now this good while:
Far worse then this have I abode:
But of these troublous cares this day
Shall make an end I trust in God,
Although with Death he do me pay,
No man to see shall me constrain
His bended brows knit furrowyse,
Nor step within the Chamber ragyne
Of maid dressed up in bridal guise
Augustus sister I will bee,
And not his wife as wont I was:
But only pains remove from me,
And fear of death I will not pass.
Yet can thou piteous wreth once trust,
Thy cruel husbands father law,
Or these few things to have so lust
While mischiefs yet in mind are raw?
Now long reserved, until this day,
And these same marriage rytes be past,
Thou shalt poor wretch without delay,
A bloody offering dye at last.
Why thus with tears disfigured sore
Thy wonted home dost thou behold?
Make hast to shun this deadly shore
And leave this straughtrous Princes fold.
Lo see that day suspecttd long
And whispered Fame in all men's ears,
With glistering pomp of bridal throng,
To vs pore wretches now appears.
And Claudius brood Octauias grace,
From Neroes wedlock place expelled,
Departed is, whose spousal space,
Hath Poppy conqueror long time held.
The while, our piety couched lies
Kept down with heavy, combrous fear.
And slow revenging grief likewise:
Where doth the peoples power appear,
That brake the force of Princes great,
That conquerous city laws hath framed,
That worthy men to honours •eat
Preferred, that war and peace proclaimed,
That savage people strange did tame
That Kings and Princes caught in fight
Shut surely up in prison frame
To keep them close from all men's sight
Lo, which wee cannot once abide,
To see where Poppies image trym,
Conjoined unto Neroes side
All glistering bright shynes very brim.
Let force of Arms pull down that frame
And match with ground that Ladies face
Too likely carved to his name,
And snatch her down from beddig place,
And let it forthwith fly with brands▪
With Darts and Javelins fiercely flonge,
From pithy braunes and sturdy hands
Unto the princes courtly throng.
FRom out of spousal bower dismayed with fear,
Whither go you? what secrets daughter dear
Unknown, makes you to look so drousely?
Why spungelike looks your face with tears frō eye
That fell? of truth the time desired long,
And wished for by prayers, and vows among
Hath shined bright. Caesars wedlock are you:
Your golden grace, whereof he took the view.
Him prisoner caught, and did him surely bind,
So much the more, how much Senec his mind
Did seek to change, and wild from love to weeld.
And Venus chief in love hath made him yield.
O in beauty passing all, what beds then down
More soft, have borne thy weight when thou with crown
Did sit in midst of court the Senate all.
At thy great beauty aghast, thou did appal.
Whilst thou the Gods with perfume send fine,
And sacred alters drenched with thankful wine,
Thy head attired with veyle of yellow hew
By Caesars side thou went as princess new:
When he aloft extolled aboue the rest,
With haughty courage merrily went to feast.
Like as king Peleus went sometimes to take
Queen Tithes, whom salt seas some bred, his make.
Whose bridinge chambers, banquet wise ydrest,
The Gods vouchsafed to hallow with their hest,
Both they that rule in skies and eake in Seas.
But tel, O Lady, tell, if it you please,
What sudden chaūce doth shade your beauties light.
What means your colour chaūge from red to white?
What moves those trickling tears, how stands your plight?
With dreams, and grisly sights, this last night, Nurse,
My mind was troubled sore, but frayd much worse.
For when sir Phoebe his weary course had rid,
While quiet resting night each thing shadid,
My senses weary fell in slumber deep,
While Narrow me within his arms did cleepe.
Resolving limbs, at length began sleep discharge,
And long I rest not under quiets targe,
For lo, I saw a route that brought me fear,
Come to my chamber with dishevelled hair:
The Matrons sage of Latin land did morn,
And sounded shrieking sighs as though forlorn
They were, the dolefulst wights that live on ground.
And oft among the warlike trumpets sound,
I saw my husbands mother terribly stand,
With threatening look berayed with b•oud in hand
A light fire brand she bare which oft she shook,
And made me go with her through fearful loke.
When down we came through op'ned earth she led
The way, I after went with bowing head,
And musing much thereat, mark what I say,
My bed, me thought I saw, wherein I lay,
When first espousde I was to Rufe Chrispyne▪
And hee me thought, with first son of his lyne,
With many following them against me fast
Did come, and me to cleepe did swift his hast,
And as he wonted was he ki•• me oft,
Then rushed into my house with pace not soft
Amassed Narrow sore, in Chryspines breast
That hid his falchion •en: fear shook of re•t
From me: I trembling stood with quivering fear,
And breast dismayed to speak made me forbear.
Till now (O Nurse) I met with thee, wh•se trust,
And faith into these words have made me burst.
Alas, what threatened me eche grisly spright?
What means of husbands blood that doleful •ight?
•he hidden sacred vain that moves swift,
Which fantasy we call by secret drift,
When we do take our rest doth show again,
The things both good and bad that broil in brain:
You marvel that you saw your make, and bower,
His ghostly funeral stackes, at that same hour
Round clasped close in arms of husband new:
Hereto, the beaten breasts with hands moved you,
And maidens hair, on marriage day displayed:
Octauias friends with heavy hearts betrayed,
Amids his brothers both and fathers hall
Their heavy cheer for her unlucky fall.
That dreadful blazing flame of fire forborne
In Agryppynas hand your grace beforne.
Which you did follow streigth declares renown
To you, though envy strive to keep it •own:
The seat you saw beneath doth promise you
Your sty•e to stand full sure not changing new:
That Narrow prince in Crispins throat did hyde
His sword, it tells that he in peace shall bide,
Unknown to bloody ruthful war for aye.
Therefore (Madam) pluck up your hart I pray:
Receive both mirth and glee cast fear aside,
With joy, and ease you may in bower abide.
To temples hie where mighty Gods do dwell,
I will repair, and offerings to them fell
In humble wise their heavy wrath t'ppease,
And me of mighty sight, and dreams to ease.
My second wish shall be, that this fear all
Upon my foes as sudden chance may fall.
O Nurse pray thou for me some vows do make
To the Gods, that ghostly fear his flight my take.
IF stealth discloasde by blabbing fame,
And lusty, pleasant, thankful love,
Of JOVE be true: who form did frame
Of swan to come from skies aboue,
And did enjoy the sweet consent
Of Lady LEDAS loves delight:
Who like a Bull his labour spent,
Through flowing floods to cary quite,
EVROPA slily stolen away:
Hee will no doubt leave reign of Sky
And POPPIES love disguised assay▪
If hee her sovereign beauty spy.
Which hee might well prefer before
Fair LEADS sugared sweet delight:
And DANE whom hee won of yore,
Amazed with golden shower so bright:
Let SPORT now for HELENS sake
Of beauty bragging fame vprayse:
Admit the TROJAN herdsman make
Of gained spoil triumphant praise:
Fair HELEN here is stained quite:
Whose beauty bred such boiling ire,
That earth was matched even in sight
With TROJAN towers consumed with fire.
But who is this that runs with fear oppressed?
Or else what news brings he in panting breast?
WHat sturdy champion stout doth joy with glee
Our chieftains royal bower safe to see,
Then to his court I counsel him to wend,
Against which the populus rout their force doth bend.
The rulers run amazed to fetch the guard,
And armed troupes of men, their town to ward.
Nor woodnes rashly caught through fear doth cease,
But more and more, their power doth increase.
What sudden rage doth beat their br••ling brain?
The garrisons great with fury astonde again,
And stirred up for Queen Octauias sake
With monstrous mischief vile, their rage to slake,
They rumbling rush into the Palace far.
What dare they do, their counsailers who are?
Advance their Empress old, suburt the new:
And grant his, brothers beds as is his due.
Which Poppy now, with hole consent doth hold?
Yea that unbridled rage in breast vprold,
Sets them agog, and makes them wondrous wood.
What ever image graven in marble stood,
If Poppies badge it bare, or if in sight,
It tended for to show his beauty bright,
Though it on heavenly altares brave did stand,
They break, or pull it down, with sword or hand.
Some parts with ropes sure tide, they trail thē forth
Which spurnd with dirty feet, as though nought worth
With •••thy stinking mire, they it all beray.
And with their deeds their talk doth jump agree,
Which mine amassed mind, thinks true to bee
For fiery flames they threat for to prepare,
Wherewith to waste, the princes Palace fair,
Unless, unto their furious mood he give
His second wife, and with Octauia live,
But he by me shall know in what hard stay
The City stands: the rulers Isle obey.
A lack, what made you cruel wars, in vain
To move, sith prisoner love you can not gain•
You can not him overcome, your fiery flame
He recks not: his sire ouercomes the same.
He darkened hath those thundering thumps that shake
Heaven, Earth, Hell, sea, al things y• makes to quake.
Yea mighty Jove, in heaven that wears chief crown
His flames from welkin hie hath brought down.
And you, not victors now, but vanquished,
Shall rau•some pay, the price of hearts blood red.
Love, patient can not be, but hot in rage,
No easy thing it is, his wrath it is•wage,
Achilles worthy •ight, that was so stout,
To twang the Harp he made in Ladies rout,
Prince Agamemnon sterne that boy benund,
And rabble rude of Greeks with love bronds bumd.
King Priams reign he topsy tu•uie tossed,
And goodly Cities great he chiefly lost.
And now my mind •ore frighted stands aghast,
What Cupids furious force brings vs at last.
AH, ah, our captains sl•e dispatching coil,
And our long suffering y•e in such a broil,
That streams of blood yet do not •uē•h their rage
Which they against our propre person wage
And that all Rome, with corses strewd about,
Those cruel villains blood, doth not sweat out.
But deeds already done, with death to pay.
A small thing it is, a greater slaughtrous day
The peoples cursed crime, and eke that dame,
Whom I did aye suspect, deserves the same.
whom, to yield those peasants would me make:
At last she shall, with life our sorrow slake,
And with his bodies blood shall quench our ire.
Then, shall their houses fall by force of fire:
What burning both, and buildings fair decay,
What beggarly want, and wailing hunger may
Those villains shall be sure, to have each day.
Ah, Prove•der pricks that vile rebellious race
No can they once our favour well embrace,
Nor be content, with peace in quiet state,
But broiling ramp about with troubled gate.
Hereon with boldness straight, hereon they fly,
With harebraind rashness headlong by and by.
Well, they must tamed be with heavy stroke,
And down be kept with peise of weighty yoke:
That they, with like attempt, do not arise,
Nor once cast up their deadly peasants eyes,
Against our loving spouses golden looks:
First punish them sure, then fear shall be their books,
To teach them, at their Princes beck to obey
But see at hand, whom faith, and virtue rare,
Lieutenant chief of camps, appointed their.
THe vulgar peoples rash unruly rage
The slaughter of a few did soon assuage,
Which long wtstode our valiant force in vain▪
To tel your grace this news, I come again▪
And is this then enough, dost thou so well▪
O soldier mark what doth thy captain tell?
Hast thou with held thy hand fro bloody ire?
Is this the due revenge that we require?
The captain guides of treason paid their hire,
By desperate death of bloody sword in fight.
The route which sought with flaming fire to light,
Our royal Palace great, who would assign
Their Prince what he should doe: and pull in fine
Our mate from vs dissolving wedlock bands:
Whose hardy slanderous tongs, &amp; wicked hands,
His princely grace reprochfully withstands,
From due revenge, are they dismissed free?
Shall subjects payne, by grief assigned bee?
It shall assign which time shall never wear.
Which neither wrath may end, nor yet your fear▪
She shall appease our hie displeased mind,
Who fiyrst, our wrath deserved due to find.
Declare whose death your mood doth most re∣quire
Let not my hand be stayde from your desire.
It seeks our sisters death, and traitorous head.
Those words through all my luns, hath stifnessespred,
Oppressed with griesty fear.
Vs to obey.
Stands thou in doubt:
On faith why do you lay
So great a fault?
Because thou sparedst our foe.
Deserves a woman to be termed so?
If treason she begin.
Is any man
So sure, that hit accuse of creason can:
The peoples rage:
Those mad vnweldye wights
Who order could?
Who could stir up their spritz?
No creature as I think.
A woman could,
In whom a mind Dame nature hath vpfould,
To mischief prone: she armed hath his heart,
To hurt by wiles: yet strength she set apart,
Least she undaunted force with his should bear:
But now his slender power with doubting fear,
Is quickly quaylde, or else with punishment,
Which his condenmed state to mischief bent
To late doth end: away with grave advise,
Vs with entreating seek not to entice.
Dispatch that we comm•not on shipboorde horn,
Far off to shore aloof with dashing worn,
Command she be: that tunlike swelling breast
At length in storming stomach may take rest.
ALack the peoples bitter love,
And dire good will to many one,
Which, when they hoisted sails aboue,
With pleasant blasts it made to groan,
And carried them from quiet shore,
That fainting, leaves them in the deep,
And tumbling, raging waters roar.
Cornelia piteous wretch did weep,
And sore bewail his sons estate:
The peoples love did undo them,
And wondrous favour, bred them hate:
Great worthy peers of noble stem:
Of high renown for virtues praise:
In faith and eloquence did pas
Their stomachs stout their fame did raise:
Ith laws eche one most excellent was.
And Scipio, thee did Fortune yield
Unto like death, and cursed wrack,
Whom neither honours pomp could shield,
Nor fenced house thy foes keep back.
More to repeat, although I could,
Pure present grief forbids sore:
Ere while to whom the people would,
Her Fathers antique Court restore,
And Brothers wedlock once again,
Now weeping, wringing hands poor wretch,
Unto his cruel, deadly payne,
The armed soldiers doe his fetch.
How safe doth poverty lye content,
In thetched house safe shrouded there?
High raised towers with blasts are bent,
Which often times them over bear.
Where pull you me poor wretch? alas,
Into what banished exiles place,
Would Narrow have me for to pass,
Or Fortune bids, with frowning face?
If now with fainting strength quite cooled,
And with my broils all wearied cease,
And longer life she grant me would,
If that she work for to increase,
My sorrows great with deadly dart,
Why is she then so much my foe,
In country that I may not part,
And leave my life before I go?
But now no help of health I feel,
Alas I see my Brothers boat:
This is the same, whose vaulted keel,
His Mother once did set a clote.
And now his piteous Sister I,
Excluded clean from spousal place,
Shall be so carried by and by:
No force hath virtue in this case.
No Gods there be my woes to wreck.
The grisly, dreadful drab Eryn,
Doth weld the world at nod and beck,
Who can lament my state, wherein
I am, alas, sufficiently?
How can Aedon duly plain,
My smarting streams at bears that I
Do shed? whose wings I would be fame,
If destnies would them grant, to wear.
Then would I leave my mourning mates,
As swiftly fled, as wings could bear,
And so avoid these bloody pates.
Then sitting sole in sherwood shirle,
And hanging sure, by dandling twig
With plaintive pipe I might out twirl
My heavy tuned note so big.
The mortalt brood the destnies guide:
Themselves they nothing can assure,
That certainly doth steadfast bide:
Which our last day of life, procure,
(Where of we always should beware,)
Much dangerous chances for to try:
Unto your troubled mind with care,
Now many samples do applies,
Which your accursed court hath brought,
To holden you in all your broil:
For what hath more your troubles wrought,
What doth against you sorer toil,
Than fortune doth? the first of all,
Agrippas child brought forth to life,
Whom we Tyberius daughter call,
By law, and eke Prince Caesars wife,
Of many sons a careful dame,
I cannot chose but now recount,
Whose worthy, glorious ample name,
Throughout the world doth much surmount.
So oft with belly bolne that bare
Desired fruicts, and peaces pledge,
Ere long thou suffered exiles care,
Strypes, chains, and bolts of iron wedge,
And mourning much, which so did frame,
That death they caused thee to abide.
So Levy, Drusus lucky name
In male kind babes, did hedling slyde,
Into a cruel monstrous deed,
And death sore piercing deadly dart.
His mothers fates doth Iulia speed,
To follow straight with all his heart,
Who after longer wasted time
With bloody fashion kene, was slain,
Although for no just cause or crime.
Your mother eke that once did reign,
Who then esteemed of Claudius well,
Did wisely weld his court at will,
And fruitful was, as you can tell,
What could not her desire fulfil:
She sometime subject to his slave,
To death was put with soldiers blade.
What she, that easly hope might have,
Toth skies, his reign to rise have made,
Prince Neroes lusty Parent great?
First tossed with shipman's boisterous force,
Then torn with sword in Princes heat,
Did she not lye a senseless corse,
Lo me the tyrant stern will send
To yrcksome shades and hellish spritz.
Why wretch doe I the tyiue thus spend?
Draw me to death you to whose myghts,
False Fortune hath bequeathed me.
I witness now the heavenly power.
What dost thou bedlam? leave to flee,
With prayer to Gods, who on thee lower.
I call to witness Tartar deep,
And sprites of Hell revenging freakes
Of heinous facts, in D••geon steep,
And Sire whom death deserved wreakes.
I doe not now rapine to dye,
Deck up your Ship, and hoise your Sail,
On frothing seas to winds on hye:
Let him that guides the Helm not fail,
To seek the shore of Pharian Land.
O pippling puff of western wind,
Which sacrifice did once with stand,
Of Iphigen to death asfignde
And close in Cloud congealed clad,
Did cary his from smòking aa•es,
Which angry, cruel Virgin had:
This Prince also oppressed, with cares,
Save from this painful punishment,
To Deans temple safely horn:
The harbarous Moors toru•enesse bent,
Then Princes Courts in Rome forlorn,
Have far more Civil curt•sie:
For there doth strangers death appease
The angry Gods in heavens on hie,
But Romaine blood, our Rome must please.

HERCVLES having subdued the
Sons of EVRITVS King of
OEchalia, (who contrary to their
promise, denied to give their Sister
IOLE unto him) &amp; having made
conquest of the City and country
thereabout, meant to sacrifice unto
the Gods for his victory in that be∣half,
and success in briging away,
perforce, his beeloued IOLE. For the solemn celebration
whereof, he sent LYCAS his servant, unto DEIANEI∣RA
his Wife, to fetch his Robe, which hee always used
when hee sacrificed. DEIANEIRA dippinge and be∣sprinckling
the same Robe in the blood of NESSVS the
Centaur, because she feared least her husband loved IOLE
better then he did her, (for NESSVS being shot through,
and slain by HERCVLES, had persuaded &amp; advised her
that she should so doe, whenever she doubted that her
husbands love were alienated from her to any other,) sent it
unto him. Which Garment when HERCVLES had put
on, the poison wherein it was dipped, and washed, enueno∣med
all his Vital parts, and drove him into most intollera∣ble
torments. For remedy whereof hee sent to APOL∣LO
his Oracle at Delphos: from whence hee received aun∣swear,
that hee should bee carried unto Mount OEtus, and
there, that a great fire should bee made: and as for all other
things, they should bee referred to the pleasure and direction
of IVPITER. The fire being there made and kindled by
PHILOCTETES, (unto whom HERCVLES be∣queathed
his Arrows,) HERCVLES went up into it, &amp;
was there burned. Whose bones being afterword sought for
and not found, the standers by were fully persuaded that
he was deified, &amp; taken up into Heaven. When knowledge
thereof was brought unto DEIANIRA, she
thinking herself to bee the cause of her hus∣bands
tormenting death, strangled
her self.
FINIS.
O Lord of Ghosts whose fyrye flash
(that forth thy hand doth shake)
Doth cause the trembling Lodges twain
of Phoebus Carre to quake,
Reign reachlesse now: in every place
thy peace procured I have
Aloof where Nereus lockes up land
Impaled in winding Wave.
Thwack not about with thunder thumps, the rebel kings bee down,
The ravening tyrants Scepterlesse, are pulled from their crown:
By me all daunted is whereon, thy bolts thou should bestow.
And yet O Father, yet the Heavens are still withheld me fro,
At all assays I serve, as might an Imp of Jove behove,
And that thou ought to Father me, my stepdame well doth prove.
Why dost thou linger in delay, is Heaven of vs afraid?
Seem wee so awful, fell, and fierce? and wherefore are wee staide?
And cannot Atlas boysteous back on stouping shoulder tough,
Uphold the payse of Hercules, and heaven well enough?
What is it sier? what is it Jove that thee so much detarres?
What may thee force keep back thy son from scaling of the Stars
For death hath let me pass again from dungeon dark to thee.
When mischiefs fell and monsters all destroyed and spoiled bee
That either Land, or Seas, or Ayre. Or hell engender could
Arcadian Lion none to range in salvage Name wolte.
The Stymphall Foul hath chased bin with Bow, and Brusell bolt.
No nimble heart of Menalus doth lye in hill nor houlte
The Dragon daunting with his blood hath goarde the golden grove.
And Hydra hath his courage cooled, and Diomedes drove
Whose puffed paunches pampered were with stoare of strangers blood
That scoarde the Coast and barren banks of cruel Heber flood
I slaughterd them, and that the force of foe might well bee seen.
I prowlde away the boots of the proud Amazon Queen,
Of silent shades in glummy Goulphes the dreadful dooms I saw.
On Cerber black the Tartar Tike the son did shine with awe,
And he with steaming Goggle eyes hath glyed upon the soon:
Anteus yawns, and gapes no more whose gasping breath to done.
A front his alters Busir fell was knocked unto the ground,
By him whose hand gave Gerion his deep and deadly wound
And slew the mighty Bull that was to hundred hearts a dread,
All noyous plagues I spoiled have that ever Tellus bread,
And daunted by my hand they lye: the Gods now need not free:
The world to answer Iunoes ire, no monsters now can get.
Now show thy valiant son his sire, or set him in the clouds,
Thou shalt not need to bee my guide, my self will climb the shrouds.
Doe thou my passage but allow, and I shall find away,
But if thou dread, that monsters more the earth engender may,
Hast on each monster hideous, to show it self in time,
While Hercules hath his abode beueath the heavenly Climb.
For who encounter shall the fiends? who first that Grecia hath,
That may be meet, to bide the brunt of mighty Iunoes wrath?
My praise burtes not my health: my fame doth fly, from land to land:
The ysy poale doth know me, where the northern bear doth stand:
The easterlings encombred with the gleede of scorching sun.
The south, where Phoebe by crooked clear of Tropic Crab doth rūne:
In every coast O Titan where thou dost thy self reveal.
How I have met thee face to face, to thee I doe appeal.
Aloof beyond the compass of thy light I set my foot,
And never could thy blaze so far his glymsinge glory shoot.
As I have forced the honour of my triumphs for to stretch,
The day it self hath had his stint, within my travels retch
Dame Nature faylde, the world was shogd beside his center dew,
And ougsome night in shimmering shade, from dungeon darck I drew.
And cankered Chaos lodged aloof encountered me awayne:
Yet from the deep I gat to ground, whence none returns again.
Wee strove against the Ocean storms, I balasen the keel
Fraught with my weight, that wrestling waives could not cōpell it reel.
What heaps of hazards tempted I through all the open ayre,
To qualify thy wedlocks wrath can mischief none repair
The earth would loath such baggage bred as I would match by might,
Yea monsters none are to be found, the fiends doe shun my sight.
And Hecules for want of fiends against him self did rage
What eluishe creatures cursed did I with naked arm assuage.
Was ever any peevish thing so big upon the ground
That coapt with me, but that my hand alone did it confound.
Not hither to from vermin vile through fainting fear I leapt
In babish years, not when to me in Cradell laid they leapt:
Each thing that was commanded me, at ease I did obey:
Thus free from painful toil to me there never past a day.
What vermin have I vanquished, no king commanding it?
My courage cloys me more then all the wiles of Iunoes wit.
But what avails me to rid mankind of fickle fear?
The Gods yet cannot reign in rest: while up the world doth pear,
New rid of furious fiends, it sees a loft in starry skies
The cruel creatures all, that erst on earth did fore aggrise.
Dame Iuno hath transport the elves The scorching Crab doth creep
About the burning zone, and aloof at Africa doth keep
The Tropic line: and Harvest fat he feeds with parching heate:
To Virgo, Leo turns the time, and in a reeking sweat.
He buckling up his burning Mane, doth dry the dropping south.
And swallows up the slabby clouds in fyry foaming mouth.
The Urchins all are crept to skies, and have prevented me:
I Conqueror from Earth to Heaven, my travels all may see:
These gargle Faces grim on heaven, Dawe Iuno first did set:
As though thereof the terror might to skies my passage let:
Although she scatter them in Skies, or make the Heavens forlorn
More then y• Earth, or hellike Goulphes, (whereby y• Gods are sworn)
Yet room for Hercles shall be made, if after monsters quilt,
Or battles fought, or hellike hound in Chains as captive held,
If all exploits cannot prevail, in skies a place to gain,
Then soukt up bee the midland Sea twixt Barbary, and Spain,
That either shore may join in one, with channel none between
There will I dam the running stream, that Sea shall none be seen▪
Or as for Corinth out shot land that tweene two seas doth lye,
It shall give way to •yther stream, that through the same shall fly.
And when the seas on passage have, the Fleet of Athens town
May float in Channel new: thus shall the world turn tops•down:
Let Ester turn his stream, and Tanaus slow another way:
Grant Jove a placket, grant, whereby the Gods uphold I may.
Discharge thy thunder dint. where I shall keep due watch, &amp; ward,
If either to the ysy poale thou bid me have regard,
Or burning zone, here let the Gods full safe all force defy:
Prince Paean purchased hath an house amid the crystal sky,
And well deserved he the temples of Pernassus hill,
For slaughter of a Dragon made? how oft recovering still
In Hydra poison Python lay? with Bacchus Perseus strong
By less desert then Hercules, have crept the Gods among.
But all the East (a mighty coast) to bond is brought, by him.
Whom Iuno spightes, how stern a bug was snaky Gorgon grim?
What Imp is he, begot between my stepdame dire and thee,
Whose praised pains have purchased him a place in heaven to be?
The heaven that on my shoulders I have hoisterd up I crave:
But Lycas, (partner of my pains) dispatch our triumph brave.
Display in pomp the ruin of Euritus house, and Crown:
And for the sacrifice with speed strike yet the Bullocks down,
Where as the Aare (that doth adnaunce the Church of Cony Jove.)
Lies open to Euboca sea: that wrackful wave doth move.
THe Gods in bliss that man doth coūteruaile,
That can at once both Grave, &amp; glory gain,
Death upon death the whilst doth him assail
Whose wretched life is lingered on in payne,
With frowning fate in spurning spite who shiues,
And sets the Keel of gaping goulphe at nought,
Will not submit his captive hands to gives,
As dish of dishonour in triumph to bee brought:
Like careful caitiff hee shall never droop,
Whelmed in storming thoughts of sower annoy
Whose stomach scorns, for dawnting death to stoup,
Though seas amid the deep in hoisted hoy
Drive him aloof, when as a southern gale
Beats Bores back, or eastern puff again
Recoils the western wind, and seems to hale
From deepest sands the surges torn in twain.
That broken planks to catch hee scrambles not
Of wrecked bark, as one that hopes to have
Amid the Channel deep a landing plot,
When dismal death appears in every wave
Hee cannot suffer shipwreck all alone:
With pined karrayne coarse, and streams of tears,
And with our country dust our heads upon,
Powldring our lockes, wee languish out our years.
Neither flashing flame, nor thumping thunder crack
Will once dawnt vs: O death thou dost pursew,
Where fortune fawns: but where she works wrack,
Thou shunnest those, that would thee not eschew,
Wee stand not in our razed country wall,
Whose ground shall now bee overgrown (alas)
With bramble, and brier, and down the temples fall:
While mucky sheepecotes are planted in their place.
And now the frostifaced Greek (alas)
This way, this way, with all his drove of Neat
By so much of AEchalia must pass,
As heaped on ashes gloweth still with heate.
The Tessayle shepherd sitting by the way
On iarringe Pipe shall play his country rhyme,
Singing with sighs alack, and weladay,
Thus to bewail the sorrows of our time.
Ere time shall roll the race of many a year,
It will be asked, where erst the town did stand?
O well was I, when as I lived a lear,
Not in the barren balkes of fallow land,
Nor in Thessalia on the foodelesse cliues,
But now among rough Trachin craggy Rocks,
And ugly shrubs necessity me drives,
Whose flaming tops detarres the feeding Ox.
And in the way less woods vntrode before
All comfortless, affright and in a maze
Needs must I trot alone, that would abhor
The salvage beasts, that on the mountains graze
But better lot (if any Dames may have)
They over Inach rambling stream shall row,
Or shroud in Dirce Walls, where Ismen wave
With feeble force of shallow fourde doth flow.
The haughty Hercles mother here was wed,
What Scythian crag, what stones engendered him?
What Rocky mountain Rhodope thee bred,
Of Tyrant, Titans race a cu•sed limb?
Stipe Ethos hill, the brutish Caspia land.
With teat unkind fed thee twixt rock &amp; stoane:
False is the tale, wherewith thou bear in hand,
Two nights for thee thy Mother dear did groan.
While lingering stars long lodged in purple sky:
The shepherd star his course did interchange
With the load star, and up the Moon doth sty,
That couched Phoebe durst not the Welkin range,
No Lance can pearce his monsters ruggy skin,
The blunted Iron tried it with thumping thwack,
And Steel is not so tough: on naked skin
A swerd was burst, and stones rebounded back.
The force of fate he utterly defies,
And toughly timberd as he is of limb
Hee doth contrive, how quarrels may arise,
That death might prove his fabled force in him
The quaries could not enter to his flesh,
Nor yet the bow with Scythian steule drawn deep,
No nor the glaues, with which Sarmacians fresh,
Hot skirmishes in th'ysy Climb doe keep.
No nor the Parthian better Archer far,
Then Create, who parcht with Phaētons soultring flame,
Under the Equinoctial raises werre,
Against the easterling discomfiting the same.
Hee with his body did batter down the wall,
Of Oechalie: nothing may him withstand:
By valiant prowess hee hath conquered all:
Tic won before, that hee doth take in hand:
The howgy Brier that fifty paunches had,
The haughty Giges with hundred arms likewise,
That climb up Thassayle hills as Giant mad,
When rebels rage would take from love the skies,
Such steaming Eyes, such ghastly visage foul,
Such Gargle face, such countnaunce glaring grim,
Wherewith stern Hercles glowningly doth scowl,
Those Giants had resembling plainly him.
Thus greatest bliss is prone to greatest bale
There wants no woe whose cup wee have not taste
Wee wretched women have with countnaunce pale.
But careful caitiff I
doe not bewail forlorn
The sweeping flames, nor Idols, with
their taitred Temples torn:
Nor that the Fathers burn
together with their Sons,
That Gods, &amp; men, that tombs &amp; Church,
at once to ruin runs.
Upon the common care
was doe not power our plaint,
For Fortune wills vs turn our tears with other woes attaint:
And thus my frowning face allotted unto me
Another kind of wretchedness, that must lamented bee:
What shall I first beweep? Or chiefly what complain?
And to bewail them all at once, would mitigate my payne.
Alas that but on breast Dame Nature did me frame,
That blows agreeing to my grief might bounce upon the same.
With weeping Sipill rock, br••se ye my baleful breast,
Or on Eridanus silent shore in sorrows let wee rest,
Where as the mourning troupe of Nymphs doe hale their hears.
To whale the death of Phaïron, with showers of dropping tears.
Or else in Sicill rock cause me encoucht to dwell,
Where Scilla Hag with howling noise, and barking big doth yell.
Or else in Linnets shape let me tell on my tale,
And weep with Adon in the woods, or turned to Nightingale
As Lady Philomele, records with weeping lay
In shade of hawly Ismar hill upon a tender spray,
With soking sighs her grief, O Gods: and me addight
In shape, that may be suitable vnso my plaintiff plight.
And of my piteous moan let craggy Trachin sound,
Sith Mire saw the tears where in Dame Venus eyes were drowned,
That she for Adopis with smoky sighs did shed,
And Halcion might whale at will her loving Ceyx dead:
The Lady Tastalis get life to weep alone,
And Philomele did change her shape, and earnefully did move
Her tender Itis death: (alas) why are not yet
With flickering Feathers fit for wings, my naked arms beset?
O happy shall I bee, and happily bee blessed,
When in the woods as in an house I make my shrouding nest,
And sitting like a bird upon my country ground
In doleful harmony shall tune the cares, that me confound.
That thus the people fond may talk how they have seen
In piteous likeness of a Bird, the Daughter of a Queen.
I careful caitiff, I, beheld my Fathers fate,
When in the Court a deadly club did Pale him on the pate,
And sprawling on the floor with brains poshed out hee lay,
Alas if fates would let thy Coarse beshrynde in pit of Clay,
What flowing tears (O Syer) would I on thee bestow?
And could I brooke it Toxeus, to see thy death with woe?
That were unwind• in years, and take in pits vnpaysde,
Upon whose naked Cheeks the prague•• 〈◊〉 hairs had raysor.
Why should I parents dear your fates with tears detest,
Whom death with hand end•fferent hath taken hence to rest:
My Fortune seeks my tears, due is mine own distress,
Now as a captive must I dawnce attendance more and less,
Upon my Ladies rock: and twist her thread yspoon,
Woe worth my beauty, for the which in dread of death I run.
And for thy sake alone my stock hath lost his life,
While that my syer Denies me to Hercles as his wife
And did for fear refuse his stepfather to bee,
But to our Laydes baleful bower as Captives hence go wee:
WHat furious fits of romping rage
doth boyle in Women's brain,
When in one roof both wedded wife
and Harlor doe remain?
Both Scylla, and Charibdis gulf
no danger like it have,
That raging roll on Sicill shore
by heaps the wrestling wave.
No salvage beast so bad there is,
that betters not the same.
For bruit no sooner blew abroad the captive Harlots name,
And that the beauty of Iolas countnaunce shined brim,
As doth the day, when marble skies, no filthy fog doth dim:
Or like the glimpse of twinkling star, that in the welkin bright
Displays abroad his shooting beams amid the frosty might:
But Deianira Hercles Wife all bedlam like doth stand,
And scowled as the Tiger wilde which couched on the sand
In shade of rock doth shroud his whelps, and buskells up in hesse,
Espying him that of his young both come to make the waste:
Or like as Menas overcharge with Bacchus liquor sixeete
With Ivy bunch on thurled Dart from place to place doth fleet:
She makes a pause, in doubt where to she might derect her pace,
Then frantically as on bestraught, she 〈◊〉 from place to place
In Hercles douse. thus was she rayt in rage of flaming ire,
The house to narrow was, to cool the despret dames desire.
She runs in, she •rots about, she makes a sudden stay.
The malady in frowning face it self doth plain display.
No galling grief remains at heart. The tears gush from her Eyes,
Nor in on kind of temper still in frenly sits she fries:
Her glowning looks with fury fell doe change her former hew,
Now glaring stand her steaming Eyes, and paleness doth ensew
The ruddy colour in her Cheeks: the anguish of her heart
Drives out her dolors deep, to show them selves in every part:
She languishes, she moans for help, she wails her froward fate,
And all the house an Echo makes resounding her estate.
Lo headlong to and fro she hies, and running still about
Goes mumbling, and the secrets of her mind she mutters out:
Oh Iuno Spouse to Jove, what part of heaven soever thou keep,
Raise up some salvage beast, against lewd Hercules to creep,
That I shall think sufficient: If any combrous snake
With breeding hee doe craule, more big in alt the slimy lake,
That may not take a foil: or if that ought doe yet remain,
So ougsome, grizzly, cursed, and grim, so fraught with filthy bain,
That hee may loathe to look thereon, that may his sight appal.
Undo their Dens, from hideous pools procure such vermin craule.
Or if that flendes can none befounde, then couture thou my ghost
To what thou •tst: this soul of mine can welt abide the most:
Some vucouth shape, some ghastly face, such one bestow on me,
Whereby the horror of my pangs may counteruayled bee.
My boiling breast cannot conceive the vengeance, I would try:
Why search thou the corners far, of lands aloof that lye?
And turnst y• world thus upside down? why seekst thou harm of hell?
To trance him, furious fl•irndes enough within this breast doe dwell:
Make me thine instrument of hate: his stepdame I will bee,
And thou may work the overthrow of Hercules by me:
Appoynct my hand to any thing. Why dost thou make delay?
Use thou my frenzy, as the means to compass his decay.
The mischief shall be brought to pass, what ever thou wilt crave:
Why stand ye musing still thereon? contrived all I have:
Thou may forbear thy malice now: thy rancour shall suffice,
To bring this wretch unto his end, my self can well devise.
My Foster gyile, of raving mind, these dreary plaints assuage,
Forbear this heate, and bridal yet the rigour of thy rage:
Behave thy self for such an one, as men may worthy judge
The noble Spouse of Hercules.
Shall Iole (slavish drudge)
Bring bastard brethren to my Babes? of her that is a slave
Shall Iupiter the God of heaven forsooth a daughter have?
The flashing flames, and fighting floods shall toyne together first.
The northern bear to Marble seas shall stoup to quench his thirst.
Yea vengeounce, vengeance, will I have, though on thy back thou wield
The boysteous heavens, and all the world doe peace unto thee yield:
There is a thing shall sting thee worse then Hydra hissing Snake,
The corsey cursed of angry Wife. Doth any fiery Flake
Vpthrowne from Etnas boiling Foarge, so sows the beaten skies?
More then all things that thou hast daunt, my ghost shall thee aggryse.
Shall thou prefer a servile Trull before thy wedded Wife?
For fear of many monsters more I tendered still thy life,
And now for to increase my care. I see no monsters lurk,
And now steps in an hateful whore, (which more my mind doth vrke)
To cumber vs, as ill as fiends. O Father thou of might,
The shield of Gods: and Titan thou, that bear the Lamp of light,
I only unto Hercules a loyal wife abode,
And to an Harlots use are turned my prayers made to God:
The fruit of my felticity a Strumpet doth obtain,
And for an Harlots love ye Gods have harde my prayers vain:
Is Hercules returned for her? O grief not yet content.
Devise some tearing torments, seek some pangs, and punishment.
Let Iuno learn of me, what force a women's fury hath.
She knows not how in deep despite, to use her harming wrath.
For me you did these batrtayles wage: for my sake Acheloe
Did let his streaming blood amid his rambling waives to floe.
When snarling Adders shape hee took, and to the boysteous Bull
Hee gieuing up his sloughy shape did bend his malice full.
And thus thou foiled a thousand foes by conquest of this one:
Yet presently thou plunged art, and that by me alone:
A prisoner now must be prefer de before thy loyal wife.
Isle none of that: but even the day that first begins the strife,
And to our wedlock brings the breach, shall be thy dismal day,
And knap in twain the fatal twist where on thy life doth stay:
What means this? my mind relents. My malice breaks his rage:
O wretched grief why dost thou faint? thy spite wilt thou assuage?
With fealty of a faithful Wife dost thou thy conscience charge?
Why lets thou not my boiling ire for to increase at large?
Why dost thou slake thy frying fits? this malady still survive.
Even now I able was with him for maistership to strive.
In deed I have not craved aid: yet Stepdame Iuno will,
To weilde my hands to work his wrack, bee here assistant still:
What treachery intend thou mad bedlam to commit?
Thy husbād wilt thou murder wretch? whose flickering fame doth flit:
From east to west: whose bright renown the earth could not contain
But raised aloft, from marble Skies it doth rebound again:
The mother Earth shall rife in arms for to revenge his grave.
His former Stepsiers stock hereby the overthrow shall have:
And all Aetolia royal blood will feel an vtterfall:
In quarrel of thy Hercules the world conspier shall.
Then silly wight how many plagues shalt thou alone abide?
But be it that from the face of man thou might thy body hyde.
Yet Jove the lightning looms of heaven doth hold in armed hand,
Behold the flying fyry flakes in ranks all ready stand:
And threatening thunders thumping thick doe bounce out all the day.
Deaths dungeon (that thou dost defy) full duly scour thee may.
For there his Uncle umpire sits: Much where thou may vnspyde.
And every where thou shalt perceive the Gods to him 〈◊〉.
I grant it despert deed, whereto despair now doth me drive.
Die sure thou shall.
And die I will, (as presently I live)
The loyal spouse of Hercules. And ere this night doe pass,
Day shall not see that Deianire a living Widow was.
Nor of my spousal head an whore shall get the interest.
The dawning day shall sooner make the morning peer in West,
Unto the eastward Indians the ysy poale shall melt,
And freezing Scithian first shall fry with flames that hee hath felt
Of Phoebus fervent wheel: ere me Thessalia Trulls shall see
Divorced: my bridal blase shall with my blood iquenched bee:
And either let him murdered bee, or take away my Life.
So soothly let him count among the foiled flendes his Wife.
Among Alcides labours let me reckned bee as on.
His love in heart I hold, until the utter gasp bee gon.
Thus vndiuorst (not vureuengde) I will to Hercles tomb.
It Iole be with child by him, isle tear it from her womb,
And rent it with these paws of mine. Yea in the wedding place,
I flying at her fearce will set my talents in her face:
Let him not spare in ramping rage a sacrifice to make
Of me upon his wedding day, when he his Trull doth take,
So that I falling down may light on Iones senseless coarse
He dyes a happy man, that first hath quilt his foes by force.
O wretched might why dost thou thus increase thy fuming heate:
And feed thy fury wittingly least hap should thee defeat.
He loved Lady Iole, but while her fathers crown
Stood flourishing in royal state and were not bartered down,
And as unto the daughter of a King bee suitor was,
But when from type of haughty pomp she did to thraldom pass
He shook her of hot love was cooled, and now her bitter bale
Would not allow the wrack •• kele to bear to hie a sale:
Vnleeful things that should be shunt we greatly desire.
But matters meeter for our state we seldom do require.
The pitying of adversity doth oft enkindle more
The fervent fits of love, and this perhappe doth urge him sore,
To see her reaft of native soil, it may his fancy touch,
Her hair not tuct with tresses trim, nor dect with golden ouch
Perhap the man with pity pricked doth love her for her carc.
Unto his noble hart to pity prisoners tic not rare.
The sister dear of Priamus (fair Lady Hesyon) he
Did cause to Thelamon the Greek in wedlock knit to bee:
Account how many wives before, and maidens did he love,
And ranged abroad to cool the rage that Venus brand did move.
Fair Auge maid of Arcadye intent set to lead
Dianas drunce, by force of him did leese her maiden head.
And yet no token could she show nor pledge of any jove,
What shall I speak of any more, or doth it me behove,
To pra•e what pranks he played with fifty daughters in one night.
And yet how soon of such a pang he over came the might,
He set much store by Omphale of Lidia land the Queen,
When like a guest on Timolus the mount he hath been seen.
He was so prict with Cupids dart, and caught in Venus trap,
That tucke in women's weed he sat with distaf in his lap
And spoon the flax with sombling fist, and rudely thumbde the thread
And flong from him the syons case the price of noble deed.
With tresses trick on plaited lockes he wailed as a maid
With mire his ftiseled poale was smeard, and curried bush was braid,
Thus every where as fancy flits, the fondling dotes in love.
But in such sort as easily he can the same remove.
But they whom fickle fancies 〈◊〉 have taint, doe learn at last
In link of love by tract of time to fix affiance fast.
Trow ye that hee this captive queen, and on whom hee doe see
The daughter of his deadly foe, will more esteem then thee?
As gladsome groves at Prime of spring in beauties pride are seen
When freshest warmth the naked twigs doth clad in pleasant greene.
But when could Bores boysteous blast the pipling puffs doth stop
Of south wind sweet, rough winter powles the naked bushes top:
The barewoode with misshapen stumps doth show a withered Face,
Even so my beauty marching forth a season on his Race
Still fades away, and evermore abates his glimsing gloss,
And what so ever was in me, by care is come to loss.
And that which erst by fancy fed the greedy gazing eyes,
Is fallen away by bearing child: so oft it droupes, and dyes.
And since I came to mothers state. I faded fast away.
And wrinkled age with furrowed face steps in with quick decay.
But yet this bondmaydes •eater fresh her sorrow better brookes.
Her comely countnaunce crazied is with lean and winnie looks.
And yet for all her kirk and care amid her deep •istresse.
She bears a glimpse of beauty bright, and favour nothing less.
Her heavy hap, and frowning rate can nothing from her pluck.
Save Sceptre from her royal hand by all this lowering luck.
By means of this first fainting fear did lodge within my breast,
That makes me wake the weary nights, and leese my kindly rest.
In all men's eyes at first I seemed to be a blessed Wife.
And Ladies all at our estate ripening very rife
Did wish my watch in spite of fate what S•eps•er shall I hope
As match in majesty to Jove within the heavenly coape?
Dear fosterdame whom shall I make my fear in spousal bed?
Although Euryst that Hercules to all these toils hath led,
Doe link with me in bridal bands, my state shall be impayrde.
Tic small worth to deserve to bee to kingly wedlock rayrde.
But Issue is the thing that doth in marriage kindle love.
And Issue is the thing that doth in marriage malice move.
This while the bondmaid to thee for present shall be brought
Lo hee •etreth up and down with princely pore full haught,
And buckles fast about his Loins the lively Lyons case,
Who doth invest the wretched with the right of kingly mace,
D•posing those from honours type that late so lofty sat.
And pestered his puissant paws with huge dvnweildy bat,
Of whose exploits, and maarciale acts the Seres sing aloof,
And all enclosed in Ocean sea thereof have perfect proof
Is now became an amorous knight: the honour of his name
Doth nothing touch his conscience, to tender once his •am.
Hee roueth through the world, as on that doth no whit esteem,
Although that men as soon to Jove shall him unworthy deem.
Nor like the man whose credit through the towns of Greece is great.
Hee seeks to compass his des•er, to work a Lovers feat.
With single Dames is his delight: If any him deny,
Then to attain his lawless lust by rigour doth hee try.
With men hee fares frantically, to others smart and blame
Hee win• his Wy•es, his folly frail is cloackt by virtues name.
The noble City Oechalie is made a razed town.
The Sun twixt morn and even did set, in one day up, and down▪
One day did see it stand in state, the same did see it fall.
These bloody broils, and wasting wars of Love proceeded all,
As oft as parents unto him deny their daughters dear,
So oft I warrant them they need his wrathful fury fear.
So oft a man with Hercules shall be at deadly food:
As hee denies his stepfather to bee by joining blood.
If hee may not be son in law, then doth hee rage, and rave:
Why doe these guiltless hands of mine still keep him from his grave,
Till hee dissemble frantic fits, to bend his aiming bow,
And deaths wound on my child, and me with bloody hands bestow?
Thus haughty Hercules was wont his wedlockes to divorce.
Yet nought there is, that law of guilt on him might have recorse.
Hee makes the world blame Iuno, for the ills hee hath commit.
O rigour, of my rage why dost thou qualify my fit?
Now must thou set thy hands on work, too't whi•e thy hands bee hot.
Thy husband wilt thou slay?
Him whō his Lemon lewd hath got.
But yet, he is the son of Jove.
And so Alemenas son.
With stroke of steel?
With stroke of steel if it cannot bee donne,
Then for to bring his death to pass, isle set for him a snare.
What kind of madness may it be that makes thee thus to fare?
Such as my husband hath me taught.
Wilt thou thy spouse de∣stroy,
On whom y• stepdames spite yet had no power to work annoy?
The wrathes of heavenly minds do make thē blessed on whō they light
So doth not spite of mortal men.
Oh silly wretched wight
For bear thy rage, and fear the worst, mans force may not assail
Him, that against the power of hell, and death could once prevail.
Isle venture on the dint of swerd.
Thy wrath (dear foster child)
Is greater then the crime, that hath thy Hercules defiled.
With eagle malice measure salts. Alas why dost thou bring
So great and sore, a penalty upon so swell a thing?
Let not thy grief be greater, then the sorrow thou sustains.
Set you it light that with our wedlock linked an harlot reigns •
Nay rather think it still to much, that doth thy sorrows breed.
And is the Jove of Hercules revolt from thee in deed?
It is not revolt, dear foster Dame, fast in my bones it sticks:
But ire boils hoate in burning breast, when love to anger pricks.
It is almost a common guise, that wedded wives doe haunt,
Their husbands hearts by magic Art, and witchcraft to enchant.
In winter could I charmed have the woods, to make them sprout.
And forced the thunder dint recoil, that hath bin bolting out.
With weltering surges I have shook the seas amid the calm.
I smoothed have the wrestling waives, and la•de down every walme.
The dry groūd gaped hath like gulphs, &amp; out new springs have gushed.
The roaring rocks have quaking stirred, &amp; none therest hath pushed.
Hell glounimy gales I have burst cape, where grisly ghosts all hushed
Have stood &amp; answering at my charm the goblins grim have scold.
The threefold headed hound of hell with barking throats hath hold.
Thus both the seas, the land, the heavens, &amp; hell bow at my beck.
Noon day to midnight, to and fro turns at my charming check.
At my enchantment every thing declines from natures law.
Our charm shall make his stomach stoup, &amp; bring him more in awe.
What herbs doe grow in Pontus sea? Or else on Pindus hill?
To trounce this machelesse champton, where shall I find the ill?
The magic vearse •uchaunts the Moon from Starry skies to groūd,
And fruitful harvest is thereby in barren winter found.
The whisking flames of lightning looms oft sorcery doth stay.
And noonetyde ropsy tur•y •oct doth dim the dusky day.
And leave the welkin to the stars, and yet not cause him stxsoupe.
The Gods them selves by charm of love have forced bin to droop.
Perhap hee shall be won by one, and yield to her the spoil.
So love shall be to Hercules the last and latest toil.
By all the host of heavenly powers, and as thou see me fear,
The secrets that I shall attempt, in council see thou bear:
What may it be, that thou would have me keep so secretly?
No broil of blades, no privy cote, no fiery force party:
I you assure I can conceal, if mischief none be meant.
For then the keeping close of it is sure a lewbe intent.
Then look about, if none be here, our council to betray:
Look round about, on all sides cast thy countnaunce every way.
Behold the place is safe enough from any listening ear.)
Beside the place of our estate there is a secret nook,
A covert corner for our talk, that sonneshyne never took.
Neither at morn, nor evening tide, when Titans blaze doth quench.
And hee in ruddy western wave his •iry wheels doth drench.
There secret lies the privy proof of Hercules amorous thought,
Isle tell thee all dear foster dame: This witchcraft Nessus taught,
Whom Ixion engendered of a misty grouing cloud,
Where Pindus hauiy hill his top among the stars doth shroud,
And other stipe doth heave his Crest about the riding rack
When Achelous over laid, with many a thumping thwack
Of Hercles club, did shift him self to every kind of shape,
And trial made of all his sleights none served to escape,
At length he turned him self into the likeness of Bull.
And so was foully vanquished in form of horny scull.
(While Hercules being Conqueror did me his Wife enjoy.)
Returning home to Greece again, it happened Even lake
To overflow the drowned marsh and channel to forsake,
And strongly streamde to seas hee runs, and swells aboue his banks.
And Nessu• used to pass the poole, and search the croaking cranks
As Ferryman demands his fare, and bare me on his back,
And wading forward brake the Waives, and surges of the lake.
At length yet Nessus waded out unto the farther shore,
Yet Hercules had swam but half the river and no more:
And plied it hard to cut the stream: but when espied had hee,
That Hercules was far behind, Madam (quoth hee) to me.
(Be thou my booty, and my wife, and clasping me about)
Away he flings, and Hercules besturres him maugre Wave:
Though Ganges gulf and Ester stream (quoth he) thou traitor slave
Might roon in on, yet shi• to scope them both, well could I make,
And in thy hast a shaft shall soon they running over take:
And ere he spake the word, his arrow flew out of his bow,
And wrought a wound in Nessus ribs, hee could no farther go.
It sped him sure, to look for death. Hee cried, well away.
The baggage running from the wound reserved as hee lay,
And putting it into his hoof the which undoing, hee
In cutting yt with his own hand, did give it unto me.
And thus at latter gasp he said, the witches have me told,
That love may charmed be by this, to have and keep his hold.
The conning witch dame Michel did teach Thessalia dames,
Who only forced the Moan to stoup to her from heavenly frames.
Therefore (quoth he) at any time when hateful whores abuse
Thy spoufall bed, or wavering man do haunt to any stews
Then with this salve anoint his shirts, and let it see no son,
But keep it close in corners dark, the blood then shall not shone
His strength: and thus full suddenly he left his talk with rest:
And deadly sleep with senseless death his feeble limbs oppressed.
Thou Dame to whom in hope of trust my secrets all bewray,
On, that the poison soaked into the vesture bright, it may
Press through his limbs, unto his hart, &amp; sink through every bone,
I will dispatch it all in hast, make thou thy earnest moan
Unto the God, whose tender hand his steadfast darts doth wield,
I thee beseech that art of earth and heaven in honour held.
And thou that shake burning bolts, thou cursed and cruel boy,
Whose eluish weapons make thy mother fear thy sharpe annoy.
Now arm thy hand with speedy shaft not of the slender sort,
But biggest bolts, with which as yet thou hast assault no fort,
We need no little shaft that may stir Hercules to love
Bring cruel hands and force thy how his depest draught to prove
Now, now draw forth thy shaft wherewith thou caused cruelly
The burning breast of Jove by fie•tes of servant love to fry.
When as the God his thonder bolt and lightning laid aside,
Began boalne with bumps on foe reheat big: and throught the wave he hid,
And swam with Europe on his back in shape of horny Bull.
Now power down love, and therewithal let Hecles hart be full.
If Ioles beauty kindle heate and Hercles hart doth move,
Quench thou these coals, and force him glow with vs in lawful love.
Full oft the thunder thumping Jove hath stouped to thy yoke:
And him that wields the moary mace of black Auerne to smoke.
Thy flames enforce, and •ache the Lord of glummy Stigian lake:
But only match thou Hereules, and of him triumph take
O Jove, whose wrath more wrackful is then yreful Iunoes might.
The charm is made in perfect force is al our medcine right,
Wherein the shirt shall steeped bee that wearied many wight.
Whose hands on Pallas distasse spoon the weary Web with payne.
And it for Hercules avail shall brincke up all the bane.
And with my charm Isle strengthen it. But lo ye in the nick
Defte Lycas comes here at hand who will dispatch it quick:
But tell him not what force it hath least hee the guilt betray.
Alas that faith to kings dwells not in houses of estate:
Have Lycas here this shirt, the which my hands have spun of late,
While Hercules at random roves, and overshot with wine
Doth rudely dandle on his lap the Lidiane Lady fine.
Now dotes hee after Iole: but this his boiling rage
That burns in his breast I will with courtesy assuage,
For courtesy conquers canckred churls. See thou my spouse desire,
Hee spare the Shirt, until hee set the Franckinfence on fire,
And offer up his sacrifice, and wear his Garlond gray
Of Poplar boughs on wreathed ••ckes. And I will go my way
To'th royal Gods, and will beseek the cruel Cupids dame.
Ye ladies and companions that with me heather came,
Now force the fountains of your tears from watered eyes to roon,
To whale our Country Calydon on every side undone.
O DEIANIRE dear daughter of our King
OENEVS late, to see thy frowning fates
Woe after woe thus down on thee to fling,
It irks our hearts, that were thy foster mates.
O woeful wight it pitieth vs to see,
Thy wedlock in this tickle state to bee.
Wee Lady, wee, that with thee wonted were
With flapping Oar on Acheloe to row,
When having past the spring time of the year,
With Channel smooth hee newly wexeth lowe,
And makes again his swelling surges calm,
And boobling runs at Ebb withouten walme.
Through weal and woe wee still with thee remain,
And now what grief so ever thou fear in mind,
Account thou vs as partners of thy payne,
For commonly when Fortune turns the wind.
And makes thee bear thy beaten Sail but low,
Then friendship ebbes, where it before did flow.
And who so guides the sway of golden mace,
Though people thick doe haunt his stately court,
And in at hundred gates doe press a pace,
Yea though that thou maintain so great a port,
To ga•de thee with this garrison, yet shall
Thou scarcely find one faithful heart of all.
In painted porch, and gates of gilded bowers
The lurcking hag Eryn her tusks doth whet:
And stirring s•rife with quarrelling face she lowers.
The portly doar •• es no s••ner o•pe are set,
But treason black, pale envy deep deceight,
With privy knife of murder step in straight.
And when the Prince appears in open place,
To show him self before his subjects sight,
Swelling despite attends on his grace:
As oft as dawning day removes the night,
And every time the sun at West goes down,
They look another man should claim the Crown.
Few hearts love kings, not few their kingly might:
The glorious show of courtly countenance
Bewitches many: where one sets his delight
How next the king hee may him self advance.
That through high streets hee may as lord of rule
With lofty looks, ride mounted on his Mule.
Ambitious heate inflames his haughty breast.
Another would his greedy hunger staunch
With gubbes of goulde, (and though hee it possessed)
Rich Arabia serves not his pining paunch,
Nor western India (aworlde for to behold)
Where Tagus flows with streams of glittering goulde.
The covetous charlie, the greedy gnoffe in deed,
In whom from cradell nature so it plants,
No horded heaps his endless hunger feed.
In plenty pines the wretch, in wealth hee wants.
Some other foundlings fancy thus doth guide,
To fawn on kings, and still in court to bide.
As one disdaining like a Country mom
And crooked clown, the plow to follow still:
Although the dingthryfte daily keep at home
A thousand drudges, that his land doe Till:
Yet wants his will and wissheth wealth therefore,
Only to waste on other men the more.
Another claweth and flattreth fast the King,
By climbing up to tread down every wight:
And some at least to blookam Feast to bring.
And thus hee strives to arm himself with might
In blood: but of their ship doth Fortune fail,
When safe they think to float with highest sail.
Whom Moon at morn on top of Fortunes wheel
High swayed hath seen, at fullness of renown,
The gliding sun hath seen his Sceptre reel,
And him from high fall topsey turuey down.
At morn full merry, blithe, in happy plight,
But whelmed in woes and brought to bale ere night.
These seldom meet hoar hairs and happy days:
The Lord that lies on stately crimson bed
Sleeps more in fear, then snoring drudge, that lays
Upon the country clod his drowsy head.
In golden roofs, and haughty courts they keep,
Whose dreadful dreams doe make them start in sleep.
The purple robes lies waking many a night,
And slombers not, when homely rags doe rest.
O if as at a Grate espy wee might
The sorrows, shrined in a Princes breast.
What pangs, what storms, what terror, O what hell
In sighing hearts or proud estates doth dwell?
The Irish Seas doe nener roar so ruff,
When wrestling waives, and swelling surges rife,
That hoisted are with sturdy northern puff,
As fearful Fancies doe their minds aggryse.
But hee sighs not, nor encumbered is with care,
Whom Fortune hath bequeathed a slender share.
In wooden dish and black beche Bole hee swills,
And heaves it not to mouth with quaking hand.
With homely fare his hungry Maw hee fills,
And leares not back for fear of those that stand
With naked swerdes: but Kings in golden cup
Wine blent with blood (most dreadful draughts) do sup.
In dainty dish the poison bait is laid,
And treason lurks amid the sugared wine
A• every bit they quake, and are a frayed,
The sword will fall, that hanges but by a twyne,
And ever as hee lifts his head, and drinks,
The rebels Knife is at his throat hee thinks.
Such flattering joys these happy worldlings have.
Their outward pomp pretends lusty lives.
When inward•lie they drowpe, as doth the slave
That pines in pangs fast clogde in golden guys.
Strive not in hast, to climb the whirling wheel,
For hasty climers oft in haste doe reel.
Mean dames defy both peerless and glittering sponges,
And golden chains with rubies rich beset,
Nor at their ears doe massy Jewels hang
With turkey stones: nor pranked proud they jet
In murray gowns: nor doth the wool they wear
Of Crimson dye the costly colour bear
Neither in Tissew, nor silken garments wrought
With needle, nor embroidered Robes they go:
And yet this state is free from Jealous thought,
Their wedding is not unto them their woe.
When thousand storms in Ladies hearts doe dwell
By wedlock breach, that breeds their noisome hell.
Who so he is that shuns the middle way,
Shall never find fast footing any where.
The wilful lad that needs would have a day.
And weighty charge of Fathers chariot bear:
While he from wonted ways his Jade doth iaunce,
Among strange stars they pricking forward prance,
Enforcing them with Phoebus flames to fry,
Whose roaming wheels refuse the beaten rut:
Thus both himself, and all the Crystal sky
In peril of the soulthring fire he put.
So haughty minds that climb aboue their skill,
Do work their own decay, and others ill.
While Daedalus in flying through the ayre
Did keep the midst between the sky and ground
He could in safe to Italy repair,
And gave no gulf his name by being dround.
But Icarus presumes to mount on hie,
And strives aboue the fethered fowls to fly.
And scorns the guiding of his fathers train.
And in his flight will coape to lofty son:
Which molt his wings so down he drops again
Into the seas, whereby his name they won
Thus proud attempts of haughty climbing hier
Receive shrewd falls to quit their fond desire.
Let other mount aloft let other sore,
As happy men in great estate to sit.
By flattering name of Lord I set no store:
For under shore my little keel shall flit:
And from rough winds my sails fain would I keep,
Least I be driven into the dangerous deep.
Proud Fortunes rage doth never stoup so low
As little roads, but them she ouerflyes
And seeks amid mayne seas her force to show
On argosies, whose tops do reach the skies
But lo, here comes our Lady Deianire,
Straught of her wits, and full of furious ire,
ALas through all my quivering joints
a running fear doth rest,
My staring hair stands stiff upright
and in my quaking breast
Deep terror dwells, and eake my hart,
with dread amazed doth pant,
With swelling veins my liver beats,
as when the wind doth want
Asswagd in calmy day, and yet
the raging Seas do roar
Whose wrestling waives were raised aloft
by Southren blasts before.
So yet my wits be tocksicate, although my fear be gone:
Thus God turmoils vs when he means to cloy th'unhappy one.
Thus proud attempts bedasht at length,
Oh wretch, O careful wight,
What mischief may it be wherewith thou art so sore affright.
The shirt with Nessus ban• imbrewde no souer hence was s•ned,
And wretched woman that I am toth closet straight I went.
(My mind mistrusts I know not what, and treason dath surmise)
And Nessus by the heate betrayed, that fainted was the blood:
The God foreshewed that here the force of all the treason stood:
For by good hap the fomy glede no foggy cloud doth dim.
But with full power of burning beams he shined blazing brim.
Scant yet I can for feeble fear unlock my fastened ••was,
The scorching heate doth d•ye away, and up by force it draws
The soaked blood that being laid amid the frying flame
And boiling heate of shining son did shrink before the same:
Wherein the shirt was steeped, and all the royal robe imbrewde:
I cannot show the villainy wherewith it was indewde:
For as the Eastern wind doth force the winter snow to melt,
Or lukewarm South when in the spring frō Mimas mount they swelt
As Lucas else that fronters on Ionian sea, a land
Doth break the wave the beaten surge lies foaming on the strand
Or by the warmth of heavenly heat the frankincense doth drop
So all the venom wastes away, and melts every crop.
And while I wonder still hereon the wonder shrinks away
But with a froth it spo••es the ground, and there the poison lay,
It rots the cloth: my woman boalne and swelled doth follow me,
And shakes her head▪ my son as one astonished I see:
And hying hither all in hast declare what news ye bring.
GO mother go, seek out aloof
if place of bydyng dwell
Beyond the ground both golf and stars
beyond both heaven and hell,
Fly mother far beyond the bounds
of Hercules his toil
A mischief great I know not what
within my breast doth boyle:
Unto the royal temples of dame Iunoes triumph hie
These will allow the sanctuary though other it deny
What heavy hap is it that may annoy my guiltless ghost
Oh mother, O that diamond of the world that pillar post
Whom fate as Ioues lieutenant hear have placed for the nones
Is dead: and Nessus burning bane deuouers Hercles bones
The daunter of the brutish beasts he conquering knight before
Is conquered now: he mourns, he walls, what ask ye any more
We wretches love the order of our wretchedness to hear,
Tell me the state now of our stock what countnance doth it bear:
O stock, O silly wretched stock now shall I be esteemed,
A widow now, a cost of now, and now a beggar deemed.
Thou dost not languish all alone for Hercules yes dead:
For whom the eyes of all the world have cause their tears to shed.
Count not thy fate allotted thee alone: now all our kind
Do howl and morn for him whom thou beway lest in thy mind,
Thou suffrest grief, the smart whereof belonges to every land
Although the sower •ast thereof first happen to thy ha•de
Thou careful caitiff dost not whale for Hercules alone.
Speak, speak, how nigh to Deathward was my dear Alcides go•?
Death whom in his own empire hee had conquered before,
Did shrink from him and fate durst not allow a deed so sore,
And Clotho she perhap put out her rock with trembling arm
As one that hastening Hercles death, did fear to do such harm,
O day, O dismal day, and shall even Hercules the great
Pass thus to death, and silent shades and to a worser seat
Is he think you already dead or may I dye before)
Speak on, if yet he be not dead
Euboea that doth rise,
With haughty crest rings every where, and Caphar rock likewise
Deuydeth Hellespontus sea and turns that side to south,
Whereas it bides the boysteous blasts of Bores windy mouth:
Euripus bends his wandering stream and winds in creakes about
His crooked course seuentymes and doth as often break it out:
While Phoebus drenched his wecye team amid the Western wave
(Here on a rock aboue the reach of clouds a temple brave)
Of Caenaei Jove show bright while all the beasts for sacrifice
At th'alter stood, and through the wood the noise began to rise,
Of al the herd: then of he put he matterd Lyons case,
And likewise did discharge him of his hog and heavy mace
A•d eased his shoulder from the burden of his quiver light.
Then tuckt in your attire he shone among the people bright
With ugly lockes, and on the alter made the fire flame
Receive (quoth hee) these fruits (O sire) though fire send the same
And not the harvest Sith: but let with frankincense good store
The fire burn that far the rich Arabian therefore
Doth gather out of Saba trees for Phoebus sacrifice
The earth (quoth he) is now at peace, so be both sea and skies
All beasts be conquered, and I am victor come again.
Lay down thy lightning looms (O Jove) in fear thou need not reign
In midst of his prayers thus whereat I was aghast,
Hee fell to sighs and grievous groans, and al the skies at last
With dreadful crying load he filles Even as the brainsick bull.
When with the axe in wound he scopes doth fill the temples full
Of roaring noise.
Or as the thunder thrown from heaven doth rumble in the skies,
Even so the seas and stars of heaven doth Hercles shake with cries
Both Calpe clyue, and Cyclas yle well hard his yelling have,
Here Caphat rocks there al the woods thereof an Echo gave.
Wee saw him weep, the people thought his former franucke fits
Had now again as erst they did bereave him of his wi•tes
His servant scatter then for fecare, while he with flaming eyes,
Al staring stands with tleaming looks among them all he pries
For Lyca: him alone he doth pursew, who in his arm
With trembling hand the alter held and scoped al the harm,
By dying first for fainting fear, and while Alcyde▪ held
The quaking Carcass in his hand thou shalt (quoth he) be quilt
And beaten with this fist of mine, O Gods eternal reign▪
Wretch Licas kills Hercules, and hath his conqueror slain,
But •o another slaughter yet: for Hercules again
Kills Lycas: thus the sacrifice of Gods with blood they stain,
With Lycas thus his labours and thrown up to heaven they say,
That with his dropping blood the clouds he stained all the way.
Even as the pitched dart of Get with pith doth score the skies,
Or as the whirling sting of Create doth make the p•ller rise:
So swift he mounted up to heaven, but down his body dropped,
And as his Carcass fell, among the rocks his neck it chopped.
The grave prepared for their corps (quoth Hercules) bestill,
I am no brainsteke frantic man, but lo this defpret ill
More noylome is thou rage or wrath, it caleth much my will
To wreck my rage upon my self, his malady he scant
Bewryes: but fares frantt•kly: and he himself doth rent
His limbs, and rifling them, with mighty hand a sunder tears,
And strives to strip him self of all th'apparell that he wears,
And only this was it, of all the things that I do know,
That past the power of Hercules yet stands he pulling so
And plucks of his limbs withal the vesture doth not linne
To bring of lumps of filthy flesh the shirt sticks to the skin
But what should ayl• the poi•on rank none knows what, nor why
And yet there is good cause it er of: now grovelling doth he lye
And beats his face against the ground to water now he hies,
But water cannot cool his heate, and now to shore he plies.
And for his sucoure seckes to seas, at lengri, his men him calth
We holding him (alas the whilst were able him to match
Now in a keel amid the seas we launched were aloof,
And Hercles payse was hosted with a little southern puff
My Ghost then left my careful coarse and darkness dimd my sight
Why stay I wretch? why doth this dreary deed make me affright.
Her coapefellow dame Iuno doth reclaim, and Jove his son,
The world must render him▪ then doe as much as may be donne,
And boar my body with a sword such sower sauce is dew
To her, whose cursed caitiff hand her love so lightly slew.
O Jove with fire and lightning flash destroy thy wretched Niece.
Let not thy mighty hand be armed with a slender piece.
Let burst the bolt from skies wherewith thou would Hydra burn.
If Hercles had not bin thy son thereof to serve the turn
Strike me with v•couth pestilence, and with such weapon smite,
As may be far more irksome plague then all my stepdames spite.
Drive forth those deadly darts that erst young Phaëthon overthrew
When be full crancke in fiery carte, about the heavens flew:
For thus by slaying Hercules, eake Nations slain I have
What need thou Deianire of Gods a tool of death to crave.
Now trouble not thy stepster Jove, think scorn may Hercles wife
To wish for death, for to her heart her hand shall set the knife
Dispatch then quickly with the blade, yet let thy blade alone,
For who with weapon ends their life tic long ere they be gon
I will be headlong hurled from a rock as hie as skies.
The Oeta hill this shall be it, where first the son doth rise,
Thence will I throw my body down, the edge of brasten rock
Shall cleave my corps, and every crag shall give a broosing knock.
My hand shall hang torn by the way the rugged mountain side
Shall with the gushing bubbles of my dropping blood be died
On death w•re vengeance small, though small yet may it be delayed.
What despret death I should attempt it makes my heart dismayed:
Alas, alas that Hercles swerd within my chamber stuck
Then well were I if for to dye on that it were my luck.
It is enough if one right hand doe bring vs both to grave.
Come near, come near ye Nations, now let all people have
In readiness, both stone and fire the same to throw at me,
Now hold your hands, and take ye to your tools for I am she
That of your succour spoiled you now cruel Kaysars may
All uncontrolled tyrantlike, in kingdoms weilde the sway,
Now every mischief may start up, and not rebuked bee.
The alters now shall up again that wonted wers to see
A bloody offering like him self in kind that offer should.
Thus have I made the guilty gap to let in bloodshed bold
I render you to tyrants kings, bugs, beasts, and grizzly devils.
By taking him away that should revenge you of these evils.
O spouse thou of the thunderer and can you yet forbear
Wilt thou not fling thy flames from heaven as did thy brother dear?
Dispatch me hence sent up to Jove, wilt thou not me destroy
The greatest praise that thou might win then shall thou not enjoy
Nor lusty triumph: I am she that bear the name to be
The daughter of the man that would in prowes caape with thee.
Why wilt thou stain thy stock which hath untainted been before,
This il procedes of ygnorance although it be full sore:
Hee is not guilty that commits the gilt not with his will.
Well may hee err of ignorance that favours his ill
And spares himself: my self of death most worthy I do deem.
He doth condemn himself to dye that needs will guilty seem.
Death can deceive no one but such as innocents may bee.
Wilt thou forsake the glorious son?
The son forsakes me.
Wretch will thou cast away thy life.
Yea though it be to death,
I follow will my Hercules
He hath both life and breath
When he perceived him overmatched he hastened his decay.
Wilt thou forgo thy son, and eake prevent thy dying day?
Her self hath lived long enough who buried hath her child.
And wilt thou follow on to death thy spouse
yea Ladies mild
Before their husbands use to dye.
Thy self thou dost accuse
Of guylt if thou cōdemne thy self.
No guilty one doth use
To take revengement of themselves.
But those are pardoned 〈◊〉
That do oftend of ygnoraunce and not of peevish will
Who will condemn the deed hee doth?
Each man doth seek to shun
His lot when spite of frowning fate against him seems to run.
And he for whom thou languishest, with arrow slow his wife
Hight Megara, and did destroy his tender childrens life.
When as a brainsick beast in hand he tossed his knarrye mace,
That squeasde the snake in Lerna lake before his fathers face.
He played thryse the murderer, himself yet he forgave
And for the heinous gilt hee did when frenzy made him rave
He purgde himself in Cynips spring toward the Southern poale
And in the water bathed his hand again to make him whole.
Now whether wilt thou caitiff wretch, why dost thou dam thy hands
In condemnation of these the ghost of Hercles stands.
I mean to plague the treachery.
Your Hercules well I know,
Perhap he will be hear again and master al his woe:
Then shall your slaked grief unto yobr Hercules give place.
They say the serpents poison doth deuowen him apace
The poison of his wicked While his lusty limbs destroys.
And think ye it to bee the serpents bane that him annoys,
That hee cannot escape who bare the brunt of it alive,
And how to pare of Hydras heads he could full well contrive
When as the victor stood with grinning teeth amid the mood,
And all his body slauerde foul with venomous spit and blood,
And shall the Centaur Nessus gore against the man prevail
That made thy pithy strength it self of Nessus for to quail.
In vain ye rescue her that is of purpose set to dye
Therefore I have determinde with my self this life to fly
And long enough hee lived hath that may with Hercles dye.
I doe beseech thee humbly for this gray and hoary head,
And for these paps that as thy Mother have thee nourished,
Remove the fervent sits that cage within thy boiling breast,
And suffer not these despret thoughts of death in thee to rest.
Who would persuade a wretch to live. He hath a cruel heart?
And though that death be unto me a great and grievous smart:
Yet unto other some it is an e•s•ing of their payne.
O wretch excuse thy handy work, and say at last again,
It is ignorance that did the deed, and not the wilful Wife.
It wilt be quit whereas the infernal ••ends shall stint the strife
And quit my guilty ghost: my conscience doth my hands condemn.
But Pluto Prince of glummy goulph shall purge from slaughter them:
Before thy banks I will appear forgetful Lethes Lake,
And being then a doleful ghost my husband will I take.
But thou that wields the sceptre black of dark internal skies
Apply thy toil: the heinous guilt that nonce durst enterprise,
This ignorance hath overcome, Dame Iuno never dare
To take away our Hercules. Thy plunging plagues prepare,
Let Sisiphs stone on my neck force my stouping shoulders shrink,
And let the fleeting liquor from my gaping gums to sink.
Yea let it mock my thirsty throat when as I mean to drink,
And thou that rackes Ixion King of Thessayle O thou Wheel,
My heinous hands deserved have thy swinging sway to feel,
And let the greedy gripe scratch out these guts on either side,
If Danaus pitchers cease: by me the rome shall be supplied.
Set open hell, take me Medea as 〈◊〉 of thy giult.
This hand of mine, then both of thine more cruel blood hath spilt
More then thou did as in respect of mother to thy thylde.
Or looking to thy brothers ghost whose gore hath thee defiled,
Have with the Lady thou of Thrice for such a cruel wife,
And the Althe that burnt the brand of Meleagers life.
Receive thy daughter now, deny me not thy babe to bee:
Why such a one should quail by you, some reason let vs see:
Ye honest matrons that enjoy the groves of holy wood
Against me shut the heavens, or such whose hands with husbands blood
Have been imbrewde, if any of the fifty sisters dire
Defying honest duty all that wedlock did require:
But desprat dames with goary blades stood armed: in me let them
See and allow their bloody hands that other will condemn.
I will go get my self among the troupe of cruel wives
But they will shun such guilty hands as shred their husbands lives.
O valiant spouse, a guile••sse ghost, but guilty hands I have
Ah silly woman, woe is me, that given light credit have
O traitor Nessus while I meant by Centaurs subtle charm
To draw from Iole Hercles love my self sustain the harm.
Hence Phoebus hence, and thou O slickring life of her that lacks
Her Hercules and gives day to wretches in their wrackes.
This is a dismal day: to thee Small penance yield I will
And life with all: my woeful fate shall I continue still
Deferring death, O spouse that of thy hand I may be slain,
And doth their any spark of life yet in thy breast remain?
Or can thy hand yet draw the bow Sarmacian shaft to cast,
Do weapons cease, and have thy feeble hands given up at last
Thy bow? but if thy hardy wife to thee a tool may reach
I long to perysh of thy hand, mine hour yet will I stretch
Like guiltless Licas mangle me disperse in other towns
My corpse, and hurl me 〈◊〉 world beyond the travails bones.
Trounce me like monster Arcade or ought that did rebel,
And yet thou shalt do nought but that becommes an husband well.
I pray you mother spare your self, forgive your fatal lot,
If ye offend of ygnoraunce, then blame deserve ye not
If thou regard true honesty, thy wretched mother slay.
Why trembles thus thy fearful hand, why lokest thow away?
Such sin shall be a sacrifice why dastard dost thou fear?
I spoiled thy father Hercules, this hand, this hand aleare
Hath murdered him whereby I have done thee a more despite,
Then joy I did, in that my wo•be did bring thee first to light.
If yet thou know not how to kill, then practise first on me.
If as thou like within my throat thy blade shall sheathed be•
Or if to paunch thy mother soon thou mean to take in hand
To yield her dreadlesse ghost to thee thy mother still shall stand,
It shall not wholly be thy deed, by thee it shall be done,
And caused by my will to be. Art thou Alcides soon
And all afraid? so shall thou never great exploits achieve
Nor pass the world such feats of arms and slights for to contrive.
If any monster should be bred thy fathers courage show,
And to it with vnfeareful arm, lo overcharged with woe
My breast lies bare unto thy hand. Strike, I thy gilt forgive
The f•ends infernal for their sin thy soul shall never grieve.
What yerking noise is this we hear▪ what hag here have we fownd•
That bears about her writhen lockes these ugly adders wound,
And one her irksome temples twain her blackish •innes do wag.
Why chase ye me with burning brands Megera filthy hag▪
Alcides can but vengeance ask, and that I will him get
But have the judges dire of hell for yt in counsel set
But of the dreadful dungeon doors I see thunfoulding leaves
What ancient sier is he that on his tatred shoulder heaves
Th'un weiloy stone that borne toth top again doth downward reel
Or what is •e that spraules his limbs upon the whirling wheel
Lo hear stood ugly Tisiphon with sterne and ghastly face,
And did demand with steaming eyes the manner of the case.
O spare thy strypes Megera spare, and with thy brands away,
Th'offence I did was meant in love, but whether do I sway
The groūd doth sink, the roof doth crack, whether went this raging route,
Now al the world with gazing eyes stand staring me about
On every side the people grudge and call for their defence.
Be good to me O nations whither, shall I get me hence?
Death only is my load of rest there may my sorrows bide
I do protest the fiery wheels that Phoebus chariot guide.
That hear I dye and leave the world, theirs Hercles yet behind.
Away she runs aghast: aye me, she hath fullylde her mind,
For purposed she was to dye and now remains my will
For to prevent her that by force her self she shall not kill
O mise rabble pretty, if I my mother •aue.
I simon a against my father then, but if unto the grave
I let h•r go, then toward her a trespass soul there lies.
And t•hus (alas) on either side great mischief doth aries,
And needs her purpose must be stayde Isle hie and take in hand
To stop her despret enterprise and mischiefy to withstand.
FVll true the dytty is
That holy ORPHEVS sang,
On Thracian harp with sound whereof
the Rocks of Rodop rang,
That nothing is creat
For ever to endure.
Dame Natures birds each on must stoup
when death throws out the lure.
The head with Crispen lockes,
or golden hairs full:
In time hath borne an hoary bush,
or bin a naked scull.
And that which tract of time
doth bring out of the grain,
Old SATVRNE sharps his Sith at length
to reap it down again.
Though PHOEBVS rise at morn,
with glistering rays full proud,
Hee runs his race, and ducketh down
at length in foggy Cloud.
Toth Gaetans ORPHEVS sang
such kind of melody.
And how the gods themselves were bound
to laws of destiny.
The God that doth the year.
By eagle parts dispose,
Howe fatal web in every climb
are daily spun he shows.
For all things made of mold
The ground again will gape,
As Hercles preaches plain by proof
that nothing can escape.
For shortly shall ensue
Discarge of Natures Law
And out of hand the gloming day
of doom shall onward draw
Then all that lies within
The scorching Libicke climb,
The poale antarctic of the South.
shall overwhelm in time.
Poale artic of the North
Shall iumble, all that lies
Within the Axeltree, whereon,
dry BORES blasinge flies
The shivering Sun in Heaven
Shall leese his fading light
The Palace of the frames of Heavens
shall run to ruin quite.
And all these blockish Gods
Some kind of Death shall quell,
And in confused CHAOS blind
they shall for ever dwell,
And after ruin made
Of Goblin, Hedge, and Elf,
Death shall bring final destiny,
at last upon it self.
Where shall be then bestowed
The world so huge a mass,
The beaten hye way unto hell
is like away to pass,
To lead unto the Heavens
That shall be laid flatt:
The space between the Heaven and earth,
enough think ye is that?
Or is it not to much
For worldly miseries:
Where may such heaps of sins be lodged
what place aboue the skies?
Remains, but that the sea
With Heaven and lowest Hell,
Three Kingdoms cast in one are like
within one roof to dwell.
But hark what roaring cry,
Thus beats my fearful ear
But lo its Hercules that yells
tic Hercules I hear.
Retire, retire thy breathing breasts,
O Titan blazing bright,
Unfold thy misty mantle black
of dim and darksome Night:
And dash this dreary day wherein
I Hercules must die.
With blemishblack of filthy fog defile the grisly sky:
Pre•• en• my stepdames naughty mind. Now should I have resignde,
(O Father) my inheritance of Plutoes dungeon blind
Heaven frames should here &amp; there be burst, &amp; either poale should crack
Why sparest thou the stars and le•st thy Hercles go to wrack?
Now Jove loke round about the heavens, and if thou can espy
On giant heave the Thessaill cliues against thassalted sky
Vnburdned be Enceladus of huge Osir hill,
And hurled be on Hercules the mighty mountain still
Proud Pluto shall unbar the gates of black and glummy cave
Yet maugre all their might (o Father Jove) I will thee save
From fury of thy •os, and set thee up again in skies,
Yet lo Jove, lo, her that on earth thy thunderdint supplies,
And for to be lieutenant of thy bolts on earth was borne,
Is sent to burning Limbo lake in torments to be torn
The sterne Enceladus again in romping rage shall rise
And hurl the weighte (that now doth cro•de him down) against the skies,
Thus by my death they shall presume to conquer heaven all
But ere that day upon my corse compel the heavens to fall
Break down, break down, the welkin that thou suffrest to decay,
O son of thunder thumping Jove no shadows do thee fray,
Now Ossa mount of Thessalie shall Pelion hill down crush
And Ethos piled on Pindus top his bushy head shall push
Among the starry skis thereby aboue the craggy rocks.
Typhoëus up shall climb, and thumpe with store of ba•tryng knocks
Iuarmen stone in Tyrant sea from thence eake shall he beat
The smoky forge of Aetna mount, that glowes with stewing heate
Enceladus not overthrown yet with the thunder crack
Shall hew the mountain side in twain, and truss it on his back
The signs of heaven shall follow thee▪ and go with thee to wrack
I that returned from dens of death, and Stigian stream defied
And ferried over Lethes lake, and dragd up, chaind, and tide
The triple headded mastiff hound, when Titans teem did start
So at the ugly sight that he fell almost from his cart.
Even I whose pith the kingdoms three of Gods full well have known
Lo yet mine end I daunted am by death and overthrown
But yet no bloody blade against my riued ribs doth crash
It is no rock that unto death my bruised bones doth posh
Nor as it were with O sir hill that cloven were in twain,
Nor with the sway o• all the mountain falling am I slain.
The glaring eyed giant grym doth not now squeeze my coarse
With paise of Pindus roch and thus not feeling enemies force
I conquered am and yet alas this coarse frets me more
O feeble force of man: he whom no might could match before
Withouten any conquest made doth end his latter day,
Without exploit or feat of arms my self I pass away.
O mighty vmpier of the world and all ye Ghosts aboue
That witness how in quarrel good my right hand ever strove
O all ye lands, O earth alas, may it your mercy please
To spoil the spiteful sting of death that dauntes your Hercules
Fie fie, what shame is it to vs what filthy fate we have?
A woman proud shall boast her bane brought Hercles to his grave
Then what are they whose mortal maim Alcides weapon gave
If thus with sway invincible my fatal wheel do run
And need must on this shameful rock my fatal twist be spun:
As by a women's cursed hand my blood should thus be shed
Yet Iunoes malice migh have poured this vengeance on my head,
So might a women's deadly band have brought me to my beer:
But pet a woman wellding sway amid the welkin clear
But this seemed ouerprowde attempt for Gods to take in hand
The paples dame in Scithia borne where pitch on hie •o•h s;tand
The Apeltree whereon the underpropped pools do sway▪
It might as well have been her hap to take my breath away,
What women's might may moister me Queen Iunoes hateful foe
Fie stepdame fie the fowler shame by this to thee doth grow?
Why dost thou triumph in this day? why did dame Tellus breed
Such parlous bugs thy humour rank of colour hoate to feed?
A mortal women's peevish spite doth pass thy rancour rough,
Thou say thou cannot have revenge on Hercules enough
Then are wee twain y• pass thy power the Gods may blush for sham?
To see their malice ouermacht by such a mortal dame.
Would God the romping Lyons paw that noyed Name wood,
Had filled his greedy mounching Jaws with plenty of my blood:
Or while the twining snakes had hemmed me in by hundreds thick,
Why might not Hydra swallow up my wrenched body quick?
Why was it not the centaurs hap my silly flesh to gnaw?
Or that I bound on Tantalls rock should gape with greedy Jaw?
In vain to catch the fleeting food when deep from Tartar soil,
Where at the Gods aggrized were, I did purloin the spoil.
And from the darck infernal Styx I got again to light,
Or Ditis dungeon all the stops and stays I conquered quite.
Death shranke from me in every place that I a noble knight
At length might end my days in shame, and in dishonour spoiled
Oh Jove the creatures terrible thou know that I have foiled
The threefold shapen mastiff cur whom up I draggde in chain,
Hee starring from the sunnewarde could not hale me back again.
The sheepherdes churlish rabble that aloof in Iber hee
Under the Spanish fervent climb could never moister me.
Nor serpents twain that unto me in tender cradell crept.
Aye woe is me that valiant death so oft I ouerleapt:
What honour shall I dye withal?
Behold how death and hell
Cannot appal the virtuous mind that of deserving well.
By guiltless conscience warrant hath the death that doth him spoil,
Irkes not as thus of such an one to take this filthy foil.
If with this torment life were lost, his mind should much be •asde,
As with vnwe•ldy Gyauntes sway hee had his body squeasde.
Or Titans burden with his monsters all he would abide.
Or wish of raging Giants rent in pieces to have died,
And if thy d•lefull death because that monster none is left.
Who may be worthy thought by whom Alcides life bee reft?
But thine own hand to doe the deed.
Aye me and wellaway,
What Scorpion scrapes within my Maw? what cralling Crab I say
With crooking cleaze to cumber me, from scorching zone returns,
And boat within my boiling bones the seathing Marowe burns.
My River meanwhile rank of blood my rotting Lunges it tawes,
And tears them in shattred gubs, and filthy withered flaws.
And now my Gall is dried up my burning Liver glowes.
The stewing heate hath stulde away the blood, and Jove hee knows
My upper skin is scorched away and thus the Canker strong
Doth eat an hole that get it may my wretched Limbs among,
And from my frying Ribs (alas) my Liver quite is rent.
It gnaws my flesh, deuowers all, my Carcass quite is spent,
It soakes into the empty bones, and out the juice it sucks
The bones by lumps drop of while it the joints a sunder plucks
My corpulent Carkes is consumed of Hercules every Gem
Yet stauncheth not the festring •ot that feeds fast •n him
O what a tingling ache it is that makes me thus to smart,
O bitter plague, O pestilence that grips to the heart.
Lo Cittes, lo what now remains of Hercules the great.
Are these the arms that did with stripes the roaring Lyon beat?
And in Name wood did tear him from his harry case
Might this hand bend y• bow from clouds the Stimphall foul to chase?
Are these the shanks that coapt the heart who shifting pace full oft?
Did bear his branched head ypranckt with garlond gay aloft?
Was Cal•e craggy cliue of these my feeble clowches broke?
To raise a dam in •eas that did their foamy channel choke.
Had these arms pith the breath of Kings, of Beasts, and bugs to stop?
Or might these shoulders tough the payse of heaven underprop?
Are these the lusty Limbs and Neck that shrank not at the payse?
Are these hands that I against the weltering heavens did raise?
Alas whose hands shall now perforce from hence hell Iaylo•• lead?
Alas the noble courage erst that now in me is dead.
Why call I Jove my Father great of whom my stock should rise?
Why by the Thunderer make I my challenge to the skies?
Now, now Ampitrio is my ster all men may it avouch.
Come out thou murreyn foul that dost within my bowels couch.
Why dost thou thus with privy wound my careful Carcass foil?
What gulf under the frozen Climb in salvage Scithian soil
Engendered the•? what water Hag did spawn thee on the shore?
Or stony C•lp Rock in Spain that borders on the Moare:
O irksome ill, and art thou not the Serpent that doth sting
With crest on ugly head, or else some other lothly thing,
Or sprung of Hydraës blood, or left here by the hellick hound.
Art thou no plague? and yet a plague in whom all plagues abound?
What ghastly countnaunce carry thou (alas) yet let me know?
What kind of mischief may thou be that dost torment me so?
What salvage sore, or murreyn strange, or uncouth plague thou bee?
With open combat face to face thou should encounter me.
And not thus ranckle in my flesh, nor soak into the sap.
By sowltring heate within my bones thy boiling bane to wrap,
And in the mid thereof to fry the Maroe that doth melt.
My jagged skin is ripped, and out my smoky Bowels swelt.
From burst Paunch my self doe flea the skin with grasping pause,
And from the naked bones doe tear the mangled flesh by flaws,
I searched for thee through my Maw, yet further dost thou creep,
And festring farther in my flesh hast gnawn an hole more deep.
O mischief match to Hercules, what grief could make me greet?
Whēce flow these streams of trillīg tears y• down my cheeks do fleet
The time hath bin no plunging pangs could cause our courage quail,
That never use with crystal tears our anguish to bewail.
Ah, fie, I am ashamed that I should learn these tears to shed:
That Hercules in weeping wise his grief hath languished:
Who ever saw at any day in any time or place?
All bitter brunes I bare with dry, and eake vnreky face
The manhood that so many ills hath maistred heretofore,
Hath yielded only unto thee, to thee thou Canker sore.
Thou first of all hast strained the tears out of my weeping eyes
Thy gargle face thy visage man that doth me sore aggrise.
More towgh then mossy Rocks, more hard then Gads of sturdy sleele,
Or roaming stream of Simplegade, whereby this smart I feel
Hath crushed my cracking Jaws, &amp; wrong the streaming tears frō me.
O wielder of the Welkin swift, lo, lo the Earth doth see
How Hercules doth weep and whale, and to my greater payne
My Stepdame Iuno sees the same, behold, behold again
My Lunges doe fry, the scorching heate prevails more, and more.
Whence fell this thunder Bolt on me that burns in me so sore?
Who stoups not whē grief doth gal? more tough thē Aem of Thrice
Whas meanwhile haughty Hercules, and did no more gieue place
Then doth the marble axelltree, his Limbs hee now doth yield
To painful pangs: and on his Neck his eking head doth wield,
And tossing still from side to side, hee bends with huge sway,
And oft his noble heart doth force his trilling tears to stay.
O Father with thy heavenly Eyes,
Behold my wretched plight,
For never HERCVLES till now
bid crave thy hand of might,
Not when as Hydraës fruitful heads
about my Limbs were wound,
Nor when I locke in Lakes allow
fought with th'inferdall hound,
These hideous fiends I foiled, with kings, &amp; tyrants proud likewise.
Yet in these broils I never looked for succour to the skies.
This hand did still avouch the vow, no thunder for my sake
Did glitter in the holy heavens, this day hath hid me make
Some suite to thee, and of my boons yet hears the first and last,
One only Thunder bolt I crave at me O Jove to cast.
Count me a Giant of my self, I can no less devise,
While Jove I thought of promise true, I spaarde the starry skies.
Bee thou either a cruel sier, or pity if thou have,
Yet lend thy son thy help, and get the glory of my grave:
Preventing this my dreary death, of this if thou doe scorn,
Or that thy hand abhor the guilt, from Sicill cliue suborn
The soultring Giants that in hand high Pindus mount can weilde,
Or Ossa that it hurled on me I may therewith bequielde,
Burst up hell Gates, and let Bellone scourge me with Iron rod,
And let in arms encounter me the mighty Martial God,
My brother I acknowledge him but by my s•epdames side,
And Pallas thou my sister take, let at thy brother slide
A thirling Dart. O stepdame mine with humble suite I crave
A wound of thee that women's hand may bring me to my grave.
Why dost thou feed thy fury now as one whose wrath were end
And satisfied? what seek ye more? I stoup, I yield, I bend.
Thou see Alcides humbly laid, where as unto this day
That ever I entreated thee, no Land, no Beast can say,
Now doe I need thy deadly wrath to rid me of my payne,
And now thy rankour is appeasde, thy hate is quenched again,
And thus thou sparest me my life, when as I wish to dye:
O Earth will none make me the fire wherein my bones may fry?
Nor reach a blade to Hercules, convey ye all from me?
So let no country Monsters breed when I shall buried be,
And let none whale the loss of me if 〈◊〉 more arise,
God send another Hercules to succour Earth and skies.
But as for me on every side ding out my broosed brain,
And crash with sturdy stroke of stones my cursed Scull in twain
And rid my torments: wilt thou not? O world to me unkind,
And are so soon our benefits forgotten in thy mind.
Even to this bower with bugs and beasts thou had 〈◊〉 over laid
Had not I bin: good people cause his torments to bestayde
That succored you: time gives you leave to recompense my payne,
If ye with death will guerdon me, I ask none other gain.
Where shall I wretched mother of Alcides wish to bee?
Where is my child? where is my son? If sight deceive not me
With gasping mouth, and panting heart lo where hee sprawling lies.
Where as (alas) in raging heart of boiling fits hee fries,
Hee groves, all is dispacht, dear child let me Alcides mine
Embrace thy pining limbs: with kiss enfold my arms in thine
Where are the limbs? where is the neck that bare the skies alone?
What thus hath mangled thee that all thy corps is waste and gone?
I am your Hercles mother dear, whom thus ye see here lost.
Acknowledge me all though God knows I seem but as a ghost.
Why doe you turn your face away and mourning visage mild.
Are ye ashamed that Hercules should counted bee your child?
What world hath bred this uncouth bug? what land engendered it?
Or else what monstrous mischief may on thee triumphing sit?
Who first that conquers Hercules?
By treason of his Wife
Thou see how wretched Hercules do leese his loathed Life.
To overthrow my Hercules, what treason hath the might?
That which a wrathful Dame doth seek to case her of her spite.
How hath this pestilence gotten to thy Limbs and bleeding bones?
I•to a Shirt the woman had conveyed it for the nonce.
Where is the Shirt for nothing but thy naked coips I see?
The vesture by the poison rank de•owred is with me.
And can such poison be contrived?
I think within my guts,
That hideous Hydra hissing Snake his slowghy body puts,
A thousand plagues of Lerna Poole within my Bowels rampes:
What raging dear is this that drives up all Sicilia dampes?
What E•me of Hell forbids the day to pass the boiling •one?
O Ma•es amid the greedy gulphes and pools let me be thrown.
What Ester can my Carcass cool? no not the Ocean mayne
Of these my stewing vapours may the raging quench again?
(Al moisture of my limbs in these my fits are fryde away)
The juice will soon be soaked up, what president of hell
Let me return from under ground again with Jove to dwell
He ought to have retained me still, receive me once again
Into thy dungeon dark that hell may in this pickle plain
Behold the man that conquered yt, no booty bring I will
Away with me: why dost thou quake for fear of Hercles still.
Set on me death coragiously for now I may be kilde
Now stint thy tender tears that down thy checks so long have trild,
And master this thy malady compel thy sorrows sloupe.
And show that in these plunging pangs Alcides did not droop,
And as it hath been ca•st thy guise force death and hell to shri•ke.
If ugly grested Cau•issue. In chain of iron link
Should bind me as ag•oning pray the greedy grype to feed
Yet from mine eyes it should not strain a brokē tear indeed
If wandering Symplegads would me wish either rock assail,
To bide the brunt of double wrack my courage would not quail.
Let Pindus tumbled be on me, hog Aemus let me have
Or Ethos rock in Thracian seas that breaks the weltering wave,
And bode the bolts of thondring Jove although thunweildy mass▪
Of all the world should fall on me and might be brought to pass
That Phoebus flaming apeltree should burn upon my grave
No uncouth cry should force the mind of Hercles thus to rave.
Let meet a thousand savage beasts and rent me al atonce
Let Stymphal •oules with howling hoarse lay strokes upon my bones
Or scrolling bull on tother side strike on with head and horn
Or else of other serpents wilde let al my parts be •orne
With roaring earthquakes, hougy lumps be puffed upon me
With griping grief let all my limbs to nothing pined bee
Although I be to powder crushed I will with patience peace
In spite of beasts or bruising blows my sighs and tears shall seace
It is not son the women's bane that in thy bones doth boil
But festring tears and broosing knocks of thy continual toil
The wrenches old with eking pangs begin to smart anew.
O where is death where is hee now? of all that I do few:
Can any witness what it is? let death now bend his bow
A naked hand is strong enough to make me stoup full low
Let any wight in al the world attempt to set on me
I warrant him, approach let him, Ah wretched might I bee
This wayward agony hath take his perfect wits away.
Have hence his tools, and eake his shaftes for danger hence co•uay.
His ruddy gills that glow like fire some mischief doe pretend.
To shroud my self (alas) into what corner shall I wend?
This malady a frenzy is, this only is the mean
To conquer Hercules, why then doe I as doting queen•
Thus fall to tears and seek to shrink, may bee that hee will have,
Alcmenas hand to give the stroke, to bring him to the grave.
But dye he in a Murreynes name, ere I for coward will
Such deadly penance bee enioynde, that on my doings still,
His baynous hand may vaunt it self, lo how the pangs full deep,
With stuggling ceased, doe hind the purple veins with deadly sleep,
And beating sore lift up and down his faint and panting breast:
If I O Gods of this my noble Child bee dispossessed:
Be gracious yet, and for the world some lusty champion save.
Rid his annoy and let his limbs again their courage have.
O Dismal day, O anguish, O
the hepper up of ill.
Ioues Son is flayne, his Daughter dyes,
his Nephew lives still.
First by the Stepdames treason, is
the Son to ruin brought.
The Daughter likewise trapt in trains,
and thereby come to nought.
What hoary head in change of tunes, or tenor of his age
Hath seen, that Fortunes frowning Face hath stirred such stormy rage.
One doleful day bereaves me (alas) of parents twain.
But least I speak to spite the Gods, I will somewhat refrain.
I lost a Father, Hercules this only I complain.
O noble Imp of Hercules, (alas) my Nephew dear,
That dost of wretched Alcmens Son the lively feature bear.
Refrain my child thy wailing words, this quiet sleep perhap
Will overcome these plonging fits. But lo? lo in my lap.
Hee doth begin to strive again, his fits begin a fresh.
Sleep gieuing up the feeble ghost to ranckle in the flesh.
What means Thrachin craggy crest to show before mine eyes?
Or now forsaking man am I advanced aboue the skies.
Why do the heavens provide for me? the father Jove I see,
And eake my stepdame Iuno dire appeased now with me.
What heavenly harmony is this that sounds in mine ear.
Dame Iuno calls me son in law, I se the palace clear
(Of crystal skies and beaten rakes of Phoebus flaming wheel)
I see the dumpish moary den of glowming lady night
Here he commands darkness dim to show it self in sight.
What means this, who is it that the heavens against me spares?
And am I thus O father mine brought down again from stars.
Even now Appolloës sowltring car did fume about my face
So no I past the pinch of Death, lo Thrachin top in place
Who brought me back to ground again, beneath me erst it lay
And al the world was under me, thou smart were worn away,
Thou forcest me confess the same. Ah mercy, mercy now.
In stead of farther vengeance do these humble words allow.
Lo Hillus, lo thy mothers gifts such presents she prepared
Ah, might my truncheon punch her puddings once as meanwhile fared
The haughty Lady Amazon well trounced for her pride
On thedge of ysy Caucasus afront the mountain side.
O noble lady Megara were thou my wretched wife,
When rapt in rage of frantic fits, I rest thee of thy life
Give me my batt and bow in hand, my wrestes I will imbrew.
And force ye all your brages on me with blemish black to rue.
Thus let of Hercules exploits a woman be the last.
Forbear O Sire thy hateful threats, she hath it, all is past.
The vengeance that ye seek on her already hath her sped.
With wound received at your hand my mother lies dead
O blinded anquish: dye she should of Hercles furious hand)
Thus Licas hath his marrow lost the heate of burning breast
Will have me on the breathless coarse for to revenge the rest
Why doth she not yet feel her force both let her want a grave
And on her cursed flesh to feed let beasts her carcass have.
The silly woman was more woe then ye that bide the smart.
Ye will release some part hereof for pity in your hart.
For grief of you with her own hand, alas her self she slew
Thus more then ye do ask of her, she doth her doing few
Yet is it not your Wife's misdeed that brought you to this plight.
No nor my mothers traytrous hand hath wrought this deep deceit.
This treason Nessus did contrive whom ye did pay his hire,
With arrow shot into his Ribs for rape of Deianire.
Thus father with the Centaurs blood your shirt was sore embrewde.
At Nessus hand the vengeance of your deed thus have ye rowed.
Hee hath his will: all is dispacht, our Fates themselves display.
This is the day of death to me. Thus erst to me did say,
A charmed Oak, and all the wood that range with yetling noise
Of Parnass hill the Temples shook, and thundered out this voice.
The dead mans hand whom thou before hast slain,
O Hercules shall murder thee again.
Thou having mot the space of gulf and ground,
And depth of hell, hear shall thou bee confound.
I therefore doe bewail no more, such should our ending bee.
That Hercles conquered after him no man alive may see.
Now let me dye a manly death, a stout and excellent,
And meet for me: this noble day shall valiantly bee spent.
Fell all the Timber on the ground hew down all OEta wood.
Let coals deuower Hercules, let fire fry his blould.
But ere I dye thou noble Imp of Peans royal race.
This doleful duty doe for me: See that an whole day space▪
My funeral fire flaming burn. And now my tender Hill,
The last petition of my mouth make unto thee I will.
Among the captive Ladies, one there is, a noble Dame,
Of royal blood, Euritus Child, Iole is her name:
Accept her to thy spousal Bed, whom victor I unkind•
Have trained from her native home and but my heart, and mind
Poor silly maid I gave her nought, and now she shall me lose.
Lo thus the wretched woman walls her still increasing woes.
But let her foster that she hath conceived as Ioues ally,
And child to me, be it thine by her that erst begot have I:
And as for thee dear mother mine your dreary dole forgo,
Your Hercules shall live: doe not vain tears on him bestow:
My manhood made a strumpet thought a Stepdame unto thee,
But if that either Hercles birth show her unsure to bee,
Or be a man my ster or else be falsified my kin.
Now let Ioues 〈◊〉 cease, and let my mothers slander •in,
I have deserved a father well that have advanced so hye
The glory of the rolling heavens, of nature tramde was I.
To work the wondrous praise of Jove, and Jove him self doth Joy,
To have the name of Hercules, begetting such a boy.
But pardon now my strained tears, but you as Jove his niece.
Shall as a stately matron bee among the Dames of Greece.
Though Iuno with the thunderer in spousal chamber lies
And in her heavenly hand doth weilde the sceptre of the skies,
When ever bare she such a Babe, and yet though heaven she hold
In heart against a mortal man she fosters malice old,
For spite that borne of women's womb becounted thus I should.
Go Tican go, run out thy Race, thee only I forsake.
I that went with thee foot by foot now to the infernal lake.
And Ghosts, I go yet with this praise to'ch pit down will I pass
That Hercules of open foe yet never foiled was.
But hee in open combats brought his conquests all to pass.
O Titan crowned with blas•ing bush whose morning moystures make
The Moon her foamy bridal from her tyred team to take.
Declare to'th Easterlinges whereas the ruddy morn doth rise.
Declare unto the Irishmen aloof at western Skies.
Make known unto the Moors annoyed by flaming axentree.
Those that with the ysy Wayne of Arches pestered bee.
Display to these that Hercules to th'eternall ghosts is gone
And to the bawling mastriffes den from whence returns none.
With dusky damp of filthy fog O Titan choke thy blaze,
With lowering light of winnie Globe on woeful wordlings gaze,
And let thy head bee muffled up with clouds and darkness dim.
For Hercles sake, when shall thou find, or where the like to him?
(O wretched world to whom wilt thou henceforth thy woes cōplaine,)
If any scattring pestilence on ear•h shall be renewde,
By benom rank, from poison mouth of scaly Dragon spewde:
If any Bore of Arcade shall cumber all a wood,
And tear the trailers flesh with tusk embrewed in goary blood:
If any champion rough of Thrice with heart more hard in breast,
Then are the ysy rocks, where as the frozen Bear doth rest,
Shall trample thick his stables foul with blood of slaughterd men,
When people quake for fear of war, who shall assist them then?
If wrathful Gods for vengeance will foe•he monsters to be bread?
Lo now enfebled all of force his Karkasse lies dead,
Whom Natures mold had made a match to thūdring Jove in strēgth.
Hale out (alas) and let your plaint be heard to towns at length.
Let women beat their naked arms, and wring their trembling hands,
Untrusse their hair, and from their locks pluck of their binding bands.
Bolt up, and lock the Temple gates of Gods, and •ape bee none,
But despret Iunoes Chapple doares. O Hercles thou art gone
To Lethes lake, and stream of Styx, from whence no Keel again
Shall bring thee back: O silly soul thou goosed to remain
Among the grizzly goblins grimm: from whence thou meanwhile came
With triumph sooner daunted death, and conquest of the same.
With ghastly face, and karrayne arms, and neck that yields to weight,
Thy ghost returns, but Carons boat then shall not have her freight.
As balased with thy only payse, and yet shalt thou not bide
Among the rascal sprites, but sit on bench by Oecus side,
And with the Judges twain of Create as Umpier there to bee,
Appointing pains to souls that may to their deserts agree.
Frō slaughter hold your guiltless hands, bath not your blades in blood.
Ye states, that bear high sail on earth, and floe•e in worldly good:
It merits praise a maiden sword vndipt in gore to bear,
And while thou rain, to keep thy realm from cruel doings clear.
But virtue hath a privilege to pass unto the skies.
To'th top of frozen Opal tree O Hercules wilt thou rise?
Or where the sun with scorching blaze his burning beams doth rest?
Or wilt thou bee a shining star amid the lukewarm west?
Where Calpe Rock is heard with roaring noise of wrestling wave?
What place amid the azure sky intend thou to have?
What place shall be in all the heavens from hurly burly free?
When Hercules amid the stars shall entertained bee?
Let Jove appoint thy biding from the ugly Lion far,
And burning Crab▪ least thou with grizzly countnaunce do thē scar.
And make the trembling stars in heaven for fear to break array
And Titan quake: while spring doth prank with flowers y• tender spray.
Then hasty winter strip the trees of all their branches greene.
Or sudden Summer decked with leaves in bushy woods be seen.
And from the trees the Apples fall, the harvest being done:
No age on earth shall wipe away the fame that thou hast won.
As far as Sun, or Stars can shyne, thy glorious name shall go.
Amid the bottom of the Sea first Corn shall sprout, and grow,
And brackish Seas his waters salt to water fresh shall change:
And fixed star of ysy bear from Clime to Climb shall range,
And sink into the frozen poole against his kindly sway,
Ere people cease the honour of thy triumphs to display:
O sovereign Jove wee wretched wights this boon of thee doe crave,
No monstrous beasts, no noisome plagues, hereafter let vs have:
With bloody champions let the earth encombred bee no more:
Cast down the haughty sway of Courts: if ought annoyance sore
Shall cloy the earth, a champion to bee our shield wee cave,
Whom as an honour of the Crown his rueful realm may have.
(That still will keep his swerd from being taint with guiltless blood.)
But lo what means this rumbling noise? Joy Hercles ster doth groan,
And sighs for his son: is it the Gods that whale, and moan.
Or is it Iunoes fearful shrike, whom Hercles doth aggrise,
That seeing him for fear she roars, and r•nneth from the skies.
Or else did Atlas faltering feet with feeble stirring stumble?
And shrinking from his tottring weight thus force the Gods to rumble?
Or scared he the waling ghosts, the which to fear he drove?
Or Cerberus burst his jingling Chains with buckling in his cave.
It is not so: but lo where Philoctetes doth appear,
And Hercles famous shaftes to him bequeathed doth hee bear.
OF Hercules most heavy haps
Good young man make report
How did hee bear it at his death?
In such a cheerful sort
As no man lives.
And could he with
so sweet and merry look,
The scorching pangs and torments of
his ending fire brooke?
That there was any heate at all his face did not bewray,
Who proved that power might force al things to stoup and to obey,
That under son untamed be.
Where did the noble knight,
Among the wrestling waives of sea display his matchless might:
That mischief witch all only yet the world knew not before,
Even fire hath bin conquered as beasts, and monsters more
Among the toils of Hercules the fire is crept in.
Declare vs how the flaming force of fire could hee win.
As soon as hee with smarting hand the Oeta hill had grypte,
And forthwith from ye branched Beach ye shrinking shade was wipte:
And felled from the stump it lies, a Pine tree hard hee bends,
That crakes the clouds, &amp; down from skies his haughty head he send•
The Rock did totter ready for to reel, and with the sway
It tumbles down, a little grove withal it bears away.
A spreading Oak of Chaon big, whose leaves did ever rush,
And dimde the sun, and did beyond the wood his branches push.
It being hewde doth crack, and eake in twain the wedges knappes:
The steel starts back and thus the tool of Iron bides the rappes,
And flies out of the Log, at length at roore it shogde and shook,
And falling down full lythly the overthrow it took.
Forthwith the place lost all his light, the birds scaard fro their nest
Doe foare about the cropped wood, and holes wherein to rest,
And chirping with their weary wings about the plot they flicker
In every tree the ringing strokes were multiplied thicker.
The holy Oaks in huge hand the Iron Axe did feel.
No timber on the stallen stocks might scope the hewing steel,
Thus all the wood upon a pile is heaped, and one by one
The Logs are laid as high as heaven that Hercules thereon
Might have a narrow room: his burning bones for to bestow.
On Pynetree top, and toughest Oak the flare begins to glow.
And on the stumped willow flames, and thus the forest wide
Doth make the Kill▪ the Poplar wood all Hercles blocks doth hyde.
But as the puissant Lyon when his fits doe vex him sore,
Lies wallowing on his back, and through the forest load doth roar.
So fares hee, who would have thought hee had to burning gon?
As one that climbs to heaven, not fire, he was to look upon
When up he stepped on Oar mount and gazed on his Kill.
Being laid aloft he brake the block, so heavy was hee still.
The shyues yet could not bear his wayght he calling for his bow
Did say to me, have Philocktet, on thee I it bestow,
This same is it that Hydra with his swarming heads did know.
This did fetch down the stimphall fowls, and all that wee have daunt,
Go thou with this let victory, and happiness thee haunt,
For never shall thou shute against thy foes with these but speed.
If at a bird amid the clouds thou aame she dies indeed.
These certain shaftes shall bring thy mark down from the azure sky,
This bow shall not deceive thy hand, full oft I did it try,
And made it meet to bear a shaft, and cast his level dew.
Thine arrows shall not fail thine aame if that thou neck them true,
I ask but only this of thee, put fire to the Stack,
Bestow on me my funeral flame to bring me to my wrack.
This knarry Club (quoth hee) the which no hand shell ever loss
Shall only with his Hercules in fire go to loss,
This also (quoth hee) should thou have if thou could wield the same,
Beside his moister let it lye to help toward the flame.
And then beside him down hee lays the Lyons vayry skin
To burn with him: the shaggy case hid all the pile within.
The people sobbed, and none there was but sorrow strained his tears.
The mother mad for egar grief her breast all bare she bears,
And naked down toth Nauill stead displays her tender teates.
And languishing with wrung hands her naked dugs she bears
And cries out upon the Gods on Jove himself she ca•es,
Her shrieking rang through all 〈◊〉 place so womanlike she yells▪
Be still (quoth hee) good mother: force your showers of tears to cease.
Your dreary dole disgraces much the death of Hercules.
Whale secretly unto your self: why make ye Iuno glad,
To se that you a weeping day with store of tears have had?
(It doth her good to see her bawds, to stand with weeping eyes.)
Forbear, forbear your malady, tic deadly sin for ye,
To tear the tears, and rent the womb, that first did foster me.
And as he blustred giving grunts when carst he led in chain
The hound about the towns of Greece what time he came again
Triumphing over conquered hell defying Plutoës might,
And dreadful destiny: so on the fire he lay upright.
What conqueror ever sat in coatch with such a chereful grace?
What tyrant did control his folk by law with such a face?
How hushed was al thing at his death? himself he could not weep
And also we had clean forgot the wound of sorrows deep
None doth lament him at his death now were it shame to whale:
Alemen (whom nature ought to move) her tears now do her fail.
And thus as ill as was the son the mother stood almost.
But at his burning did hee not call on the heavenly host,
Remembering Jove to hear his suite.
As on in deep despair
He lay, and staring up so rolled his eyes into the ayre
To spy if Jove look down to him from any turret hye.
Then with his hands displayed to heaven (quoth he) where so thou lye,
And lokest down to se thy son, this same, this same is hee,
Whom one day eeked with a night engendered hath to thee
If East and West if Scithia, and every burning plot,
That parched is with glowing glede of Phoebus fire hot
Doth sing my praise? and if the earth full satisfied with peace
If languishing and wailing words in every town doe cease.
If none their alters do imbrew with any guiltless gore,
Then Jove let my vncaged spirit have heaven for evermore.
As for thinfernall dens of death they do not me deter?
Nor scowling Plutoes dungeon darck, but Jove I do abhor.
Unto those ghastly Goblins as a stlly shade to go.
Sith I am he whose conquering hand gave them their overthrow.
Withdraw these foggy clouds of night, display the glimsyng light
That Hercles broyld with flying flames the Gods may have in sight
And if thou do deny (O fire) the stars and heaven to me
To give me them against thy will thou shalt constrained bee,
If glutting grief do stop thy speech, the Stygian goulphes set up,
And let me dye, but first declare within the heavenly coape,
That thou accepst me as thy soon: this day it shall be wrought,
That to bee raised aloft to stars, I may be worthy thought.
Thou hast done little for me yet: it may be doubted well
Whether Jove did first beget his son, or damned him first to hell.
And (quoth he) let my stepdame see, how well I can abide
The scorching heate of burning brands: for fire then he cried,
And saith to me O Philoctet in hast upon me throw
The burning logs, why quakest thou? dost dastard thow forslow,
For fear to this wicked deed? O coward peasant slave,
Thou art to weak to bend my bow, unmeet my shaftes to have
What ails thou to loke so pale? and as thou see me lye
With cheerful look courageously do thou the fire ply.
Behold me wretch that broil and burn my father ops the Skies
And unto me son Hercules come, come away he cries.
O father Jove (quoth he) I come: with that I waxed pale
And toward him a burning beam with might and mayne I hale:
But back from him the billets fly and tumbling out they leap,
And from the limbs of Hercules down falls all the heap.
But he encroached on the fire as it from him doth shrink.
That many mountains whole were set on fire a man would think
No noise was hard, and all was hushed, but that the fire did hiss
In Hercles glowing paunch when as his liver burning is.
It boysteous giant Typhus had amid this fire been thrown,
These torments would have strained his tears &amp; forced him sigh &amp; groan.
Or tough Euceladus that tossed a mountain on his back.
But Hercles lifted up himself amid his fires all black,
With smoke besmeared his corps half burnt in shivers, gube &amp; flaws,
And down the throat his gasping breath &amp; flames at once he draws
Then to Alemen he turned himself: O mother mine (quoth hee)
Should ye so stand at Hercles death? should you thus whale for me?
And thus between the fire and smoke, upright and stiff he stands.
And neither stoups nor leanes awry, but moves and stirs his hands,
With al his lively gestures still, and thus he doth persuade.
His mother leave the langusshing, and mourning that she made.
And did encourage all his men t'encrease the fire than
As though he were not burning, but would burn some other man.
The people stood astonished, and scant they would believe
That fire had any force on him, or that it did him grieve.
Because his chereful look had such a majesty and grace.
And never wilde vs move the fire that he might burn apace,
(And now when as he thought, he had endured pangs enough,)
And stoutly bode the brunt of death, the blocks hee doth remove,
That smothering lay, to make thē burn: then downward doth he shove
And where the stewing heate did chiefly scorch, and burn most hot,
That way he thrusts his frying limbs, and thither hath hee got.
(With steaming countnaunce vnapaulde his mouth now doth he fill)
With burning coals, his comely Beard thē blast about his cheeks:
And now when as the sparkling fire unto his visage seeks,
The flame licked up his s••general hair, and yet he did not wink:
But open kept his staring eyes But what is this? my think
Alomene comes yonder as a woeful wight forlorn,
With sighs and sobs, and all her hair befrounced rent, and torn.
And bears the remnant in her Lap, of Hercules the great.
Learn Lordings, learn to fear and dread
th'unwelldy fatal force.
This little dust is all thats lef•
of Hercles huge coarse.
That boysteous Giant is consumed
unto these ashes small
O Titan what a mighty mass
is come to nought at all.
Aye me an aged women's lap all Hercules doth shroud,
her lap doth serve him for a grave, and yet the champion proud,
With all his lump stils not the room. Aye me a burden small
I •eel of him to whom whole heaven no burden was at all.
O Hercules, bear child, O son the season meanwhile was,
That thou to Tartar pits, and sluggish deus aloof did pass
For to repose: from deep of hell when wilt thou come again?
For to put loin the spoils thereof, or bring from captive chain
To life thy friendly Theseus. But when wilt thou return
Alone: can flaming Phelegethon thy ghost in torments burn:
Or can the masti••e Dog of hell keep down thy woeful sprite?
Where then might I come see thy soul and leave this loathed light?
When shall I rap at Tartar gate? what Jaws shall me deuower?
What death shall d•wnt me: goosed thou to hell, and hast no power
To come again: alas why do I wast, the day in tears and 〈◊〉
O wretched life why dost thou last thou shouldest droop and saint,
And loath this dreary day: how: can I bear to Jove agay•e
Another noble Hercules, what son may I obtain
So valiunt to call me thus (Alcmena mother mine)
O happy spouse Ampliterio twice happy hast thou been
In entering at the dens of death, and through the noble son
The Deutis arthy presents quake to see thee thither come.
Though thou but forged father were to Hercules of late
Whether shall old beldam go whom many kings do hate:
If any prince remain with blody breast and murdering mind
Then woe to me: if groaning babes be any left behind,
That sorrow for their parents deaths now, now for Hercles sake
Their malice let them wreck on me, on me dire vengeance take
If any young Bustris be, I fear the Persians sore
Will come and take me captive hence in chains for evermore.
If any tyrant feed his horse with gubbes of strangers flesh
Now let his pampered jade unto my Carksse fall a fresh.
Perhap dame June• covets on me to wreck her ire•.
And e•vs of her burning breast will turn the flaming fire
Her wreckful hand doth loiter now sith Hercules is slain.
And now to feel her spurning spyte as harlot I remain.
My valiant son is cause of this my womb shall barren be,
Least I should bear another child as hardy as was hee.
Oh whether may Alcmena go? or whether shall she wend?
What country or what kingdoms may my careful head defend
Where may I couch my wretched coarse, that every where am knownde
If I unto my native soil repair among mine own,
Euristeus is of Ergo lord thus woefully forlorn.
I will to Thebes where I was wed, and Hercules was borne:
And where with Jove I did enjoy dame Venus dear delight.
O blessed woman had I been and in most happy plight,
It Jove with flash of lightning looms and blazing flakes of fire
Had smolthred me as Simile was soused at her desire.
Would God that Hercles while he was a babe had ripped been
Out of my womb, then wretchedly I should not this have seen
The pangs and torments of my son, whose praise doth coūteruaile
Even Jove: then had I learned that death at length might him assail,
And take him from my sight: O child, who will remember thee?
For now unthankfulness is great in men of each degree:
〈◊〉, for thy 〈◊〉 I do not know where entertained to bee).
The •word▪ of the Cleonies I will attempt and fire
Whom from the Lyon ross•with he and made the monster dye,
Or shall I too th'Archadians go where thou did sle• the boar
Where thy renown remain 〈…〉 of great exploits before,
The parlous 〈◊〉 Hydra hear was slayue there fell he dead,
That with the flesh of slaughtered men his greedy horses fed
And yondes were the Stimphall burdes compelde to leave the say
And tamed by the handy toil, now doth the Lyon fry,
And belketh 〈◊〉 fumes in heavens while thou least in thy grove
O if mankind but any spark of thankful nature have
Let all men prcace to succour me Alcmene thy mother dear.
What if among the Thracians I venture to appear,
Or on the 〈◊〉 of Hoboed flood? thy prowess every where
Hath succoured all these soylts: for erst in Thrice thou did put down
The fleshy meangres of the King and put him from his crown,
By slaughter of the salvage print the people live in peace,
Where did thou deny thy help to make tormoyling cease?
Unhappy mother that I am a shrine where may I have
To shroud thy coarse: for all the world may strine about thy grave
What temple may be meet to shrine thy relics safe for aye,
And hallowed bones? what nations unto the ghost shall pray?
O noble son what sepulchre what hearse may serve for thee?
The world it self through flying flame thy fatal tomb shall be:
Who takes here this payse from me his ashes which I bear
Why loath I them? embrace his bones keep still his ashes here,
And they shall be a shield to thee his dust that thee defend,
To see his shadow, princes proud for fear shall stoup and bend
O mother of noble Hercules forbear your dreary plaint:
His valiant death thus should not be with female tears attaint.
Ye should not languish thus for him, nor count him wretched man
In dying, who by noble mind prevent his destny can.
His cheuatry forbids vs with tears him to bewail:
The stately stomach doth not sloupe: they sigh whose hearts do fail.
(Isle moan no more: behold, behold. most wretched mother I)
Have lost the shield of land end sead, where glittering Phoebe displays
With whirling wheels in foamy gulphes, and red and purple rays
The loss of many sons I may lament in him alone.
Through him I lifted Kings to frown, when crown my self hadnone
Aid never any mother lived, that needed less to crave.
Of Gods, then I. I asked nought while I my son might have.
What could not Hercles tender love like on me to bestow?
What God would once den•• to 〈…〉 or what he held me fro,
I was in my power to ask and have. If Jove would ought deny,
My Hercules did bring to pass I had 〈…〉 by.
What mortal mother ever bare and lost so dear a son?
Erst down the cheeks of Niobe the 〈…〉
When of her dear and tender brattes she wholly was hereuen,
And did bow•le with strained sighs her children seven and seue•
And yet might I compare this one (my Hercles) unto those
And I in him as much as she in all her imp•s die lose.
The mothers that are mourning dames do lack on h•d and chief,
And now Alcmene shall be she deprived of all releese,
Cease woeful ••theirs cease, if that among you any are
Constrain to shed your streaming tears by force of peas•ue care•
Ye Lady whom lamenting song of women formed rocks,
Give place unto my glutting grief, beat on with burning knocks
Ye hands upon my rivaled breast, alas am I alone
Enough for such a funeral to languish and to move,
Whom al the world shall shortly need? yet steech thyfeble arms
To thumpe upon thy sounding breast thy grief with boleful 〈◊〉
And in despite of al the gods power put thy woeful aria
And to receive thy flowing tears thy warry cheeks apply.
Bewail Alcmenas woeful state: the son of Jove bewail,
Whose birth did cause the du•ay day in kindly course 〈◊〉 fail.
The East compact two nights in one: Lo, to, a greater thing
Then glorious day the world hath lost now let your forrowes ring,
Yet people al whose lowryng lords he draw to dens of death
Their blades (that reckt with guiltless 〈◊〉) he 〈◊〉 into the sheath.
Bestow on hen your Crystal tears, which he deserved wellt
Howl out ye heavens, ye myrtle seas, and goulphes with gronings yell.
O Crete Dear darling unto Jove For Jove of Hercles to•e,
Ye hundred cities beat yont arms: my son, for evermore
Is gone among the gries•y ghosts, and shimmering shades of hell
Lament for him ye woeful mightes, that here on 〈◊〉 do dwell,
WHy Mother whale you me an 〈◊〉
〈…〉 ho•t of hell?
Or 〈…〉 of death, sith I
among 〈◊〉 Spheres doe dwell?
Forbear, forbear, to moan for me
for virtue opened hath
To me the passage to the Stars:
and set me in the path,
That guides to everlasting Life,
whence co•s this dreadful sound?
Whence roars this thundering voice. y• doth against mine ears rebosid,
And bids me to shine my tears? I know it now I know,
The darksome dung••• daunied are, and Demies of Lakes allow.
O Son art thou ret•and to the from Stygian gulf again?
And can thou twice of ugly death the con quest thus obtain?
And burst the baleful prisons twice, of glum and ghastly night.
Aga••st 〈…〉 thus by might?
May any scope from 〈…〉 thou stape alone?
Hath hell no power to hold thy sprite, when breath from breast is gone?
Or else hath Pluto bailed thee out, for fear least thou alone
Should cloyne his Sceptre from 〈◊〉 hand, &amp; pluck him from his front?
For I am sure I saw thee laid upon the burning trees:
And from thy Corps the slame and sparks against the welkin flies:
That sure thou wast to po•ldee burn, and feeble life was lost:
But sure the deeps and pits of 〈◊〉 did not lock up thy ghost.
Why were the devils alrayde of thee? why quaked Ditis grim?
And did thy noble ghost seem such a ghastly bug to him?
The dampy 〈◊〉 of Cocitas could not keep me from light.
Nor Carons fusty musty Barge iramsported hath my sprite,
Now Myther 〈…〉 more once have I seem the 〈◊〉 of hell,
And all the 〈…〉 that dwell.
That mortal mold I took of you to nought the flames have fried:
Heaven hath the substance that I took of Jove: in fire yours died.
And therefore rawse your playntius tear•, which parents use to shed,
When wretchedly they whale their sons, that dastardly are dead.
Thus vulgar varlets weep: Joy virtue hopes the Stars to get:
But fainting fear 〈◊〉 on death, from heaven where I am set,
You hear my voice: Euristeus now shall bide the deadly push
With chariot sway his cracked scull ye shall on sunder crush
Now must I hence advance my Ghost up to the rolling skies
Once more I daunt the devils, and do the goblins grim aggrise
But stay awhile my son: he fades and shrinks from my sight
Advanced he is among the stars: doth this my charmed Spirit
Dote in a trance &amp; or do I dream that I have seen my son
A troubled mind can scante believe the things he sees done.
But now I see thou art a God possessing heaven for aye.
I see it sure. I will to Thebes thy triumphs to display.
LO virtue scopes the ghastly shades of hell,
Ye noble peers that shyne in virtue bright
Dire destiny cannot constrain you dwell
Among the glowming glades of ugly might,
Nor sink your fame in loathsome lakes of spyte.
But when deaths day draws on the gasping hour,
You purchased glory shall direct your right
To find the passage to the heavenly bower.
When flesh doth fall, and breathing body dies
Then (Fame the child of Virtue) doth arise.
But sluggish sottes that sleep their days in sloth,
Or give their golden age to loath some lust.
Them and their names the wretches bury both,
When as their bones shall shryned be in dust:
The clay shall cover their carcasses forlorn,
As though such kaytisses never had been borne.
But if that ought of memory they have.
In thafter age it shall be filthy shame.
The gnawing worms torment not so in grave
Their rotten flesh, as tounges do tear their name,
That daily kilt to further mischief lives.
Lo both the fruits, that vice and virtue gives.

when whirling winds which blow with bl•st•…ng blast,
Shall cease their course, and not the Ayre •…ooue.
But still vnstirred it doth stand, it chances at the last,
To be infect, the truth hereof even day by day we prove,
For deep within the Caves of earth, of force it doth beho•e,
Sith that no winds do come thereto, the Ayre out to beat,
By standing still the closed ayre, doth breed infections great.
¶ The stream or flood, which runs up and down,
Is far more sweet, then is the standing brooke.
If long vnworne, you leave a Cloak or Gown,
Moathes will it mar, unless you thereto look:
Again, if that upon a shelf, you place, or set a book▪
And suffer it there still to stand, the worms will soon it eat:
A Knife likewise, in sheath laid up, the rust will mar and freat.
¶ The good road horse, if still at rack he stand,
To resty •ade will soon transformed be,
If long un•…lt, you leave a fertile land,
From strecke, and weed, no place will be left free:
By these examples, and such like, approve then well may wee,
That idleness more evils doth bring, into the mind of man,
Then labour great in longer time, again expel out can.
¶ Which thing our Author marking well, when wearied was his mind,
From reading grave and ancient works, yet loath his time to loose,
Bethought himself, to ease his heart, some recreance to find
And as he mused in his mind, immediately arose,
A strange example done of late, which might as he suppose,
Stir up their minds to godliness, which should it see or hear,
And therefore humbly doth you pray, to give attentive care.
¶ The argument or ground whereon our Author chefely stayed,
Is (sure) a History strange and true, to many men well known,
Of one through love of worldly wealth, and fear of death dismayed,
Because he would his life and goods, have kept still as his own,
From state of grace wherein he stood, was almost overthrown:
So that he had no power at all, in heart firm faith to have,
Till at the last, God changed his mind his mercies for to crave.
¶ And here, our Author, thought it meet, the true name to omit,
And at this time▪ imagine him PHILOLOGVS to be,
First, for because▪ a Comedy, will hardly him permit,
The vices of one private man, to touch particularly,
Again, now shall it stir them more, who shall it hear or see,
For if this worldling had ben named, we wold straight deem in mind,
That all by him then spoken were, our selves we would not find.
¶ But sith PHILOLOGVS is nought else, but one that loves to talk,
And common of the word of God, but hath no further care,
According as it teaches them, in Gods fear for to walk,
If that we practise this in deed, PHILOLOGI we are,
And so by his deserved fault, we may in time beware,
Now, if as Author first it meant, you hear it with this gain,
In good behalf he will esteem, that he bestowed his payne.
¶ And for because we see by proof, that men do soon forget,
Those things for which to call them by, no name at all they know,
Our Author for to help short wits, did think it very meet,
Some name for this his Comedy, in preface for to show,
Now names to natures must agree, as every man do know,
A fitter name he could in mind, no where excogitate,
Then, THE CONFLICT OF CONSCIENCE, the same to nominate.
A cruel Conflict certainly, where Conscience takes the foil,
And is constrained by the flesh, to yield to deadly sin,
Whereby the grace and love of God, from him, his sin doth spoil,
Then (wretch accursed) small power hath, repentance to begin,
This History here, example shows, of one fast wrapped therein,
As in discourse before your eyes, shall plainly proved be,
Yet (at the last) God him restoarde, even of his mercy free.
¶ And though the History of it self, be too too, dolorus,
And would constrain a man with tears of blood, his cheeks to wet,
Yet to refresh the minds of them that be the Auditors,
Our Author intermixed hath, in places fit and meet,
Some honest mirth, yet always ware, DECORVM, to exceed:
But list, I hear the players pressed, in presence forth to come,
I therefore cease, and take my leave, my Message I have done. Exit.
HIgh time it is for mée to stir about,
And doo my best, my kingdom to maintain,
For why? I sée of enemies a roughed:
Which all my laws, and Statutes doo disdain:
Against my state, d•• fight and▪ strive amain.
Whom, in time if I doo not dissipate,
I shall repent it, when it is to late.
My mortal foe, the Carpenters poor son,
Against my Children, the Pharises I mean,
Upbraiding them, did use this comparison,
As in the story of his life, may be séene,
There was a man, which had a vinyard greene:
Who letting it to husbandmen unkind,
In stead of fruit, unthankfulness did find.
So that his Servants, firstly they did beat,
His Son likewise, they afterword did kill,
And héere upon that man in fury great:
Did soldiers send, these Husbandmen to spill,
Their Towue to burn, he did them also will.
But out alas, alas, for woe I cry,
To use the same, far juster cause have I,
For where the kingdom, of this world is mine,
And his, on whom I will the same bestow,
As Prince héereof, I did my self assign:
My darling dear, whose faithful live I know,
Shall never fail from mée, but daily flow:
But who that is: perhaps some man may doubt.
I will therefore in bréefe; purtraict and paint him out.
The mortal man by natures rule is bound
That Child to favour, more then all the rest,
Which to himself in face, is likest found:
So that he shall with all his goods be blessed:
Even so doo I estéeme and like him best,
Which doth most near my dealings imitate,
And doth pursue Gods laws, with deadly hate.
As therefore I, when once in Angels state,
I was, did think my self, with God as mate to bée,
So doth my son himself, now elevate,
Aboue mans nature, in rule and dignity.
So that in terris Deus sum, saith he:
In earth I am a God, with sins for to dispense,
And for rewards, I will forgive eche manet of offence.
I said to Eve, tush, tush, thou shalt not die,
But rather shalt as God, know every thing:
My son likewise, to maintain Idolatry,
Saith tush what hurt can carved Idols bring?
Despise this law of God, the heavenly King:
And set them in the Church, for men thereon to look,
An Idol doth much good, it is a laymans book.
Nemb•oath that Tyrant, fearing Gods hand,
By me was persuaded to build up high Babel:
Whereby he presumed, Gods wrath to withstand:
So hath my Boy, devised very well,
Many pretty toys, to kéepe men's soul from hell:
Live they never so evil héere, and wickedly,
As Masses, trentalles, Pardons, and Scala coeli.
I egged on Pharao of Eg•pt the King,
The Israelites to kill, so soon as they were borne:
My darling likewise, doth the self same thing:
And therefore cause Kings, and Princes to be sworn,
That with might and maine, they shall kéepe vs his horn.
And shall destroy with fire, Are and sword,
Such as against him, shall speak but one word.
And even as I was some what to slow,
So that not withstanding, the Isralites did augment:
So for lack of murdering Gods people doo grow,
And daily increase, at this time present:
Which my son shall feel incontinent.
Yet an other practise, this evil to withstand,
He learned of 〈◊〉, which now he takes in hand.
For when as Moses, I might not destroy,
Because that he was of the Lord appointed,
To bring the people from thraldom to joy:
I did not cease, whilst I had invented,
An other means to have him prevented:
By accounting himself the son of Pharao,
To make him loath Egipt to forgo.
The same advise I also attempted,
Against the son of God, when he was incarnate,
Hoping there by, to have him relented:
And for promotion sake, himself to prostrate,
Before my féete when I did demonstrate,
The whole world unto him, and all the glory,
As it is recorded in Matheus History.
So hath the Pope, who is my darling dear,
My eldest boy, in whom I doo delight:
Least he should fall, which thing he greatly fear,
Out of his Seat, of honour pomp and might,
Hath got to him, on his behalf to fight:
Two Champions stout, of which the one is Avarice,
The other is called Tyrannical practise.
For as I said, although I claim by right,
The kingdom of this earthly world so round:
And in my stead to rule with force and might,
I have assigned the Pope, whose match I no where found,
His hart with love, to mée, so much abound:
Yet divers men of late, of malice most unkind,
Do study to displace my son, some way ward means to find
Wherefore I marvel much, what cause of let there is,
That hitherto, they have not their office put in ur,
I will go sée, for why, I fear that somewhat is amiss▪
If not, to range abroad, the world, I will them straight procure,
But néedes they must, have one to help, men's harts for to allure:
Unto their train, who that should bée, I cannot yet espy,
No méeter match I can find out, then is Hypocrisy.
Who can full well in time and place, dissemble eiders part,
No man shall easily perceive, with which side he tooth bear.
But when once favour he hath got, and credit in mans hart:
He will not slack in mine 〈◊〉, I do• 〈◊〉 nothing fear:
But time doth run, too fast away, for me to •arie h••re,
For none will be enamoured, of my shape I do• know,
I will therefore, mine imps 〈◊〉 out, from hell their shapes to show.
MY mind doth thirst dear friend Philologus,
Of former talk to make a final end:
And where before we •…n for to discus,
The cause why God doth such affli•…ns send,
Into his Church, you would some more time spend.
In the same cause, that thereby you might learn,
Betwixt the wrath and jove of God, a right for to discern.
With right good will, to your request •…rin I doo consent,
As well because, as I perceive, 〈◊〉 take therein delight,
As also for because, it is most chiefly pertinent,
Unto mine office, to instruct, and teach e•che Christian wight,
True godliness, and show to them, the path that leads right,
Unto Gods kingdom, where we shall, inherit our salvation,
Given unto vs from God, by Christ our true propitiation.
But that a better ordered course, he•r •…n we may observe,
And may directly to the first, apply that which ensue,
To speak that hath been said, before, I well a time reserve:
And so procéede, from whence we left, by course and order due,
Unto the end: At first therefore, you did lament and rue,
The misery of these our days, and great calamity,
Which those sustain, who dare ga•nsay, the Romish Hypocrisy.
I have just cause, as hath eche Christian hart,
To wail and weep, to shed out tears of blood:
When as I call to mind, the torments and the smart,
Which those have borne, who honest be and good,
For nought else, but because, their errors they withstood:
Yet joyed I much, to see how patiently,
They boar the cross of Christ, with constancy.
So many of vs, as into one body bée,
Incorporate, whereof Christ is the lively head,
As members of our bodies which wée sée:
With joints of love together bee conjoined:
And must néedes suffer, unless that they be dead:
Some part of grief in mind which other féele,
In body though not so much by a great deal.
Wherefore by this it is most apparent,
That those two into one body are not united,
Of the which, the one doth suffer, the other doth forment:
And in the wounds of his Brother is delighted:
Now which is Christ's body, may easily be decided:
For the Lamb is deuonred of the Wolf always,
Not the Wolf of the Lamb as Chrisostom doth say.
Again of unrighteous Caine murdered was Abel,
By whom the Church of God was figured:
Isaac likewise was persecuted of Ismaell,?
As in the Book of Genesis is mentioned:
Israel of Pharao was also terrified,
Dauid the Saint, was afflicted by his Son,
And put from his kingdom I mean by Absolon.
Alias the Thesbit, for fear of Iezabell,
Did fly to Horeb, and hid him in a Cave:
Micheas the Prophet, as the Story doth tell,
Did hardly his life from Baalles Priests save:
Ieremy of that sauce tasted have:
So did Essay, Daniell, and the Children thrée,
And thousands more, which in stories we may sée.
In the new Testament, we may also réede,
That our Saviour Christ, even in his Infancy,
Of Herod the King might stand in great dread:
Who sought to destroy him, such was his insolence:
Afterword of the Pharises, he did with constancy,
Suffer shameful death, his Apostles also,
For testimony of the truth, did their crosses under go.
Iames under Herod, was headed with the Sword,
The rest of the Apostles, did suffer much turmoil:
Good Paul was murdered by Narrow his word:
Domitian devised a Barrel full of Oil,
The body of Iohn the Euangelist to boil:
The Pope at this instant sundry torments procure,
For such as by Gods holy word will endure.
By these former stories, two things we may learn,
And profitably record in our remembrance:
The first is Gods Church from the Devils to discern:
The second to mark, what manifest resistance,
The Truth of God hath, and what encumbrance:
It brings upon them that will it profess,
Wherefore, they must arm them selves, to suffer distress.
It is no new thing, I doo now perceive,
That Christ's Church doo suffer tribulation,
But that the same cross I might better receive:
I request you to show me for my consolation:
What is the cause, by your estimation:
That God doth suffer, his people be in thrall▪
Yet help them so soon as they to him call.
The chiefest thing, which might vs cause or move,
With constant minds, Christ's cross for to sustain:
Is to conceive of Heaven, a faithful love:
Where we may not come, as Paul doth prove it plain:
Unless with Christ we suffer, that with him we may rain:
Again sith that it is our heavenly Fathers will,
By worldly woes our carnal lusts to kill.
Moreover, we do use to loath that thing we always have,
And doo delight the more in that which mostly we doe want,
Affliction urges vs also, more earnestly to crave:
And when we once reléeued be, true faith in vs it plant,
So that to call in eche distress on God we will not faint:
For trouble bring forth patience, from patience doth ensue
Experience, from experience Hope, of health the anchor true.
Again, oftimes, God doth provide, affliction for our gain,
As Iob who after loss of goods, had twice so much therefore:
Sometime affliction is a means, to honour to attain:
As you may sée, if Iosephes life, you set your eyes before:
Continually it doth vs warn, from sinning any more:
When as we sée the judgements just, which God our heavenly king,
Upon offenders héere in earth, for their offences bring.
Sometime God doth it vs to prove, if constant we will be.
As he did unto Abraham: sometime his whole intent,
Is to declare his heavenly might, as in Iohn we may sée:
When the Disciples did ask Christ, why God the blindness sent
Unto that man that was borne blind? to whom incontinent,
Christ said: neither for Parents sins, nor for his own offence,
Was he borne blind, but that God might show his magnificence.
This is the sum of all your talk, if that I guess a right,
That God doth punish his electt to kéepe their faith in ur,
Or least that if continual ease, and rest enjoy they might:
God to forget through hautinesse, frail nature should procure:
Or else by feeling punishment, our sins for to abjure:
Or else to prove our constancy, or lastly that we may,
Be instruments in whom his might, God may abroad display.
Now must I néedes confess, to you my former ignorance,
Which knew no cause at all, why God should trouble his elect,
But thought afflictions all, to be rewards for our offence:
And to procéede from wrathful Judge, did always it susped:
As doe the common sort of men, who will straightway direct
And point their fingers at such men, as God doth chastise héere,
Estéeming them by just desert, their punishment to bear.
Such is the nature of mankind, himself to justify,
And to condemn all other men, whereas we ought of right:
Accuse our selves especial, and God to magnfie:
Who in his mercy doth vs spare, whereas he also might,
Sith that we doo the self same things, with like plagues vs requight
Which thing our Saviour Christ doth teach, as testifies Luke,
The thirtéenth Chapter, where he doth vain glorious men rebuke:
But for this time let this suffice, now lets homeward go,
And further talk in private place, if néede be, we will have:
With right good will, I will attend on you, your house unto:
Or else go you with mée to mine, the longer journey save:
For it is now high dinner time, my stomach meat do•th crave:
I am soon bidden to my friend, come on let vs depart,
Go you before, and I will come behind with all my heart.
GOD spéede you all, that be of Gods beléefe,
The mighty Iehouah protect you from ill:
I beséeche the living God, that he would give,
To each of you present, a hearty good will,
With flesh to contend, your lust for to kill:
That by the aide of spiritual assistance,
You may subdue your carnal concupisence.
God grant you all for his mercies sake,
The light of his word to your hearts joy:
I humbly beséeche him a confusion to make
Of erroneous sectes, which might you annoy:
Earnestly requiring eche one to employ,
His whole endeavour Gods word to maintain,
And from strange doctrine your hearts to refrain.
Grant Lord I pray thée, such preachers to bée,
In thy congregation, thy people to learn:
As may for Conscience sake, and of méere sincerity,
Being able twixt Corn and Cockle to discern.
Apply their study to replenish the Berne.
That is thy Church, by their doctrines increase,
And make many heirs of thine eternal peace. Amen▪ Amen.
But soft let mée sée, who doth mée aspect,
First sluggish Saturn of nature so cold:
Being placed in Taro, my beams doo reject,
And Luna in C•ncro in sextile he behold:
I will the effect héereafter unfold.
Now Iupiter the gentile▪ of temperature mean,
Poor Mercury the turn••te, hée force••ke clean.
Now murdering Mars retrogarde in Libra,
With amiable tryne, apply to my beam,
And splendent Sol the ruler of the day:
After his Eclipse to Iupiter will lean,
The Goddess of pleasure, Dame Venus I mean,
To me her poor servant seem friendly to be,
So also doth Luna otherwise called Phebe.
But now I speak mischeuously, I would say, in a mystery
Wherefore to interpret it, I hold it best done,
For here be a good sort I beléeue in this company:
That know not my meaning, as this man for one,
What? blush not at it, you are not alone:
Héere is an other that know not my mind,
Nor hée in my words, great savour can find.
The Planet Mercurius, is neither what nor cold,
Neither good nor yet very bad of his own nature,
But doth alter his quality, with them which doo hold:
Any friendly aspect to him, even so I assure:
We Mercurialists I mean Hypocrits cannot long endure
In one condition, but doo alter our mind,
To theirs that talk with vs, thereby friendship to find.
The little Camelyon by Nature can change
Her self, to that colour, the which she behold:
Why should it then to any séeme strange?
That we d•• thus alter, why are we controlled?
Sith only the rule of nature we hold:
We séeke to please all men, yet most doo vs hate,
And we are rewarded for friendship debate.
Saturnus is envious, how then can hée leave?
Adulation or Hypocrisy to him most contrary,
The Iouists being good d•• look high aboue:
And doo not regard the rest of the company:
Now Mars being retrogard, foretells misery:
To tyrannical practise, to happen eftsoon,
As shall be apparent before all be done.
Which Tyranny with flattery is easily pacified,
Whereas Tom tell troth shall féele of his Sword,
So that with such men is fully verified,
That old said saw, and common by word:
Obsequium amicos, by flateries friends are prepared:
But veritas ôdium parit, as commonly is séene,
For speaking the truth, many hated have béene.
By Sol understand, Popish principality,
With whom full highly I am entertained,
But being eclipsed shall show forth his quality:
Then shall Hypocrisy be utterly disdained:
Whose wretched exile though greatly complained:
And wept for of many, shall be without hope,
That in such pomp shall ever be Pope.
By Vans the riotus, by Luna the variable,
Betwixt whom and Mercury no variance can fall,
For they which in words be most unstable:
Would be thought faithful, and the riotous liberal:
So that Hypocrisy their doings cloak shall:
But whist not a word, for yonder come some, 
While I know what they are, I will be dombe.
PVt mée before for I will shift for one, 
So long as strength remains in this Arm,
And pluck up thy hart thou faint hearted mom,
As long as I live, thou shalt take no harm:
Such as control vs, I will their tongues charm,
By Fire or sword or other like torment,
So that ever they did it they shall it repent.
Hast thou forgotten what satan did say,
That the K. Hypocrisy our doings should hide, 
So that under his Cloak our parts we should play,
And of the rude people should never be spied,
Or if the worst should hap or betide,
That I by Tyranny should both you defend.
Against such as mischief to you should pretend.
Indéed such words our Belsire did speak, 
Which being remembered doth make my heart glad,
But yet one thing my courage doth break,
And when I think of it, it makes me full sad,
I mean the evil luck which Hypocrisy had,
When he was expelled out of this land
For then with me the matter evil did stand.
For I by him so shadowed was from light, 
That almost no man could me out espy,
But he being gon to every mans sight,
I was apparent each man did descry,
My piling and poling so that glad was I,
From my nature to cease a thing most marvelous,
And live in secret the time was so dangerous.
Tush Avarice thou fairest a thing that is vain, 
For by me alone both you shall be stayed,
And if thou mark well thou shalt perceive plain,
That if I Tyranny my part had well played,
And from killing of Heretikes my hand had not stayed,
They had never grown to such a great rowt,
Neither should have been able to have banished him out:
But sero sapiunt Phriges, at length I will take héede,
And with blood enough this evil will prevent, 
For if I here of any that in word or in déed,
Yea if it be possible to know their intent,
If I can prove that in thought they it meant:
To impair our estates, no prayer shall serve, 
But will pay them their hire, as eche one deserve.
The Fish once taken, and scoped from baight,
Will ever hereafter, be ware of the hook,
Such as use hunting will spy the Hare straight,
Though other discern her not, yet on her shall look:
Again, the learned can read in a Book,
Though the unskilful •eeing equal with them,
Cannot discern an F from an M.
So those which have tasted, the fruit that we bear
And find it so sower, will not vs implant:
Tush Avarice, I warrant thée thou née•st not fear, 
In the clergy I know, no friends we shall want:
Which for hope of gain, the truth will recant:
And give them selves wholly to set out Hypocrisy,
Being egd on with Avarice, and defended by Tyranny.
Well may the Clergy on our side hold,
For they by vs no small gain did reap,
But all the temporaltie, I dare be bold,
To venture in wager of Gold a good heap,
At our preferments will morn wail and wéepe,
Though indéede no just cause of joy they can find,
Yet for fear of my sword, they will alter their mind. 
But I marvel much, where Hypocrisy is,
Mée think it is long since, from vs he did go,
I doubt that of his purpose he miss:
And therefore hath hanged him self for woe. 
How say thou Tyranny doest not think so
In faith if I thought that he might bée spared, 
And we have our purpose beshrew mée if I cared.
Saw you ever the like of this doubting doult? 
It gréeues mée to hear how faint hearted he is,
A little would cause me to kill thee, thou Ascoulte:
See, see, for woe he is like for to peace:
To give an attempt, what a fellow were this?
But this is the good that comes of Covetousness
He lives always in fear to loose his riches.
Again, mark how he regards the death of his friend
So he hath his purpose, he cares for no more,
A perfect pattern of a covetous mind,
Which neither estéemeth his friend nor his foe,
But rather Avarice might I have saides•:
Who if he were gone, my self could defend,
Where thou by his absence were soon at an eude.
O Loving Father and merciful God,
We through our sins thy punishment deserve,
And have provoked to beat with thy rod:
We stubborn Children, which from thée doo swerve:
We loathed thy word, but now we shall starve:
For Hypocrisy is placed again in this land,
And thy true Gospel as exile doth stand.
This is thy just judgment for our offence,
Who having the light, in darkness did stray,
But now if thou would of thy fatherly ben•uolence:
Thy purposed judgements in wrath for to stay:
The part of the prodigal Son we would play:
And with bitter tears before thée would fall,
And in true repentance for mercy would call.
In our prosperity we would not regard,
The words of the Preachers, who threatened the same,
But flattering our selves, thought you would have spared
Vs in thy mercy, and never vs blame:
But so much provoked thée, by blaspheming thy name:
Indeeds to deny, that in words we may•…e,
That from thy Justice thou could not restrain.
So that Romish Pharao a Tyrant most cruel,
Hath brought vs again into captivity,
And instead of the pure 〈◊〉 of thy Gospel:
Hath poisoned our souls with •iuelish Hypocrisy:
Unable to maintain it, but by murdering Tyranny:
Séeking rather the 〈◊〉, then the health of the Shéepe,
Which are appointed for him for to kéepe.
Lo Avarice, hark what a T•… is héere,
Against our holy Father this 〈…〉 to use: 
I might have harde more if I would him forbear:
But for gréefe my ea•… 〈◊〉 to hear him abuse
His tongue in this manner: wherefore no excuse,
Shall purchase favour but that with all speed,
By Sword I will render, to him his due méede.
Wherefore, thou •…ant, wh•• thou hast th•e,
Pray to the Saints, thy spokesmen to bée,
That at Gods hand, from this 〈◊〉 great 〈◊〉:
By their intercession, thou may be •et frée:
Nay hear thou 〈◊〉 be 〈◊〉 by 〈◊〉:
First cut of his head, and then let him pray,
So shall he be sure, vs not to •…ray.
O wicked Tyranny, thou 〈◊〉 of the Devil,
Too ioyfyll tidings to thee have I brought,
For now thou are 〈…〉, to pra•…e all evil:
Marry thou shalt not give 〈◊〉 thy service for nought:
But for thy pains to please thée I thought.
Thou art nothing so ready to doo any good,
As thou art to she• poor •…ants blood.
Nay Tyranny suffer this rascal to pra•e, 
Till some man come by, and then he is gone▪
Then wilt thou repent it, when it is to late▪
Dispatch him therefore, while we are alone▪
Well may the Covetous be likened to a dro•…,
Which of the Bées labours will sp•…e and •ast make▪
And yet to get honey, no labour will •ache.
The Coueitous likewise from poor men e•…rf,
Their gains to increase, they only doo séeke:
And so they may have it of them a great sort:
What means they use for 〈◊〉, they rare not 〈◊〉 séeke:
Yet will these misers scarce once a wéeke:
Have one good meal, at their own table.
So by Avarice, to help them selves they are unable.
Avarice to a Fire may well compared •ée,
To the which the more you add, •he more still it cra•e▪
So likewise the Covetous mind the doo sée:
Though riches abound, doo wi•h still more to have▪
And to be short, your re•erences to save:
To a filthy Swine, such misers are comparable,
Which while they be dead are nothing profy•able.
Nay farewell Tyranny, I came hither too soon,
I perceive already, I am to well known:
I were not best in their •laws for •o come:
Unless I were willing to be clean overthrown:
By the preaching of Gods word, at this mischief is grow •n:
Which if Hypocrisy might happily expel,
All we in safety and pleasure might dwell.
Stay therefore, while from Hypocrisy we bear,
Dispatch then this Merchant, least our counsel he tell,
I am content for Gods cause, this cross for to bear.
It is best killing him, now his mind is set well.
Your scoffing and mocking God séeth eche deal:
Yea, doest thou persist, vs still thus to check,
Thy speech I will hinder, by cutting of thy neck.
Nay, hold thy hand Cadby, thou hast kilt mée enough
What never the sooner for a merry word?
I meant not good earnest, to your friendship I vow:
I did but jest, and spake but in board:
Therefore of friendship, put up again thy sword:
Nay caitiff presume not, that thou shalt go scotfrée,
Therefore hold still and I will soon dispatch thée.
What? I pray thée Tyranny know first who I am,
Ye purblinded fools, doo your lips blind your eyes?
Why, I was in place long before you came:
But you could not sée the wood for the trées:
But in faith father Avarice I will pay you your fées:
For the great goodwill which you to me bear, 
And in time will requight it again doo not fear.
Content your self, good master Hypocrisy.
The words which I spake I spake vnaware.
Hold thy hand Hypocrisy, I pray thee heartily:
So like a mad man with thy friends doo not fare.
For nether of you both, a pin doo I care:
Go shake your ears both, like slaves as you bee,
And look not in your need to be helped of me.
What Master Hypocrisy, will you take snuff so soon?
Marry then you had néeede to be kept very warm,
I swear to your maistership, by the men in the Moon,
That to your person I intended no harm:
But that I am weary, I would both your tongs charm
See how to my face they do• mée deride,
I will not therefore in your companies abide.
Why master Hypocrisy, what would you that I doo?
For my offence, of mercy I you pray.
With thée I am at one, but of that Merchant to,
I look for some amends, or else I will away:
The presumptuous fools part héerein thou doest play,
What? of thy Master, do thou look for obeisance,
I will not once entreat thée, if thou wilt get thée hence.
Nimia familiaritas parit contemptum,
The old proverb by mée is verified,
By too much familiarity contemned be some:
Even so at this present to mée it betide:
For of long time Hypocrisy hath ruled as guide:
While now of later days, through Heretikes resistance
I retained Tyranny to yéeld mée assistance.
But through over much lenity, he thinks himself check mate
With mée his good patron, Master Hypocrisy.
List I pray thée Avarice, how this rascal can prate:
And with mée Tyranny doth challenge equality:
Where hee of himself hath neither strength nor hability
But thou to him riches, and I strength doo give,
So that I must be his master, though it both him gréeue.
Two Dogs oftentimes one bone would fine catch,
But yet the third doo both them deceive,
Even so Hypocrisy for the pre-eminence doth snatch:
Which Tyranny gapes for, ye may, perceive:
But I must obtain it, for of mée they retain
All kind of riches, their states to maintain,
To yield to me therefore they must be both fine.
Was Iudas Christ's master, because he ba•• the purse
Nay rather of all, he was least regarded,
Have not men of honour, Stewards to disburse:
All such sums of money, wherewith they be charged:
Yet aboue their moister their honour is not enlarged:
Even so, thee Avarice, my Steward I account,
To pay that whereto my charges amount.
And to thee Tyranny, this one word I object,
Whether was Ioab or Dauid the King?
When Ioab was glad his ease to reject:
The Ammonyts in Rabah, to confusion to bring:
When Dauid with Bethseba at home was sleeping:
Was not Ioab his servant, in warfare to fight,
And so art thou mine, mine enemies to quite.
Nay then at the hole god give you good night:
Shall Tyranny to Hypocrisy in any point yéelde?
With this one word I will vanquish thée quite:
That thou shalt be glad to give mée the field:
The end to be preferred all learned men wild:
Sith therefore Hypocrisy of Tyranny is end,
I must have the preferment, for which I contend.
I will make you both grant that I am the chief, 
Or else with my sword your sides I will pearce,
That were sharp reasoning indéede, with a mischief:
I will yéelde him my right if that hée be so fearce,
The nature of Hypocrites, héerein we rehearse:
Which being convinced by the text of Gods word,
The end of their sp•wting is Fire and Sword.
But if you will néeds be chief, God spéed well ye plough
I will be none that shall follow your train,
For if I should, I know well enough:
That to fly the Country, we all should be fine,
Then were my labour done but in vain,
You know not so much as I doo Tyranny,
Therefore I advise you be ruled by me.
Inter amicos omnia sunt communia they say,
Among friends there is reasoned no property•▪
But what the one hath of his own, tother, ma•…
Have the use of the same, 〈◊〉 his own liberty:
Even so among vs it is of a surety:
For what the one hath of his own proper right,
It is thine to use by day or by night.
Indéede you say truth▪ the end is worth all, 
Such things as to get the end are referred,
And by this reason to you I prove shall:
That I before Hypocrisy must be preferred:
The conclusion of my reason is this inserred:
Sith Hypocrisy was invented to augment private gau•e,
I am the end of Hypocrisy, this is plain.
Actum est de Amicitia, the bargen is dispatched,
And we two in friendship, are united as one.
In the same knot, with you let mée also be matched▪
And of money I warrant you, you shall want none:
I agrée, what say you? shall he be one?
Tyrant. I judge him needful in our company to bee: 
And therefore, for my part, he is welcome to me.
Let vs now spéedely on our business attend,
And labour eche one to bring it about.
That is already by mée brought to end:
So that of your preferment you néede not to doubt:
And my coming hither was to find you out:
That at my elbow you might be in readiness,
To help if néede were in this weighty business.
To tell you the Story it were but to tedious,
How the Pope and I together have devised,
Firstly to inuegle the people religious:
For gréedinesse of gain, who will be so•e prezed:
And for fear least héereaster they should be despised:
Of their own frée will, will maintain Hypocrisy
So that Avarice alone, shall conquer the Clergy.
Now of the chiefest of his carnal Cardinals,
He doth appoint certain, and give them authority,
To ride abroad in their pontificalles:
To sée if with Avarice, they may win the Layitie:
If not, then to threaten them with open Tyranny:
Whereby doubt not but many will forsake,
The truth of the Gospel, and our parties take.
This device is praise worthy, how say thou Avarice?
I like it well if it were put in bre,
Yet little gain to mée, shall this whole practise:
More then I had before time procure:
The Legates are ready to ride I am sure:
Wherefore we had néede to make no small delay,
They stay for my coming alone, I dare say,
Howbeit the Layitie would greatly mislike,
If they should know all our purpose and intent,
Yea and perhaps some means they would séeke:
Our forsaide business in time to prevent:
Will you then be ruled by my arbitrament?
Least the people should suddenly dissolve franquyllytie,
For the Legates defence, let him use me Tyranny.
Herein your counsel is not much unwise,
Save that in one thing, we had néede to beware,
Least you be known, we will you disguise,
And some grave Apparel for you will prepare,
But your name Tyranny, I fear all will mar:
Let me alone, and I will invent,
A name to your nature, which shall be convenient:
Zeal shall your name be, how like you by that?
And therefore, in office, you must deal zealously:
Let me alone, I will pay them home pat:
Though they call me Zeal, they shall 〈◊〉 me Tyranny
Lo, here is a Garment, come dress you handsomely:
I mary (quoth he) I like this very well:
Now, to the Devils Grace, you may séeme to give coūsell
Now must I apply al my Invention,
That I may device Avarice to hide:
Thy name shall be called Careful provision
And every man for his Ho••hold may lawfully provide,
Thus shalt thou go cloaked, and never be spied:
Thy counsel Hypocrisy, I very well allow,
And will recompense thée, if ever I know how.
Now, on a boon voyage, let vs depart,
For I well loathe any time to delay,
Nay, yet in sign of a merry hart,
Let vs singe before we go away.
I am content, begin I you pray,
But to singe the Treble, we must néedes have one.
If you say so, let it even alone.
TOO true (alas) too true I say, was our Divination,
The which Mathaetes did foresée, when last we were in place,
For now (in deed) we féele the smart and horrible veration,
Which Romish power unto vs did threaten and manace:
Wherefore, great néede we have, to call to God always for grace:
For féeble flesh is far too weak, those pains to undergo:
The which all they that fear the Lord, are now appoin•ted too.
The Legate from the Pope of Room, is come into our Coasts,
Who doth the Saints of God eche where, with Tyranny oppress,
And in the same most gloriously himself he vaunt and boast,
The more one mourns unto him, he pities the less,
Out of his cruel Tyranny, the Lord of Heaven me bless:
For hitherto, in blessed state, my whole life I have spent:
With health of body, wealth in Gods, and mind always content.
Besides, of friends, I have great store, who do me firmly love,
A faithful wife and children fair, of woods and pasture store,
And divers other things, which I have got for my behoof,
Which now to be depraved off, would grieve my hart full sore:
And if I come once in their claws, I shall get out no more.
Unless I will renounce my faith, and so their mind fulfil,
Which if I do, without all doubt, my soul for ay I spyll.
For sith I have received once the first fruits of my faith,
And have begone to run the course, that leads to salvation,
If in the midst thereof, I stay or cease, the Scripture saith,
It boots not that I began with so good preparation,
But rather, makes much the more, unto my condemnation:
For he alone shall have the Palm, which to the end doth run,
And he which plucks his hand frō Plough, in Heauē shall never com.
Those Labourers which hired were in Vineard for to moil,
And had their Penny for their payne, they tarried all while night,
For if they ceased had, when Sun their flesh with h•… did droyse,
And had departed from their work, they should have lost by right,
Their wages Penny: I like wise, shall be deprived qaight
Of that same Crown, the which I have in faith lunge looked for,
But for this time, I will depart, I dare here say no more.
HA, ha, ha, mary now the Game begin,
Hypocrisy throughout this Realwe is had in admiration,
And by my means, both Avarice and Tyranny crept in,
Who in short space, will make men tonne the way to desolation,
What did I say? my tongue did trip, I should say, console ation.
For now (forsooth) the Clergy must into my bosom créepe,
Or else, they know not, by what means, them selves alive to kéepe.
On the other side, the Laietie, be they either rich or poor,
If rich then Avarice strangle them, because they will 〈◊〉 loose
The worldly wealth▪ or else we have one subtle practise more,
That is, that sensual Suggestion, their outward man shall pose,
Who can full finely in eche cause, his mind to them disclose,
But if that neither of these twain, can to my train them wind,
Then, at his Cue (to play his part, doth Tyranny begin.
As for the poor knaves, such a one as this is,
We do not esteem him, but make short ado,
If he, will not come on, we doo him not miss,
But to the Pot, he is sure to go:
Tyranny deals with him and no more.
But I marvel, what doth him from hence so lunge stay?
Sooner named, sooner cūme, as cōmon Proverbs say. 
BY his wounds, I fear not, but it is cock sure now, 
Under the Legates Seal, in Office I am placed:
Therefore who so resist me I will make him to bow, 
Who can make Tyranny now •e disgraced?
With a head of brass I will not be out faced,
But will execute mine office with extréeme cruelty,
So that all men shall know me to be plain Tyranny.
Nay Master Zeal be ruled by me,
To such as resist, such rigour you may show,
Zeal nay, no Zeal, my name is Tyranny,
Neither am I ashamed who doth my name know, 
For in my dealings the same I will show,
None dare reprove me of that I am sure,
So long as Authority on my side endure,
But to thy words a while I will list,
Therefore in brief say on what you will.
I would have •ou show rigour to such as resist.
And such as be •bstinate spare not to kill,
But those that be willing your hestes to fulfil,
If they offend and not of obstinacy,
For money e•cuse them though they use villainy, 
Thus shall you perform your office aright,
For favour or money to spare the offendent.
So may I also of malice or spite,
Or ranckor of mine punish the innocent,
But I will be ruled by thine arbitrament,
And will favour such as will my hand grease,
The de•• is a good fellow if one can him please, 
But to sollow our business great pains we do take,
On an hasty message we were fit to be sent.
When I lye a dying I will you messengers make,
You ply you so fast you are too to diligent,
Hoop how, Master Zeal whether are yée bent?
Hark me thought one hallowed &amp; called you by name.
I would it were Hypocrisy. Aua. It is the very same,
What Master Hyprcrisie for you I have sought,
This hour or two but could you not find.
That is no marvel it is not for nought,
For I am but little and you two are blind,
Neither have you eyes to sée with behind,
Yet may the learned note herein a mystery,
That neither Tyrant, nor Auar. can find out Hypôcrisie.
But what earnest business have you in charge,
That with so great spéede must presently be finished.
Mary sée here. Hip. what is it? Tyrant. a commission large
From my Lord Legate him self au•thorized,
The effect whereof must presently be practised.
What is the tenure I pray you let me know.
Avarice hath red it, not I, let him show.
He hath firstly in charge to make inquisition,
Whether Aulters be reedified whether chalice and book,
Ves•mints for Mass, sacraments and procession,
Be prepared again: if not he must look,
And find out such fellows as these cannot brooke:
And to my Lord Legate such Merchants present,
That for their offence they may have condign punishmēt.
If any we take tardy Tyranny them threat,
That for their negligence he will them present,
And I desirous some money to get,
If ought they will give me, their evil will prevent,
Yea sometime, of purpose, such shifts we invent.
Peace, yonder coms one (me think) it is a préest,
By his gown cap and tippet, made of a list.
IN good seth sir, this newis de gar me lope,
Ay is as light as ay me wend, gif that yo wol me troth,
Far new even within awer land installed is the Pope,
Whese Legate with authority tharawawt our cūtry goth,
And charge before him far te com, vs Préests end lemon bath,
Far te spay awt gif that he mea, these new sprang Arataykes,
Whelk de disturb our hally Kirk, leek a sart of saysmataykes.
Our gilden Gods are brought even intea our Kirks ilk where,
That vnte tham our Parishioner, ma offer there gudewill,
Far hally Mass in ilke place, new thea auters de prepare,
Hally watter, Pox, Cross, Banner, Censour and Candle,
Cream, Crismatory, hally Bred, the rest omit ay will,
Whiled hally Fathers did invent •e old Antiquity,
Be new received inte our Kirks, with great solemnit•e.
Bay these thaugh lemon been apprest, the Clergy sall het gean,
Far te our Scents their offer yifts all whelk we sall receive,
Our hally Mass, thaw thea bay dere, thea de it but in vain,
Far thaw there friends frea Purgatory, te help thea dea believe,
Yet af there hope, gif need rewhayre it would theme all deceive,
Sea wawde our Pilgrimage, Relics, Trentals and Pardons,
Whelk far our gain inte our Kirk are brought in far the nones.
Far well a ne'er what war our tenths &amp; taythes that gro in filled,
What gif we han of globed land en plawwark bay the year,
Our offering deas de vara laytell are nothing te vs yield,
Our Bedroll geanes, our chrisom clethes de laytle mend our fare
Gif awt af this we pea far vale, we laytle mare can spare,
Sawl Masses, Diriges, Monethmayndes and Buryinges,
Alsow•nday, Kirkings, Baneasking and weddings.
The Sacraments, gif we mowt sell, war better then thea all,
Far gif the Jaws gave thratty pence, te hang Chrayst on a trée,
Good christiā folk thrayse thratty pence would coūt a price but small
Sea that te ete him with there téeth delayuered he mawght be,
New of this thing delayuerance, no man can make but we,
Se that the market in this punt, we Préests sawd han at will,
And with the money we sowd yet, our pooches we sowd fill.
I will go and salowt him, good morrow sir Iohn,
Naw bay may Préest hade God give ye ten far en,
Do you Master Parson in this Parish singe?
Yai sir that ay de, gif yowll give me troothing,
I have a commission your house and Church to séeke,
To search if you any seditious Books do kéepe.
When ay? well a near ay swer bay the Sacrament,
Ay had rather han a cup af nale then a Testament.
How can you without it your office discharge?
It is the least thing ay car far bay may charge,
Far se lang as thea han Images whereon te luke,
What need thea be distructed awt af a Buke.
Tush that will nodisie them all well enough,
As well a dead Image as a dumb Idol I make God avow,
Yai, ay my sen, bay experience thot con show,
Far in may Portico the tongue ay de not know,
Yet when ay see the great gilded letter,
Ay ken it sea well, as no man ken better:
As far Example, on the day of Chra•stes Nativity,
Ay sée a Bab in a Manger, and two Beasts standing by
The Service whelk to Newyeares day is assaygnd,
Bay the Paicture of the Circumcision ay faynd.
The Service, whelk on Twelfth day mun be don,
Ay séeke •ay the mark of the thrée kings of Colon.
Bay the Devil tentyng Chraist, ay faind whadragesima,
Bay Chraist on the Cross, ay search out good frayday:
Pasch for his mark, hath the Resurrection,
Ayenst Hally Thursday, is panted Chraistes Assention,
Thus in mayn own buke, ay is a good Clarke,
But gyf the Scents war gone, the Cat had eat my mark
Se the sandry mairacles, whi•• ilk Sent have done,
Bay the Pictures on the walls sal appéere to them soon
Bay the whelk thea are learned in every distress,
What Sent thea mun prea te far succour doubtless:
Sea that all Lepers te Syluester must prea,
That he would frée tham, there disease take away.
Layk wais, thea that han the falling saicknes,
Te be eased therfre, thea m•n prea to St. Cornelis:
In contagious jeer, as in plague or pestilence,
Te hally Sent Ruke, thea mun call far assistance.
Fra parill of drowning, Sent Carp kéepe the Mariners
Fra dayng in warfare, Sent George guard the Soldiers,
Sent Iob heal the Pox, the Agew, Sent Germain,
Far te ease the toothache, call te Sent Appollyne,
Gif that a woman be barren and childless,
Te help her herein, she must prea t• Sent Nicolas.
Far women in travail, call to Sent Magdalene
Far lawlynes of mind, call te Sent Katherine,
Sent Loy save your Horse, Sent Anthony your Swine.
What? this Parson, séemeth conning to be,
And as far as I sée, in a good uniformity:
Yea, he is well red, in that golden Legend.
Bay may trooth, in reading any other, no time do I spend
Far that ay ken, bay gene•al caūsell, is canonised
And bay the holy Pope himself is authorized:
That Buke farther, is wholly permitted,
Wharas, the Bayble in part is prohibited.
And therefore, gif it be lawful to utter my conscience,
Before the new Testament eyes give it credence.
I allow his Iudgemnet before Ambrose &amp; Austin,
And for Hypocrisy, a more convenient Chaplain,
It gréeueth me much that no fault we can spy,
For now of some bribe disappointed am I,
Yet happily he may tell vs of some Heretykes.
Is there M. Parson in your parish no Scismatikes?
Yai mara is there a vara busy body,
When will jest with me and call me full and noddy,
And sets his Lads te spout latin ayenst me,
But ay spose then with Deparfundis Clam aui,
And oftentimes▪ he will reason with me of the Sacarment,
And say he can prove bay the new Testament,
That Chraystss body is in Heaven placed,
But eyes not believe him, ay woll not be awt faced,
He says besaid that the Pope is Anticraist,
Fugered of Iohn bay the seven hatted beast,
And all awre religion is but mons invention,
And with Gods ward is at utter dissention,
And a plaguy déel mare af sayk layk talk,
That ay dar not far may narc bay his yate walk,
But ay would he were brunt that ay mawght be whaiet,
He must. have a cooler his tongue runs at riot.
What is his name sir Iohn, can thou tell vs?
Yai sir that ay ken he is •léped Phailelegoos.
Wilt thou go show his house where he dwell?
Yai or else ay would may sawl war in Hell,
Te de him a pleasure ay would gang a whole year,
Gif it war but te make him a Fadocke te bear.
Go with vs Avarice and bear vs company.
Nay, if you go hence I will not here tarry.
Away sirs in your business in a corner do not lu•ke,
That my Lord Legate when he coms may have work.
Come on let vs go together sir Iohn.
Ay sall follow after, God boy you good Gentleman.
Farewell, thrée false knaves, as betwéene this and London.
What say thou? Hip. As honest men as ye thrée Kings of Colon.
This gear goes round if that we had a fiddle: 
Nay, I must sing too, heigh dairy dairy dairy,
I can do but laugh my hart is so merry,
I will be minstrel my self heigh didle didle didle,
But lay there a straw I began to be weary:
But hark I héere a trampling of féete,
It is my Lord Legate I will him go méete.
GO to Master Zeal, bring forth that Heretike,
Which doth thus disturb our religion Catholic.
Room for my Lords grate: what? no manner reverence,
But Cap on head Hodge, and that in a Lords presence.
What? Master Hypocrisy I have stayed for you long.
You were best •rowed in and play vs among.
Where have you ben from me so long absent,
I appointed to have ben here thrée hours ago,
In my consistory to have set in Judgment,
Of that wretched Scismatike that doth trouble vs so.
What have you caught but one and no more?
In faith father Avarice, you have plied your chaps well.
I must néeds confess that I am paid for my travel.
Room for the prisoner, what? room on each hand,
Or I shall make some out of the way for to stand.
Lo héere (my Lord) is that seditious Scismatike,
That we have laid waite for, an arrant Heretike.
Sit down Master Hypocrisy to yéeld me assistance.
I thank your Lordship for your courteous benevolence,
I will be the Noddy, I should say the Notary,
To wright before my Lord Legate which is Commissary.
Ah sir, be you he that doth thus disturb,
The whole estate of our faith Catholic?
Art thou so expert in Gods laws and word,
That no man may learn thée? thou arrant Heretike:
But this is the nature of every Scismatike:
Be his errors never so false Doctrine,
He will say, by Gods word, he dare it examine.
With humble submission to your authority,
I pardon crave if ought 〈◊〉 I say,
For being thus fet in peril and extremity,
To me unacquainted, my tongue soon trip may,
Wherefore excuse me, I do your Lordship pray,
And I will answer to every demand,
According to my conscience, Gods word being my warrant.
To begin therefore orderly, how say thou Philologus?
Have I authority to call the me before?
Or to be short, I will object it thus:
Whether hath the Pope which is Peters successor:
Then all other Bish••s pre-eminence more?
If not, then it follow that neither he,
Nor I which am his Legate, to accounts may call thee.
The question is perilous for me to determine,
Chéefely when the party is Judge in the cause,
Yet if the whole course of Scripture ye examine,
And will be tried by Gods holy laws,
Small help shall you find to defend the same cause,
But the contrary may be proved manifestly:
As I in short words will prove to you briefly.
The surest ground whereon your Pope doth stand:
Is of Peters being at Room a strong imagination,
And the same Peter▪ you do understand,
Of all the Disciples had the gubernation,
Surmising both without good approbation:
Unless you will by the name of Babylon,
From whence Peter wrote is understanded Room:
As indéed divers of your writers have affirmed,
Reciting Ieromy, Austine, Primasius and Ambrose,
Who by their several writings have confirmed:
That Rome is new Babylon I may it not gloss,
But it were better for you they were dumb I suppose,
For they labour to prove Room by that acception:
The whore of Babilon spoke of in the Revelation,
But grant that Peter in Room settled was,
Yet that he was chief, it remains you to prove:
For in my Judgment it is a plain case,
That if any amongst them to rule it did behoove,
He should be chéefe whom Christ most did love:
To whom he bequeathed his mother most déere,
To whom in revelation Christ did also appéere.
I mean Iohn Euangelist (by birth) Cousin germaine,
To our Saviour Christ as stories do vs tell,
From whose succession if that you should claim
Superiority, you should mend your cause well,
For then of some likelihood of truth it should smell,
Where none so often as Peeter was reproved,
Nor from steadfast faith so often times removed,
But grant all were true herein you do fain,
Mark one proper lesson of a Greek Orator:
As a good child of his fathers wealth is inheritor,
So of his fathers virtues he must be possessor,
Now Peter folows Christ and al worldly goods forsakes
But the Pope leaves Christ, &amp; himself to glory takes:
And to be short Christ himself refused to be a King,
And the servant aboue the Master may not be,
Which being both true it is a strange thing,
How the Pope can receive this pomp and dignity,
And yet profess himself Christ's servant to be,
Christ will be no King, the Pope will be more,
The Pope is Christ's Master not his servant therefore.
Ah thou arrant Heretike I will thée remember,
I am glad I know so much as I doo,
I have weighed thy reasons and have found them so slender
That I think them not worthy to be answered:
How say you Master Hypocrisy? HIP. I also think so,
But let him go forward and utter his conscience,
And we will awhile longer here him with patience.
Say on thou Heretike of the holy Sacrament,
Of the body and blood of Christ, what is thine opinion?
I have not yet finished my former argument.
Say on as I bid thée, thou art a stout Minion:
I shall then gladly: it is a sign of union,
The which should remain vs Christians among,
That one should love another all our life long:
For as the bread is of many Cornells compounded,
And the Wine from the Juice of many Grips do descend,
So we which into Christ our Rock are ingrounded:
As into one Temple, should cease to contend:
Least by our conte•tion the Church we offend,
This was not the least cause among many more,
Which are now omitted that this Sacrament was given for,
The chéefest cause why this Sacrament was ordained,
Was the infirmity of our outward man:
Whereas Salvation to all men was proclaimed.
That with true faith apprehend the same can,
By the death of Iesus Christ that immaculate Lamb,
That the same might the rather of all men be believed,
To the word to ad a Sacramēt, it Christ nothing grieve▪
And as we the sooner beléeue that thing true,
For the trial whereof more witnesses we find,
So by the means of the Sacrament many grue
Beléeuing creatures, where before they were blind,
For our senses some savour of our faith now do find,
Because in the Sacrament there is this Analogy:
That Christ féedes our souls as the bread doth our body
Ah thou foul Heretike, is there bread in the Sacrament
Where is Christ's body then which he did vs give?
I know to the faithful receiver it is there present:
But yet the bread remains still I steadfastly beléeue.
To here these his errors it doth me greatly gréeue:
But that we may shortly to some issue come,
In what sense said Christ, Hoc est Corpus meum?
Even in the same sense that he said before:
Vos estis sall tarry, vos estis Lux mundi:
Ego sum ostium: and a hundredth such more,
If time would permit to allege them severally,
But that I may the simple sort edify,
You ask me in what sense these words I verify,
Where Christ of the bread said: this is my body:
For answer herein, I ask you this question,
Were Christ's disciples into salt transformed?
When he said: ye are the salt of the earth every one,
Or when the light of the world he them affirmed?
Or himself to be a door when he confirmed,
Or to be a Vine did his body then change?
If not then, why now? this to me séemeth strange.
Why doest thou doubt of Christ his omnipotence?
But what so he wills doth so come to pass?
God kéepe me and all men from such a frencye,
As to think any thing Christ's power to surpass,
When his will to his power joined was,
But where his will wants his power is vneffectuall:
As Christ can be no liar, God cannot be mortal:
Set down therefore some proof of his will,
That he would be made bread, and then I recant.
This C•ytif, mine ears with wind he doth fill:
His words both truth and reason doth want:
Christ's word is his will, this must thou néedes grant.
He spake the word likewise, when he said: I am the door,
Was his body transformed into timber therefore?
Nay if thou béest obstinate I will say no more.
Have him hence to prison and kéepe him full sure:
I will make him set by my friendship more store:
But herest thou Zeal, go first and procure,
Some kind of new torment which he may not endure.
I am here in redines to do your commandment,
And will return hither again incontinent.
At thy return, bring hither Sensual Suggestion.
That if néede be, he may vs assist,
Least that both I, and Careful provision,
The zeal of Philologus, may not fully resist.
But he in his obstinacy doth styll persist,
To put him to death, would accuse vs of Tyranny:
But if we could win him, he should do vs much honesty.
I hear you, and will fulfil your words speedily.
Good Moister Philologus, I pity your case,
To sée you so foolish, your self to undo:
I durst yet promise to purchase you grace,
If you would (at length) your errors forgo:
Therefore, I pray you, be not your own foe.
Call you those Errors, which the Gospel defends,
I know not then, whence true D•rine descends.
Nay, Master Hypocrisy, you spend time in vain.
To reason with him, he will not be removed,
Had I so much to live by as he hath certain,
I would not loose that which I so well loved.
He stands in his reputation, he will not be reproved:
And that is the cause that he is co obstinate?
But I shall well enough thy courage abate.
I humbly beséeche you of Christian charity,
You séeke not of purpose my blood for to spill:
For if I have displeased your authority,
In reasonable causes redress it I will,
But in this respect I fear I should kill
My soul for ever: if against my conscience
I should to the Popes laws acknowledge Obedience.
Ceace from those words, if your safety you love:
As though no man had a soul more then you:
Such nips (perchance) my Lords patience will move:
Then would you please him, if that you wist how:
But, if you will be ruled, (by my honesty) I vow,
I will do the best herein that I can:
Because you séeme to be a good Gentleman.
Were it not better for you to live at ease?
And spend that merely, which erst you have got,
Then by your own •whole•e, your self to disease?
And bring you to trouble, which other men séeke not.
In faith, Philologus, your zeal is too hot,
Which will not be quenched, but with your hart blood,
If I were so zealous, I would think my self wood.
Tush, it will not be, he thinks we do but jest,
Wherefore, that some trial of my mind, he may have,
That Careful Provision, should go, I think best,
Into the town, and there, assistance crave,
His House for to enter, and his Goods for me save:
Least, when his wife know, that they be confiscate,
Into other men's keeping, the same she doth dissipate.
You speak very wisely, in my simple Judgment,
Therefore, you were best to send him away.
Go too, Careful Provision, depart incontinent,
And fulfil the words, which I to you say,
Of pardon herein, I do your Lordship pray,
You doubt not I trust, of my willing mind,
Which herein most ready, you always shall find.
For who is more ready, by fraud to put loy•e,
Other men's goods then I am eche where?
But least some man at mée should chance to fine,
And kill mée at once I greatly doo fear,
I had rather persuade him his folly to forbear.
Prove then if thou can doo him any good,
He shall not say that we séeke his blood.
Ah moister Philologus, you sée your own case,
That both life and goods are in my Lords will,
Therefore you were best to sue for some grace,
And be content his words to fulfi•…:
If you neglect this, hence straight way I will,
And all your goods I will sure confiscate,
Then will you repent, it when it is to late.
My case indéede I sée most miserable,
As was Suzanne betwixt two evils placed,
Either to consent to sin most abominable:
Or else in the worlds sight to be utterly disgraced:
But as she her chastity at that tune embraced,
So will I now spiritual who•doom resist,
And kéepe me a true Virgin to my loving spouse Christ.
Wilt thou then neglect the provision of thy household?
Thou art therefore worse•e then an Infidel is.
That you abuse Gods word, to say I dare be bold:
And the saying of Paule you interpret a•…isse
I never saw the like heretic that this is:
Away Careful Provision, about your business,
Sith there is no remedy, I am héere in readiness.
I beséeche your Lordship even from the hart root,
That you would vouchsafe for my contentation,
To approve unto mée by Gods holy book,
Some one of the questions of our disputation:
For I will here you with hearts delectation:
Because I would gladly▪ to your doctrine consent,
If that I could so my conscience content.
But my Conscience cries out and bids me take hée••
To love my lord God aboue all earthly gain,
Whereby all this while, I stand in great drea•,
That if I should Gods statutes disdain,
In wretched state then, I should remain:
Thus cries my Conscience, to mée continually,
which if you can stay, I will yéelde to you gladly.
I can say nomore, then I have done already,
Thou heardest that I called the heretic and fool:
If thou wilt not consent to mée and that spéedily:
With a new moister, thou shalt go to school,
Thou hast no more wit, I sée then this stool,
Far unfit to dispute, or reason with my Lord,
He can subdue thée, with fire &amp; sword, quite with one word
Come, •ollow apàce, sensual Suggestion,
Or else I will leave you to come all alone:
You go in hast, you make expedition,
Nay, if you run so fast I will none:
This little journey, will make mée to groan:
I use not to trouble my self in this wise,
And now to begin, I doo not advise:
Have not I plied mée, which am come again so soon,
And yet have finished such sundry business:
I have caused many pretty toys to be done:
So that now I have eche thing in readiness.
What moister Zeal, you are praise worthy doubtless,
Art thoou prepared this gentleman to receive?
He will rest a Faggot, or else he me deceive.
In simple manner I will him entertain,
Yet must he take it all in good part:
And though his diet be small, he may not disdain,
Nor yet contemn the kindness of my heart,
For though I lack instruments, to put him to smart,
Yet shall he abide in a hellish black dungeon:
As for blocks, stocks &amp; irons, I warrant him want none.
Well, farewell Philologus, you hear of your lodging,
I would yet do you good, if that I wist howe.
Let him go Hypocrisy, stand not all day dodging,
You have don to much for him, I make God avow.
Staye, for Suggestion doth come yonder now,
Come on lasy Lubber, you make but small haste,
Had you stayed awhile lōger, your cōming had ben waste.
You know of my self, I am not very quick,
Because that my body I do so much tender,
For Sensual Suggestion, will quickly be sick
If that his own ease he should not remember:
Thus one cause of my tarriance to you I do render,
Another I had, as I came by the way:
Which did me the longer from your company staye.
What was that Suggestion, I pray thée to vs utter,
For I am with child, till that I do it hear.
A certain gentle woman, did murmur, and mutter,
And for grief of mind, her hair she did tear:
She will at last kill her self, I greatly do fear.
What is the cause why this gréefe she did take?
Because her Husband her company did forsake:
Her children also about her did stand,
Sobbing, and sighing, and made lamentation:
Knocking their breasts, and wringing their hand:
Saying, they are brought to utter desolation,
By the means of their fathers wilful protestation,
Whose goods they say, are already confiscate,
Because he doth the Popes laws violate,
And indeed I saw Avarice standing at the door,
And a company of Ruffians assisting him there.
Alas alas, this pinches my heart full sore,
Mine evils he doth declare, mine own wo, I do hear,
Wherefore from tears, I cannot forbear.
Ha ha, doth this touch you, Master Philologus,
You need not have had it, being ruled by vs.
Why? what is he, thus, Master Hypocrisy,
That takes such sorrow at the words which I spake.
One that is taken, and convinced of Heresy,
And I fear me much, will burn at a stake,
Yet to reclaim him, much pains would I take,
And have don already, howbeit in vain,
I would crave thine assistance, were it not to thy payne,
I will do the best herein that I can,
Yet go thou with me, to help at a need,
With all my heart, God save you, good gentleman,
To sée your great sorrow, my heart doth well-nigh bleed:
But what is the cause of your trouble and dréede?
Disdain not to me your secrets to tell:
A wise man sometime, of a fool may take counsel.
Mine estate (alas) is now most lamentable,
For I am but dead, which ever side I take,
Neither to determine herein am I able,
With good advice mine election to make:
The worse to refuse, and the best for to take,
My Spirit covets theone, but alas since your presence,
My flesh leads my spirit therfroe by violence.
For at this time, I being in great extremity,
Either my Lord God in hart to reject,
Or else to be oppressed by the Legates authority:
And in this world to be counted an abject:
My Lands, wife and Children also to neglect:
This later part to take, my Spirit is in readiness,
But my Flesh doth subdue, my Spirit doubtless.
Your estate perhaps, seems io you dangerous,
The rather because you have not been used:
To incur before time, such troubles perilous:
But to your power such evils have refused,
Howbeit of two evils, the least must be chose:
Now which is the least evil, wee will shortly examine,
That which part to take, your self may determine.
On ye right hand you say, you sée gods just judgment,
His wrath and displeasure, on you for to fall,
And in steed of the joys of Heaven, ever permanent,
You see for your stipend, the torments infernal:
That is it indéede, which I fear most of all:
For Christ said, fear not them, which the body can ānoy,
But fear him, which the body and soul can destroy:
Well, let that ley aside, awhile as it is,
And on the other side make the like inquisition,
If on the left side you fall, then shall you not miss,
But to bring your body, to utter perdition:
For at mans hand, you know there is no remission:
Beside your Children fatherless, your wife desolate,
Your goods and possessions, to other men consiscate.
Saint Paul to the Romans, hath this worthy sentence
I account the afflictions of this world transitory,
Be they never so many, in full equiuolence:
Cannot countervail those heavenly glory:
Which we shall have through Christ his propitiatory:
I also account the rebukes of our Saviour,
Greater gains to mée, then this house full of treasure.
You have spoken reasonably, but yet as they say,
One Bird in the hand, is worth two in the bush,
So you now enjoying, these worldly joys may,
Esteem the other, as light as a rush:
Thus may you scope this perilous push:
Yea, but my salvation to me is most certain,
Neither doubt I, that I shall suffer this in vain.
Is your death meritorious, then in Gods sight?
That you are so sure, to attain to salvation,
I doo not think so, but my faith is full pitch:
In the mercies of God, by Christs mediation:
By whom I am sure of my preservation.
Then to the faithful, no hurt can accrue,
But what so he works, good end shall ensue.
Our Saviour Christ, did say to the tempter,
When he did persuade him, from the Pinnacle to fall,
And said, he might safely, that danger adventure:
Because that Gods Angels, from hurt him save shall:
See that thy Lord God, thou tempt not at all:
So I, though persuaded, of my sins free remission,
May not commit sin, upon this presumption.
What have you not yet done, your foolish tatteling?
With that froward heretic, I will then away,
If you will tarry to hear all his prattelyng:
He would surely keep you most part of the day:
It is now high dinner time my stomach doth say:
And I will not lose one meal of my diet,
Though thereon did hang an hundred men's quiet.
By your Lordships patience, one word with him more,
And then if he will not, I give him to Tyranny.
I never saw my Lord so patient before,
To suffe one to speak for himself so quietly,
But you were not best to trust to his courtesy:
It is evil waking of a Dog that doth sleep,
While you have his friendship, you were best it to kéepe.
I promise thee Philologus, by my vowed chastity,
If thou wilt be ruled by thy friends that be héere,
Thou shalt abound in wealth and prosperity:
And in the Country chief rule thou shalt bear,
And a hundred pounds more thou shalt have in the yéere:
If thou will this courtesy refuse,
Thou shalt die incontinent, the one of these choose.
Well sith it is no time, for vs to debate,
In former manner what is in my mind:
I will at once to thée straight demonstrate,
Those worldly joys, which here thou shalt find:
And for because thou art partly blind,
In this respect look through this mirror,
And thou shalt behold an unspeakable pleasure.
Oh péerelesse pleasures, oh joys unspeakable,
Oh worldly wealth, oh palaces gorgeous,
Oh fair Children, oh wife most amiable:
Oh pleasant pastime, oh pomp so glorious,
Oh delicate diet, oh life lascivious:
Oh dolorous death which would mée betray,
And my felicity from mée take away,
I am fully resolved without further demeanour,
In these delights to take my whole solace,
And what pain so ever hereby I incur:
Whether heaven or hell, whether Gods wrath or grace,
This glass of delight I will ever embrace:
But one thing most chiesly doth trouble mée héere,
My Neighbours inconstant will count mée I fear.
He that will séeke eche man to content.
Shall prove him self at last most unwise,
Your self to save harmless think it sufficient:
And weigh not the peoples clamorous outeries,
Yet there mouths to stop I can soon devise:
Say that the reading of the works of S. Selfloue,
And doctor Ambition did your errors remove.
And hark in mine ear delay no more time,
The sooner the better in end you will say,
We have now caught him as Bird is in line.
Come on sirs have yée done, I would fine away.
Go even when you w•ll, we doo you not stay,
Philologus hath drunk such a draught of Hypocrisy,
That he minds not to die yet, he will master this malady.
Come on master Philologus, are you grown to a stay
I am glad to hear that you become tractable.
If it please your Lordship, I say even what you say
And con•esse your religion, to be most allowable,
Neither will I gainsay your customs laudable:
My •ormer follies I utterly •enownce,
That my self was an Heretic I doo héere pronounce.
Nay Master Philologus, go with mée to my Palace
And I shall set down the form of recantation,
Which you shall read on Sunday next, in open place:
This done, you shall satisfy our expectation,
And shall be set frée, from all molestation:
Into the bosom of the Church, we will you take,
And some high officer, therein will you make
I must first request your Lordships favour,
That I may go home, my wife for to sée,
And I will attend on you, within this hour.
Nay I may not suffer, you alone to go frée,
Unless one of these, your surety will bée:
I sensual Suggestion, for him will undertake,
Very well take him to you, your prisoner I him make.
Go you moister Philologus and bear mée company,
Or else I am sure no meat I should eat,
And go before Zeal, to sée each thing ready:
That when we once come, we stay not for meat:
With small suit héereto, you shall mée entreat.
Farewell Philologus, and make small delay,
Perhaps of our dinners, for you I will stay,
Had not you been a wise man, your self to have lost,
And brought your whole family to wretched estate,
Where now of your blessedness, your self you may bossed:
And of all the country, account your self fortunate,
Such was the wit of my foolish pate,
But what doo we stay, so long in this place,
I shall not be well, whilst I am with my Lords grace.
PHilologus, Philologus, Philologus, I say,
In time take héede, go not to far, look well thy steps unto,
Let not Suggestion of thy flesh, thy Conscience thée betray,
Who doth conduct thée in the path, that leads to all woe:
Weigh well this warning given from God, before thou further go:
And sell not everlasting joys, for pleasures temporal,
From which thou soon shalt go, or they from thée bereaved shall.
Alas, what voice is this I héere, so dolefully to sound,
Into mine ears, and warned mée, in time yet to beware,
Why have not I the pleasant path, of worldly pleasures found,
To walk therein for my delight, no man shall me debar.
Look in this Glass Philologus, for nought else doo thou care,
What dost thou see within the same? is not the Coast all clear?
Nought else but pleasure, pomp, and wealth, héerein to mée appear.
Give mée thy hand, I will be guide, and lead thée in the way,
What dost thou shrink Philologus? where I dare go before?
Yea, shrink so still Philologus, no time turn back I say,
In sensual Suggestions steppes, see that thou tread no more:
And though the frailty of the flesh, hath made the fall full sore:
And to deny with outward lips, thy Lord and God most dear
The same to stablish with consent, of Conscience, stand in fear:
Thou art yet frée Philologus, all torments thou moist scope,
Only the pleasures of the world, thou shalt awhile forbear,
Renownce thy crime, and sue for grace, and do not captivate
Thy Conscience unto mortal sin, the yoke of Christ doo bear,
Shut up these words within thy breast, which sound so in thine ear:
The outward man hath caused thee, this enterprise to take,
Beware least wickedness of spirit, the same doo perfect make.
My hart doth tremble for distress, my conscience pricks mée sore
And bid me cease that course in time, which I would gladly run
The wrath of God it doth mée tell, doth stand my face before:
Wherefore, I hold it best to cease that race I have begun.
These are but fancies certainly, for this way thou shalt shun
All worldly woes: look in thy Glass and tell me what it show,
Thou wilt not credit other men, before thy self I trow.
Oh gladsome Glass, oh mirror bright, oh crystal clear as sun
The joys cannot be uttered, which herein I behold,
Wherefore I will not thee forsake: what evil so ever come.
If néedes thou wilt thy self undo, say not, but thou art told:
Hap, what hap will I will not loose these pleasures manifold
Wherefore conduct me once again, here take mée by the hand.
That sensual Suggestion doth lead him understand.
ALas alas, thou woeful wight, what fury doth thée move?
So willingly to cast thy self into consuming fire,
What Circes hath bewitched thée, thy worldly wealth to love
More then the blessed state of Soul, this one thing I desire:
Weigh well the cause with sincere hart, thy Cōscience thee require
And sell not everlasting joys, for pleasures temporal,
Resist Suggestion of the flesh, who séekes thée for to spoil:
From which thou soon shalt go or they from thee b• rea•ed shall:
And take from thee which God elect, true everlasting soil.
Sée where confusion doth attend, to catch thée in his snare,
Whose hands, if that thou goosed on still, thou shalt no way eschew
What wight art thou? which for my health, dost take such ear∣nest care?
Thy crazed Conscience, which forsée, the plagues &amp; torments due,
Which from just Judge, whom thou deny shall by and by ensue:
Thou hast good trial of the faith, which I to thée doo bear,
Commit thy safety to my charge, there is no danger néere.
Such is the blindness of the flesh, that it may not descry,
Or sée the perils which the Soul, is ready to incur:
And much the less, our own estates, we can our selves espy:
Because Suggestion in our hearts such fancies often stir:
Whereby to worldly vanities, we cleave as fast as bur:
Estéeming them with heavenly joys, in goodness comparable,
Yet be they mostly very pricks, to sin abominable.
For proof we néede no further go, then to this present man,
Who by the blessing of the Lord, of riches having store,
When with his hart to fancy them, this worldling once began:
And had this Glass of vanities espied, his eyes before,
He God forsook, whereas he ought have loved him the more:
And chooses rather with his goods, to be thrown down to hell,
Then by refusing of the same, with God in heaven to dwell.
Nay hark Philologus, how thy conscience can teach,
And would detain thée with glosinges untrue:
But hear thou Conscience, thou majesty long enough preach,
Ear words, from whence reason or truth none ensue,
Shall make Philologus to bid mée adieu.
What shall there no rich man dwell in Gods kingdom?
where is then Abraham, Iob, and Dauid become?
I speak not largely of all them, which have this worldly wealth,
For why, I know that riches are the creatures of the Lord:
Which of themselves, are good each one, as Solomon vs tells,
And are appointed to do good withal, by Gods own word,
But when they let vs from the Lord, then ought they be abhord:
Which caused Christ himself to say, that with much lesser payne,
Should Camel pass through néedles ey, thē rich men Heauē obtain,
Hereby Rich men, Christ did not mean, each one which wealth enjoy
But those which fastened have their love upon this worldly dust,
Wherefore another cries, and saith, oh death, how great annoy
Doest thou procure unto that man, which in his goods doth trust?
That thou doest this Philologus, thou néedes acknowledge must,
Whereby each one may easly sée, thou take more delight,
In Mundane joys, then thou estéemest to be with Angels bright.
This touches ye quick, I féele ye wound, which if thou can not cure,
As mimed in limbs I must retire, I can no further go.
This is the gréef which Conscience takes against thée I am sure,
Because thou uses those delights, which Conscience may not do,
And therefore he persuades thée, to leave the same also:
As did the Fore, which caught in snare, and escaped with loss of tail,
To cut off theirs, as burdenous, did all the rest counsel.
In déede I cannot use, those fond and foolish vanities
In which the outward part of man doth take so great delight,
No, neither would I, though to me were given that liberty,
But rather would consume them all to nought, if that I might,
For if I should delight therein, it were as good a sight,
As if a man of perfect age, should ride upon a stick:
Or play with counters in the street, which pastime children like.
But all my joys in Heaven remains, whereas I long to be,
And so would thou, if that on Christ thy faith full fastened were,
For that affection, was in Paull the apostle, we may sée,
The first to the Philippians doth witness herein bear,
His words be these: oh would to God disolued that I were,
And were with Christ, another place his mind in those words tell,
We are but strangers all from God, while in this world we dwell:
Now mark, how far from his request, dissenting is thy mind,
He wished for death, but more then hell, thou doest the same detest.
The cause why Paul did loath his life, may easily be assigned:
Because the Jaws in every place, did séeke him to molest,
But those which in this world, obtain security and rest:
Do take delight to live therein, yea nature doth endue,
Each living creature with a fear, least death should them accrue.
Yea the same Paul at Antioche, dissembled to be dead,
While they were gone who sought his life, with stones for to destroy
Alias for to save his life, to Horeb likewise fled,
So did king Dauid flee, when Saul did séeke him to annoy:
Yea Christ himself, whom in our deeds, to follow we may joy,
Did secretly convey himself, from Jaws so full of hate.
When they thought from the top of hill, him to precipitate.
Wherefore, it is no sin at all, a man for to defend,
And keep himself from death, so long as nature gives him leave.
The same whom you recited have, conceived a further end:
Then to them selves to live alone, as each man may perceive,
For when that Paul had run his course, he did at last receive:
with hearts consent, the small death, which was him put unto,
So when Christ had performed his work, he did death undergo:
And would to god, thou would do yt, which these men were contēt,
For they despised worldly pomp, their flesh they did subdue,
And brought it under, that to spirit, it mostly did consent:
Whereby they séeking God to please, did bid the world adieu:
Wife, Children, and possessions forsaking, for they knew
That everlasting treasures were, appointed them at last,
The which they thy•sting, did from them, al worldly pleasures cast.
But thou O wretch doest life prolong, not that thou would gods name
As duty binds vs all to doo, most chiefly glorify,
But rather by thy living still, wilt Gods renown defame,
And more and more dishonour him, this is thy drift I spy.
I mean to live in worldly joys, I can it not deny.
What are those joys, which thou dost mean, but pleasures strange frō god?
By using of the which, thou shalt provoke his heavy rod:
Tush know thou what Philologus, be wise thy selse unto,
And listen not to these fond words which Conscience to thée tell,
For thy defence I will allege one worthy lesson more:
Unto the which I am right sure, he cannot answer well:
When Dauid by vain trust in men of war, from God sore fell,
And was appointed of thrée plagues, the easiest for to choose,
He said Gods mercy easier is to get, then mans as I suppose.
Again he says among the Psalms, it better is to trust
In God, then that our confidence we setle should in man,
Wherefore, to this which I now say of force consent thou must:
That when two evils before vs placed, no way avoid we can:
Into the hand of God to fall by choice is lawful than,
Because that God is merciful, when man no mercy show,
Thus have I pleaded in this cause, sufficiently I trow.
How can you say, you trust in God, when as you him forsake,
And of the wicked Mammon here, doo make your fained friend,
No, no, these words which you recite against you mostly make:
For thus he thinks in his distress, God cannot mée defend,
And therefore by Suggestion frail, to mans help he hath leande.
Mark who say truth of him or mée▪ and doo him best beléeue.
I like thy words, but that to lose these joys it would mée gréeue.
And where Suggestion, tells thée, that God in mercies flow,
Yet is he just sins to correct, and true in that he speak,
Wherefore he says, who so my name, before men shall not know,
I shall not know him, when as Judge I shall sit in my seat▪
This if you call to mind, it will your proud presumption break,
Again he says, who so his life or goods, will séeke to save,
Shall loose them all: but who for Christ will lose them, gain shall have
What did not Peter Christ deny, yet mercy did obtain.
Where if he had not, of the Jaws, he should have tasted death:
Even so shall I in tract of time, with bitter tears complain.
Yea time enough, though thou defferst, until thy latest breath.
So says Suggestion unto thée, but Conscience it denies,
And in the end what so I say, for truth thou shalt espy,
And that most false, which Conscience shall in secret hart deny.
Ah wretched man, what shall I doo? which doo so plainly sée,
My flesh and Spirit to contend, and that in no small thing,
But as concerning the event, of extreme misery▪
Which either study to avoid, or else upon mée bring,
And which of them I should best trust, it is a doubtful thing.
My Conscience speaks truth mée think, butyet because I fear,
By his advice to suffer death, I doo his words forbear.
And therefore pacify thy self, and doo not so torment,
Thy self, in vain I must séeke some means for to eschew,
These griping gréefes, which unto mée, I sée now imminent.
And therefore will no longer stay, but bid thée now adieu.
Oh stay I say Philologus, or else thou wilt it rue.
It is lost labour that thou doest, I will be at a point,
And to enjoy these worldly joys, I jeopardy will a iont.
Oh cursed creature O frail flesh, O meat for worms, O dust,
O blither puffed full of wind, O vainer then these all,
What cause hast thou in thine own wit? to have so great a trust:
Which of thy self can not espy, the evils which on thée fall,
The blindness of the outward man, Philologus show shall
At his return, unless I can at last, make him relent,
For why the Lord him to correct, in furious wrath is bent.
Such chopping cheer, as we have made, the like hath not bin séene
And who so pleasant with my Lord, as is Philologus,
His recantation, he hath made, and is dispatched clean,
Of all the griefs which unto him, did séeme so dangerous:
Which thing you know, was brought to pass especially by vs,
So that Hypocrisy hath done that, which Satan did intende,
That men •or worldly wealth, should cease the Gospel to defend:
What shall become of foolish Goose, I mean Philologus:
In actual manner to your eyes, shall represented bée:
For though as now, he seems to be, in state most glorious,
He shall not long continue so, eche one of you shall sée.
But néedes I must be packing hence, my fellows stay for mée,
Shake hands before we do depart, you shall sée mée no more:
And though Hypocrisy go away, of hypocrits héere is good store.
COme on my Children dear to mée, and let vs talk a while,
Of worldly goods, which I have got and of my pleasant state,
Which fortune hath installed mée, who on me chéerely smile.
So that into the top of whéele, she doth mée elevate:
I have escaped all mishaps, of which my Conscience did prate,
And where before I ruled was, as is the common •orte,
Now as a Judge within this Land, I bear a Rulers port.
Indéede, good father, we have cause, to praise your gravity,
Who did both save your self from woe, and vs from begging state,
Where if you had persevered still, as we did fear greatly:
Your goods from vs, your Children should, to Legate been confiscate
Our glorious pomps, then, should we have been glad for to abate.
But now, not only that you had for vs, but also have
Such offices, whereby more gains, you year by year shall save:
I was at point, once, very near, to have been quite forlorn,
Had not Suggestion of the flesh, from folly me reclaimed,
And set this Glass of worldly joys, my sight and eyes beforne:
The sight whereof did cause all things, of mée to be disdained,
I thought I had felicity, when it I had obtained:
And to say truth, I doo not care, what to my soul betide,
So long as this prosperity, and wealth by mée abide.
But let vs homeward go again, some pastime there to make,
My whole delight in sport and games, of pleasure I repose:
Nay stay thy journey héere awhile, I doo thée prisoner take,
I shall abate thy pleasures soon, yea, to soon. thou wilt suppose,
What is thy name? whence comes thou? wherefore to me disclose?
My name is called Confusion and horror of the mind,
And to correct impenitents, of God I am assigned.
And for because thou dost despise, Gods mercy and his grace,
And would no admonition take, by them that did thée warn,
Neither when Conscience counselled thée, thou would his words embrace
who would have had thée unto god, obedience true to learn:
Nor could betwéene Suggestions craft, &amp; Conscience truth discern
Behold therefore, thou shalt of mée an other lesson hear,
Which will thou, nil thou, with torment of Conscience, thou shalt bear
And where thou hast extinguished, the holy Spirit of God,
And made him weary with thy sins, which daily thou hast done,
He will no longer in thy soul, and spirit make abode:
But with the Graces, which he gave to thée, now is he gone,
So that to Godwarde, by Christ's death, rejoicing thou hast none,
The peace of Conscience faded is, in stead whereof, I brlng
The Spirit of Satan, blasphemy, confusion and cursing.
The Glasie likewise of vanities, which is thine only joy
I will transform into the Glass of deadly desperation,
By looking in the which, thou shalt conceive a great annoy:
Thus have I caught thée in thy pride, and brought thée to damnatiō:
So that thou art a pattern true, of Gods just indignation:
Whereby eche man may warned be, the like sins to eschew,
Least the same torments they incur, which in thée they shall view.
O painful pain of déepe disdain, oh griping gréefe of hell,
Oh horror huge, oh soul suppressed, and slain with desperation,
Oh heap of sins, the sum whereof, no man can number well:
Oh death, oh furious flames of hell, my just recompensation,
Oh wretched wight, oh creature cursed, oh child of condemnation.
Oh angry God, and merciless, most fearful to behold,
Oh Christ thou art no Lamb to mée, but Lion fearce and bold.
Alas dear Father, what doth move and cause you to lament?
My sins (alas) which in this Glass, appear innumerable,
For which I shall no pardon get, for God is fully bent:
In fury for to punish me, with pains intolerable:
Neither to call to him for grace, or pardon am I able,
My sin is unto death, I féele Christ's death doth me no good,
Neither for my behoof, did Christ shed his most precious blood.
Alas dear Father (alas I say) what sudden change is this?
I am condemned into hell, these torments to sustain.
Oh say not so my Father dear, Gods mercy mighty is,
The sentence of the righteous Judge, cannot be called again,
Who hath already judged mée to everlasting payne:
Oh that my body buried were, that it at rest might bée,
Though soul were put in Iudas place, or Coins extremity.
Oh Brother hast you to the Town and tel Theologus,
What sudden plague and punishment, my Father hath befell,
I run in hast, and will request him for to come with vs.
Oh Father, rest your self in God, and all thing shall be well,
Ah dreadful name, which when I héere, to sigh it mée compel:
God is against mée I perceive, he is none of my God,
Unless in this, that he will beat, and plague mée with his rod.
And though his mercy doth surpass, the sins of all the world,
Yet shall it not once profit me, or pardon mine offence,
I am refused utterly, I quite from God am whorld:
My name within the Book of life, had never residence,
Christ prayed not, Christ suffered not, my sins to recompense:
But only for the Lords elect, of which sort I am none,
I •éele his justice towards mée, his mercy all is gone:
And to be short, within short space, my final end shall bée,
Then shall my soul incur the pains, of utter desolation,
And I shall be a president, most horrible to sée:
To Gods elect, that they may sée, the price of abiuration.
To héere my Fathers doleful plaints, it brings preturbation,
Unto my soul, but yonder comes, that good Theologus:
Oh welcome sir, and welcome you good master Eusebius.
GOd save you good Philologus, how doo you by Gods grace,
You welcome are, but I (alas) vile wretch, am héere evil found
What is the chiefest cause (tell vs) of this your dolorus case?
Oh would my soul were sunk in hell▪ so body were in ground
That angry God, now hath his will, who sought me to confound.
Oh say not so Philologus, for God is gracious,
And to forgive the penitent his mercy is plenteous.
Do you not know that all the earth with mercy doth abound,
And though the sins of all the world upon one man were laid,
If he one only spark of grace or mercy once had found,
His wickedness could not him harm: wherefore be not dismayed,
Christ's death alone for all your sins, a perfect ransom paid:
God doth not covet sinners death, but rather that he may
By living still, bewail his sins, and so them put away.
Consider Peeter who thrée times his Moister did deny:
Yea, with an oath, and that although Christ did him warning give,
With whom before time he had lived so long familiarly,
Of whom so many benefits of love he did receive,
Yet when once Peeter his own fault, did at the last perceive,
And did bewail his former crime, with •alt and bitter tears,
Christ by and by did pardon him, the Gospel witness bears.
The thief likewise, and murderer, which never had don good,
But had in mischief spent his days, yea, during all his life,
With lattest breath when he his sins and wickedness with stood,
And with iniquityes of flesh, his spirit was at strife,
Thorough that one motion of his heart, and power of true belief,
He was received into grace, and all his sins defaced,
Christ saying, soon in Paradise with me thou shalt be placed.
The hand of God is not abridged, but still he is of might,
To pardon them that call to him unfeignedly for grace,
Again, it is Gods property, to pardon sinners quite:
Pray therefore with thy heart to God, here in this open place,
And from the very root of heart bewail to him thy case:
And I assure thée, God will, on thée his mercy show,
Through Iesus Christ, who is with him our advocate you know.
I have no faith, the words you speak my hart doth not beléeue,
I must confess that I for sin, am justly thrown to hell.
His monstrous incredulity, my very heart doth gréeue,
Ah dere Philologus, I have known by face and visage well,
A sort of men, which have been vexed, with Devils and spirits fell,
In far worse state then you are yet, brought into desperation.
Yet in the end have been reclaimde, by godly exhortation.
Such are the mercies of the Lord, he will throw down to hell:
And yet call back again from thence, as holy Dauid wrightes.
What? should then let your trust in God? I pray you to vs tel,
Sith to forgive, and doo vs go•d, it chiefly him delights.
What would not you, that of your sins, he should you clean acquit?
How can he once deny to you, one thing you doo request?
Which hath already given to you, his best beloved Christ.
Lift up your hart in hope therefore, awhile be of good cheer,
And make access, unto his seat of grace, by earnest prayer,
And God will surely you reléeue with grace, stand not in fear:
I doo beléeue, that out from God, proceed these comforts fair,
So doo the Devils, yet of their health, they always doe despair.
They are not written unto mée, for I would fine attain,
The mercy, and the love of God, but he doth me disdain.
How would you have that man to live, which hath no mouth to eat
No more can I live in my soul, which have no faith at all:
And where you say, that Peter did, of Christ soon pardon get,
who in the sell•e same sin, with mée, from God did greatly fall,
why? I cannot, obtain the same, to you I open shall:
God had respect to him always, and did mée firmly leave,
But I alas, am reprobate, God doth my soul reprove.
Moreover, I will say with tongue, what so you will require,
My heart I •eel with blasphemy, and cursing is replete.
Then pray with vs, as Christ vs taught, we do• you all desire.
To pray with lips, unto your God, you shall mée scene entreat,
My spirit, to Satan is in thrall, I can it not thence get:
God shall renew your spirit again, pray only as you can,
And to assist you in the same, we pray each Christian man.
O God which duellist in the Heavens, and art our father dear.
Thy holy name throughout the world be ener sainctified,
The kingdom of thy word and spirit, upon vs rule might bear,
Thy will in earth, as by thy faincts in heaven be ratified,
Our daily bread, we thee beseech, O Lord for vs provide,
Our sins remit (Lord unto vs) as we each man forgive,
Let not tentation vs assail, in all evil vs relieve. Amen.
The Lord be praised, who hath at length thy spirit mollified,
These are not tokens unto vs of your reprobation,
You morn with tears, and sue for grace, wherefore be certified,
That God in mercy gives care, unto your supplication,
Wherefore despair not thou at all of thy souls preservation,
And say not with a desperate heart, that God against thée is,
He will no doubt, these pains once past, receive you into bliss.
No, no, my friends, you only hear and sée the outward part,
Which though you think they have don well, it boots not at all,
My lips have spoke the words in déede, but yet I féele my heart,
With cursing is replenished, with rancor, spite, and gall,
Neither do I your Lord and God, in hart my father call,
But rather seek his holy name for to blaspheme and curse,
My state therefore doth not amend, but ware still worse and worse,
I am secluded clean from grace, my heart is hardened quite,
Wherefore you do your labour loose, and spend your breath in vain.
Oh say not so Philologus, but let your heart be pitch,
Upon the mercies of the Lord, and I you ascertain,
Remission of your former sins, you shall at last obtain:
God hath it said (who cannot lye) at whatsoever time
A sinner shall from heart repent, I will remitt his crime.
You cannot say so much to me, as herein I do know,
That by the mercies of the Lord, all sins are don away,
And unto them that have true faith, abundantly it flow,
But whence do this true faith procéede to vs, I do you pray,
It is the only gift of God, from him it comes always,
I would therefore he would vouchsafe, one spark of faith to plant,
within my breast, then of his grace, I know I should not want.
But it as easily may be done, as you may with one spoon,
At once take up the water clean, which in the seas abide:
And at one draught, then drink it up, this shall ye doe as soon,
As to my breast of true beléefe, one sparkle shall betide:
Tush, you which are in prosperous state, &amp; my pains have not tried
Doe think it but an easy thing, a sinner to repent
Him of his sins, and by true faith, damnation to prevent.
The healthful néede not Phisicks art, and ye which are all hail,
Can give good counsel to the sick, their sickness to eschew:
But here alas, confusion, and hell, doth mée assail,
And that all grace, from me is reft, I find it to be true.
My hart is steel, so that no faith, can from the same ensue.
I can conceive no hope at all, of pardon or of grace,
But out alas, Confusion is always before my face.
And certainly, even at his time, I doo most plainly sée,
The devils to be about me round, which make great preparation,
And kéepe a stir, here in this place, which only is for me.
Neither doe I conceive, these things, by vain imagination,
But even as truly, as mine eyes, behold your shape and fashion.
Wherefore, desired Death dispatch, my body bring to rest,
Though that my soul, in furious flames of fire, be suppressed.
Your mind corrupted doth present, to you, this fall•e illusion,
But turn awhile, unto the spirit of truth, in your distress,
And it shall cast out from your eyes, all horror and confusion:
And of this your affliction, it will you soon redress.
We have good hope Philologus, of your salvation doubtless.
What your hope is concerning mée, I utterly contempne,
My Conscience, which for thousands stand, as guilty mée condemn.
When did this horror first you take, what think you is the cause?
Even shortly, after I did make, mine open abiuration,
For that I did prefer my goods, before Gods holy laws.
Therefore in wrath he did me send, this horrible veration,
And hath me wounded in the soul, with gréeuous tribulation:
That I may be a president, in whom all men may view,
Those torments, which to them, that will forsake the Lord, are due.
Yet let me boldly ask one thing of you, without offence,
What was your former faith in Christ, which you before did hold?
For it is said of holy Paule, in these same words in sense:
It cannot be that utterly, in faith he should bee cold,
Who so he be, which perfectly, true faith in hart once hold:
Wherefore rehearse in short discourse, the sum of your beléefe,
In these points chiefly, which for health of soul, are thought most chéefe.
I did believe in hart, that Christ was 'that true sacrifice.
Which did appease the fathers wrath, and that by him alone
We were made just and sanctified: I did believe likewise,
That without him, heaven to attain, sufficient means were none.
But to reknowledge this again, alas, all grace was gone:
I never loved him again, with right and sincere heart,
Neither was thankful for the same, as was each goodmans part.
But rather took the faith of Christ, for liberty to sin,
And did abuse his graces great, to further carnal lust,
what wickedness I did commit, I cared not a pin:
For that, that Christ discharged had any ransom, I did trust:
wherefore the Lord doth now correct, the same with torments just.
My sons, my sons, I speak to you, my counsel ponder well,
And practise that in déedes, which I in words shall to you tell.
I speak not this, that I would ought, the Gospel derogate,
which is most true in every part, I must it néedes confess,
But this I say, that of vain faith alone, you should not prate:
But also by your holy life, you should your faith express,
Beléeue me syres, for by good proof, these things I doo express:
Peruse the wrighting of S. Iames, and first of Peters too,
which all Gods people, holiness of life exhort unto.
By sundry reasons, as for first, because we strangers are,
Again, sin from the flesh procéede, but we are of the spirit,
The third, because the flesh always, against the spirit doo war,
The fourth, yt we may stop the mouths of such as would backbight,
The fifth, that other by our lives, to God reduce we might:
Again, they sing a pleasant song, which▪ sing in déede and word,
But where evil life ensue good words, there is a foul discord:
But I alas, most wretched wight, whereas I did presume,
That I had got a perfect faith, did holy life disdain:
And though I did to other preach, good life I did consume:
My life in wickedness and sin, in sport and pleasures vain,
No, neither did I once contend, from them flesh to refrain,
Behold therefore, the judgements just, of God doth mée annoy,
Not for amendment of my life, but mée for to destroy.
We doo not altogether like of this your exhortation,
whereas you warn vs not to trust, so much unto our faith,
But that good works we should prepare, unto our preservation,
There are two kinds of righteousness, as Paul to Romans faith:
The one depends of good works, the other hangs of faith:
The former which the world allows, good counts it least of twain,
As by good proof, it shall to you, in words be proved plain.
For Socrates and Cato both, did purchase great renown,
And Aristides surnamed Just, this righteousness fulfilled,
Wherefore he was as justest man, erpelde his native town,
Yet are their souls with Infidels, in hell for ever spilled,
Because they sought not righteousness, that way that God thē willed
The other righteousness coms from faith, which God regards alone,
And makes vs seem immaculate, before his heavenly throne.
Wherefore, there is no cause you should, send vs to outward act,
As to the encore or refuge, of our preservation.
The meaning of Philologus, is not héere so exact,
As doo his words make it to seem, by your allegation,
He doth not mean betwéene good works, and faith to make relation
As though works were equivalent, salvation to attain.
As is true faith, but what he meant, I will set down more plain,
He did exhort the young man here, by him for to beware,
Least as he did, so they abuse, Gods gospel pure,
And without good advice, usurp of faith the gift so rare:
Whereby they think, what so they doo, thē selves from torments frée,
And by this proud presumption, Gods anger should procure:
And where they boast and vaunt, thē selves, good faithful men to bée,
Yet in their lives, they doo deny their faith in each degrée:
Wherefore he saith, as Peter said, see that you doo make known,
Your own election by your works: again, S. Iames doth say,
Show mée thy faith, and by my works, my faith shall thée be shown.
And whereupon his own offence, he doth to them bewray,
Whereas he did vainegloryously, upon a dead faith stay:
Which for the inward righteousness, he always did suspect,
And héereupon all godliness of life, he did neglect.
That was the meaning of my words, how ever I them spake,
The truth (alas) vile wretch, my soul and Conscience too true féele
What? do you not Philologus, with vs no comfort take,
When all these things, so godlyly, to you I doo reveal,
Especially, sith that your self, in them are séene so well:
Some hope unto vs of your health, and safety yet is left,
we do not think that all Gods grace, from you is wholly reft.
Alas, what comfort can betide, unto a damned wretch?
what so I héere, sée, féele, taste, speak, is turned all to woe.
Ah dear Philologus, think not, yt ought can Gods grace outreach,
Consider Dauid which did sin in lust, and murder too:
Yet was he pardoned of his sins, and so shalt thou also.
Phil. King Dauid always, was elect, but I am reprobate,
And therefore I can find small ease, by weighing his estate.
He also prayed unto God, which I shall never doe,
His prayer was that God would not, his spirit take away:
But it is gone from mée long since, and shall be given no more.
But what became of Caine, of Cam, of Saul, I do you pray?
Of Iudas, and Barehu, these must my Conscience slay.
Of Iulyan Apostate, with other of that crew,
The same torments must I abide, which these men did ensue:
Alas my friend, take in good part, the chastment of ye Lord
Who doth correct you in this world, that in the life to come,
He might you save, for of the like, the Scripture tears re•…
That is not Gods intent with mée though it be so with some,
who after bodies punishment, have into favour come:
But I (alas) in spirit and soul, these greenous torments bear,
God hath condemded my Conscience, to perpetual grief and fear.
I would most gladly choose to live, a thousand, thousand year.
In all the torments and the grief that damned souls sustain,
So that at length I might have ease, it would me greatly cheer.
But I alas, shall in this life, in torments still remain,
while Gods just anger, upon me, shall be revealed plain:
And I example made to all, of Gods just indionation,
Oh that my body were at rest, and soul in condemnation.
I pray you answer me herein, where you by déepe despair,
Say, you are worse here in this life, then if you were in hell,
And for because to have death come, you always make your prayer,
As though your foul and body both in torments great did dwell:
If that a man should give to you a sword, I pray you tell,
would you destroy your self there with? as doe the desperate,
which hang or kill, or into floods, themselves precipitate.
Give me a sword, then shall you know, what is in mine intent.
Not so my friend, I only ask, what héerein were your will?
I cannot, neither will I tell, where I would be bent.
These words doe nothing edify, but rather fancies fill,
which we would gladly if we could, endeavour for to kill.
wherefore, I once again request, together let vs pray:
And so we will leave you to God, and send you hen•e away.
I cannot pray, my spirit is dead, no faith in me remain
Doe as you can, no more then might, we can ask at your hand.
My prayers turned is to sin, for God doth it disdain,
It is the false•hood of the spirit, which doo your health withstand,
That teach you this, wherefore in time, reject his filthy band.
Come knéele by me, and let vs pray, the Lord of Heaven unto:
With as good will as did the Devil, out of the deaffe man go.
O God which duellist in the heavens. &amp;c.
Tush sirs, you doo your labours loose, see where Beelzebub doth come,
And doth inuit me to a feast, you therefore speak in vain,
•ea if you ask ought more of me▪ in answer I will be dumb,
I will not wast my •ong for nought, as soon shall one small grain
Of Musterdseede, fill all the world, as I true faith attain.
We will no longer stay you now, but let you hence depart.
Yet will we pray continually, that God would you convert.
Gisbertus and Paphinitius, conduct him to his ply•▪
But see he have good company, let him not be alone:
We shall so doo, God vs assist, with his most holy grace.
Come Father doo you not think good, that we from hence begone?
Let go my hands at liberty, assistance I crave none:
Oh that I had a sword a while, I should soon eased bee.
Alas dear father, what do you? Euseb. His will we may now sée
O glorious God, how wonderful, those judgements are of thine
Thou dost behold the secret hart, nought doth thy eyes beguile,
Oh what occasion is vs given, to fear thy might divine,
And from our ha•…es to hate and loathe, iniquities so vile,
Least for the sane, thou in thy wrath, dost grace from vs exile.
The outward man doth thée not please, nor yet, the mind alone,
But thou require both of vs, or else regardest none.
Héere may the worldlings have a glass, their states for to behold,
And learn in time, for to escape, the judgements of the Lord,
Whilst they by flattering of them selves, of faith both dead and cold
Doo sell their souls to wickedness, of all good men abhorde:
But godliness doth not depend, in knowing of the word:
But in fulfilling of the same, as in this man we see,
Who though he did to others preach, his life did not agrée.
Again Philologus witnesses, which is the truth of Christ,
For that consenting to the Pope, he did the Lord abture,
Whereby he teacht the wavering faith, on which side to persist:
And those which have the truth of God, that still they may endure,
The Tyrants, which delight in blood, he likewise doth assure,
In whose affairs, they spend their time: but let vs home ward go.
I am content, that after meat, we may resort him to.
OH joyful news, which I report, and bring into your ears,
Philologus, that would have hanged himself with cord,
—Is now converted unto God, with many bitter tears,
By godly council he was won, all praise be to the Lord,
His errors all, he did renounce, his blasphemies he abhorde:
And being converted, left his life, exhorting foe and friend,
That do profess the faith of Christ, to be constant to the end,
Full thyrtie wéekes, in woeful wise, afflicted he had been,
All which long time, he took no food, but forced against his will,
Even with a spoon to pour some broth, his téeth betwéene,
And though they sought by force, this wise to féede him still,
He always strove with all his might, the same on ground to spill,
So that no sustenance he received, no sléepe could he attain,
And now the Lord, in mercy great hath eased him of his payne.

