THey that fear the flinging of Wasps make fans of Peacokes tails, whose spots are like eyes. And Lepidus, which could not sleep for the chatting of birds, set up a beast, whose head was like a Dragon: and we which stand in awe of report, are compelled to set before our owl Pallas shield, thinking by her virtue to cover the others deformity. It was a sign of famine to Egypt, when Nylus flowed less then twelve Cubits, or more then eighteen, and it may threaten despair unto vs, if wee be less curious then you look for, or more cumbersome. But as Theseus being promised to bee brought to an Ea∣gles nest, and travailing all the day, found but a wren in a hedge, yet said, this is a bird: so we hope, if the shower of our swelling mountain seem to bring forth some Elephant, perform but a mouse, you will gently say, this is a beast? Basil softly touched, yields a sweet sent, but chafed in the hand, a rank savour. Wee fear even so that our labours slylye glanced on, will breed some content, but examined to the proof, small com∣mendation. The haste in performing shall be our ex∣cuse, There went two nights to the begetting of Her∣cules. Feathers appear not on the Phoenix under seven months, and the Mulberry is twelve in buddinge, but our travails are like the Hares, who at one time brine∣geth forth, nourishes, and engenders again, or like the brood of Trasbylus, whose eggs in the same mo∣meant
that they are laid, become birds. But howsoever we finish our work, we crave pardō, if we offend in mat∣la, and patience if we transgress in manners. Wee have mixed mirth with counsel, and discipline with delight, thinking it not amiss in the same garden to sow pot∣herbs, that we set flowers. But wee hope, as Harts that cast their horns, Snakes their skins, Eagles their bills, become more fresh for any other labour: so our charge being shaken off, we shall be fit for greater matters. But least like the Mindyans, we make our gates greater then our town, and that our play runs out at the preface, we here conclude: wishing that although there bee in your precise judgements an universal mislike, yet wee may enjoy by your wonted courtesies a general silēce.
WEe are ashamed that our bird, which fluttered by twilight seeming a Swan, should be proved a Bat set against the sun. But as Iupiter placed Silenus Ass among the stars, and Alcebiades covered his pictures being Owls and Apes, with a curtain embroidered with Lyons and Eagles, so are we enforced upon a rough discourse to draw on a smooth excuse, resbling Lapida∣ries, who think to hide the crack in a stone by setting it deep in gold. The Gods supped once with poor Basis, the Persian kings sometimes shaved sticks, our hope is your heighnesse will at this time lend an ear to •n idle pastime. Appion raising Homer from hell, demā∣ded only who was his father, and we calling Alexander from his grave, seek only who was his love. Whatsoe∣for we present, we wish it may be thought the dancing of Agrippa his shadows, who in the moment they were seen, were of any shape one would conceive: or Lynces, who having a quick fight to discern, have a short me∣more to forget. With vs it is like to fare, as with these torches, which giving light to others, consume them∣selves, and wee showing delight to others, shame our selves.
PArmenio, I cannot tel whether I should more commend in Alex∣anders victories, courage, or cur∣tesie, in the one being a resolute∣on without fear, in the other a liberality aboue custōe: Thebes is raised, the people not racked, towers thrown down, bodies not thrust aside, a cōquest without conflict, and a cruel war in a mild peace.
Clytus, it becomes the son of Phillip to be none other then Alexander is: therefore seeing in the father a full perfection, who could have doubted in the son an excellence. For as the moon can borrow no∣thing else of the sun but light, so of a fire, in whom nothing but virtue was, what could the child receive but singular? It is for Turks to stain each other, not for Dyamordes, in the one to bee made a difference in goodness, in the other no comparison.
You mistake me Parmenio, if whilst I com∣mend Alexander, you imagine I call Phillyp into quest∣on, unless happily you conjecture (which none of judge∣meant will conceive) that because I like the fruit, there∣fore I heave at the tree, or coveting to kiss the child, I therefore go about to poison the teat.
I but Clytus I perceive you are borne in the East, and never laugh but at the sun rising, which are∣guide though a duty where you ought, yet no great devotion where you might.
We will make no controversy of that which there ought to be no question, only this shall be the o∣pinion
of vs both, that none was worthy to be the fa∣there of Alexander but Phillip, nor any meet to bee the son of Phillip but Alexander.
Soft Clytus, behold the spoils &amp; prisoners, a pleasant sight to vs, because profit is joined with ho∣nor, not much paineful to them, because their captive∣tie is eased by mercy.
Fortune, thou did never yet deceive virtue, because virtue never yet did trust fortune. Sword and fire will never get spoil, where wisdom and fortitude bears sway. O Thebes, thy walls were raised by the sweetness of the harp, but rased by the shrillness of the trumpet. Alexander had never come so near the walls, had Epaminondas walked about the walls, and yet might the Thebanes have been merry in their streets, if he had been to watch their towers. But destiny is seldom foreseen, never prevented. We are here now captives, whose necks are yoked by force, but whose hearts can not yield by death. Come Campaspe and the rest, let vs not be ashamed to cast our eyes on him, on whom wee feared not to cast our darts.
Madame, you need not doubt, it is Alexan∣der, that is, the conqueror.
Alexander hath overcome, not conquered.
To bring al under his subjection is to cōquer.
He cannot subdue that which is divine.
Thebes was not.
Virtue is.
Alexander as hee tendered virtue, so hee will you, he drinks not blood, but thirsts after honour, he is greedy of victory, but never satisfied with mercy. In fight terrible, as beecommeth a captain, in conquest mild, as beseems a king. In al things then which no∣thing can be greater he is Alexander.
Then if it be such a thing to be Alexander, I hope it shall be no miserable thing to be a virgin. For if
he save our honours, it is more thē; to restore our goods. And rather doe I wish hee preserve our fame then our lives, which if he do, wee will confess there can bee no greater thing then to be Alexander.
Clytus, are these prisoners? of whēce these spoils?
Like your majesty they are prisoners, &amp; of Thebes.
Of what calling or reputation?
I know not, but they seem to be Ladies of honour.
I will know: Madam, of whence you are I know, but who, I cannot tell.
Alexander, I am the sister of Theagines, who fought a battle with thy father, before the City of Chye∣ron, where he died, I say which none cāgainsay, valialy.
Lady, there seem in your words sparks of your brothers deeds, but woorser fortune in your life then his death: but fear not, for you shall live without violence, enemies, or necessity: but what are you fair Lady, an other sister to Theagines?
No sister to Theagines, but an humble hand∣maid to Alexander, borne of a mean parentage, but to extreme fortune.
Well Ladies, for so your virtues show you, whatsoever your births be, you shall be honourably en∣treated. Athens shall be your Thebes, &amp; you shall not be as abiectes of war, but as subjects to Alexander▪ Perm∣nio, conduct these honourable Ladies into the City, charge the soldiers not so much as in words to offer them any offence, and let all wants be supplied so far forth as shall be necessary for such persons and my prison∣ners.
Hephestion, it rests now that we have as great care to govern in peace, as conquer in war: that whilst arms cease, Arts may flourish, and joining letters with lane∣ces we endeavour to be as good Philosophers as soldiers, knowing it no less praise to be wise, thē commendable to be valiant▪
Your Majesty therein shows that you have as great desire to rule as to subdue: &amp; needs must that common wealth be fortunate, whose Captain is a Philosopher, and whose Philosopher is a Captain.
I serve in steed of a moister, a mouse, whose house is a tub, whose dinner is a crust, and whose board is a bed.
Then art thou in a state of life, which Philo∣sophers commend. A crumb for thy supper, an hand for thy cup, and thy clothes for thy sheets. For Nature paucis content.
Manes, it is pity so proper a man should be cast away upon a Philosopher: but that Diogines that dog should have Manes that dogbolte, it grieves na∣ture and spiteth art: the one having found the so dis∣solute, absolute I would say, in body, the other so single singular in mind.
Are you merry, it is a sign by the trip of your tongue, and the toys of your head, that you have done that to day, which I have not done these three days.
Whats that?
Dined.
I think Diogines keeps but cold cheer.
I would it were so, but hee keeps neither hot nor cold.
What then, luke warm? That made Manes run from his moister last day.
Manes had reason: for his name foretold as much.
My name? how so sir boy?
You know that it is called Mons, à mouendo, because it stands still.
Good.
And thou art named Manes, à manendo, bee∣cause thou runst away.
Passing reasons, I did not run away, but retire.
To a prison, because thou would have lea∣sure to contemplate.
I will prove that my body was immortal: because it was in prison.
As how?
Did your masters never teach you that the soul is immortal?
Yes.
And the body is the prison of the soul.
True.
Why then, thus to make my body immor∣tall, I put it to prison.
Oh bad.
Excellent ill.
You may see how dull a fasting wit is: there∣fore Psyllus let vs go to supper with Granichus: Plato is the best fellow of al Philosophers. Give me him that reads in the morning in the school, and at noon in the kit∣chin.
And me.
Ah firs, my moister is a king in his parlour for the body, &amp; a God in his study for the soul. Among all his men he commends one that is an excellent Musician, then stand I by and clap another on the should∣der and say, this is a passing good Cooke.
It is well done Granichus, for give me plea∣sure that goes in at the mouth, not the ear, I had rather fill my guts, then my brains.
I serve Apelles, who feeds me, as Dioge∣nes
doth Manes, for at dinner the one preaches absti∣nonce, the other commends counterfeiting: when I would eat meat, he paints a spit, &amp; whē I thirst, O faith he, is not this a fair pot, and points to a table, which contains the banquet of the Gods, where are many di∣shes to feed the eye, but not to fill the gut.
What dost thou then?
This doth hee then bring in many examples that some have lived by favours, &amp; proves that much easier it is to fat by colours, and tells of birds that have been fatted by painted grapes in winter: &amp; howe many have so fed their eyes with their mistress picture, that they never desired to take food, being glutted with the delight in their favours. Then doth he show me coū∣terfeites, such as have furfeited with their filthy &amp; loath∣some vomits, and with the riotous Bacchanals of the God Bacchus, and his disorderly crew, which are painted al to the life in his shop. To cōclude, I fare hardly, though I go richly, which makes me when I should begin to sha∣dow a Ladies face, to draw a Lambs head, and sometime to set to the body of a maid a shoulder of mutton: for semper animus mouse est in patinis.
Thou art a God to me: for could I see but a Cooks shop painted, I would make mine eyes fat as butter. For I have nought but sentences to fill my maw, as, plures occidit crapula quàm gladius: musateiunantibus a∣mica: repletion kills delicately: &amp; an old saw of absti∣nonce, Socrates: The belly is the heads grave. Thus with sayings not with meat he makes a gallymafrey.
But how doest thou then live?
With fine jests, sweet air, &amp; the dogs alms.
Well, for this time I will stanch thy gut, and a∣mong pots and platters thou shalt see what it is to serve Plato.
For joy of Granichus lets sing.
My voice is as clear in the evening as in the more∣ning.
An other commodity of emptiness.
I had never such ado to warn scholars to come before a king: First, I came to Crisippus a tall lean old mad man, willing him presently to appear before Alexander, he stood staring on my face, neither moving his eyes nor his body, I urging him to give some answer, hee took up a book, sate down and said nothing: Melissa his maid told me it was his manner, and that of∣tētimes she was fain to thrust meat in to his mouth: for that he wold rather starve thē cease study. Well thought I, seeing bookish men are so blockish, &amp; so great clerks such simple courtiers, I will neither be partaker of their cōmons nor their commēdations. Frō thence I came to Plato and to Aristotle, and to diverse other none refusing to come, saving an old obscure fellow, who sitting in a tub turned towards the son, read Greek to a young boy, him when I willed to appear before Alexander, he answered, if Alexander would fine see me, let him come to me, if learn of me, let him come to me, whatsoe∣for it be, let him come to me: why, said I, he is a king, hee answered, why I am a Philosopher, why, but he is Alex∣ander, I but I am Diogenes. I was half angry to see one so crooked in his shape, to be so crabbed in his sayings. So going my way, I said thou shalt repent it, if thou cōmest not to Alexander: nay, smiling answered hee, Alexander may repent it, if he come not to Diogenes: virtue must be sought, not offered: and so turning himself to his cell, he grunted I know not what, like a pig under a tub. But I must be gone, the Philosophers are coming.
It is a difficult controversy, Aristotle, and ra∣there to be wondered at, then believed, how natural cau∣ses should work supernal effects.
I doe not so much stand upon the apparition is seen in the Moon, neither the Demonium of Socrates, as that I cannot by natural reason give any reason of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, which makes me in the depth of my studies to cry out, O •ns entium misere∣re mei.
Cleanthes, and you attribute so much to na∣ture by searching for things which are not to be found, that whilst you study a cause of your own, you omit the occasion it self. There is no man so savage in whom rests not this divine particle, that there is an omni∣potent, eternal and divine mover, which may be called God.
I am of this mind, that that first moouer, which you term God, is the instrument of all the mo∣uinges, which we attribute to nature. The earth which is mass, swims on the sea, seasons divided in them∣selves, fruits growing in themselves, the majesty of the sky, the whole firmament of the world, and whatsoever else appears miraculous, what man almost of mean capacity but can prove it natural.
These causes shall be debated at our Philoso∣phers feast, in which controversy I will take part with Aristotle, that there is Naturanaturans, and yet not God.
And I with Plato, that there is Deus optimus maximus, and not nature.
Here comes Alexander.
I see Hephestion, that these Philosophers are here attending for vs.
They were not Philosophers, if they knew not their duties.
But I much marvel Diogenes should bee so dogged.
I do not think but his excuse will be better then Melippus message.
I will go see him Hephestion, because I long to see him that would command Alexander to come, to whom all the world is like to come. Aristotle &amp; the rest since my coming from Thebes to Athens, from a place of conquest to a pallāce of quiet, I have resolved with my self in my court to have as many Philosophers as I had in my camp soldiers. My court shall be a school, wherein I will have used as great doctrine in peace, as I did in war discipline.
We are al here ready to be commanded, &amp; glad we are that we are commanded, for that nothing better becomes kings then literature, which makes them come as near to the Gods in wisdom, as they doe in dignity.
It is so Aristotle, but yet there is among you, yea &amp; of your bringing up, that sought to destroy Alex∣ander, Calistenes, Aristotle, whose treasons against his prince shall not bee borne out with the reasons of his Philosophy.
If ever mischief entered into the heart of Calistenes, let Calistenes suffer for it, but that Aristotle ever imagined any such thing of Calistenes, Aristotle doth de∣no.
Well Aristotle, kindred may blind thee, and affection me, but in kings causes I will not stand to scholars arguments. This meeting shall be for a cōman∣demeaned, that you all frequent my court, instruct the young with rules, confirm the old with reasons: let your lives be answerable to your learnings, least my proceedings be contrary to my promises.
You said you would ask every one of them a question, which yester night none of vs could answer.
I will. Plato, of all beasts, which is the subtle∣lest?
That which man hitherto never knew.
Aristotle, how should a man bee thought a God?
In doing a thing unpossible for a man.
Crisyppus, which was first, the day or the night?
The day by a day.
In deed strange questions must have strange answers, Cleanthes, what say you, is life or death the stronger?
Life, that suffered so many troubles.
Crates, how long should a man live?
Till he think it better to die then live.
Anaxarchus, whether doth the sea or the earth bring forth most creatures?
The earth, for the sea is but a part of the earth.
Hephestion, me thinks they have answered all well, and in such questions I mean often to try them.
It is better to have in your court a wise manne, then in your ground a golden mine. Therefore would I lean war, to study wisdom, were I Alexander.
So would I, were I Hephestion. But come let vs go and give release, as I promised to our Theba• thralls.
Thou art fortunate Aristotle, that Alexander is thy scholar.
And all you happy that he is your sovereign.
I could like the man well, if he could be contē∣ted to be but a man.
He seeks to draw near to the Gods in know∣ledge, not to be a God.
Let vs questiō a little with Diogines, why he went not with vs to Alexander, Diogenes, thou did forget thy duty, that thou went not with vs to the king.
And you your profession, that you went to the king.
Thou take as great pride to be peevish, as o∣theirs do glory to be virtuous.
And thou as great honour being a Philosopher to be thought courtlike, as others shame that be cour∣tiers, to be accounted Philosophers.
These austere manners set aside, it is well known that thou did counterfeit money.
And thou thy manners, in that thou did not counterfeit money.
Thou hast reason to contemn the court, being both in body and mind too crooked for a courtier.
As good bee crooked, and endeavour to make my self straight from the court, as to bee straight, and learn to be crooked at the court.
Thou think it a grace to be opposite against Alexander.
And thou to be jump with Alexander.
Let vs go: for in cotemning him, we shall bet∣la please him, then in wondering at him.
Plato, what doest thou think of Diogenes?
To be Socrates furious, let vs go.
Behold Manes where thy moister is, seeking either for bones for his dinner, or pins for his sleeves. I will go salute him.
Doe so, butmum not a word that you saw Manes.
Then staye thou behind, and I will go with Psyllus.
All hail Diogenes to your proper person.
All hate to thy peevish conditions.
O Dog.
What dost thou seek for here?
For a man and a beast.
That is easy without thy light to be found, be not all these men?
Called men.
What beast is it thou look for?
The beast my man Manes.
He is a beast in deed that will serve thee.
So is he that begat thee.
What would thou do, if thou should find Manes?
Give him leave to doe as hee hath done bee∣fore.
Whats that?
To run away.
Why, hast thou no need of Manes?
It were a shame for Diogenes to have need of Manes, and for Manes to have no need of Diogenes.
But put the case he were gone, would thou entertain any of vs two?
Upon condition.
What?
That you should tell me wherefore any of you both were good.
Why, I am a scholar, and well seen in Phi∣losophy.
And I a prentice, and well seen in painting.
Well then Granichus, be thou a painter to a∣mend thine ill face, and thou Psyllus a Philosopher to correct thine evil manners. But who is that Manes?
I care not who I were so I were not Ma∣nes.
You are taken tardy.
Let vs slip aside Grauickiis, to see the salutation∣on between Manes and his moister.
Manes, thou know the last day I threw a∣way my dish to drink in my hand, because it was super∣fluous, now I am determined to put away my man, and serve my self: Queen non egeo •ui volt.
Moister, you know a while ago I ran away, so doe I mean to doe again, quia'scio •ibi esse argen∣tum.
I know I have no money, neither will I have ever a man: for I was resolved long sithēce to put away both my slaves, money and Maues.
So was I determined to shake off both my dogs, hunger and Diogenes.
O sweet consent between a crowd and a Jaws harp.
Come, let vs reconcile them
It shall not need: for this is their use, now do they dine one upon another.
How now Manes, art thou gone from thy master.
No, I did but now bind my self to him.
Why, you were at mortalliars.
In faith no, we brake a bitter jest one upon another.
Why, thou art as dogged as he.
My father knew them both little whelps.
Well, I will hie me after my moister.
Why, is it supper time with Diogenes?
I, with him at al times when he hath meat.
Why then every man to his home, and let vs steal out again anon.
Where shall we meet.
Why, at Ala vendibili suspense badera non est e∣pus.
O Psyllus habeo te loco parents, thou blessestme.
Stand aside sir boy, till you bee called. Hephe∣stion, how doe ye like the sweet face of Campaspe?
I cannot but commend the stout courage of Timeclea.
Without doubt Campaspe had some great man to her father.
You know Timoclea had Theagines to her bro∣there.
Timoclea still in thy mouth, art thou not in love?
Not I.
Not with Timoclea you mean, wherein you resemble the Lapwing, who cries most where her nest is not. And so you lead me from espying your love with Campaspe, you cry Timoclea.
Could I as well subdue kingdoms, as I can my thoughts, or were I as far from ambition, as I am from love, all the world would account me as vali∣aunt in arms as I know my self moderate in affection.
Is love a vice?
It is no virtue.
Well, now shalt thou see what small diffe∣rinse I make between Alexander and Hephestion. And sith thou hast been always partaker of my triumphs, thou shalt be partaker of my torments. I love Hephesti∣on, I love I love Campaspe, a thing far unfit for a Mace∣donian, for a king, for Alexander. Why hangest thou down thy head Hephestion? blushing to hear that which
I am not ashamed to tell.
Might my words crave pardon and my counsel credit, I would both discharge the duty of a subject, for so I am, and the office of a friend, for so I will.
Speak Hephestion, for whatsoever is spoken, Hephestion speaks to Alexander.
I cannot tell Alexander, whether the report be more shameful to be heard, or the cause sorrowful to be believed? What, is the son of Phillip, king of Mace∣don become the subject of Campaspe, the captive of The∣bes? Is that mind, whose greatness the world could not contain, drawn within the compass of an idle alluring eye? Will you handle the spindle with Hercules, when you should shake the spear with Achilles? Is the warlike sound of drum and trump turned to the soft noise of lire and lute, the neighing of barbed steeds, whose loudness filled the ayre with terror, and whose breathes dim∣med the sun with smoke, converted to delicate tunes and amorous glances? O Alexander, that soft and yeel∣ding mind should not bee in him, whose hard and un∣conquered heart hath made so many yield. But you love, ah grief, but whom? Campaspe, ah shame, a maid forsooth unknown, unnoble; and who can tell whether immodest? whose eyes are framed by art to enamour, and whose heart was made by nature to enchant. I, but she is beautiful, yea, but not therefore chaste: I, but she is comely in al parts of the body: yea, but she may be croo∣ked in some part of the mind; I, but she is wise, yea, but she is a woman: Beauty is like the blackberry, which see∣meth red, when it is not ripe resembling precious stones that are polished with honey, which the smother they look, the sooner they break. It is thought wonderful a∣mong the sea men that Mugil of all fishes the swiftest is found in the belly of the Bret of all the slowest; And shall it not seem monstrous to wise men, that the heart of the greatest conqueror of the world, should be found
in the hands of the weakest creature of nature? of a woman? of a captive? Hermyns have fair skins, but foul livers; Sepulcher's fresh colours but rotten bones, women fair faces, but false hearts. Remember Alex∣ander thou haste a camp to govern, not a chamber, fall not from the armour of Mars to the arms of Venus, frō the fiery assaults of war, to the maidenly skirmishes of love from displaying the Eagle in thine ensign, to set down the sparrow. I sigh Alexander that where fortune could not conquer, folly should overcome. But behold al the perfection that may be in Campaspe, a hair curling by nature, not art: sweet alluring eyes, a fair face made in despite of Venus; and a stately port in disdain of in∣••, a wit apt to conceive, and quick to answer a skin as soft as silk, and as smooth as jet, a long white hand, a fine little foot, to conclude, all parts answerable to the best part, what of this? Though she have heavenly gifts, virtue and beauty, is she not of earthly metal flesh and blood? You Alexander that would be a God, show your self in this worse then a man, so soon to bee both overseen and overtaken in a woman, whose false tears know their true times, whose smooth words wound deeper then sharpeswordes. There is no surfeit so dan∣gerous, as that of honey, nor any poison so deadly, as that of love, in the one physic cannot prevail, nor in the other counsel.
My case were light Hephestion, and notwor∣thy to be called love, if reason were a remedy, or sentē∣ses could salve, that sense cannot conceive, Little do you know, and therefore slightly doe you regard the dead embers in a private person, or live coals in a great prince, whose passions and thoughts do as far exceed others in extremity, as their callinges doe in Majesty. An E∣clipse in the Sun is more then the falling of a star, none can conceive the torments of a king, unless hee be a king; whose desires are not inferior to their digni∣ties.
And then judge Hephestion if the agonies of love be dangerous in a subject, whether they be not more then deadly unto Alexander, whose deep and not to be con¦ceiued sighs, cleave the heart in shivers, whose won∣ded thoughts can neither be expressed nor endured. Cease then Hephestion with arguments to seek to refile that, which with their deity the Gods cannot resist, and let this suffice to answer thee, that it is a king that lo∣ueth and Alexander, whose affections are not to be mea∣sured by reason, being immortal, nor I fear me to bee borne being intolerable.
I must needs yield, when neither reason nor counsel can be heard.
Yield Hephestion, for Alexander doth love, &amp; therefore must obtain.
Suppose she loves not you, affection cōmeth not by appointment or birth, and then as good hated as enforced.
I am a king, and will command.
You may, to yield to lust by force, but to consent to love by fear you cannot.
Why, what is that, which Alexander may not conquer as he list?
Why, that which you say the Gods cannot re∣sect, Love.
I am a conqueror, she a captive, I as for∣tunate, as she fair: my greatness may answer her wants, and the gifts of my mind, the modesty of hers: Is it not likely then that she should love? Is it not reason∣ble?
You say that in love there is no reason, and therefore there can be no likelihood.
No more Hephestion: in this case I will use mine own counsel, and in all other thine advice, thou may be a good soldier, but never good lover. Call my page. Sirha, go presently to Apelles, and will him to come to
me without either delay or excuse.
I go.
In the mean season to recreate my spirits, be∣ing so near, we will go see Diogenes. And see where his tub is, Diogenes.
Who calls?
Alexander: how happened it that you would not come out of your tub to my palace?
Because it was as far from my tub to your pal∣lace, as from your palace to my tub.
Why then doest thou ow no reuerēce to kings?
No.
Why so?
Because they be no Gods.
They be Gods of the earth.
Yea, Gods of earth.
Plato is not of thy mind.
I am glad of it.
Why?
Because I would have none of Diogenes mind, but Diogenes
If Alexander have any thing that may pleasure Diogenes, let me know, and take it.
Then take not from me, that you cannot give me, the light of the world.
What dost thou want?
Nothing that you have.
I have the world at command.
And I in contempt.
Thou shalt live no longer then I will.
But I shall die whether you will or no.
How should one learn to be content?
Vnlearne to covet.
Hephestion, were I not Alexander, I would wish to be Diogenes.
He is dogged, but discrete, I cannot tell how
sharpe with a kind of sweetness, full of wit, yet too to wayward.
Diogenes, when I come this way again, I will both see thee, and confer with thee.
Doe.
But here comes Apelles, how now Apelles, is Venus face yet finished?
Not yet: Beauty is not so soon shadowed, whose perfection comes not within the compass either of cunning or of colour.
Well let it rest imperfect, &amp; come you with me, where I will show you that finished by nature, that you have been trifling about by art.
Lady, I doubt whether there bee any colour so fresh, that may shadow a countenance so fair.
Sir, I had thought you had been commanded to paint with your hand, not to gloss with your tongue, but as I have heard, it is the hardest thing in painting to set down a hard favour, which makes you to despair of my face, and then shall you have as great thanks to spare your labour, as to discredit your art.
Mistress, you neither differ from your self nor your sex: for knowing your own perfectiō, you seem to dispraise that which men most commend, drawing thē by that mean into an admiration, where feeding themselves they fall into an ecstasy, your modesty being the cause of the one, and of the other, your affections.
I am too young to understand your speech, though old enough to withstād your devise: you have bin so long used to colours, you can do nothing but colour.
Indeed the colours I see, I fear, will altar the co∣lore I have: but come Madam, will you draw near: for
Alexander will be here anon. Psyllus, stay you here at the window, if any enquire for me, answer, Nonlubet esse domi.
It is always my masters fashion, when any fair gentlewoman is to be drawn within, to make me to stay without. But if he should paint Iupiter like a Bull, like a Swan like an Eagle, then must Psyllus with one hand grind colours, and with the other hold the candle. But let him alone, the better he shadows her face, the more will he burn his own heart. And now if a manne could mere with Manes, who I dare say, looks as lean, as if Diogenes dropped out of his nose.
And here comes Manes, who hath as much meat in his maw, as thou hast honesty in thy head.
Then I hope thou art very hungry.
They that know thee, know that.
But doest thou not remember that wee have certain liquor to confer withal.
I, but I have business, I must go cry a thing.
Why, what hast thou lost?
That which I never had, my dinner?
Foul lubber wilt thou cry for thy dinner?
I mean, I must cry, not as one wold say cry, but cry, that is, make a noise.
Why fool, that is all one, for if thou cry, thou must needs make a noise.
Boy, thou art deceived Cry hath diverse sign∣fications, and may bee alluded to many things, knave but one, and can be applied but to thee.
Profound Manes.
Wee Cynickes are mad fellows, did thou
not find I did quip thee?
No verily, why, whats a quip?
We great girders call it a short saying of a sharp wit, with a bitter sense in a sweet word.
How can thou thus divine, divide, define, di∣spute, and all on the sudden?
Wit will have his swing, I am bewitched, inspirde, inflamed, infected.
Well, then will not I tempt thy gybing spirit.
Do not Psyllus, for thy dull head will bee but a grindstone for my quick wit, which if thou whet with o∣uertwhartes, peristi, actum est de te. I have drawn blood at ones brains with a bitter bob.
Let me cross my self: for I die, if I cross thee.
Let me do my business, I my self am afraid, least my wit should wax warm, and then must it needs con∣sum some hard head with fine &amp; pretty jests. I am some∣times in such a vain, that for want of some dull pate to work on, I begin to gird my self.
The Gods shield me from such a fine fellow, whose words melt wits like wax.
Well then, let vs to the matter. In faith my moister means tomorrow to fly.
It is a jest.
Is it a jest to fly? shouldest thou fly so soon, thou shouldest repent it in earnest.
Well, I will be the crier.
O is, o is, o is, All man∣ner of men, women, or children, that will come to mo∣row into the market place, between the hours of nine and ten, shall see Diogenes the Cynic fly.
I do not think he will fly.
Tush, say fly.
Fly.
Now let vs go: for I will not see him again, till midnight, I have a back way into his tub.
Which way call thou the backwaye, when e∣very way is open.
I mean to come in at his back.
Well, let vs go away, that we may return spy∣deli.
I shall never draw your eyes well, because they blind mine.
Why thē, paint me without eyes, for I am blind?
Were you ever shadowed before of any?
No. And would you could so now shadow me, that I might not be perceived of any.
It were pity, but that so absolute a face should furnish Venus temple amongst these pictures.
What are these pictures?
This is Laeda, whom Jove deceived in likeness of a swan.
A fair woman, but a foul deceit.
This is Alcmena, unto whō Iupiter came in shape of Amphitriō her husband, and begat Hercules.
A famous son, but an infamous fact.
He might do it, because he was a God.
Nay, therefore it was evil done, because he was a God.
This is Dane, into whose prison Iupiter drizzled a golden shower, and obtained his desire.
What gold can make one yield to desire?
This is Europe, whom Iupiter ravished, this Anti∣open.
Were al the Gods like this Iupiter?
There were many Gods in this like Iupiter.
I think in those days love was well ratified a∣mong
men on earth, when lust was so full auto∣rised by the Gods in heaven.
Nay, you may imagine there were womē passing a∣miable, whēther were Gods exceeding amorous.
Were women never so fair, men would be false.
Were women never so false, men wold be fond.
What counterfeit is this Apelles?
This is Venus, the Goddess of love.
What, be there also loving Goddesses?
This is she that hath power to command the very affections of the heart.
How is she hired, by prayer, by sacrifice, or bribs?
By prayer, sacrifice and bribes.
What prayer?
Vows irrevocable.
What sacrifice?
Hearts ever sighing, never dissembling.
What bribes?
Roses and kisses? but were you never in love?
No, nor love in me.
Then have you injuried many.
How so?
Because you have been loved of many.
Flattered perchance of some.
Is it not possible that a face so fair, and a wit so sharp, both without comparison, should not bee apt to love.
If you begin to tip your tong with cunning, I pray dip your pencil in colours, and fall to that you must doe, not that you would doe.
Parmenio I cannot tell howe it cōmeth to pass, that in Alexander now a days there grows an vnpaciēt kind of life, in the morning he is melācholye, at noon
solomne, at all times either more sower or severe, then he was accustomed.
In kings causes I rather love to doubt then conjecture and think it better to be ignorant then in∣quisitiue: they have long ears and stretched arms, in whose heads suspicion is a proof, and to bee accused is to be condemned.
Yet between vs there canne be no danger to find out the cause: for that there is no malice to with∣stand it. It may be an unquenchable thirst of conque∣ring makes him unquiet: it is not unlikely his long ease hath altered his humour: that hee should be in love, it is not impossible.
In love Clytus, no, no, it is as far from his thought, as treason in ours: hee, whose ever waking eye, whose never tired heart, whose body patient of labour, whose mind unsatiable of victory hath always bin no∣ted, cannot so soon be melted into the weak conceits of love: Aristotle told him there were many worlds, and that he hath not conquered one that gapes for all, gal∣leth Alexander. But here he comes.
Parmenio, and Clitus, I would have you both re∣die to go into Persia about an embassage no less proof∣table to me, then to your selves honourable.
We are ready at all commands, wishing no∣thing else, but continually to be commanded.
Well, then withdraw your selves, till I have fur∣there considered of this matter.
Now we will see how Apelles goes forward: I doubt me that nature hath overcome art, and her countenāce his cunning.
You love, and therefore think any thing.
But not so far in love with Campaspe, as with B•cephalus, if occasion serve either of conflict or of con∣quest.
Occasion cannot want, if will doe not. Behold all Persia swelling in the pride of their own power, the Scithians careless what courage or fortune canne doe: the Egyptians dreaming in the southsayinges of their Augurs, and gaping over the sinoak of their beasts in∣tralles. All these Alexander are to bee subdued, if that world be not slipped out of your head, which you have sworn to conquer with that hand.
I confess the labours fit for Alexander, and yet recreation necessary among so many assaults, bloody wounds, intolerable troubles: give me leave a little, if not to sit, yet to breath. And doubt not but Alexander can when he will throw affections as far from him, as he can cowardice. But behold Diogenes talking with one at his tub.
One penny Diogenes, I am a Cynic.
He made thee a beggar, that first gave thee any thing.
Why, if thou wilt give nothing, no body will give thee.
I want nothing, till the springs dry, &amp; the earth perish.
I gather for the Gods.
And I care not for those gods, which want mo∣ney.
Thou art a right Cynic, that will give no∣thing.
Thou art not, that will beg anything.
Alexander, king Alexander, give a poor Cy∣nick a great.
It is not for a king to give a great.
Then give me a talent.
It is not for a beggar to ask a talent. Away. Apelles?
Here.
Now Gentlewoman, doth not your beauty
put the painter to his trump?
Yes my lord, seeing so disordered a countenāce, he fears he shall, shadow a deformed counter∣feit.
Would he could colour the life with the feature. And me thinks Apelles, were you as cunning as report saith you are, you may paint flowers as well with sweet sinels, as fresh colours, observing in your mixture such things as should draw near to their savours.
Your majesty must know, it is no less harde to paint savours then virtues, colours can neither speak nor think.
Where do you first begin, when you draw any picture?
The proportion of the face in just compass, as I can.
I would begin with the eye, as a light to all the rest.
If you will paint, as you are a king, your Majesty, may begin where you please, but as you wold be a painter, you must begin with the face.
Aurelius would in one hour colour four faces.
I marvel in half an hour he did not four.
Why, is it so easy?
No, but he doth it so homely.
When will you finish Campaspe?
Never finish: for always in absolute beauty there is somewhat aboue art.
Why should not I by labour bee as cunning as Apelles?
God shield you should have cause to be so cun∣ning as Apelles.
Me thinks four colours are sufficiēt to shadow any countenance, &amp; so it was in the time of Phy•ease.
Then had men fewer fancies, &amp; womē not so many favours. For now, if the hair of her eye brows be black,
yet must the hear of her head be yellow: the attire of her head must be different from the habit of her body, else would the picture seem like the blazon of ancient Armoury, not like the sweet delight of new found ami∣ableness. For as in garden knots diversity of odours make a more sweet savour, or as in music divers strings cause a more delicate consent, so in painting, the more colours, the better counterfeit, observing black for a ground, and the rest for grace.
Lend me thy pencil Apelles, I will paint, and thou shalt judge.
Here.
The coal breaks.
You lean too hard.
Now it blacks not.
You lean too soft.
This is awry.
Your eye goes not with your hand.
Now it is worse.
Your hand goes not with your mind.
Nay, if all be too hard or soft, so many rules and regards, that ones hand ones eye, ones mind must all draw together, I had rather be setting of a battle, then blotting of a board. But how have I done here?
Like a king.
I think so: but nothing more unlike a Painter. Well Apelles, Campaspe is finished as I wish, dismiss her, &amp; bring presently her counterfeit after me.
I will.
Now Hephestion, doth not this matter cotton as I would, Campaspe looks pleasantly, liberty will increase her beauty, and my love shall advance her honour.
I will not contrary your majesty, for time must wear out that love hath wrought, and reason wean what appetite nursed.
How stately she passes bye, yet howe soberly, a
sweet consent in her countenance with a chaste disdain, desire mingled with coyness, and I cannot tell howe to term it, a cursed yielding modesty.
Let her pass.
So she shall for the fairest on the earth.
I shall be hanged for tarrying so long.
I pray God my moister bee not flown before I come.
Away Manes, my moister doth come.
Where have you bin all this while?
No where but here.
Who was here since my coming?
No body.
Ungracious wag, I perceive you have been a loitering, was Alexander no body?
He was a king, I meant no mean body.
I will cogell your body for it, and then will I say it was no body, because it was no honest body. Away in.
Unfortunate Apelles, and therefore unfortunate, bee∣cause Apelles. Haft thou by drawing her beauty brought to pass, y• thou can scarce draw thine own breath? And by so much the more hast thou increased thy care, by how much the more thou hast showed thy cūning: was it not sufficient to behold the fire, and warm thee, but with Satyrus thou must kiss the fire and burn thee? O Campaspe, Campaspe, art must yield to nature, reason to appetite, wisdom to affection, Could Pigmalion entreat
by prayer to have his Ivory turned into flesh? and can∣not Apelles obtain by plaints to have the picture of his love changed to life? Is painting so far inferior to carving? or doest thou Venus more delight to be hewed with Chisels, then shadowed with colours? what Pygmy∣dion, or what Pyrgoteles, or what Lysippus is hee, that ever made thy face so fair, or spread thy fame so far as I? unless Venus, in this thou enuiest mine art, that in co∣louring my sweet Campaspe, I have left no place by cun∣ning to make thee so amiable. But alas, she is the para∣more to a prince. Alexander the Monarch of the •arth hath both her body and affection. For what is it that kings cannot obtain by prayers, threats and promi∣ses? Will not she think it better to sit under a cloth of e∣state like a queen, thē in a poor shop like a huswife? and esteem it sweeter to be the concubine of the Lord of the world, then spouse to a painter in Athens? Yes, yes Apelles, thou moist smimme against the stream with the Crab, and feed against the wind with the dear, and peck against the steel with the Cockatrice: stars are to be looked at, not reached at. Princes to be yielded un∣to, not contended with, Campaspe to bee honoured, not obtained, to be painted, not possessed of thee: O fair face, O unhappy hand, &amp; why did thou draw it so fair a face? O beautiful countenance, the express image of Venus, but sōwhat fresher: the only pattern of that eter∣night which Iupiter dreaming of asleep, could not cōceiue again waking. Blush Venus, for I am ashamed to end thee. Now must I paint things unpossible for mine art, but agreeable with my affections: deep and hollow sighs, sad and melancholy thoughts, wounds and slaughters of conceits, a life posting to death, a death galloping from life, a wavering constancy, an unsettled resolution, and what not, Apelles? And what but Apelles? But as they that are shaken with a fever are to bee war∣med with clothes, not groans, and as he that melts in
a consumptiō is to be recurred by Colices, not conceits: so the feeding canker of my care, the never dying worm of my heart, is to be killed by counsel, not cries, by ap∣plying of remedies, not by replying of reasons. And sith in cases desperate there must be used medicines yt are ex∣treame, I will hazard that little life that is left, to restore the greater part that is lost, and this shall be my first pra∣ctise: for wit must work, where authority is not. As∣soon as Alexander hath viewed this portraiture, I will by devise give it a blemish, that by that means she may come again to my shop, and then as good it were to vt∣la my love, and die with denial, as conceal it and live in despair.
This is the place, the day, the time, that Diogenes hath appointed to fly.
I will not loose the flight of so fair a foul as Di∣ogenes is, though my moister cogel my no body, as he threatened.
What Psyllus, will the beast wag his wings to day?
We shall hear: for here comes Manes: Manes will it be?
Be, he were best be as cunning as a Bee, 'or else shortly he will not be at all.
How is he furnished to fly, hath he feathers?
Thou art an ass, Capons, Geese and Owls have feathers. He hath found Dedalus old waxen wings, and hath been piecing them this month, he is so broad in the shoulders. O you shall see him cut the air even like a Tortoise.
Methinks so wise a man should not be so mad, his body must needs be too heavy.
Why, he hath eatē nothing this seven-night but cork and feathers.
Tutch him Manes.
He is so light that he can scarce keep him from flying at midnight.
See they begin to flock, and behold my my∣ster bustels himself to fly.
Ye wicked and bewitched Athenians, whose bodies make the earth to groan, and whose breathes infect the air with stench. Come ye to see Diogenes fly? Diogenes comes to see you sink: ye call me dog, so I am, for I long to gnaw the bones in your skins. Ye term mean hater of men: no, I am a hater of your māers. Your lives dissolute, not fearing death, will prove your deaths desperate, not hoping for life. What do you else in Athens but sleep in the day, and surfeit in the night: back Gods in the morning with pride, in the e∣uening belly Gods with gluttony. You flatter kings, &amp; call them Gods, speak truth of your selves, and cōfesse you are devils. From the Bee you have takē not the ho∣ney, but the wax to make your religion, framing it to the time, not to the truth. Your filthy lust you colour under a courtly colour of love, injuries abroad under the title of policies at home, &amp; secrete malice creeps under the name of public justice. You have caused Alexander to dry up springs and plant vines, to sow roket and weed entice, to shear sheep, and shrine foxes. All conscience is sealed at Athens. Swearing comes of a hot mettle: lying of a quick wit: flattery of a flowing tong, indecent talk of a merry disposition. Al things are lawful at Athēs. Either you think there are no Gods, or I must think ye are no men. You build as though you should live for e∣for, and surfeit as though you should die tomorrow.
None teaches true Philosophy but Aristotle, because he was the kings schoolmaster. O times, O men, O corruption in manners. Remember that greene grass must turn to dry hay. When you sleep, you are not sure to wake, and when you rise not certain to lye down. Look you never so hye, your heads must lye level with your feet. Thus have I flown over your disordered lives, and if you will not amend your manners, I will study to fly further from you, that I may be nearer to hone∣sty.
Thou rauest Diogenes, for thy life is different frō thy words. Did not, I see thee come out of a brothel house? was it not a shame?
It was no shame to go out, but a shame to go in.
It were a good deed Manes, to beat thy my∣ster.
You were as good eat my moister.
Hast thou made vs all fools, and wile thou not fly?
I tell thee, unless thou be honest, I will fly.
Dog, dog, take a boon.
Thy father need fear no dogs, but dogs thy fa∣there.
We will tel Alexander, that thou reproouest him behind his back.
And I will tell him, that you flatter him before his face.
We will cause all the boys in the street to hiss at thee.
In deed I think the Athenians have their i will∣drē ready for any vice, because they be Atheniās.
Why moister, mean you not to fly?
No Manes, not without wings.
Every body will account you alyar.
No, I warrant you: for I will always say the A∣thenians are mischievous.
I care not, it was sportynogh for me to see these old huddles hit home.
Nor I.
Come, let vs go, and hereafter when I mean to raise upon any body openly, it shall be given out, I will fly.
Campaspe, it is hard to judge whether thy choice be more unwise, or thy chance unfortunate. Doest thou prefer, but stay, utter not that in words, which makes thine ears to glow with thoughts. Tus• better thy tongue wag, then thy heart break. Hath a painter crept further into thy mind then a prince? Apel∣les then Alexander? Fond wench, the baseness of thy mind bewrays the meanness of thy birth. But alas, affection is a fire, which kindles as well in the bramble as in the oak, and catches hold where it first lights, not where it may best burn, Larks that mount aloft in the ayre, build their nests below in the earth, and women that cast their eyes upon kings, may place their hearts upon vassals. A needle will become thy fingers better then a lute, and a distasfe is fitter for thy hand then a sceptre. Aunts live safely, till they have gotten wings, and In∣nipper is not blown up, till it hath gotten an high top. The mean estate is without care as long as it continue∣eth without pride. But here comes Apelles, in whom I would there were the like affection.
Gentlewoman, the misfortune I had with your picture, will put you to some pains, to sit again to be painted.
It is small pains for me to sit still, but infinite for you to draw still.
No Madame, to paint Venus was a pleasure, but to shadow the sweet face of Campaspe it is a heaven.
If your tongue were made of the same flesh that your heart is, your words would be as your thoughts are: but such a common thing it is amongst you to com∣mend, that oftentimes for fashion sake you call thē bew∣tifull, whom you know black.
What might men doe to be believed?
Whet their tongues on their hearts.
So they doe, and speak as they think.
I would they did.
I would they did not.
Why, would you have them dissemble?
Not in love, but their love. But will you give me leave to ask you a question without offēce?
So that you will answer me an other without excuse.
Whom do you love best in the world?
He that made me last in the world.
That was a God.
I had thought it had been a man: but whom do you honour most Apelles?
The thing that is likest you Campaspe.
My picture?
I dare not venture upon your person. But come, let vs go in: for Alexander will think it lunge till we return.
We hear nothing of our Embassage, a colour
belike to blear our eyes, or tickle our ears, or inflame our hearts. But what doth Alexander in the mean sea∣son, but use sor Tantara, Sol. Fa. La. for his harde couch, down beds, for his handful of water, his standing Cup of wine?
Clytus, I mislike this new delicacy and pleasing peace: for what else do we see now then a kind of softness in every mans mind, Bees to make their hives in soldi∣ers helmets, our steeds furnished with foot clothes of gold, instead of saddles of steel: More time to bee re∣quarrelled to scour the rust of our weapons, thē there was wont to be in subdewing the countries of our enemies. Since Alexander fell from his harde armour to his soft robes, behold the face of his court, youths that were wont to carry devises of victory in their shields, engrave now posies of love in their rings: they that were accustomed on trotting horses to ch••ge the en∣my with a lance, now in easy coch•• ••de up &amp; down to court Ladies: in steed of sword and target to hazard their lives, use pen and paper to paint their loves. Yea, such a fear and faintness is grown in court, that they wish rather to hear the blowing of a horn to hunt, thē the sound of a trumpet to fight? O Phillip, were thou a∣live to see this alteration, thy men turned to women, thy soldiers to lovers, gloves worn in velvet, caps in steed of plumes in graven helmets, thou would either dye among them for sorrow, or confound them for anger.
Cease Permenio, least in speaking what become∣meth thee not, thou feel what likes thee not: truth is never without a scratched face, whose tongue although it cannot be cut out, yet must it be tied up.
It grieves me not a little for Hephestion, who thristeth for honour, not ease, but such is his fortune &amp; nearness in friendship to Alexander, that he must lay a pillow under his head, when he would put a target in his hand.
But let vs draw in, to see how well it beecomes them to tread the measures in a dance, that were wont to set the order for a march.
I have now Campaspe almost made an end.
You told me Apelles, you would never end.
Never end my love: for it shall be eternal.
That is, neither to have beginning nor ending.
You are disposed to mistake, I hope you do not mistrust.
What will you say, if Alexander perceive your love?
I will say, it is no treason to love.
But how if he will not suffer thee to see my per∣son?
Then will I case continually on thy picture.
That will not feed thy heart.
Yet shall it fill mine eye: besides the sweet thoughts, the sure hopes, thy protested faith, will cause me to embrace thy shadow continually in mine arms, of the which by strong imagination I will make a sub∣stance.
Well, I must be gon: but this assure your self, that I had rather be in thy shop grinding colours, then in A∣lexanders court, following higher fortunes.
Foolish wench, what hast thou done? that alas which cannot be undone, and therefore I fear me undone. But content is such a life, I care not for abundance. O Apel∣les,
thy love comes from the heart, but Alex∣anders from the mouth. The love of Kings is like the blowing of winds, which whistle sometimes gently among the leaves, and straight ways turn the trees up by the roots, or fire which warms a far off, and burns near hand, or the sea, which makes men hoise their sails in a flattering calm, and to cut their mastes in a rough storm. They place affection by times, by policy, by appointment, if they frown, who dares call them inconstant, if bewray secretes, who will term them untrue, if fall to other loves, who trembles not, if he call them unfaithful. In kings there can be no love, but to Queens: for as near must they meet in may∣sty, as they doe in affection. It is requisite to stand a∣aloof from kings love, love, and lightening.
Now Apelles, gather thy wits together: Cam∣paspe is no less wise then fair, thy self must be no less cunning then faithful. It is no small matter to be rival with Alexander.
Apelles, you must come away quickly with the picture, the king thinks that now you have painted it, you play with it.
If I would play with pictures, I have enough at home.
None perhaps you like so well.
It may be I have painted none so well.
I have known many fairer faces.
And I many better boys.
I have brought my sons Diogenes, to bee taught of thee.
What can thy sons doe?
You shall see their qualities: Dance sirha.
How like you this? doth he well?
The better, the worser.
The music very good.
The Musicians very bad, who only study to have their strings in tune, never framing their manners to order.
Now shall you see the other: tumble sirha.
How like you this? why do you laugh?
To see a wag, that was born to break his neck by destiny, to practise it by art.
This dog will bite me, I will not be with him.
Fear not boy, dogs eat no thistles.
I marvel what dog thou art, if thou be a dog.
When I am hungry, a mastiff, and when my bell∣lie is full, a spaniel.
Doest thou believe that there are any gods, that thou art so dogged?
I must needs believe there are Gods: for I think thee an enemy to them.
Why so?
Because thou hast taught one of thy sons to rule his legs, and not to follow learning, the other to bend his body every way, and his mind no way.
Thou doest nothing but snarl, and bark like a dog.
It is the next way to drive away a thief.
Now shall you hear the third, who signs like a Nightingale.
I care not: for I have heard a Nightingale sing her self.
Sing sirha.
Lo Diogenes, I am sure thou can not doe so much.
But there is never a Thrush but can.
What hast thou taught Manes thy man?
To be as unlike as may be thy sons.
He hath taught me to fast, lye hard, and run a∣way.
Howe says thou Perim, wilt thou bee with him?
I, so he will teach me first to run away.
Thou neatest not be taught, thy legs are so nim∣ble.
Howe say thou Milo wilt thou bee with him▪
Nay, hold your peace, he shall not.
Why?
There is not room enough for him and me both to tumble in one tub.
Well Diogenes, I perceive my sons brook not thy manners.
I thought no less, when they knew my ver∣tues.
Farewell Diogenes, thou neededst not have scra∣ped roots, if thou would have followed Alex∣ander.
Nor thou have followed Alexāder, if thou had scraped roots.
I fear me Apelles, that thine eyes have blabbed that, which thy tongue dared not. What little regard had thou, whilst Alexander viewed the counterfeit of Cam∣paspe, thou stoodest gazing on her countenance? If hee espy or but suspect, thou must needs twice perish with his hate, and thine own love. Thy pale looks, when he blushed, thy sad countenance, when hee smiled, thy sighs, when he questioned, may breed in him a jealousy, perchance a frenzy. O love, I never before knew what thou were, and now haste thou made me that I know not what my self am? Only this I know, that I must endure intolerable passions, for unknown plea∣sures. Dispute not the cause wretch, but yield to it: for better it is to melt with desire, then wrestle with love. Cast thy self on thy careful bed, be content to live unknown, and die vnfounde. O Campaspe, I have pain∣ted thee in my heart, painted? nay, contrary to mine art, imprinted, and that in such deep Characters, that nothing can rase it out, unless it rub thy heart out.
It shall go hard, but this peace shall bring vs some pleasure.
Down with arms, and up with legs, this is a world for the nonce.
Sweet youths, if you knew what it were to save your sweet blood, you would not so foolishly go about to spend it. What delight can there be in gashing, to make foul scars in fair faces, &amp; crooked malmes in straight legs? as though men being borne goodly by nature, would of purpose become deformed by folly, and all forsooth for a new found term, called valiant, a word which breeds more quarrels then the sense can commendation.
It is true Lays, a featherbed hath no fellow, good drink makes good blood, and shall pelting words spill it?
I mean to enjoy the world, and to draw out my life at the wiredrawers, not to curtal it off at the cut∣lers.
You may talk of war, speak big, conquer worlds with great words: but stay at home, where in steed of Alarms you shall have dances, for hot bat∣tells with fierce men, gentle skirmishes with fair women. These pewter coats canne never sit so well as satin dublets. Believe me, you cannot conceive the pleasure of peace, unless you despise the rudeness of war.
It is so. But see Diogenes prying over his tubbe: Diogenes, what says thou to such a morsel?
I say, I would spit it out of my mouth, because it should not poison my stomach.
Thou speak as thou art, 'it is no meat for dogs.
I am a dog, and Philosophy rates me from carrion.
Uncivil wretch, whose manners are answer∣ble to thy calling, the time was thou would have had my company, had it not been, as thou said too dear.
I remember there was a thing, that I repented
me of, and now thou haste told it, indeed it was too dear of nothing, and thou dear to no by∣dye.
Down villain, or I will have thy head broken?
Will you couch?
Avaunt cur: Come sweet Lays, let vs go to some place, and possess peace. But first let vs sing, there is more pleasure in tuning of a voice, then in a volley of shot.
Now let vs make haste, least Alexander find vs here.
Me thinks Hephestion you are more melan∣choly then you were accustomed; but I perceive it is all for Alexander. You can neither brooke this peace, nor my pleasure, be of good cheer, though I wink, I sleep not.
Melancholy I am not, nor well content: for I know not how there is such a rust crept into my bones with this long ease, that I fear I shall not scour it out with infinite labours.
Yes, yes, if all the travails of conquering the world will set either thy body or mine in tune, wee will undertake them. But what think you of Apelles? Did ye ever see any so perplexed? Hee neither answered dire∣ctly to any question, nor looked steadfastly upon any thing. I hold my life the painter is in love.
It may be: for commonly we see it incident in artificers to be enamoured of their own works, as Are∣chidamus of his wooden douc, Pygmalion, of his ivory
Image, Arachue of his woddē swan, especially painters, who playing with their own conceits, now coveting to draw a glancing eye, then a rolling, now a winking; still mending it, never ending it, till they bee caught with it, and then poor souls they kiss the colours with their lips, with which before they were loath to taint their fingers.
I will find it out. Page, go speedily for Apelles, will him to come hither, and when you see vs earnestly in talk, suddenly cry out, Apelles shop is on fire.
It shall be done.
Forget not your lesson
I 〈◊〉 what your device shall be.
The event shall prove.
I pity the poor painter, if he be in love.
Pity him not, I pray thee, that severe gravity set aside, what do you think of love?
As the Macedonians doe of their Herb Beet, which looking yellow in the ground; and black in the hand, think it better seen then touched.
But what do you imagine it to be.
A word by superstition thought a God, by use turned to an humour, by self will made a slattering mad∣ness.
You are too hard hearted to think so of love. Let vs go to Diogenes. Diogenes, thou moist think it somewhat, that Alexander comes to thee again so soon
If you come to learn, you could not come soon enough, if to laugh, you be come too soon.
It would better become thee to be more curt∣os, and frame thy self to please.
And you 〈…〉 loss, if you durst displease.
What dost thou think of the time we have here?
That we have lit be; and lose much.
If one be sick, what would thou have him do?
Be sure that he make not his Phisit•on his hi••e.
If thou might have thy will, how much groūd would content thee?
As much as you in the end must bee contented withal.
What, a world?
No, the length of my body.
Hephestion, shall I be a little pleasant with him?
You may: but he will be very perverse with you.
It skills not, I cannot be angry with him. Dio∣genes, I pray thee, what dost thou think of love?
A little worser then I can of hate.
And why?
Because it is better to hate the things, which make to love, thē to love the things, which give occasion of hate.
Why, be not women the best creatures in the world?
Next men and Bees.
What dost thou dislike chiefly in a woman?
One thing.
What?
That she is a woman.
In mine opinion thou were never born of a wo∣man, that thou think so hardly of womē. But not cō∣meth Apelles, who I am sure is as far from thy thoughts, as thou art frō his cunning. Diogenes, I will have thy cabin re∣moved nearer to my court, because I will be a philosopher
And when you have done so, I pray you remove your court further from my cabin, because I will not be a courtier.
But here comes Apelles. Apelles, what piece of work have you now in hand?
None in hand, if it like your majesty: but I am devising a platform in my head.
I think your hand put it in your head. Is it no∣thing about Venus?
No, but some thing about Venus.
Apelles, Apelles, look about you, your shope is on fire.
Ay me, if the picture of Campaspe be burnt, I am undone.
Stay Apelles, no haste, it is your hart is on fire, not your shop, &amp; if Camp. hang there, I wold she were burnt. But have you the picture of Campaspe? Beelike you love her well, that you care not though al be lost, so she be safe.
Not love her: but your Majesty knows that painters in their last works are said to excel themselves, and in this I have so much pleased my self, that the sha∣dow as much delights me being an artificer, as the substance doth others that are amorous.
You lay your colours grossly, though I could not paint in your shop, I cā spy into your excuse. Be not asha∣med Apelles, it is a Gentleman's sport to be in love. Call hither Campaspe. Me thinks I might have bin made pri∣uie to your affection, though my counsel had not been necessary, yet my countenance might have bin thought requisite. But Apelles forsooth loves under hand, yea &amp; under Alexanders nose, and, but I say no more.
Apelles loves not so: but he lives to do as A∣lexander will.
Compaspe, here is news, Apel. is in love with you.
It pleases your majesty to say so.
Hephestion, I will try her to. Campaspe, for the good qualities I know in Apelles and the virtue I see in you, I am determined you shall enjoy one the other. Howe say you Campaspe, would you say, I?
Your handmaid must obey, if you command.
Think you not Hephestion that she would fine be commanded?
I am no thought catcher, but I guess unhappily.
I will not enforce marriage, where I cannot cō∣pel love.
But your majesty may move a question, where
you be willing to have a match.
`Hephestion, these parties are agreed, they would have me both priest and witness. Apelles, take Campaspe, why move ye not? Campaspe, take Apelles, will it not be? If you be ashamed one of the other, by my consent you shall never come together. But dissemble not Campaspe, do you love Apelles?
Pardon my Lord, I love Apelles.
Apelles, it were a shame for you, being loved so openly of so fair a virgin, to say the contrary. Doe you love Campaspe?
Only Campaspe.
Two loving worms, Hephestion, I perceive Alex∣ander cannot subdue the affections of men, though he cōquer their countries. Love falls like dew as well vpō the low grass, as upon the high Caedar. Sparks have their heate, Antes their gall, Flies their spline. Well, enjoy one an other, I give her thee frāckly Apelles. Thou shalt see that Alexander makes but a toy of love, and leads affection in setters, using fācie as a fool to make him sport, or as a minstrel to make him merry. It is not the amorous glance of an eye can settle an idle thought in the heart, no no, it is childrens game, a life for seam∣sters and scholars, the one pricking in clouts have no∣thing else to think on, the other picking fancies out of books, have little else to marvel at. Go Apelles take with you your Campaspe, Alexander is cloied with looking on that, which thou wondredst at.
Thanks to your majesty on bended knee; you have honoured Apelles.
Thanks with bowed heart▪ you have blessed Campaspe.
Page, go warn Clitus and Parmenio and the o∣there Lords to be in a readiness, let the trumpet sound, strike up the drum, and I will presently into Persia.
How now Hephestion, is Alexander able to resisle love as he lift?
The conquering of Thebes was not so honour∣ble, as the subdueing of these thoughts.
It were a shame Alexander should desire to com∣maund the world, if he could not command himself. But come, let vs go, I well try whether I can better bear my hand with my heart, then I could with mine eye. And good Hephestion, when, al the world is won, and every country is thine and mine, either find me out an other to subdue, or of my word I will fall in love.
WHere the Rainbow touches the tree, no Cater∣pillars will hang on the leaves▪ where the Glo∣worm creeps in the night, no Addar will go in the day. We hope in the ears where our travails be lodged, no carping shall harbour in those tongues. Our exercises must be as your judgment is, resembling water, which is always of the same colour into what it runs. In the Trojan horse lay couched soldiers with childrē, and in heaps of many words we seat, diverse vnsitte, a∣mong some allowable. But as Demosthenes with often breathing up the hill amended his stammering, so wee hope with sundry labours against the hair, to correct our studies. If the tree be blasted that blossoms, the fault is in the wind, and not in the root, and if our pa∣stems be misliked, that have bin allowed, you must im∣put it to the malice of others, and not our endeavour. And so wee rest in good case if you rest well content.
WE cannot tell whether we are fallen among Diome∣des birds or his horses, the one received some mē with sweet notes, the other bit all men with sharp teeth. But as Homer▪ Gods conveyed them into clouds, whom they would have kept from curses, and as Venus, least Atones should be pricked with the stings of Adders, covered his face with the wings of Swans: so wee hope being shielded with your highness countenance, wee shall, though hear the neighing, yet not feel the kick∣ing of those jade, and receive, though no praise (which we cannot deserve) yet a pardon, which in all humility we desire As yet wee cannot tell what we should term our labours, iron or bullion, only it belonged to your majesty to make thē fit either for the forge or the mint, currant by the stamp, or counterfeit by the anvil. For as nothing is to be called white, unless it had bin named white by the first creature, so can there be nothing thought good in the opinion of others, unless it bee christened good by the judgment of yourself. For our selves a∣gain, we are like these torches wax, of which being in your heighnesse hands, you may make Doves or Vul∣tures, Roses or Nettles, Laurel for a garland, or elder for a disgrace.

WHere the Bee can suck no honey, she lea∣ueth
her sting behind, and where the
Bear cannot find Origanum to heal his
grief, he blasts all other leaves with his
breath. Wee fear it is like to fare so with
vs, that seeing you cannot draw from our
labours sweet content, you leave behind you a sour
mislike, and with open reproach blame our good mea∣ninges:
because you cannot reap your wonted mirthes.
Our intēt was at this time to move inward delight, not
outward lightness, and to breed, (if it might bee) soft
smiling, not loud laughing: knowing it to the wise to
be as great pleasure to hear counsel mixed with wit,
as to the foolish to have sport mingled with rudeness.
They were banished the Theater at Athens, and from
Rome hyssed, that brought parasites on the stage with
apish actions, or fools with uncivil habits, or Curti∣sans
with immodest words. We have endeavoured to be
as far from unseemly speeches, to make your ears
glow, as wee hope you will bee from unkind reports
to make our cheeks blush. The Griffyon never spree∣death
her wings in the sun, when she hath any sick fea∣theirs:
yet have we ventured to present out exercise bee∣fore
your indgements, when we know them full of weak
matter, yielding rather our selves to the courtesy, which
we have ever sound, then to the preciseness, which wee
ought to fear.
THe Arabyās being stuffed with perfumes,
burn Hemblock, a rank poison: &amp; in Hy∣bla
being cloid with hōney, they account
it dainty to feed on wax. Your High∣ness
eyes, whom variety hath filled with
fair shows, and whose ears pleasure
hath possessed with rare sounds, will (we trust) at this
time resemble the princely Eagle, who fearing to sir∣feit
on spices, stoups to bite on wormwood. We pre∣sent
no conceits nor wars, but deceits and loves,
wherein the truth may excuse the plainness. The no∣cessitie,
the length: the poetry, the bitterness. There is
no needless point so small, which hath not his cōpasse:
nor hair so slender, which hath not his shadow: nor
sport so simple, which hath not his shadow: nor
sport so simple, which hath not show. Whatsoever
we presēt, whether it be tedious (which we fear) or toy∣ishe
(which we doubt) sweet or sour, absolute or im∣perfect,
or whatsoever, in al humbleness we all, &amp; I on
knee for all, entreat, that your Highness imagine your
self to be in a deep dream, that staying the conclusiō,
in your rising your Majesty vouchsafe but to say, And
so you awaked.
THou art a Ferriman, Phao, yet a
free man, possessing for riches
content, and for honours quiet.
Thy thoughts are no higher thē
thy fortunes, nor thy desires
greater then thy calling. Who
climbs, stands on glass, and falls on thorne. Thy
hearts thirst is satisfied with thy hands thrift, and thy
gentle labours in the day, turn to sweet slumbers in
the night. As much doth it delight thee to rule thine
oar in a calm stream, as it doth Sapho to swaye the
Sceptre in her brave court. Envy never casts her eye
lowe, ambition points always upward, and revenge
barks only at stars. Thou forest delicately, if thou
have a fare to buy any thing. Thine angle is ready, when
thine oar is idle, and as sweet is the fish which thou get∣test
in the river, as the foul which other buy in the
market. Thou need not fear poison in thy glass, nor
treason in thy guard. The wind is thy greatest enemy,
whose might is withstood with policy. O sweet life
seldom found under a goldē covert, oftē under a thach∣ed
cottage. But here comes one, I will withdraw my
self aside, it may be a passenger.
It is no less unseemly then unwholesome for
Venus, who is most honoured in Princes courts, to so∣journey
with Vulcan in a smiths forge, where bellows
blow in steed of sighs, dark smokes rise for sweet per∣fumes,
&amp; for the panting of loving hearts, is only heard
the beating of steeled hāmers. Unhappy Venus, yt cariing
fire in thine own breast, thou shouldest dwell with fire in
his forge. What doth Vulcan all day but endeavour to be
as crabbed in manners, as he is crooked in body? driving
nails, when he should give kisses, and hammering hard
armours, when he should sing sweet Amors. It came by
lot, not love, that I was linked with him. He gives thee
bolts, Cupped, in steed of arrows, fearing belike (jealous
fool that he is) that if he should give thee an arrow head
he should make himself a broad head. But come, we will
to Syracusa, where thy deity shall be shown, and my dis∣deign.
I will yoke the neck, that yet never bowed, at
which, if Jove rapine, Jove shall repent. Sapho shall know,
be she never so fair, that there is a Venus, which can cō∣quer,
were she never so fortunate.
If Jove espy Sapho, he will devise some new
shape to entertain her.
Strike thou Sapho, let Jove devise what shape
he can.
Mother, they say she hath her thoughts in a
string, that she conquers affections, and sends love up
and down upon errands, I am afraid she will yerk me,
if I hit her.
Peevish boy, can mortal creatures resist that,
which the immortal Gods cannotredresse?
The Gods are amorous and therefore will∣ling
to be pierced.
And she amiable, &amp; therefore must be pear∣sed.
I dare not.
Draw thine arrow to the head, else I will make
thee repent it at the heart. Come away and behold the
ferry boy ready to conduct vs. Pretty youth, de you keep
the ferry that bends to Syracusa?
The ferry, fair Lady, that bends to Syra∣cusa.
I fear if the water should begin to swell thou
wilt want cunning to guide.
These waters are commonly as the passengers
be, and therefore carrying one so fair in show, there is
no cause to fear a rough sea.
To pass the time in thy boat, can thou de∣uise
any pastime?
If the wind be with me, I can angle, or tell
tales: if against me, it will be pleasure for you to see me
take pains.
I like not fishing: yet was I borne of the sea.
But he may bless fishing, that caught such an
one in the sea.
It was not with an angle, my boy, but with a
net.
So was it said, that vulcan caught Mars with
Venus.
Did thou hear so? It was some tale.
Yea Madame and that in the boat I did
mean to make my tale.
It is not for a ferry man to talk of the Gods
loves: but to tell how thy father could dig, and thy mo∣there
spin. But come, let vs away.
I am ready to waite.
Pension, since your coming from the uni∣uersitie
to the court, from Athens to Syracusa, how doe
you feel your self altered either in humour or opinion?
Altered Trachinus, I say no more, and shame
that any should know so much.
Here you see as great virtue, far greater brave
rye, the action of that which you cōtemplate▪ Sapho, fair
by nature, by birth royal, learned by education by go∣uernment
politic, rich by peace: insomuch as it is hard
to judge, whether she be more beautiful or wise, virtue∣os
or fortunate. Besides, doe you not look on fair
Ladies in steed of good letters, and behold fair faces
in steed of fine phrases: In universities virtues and vi∣ces
are but shadowed in colours white and black, in
courts showed to life good and bad. There, times paste
are read of in old books, times present set down by
new devises, times to come conjectured at by aim, by
prophecy, or chance here, are times in perfection, nor
by devise, as fables, but in execution, as truss. Believe
me Pension, in Athens you have but tombs, we in court
the bodies, you the pictures of Venus &amp; the wise God∣desses,
we the persons &amp; the virtues. What hath a seh whole∣ler
found out by study, that a courtier hath not found
out by practise. Simple are you that think to see more at
the candle snuff, then the sun beams, to sail further
in a little brooke, then in the maine Ocean, to make a
greater harvest by gleaning, then reaping. How say you
Pension, is not all this true?
Trachinus, what would you more, all true.
Cease then to lead thy life in a study, pinned
with a few boards, and endeavour to be a courtier to
live in embossed rouffes.
A labour intolerable for Pension.
Why?
Because it is harder to shape a life to dissem∣ble,
then to go forward with the liberty of truth.
Why do you think in court any use to dis∣semble?
Doe you know in court any that mean to
live?
You have no reasō for it, but an old report.
Report hath not always a blister on her
tongue.
I, but this is the court of Sapho natures mi∣racle,
which resembles the tree Salurus, whose root is
fastened upon knotted steel, &amp; in whose top bud leaves
of pure gold.
Yet hath Salurus blasts, and water boughs,
worms and Caterpillars.
The virtue of the tree is not the cause: but the
Easterly wind, which is thought commonly to bring
cankers and rottenesse.
Nor the excellence of Sapho the occasion: but
the iniquity of flatterers, who always whisper in Prin∣ces
ears suspicion and soreness.
Why, then you conclude with me, that Sapho
for virtue hath no copartner.
Yea, &amp; with the judgment of the world, that
she is without comparison.
We will thither straight.
I would I might return straight.
Why, there you may live still.
But not still.
Howe like you the Ladies, are they not passing
fair?
Mine eye drinks neither the colour of wine
nor women.
Yet am I sure that in judgement you are not
so severe, but that you can be content to allow of
beauty by day or by night.
When I behold beauty before the sun, his
beams dim beauty: when by candle, beauty obscures
torch light: so as no time I can judge, because at any
time I cannot discern being in the sun a brightness
to shadow beauty, and in beauty a glistening to extin∣guish
light.
Schollerlike said, you flatter that, which you
seem to mislike, and to disgrace that, which you most
wonder at. But let vs away.
I follow. And you sir boy go to Syracusa
about by land, where you shall meet my stuff, pay for
the carriage, and convey it to my lodging.
I think all your stuff are bundles of paper:
but now must you learn to turn your library to a war
drop, &amp; see whether your rapier hang better by your
side, then the pen did in your ear.
Molus, what odds between thy commons in
Athens, and the diet in court? A pages life, &amp; a scollers?
This difference: there of a little I had somewhat,
here of a great deal nothing, there did I wear Pinto∣pheles
on my legs, here doe I bear them in my hands.
Thou moist be skilled in thy Logic, but not in
thy Lerypoope: belike no meat can down with you,
unless you have a knife to cut it: but come among vs,
and you shall see vs once in a morning have a mouse at a
bay.
A mouse? unproperly spoken.
Aptly understood, a mouse of beef.
I think indeed a piece of beef as big as a
mouse, serves a great company of such cattes. But what
else?
For other sports, a square die in a pages pose∣ket,
is as decent as a square cap on a Graduates head.
You courtiers be mad fellows, wee silly souls
are only plodders at Ergo, whose wits are clasped up
with our books, &amp; so full of learning are we at home,
that wescarce know good manners when wee come a∣broad,
Cunning in nothing but in making small things
great by figures, pulling on with the sweat of our stu∣dies
a great shoe upon a little foot, burning out one
cādle in seeking for an other, raw wordlings in matters
of substance passing wranglers about shadows.
Then is it time lost to be a scholar. We pages are
Politians: for look what we hear our masters talk of,
ve determine of: where we suspect, we undermine: and
where we mislike for some particular grudge, there we
pick quarrels for a general grief. Nothing among vs
but in steed of good morrow, what news: wee fall from
cogging at dice to cog with states: &amp; so forward are
mean mē in those matters, that they wold be cocks to
tread down others, before they be chickēs to rise them∣selves.
Youths are very forward to stroke their chins,
though they have no beards, and to lie as loud as hee
that hath lived longest.
These be the golden days.
Then be they very dark days: for I can see no
gold.
You are gross wetted, moister courtier.
And you moister scholar slender wetted.
I meant times which were prophesied golden
for plenty of all things, sharpness of wit, excellence in
knowledge, policy in government, for,
Soft Scholaris, I deny your argument.
Why, it is no argument.
Then I deny it because it is no argument. But
let vs go and follow our masters.
Is it not strange that Phao on the sudden should
be so fair?
It cannot be strange, sith Venus was disposed
to make him fair. That cunning had been better be∣stowed
on women, which would have deserved thanks
of nature.
Happily she did in spite of women, or scorn
of nature.
Proud else, how squeamish he is be come alrea∣die,
using both disdaineful looks, &amp; imperious words:
insomuch that he galls with ingratitude. And then
Ladies you know how it cutteth a woman to become a
wooer.
Tush, children and fools, the fairer they are,
the sooner they yield, an apple will catch the one, a ba∣by
the other.
Your loouer I think be a fair fool: for you love
nothing but fruit and puppets.
I laugh at that you all call love, and judge it
only a word called love. Me thinks liking, a courtesy, a
smile, a beck, and such like, are the very Quintessence of
love.
I, Mileta, but were you as wise, as you would
be thought fair, or as fair, as you think your self wise,
you would bee as ready to please men, as you are coy
to prank your self, &amp; as careful to bee accounted a∣morose,
as you are willing to be thought discrete.
No, no, men are good souls (poor souls:)
who never enquire but with their eyes, loving to father
the cradle, though they but mother the child. Give me
their gifts, not their virtues, a grain of their gold
weighs down a pound of their wit, a dram of give
me, is heavier then an ounce of hear me. Believe me
Ladies, give is a pretty thing.
I cannot but oftentimes smile to my self, to
hear men call vs weak vessels, when they prove thē∣selves
broken hearted, vs frail, when their thoughts
cannot hang together, studying with words to flatter,
and with bribes to allure, when we commōly wish their
tongues in their purses, they speak so simply, and their
offers in their bellies, they doe it so peevishly.
It is good sport to see them want matter:
for then fall they to good manners, having nothing in
their mouths but sweet mistress, wearing our hands
out with courtly kissings, when their wits fail in court∣lie
discourses. Now rufling their hairs, now setting their
ruffs, then gazing with their eyes, then sighing with a
privy wring by the hand, thinking vs like to be wowed
by signs and ceremonies.
Yet we, when we swear with our mouths wee
are not in love, then we sigh from the heart and pine in
love.
Wee are mad wenches, if men mark our
words: for whē I say, I would none cared for love more
then I, what mean I, but I would none loved but I,
where we cry away, doe we not presently say, go too: &amp;
when men strive for kisses, we exclaim, let vs alone, as
though we would fall to that our selves.
Nay, then Canopy, it is time to go, and bee∣hold
Phao.
Where?
In your head Ismena, no where else: but let vs
keep on our way.
Wisely.
Phao, thy mean fortune causes thee to use
an oar, and thy sudden beauty a glass: by the one is
seen thy need, in the other thy pride. O Venus, in thin∣king
thou hast blessed me, thou hast cursed me, adding to a
poor estate, a proud heart: and to a disdained man, a
disdaining mind. Thou doest not flatter thy self Phao,
thou art fair: fair? I fear me fair, be a word too foul
for a face so passing fayte. But what avails beauty,
had thou all things thou would wish, thou might
die to morrow, and did thou want al things thou desi∣rest,
thou shalt live till thou die. Tush Phao, there is
grown more pride in thy mind, then favour in thy
face. Blush foolish boy, to think on thine own thoughts:
cease complaints, &amp; crave counsel. And lo, behold Sy∣bill
in the mouth of her cave, I will salute her. Lady, I
fear me I am out of my way, and so benighted withal
that I am compelled to ask your direction.
Fair youth, if you will be advised by me, you
shall for this time seek none other Inn, then my cave:
for that it is no less perilous to travail by night, then
uncomfortable.
Your courtesy offered hath prevented what my
necessity was to entreat.
Come near, take a stool, and sit down. Now,
for that these winter nights are long, and that children
delight in nothing more then to hear old wives tales,
we will beguile the time with some story. And though
you behold wrinkles and furrows in my tawny face:
yet may you happily find wisdom and counsel in my
white hairs.
Lady nothing can content me better thē a tale,
neither is there any thing more necessary for me then
counsel.
Were you borne so fair by nature?
No, made so fair by Venus.
For what cause?
I fear me for some curse.
Why, doe you love, and cannot obtain?
No I may obtain but cannot love.
Take heed of that my child.
I cannot choose good Madame.
Then hearken to my tale, which I hope shall be
as a straight thread to lead you out of those crooked
conceits, and place you in the plain path of love.
I attend.
When I was young, as you now are, I speak it
without boasting, I was as beautiful: for Phoebus in his
Godhood sought to get my maiden head: but I, fond
wench, receiving a benefit from aboue, began to wax
sqemishe beneath, not unlike to Asolis, which being
made greene by heavenly drops, shrinks into the
ground when there fall showers: or the Syrian mud,
which being made white chalk by the sun, never cea∣seth
rolling, till it lie in the shadow. He to sweet prayers
added great promises, I either desirous to make trial of
his power, or willing to prolong mine own life, caught
up my handful of sand, consenting to his suite, if I might
live as many years as there were grains. Phoebus, (for
what cannot Gods doe, and what for love will they not
do,) granted my petition. And then I sigh and blush
to tell the rest, I recalled my promise.
Was not the God angry to see you unkind?
Angry my boy, which was the cause that I was
unfortunate.
What revenge for such rigour used the Gods?
None, but suffering vs to live, and know wee are
no Gods.
I pray tell on.
I will Having received long life by Phoebus, &amp;
rare beauty by nature, I thought all the year would
have been May, that fresh colours would always con∣tinue,
yt time &amp; fortune could not wear out, what Gods
and nature had wrought up: not once imagining that
white and read should return to black and yellow, the
Juniper, the longer it grew, the crookedder it waxed, or
that in a face without blemish, there should come wrin∣kles
without number. I did as you do, go with my glass,
ravished with the pride of mine own beauty, &amp; you shall
do as I doe, loath to see a glass disdaining deformity.
There was none that heard of my fault, but shunned my
favour, insomuch as I stooped for age before I tasted of
youth, sure to be long lived, uncertain to bee beloved.
Gentlemen that used to sigh from their hearts for my
sweet love, began to point with their fingers at my wi∣thered
face, &amp; laughed to see the eyes, out of which fire
seemed to sparkle, to be suckered being old with specta∣cles.
This causes me to withdraw my self to a solitary
cave, where I must lead six hundred years in no less
pensiveness of crabbed age, then grief of remembered
youth. Only this comfort, that being ceased to be fair,
I study to be wise, wishing to be thought a grave matrō,
since I cannot return to be a young maid.
Is it not possible to die before you become so
old?
No more possible then to return as you are,
to be so young.
Could not you settle your fancy upon any, or
would not destiny suffer it?
Women willingly ascribe that to fortune,
which wittingly was committed by frowardness.
What will you have me doe?
Take heed you do not as I did. Make not too
much of fading beauty, which is fair in the cradle, &amp; foul
in the grave, resembling Polyon, whose leaves are white
in the morning, and blew before night, or Anita, which
being a sweet flower at the rising of the sun, become∣meth
a weed, if it be not plucked before the setting Fair
faces have no fruits, if they have no witnesses. When
you shall behold over this tender flesh a tough skin,
your eyes which were wont to glance on others faces
to be sunk so hollow, that you can scarce look out of
your own head, and when all your teach shall wag as
fast as your tongue, thē will you repent the time which
you cannot recall, and be enforced to bear what most
you blame. Loose not the pleasant time of your youth,
then the which there is nothing swifter, nothing sue∣la.
Beauty is a slippery good, which decreases whilst
it is increasing, resēbling the Meddler, which in the mo∣meant
of his full ripens is known to be in a rottennes.
Whiles you look in the glass, it waxes old with time,
if on the Sun parcht with heate, if on the wind, bla∣sted
with cold. A great care to keep it, a short space to
enjoy it, a sudden time to loose it. Be not coy, when you
are courted. Fortunes wings are made of times fea∣theirs,
which stay not whilst one may measure them. Be
affable and courteous in youth, that you may be honou∣red
in age. Roses that lose their colours, keep their sa∣uours,
and plucked from the stalk, are put to the still. Co∣tonea,
because it bows when the sun rises, is sue∣test,
when it is oldest: and children, which in their tēder
years sow courtesy, shall in their declining states reap pi∣tie.
Be not proud of beauties painting whose colours
cōsume themselves, because they are beauties painting.
I am driven by your counsel into diverse con∣ceites,
neither knowing how to stand, or where to fall,
but to yield to love is the only thing I hate.
I cōmit you to fortune, who is like to play such
pranks with you, as your tēder years can scarce bear,
nor your greene wits understand. But repair unto me
often, and if I cannot remove the effects, yet I will ma∣nifest
the causes.
I go, ready to return for advice, before I am
resolved to adventure.
Yet hearken two words, thou shalt get friend∣ship
by dissembling, love by hatred, unless thou pe∣rich,
thou shalt perish: in digging for a stone, thou shalt
reach a star: thou shalt be hated most, because thou art
loved most. Thy death shall be feared &amp; wished: so much
for prophecy, which nothing can prevent: and this for
counsel, which thou moist follow. Keep not company
with Antes, that have wings, nor talk with any, near
the hill of a mowle, where thou smellest the sweetness
of serpents breath, beware thou touch no part of the
body. Be not merry among those that put Buglosse in
their wine, and sugar in thine. If any talk of the Eclipse
of the sun, say thou never saw it. Nourish no co∣niece
in thy vaults, nor swallows in thine eves. Sow
next thy vine Mandrage, and ever keep thine ears o∣pen,
and thy mouth shut, thine eyes upward, and thy
fingers down: so shalt thou doe better then otherwise,
though never so well as I wish.
Alas Madame, your prophecy threatened mise∣ries,
and your counsel warned impossibilities.
Farewell, I can answer no more.
Unhappy Phao. But soft, what gallant troupe is
this? What Gentlewoman in this?
Sapho, a Lady here in Sicily.
What fair boy is that?
Phao, the Ferry man of Syracusa.
I never saw one more brave: be al Ladies of such
majesty?
No, this is she that al wonder at and worship.
I have seldom seen a sweeter face. Be all Fer∣rye
men of that fairness?
No Madame, this is he that Venus determined
among men to make the fairest.
Seeing I am only come forth to take the ayre,
I will cross the Ferry, and so the fields, then going in
through the park, I think the walk will be pleasant.
You will much delight in the flattering greene,
which now begins to be in his glory.
Sir boy, will ye undertake to cary vs over the
water? Are you dumb, can you not speak?
Madame, I crave pardon, I am spurblinde, I
could scarce see.
It is pity in so good a face there should bee an
evil eye.
I would in my face there were never an eye.
Thou can never be rich in a trade of life of all
the basest.
Yet content Madame, which is a kind of life of
all the best.
Wilt thou forsake the ferry, and follow the
court as a Page?
As it pleases fortune Madame, to whom I am
a prentice.
Come, let vs go?
Will you go Pension.
Yea.
Cryticus comes in good time, I shall not bee a∣lone.
What news Cryticus?
I taught you that lesson, to ask what news, &amp;
this is the news: to morrow there shall be a desperate fray
between two, made at all weapons, from the browne
bill to the bodkin.
Now thou talk of Frays, I pray thee what is
that, whereof they talk so commonly in court, va∣lore,
the stab, the pistol, for the which every man that
dares is so much honoured?
O Molus, beware of valour, hee that can look
big, and wear his dagger pommel lower thē the point,
that lies at a good ward, and can hit a button with a
thrust, and will into the field man to man for a bout or
two, he, Molus, is a shrewd fellow, and shall be well foal∣lowed.
What is the end?
Danger or death.
If it be but death that brings all this com∣mendation,
I account him as valiant that is killed with
a surfeit, as with a sword.
How so?
If I venture upon a full stomach to eat a rasher
on the coals, a carbonado, drink a carouse, swallow all
things that may procure sickness or death, am not I as
valiant to die so in a house, as the other in a field? Me
thinks that Epicures are as desperate as soldiers, and
cooks provide as good weapons as cutlers?
O valiant kinght.
I will die for it, what greater valour?
Scholars fight, who rather seek to choke their
stomachs, then see their blood.
I will stand upon this point: if it bee valour to
dare die, he is valiant howsoever he dies.
Well, of this hereafter but here comes Cali∣pho,
we will have some sport.
My mistress, I think hath got a Gadfly, never
at home, and yet none can tel where abroad. My moister
was a wise man, when he matched with such a woman.
When she comes in, we must put out the fire, because of
the smoke, hang up our hammers because of the noise,
and doe no work, but watch, what she wants. She is
fair, but by my troth I doubt of her honesty. I must
seek her, that I fear Mars hath found.
Whom doest thou seek?
I have found those I seek not.
I hope you have found those, which are honest.
It may be: but I seek no such.
Cryticus, you shall see me by learning to prove
Calipho to bee the deiull.
Let vs see but I pray thee prove it better, then
thou did thy self to be valiant.
Calipho, I will prove thee to bee the devil.
Then will I swear thee to bee a God.
The devil is black.
What care I.
Thou art black.
What care you.
Therefore thou art the devil.
I deny that.
It is the conclusion, thou must not deny it.
In spite of all conclusions, I will deny it.
Molus, the Smith holds you hard.
Thou see he hath no reason.
Try him again.
I will reason with thee now from a place.
I mean to answer you in no other place.
Like moister, like man.
Yt may be.
But thy moister hath horns.
And so moist thou.
Therefore thou hast horns, and ergo a devil,
Be they all devils have horns?
All men that have horns, are.
Then are there more devils on earth thē in hell.
But what doest thou answer?
I deny that.
What?
Whatsoever it is, that shall prove me a devil.
But hear thou scholar, I am a plain fellow, and can
fashion nothing but with the hammer. What wilt thou
say, if I prove thee a smith?
Then will I say thou art a scholar.
Prove it Calipho, and I will give thee a good
Colaphum.
I will prove it, or else,
Or else what?
Or else I will not prove it. Thou art a Smith:
therefore thou art a smith. The conclusion, you say, must
not bee denied: &amp; therefore it is true, thou art a smith.
I, but I deny your Antecedent.
I, but you shall not. Have I not touched him Cry∣ticus?
You have both done learnedly: for as sure as he
is a smith, thou art a devil.
And then he a devil, because a smith: for that it
was his reasō to make me a devil being a smith.
There is no reasoning with these Mechanical
dolts, whose wits are in their hands, not in their heads.
Be not choleric, you are wise: but let vs take
up this matter with a song.
I am content, my voice is as good as my reason.
Than shall we have sweet music. But come, I
will not break of.
What unacquainted thoughts are these Phao,
far unfit for thy thoughts, unmeet for thy birth, thy
fortune, thy years, for Phao: unhappy, can thou not
be content to behold the sun, but thou must co∣uet
to build thy nest in the Sun? Doth Sapho bewitch
thee, whom all the Ladies in Sicily could not woo:
Yea, poor Phao, the greatness of thy mind is far aboue
the beauty of thy face, and the hardness of thy fortune
beyond the bitterness of thy words. Die Phao, Phao
die: for there is no hope if thou bee wise, nor safety, if
thou be fortunate. Ah Phao, the more thou seek to
suppress those mounting affections, they soar the lof∣tier,
&amp; the more thou wrastlest with them the stronger
they wax, not unlike unto a ball, which the harder it is
thrown against the earth, the higher it bounds into
the ayre: or our Sycilyan stone, which grows hardest
by hammering. O divine love, and therefore di∣vine,
because love, whose deity no conceit canne
compase, and therefore no authority canne constrain,
as miraculous in working as mighty, &amp; no more to bee
suppressed then comprehended. Howe now Phao, when∣there
art thou carried, committing idolatry with that
God, whom thou hast cause to blaspheme. O Sapho,
fair Sapho; peace miserable wretch, enjoy thy care in
covert, we are willow in thy hat, and bays in thy hart.
Lead a Lamb in thy hand, &amp; a Fox in thy head, a dove
on the back of thy hand, &amp; a sparrow in the palm. Gold
boils best, whē it bubbled least, water runs smoo∣thest,
where it is deepest. Let thy love hang at thy hearts
bottom, not at the tongues brim. Things untold,
are undone, there can be no greater comfort, then to
know much, nor any less labour, then to say nothing.
But ah thy beauty Sapho, thy beauty. Beginnest thou to
blab? I blab it Phao, as long as thou blabbest her
beauty. Bees that die with honey, are buried with har∣money.
Swans that end their lives with songs, are co∣uered
when they are dead, with flowers: and they that
till their latter gasp commend beauty, shall be ever ho∣noured
with benefits. In these extremities I will go
to none other Oracle▪ then Sybilla, whose old years
have not been idle in these young attempts, &amp; whose
sound advice may mitigate (though the heauēs cannot
remove) my miseries. O Sapho, sweet Sapho, Sapho. Si∣bill?
Who is there?
One not worthy to be one.
Fair Phao?
Unfortunate Phao.
Come in.
So I will, and quite thy tale of Phoebus, with one
whose brightness darkens Phoebus. I love Sapho, Sy∣bill,
Sapho, ah Sapho, Sybilla.
A short tale Phao, and a sorrowful, it asks pity
rather then counsel.
So it is Sybilla: yet in those firm years me thin∣keth
there should harbour such experience, as may de∣far,
though not take away, my destiny.
It is hard to cure that by words, which cannot
be eased by herbs, and yet if thou wilt take advice, be
attentive.
I have brought mine ears of purpose, and will
hāg at your mouth, till you have finished your discourse.
Love, fair child, is to be governed by art, as thy
boat by an oar: for fancy, though it cōmeth by hazard,
is ruled by wisdom. If my precepts may persuade,
(and I pray thee let them persuade) I would wish thee
first to be diligent: for that women desire nothing
more then to have their servants officious. Be always in
sight, but never slothful. Flatter I mean, lie, little things
catch light minds, and fancy is a worm, that feeds
first upon fenell. Imagine with thy self all are to bee
won, otherwise mine advise were as unnecessary as thy
labour. It is unpossible for the brittle mettle of womē
to withstand the flattering attempts of men: only this,
let them be asked, their sex requires no less, their mo∣desties
are to be allowed so much. Be prodigal in pray∣ses
and promises, beauty must have a trumpet, &amp; pride
a gift. Peacocks never spread their feathers, but when
they are flattered, &amp; Gods are seldom pleased, if they
be not bribed. There is none so foul, that thinks not
her self fair. In commending thou can loose no la∣bore.
for of every one thou shalt be believed. O simple
women, that are brought rather to believe what their
ears hear of flattering men, then what their eyes see in
true glasses.
You degress only to make me believe, that
women do so lightly believe.
Then to the purpose. Choose such times to break
thy suite, as thy Lady is pleasant. The wooden horse en∣tred
Troy, when the soldiers were quaffing, and Penelope
forsooth, whom fables make so coy, among the pots
wrong her wooers by the fists, when she lowered on their
faces. Grapes are mind glasses. Venus works in Bac∣choose
press, &amp; blows fire upon his liquor. When thou
talk with her, let thy speech be pleasant, but not in∣credible.
Choose such words as may (as many may) melt
her mind. Honey ranckleth, when it is eaten for plea∣sure
and fair words wound, when they are heard for
love. Write, and persist in writing, they read more then
is written to them, &amp; write less then they think. In cō∣ceite
study to be pleasant in attire brave, but not too
curious, when she smiles laugh outright, if rise, stand
up, if sit, lye down. Loose al thy time to keep time with
her. Can you sing, show your cunning, can you dance,
use your legs, can you play vppō any instrument, pra∣ctise
your fingers to please her fancy, seek out qualy∣ties.
If she seem at the first cruel, be not discouraged. I
tell the a strange thing, women strive, because they
would be overcome, force they call it: but such a well∣come
force they account it, that continually, they study
to be enforced. To fair words join sweet kisses, which
if they gently receive, I say no more, they will gently re∣ceiue.
But be not pinned always on her sleeves, straun∣gers
have greene rushes, whē daily guests are not worth
a rush. Look pale, and learn to be lean, that who so
sees thee, may say, the Gentleman is in love. Use no
forcerie to hasten thy success, wit is a witch, Vlysses was
not fair, but wise, not cunning in charms, but sweet
in speech, whose filed tōgue made those enamoured that
sought to have him inchaūted. Be not coy, bear, sooth,
swear, die to please thy Lady, these are rules for poor
lovers, to others I am no mistress. He hath wit enough,
that can give enough. Dumb men are eloquent, if they
be liberal. Believe me great gifts are little Gods. When
thy mistress doth bend her brow, do not thou bend thy
fist. Camokes must be bowed with slight, not strēgth,
water to be trained with pipes, not stopped with sluices,
fire to be quenched with dust, not with swords. If thou
have a rival, be patient, art must wind him out not
malice: time, not might, her change, and thy constan∣cie.
Whatsoever she wears: swear it becomes her. In
thy louse be secrete. Venus confers, though they bee hole∣low,
never sound, &amp; when they seem emptiest, they are
fullest. Old fool that I am, to doe thee good, I begin
to dote, &amp; counsel that, which I would have concea∣led.
Thus Phao have I given thee certain regards, no
rules, only to set thee in the way, not to bring thee hōe.
Ah Sybilla, I pray go on, that I may glut my
self in this science.
Thou shalt not surfeit Phao, whilst I diet thee.
Flies that die on the honey suckle become poison to
bees. A little in love is a great deal.
But all that can be said not enough.
White silver draws black lines, and sweet
words will breed sharpe torments.
What shall become of me?
Go dare
I go, Phao, thou can but die, &amp; then as good
die with great desires, as pine in base fortunes.
Sapho is fallen suddenly sick, I cannot guess the
cause.
Some cold belike, or else a women's qualm.
A strange nature of cold, to drive one into
such an heate.
Your Physic sir I think be of the second sort,
else would you not judge it rare, that what fevers are in∣gendred
by cold causes.
Indeed Lady, I have no more Physic then will
purge choler, and that if it please you, I will practise up∣pone
you. It is good for women that be waspish.
Faith sir no, you are best purge your own me∣lancholy:
belike you are a male content.
It is true, and are not you a female content.
Soft, I am not content, that a male and Female
content, should go together.
Ismena is disposed to be merry.
No, it is Pension would fine seem wise.
You shall not fall out? for Pigeons after biting
fall to billing, and open jars make the closest jests.
Mileta, Ismena, Mileta: Come away, my Lady is
in a sown.
Aye me.
Come, let vs make haste.
I am sorry for Sapho: because she will take no
Physic, like you Pension, who being sick of the sul∣lens,
will seek no friend.
Of men we learn to speak, of Gods to hold
our peace. Silence shall digest what folly hath swallo∣wed,
and wisdom wean what fancy hath nursed.
Is it not love?
If it were, what then?
Nothing, but that I hope it be not.
Why, in courts there is nothing more com∣mon.
And as to be bald among the Micanyans it was ac∣counted
no shame, because they were all bald: so to be
in love among courtiers it is no discredit: for that they
are al in love.
Why, what doe you think of our Ladies?
As of the Seres wool, which being whitest &amp;
softest, fretted soonestand deepest.
I will not tempt you in your deep Melācholy,
least you seem sour to those, which are so sweet. But
come, let vs walk a little into the fields, it may bee the
open ayre will disclose your close conceits.
I will go with you: but send our pages away.
What browne study are• thou in Molus, no
mirth? no life?
I am in the depth of my learning driven to a
muse, how this lent I shall scamble in the court, that was
wont to fast so oft in the University.
Thy belly is thy God.
Then is he a deaffe God.
Why?
For venture non habit aures. But thy back is thy
God.
Then is it a blind God.
How prove you that?
Easy. Nemo videt manticae, quote intergo est.
Then would the sachell that hanges at your
God, id est, your back, were full of meat to stuff my
God, hoc est, my belly.
Excellent. But how can thou study, when thy
mind is only in the kitchen?
Doth not the horse travel best, that sleeps
with his head in the manger?
Yes, what then?
Good wits will apply. But what cheer is there
here this Lent?
Fish.
I can eat none, it is wind.
Eggs.
I must eat none, they are fire.
Cheese.
It is against the old verse, Caseus est nequam.
Yea, but it digested all things except it self.
Yea, but if a man hath nothing else to eat, what
shall it digest?
You are disposed to jest. But if your silkē throat
can swallow no packthread, you must pick your teeth,
and play with your trencher.
So shall I not incur the fulsome &amp; vnmanner∣lie
sin of surfeiting. But here comes Calipho.
What news?
Since my being here, I have sweat like a dog,
to prove my moister a devil, hee brought such reasons
to refile me, as I promise you, I shall like the better of his
wit, as long as I am with him.
How?
Thus, I always arguing that he had horns, &amp;
therefore a devil, he said: fool, they are things like
horns, but no horns. For once in the Senate of Gods
being hold a solemn session, in the midst of their talk
I put in my sentence, which was so indifferent, that they
all concluded it might as well have been left out, as put
in, and so placed on each side of my head things like
horns, and called me a Parenthesis, Now my masters,
this may be true, for I have seen it my self about di∣uerse
sentences.
It is true, and the same time did Mars make a
full point, that Vulcans head was made a Parenthesis.
This shall go with me, I trust in Syracusa to give
one or other a Parenthesis.
Is Venus yet come home?
No, but were I Vulcan, I would by the Gods,
What would thou?
Nothing, but as Vulcan halt by the Gods.
I thought you would have hardly entreated Ve∣nus.
Nay, Venus is easily entreated: but let that go
by.
What?
That which makes so many Parenthesis.
I must go by too, or else my moister will not go
by me: but meet me full with his fist. Therefore, if we
shall sing, give me my part quickly: for if I tarry long, I
shall cry my part woefully.
Hey ho: I know not which way to turn me Ah,
ah, I faint, I die,
Madame, I think it good you have more clo∣these,
and sweat it out.
No, no, the best ease I find is to sigh it
out.
A strange disease, that should breed such a
de∣sire.
A strange desire that hath brought such a disease.
Where, Lady, doe you feel your most pain?
Where no body else can feel it Canopy.
At the heart?
In the heart.
Will you have any Mithrydate?
Yea, if for this disease there were any Mithrydate?
Why? what disease is it Madam, that physic cā
not cure?
Only the disease Mileta that I have.
Is it a burning ague?
I think so, or a burning agony.
Will you have any of this Syrup, to moisture
your mouth?
Would I had some local things to dry my brain.
Madame will you see if you can sleep?
Sleep Fauilla: I shall then dream.
As good dream sleeping, as sigh waking.
Phao is cunning in all kind of simples, and it is
hard, if there bee none to procure sleep.
Who?
Phao.
Yea Phao, Phao, ah Phao, let him come presētly.
Shall we draw the cutteines, whilst you give
your self to slumber?
Doe, but depart not, I have such starts in my
sleep, disquieted I know not how. 
Phao, Phao.
What say you Madame?
Nothing, but if I sleep not now, you send for
Phao. Ah Gods.
There is a fish called Garus, that heals al
sick
ness, so as whilst it is applied one name not Garus.
An evil medicine for vs women: for if we should
be forbidden to name Garus, we should chat nothing but
Garus.
Well said Eugenua, you know your self.
Yea Canopy, and that I am one of your sex.
I have heard of an herb called Lunary, that
being bound to the pulses of the sick, causes nothing
but dreams of weddings and dances.
I think Ismena, that herb be at thy pulses now:
for thou art ever talking of matches and merriments.
It is an unlucky figne in the chamber of the sick
to talk of marriages; for my mother said, it foreshew∣eth
death.
It is very evil to Canopy to sit at the beds
feet, and foretells danger: therefore remove your
stool, and sit by me.
Sure it is some cold she hath taken.
If one were burnt, I think wee women would
say, he died of a cold.
It may be some conceit.
Then is there no fear: for yet did I never hear
of a woman that died of a conceit.
I mistrust her not: for that the owl hath not
shrikte at the window, or the night Raven crooked, both
being fatal.
You are all superstitious: for these bee but fan∣cies
of doting age: who by chance observing it in some,
have set it down as a religion for all.
Fauilla, thou art but a Girl, I would not have a
Weasel cry, nor desire to see a Glass, nor an old wife
come into my chamber: for then though I lingered in
my disease, I should never escape it.
Ah, who is there? what sudden affrightes bee
these? Me thought Phao came with simples to make me
sleep. Did no body name Phao before I began to
slumber?
Yes, we told you of him.
Let him be here too morrow.
He shall, will you have a little broth to comfort
you?
I can relish nothing.
Yet a little you must take to sustain nature.
I cannot Mileta, I will not. Oh, which way shall
I lye? what shall I doe? Heygh ho. O Mileta, help to rear
me up, my bed, my head lies too lowe. You pester me
with too many clothes. Fie, you keep the chamber too
hot, avoid it, it may be I shall steal a nap when all
are gone.
Wee will.
Ah impatient disease of love, and Goddess
of love thrice unpitiful. The Eagle is never stricken with
thunder, nor the Olive with lightning and may great
Ladies be plagued with love? O Venus, have I not stra∣wed
thine Altars with sweet roses? kept thy swans
in clear rvuers? sead thy sparrows with ripe corn, &amp;
harboured thy doves in fair houses? Thy Tortoise have
I nourished under my fig tree, my chāber have I ceeled
with thy Cockleshels, &amp; dipped thy sponge into the fre∣shest
waters. Did thou nurse me in my swaddling clouts
with wholesome herbs, that I might perish in my flow∣ting
years by fancy? I perceive, but to late I perceive,
and yet not too late, because at last, that strains are
caught as well by stooping too low, as reaching to high:
that eyes are bleared as soon with vapours that come
from the earth, as with beams that proceed from the
sun. Love lodges sometimes in caves: &amp; thou Phoe∣bus,
that in the pride of thy hearre shine all day in our
Horizon, at night dippest thy head in the Ocean. Re∣sect
it Sapho, whilst it is yet tender. Of Acorns comes
Oaks, of drops floods, of sparks flames of Atoms
Elements. But alas it fares with me as with wasps,
who feeding on serpents, make their stings more veno∣mous:
for glutting my self on the face of Phao, I have
made my desire more desperate. Into the nest of an
Alcyon no bird can enter but the Alcyon, and into the
hart of so great a Lady can any creep but a great Lord?
There is an herb (not unlike unto my love) which the
further it grows from the sea, the salter it is, and my
desires the more they swerve from reason, the more
seem they reasonable. When Phao comes, what thē?
wilt thou open thy love? Yea. No Sapho: but staring in
his face till thine eyes dazzle, and thy spirits faint, die
before his face: then this shall be written on thy Tomb,
that though thy love were greater then wisdom could
endure; yet thine honour was such, as love could not vi∣olate,
Mileta?
I come.
It will not be, I can take no rest, which way so∣for
I turn.
A strange malady.
Mileta, if thou wilt, a Martiredom. But give me
my lute, and I will see if in songe I can beguile
mine own eyes.
Here Madame.
Have you sent for Phao?
Yea.
And to bring simples that will procure sleep?
No.
Foolish wensh, what should the boy do here,
if he bring not remedies with him? you think belike I
could sleep if I did but see him, Let him not come at al,
yes, let him come: no, it is no matter: yet will I try, let
him come: doe you hear?
Yea Madame, it shall be done Peace, no noise:
she begins to fall asleep. I will go to Phao.
Go speedily: for if she wake, and find you not
here, she will bee angry. Sick folks are testy, who
though they eat nothing yet they feed on gall.
I would either your cunning, Phao, or your
fortune might by simples provoke my Lady to some
slumber.
My simples are in operation as my simplicity
is, which if they do little good, assuredly they can doe no
harm.
Were I sick, the very sight of thy fair face
would drive me into a sound sleep.
Indeed Gentlewomen are so drowsy in their
desires, that they can scarce hold up their eyes for love.
I mean the delight of beauty would so blind
my senses, as I should bee quickly rocked into a deep
rest.
You women have an excuse for an advantage,
which must be allowed: because only to you women it
was allotted.
Phao, thou art passing fair, &amp; able to draw a
chaste eye not only to glance: but to gaze on thee. Thy
young years, thy quick wit, thy stayed desires are of force
to control those which should command.
Lady, I forgot to commend you first, and least I
should have overslipped to praise you at all, you have
brought in my beauty, which is simple, that in courtesy I
might remember yours, which is singular.
You mistake of purpose, or miscōster of malice.
I am as far from malice, as you from love, &amp;
to mistake of purpose, were to mislike of peevishness.
As far as I from love? Why, think you me so dull
I cannot love, or so spiteful I will not?
Neither Lady: but how should men imagine
women can love, when in their mouths there is nothing
rifer, then in faith I do not love.
Why, will you have womēs love in their tongs?
Yea,else do I think there is none in their harts.
Why?
Because there was never any thing in the bottō
of a women's hart, that comes not to her tongs end.
You are too young to cheapen love.
Yet old enough to talk with market folks.
Well, let vs in.
Phao is come.
Who?Phao? Phao, let him come near: but who
sent for him?
You Madame.
I am loath to take any medicines: yet must I ra∣there
thē pine in these maladies. Phao, you may make me
sleep, if you will?
If I can, I must, if you will?
What herbs have you brought Phao?
Such as will make you sleep Madame, though
they cannot make me slumber.
Why, how can you cure me, when you cannot
remedy your self?
Yes Madame, the causes are contrary. For it is
only a dryness in your brains, that keeps you from
rest, But,
But what?
Nothing, but mine is not so.
Nay, then I despair of help, if our disease bee
not all one.
I would our diseases were all one.
It goes hard with the patient, whē the Phisiti∣on
is desperate.
Yet Medea made the euerwaking Dragon to
snort, when she poor soul could not wink.
Medaea was in love, &amp; nothing could cause her
rest but Iason.
Indeed I know no herb to make lovers sleep
but Hearts ease, which because it grows so high, I
cannot reach: for,
For whom?
For such as love.
It grows very low, and I can never stoop to
it that,
That what?
That I may gather it: but why doe you sight so
Phao
It is mine use Madame.
It will doe you harm, and me too: for I never
hear one sigh, but I must sight also.
It were best then that your Ladyship give me
leave to be gone: for I can but sigh.
Nay stay: for now I begin to sigh, I shall not
leave, though you be gone. But what do you think best
for your sighing to take it away.
Yew Madame.
Me?
No Madame, yew of the tree.
Then will I love yew the better. And indeed I
think it would make me sleep too, therefore all other
simples set aside, I will simply use only yew.
Doe madame:for I think nothing in the world
so good as yew.
Farewell for this time.
Is not your name Phao?
Phao, fair Venus, whom you made so fair.
So passing fair, O fair Phao, O sweet Phao:
what wilt thou doe for Venus?
Anything that comes in the compass of
my poor fortune.
Cupped shall teach thee to shoot, &amp; I will instruct
thee to dissemble.
I will learn any thing but dissembling.
Why my boy.
Because then I must learn to be a woman,
Thou heardest that of a man.
Men speak truth.
But truth is a she, and so always painted.
I think a painted truth.
Well, farewell for this time; for I must visit Sa∣pho.
Sapho, I have heard thy complaints, and pit∣tied
thine agonies.
O Venus, my cares are only known to thee,
and by thee only came the cause. Cupped, why did thou
wound me so deep?
My mother bad me draw mine arrow to ye head.
Venus, why did thou prove so hateful?
Cupped took a wrong shaft.
O Cupped too unkind, to make me so kind, that
almost I transgress the modesty of my kind.
I was blind, and could not see mine arrow.
How came it to pass, thou did hit my heart?
That came by the nature of the head, which be
ing once let out of the bow, cā find none other ligh∣ting
place but the heart.
Be not dismayed, Phao shall yield.
If hee yield, then shall I shame to embrace one
so mean if not, die: because I cannot embrace one so
mean. Thus doe I find no mean.
Well, I will work for thee. Farewell.
Farewell sweet Venus, and thou Cupped, which
art sweetest in thy sharpness.
Cupped, what haste thou done put thine arrows
in Phaoes eyes, and wounded thy mothers heart?
You gave him a face to allure, then why should
not I give him eyes to pearce?
O Venus, un happy Venus, who in bestowing a
benefit upon a man, haste brought a bane unto a God∣desse.
What perplexities dost thou feel? O fair Phao,
and therefore made fair to breed in me a frenzy? O
would that when I gave thee golden locks to curl thy
head, I had shackled thee with iron lockes on thy feet.
And when I nursed thee Sapho with lattice, would it
had turned to hemlock, Have I brought a smooth skin
over thy face to make a rough scarre in my heart? and
given thee a fresh colour like the damask rose, to make
mine pale like the stained Turkie. O Cupped, thy flames
with Psyches were but sparks, and my desires with Ado∣nis
but dreams, in respect of these unacquainted tor∣mentes.
Laugh Iuno, Venus is in love, but Iuno shall not
see with whom, least she be in love. Venus belike is be∣come
stale. Sapho forsooth because she hath many ver∣tues,
therefore she must have all the favours. Venus wax∣eth
old: and then she was a pretty wench, when Iuno was
a young wife, now crows foot is on her eye, and the
black ox hath trod on her foot. But were Sapho no∣for
so virtuous, doth she think to contend with Venus
to be as amorous? Yield Phao, but yield to me Phao,
I entreat where I may command, command thou,
where thou shouldest entreat. In this case Cupped what
is thy coūsell, Venus must both play the lover &amp; the dis∣sembler,
&amp; therefore the dissembler, because the Lover.
You will ever be playing with arrows, like i will∣drē
with knives, &amp; thē when you bleed, you cry, go to
Vulcan, entreat by prayers, threatē with blows, wow
with kisses, ban with curses, try al means to rid these
extremities.
To what end?
That he might make me new arrows: for no∣thing
can root out the desires of Phao, but a new shaft
of inconstancy, nor any thing turn Saphoeshart, but a
new arrow of disdain. And then they disliking one the
other, who shall enjoy Phao but Venus?
I will follow thy counsel. For Venus, though
she be in her latter age for years: yet is she in her Non∣age
for affections. When Venus cease to love, let love
cease to rule. But come, let vs to Vulcan.
What dreams are these Mileta? and can there
be no truth in dreams? yea, dreams have their truth.
Me thought I saw a Stock dove or woodquist, I know
not how to term it, that brought short straws to build
his nest in a tall Caedar, where, whiles with his bill hee
was framing his building, he lost as many feathers from
his wings, as he laid straws in his nest: yet scambling
to catch hold to harbour in the house he had made, he so
denly fell from the bough where he stood. And thē pi∣tifully
casting up his eyes, he cried in such terms (as I
imagined) as might either cōdemne the nature of such
a tree, or the daring of such a mind. Whilst he lay qua∣king
vpō the ground, &amp; I gazing one the Caeder, I might
perceive Antes to breed in the rind coveting only to
hoard, &amp; caterpillars to cleave to the leaves, labouring
only to suck, which caused mo leaves to fall frō the tree,
thē there did feathers before frō the dove. Me thought
Mileta, I sighed in my sleep, pitying both the fortune
of the bird, &amp; the missortun of the tree but in this time
quills began to bud again in the bird, which made him
look as though he would fly up, and then wished I that
the body of the tree would bow, that hee might but
creep up the tree, then and so▪ Hey, ho.
And so what?
Nothing Mileta: but, and so I waked. But did
no body dream but I?
I dreamed last night, but I hope dreams are
contrary, that holding my head over a sweet smoke,
al my hair blast on a bright flame. Me thought Ismena
cast water to quench it: yet the sparks fell on my bosom,
and wiping them away with my hand, I was all in a gore
blood, till one with a few fresh flowers staunched it. And
so stretching my self as stiff I started, it was but a dream.
It is a sign you shall fall in love with hearing
fair words. Water signifies counsel, flowers death. And
nothing can purge your loving humour but death.
You are no interpreter: but an interpreter, har∣ping
always upon love, till you be as blind as a Harper.
I remember last night but one, I dreamed mine
eye tooth was lose, &amp; that I thrust it out with my tongue.
It foretells the loss of a friend: and I ever
thought thee so full of prattle, that thou would thrust
out the best friend with the tattling.
Yea Mileta: but it was loose before, and if my
friend bee lose, as good thrust out with plain words, as
kept in with dissembling.
Dreams are but dotings, which come either by
things wee see in the day, or meates that we eat, and so
the common sense preferring it to bee the imaginative.
Soft Philosophatrix, well seen in the secretes of
art, and not seduced with the superstitions of nature.
Ismenaes tongue never lies still, I think all her
teeth will bee loose, they are so often jogged against her
tongue. But say on Eugenua.
There is all.
What did you dream, Canopy?
I seldom dream Madame: but since your
sickness, I cannot tell whether with over watching but I
have had many fantastical visions, for even now slum∣bring
by your beds side, me thought I was shadowed
with a cloud, where labouring to vnwrap my self, I was
more entangled. But in the midst of my striving, it see∣med
to mysell gold, with fair drops, I filled my lap, and
running to show it my fellows, it turned to dust, I blue∣shed,
they laughed; and then I waked, being glad it was
but a dream.
Take heed Canopy, that gold tempt not your
lap, and then you blush for shame.
It is good luck to dream of gold.
Yea, if it had continued gold.
I dream every night, and the last night this. Me
though that walking in the sun, I was stung with the
fly Tarantula, whose venom nothing can expel but the
sweet consent of music. I tried all kind of instru∣mints,
but found no ease, till at the last two Lutes tuned
in one key, so glutted my thirsting ears, that my grief
presently seized, for joy whereof as I was clapping my
hands, your Ladyship called.
It is a sign that nothing shall assuage your love
but marriage: for such is the tying of two in wedlock, as
is the tuning of two Lutes, in one key: for striking the
strings of the one, straws will stir upon the strings of
the other, and in two minds linked in love, one can∣not
be delighted but the other rejoices.
Me thought going by the sea side among Pe∣bells,
I saw one playing with a round stone, ever throe∣wing
it into the water, when the sun shined: I asked
the name, hee said, it was called Abeston, which being
once what, would never be cold, he gave it me, and va∣nished.
I forgetting my self, delighted with the fair
show, would always show it by candle light, pull it
out in the Sun, and see howe bright it would look in
the fire, where catching heate, nothing could cool it:
for anger I threw it against the wall, and with the hey∣uing
up of mine arm I waked.
Beware of love, Fauilla: for women hearts are
such stones, which warmed by affection, cannot be cooled
by wisdom.
I warrant you: for I never credit men words.
Yet be wary▪ for women are scorched sometimes
with men's eyes, though they had rather consume then
confess.
Cease your talking: for I would fine sleep, to
see if I can dream, whether the bird hath feathers, or
the Antes wings. Draw the curtain.
Come Cupped, Vulcans flames must quench Ve∣nus
fires. Vulcan?
Who?
Venus.
Ho, ho, Venus.
Come sweet Vulcan, thou know how sweet
thou hast found Venus, who being, of all the gooddesses
the most fair, hath chosen thee of all the Gods the most
foul, thou must needs then confess I was most loving.
Enquire not the cause of my suite by questions: but pre∣uent
the effects by curtifie. Make me six arrow heads: it
is given thee of the Gods by permission to frame them
to any purpose, I shall request them by prayer. Why low∣rest
thou Vulcan? wilt thou have a kiss: hold up thy
head. Venus hath young thoughts, and fresh affections.
Roots have strings, when boughs have no leaves. But
hearken in thine ear Vulcan: how says thou?
Vulcan is a God with you, when you are dispo∣sed
to flatter. A right woman, whose tongue is like a
Bees sting, which pricks deepest, when it is fullest of
honey. Because you have made mine eyes drunk with
fair looks, you will set mine ears on edge with sweet
words. You were wont to say that the beating of ham∣mers
made your head ache, and the smoke of the forge
your eyes water, and every coal was a block in your
way. You weep rose water, when you ask, and spit
vinegar, when you have obtained. What would you now,
with new arrows? belike Mars hath a tougher skin one
his heart, or Cupped a weaker arm, or Venus a better cou∣rage.
Well Venus, there is never a smile in your face
but hath made a wrinkle in my forehead. Ganymedes must
fill your cup▪ and you will pledge none but Iupiter. But
I will not chide Venus: Come Cyclops, my wife must have
her will let vs doe that in earth, which the Gods cannot
undo in heaven.
Gramercy sweet Vulcan: to your work.
Here Venus, I have finished these arrows
by art, bestow them you by wit: for as great advise
must he use that hath them, as hee cunning that made
them.
Vulcan, now you have done with your forge,
let vs alone with the fancy: you are as the Flet∣cher,
not the Archer, to meddle with the arrow, not
the aim.
I thought so: when I have done working, you
have done woowing. Where is now sweet Vulcan? Well,
I can say no more, but this which is enough, and as
much as any can say: Venus is a woman.
Bee not angry Vulcan, I will love thee a∣gain,
when I have either business, or nothing else to
doe.
My mother will make much of you, when there
are no more men then Vulcan.
Come Cupped, receive with thy fathers instru∣mints,
thy mothers instructions: for thou must be wise
in conceit, if thou wilt be fortunate in execution. This
arrow is feathered with the wings of Aegitus, which no∣for
sleeps for fear of his hen: the head touched with
the stone Perillus, which causes mistrust and jealousy.
Shoot this, Cupped, at men that have fair wives, which
will make them rub the brows, when they swell in
the brains. This shaft is headed with Lidian steel, which
strikes a deep disdain of yt which we most desire, ye fea∣theirs
are of Turtel, but dipped in the blood of a Tigress,
draw this up close to the head at Sapho, that she may de∣spice,
where now she dotes. Good my boy, gall her on
the side, that for Phaos love she may never sigh. This
arrow is feathered with the Phoenix wing, and headed
with the Eagles bill, it makes mē passionate in desires,
in love constant, and wise in conveyance, melting as it
were their fancies into faith: this arrow, sweet child,
and with as great aim as thou can, must Phao be stri∣ken
withal, and cry softly to thy self in the very loose,
Venus. Sweet Cupped mistake me not, I will make a quiver
for that by it self. The fourth hath feathers of the Pea∣cock,
but glowed with the gum of the Myrtle tree, hey∣ded
with fine gold, and fastened with brittle Chrysocoll:
this shoot at dainty and coy Ladies, at amiable and
young Nymphs, choose no other white but women: for
this will work liking in their minds, but not love af∣fabilitie
in speech, but no faith, courtly favours, to bee
Mistresses over many, but constant to none: sighs to be
fetched from the lunges, not the heart, and tears to bee
wrong out with their fingers, not their eyes, secrete
laughing at men's pale looks and neat attire, open re∣ioycinge
at their own comeliness and men's courting.
Shoot this arrow among the thickest of them, whose
bosoms lye open, because they would be stricken with
it. And seeing men term women Iupiters fools, wo∣men
shall make men Venus fools. This shaft is lead in
the head, and whose feathers are of the night Raven, a
deadly and poisoned shaft, which breeds hate only
against those which sue for love. Take heed Cupped thou
hit not Phao with this shaft: for then shall Venus pe∣rich.
This last is an old arrow, but newly mended, the
arrow which hit both Sapho and Phao, working only
in mean minds an aspiring to superiors, &amp; in high
estates a stooping to inferiors: with this Cupped I am
galled my self, till thou have galled Phao with the o∣there.
I warrant you I will cause Phao to languish in
your love and Sapho to disdain his.
Go, loiter not, nor mistake your shaft. Now
Venus, hast thou plaide a cunning part, though not cur∣rant.
But why should Venus dispute of unlawfulness in
love, or faith in affection? being both the Goddess of
love and affection? knowing there is as little truth to
be used in love, as there is reason. No, sweet Phao, Ve∣nus
will obtain because she is venus. Not thou Jove
with thūder in thy hand, shalt take him out of my hands.
I have new arrows now for my boy, and fresh flames, at
which the Gods shall tremble, if they begin to trow∣ble
me. But I will expect the event, and tarry for Cupped
at the forge▪
What hast thou done Cupped?
That my mother commanded, Sapho.
My thinks I feel an alteration in my mind,
and as it were a withstanding in my self of mine own af∣fections.
Then hath mine arrow his effect.
I pray thee tell me the cause?
I dare not.
Fear nothing: for if Venus fret, Sapho canne
frown, thou shalt bee my son. Mileta▪ give him some
sweet meates, speak good Cupped, and I will give thee
many pretty things.
My mother is in love with Phao, she willed me
to strike you with disdain of him, and him with desire
of her.
O spiteful Venus, Mileta give him some of that.
What else Cupped?
I could be even with my mother: and so I will,
if I shall call you mother?
Yea Cupped, call me any thing, so I may be even
with her.
I have an arrow, with which if I strike Phao, it
will cause him to loath only Venus.
Sweet Cupped, strike Phao with it. Thou shalt
sit in my lap, I will rock thee asleep, and feed thee
with all these fine knackes.
I will about it.
But come quickly again. Ah unkind Venus,
is this thy promise to Sapho? But if I get Cuppid from
thee, I my self will be the Queen of love. I will direct
these arrows with better aim, and conquer mine own
affections, with greater modesty. Venus heart shall flame,
and her love be as common as her craft. O Mileta, time
hath disclosed that, which my temperance hath kept in:
but sith I am rid of the disease, I will not be ashamed to
confess the cause. I loved Phao Mileta, a thing unfit for
my degree, but forced by my desire.
Phao?
Phao, Mileta, of whom now Venus is inamou∣red.
And doe you love him still.
No, I feel relenting thoughts, and reason not
yielding to appetite. Let Venus have him, no, she shall
not have him. But here coms Cupped. How now my boy,
haste thou done it?
Yea, and left Phao railing on Venus, and cur∣sing
her name: yet still sighing for Sapho, and blafing her
virtues.
Alas poor Phao, thy extreme love should not
be requited with so mean a fortune, thy fair face de∣served
greater favours: I cannot love, Venus hath harde∣ned
my heart.
I marvel Cupped comes not all this while.
How now, in Saphoes lap?
Yea Venus, what say you to it, in Saphoes lap.
Sir boy, come hither?
I will not.
What now? will you not? hath Sapho made you
so saucy?
I will be Saphoes son, I have as you comman∣ded
stricken her with a deep disdain of Phao, and Phao
as she entreated me, with a great despite of you.
Unhappy wag, what hast thou done? I will make
thee repent it every vain in thy heart.
Venus be not choleric, Cupped is mine, he hath
given me his Arrows, and I will give him a new bow to
shoot in. You are not worthy to be the Lady of love,
that yield so often to the impressions of love. Immo∣dest
Venus, that to satisfy the unbridled thoughts of
thy heart, transgressest so far from the staye of thine
honour. Howe say thou Cupped, wilt thou bee with
me?
Yes.
Shall not I bee on earth the Goddess of affecti∣once?
Yes.
Shall not I rule the fancies of men, and lead Ve∣nus
in chains like a captive?
Yes.
It is a good boy.
What have we here? you the Goddess of Love?
and you her son, Cupped? I will tame that proud heart,
else shall the Gods say, they are not Venus friends. And
as for you, sit boy, I will teach you how to run away: you
shall be stripped from top to toe, and whipped with nettles,
not roses. I will set you to blow Vulcans coals, not to
bear Venus quiver, I will handle you for this gear:
well, I say no more. But as for the new Mistress of love,
or Lady, I cry you mercy, I think you would be called a
Goddess, you shall know what it is to usurp the name
of Venus. I will pull those plumes, and cause you to cast
your eyes on your feet, not your feathers: your soft
hair will I turn to harde bristles, your tongue to a
sting, and those alluring eyes to vnluckynes, in which
if the Gods aid me not, I will curse the Gods.
Venus, you are in a vain answerable to your
vanity, whose high words neither become you,
nor fear me. But let this suffice, I will keep Cupped
in despite of you, and yet with the content of the
Gods.
Will you? why then we shall have pretty Gods
in heaven, when you take Gods prisoners on earth. Be∣fore
I sleep you shall both repent, and find what it is
but to think irreverently of Venus. Come Cupped, she
knows not how to use thee, come with me, you know
what I have for you: will you not?
Not I.
Well, I will be even with you both, &amp; that short∣lye,
Cupped, fear not, I will direct thine arrows bet∣la.
Every rude ass shall not say he is in love. It is a toy
made for Ladies, and I will keep it only for Ladies.
But what will you doe for Phao?
I will wish him fortunate. This will I do for Phao,
because I once loved Phao: for never shall it be said that
Sapho loved to hate, or that out of love she could not
be as courteous, as she was in love passionate. Come
Mileta, shut the door.
Go to Sybilla, tell the beginning of thy love,
and the end of thy fortune. And lo how happily she
sits in her cave. Sybilla?
Phao, welcome, what news?
Venus, the Goddess of love I loath, Cupped caused
it with a new shaft. Sapho disdains me, Venus caused
it for a new spite. O Sybilla, if Venus be unfaithful in
love, where shall one fly for truth? She uses deceit,
is it not then likely she will dispense with subtlety. And
being careful to commit injuries, will she not be care∣less
to revenge them? I must now fall from love to la∣bore,
and endeavour with mine oar to get a fare, not
with my pen to write a fancy. Loves are but smokes,
which vanish in the seeing, and yet hurt whilst they
are seen. A Ferry Phao, no the stars cannot call it a
worser fortune. Raung rather over the world, forswear
affections, entreat for death. O Sapho, thou haste Cu∣bid
in thine arms, I in my heart, thou kissest him for
sport, I must curse him for spite: yet will I not curse
him Sapho, whom thou kissest. This shall be my reason∣lutiō,
where ever I wāder, to be as I were ever kneeling
before Sapho, my loyalty unspotted, though vnrewar∣ded.
With as little malice will I go to my grave, as I did
lye with all in my cradle. My life shall be spent in sighing
and wishing, the one for my bad fortune, the other for
Saphoes good.
Doe so Phao: for destiny calls thee as well
from Sicily as from love. Other things hang over thy
head, which I must neither tell, nor thou enquire. And
so farewell.
Farewell Sybilla, and farewell Sicily. Thoughts
shall be thy food, and in thy steppes shall be printed bee∣hind
thee, that there was none so loyal left behind
thee. Farewell Syracusa, unworthy to harbour faith, and
when I am gone, unless Sapho be here, unlikely to har∣bore
any.
THey that tread in a maze, walk often∣times
in one path, &amp; at the last come out
where they entered in. Wee fear we have
lead you all this while in a Labyrinth of
conceits, diverse times hearing one de∣vice,
&amp; have now brought you to an end,
where we first began. Which wearisome travail, you
must impute to the necessity of the history, as Theseus
did his labour to the art of the Labyrinth. There is no∣thing
causes such giddiness, as going in a wheel, nei∣there
cā there any thing breed such tediousness, as hey∣ring
many words uttered in a small compass. But if you
accept this daūce of a Farie in a circle, wee will herafter
at your wills frame our fingers to all forms. And so
we wish every one of you a thread to lead you out of
the doubts, wherewith we leave you entangled: that no∣thing
be mistaken by our rash oversights, nor miscon∣strued
by your deep insights.

