VVEe are ashamed that our bird which flute∣red by twilight seeming a swan, should bee proved a Bat set against the sun. But as Iupiter ply∣ced Silenus Ass among the stars, and Alcebiades cove∣red his pictures being Owls and Apes, with a cour∣taine embroidered with Lions and Eagles, so are we en∣forced upon a rough discourse to draw on a smooth excuse resembling Lapidaries, who think to hide the croak in a stone by setting it deep in gold. The Gods supped once with poor Basis, the Persian kings some∣times shaved sticks, our hope is, your heighnesse will at this time lend an ear to an idle pastime. Appion raising Homer from hell, demanded only who was his father, and we calling Alexander from his grave, seek only who was his love. Whatsoever we present, we wish it may be thought the dancing of Agrippa his shadows: who, in the moment they were seen, were of any shape one would conceive: or Lynces, who having a quick sight to discern, have a short memory to forget. With vs it is like to fare, as with these torches, which giving light to others, consume themselves, and wee showing delight to others, shame our selves.
THey that fear the stinging of wasps make fans of peacocks tails, whose spots are like eyes. And Lepidus, which could not sleep for the chatting of birds, set up a beast, whose head was like a dragon: and we which stand in awe of report, are compelled to set before our owl Pallas shield thinking by her virtue to cover the others deformity. It was a sign of famine to Egypt, when Nilus flowed less then twelve Cubits, or more then eighteen: and it may threaten despair unto vs, if we be less curious then you look for, or more cumbersome. But as Theseus being promised to be brought to an Ea∣gles nest, and travailing al the day, found but a wren in a hedge, yet said, this is a bird: so we hope if the shower of our swelling mountain seem to bring forth some Elephant, perform but a mouse, you will gently say, this is a beast. Basil softly touched, yields a sweet sent but chafed in the hand, a rank savour. Wee fear even so that our labours slylye glanced on, will breed some content, but examined to the proof, small com∣mendation. The haste in performing shall bee our ex∣cuse. There went two nights to the begetting of Her∣cules. Feathers appear not on the Phoenix under seven months, and the mulberry is twelve in budding, but our travails are like the Hares, who at one time brine∣geth forth, nourishes, and engenders again, or like the brood of Trochilus, whose eggs in the same mo∣meant
that they are laid, become birds. But howsoever we finish our work, we crave pardō, if we offend in mat∣la, and patience if we transgress in manners. We have mixed mirth with counsel, and discipline with delight, thinking it not amiss, in the same garden to sow pot∣herbs, that we set flowers. But we hope, as Harts that cast their horns, Snakes their skins, Eagles their bills, become more fresh for any other labour: so our charge being shaken of, we shall be fit for greater matters. But least like the Mindyans, we make our gates greater then our town, and that our play runs out at the preface, we here conclude: wishing that although there bee in your precise judgements an universal mislike, yet wee may enjoy by your wonted courtesies a general silēce
PArmenio I cannot tel whether I should more commend in Alex∣anders victories, courage, or cur∣tesie, in the one being a resolve∣tion without fear in the other a liberality aboue custom: The∣bes is raised, the people not racked, towers thrown down, bodies not thrust aside, a conquest without con∣flict, and a cruel war in a mild peace.
Clytus, it becomes the son of Phillip to be none other then Alexander is: therefore seeing in the father a full perfection, who could have doubted in the son an excellence. For as the moon can borrow nothing else of the sun but light, so of a sire, in whom nothing but virtue was, what could the child receive but singular? it is for Turkeys to stain each other, not for Diamonds, in the one to bee made a difference in goodness, in the other no comparison.
You mistake me Parmenio, if whilst I com∣mend Alexander, you imagine I call Phillip into quest∣on, unless happily you conjecture (which none of judge∣meant will conceive) that because I like the fruit, there∣fore I heave at the tree, or coveting to kiss the child, I therefore go about to poison the teat.
I but Clytus, I perceive you are borne in the East, and never laugh but at the sun rising, which are∣guide though a duty where you ought, yet no great devotion where you might.
We will make no controversy of that which there ought to be no question, only this shall be the o∣pinion
of vs both, that none was worthy to be the fa∣there of Alexander but Phillip, nor any meet to bee the son of Phillip but Alexander.
Soft Clytus, behold the spoils &amp; prisoners, a pleasant sight to vs, because profit is joined with ho∣nor, not much paineful to them, because their captive∣tie is eased by mercy.
Fortune, thou did never yet deceive virtue, because virtue never yet did trust fortune. Sword and fire will never get spoil, where wisdom and fortitude bears sway. O Thebes, thy walls were raised by the sweetness of the harp, but raced by the shrillness of the trumpet. Alexander had never come so near the walls. had Epaminondas walked about the walls, and yet might the Thebanes have been merry in there streets, if he had been to watch their to wers. But destiny is seldom foreseen, never prevented. We are here now captives, whose necks are yoked by force, but whose harts can not yield by death. Come Campaspe and the rest, let vs not be ashamed to cast our eyes one him, on whom wee feared not to cast our darts.
Madame, you need not doubt, it is Alexan∣der, that is, the conqueror.
Alex. hath overcome, not conquered.
To bring al under his subjection is to cōquer.
He cannot subdue that which is divine.
Thebes was not.
Virtue is.
Alexander as he tendered virtue, so he Will you, he drinks not blood, but thirsts after honour, he is greedy of victory, but never satisfied with mercy. In fight terrible, as becomes a captain, in conquest mild, as beseems a king. In al things, then which no∣thing can be greater, he is Alexander.
Then if it be such a thing to be Alexander, I hope it shall be no miserable things to be a virgin. For if
he save our honours, it is more thē to restore our goods. And rather doe I wish hee preserve our fame, then our lives, which if he do, wee will confess there can be no greater thing then to be Alexander.
Clitus, are these prisoners? of whēce these spoils?
Like your majesty, they are prisoners, &amp; of Thebes.
Of what calling or reputation?
I know not, but they seem to be Ladies of honour.
I will know. Madam, of whence you are I know: but who I cannot tell.
Alexander, I am the sister of Theagenes, who fought a battle with thy father before the City of Chy∣ron, where he died, I say which nōe cā gainsay, valiātly.
Lady, there seem in your words sparks of your brothers deeds, but woorser fortune in your life then his death: but fear not, for you shall live without violence, enemies, or necessity, but what are you fair Lady, another sister to Theagines?
No sister to Theagines, but an humble hand∣maid to Alexander, borne of a mean parentage, but to extreme fortune.
Well Ladies, for so your virtues show you, whatsoever your births be, you shall be honourably en∣treated. Athens shall be your Thebes, &amp; you shall not be as abiectes of war, but as subjects to Alexander Perm∣nio, conduct these honourable Ladies into the City: charge the soldiers not so much as in words to offer them any offence, and let all wants be supplied, so far forth as shall be necessary for such persons &amp; my prison∣ners.
Hephestion, it rests now that we have as great care to govern in peace, as conquer in war: that whilst arms cease, arts may flourish, and joining letters with lane∣ces, we endeavour to be as good Philosophers as soldiers, knowing it no less praise to be wise, thē commendable to be vailiant.
Your Majesty therein shows that you have as great desire to rule as to subdue, &amp; needs must that common wealth be fortunate, whose captain is a Phi∣losopher, and whose Philosopher is a Captain.
I serve in steed of a moister, a mouse, whose house is a tub, whose dinner is a crust, and whose board is a bed.
Then art thou in a state of life, which Philo∣sophers commend. A crumb for thy supper, an hand for thy cup, and thy clothes for thy sheets. I or Nature paucis content.
Manes, it is pity so proper a man should be cast away upon a Philosopher: but that Diogenes that dog should have Manes, that dogbolt, it greened na∣ture and spiteth art, the one having found thee so dis∣solute, absolute I would say, in body, the other so single singular in mind.
Are you merry, it is a sign by the trip of your tongue, and the toys of your head, that you have done that to day, which I have not done these three days.
What is that?
Dined.
I think Diogenes keeps but cold cheer.
I would it were so, but hee keeps neither hot nor cold.
What then, luck warm? That made Manes run from his moister last day.
Manes had reason: for his name foretold as much.
My name? how so sir boy?
You know that it is called Mons, à mouendo, be∣cause it stands still.
Good.
And thou art named Manes, à manendo, bee∣cause thou runst away.
Passing reasons, I did not run away, but re∣tire.
To a prison, because thou would have leisure to contemplate.
I will prove that my body was immortal: bee∣cause it was in prison.
As how?
Did your masters never teach you that the soul is immortal?
Yes.
And the body is the prison of the soul.
True.
Why then, thus to make my body immortal, I put it to prison.
Oh bad.
Excellent ill.
You may see how dull a fasting wit is: therefore Psyllus let vs go to supper with Granichus: Plato is the best fellow of al Philosophers. Give me him that reads in the morning in the school, and at noon in the kit∣chin.
And me.
Ah sirs, my moister is a king in his parlour for the body, and a God in his study for the soul. Among all his men he commedeth one that is an excellent Musician, then stand I by, &amp; clap another on the should∣der, and say, this is a passing good Cooke.
It is well done Granichus, for give me plea∣sure that goes in at the mouth, not the ear, I had rather fill my guts, then my brains.
I serve Apelles, who feeds me as Dioge∣nes
doth Manes, for at dinner the one preaches absti∣nonce, the other commends counterfeiting: when I would eat meat, he paints a spit, &amp; whē I thirst, O saith he, is not this a fair pot, and points to a table, which cōteines the banquet of the Gods, where are many di∣shes to feed the eye, but not to fill the gut.
What dost thou then?
This doth hee then bring in many examples that some have lived by savours, &amp; proves that much easier it is to fat by colours: and tells of birds that have been fatted by painted grapes in winter: &amp; how many have so fed their eyes with their mistress picture, that they never desired to take food, being glutted with the delight in their favours. Then doth he show me coū∣terfeits, such as have surfeited with their filthy &amp; loath∣some vomits, and with the riotous Bacchanals of the God Bacchus, &amp; his disorderly crew, which are painted al to the life in his shop. To cōclude, I fare hardly, though I go richly, which makes me when I should begin to sha∣dow a Ladies face, to draw a Lambs head, &amp; sometime to set to the body of a maid a shoulder of mutton: for semper animus mouse est in patinis.
Thou art a God to me: for could I see but a Cooks shop painted, I would make mine eyes fat as butter. For I have nought but sentences to fill my maw, as plures occidit crapula quàm gladius, muse ieiunantibus a∣mica: repletion kills delicately: &amp; an old saw of absti∣nonce, Socrates, The belly is the heads grieve. Thus with sayings not with meat he makes a gally mafrey.
But how doest thou then live?
With fine jests, sweet air, &amp; the dogs alms.
Well for this time I will stanch thy gut, &amp; amōg pots &amp; platters thou shalt see what it is to serve Plato.
For joy of Granichus lets sing.
My voice is as clear in the evening as in the morning.
Another commodity of emptiness.
I had never such a doe to warn scholars to come before a king. First, I cam to Crisippus a tall lean old mad man, willing him presently to appear before Alexander, he stood staring on my face, neither moving his eyes nor his body, I urging him to give some answer, hee took up a book, sate down, and said nothing: Melissa his maid told me it was his manner, and that of∣tētimes she was fain to thrust meat into his mouth: for that he wold rather starve thē cease study. Well thought I, seeing bookish men are so blockish, &amp; so great clarks such simple courtiers, I will neither be partaker of their cōmons nor their commēdations. Frō thence I came to Plato &amp; to Aristotle, and to diverse other, none refusing to come, saving an old obscure fellow, who sitting in a tub turned towards the sun, read Greek to a young boy, him when I willed to appear before Alexander, he answered, if Alexander wold fine see me, let him come to me, if learn of me, let him come to me, whosoever∣for it be, let him come to me. why, said I, he is a king, he answered, why I am a Philosopher, why, but he is Alex∣ander: I but I am Diogenes. I was half angry to see one so crooked in his shape, to be so crabbed in his sayings. So going my way, I said thou shalt repent it, if thou cōmest not to Alexander: nay smiling answered he: Alexander may repent it, if he come not to Diogenes, virtue must be sought, not offered: and so turning himself to his cel, he grunted I know not what, like a pig under a tub. But I must be gone, the Philosophers are coming.
It is a difficult controversy, Aristotle, and ra∣there to be wondered at, then believed, how natural cau∣ses should work supernatural effects.
I doe not so much stand upon the apparition is seen in the Moon, neither the Demonium of Socrates, as that I cannot by natural reason give any reason of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, which makes me in the depth of my studies to cry out, O ens entium, misere∣re mei.
Cleanthes and you attribute so much to na∣ture by searching for things which are not to be found, that whilst you study a cause of your own, you omit the occasion it self. There is no man so savage in whom rests not this divine particle, that there is an omni∣potent, eternal and divine mover, which may be called God.
I am of this mind, that that first mover, which you term God, is the instrument of all the mo∣uings, which we attribute to nature. The earth which is mass, swims on the sea, seasons divided in them∣selves, fruits growing in themselves, the majesty of the sky, the whole firmament of the world, &amp; whatsoever else appears miraculous, what man almost of mean capacity but can prove it natural.
These causes shall be debated at our Philoso∣phers feast, in which controversy I will take part with Aristotle, that there is Nature naturans, &amp; yet not God.
And I with Plato, that there is Deus optimus maximus, and not nature.
Here comes Alexander.
I see Hephestion, that these Philosophers are here attending for vs.
They were not Philosophers, if they knew not their duties.
But I much marvel Diogenes should be so dogged.
I doe not think but his excuse will be better then Melippus message.
I will go see him Hephestion, because I long to see him that would command Alexander to come, to whom al the world is like to come. Aristotle &amp; the rest since my coming from Thebes to Athens, from a place of conquest to a palace of quiet, I have resolved with my self in my court to have as many Philisophers, as I had in my camp soldiers. My court shall be a school, wherein I will have used as great doctrine in peace, as I did in war discipline.
We are al here ready to be commanded, &amp; glad we are that we are commanded: for that nothing better becomes kings thē literature, which makes them come as near to the Gods in wisdom, as they do in dignity.
It is so Aristotle: but yet there is among you, yea &amp; of your bringing up, that sought to destroy Alex∣ander: Calistenes, Aristotle, whose treasons against his prince shall not bee borne out with the reasons of his Philosophy.
If ever mischief entered into the heart of Calistenes, let Calistenes suffer for it, but that Aristotle ever imagined any such thing of Calistenes, Aristotle doth de∣no.
Well Aristotle, kindred may blind thee, and affection me, but in kings causes I will not stand to scholars arguments. This meeting shall be for a cōman∣demeaned, that you all frequent my court instruct the young with rules confirm the old with reasons: let your lives be answerable to your learnings, least my proceedings by contrary to my promises.
You said you would ask every one of them a question, which yester night none of vs could answer.
I will Plato, of all beasts, which is the subtlest?
That which man hitherto never knew.
Aristotle, how should a man be thought a God?
In doing a thing unpossible for a man.
Crisippus, which was first, the day or the night?
The day by a day.
Indeed strange questions must have strange answers. Cleanthes, what say you, is life or death the stronger?
Life, that suffered so many troubles.
Crates, how long should a man live?
Till he think it better to die then live.
Anaxarchus, whether doth the sea or the earth bring forth most creatures?
The earth, for the sea is but a part of the earth.
Hephestion, me thinks they have answered all well, &amp; in such questions I mean often to try them.
It is better to have in your court a wise man then in your ground a golden mine. Therefore would I leave war, to study wisdom, were I A∣lexander.
So would I, were I Hephestion. But come, let vs go and give release, as I promised, to our Thebā thralls.
Thou art fortunate Aristotle, that Alexander is thy scholar.
And you happy that he is your sovereign.
I could like the man well, if he could be contē∣ted to be but a man.
He seeks to draw near to the Gods in know¦ledge, not to be a God.
Let vs questiō a little with Diogenes, why he went not with vs to Alexander. Diogenes, thou did forget thy duty, that thou went not with vs to the king.
And you your profession, that you went to the king.
Thou take as great pride to bee peevish, as o∣theirs doe glory to bee virtuous.
And thou as great honour being a Philosopher to bee thought courtlike, as others shame that be courtiers, to be accounted Philosophers.
These austere manners set a side, it is well known that thou did counterfeit money.
And thou thy manners, in that thou did not counterfeit money.
Thou hast reason to cōtemn the court, being both in body and mind too crooked for a courtier.
As good be crooked, and endeavour to make my self straight from the court, as to be straight and learn to be crooked at the court.
Thou think it a grace to be opposite against Alexander.
And thou to be jump with Alexander.
Let vs go: for in contemning him, wee shall better please him, than in wondering at him.
Plato, what dost thou think of Diogenes.
To be Socrates furious, let vs go.
Behold Manes where thy moister is, seeking ei∣there for bones for his dinner, or pins for his sleeves. I will go salute him.
Doe so: but mum, not a word you saw Ma∣nes.
Then stay thou behind, I will go with Psyl∣lus.
All hail Diogenes to your proper person.
All hate to thy peevish conditions.
O Dog.
What dost thou seek for here?
For a man and a beast.
That is easy without thy light to be found, bee not all these men?
Called men.
What beast is it thou look for?
The beast my man Manes.
He is a beast indeed that will serve thee.
So is he that begat thee.
What would thou do, if thou shouldest find Manes?
Give him leave to doo as he hath done before.
Whats that.
To run away.
Why, hast thou no need of Manes?
It were a shame for Diogenes to have need of Manes, &amp; for Manes to have no need of Dioge∣nes.
But put the case he were gone, would thou entertain any of vs two?
Upon condition.
What?
That you should tell me wherefore any of you both were good.
Why, I am a scholar, and well seen in Phylo∣sophie.
And I a prentice, and well seen in painting.
Well then Granichus, bee thou a painter to a∣mend thine ill face, &amp; thou Psyllus a Phyloso∣pher, to correct thine evil manners. But who is that, Manes?
I care not who I were, so I were not Manes.
You are taken tardy.
Let vs slip aside Granichus, to see the salutation between Manes and his moister.
Manes, thou know the last day I threw away my dish, to drink in my hād, because it was superfluous, now I am determined to put away my man, and serve my self: Queen non egeo tui vel te.
Moister, you know a while a go I ran away, so doe I mean to do again, queen scio tibi non esse argen∣tum.
I know I have no money, neither will I have e∣for a man, for I was resolved lunge since to put away both my slaves, money and Manes.
So was I determined to shake of both my dogs, hunger and Diogenes.
O sweet consent between a crowd and a Jaws harp.
Come, let vs reconcile them.
It shall not need: for this is their use, now do they dine one upon another.
How now Manes, art thou gone from thy my∣ster.
No, I did but now bind my self to him.
Why, you were at mortal iars.
In faith no, wee brake a bitter jest one upon another.
Why, thou art as dogged as he.
My father knew them both little whelps.
Well, I will hie me after my moister.
Why, is it supper time with Diogenes?
I, with him at al times when he hath meat.
Why then, every man to his home, and let vs steal out again anon.
Where shall we meet.
Why, at Ala vendibili suspense haedera non est o∣pus.
O Psyllus, habeo te loco parents, thou blessest me.
Stand aside sir boy, till you be called. Hephestion, how doe ye like the sweet face of Campaspe.
I cannot but commend the stout courage of Timoclea.
Without doubt Campaspe had some great man to her father.
You know Timoclea had Theagines to her bro∣there,
Timoclea still in thy mouth, art thou not in love?
Not I.
Not with Timoclea you mean, wherein you re∣semble the Lapwing, who cries most, where her nest is not. And so you lead me from espying your love with Campaspe, you cry Timoclea.
Could I as well subdue kingdoms, as I can my thoughts, or were I as far from ambition, as I am frō love, al the world wold account me as valiant in arms, as I know my self moderate in affection.
Is love a vice?
It is no virtue.
Well, now shalt thou see what small difference I make between Alexander and Hephestion. And sith thou haste been always partaker of my triumphs, thou shalt be partaker of my tormētes. I love Hephesti∣on, I love I love Campaspe, a thing far Unfit for a Mace∣donian, for a king, for Alexander. Why hangest thou down thy head Hephestion? blushing to hear that which
I am not ashamed to tell.
Might my words crave pardon, and my counsel credit, I would both discharge the duty of a subject, for so I am, &amp; the office of a friend, for so I will.
Speak Hephestion for what soever is spoken, Hephestion speaks to Alexander.
I can not tel, Alexander, whether the report be more shameful to be heard or the cause sorrowful to be believed? What? is the son of Phillip, king of Mace∣don become the subject of Campaspe the captive of The∣bes? Is that mind, whose greatness the world could not contain, drawn within the compass of an idle alluring eye? Will you handle the spindle with Hercules, when you should shake the spear with Achilles? Is the warlike soūd of drum, and trump turned to the soft noise of lire, and lute, the neighing of barbed steeds, whose loudness filled the ayre with terror, and whose breathes dim∣med the sun with smoke, converted to delicate tunes and amorous glances? O Alexander, that soft and yeel∣ding mind should not bee in him, whose hard and un∣conquered heart hath made so many yield. But you love, ah grief, but whom? Campaspe, ah shame, a maid forsooth unknown, unnoble, &amp; who can tell whether immodest? whose eyes are framed by nature to enamour, &amp; whose heart was made by nature to enchant. I, but she is beautiful, yea but not therefore chaste: I, but she is comely in al parts of the body: yea, but she may be croo∣ked in some part of the mind: I, but she is wise, yea, but she is a woman? Beauty is like the black berry which see∣meth red, when it is not ripe, resembling precious stoēs that are polished with honey, which the smother they look, the sooner they break. It is thought wonderful a∣mong the sea men, that Mugil of all fishes, the swiftest, is found in the belly of the Bret of al the slowest: And shall it not seem monstrous to wisemen, that the heart of the greatest conqueror of the world, should be found
in the hands of the weakest creature of nature? of a woman? of a captive? Hermyns have fair skins, but foul livers, Sepulchres fresh colours, but rottē bones, women fair faces, but false hearts. Remember Alex∣ander thou hast a camp to govern, not a chamber, fall not from the armour of Mars to the arms of Venus, from the fiery assaults of war, to the maidēly skirmishes of love, from displaying the Eagle in thine ensign, to set down the sparrow. I sigh Alexander that where for∣tune could not conquer, folly should overcome. But be∣hold al the perfection that may be in Campaspe, a hair curling by nature not art: sweet alluring eyes, a fair face made in despite of Venus, and a stately port in dis∣deign of Iuno, a wit apt to conceive, and quick to an∣swear a skin as soft as silk, and as smooth as jet, a lunge white hand, a fine little foot, to conclude, all parts an∣swerable to the best part, what of this? Though she have heavenly gifts, virtue and beauty, is she not of earthly metal flesh and blood? You Alexander that would be a God, show your self in this worse then a man, so soon to be both overseen and overtaken in a womā, whose false tears know their true times, whose smooth words wound deeper then sharpe swords. There is no surfeit so dangerous, as that of honey, nor any poison so deadly, as that of love, in the one physic cannot pre∣uaile, nor in the other counsel.
My case were light Hephestion, and not worthy to be called love, if reason were a remedy, or senten∣ces could salve, that sense cānot conceive. Little do you know, and therefore slightly do you regard the dead embers in a private persō, or live coals in a great prince, whose passions and thoughts do as far exceed others in extremity, as their callings doe in Majesty. An E∣clipse in the Sun is more then the falling of a star, none can conceive the torments of a king, unless hee be a king whose desires are not inferior to their digni∣ties.
And then judge Hephestion if the agonies of love be dangerous in a subject, whether they be not more then deadly unto Alexander, whose deep and not to be conceived sighs, cleave the hart in shivers: whose woū∣ded thoughts can neither be expressed nor endured. Cease then Hephestion, with arguments to seek to refile that, which with their deity the Gods cannot resist, &amp; let this suffice to answer thee that it is a king that lo∣ueth and Alexander, whose affectiōs are not to be mea∣sured by reason, being immortal, nor I fear me to be borne being intolerable.
I must needs yield, when neither reason nor counsel can be heard.
Yield Hephestion, for Alexander doth love, and therefore must obtain.
Suppose she loves not you, affection comes not by appointment or birth, &amp; then as good hated as enforced.
I am a king, and will command.
You may to yield to lust by force, but to consent to love by fear you cannot.
Why, what is that, which Alexander may not conquer as he list?
Why, that which you say the Gods cannot re∣sect, Love.
I am a conqueror, she a captive, I as fortune∣nate, as she fair: my greatness may answer her wants, and the gifts of my mind, the modesty of hers: Is it not likely then that she should love? Is it not reason∣ble?
You say that in love there is no reason, &amp; there∣fore there can be no likelihood.
No more Hephestion, in this case I will use mine own counsel, and in all other thine advice, thou moist be a good soldier, but never good lover. Cal my Page. Sirha, go presently to Apelles, and will him to come to
me without either delay or excuse.
I go.
In the mean season to recreate my spirits, be∣ing so near, we will go see Diogenes, and see where his tub is. Diogenes?
Who calls?
Alexander. How happened it that you would not come out of your tub to my palace?
Because it was as far from my tub to your pal∣lace, as from your palace to my tub.
Why thē doest thou ow no reuerēce to kings:
No.
Why so?
Because they be no Gods.
They be Gods of the earth.
Yea, Gods of earth.
Plato is not of thy mind.
I am glad of it.
Why?
Because I would have none of Diogenes mind but Diogenes.
If Alexander have any thing that may pleasure Diogenes, let me know, and take it.
Then take not from me, that you cannot give me, the light of the world.
What doest thou want?
Nothing that you have.
I have the world at command.
And I in contempt.
Thou shalt live no longer than I will.
But I will die whether you will or no.
How should one learn to be content?
Vnlearn to covet.
Hephestion, were I not Alexander, I would wish to be Diogenes.
He is dogged, but discrete, I cannot tel how
sharpe with a kind of sweetness, full of wit, yet too too wayward.
Diogenes, whē I come this way again, I will both see thee, and confer with thee.
Doe.
But here comes Apelles, how now Apelles, is Venus face yet finished
Not yet: Beauty is not so soon shadowed whose perfection comes not within the compass either of cunning or of colour.
Well let it rest imperfect, &amp; come you with me, where I will show you that finished by nature, that you have been trifling about by art.
Lady, I doubt whether there bee any colour so fresh, that may shadow a countenance so fair.
Sir, I had thought you had been commanded to paint with your hand, not to gloss with your tongue, but as I have heard, it is the hardest thing in painting to set down a hard favour, which makes you to despair of my face, and then shall you have as great thanks to spare your labour, as to discredit your art.
Mistress, you neither differ from you self, nor your sex: for knowing your own perfection, you seem to dispraise that which men most cōmend, drawing thē by that mean into an admiration, where feeding them selves they fall into an ecstasy, your modesty being the cause of the one, and of the other, your affections.
I am too young to understand your speech, though old enough to withstand your devise: you have bin so long used to colours, you cā do nothing but co∣lore.
Indeed the colours I see, I fear will alter the co∣lore I have: but come madam, will you draw near, for
Alexander will be here anon. Psyllus, stay you here at the window, if any enquire for me, answer, Non lubet esse domi.
It is always my masters fashion, when any fair Gentlewoman is to be drawn within, to make me to stay without. But if he should paint Iupiter like a Bull, like a Swan, like an Eagle, then must Psyllus with one hand grind colours, and with the other hold the candle. But let him alone, the better he shadows her face, the more will he burn his own heart. And now if a manne cold meet with Manes, who I dare say, looks as lean, as if Diogenes dropped out of his nose.
And here comes Manes, who hath as much meat in his maw, as thou hast honesty in thy head.
Then I hope thou art very hungry.
They that know thee, know that.
But doest thou not remember that wee have certain liquor to confer withal.
I, but I have business, I must go cry a thing.
Why, what hast thou lost?
That which I never had my dinner.
Foul lubber wilt thou cry for thy dinner?
I mean, I must cry, not as one would say cry, but cry, that is make a noise.
Why fool, that is al one, for if thou cry, thou must needs make a noise.
Boy thou art deceived. Cry hath diverse sign∣fications, and may bee alluded to many things, knave but one, and can be applied but to thee.
Profound Manes.
Wee Cynickes are mad fellows, did thou
not find I did quip thee?
No verily, why, what is a quip.
We great girders cal it a short saying of a sharp wit, with a bitter sense in a sweet word.
How can thou thus divine, divide, define, di∣spute, and all on the sudden?
Wit will have his swing, I am bewitched, inspird, inflamed, infected.
Well, then will not I tempt thy gybing spirit.
Do not Psyllus, for thy dull head will bee but a grindstone for my quick wit, which if thou whet with o∣uerwhartes, peristi, actum est de te. I have drawn blood at ones brains with a bitter bob.
Let me cross my self: for I die, if I cross thee.
Let me do my business, I my self am afraid, least my wit should wax warm, and then must it needs con∣sum some hard head with fine &amp; pretty jests. I am some times in such a vain, that for want of some dull pate to work on, I begin to gird my self.
The Gods shield me from such a fine fellow, whose words melt wits like wax.
Well then, let vs to the matter. In faith my moister means to morrow to fly.
It is a jest.
Is it a jest to fly: shouldest thou fly so soon, thou shouldest repent it in earnest.
Well, I will be the crier.
O is, o is, o is, Al man∣ner of men, women or children, that will come to mo∣row into the market place, between the hours of nine and ten, shall see Diogenes the Cynic fly.
I do not think he will fly.
Tush, say fly.
Fly.
Now let vs go: for I will not see him again till midnight, I have a back way into his tub.
Which way call thou the backwaye, when every way is open.
I mean to come in at his back.
Well, let vs go away, that wee may return speedily.
I shall never draw your eyes well, because they blind mine.
Why thē, paint me without eyes, for I am blind.
Were you ever shadowed before of any?
No. And would you could so now shadow me, that I might not be perceived of any?
It were pity, but that so absolute a face should furnish Venus temple amongst these pictures.
What are these pictures?
This is Laeda, whom love deceived in likeness of a swan.
A fair woman, but a foul deceit.
This is Alcmena, Unto whō Iupiter came in shape of Amphitriō her husband, and begat Hercules.
A famous son, but an infamous fact.
He might do it, because he was a God.
Nay, therefore it was evil done, because he was a God.
This is Dane, into whose prison Iupiter drizzled a golden shower, and obtained his desire?
What Gold can make one yield to desire?
This is Europe, whom Iupiter ravished: this An∣tiopa.
Were al the Gods like this Iupiter?
There were many Gods in this like Iupiter.
I think in those days love was well ratified a∣mong
men on earth, when lust was so full ado∣rised by the Gods in heaven.
Nay, you may imagine there were womē passing amiable, when there were Gods exceeding amorous.
Were women never so fair, mē wold be false.
Were womē never so false, men wold be fond.
What counterfeit is this Appeals?
This is Venus, the Goddess of love.
What, be there also loving Goddesses?
This is she that hath power to command the very affections of the heart.
How is she hired: by prayer, by sacrifice, or bribs?
By prayer, sacrifice and bribes.
What prayer?
Vows irrevocable.
What sacrifice?
Hearts ever sighing never dissembling.
What bribes.
Roses and kisses: but were you never in love?
No, nor love in me.
Then have you injuried many.
How so?
Because you have been loved of many.
Flattered perchance of some.
It is not possible that a face so fair, &amp; a wit so sharpe, both without comparison, should not be apt to love.
If you begin to tip your tongue with cunning, I pray you dip your pencil in colours, and fall to that you must doe, not that you would doe.
Parmenio, I cannot tel how it comes to pass, that in Alexander now a days there grows an vnpatiēt kind of life, in the morning he is melancholy, at noon
solomne, at all times either more sower or severe, then he was accustomed.
In kings causes I rather love to doubt then conjecture, and think it better to be ignorant then in∣quisitiue: they have long ears and stretched arms, in whose heads suspicion is a proof, and to be accused is to be condemned.
Yet between vs there canne be no danger to find out the cause: for that there is no malice to with∣stand it. It may be an unquenchable thirst of conque∣ring makes him unquiet: it is not unlikely his long ease hath altered his humour: that he should bee in love, it is not impossible.
In love Clytus? no, no, it is as far from his thought, as treason in ours, he whose ever waking eye, whose never tried heart, whose body patient of labour, whose mind unsatiable of victory, hath always bin no∣ted, cannot so soon be melted into the weak conceits of love. Aristotle told him there were many worlds, &amp; that he hath not conquered one that gapes for al, gal∣leth Alexander. But here he comes.
Parmenio, and Clitus, I would have you both ready to go into Persia about an embassage no less pro∣fitable to me, then to your selves honourable.
We are ready at all commands, wishing no∣thing else, but continually to be commanded.
Well, then withdraw your selves, till I have fur∣there considered of this matter.
Now we will see how Apelles goes forward: I doubt me that nature hath overcome art, &amp; her countenance his cunning.
You love, and therefore think any thing.
But not so far in love with Campaspe, as with Bucephalus, if occasion serve either of cōflicte or of con¦quest.
Occasion cannot want, if will doe not. Behold all Persia swelling in the pride of their own power. the Scithians careless what courage or fortune canne doe: the Egyptians dreaming in the southsayings of their Auguries, and gaping over the smoke of their beasts in∣tralles. All these Alexander, are to bee subdued, if that world be not slipped out of your head, which you have sworn to conquer with that hand.
I confess the labours fit for Alexander, and yet recreation necessary among so many assaults, bloody wounds, intolerable troubles: give me leave a little, if not to sit, yet to breath. And doubt not but Alexander can, when he will, throw affections as far from him, as he can cowardice. But behold Diogenes talking with one at his tub.
One penny Diogenes, I am a Cynic.
He made thee a beggar, that first gave thee any thing.
Why, if thou wilt give nothing, no body will give thee.
I want nothing, till the springs dry, &amp; the earth perish.
I gather for the Gods.
And I care not for those gods, which want mo∣ney.
Thou art a right Cynic, that will give no∣thing.
Thou art not, that will beg any thing.
Alexander, king Alexāder, give a poor Cynic a great.
It is not for a king to give a great.
Then give me a talent.
It is not for a beggar to ask a talent, A way. Apelles?
Here.
Now Gentlewoman, doth not your beauty
put the painter to his trump?
Yes my Lord, seeing so disordered a count∣naunce he fears he shall shadow a deformed counterfeit.
Wold he could colour the life with the feature. And me thinks Apelles, were you as cūning as report saith you are, you may paint flowers as well with sweet smells, as fresh colours observing in your mixture such things as should draw near to their savours.
Your majesty must know, it is no less harde to paint savours thē virtues, colours can neither speak nor think.
Where do you first begin, when you draw any picture?
The proposition of the face in just compass, as I can.
I would begin with the eye, as a light to all the rest.
If you will paint, as you are a king, your May∣sty, may begin where you please, but as you wold be a painter, you must begin with the face.
Aurelius would in one hour colour four faces.
I marvel in half an hour he did not four.
Why, is it so easy?
No but he doth it so homely.
When will you finish Campaspe?
Never finish: for always in absolute beauty there is somewhat aboue art.
Why should not I by labour bee as cunning as Apelles?
God shield you should have cause to be so cun∣ning as Apelles.
Me thinks 4. colours are sufficiēt to shadow any countenance, &amp; so it was in the time of Phyaias.
Thē had mē fewer fancies, &amp; womē not so many favours. For now, if the hair of her eye brows be black,
yet must the hair of her head be yellow: the attire of her head must be different from the habit of her body, else must the picture seem like the blazon of ancient armoury, not like the sweet delight of new found ami∣ableness. For as in garden knots diversity of odours make a more sweet savor, or as in music divers strings cause a more delicate consent, so in painting, the more colours, the better counterfeit, observing black for a ground, and the rest for grace.
Lend me thy pencil Apelles, I will paint, &amp; thou shalt judge.
Here.
The coal breaks.
You lean too hard.
Now it blacks not.
You lean too soft.
This is awry.
Your eye goes not with your hand.
Now it is worse.
Your hand goes not with your mind.
Nay, if al be too hard or soft, so many rules and regards, that ones hand, ones eye, ones mind must all draw together, I had rather be setting of a battle, then blotting of a board. But how have I done here?
Like a king.
I think so: but nothing more unlike a Painter. Well Apelles, Campaspe is finished as I wish, dismiss her, bring presently her counterfeit after me.
I will.
Now Hephestion, doth not this matter cotton as I would, Campaspe looks pleasantly, liberty will en∣crease her beauty, &amp; my love shall advance her honour.
I will not contrary your majesty, for time must we are out that love hath wrought, and reason wean what appetite nursed.
How stately she passes bye, yet how so barley, a
sweet consent in her countenance with a chaste disdain, desire mingled with coyness, and I cannot tell how to term it, a cursed yielding modesty.
Let her pass.
So she shall for the fairest on the earth.
I shall be hanged for tarrying so long.
I pray God my moister be not flown before I come.
Away Manes, my moister doth come.
Where have you bin all this while?
No where but here.
Who was here since my coming?
No body.
Ungracious wag, I perceive you have been a loitering: was Alexander no body?
He was a king, I meant no mean body.
I will cogell your body for it, and then will I say it was no body, because it was no honest body. Away in.
Unfortunate Apelles, and therefore unfortunate, bee∣cause Apelles. Hast thou by drawing her beauty brought to pass, that thou can scarce draw thine own breath. And by so much the more hast thou increased thy care, by how much the more thou hast showed thy cūning: was it not sufficient to behold the fire and warm thee, but with Satyrus thou must kiss the fire and burn thee? O Campaspe, Campaspe, art must yield to nature, reason to appetite, wisdom to affection Could Pigmalion entreat
by prayer to have his Ivory turned into flesh? and can∣not Apelles obtain by plaints to have the picture of his love changed to life? Is painting so far inferior to carving? or dost thou Venus, more delight to be hewed with Chisels, then shadowed with colours? what Pygmy∣lyon, or what Pyrgoteles, or what Lysppus is hee, that ever made thy face so fair or spread thy fame so far as I? unless, Ʋenus, in this thou enuiest mine art, that in co∣louring my sweet Campaspe, I have left no place by cun∣ning to make thee so amiable. But alas, she is the para∣more to a prince. Alexander the monarch of the earth hath both her body and affection. For what is it that kings cannot obtain by prayers, threats and promi∣ses? Will not she think it better to sit under a cloth of e∣state like a queen, then in a poor shop like a huswife? and esteem it sweeter to be the concubine of the Lord of the world, then spouse to a painter in Athēs? Yes, yes Apelles, thou moist swim against the stream with the Crab, and feed against the wind with the dear, and peck against the steel with the Cockatrice: stars are to be looked at, not reached at, princes to bee yielded unto, not contended with: Campaspe to bee honoured, not obtained to be painted not possessed of thee. O fair face, O unhappy hand, &amp; why did thou draw it so fair a face? O beautiful countenance, the express image of Venus, but sowhat fresher: the only pattern of that eter∣night, which Iupiter dreaming of asleep, could not con∣ceiue again wakīg Blush Venus, for I am ashamed to end thee. Now must I paint things unpossible for mine art, but agreeable with my affections: deep and hollow sighs, sad and melancholy thoughts, wounds and slaughters of conceits, a life posting to death, a death galloping from life, a wavering constancy, an unsettled resolution, and what not, Apelles? And what but Apelles? But as they that are shaken with a fever are to bee war∣med with clothes, not groans, &amp; as he that melts in
a consumption is to bee recurred by Colices, not con∣ceites: so the feeding cāker of my care, the never dying worm of my hart is to be killed by coūsel, not cries by applying of remedies, not by replying of reasons. And sith in cases desperate there must be used medicines that are extreme, I will hazard that little life that is left, to re∣store the greater part that is lost, &amp; this shall be my first practise: for wit must work, where authority is not. As∣soon as Alexander hath viewed this portraiture, I will by devise give it a blemish, that by that means she may come again to my shop, and then as good it were to vt∣la my love, and die with denial, as conceal it, &amp; live in despair.
This is the place, the day, the time, that Dioge∣nes hath appointed to fly.
I will not loose the flight of so fair a foul as Diogenes is, though my moister cogel my no by∣die, as he threatened.
What Psyllus, will the beast wag his wings to day?
We shall hear: for here comes Manes. Ma∣nes will it be?
Be, he were best be as cunning as a Bee, or else shortly he will not be at all.
How is he furnished to fly, hath he feathers?
Thou art an ass, Capons, Geese &amp; Owls, have feathers. He hath found Dedalus old waxen wings, and hath been piecing them this month, he is so broad in the shoulders. O you shall see him cut the ayre even like a Tortoise.
Me thinks so wise a man should not be so mad, his body must needs be to heavy.
Why, hee hath eaten nothing this seven-night but cork and feathers.
Tutch him Manes
He is so light, that he can scarce keep him from flying at midnight.
See they begin to flock, and behold my may∣ster bustles himself to fly.
Ye wicked and beewtiched Atheneans, whose bodies make the earth to groan, and whose breathes infect the air with stench. Come ye to see Diogenes fly? Diogenes comes to see you sink? ye call me dog: so I am, for I long to gnaw the bones in your skins. Ye term me an hater of men: no, I am a hater of your manners. Your lives dissolute, not fearing death, will prove your deaths desperate, not hoping for life: what do you else in Athens but sleep in the day, and surfeit in the night: back Gods in the morning with pride, in the evening belly Gods with gluttony. You flatter kings, &amp; call them Gods: speak truth of your selves, &amp; confess you are devils. From the Bee you have taken not the honey, but the wax to make your religion, fra∣ming it to the time, not to the truth. Your filthy lust you colour under a courtly colour of love, injuries a∣broad under the title of policies at home, and secrete malice creeps under the name of public justice. You have caused Alexander to dry up springs &amp; plant Vines, to sow roket and weed endiffe, to shear sheep, and shrine foxes. Al cōscience is sealed at Athens. Swearing comes of a hot metal: lying of a quick wit: flattery of a flowing tongue, indecent talk of a merry dispose∣tion. Al things are lawful at Athens. Either you think there are no Gods, or I must think ye are no men. You build as though you should live for ever, and surfeit as though you should die to morrow.
None teaches true Philosophy but Aristotle, because he was the kings schoolmaster. O times, O men, O corruption in manners. Remember that greene grass must turn to dry hay. When you sleep, you are not sure to wake, and when you rise, not certain to lye down, Look you never so hie, your heads must lye level with your feet. Thus have I flown over your disordered lives, and if you will not amend your manners, I will stu∣die to fly further from you, that I may be nearer to ho∣nasty.
Thou rauest Diogenes, for thy life is different from thy words. Did not I see thee come out of a brothel house? was it not a shame?
It was no shame to go out, but a shame to go in.
It were a good deed Manes, to beat thy my∣ster.
You were as good eat my moister.
Hast thou made vs all fools, and wilt thou not fly?
I tell thee unless thou be honest, I will fly.
Dog, dog, take a boon.
Thy father need fear no dogs, but dogs thy father.
We will tel Alexander, that thou reprouest him behind his back.
And I will tell him, that you flatter him before his face.
We will cause al the boys in the street to hiss at thee.
Indeed I think the Athenians have their children ready for any vice, because they be A∣thenians.
Why moister, mean you not to fly?
No Manes, not without wings.
Every body will account you a liar.
No, I warrant you: for I will always say the A∣thenians are mischievous.
I care not, it was sport ynogh for me to see these old huddles hit home.
Nor I.
Come, let vs go, and hereafter when I mean to rail upon any body openly, it shall be given out, I will fly,
Campaspe, It is hard to judge whether thy choice be more unwise, or the chance unfortunate. Doest thou prefer, but stay, utter not that in words, which makes thine ears to glow with thoughts. Tush better thy tongue wag, then thy heart break. Hath a painter crept further into thy mind then a Prince? Apel∣les thē Alexander? Fond wench, the baseness of thy mind bewrays the meanness of thy birth. But alas, affection is a fire which kindles as well in the bramble as in the oak, &amp; catches hold where it first lights, not where it may best burn. Larks that mount aloof in the ayre, build their nests below in the earth, and women that cast their eyes upon kings, may place their hearts upon vassals. A needle will become thy fingers better then a Lute, and a distaff is fitter for thy hand then a Sceptre. Ants live safely, till they have gotten wings, &amp; Juniper is not blown up, till it hath gotten an hie top. The mean estate is without care, as long as it continues without pride. But here comes Apelles, in whom I would there were the like affection.
Gentlewoman, the misfortune I had with your picture, will put you to some pains, to sit again to be painted.
It is small pains for me to sit still, but infinite for you to draw still.
No Madame, to paint Venus was a pleasure, but to shadow the sweet face of Campaspe it is a heaven.
If your tongue were made of the same flesh that your heart is, your words would be as your thoughts are, but such a common thing it is amōgst you to com∣mēd, that oftentimes for fashion sake you cal thē beau∣tifull, whom you know black.
What might men doe to be believed?
Whet their tongues on their hearts.
So they doe, and speak as they think.
I would they did.
I would they did not.
Why, would you have them dissemble?
Not in love, but their love. But will you give me leave to ask you a question without offence.
So that you will answer me an other without excuse.
Whom do you love best in the world.
He that made me last in the world.
That was a God.
I had thought it had been a man. But whom do you honour most Apelles.
The thing that is likest you Campaspe.
My picture?
I dare not venture upon your person. But come, let vs go in: for Alexander will think it long till we return.
We hear nothing of our Embassage, a colour
belike to blear our eyes, or tickle our ears, or inflame our hearts. But what doth Alexander in the mean sea∣son, but use for Tantara, Sol. Fa. La. for his harde couch, down beds, for his handful of water, his standing Cup of wine?
Clytus, I mislike this new delicacy &amp; pleasing peace: for what else do we se now then a kind of softness in every mans mind, Bees do make their hives in soldi∣ers helmets, our steeds furnished with foot clothes of gold, in steed of saddles of steel. More time to bee re∣quarrelled to scour the rust of our weapons, thē there was woōt to be in subdewing the countries of our enemies. Since Alexander fell from his harde armour to his soft robes behold the face of his court, youths that were wont to carry devises of victory in their shields, engrave now posies of love in their rings. They that were accustomed on trotting horses to charge the eni∣my with a lance, now in easy coches ride up &amp; down, to court Ladies: in steed of sword and target to hazard their lives, use pen and paper to paint their loves. Yea, such a fear and faintness is grown in court, that they wish rather to hear the blowing of a horn to hunt, thē the sound of a trumpet to fight? O Phillip, were thou a∣live to see this alteration, thy men turned to womē, thy soldiers to lovers, gloves worn in velvet, caps in steed of plumes in graven helmets, thou would ether die among them for sorrow, or confound them for anger.
Cease Permenio, least in speaking what become∣meth thee not, thou feel what likes thee not: truth is never without a scratched face, whose tōgue although it cannot be cut out, yet must it be tied up.
It grieves me not a little for Hephestion, who thirsts for honour, not ease: but such is his fortune &amp; nearness in friendship to Alexander, that he must lay a pillow under his head, when he would put a target in his hand.
But let vs draw in, to see how well it becomes them to tread the measurs in a dance, that were wont to set the order for a march.
I have now Campaspe, almost made an end.
You told me Apelles, you would never end.
Never end my love: for it shall be eternal.
That is, neither to have beginning nor ending.
You are disposed to mistake, I hope you do not mistrust.
What will you say, if Alexander perceive your love?
I will say it is no treason to love.
But how if he will not suffer thee to see my per∣son?
Then will I case continually on thy picture.
That will not feed thy heart.
Yet shall it fill mine eye: besides the sweet thoughts, the sure hopes, thy protested faith, will cause me to embrace thy shadow continually in mine arms, of the which by strong imagination I will make a sub∣stance.
Well, I must be gon: but this assure your self, that I had rather bee in thy shop grinding colours, then in Alexanders court, following higher fortunes.
Foolish wensh, what hast thou done? that alas which cannot be undone, and therefore I fear me undone. But content is such a life, I care not for abundance. O Apel∣les,
thy love comes from the heart, but Alexan∣ders from the mouth. The love of Kings is like the blowing of winds, which whistle sometimes gent∣lye among the leaves, and straight ways turn the trees up by the roots: or fire which warms a far off, and burns near hand, or the sea, which makes men hoise their seals in a flattering calm, and to cut their mastes in a rough storm. They place affection by times, by policy, by appointment, if they frown, who dares cal them inconstant? if bewray secretes, who will term them untrue? if fall to other loves, who trembles not, if he call them unfaithful. In kings there can be no love, but to Queens: for as near must they meet in may∣sty, as they doe in affection. It is requisite to stand a∣aloof from kings love, Jove, and lightening.
Now Apelles, gather thy wits together: Campas∣pe is no less wise then fair, thy self must bee no less cunning then faithful. It is no small matter to be rival with Alexander.
Apelles, you must come away quickly with the picture, the king thinks that now you have painted it, you play with it.
If I would play with pictures, I have enough at home.
None perhaps you like so well.
It may be I have painted none so well.
I have known many fairer faces.
And I many better boys.
I have brought my sons Diogenes, to be taught of thee.
What can thy sons doe?
You shall see their qualities. Dance sirha.
How like you this? doth he well?
The better, the worser.
The Music very good.
The Musicians very bad, who only study to have their strings in tune, never framing their manners to order.
Now shall you see the other. Tumble sirha.
How like you this? why do you laugh?
To see a wag, that was born to break his neck by destiny, to practise it by art.
This dog will bite me I will not be with him.
Fear not boy, dogs eat no thistles.
I marvel what dog thou art, if thou be a dog.
When I am hungry, a mastiff, and whē my bell∣lie is full a spaniel.
Doest thou believe that there are any gods, that thou art so dogged?
I must needs believe there are gods; for I think thee an enemy to them.
Why so?
Because thou hast taught one of thy sons to rule his legs, and not to follow learning, the other to bend his body every way, and his mind no way.
Thou doest nothing but snarl, and bark like a dog.
It is the next way to drive away a thief.
Now shall you hear the third, who signs like a Nightingale.
I care not: for I have heard a Nightingale sing her self.
Sing sirha.
Lo Diogenes, I am sure thou can not doe so much.
But there is never a Thrush but can.
What hast thou taught Manes thy man:
To be as unlike as may be thy sons.
He hath taught me to fast, lye hard, &amp; run a∣way.
How say thou Perim, wilt thou bee with him?
I, so he will teach me first to run away.
Thou neatest not be taught, thy legs are so nimble.
How say thou Milo, Wilt thou bee with him?
Nay, hold your peace, he shall not.
Why?
There is not room enough for him and me both to tumble in one tub.
Well Diogenes, I perceive my sons brooke not thy manners.
I thought no less, when they knew my ver∣tues.
Farewell Diogenes, thou neededst not have scra∣ped roots, if thou would have followed A∣lexander.
Nor thou have followed Alexāder, if thou had scraped roots.
I fear me Apelles, that thine eyes have blabbed that, which thy tongue durst not. What little regard had thou, whilst Alexander viewed the conterfeite of Cam∣paspe? thou stoodest gazing on her countenance. If he espy or but suspect, thou must needs twice perish with his hate, and thine own love. Thy pale looks when he blushed, thy sad countenance, when hee smiled, thy sighs, when he questioned, may breed in him a jealousy, perchance a frenzy. O love, I never before knew what thou were and now haste thou made me that I know not what my self am? Only this I know, that I must endure intolerable passions, for unknown plea∣sures. Dispute not the cause wretch, but yield to it: for better it is to melt with desire, then wrestle with love. Cast thy self on thy careful bed, be content to live unknown, and die vnfounde. O Campaspe, I have pain∣ted thee in my heart, painted? nay, contrary to mine art, imprinted, and that in such deep Characters, that nothing can rase it out, unless it rub thy heart out.
It shall go hard, but this peace shall bring vs some pleasure.
Down with arms, and up with legs, this is a world for the nonce.
Sweet youths, if you knew what it were to save your sweet blood, you would not so foolishly go about to spend it. What delight can there be in gashing, to make foul scars in fair faces, &amp; crooked maims in straight legs? as though men being borne goodly by nature, would of purpose become deformed by folly, and all forsooth for a new found term, called valiant, a word which breeds more quarrels than the sense can commendation.
It is true Lays, a featherbed hath no fellow, good drink makes good blood, and shall pelting words spill it?
I mean to enjoy the world, and to draw out my life at the wiredrawers, not to curtal it off at the cutlers.
You may talk of war, speak big, conquer worlds with great words: but stay at home, where in steed of Alarms you shall have dances, for hot bat∣tails with fierce men, gentle skirmishes with fair women. These pewter coats can never sit so well as Satin dublets. Believe me, you cannot conceive the pleasure of peace, unless you despise the rudeness of war.
It is so. But see Diogenes prying over his tub: Diogenes what say thou to such a morsel?
I say, I would spit it out of my mouth, because it should not poison my stomach.
Thou speak as thou art, it is no meat for dogs.
I am a dog, and Philosophy rates me from carrion.
Uncivil wretch, whose manners are answer∣able to thy calling, the time was thou would have had my company, had it not been, as thou said too dear.
I remember there was a thing, that I repented
me of, and now thou haste told it: indeed it was too dear of nothing, and thou dear to no body.
Down villain, or I will have thy head bro∣ken.
Will you couch?
Avaunt cur. Come sweet Lays, let vs go to some place, and possess peace. But first let vs sing, there is more pleasure in tuning of a voice, than in a volley of shot.
Now let vs make haste, least Alexander find vs here.
Me thinks Hephestion you are more melan∣choly than you were accustomed, but I perceive it is all for Alexander. You can neither brooke this peace, nor my pleasure, be of good cheer, though I wink, I sleep not.
Melancholy I am not, nor well content: for I know not how there is such a rust crept into my bones with this long ease, that I fear I shall not scour it out with infinite labours.
Yes, yes, if all the travails of conquering the world will set either thy body or mine in tune, we will undertake them. But what think you of Apelles? Did ye ever see any so perplexed? Hee neither answered dire∣ctly to any question, nor looked steadfastly upon any thing. I hold my life the painter is in love.
It may be: for commonly we see it incident in artificers to be enamoured of their own works, as Are∣chidamus of his wooden dove, Pygmalion of his ivory
Image, Arachne of his woddē swan, especially painters, who playing with their own confesses, now coveting to draw a glancing eye, then a rolling, now a winking, still mending it, never ending it, till they bee caught with it, and then poor souls they kiss the colours with their lips, with which before they were loath to taint their fingers.
I will find it out. Page, go speedily for Apel∣les, will him to come hither, and when you see vs earnest∣lie in talk, suddenly cry out, Apelles shop is on fire.
It shall be done.
Forget not your lesson.
I marvel what your devise shall be.
The event shall prove.
I pity the poor painter, if he be in love.
Pity him not, I pray thee, that severe gravity set aside, what doe you think of love?
As the Macedonians doe of their herb Beet, which looking yellow in the ground, and black in the hand, think it better seen than touched.
But what doe you imagine it to be?
A word by supersticiō thought a God, by use turned to an humour, by self-will made a flattering mad∣ness.
You are too hard hearted to think so of love. Let vs go to Diogenes. Diogenes, thou moist think it some∣what, that Alexander comes to thee again so soon.
If you come to learn, you could not come soon enough, if to laugh, you be come too soon.
It would better become thee to bee more cur∣teous, and frame thy self to please.
And you better to be less, if you durst displease.
What dost thou think of the time we have here?
That we have little and lose much.
If one be sick what would thou have him do?
Be sure that he make not his physician his heir.
If thou might have thy will, how much groūd would content thee?
As much as you in the end must bee contented withal.
What, a world?
No, the length of my body.
Hephestion, shall I be a little pleasant with him?
You may: but he will be very perverse with you.
It skills not, I cannot be angry with him. Dio∣genes, I pray thee what doest thou think of love?
A little worser than I can of hate.
And why?
Because it is better to hate the things, which make to love, than to love the things, which give occasi∣on of hate.
Why, be not women the best creatures in the world?
Next men and Bees.
What doest thou dislike chiefly in a woman?
One thing.
What?
That she is a woman.
In mine opinion thou were never born of a wo∣man, that thou think so hardly of womē. But now cō∣meth Apelles, who I am sure is as far frō thy thoughts, as thou art frō his cūning. Diogenes, I will have thy cabin re∣moved nearer to my court, because I will be a philosopher.
And whē you have done so, I pray you remove your court further from my cabin, because I will not be a courtier.
But here comes Apelles. Apelles, what piece of work have you now in hand?
None in hand if it like your majesty: but I am devising a platform in my head.
I think your hand put it in your head. Is it no∣thing about Ʋenus?
No, but some thing aboue Venus.
Apelles, look about you, your shop is on fire.
Ay me, if the picture of Campaspe be burnt, I am undone.
Stay Apelles, no haste, it is your hart is on fire, not your shop, &amp; if Cam. hang there, I would she were burnt. But have you the picture of Campaspe? Belike you love her well, that you care not though al be lost, so she be safe.
Not love her: but your majesty knows that painter• in their last works are said to excel themselves, and in this I have so much pleased my self, that the sha∣dow as much delights me being an artificer, as the substance doth others that are amorous.
You lay your colours grossly, though I could not paint in your shop, I cā spy into your excuse. Be not asha∣med Apelles, it is a gentleman's sport to be in love. Call hither Campaspe. Me thinks I might have bin made pri∣uie to your affection, though my counsel had not been necessary, yet my countenance might have bin thought requisite. But Apelles forsooth loves under hand, yea &amp; under Alexanders nose, and: but I say no more.
Apelles loves not so: but he lives to doe as Alexander will.
Campas here is news. Apel. is in love with you.
It pleases your Majesty to say so.
Hephestion, I will try her too. Campaspe, for the good qualities I know in Apelles, and the virtue I see in you, I am determined you shall enjoy one another. How say you Campaspe, would you say I?
Your handmaid must obey, if you command.
Think you not Hephestion that she would fine be commanded?
I am no thought catcher, but I guess unhappily.
I will not enforce marriage, where I cannot compel love.
But your majesty may move a question, where
you be willing to have a match.
Believe me Hephestion, these parties are agreed, they would have me both priest and witness. Apelles. take Campaspe, why move ye not? Campaspe, take Apelles will it not be? If you be ashamed one of the other, by my consent you shall never come together. But dissemble not Campaspe, do you love Apelles?
Pardon my Lord, I love Apelles.
Apelles, it were a shame for you, being loved so openly of so fair a virgin, to say the contrary. Doe you love Campaspe?
Only Campaspe.
Two loving worms Hephestion, I perceive Alexander cannot subdue the affections of men, though cōquer their coūtries. Love falls like a dew as well vpō the low grass, as upon the high Caedar. Sparks have their heat, Antes their gall, Flies their spline. Well, enjoy one another, I give her thee frāckly Apelles. Thou shalt see that Alexander makes but a toy of love, and leads affection in fetters, using fācie as a fool to make him sport, or a minsttell to make him merry. It is not the amorous glance of an eye can settle an idle thought in the heart, no no, it is childrens game, a life for seam∣sters and scholars, the one pricking in clouts have no∣thing else to think on, the other picking fancies out of books, have little else to marvel at. Go Apelles, take with you your Campaspe, Alexander is cloyed with loo∣king on that, which thou wondrest at.
Thanks to your majesty on bended knee, you have honoured Apelles.
Thanks withbowed heart, you have blessed Campaspe.
Page go warn Clytus and Parmenio and the o∣there Lords to be in a readiness, let the trumpet sound, strike up the drum, and I will presently into Persia.
How now Hephestion, is Alexander able to resist love as he list?
The conquering of Thebes was not so honou∣rabble as the subduing of these thoughts.
It were a shame Alexander should desire to cō∣mand the world, if he could not command himself. But come let vs go, I will try whether I can better bear my hand with my hart, than I could with mine eye. And good Hephestion, when al the world is won, and every country is thine and mine, either find me out another to subdue, or of my word I will fall in love.
where the Rain-bow touches the tree, no Cater∣pillars will hang on the leaves: where the Glo∣worm creeps in the night, no Addar will go in the day. We hope in the ears where our travails be lodged, no carping shall harbour in those tongues. Our exercises must be as your iudgemēt is, resembling water, which is always of the same colour into what it runs. In the Trojan horse lay couched soldiers with children, and in heaps of many words we fear divers vnsit, among some allowable. But as Demosthenes with often brea∣thing up the hill amend his stammering, so wee hope with sundry labours against the hair, to correct our stu∣dies. If the tree be blasted that blossoms, the fault is in the wind, and not in the root, and if our pastimes be misliked, that have been allowed, you must impute it to the malice of others, and not our endeavour. And so wee rest in good case if you rest well content.
WE cannot tell whether we are fallen among Dio∣medes birds or his horses, the one received some men with sweet notes, the other bit al men with sharp teeth. But as Homers Gods conveyed them into clouds, whom they would have kept from curses, and as Venus, least Advnis should be pricked with the stings of Adders, covered his face with the wings of Swans: so wee hope, being shielded with your highness countenance, wee shall, though hear the neighing, yet not feel the kick∣ing of those jade, and receive, though no praise (which we cannot deserve) yet a pardon, which in all humility we desire. As yet we cannot tell what we should term our labours, iron or bullion, only it belonged to your majesty to make thē fit either for the forge or the mynt, currant by the stamp, or counterfeit by the anvil. For as nothing is to be called white, unless it had bin named white by the first creature, so can there bee nothing thought good in the opinion of others, unless it bee christened good by the judgment of your self. For our selves again, we are like these torches wax, of which being in your highness hands, you may make Doves or Vultures, Roses or Nettles, Laurel for a garland, or El∣der for a disgrace.

