IOS and Smyrna were two sweet Cytties, the first named of the Violet, the latter of the Myrrh: Homer was borne in the one, and buried in the other; Your Majesties judgment and favour, are our Sun and shadow, the one coming of your deep wisdom, the other of your won∣ted grace. VVee in all humility desire, that by the former, receiving our first breath, we may in the latter, take our last rest.
Augustus Caesar had such piercing eyes, that who so looked on him, was constrained to wink. Your highness hath so perfect a judge∣meant, that what soever we offer, we are enfor∣ced to blush; yet as the Athenians were most curious, that the Lawn wherewith Minerua was covered, should be without spot or wrin∣kle,
So have we endeavoured with all care, that what wee present your Highness, should ney∣there offend in Scene nor syllable, knowing that as in the ground where Gold grows, nothing will prosper but Gold, so in your Maiestes mind, where nothing doth harbour but virtue, nothing can enter but virtue.
THE Sun doth beat upon the plain fields, wherefore let vs sit down Gallathea, under this fair Oak, by whose broad leaves, being defended from the warm beams, we may enjoy the fresh ayre, which softly breathes from Humber floods.
Father, you have devised well, and whilst our flock doth roam up and down this pleasant greene, you shall recount to me, if it please you, for what cause this Tree was dedicated unto Neptune, and why you have thus disguised me.
I doe agree thereto, and when thy state and my care be considered, thou shalt know this question was not asked in vain.
I willingly attend.
In times past, where thou see a heap of small pyble, stood a stately Temple of white Mar∣ble, which was dedicated to the God of the Sea, (and in right being so near the Sea) hither came all such as
either ventured by long travel to see Countries, or by great traffic to use merchandise, offering Sacrifice by fire, to get safety by water; yielding thanks for per∣rils past, &amp; making prayers for good success to come; but Fortune, constant in nothing but inconstancy, did change her copy, as the people their custom, for the Land being oppressed by Danes, who in steed of sacri∣fice, committed sacrilege, in steed of religion, rebelli∣on, and made a pray of that in which they should have made their prayers, tearing down the Temple even with the earth, being almost equal with the skies, en∣raged so the God who binds the winds in the hole∣lowes of the earth, that he caused the Seas to break their bounds, sith men had broke their vows, and to swell as far aboue their reach, as men had swarued beyond their reason: then might you see ships sail where sheep fed, anchors cast where ploughs go, fishermen throw their nets, where husbandmen sow their Corn, and fishes throw their scales where fowls doe breed their quills: then might you gather froth where now is dew, rotten weeds for sweet roses, &amp; take view of monstrous Mermaids, instead of pas∣sing fair Maids.
To hear these sweet marvels, I would mine eyes were turned also into ears.
But at the last, our Country-men repenting, and not too late, because at last, Neptune either weary of his wroth, or wary to doe them wrong, upon condi∣tion consented to ease their miseries.
What condition will not miserable men ac∣cept?
The condition was this, that at every five years day, the fairest and chastest virgin in all the Country, should be brought unto this Tree, &amp; here being bound, (whom neither parentage shall excuse
for honour, nor virtue for integrity) is left for a peace offering unto Neptune.
Dear is the peace that is bought with guilt∣less blood.
I am not able to say that, but hee sends a Monster called the Agar, against whose coming the waters roar, the fowls fly away, and the Cattle in the field for terror, shun the banks.
And she bound to endure that horror?
And she bound to endure that horror.
Doth this Monster devour her?
Whether she be devoured of him, or convey∣ed to Neptune, or drowned between both, it is not per∣meted to know, and encurreth danger to conjecture; Now Gallathea here ends my tale, &amp; begins thy tragedy.
Alas father, and why so?
I would thou had been less fair, or more fortunate, then shouldest thou not rapine that I have disguised thee in this attire, for thy beauty will make thee to be thought worthy of this God; to avoid there∣fore destiny (for wisdom rules the stars) I think it better to use an unlawful means (your honour preser∣ued) then intolerable grief, both life and honour ha∣zarded, and to prevent (if it be possible) thy constella∣tion by my craft. Now hast thou heard the custom of this Country, the cause why this Tree was dedicated unto Neptune, and the vexing care of thy fearful Fa∣there.
Father, I have been attentive to hear, and by your patience am ready to answer. Destiny may be deferred, not prevented; and therefore it were bet∣la to offer my self in triumph, then to be drawn to it with dishonour. Hath nature (as you say) made me so fair aboue all, and shall not virtue make me as fa∣mous
as others? Doe you not know, (or doth over∣carefulness make you forget) that an honourable death is to be preferred before an infamous life. I am but a child, and have not lived long, and yet not so childish, as I de∣sire to live ever: virtues I mean to carry to my grave, not gray hairs. I would I were as sure that destiny would light on me, as I am resolved it could not fear me. Nature hath giuē me beauty, Virtue courage, Na∣ture must yield me death, Virtue honour. Suffer me therefore to die, for which I was borne, or let me curse that I was borne, sith I may not die for it.
Alas Gallathea, to consider the causes of change, thou art too young, and that I should find them out for thee, too too fortunate.
The destiny to me cannot be so hard as the disguising hateful.
To gain love, the Gods have taken shapes of beasts, and to save life art thou coy to take the at∣tire of men?
They were beastly gods, that lust could make them seem as beasts.
In health it is easy to counsel the sick, but it's hard for the sick to follow wholesome counsel. Well let vs depart, the day is far spent.
Fair Nymph, are you strayed from your company by chance, or love you to wander solitarily on purpose?
Fair boy, or god, or what ever you bee, I would you knew these woods are to me so well known, that I cannot stray though I would, and my mind so free, that to be melancholy I have no cause. There is none of Dianaes train that any can train, either out
of their way, or out of their wits.
What is that Diana a goddess? what her Nymphs virgins? what her pastimes hunting?
A goddess? who knows it not? Virgins? who thinks it not? Hunting? who loves it not?
I pray thee sweet wench, amongst all your sweet troop, is there not one that follows the sue∣test thing. Sweet love?
Love good sir, what mean you by it? or what doe you call it?
A heate full of coldness, a sweet full of bit∣ternesse, a pain full of pleasantness, which makes thoughts have eyes, and harts ears, bred by desire, nur∣sed by delight, weaned by jealousy, kilt by dissembling, buried by ingratitude, and this is love, fair Lady will you any?
If it be nothing else, it is but a foolish thing.
Try, and you shall find it a pretty thing.
I have neither will nor leisure, but I will foal∣lowe Diana in the Chase, whose virgins are all chaste, de∣lighting in the bow that wounds the swift Hart in the Forest, not fearing the bow that strikes the soft hart in the Chamber. This difference is between my Mi∣stress Diana, and your Mother (as I guess) Venus, that all her Nymphs are amiable and wise in their kind, the other amorous and too kind for their sex; and so farewell little god.
Diana, and thou, and all thine, shall know that Cupped is a great god, I will practise a while in these woods, and play such pranks with these Nymphs, that while they aim to hit others with their Arrows, they shall be wounded themselves with their own eyes.
Come Phillida, fair Phillida, and I fear me too fair being my Phillida, thou know the cu∣stome of this Country, &amp; I the greatness of thy beau∣tie, we both the fierceness of the monster Agar. Eve∣rye one thinks his own child fair, but I know that which I most desire, and would least have, that thou art fairest. Thou shalt therefore disguise thy self in attire, least I should disguise my self in affection, in suffering thee to perrish by a fond desire, whom I may preserve by a sure deceit.
Dear father, Nature could not make me so fair as she hath made you kind, nor you more kind then me dutiful. What soever you command I will not refuse, because you command nothing but my sa∣fetie, and your happiness. But howe shall I be disgui∣sed?
In mans apparel.
It will neither become my body, nor my mind.
Why Phillida?
For then I must keep company with boys, and commit follies unseemly for my sex, or keep company with girls, and be thought more wanton then becomes me. Besides, I shall be ashamed of my long hose and short coat, and so vnwarelie blab out something by blushing at every thing.
Fear not Phillida, use will make it easy, fear must make it necessary.
I agree, since my father will have it so, and fortune must.
Come let vs in, and when thou art disgui∣sed, roam about these woods till the time be past, and Neptune pleased.
Now Mariner, what call thou this sport on the Sea?
It is called a wrack.
I take no pleasure in it. Of all deaths I wold not be drowned, ones clothes will be so wet when hee is taken up.
What call thou the thing wee were bound to?
A raughter.
I will rather hang my self on a raughter in the house, then be so haled in the Sea, there one may have a leap for his life; but I marvel howe our Ma∣ster speeds.
Isle warrant by this time he is wetshod. Did you ever see water bubble as the Sea did? But what shall we doe?
You are now in Lincolnshire, where you can want no foul, if you can devise means to catch them, there be woods hard by, and at every miles end thou∣ses: so that if you seek on the Land, you shall speed better then on the Sea.
Sea, nay I will never sail more, I brooke not their diet: their bread is so hard, that one must carry a whetstone in his mouth to grind his teeth: the meat so salt, that one would think after dinner his tongue had been powdered ten days.
O thou hast a sweet life Mariner to be pined in a few boards, and to be within an inch of a thing bottomless. I pray thee howe often hast thou been drowned?
Fool thou see I am yet alive.
Why be they dead that be drowned, I had
thought they had been with the fish, and so by chance been caught up with them in a Net again. It were a shame a little cold water should kill a man of reason, when you shall see a poor Mynow lie in it, that hath no understanding.
Thou art wise from the crown of thy head upwards; seek you new fortunes now, I will follow mine old. I can shift the Moon and the Sun, and know by one Card, what all you cannot do by a whole pair. The Lode-stone that always holds his nose to the North, the two and thirty points for the wind, the wonders I see would make all you blind: you be but boys, I fear the Sea no more then a dish of water. Why fools it is but a liquid element, farewell.
It were good wee learned his cunning at the Cards, for we must live by cosenage, we have neither Lands nor wit, nor Masters, nor honesty.
Nay I would fine have his thirty two, that is, his three dozen lacking four points, for you see be∣twixt vs three there is not two good points.
Let vs call him a little back that wee may learn those points. Sir a word, I pray thee show vs thy points.
Will you learn?
I.
Then as you like this I will instruct you in all our secretes: for there is not a clout nor card, nor board, nor post, that hath not a special name, or singu∣ler nature.
Well begin with your points, for I lack on∣lie points in this world.
North. North &amp; by East. North North East. North-east and by North, North-east. North-east and by East. East North-east, East and by North. East.
Isle say it, North, north-east, North-east, Nor
nor and by Nore-east. I shall never doe it.
This is but one quarter.
I shall never learn a quarter of it. I will try. North, North-east, is by the West side, North and by North.
Passing ill.
Hast thou no memory. Try thou.
North North and by North. I can go no fur∣there.
O dullard, is thy head lighter then the wind, and thy tongue so heavy it will not wag. I will once again say it.
I will never learn this language, it will get but small living, when it will scarce be learned till one bee old.
Nay then farewell, and if your fortunes ex∣ceede not your wits, you shall starve before ye sleep.
Was there ever such cozening? Come let vs to the woods, and see what fortune we may have be∣fore they be made ships: as for our Moister hee is drowned.
I will this way.
I this.
I this, &amp; this day twelue-month let vs all meet here again: it may be we shall either beg together, or hang together.
It skils not so we be together. But let vs sing now, though we cry hereafter.
BLush Gallathea that must frame thy office∣tion fit for thy habit, and therefore be thought immodest, because thou art unfortunate. Thy
tender years cannot dissemble this deceit: nor thy sex bear it. O would the gods had made me as I seem to be, or that I might safely be what I seem not. Thy Father dotes Gallathea, whose blind love cor∣rupteth his fond judgment, and jealous of thy death, seems to dote on thy beauty, whose fond care carri∣eth his partial eye as far from truth, as his hart is frō falsehood. But why dost thou blame him or blab what thou art, when thou shouldest only counterfeit what thou art not. But whist, here comes a lad: I will learn of him how to behave my self.
I neither like my gate, nor my garments, the one untoward, the other unfit, both unseemly. O Phil∣lida, but yonder stays one, and therefore say nothing. But ô Phillida.
I perceive that boys are in as great disliking of themselves as maids, therefore though I wear the apparel, I am glad I am not the person.
It is a pretty boy and a fair, hee might well have been a woman, but because he is not, I am glad I am, for now under the color of my coat, I shall deci∣pher the follies of their kind.
I would salute him, but I fear I should make a curtsy in steed of a leg.
If I durst trust my face as well as I doe my habit, I would spend some time to make pastime, for say what they will of a mans wit, it is no second thing to be a woman.
All the blood in my body would be in my face, if he should ask me (as the question among men is common) are you a maid?
Why stand I still, boys should be bold, but here comes a brave train that will spill all our talk.
God speed fair boy.
You are deceived Lady.
Why, are you no boy?
No fair boy.
But I see an unhappy boy.
Saw you not the Dear come this way, hee flew down the wind, &amp; I believe you have blancht him.
Whose Dear was it Lady?
Dianaes Dear.
I saw none but mine own Dear.
This wag is wanton or a fool, ask the other, Diana.
I know not howe it comes to pass, but yonder boy is in mine eye too beautiful, I pray gods the Ladies think him not their Dear.
Pretty lad, doe your sheep feed in the For∣rest, or are you strayed from you flock, or on purpose come ye to mar Dianaes pastime?
I understand not one word you speak.
What art thou neither Lad nor sheep∣heard?
My mother said I could be no lad till I was twenty year old, nor keep sheep till I could tell them; and therefore Lady neither lad nor shepherd is here.
These boys are both agreed, either they are very pleasant or too perverse: you were best Lady make them tusk these Woods, whilst wee stand with our bows, and so use them as Beagles since they have so good mouths.
I will. Follow me without delay, or excuse, &amp; if you can doe nothing, yet shall you hallow the Dear.
I am willing to go, not for these Ladies c•∣panie, because my self am a virgin, but for that fair boys favour, who I think be a God.
You sir boy shall also go.
I must if you command, and would if you had not.
Now Cupped, under the shape of a silly girl show the power of a mighty God. Let Diana and all her coy Nymphs know, that there is no hart so chaste but thy bow can wound, nor eyes so modest, but thy brands can kindle, nor thoughts so stayed, but thy shafts can make wavering, weak and wanton: Cu∣bid though he be a child, is no baby. I will make their pains my pastimes, &amp; so confound their loves in their own sex, that they shall dote in their desires, delight in their affections, and practise only impossibilities. Whilst I truant from my mother, I will use some tie∣ronnie in these woods, and so shall their exercise in foo∣lish love, be my excuse for running away. I will see whi∣there fair faces be always chaste, or Dianaes virgins one∣lie modest, else will I spend both my shafts and shifts, and then Ladies if you see these dainty Dames entrapped in love, say softly to your selves, wee may all love.
Doe silly Shepherds go about to de∣ceiue great Neptune, in putting on mans attire upon women: and Cupped to make sport deceive them all, by using a woman's apparel upon a God, then Neptune that hast taken sundry shapes to obtain love, stick not to practise some deceit to show thy deity, and having oftē thrust thy self into the shape of beasts to deceive
men be not coy to use the shape of a Shepherd, to show thy self a God. Neptune cannot be ouer-reached by Swains, himself is subtle, and if Diana be over∣taken by craft, Cupped is wise. I will into these woods and mark all, and in the end will mar all.
Call you this seeking of fortunes when one can find nothing but birds nests? would I were out of these Woods, for I shall have but wooden luck, heers nothing but the screaking of Owls, croaking of Frogs, hissing of Adders, barking of Foxes, walking of Hags. But what be these?
I will follow them, to hell I shall not go, for so fair faces never can have such hard fortunes. What black boy is this.
What a life doe I lead with my Moister no∣thing but blowing of bellows, beating of spirits, &amp; scra∣ping of Croslets? it is a very secrete Science, for none almost can understand the language of it. Sublimation, Almigation, Calcination, Rubification, Incorporate∣on, Circination, Sementation, Albification, and Fre∣mentation. With as many terms unpossible to be vtte∣red, as the Art to be compassed.
Let me cross my self, I never heard so many great devils in a little Monkeys mouth.
Then our instruments, Croslets, Subliuato∣ries, Cucurbits, Limbecks, Decensores, Violes, menu∣all and mural, for enbibing and conbibing, Bellows, molificatiue and enduratiue.
What language is this? doe they speak so?
Then our Mottles, Saltpeeter, Vitriol, Sal tartar, Sal perperat, Argon, Resagar, Sal Armonick, E∣grimony, Lumany, Brimstone, Valerian, Tartar Alam, Breeme-worte, Glass, Vnsleked lyme, Chalk, A∣shes, hair; and what not, to make I know not what.
My hair begins to stand upright, would the boy would make an end.
And yet such a beggarly Science it is, and so strong on multiplication, that the end is to have ney∣there gold, wit, nor honesty.
Then am I just of thy occupation. What fell∣low, well met.
Fellow, upon what acquaintance?
Why thou say, the end of thy occupation is to have neither wit, money, nor honesty: &amp; me thinks at a blush, thou shouldest be one of my occupation.
Thou art deceived, my Master is an Alcu∣mist.
Whats that, a man?
A little more then a man, and a hairs breadth less then a God. He can make of thy cap gold, and by multiplication of one groat, three old Angels. I have known him of the tag of a point, to make a silver boole of a pint.
That makes thee have never a point, they be al turned to pots: but if he can doe this, he shall be a god altogether.
If thou have any gold to work on, thou art then made for ever: for with one pound of gold, hee will go near to pave ten Akers of ground.
Howe might a man serve him and learn his cunning?
Easily. First seem to understand the terms, and specially mark these points. In our Art there are four Spirits.
Nay I have done if you work with devils.
Thou art gross; we call those Spirits that are the grounds of our Art, &amp; as it were the mottles more incorporatiue for domination. The first Spirit is Quick-siluer.
That is my Spirit, for my silver is so quick; that I have much a doe to catch it, and when I have it, it is so nimble that I cannot hold it; I thought there was a devil in it.
The second, Orpyment.
Thats no Spirit, but a word to conjure a Spirit.
The third, Sal Ammoniac.
A proper word.
The fourth, Brimstone.
Thats a stinking Spirit, I thought there was some spirit in it because it burnt so blew. For my Mo∣there would often tell me that when the candle burnt blew, there was some ill Spirit in the house, and now I perceive it was the spirit Brimstone.
Thou cast remember these four spirits.
Let me alone to conjure them.
Now are there also seven bodies, but here comes my Moister.
This is a beggar.
No, such cunning men must disguise them∣selves, as though there were nothing in them for other∣wise they shall be compelled to work for Princes, and so be constrained to bewray their secrets.
I like not his attire, but am enamoured of his Art.
An ounce of Silver limde, as much of crude Mercury, of Spirits four, being tempered with the bodies seven, by multiplying of it ten times, comes
for one pound, eight thousand pounds, so that I may have only Beechen coals.
Is it possible?
It is more certain then certainty.
Isle tell thee one secrete, I stole a silver thim∣ble; dost thou think that he will make it a pottle pot?
A pottle pot, nay I dare warrant it a whole Cupbord of plate: why of the quintessence of a leaden plummet, he hath framed xx, dozen of silver Spoons. Look howe hee studies, I durst venture my life hee is now casting about, howe of his breath hee may make golden bracelets, for often-times of smoke hee hath made silver drops.
What doe I hear?
Did thou never hear howe Iupiter came in a golden shower to Dane?
I remember that tale.
That shower did my Master make of a spoon∣full of Tartar-alom, but with the fire of blood, &amp; the corrosive of the ayre, he is able to make nothing infinite, but whist he espies vs.
What Peter doe you loiter, knowing that every minute increases our Mine?
I was glad to take ayre, for the mettle came so fast, that I feared my face would have been turned to silver.
But what stripling is this?
One that is desirous to learn your craft.
Craft sir boy, you must call it mystery.
All is one, a crafty mystery, and a mystical craft.
Can thou take pains?
Infinite.
But thou must be sworn to be secret, and then I will entertain thee.
I can swear though I be a poor fellow as well as the best man in the Shire. But Sir I much marvel that you being so cunning, should be so ragged.
O my child, Gryphes make their nests of gold though their coats are feathers, and we feather our nests with Diamonds, though our garments be but frizz. If thou knew the secret of this Science, the cunning would make thee so proud that thou woul∣dest disdain the outward pomp.
My Moister is so ravished with his Art, that we many times go supperless to bed, for he will make gold of his bread, and such is the drouth of his desire, that we all wish our very guts were gold.
I have good fortune to light upon such a My∣ster.
When in the depth of my skill I determine to try the uttermost of mine Art, I am dissuaded by the gods, otherwise, I durst undertake to make the fire as it flames, gold, the wind as it blows, silver, the wa∣la as it runs, lead, the earth as it stands, iron, the sky, brass, and men's thoughts, firm mottles.
I must bless my self, and marvel at you.
Come in, and thou shalt see all.
I follow, I run, I fly; they say my Father hath a golden thumb, you shall see me have a golden body.
I am glad of this, for now I shall have leisure to run away; such a bald Art as never was, let him keep his new man, for he shall never see his old a∣gain; God shield me from blowing gold to nothing, with a strong imagination to make nothing any thing.
How now Gallathea? miserable Gallathea, that having put on the apparel of a boy, thou can also put on the mind. O fair Melebeus, I too fair, and therefore I fear, too proud. Had it not been better for thee to have been a sacrifice to Neptune, then a slave to Cupped? to die for thy Country, then to live I thy fancy? to be a sacrifice, then a Lover? O would when I hunted his eye with my heart, hee might have seen my hart with his eyes. Why did Nature to him a boy give a face so fair, or to me a virgin a fortune so •••d? I will now use for the distaff the bow, and play at quoits abroad, that was wont to sow i• my Sam∣pler at home. It may be Gallathea, foolish Gallathea, what may be? nothing. Let me follow him into the Woods, and thou sweet Venus be my guide.
Poor Phillida, curse the time of thy birth and rareness of thy beauty, the unaptness of thy apparel, and the vntamednes of thy affections. Art thou no so∣ner in the habit of a boy, but thou must be enamoured of a boy, what shalt thou doe when what best likes thee, most discontented thee? Go into the Woods, watch the good times, his best moods, and transgress in love a little of thy modesty, I will, I dare not, thou must, I cannot. Then pine in thine own peevishness. I will not, I will. Ah Phillida doe something, nay any thing rather then live thus. Well, what I will doe, my self knows not, but what I ought I know too well, and so I go resolute, either to bewray my love, or suf∣fer shame.
HOwe now? what new conceits, what strange contraries breed in thy mind? is thy Diana become a Venus, thy chaste thoughts turned to wanton looks, thy conquering modesty to a cap∣tiue imagination? Beginnest thou with Perils to die in the ayre and live in the fire, to leave the sweet delight of hunting, and to follow the hot desire of love? O Telusa, these words are unfit for thy sex being a fire∣gin, but apt for thy affections being a Lover. And can there in years so young, in education so precise, in vows so holy, and in a hart so chaste, enter either a strong desire, or a wish, or a wavering thought of love? Can Cupids brands quench Vistas flames, and his fee∣ble shafts headed with feathers, pearce deeper the Di∣anaes arrows headed with steel? Break thy bow Telusa that seek to break thy vow, and let those hands that aimed to hit the wilde Hart, scratch out those eyes that have wounded thy tame hart. O vain and only naked name of Chastity, that is made eter∣nil, and perish by time: holy, and is infected by fancy: divine, and is made mortal by folly. Virgins harts I perceive are not unlike Cotton trees, whose fruit is so hard in the bud, that it sounds like steel, and bee∣ing ripe, pours forth nothing but wool, and their thoughts like the leaves of Lunary, which the further they grow from the Sun, the sooner they are score∣ched with his beams. O Melebeus, because thou art fair, must I be fickle, and false my vow because I see thy virtue? Fond girl that I am to think of love, nay vain profession that I follow to disdain love, but here comes Eurota, I must now put on a red
mask and blush, least she perceive my pale face and laugh.
Telusa, Diana bid me hunt you out, &amp; saith that you care not to hunt with her, but if you follow any other Game then she hath roused, your punishment shall be to bend all our bows, and weave al our strings. Why look ye so pale, so sad, so wildly.
Eurota the Game I follow is the thing I fly: my strange disease my chief desire.
I am no Oedipus to expound riddles, and I muse how thou can be Sphinx to utter them. But I pray thee Telusa tell me what thou ails, if thou be sick, this ground hath leaves to heal: if melancholy, here are pastimes to use: if peevish, wit must wean it, or time, or counsel. If thou be in love (for I have heard of such a beast called love) it shall be cured, why blush thou Telusa?
To hear thee in reckoning my pains to re∣cite thine own. I saw Eurota howe amorously you glanced your eye on the fair boy in the white coat, and howe cunningly (now that you would have some talk of love) you hit me in the teeth with love.
I confess that I am in love, and yet swear that I know not what it is. I feel my thoughts vnknit, mine eyes unstaid, my hart I know not how affected, or infected, my sleeps broken and full of dreams, my wakenesse sad and full of sighs, my self in all things unlike my self. If this be love, I would it had never been devised.
Thou hast told what I am in uttering what thy self is: these are my passions Eurota my unbridled passions, my intolerable passions, which I were as good acknowledge and crave counsel, as to deny and en∣dure peril.
How did it take you first Telusa?
By the eyes, my wanton eyes which concei∣ued the picture of his face, and hanged it on the very strings of my hart. O fair Melebeus, ô fond Telusa, but how did it take you Eurota?
By the ears, whose sweet words sunk so deep into my head, that the remembrance of his wit, hath bereaved me of my wisdom, ô eloquent Tyte∣rus, ô credulous Eurota. But soft here comes Ra∣mia, but let her not hear vs talk, wee will withdraw our selves, and hear her talk.
I am sent to seek others that have lost my self.
You shall see Romeo hath also bitten on a love leaf.
Can there be no hart so chaste, but love can wound? nor vows so holy but affection can violate. Vain art thou virtue, &amp; thou chastity but a by word, when you both are subject to love, of all things the most abject. If Love be a God, why should not lovers be virtuous? Love is a God, and Lovers are virtuous.
Indeed Romeo, if Lovers were not virtue∣os, then were thou vicious.
What are you come so near me?
I think we came near you when wee said you loved.
Tush Romeo, tic too late to recall it, to re∣pent it a shame: therefore I pray thee tell what is love?
If my self felt only this infection, I would then take upon me the definition, but being incident to so many, I dare not my self describe it, but we will all talk of that in the Woods. Diana storms that sending one to seek another, she loses all. Seruia of all the Nymphs the coyest, loves deadly, and ex∣claims
claims against Diana, honours Venus, detests Vesta, and makes a common scorn of virtue. Cly∣mene, whose stately looks seemed to amaze the gre∣test Lords, stoops, yields, and fauneth on the strange boy in the Woods. My self (with blushing I speak it) am thrall to that boy, that fair boy, that beau∣tifull boy.
What have wee here, all in love? no other food then fancy; no no, she shall not have the fair boy.
Nor you Telusa.
Nor you Eurota.
I love Melebeus, and my deserts shall be aun∣swerable to my desires. I will forsake Diana for him. I will die for him.
So saith Clymene, and she will have Him. I care not, my sweet Tyterus though he seem proud, I impute it to childishness: who being yet scarce out of his swath-clowtes, cannot understand these deep conceits; I love him.
So doe I, and I will have him.
Immodest all that wee are, unfortunate all that we are like to be; shall virgins begin to wrangle for love, and become wanton in their thoughts, in their words, in their actions. O divine Love, which art there∣fore called divine, because thou ouer-reachest the wi∣sest, conquerest the chastest, and dost all things both unlikely and impossible, because thou art Love. Thou make the bashful impudent, the wise fond, the chaste wanton, and workest contraries to our reach, because thy self is beyond reason.
Talk no more Telusa, your words wound. Ah would I were no woman.
Would Tyterus were no boy.
Would Telusa were no body.
It is pity that Nature framed you not a wo∣man having a face so fair, so lovely a countenance, so modest a behaviour.
There is a Tree in Tylos, whose nuts have shells like fire, and being cracked, the kernel is but water.
What a toy is it to tell me of that tree, being nothing to the purpose: I say it is pity you are not a woman.
I would not wish to be a woman, unless it were because thou art a man.
Nay I doe not wish to be woman, for then I should not love thee, for I have sworn never to love a woman.
A strange humour in so pretty a youth, and according to mine, for my self will never love a wo∣man.
It were a shame if a maiden should be a su∣la, (a thing hated in that sex) that thou shouldest deny to be her servant.
If it be a shame in me, it can be no come∣dation in you, for your self is of that mind.
Suppose I were a virgin (I blush in suppo∣sing my self one) and that under the habit of a boy were the person of a maid, if I should utter my office∣tion with sighs, manifest my sweet love by my salt tears, and prove my loyalty unspotted, and my griefs intolerable, would not then that fair face, pity this true hart?
Admit that I were, as you would have me suppose that you are, and that I should with entreaties, prayers, oaths, bribes, and what ever can be invented in
love, desire your favour, would you not yield?
Trush you come in with admit.
And you with suppose.
What doubtful speeches be these? I fear me he is as I am, a maiden.
What dread rises in my mind, I fear the boy to be as I am a maiden.
Tush it cannot be, his voice shows the con∣trarie.
Yet I doe not think it, for he would then have blushed.
Have you ever a Sister?
If I had but one my brother must needs have two, but I pray have you ever a one?
My Father had but one daughter, and there∣fore I could have no sister.
Aye me, he is as I am, for his speeches be as mine are.
What shall I doe, either hee is subtle or my sex simple.
I have known divers of Dianaes Nymphs enamoured of him, yet hath he rejected all, either as too proud to disdain, or too childish not to understand, or for that he knows himself to he a Virgin.
I am in a quandary, Dianaes Nymphs have followed him, and he despised them, either knowing too well the beauty of his own face, or that himself is of the same mold. I will once again try him. You promised me in the woods, that you would love me be∣fore all Dianaes Nymphs.
I, so you would love me before all Dianaes Nymphs.
Can you prefer a fond boy as I am, before so fair Ladies as they are.
Why should not I as well as you?
Come let vs into the Grove, and make much one of another, that cannot tel what to think one of another.
Raf, my boy is run away, I trust thou wilt not run after.
I would I had a pair of wings that I might fly after.
My boy was the veriest these, the iran∣test liar, and the vildest swearer in the world, other∣wise the best boy in the world, he hath stolen my appa∣rell, all my money, and forgot nothing but to bid me farewell.
That will not I forget, farewell Moister.
Why thou hast not yet seen the end of my Art.
I would I had not known the beginning. Did not you promise me, of my silver thimble to make a whole cupboard of plate, and that of a Spanish needle you would build a silver steeple?
I Raf, the fortune of this Art consists in the measure of the fire, for if there be a cole too much, or a spark too little, if it be a little too hot, or a thought too soft, all our labour is in vain; besides, they that blow, must beat time with their breathes, as Musicions doe with their breasts, so as there must be of the metals, the fire and workers a very harmony.
Nay if you must weigh your fire by ounces, &amp; take measure of a mans blast, you may then make of a dram of wind a wedge of gold, and of the shadow of one shilling make another, so as you have an Orga∣nest to tune your temperatures.
So is it, and often doth it happen, that the
just proportion of the fire and all things concur.
Concur, condogge. I will away.
Then away.
An art quoth you, that one multiplies so much all day, that he wants money to buy meat at night? But what have we yonder? what devout man? he will never speak till he be urged. I will salute him. Sir, there lies a purse under your feet, if I thought it were not yours, I would take it up.
Dost thou not know that I was calculi∣ting the nativity of Alexanders great horse?
Why what are you?
An Astronomer.
What one of those that makes Almanacs.
Ipsissimus. I can tell the minute of thy birth, the moment of thy death, and the manner. I can tel thee what whether shall be between this and Octogessimus octauus mirabilis annus. When I list I can set a trap for the Sun, catch the Moon with lyme-twigges, and go a batfowling for stars. I can tell thee things past, and things to come, &amp; with my cunning, measure how many yards of Clouds are beneath the Sky. Nothing can happen which I fore-see not, nothing shall.
I hope sir you are no more then a God.
I can bring the twelve signs out of their Zodiacs, and hang them up at Taverns.
I pray you sir tell me what you cannot doe, for I perceive there is nothing so easy for you to compass as impossibilities. But what be those signs?
As a man should say, signs which govern the body. The Ram governs the head.
That is the worst sign for the head.
Why?
Because it is a sign of an ill Ewe.
Tush, that sign must be there. Then the Bull for the throat, Capricornus for the knees.
I will hear no more signs, if they be all such desperate signs: but seeing you are, (I know not who to term you) shall I serve you? I would fine serve.
I accept thee.
Happy am I, for now shall I reach thoughts, and tell how many drops of water goes to the greatest shower of rain. You shall see me catch the Moon in the clips like a Conny in a pursnet.
I will teach thee the Golden number, the Epact, and the Prime.
I will meddle no more with numbering of gold, for multiplication is a miserable action; I pray sir what whether shall we have this hour three-score year?
That I must cast by our Iudicials Astrono∣micall, therefore come in with me, and thou shall see e∣very wrinkle of my Astrological wisdom, and I will make the Heavens as plain to thee as the high way, thy cunning shall sit cheek by iole with the Suns Chariot; then shalt thou see what a base thing it is, to have others thoughts creep on the ground, when as thine shall be stitched to the stars.
Then I shall be translated from this mortality.
Thy thoughts shall be metamorphosed, and made hail fellows with the Gods.
O fortune. I feel my very brains moralised, and as it were a certain contempt of earthly actions is crept into my mind, by an ethereal contemplation. Come let vs in.
What news have we here Ladies, are all in love? are Dianaes Nymphs become Venus wan∣tons? is it a shame to be chaste, because you be amiable? or must you needs be amorous, because you are fair? O Venus, if this be thy spite, I will require it with more then hate, well shalt thou know what it is to drib thine arrows up and down Dianaes leies. There is an unknown Nymph that straggleth up and down these woods, which I suspect hath been the weaver of these woes, I saw her slumbering by the brooke side, go search her &amp; bring her, if you find upon her shoulder a burn, it is Cupped: if any print on her back like a leaf, it is Medea: if any picture on her left breast like a bird, it is Calipso; who ever it be, bring her hither, and spy∣deli bring her hither.
I will go with speed.
Go you Larissa and help her.
I obey.
Now Ladies, doth not that make your cheeks blush, that makes mine ears glow? or can you remember that without sobs, which Diana can not think on without sighs? What greater dishonour could happen to Diana, or to her Nymphs shame, then that there can be any time so idle, that should make their heads so addle? Your chaste harts my Nymphs, should resemble the Onix, which is hottest when it is whitest, and your thoughts, the more they are assaul∣ted with desires, the less they should be affected. You should think love like Homers Moly, a white leaf &amp; a black root, a fair show, and a bitter taste. Of all Trees the Cedar is greatest, and hath the smallest seeds: of all affections, love hath the greatest name, &amp;
the least virtue. Shall it be said, and shall Venus say it? nay shall it be seen, and shall wantons see it? that Di∣ana the goddess of chastity, whose thoughts are al∣ways answerable to her vows, whose eyes never glen∣ced on desire, and whose hart abates the point of Cu∣pids arrows, shall have her virgins to become unchaste in desires, immoderate in affection, intemperate in love, in foolish love, in base love. Eagles cast their evil feathers in the Sun, but you cast your best desires v∣pone a shadow. The birds Ibis lose their sweetness when they lose their sights, and virgins all their ver∣tues with their unchaste thoughts, unchaste, Diana cal∣leth that, that hath either any show or suspicion of lightness. O my dear Nymphs, if you knew howe loving thoughts stain lovely faces, you would bee as careful to have the one as unspotted as the other beau∣tiful.
Cast before your eyes the loves of Venus truls, their fortunes, their fancies, their ends. What are they else but Silenus pictures, without, Lambs &amp; Doves, with in, Apes, and Owls, who like Ixion embrace clouds for Iuno, the shadows of virtue in steed of the sub∣stance. The Eagles feathers consume the feathers of all o∣theirs, and loves desire corrupts all other virtues. I blush Ladies that you having been heretofore patient of labours, should now become prentices to idleness, and use the pen for Sonnets, not the needle for Sam∣plers. And howe is your love placed, upon pelting boys, perhaps base of birth, without doubt weak of discretion. I but they are fair. O Ladies doe your eyes begin to love colours, whose harts was wont to loath them? is Dianaes Chase become Venus Court? and are your holy vows turned to hollow thoughts?
Madame, if love were not a thing beyond reason, we might then give a reason of our doings, but
so divine is his force, that it works effects as country∣rye to that wee wish, as unreasonable against that wee ought.
Lady, so unacquainted are the passions of love, that we can neither describe them nor bear them.
Foolish girls, how willing you are to follow that which you should fly, but here comes Telusa.
We have brought the disguised Nymph, &amp;c have found on his shoulder Psiches burn, and he con∣fesseth himself to be Cupped.
Howe now sir, are you caught, are you Cu∣bid?
Thou shalt see Diana that I dare confess my self to be Cupped.
And thou shalt see Cupped that I will show my self to be Diana, that is, Conqueror of thy loose &amp; untamed appetites. Did thy mother Venus under the colour of a Nymph, send thee hither to wound my Nymphs? Doth she add craft to her malice, and mis∣trusting her deity, practise deceit: is there no place but my Groves, no persons but my Nymphs? Cruel and unkind Venus, that spited only chastity, thou shalt see that Dianaes power shall revenge thy policy, and tame this pride. As for thee Cupped, I will break thy bow, and burn thine arrows, bind thy hands, clyp thy wings, and fetter thy feet. Thou that fattest others with hopes, shalt be fed thy self with wishes, &amp; thou that bindest others with golden thoughts, shalt be bound thy self with golden fetters. Venus rods are made of Roses, Dianaes of Briars. Let Venus that great Goddess, ransom Cupped that little God. These La∣dies here whom thou hast infected with foolish love, shall both tread on thee and triumph over thee. Thine
own arrow shall be shot into thine own bosom, and thou shalt be enamoured, not on Psiches, but on Circes. I will teach thee what it is to displease Diana, distress her Nymphs, or disturb her Game.
Diana, what I have done, cannot be undone, but what you mean to doe, shall. Venus hath some Gods to her friends, Cupped shall have all.
Are you prating? I will bridle thy tongue &amp; thy power, and in spite of mine own thoughts, I will set thee a task every day, which if thou finish not, thou shalt feel the smart. Thou shalt be used as Dianaes slave, not Venus son. All the world shall see that I will use thee like a captive, and show my self a Conqueror. Come have him in, that wee may devise apt punishments for his proud presumptions.
We will plague ye for a little God.
We will never pity thee though thou be a God.
Nor I.
Nor I.
THis is the day wherein you must satis-fie Neptune and save your selves, call toge∣there your fair Daughters, and for a Sacrifice take the fairest, for better it is to offer a Virgin then suffer rue∣in. If you think it against nature to sacrifice your i will∣drone, think it also against sense to destroy your Coun∣trey. If you imagine Neptune pitiless to desire such a pray, confess your selves perverse to deserve such a punishment. You see this tree, this fatal Tree, whose leaves though they glister like gold, yet it threatened to fair virgins grief. To this Tree must the beauti∣fullest
be bound do until the Monster Agar carry her a∣way, and if the Monster come not, then assure your selves that the fairest is concealed, and then your coun∣trey shall be destroyed, therefore consult with your selves, not as fathers of children, but as favourers of your Country. Let Neptune have his right if you will have your quiet; thus have I warned you to be care∣full, and would wish you to be wise, knowing that who so hath the fairest daughter, hath the greatest fortune, in loosing one to save all, and so I depart to provide ce∣remonies for the Sacrifice, and command you to bring the Sacrifice.
They say Tyterus that you have a fair daugh∣la, if it be so, dissemble not, for you shall be a fortune∣nate father. It is a thing holy to preserve ones Country, and honourable to be the cause.
In deed Melebeus I have heard you boast that you had a fair daughter, then the which none was more beautiful. I hope you are not so careful of a child, that you will be careless of your Country, or add so much to nature, that you will detract from wisdom.
I must confess that I had a daughter, and I know you have, but alas my Childes cradle was her grave, and her swath-clowte her winding sheet. I would she had lived till now, she should willingly have died now; for what could have happened to pore Me∣lebeus more comfortable, then to bee the father of a fair child and sweet Country.
O Mellebeus, dissemble you may with mē, deceive the Gods you cannot, did not I see, (and very lately see) your daughter in your arms, when as you gave her infinite kisses, with affection I fear me more then fatherly. You have conueyed her away, that you might cast vs all away, bereaving her the honour of her beauty, and vs the benefit, preferring a common in∣convenience,
before a private mischief.
It is a bad cloth Tyterus that will take no co∣lore, and a simple Father that can use no cunning, you make the people believe that you wish well, when you practise nothing but ill, wishing to be thought religi∣os towards the Gods, when I know you deceitful to∣wards men. You cannot ouer-reach me Tyterus, over∣shoot your self you may. It is a wily Mouse that will breed in the Cats ear, and hee must halt cunningly, that will deceive a Cripple. Did you ever see me kiss my Daughter? you are deceived, it was my wife. And if you thought so young a piece unfit for so old a per∣son, and therefore imagined it to be my child, not my spouse, you must know that silver hairs delight in golden lockes, and the old fancies crave young Nur∣ses, and frosty years must bee thawed by youthful fierce. But this matter set aside, you have a fair daugh∣la Tyterus, and it is pity you are so fond a Father.
You are both either too fond or too fro∣ward: for whilst you dispute to save your Daughters, we neglect to prevent our destruction.
Come let vs away and seek out a sacrifice. Wee must sift out their cunning, and let them shift for themselves.
Come Cupped to your task. First you must undo all these Lovers knots, because you tied them.
If they be true love knots, tic unpossible to un∣knit them, if false, I never tied them.
Make no excuse but to it.
Love knots are tide with eyes, and cannot
be undone with hands, made fast with thoughts, and cannot be vnlosed with fingers, had Diana no task to set Cupped to but things impossible, I will to it.
Why how now? you tie the knots faster.
I cannot choose, it goes against my mind to make them loose.
Let me see, now tic unpossible to be un∣done.
It is the true love knot of a women's hart, therefore cannot be undone.
That false in sunder of it self.
It was made of a mans thought which will never hang together.
You have undone that well.
I, because it was never tide well.
To the rest, for she will give you no rest. These two knots are finely untied.
It was because I never tide them, the one was knit by Pluto, not Cupped, by money, not love, the other by force, not faith, by appointment, not affection.
Why doe you lay that knot aside.
For death.
Why?
Because the knot was knit by faith, and must only be vnknit of death.
Why laugh you?
Because it is the fairest and the falsest, done with greatest art and least truth, with best colours, and worst conceits.
Who tide it?
A mans tongue.
Why doe you put that in my bosom?
Because it is only for a Women's bosom.
Why what is it?
A women's hart.
Come let vs go in, and tell that Cupped hath done his task, stay you behind Larissa, and see hee sleep not, for Love will be idle, and take heed you surfeit not, for love will be wanton.
Let me alone I will find him some-what to do.
Lady, can you for pity see Cupped thus pu∣nished.
Why did Cupped punish vs without pity?
Is love a punishment?
It is no pastime.
O Venus, if thou saw Cupped as a captive, bound to obey that was wont to command, fearing Ladies threats, that once pierced their harts, I cannot tell whether thou would revenge it for despite, or laugh at it for disport. The time may come Diana, and the time shall come, that thou that set Cupped to un∣doe knots, shall entreat Cupped to tie knots, and you Ladies that with solace have beheld my pains, shall with sighs entreat my pity.
Hee offered to sleep.
How now Cupped begin you to nod?
Come Cupped, Diana hath devised new la∣bours for you that are God of loves, you shall weave Samplers all night, and lackey after Diana all day. You shall shortly shoot at beasts for men, because you have made beasts of men, &amp; weight on Ladies trains, because thou intrappest Ladies by trains. All the sto∣ries that are in Dianaes Arras, which are of love, you must pick out with your needle, &amp; in that place sow Vesta with her Nuns, and Diana with her Nymphs. How like you this Cupped.
I say I will prick as well with my needle, as ever I did with mine arrows.
Diana cannot yield, she conquers affection.
Diana shall yield, she cannot conquer destiny.
Come Cupped, you must to your business.
You shall find me so busy in your heads, that you shall wish I had been idle with your harts.
This day is the solemn Sacrifice at this Tree, wherein the fairest virgin (were not the inhabi∣tants faithless) should be offered unto me, but so over careful are Fathers to their children, that they forget the safety of their Country, &amp; fearing to become un∣natural, become unreasonable; their slights may blear men, deceive me they cannot, I will be here at the hour, and show as great cruelty as they have done craft, &amp; well shall they know that Neptune should have been entreated, not cozened.
I marvel what virgin the people will pre∣present, it is happy you are none, for thē it would have fallen to your lot because you are so fair.
If you had been a Maiden too I need not to have feared, because you are fairer.
I pray thee sweet boy flatter not me, speak truth of thy self, for in mine eye of all the world thou art fairest.
These be fair words, but far from thy true thoughts, I know mine own face in a true Glass, and desire not to see it in a flattering mouth.
O would I did flatter thee, and that fortune would not flatter me. I love thee as a brother, but love not me so.
No I will not, but love thee better, because I
cannot love as a brother.
Seeing we are both boys, and both lovers, that our affection may have some show, and seem as it were love, let me call thee Mistress.
I accept that name, for divers before have called me Mistress.
For what cause?
Nay there lie the Mistress.
Will not you be at the sacrifice?
No.
Why?
Because I dreamt that if I were there, I should be turned to a virgin, and then being so fair (as thou say I am) I should be offered as thou know one must. But will not you be there.
Not unless I were sure that a boy might be sacrificed, and not a maiden.
Why then you are in danger.
But I would escape it by deceit, but seeing we are resolved to be both absent, let vs wander into these Groves, till the hour be past.
I am agreed, for then my fear will be past.
Why, what dost thou fear?
Nothing but that you love me not.
I will. Poor Phillida, what shouldest thou think of thy self, that love one that I fear me, is as thy self is; and may it not be, that her Father practi∣zed the same deceit with her, that my Father hath with me, and knowing her to be fair, feared she should be unfortunate, if it be so, Phillida how desperate is thy case? if it be not, howe doubtful? For if she be a May∣den there is no hope of my love, if a boy, a hazard: I will after him or her, and lead a melancholy life, that look for a miserable death.
NO more Masters now, but a Mistress if I can light on her. An Astronomer? of all occupations thats the worst, yet well fare the Alcu∣mist, for he keeps good fires though he gets no gold, the other stands warming himself by staring on the stars, which I think he can as soon number as know their virtues. He told me a long tale of Octogessimus octauus, and the meeting of the Coniunctions &amp; Ply∣nets, and in the meane-time he fell backward himself into a pond. I asked him why he fore-sawe not that by the stars, he said hee knew it, but contemnd it. But soft, is not this my brother Robin?
Yes as sure as thou art Raf.
What Robin? what news? what fortune?
Faith I have had but bad fortune, but I prie-thee tell me thine.
I have had two Masters, not by art but by nature, one said, that by multiplying he would make of a penny ten pound.
I but could he doe it?
Could he doe it quoth you? why man, I saw a pretty wench come to his shop, where with puf∣fing, blowing, and sweating, he so plied her, that hee multiplied her.
Howe?
Why he made her of one, two.
What by fire?
No, by the Philosophers stone.
Why, have Philosophers such stones?
I, but they lie in a privy cupboard.
Why then thou art rich if thou have learned this cunning.
Tush this was nothing, hee would of a little fasting spittle, make a hose &amp; doublet of cloth of silver.
Would I had been with him, for I have had almost no meat, but spittle since I came to the woods.
How then did thou live?
Why man I served a fortune-teller, who said I should live to see my Father hanged, and both my bro∣theirs beg. So I conclude the Mill shall be mine, and I live by imagination still.
Thy Moister was an Ass, and looked on the lines of thy hands, but my other Moister was an Astro∣nomer, which could pick my nativity out of the stars. I should have half a dozen stars in my pocket if I have not lost them, but here they be. Sol, Saturn, In∣peter, Mars, Venus.
Why these be but names.
I, but by these he gathered, that I was a Io∣ualist, borne of a Thursday, &amp; that I should be a brave Venerian, and get all my good luck on a Friday.
Tic strange that a fish day should be a flesh-day.
O Robin, Venus orta mari, Venus was borne of the Sea, the Sea will have fish, fish must have wine, wine will have flesh, for Caro corns genus est muliebre: but soft, here comes that notable villain, that once preferred me to the Alcumist.
So I had a Moister, I would not care what became of me.
Robin thou shalt see me fit him. So I had a servant, I care neither for his conditions, his qual∣lites, nor his person.
What Raf? well met. No doubt you had a
warm service of my Moister the Alcumist.
It was warm indeed, for the fire had almost burnt out mine eyes, and yet my teeth still watered with hunger: so that my service was both too what &amp; too cold. I melted all my meat, and made only my slum∣ber thoughts, and so had a full head and an empty bell∣lie. But where hast thou been since?
With a brother of thine I think, for hee hath such a coat, and two brothers (as hee saith) seeking of fortunes.
Tys my brother Dicke, I prie-thee lets go to him.
Syrra, what was he doing that hee came not with thee?
Hee hath gotten a Moister now, that will teach him to make you both his younger brothers.
I, thou possessed for devising impossibilities, thats as true as thy Moister could make silver pots of tags of points.
Nay he will teach him to cozen you both, &amp; so get the Mill to himself.
Nay if he be both our cozens, I will bee his great Grand-father, and Robin shall be his Uncle, but I pray thee bring vs to him quickly, for I am great belli∣ed with conceit till I see him.
Come then and go with me, and I will bring ye to him straight.
Bring forth the virgin, the fatal virgin, the fairest virgin, if you mean to appease Neptune, and preserve your Country.
Here she comes, accompanied only with men, because it is a sight unseemly (as all virgins say) to see the mis-fortune of a maiden, and terrible to behold the fierceness of Agar that Monster.
Miserable and accursed Haebe, that being neither fair nor fortunate, thou shouldest be thought most happy and beautiful. Curse thy birth, thy life, thy death, being borne to live in danger, and having lived, to die by deceit. Art thou the sacrifice to appease Neptune, and satis-fie the custom, the bloody cu∣stom, ordained for the safety of thy Country. I Haebe, poor Haebe, men will have it so, whose forces com∣maund our weak natures, nay the Gods will have it so, whose powers dally with our purposes. The Egipti∣ans never cut their Dates from the tree, because they are so fresh and greene. It is thought wickedness to pull Roses from the stalks in the Garden of Palestine, for that they have so lively a red: and who so cutteth the incense Tree in Arabia before it fall, committed sa∣criledge.
Shall it only be lawful amongst vs in the prime of youth, and pride of beauty, to destroy both youth and beauty: and what was honoured in fruits and flowers as a virtue, to violate in a virgin as a vice? But alas destiny allows no dispute, die Haebe, Haebe die, woeful Haebe, and only accursed Haebe. Farewell the sweet delights of life, and welcome now the bitter pangs of death. Fare-well you chaste virgins, whose thoughts are divine, whose faces fair, whose fortunes are agreeable to your affections, enjoy and long enjoy the pleasure of your curled locks, the amiablenesse of
your wished looks, the sweetness of your tuned voices, the content of your inward thoughts, the pomp of your outward shows, only Haebe bids farewell to all the joys that she conceived, and you hope for, that she possessed, and you shall; fare-well the pomp of Princes Courts, whose roofs are embossed with gold, and whose pavements are decked with fair Ladies, where the days are spent in sweet delights, the nights in pleasant dreams, where chastity honoured affecti∣once, and commands, yields to desire and conque∣reth.
Fare-well the Sovereign of all virtue, and God∣desse of all virgins, Diana, whose perfections are impose∣sible to be numbered, and therefore infinite, never to be matched, and therefore immortal. Fare-well sweet Pa∣rents, yet to be mine, unfortunate Parents. Howe bless∣sed had you been in barrennes? how happy had I been if I had not been. Fare-well life, vain life, wretched life, whose sorrows are long, whose end doubtful, whose miseries certain, whose hopes innumerable, whose fears intolerable. Come death, and welcome death whom nature cannot resist, because necessity rue∣leth, nor defer because destiny hastes. Come Agar thou unsatiable Monster of Maidens blood, &amp; douou∣rer of beauties bowels, glut thy self till thou surfeit, &amp; let my life end thine. Tear these tender joints with thy greedy jaws, these yellow lockes with thy black feet, this fair face with thy foul teeth. Why abatest thou thy wonted swiftness? I am fair, I am a virgin, I am ready. Come Agar thou horrible monster, &amp; fare∣well world thou viler Monster.
The Monster is not come, and therefore I see Neptune is abused, whose rage will I fear me, be both infinite and intolerable: take in this Virgin,
whose want of beauty hath saved her own life, and all yours.
We could not find any fairer.
Neptune will. Go deliver her to her father.
Fortunate Haebe, howe shalt thou express thy joys? Nay unhappy girl that art not the fairest. Had it not been better for thee to have died with fame, then to live with dishonour, to have preferred the safe∣tie of thy Country and rareness of thy beauty, before sweetness of life, &amp; vanity of the world? But alas, destiny would not have it so, destiny could not, for it asks the beautifulest, I would Haebe thou had been beau∣tifullest.
Come Haebe, here is no time for vs to rea∣son, it had been best for vs thou had been most beautiful.
We met the virgin that should have been offered to Neptune, belike either the custom is pardoned, or she not thought fairest.
I cannot conjecture the cause, but I fear the event.
Why should you fear, the God requires no boy.
I would he did, then should I have no fear.
I am glad he doth not tho, because if he did, I should have also cause to fear. But soft, what man or God is this? Let vs closely withdraw our selves into the Thickets,
And doe men begin to bee equal with Gods, seeking by craft to ouer-reach thē that by power ouer-see them? Doe they dote so much on their daugh∣ters, that they stick not to dally with our deities, well shall the inhabitants see, that destiny cannot be pre∣uented by craft, nor my anger be appeased by submiss∣zion. I will make havoc of Dianaes Nymphs, my Temple shall bee died with Maidens blood, and there shall be nothing more vile then to be a Virgin. To be young and fair, shall be accounted shame &amp; punish∣meant, in so much as it shall be thought as dishonourable to be honest, as fortunate to be deformed.
O Neptune, hast thou forgotten thy self, or wilt thou clean for-sake me? Hath Diana therefore brought danger to her Nymphs, because they be chaste? shall virtue suffer both pain and shame which always deserves praise and honour?
Praise and honour (Neptune) nothing less, except it be commendable to be coy, and honourable to be peevish. Sweet Neptune, if Venus can do any thing, let her try it in this one thing, that Diana may find as small comfort at thy hands, as Love hath found curt∣sie at hers.
This is she that hates sweet delights, envies loving desires, masks wanton eyes, stopped amo∣rous ears, bridles youthful mouths, and under a name, or a word constancy, entertains all kind of cruelty: she hath taken my son Cupped, Cupped my
lovely son, using him like a prentice, whipping him like a slave, scorning him like a beast, therefore Nep∣tune I entreat thee by no other God, then the God of love, that thou evil entreat this Goddess of hate.
I muse not a little to see you two in this place, at this time, and about this matter, but what say you Diana, have you Cupped captive?
I say there is nothing more vain, then to dispute with Venus, whose untamed affections have bred more brawls in heaven, then is fit to repeat in earth, or possible to recount in number, I have Cupped, and will keep him, not to dandle in my lap, whom I abhor in my hart, but to laugh him to scorn, that hath made in my virgins harts such deep scars.
Scars Diana call you them that I know to be bleeding wounds? alas weak deity, it stretches not so far, both to abate the sharpness of his Are∣rows and to heal the hurts. No, Loves wounds when they seem greene, rankle, and having a smooth skin without, fester to the death within. Therefore Neptune, if ever Venus stood thee in steed, furthe∣red thy fancies, or shall at all times be at thy cōmaund, let either Diana bring her Virgins to a continual massacre, or release Cupped of his martyrdom.
It is known Venus, that your tongue is as unruly as your thoughts, and your thoughts as un∣stayed as your eyes, Diana cannot chatter, Venus can∣not choose.
It is an honour for Diana to have Venus mean ill, when she so speaks well, but you shall see I come not to trifle, therefore once again Neptune, if that be not buried, which can never die, fancy, or that quenched which must ever burn, affection, show thy self the same Neptune that I knew thee to bee when
thou wast a Shepherd, and let not Venus words be vain in thine ears, since thine were imprinted in my hart.
It were unfit that Goddesses should strive, and it were unreasonable that I should not yield, and therefore to please both, both attend; Diana I must honour, her virtue deserves no less, but Venus I must love, I must confess so much.
Diana, restore Cupped to Venus, and I will for ever release the sacrifice of Virgins, if therefore you love your Nymphs as she doth her Son, or prefer not a private grudge before a common grief, answer what you will doe.
I account not the choice harde, for had I twenty Cupids, I would deliver them all to save one Virgin, knowing love to be a thing of all the vainest, virginity to be a virtue of all the noblest. I yield, La∣rise, bring out Cupped: and now shall it be said, that Cupped saved those he thought to spoil.
I agree to this willingly: for I will be wary howe my Son wander again. But Diana cannot for∣bid him to wound.
Yes, chastity is not within the level of his bow.
But beauty is a fair mark to hit.
Well I am glad you are agreed: and say that Neptune hath dealt well with Beauty and Chastity.
Here take your son.
Sir boy where have you been? always ta∣ken, first by Sapho, now by Diana, howe happens it
you unhappy Alpha?
Coming through Dianaes woods, and see∣ing so many fair faces with fond hearts, I thought for my sport to make them smart, and so was taken by Diana.
I am glad I have you.
And I am glad I am rid of him.
Alas poor boy, thy VVinges clypt? thy brands quenched? thy Bow burnt? and thy Arrows broke?
I but it skills not, I bear now mine Are∣rows in mine eyes, my Wings on my thoughts, my brands in mine ears, my bow in my mouth, so as I can wound with looking, fly with thinking, burn with hearing, shoot with speaking.
Well you shall up to heaven with me, for on earth thou wilt lose me.
But soft, what be these?
Those that have offended thee to save their daughters.
Why, had you a fair daughter?
I, and Melebeus a fair daughter.
Where be they?
In yonder Woods, and me thinks I see them coming.
Well, your deserts have not gotten par∣don, but these Goddesses jars.
This is my Daughter, my sweet Phil∣lida.
And this is my fair Gallathea.
Unfortunate Gallathea if this be Phillida.
Accursed Phillida if that be Gallathea.
And wast thou all this while enamoured of Phillida, that sweet Phillida?
And coldest thou dote upon the face of a Maiden, thy self being one, on the face of fair Gal∣lathea?
Doe you both being Maidens love one another?
I had thought the habit agreeable with the Sex, and so burned in the fire of mine own fancies.
I had thought that in the attire of a boy, there could not have lodged the body of a Virgin, &amp; so was inflamed with a sweet desire, which now I find a sower deceit.
Now things falling out as they doe, you must leave these fond fond affections, nature will have it so, necessity must.
I will never love any but Phillida, her love is engraven in my hart, with her eyes.
Nor I any but Gallathea, whose faith is im∣printed in my thoughts by her words.
An idle choice, strange, and foolish, for one Virgin to dote on another, and to imagine a con∣stant faith, where there can be no cause of affection. Howe like you this Venus?
I like well and allow it, they shall both be possessed of their wishes, for never shall it be said that Nature or Fortune shall ouer-throwe Love, and Faith. Is your loves unspotted, begun with truth, con∣tinued with constancy, and not to bee altered till death?
Die Gallathea if thy love be not so.
Accursed bee thou Phillida if thy love be
not so.
Suppose all this Venus, what then?
Then shall it be seen, that I can turn one of them to be a man, and that I will.
Is it possible?
What is to Love or the Mistress of love un∣possible? Was it not Venus that did the like to Iphis and Jade; howe say ye are ye agreed, one to bee a boy presently?
I am content, so I may embrace Gallathea.
I wish it, so I may enjoy Phillida.
Soft Daughter, you must know whether I will have you a Son.
Take me with you Gallathea, I will keep you as I begat you, a Daughter.
Tyterus, let yours be a boy and if you will, mine shall not.
Nay mine shall not, for by that means my young son shall lose his inheritance.
Why then get him to be made a Maiden and then there is nothing lost.
If there bee such changing, I would Venus could make my wife a Man.
Why?
Because she loves always to play with men.
Well you are both fond, therefore agree to this changing, or suffer your Daughters to endure harde chance.
Howe say you Tyterus, shall wee refer it to Venus.
I am content, because she is a Goddess.
Neptune you will not dislike it.
Not I.
Nor you Diana.
Not I.
Cupped shall not.
I will not.
Then let vs depart, neither of them shall know whose lot it shall be till they come to the Church∣door. One shall be, doth it suffice?
And satis-fie vs both, doth it not Galla∣thea?
Yes Phillida.
Come Robin, I am glad I have met with thee, for now wee will make our Father laugh at these tales.
What are these that so malepartlie thrust themselves into our companies?
Forsooth Madame we are fortune tellers.
Fortune tellers; tell me my fortune.
We doe not mean fortune tellers, we mean fortune tellers: we can tell what fortune wee have had these twelve months in the Woods.
Let them alone, they be but peevish.
Yet they will be as good as Minstrels at the marriage, to make vs all merry.
I Ladies we bear a very good Consort,
Can you sing?
Basely.
And you?
Meanly.
And what can you doe?
If they duble it, I will treble it.
Then shall ye go with vs, and sing Hymen before the marriage. Are you content?
Content? never better content, for there we shall be sure to fill our bellies with Capons rumps, or some such dainty dishes.
Then follow vs.
GO all, tic I only that conclude al. You Ladies may see, that Venus can make constancy fickleness, courage cowardice, modesty lightness, working things impossible in your Sex, and tempering hardest harts like softest wool. Yield Ladies, yield to love Ladies, which lurks under your eye-lids whilst you sleep, and plays with your hart strings whilst you wake: whose sweetness never bree∣death satiety, labour weariness, nor grief bitterness. Cupped was begotten in a mist, nursed in Clouds, and sucking only upon conceits. Confess him a Conque∣rer, whom ye ought to regard, sith it is unpossible to resist, for this is infallible, that Love conquers all things but it self, and Ladies all harts but their own.

HE that discloses to a fréend the secrets of his mind:
Doth rob him self of liberty, besides we daily find,
That others councels will by such in every ear be blown:
As have no power when time requires, to smother all their own
Heavy and sad thow séest I am, but why my hart is sore:
Of courtesy content thy self and ask me that no more.
¶Heavy in déed and as heavy as lead,
Either it is some of these same bremy quauers, or some kind of pricksong that runs in his head.
Hear you Moister Fortunio, by the honour of a Soldier, by the glo∣rye of a Captain▪
By all the Poleaxes and tormentors, that theise hands have slain,
Doo but scour your mind to mée, and shut up your gréef:
Either Isle find you some ease, or you shall be hanged for a théef.
You know I am a good fellow, nothing venture nothing have,
If I had not put my carcass to the Iibbet, I had not béen thus brave.
So now, if you venture not to show some trusty body your mind:
It will be very long ere the dresser you find.
And so peradventure you shall never be sped:
For when the Cooke is out of the way, you must go supperless to bed.
¶How finds he redress, that breaks his mind unto a fool?
Or what is learned, where folly sets the wiser sort to school?
Yet sith he braves it with the best, in every company:
And knows where every gallant loves, and sées the remedy,
I will not stick to let him know the secrets of my hart:
And make him partner of my pain, and privy to my smart.
Doo you know Victoria?
¶Doo not I know her? what think yée?
As though ere a proper gentlewoman in Naples were out of queen∣tance with mée?
¶Her have I seen of late, and often by her window past:
From which shée let a letter fall, which taking up in hast,
I read, and found within described the frantic fits of loo:
Whether it were for mée, or any else I cannot prove.
Whether she fine and bait her hooks the simple to beguile:
Cannot be found, till wit by line have measured every wile.
I know she loved Fatal once, before he went to Spain:
And means perhaps to love him still, sith hée's returned again.
Doo thou but sift him for my sake, and haunt out his desire:
And doubtless thou shalt have of mée, thy Captains pay for hire.
¶If this be all Sir, let mée alone,
About your business you may be gone.
I will féele Signior Fedeles mind very cunningly:
And return you an answer of this gear presently.
¶Gramercy, be trusty.
¶As trusty as stéele:
I have no fault but one, I am somewhat short in the héele.
¶Miraccommando.
¶Basilus Codpéece for an old Manus,
You shall not have her at rack and manger I trow:
Somewhat by this for mine own proportion I know.
When two bones are at strife for a dog, it is commonly séen:
That the third comes and takes it, and wipes their mouths cléen.
I mean as you sée mée in this braualitie:
To be a suitor to Victoria with all profigalitie.
I brought Butter and Chéese hither to vittaile the Camp a great while:
Many times I would nick them of their measure, and the Soldiers beguile.
Like a crafty knave, by this means I got so much gain:
That I bought this apparel of a Captain that was slain.
And wearing the same abroad as you sée:
The Soldiers all the town over, make a Captain of mée.
One calls mée Captain Chéese, an other Captain Crust:
An other brave Crack-stone, take which name ye lust.
The Gentlemen are every one glad of my company:
Because I have such a wilde worm in my head, as makes them all merry.
The women they love mée, Victoria is chéefe:
But shée hath béen somewhat strange of late, therefore to be bréefe,
I thought some straws were in the pad, that shée looked so coy:
But now have at her again, with a fresh head in my toy.
I will first vnderproyn Sir Fatal his mind to understand:
Sée good luck, his Schoolmaster and her Maid are at hand.
As both of them fréendly together doo walk:
I will sneke into a corner and hearken to their talk.
I Pray you moister Schoolmaster let me be gone:
I have haste on my way, Isle be at home again anon.
¶Swéet hart and bag pudding go you so swiftly?
Have with you then, doo ye lack any company?
¶In faith Sir no.
¶I pray you tell me one thing before you part,
I think you be somewhat wetherwise by your art.
Doo you know me by acqaintance, or guess you by aim?
That you hit so right on my office in stead of my name?
¶I have séen you before if I am not beguiled:
You have béen Schoolmaster to moister Fatal ever since he was a child.
¶True swéet hart, but I pray thée be not angry with mée▪
But give me leave a little while to move a question to thée.
What is your name, and where doo you dwell?
¶Soft, there lay a straw, that will I not tell.
Alas poor Attilia, what means he by this?
If I stay with him long, my mistress Victoria her servant will miss.
About your business good Sir, I pray you get you away:
I purpose not to tell you my name this day.
¶Be not so strange fair Lady, I know your name very well,
And the name of your mistress, and the place where you dwell.
¶If you doo, much good doo it you, I can tarry no longer:
¶Then I perceive I shall be driven to try who is the stronger.
I shall tell you one thing if it please you to stay:
¶Speak your mind quickly, a word and away,
¶Bee not angry I beséech you, to hear that is true,
You are the fairest Creature that ever I did view.
¶What follows of this?
¶I like you, and loo you, before all the
Creatures that ever I knew,
¶What ill luck is this? I sée nothing that makes me to love and like you.
¶You might if you tried me, for I come of the siniters:
¶Great barkers are none of the greatest biters.
¶Good mistress Attilia, because you have haste:
I will talk with you more, when your business is past.
If I can be spared from my Moister so long, soon at night:
I will resort to your house, and lay my meaning wide open before your sight.
¶Farewell Sir Pedant, look you be not too quick:
¶What a drunken wooer am I that gave her never a like,
This falls out pat for my Moister Fatal, and comes in the nick.
By cogging and counterfeiting loo, as you sée:
If Attilia be so mad, as to like and loo mée,
By her all the Juggling ofher mistress I shall know:
And find whether any new cōmers, have set my Moister beside the cushin or no.
¶This is as excrement for my proposition as can be desired,
Soon at night like the Schoolmaster will I be attired.
First come, first served, if the maid be so fréendly to let mée in:
Then Sa Sa Sa, the battle will begin.
With that Magnaniminstrelsie and mercy, that in mée doth floe:
Isle make a conflict of the Mistress, and let the maid go.
Farewell seely Schoolmaster. this Injunction is not found in his Aduerb I trow▪
¶These tidings will be joyful to my moister I am sure,
Who for love of Victoria suffers many a sharp shower:
Lo where he comes walking by him self alone,
With his head full of thoughts, and his hart full of moan.
Rouse up your wits Sir, what are you a sléep?
Never be so base minded to a woman to créep.
Sée, sée, your cap on your head, good manners forgot,
Now you are come to your own swinge, you know me not.
Doo your duty to your moister, good nurture is best:
In via virtutis non progredi, regret est.
¶Alas my care so closes up my sight:
That all is lost, wherein I should delight.
¶You know that it may be said of me, which was said of Vlisses,
Multorum hominum mores queen vidit et vrbes.
Therefore if you desire mée your cares to reléeue:
The best counsel I can, to you I will give.
¶You know Victoria is the cause of all my secret smart:
Victories beauty is the worm, that gnaws me to the hart.
What counsel now?
¶Did not I teach you long ago out of tragical Seneca:
His golden saying, duo omnium malorum foemina?
Did I not cause you with your pen in the margent of your book, to mark that place:
And yet will you be tooting on a beautiful face?
Which no otherwise vanishes, and away doth go:
Then water, that never returns to the spring, from whence it did flow.
Beauty is so tickle a foundation to bear any frame:
And loo so uncertain, that it throws the house on his head that built the same.
Whereupon I gave you a good lesson of old:
Every letter thereof would be written in Gold.
Quote inuit exiguum est, plus est quote laedit amantes:
They know what I mean that are versificautes
¶If this cold comfort in my néed, be all that I shall have:
Out of my sight. No succour at thy hands I mean to crave.
¶Adultus Iuuenis tandem custody remoto:
Cereus in vitium flecti, monitoribus aspire.
The right course of the world, now he runs upon whéeles:
Had I known this when you were a boy, I would have hamperd your héeles.
It were a good déed to set all your fortune at even and od:
And let you alone till you are beaten with your own rod.
But the loo that I bear to you every day:
Will not suffer me to sée this good wit cast away.
Some tidings I have for you, therefore be not afraid:
I am grown in acquaintance with Victories maid.
By whom I trust in the end to know:
What Suitors to her Mistress resort too and fro.
If no body else do follow the game:
The spark that you left in her breast, will break out in a flame.
¶Thanks good Pedant, get thée home and leave me héer a space:
To try if I may méet with fair Victoria in this place.
¶I know where to prick that the vain may bléed:
Sée how fair he doth speak, when his humour I féed.
This passes Prosody, Sintaxis and all,
Tic the way to my profit to stoop to his call.
¶Héer was I would to méet with her, and héer I mean to walk:
And sound her meaning if I may, by mooing her to talk.
If loo be like the flower that in the night,
When darkness drowns the glory of the Skies:
Smells sweet, and glitters in the gazers sight,
But when the gladsome Sun begins to rise,
And he that views it, would the same embrace:
It withers, and loses all his grace.
Why doo I loo and like the cursed Tree,
Whose buds appear, but fruit will not be seen:
Why doo I languish for the flower I see?
Whose root is rot, when all the leaves be green.
In such a case it is a point of skill:
To follow chance, and loo against my will.
Ah poor Victoria, héer it was thy guise,
To stand and sée Fortunio passing by:
Whose loouely shape hath caught me by mine eyes,
And means to make me prisoner while I dye.
To gaze on him was life to mée before:
His absence death, because I sée no more.
¶Oh gréedy loo that never féeleth glut,
How have I boasted of Victories grace?
With fear at last from favour to be shut,
And lose the light of such a shining face?
Shall neither tears, nor toil, nor broken sléep:
Have force enough a Ladies loo to kéep?
¶And hath Fortunio now forgot the way.
Which by my window learned of late to walk:
Sée the disturber of my peace this day,
Fatal comes to proffer mée some talk.
Sith hée is héer, his patience I will prove:
Whom for Fortunios sake I cannot loo.
¶I serve a Mistress whiter then the snow,
Straighter then Cedar, brighter then the Glass:
Finer in trip and swifter then the Roe,
More pleasant then the Féeld of flowering Grass.
More gladsome to my withering Joys that fade:
Then Winters Sun, or Summers cooling shade,
Swéeter then swelling grape of ripest wine,
Softer then feathers of the fairest Swan:
Smoother then Jet, more stately then the Pine,
Fresher then Poplar, smaller then my span.
Clearer then Beauties fiery pointed beam:
Or Ysie crust of Christalles frozen stream.
Yet is shée curster then the Bear by kind,
And harder hearted then the aged Ok:
More glib then Oil, more fickle then the wind,
Stiffer then Stéele, no sooner bent but broke.
Lo thus my service is a lasting sore:
Yet will I serve although I dye therefore.
¶Now must I either foot him off with fained courtesy:
Or else be coy in talk, to rid mée of his company.
Sir Fatal well met, and so farewell, I must away:
My business is such as will not suffer me to staye.
¶Mistress Victoria: let us have one word before yée go,
Oh loo, oh death, betwéen you both, vouchsafe to rid my woe.
¶A wunder sure it is to sée, how gentlemen complain:
What cork, what care, what hell on earth, for women they sustain.
Your peace is war, your sléep is watching, and your ease is toil:
Your life is death, your mirth is moan, and your success a foil.
These words are used for ornaments to beautify your stile:
And these I think you follow, poor Victoria to beguile.
¶If for your sake alone, more then for any other dame:
I were not thus tormented, then, I grant I were too blame.
But sith your golden graces are the cause of all my gréfe:
Give ear and credit to my plaint, and yéeld me some reléefe.
¶If this be true, why did you part? and stay so long in Spain:
Delay bréeds loss, either I thought you would not come again.
Or else that change of company would alter your delight,
And absence put me out of mind, that shut me out of sight.
Did not I say, that your departure would my death procure?
¶You did.
¶And could you make me then to féele so sharp a shower?
¶Need has no law, the matter touched my land and life so néer:
That I was forced against my will, to stay no longer héer.
But sith I have dispatcht, according to mine own desire:
Lo héer I am to serve you still, in bitter frost, or fire.
Depart Fatal for this time, come to me soon at night,
I will consider better of your plaint and heavy plight.
My maid and other company doth press into this place:
It were not good to make them all, acquainted with your case.
¶A thousand thanks, this in your ear, let that the token bée,
¶I know your meaning Sir, farewell, refer the rest to mée.
Alas poor soul, he little knows, how cold a suit he has,
He must be dallied with a while, for fear of after scathe.
¶And must you séek Fatal out?
¶I must.
¶But to what end?
¶To crave of courtesy, that he would stand my Mistress fréend.
¶Mistress Virginia:
¶The same.
¶In what matter I pray.
¶Thats counsel unto you, I must not every thing bewray.
And yet by her, so bitter is the taste of loo, I find:
That gall were swéeter to the mouth, and better to the mind.
¶I have the Hare on foot.
¶But know you where Fatal is?
¶Him at his house, or walking in the stréet you shall not miss.
¶Farewell, I will go séek him straight.
¶Yet find him not too soon:
Alas poor soul, her suit is cold before it be begun,
Lo héer the common fault of loo, to follow her that flies:
And fly from her that makes pursuit, with loud lamenting cries.
Fatal looues Victoria, and shée hath him forgot:
Virginia likes Fatal best, and hée regards her not.
¶O foolish loo, and loouers that look not to their state,
But swim against the tide, and then repent when tic too late.
If wée could learn to séek to them, that unto vs doo sue:
The match were made, and wée should have no cause at all to rue.
When wée be coy, and hold our fréendes aloof at cap and knée:
The Mart is mart, and every eye our folly then doth sée.
¶What talk you there Attilia?
¶No hurt at all to you.
¶What news?
¶Good, swéet, and joyful news, Mistress I bring you now.
¶Hast thou met with Fortunio?
¶Not so.
¶Then what's the news?
¶As I was walking through the stréets alone:
Devising how to find a remedy to cure your moan,
I met Medusa with her box and trinkets as you sée:
Whose cunning shortly shall devise, the way to set you frée.
¶No way without Fortunio.
¶Fortunio you shall have:
Be not afraid therefore in this: this women's aide to crave.
Shée can enchant, and work wonders, by Magicks learned art:
Shée can with words, with charms and herbs, give you Fortune∣nioes hart.
Make much of her.
¶Ah fool, I know that loo is such a passion of the mind:
As neither Ayrye Sprites can rule, nor force of Magic bind.
¶Yet try her cunning, sith that I have brought her into place,
¶Medusa, will thy drugs procure a pining loouer grace?
¶Mistress, they will.
¶Open thy box and let me sée thy store:
Let me have that shall pleasure me, Isle pay thée well therefore.
¶Héer is an Egg of a black Hen, a quill plucked from a Crow,
Who with this pen writes on this Egg, a charm ye I doo know
And names the party whom they like: the same shall loo again,
What think you of this remedy?
¶This remedy is vain.
Look farther yet into your box, some other medicin prove:
Because my Mistress cares not for the single juice of loo.
She craves more, shée must enjoy the party shée desires:
¶Fie, hold thy peace.
¶Else hath shée not the thing that shée requires.
¶Lo héer a spoonful of a Virgins milk,
Incorporated with a péece of dow:
Powdered with cinders of fine Spanish Silk,
And steeped in the licquor of a Slow.
On the one side write Venus and Cupids name:
On tother his that loved, then take the same
And broil it on the coals unto a crust,
Basting it well with honey dropes and oil:
Give it to him you loo, to kindle lust,
And then your suit shall never suffer foil.
This will so bind the gallant whom you choose:
That he shall ne'er him self héerafter loose.
¶All this is to no purpose, yet me thinks you are too wide:
What pleasure can my Mistress have so long as he is tied?
¶Shée means not tied in hand or foot, but bound to be my slave:
In all the services and duties that I mean to crave.
¶Héere are two hearts, the one was taken out of a black Cat:
The other from a Pigeon: héer is the blood of a Bat.
Héere is a péece of Virgin wax, héers an enchanted Bean,
To make you go invisible,
¶You know not what I mean.
¶These things are pretty, but they are not for my Mistress fit,
For if she be invisible, I pray what profits it?
She shall beholds man, whom shée delights most to sée:
But béeing hid: she never can enjoy his company.
Yet show vs more.
¶Héer's things will make men melt in fits of loo,
A wanton Goats brain, and the Liver of a purple Do.
A Cocks eye, and a Capons spur, the left leg of a Quail:
A Goose bill, and a Ganders tongue, a mounting Eagles tail.
But sith they must be taken in thincreasing of the Moon:
Before the rising of the Sun, or when the same is down.
And closely wrapped in Virgin parchement on a Friday night:
I will not trouble you with these.
¶Of more lets have a sight.
¶Héer is the Image of a man, made out in Virgin wax,
Which béeing pricked, or toasted in the flame of burning Flax.
Hée that you loo shall come and throw him self before your féet:
More humble then a Lamb, to doo what you shall think is méet.
¶O that is it.
¶This is it must doo my Mistress good:
By Images it must be wrought, Loo is a holy Rood.
¶Wée must withdraw our selves aside, and work it out of sight:
¶Enter my house, the Sun is set, &amp; now begins the night.
Soft, for it is night, I must not make any noise I trow:
Me thinks this apparel makes me learned,
which of all these Stars doo I know.
Yonder is the gréen Dog, and the blew Bear,
Harry Horners Girdle, and the Lyons ear.
Me thinks I should spout Latin before I beware,
Argus mecum insputare?
Cur Canis tollit poplitem,
Cum mingit in parietem?
Alice tittle tattle Mistress Victories Maid:
If I speak like the Schoolmaster, shée will never be afraid.
As soon as she opens the door to let mée in:
With my Ropericall aliquanci I will begin.
Swinum, Volume, Porcum. Graye-goosorum iostibus:
Rentibus dentibus, lofadishibus, come after vs.
I have berayed my self I think with speaking so high:
This is Sir Fatal that is so nigh.
Till he be past it were not good for mée to appéere:
Therefore Isle slip into the Temple, and hide me in the Tomb that stands héere.
¶Too strange it is, that when I should rejoice,
A chilling fear doth flit through every vain:
And when I hope to hear Victories voice,
Doubt throws me down into despair again.
The comfort that she gave me, was so cold:
That for my life I dare not be too bold.
¶Degeneres animos timor arguit, faint hart never wun fair Lady they say:
And Amor odit inerts, take that by the way.
Séeing shée appointed this time, forward with a courage, never stand you in doubt:
Imagination many times fetches wonders about.
Not because it changes the course of the thing you would find:
But because it doth rule and govern the mind.
¶I shiver still, come bear me company,
Until thou see mée nearer to the door:
Thy spéech doth give me comfort mightily,
And eggs me on unto it more and more.
¶Andate allegramente, you are right under her window now:
What shall I doo, will you have me to leave you?
¶Not so, but stay until thou séest me in:
To give the sign I purpose to begin.
What means this? a letter: woe is mée,
Where shall I read it? light within the Temple I doo sée.
¶This gréeting me thinks is none of the best:
I sée by his countenance he likes not the rest.
¶Ah cruel Dame that can dissemble so,
Dye poor Fatal, life thou must forgo.
¶What news in your letter Sir, tell mée?
¶Read it thy self and sée.
La mia mala fortune m'ha fatto d'auenire cos che meglio sa∣rebbe ch'io non fuse nata, m'incresce non potter attenderui la promise, ma piú mi duole, che mi sia tolta la commodity del vederui, perô se m'amate, non passate my piú di qua, perch sarete causa della mia rouina.
This is strange upon strange, your days are out worn,
"My fortune is such, that it had béen better for mée I had never béen borne.
"I am sorry that I can not stand to my word:
"And more sorry, that fortune to mée will not your presence afford.
"Sith I am robed of your company whom most I desire:
"If you loo mée come no more this way, for bréeding my trouble, and kindling of fire.
Héer is a sléeueles answer with all my hart,
You have your errand Sir, now when you will you may depart.
¶It cannot bée, but that Victoria hath an other loo:
Therefore I purpose presently, her privy sleights to prove.
¶You are the fearfullest gentleman that ever I knew:
It is impossible that should be true.
Your own doubtfulness tangles you still in the briers,
Did I never teach you: That a woman denies that in show, which in deed shée desires.
Are all those horrible oaths which so oft shée hath sworn,
Any likelihode that shée would leave you forlorn?
Remember her tears and her pitiful looks:
If shée loo you not still, I dare burn my books.
¶No no, her oaths and tears, and looks, and all thou can repeat
Were but as shadows finely cast, to cover her deceit.
But sith I find her as shée is, I will revenge the wrong:
Or dye the death in this attempt, because I live too long.
¶You are to hasty a Soldier, too the battle to go,
If you will be revenged ere your enemy you know.
¶Mine enemies I purpose straight to try,
Hide thée within some privy corner héer:
Be diligent to mark who passes by,
And if that any other man appéere
Either to enter, or to issue out,
Mark what he is, and put mée out of doubt.
¶Farewell Sir, commit the care to my hand,
As close as I can, in this place I will stand.
Unseen unto any, yet viewing of all:
A pretty scout set to take a knave in a pit-fall.
Yonder come some, whatsoever they bée,
Stand close Pedant, that no body sée.
¶A rope on these passengers, I am in a miserable plight,
I think I shall not get out of this place this night.
¶Tic almost one a clock, the fittest hour to bind the Sprites:
And compass every thing, that best may further your delights.
¶Then let vs go.
¶O che cricca di vacche? What cattle have we hear?
Be they women, or devils in the likeness of women that appear?
¶Mistress take héed we be not spied, for that may bréed vs harm:
¶No, no, but like a sort of Nuns unto the Church we swarm.
¶Enter the Chapel, we will make as though we meant to pray:
¶Read good Medusa.
¶Ah miserable Pedant, would I were away,
I quiver so fast, that I féele no ground:
Tic a company of witches I hold forty pound.
¶When begin you swéet hart?
¶Make haste you had néed,
The day will approach, and the night gon with spéed.
¶A rope on them all, they go a catter-walling I trow,
Whom they mean to torment I would gladly know.
¶This water and this oil I have, is conjured as you sée,
In the name of those Sprites that written on this Image bée.
Now must I write the name of him whom you so much doo love:
Then bind these sprites, him to the like affection for to move.
I charge you as you mean to purchase favour in his sight:
And by the virtue of mine art, tell me his name aright.
¶Fortunio.
¶Thats he that doth my moister Fatal disgrace,
And this is Victoria disguised in place.
¶Your name upon the breast, his on the forehead must I write,
Then conjure, now it is the stillest time of all the night.
¶Doe so.
¶I conjure thée thou waxen Image héere,
By Venus fruitful womb that Cupped bare:
That in Fortunios name thy force appear,
To comfort fair Victoria full of care.
That by the virtue of mine Art thou be:
In this her gréef a present remedy:
I conjure thée Fortunio at the length,
By head, eyes, ears, thy liver and thy hart:
Thy Guts, thy veins, flesh, blood, bones, sinews, strength,
Thy lights, thy lungs, féet, hands, and every part.
That presently thy breast be set on fire:
And all thy bowels boyle with hot desire.
Look that by night thou take no quiet rest,
By day thou loathe thy comfortable food:
Let every joy be daggers to thy breast,
Sée, hear, and touch nought that may doo thée good.
Till fancy make thée for a lover méet,
And throw thée down before Victories féet.
Look that she never pass out of thy mind,
But paint her heavenly face in every thought:
Loo her aboue all Creatures of her kind,
Prosper not, till by thée her joys be wrought.
But waste as this melts at the candles flame:
Amen, fiat, fiat, in Cupidoes name.
¶What have you done? and is the Spirit come up that you do call?
¶The greatest Féend of hell come and take you all.
¶With oil of Virgin wax I thée anoint,
And sign, and mark thée with the holy Cross:
In Venus name, I water every joint.
That loo by thée may never suffer loss.
¶Now have you done?
¶It must be pricked, and set in greater heat:
Then the Spirits bound, before it doo the feat.
¶Make haste.
¶I Conjure you yée Sprites, whose names are on this Image writ:
And now rehearse you one by one, in order as you sit.
Nettabor, Temapttor, Vigilator, Somniator, Astarot, Berliche,
Buffon, Amachon, Suchon, Sustani, Asmodeus.
¶Ottomanus, Sophie, Turk, and the great Cham:
Robin goodfellowe, Hobgoblin, the devil and his dam.
O vi possono porter in precipitio.
¶I conjure you, you foul infernal knot of baser Sprites,
By the most Mighty power and force of that great God of loo:
Both by the Bow and dreadful dint of all his feathered Flights,
And by his wingges, and by the smoke of loouers scalding sighs.
And by the smart and sorrow, that this troubled dame doth prove:
By all the Planets that our hearts, to hate or liking move.
By the desires of her that hath Victoria unto name:
By Venus Fillet, and the golden pleasures of her game.
Break loose I say, and trudge with hasty foot out of your den,
Hunt and pursue, besturre your selves to seek Fortunio out:
Forsake with spéed the stinking fog of that your ugly fen,
Possess, and chase him, sée that you return no more again,
Till you haoue brught him down and humbled him, if he be stout,
Drive him with your tormenting gnaw, the City round about.
Go make his bed of Thistles, and his seat of pricking thorne:
Until you bring him hither unto her that is forlorn.
¶Have you done Medusa?
¶Now must I stick a néedle in his hart,
And prick him with the point, before we part.
¶I pray you prick him well.
¶If that I strike the néedle through, the gentleman will dye:
¶Then spare him good Medusa, touch him tenderly.
¶Now have I done, follow and throw your Tapers out of hand,
Into this Tomb that as you sée, hard by vs héer doth stand:
Set fire unto their féet, and toast the corses of the dead,
That long have slept within this place since they were buried.
¶But will this make him come, and then submit him self to mée?
¶Mistress it will, and you th'euent thereof shall shortly sée:
¶All is mine, ho, ho. ho. All is mine,
Devils were smocks, in this latter time.
Such sights, as among the bones of the dead in this Tomb I have séen:
Would have made any man but my self, out of his wits to have béen.
Good Lord: once me thought I saw my Grandam trot round about me in her gray petticoat and her red cap,
Never since I was borne, was I taken in such a trap.
Another time me thought I saw the souls, of all them that died for love,
Cry out upon Lady Vengeance, one that was such a fair woman as nothing could move.
Little Cuprit him self in the bottom of hell:
Cursed fair Lady Pilcher, for burning his skin with a Lamprell.
This coniugation put me in a terrible fear,
If it had continued longer, Termagant, Rawhead, Roste-meat, and Eatbread, and all the armies of Devils had béen héer.
Whats this? somewhat I perceive they have let fall for haste,
An Image in wax very prettily caste.
Fortunio is written in the forehead of the same,
And jump upon his belly Victories name.
This falls out very well for me,
I'll send this to Fatal that he and Fortunio the same may se.
This will make them to hate her wonderfully,
Then shall I have her in spite of the pie.
What have we here? a néedle in his heart,
And names of Augrem writ round about it with Margaris art.
Nettabor, Temptator, Vigilator, and Buffon.
They come, they come, they come, tic time to be gone.
¶In such a fear at rising of the spirits wée all were cast,
That being scared, we lost our way and Image too at last.
I marvel where Medusa is?
¶Shée took her to her héeles,
And time I trow, for all ye world me thought did rūne on whéeles.
¶Sith this enchanting takes no place, go séeke Fortunio straight,
And tell him that to speak with him his pleasure I do wait.
A word or two will serve my turn, go séeke him out of hand,
¶Where shall I séeke him? for I know not where his house doth stand.
¶By ye Piazza, there I am sure yt thou shalt sée him walk,
Spending the time with one or other of his friends in talk.
¶I go.
¶I was so troubled in my mind, with fright of sudden fear,
That yet I féele my sinews shake, and tremble every where.
Alas look where Fatal comes, I cannot scope vnséene,
He is importunate, I know not how to rid me of him cléene.
¶Ah cursed dames, their love is like a flame,
Quivering in the air betwéene too blasts of wind,
Borne here and there, by either of the same.
Yet properly to none of both inclined.
Hate and disdain is painted in their eyes,
Deceit and treason in their besom lies.
Their promises are made of brittle glass,
Ground with a fillop to the finest dust,
Their thoughts as streaming rivers swiftly pass.
Their words are oil, and yet they gather rust.
Their virtues mount like billows to the skies,
And vanish straight out of the gazers eyes.
True are they never found but in vntrueth,
Constant in nought, but in inconstancy,
The common foes of weal, and fluddes of rues.
Devouring cankers of mans liberty.
Here doth the stain of modesty abide:
And shrowdingly desires her self to hide.
But get thée straight to Sir Fortunio.
Will him to come and speak a word with me,
Haste and post haste with spéede sée that thou go,
That he this treachery may quickly sée.
Mean while on her whose face begins to glow:
The burden of my breast I mean to throw.
¶Then take you this Image of wax that you sée,
Crackstone the Captain delivered it to mée.
Being his turn as he said for to watch this night,
And breaking up sentinel when it began to be light.
This Image he told me in the stréete he found,
Lying harde by the chapel upon the ground.
This is the same that was made to enchant Fortunio,
Behold it and sée whether I say truth or no.
¶He ploughs the seas, and fishes in the land,
And loses all the labour of them both,
He fondly reares his fortress on the sand.
That builds his trust upon a women's troth.
But get thée hence about thy business,
That I may talk with this my good mistress.
¶A Dio.
¶Well met good Sir Fatal, whats the cause
Of these your troubled looks that I behold,
What rain is threatened by these stormy flaws:
Which by your gate, and gesture you unfold?
Is loo the spark that kindels all this fire:
Or doo you lack the fruit of your desire?
¶The cause that sets my gestures out of frame.
Is in your self if you doo search the same.
¶And why good Sir?
¶What make you héer so early in the stréet?
¶My longing thoughts did prophecy, that héer I should you méet.
¶Not mée but Sir Fortunio: you know this I am suer:
And what by magic you have done, his favour to procure.
I never thought so fair a dame, had béen so foul within,
But sith continued service, had no force thy grace to win:
Be suer unthankful wretch, perjured and most disloyal dame:
I will not rest, before I bée revenged of the same.
This to Fortunio presently I purpose shall be shown:
And open brute of thy reproach, throughout the City blown.
All that in Naples dwell this day, shall wunder at this déed,
And every wounding tongue shall make thine honour now to bléed.
My self will help to tear the hart, out of thy body quick,
And give thy crimson coloured blood, unto the dogs to lick.
So lively will I blaze thée out, to every gazers eye:
That though thy carcass rot and waste, thy shame shall never dye.
As busy will I bée to plague thée more then is expressed:
As thou wast cunning to deceive the man that loved thée best.
¶I think you are disposed to jest, and make some trial héere,
How trimly you can tread aloft to thunder in mine ear.
For when I slide into my self, and there examine well,
What I have done, I find I never from Fatal fell.
And yet I sée your hart still works, by which I doo suspect,
Some Sycophants would make you, your Victoria to reject.
But patience is a virtue, as the worthiest wits doo say,
My love to you, deserves not that you uttered héer this day.
¶Yes that, and more, in thée's no truth, love, faith, nor loyalty,
But lies, dissembling, falsehood, hate, sin, shame, and sorcery.
Bestur thy self, enchant, and conjure now and doo thy worst,
The day thow knew vs both, shall shortly be by thée accursed.
¶I am not privy unto this, nor know Fortunio.
Ah poor Victoria thou art caught, alas what shall I doo?
Now counsel me Attilia, Attilia, is not héer:
Where be my gallants now, will not Crack-stone appear?
Now is the time for thée Crack-stone my hart to gain,
Oh save my life, and him dispatch that doth mine honour stain.
Doo this and then I well be thine, and listen to thy suit,
But till that I may speak with him, tic best that I be mute.
Farewell Sir, be not rash, but Judge, I cannot answer much:
More you shall know when time hath tried, my truth by perfect tush. A Dio.
¶A diauolo.
As I have known thée, so shall Sir Fortunio know thée straight,
For whom I sent, and héer he comes, whose coming I doo wait.
¶Est mora damnosa, pray let vs away,
For yonder my Moister your coming doth stay.
¶Sir Fatal God save you.
¶And you Sir Fortunio,
I was so bold to charge my man, unto your house to go.
Matters of weight I have to you, of fréendship to impart:
¶My leisure serves, and I will stand, to héer withal my hart.
¶Not so, but sith it asks time, if you will take the pain,
To walk with mée unto my house, there will I tell you plain.
Both what I saw and heard of late, which touches you so néer:
That you will give mée thanks I know, when you the matter héer
¶Go when you please Il'e bear you company,
¶Pedant you may walk abroad, till Dinner draws ny.
¶With a good will Sir, thats the thing I desire,
But if I méet not Attillia, the fat is in the fire.
For my Masters sake, I began to love her in jest,
And may chance to swallow a Gudgion in earnest.
For love is a Fox, he begins at first by dalliance and play:
Then increases his gettings every day.
Oh deus adiunxit nostris sua numina votes.
Behold I beséech you my delicate Mistress.
¶How prove you that?
¶I am so terrebinthinall and play such reakes when I come to the féeld:
That mine enemies choose, rather to murder them selves then to yéeld.
Whereby their Damned souls have so pestered all hell:
That ther's no room left for women to dwell.
Thus being thrust out of the place that is theirs by right:
They are constrained into heaven to take their flight.
¶I confess that this benefit is so great,
That my tongue is not able your praise to repeat.
¶Besides that, I have as good luck as any man of my life,
To find favour and fréendship in Gentlewoman's eyes.
I thank them they slout me to my face, when no other they mock,
This was my fathers craft, for he ever made my Mother to wrap mée in her smock.
Give me good luck and throw mée into the Seas,
Where women take a pitch, it is easy to please.
¶Truth Sir, but will you go too my Mistress with mée,
¶With an almond hart my girl I will follow thée.
Mistress I may, and will once more go séek him if you please:
Although I fear his answer will return you little ease.
What though he loved you first? you sée his suit falls to the ground,
And by this small pursuit, thinks you are as good lost as found.
Hée stoops to Victories lure, but she hath cast him of,
Hée bows, and créepes to her, she turns his labour too a scoff.
¶How can thou tell?
¶Even yesterday I heard it of her maid:
¶If it bée so, then is hée justly plagued from aboue,
And féeles that hell of mind, which all forsakē Ghosts doo prove
Yet can I not beléeue it Pamphila, before I sée,
And gather by his answer, that he hath forsaken mée.
Therefore go seek him out again.
¶Mistress it shall not néede,
Lo where he walks as sad as though his heart within did bléde.
¶Steppe to him straight.
¶Master Fatal, if you knew as well
To love: and her that loves you, to reléeue,
As you are skilful in deceit to dwell.
And to torment whom you should never gréeue.
Happy were she that bears you in her breast,
Happy were you of such a pearl possessed.
¶What means this?
¶Talk with my mistress Sir, and you shall know,
¶Then to thy mistress Pamphila, I go.
Mistress Virginia, what's the cause I pray,
That you did send of late to séeke me out?
If you have any thing to me to say,
Speak, that I may resolve you of the doubt.
¶Fatal, now behold thy cruelty,
Her voice is stopped, and doth for sorrow die.
¶I never thought Fatal to have found,
Your show of faith in promises forgot:
Your liking dead, and buried in the ground,
My self cast off as though you knew me not.
To love in jest and turn it to a scorn,
Is not the nature of a Gentle borne.
¶Mistress, I love you as I did before,
As dearly as the dearest friend you have,
Or as a brother, would you any more?
Command of me what courtesy may crave.
If Fancies lurking poison you remove,
And be not shipped in Seas of raging love.
Whose great companions are discord and wrath,
Flattery, Deceit, Treason and Cruelty:
Heaviness of mind, gréef, penury, and scathe:
Unrest, suspicion, fear, and Jealousy,
Consuming hunger, and an endless thirst,
A iuing death, life dying with the first.
¶Ah Pamphila, I find thy words are true,
The more in liking I did think him bound:
The looser he, and hunts after new,
His talk was nothing but an empty sound.
Those virtues now, I sée he doth despise:
That once did paint my picture in his eyes.
If Justice Palace stand aboue the skies,
And angry gods doe look into our life:
Some plague no doubt, for him they will devise,
And scourge him with some storm of bitter strife.
Although he vaunt of conquest here a while,
It is not praise worthy a woman to beguile.
Come Pamphila I'll learn to set him light,
That so dissembles with a double tongue,
Help to convey me straight out of his sight,
Whose wandering choice hath done me double wrong.
Farewell Sir, as we met, we mean to part.
¶This gréeting answers unto his desert.
¶So quickly gone? farewell, all women for Victories sake,
And on them all for her, revenge I mean to take.
Busy they are with pen to write our vices in our face,
But negligent to know the blemish of their own disgrace.
Gestures and looks in readiness, at their command they have,
Mirth, sorrow, fear, hope, and what other passion you can crave.
Hence rises every cloud in love, this bréedeth all the strife,
Snares to our féete, devouring cankers, these are unto life.
¶Ridetur chord queen semper aberrat eadem.
I cannot abide Sir, to harp still upon one string,
It is too Cuckolike they say, one song continually to sing.
It were good for you to learn quickly in what cléefe you should take your part,
And be spéedely revenged on her that strikes such a dagger to your heart.
Oh they are full of deceit, cogging, flattery, foisting, twitle-twatle, and I know not what,
This Genus demonstratiuam, is such a bottomless sea, you will never have done if you enter into that.
The dispraise of women is so great, that without doubt,
All the tongnes in the world are not able to set it out.
It is one of my precepts, to be short and sharpe in word and blue,
When they anger you, bid the devil take them all, and make no more ado.
¶Waste thou so near Pedant?
¶I heard you well enough.
I think I must bring you to Copy rerū again for chāge of stuff,
Leave these exclamations, and crying out upon women now,
If you look well to your self, the fault is in you.
You would néedes love, though in your last lecture among your la, similitudines and dicendi floras.
I made you write this in your paper book, Littore quote conchae, tot sunt in amore dolores.
¶Thou did in déede Pedant, and I have not it forgot,
¶Now you find it by proof, I beléeue you will not.
But let this matter pass, and tell me Sir, how with Fortunio you spéede,
Did you touch him so néere that his heart did bléede?
¶Oh no, for in Victoria he hath such confidence,
That he excuses her, and now mistrusted my pretence.
¶What remedy then?
¶I know not, for he saith, except that I can plainly prove,
That other men besides him self Victoria doth love.
He was, and is, and will be hers, so long as he doth live,
¶Accident in puncto, quote non contingit in anno, very good coūsell for this I can give.
Doe you sée this brave robe?
¶I doe, very well,
¶But why I have brought it, you cannot tell,
¶No trust me.
¶Did not I tel you that for your sake I begā to curry favour with Victories maid?
¶In déede Pedant, I remember such a thing you said.
¶She took order this very day with mée,
That disguised on this manner, as by and by you shall sée.
Even thus Sir behold, I should come this night,
Disguised that no man might know me by sight.
And beg an alms at the door, she would let me in straight,
And make me a posit for my labour, that so well can weight.
We shall be as merry as cup and can, when I am once there,
¶What's this to me?
¶Tush take you no care:
Look that some pretty corner, by you may be espied,
Where you and Fortunio your selves may hide.
Be both of you héer about the midst of the night,
That when I come out, both of you of me may have a sight.
I at departure will bid Victoria farewell,
Commend my entertainment, and say it doth excel.
This will make him to think as soon as I am gone,
That Victoria loves not him alone.
¶O excellent.
¶Sée what an old Fox these rotten rags shrouds,
I can play the knave and convey it in the clouds.
But hear you Sir?
¶What say thou?
¶Hold fast Master Fortunio, till I be out of his reach,
Least he cut me in péeces when he hears me preach.
¶Fear not, be suer he shall not stir before I sée thée gon,
Farewell, and thanks to finish this, I will to him anon.
¶Adieu Sir, If Appollo the very brother of Diana and Iupiters son,
For the love of a Lady that was hard to be wun.
Thought it no shame in a Shepherds wéed,
Him self to debase, the sooner to spéed.
Should I that am not worthy to bear out Apollos chamber-pot, think any scorn,
That these rascolly rags by me should be worn.
So long as I doo it my suit for to move:
And further my Master with my slavering love.
Quote exemplo fit, jure fieri putant, Tully doth say,
Whose authority is a privilege to follow this way.
Therefore god Appollo whose example I take,
Vouchsafe to stay the course of thy Chariot a while for my sake.
Suffer not thy horses to hasten the day,
But prolong ye night, as when Iupiter thy father with Alcmena lay.
Peradventure I may get a young Hercules as well as he,
But for very sin and shame too, so it should be.
If I speed well this day, I will shut up my school door every yéer,
It shall be festival to my Scholars, to make good chéere.
They shall play if they will, from morning to night,
During that time, they shall not be cōstrained to come in my sight.
This will be cake and pudding to them that are truantly,
And care not how little they take for their money.
A begging Pedant, I a begging I go,
Tic, toc, fate una limosina, á un pouerino.
¶What bold beggar have we at the gate,
Art thou not ashamed to go a begging so late?
¶No good mistress, it is no shame at all,
But the greatest honour that unto a man may fall.
For an Alms is a gift, and a gift is a token of reverence I trow,
And reverence is, when our superiors we know.
Thus I being presented of all men with alms as you sée,
Reverenced of all men of force I must bée.
¶For reasoning so déepely, no Alms shall you have,
Because I will not honour such a beggarly knave.
¶Farewell and be hanged, there I was ouer-reacht with a crookte measure,
Wit bought at this rate is an excellent treasure.
Beginnings are harde, this proverb is old,
Therefore at some other bodies door I mean to be bold.
Tic, toc, fate limosina: popoli mei benedetti,
Che iddio v'aiuterá, nile vostre tribulationi.
Tic, toc, chi la diua over la fara dire,
Di buona morte non potrà morire.
¶What sturdy knave have we heer in the stréete,
To beg at this time of the night? Sir it is not méete.
Pack hence Sir I advise you, least I give you a sowce,
Or take thée by the héeles and throw thée over the hows.
¶Good moister beat not the poor, when they make their moan,
It is not long since your courage was as cold as a stone.
¶What saucy knave, me thinks he doth prate,
Doest thou know to whom thou speak, or at whose gate?
¶No good moister, be good to me, I beséeche you, for I have done,
I were best to be quiet till he be gone.
¶We have many good startoppes made heer in the city,
For publishing these vargery knaves that go up and down idly
Sée how he is escaped, and shrinks aside,
My looks are to big for him too abide.
It is a wonder to sée how they crouch where soever I come,
If I stand they stoup, if I speak they are dumb.
Mistress Victarrogantie hath sent for me,
Her Chaplin against Fatal to be.
If I kill him for her sake, and put him to shame,
She hath promised me her love, to reward the same.
¶Oh, Traditora.
¶How am I bound to Mars, yt when my stomach so swells yt I am driven to lay out my heart in my hose,
He sows up my gorget with the slaughter of my foes.
I'll go put on my Horslittor, &amp; the rest of mine Armour straight,
And here about her house for him I will weight.
Every night she saith, he comes sneaking heer by,
But if he come now, I will handle him trimly.
¶Go goodman Goose, provide you, &amp; arm you as well as you can,
Lay about you, and play the proper man.
In tempore veni, I came hither in the nick,
My master shall spéedely hear of this trick.
Yet will I go foreword with my business as I decreed,
And try how well of my purpose I am like to spéede.
Tic toc, una limosina al poueretto,
Date Signora per l'amour di Dio.
¶Who is there?
¶Your charity good mistress,
¶Enter and take it,
¶God reward you good mistress, I will not forsake it.
O Happy is I trust that Doctors soul by whom I learned,
This famous Art, and easily by it my living earnde.
O that he knew how déere his life and learning was to me,
O yt he could but for his death my grief and sorrow sée.
¶Medusa, if I did not fear my honour and my name,
Would soon be lost hereby, and turn my credit into shame.
I would become thy Scholar, but I blush to speak of it,
¶No Pamphila, for such a mistress thou art far unfit.
What talk thou of thy name, and honour likely to be lost,
By learning of mine Art? which should be honoured of the most.
And more estéemde then Phisike.
¶Why?
¶That's easy to be proved,
For, as by Phisikes learned skill, diseases be removed.
So by my cunning, every smart that doth afflict the mind,
Is put to chase, for every grief, a remedy I find.
‡And have you any salve for love?
¶I have.
‡Whereof is it made?
¶Of divers things, simple, and mixed, according to my trade.
¶Then if for love, or money, you will grant me my request,
Let me once by your cunning sée, my mistress have some rest.
¶Whom serve you then?
¶Forsooth, I serve mistress Virginia.
¶Yet farther, let me crave your name.
¶My name is pamphila.
¶What's her disease?
¶Nothing but love.
¶How fares she with it?
¶Sad, sick, and sore, with sorrow pined, and disposseste of wit.
¶Whom loves she?
¶Fatal.
¶And how long hath she bin so?
¶I know not, yet I guess, that she sickened a yéere ago.
¶What if I help her? tell me who shall please me for my pain?
¶My self, because unknown to her, I séeke her health to gain.
¶A loving servant, go thy ways and leave it all to me.
But hark thée.
¶What?
¶Let me have passage to her lodging frée.
That when she little thinks thereof, my Medcins I may make,
By virtue of the which, her wounded heart may comfort take.
The less she looks for remedy, the more is her delight, when it is obtained.
¶Then let's be gon.
¶Content, for it is night.
And yonder comes Fatal with Fortunio hand in hand,
To shun suspect, they shall not sée vs talking here to stāde.
¶Come Sir Fortunio, now is the time to put you out of doubt,
Whether Victoria love you, or your dealings doe but flout.
Here let vs shroud our selves a while, that standing out of sight,
We may perceive what lovers haunt Victories house by night.
¶Agreed, this is the fittest time to pass the stréete,
And give her music at her window, for a gallant méete.
¶Whist, for her door begins to creak,
¶It doth in déede.
¶I sée.
¶A man me thinks, O let me go.
¶Stay Sir, be ruled by me,
¶O delicate Victoria so long as I live,
For this entertainment, great thanks will I give.
The remembrance of the swéetenesse of this night so well past,
Will féede me with honey while my life doth last.
¶A villainy, let me go Fatal, let me go I say:
I will revenge this injury before he get away.
¶Not so, for raising of a tumult in the stréete so late,
And troubling of the watch that stand armed at every gate.
¶Out strumpet, I will make thée now a mirror to this town,
A pointing stock to every one that passes up and down.
¶How will you be revenged?
¶By sword, and sheathe it in her breast,
¶Be not too swift to serve her so, I think it were not best.
¶And why?
¶Because that if you kill her, then your self you doe defame,
Discredit her, and put her house, and kindred unto shame.
Thus you shall ever walk in fear of those you never saw,
Besides, her friends will trip at you, by danger of the law.
¶How shall I be revenged then?
¶Give her a Fico out of hand,
¶So should I scope, but the revenge in little stéede would stand.
For she should die, and none should know the villainy she did,
But every tong ere long shall talk of that, that I have spied.
Some other way I will devise,
¶Doe so, for I'll be gone.
¶And I will sée what this Victoria saith to me anon,
Who is there within?
¶Mistress, behold Fortunio.
¶I come to him, welcome good Sir.
¶Out Hipocrite, no, no,
How do you like your other love?
¶I like of none, but you.
¶Tush, hold your peace, I had as live you told me that it snow.
Even now came one out of thy house, who bidding thée farewell,
Triumphed of thy curtsy, and said it did excel.
¶Come hither maid, what have you done? tell me, why doe you wéepe?
¶It is no matter mistress, you think I let in my companions when you are a sléepe.
¶But séeing you have no better confidence in me,
Pay me my wages, I'll be gone, your servant no longer will I be.
Séeing you go about, me so much to disgrace,
Provide for your self, I can have more wages in another place.
¶Peace péeuish fool, I think not so, yet let me ask I pray,
Because to slander me, you hear what Fortunio doth say.
¶I force not what he saith, I know my conscience to be clear,
¶And so is mine, although so stoutly he reprove me heer.
¶Then had I neither listening ears to hear, nor eyes to sée,
Sith they fail not, I'll credit them, and give no héede to thée.
But trust to it, and look for it, thou shalt repent at last,
That ere thou bleard'st Fortunioes sight with such a juggling cast.
¶It boots not to speak to him, he is in such a heate,
But I durst lay my life Fatal wrought this feat.
¶It may be so.
¶Thy falsehood and thy Sorcery, at length I have perceived,
But by thy subtle train, no longer will I be deceived.
¶I said, it was Fedeles déede, but Crack-stone is too slow,
To cut him off, before this rumours root begin to grow.
¶Mistress, I'll séeke Crack-stone, and haste him to the deed,
Else I perceive that very ill, your self is like to spéede.
¶Doe so, and till I sée Fortunioes angry mood be past,
It is best out of his presence to convey my self in haste.
Farewell Sir Fortunio, think as you find me.
¶I will, and will revenge it as far as you bind me.
Fie hartlesse wretch, slothful, and that that's more,
Yet unrevenged, why did I stay my hand?
Why did I not her faithless body gore?
Whiles in my power before me she did stand.
Why did I not for to fulfil my vow:
Doe that, which none would cover nor allow?
Her treason makes my raging thoughts to swell,
Beyond the bounds of all humanity,
Her falsehood drives the Furies out of hell.
To practise strange and extreme cruelty.
Yet neither rancoures force, nor ugly fiend,
Hath scourge enough for such a double friend.
But yet before revenge my fury take,
I'll offer service to Virginia.
Least every dame here after me forsake,
When it is known how I used Victoria.
Good luck, Medusa héer me thinks I sée,
A cunning broker, very fit for mée.
¶Mytoyle so great, reward so small, that every man doth give,
Hath made me weary of my trade, uncertain how to live.
¶Well met Medusa, whether goosed thou with thy Pack so late?
¶I was abroad to sell my wares, at every Ladies gate.
But being overtaken thus by night, I hie me home,
Till Fortune send a better market, for the world is done.
¶What hast thou sold?
¶Nothing but words,
¶What hast thou got?
Nothing but wind:
¶That market thou mighst well have kept, and yet have left thy Pack behind,
¶Not so, for by the carriage that within my pretty Pack I have,
I enter in those Ladies chambers, that I find both fine and brave.
And under colour of the trifles I bear about to sell,
I plead for such as you good Sir, that féele by love the force of hell.
¶What hast thou there?
¶Calls Gorgets, Hears, Powders to make a Ball,
Vallentia Gloves, and Venice Rolls, to rub the téeth withal.
Laces, Purses, Rings, Busks, Wires, and Glasses fine,
Bracelets, Perfumes, Stilled waters, Sops in wine.
Pins, Bodkins, Stays, and other kind of stuff,
No more but tell me what you lack, and you shall have enough.
A thousand knackes I have, to utter, which I must be slow,
Because they are so secret, as becomes not you to know.
¶Neither am I importunate, to wring it out of thée,
Yet must I crave thée now, to show thy self a friend to mée.
¶Wherein?
¶Even in the love that I to fair Virginia bear.
¶I doubt it is too harde a task, she loves Fatal so,
That she by no means can be won, Fatal to forgo.
¶Yet doe thy best, to move my suit.
¶The best I can I will,
And ransack every corner of my wits to show my skill.
Either it must be done by craft, or Magic, which you please,
¶By Craft, or Magic, which you list, so I may purchase ease.
¶Sir, first by deceit I'll try how I can bring the same about,
If shifts doe fail, Enchanted herbs shall put you out of doubt.
I will unto her lodging straight, and stay your coming there,
Within an hour or half, to follow, sée you doe not fear.
I'll tell her that I mean to bring Fatal to her bed,
When lights are out, and sléepe is crept into her fathers head.
When you are in and half vnbraste, a tumult will I make,
And call her father up, you in her chamber there to take.
You know age will suspect the worst, and when he sées you so,
Will force you then to marry her, whether shée will or no.
Besides, when that the brute heer of is blown in every place,
Fatal and all other suitors, will forsake the chase.
Lo, thus by subtlety you shall possess the dame you craved,
And yet by me when all is told, her honour shall be sau'de.
¶This is as well as can be wished, depart I pray thée straight.
¶I go, forget not you to come.
¶Upon thée will I waighte.
Sée where Fatal comes, because he shall not me suspect,
I will avoid the stréetes a while, that nothing me detect.
¶And is it so Pedant?
¶It is as I tell ye.
Attilia told me, that her mistress had made a request,
To Crack-stone, to sheathe his sword in your breast.
Besides I go as you know, disguised to the house for an other in∣tent,
I saw him come thence, bragging what he would doe, in the stréetes as he went.
¶Alas poor soul, I know he dare scarce look a fly in the face,
But séest thou this? I will provide my Captain to disgrace.
Come on my friends, go you and set this net at the Lanes end,
For when he comes, my sword upon this Gallant will I bend.
And cry aloud arm, arm, as though our enemies had the wall,
He hearing this, will take his héeles and let his anger fall.
We will pursue him so, that we will drive him to the net,
When he is in, pull you the cords, for that same purpose set.
And make him fast, then will we lead him hampred in the same,
With mirth and glée about the town, to put him to the shame.
Go set it up.
¶We will.
¶Ah, Sir, I perceive we shall go a batfowling this night,
I would ye Captain would come, that of this pretty sport I might have a sight.
¶Whist, not a word, for he is at hand,
Come let vs both privily in ambush stand.
¶Now shall my valerositie appear unto all,
How I can kill men, and serve a woman at her call.
My greatest grief is, that in doing this feat,
I am sure my honour will not be so great.
As when I give a charger to my foes in the open féelde,
Or put Cities into sackes, and make thousands to yéelde.
To bring Fatal to the Counter, is but to fight with a fly,
There is neither praise, pride, nor providence in the victory.
Therefore take héede Crack-stone what you doe,
You hazard your good name, your honour stands on tip toe.
To kill a Gentlemā yt never ought me malice, is more thē cruelty,
And to kill him for a woman, will bring me utterly to infancy.
Shall I kill him then? peradventure yea: shall I let him go?
Peradventure I may, peradventure no.
Oh single devise, here is a brain I beléeue,
Able to shoot birdboltes of inuentiōs, from my head into my sléeue.
I will make a great noise before Victories door in the stréete,
As though at this present with Fatal I did méete.
Then will I run to her house amain,
And make her beléeue that Fatal is slain.
Then before that she hear any news of his life,
I'll have her to the Priest, and make her my wife.
Have even at it as well as I can,
Ah Villains, thus many of you set upon a naked man.
Draw on my good fellows and spare not, strike home,
Ah cowardly Dastards, so soon be you gone?
¶Arm, Arm, Arm.
¶Kill, kill, kill.
¶Down with Crack-stone.
¶Give me a Bill.
¶Follow, follow.
¶Out alas where am I now?
¶Fast enough by this time I trow.
Is this my lusty kill Cow, that will eat up so many men at a bit,
And when he deals with a shadow will not stand to it?
BE still my mates, that keep the gates,
When every watch is set:
Your luck is nought, your friends have caught,
Your Captain in a net.
Heigh ho Crack-stone, heigh ho Crack-stone.
A Nodie, a Nodie, a Nodie, we have,
Heigh hoe, Crack-stone, lusty and brave.
‡ Now soldiers all, forsake the wall,
Your foes have got the town,
Manhood is fled, God Mars is dead,
Your Captain is a clown.
Heigh ho Crack-stone, Heigh ho Crack-stone,
A Nodie, a Nodie, a Nodie, we have,
Heigh ho Crack-stone, lusty and brave.
Attilia, come hither straight, some stir is in the stréete,
Me thinks I hear the noise of men, and trampling of their féete.
¶Ah Sir, you meant to kill me you, to please Victoria,
But now I trust to make of thée a poor Crack-stone, if I may.
¶If that victorious Prince of battle god Marche-beere, had not been a sléepe,
I had made you every one into corners to créepe.
It is the Fortune of war, luck runs not ever to one side,
Therefore I am content the prickatorie to abide.
I am not strong Sampier to break out of your hands,
But oh yt some little hōgry Mouse, would gnaw a sunder my bāds.
I would give you such a frezado, or cāuazado, take which you please
As should be small to your comfort, and little to your ease.
¶Oh what this Captain would do, if he were out of his skin,
Till his courage be cooler, I pray you hold him in.
¶Mistress, I can not tell what is best to be said,
Once more I perceive you are betrayed.
I sée that Fatal and his friends have your Champion beset,
And now both to his shame and yours, he is caught in a net.
¶Art thou sure that it is so?
¶Have an eye to the end.
¶Now let vs show him to Victoria, his dearest friend.
¶Then let him be led through every stréete in ye town,
That every crackrope, may throw rottē eggs at ye clown.
¶Hoe, Victoria if you be awake, rise &amp; look out I pray,
¶The hunt is up,
And fools be fledged before the perfect day.
¶Who calls?
¶Fatal: Sée the Champion, whom you set to murder me,
This déed throughout the City, shortly shall dishonour thée.
¶Out, I defy him.
¶What say thou Attilia?
¶He is a knave, I deny him.
¶Thou art a Drab and a Queen, if my name be Crack-stone, you say?
I was requested to this, both by thée and Victoria.
¶By my mistress and me good man Coward, doe you know what
Take yt Sir, your face was not washte yester day.
¶A rope on all whores, will you drink any Ale,
I think she crowned me with a potle of stale.
This drink was ill brewed, and might have been spared,
The very grains of the Malt, sticks fast to my beard.
¶You will tell me more anon, when every maid in this town,
Hath emptied her alms box on the top of your crown.
¶Alas good moister Fatal, as you are a Gentleman, no farther let me go,
I shall be chok'te with this dole, if you handle me so.
Consider I am a man, subject to ye same pressing-yron of ye mind ye other mē are,
For the love of a woman, overwhelmed with care.
I confess I am as you are, flesh &amp; blood, and loved Victoria so well,
That I could have bin content for her sake, to have gone quick to hell.
Therefore forgive me, and if I take not your part, and be revenged upon her, before I doe rest,
Set the gun-shot of tyranny to the bulwarks of my breast.
Cut off my Rams horns, and break into the belfry,
And bless the cursed days of my virginity.
¶He rolls in his Retorike as an Ape in his tail,
Wind and tide at commandment, he flies with full sail.
¶So that thou séeke all means thou can, Victoria to deface,
And blaze her in each company, and strike her in disgrace.
I let thée go.
¶Unhoode me I pray,
I am as weary of my carriage as a Dog of his day.
¶Slack the cords there my masters, give him sea-roome in haste,
Close ayre is not wholesome for Gallants to taste.
¶Now I begin to féele my heart by little &amp; little rise out of my hose,
Yet the sent of this water, is still in my nose.
I think I am the perplexionablest man that lives at this day,
For I would fine be revenged of Victoria, and I know not which way.
¶Follow my counsel, and be ruled by mée,
Then shalt thou sée Captain, what I'll doe for thée.
I'll teach thée a way, to cry quittance with her before it be long,
And make her recant her chatering at window with an other song.
¶Gramercy Pediculus, thou art the comfortablest fellow that ever I did sée,
I think thou wast borne under some merry Planet, in the time of diversity.
¶Now sith Victories name is like for ever to be lost,
Further revenge I will not séeke, as I to her did boste.
Because that as my self unjustly served Virginia.
So am I now justly requited by Victoria.
Therefore Pedant go, and pardon of Virginia crave,
And tell her that I will be hers,
¶That's it she would have.
But I beséech you Sir, tarry till the day be light,
I am loath to go stumbling in the stréetes this night,
¶Then till the morning let it rest, but early sée thou rise,
And doe my message in the méekest sort thou can devise.
Mean while wée'le home and take a sléepe,
for I am ouer-watcht.
¶Very well Sir, bear you the net after,
I have some business with the Captain to be dispatcht.
Now moister Captain come with me, for as soon as my moister to bed I have brought,
You shall sée what a thing for you I have wrought.
And because you have determined on Victoria to revenge your wrōg,
It must be done this night or never, time doe not prolong.
As her flattery this night, bring did you in bands,
So this night I shall deliver her into your hands.
¶Then let vs away and our selves provide,
Thou know the paruerbe, no body taries for the tide.
I Know Virginia loves Fatal best,
Medusa likewise may be sent to flout:
My self her favour never yet possessed,
If none of these, yet all may make me doubt.
How service should with bright triumphing face,
Disperse the clouds, that put my joys to chase.
Yet if Fatal be not liked alone,
Or if Medusa of true promise be:
Or fair Virginia will be moved by moan.
If not all these, yet one may pleasure me.
Therefore, to give the watch word I'll begin,
Good luck, the door opens, I'll enter in.
¶Take héede Attilia, was not that Fortunio thou did sée?
It is now midnight, so late abroad in the stréete what makes he?
I sée Pedant is not heer, I muse he méetes me not,
I little thought he could so soon his promise have forgot.
If he be moister of his word, and love me as his life,
The time is come to show the same, and take me for his wife.
Come on Sir apace, what makes you so slack?
Presently put me this Robe on your back.
Now get you up along the stréete, and be not afraid,
There shall you méete Victoria, in the apparel of her maid.
Thinking you thus disguised, to be Fortunio,
Very ready you shall find her with you to go.
When you have her, hold fast, for she will not resist,
Woe her, wed her, bed her, and use her as you list.
Either now or never, your desire you shall have,
Or be revenged on the entertainment that out of her window to you she gave.
¶Sée the force of love, how it is able for a néede,
To shroud a brave mind in a base kind of wéede.
Moister Pediculus, or Pedantonie, I am not very prospect in your name,
If this gear fall out, I shall be bound while I live, to thank you for the same.
¶I would not be he that should so courageous a Captain, and valiant Gentleman deceive.
Therefore try me, &amp; trust me, for this time I purpose to take my leave
¶Farewell little Pastry,
If I may méete with Mistress Victoriarie heer.
Thinking that Fortunio in this place, to her will appear.
Either I will make her incant the former words that she spake,
When she defied me, &amp; denied that she wild me to kill Fatal for her sake.
Or I will back beat her, &amp; belly beat her too too pitifully,
You know love is a fire, and they say fire and water hath no mercy.
But first I will speak her fair, because to be plain,
Commonly fair fools make words and persuasions to be fine.
¶Alas how long in the stréete shall I for my Pedant stay?
He promised to méete me heer, and steal me quite away.
Some body in the stréete I hear, I trust the same is hée,
And so I doe persuade me, by the beggars wéede I sée.
¶I'll believe Pediculus again another day,
For yonder in Alice tittle tattles parrell the Mistress doth stay,
O yt I had some of Pediculus Schoole-butter to make me a lip salve,
Or could but wet my tongue in his inkhorn, for women will hearken when we speak brave.
O thou that carry a ball of wilde fire in thine eye, to burn up my heart,
What shall I say more, to set out my smart.
The time will not suffer to show my prosperity,
Therefore I commit you to the Gods for lack of brevity.
¶Sée how Pedant counterfeits Crack-stone in talk,
Thereby we shall escape, and through the watch in safety walk.
¶Captain Sbirri, this night my maid Attilia ran away,
Her I beséeche you, if she be not past the watch, to stay.
Some thing I doubt that she hath stolen, and carried to her mates,
Therefore I pray beset the stréetes, and all the city gates.
¶Mistress Victoria I will, but some body I sée,
¶Steppe to them both and take them straight, for sure the same is shée.
¶Come mine own Paragon, I know thou hast tarried for me all this while,
Therefore follow me straight, least the lickorish Soldiers méete vs, and me beguile.
¶Soft not to fast, but stay I charge you in the Princes name,
¶God save the Princes grace, and put his enemies to shame.
Wée are the Kings friends, I would you should well know,
Therefore trouble vs no farther, but let vs go.
The kings head is occupied with matters of great importunity,
I know he is not conswapted, at this time to speak with me.
We are peace-able people, we have no weapons héere,
We are neither drunk nor sober, nor make any stéere.
Get you to your places, kéepe the watch as you should,
And we'll to our lodging you may be bold.
¶Nay Sir, we will know your name, and eke the place where you have been,
Whether you go, night-walkers heer are very seldom séene.
¶Then I pray you, what make you abroad so late?
It is longing to your office to kéepe the gate.
As for our names, I know of no such commencement you have,
Why you should be so pearchant the same to crave.
¶We have bin forth at supper Sir, in the town with a good friend,
And now we are returning home, nigh at our yournies end.
¶What Minion, are you there indéede?
¶My Mistress, out alas,
Behold Pedant we are tan, how shall we doe to pass?
¶I hold forty pound I am Unckled, I would Pediculus were heer,
I would méete with the scald Squitterbe-booke for this gear.
¶Is this your maid?
¶It is.
¶Lay hold on her with spéede,
Let vs sée what Uagabonde is hid within this wéede.
Crack-stone? Whowe?
¶And whowe too then, did you never sée man before?
I am not taken in deuowtrie, therefore wonder no more.
¶A halter come to him, is it hee?
¶Sorry I am good Captain, you in such a case to sée.
Heer you are taken with this maid, which is like to be tachte
Offellonie, and accessory you with her are cachte.
¶I steal nothing from women but their honesty:
Which is as good, as he that robs the Printer of a Bible, because he would study Divinity.
¶Stop, stop.
¶What means this? come bend your weapons at them all,
Whom shall we stop? and what's the cause that makes you thus to call?
¶Pedant, take thy sword,
arise let's go into the streéete,
Some wondrous broil I doubt there is,
¶I am so fast wrapped in the upper shéete.
That I can not get out, I pray you make not such haste,
Till you think that the hottest of the broil be paste.
¶Stay Captain, lay no hands on me, a Gentleman I am,
And will not flit,
¶Woe worth the time that to my house he came.
¶Ottauiano, what's the cause of your lamenting cry?
Let's know, hath Sir Fortunio done you any injury?
¶Come quickly man, let's sée this Pageant ere it take an end,
¶He that breaks me of my sléepe, is none of my fréende,
¶Ah wretch that am I alas, and half undone,
¶What strange kind of broil is this that is begone?
¶Is it Fortunio in déede? This is thy treachery, Medusa.
¶Mine, alas good Sir, you doe me injury,
I grant that after I had brought my young mistress to bed,
Féeling the sléepe shut up mine eyes, and drooping with my head,
I laid me down to take my rest, and so with haste forgot,
To locke the doors about the house, and how it comes God wot,
I can not tell, but when I fet a nap and wooke again,
I heard a bustling in the dark, and then did I complain.
And cried aloud to you for help, whereat immediately,
This Gentleman withdrew him self, and forth began to fly.
¶Master.
¶What say thou?
¶Your cake is dow,
¶It kills me to think on it: the greater my woe.
¶This is luck nidget with all my heart,
¶I am glad, that I have some body to take my part.
But oh that my hands were at liberality now to strike,
I would set my Gramariner a lesson to pike.
¶Ah Sir Fortunio, use you thus the man that loved you best,
Take him, this villainy shall not be turned to a jest.
¶Quiet your self Ottauiano, sith it is so past,
The brute will not be called back so long as life doth last.
His punishment makes not your daughter as she was before,
But give her unto him to wife, and talk of it no more.
His living is as good as yours, make up the match with speed,
¶Néede hath no law, I am content, if they be both agréede.
¶Alas I never knew the man, he never touched me yet,
I love Fatal, and he alone is for Virginia fit?
¶I'll take no wife at second hand, thanks for your courtesy,
Let him that hath possessed your honour, wear the same for me.
¶In every Tennis Court in the world, false play it is found,
To take up the Ball at the second rebound.
¶Virginia, if that you can be content,
To like of him that loves you in his heart:
Give me your hand, and if your mind be bent,
To marry me, I never mean to part.
My life, and living, more you can not crave,
Remains yours, doe now but ask and have.
¶I thank you Sir, in that it pleases you to use me so,
My promise was nigh granted to Fatal long ago.
¶But he hath now forsaken you.
¶Virginia, you are frée,
Assure your self, your marriage never shall be staide by me.
¶Then if you love I will be yours.
¶Shall I have your good will?
¶You have.
¶I love you then, and mean to love you still.
¶Now man and wife, Ottauiano hearken unto me,
Although this Gallant in Virginiaes chamber you did sée.
Yet is her honour as it was, unspotted by the same,
And kept by me, which ever had regard unto her name.
Fortunio made his moan and said, he loved Virginia best,
Virginia for Fedeles sake could never take her rest.
His mind was on Victoria, Virginia light estéemde,
Now that Virginiaes life and liberty might be redéemde.
I brought Fortunio to the house when she was fast a sléepe,
And close this night into her chamber both of vs did créepe.
I made him to unbrace him self, and presently did call
For you to come, as though some greater matter did befall.
You came, he fled, and now is taken in Fedeles sight,
As though Virginia had dishonoured béene by him this night.
Which is not so, but this was done to blear the gazers eyes,
To pleasure him, and save her life, this thing did I devise.
¶O mischievous head, moister did you hear this gear,
Such a girl is worth gold in a dear yéere.
¶I Ipse tipse, tittle, tittle este amen,
Such a wench is not be found in the world again.
I have heard it often, and now I do prove,
That women are subtle worms for the conuariance of love.
¶If this be true I joy?
¶Else take my head,
I came not nigh Virginia, although she were in bed.
¶Fortunio you are quit with me, for when we lay in scout,
To watch by fair Victories house, who passed in and out.
It was my man disguised, that issued forth out of the same,
That for the nonce by me was set, to call Victoria by her name.
He went unto Attilia, with counterfeited love,
That by his means, from fair Victoria I might you remove.
You séeing him, and hearing when he came forth, what he said,
Thought he had been with her, when he had been but with the maid.
Whereat you stormde, and left the chase of her that loved you déere,
Which is no grief at all to me, that hopes to win her héere.
Therefore Victoria now forget Fortunio which is lost,
And love Fatal, who for you, yet never spared cost.
Let fall thy wrath, for give me too, that means to be thine own,
It is seldom séen but wars have end, whē foes are overthrown.
¶Sith you have so prevented me, and perfect love protest,
I will put up the injury, and yours for ever rest.
¶My nose is jointed, I may go shoe the Gosling now if I will,
He that eats with ye devil without a long spoon, his fare will be ill.
What spirits of the Buttry were abroad this night,
I have béene so hard hearted to mine enemies, that I think all the Gods of love ought me a spite.
I grant I am none of these fine Criminadoes, that can tumble in a Genlewomās lap, and rumble in her ear,
But without vantage be it spoken, I am as góod as the best at the push of a spear.
I can cut and flash to make mine enemies to bléede.
And prick it proudly I tell you, when I am surmounted upon my stéede.
¶Mistress Victoria, now I see this only rests to know,
What shall be done unto your maid, or shall we let her go?
¶Sith with Crack-stone this night, you took my maid so short,
To prison with her if you please, to cut off her resort.
¶Good mistress bear with me, I took no hurt by him at all,
But mean to tell you justly how the matter did befall.
The Schoolmaster that on Fatal ever doth attend,
Promi'ste to marry me this night, my servile life to end.
Upon whose word, from you I fled, and staide for him in the stréete
Where I against my will, with this Crack-stone did méete.
¶Bowl to thy bias, master Pediculus, I pray you take your wife,
You and I for this matter will not stand at strife.
Are you bememberde what you said when you constulted with me,
To come hither in this parrell secretly.
¶What moister Crack-stone, and mistress Attilia, you are welcome to the buttes,
¶Welcome with a Knaves name, I beshrumpe your guts.
¶Why so Sir?
¶Did not thou tell me, that in this parrell mistress Victoria I should sée.
This night in the stréete to be compensed of my injury,
¶So you may if you please, take your eyes in your hand,
Turn about Sir, and sée where Victoria doth stand.
And as for Attilia, as you brew, so bake,
I am not so base minded your leavings to take.
¶Why moister Pedant, will you serve me so?
¶I must I perceive whither I will or no.
¶Draw Villain.
¶Soft there Crack-stone, be not too rash to proffer fight,
You and this maid together in the dark were tan this night.
The matter is suspicious, sith he forsakes her,
To take her to your wife no time you should defer.
We cannot force her upon him, sith she was tan with you.
And howsoever you cloak it, none your méeting can allow.
¶Well sith there is no remorse of conscience to be found,
How say thou Alice tittle tattle, art thou content by love to be bound?


follows brought no less like to the Queens majesty: and al the rest that were present: for at his coming hee caused them to dismount themselves and said:
You must fight no more, most valiant Knights: vyolenee must give place to virtue, and the Doubtful hazard you be in, by a most no∣ble help must be ended. Therefore cease your fight and follow me, so shall you hear that you would least believe, and shall have with me that shall most behoove you. And you fair Lady, fall into this fellowship, where it shall appear Sibilla said true, and your infortunes shall have end.
This said, he brings them al to ye place where the Queens Majesty stood (in a fine Bower made of purpose covered with greene Ivy, and seats made of earth with sweet smelling herbs, (even such a place as you shall conjecture) and after some reverence beginning his tale, hee showed a great proof of his audacity, in which tale if you mark the words with this pre∣sent world, or were acquainted with the state of the devises, you should find no less hidden then uttered, and no less uttered then should deserve a double reading over, even of those (with whom I find you a companion) that have disposed their hours to the study of great matters.
Most excellent Princes, forepoynted from aboue with your pre∣sense and your virtue to profit more then you are aware of, howe much you are bound to the immortal Gods, and mortal men are bound to you, our present case will partly prove: But before you understand the worth of your virtue, may it please you to hear the variableness of our adventures. Not long since in the Country of Cambia which is situate near the mouth of the rich River Induce, a mighty Duke bare dominion called Occanon: who had heir to his estate but one only Daughter named Caudina:
this Lady then more fairer then fortunate, lived most dear to her father and best beloved of his people: But to prove that Beauty is not always a benefit, nor highest states be ever the happiest, it chā∣ced within a while that Caudina being sought unto by sundry that were great, and served by many that were worthy, had more com∣petitors of her beauty then did either well content her, or proved commodious unto them: for love, which is not led by order nor chosen by appoyntemente, had limed her affections unreasonably with the liking of a knight, of estate but mean, but of value very great called Contarenus who as he exceedingly loved her, so the desires of divers others was somewhat for his glory, but nothing for his gain. In small process of time the secret fires of their fācies discovered by the smoke of their desires, betrayed this matter unto her father long time before they would. The Duke dissem∣bling what he saw, but determined to disappoint that he most mis∣sliked, neither made challenge to the Knight, nor charged his Daughter for any love was betwixt them, but devised a way as he thought more sure, (but as it proved most sorrowful) to set these lovers asunder by the work of an enchantress most cunning in her kind: he caused Contarenus, to be conueyed up and carried in the ayre frō the cost of Cambia to the very boūds of the Occean sea: which cost Occanon twenty thousand Crowns (a dear price for repentāce:) but it is no novelty for Princes to make their wills very costly, and sometime to pay dear for their own displea∣sures. Contarenus thus strangely divided from his joy and per∣plexed aboue measure was charged by the enchantress to wear this punishment with patience, which necessity did put on, and de∣stiny would put off: and ere seven years came about, she truly as∣sured him, he should have for his reward the height of his desire: but first he should fight with the hardiest knight, and see the worcester∣thiest Lady of the world. The whilst she told him, hee must there take the guard of a blind Hermit, who should recover his sight, and he his satisfaction, both at one time, so she left him on the earth, and took her way again into the ayre. Caudina now lacking log that she looked for, the sight &amp; service of her knight, fell soon
in those diseases that accompany such desires as to be acombred with mistrust, curiosity, and exceeding unrest. At last as Princes doe few things privily, but they have partakers of their Council: &amp; heirs to crowns lack never servants of hope, which be curious to please thē: The devise and dealing of Occanon came to the ears of his daugh∣la, which being told her: And is it even so, quoth Candina? care kings for no right? then right cares for no kingdoms. It is neither the court of Occanon, nor the coūtrey of Comb. that I can account of, if Contarenus be gone: Farewell most unhappy coūtrey, and most cruel Father, that turns me to this fortune, to follow my fates, which ney∣there greatness of estate nor hazard of mine adventure shall make me forsake: but if I lose not my life, I will find Contarenus, if he be in the world. This said, she pursues her most hard determinations, and ta∣king only two Damsels with her in simple habit, with such things as were necessary, she straightwaies conueyed her self most closely from the borders of Comb. &amp; with toil too long to tell, passed perils past belief, till at last she arri•ed at the grate of Sibilla, where, by chance she met with a most noble knight eclipped Loricus, by love likewise drawn thither, to learn what should betide him. This Loricus loved a Lady that was matchless, in such manner as is strange, for after much devise to attain but the favour that she would be pleased, hee might but love her without looking froward: and seeing no glance of her liking (his uttermost devotion) to find surely out her fancy (which she carried most closely,) he made a strange assay with all the sem∣blanc that might be. He showed to set by her but lightly, that was so sought for of all, and the better to colour the passion, hee was not able to conquer, hee made show of choice of a new mistress, that lived eve∣rye day in her eye: A piece sure of pri•• but far from such a pearl, as his heart only esteemed. And to this Idol he seemed to offer all his love and service, leaving no manner of observance undone, that to love appertained: As wearing her colours on his back, her pictures in his bosom, keeping her company aboue all others, and continuing most at her commandment: which espied by this Lady (that indeed was liked no more) for whatsoever man may think might become or content though she cared not for his choice, yet he showed scorn of
his change: and by jealousy disclosed that which love could not dis∣cover. Which Loricus perceiving, he fell by &amp; by to consider, that the want of his worth made his service unaccepted, and no impossibility in her will to receive one too serve her, that merited the honour of such favour. Therefore hee left his own country, and betook him∣self altogether to travel, and to arms, desiring with most endeavour but to deserve that reputation as this great and noble mistress would but think him worthy to be hers, though she would never bee none of his; so thinking no toil too tough, nor no attempt too hard to at∣tayne to renown, he wandered through the world till he came by pain∣full ways to Sibillas grate, where he met with Caudina. Where these two lovers having occasion to unfold al their fortunes: the Lady see∣king to know the end of her travel, and the knight advise for the ease of his hope, they both received this answer of Sibilla: That as they were now coupled by this fortune, so they should never depart fell∣lowship, till they had found out a place, where men were most strōg, womē most fair, the country most fertile, the people most wealthy, the government most just, and the Princes most worthy: so should the Lady see that would content her, so should the knight hear that might comfort him. Now most dear and best deserving Lady, it falls to my purpose, and your praise, to say somewhat of my self. Old though you see me here, &amp; wrinkled and cast into a corner, yet once have I been otherwise: A knight known and accounted of, with the best of the world: and living in court of most fame amongst a swarm of knights and Ladies of great worth and virtue, where beauty bade the basse &amp; desire sought the gole. It chanced me to love a Lady, to be beloved of Love himself, if he could but have seen her: but as she was such as did excel, so was she of wonderful condition, without disdain to be desired, but most dainty to bee dealt with: for touch her, &amp; she will turn to 20. divers shapes, yet to none but to content, as me thought, that thought still to touch her, was a heaven: &amp; so it see∣med by my hold that was so loath to let her go. Till (alas) it liked her at last to put on the shape of a Tigris so terrible to behold, as I durst hold her no longer, and being so escaped, I could never more set eye on her. Madam, thus began my pain, but you hear not yet my punish∣meant:
being shifted from the sight of that I sought aboue the world, and then little delighting to look on any thing else, I took by &amp; by a Pilgrimage to Paphos in Cyprus, trusting to hear of my mi∣stress there, where Venus was most honoured. Whither when I came, as I began to step in at the door of her temple, I was suddenly stricken blind••••stonied at my mischance, and understanding not the cause thereo•••fell down on my knees and said: O fairest of the Goddesses and farthest from cruelty, what hath been my fault, that thou art thus offended? Thy folly &amp; presumption (quoth Venus Chaplin as I guess) from my youth up quoth I, have I ever been an honourer of virtue, a delighter in learning, and a servant of Love. But it is no parted affe∣ction quoth he, that Venus will be honoured with. Books and beauty make no match, and it is an whole man or no man, that this Goddess will have to serve her, and therewithal taking me by the shoulders, he thrust me out of the Temple. So with sighs and sorrow I sate down in the porch, making intercessiō to Apollo (the peculiar God I honoured) to have compassion on my estate: Now faithful prayers being hard ere they be ended: Mercury comes unto me, and bid me be of good comfort, the goddesses be alfound to have this fault: Diana with A∣cteō: Pallas with Arachne: Iuno with Tirecias, were angry aboue measure: so is Venus now with thee, the cause with the remedy shall be told thee at Delphos, whither straight I must carry thee. Which he had no sooner spoken, but by &amp; by I was set in the temple of Apollo. Where first demanding my fault, the Oracle made answer: Thy fear and not thy faith: and what quoth I, may be my remedy? The best be∣sides the beautifulest, the Oracle straight answered. And with this A∣polo his priest took me by the hand, recounting unto me the whole course of my life, whom I loved, and how I lost her. And when I told him of the faithfulness of my service. &amp; the faithfulness of my meaning, of the variableness of her conditiō, and at the last of the fearfulness of her apperāce: Ah, good Hemetes quoth he, it is not the kind of womē to be cruel, it is but their countenance, &amp; touching their variableness, who will not apply himself thereto, shall not much please them, nor long hold them, neither is it to be found fault with. Nature her self loves variety, so it be done without deceit. Now for thy faithfulness it
suffices not, the servants of Venus must not only have faith, but al∣so lack fear, fear lost thee thy mistress, and thy boldness to enter in∣to Venus Temple, being unacceptable, made her strike thee blind. But Apollo bid me tell thee, the Gods will receive, whom women for sake, thy eyes shut up from delight, shall give thy mind more open under∣standing: this punishment shall be thy profit, Venus can bar thee but from her felicity of love: but for the devotion thou bear to A∣polo, hee gives thee this gift, to be able to decipher the destiny of e∣very one in love, and better to advise them, then the best of her Dar∣lings. And furthermore, doth promise thee, that in revolution of years thou shalt recover thy sight: but this shall not betide thee till at one time, and in one place, in a country of most peace, two of the most va∣liant knights shall fight, two of the most constant lovers shall meet, and the most virtuous Lady of the world shall be there to look on. And when thy eyes shall behold what thy heart delights in, even a Lady in whom inhabits the most virtue, Learning, and beauty, that ever yet was in creature, then shall they be opened, and that shall bee thy warrant.
Al Apollo says is sooth: the while, it is determined that thou shalt dwell in an Hermitage, where nothing that lunges unto Natures use, shall bee lacking unto thee: so suddenly I was shifted unto this hill harde by, where I have wintered many a year far from the woes and wrongs, the world besides is full of. And now best Lady and most beautiful, so termed of the Oracle, and so thought of in the world: what the Enchantress told Contarenus: Sibilla showed Caudina, and Loricus: and Apollo said to me, by your most happy coming is verified, The most hardy knights Cont. and Lore. have here fought, the most constant Lovers Cont and Caudina here be met, and I poor Hemetes (as the knight knows full lōg blind) have received my sight. Al which happened by virtue of your grace, which the best so much honour, &amp; we most boūd unto you: and so I present these noble persos to please you with their service, &amp; my self to serve you ever with my prayers, &amp; leaving these Lovers to their delights, must leave Loric. to this advise. Knight, pro∣secute thy purpose, it is noble, learning by me not to fear of thy self to
take pain: remembering, nothing notable is won without difficulty, Hercules had by his labours his renown, and his end by his Love: Loricus, thy end will be reward, at least most reputation, with noblest women most esteemed. But I fear I have too lōg tyred your most no∣ble ears, &amp; therefore only now I beseech your Ma. with your happy presence to honour my poor home, whither straight I mean to guide you.
This Learned or long tale being brought to his end: the poor Hermit laden as it were with beads and other such ornaments of his professiō, begins to tread the way before the Queen, which her Majesty espying, refused her steed, and betook her self in like sort to the use of her feet, &amp; accompanying the Hermit (her self waited on of the rest) fell into some discourse &amp; praise of his good tale, which not ended, or rather scarce fully begun, the Q. Ma. had in sight the house, which indeed was a place by art so reared from the ground, as never before, nor hereafter, shall I see ye like. First it was incōpassed the number of 200. paces round with lat¦tise, the place of the princes entrance bedect with Ivy &amp; sponges of gold plate, the glimering whereof was such, that men of great judgment might have held themselves at stay. The ground frō thence reared little &amp; little to the altitude of forty foot or more, the path in mounting covered with fresh turues, with such art, that a great many made question of his skill, which was ye Layer. The way was railed with lattice, beset with sweet flowers &amp; Ivy, as before: aboue in the house was a Table made in order of a half moon or more, covered with green turues (&amp; so replenished with sorts of dainty, &amp; those divers dishes belōging to banquet, that the be∣holders might well have though, Iupit. had hoped the connuing, &amp; trusted the pleasing by banquet of his fair Europe.) At one end thereof somewhat distāt, frō ye other, was placed another table (but round) with a chair costly made of Crimson velvet, imbrodred with branches &amp; pictures of wild beasts &amp; trees, as it had been a piece of work made in the deserts. But least I hold you too lunge, this mount made, as I have said, about an Oak, the top whereof was enforced by strength too bend
down her branches to cover the house, which was done with such art, that ye praise of the beholders coming wold have suf∣ficed the woorker for his travel: although hee was not so satisfied for his skill, by more then 40. pounds. A number of fine Pictures with posies of the Noble or men of great credit, was in like sort hanging there, where with many were in love, and aboue the rest the French Ambassador, which was present at these sights, made great suite to have some of them. The which posies, with some perfect note of their pictures, I would have presented unto you: but because the Allegories are hard to be understood, with∣out some knowledge of the inuentors, I have chosen my time rather when my self shall be present, &amp; more the sooner, because I would leave nothing vnfulfilled of my first determination. Now Hemetes having brought her Majesty to the entrance of this place said:
Here most Noble Lady, having now brought you to this most simple Hermitage, where you shall see small cunning, but of nature, &amp; no cost, but of good will, my hour approaching for my orrisones (which accor∣ding to my vow I must never break) I must here leave your majesty, promising to pray, as for my self, that whosoever wish you best, may never wish in vain.
Thus the Hermit departes, &amp; the Queens Majesty ad∣dresses her self with merry cheer to banqueting, which to en∣crease a divine sound of unacquainted instruments in the hollow room under the house, made such strokes of pleasure, &amp; moved such delights, that if Apollo himself had bin there, I think hee would have entreated the learning of their skill, or at the least forgotten the pleasant remembrance of his sweet Daphnes. Her Majesty thus in the midst of this mirth might espy the Queen of the Fairy drawn with 6. children in a waggon of state: the Boys bravely attired, &amp; her self very costly apparelled, whose present show might well argue her immortality, and presenting her self to the Queens Majesty, she spake as follows.
As I did roam abroad in woody range,
In shade to shun the heate of Sunny day:
I met a sorrowing knight in passion strange.
by whom I learned, that coasting on this way
I should ere long your highness here espy,
to whom who bears a greater love then I?
Which then took root still mounting up on height,
when I beheld you last nigh to this place,
with gracious speech appeasing cruel fight.
This love hath caused me transform my face,
and in your hue to come before your eyne,
now white, then black, your friend the fayery Queen.
Which marking all, as all to me is known,
your face, your grace, your government of state,
your passing sprite whereby your same is blown:
doe know by certain skill you have no mate:
and that no man throughout the world hath seen
a prince that may compare with the English Queen.
This knowledge kinds in me so hot desire
to see your highness here in this my walk
as since your parting hence I flamed in fire
till your return that I might hear you talk,
that none to you a better heart doth bear
my self in speech to you might make it clear.
In sign whereof accept most sacred Queen,
this simple token wrought within this wood,
which as but base so better should have been
If I had not at sudden understood
of your arrival here, which made me take
what came to hand, and no great choice to make.
Her speech thus ended she delivered her gift, which was a goune for her Majesty of great price, whereon the imbroderer
had bestowed the sum of his conning, which she received with yielding thanks: to whom the fairy Dueene replied:
The thing is far beneth both your desert,
and my desire, yet am I glad to hear
your highness take it thus in so good part,
which for my self, if it like you to wear:
then shall I reap the fruit of happy mind,
as honoured by you the honour of your kind.
To gratify the rest of the Ladies present, there was devised many excellent and fine smelling Nosegays made of all cul∣lers to every one whereof was annexed a posy of two verses, go∣uen by a handmaid of the fairy Queen, and one aboue the rest of greatest price for the Queens Majesty with her posy in I∣talian, which because I neither understood it, nor scarce canne write it to be understood: I leave also till my next cōmig to vi∣site you: for the rest as they wear given, I have set down: every several posy was fair written and bordered about con∣ningly with several branches excellent to behold.
The virtues four went wandering once and harbarlesse astray,
Till Derby gave them room to rest whereas they now may stay.
If your deserts surpassed not my silly pen and speech,
Some other mē should view them then, which now do pass my reach.
For husband, children, and your self, or ornaments of fame,
You are aboue comparison, a right thrice happy dame,
The means that make a mother bleste, you have a frutefull race,
A noble dame, a patient wife, whats this but blessed case.
Take heed least in a mood, dame Venus work your woo,
For spite of right must work in her, you pass her beauty so.
Where virtue, birth, and beauty to, are thus in one mould cast,
This place to simple' is for her seat with gods let her be placed.
Trusty and true, secrete and sage in place where you do serve.
With wise foresight these praises lo your worthiness deserve.
For lunge and faithful service sake which hath abidden tuche,
good Parry is a paragon, show me a another such.
Good liking upon choice made way, to bring you first in place,
Which you maintain by modest mean still in your Princes grace.
Tho young in years yet old in wit, a gest dew to your race,
If you hold on as you begin who first you'll not deface?
Whē Phebus saw fair Hopton come to Court &amp; leave the tower,
He spread his beams with merry looks that erst before did lower.
For noble race, and virtues gifts, compare you with the best,
Who list to seek, in you shall find, no less then in the rest.
Why doe men set their sights to feed on Pictures set in goulde?
sith Garret gives the very view of natures modest mold.
In guess is guile, conjectures fail, your graces be well known:
Which who denies, fame saith he lies, by whom the brute is blown.
Apollo seeing his Burroughes brows his Daphne did forget,
so stald in stay, so rapped in love as he stands musing yet.
You gallants give the room a Dame of price doth come,
Conjecture what your brags may be whē she hath cast the sum
Sum say dame nature took in care, to keep Cornelias mold,
But Howards it is about her neecke eframed in finest goulde.
I think (good sir) I have within little repeated the names of those that were Ladies and maids of Honour, at these sights, wherein you shall see the vain, that runs to the liking of such kinds. Now her Majesty being risen: with good cheer, accompanied with the Queen of the fey r ye and the Lady Caudina; she comes from her banquet, and at her departure the Lady Caudina saith:
Let thanks suffice in word where strength in power doth faint.
let pith in prayer from Heaven to crave requite,
stand for reward to such a sacred Saint.
in whom on earth the gods in Heaven delight,
whose mold when nature made she began to stand,
in wonder of the work she had in hand.
The gods for all their good bestowed on man,
accept our speech, as fruit of thankful heart:
which sith it is the utmost that we can,
let humble thanks be price for your desert.
Content your self with that contents the gods,
twixt whom and you I see such little odds.
The day thus spent, her Majesty took her coach with joy in remembering what had passed, recounting with her self and others how well she had spent the after noon, and as it fell of necessity in her way homeward, closely in an Ok she heard ye sound both of voice and instrument of ye excelentest now living whose pleasantness therein bred a great liking with a willing ear to ye purport which I have hardly gotton to present you withal: assuredly I see great invention therein, and yet no more then the just fame of the deuiser doth both deserve and carry.
The man whose thoughts against him doe conspire,
in whom mishap her story did depante:
The man of woo, the matter of desire,
free of the dead that lives in endless plaint:
His sprite am I within this desert won,
to few his case whose cause I cannot shun.
Despair my name who never seek relief,
fronted of none, unto my self my foe,
An idle care maintained by firm belief,
that praise of faith shall through my torments grow.
And count the hopes that other hearts doe ease,
but base conceits the common sort to please.
I am most sure that I shall not attain,
the only good wherein the joy doth lye.
I have no power my passions to refrain,
but whale the want which nought else may supply.
Whereby my life the shape of death, must bear
that death, which feels the worst that life doth fear.
But what avails with Tragical complaint,
not hoping help, the furies to awake?
Or why should I the happy minds acquaint
with doleful tunes, their settled peace to shake?
O ye that here behold infortunes fare,
there is no grief that may with mine compare.
Now was it dark night, and her Majesty filled with con∣ceites, returns home, leaving earnest command that the whole in order as it fell, should be brought her in writing, which being done, as I hear, she used, besides her own skill, the help of the deuisors, &amp; how things were made I know not, but sure I am her Majesty hath often in speech some part hereof with mirth at the remembrance.
But to keep my promise for the rest, I will begin in order to make you privy of the sequel: which indeed follows, as an apt consequent to what is past. Therefore shall you understand, that upon the 20. day of the same month, the Queen being dis∣posed to spend her time with some delights, this Comedy was presented, acted before her Majesty.
And the more to egg you forward with desire of the end, assure your self, it was as well thought of, as any thing ever done before her Majesty, not only of her, but of the rest: in such sort, that her Graces passions, and other the Ladies could not but show it self in open place more then ever hath been seen.
I Think as yet all here hath fresh in mind,
a strange adventure past in act of late,
How that a Lady borne nigh to the Inde,
arrived here in quest of loving mate:
Whom she did find by such adventurous sort,
as erst the Hermit showed by large report.
Which Hermit then if you remember well,
required the Prince and Lady of this land,
That she with her would let the Lady dwell:
and waiting still on her, attend at hand:
And that the Knight in Court there might remain,
till that they both returned home again.
Which thing consented too by Princes voice,
they have pursued and waited on the train,
Tillate desire hath made them alter choice:
the Ladies heart still longing home again,
And glad to win the Duke her Fathers will:
for moving whom she knows she hath done ill.
For though at first in heat she set him light,
and forced by fathers wrong, went wandering so,
Yet doth she still suspect strong Natures might,
who checking chafe sure works the chafer woe:
Which to appear, is now her chief desire,
and therefore home she means to retire.
Which thing to compass well, and leave no part
of duty vnfulfulfilde both here and there,
She with the fairy Queen is gone apart,
of whom she hopes the readiest way to hear:
How to return with love from whence she came,
as she for love departed from the same.
Now wild she me (as loath to move offence)
if she were called for ere she could come back,
To be in place, and not to part from hence,
that for excuse in me might be no lack:
Till whose return fair Ladies if I may,
among you with your leave I mean to stay.
Now good my Lord let mourning moan have end,
the harm is yours, your self this still to wrack,
The Heavens I trust some better news will send,
the Gods which suffered you these pains to take,
Intend you to behold with cheerful eye:
your help is near, it must of force so be.
In seeking hope, hap flies still away,
my weary corpse is ready for to faint,
Then death, that debt which I at length must pay,
by yielding life receive, and end my plaint.
Now is the time most for to pleasure me,
when I in grief, doe crave it thus of thee.
Who hath not heretofore beheld on stage.
the hard conflict which breach of duty breeds,
With natures might in way to vanquish rage,
let him behold me and my daughters deeds:
Twixt whom, as strange contempt hath caused flame,
so nature seeks again to quench the same.
She set her love where she her self liked best,
I much mislikt because her choice did light,
Beneath her birth, though I might like the rest:
to stay this stream I did all that I might.
First with persuasions sweet I did begin,
to try if so my daughter I could win.
The more I charged, the sorer she repeld,
wherefore my labour lost, I changed my way,
And from my Court her Lover I expelled,
thereby in hope to work my daughters stay.
But while I sought to wring her from her love,
love wrought her clean from me, as then de did prove.
No sooner did she find her self alone,
bereft of him whom she a love did choose.
But secretly her self must needs be gone:
her state, her train, her wealth, she did refuse:
And held that hap to be her only bliss,
him to enjoy whom she in Court did miss.
Her parting first, because it did proceed,
from wild contempt of duty to her Sire,
Did stir my choler much, for that her deed,
till nature did arrest, and wrought desire
To have my child restored to me again,
whose absence then had wrought my woe and pain.
Then I began such parents to accuse,
as be too sour to those they have begot,
And found of al, them farthest from excuse,
whose noble state doth make them more of note,
On them and theirs Love hath the greatest power,
therefore on Love they ought the least to lower,
A quiet life where need no labour wills,
A seemly face whereon all eyes be cast,
A diet where desire the heart fulfils,
A world of sport while day, while night doth last,
How can these things but make Love open a way,
and fancy force with her delights to play?
Here did I fail in seeking to withstand,
where I confess the power of love is most,
Hence did proceed the leaving of my land
to find her out which I so lewdly lost.
This is the cause why in such simple case,
I wander seeking her from place to place.
So as I feel my weary bones to shrink,
not able long my fainting corpse to bear,
Sleep doth oppress my limbs which gin to sink,
while slumbering ease relieves my toilsome cheer.
I pray you Sir, depart not hence from me.
your faithful help maintains my hope I see.
I will my Lord not once part from your side,
take you your rest, your travels doe it crave,
Here fast by you I am resolved to bide,
to guard you so, as nought your rest deprave.
The grief of mind I see works wondrous things,
commanding al estates both Lords and kings.
O Gods what have I heard, O cruel fates,
must that needs fall which you will needs fulfil:
My Lord the Duke to leave his Princely states,
and wandering thus to yield to Fortunes will?
Then doe I see that even as you please,
men reap their rest and feel their most disease.
This haughty Duke which set so light by love,
as though he could command him to obey,
Doth now himself by strange adventures prove:
that against Loves force no power bears sway:
For where Love lives at will, he soonest dies,
and where he flaunts at full thence soonest flies.
But yet to learn more certainly whats past,
ere that to him my self I doe bewray,
At this good man I mean to have a cast,
of whom I will learn out if that I may:
By way of glance who it is that lies here,
and what might cause this his so ruthful cheer.
If it be not he, then is my labour lost,
and being but few words the cost is small,
If it be he, then hence straight will I post,
and to my Ladies ears report it all:
That she thereby may presently advise,
what good therein may to her state arise.
Good Sir I see you sad which grieves me,
whom curchy makes partaker of your woe,
To ryp your grief unpleasant it will be,
as to all pained souls it is I know:
Yet if I may find such grace in your eye,
tell me what man this is that here doth lie.
Fair Lady this your courteous speech doth crave,
disclose of all that careful breast doth hide,
In him that lies here the world may have,
wherein with maze to let their minds abide.
A Prince he is, whom fortune doth constrain,
with fruitless toil to travel still in vain.
A Prince? I pray you where, and of what land?
An Asian Lord the great Cambaian Duke.
What fate might force him take this toil in hand?
To find his daughter out these pains he took.
Why where is she, how hoped he her to leese?
Because in love her mind he did displease.
Perhaps he did not like where she had loved,
Even so it was: for hee from court removed
her friend, for whom her country she forsook,
As not of force her Lovers lack to bear:
which known, the Duke to travel him betook:
To find her out whom Nature made so dear,
With mind resolved if he her met again,
to think such hap sweet pay for all his payne.
And hath he not as yet heard where she is?
Not yet, but that Sibilla bade him go,
to such a soil as I suppose is this,
and there to have his hope and end his woe,
These things be strāge, yet stranger things have been
accomplished here, as I my self have seen.
Well Sir, I am to think my self much bound,
for this your curchy showed at my request,
And if your ease may grow within this ground,
by means of me, sure I will doe my best.
But Sir, may I desire your Princes daughters name?
Gaudina she is called of worthy fame.
I thank you Sir, I can no longer stay,
but for requite command me any way.
I thank you for your courtesy.
Now to my L. Isle go with speed,
that hearing this she may accordingly proceed.
Ah, ah, it is but vain to hope in sleep,
to purchase ease, where waking fills with care:
In sleep I felt my slumbering eyes did weep,
my heart did pant for grief in mind I bare.
Now let vs pass unto our journeys end,
till we find out what chance the Gods will send.
My Lord, if words that pass from faithful heart
may stay your mind, my hope here bids me stay,
For marking all that's here in every part,
and minding that which Sibil once did say:
Me think this place should be the happy land,
where we should rest, as she bare vs in hand.
Besides while you took rest, a Lady came
with show of grief, that your mishaps were such,
And learning both yours and your daughters name,
did pass away: all which persuade me much:
That if you stay till she again return,
your heavy heart with joyful news shall burn.
The nearer hope to have that I desire,
to see my child whom I so far have sought,
The more I burn, the greater is my fire,
for fear to fail of that to win I thought,
The wished end requites the toil that's past,
and joy for grief is recompense at last.
What is the force of fathers care I see,
though I my self am father to my care,
To this effect the same hath wrought in me,
that though it be among examples rare:
My self I have disrobed of my state,
to find my child which I did lose of late.
For great offence my Lord the payment great,
the meanest man feels not the greatest fall,
You few with time that you did work in heat,
and yet you find to comfort you withal:
This cost to Sibilles words so doth agree.
But sir behold what Ladies do I see?
A royal blood her virtue will bew ray,
though Fortune seek her near so to oppress,
And noble race will not run far astray.
but of her self will work her own redress:
As I my self even now have found most true,
in this your Ladies case whom I so rue.
She fearing fathers wrath for her offence,
though by constraint unkindly caused to stray,
As she intends with speed departure hence,
so will she not but wisely part away,
And for advise resorted unto me,
to learn what way her best return might be.
My Council was, since fates had found the mean,
the English Queen to make for her defence,
To whose assured stay she might welleane
to swag her fathers wrath, so wrought for her offence:
For none could help her more nor so as she,
if with such suit her grace content might be.
Her credit is so good her fame so flies,
her Honour such, her wisdom so in note,
Her name so known to all men's ears and eyes,
as better mean could no where else be got,
Then if he might at her hands understand,
what she hath heard and seen within her land.
Whereon when we resolved by joint assent,
and I at her request was drawing near,
To move the suit according as we meant,
I met you by the way which had bin here:
By whom I learned a very speedy mean,
to work her weal and void al terror clean.
But maid where is the Duke of whom you spake,
which took this toil for your good Ladies sake?
Yon same is he whose strange attire,
descries his grief and points at his desire.
Well: Isle feel his pulse. Sir knight I hear,
you are inquest your daughter here to find.
In weed disguised because behaps you fear,
least being known contrary to your mind.
Your search might grow too long, yet may it be,
your state descried you may find help of me.
Alas Madam, and must it needs be so?
must grief burst out? and must my careful thought,
Make you by speech partaker of my woe?
wherein the wrong that I have justly wrought
unto my self, shall lead me on along,
till her I find whose wandering is my wrong.
My native Country is, where Indies stream,
doth enter Sea, nigh to the Cambaian cost,
From whence I rome into this famous realm,
to seek my child which by mischance I lost,
There Duke I am, a Lord of fruitful soil,
though Fortunes force now tax me with this toil.
How hap your child did leave you so alone?
was there no help but she must needs be gone?
She would needs love where I misliked much,
a man of mean estate of base degree,
She is my only care and his case such,
as, though well borne, a subject yet to me.
Whom I in heate removed from her: but she
in greater heat removed her self from me.
Me thinks these words in such high state bewray
more egar mind then gift of great conceit,
A Princess peer a Duke should seek to stay,
and not against fume with wit to work debate.
Are you so far misled for want of skill,
as you know not that love will have his will?
He knows no peer: al states stoup to his check,
he spares no prince no more then mean estate,
But makes each one obey him at a beck:
He takes great scorn to hear tell of a mate,
But where he finds such match as he doth like,
without gainsay he bends his bow to strike.
Because you are a Prince of high degree,
in Country where you dwell, you hold it light
That Love should should wound your only heir I see,
but were you of far more puissant might,
And she of price as peerless as may be,
love hath subdued far braver Dames then she.
Madam I must confess the force of love,
to be a thing in vain against to bend,
Which blind reason first did after prove,
to set vs so as we can not defend,
And so triumphing when we cannot see,
we must confess, who is the God but he?
As who should say, Love never hits aright,
but beetle like bereaved of sight doth run,
Not weighing worth, nor marking where to light,
But love oft times by due desert is won,
And most pressed on in Dames of highest prise,
wherefore judge right, for love oft times is wise.
Perhaps your daughters Love sprang from desert,
perhaps the persons worth procured her choice,
Perhaps he was so tied he could not start
from her, commanding him by virtues voice:
And would you seem at such link to rapine,
which virtue did with her own fingers twyne?
Therefore make your account this grief you feel,
proceeds from offence against such a power,
And never hope to win your better weal,
till that his wrath appeared, he leave to lower.
Love is a Lord, who lothes, him him he shames,
not sparing Lords, not sparing princely Dames.
And chiefly where with virtue he doth link,
for virtues sake, where love doth like to light.
There can no force enforce his force to shrink,
he trusts so much to his confederates might.
Wherefore your daughters love for virtues sake,
work what you could, no overthrow would take.
I never did rapine where virtues love did link,
but where there seemed Disparagement to rise,
As in her match I did and do still think,
his birth to hers in no point did suffice,
A Princes child inheritor to state,
too good I thought so far to vndermate.
Alas good Sir, know you not at these years,
that Love doth always fight on equal ground,
And where he minds match, he makes them peers:
if minds agree the ground of states is found.
A Princely heart in meaner man may dwell,
where, if a Princess like, she doth but well.
For when the ear is fed with words report,
when eye beholds what ravishes the sight,
The heart straight to desire yields up the fort:
where if again like liking hap to light,
When virtues join and like with like is knit,
what match is made more excellent then it?
This match should you maintain where love crept in.
not of himself but gesse-waies led by hand,
For virtue was the first that did begin,
against whose force whilst you thought to withstand,
In single terms as not allowing love,
the compound strength of virtue you do prove.
You blame not him for mounting up so hie,
she bears the blame for bending down so low,
Whom fortune bids look up, too blame were he,
if he should quail, and worthy overthrow.
And she too blame, of near so high degree,
not casting Love where virtues doth agree.
Alas whats birth though borne so much in eye,
the only mean to blind who so is borne,
Who looking big with countenance on hye,
with vain conceits holds virtues gifts in scorn,
Unhappy he that brags in that behalf,
where virtue lacks he proves himself a calfe.
You force me sore, yet this you'll not deny,
that though Loves power be not to be withstood,
And that the match of minds be beyond cry.
and they best linked where liking thinks it good,
Yet should my child of me make so small store,
as match her self and not move me before?
If match were made by only mean of man,
you had bin first, as whom the cause concerned,
But what the Gods first move doe what you can,
they will pass on though parents be not warned,
It is but vain to say love shall not win,
unless at your consent he first begin.
But was not that unkindly done of her,
unknown to me to stray from Countries soil?
Thereby her Fathers blood so sore to stir,
which for her sake doe take this irksome toil?
In kind a child, unkind to such a Sire,
deserving just revenge of fathers ire.
Nay was not that unkindly done of you,
unknown to her, to send her love away,
To work you both such woe as you feel now,
you for her sake, she for her Love to stray:
In kind a Sire, unkind to such a child,
whose only fault hath child and Sire exiled.
But nature should have borne with parents heat,
sith what was meant was meant but for her good,
The Love of kind, such fancy love should beat,
and though she found me for a time in mood.
Time would have turned and caused me to relent,
in that for which from me she silly went.
Where nature doth but warm love sets on fire,
and greater force of lesser is obeyed,
For love by choice doth draw more deep desire,
the love of kind, by kind loue's over wayde,
Which moister like gives not time to relent,
but on he will or make the man repent.
How could your Tigrish heart by sundring them,
which lived in heaven before you sought their hell,
Defeat the hold where Cupped held his claim?
but in these terms no longer for to dwell:
What if your child were offered to your face,
should she, or should she not obtain your grace?
And if her Love for whom her toil hath been,
should come with her resolved to be her own,
Should not this angry mood of yours void clean?
answer me that, for that thing being known,
Perhaps I would in part procure your ease,
so that their match your mind might not displease.
This compound case doth cause a fight in mind:
to gain my child my grief would soon relent,
Though in her flight she followed not her kind,
but with her match I cannot be content.
But who are you Madam if I may crave,
to know your name which seeks them thus to save.
I am the Fairy Queen.
O noble Dame,
whose skill is such, as nought is hid from you,
Nothing so dark but you doe know the same,
I know you know where both they be, and how
I may obtain the thing I have so sought,
whose want I wrought and dearly have it bought.
Well Sir, I doe perceive you are content,
to take your child into your grace again,
In hope whereof she shall straight be present,
to please her fathers sight, to stay his pain:
For other things discourse you when you meet,
all will be well since you are won from heat.
I thank you noble Dame for pitying me,
and tendering this my silly daughters state,
Whom if it be my hap again to see,
no such like heat shall set vs at debate,
And yet I hope by reason so to deal,
as that her match shall stand to Countries weal.
It will be hard her settled love to shake,
which grounded once is not light to remove,
Yet for your love and for her Countries sake,
it may fall out she will forget her love:
Which being new and young did ravish so,
now being old hath better leave to go,
But yonder comes the maiden which was sent,
and lo my Lady there for whom she went.
It is true my L. your daughter is in place.
perform your speech and let her find some grace.
I must dear father crave here at your feet,
for mine offence your pardon to obtain,
From whom to fly, I yield it was not meet,
yet Love (my Lord) in me so sore did rain:
As victor once repulse he would not bear,
but bade me seek my love in place each where.
You understand my Lord the course I kept,
you see the gods have brought this gear to end,
These fatal lifts could not be over leapt,
but needs my will to their great might must bend:
For fault to you their force I must oppose,
I am your child of me you may dispose.
Small pardon needs where grace is ready found,
upon some better hope you have discharge,
Affection heales where folly made the wound,
but these things are to be discoursed at large.
But now the mean to mend your present case,
is that you yield and gain your fathers grace.
This Lady here the Fairy Queen hath laid,
for your defence in so forsaking me,
As much as may in your behalf be said,
to whom we both are bound exceedingly:
One point remains, wherein if you relent,
to take you home to grace I am content.
I dare my self for her part undertake,
that on her side resistance will be small,
To what request her father here shall make,
the cause once known, and circumstance withal;
To compass your good will is her desire,
wherefore demand the thing that you require.
Gaudina this long time you have given rain,
to serve your choice and feed your fancy still,
Wherein as you have suffered part of payne,
so I became partaker of your ill,
Now is the time to come to reasons school,
which can alone these hot affections cool.
For love to leave the land where you were borne,
to tread your Fathers tears quite under feet.
To stray you wot not where as one forlorn,
to wander stranger like in such a heat:
Doth ill beseem a person of your port,
which being done, to reason now resort.
You are mine only child, heir to my state,
the wealth whereof doth rest upon your choice,
Which will be well if you in taking mate,
do use advise of Fathers careful voice,
Mark well, hereon doth hang your Fathers love,
besides the good by you my state may prove.
I will (considering both birth and your degree,
where at first I cast my chief respect)
To Countries good you chiefly have an eye,
which calls you home, and wills you to neglect,
The Love of him which led you so astray,
and for her sake to take a better way.
A dainty choice my Lord you offer me,
old rooted love still wedded to conceit,
With rueful look appearing in mine eye,
and to your suit presenting still debate,
Whom Countries good and nature bids obey,
whereby my tongue knows not whats best to say.
But good my Lord sith you which may command,
doe give me leave for my defence to plead,
May it please you in short to understand,
how things have past twixt him and me indeed,
Which being heard, if you be not content,
my will to yours shall presently be bent:
How worth in him did work love first in me,
in Princely state while I did live at home,
Your self therewith displeased did right well see,
which banishing him enforced me to rome,
Because the bait which love for vs had laid,
held vs so fast as it could not be stayde.
By land and Sea I wandered far and near,
not finding rest till Sibil told me plain,
het hap of that I hoped remained here,
where I should rest and finish al my payne:
Success confirmed her speech, and here I found,
to whom by chained link love hath me bound.
For farther link in marriage to proceed,
because therein I had not your consent,
I followed still Apollos holy reed,
whose priest in that restrained mine intent,
And wild me not to marriage to give place,
till he should like of whom I took my race.
Our state is thus, our love which thus did grow,
stands in these terms, in other terms yet free,
I loved where I liked which reft me fro,
I hasted on the thing I liked to see:
I sought, I found, our love remains still,
so to pass forth, if it be your good will.
If you stand free save only that it pleased
the mighty Cupped this to cause you rome,
Therein I find my heart well easd,
and trust to match you well when I come home:
With love more fit for you then this can be,
where both estate and wealth shall well agree.
Alas my Lord, it is but fortunes gift,
to have descent brought down from Princes train,
The persons worth is virtues worthy drift,
which by desert the highest place should gain.
Care not for birth though it be never so base,
but virtue rake which craves the highest place.
As it is a chance to be a Princes child,
so if you think that virtue is restraind,
To one alone, therein you are beguiled,
she doth refuse of none to be obtained:
And where that royal blood with virtues meet,
doth not such one best seem a Princely seat.
Such one I know in place where you were borne,
more fit for you then this to whom you cleave,
Whefore give your consent, and think no scorn,
at Fathers suit your former love to leave:
For duty so despised for al my payne,
to find you out, I crave this only gain.
But yet my Lord consider al the toil,
which I have past to compass this my love?
Shall old conceit at length receive the foil,
whose force I feel not minding to remove?
When Love forsaken shall revive again,
alas my Lord how sore will be my payne:
To be constrained not once to cast a look,
where I tofore did pitch my whole delight?
To leave him thus, for whom I all forsook,
how can true love abide such poisoned spite?
VVhats to be said in this unequal fight,
where love denies what nature claims of right?
O Cupped be content with that is past,
thus long to thee I have my service vowed,
Let nature now prevail at last,
what she demands hold it not disalowd:
And shall I then forsake my former joy?
nay my Gaudina death were less annoy.
Plaint hath found mean, and love hath won his right,
from whom but death no force shall sever me,
Dame Nature be content, here in thy sight
my Love I doe release and yield to thee,
Yet neither love nor nature may possess,
but only death the mother to redress.
See how this heate doth burst to extreme flame,
see what devise extreme desire hath found,
She loves and cannot leave yet to void blame,
she hath found out another helpless ground,
By death to disappoint both our desires:
see reasons check when senseless love aspires.
Yet this I may not leave that is begone,
Madam of you I must crave farther aid,
By whom I trust this fort shall yet be won:
you have perceived by both what hath bin said,
You see the ground whereon my reasons lean,
to work my daughters weal be you the mean.
I see affection armed and loath to yield,
whom length of time and strength of love support,
I see whereon persuasions right doth build,
which hath me thinks possessed the stronger fort:
If love had sight and reason could be hold,
or fiery flame could be subdued with cold.
But Lady, give me leave whose friendship tried,
doth bid you bend your ear to that I say,
The truth whereof cannot be well denied,
though flaming love in heate seem to say nay:
Immortal states as you know mine to be,
from passions blind affects are quite and free.
If you may so consent to Parents mind,
(wherewith is joined the wealth of countries soil)
As love cannot accuse you for unkind,
no yet complain himself to have the foil:
Considering he whereon your Love is bent,
may have your love though you herein relent.
If you forsake, not forced by greater cause,
love then of some unkindness might you blame.
But weight of greater worth forbidding pause
if you withstand, you blemish much your name.
It were no love that stood so in your sight:
but might be termed mere madness out of right.
Return again with parent whence you came,
regard the state which birth hath brought you to,
Relent to love that will augment your fame,
and yet this knight cannot, if you so do,
Condemn you much although you him forsake,
sith of two gods the greater you doe take.
Your Fathers reason springs from such a ground,
as cannot well by reason be denied:
If he for you so fit a match have found,
as for your birth no fitter may be spied,
What have you then against him to withstand,
since nought but good can come from parents hand.
Set al aside, and only this observe,
to seek you out, your knight he took no pain,
Yours was the toil, you did from country swerve,
you trauail'de still, in rest he did remain:
So that of you if love crave further aid,
you answer may, he hath his wages paid.
But though you may thus check his love you'll say,
how shall I choke the love which flames in me,
That, do my best, so keeps me at the bay,
as ties me fast when loose I fine would be:
So that I find, the goal must there be won,
where fancy fights, and love the broil begun?
Your countenance seems to yield, debar al dout,
let meaner love to greater quickly yield,
Your good it is these reasons go about,
let common care give private will the field,
Why stand you still as one in sudden trance,
give place to that your honour may advance.
Th'assault is great, yet love bids keep the field,
what al this time hath my long travel won?
If now by light attempt I hap to yield:
these reasons helte before my flight begone:
What is now said but then the same was true?
the ground is old though flowers be fresh and new.
When he by slight was so withdrawn from me,
then did my love condemn these reasons all,
And shall I now sith nothing else I see,
by yielding thus procure both present thral?
I rather choose to wander with him still,
then so to change and countermand my will.
I feel a false alarm as though there were,
a fitter match to be found out for me;
No Contarenus no, I smell this gear,
to try if so I would relent from thee:
No our consents have joined this faithful link,
till thou says nay I will not from thee shrink.
And yet in thee if slender shows take place,
Isle never yield for honour of my kind,
Let men remove and slightly turn their face,
in women's breast more stay they still shall find:
My parents pardon me my country stay,
for what is said from Love I will not stray.
You see how sore my headstrong daughter's bent,
she will not yield for ought that can be said,
Were it not good that to the knight we went,
to see if his desire might be delayed:
I see by him the mean must first begin,
to quench the flame my daughter frieth in.
If it seem good to you is it doth to me,
to him where as he is, we will repair,
For at his hand this must be wrought I see,
if he himself will yield to countries care:
Com Sir, and you Madam, let vs retire,
we have to deal with him whom you desire.
You may so with persuasions deal I think,
as he to your demand may seem to yield,
But inwardly that he from me will shrink,
no reason can such ground bring for her shield:
Yet to doe that which both you do desire,
apart with you my self I will retire.
But yonder comes the Fairy Queen,
and brings with her in train,
My Lord the Duke with merry look,
I hope weis home again.
You hear Sir Knight the parents just request,
you see the force whereon his reasons stand,
Affections stays what wisdom thinks for best,
the matter rests al only in your hand.
By nature you are farther to foresee,
you are therefore to strike the stroke, not she.
You know of old what led me so to let
the great desire wherewith you both so brent,
Against your worth my will was never set,
to further Countries good was mine intent:
Which sith in me so constantly doth dwell,
to yield thereto me thinks you might do well.
Yet Contarenus think what is in you,
if virtues worth and weight in you be great,
And such as none but blind can disallow,
why should persuasions then vs two defeat,
As who say, any else might better seem.
then you and I to rule so great a realm,
Birth bears me out, and virtue bears up you,
and why should any then thereof mislike?
As certain proof shall still prevail I trow,
before that is uncertain how to like.
You are to choose my friend, make answer so
as you do not procure vs endless wo.
The choice is hard in midst of such extremes,
my Lord and Prince pretending Countries good,
On the other side affections dazzling beams,
which still will shine though clypsed with a cloud,
Lays in mine eye my Ladies due desert,
which nought but death can sever from my heart.
What flashing flames did she at first abide,
when as on me her love she did bestow?
What constance still in her wrought on my side,
to keep that love whereto my life I owe?
What grief did then consume her careful heart,
when as my Lord wild me from Court depart?
What was the zeal that made her so forsake,
the bliss which princely Court to her could bring,
And for my Love such passing pains to take,
to find me out where bruit of me should ring.
Now should I swerve whom she so long hath sought?
death were too small did I but fault in thought.
How can I leave her thus and not deserve,
to be enroled with those infamous men,
Whom Love, because they did from him so swerve,
hath painted out by Poets public pen:
In hell to have their well deserving hire,
for so defrauding love of just desire?
Yet pardon me Madam for weighing both,
if any harm do rise, the grief is mine,
You to displease the god, know I am loath,
for whom my heart disdains not any pine.
Set love aside till reason hath found out,
what is the best in that we go about.
Against our Love our Countries good is laid,
for whose avail we ought not death refuse,
Then death for love in Countries cause bewraid,
ought to rejoice and seek no other scuce:
Yet leaving Love for countries cause I die,
who will not weep such hap on me to lie.
Because my Lord your father may well know
that virtue is the link of this our Love,
And not affection blind which leads vs so,
as being bent we cannot once remove:
Mark Madam what I say, and yield consent,
it is your love that causes me relent.
Without my Lord your parents free good will,
at home with him what can his child enjoy?
And thus to live in state a wanderer still,
as you do now, what more may breed annoy?
Good Madam though I love as no man more,
yield yet to him, withstand him not so sore.
You shall obtain such one by his foresight,
as he shall like, and countries weal shall crave,
You mustregard the common weals good plight,
and seek the whole not only one to save.
If you doe well, I cannot doe amiss,
though loosing you I lose mine only bliss.
I doe foresee the grief that will ensue,
when I shall find my self of you bereft,
When careful mind my late mishap shall rue,
that void of you and of your sight am left.
A double death my doleful days shall feel,
yet I resign my right to countries weal.
A noble speech confirming what was said,
that virtues worth was causer of your love,
For sure my Lord it cannot be denaide,
but that this mind a stony heart might move,
Which to his praise doth yield to Countries good,
the thing which to possess so near he stood.
Well Conta. I must needs esteem,
you of such worth as your estate doth bear,
And if it might so to all others seem,
you best deserve the garland for to wear.
But sith the fates against your virtues bend,
your virtue wills you this to condescend.
Whereto this far I yield if that you please
with me again to Country to resort,
You shall in noble state there live at ease,
and spend your days in most delightful sport.
And as for love I banished you my land,
even so for love in grace still shall you stand.
My Lord, what you have done, your state maintains,
exiling me that did offend your eye,
My life must be in course of restless pains,
for her whom care of country doth deny.
Good hap light on the land where I was borne,
though I doe live in wretched state forlorn.
Alas that such a spirit cannot persuade,
Alas that state and virtue sunder so,
Alas of worth no more account is made,
but thus from thee my love must I needs go.
Well sith he yields which hath most right in me,
Ah Countries good I yield my self to thee.
Now have I that which though I bought with pain,
I think it light, the gain thereof so great,
Now I receive you to my grace again,
whereof before Love sought you to defeat.
The second mends the former fault doth heal,
since you give place to care of Countries weal.
Well now the force where your fate made way
is well expired, you have the heavens to friend,
Who though they saw you run so long astray,
yet have they given your care a joyful end.
Think on and thank, it is a special grace,
first so to stray, then so to end your race.
Your peace is wrought Madam, retire with me,
to place where I do dwell from whence you may
To Country make repair when time shall be.
till when my Lord if you with me will stay,
What things shall need for that your home retire,
I will supply your want to your desire.
Your goodness hath so bound both her and me,
as while we live we be yours to command,
By you is wrought this wished work I see,
by power divine, and by no mortal hand.
Pass on Madam let vs be of your train,
the causer of our joy the healer of our payne.
And you sir knight whose honest yielding made
the good consent which past to help this ill.
You may remain as I before have said,
where I do dwell with hearty great good will.
And ever have the Fairy Queen to friend,
for virtues sake which I in you do find.
Madam I am your own still to command,
as one you see of hap bereaved quite,
Resolved not to return to countries land,
sith I have lost what was my whole delight:
When resting pause hath stayed my troubled heart,
I will retire and draw my self apart.
And now sith cause of such importance moves,
my woeful heart thus to forgo his love,
Most worthy Dame sith chance so parts our loves,
that from my sight your presence must remove,
Grant me herein, sith now the last I see,
let not your love all whole depart from me.
Weigh well the cause that moved me to relent,
which may perhaps imprint more deep conceit,
What man as I, his love so firmly bent,
would yield the hold once moister of the bait?
The gods preserve your honour still in health,
my private good, my common countries wealth.
And if your mind were set that home you will,
it were but labour lost, if I gainsaid,
And absent if your love continue still,
my gain is great who still this ground have laid,
That honest love might think it no disgrace,
though they that love do hap to sunder place.
Well, Contarenus well, what shall ensue?
you are the cause whose yielding makes me yield,
Yet of my word for ever hold this true,
whereon you may assured comfort build:
Till death my soul and body shall depart,
your love shall lodge in some part of my heart.
Such is my recompense.
Now doe I feel the pangs the Sea men bide,
which having harbour nigh in hope to land
By turning wind are driven to try the tide,
and trust the Seas thereby to void the sand.
Now doe I feel the depth of mothers pain,
for death of child she hoped to see again.
Was ever man more near his haven of bliss?
his ship driven forth with wind that filled the sail,
Had ever man such cause of hopeless miss,
as I which at the fall so soon did fail?
Did Fortune ere so sudden show her power
as in her mirth so soon again to lower?
When I had lived so long in strange exile,
in desert wastes commanded still to dwell,
Disfauored of my prince (alas the while)
and bard my Ladies sight my heaviest hell:
Again at last though to her pain we met,
so Love in her surmounted luckless let,
Which love as it did work in her to ease,
so Fathers search which sought to salve his loss,
Hath bred vs both more cause of great displease,
and tied vs thus to try more bitter cross:
By duty she is forced to relent,
and leaves to love a leisure to repent.
Yet can I not Gaudina blame therefore,
her hearty love, her toiling tracts bewails,
She is the lodge where virtue makes her store,
it was her sire that bred my doleful days:
Most happy he that on her jove can hit,
most haplesse I for so forgoing it.
And so far went I yet as one that spied,
her whole estate depend upon my grant,
Though my mishap herein be not denied,
yet of her spied my self may justly vaunt.
To work her good my life I would forgo,
as I have done though to my endless woe.
Friend Niphe could we two have ever once surmised,
that such event would fall to this exceeding love,
Or that blind Cupped could so quickly be suppressed,
which to all reason first so strongly gave the glove?
I never thought but that there might fall out some turn,
the stream did run so strong, it threatened still to stay,
The flame so flashing hot could not so always burn,
but being closely kept would burst some other way.
What Niphe, art thou here, and heard my plaint?
with silent voice could thou such grief abide?
Which heretofore when fortune gave the taint,
from sounding shrill could not thine anguish hide?
Oh help in sound to show my sorrowing state,
which seemed to thee most happy but of late.
I will good sir doe al that lies in me,
to ease your care whose case doth touch me near,
To find you out by land, and eke by Sea,
my self did toil twixt hope and trembling fear,
Whose shaking off in sort as now we see,
is sour to you, and nothing sweet to me.
But sith you may with licence of my Lord,
return again from whence you were exiled,
Why will you not with him therein accord?
me thinks refusing that, you are beguiled,
There whom you love, you may have still in sight,
which step in love was never holden light.
Can I behold another to embrace,
where I my self my Love have always cast,
Would not my grief bewray it self in place,
to see my Love so clearly from me past.
Good Niphe help, this is my last request,
to show my grief good Niphe doe thy best.
O silly Bird what feels thy heavy breast,
which seeking food to feed thy young withal,
At thy return doest find thy empty nest,
and none therein to answer at thy call?
How can thy heart but melt away for grief,
forgoing them to thee of late so lief?
How coldest thou Thisby stay, by trembling hand,
from reauing thee thy then so loathsome life,
When dead on ground thy Pyrramus began stand,
who hoped forthwith to have thee to his wife?
The nearer hope the fuller fraught with gall,
when trust in hope to rest hath sudden fall.
Poor Contarenus how hath Fortune fickle dame,
procured thy grief in offering thee her hand?
Which in thy cause doth now deserve most blame,
when she would seem thy special friend to stand,
O ye that trust the whirling of her wheel,
beware the wrench at turning of her heel.
And you that look aloft beyond degree,
when fairest wind doth fill your flying sail,
Hold fast for fear your footing ficklest bee,
when hope will seem to help you to prevail.
So did she here with Contarenus play,
from whom she fled when she made show of stay.
I thank thee Niphe for thy mournful song,
the tune whereof delights the doleful ears
Of such as justly may complain the wrong,
whose grief dams up the flood of trickling tears.
Farewell to both, sith I must needs depart,
bear witness of my woe and careful heart.
And tel my Lady dear that I intend,
henceforth to seek if I may meet her friend,
Loricus whom the Hermit did commend,
Isle bid him think and hope one day to find
Reward for that his faithful service long,
till when we both may plain of fortunes wrong.
Yet say, I will abide hers to command,
where so adventures hard shall carry me,
Not leaving love by Sea nor yet by land,
though that I love, I never hap to see.
Oh careful heart oppressed with such desires,
as lacks the joys that liking aye requires.
Yet this I am assured her Princely heart,
where she hath loved will never quite forget,
I know in her I shall have still apart,
in honest sort I know she loves me yet.
These thoughts in me maintain the hope of life,
which other ways by death should end the strife.
Well then I see our fortune must divide,
we must again to Countries land retire,
This knight delights in sorrowing to abide,
For missing her which was his whole desire.
My self have felt such travel on their train,
as I am glad home to return again.
The Gods send al good speed that tarry here,
and chiefly her which governs al the rest,
As for my self I will spread far and near,
for princely praise that she deserves best:
And that God loved vs which made vs stay,
where virtuous Queen doth stately sceptre sway.

