CIcero in his book de amicitia these words doth express,
Saying nothing is more desirous then like is unto like:
Whose words are most true and of a certainty doubtless,
For the virtuous doo not the virtuous company mislike.
But the vicious doth the virtuous company eschew:
And like will unto like this is most true.
It is not my meaning your ears for to weary,
with harkening what is the effect of our matter:
But our pretence is to move you to be merry,
Merrily to speak meaning no man to flatter.
The name of this matter as I said while ere,
is like will to like quote the Devil to the Collier.
Sith pithy proverbs in our English sung doo abound,
Our author thought good such a one for to choose:
As may show good example and mirth may eke bé found,
But no lascivious toys he purposes to use,
Heerin as it were in a glass see you may:
the advancement of virtue and of vice the decay,
To what ruin ruffians and roisters are brought,
You may heer see of them the final end:
Begging is the best though that end be nought.
But hanging is worse if they doo not amend.
The virtuous life is brought to honour and dignity:
And at the last to everlasting eternity.
And because divers men of divers minds be,
Some doo matters of mirth and pastime require:
Other some are delighted with matters of gravity.
to please all men is our authors chief desire.
Wherefore mirth with measure to sadness is annexed,
Desiring that none heer at our matter will be perplexed.
Thus as I said I will be short and brief,
Because that from this dump you shall reléeued be:
And the Devil with the Colier, the thief that seeks the thief,
Shall soon make you merry as shortly you shall see.
And sith mirth for sadness is a sauce most sweet:
take mirth then with measure that best sauceth it.
¶ Ha, ha, ha, ha, now like un to like it will be none other,
Stop gentle knave and take up your brother.
Why is it so? and is it even so indeed?
Why then may I say God send vs good speed,
And is every one heer so greatly unkind,
that I am no sooner out of sight but quite out of mind.
Mary this will make a man even weep for woe,
that on such a sudden no man will him know.
Though men be so dangerous now at this day,
Yet are women kind woorms I dare well say.
How say you woman you that stand in the Angle,
were you never acquainted with Nichol newfangle?
Then I see Nichol newfangle is quite forgot,
Yet you will know me anon, I dare ieopard a groat.
Nichol newfangle is my name, doo you me not know?
my whole education to you I will show,
For first before I was born I remember very well,
that my gransier and I made a journey into hell.
Where I was bound prentice before my nativity,
to Lucifer himself such was mine agility.
All kind of sciences he taught unto me,
that to the maintenance of pride might best agree.
I learned to make gowns with long sleeves and wings:
I learned to make ruffs like Calves chitterlings.
Caps, Hats, Cotes, and all kind of apparails,
And especially Breethes as big as good barrels.
Shoos, Boots, Buskins, with many pretty toys,
All kind of garments for men, women and boys.
Know ye me not now I thought that at the last,
All acquaintance from Nichol newfangle is not past.
Nichol newfangle was and is and ever shall be,
And there are but few that are not acquainted with me.
For so soon as my prentishood was once come out,
I went by and by the whole world about.
Sancte benedicite, who have we here?
Tom tumbler or else some dancing bear,
Body of me it were best go no near,
For ought that I see it is my Godfather Lucifer.
Whose prentice I have been this many a day,
But no more words but mum, you shall hear what he will say
¶ Howe mine own boy I am glad that thou art here,
‡He speaks to you sir, I pray you come near. 
‡Nay you art even he of whō I am well appaid.
¶ Then speak aloof of, to come no I am afraid.
¶ Why so my boy as though thou did never see me?
¶ Yes godfather but I am afraid it is now as often times it is with thee
For if my dame &amp; you hast been tumbling by the ears,
As oftentimes you doo like a couple of great bears.
Thou care not whom thou kill in thy raging mind,
Dost not thou remember since thou brusedst me behind?
This hole in thy fury did thou disclose:
that now may a tent be put in as big as thy nose.
this was when my dame called thee bottle nosed knave:
But I am like to cary the mark to my grave,
¶ Oh my good boy he not afraid,
For no such thing hath happened as thou hast said.
But come to me my boy and bless thee I will,
And see that my precepts thou doo fulfil.
‡Well Godfather if you will say ought to me in this case,
Speak for in faith I mean not to kneel to that ill face.
If our Lady Walsingham had no fairer face and visage,
By the mass they were fools that would go to her on pile∣gremage
¶ Well boy it shall not greatly skill:
Whether thou stand or whether thou kneel.
thou know what sciences I have thee taught,
Which are able to bring the world to nought,
For thou know that through pride from heaven I was cast:
Even unto hell wherefore see thou make haste.
Such pride through new fashions in men's harts for to sow.
that those that use it may have the like overthrow.
From virtue procure men to set their minds aside:
And wholly employ it to all sin and pride.
Let thy new fangled fashions bear such a sway:
That a rascal be as proud as he that best may.
¶ Tush, tush, that is already brought to pass,
For a very skip jack is prouder I swear by the mas,
And seeks to go more gayer and brave:
then doth a Lord though himself be a knave.
† I can thee thank that so well thou hast plaid thy part,
Such as doo so shall soon seel the smart.
Sith that thou hast thus done, there remains behind,
that thou in another thing show thy right kind.
¶ Then good Godfather let me hear thy mind.
¶ Thou know that I am both proud and arrogant,
And with the proud I will ever be conversant.
I cannot abide to see men that are vicious,
Accompany themselves with such as be virtuous.
Wherefore my mind is sith thou thy part can play,
that thou adjoin like to like always.
¶ I never loved that well I swear by this day,
¶ What my boy?
¶ Your mind is sith I fast three meals every good friday.
that I eat nothing but Onions and leekes always.
¶ Nay my mind is sith thou thy part can play:
that thou adjoin like to like always.
¶ Tush, tush godfather Devil for that have thou no care,
thou know that like will to like quote the devil to the Colier.
And thou shalt see that such a match I shall make anon:
That thou shalt say I am thy good good sweet sweet godson.
¶ I will give thee thanks when thou hast so done.
¶ Well Godfather no more words but mum,
For yonder comes the Collier as seems me,
By the mas he will make a good mate for thee.
what old acquaintance small remembrance,
welcome to town with? very vengeance.
Now welcome Tom Colier give me thy hand:
As very a knave as any in Englank.
¶ By mass god amarcy my vreend Nichol,
¶ By God and welcome gentle tom lick hole,
¶ Cham glad to see thee merry my vreend nickol,
and how dost thou now a days good nickole.
¶ And nothing else but even plain nichol?
‡ I pray thee tell me how dost good vreend lick hole.
‡ It is turned from nichol to lick hole with tom Colier
I say no more tom but hold thy nose there.
¶ Nay hold thy tongue nichol till my nose doth come:
So thou shalt take part and I shall take some.
‡ Well tom Colier let these things pass away,
tel me what market thou hast made of thy coals to day,
¶ To every Bushel cha sold three pack,
Lo here be the empty zacks on my neck.
Cha begide the whorsons that of me ha bought,
But to beguile me was their whole thought
¶ But hast thou no conscience to beguile thy poor neighbour.
¶ No mary so I may gain for my labour.
It is a common trade now a days this is plain.
to cut one another throat for lucar and gain.
A small vaut as the world is now brought to pass
¶ Thou art a good fellow I swear by the mass.
As fit a companion for the Devil as may be,
Lo good father devil this fellow will I match with th•e.
¶ And good tom collier thou art welcome to me, 
‡ God a mercy good devil chā glad of thy company.
¶ Like will to like I see very well,
‡ God father wilt thou dance a little before thou go home to hell
¶ I am content so that tom colier doo agree,
¶ I will never refuse Devil to dance with thee.
¶ Then godfather name what the dance shall be.
¶ Tom Colier of Croidon hath sold his cole,
¶ Why then have at it by my fathers soul.
Tom Colier of Croidon hath sold his Coals,
and made his market to day:
And now he dances with the Devil,
for like will to like always.
¶ Wherefore let vs rejoice and sing,
let vs be merry and glad,
Sith that the Colier and the Devil,
this match and bounce hath made.
¶ Now of this dance we make an and,
with mirth and eke with joy:
The Colier and the Devil will be,
much like to like always.
¶ Aha, mary this is trini singing,
I had not thought the Devil to be so cunning.
And by the mas Tom Colier is as good as he,
I see that like with like will ever agree.
¶ Var well moister Devil vorich must be gone, 
¶ Why then farewell my gentle friend tom.
¶ Farewell tour Colier a knave be thy comfort,
How say thou Godfather, is not this trim sport▪
¶ thou art mine own boy, my blessing thou shalt have,
¶ By my troth Godfather that blessing I doe not crave.
But if you go your way I will doo my diligence,
As well in your absence as in your presence.
¶ But thou shalt salute me or I go doubtless,
that in thy doings thou moist have the better success.
Wherefore kneel down and say after me,
¶ When ye devil will have it so: it must needs so be. 
what shall I say hotel nosed godfather can you tel?
¶ All hail Oh noble Prince of hell,
¶ All my dames cow tails fell down into the well.
¶ I will exalt thee aboue the clouds,
¶ I will salt thee and hang thee in the shrouds.
¶ Thou art the enhancer of my renown,
¶ Thou art haunce the haugman of Callis town,
¶ To thee be honour alone,
¶ To thee shall come our hobbling Ione.
* Amen.
¶ Amen.
¶ Now farewell my boy, farewell heartily,
¶ Is there never a knave heer will keep the Devil company?
Farewell godfather for thou must go alone:
I pray thee come hither again anon. 
Mary here was a benediction of the Devils good grace,
Body of me I was so afraid I was like to bestench the place.
My buttocks made buttons of the new fashion.
While the whoreson Devil was making his salutation.
But by the mass I am as glad as ever was madge mare:
That the whoreson Devil is joined with the knave Coliar.
As fit a match as ever could be picked out:
what say thou Ione with the long snout.
But who comes yonder puffing as what as a black pudding,
I hold xx. li. it is a ruffin, if a Goose go a gooding.
‡ Gogs hart and his guts is not this too bad?
Blood, wounds and nails, it will make a man mad
¶ I warrant you here is a lusty one very brave:
I think anon he will swear him self a knave.
‡ Many a mile have I ridden and many a null have I goue:
Yet can I not find for me a fit companion.
Many there be which my company would frequent,
If to doo as they doo I would be content.
They would have me leave off my pride and swearing,
My new fangled fashions and leave of this wearing.
But rather then I such companions will have:
I will see a thousand of them laid in their grave.
Similes similem sibi quaerit, such a one doo I seek
As unto my self in every condition is like.
¶ Sir you are welcome ye seem to be an honest man:
And I will help you in this matter as much as I can.
If you tarry heer a while I tel you in good sooth,
I will find one as fit for you as a pudding for a friars mouth.
‡ Ithank you my friend for your gentle offer to me.
I pray you tell me what your name may be.
‡ Me think by your apparel you have had me in regard:
I pray you of Nichole newfangle have you never heard?
‡ Nichole newfangle? why we are of old acquaintance,
‡ By my troth your name is quite out of my remembrance.
‡ At your first coming into England well I wot,
You were very well acquainted with Tom tospot.
‡ Tom tospot? Sanct•amen, how you were out of my mind:
¶ You know whē you brought into englād this new fāgled kind
That tospots and Ruffians with you were first acquainted,
‡ It is even so Tom tospot as thou hast said.
¶ It is an old saying, that mountains and hills never meet,
But I see that men shall meet, though they doo not seek.
And I promise you more joy in my hart I have found:
Then if I had gained an hundred pound.
‡ And I am as glad as one had given me a groat:
that I have met with thee Tom tospot,
And seeing a mate thou would so fine have,
I will join thee with one that shall be as very a knave.
as thou art thy self you may believe me:
thou shalt see anon what I will doo for thee.
For you seek as very a knave as you your self are:
For like will to like quote the Devil to the Coliar.
‡ Indeed Nichole newfangle ye say the verity, 
For like will to like it will none otherwise be.
‡ Behold Tom tospot even in pudding time:
Yonder comes Raf Roister an old friend of mine,
By the mas for thee he is so fit a mate
As Tom and Tib for Kit and Kate.
Now welcome my friend Raf coister by the mass,
‡ And I am glad to see you here in this place.
‡ Bid him welcome, hark he can play a knaves part:
‡ My friend you are welcome with all my hart.
¶ God a mercy good fellow, tel me what thou art.
¶ As very a knave as thou, though the best be to bad,
¶ I am one, which of thy company would be very glad.
¶ And I will not your company refuse of a certainty.
So that to my conditions your manners doo agree.
¶ It should appear by your sayings yt we are of one mind,
For I know that roisters and tospots come of one kind.
And as our names be much of one accord and much like,
So I think our conditions be not far unlike.
¶ If your name to me you will declare and show:
You may in this matter my mind the sooner know.
¶ Few words are best among friends this is true,
Wherefore I shall briefly show my name unto you.
Tom tospot it is, it need not be painted,
Wherefore with Raf Roister I must needs be acquainted.
¶ In faith Raf Roister if thou wilt be ruled by me,
we will dance hand in hand like knaves all three.
It is as unpossible for thée his company to deny:
As it is for a Cammel to creep through a needles eye.
therefore did him welcome like a knave as thou art,
¶ By my troth Tom tospot you are welcome with all my hart,
¶ I thank you that mine acquaintāce you will take in good part.
And by my troth I will be your sworn brother:
¶ Tush like will to like it will be none other.
For the virtuous will always the virtuous company seek out:
A Gentleman never seeks the company of a Lout.
And Roisters and Ruffians do sober company eschew:
For like will ever to like this is most true.
¶ Now friend tom tospot seeing that we are brethren sworn:
And neither of our companies from other may be forborne.
the whole trade of my life to thee I will declare:
¶ And to tell you my properties also I shall not spare.
¶ Then my masters if you will a while abide it:
Ye shall see two such Knaves so lively described
that if hell should be raked even by and by indeed:
Such another couple cannot be found I swear by my creed.
Go to sirs say on your whole minds:
And I shall paint you out in your right kinds.
First tom tospot plead thou thy cause and thy name:
And I will sit in this chair and give sentence on the same.
I will play the Judge and in this matter give judgment:
How say you my masters are you so content?
¶ By my truth for my part thereto I doo agree,
¶ I were to blame if any fault should be in me.
¶ Then that I be in office neither of you doo grudge?
¶ No indeed:
¶ Where learned you to stand capt before a Judge?
You sowterly knaves, show you all your manners at once.
¶ Why Nichole all we are content:
¶ And am I plain Nichole? and yet it is in my arbitrament?
to Judge which of you two is the veriest knave:
I am moister Nichole Newfangle both gay and brave.
For seeing you make me your Judge I crow:
I shall teach you both your leripup to know. 
* Stay your self I pray you heartily.
¶ I pray you be content and we will be more mannerly.
¶ •ay I cannot put up such an injury.
For seeing I am in office I will be known therefore, 
Fend your heads sirs for for I will fight once more,
¶ I pray you be content good gentle moister Nichole,
¶ I never saw the like by gogs soul.
¶ Well my masters because you doo intend:
to learn good manners and your conditions to amend.
I will have but one fit more and so make an end. 
¶ I pray you sir let vs no more contend.
¶ Mary this hath brethed me very well:
Now let me hear how you your tales can tel.
And I moister judge wit so bring to pass:
that I will judge who shall be knave of Clubs at Christmas
‡ Gogs wounds I am like Phalaris ye made a bull of brass,
‡ Thou art like a false knave now and ever more was.
‡ Nay I am like Phalaris that made a bull of brass,
As a cruel torment for such as did offend:
and he him self first therein put was:
Even so are we brought to this end.
In ordaining him a judge who will be honoured as a God:
So for our own tails we have made a rod.
‡ And I am served as Hamao that prepared,
‡ How was he served I pray thee doo me tel,
‡ Whom I speak of thou know not well.
‡ Thou art served a• Harry hangman captain of the black guard,
‡ Nay I am served as Haman that prepared.
A high pair of gallous for Mardocheus the Jew,
and was the first that thereon was hanged:
So I feel the smart at mine own too this is true.
But heerafter I will learn to be wise,
and ere I leap once I will look twice.
‡ Well Tom tospot first let me hear thee,
How can thou prove thy self a verier knave then hee
‡ You know that Tom tospot men doo me call,
‡ A knave thou hast always been and ever shall.
‡ My conditions I am sure ye know as well as I,
‡ A knave thou wast born and so shalt thou dye.
‡ But that you are a judge. I would say unto you,
Knaves are Christen men else you are a jew.
‡ He calls me knave by craft, doo you not see?
Sir I will remember it when you think not on me.
Well say what thou can for thine own behoof:
If thou prove thy self the verier Knave by good proof.
Thou must be the elder brother and have the patrimony,
And when he hath said then doo thou reply
Even Thomas a wa•rings, or Tiburn hill:
to the falsest thief of you both by my fathers will.
‡ I pray you sir what is that patrimony?
‡ I pray you leave your courtesy &amp; I will tel you by and by.
if he be the more Knave the patrimony he must have,
But thou shalt have it if you prove thy self the verier knave.
A piece of ground it is that on beggets manner doth hold:
and who so deserves it shall have it ye may be bold.
Called Saint Thomas a watrings or else Tiburn hill:
Given and so bequeathed to the faliest Knave by will.
¶ Then I trow I am he that this patrimony shall possess,
For I am Tom tospot to use this trade doubtless.
From morning till night I sit tossing the black hole:
then come I home and pray for my fathers soul.
Saying my prayers with wounds, blood guts and hart,
Swearing and staring thus play I my parts.
If any poor man have in a whole week earnd a groat:
He shall spend it in one hour in tossing the pot.
I use to call servants and poor men to my company,
and make them spend all they have vnthriftily.
So that my company they think to be so good:
that in short space their hair grows through their hood.
¶ But will no gossips keep thee company now and than?
¶ Tush I am acquainted with many a woman.
That with me will sit in every house and place:
But then their husbands had need to fend their face.
For when they come home they will not be a feared:
to shake the goodman, and sometime shave his beard.
And as for flemish servants I have such a train:
that will quasse and carous, and therein spend their gain.
From week to week I have this company,
Wherefore I am worthy to have the patrimony.
¶ Thus thou moist be called a knave in grain,
And where Knaves be scant thou moist go for twain.
But now Raf Roister let me hear what thou can say
* You know that Rate roister I am called always,
And my conditions in knavery so far doo surmount:
that to have this patrimony I make mine account.
For I entice young gentle men all virtue to eschew
And to give them to riotousnes, this is true,
Serving men by me are also seduced:
that all in bravery their minds are confused.
then if they have not themseluesto maintain,
to pick and to steal they must be fain.
And I may say to you I have such a train:
that some time I pitch a field on Salisbury plain.
And much more if need were I could say verily,
Wherefore I am worthy to have the patrimony.
¶ He that should judge this manner had •erd have more wit then I
But seeing you have referred it unto my arbitrament:
In faith I will give such equal judgment,
that both of you shall be well pleased and c•ntent.
¶ Nay I have not done for I can say much more,
¶ Well I will not have you contend any more.
But this farm which to beggars manner doth appertain
I will equally divide between you twain.
Are you not content that so it shall be?
¶ As it pleases you so shall we agree.
¶ Then see that anon you come both unto me
¶ Sir for my part I thank you heartily.
I promised of fate to come unto a company.
Which at Hob filchers for me doo remain:
God be with you and anon I will come again,
¶ Farewell brother Raie I will come to you ano•.
‡ Cum again for you shall not so suddenly be gon. 
see you not who cums yōder an old frēd of yours
One that is ready to quasse at all hours.
Quas in hart and quas again, and quas about the house a:
And toss the black bole to and fro, and I brinks them all carous a.
¶ Be go go gogs nouns cha cha drunk so so much to day:
That be be be mass I cham a most drunk each da da dare say.
Chud spe spe spend a goo goo good groat:
tha that each cud vi vinde my ca ca chaptain to to tom tospot.
¶ Sit down good haunce lest you lye on ye ground. 
he knows not tom tospot I dare ieopard xx.l.
¶ He will know me by and by I hold you a crown.
how dost thou servant haunce? how comes this to pass?
¶ Ma ma master to to tom cha cha cham glad by mas.
Ca ca carouse to to thee goo goo good tom, 
¶ Hold up haunce I will pledge thee anon.
¶ Well there is no remedy but I must be gone.
¶ Ta ta tarry good velow, a wo wo word or twain:
If tho tho thou thy self do do doo not come again,
Bi bi bid Philip Fleming cu cu cum hither to me,
Vo vo for he must lead me home now each doo see.
¶ Then farewell Haunce I will remember thy errant,
he will be heer by and by I dare be his warrant. 
¶ Farewell Raf roister with all my hart,
Come anon and I will deliver thee thy part.
¶ Now haunce right now thou drankst to me,
Drink again and I •oil pledge thee.
¶ Omni po po potenti, all the po po pot is empty.
¶ Why Haunce thou hast latin in thy belly me think,
I thought there was no room for latin, there is so much drink.
¶ Each le le lernd some la la latin when each was a la la lad,
Ith ca ca can say tu es nebulo each learned of my dad.
And each did once he he help the pre pre priest to say mass,
By gis ma man each ha been cunning when it was.
¶ I knew Haunce when he was as he saith,
For he was once a Scholar in good faith.
But through my company he was with drawn from thence,
through his riot and excessive expense.
Unto this trade which now you doo in him see:
So that now he is wholly addicted to follow me.
And one of my guard he is now become:
Well Haunce well, thou wast once a white son.
¶ Now so God help me thou art a pretty fellow Haunce,
A clean legged gentleman, and as proper a prance.
As any I know between this and France.
‡ Yes by by God each cud once dance,
‡ I speak of no dancing little belied Haunce:
But seeing thou say thou can so well dance.
Let me see where thou can dance lively:
‡ Tha tha that ca ca can each doo full trimly.
¶ Rise again Haunce thou had almost got a fall:
But thou dauncest trimly legs and all.
Body of me haunce how doth thy belly can thou tel?
By the mass he hath be raid his breeches me think by ye smell.
‡ I will help thee up Haunce give me thy hand, 
‡ By by mas ch ch ch was almost down I think verily,
‡ Wast thou almost down haunce? so think I.
But thou art sick me think by thy groaning,
He groans like a bear when he is a moaning.
Hark how his head aches and his pulses doo beat:
I think he will be hanged his belly is so great.
‡ Go go God a mercy Tom with all my hart:
‡ If thou can not leap Haunce, let me see thee drink a quart.
And get thee out abroad into the air:
‡ Tush he had more need to keep his chair.
Sit down Haunce and thou shalt see anon:
Philip fleming will come and fetch thee home.
‡ I pray thee Tom tospot is this one of thy men?
‡ He is a companion of mine now and then.
‡ By the faith of my body such Carpenter such chips,
And as the wise man saith, such lattice such lips.
For like moister like men, like tutor like Scholar,
And like will to like, quoth the devil to the Colier.
‡ There is no remedy for it must needs so be,
Like will to like you may believe me.
¶ Lo where Phillip Fleming comes even in pudding time:
‡ He brings in his hand either good ale or else good wine.
Troll the bole and drink to me, and troll the bole again a:
And put a browne tossed in the pot, for Phillip Flemmings brain a.
And I shall toss it to and fro, even round about the house a:
Good hostess now let it be so I brinks them all carous a.
‡ Mary heer is a pot of nappy good Ale,
As pure as Crystal pure and stale.
Now a Crab in the fire were worth a good groat:
That I might quasse with my captain Tom tospot.
What? I can no sooner wish, but by and by have:
God save mine eye sight me think I see a knave.
what Captain how goes the world with you?
¶ Why now I see the old proverb to be true:
Like will to like both with Christian turk and jew.
¶ Mary Phillip even as I was would to doo.
¶ Raf Roister told me I should find Haunce here,
where is he that he doth not appear?
¶ I hold twenty pound the Knave is blind,
turn about Phillip Fleming and look behind.
Hast thou drunk so much that thine eyes be out?
Lo how he snorted like a lazy lout.
Go to him for he sleeps sound.
two such paunches in all England can scant be found.
¶ Why Haunce art thou in thy prayers so devoutly?
awake man and we two will quasse together stoutly.
* Domino dominus noster:
Me think I cha spied three knaves in a cluster.
¶ Stay a while for he saith his Pater noster,
Sanctum benedicitum what have I dreamed?
By gogs nouns chad thought each had been in my bed.
Cha dreamed such a dream that thou wilt marvel to here,
Me thought each was drowned in a barrel of Beer.
And by and by the Barrel was turned to a Ship:
Which me thought the wind made lively to skip.
And each did sail therein from Flaunders to France:
At last each was brought hither among a sort of knaves by chance
¶ Lo Haunce heer is Phillip Fleming come now,
we will go drink together now, how say thou?
¶ I pray thee good Vilip lead me away,
¶ Give me thy hand and I will thee stay.
¶ How say you moister Nichol will you keep vs company?
¶ Go before moister lickhole and I welcome by and by.
Mates matched together depart you three,
I will come after you may believe me.
* Ha ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha,
Now three knaves are gone, and I am left alone:
my self here to solace:
Well done gentle Ione, why begin you to moan?
though they be gone I am in place.
And now I will dance, now will I prance,
For why I have none other work:
Snip snap Butter is no bone meat:
Knaves flesh is no Pork.
Hey testy tosty an Whole is a bird,
Jack a napes hath an old face:
You may believe me at one bare word,
how like you this merry case?
A piece of ground, they think they have found,
I will tel you what it is:
For I them told that of beggars manner it hid hold,
a staff and a wallet I wis.
Which in short space, even in this place,
of me they shall receive:
For when that their drift, hath spent all their thrift,
their minds I shall deceive.
I trow you shall see more Knaves come to me,
which whenever they doo:
they shall have their meed, as they deserve indeed.
as you shall shortly see these two.
When they doo pretend to have a good end,
mark well then what shall ensue:
A Bag and a Bottle, or else a Rope Knottle,
this shall they prove to true.
But mark well this game, I see this gear frame.
Lo who comes now in such hast?
It is Cutbert cutpursse and Pierce pickpurse,
Give room now a little cast.
¶ By Gogs wounds it doth me good to the hart:
to see how cleanly I plaid this part.
While they stood thrusting together in the throng:
I began to go them among.
And with this knife which here you doo see:
I cut away his purse cleanly.
‡ See to your purses my masters be ruled by me.
For Knaves are abroad therefore beware:
You are warned and ye take not heed I doo not care.
‡ And also so soon as I had espied,
A woman in the throng whose purse was fat:
I took it by the strings and cleanly it untied,
She knew no more of it, then Gibe our Cat.
Yet at the last she hied apace,
And said the money in my hand she saw:
Thou whore said I, I will have an action of the case,
And seeing thou say so I will try the law.
‡ How say thou Pierce pickpurse art thou not agreed?
these two booties equally to divide.
‡ Then let vs count the total sum,
And divide it equally when we have done.
‡ My masters here is a good fellow that would fine have some.
‡ What Nicola Newfangle be you here?
So God help me I am glad with all my hart:
¶ Then ere we depart we will have some cheer.
And of this booty you shall have your part.
¶ I thank you both heartily.
And I will doo somewhat for you by and by:
Are not you two sworn brothers in every booty?
‡ Yes that we are truly.
‡ Then will I tell you news which you doo not know:
Such news as will make you glad I trow.
But first tel me this Pierce Pickpurse,
Whether is the elder thou or Cutbert cutpurse,
¶ In faith I think we are both of one age well ny.
¶ I suppose there is no great differonce truly.
But wherefore ask you? I pray thee tell me why,
¶ I will tell you the cause without delay,
For a piece of land is fallen as I hear say.
A proper plot it is this is most true.
which by succession must come to one of you.
For thou Cutbert Cutpurse, wast Cutbert cutthroses son,
And thou Pierce pickpurse, by that time thou hast done,
Can derive thy pedigree from an ancient house:
thy father was tom thief, thy mother tib louse.
This piece of land where you inheritors are,
Is called the land of the two legged mare.
In this piece of ground there is a mare in deed:
Which is the quickest mare in England for speed.
Therefore if you will come anon unto me:
I will put you in possession and that you shall see.
¶ I cannot believe that such luck is happened unto vs.
‡ It is true that I to you doo discuss.
¶ If you will help vs to this piece of ground:
Both of vs to you shall think our selves bound.
¶ Yes in faith you shall have it, you may believe me,
I will be as good as my word, as shortly you shall see.
Then brother Pierce we may think ourselves happy,
that ever we were with him acquainted:
¶ Even so we may of certainty,
that such good luck unto vs hath happened.
But brother Cutbert is it not best,
to go in for a while and distribute this booty?
where we three will make some feast.
And quasse together and be merry.
¶ What say you Nichol? I doo agree,
¶ But soft a while be ruled by me,
Look yonder a little doo you not see.
Who comes yonder? a while we will abide,
Let him say his pleasure and we will stand aside.
¶ Oh gracious God how wonderful are thy woorks?
how highly art thou of all men to be praised?
Of Christians, Saracens, Jaws and also Turks,
thy glory ought to be erected and raised
What joys hast thou prepared for the virtuous life,
And such as have thy name in love and awe?
thou hast promised salvation to man, Child and wife,
that thy precepts observe and keep well thy law.
And to the virtuous life what doth ensue?
Vertutis premium honour Tully doth say:
Honour is the guerdon for virtue due,
And eternal salvation at the latter day.
How clear in conscience is the virtuous life?
the vicious hath consciences so heavy as lead:
their conscience and their doings is always at strife:
And although they live: yet in sin they are dead.
¶ God give you good morrow sir, how doo you to day?
¶ God bless you also both now and always.
I pray you with me have you any acquaintance?
¶ Yea mary I am an old friend of yours perchance.
¶ I fit be so I marvel very much,
That the dullness •f my wit should be such.
That you should be altogether out of my memory,
tell me your name I pray you heartily.
¶ By the faith of my body you will oppose me by and by.
But indeed I was but little when I was first borne,
And my mother to tell me my name thought it scorn.
¶ I will never acquaint me with such in any place,
As are ashamed of their names by Gods grace.
¶ I remember my name now it is come to mind,
I have mused much before I could it find.
Nich•le newfangle it is, I am your old friend.
¶ My friend mary I doo thee defy,
And all such company I doo deny.
For thou art a companion for roisters and ruffians,
And not fit for any virtuous companions.
¶ And in faith art thou at plain defiance?
then I see I must go to mine old acquaintance.
Well Cutbert cutpurse and Pierce pickpurse, we must go to∣gender
For like will to like quoth the Devil to the Colier.
¶ Indeed thou say true it must needs be so,
For like will ever to like go.
And my conditions and thine so far doo disagree,
That no familiarity between vs may be.
For thou nourishest vice both day and night,
My name is virtuous life and in virtue is my delight.
So vice and virtue cannot together be united,
But the one the other hath always spited.
For as water quenches fire and the flame doth suppres,
So virtue hates vice and seeks a redress.
¶ Tush if he be so dangerous let vs not bim esteem.
And he is not for our company I see very well:
For if he be so holy as he doth seen.
we and he differ as much as Heaven and Hell.
¶ You know that like will to like always.
And you see how holily he is now bent:
To seek his company why doo we assay?
I promise you, doo you what you will, I will not consent.
For I pass not for him be he better or be he wurise,
¶ Friend if you be wise be ware of your purse.
For this fellow may doo you good when all comes to all,
If you chance to loose your purse in Cutpurse hall.
But in faith fare ye well sith of our company you be weary:
we will go to a place where we will make merry.
For I see your company and ours doo far differ,
For like will to like quoth the Devil to the Colier.
¶ Well let vs be gon and did him adieu:
For I see this proverb proves very true.
¶ Then let vs go to Hob filchers house,
where we will be merry and quasse carous.
And there shall we find Tom tospot with other more,
Meet mates for vs therefore let vs go.
¶ Then seeing we are all of one mind:
Let vs three go and leave a knave heer behind, 
¶ Good hostess lay a Crab in the fire, end broil a mess of Sous a:
That we may toss the hole so and fro, and brinks them all carous a
¶ And I will pledge Tom to spot till I be as drunk as a meuse a:
Who so will drink to me all day, I will pledge them all carous a.
¶ Then we will not spare for any cost, so long as we be in a house a:
Then hostess filth••of again, for I pledge them all carous a. 
¶ Oh wicked 〈◊〉 that have such delig•t,
In evil conversation wicked and 〈…〉
And from virtues lo•• withdraw yourselves quite,
And lean to vice most 〈◊〉 and d•testa•le.
How prone and 〈…〉 to ensue,
How defe we be good 〈◊〉 to hear?
How strange we make it our ha•ts to be ne'er?
How little we have Gods threats in fear?
Saint Augustine saith in his 5. book de ciuitate Dei,
Coniuncta sunt edes Vertutis et honoris (saith he)
The house of Virtue and Honour joined together be.
And so the way to Honours house is disposed,
that through virtues house he must needs pass:
Or else from honour he shall soon be deposed,
and brought to that point that he before was.
But if through virtue honour be attained:
The path to salvation may soon be gained.
Some there be that doo fortune prefer,
Some esteem pleasure more then virtuous life:
But in mine opinion all such doo err,
For virtue and fortune be not at strife.
Where virtue is, fortune must needs grow:
But fortune without virtue hath soon the overthrow.
Thrice happy are they that doo virtue embrace,
For a Crown of glory shall be their reward:
Sa•han at no time may him any thing deface,
For God over him will have such regard.
That his foes he shall soon tread under his foot:
And by Gods permission, pluck them up by the root.
It boots not vice against virtue to stir,
For why vice is feeble and of no force:
But Vi•tus eterna preclaraque habentur.
wherefore I would all men would have a remorse.
And eschew evil company vile and pernicious.
And as the end of virtue is honour and felicity,
So mark well the end of wickedness and vice:
Shame in •his world and pain eternally,
Wherefore you that are here learn to be wise.
And the end of the one, with the other way:
By that tune you have heard the end of this play.
But why doo I thus much say in the praise of Virtue?
Sith the thing praise worthy need no praise at all:
It praises it self sufficiently this is true,
Which chase away sin as bitter as gall.
And where Virtue is, it need not to be praised:
For the renown thereof shall soon be raised. 
¶ Oh virtuous life God rest you merry,
to you I am come to attend,
¶ Good Fame you are welcome heartily,
I pray you who did you hither send?
¶ Even Gods promise hath sent me unto you,
willing me not from you to depart:
But always to give attendance due,
And in no wise from you to start.
For god of his promise hath most liberally,
Sent me good fame to you Virtuous life:
Whereby it may be seen manifestly,
Gods great zeal to virtue both in man and wife.
For why they may be sure that I good Fame,
From the Virtuous life will stray:
Whereby honour and renown may grow to their name,
And eternal salvation at the latter day.
¶ God is gracious and full of great mercy,
To such as in virtue set their whole delight:
Pouring his benefits upon them abundantly:
Oh man what meanest thou with saviour to fight?
Come unto him for he is full of mercy.
The fountain of virtue and of godliness the spring,
Come unto me and thou shalt live everlastingly:
He doth not require thee any price to bring,
Come unto me ye that travail (saith he,
And such as with sin are heavily laden:
And of my self refreshed you shall be.
Repent, repent, your deeds shall be down trodden,
Well Good Fame sith God of his goodness,
Hath hither sent you on me to attend:
Let vs give thanks to him with humbleness,
And persuade with all men their lives to amend.
¶ Virtuous life thereto I doo agree,
For it becomes all men to doo so:
But behold yonder comes Gods promise as seems to me,
And honour with him comes also. 
¶ Such godly company likes me very well:
for vicio{us} mē frō our cōpany we would expel
¶ God rest you merry both, and God be your good guide:
¶ We are now come to the place where we must abide,
For from you Virtuous life, I honour may not slide.
¶ I am Gods promise which is a thing etern.
And nothing more surer then his promises may be:
A sure foundation to such as will learn,
Gods precepts to observe then must they needs see.
Honour in this world, and at last a Crown of glory,
Ever in joy and mirth, and never to be sorry.
Wherefore oh Virtuous life to thee we doo repair,
As messengers from God, his promise to fulfil:
And therefore sit you down in this Chair,
For to endue you with honour it is Gods promise and will.
¶ Now take this sword in hand as a token of victory,
This Crown from my head to you I shall give?
I crown you with it as one most worthy,
And see that all vice ye doo punish and grieve.
For in this world I honour with you shall remain.
And g•od fame from you cannot refrain?
And after this life a greater Crown you shall attain.
¶ What hart can think: or what tongue can express?
The great goodness of God which is almighty:
Who sees this, and seeks not vice to suppress,
Honour, good fame, yea and life everlastingly.
Thy name be praised oh Lord therefore:
And to thee only be glory and honour.
¶ S'th Gods promise hath brought honour in to this place,
I will for a while leave you three alone:
For I must depart now for a little space,
But I shall come to you again anon. 
¶ Gods promise is infallible, his word is most true,
And to ground thereon a man may be bold:
As Scripture doth testify and declare unto you,
On which foundation your building you may behold.
For virtuous rulers the fruit of felicity do• reap:
And the reward of fame, &amp; honour to themselves they heap.
¶ Seeing we have now endued him with y• crown and sword,
Which is due unto him by Gods promise and word:
Let vs three sing unto God with one accord.
¶ To sing praises unto God it likes well me:
¶ And I also with you thereto doo agree.
A pleasant noise to Gods ears it must needs bring:
That Gods promise, Honour, and Virtuous life doo sing.
Life is but short hope not therein:
Virtue immortal seek for to win.
Who so to virtue doth apply,
Good Fame and Honour must obtain:
And also live eternally,
For Virtuous life this is the gain.
Life is but short, &amp;c.
Gods promise sure will never fail,
His holy word is a perfect ground,
The forte of virtue oh man assail,
Where treasure always doth abound.
Life is but short, &amp;c.
To thée alone be laud and praise,
Oh Lord thou art so merciful:
Who never failed at all assays,
To aid and help the pitiful.
Life is but short hope not therein:
Trim merchandise trim trim, trim merchandise trim trim,
He may sing this as oft as he thinks good.
¶ Mary heer is merchandise who list for to buy any,
Come see for your love and buy for your money.
This is the land which I must distribute anon:
According to my promise or I beg on.
For why Tom tospot since he went hence:
Hath incr•sed a Noble just unto nine pence.
And Rate roister, it may none otherwise be chosen:
Hath brought a pack of wul to a saite pair of hosen.
This is good thrift learn it who shall:
And now a couple of fellows, are come from cutpurse hall.
And there have they brought many a purse to wrack:
Lo hearts gear that will make their necks to crack.
For I promised Tom tospot and Raf roister a piece of Land,
Lo here it is ready in my right hand.
A wallet and Bottle, but it is not to be sold:
I told them before that of beggars manner it did hold.
And for Cutbert Cutpurse, and Pierce Pickpurse here is good fare,
This is the land of the two legged Mare.
Which I to them promised and divide it with discretion:
Shortly you shall see I will put them in possession.
How like you this Merchandise my moister? is not this trim?
A wallet, a Bottle, a Staff and a String.
In faith Raf roister is in good case as I suppose,
For he hath lost all that he hath, save his Doublet and his Hose,
And tom tospot is even at the same point:
For he would loose a Limb or ieopard a joint.
But behold yonder they come both, now all is gone and spent,
I know their errand and what is their intent.
¶ Well, be as be may is no banning,
But I fear that when this gear shall come to scanning.
The land to the which we did wholly trust:
Shall be gone from vs and we cast in the dust.
¶ Gogs blood if Nichol newfangle serve vs so:
we may say that we have had a shrewd blow.
For all that I had is now lost at dice,
My Sword, my Buckler and all at sink and sic,
My Cote, my Cloak, and my Hat also,
And now in my Doublet and my Hose I am fine to go.
Therefore if Nichol newfangle help not now at a pinch:
I am undone for land I have not an inch.
¶ By Gogs wounds even so it is with me:
I am in my doublet and my hose as ye see.
For all that I had doth lye at pledge for Ale:
By the mass I am as bare as my nail.
Not a Cross of money to bless me have I,
But I trow we shall meet with Nichol newfangle by and by.
¶ Turn hither turn hither, I say sir knave:
For I am even he that you so fain would have.
¶ What? Moister Nichole are you heer all this while▪
¶ I think I am here or else I doo thee beguile.
¶ So God help me I am glad that you be in sight:
For in faith your presence hath made my hartlight.
¶ I will make it lighter anon I trow:
My ma•sters I have a piece of land for you, doo you not know?
¶ Mary that is the cause of our hither resort:
For now we are void of all joy and comfort.
¶ You see in what care we now stand in,
And you he•rd vs also even now I when.
When〈…〉 good moister Nichol let vs have this land now:
And 〈…〉 our selves much bound unto you.
¶ You know that I this land must divide.
Which I shall doo but a while abide.
All 〈…〉 at pledge be:
And 〈…〉 a part of Dice hath made thee free.
〈…〉 come thou unto me. 
Base•se 〈◊〉 hast lost every whit at dice,
take you this 〈◊〉 to cary Bread and cheese.
And take thou this bottle and mark what I shall say:
If he chance 〈◊〉 the bread and Cheese by the way.
Doo thou in this matter follow my council:
Drink by the drink and knock him about the head with the bottle
And because that Rase is the Elder knave:
this staff also of me thou shalt have?
¶ But where is the land that to vs you promised:
¶ In faith good fellows my promise is performed.
¶ By Gogs blood I thought that it would be so,
¶ This must you have whether you will or no.
Or else fall to work with Shouel and with spade:
For begging now must be your chiefest trade.
¶ Gods hart can I away with this life?
To beg my bread from door to door?
I will rather cut my throat with a knife,
then I will live thus beggarly and poor.
By Gogs blood rather then I will it assay:
I will rob and steal, and keep the hye way.
¶ Well Raf roister seeing we be in this misery,
And labour we cannot and to beg it is a shame:
Yet better it is to beg most shamfully,
then to be hanged and to thievery our selves to frame.
¶ Now my masters learn to beware:
But like will to like quote the Devil to the Coliar.
¶ Oh Lord why did not I consider this before,
what should of roisting be the final end?
Now the house is stolen I shut the stable door,
Alas that I had time my life to amend.
Time I have I must needs confess,
But yet in misery that time must be spent:
Seeing that my life I would not redress,
But wholly in riot I have it all spent.
Wherefore I am now brought to this exigent.
But the time past cannot be called again this is no nay,
Wherefore all you here take example by me:
Time tarries no man but passes still away,
take time while time is for time doth flee:
Use well your youthful years and to virtues •ore agree.
For if I to virtue had any respect,
this misfortune to me could not have chanced:
But because unto vice I was a subject;
to no good fame may I now be advanced.
My credit also is now quite staunched.
Wherefore I would all men my woeful case might see:
that I to them a mirror might be.
¶ Oh all ye parents to you I doo say,
Have respect to your Children and for their education:
Least you answer therefore at the latter day,
And your meed shall be eternal damnation.
If my parents had brought me up in virtue and learning,
I should not have had this shameful end:
But all licentiously was my up bringing,
wherefore learn by me your faults to amend.
But neither in virtue, learning, nor yet honest trade▪
was I bred up my living for to get:
therefore in misery my life away must fade,
For vicious persons behold not the net.
I am in the snare I am caught with the gin:
And now it is too late, I cannot again begin.
¶ This gear would have been looked too before:
But now my masters you are upon the skore.
Be packing I say and get you hence:
Learn to say I pray good moister give me nine pence.
¶ Thou villain art only the colour of this woe:
therefore thou shalt have some thing of mere I go.
¶ Thou hast given me a Bottle here:
But thou shalt drink first of it be it Ale or beer.
¶ Take this of me before I go henee,
¶ Take this of me in part of recompense.
¶ Now am I driven to play the moister of fence.
Come no near me you knaves for your in:
Least I stick you both with this wood knife. 
Back I say back thou sturdy beggar:
body of me they have tan away my dagger
¶ Now in faith you whoreson take heed I you acu•se:
How you doo any more young men entice.
¶ Now farewell thou hast thy just meed:
¶ Now we go a begging God send vs good speed.
¶ That upright judgment without parcialitie,
Be ministered duly to ill dooers and offenders:
I am one whose name is Severity,
Appointed a Judge to suppress evil dooers.
Not for hatred nor yet for malice:
But to advance virtue and suppress vice.
Wherefore Isidorus these words doth say:
Non est Iudex si in eo non est Iusticia.
He is not a Judge that Justice doth want:
But he that truth and equity doth plant.
Tully all these words doth express:
which words are very true doubtless.
Semper iniquus est, queen autinuidet aut •auet,
They 〈◊〉 ••rightful Judges all:
that are ei•her, ••uious or else partial.
¶ 〈…〉 up good sir for I have got a fall.
〈…〉 •au•e have you my friend thus beauily to groan
¶ O• sir I have good cause to make great moan.
Here 〈◊〉 too •allow•s but right now:
What • think have killed me I make God a vow.
〈…〉 alive or am I dead?
¶ Fellow it is more need for thee to be in thy bed.
Then to lye here in such so•• as thou dost:
¶ In faith I should have laid some of the knaves in the dust.
If I had your sword right now in presence:
I would hrue had a leg or an arm ere they had gon hence.
¶ Who is it that hath done thee this injury?
¶ A couple of beggars have done me this vilary.
¶ I see if severity should not be executed,
One man should not live by another:
If such injuries should not be con•uted.
The Child would not regard Father nor mother.
Give me thy hand and I will help thee,
¶ Hold fast your sword then I pray you heartily. 
¶ Now friend it appears unto me:
That you have been a travailer of the Country.
And such as doo travail doo hear of things done:
As well in the country as in the City of London.
How say you my friend can you tel any news?
¶ That can I, for I came lately from the stews.
There are knaves abroad you may believe me.
As in this place shortly you shall see.
No more words but mum and stand a while aside:
Yonder comes two knaves therefore abide.
¶ By gogs wounds if he help not now we are undone,
By the mas for my part I wot not where to run.
We be so pursued on every side:
that by gogs hart I wot not where to abide.
Every Constable is charged to make privy search:
So that if we may be got, we shall be thrown over the perch.
¶ If F•ichol newfangle help not now in our need:
we are like in our business full evil to speed.
therefore let vs make no more delay,
But seek him out of hand and be gone away,
¶ Soft my masters a while I you pray,
For I am heer for whom you doo seek:
For you know that like will never from like.
I promised you of late a piece of land:
Which by and by shall fall into your hand.
¶ What moister Nichol, how doo you to day?
‡ For the passion of God moister Nichol help to rid vs away,
And help vs to the land whereof you did say.
that we might make money of it by and by:
For out of the Realm we purpose to flee.
‡ Mary I will help you I swear by allhallowes:
I will not part from you till you come to the gallows.
Lo noble Severity these be they without doubt,
On whom this rumour of the every is gon about.
Therefore my masters heer is the snare:
that shall lead you to the land called the two legged mare.
¶ My friend hold them fast in that plight:
‡ Then come and help me with your sword, for I fear they will fight.
‡ Strive not my masters for it shall not avail:
But a while give care unto my counsel.
Your own words have condemned you for to dye:
therefore to God make you your selves ready.
And by and by I will send one which for your abusion,
Shall lead you to the place of execution.
‡ Help to tie their hāds before ye be gon. 
‡ Now they are bound I will send one to you anon. 
‡ Ah my masters how like you this play?
You shall take possession of your land to day.
I will help to bridle the two legged mare,
And both you for to ride need not to spare.
Now so God help me I swear by this Bread,
I marvel who shall play the knave when you twain be dead.
¶ Oh cursed caitiue borne in an ill hour,
Woe unto me that ever I did thee know:
For of all iniquity thou art the bower,
the seed of Satan thou dost always sow.
thou only hast given me the overthrow.
Woe worth the house wherein I was borne,
woe worth the time that ever I knew thee,
For now in misery I am forlorn.
Oh all youth take example by me.
Flee from evil company as from Serpent ye would flee:
For I to you all a mirror may be.
I have been daintily and delicately bred,
But nothing at all in virtues lore:
And now I am but a man dead,
Hanged I must be which grieves me full sore.
Note well the end of me therefore.
And you that fathers and Mothers be:
Bring not up your Children in to much liberty,
¶ Sith that by the law we are condemned,
Let vs call to God for his mercy and grace:
And exhort that all vice may be amended,
while we in this world have time and space.
And though our lives have licentiously been spent,
Yet at the last to God let vs call:
For he hears such as are ready to repent,
And desires not that sinners should fall.
Now are we ready to suffer, come when it shall.
¶ Come Hankin hangman let vs two cast lots,
And between vs divide a couple of coats.
take thou the one and the other shall be mine:
Come Hankin Hangman thou cainst in good time.
¶ Thou should have one (Nichol) I swear by the mass:
For thou bring work for me daily to pass.
And through thy means I get more cotes in a year:
then all my living is worth beside, I swear.
Therefore Nichol newfangle we depart never,
For like will to like quoth the Devil to the Collier.
¶ Now farewell Hankin hangman, farewell to thee:
¶ Farewell Nichol newfangle come you two with me.
¶ Ha, ha, ha, there is a brace of hounds well worth a dozen Crowns
behold the huntsman leads away:
I think in twenty towns, on hills and eke on downs,
they taken have their pray.
So well liked was their hunting on hill and eke on mountain.
that now they be up in a leace:
To keep within a string it is now a gay thing,
doo all you hold your peace.
Why then good gentle boy, how likest thou this play?
no more but say thy mind:
I swear by this day, if thou wilt this assay,
I will to thee be kind.
This is well brought to pass of me I swear by the mass,
some to hang and other some to beg:
I would I had Balams ass to cary me where I was,
how say you little Mec.
Raf roister and Tom tospot are not now worth a groat,
So well with them it is:
I would I had a pot for now I am so what,
by the ma•e I must go pis•e.
Philip fleming and Haunce hath danced a pretty dance,
that all is now spent out:
And now a great mischance came on while they did prance,
they lye sick of the gout.
And in a spittle house, with little Laurence louse,
they be fame to dwell:
if they eat a morsel of souse, or else a roasted mouse,
they think they doo fare well.
But as for pierce pickpurse, and cutbert cutpurse,
you saw them both right now:
with them it is much worse, for they doo ban and curse,
for the halter shall them bow.
Now if I had my nag, to see the world wag.
I would straight ride about:
Ginks doo fill the bag, I would not pass a rag,
to hit you on the snout.
¶ Ho, ho, ho, mine own boy make no more delay,
But leap upon my back straight way.
¶ Then who shall hold my stirrup while I go to horse?
¶ Tush for that doo thou not force,
Leap up I say, leap up quickly.
¶ Who ball who, and I will come by and by.
Now for a pair of spurs I would give a good groat:
to try whether the jade doth amble or trot.
Farewell my masters till I come again:
For now I must make a journey into Spain.
‡ Oh worthy Diadem▪ oh jewel most precious.
Oh virtue which doth all worldly things excel:
How worthy a treasure thou art to the virtuous
thy praise no pen can write no tongue tel.
For I who am called virtuous life,
Have in this world both honour and dignity:
Immortal fame of man, child and wife,
Daily waits and attends on me.
The commodity of virtue in me you may behold,
the enormities of vice you have also seen:
Therefore to make an end we may be bold,
And pray for our noble and virtuous Queen.
‡ To doo so virtuous life it is our bounden duty,
And because we must doo so before we doo end,
To aid vs therein Good fame comes verily,
which daily and hourly on you doth attend.
¶ Virtuous life doo what you list.
to pray or to sing I will you assist.
¶ O Lord of hostess, oh K•ng almighty,
Pour down thy grace upon our noble Queen:
Vanquish her foes Lord that daily and nightly,
through her thy laws may be sincerely seen.
‡ The honourable Counsel also O Lord preserve,
The Lords both of the Clergy and of the temporalitie:
Grant that with meekness they may thee serve,
Submitting to thee with all humility.
¶ Oh Lord preserve the commons of this Realm also,
Pour upon them thy heavenly grace:
To advance virtue and vice to overthrow,
that at the last in Heaven with thee they may have a place.

POets are scarce when Goddesses themselves
Are forced to leave their high and stately seats
Placed on the top of high Olympus Mount,
To seek them out, to pen their Champions praise.
The time hath been when Homers sugared Muse,
Did make each Echo to repeat his verse,
That every coward that durst crack a spear,
And Tilt and Turney for his Ladies sake,
Was painted out in colours of such price
As might become the proudest Potentate.
But now a days so irksome Idels slights,
And cursed charms have witched each students mind,
That death it is to any of them all,
If that their hands to penning you do call:
Oh Virgil, Virgil, were thou now alive,
Whose painful pen in stout Augustus days,
Did deign to let the base and silly flea
To scope away without thy praise of her.
I do not doubt but long or ere this time,
Alphonsus fame unto the heauen's should clime:
Alphonsus fame that man of Jove his seed,
Sprung from the loins of the immortal Gods,
Whose sire although he habit on the earth,
May claim a portion in the fiery Pole,
As well as any one what ere he be.
But setting by Alphonsus power divine,
What man alive or now amongst the ghoasts
Could countervail his courage and his strength?
But thou art dead, yea Virgil thou art gon:
And all his acts drowned in oblivion.
And all his acts drowned in oblivion?
No Venus no, though Poets prove unkind,
And loath to stand in penning of his deeds,
Yet rather then they shall be clean forgot,
I which was wont to sollow Cupids games
Will put in ur Mineruaes sacred Art,
And this my hand which used for to pen
The praise of love, and Cupids peerless power,
Will now begin to treat of bloody Mars,
Of doughty deeds and valiant victories.
But see whereas the stately Muses come,
Whose harmony doth very far surpass
The heavenly music of Appolloes pipe.
But what means this Melpomine her self
With all her sisters sound their Instruments,
Only excepted fair Calliope?
Who coming last &amp; hanging down her head,
Doth plainly show by outward actions
What secret sorrow doth torment her heart.
Calliope thou which so oft did croak,
How that such clients clustred to thy Court
By thick and threefold, as not any any one
Of all thy sisters might compare with thee:
Where be thy scholars now become I trow?
Where are they vanished in such sudden sort,
That while as we do play upon our strings,
You stand still lazing, and have nought to do?
Melpomine make you a why of that?
I know full oft you have Authors red,
The higher tree the sooner is his fall,
And they which first do flourish and bear sway,
Upon the sudden vanish clean away.
Mock on apace, my back is broad enough
To bear your flouts as many as they be.
That year is rare, that ne'er feels winters storms:
That tree is fertile which ne'er wants fruit.
And that same Muse hath heaped well in store:
Which never wants clients at her door.
But yet my sisters, when the surgent seas
Have ebde their fill, their waives do rise again
And fill their banks up to the very brims:
And when my pipe hath easd her self a while,
Such store of suitors shall my seat frequent,
That you shall see my scholars be not spent.
Spent (quoth you) sister, then we were too blame
If we should say your scholars all were spent:
But pray now tell me when your painful pen will rest enough?
When husbandmen sheer hogs.
Melpomine, Errato and the rest,
From thickest shrubs dame Venus did espy
The mortal hatred which you jointly bear
Unto your sister high Calliope.
What do you think if that the tree do bend,
It follows therefore that it needs must breaks
And since her pipe a little while doth rest,
It never shall be able for to sound?
Yes Muses yes, if that she will vouchsafe
To ente•…tain Dame Venus in her school,
And further me with her insti•…tions,
She shall have scholars which will deign to be
In any other Muses company.
Most sacred Venus do you doubt of that?
Cal•…op would think her three times blessed,
For to receive a Gods in her school,
Especially so high an one as you,
Which rules the earth, and guides the heavens too.
Then sound your pipes, and let vs bend our steps
Unto the top of high Pernassus hill,
And there together do our best deuoyr
For to describe Alphonsus warlike fame:
And in the manner of a Comedy,
Set down his noble valour presently.
As Venus wills, so bids Calliope.
And as you bid your sisters do agree.
My noble son, since first I did recount
The noble acts your predecessors did
In Are gone, against their war•…ke foes,
I never yet could see thee joy at all,
But hanging down thy head as malcontent:
Thy youthful days in mourning have been spent.
Tell me Alphonsus what might be the cause
That makes thee thus to pine away with care?
Hath old Carinus done thee any offence
In reckoning up these stories unto thee?
What ne'er a word 〈◊〉 •…mm? Alphonsus speak,
Unless your Fathers fatal day you seek.
Although dear father I have often vowed
Ne'er to unfold the secrets of my heart
To any man or woman, who some ere
Dwells underneath the circle of the •…kie:
Yet do your words so conjure me dear sire,
That needs I must fulfil that you require.
Then so it is, amongst the famous tales
Which you rehearsed done by our sires in war,
When as you came unto your fathers days,
With sobbing notes, with sighs &amp; blubbering tears,
And much ado, at length you thus began.
Next to Alphonsus should my father come,
For to possess the Diadem by right
Of Are gone, but that the wicked wretch
His younger brother, with aspiring mind,
By secret treason robbed him of his life,
And me his son, of that which was my due.
These words my sire, did so torment my mind,
As had I been with Ixion in hell,
The ravening bird could never plague me worse:
For ever since my mind hath troubled been
Which way I might revenge this traitorous fact,
And that recover which is ours by right.
Ah my Alphònsus never think on that,
In vain it is to sttiue against the stream,
The Crown is lost, and now in hucksters hands,
And all our hope is cast •…to the dust:
Bridle these thoughts, and learn the same of me,
A quiet life doth pass an Empery.
Yet noble father, ere Carinus brood
Shall brooke his foe for to vsu•… his seat,
Heel die the death with honour in the field,
And so his life and sorrows briefly end.
But did I know my froward fate were such,
A•… I should fail in this my just attempt:
This sword dear father should the Author be,
To make an end of this my Tragedy.
Therefore sweet sire, remain you here a while,
And let me walk my Fortune for to t•…e:
I do not doubt but ere the time be long,
Isle quite his cost, or else my self will die.
My noble son, since that thy mind is such
For to revenge thy fathers foul abuse,
As that my words may not a whit prevail
To stay thy journey, go with happy fate,
And soon return unto thy fathers Cell,
With such a t•…no as Iulius C•…are came
To noble Rome, when as he had achieved
The mighty Monarch of the triple wo•…lt,
Mean time Carinus in this silly grove 〈◊〉
Will spend his days with prayer and horizons,
To mighty Jove, to further thine intent:
Farewell dear son Alphonsu•… fare you well.
And is he gone? then hie Alphonsus hie,
To try thy fortune where thy fates do call:
A noble mind disdains to hide his head,
And let his foes triumph in his overthrow.
What loitering follow have we spied here?
Presume not will•…no 〈◊〉 her for to go,
Unless you do at length the same •…pent.
Villain sai•…t thou, nay vilain in thy throat:
What know •…ou skip•…ck whom thou vilain call?
A common vassal I 〈◊〉 villain call.
That shalt thou soon approve persuade thy self,
Or else isle die, or thou shalt die for me.
What do I dream, or do my dazzling eyes
Deceive me? First Alpho•…suss that I see?
Doth now Medea use her wonted charms
For to delude Albinius fantasy?
Or doth black Pluto king of dark Auerne,
Seek to flout m•… with his cou•…rfait?
His body like to Alphonsus framed is:
His face resembles much Alphonsus hew:
His noble mind declares him for no les.
Tic he indeed, wo worth Albinius,
Whose babbling tong hath caused his own annoy.
Why doth not Jove send from the glittering skies
His Thunder bolts to chastise this offence?
Why doth dame Terra cease with greedy jaws
To swallow up Albinius presently?
What •…ll I fly and hide my traitorous head,
From •…out Alphonsus whom I so misusde?
Or shall I •…old Tush yielding is in vain:
Nor can I fly, but he will follow me.
Then •…ast thy self down at his graces seete,
Confess thy fault, and ready make thy breast,
To entertain thy well de•…ued death.
What news my friend? why are you so blank
That erst before did vau•… it to the skies?
Pardon dear Lord, Albinius pardon craves
For this offence, which by the heave•… I vow,
Unwittingly I did unto your grace.
For had I known Alphonsus had been here,
Ere that my tongue had spoke so traitorously,
This hand should make my very •…uie to •…ie.
Rise up my f•…end, thy pardon soon is go•…
But prithi•… •…ll me what the •…avi might be•…
That in such s•…t thou e•…st 〈◊〉 m•…?
Have compassed the circle of the sky,
Isle clog their toongs, since nothing else will serve
To keep those wild and threatening speeches in.
Farewell Belinus, loke thou to thy self:
Alphonsus means to have thy Crown ere night.
What is he gone, the devil break his neck,
The fiends of hell torment his traitorous corpse:
Is this the quittance of Belinus grace,
Which he did show unto that thankless wre•…ch?
That runagate, that rachel, yea that thief,
For well I wot he hath robbed me of a Crown.
If ever he had sprung from gentle blood,
He would not thus misuse his favourer.
That •…nnag, that rachel, yea that thief?
Stay their sir King, your mouth runs over much,
It ill becomes the subject for to use
Such traitorous terms against his sovereign.
Know thou Belinus, that Carinus son,
Is neither rachel nor runagate,
But be thou sure, that ere the darksome night
Do drive God Phoebus to his Thetis lap,
Both thou and all the rest of this thy train,
Shall well repent the words which you have sane.
What traitorous villain dost thou threaten me?
Lay hold on him, and see he do not scope,
Isle teach the slave to know to whom he speaks.
To thee I speak, and to thy fellows all:
And though as now you have me in your power,
Yet doubt I not but that in little space,
These eyes shall see thy treason recompensed:
And then I mean to vaunt of our victory.
Nay proud Albinius, never build on that,
For though the Gods do chance for to appoyn•…
Alphonsus victor of Belinus land,
Yet shalt thou never live to see that day,
And therefore Fabius stand not lingering,
But presently slash off his traitorous head.
Slash off his head, as though Albinius head
Were then so easy to be slashed off.
In faith sir no, when you are gone and dead,
I hope to flourish like the pleasant spring.
Why how now Fabius, what do you stand in doubt,
To do the deed? what fear you? who dares seek•…
For to revenge his death on thee again,
Since that Belinus did command it so?
Or are you waxed so dainty, that you dare
Not use your sword for staining of your hands?
If it be so, then let me see thy sword,
And I will be his butcher for this time.
Now sir Albinius, are you of the mind
That erst you were? what do you look to see
And triumph in Belinus overthrow?
I hope the very sight of this my blade,
Hath changed your mind into an other tune.
Not so Belin•…s, I am constant still,
My mind is like to the Abeston stone,
Which if it once be heat in flames of fire,
Deineth to becommen cold again.
Even so am I, and shall be till I die,
And though I should see Attropos appear,
With knife in hand, •…o slit my thread in twain,
Yet ne'er Albinius should persuaded be,
But that Belinus he should vanquished see.
Nay then Albinius, since that words are vain
For to persuade you from this heresy:
Th•… sword shall sure put you out of doubt.
My noble Lords of Are gone, I know
You wonder much what might the occasion be,
That Laelius which erst did fly the field,
Doth egg you forwards now unto the wars,
But when you hear my reason, out of doubt
Yowle be content with this my rash attempt.
When first our King, Flaminius I do mean,
Did set upon the Neapolitans,
The worst of you did know and plainly see,
How far they were unable to withstand
The mighty forces of our royal Camp,
Until such time as froward fates we thought,
Although the fates ordained it for our gain,
Did send a stranger stout, whose sturdy blows
And force alone, did cause our overthrow.
But to our purpose, this same martial knight
Did hap to hit upon Flaminius,
And lent our King then such a friendly blow,
As that his gasping ghost to Limbo went:
Which when I saw, and seeking to revenge,
My noble Lords, did hap on such a prize:
As never King nor Kaiser got the like.
Laelius, of force we must confess to thee,
We wondered all, when as you did persuade
Vs to return unto the wars again,
But since our marvel is increased much
By these your words, which sound of happiness,
Therefore good Laelius make no tarrying,
But soon unfold thy happy chance to vs.
Then friends and fellow soldiers, hark to me.
When Laelius thought for to revenge his king,
On that same knight, in steed of mortal foe,
I found him for to be our chiefest friend.
Our chiefest friend, I hardly can believe,
That he which made such bloody massacres
Of stout Italians, can in any point
Bear friendship to the country or the King.
As for your king Miles, I hold with you,
He bear no friendship to Flaminius,
But hated him as bloody Attropos,
But for your country, Laelius doth a•…owe,
He loves as well as any other land:
Yea sure he loves it best of all the world:
And for because, you shall not think that I
Do say the same without a reason why,
Know that the knight Alphonsus hath to name,
Both son and heir to old Carinus, whom
Flaminius sire bereaved of his Crown:
Who did not seek the ruin of our host,
For any envy he did bear to vs,
But to revenge him on his mortal foe,
Which by the help of high celestial Jove,
He hath achieved with honour in the field.
Alphonsus man, isle ne'er persuaded be,
That ere Alphonsus may survive again,
Who with Carinus many years ago,
Was said to wander in the stigian fields.
Truth Noble Miles, these mine ears have heard,
For certainty reported unto me,
That old Carinus with his peerless son,
Had felt the sharpness of the sisters shears,
And had I not of late Alphonsus seen
In good estate, though all the world should say
He is alive, I would not credit them:
But fellow soldiers wend you back with me,
And let vs lurk within the secret shade,
Which he himself appointed unto vs:
And if you find my words to be vntroth,
Then let me die to recompense the wrong.
Laelius make haste, soldiers of Are gone,
Set lingering by, and come and help your King.
I mean Alphonsus, who whilst that he did
Pursue Belinus at the very heals,
Was suddenly environed about,
With all the troupes of mighty Millain land.
What news is this, and is it very so?
Is our Alphonsus yet in humane state,
Whom all the world did judge for to be dead.
Yet can I scarce give credit to the same.
Give credit, yes, and since the Millain Duke,
Hath broke his league of friendship, be he sure,
E•…e Cynthia, the shining lamp of night,
Doth scale the heavens with her horned head,
Both he and his shall very plainly see,
The league is burst, that caused long the glee.
And could the traitor harbour in his breast
Such mortal treason against his sovereign,
As when he should with fire and sword defend
Him from his foes, he seeks his overthrow?
March on my friends, I ne'er shall joy at all,
Until I see that bloody traitors fall.
NO sooner did Alphonsus with his troupe,
Set on the soldiers of Belinus band,
But that the fury of his sturdy blows,
Did strike such terror to their daunted minds,
That glad was he which could escape away,
With life and limb, forth of that bloody fray.
Belinus flies unto the Turkish soil,
To crave the aide of A•…r their King:
Unto the which he willingly did consent,
And sends Belinus with two other Kings,
To know god M•…ets pleasure in the same:
Mean time the Empress by Medeas help,
Did use such charms, that Amuracke did see
In soundest sleep, what afterword should hap:
How Amuracke did recompense her pain,
With mickle more, this Act shall show you plain.
Welcome brave youths of Are gone to me.
Yea welcome Miles, Lali•…s and the rest,
Whose prowess alone hath been the only cause,
That we like victors have subdued our foes.
Lord what a pleasure was it to my mind,
To see Bell•…s, which not long before,
Did with his threatenings terrify the Gods,
Now scudde apace, from warlike L•…lives blows:
The Duke of Millaine he increased our sport,
When doubting that his force was ouerweake,
For to withstand Miles, thy sturdy arm
Did give more credence to his frisking skippes
Then to the sharpness of his cutting blade,
What Fabius did to pleasure vs withal,
Albinius knows as well as I my self:
For well I wot, if that thy tyred steed
Had been as fresh and swift in foot as his,
He should have felt, yea known for certainty,
To check Alphonsus, did deserve to die.
Briefly my friends and fellow peers in arms,
The worst of you doo deserve such mickle praise,
As that my tongue denies for to set forth
The demi parcel of your valiant deeds,
So that perforce, I must by duty be
Bound to you all, for this your courtesy.
Not so my Lord, for if our willing arms
Have pleasured you so much, as you do say,
We have done nought but that becomes vs:
For to defend our mighty sovereign.
As for my part, I count my labour small,
Yea though it had been twice as much again,
Since that Alphonsus doth accept thereof.
Thanks worthy Miles, least all the world
Should count Alphonsus thankless for to be,
Laelius sit down, and Miles sit by him,
And that receive, the which your swords have won.
First, for because thou Laelius in these broils,
By martial might, did proud Belinus chase,
From troupe to troupe, from side to side about,
And never ceased from this thy swift pursuit,
Until thou had obtained his royal Crown,
Therefore I say, isle do thee nought but right,
And give thee that which thou well hast won.
Here doth Alphonsus Crown thee Laelius, King
Of Naples Town, with all dominions
That erst belonged to our traitorous foe,
That proud Belinus in his regiment.
Miles, thy share the Millaine Dukedom is,
For well I wot thy sword deserved no less.
The which Alphonsus frankly gives thee,
In presen•… of his warlike men at arms.
And if that any stomach this my deed,
Alphonsus can revenge thy wrong with speed.
Now to Albinius which in all my toils
I have both faithful, yea and friendly found:
Since that the Gods and friendly Fates assign
This present time to me to recompense,
The sundry pleasures thou hast done to me,
Sit down by them, and on thy faithful head
Receive the Crown of peerless Are gone.
Pardon dear Lord Albinius at this time,
It ill becomes me for to wear a Crown,
When as my Lord is destitute himself:
Why high Alphonsus, if I should receive
This Crown of you, the which high Jove forbid,
Where would your self obtain a Diadem?
Naples is gone, Millaine possessed is,
And nought is left for you but Are gone.
And nought is left for me but Are gone?
Yes surely yes, my Fates have so decreed,
That Are gone should be too base a thing,
For to obtain Alphonsus for her King.
What hear you not how that our scattered foes,
Belinus, Fabius, and the Millaine Duke,
Are fled for succour to the Turkish Court?
And think you not that Amurack their King,
Will with the mightiest power of all his land,
Seek to revenge Belinus overthrow?
Then doubt I not but ere these broils do end,
Alphonsus shall possess the Diadem
That Amurack now wears upon his head.
Sit down therefore and that receive of me:
The which the Fates appointed unto thee.
Thou king of heaven, which by thy power divine,
Dost see the secrets of each livers heart,
Bear record now with what unwilling mind,
I do receive the Crown of Are gone.
A rise Albinius King of Are gone,
Crowned by me, who till my gasping ghost
Do part asunder from my breathless corpse,
Will be thy shield against all men alive:
That for thy kingdom any way do strive.
Now since we have in such an happy hour
Confirmed three kings, come let vs march with speed
Into the City, for to celebrate
With mirth and joy, this blissful festival.
Welcome Belinus to thy cousins Court,
Whose late arrival in such posting pace,
Doth bring both joy and sorrow to vs all:
Sorrow because the Fates have been so false,
To let Alphonsus drive thee from thy land:
And joy, since that now mighty Mahomet
Hath given me cause to recompense at full,
The sundry pleasures I received of thee.
Therefore Belinus do but ask and have:
For Amurack doth grant what ere you crave.
Thou second sun which with thy glimsing beams
Doest clarify each corner of the earth,
Belinus comes not, as erst Midst did,
To mighty Bacchus, to desire of him,
That what so ere at any time he touched,
Might turned be to gold incontinent.
Nor do I come as Iuppiter did erst
Unto the Palace of Amphitrion,
For any fond or foul concupiscence,
Which I do bear to Alcumenaes hew.
But as poor Saturn, forced by mighty Jove
To fly his Country, banished and forlorn,
Did crave the aide of Troos, King of Troy.
So comes Belinus to high Amurack.
And if he can but once your aide obtain,
He turns with speed to Naples back again.
My aide Belinus, do you doubt of that?
If all the men at arms of Africa,
Of Asia likewise, will sufficient be,
To press the pomp of that usurping mate:
Assure thy self, thy kingdom shall be thine,
If Mahomet say I unto the same:
For were I sure to vanquish all our foes,
And find such spoils in ransacking their Tents,
As never any Kaiser did obtain,
Yet would I not set foot forth of this land:
If Mahomet our journey did withstand.
Nor would Belinus for King Croesus trash,
Wish Amurack to displease the Gods;
In pleasuring me in such à •…ling toy.
Then 〈◊〉 Monarch, if it be thy will,
Get the•… consents, and then the act fulfil.
You counsel well, therefore Belinus haste,
And Claramount go bear him company,
With King Arcastus, to the City walls.
Then bend with speed unto the darksome grove,
Where Mahomet this many a hundred year
Hath prophesied unto our ancestors,
Tell to his Priests, that Amurack your King
Is now selecting all his men at arms,
To set upon that proud Alphonsus troupe.
The cause you know, and can inform him well,
That makes me take these bloody broils in hand:
And say that I desire their sacred God,
That Mahomet which rules all the skies,
To send me word and that most speedily,
Which of vs shall obtain the victory.
You Baiazet go post away apace,
To Siria, Scythia, and Albany,
To Babylon, with Mesopotamia,
Asia, Armenia, and all other lands
Which owe their homage to high Amurack.
Charge all their Kings with expedition
To gather up the ch•…est men at arms
Which now remain in their dominions,
And on the twenty day of the same month,
To come and wait on Amurack their King,
At his chief City Constantinople.
Tell them moreover, that who so doth fail,
Nought else but death, from prison shall him bail.
What heavenly Music sounds in my ear?
Peace Amurack and hearken to the same.
Now have our charms fulfild our minds full well,
High Amurack is lulled fast a sleep,
And doubt I not, but ere he wakes again,
You shall perceive Medea did not gibe,
When as she put this practise in your mind:
Sit worthy Fast at thy spouse his feet.
Iphigina, sit thou on the other side:
What ere you see be not aghast thereat,
But bear in mind what Amurack doth chat.
Thou which were wont in Agamemnons days
To utter forth Apolloes Oracles
At sacred Delphos, Calchas I do mean,
I charge thee come, all lingering set aside,
Unless the penance you thereof abide.
I conjure thee by Plutoes loathsome lake,
By all the hags which harbour in the same,
By stinking Styx, and filthy Flegeton,
To come with speed, and truly to fulfil
That which Medea to thee straight shall will.
Thou wretched witch, when wilt thou make an end
Of troubling vs with these thy cursed Charms?
What meanst thou thus to call me from my grave?
Shall ne'er my ghost obtain his quiet rest?
Yes Calchas yes, your rest doth now approach
Medea means to trouble thee no more,
When as thou hast fulfild her mind this once.
Go get thee hence to Pluto back again,
And there enquire of the Destinies,
How Amurack shall speed in these his wars:
P•…use their books, and mark what is decreed
By Jove himself, and all his fellow Gods:
And when thou know the certainty thereof,
By fleshless visions show it presently
To Amuracke, in pain of penalty.
Forced by thy charm though with unwilling mind:
I hast to hell, the certainty to find.
Now peerless Princes I must needs be gon,
My hast•… buns•…esse calls me from this place.
There rests nought, but that you bear in mind,
What Amuracke in this his fit doth say.
For mark what dreaming madam he doth prate:
Assure your self, that that shall be his fate.
Though very loath to let thee so depart,
Farewell Medea, easer of my hart.
What Amurack doest thou begin to nod?
Is this the care that thou hast of thy wars?
As when thou should be prancing of thy steed,
To egg thy soldiers forward in thy wars:
Thou sit moping by the fire side?
See where thy Viceroys grovel on the ground.
Look where Belinus breaths forth his ghost.
Behold by millions how thy men do fall
Before Alphonsus like to silly sheep.
And can thou stand still lazing in this sort?
No proud Alphonsus, Amurack doth fly
To quail thy courage, and that speedily.
And doest thou think thou proud injurious God,
Mahound I mean since thy vain prophesies
Led Amurack into this doleful case,
To have his Princely feet in irons clapped,
Which erst the proudest kings were foe•…st to kiss,
That thou shalt scope unpunished for the same?
No no, as soon as by the help of Jove,
I scope this bondage, down go all thy groves.
Thy alters tumble round about the streets.
And whereas erst we sacrifisde to thee:
Now all the Turks thy mortal foes shall bee.
Behold the Gem and Jewel of mine age,
See where she comes, whose heavenly majesty
Doth far surpass the brave and gorgeous pace
Which Cytherea daughter unto Jove,
Did put in ur when as she had obtained
The golden Apple at the shepherds hands.
See worth•… Fast where Alphonsus stands,
Whose valiant courage could not daunted be,
Brid'ed my thoughts, and pressed down my rage,
In recompense of which my good intent,
I h•…ue received this woeful bamshment.
Wo•…l said I? nay happy I did mean,
If that be happy, which doth set one free:
For by this means, I do not doubt ere long,
But Fast shall with ease, revenge her wrong.
Come daughter come, my mind fore•…lleth me:
That Amuracke shall soon requited be.
Fast, what means this sudden flight of yours?
Why do you leave your husbands princely Court,
And all alone pass through these thickest groves,
More fit to harbour brutish savage beasts,
Then to receive so high a Queen as you?
Although your credit would not stay your steps,
From bending them into these daikish dens,
Yet should the danger which is imminent,
To every one which passes by these paths,
Keep you at home with fey•…e Iphigina.
What fool•…h toy hath tickled you to this?
I greatly fear some hap hath hit amiss.
No toy Medea, tickle•…d Faustaes head,
Nor foolish fancy led me to these grove•…s,
But •…nest business eggs my tree•…'ing steps,
To pass all dangers what so ere they be.
I banished am Medea, I which erst
Was Empress over all the triple world,
Am banished now from palace and from pomp,
But if the gods be fauou•…ers to me,
Ere twenty days, I will revenged be.
I thought as much, when first from thickest leaves,
I saw you trudging in such posting pace.
But to the purpose, what may be the cause,
Of this strnnge and sudden banishment?
The cause ask you, a simple cause god wo•…:
It was neither treason, nor yet felony,
But for because I blamed his foolishness.
I hear you say so, but I greatly fear,
Ere that your tale be brought unto an end,
You'll prove your self the author of the same:
But pray be brief, what folly did your spouse?
And how will you revenge your wrong on him?
What folly quoth you? such as never yet
Was heard or seen, since Phoebus first began shine,
You know how he was gathering in all haste,
His men at arms, to set upon the troupe
Of proud Alphonsus, yea you well do know,
How you and I did do the best we could,
To make him show vs in his drowsy dream,
What afterword should happen in his wars:
Much talk he had, which now I have forgot.
But at the length, this surely was decreed,
How that Alphonsus and Iphigina
Should be conioynd in Iunoes sacred rites,
Which when I heard, as one that did despise,
That such a traitor should be son to me,
I did rebuke my husband Amuracke.
And since my words could take no better place,
My sword with help of all Amazons,
Shall make him soon repent his foolishness.
This is the cause then of your banishment,
And now you go unto Amazon,
To gather all your may dens in array,
To set upon the migh•…ie Amuracke?
Oh foolish Queen, what meant you by this talk?
Those pra•…ing speeches have undone you all.
Do you disdain to have that migh•…ie Prince,
I mean Alphonsus, counted for your son?
I tell you Fast, he is borne to be,
The ruler of a mighty Monarchy:
I must confess the powers of Amuracke
Be great, his confines stretch both far and near,
Yet are they not the third part of the lands,
Which shall be ruled by Alphonsus hands,
And yet you deign to call him son in law:
But when you see his sharpe and cutting sword
Piercing the heart of this your gallant girl,
You'll curse the hour wherein you did deny,
To join Alphonsus with Iphigina.
The gods forbid, that ere it happen so.
Nay never pray, for it must happen so.
And is there then no remedy for it?
No none but one, &amp; that you have forsworn,
As though an oath can bridle so my mind,
As that I d•…re not break a thousand oaths,
For to eschew the danger imminent.
Speak good Medea, tell that way to me,
And I will do it, what so ere it be.
Then as already you have well decreed,
Pack to your country, and in readiness,
Select the army of Amazons,
When you have done, march with your female troupe
To Naples Town, to succour Amuracke,
And so by marriage of Iphigina,
You soon shall drive the danger clean away.
So shall we soon eschew Caribdis lake,
And headlong fall to Sillies greedy gulf,
I vowed before, and now do vow again:
Before I wed Alphonsus, Isle be slain.
In vain it is, to strive against the stream,
Fates must be followed, and the gods decree
Must needs take place in every kind of cause.
Therefore fair maid, bridle these brutish thoughts,
And learn to follow what the fates assign,
When Saturn heard that Iuppiter his son
Should drive him headlong from his heavenly seat,
Down to the bottom of the dark Auarne,
He did command his mother presently,
To do to death, the young and guiltless child:
But what of that, the mother •…oathd in heart,
For to commit so vile a massacre.
Yea Jove did live, and as the fates did say,
From heavenly seat, drove Saturn clean away.
What did avail the Castle all of Steel,
The which Acrisius caused to be made,
To keep his daughter Dane clogged in?
She was with child for all her Castles force,
And by that child, Acrisius her sire,
Was after slain, so did the fates require.
A thousand examples, I could bring hereof.
But Marble stones needs no colouring,
And that which every one doth know for truth,
Needs no examples to confirm the same.
That which the fates appoint must happen so,
Though heavenly Jove, and all the Gods say no.
Iphigina, she saith nought but truth,
Fates must be followed in their just decrees:
And therefore setting all delays aside,
Come let vs wend unto Amazon,
And gather up our forces out of hand.
Since Fast wills, and fates do so command,
Iphigina will never it withstand.
THus have you seen, how Amuracke himself,
Fast his wife, and every other King,
Which holds their seepters at the Turk his hands,
Are now in arms, intending to destroy
And bring to nought, the Prince of Are gone.
Charms have been used by wise Medeas art,
To know before what afterword shall hap,
And King Belinus with high Claramount,
Joined to Alphonsus, which with Princely pomp,
Doth rule and govern all the warlike Moors,
Are sent as Legates to god Mahomet,
To know his counsel in these high affairs.
Mahound proupk•… by Amurackes discourse,
Which as you heard, he in his dream did use,
Denies to play the Prophet any more,
But by the long in•…atie of his Priests,
He prophesies in such a crafty sort,
As that the hearers needs must laugh for sport.
Yet poor Belinus with his fellow Kings,
Did give such credence to that forged tale,
As that they lost their dearest lives thereby,
And Amuracke became a prisoner
Unto Alphonsus, as straight shall appear.
My fellow Priests of Mahounds holy house,
What can you judge of these strange miracles,
Which daily happen in this sacred seat?
Hark what a rumbling ratleth in our cares.
See flakes of fire proceeding from the mouth
Of Mahomet that God of peerless power.
Nor can I tell with all the wit I have,
What Mahomet by these his signs doth crave.
Thrice ten times Phoebus with his golden beams,
Hath compassed the circle of the sky,
Thrice ten times Ceres, hath her workmen hired,
And filled her barnes with frutefull crops of corn,
Since first in Priesthood I did lead my life:
Yet in this time I never heard before,
Such fearful sounds, nor saw such wondrous sights,
Nor can I tell, with all the wit I have,
What Mahomet by these his signs doth crave.
You cannot tell, nor will you seek to know,
Oh perverse Priest, how careless are you waxed?
As when my foes approach unto my gates,
You stand still talking of I cannot tell:
Go pack you hence, and meet the Turkish kings,
Which now are drawing to my Temple ward:
Tell them from me, God Mahomet is disposed
To prophecy no more to Amuracke,
Since that his tongue is waxen now so free,
As that it needs-must chat and rail at me.
Oh Mahomet, if all the solemn prayers
Which from our childhood we have offered th•…,
Can make thee call this sentence back again,
Bring not thy Priest into this dangerous state:
For when the Turk doth hear of this repulse,
We shall be sure to die the death therefore.
Thou say truth, go call the Princes in,
Isle prophecy unto them for this once,
But in such wise, as they shall neither boast,
Nor you be hurt in any kind of wise.
You Kings of Turkie, Mahomet our God,
By sacred science, having notice that
You were sent Legates from high Amuracke,
Unto this place, commanded vs his Priests,
That we should cause you make as mickle speed,
As well you might, to hear for certainty,
Of that shall happen to your King and ye.
For that intent we came into this place,
And since that, the mighty Mahomet
Is now at leisure for to tell the same,
Let vs make haste and take time while we may:
For mickle danger happens through delay.
Truth worthy king, and therefore you your self,
With your companions, kneel before this place,
And listen well what Mahomet doth say.
As you do will, we •…oyntly will obey.
Princes of Turkie, and Ambassadors
Of Amuracke, to mighty Mahomet,
I needs must muse, that you which e•…st have been
The readiest soldiers of the triple world,
Are now become so slack in your affairs,
As when you should with bloody blade in hand,
Be hacking he mes in thickest of your foes,
You stand still loitering in the Turkish soil.
What know you not, how that it is decreed,
By all the gods, and chiefly by my self•…
That you with triumph should all Crowned bee:
Make haste Kings, least when the fates do see,
How carlesly you do neglect their words,
They call a Counsel, and force Mahomet
Against his will some other thing to set.
Send Fabius back to Amuracke again,
To haste him forwards in his enterprise:
And march you on with all the troupes you have,
To Naples ward, to conquer Are gone.
For if you stay, both you and all your men,
Must needs be sent down straight to Limbo den.
Muse not brave kings at Mahomets discourse,
For mark what he forth of that mouth doth say,
Assure your self it needs must happen so.
Therefore make hast, go mount you on your steeds,
And set upon Alphonsus presently.
So shall you reap great honour for your pain:
And scope the scourge, which else the Fates ordain.
Then proud Alphonsus, look thou to thy Crown,
Belinus comes in glittering armour clad,
All ready pressed for to revenge the wrong
Which not long since, you offred unto him.
And since we have God Mahound on our side:
The victory must needs to vs betide.
Worthy Belinus, set such threats away,
And let vs haste as fast as horse can trot,
To set upon presumptuous Are gone.
You Fabius, hast as Mahound did command,
To Amuracke, with all the speed you may.
With willing mind I hasten on my way.
And thinking long till that we be in fight,
Belinus hastes to quail Alphonsus might.
No sooner had God P•…bus brightsome beams
Both Millaine land, and all the parts thereof.
Why then I doubt not but you can resolve
Me of a question that I shall demand.
I that I can, what ever that it be.
Then to be brief, not twenty winters past
When these my limbs which withered are with age,
Were in the prime and spring of all their youth,
I still desirous as voong gallants be,
To see the fashions of Arabia,
My native soil, and in this pilgrims weed,
Began to travel through vnkenned lands,
Much ground I past, and many soils I saw,
But when my feet in Millain land I set,
Such sumptuous triumphs daily there I saw,
As never in my life I found the like.
I pray good sir, what might the occasion bee:
That made the Millains make such mirth and glee?
This solemn joy whereof you now do speak,
Was not solemnised my friend in vain.
For at that time there came into the land,
The happiest tidings that they ere did hear.
For news was brought upon that solemn day,
Unto our Court, that Ferdinandus proud
Was slain himself, Carinus and his son
Were banished both for ever from Are gone:
And for these happy news that joy was made.
But what I pray did afterword become,
Of old Carinus with his banished son?
What hear you nothing of them all this while?
Yes too too much, the Millain Duke may say.
Alphonsus first by secret means did get
To be a soldier in Belinus wars:
Wherein he did behave himself so well,
As that he got the Crown of Are gone.
Which being got, he dispossessed also,
The King Belinus which had fostered him:
As for Carinus he is dead and gone,
I would his son were his companion.
A blister build upon that traitors tongue,
But for thy friendship which thou showed me,
Take that of me, I frankly give it thee.
Now will I haste to Naples with all speed,
To see if Fortune will so favour me,
To view Alphonsus in his happy state.
Fabius come hither, what is that thou say?
What did god Mahound prophecy to vs?
Why do our Viceroys wend unto the wars,
Before their king had notice of the same?
What do they think to play bob fool with me?
Or are they waxed so frolic now of late,
Since that they had the leading of our bands,
As that they think that mighty Amuracke
Dares do no other then to soothe them up?
Why speak thou not? what fond or frantic fit
Did make those careless Kings to venture it?
Pardon dear Lord, no frantic fit at all,
No frolic vain, nor no presumptuous mind,
Did make your Viceroys take these wars in hand.
But forced they were by Mahounds prophecy,
To do the same, or else resolve to die.
So sir, I hear you, but can scare believe
That Mahomet would charge them go before
Against Alphonsus with so small a troupe,
Whose number far exceeds king Xerxe•… troupe,
Yes Noble Lord, and more then that hee said,
That ere that you with these your warlike men,
Should come to bring your succour to the field:
Belinus, Claramount, and Arcastus too,
Should al be crowned with crowns of beaten gold,
And by•…no with triumphs round about their tēts.
With triumph man, did Mahound tell them so•…
Provost go carry Fabius presently,
Unto the Marshalsie, there let him rest,
Clapped sure and safe in fetters all of steel,
Till Amuracke discharge him from the same.
For be he sure, unless it happen so
As he did say, Mahound did prophecy,
By this my hand, forthwith the slave shall die.
Stay Provost stay, let Fabius alone,
More fitteth now, that every lusty lad
Be buckling on his helmet, then to stand
In carrying soldiers to the Marshalsie.
Why what art thou,
That dare once presume,
For to gainsay that Amuracke did bid?
I am my Lord,
The wretcheds man alive:
Borne underneath the Planet of mishap:
Erewhile, a soldier of Belinus band
But now.
What now?
The mirror of mishap:
Whose Captain is slain, and all his army dead:
Only excepted me unhappy wretch.
What news is this, and is Belinus Slain?
Is this the Crown which Mahomet did say,
He should with triumph wear upon his head?
Is this the honour which that cursed god
Did prophecy, should happen to them all?
Oh Dadalus, and were thou now alive,
To fasten wings upon high Amuracke,
Mahound should know, and that for certainty,
That turkish Kings can brooke no injury.
Tush tush my Lord,
I wonder what you mean,
Thus to exclaim against high Mahomet:
Isle lay my life, that ere this day be past,
You shall perceive, his tidings all be waste.
We shall perceive, accursed Fabius,
Suffice it not that thou hast been the man,
That first did beat those bibles in my brain,
But that to help me forward in my grief,
Thou seek to confirm so foul a lie.
Go get thee hence, and tell thy traitorous King
What gift you had, which did such tidings bring.
And now my Lords, since nothing else will serve,
Buckle your helmes, clap on your steeled coats,
Mount on your steeds, take Lances in your hands,
For Amuracke doth mean this very day,
Proud Mahomet with weapons to assay.
Mercy high Monarch, tic no time now
To spend the day in such vain threatenings,
Against our god, the mighty Mahomet:
More fitteth thee to place thy men at arms
In battle ray, for to withstand your foes,
Which now are drawing towards you with speed.
Hark how their drums with dub a dub do come,
To arms high Lord, and set these trifles by:
That you may set upon them valiantly.
And do they come you kings of Turkie?
Now is the time, in which your warlike arms
Must raise your names aboue the starry skies:
Call to your mind your predecessors acts,
Whose martial might, this many a hundred year,
Did keep those fearful dogs in dread and awe,
And let your weapons show Alphonsus plain,
That though that they be clapped up in clay,
Yet there be branches sprung up from those trees,
In Turkish land, which brooke no injuries.
Besides the same, remember with your selves,
What foes we have, not mighty Tamberlaine,
Nor soldiers trained up amongst the wars,
But fearful bodies, picked from their rural flock,
Which till this time were wholly ignorant
What weapons meant, or bloody Mars doth crave.
More would I say, but horses that be free,
Do need no spur•… and soldiers which themselves
Long and desire to buckle with the foe,
Do need no words to egg them to the same.
Besides the same, behold whereas our foes
Are marching towards vs most speedily.
Courage my Lords, ours is the victory.
Thou Pagan dog how dare thou be so bold
To set thy foot within Alphonsus land?
What art thou come to view thy wretched kings,
Whose traitorous heads bedecked my tents so well?
Or else thou hearing that on top thereof,
There is a place left vacant, art thou come
To have thy head possess the highest seat?
If it be so, lie down, and this my sword
Shall presently that honour thee afford.
If not, pack hence, or by the heavens I vow,
Both thou and thine shall very soon perceive,
That he that seeks to move my patience,
Must yield his life to thee for recompense.
Why proud Alphonsus, think thou Amurack
Whose mighty force doth terrify the Gods,
Can ere be found to turn his heals and fly
Away for fear, from such a boy as thou?
No no, although that Mars this mickle while
Hath fortified thy weak and feeble arm,
And Fortune oft hath viewed with friendly face,
Thy armies marching victors from the field,
Yet at the presence of high Amuracke,
Fortune shall change, and Mars that God of might
Shall succour me, and leave Alphonsus quite.
Pagan I say, thou greatly art deceived,
I clap up Fortune in a cage of gold,
To make her turn her wheel as I think best.
And as for Mars whom you do say will change,
He moping sits behind the kitchen door,
Pressed at command of every Skullians mouth•…
Who dares not stir, nor once to move a whit
For fear Alphonsus then should stomach it.
Blasphemous dog, I wonder that the earth
Doth cease from renting underneath thy feet,
What froward fortune happened on your side:
I hope your king in safety doth abide?
I noble madam, Amurack doth live:
And long I hope he shall enjoy his life.
But yet I fear, unless more succour come,
We shall both loose our king and sovereign.
How so king Crocon, dost thou speak in jest?
To prove if Fast would lament his death?
Or else hath any thing hoped him amiss?
Speak quickly Crocon what the cause might be,
That thou dost utter forth these words to me?
Then worthy Fast know, that Amuracke
Our mighty king, and your approved spouse,
Pricked with desire of everlasting fame,
As he was pressing in the thickest ranks
Of Aragonians, was with much ado
At length took prisoner, by Alphonsus hands.
So that unless you succour soon do bring,
You loose your spouse, and we shall want our king.
Oh hapless hap, oh dire and cruel fate!
What injury hath Amuracke my sire
Done to the Gods, which now I know are wrath?
Although unjustly and without a cause.
For well I wot, not any other king
Which now doth live, or since the world begun
Did sway a sceptre, had a greater care
To please the Gods, then mighty Amuracke.
And for to quite our fathers great good will,
Seek they thu•… basely all his fame to spill.
Iphigina, leave off these woeful tunes,
It is not words can cure and ease this wound:
But warlike swords, not tears, but sturdy spears:
High Amuracke is prisoner to our foes.
What then? think you that our Amazons
Joined with the forces of the Turkish troupe,
Are not sufficient for to set him free?
Yes daughter yes, I mean not for to sleep,
Until he is free, or we him company keep.
March on my mates.
How now Alphonsus, you which never yet
Could meet your equal in the feats of arms,
How haps it now that in such sudden sort
You fly the presence of a silly maid?
What have you found mine arm of such a force,
As that you think your body ouerweake
For to withstand the fury of my blows?
Or do you else disdain to fight with me:
For staining of your high nobility?
No dainty dame, I wold not have thee think
That ever thou or any other wight,
Shall live to see Alphnosus fly the field
From any king or Kaiser who some ere,
First will I die in thickest of my foe,
Before I will disbase mine honour so.
Nor do I scorn thou gods for to stain
My prowes with thee, although it be a shame
For knights to combat with the female sect.
But love sweet mouse hath so benumbd my wit,
That though I would, I must refrain from it.
I thought as much when first I came to wars,
Your noble acts were fitter to be writ
Within the Tables of dame Venus sun,
Then in God Mars his warlike registers.
When as your Lords are hacking helm es abroad,
And make their spears to shiver in the air,
Your mind is busied in fond Cupids toys.
Come on I faith, isle teach you for to know
We came to fight, and not to love I trow.
Nay virgin stay, and if thou wilt vouchsafe
To entertain Alphonsus simple suit,
Thou shalt ere long be Monarch of the world:
All christened kings, with all your Pagan dogs
Shall bend their knees unto Iphigina.
The Indian soil shall be thine at command,
Where every step thou set on the ground,
Shall be received on the golden mines.
Rich Pactolus that river of account,
Which doth descend from top of Tiuole mount,
Shall be thine own, and all the world beside:
If you will grant to be Alphonsus bride.
Alphonsus bride? nay villain do not think
That fame or riches can so rule my thoughts,
As for to make me love and fancy him
Whom I do hate, and in such sort despise,
As if my death could bring to pass his bain:
I would not long from Plutoes port remain.
Nay then proud peacock since thou art so stou•…,
As that entreaty will not move thy mind
For to consent to be my wedded spouse,
Thou shalt in spite of Gods and Fortune too,
Serve high. Alphonsus as a concubine.
Isle rather die then ever that shall hap.
And thou shalt die unless it come to pas.
Nay Amurack this is no time to jar,
Although thy wife did in her frantic mood
Use speeches which might better have been spared,
Yet do thou not judge the same time to be
A season to requite that injury:
More fitteth thee with all the wit thou hast,
To call to mind which way thou moist release
Thy self, thy wife, and fair Iphigina,
Forth of the power of stout Alphonsus hands.
For well I wot, since first you breathed breath,
You never were so no the snares of death.
Now Amurack, •…our high and kingly seat,
Your to•…all sceptre, and your stately Crown,
Your mighty Country, and your men at arms,
Be conquered all, and can no succour bring.
Put then no trust in these same paltry toys:
But call to mind that thou a prisoner art:
Clapped up in chains, whose life and deaths depends
Upon the hands of thy most mortal foe.
Then take thou heed that what some ere he say,
Thou doest not once presume for to gainsay.
Away you fool, think you your cursed-charmes
Can bridle so the mind of Amuracke,
As that he will stand croaching to his foe?
No no, be sure that if that beggars brat
Do dare but once to contrary my will,
Isle make him soon in heart for to repent,
That ere such words against Amuracke he spent.
Then since thou dost disdain my good advise,
Look to thy self, and if you fare amiss
Remember that Medea counsel gave,
Which might you safe from all those perils save.
But Fast you, as well you have begun,
Beware you follow still your friends advise.
If that Alphonsus do desire of thee
To have your daughter for his wedded spouse,
Beware you do not once the same gainsay:
Unless with death he do your rashness pay.
No worthy wight, first Fast means to die,
Before Alphonsus she will contrary.
Why then farewell, but you Iphigina,
Beware you do not ouersqueamish wax,
When as your mother gives her consent.
The Gods forbid that ere I should gainsay
That which Medea bids me to obey.
Now Amurack the proud blasphemous dogs
(For so •…ou termed vs) which did brawl and rail
Against God Mars, and fickle Fortunes wheel,
Have got the gole for all your solemn prayers:
Your self are prisoner, which as then did think
That all the forces of the triple world,
Were insufficient to fulfil the same.
How like you this? is Fortune of such might,
Or hath God Mars such force or power divine,
As that he can with all the power he hath,
Set thee and thine forth of Alphonsus hands?
I do not think but that your hopes so small,
As that you would with very willing mind,
Yield for my spouse the fair Iphigina,
On that condition, that without delay,
Fast and you may scotfree scope away.
What think thou vilain that high Amurack
Bears such a mind, as for the fear of death,
Heel yield his daughter, yea his only joy,
Into the hands of such a dunghill Knight?
No traitor no, for as now I lie
Clapped up in Irons, and with bolts of steel:
Yet do there lurk within the Turkish soil,
Such troupes of soldiers, that with small ado,
Theile set me scotfree from your men and you.
Villain say thou, traitor &amp; dunghill knight,
Now by the heavens, since that thou dost deny,
For to fulfil that which in gentle wise
Alphonsus craves, both thou and all thy train
Shall with your lives requite that injury.
Albinius lay hold of Amuracke,
And carry him to prison presently,
There to remain until I do return
Into my tent, for by high Jove I vow,
Unless he wax more calmer out of hand,
His head amongst his fellow Kings shall stand.
No villain, think not that the fear of death
Shall make me calmer while I draw my breath.
Now Laelius, take you Iphigina,
Her mother Fast, with these other Kings,
And put them into prisons severally:
For Amuracks stout stomach shall undo,
Both he himself and all his other crew.
Oh sacred Prince, if that the salt-brine tears,
Distilling down poor Faustas withered cheeks,
What ne'er a word Alphonsus, art thou dumb?
O•… d•…th my presence so perturb thy mind,
That for because I come in Pilgrims weed,
You think each word which you do spend to me
A great disgrace unto your name to be?
Why speak thou not? if that my place you crave,
I will be gone and you my place shall have.
Nay father stay, the Gods of heaven forbid,
That ere Alphonsus should desire or wish
To have his absence whom he doth account
To be the Loadstone of his life.
What though the fates and fortune both in one,
Have been content to call your loving son,
From beggars state, unto this princely seat,
Should I therefore disdain my aged sire?
No first both Crown and life I will detest,
Before such venom breed within my breast.
What erst I did, the sudden joy I took,
To see Carinus in such happy state,
Did make me do, and nothing else at all,
High Jove himself do I to witness call.
These words are vain, I knew as much before:
But yet Alphonsus I must wonder needs,
That you whose years are prove to Cupids snares,
Can suffer such a Gods as this dame,
Thus for to shed such store of Crystal tears.
Believe me son, although my years be spent,
Her sighs and sobs in twain my heart do rent.
Like power dear father had she over me,
Until for love, I looking to receive
Love back again, not only was denied,
But also taunted in most spiteful sort:
Which made me loathe that which I erst did love,
As she her self, with all her friends shall prove.
How now Alphonsus, you which have so lōg
Been trained up in bloody broils of Mars,
What know you not, that Castles are not won
At first assault, and women are not wooed
When first their suitors profer love to them:
As for my part, I should account that maid
A wanton wench, inconstant lewd and light,
That yields the field, before she venture fight.
Especially unto her mortal foe,
As you were then unto Iphigina.
But for because I see you fitter are
To enter Lists and combat with your foes,
Then court fair Ladies in God Cupids tents,
Carinus means, your spokesman for to bee,
And if that she consent, you shall agree.
What you command,
Alphonsus must not fly:
Though otherwise perhaps he would deny.
Then dainty damsel stint these trickling tears,
Cease sighs and sobs, yea make a merry cheer,
Your pardon is already purchased:
So that you be not over curious
In granting to Alphonsus just demand.
Thanks mighty Prince, no curioser isle bee,
Then doth become a maid of my degree.
The Gods forbid that ere Carinus tongue
Should go about to make a maid consent
Unto the thing which modesty denies:
That which I ask, is neither hurt to thee,
Danger to parents, nor disgrace to friends,
But good and honest, and will profit bring,
To thee and those which lean unto that thing.
And that is this, since first Alphonsus eyes,
Did hap to glance upon your heavenly hew,
And saw the rare perfection of the same,
He hath desired to become your spouse.
Now if you will unto the same agree,
I dare assure you, that you shall be free.
Pardon dear Lord, the world goes very hard,
When women kind are forced for to woo,
If that your son had loved me so well,
Why did he not inform me of the same?
Why did he not? what have you clean forgot
What ample proffers he did make to you,
When hand to hand he did encounter you?
No worthy sir, I have not it forgot,
But Cupped cannot enter in the breast,
Where Mars before had took possession:
That was no time to talk of Venus games,
When all our fellows were pressed in the wars.
Well, let that pass, now can thou be con∣tent
To love Alphonsus, and become his spouse?
I if the high Alphonsus could vouchsafe
To entertain me as his wedded spouse.
If that he could? what dost thou doubt of that
Iason did jet when as he had obtained,
The golden fleece by wise Medeas art,
The Greeks rejoiced when they had subdued
The famous bulwarks of most stately Troy,
But all their mirth was nothing in respect
Of this my joy, since that I now have got,
That which I long desired in my heart.
But what says Fast to her daughters choice?
Fast doth say, the Gods have bin her friends
To let her live to see Iphigina
Bestowed so unto her hearts content.
Thanks mighty Empress for your gentleness,
And if Alphonsus can at any time
With all his power requite this courtesy,
You shall perceive how kindly he doth take
Your forwardness in this his happy chance.
Albinius go call forth Amuracke,
Weal see what he doth say unto this match.
Most mighty Turk, I with my warlike son
Alphonsus, loathing that so great a Prince
As you should live in such unseemly sort,
Have sent for you to profer life or death:
Life, if you do consent to our demand,
And death if that you dare gainsay the same,
Your wife, high Fast, with Iphigina,
Have given consent that this my warlike son
Should have your daughter for his bedfellow,
Now rests nought but that you do agree,
And so to purchase sure tranquillity.
Now Emu•…ack advise thee what thou say,
Bethink thee well what answer thou wilt make:
Thy life and death depends on thy words,
If thou deny to be Alphonsus sire,
Death is thy share: but if that thou consent,
Thy life is saved, consent? nay rather die.
Should I consent to give Iphigina
Into the hands of such a beggars brat?
What Amuracke thou dost deceive thy self,
Alphonsus is the son unto a King:
What then? the worthy of thy daughters love
She is agreed, and Fast is content:
Then Amuracke will not be discontent.
Here brave Alphonsus, take thou at my hand,
Iphigina, I give her unto thee:
And for her dowry, when her father die,
Thou shalt possess the Turkish Empery.
Take her I say, and live King Nestors years,
So would the Tu•…ke and all his Noble Peers.
Immo•…tall thanks I give unto your grace.
Now worthy Princes, since by help of Jove
On either side the wedding is decreed,
Come let vs wend to Naples speedily,
For to solemnise it with mirth and glee.
As you do will, we jointly do agree.
Now worthy Muses with unwilling mind,
Venus is forced to trudge to heavens again:
For luppiter that God of peerless power,
Proclaimed hath a solemn festival,
In honour of dame Danes luckless death:
Unto the which, in pain of his displeasure
He hath invited all the immortal Gods
And Goddesses, so that I must be there,
Unless I will his high displeasure bear:
You see Alphonsus hath with much ado,
At length obtained fair Iphigina
Of Amuracke her father, for his wife.
Who now are going to the Temple wards,
For to perfo•…me dame Iunoes sacred rites,
When•…e we will leave them till the feast be done:
Which in the heavens by this time is begun,
Mean time dear Muses, wander you not far•…
Forth of the path of high Pernassus hill:
That when I come to finish up his life,
You may be ready for to succour me.
Adieu dear dames, farewell Calltope.
A dieu you sacred Gods of the sky.
Well loving sisters, since that she is gone,
Come let vs haste unto Pernassus hill,
As Citherea did lately will.
Then make you haste her mind for to fulfil.

SInce thus through channels black of Limbo lake,
And deépe infernal floude of Stygian poole,
The ghastly Caron's boat transported back
Thy ghost, from Pluto's pits and glowming shades,
To former light once lost by Destnies doom:
Where proud Pendragon broylde with shameful lust,
Dispoylde theé erst of wife, of land, and life:
Now (Gorlois) work thy wish, cast here thy gaul,
Glut on revenge: thy wrath abhors delays.
What though (besides Pendragons poisoned end)
The vile reproach he wrought thee by thy phere,
Through deépe increase of crimes alike is plagued?
And that the shame thou suffredst for his lusts,
Rebounded back, and stifeleth in his stock?
Yet is not mischiefe's measure all fulfilde,
Nor wreak sufficient wrought: Thy murdered corse
And Dukedom reft, for heavier vengeance cries.
Come therefore blooms of settled mischiefs root,
Come each thing else, what fury can invent,
Wreak all at once, infect the ayre with plagues,
Till bad to worse, till worse to worst be turned.
Let mischiefs know no mean, nor plagues an end.
Let th'ofsprings sin exceéde the former stock:
Let none have time to hate his former fault,
But still with fresh supply let punished crime
Increase, till time it make a complete sin.
Go to: some fact, which no age shall allow,
Nor yet conceal: some fact must neédes be dared,
That for thy horror great and outrage fell
Thereof, may well beseem Pendragons brood.
And first, whiles Arthurs navies homewards flott
Triumphantly bedecked with Romaine spoils:
Let Guenouer express what frantic moods
Distract a wife, when wronging wedlockes rights,
Both fond and fell, she loves and loathes at once.
Let deépe despair pursue, till loathing life
Her hateful head in cowl and cloister lurk.
Let traitorous Mordred keépe his sire from shore.
Let Britain rest a pray for foreign powers
Let sword and fire still fed with mutual strife
Turn all the Kings to ghosts, let civil wars
And discord swell till all the realm be torn.
Even in that soil whereof my self was Duke,
Where first my spouse Igerna brake her vow,
Where this ungracious offspring was
In Cornwall, there, let Mordreds
Let Arthurs fatal wound bewray the wrong,
The murder vile, the rape of wife and weal,
Wherewith their sire incensed both Gods and man:
Thus, thus Pendragons seed so sown and reaped,
Thus cursed imps, ill borne, and worse consumed,
Shall render just revenge for parents crimes,
And penance due t'asswadge my swelling w•ath.
The whiles O Cassiopaea gempright sign,
Most sacred sight, and sweéte Celestial star,
This Clymat's joy, placed in imperial throne
With fragrant Olive branch portending peace:
And whosoe'r besides ye heavenly powers
(Her stately train with influence divine,
And mild aspect all prone to Britain• good)
Foreseé what present plagues doe threat this Isle:
Prevent not this my w•eake. For you their rest's
A happier age a thousand years to come:
An age for peace, religion, wealth, and •as,
When all the world shall wonder at your bliss:
That, that is yours. Leave this to Gorlois ghost.
And seé where com's one engine of my hate.
With moods and manners fit for my revenge.
AND dares he after nine years space return,
And seé her face, whom he so long disdain'de?
Was I then chose and wedded for his stale,
To look and ga•e for his retirelesse sails,
Puffed back, and flittering spread to every wind?
O wrong content with no revenge: seek out
Undared plagues, teach Mordred how to rage.
Attempt some bloody dreadful, irksome fact,
And such as Mordred would were rather his.
Why stayest? it must be done: let bridle go,
Frame out some trap beyond all vulgar guile,
Beyond Medea's wiles: attempt some fact,
That any wight unwildy of her self,
That any spouse unfaithful to her phere,
Durst ever attempt in most despair of weal.
Spare no revenge, b'it poison, knife, or fire.
Good Madame, temper these outrageous moods,
And let not will usurp, where wit should rule.
The wrath, that breaths blood, doth loath to lurk.
What reason most with holds, rage wrings perforce.
I am disdained: so will I not be long:
〈…〉, that he shall first arrive,
〈…〉 shall aforde him life.
〈…〉 lands, nor wars abroad
Sufficed for thy foil: yet shalt thou find
Far worse at home: Thy deépe displeased spouse.
What ever thou hast •ubdude in all thy stay,
This hand shall now subdue: then stay thy fill.
What's this? my mind recoils, and yrkes these threats:
Anger delays, my grief gins to assuage,
My fury faintes, and sacred wedlockes faith
Presents it self. Why shunst thou fearful wrath?
Add coals a fresh, preserve me to this avenge.
At lest exile thy self to realms unknown,
And steal his wealth to help thy banished state,
For flight is best. O base and hartlesse fear.
Theft? exile? flight? all these may Fortune send
Unsought: but thee beséemes more high revenge.
Come spiteful fiends, come heaps of furies fell,
Not one, by one, but all at once: my breast
Raves not enough: it likes me to be filed
With greater monsters yet. My hart doth throb:
My liver boils: some what my mind portendes,
Uncertain what: but whatsoever, it's huge.
So it excéede, be what it will: it's well.
Omit no plague, and none will be enough.
Wrong cannot be revenged, but by excess.
O spare this heate: you yeélde too much to rage,
You're too unjust: is there no mean in wrong?
Wrong claims a mean, when first you offer wrong.
The mean is vain, when wrong is in revenge.
Great harms cannot be hid, the grief is small,
That can re•eaue advise, or rule it self.
Hatred concealed doth often hap to hurt,
But once professed, it oftner fails revenge.
How better tho, were to repress your ire?
A Ladies best revenge is to forgive.
What mean is in your hate? how much so ever
You can invent, or dare: so much you hate.
And would you know what mean there is in hate?
Call love to mind, and seé what mean is there.
My love, redoubled love, and constant faith
Engaged unto Mordred works so deépe:
That both my hart and marrow quite be burnt,
And sinews dried with force of woontlesse flames,
Desire to joy him still, torments my mind:
Fear of his want doth and a double grief.
Lo here the love, that stirs this meanelesse hate.
Eschew it far: such love impugns the laws▪
Unlawful love doth like, when lawful lothes.
And is your love of husband quite extinct?
The greater flame must neédes delay the less.
Besides, his sore revenge I greatly fear.
How can you then attempt a fresh offence?
Who can appoint a stint to her offence?
But here the greatness of the fact should move.
The greater it, the fitter for my grief:
To kill your spouse?
A stranger, and a foe.
Your liedge and king?
He wants both Realm and Crown.
Nature affords not to your sex such strength.
Love, anguish, wrath, will soon afford enough.
What rage is this?
Such as himself shall rue.
Whom Gods doe press enough, will you annoy?
Whom Gods doe press, they bend: whom man annoys,
He breaks.
Your grief is more then his deserts:
Each fault requires an equal hate: be not severe,
Where crimes be light: as you have felt, so greéue.
And seémes it light to want him nine year space?
Then to be spoiled of one I hold more dear?
Think all to much, b'it ne'er so just, that feédes
Continual grief: the lasting woe is worst.
Yet let your highness shun these desperate moods,
Cast of this rage, and fell disposed mind.
Put not shame quite to flight, have some regard
Both of your sex, and future fame of life.
Use no such cruel thoughts, as far exceéde
A manly mind, much more a women's hart.
Well: shame is not so quite exiled, but that
I can, and will respect your sage advise.
Your Counsel I accept, give leave a while,
Till fiery wrath may s•ache, and rage relent.
THE love, that for his rage will not be ruled,
Must be restrained: fame shall receive no foil.
Let Arthur live, whereof to make him sure,
My self will dye, and so prevent his harms.
Why stayest thou thus amazed O slothful wrath?
Mischief is meant, dispatch it on thy self.
Her breast not yet appeasde from former rage
Hath changed her wrath, which wanting means to work
An others woe, (for such is furies wont,)
Seékes out his own, and raves upon it self.
Assuage (alas) that over fervent ire,
Through to much anger, you offend too much:
Thereby the rather you deserve to live,
For seéming worthy in your self to dye.
Death is decreéd: what kind of death, I doubt:
Whether to dround, or stifill up his breath.
On forcing blood, to dye with dint of knife.
All hope of prosperous hap is gone, my fame,
My faith, my spouse: no good is left vnlost:
My self am left, ther's left both seas and lands,
And sword, and fire, and chains, and choice of harms.
O gnawing easelesse grief. Who now can heal
My maimed mind? it must be healed by death.
No mischief must be done, whiles I be by,
Or if there must, there must be more then one.
If death it be you seek, I seéke, it too:
Alone you may not die, with me you may.
They, that will drive th'unwilling to their death,
Or frustrate death in those, that fine would die,
Offend alike. They spoil, that b•otelesse spare.
But will my tears and mornings move you nought?
Then is it best to die, when friends doe morn.
Each where is death: that, fates have well ordained,
That each man may bereave himself of life,
But none of death: death is so sure a doom:
A thousand ways doe guide vs to our graves.
Who then can ever come too late to that,
Whence, when h'is come, he never can return?
Or what avails to hasten on our ends,
And long for that, which destinies have sworn?
Look back in time, to late is to repent,
When furious rage hath once cut of the choice.
Death is an end of pain▪ no pain it self.
Is it meéte a plague, for such excessive wrong,
Should be so short? Soould one stroke answer all?
And would thou dye? Well: that contents the laws,
What then for Arthurs ire? What for thy fame,
Which thou hast stained? What for thy stock thou shamst?
Not death, nor life alone can give a full
Revenge: join both in one. Die: and yet live▪
Where pain may not be oft, let it be long.
Seéke out some lingering death, whereby, thy corse
May neither touch the dead, nor joy the quick.
Dye: but no common death: pass Natures bounds.
Set plaints aside, despair yeélds no relief.
The more you search a wound, the more it stings.
When guilty minds torment them selves, they heal:
Whiles wounds be cured, grief is a salve for grief.
Grief is no just esteémer of our deédes:
What so hath yet beéne done, proceédes from chance.
The mind, and not the chance, doth make th'unchast,
Then is your fault from Fate, you rest excusde:
None can be deémed faulty for her Fate.
No Fate, but manners fail, when we offend.
Impute mishaps to Fates, to manners faults.
Love is an error, that may blind the best.
A mighty error oft hath seémde a sin.
My death is vowed, and death must neédes take place.
But such a death, as stands with just remorse:
Death, to the world, and to her slippery joys:
A full divorce from all this Courtly pomp.
Where daily penance done for each offence,
May render due revenge for every wrong.
Which to accomplish: pray my deérest friends,
That they forthwith attired in saddest guise,
Conduct me to the Cloister next hereby,
There to profess, and to renounce the world.
Alas▪ What change were that, from Kingly rooffes
To Cloistered celles? To live, and die at once?
To want your stately troupes, your friends and kin?
To shun the shows and sights of stately Court.
To seé in sort alive, your Countries death?
Yea, what so'er even Death it self withdraws
From any else, that life with draws from you.
Yet since your highness is so fully bent,
I will obey, the whiles assuage your grief
THE hour which erst I always feared most,
The certain ruin of •ny desperate state,
Is happened now: why turnst thou (mind) thy back?
Why at the first assault doest thou recoil?
Trust to it: the angry Heavens contrive some spite,
And dreadful doom, t'augment thy cursed hap.
Oppose to each revenge thy guilty head,
And shun no pain nor plague fit for thy fact.
What should thou fear, that seést not what to hope?
No danger's left before, ell's at thy back.
He safely stands, that stands beyond his harms.
Thine (death) is all, that East, or West can seé,
For theé we live, our coming is not long,
Spare vs, but whiles we may prepare our graves,
Though thou were s•owe, we hasten of our selves.
The hour that gave, did also take our lives:
No sooner men, then mortal were we borne.
I seé mine end draws on, I feéle my plagues.
No plague for one ill borne, to dye as ill.
O Queéne! my sweéte associate in this plunge,
And desperate plight, behold, the time is come,
That either justifies our former faults,
Or shortly sets vs freé from every fear.
My fear is past, and wedlock love hath won.
Retire we thither yet, whence first we ought
Not to have stirred. Call back chaste faith again.
The way, that leads to good, is ne'er to late:
Who so repents, is guiltless of his crimes.
What means this course? Is Arthurs wedlock safe?
Or can he love, that hath just cause to hate?
That nothing else were to be feared:
Is most apparent, that he hates at home,
What ever he be, whose fancy strays abroad?
Think then, our love is not unknown to him:
Whereof what patience can be safely hopte?
Nor love, nor sovereignty can bear a peére.
Why dost thou still stir up my flames delayed?
His strays and errors must not move my mind.
A law for private men binds not the King.
What, that I ought not to condemn my liedge,
Nor can, thus guilty to mine own offence?
Where both have done amiss, both will relent.
He will forgive, that neédes must be forgiven.
A likely thing▪ your faults must make you friends:
What sets you both at odds, must join you both:
Think well he casts already for revenge,
And how to plague vs both. I know his law,
A Judge severe to vs, mild to himself.
What then avails you to return to late,
When you have past to far? You feéde vain hopes.
The further past, the more this fault is yours:
It served your turn, t'usurpe your fathers Crown.
His is the crime, whom crime stands most in steéde.
They, that conspire in faults offend a like:
Crime makes them equal, whom it jointly staines.
If for my sake you then partook my guilt,
You cannot guiltless seéme, the crime was joint.
Well should should she seéme most guiltless unto theé,
Whatever she be, that's guilty for thy sake.
The remnant of that sober mind, which thou
Had heretofore ne'er vanquished, yet resists.
Suppress for shame that impious mouth so taught,
And to much skilled t'abuse the wedded bed.
Look back to former Fates: Troy still had stood,
Had not her Prince made light of wedlocks lore.
The vice, that threw down Troy, doth threat thy Throne:
Take heéde: there Mordred stands, whence Paris fell.
Since that your highness knows for certain truth
What power your sire prepares to claim his right:
It neérely now concerns you to resolve
In humbliest sort to reconcile your self.
Against his return:
will war.
that lies in chaun••
I have as great a share in chance, as he.
His ways be blind, that makes chance his guide.
Whose refuge lies in chance, what dares he not?
Wars were a crime far worse then all the rest.
The safest passage is from bad to worse.
That were to pass too far, and put no mean.
He is a fool, that puts a mean in crimes.
But sword and fire would cause a common wound.
So sword and fire will often sear the soar.
Extremest cures must not be used first.
In desperate times, the headlong way is best.
You've many foes.
No more then faithful friends.
Trust to it, their faith will faint, where Fortune fails.
Where many men pretend a love to one,
Whose power may doe what good, and harm he will:
It is hard to say, which be his faithful friends.
Dame Flattery flitteth oft: she loves and hates
With time, a present friend an absent foe.
But yet i'll hope the best: Even then you fear
The worst▪ Fears follow hopes, as fumes doe flames.
Mischief is sometimes safe: but ne'er secure:
The wrongful Scepter's held with trembling hand.
Whose rule wants right, his safety's in his Sword.
For Sword and Sceptre comes to Kings at once.
The Kingliest point is to affect but right,
Weak is the Scepters hold, that seékes but right,
The ca•e whereof hath dangered many Crowns.
As much as water differed from the fire,
So much man's profit jars from what is just.
A freé recourse to wrong doth oft secure
The doubtful seat, and plucks down many a foe.
The Sword must seldom cease: a Sovereigns hand
Is scantly safe, but whiles it smites. Let him
Usurp no Crown, that likes a guiltless life:
Aspiring power and Justice •ield agreé.
He always fears, that shames to offer wrong.
What son would use such wrong against his sire?
Come son, come sire, I first prefer my self.
And since a wrong must be, then it excels,
When it is to gain a Crown. I hate a peére,
I loath, I yrke, I doe detest a head.
B'it Nature, be it Reason, be it Pride,
I love to rule: my mind nor with, nor by,
Nor after any claims, but chief and first.
Yet think what fame and grievous bruits would run
Of such disloyal and unjust attempts.
Fame goo's not with our Ghosts, the senseless soul
Once gone, neglects what vulgar bruit reports.
She is both light and vain.
She notes though.
She fears States.
She carps ne'er the less.
She's soon suppressed.
As soon she springs again,
Tongs are vntamde: and Fame is Envies Dog,
That absent barckes, and present fawns as fast.
It fearing dares, and yet hath never done,
But duress: though Death redeéme vs from all foes
Besides, yet Death redeémes vs not from Tongs.
Ever Arthur land, the Sea shall blush with blood.
And all the Stronds with smoking slaughters reéke.
Now (Mars) protect me in my first attempt.
If Mordred scope, this Realm shall want no wars.
Se• here the drifts of Gorlois Cornish Duke,
And deep desire to shake his Sovereigns Throne:
How foul his fall, how bitter his rebuke,
Whiles wife, and weal, and life, and all be gone?
He now in Hell tormented wants that good▪
Lo, lo the end of traitorous bones and blood.
Pendragon broylde with flames of filthy fires,
By Marlins mists enjoyed Igerna's bed,
Next spoiled Gorlois doubting his desires,
Then was himself through force of poison sped.
Who sows in sin, in sin shall reap his pain:
The Doom is sworn: Death guerdon's death again.
Whiles Arthur wars abroad and reapes renown,
Gueneuora prefers his sons desire.
And traitorous Mordred still usurps the Crown,
Affording fuel to her quenchless fire.
But Death's too good, and life too sweéte for thease,
That wanting both, should taste of neithers ease.
In Rome the gaping gulf would not decrease,
Till Curtius corse had closed her yawning •awes▪
In Th•b's the Rot and Murrain would not cease,
Till Laius brood had paid for breach of laws:
In Britain wars and discord will not stent:
Till Vther's line and offspring quite be spent.
1 IN the first Scene a Nuntio declares the success of Arth•• wars in France, and Mordred's foil that resisted his 〈◊〉.
2 In the second Scene Mordred enraged at the overthrow, v••eth a second battle, notwithstanding Conan's disswasio• the contrary.
3 In the third Scene Gawin (brother to Mordred by 〈…〉) with an Heralt from Arthur to imparle of peace, but 〈◊〉 some debate thereof peace is rejected.
4 In the fourth Scene the King of Ireland &amp; other foreign 〈◊〉 assure Mordred of their assistane against Arthur.
WHILES the Music sounded there came out of Mordred's 〈◊〉 man stately attired representing a King, who walking once 〈◊〉 Stage. Then out of the house appointed for Arthur, there came 〈◊〉 Nymphs apparelled accordingly, the first holding a Cornucopia in her han• second a golden branch of Olive, the third a sheaffe of Corn. These 〈◊〉 one after another offered these presents to the King who seemefully refu••
After the which there came a man bareheaded, with black long shagged hair down to his shoulders, apparelled with an Irish Jacket and shirt, having an Irish dagger by his side and a dart in his hand. Who first with a threatening countenance looking about, and then spying the King, did furiously chase and drive him into Mordreds house. The King represented Mordred. The three Nymphs with their proffers the treatise of peace, for the which Arthur sent Gawin with an Herald unto Mordred who rejected it: The Irish man signified Revenge and Fury which Mordred conceived after his foil on the Shores, whereunto Mordred headlong yields himself.
LO here at length the stately type of Troy,
And Britain land the promised seat of Brute.
Decked with so many spoils of conquered Kings.
Hail native soil, these nine years space vnseéne:
To theé hath long renowned Rome at last
Held up her hands, bereft of former pomp.
But first inflamed with wonted valures heate,
Amidst our sorest s•edge and thickest broils,
She stoutly fought, and fiercely waged wars.
Tiberius courage gave, upbraiding oft
The Roman force, their wonted luck, and long
Retained rule, by wars throughout the world.
What shame it were, since such achieved spoils,
And conquests gained both far and wide, to want
Of courage then, when most it should be moved.
How Britains erst paid tribute for their peace,
But now rebel, and dare them at their doors:
For what was France but theirs? Herewith incensed
They fiercely raved, and bent their force a fresh.
Which Arthur spying, cried with thundering voice,
Fie, (Britains) fie: what hath bewitched you thus?
So many Nations foiled, must Romans foil?
What sloth is this? Have you forgot to war,
Which ne'er knew hour of peace? Turn to your foes,
Where you may bath in blood, and fight your fill.
Let courage work: what can he not that dares?
Thus he puissant guide in doubtful wars,
A shamde to shun his foes, inflamed his friends.
Then yeélding to his stately Stead the reigns,
He furious drives the Romaine troupes about:
He plies each place, least Fates mought alter ought,
Pursuing hap, and urging each success.
He yeélds in nought, but instantly persists
In all attempts, wherein what so withstands
His wish, he joys to work a way by wrack.
And matching death to death, no passage seeks,
But what destruction works, with blade or blood.
He scorns the yielded way, he fiercely raves
To break and bruise the ranks in thickest throngs,
All headlong bent, and prone to present spoil.
The foes enforced withstand: but much dismayed
They senseless fight, whiles millions lose their lives.
At length Tiberius, pierced with point of spear,
Doth bleéding fall, engoard with deadly wound.
Hereat the rest recoil, and headlong fly,
Each man to save himself. The battle quails
And Britains win unto their most renown.
Then Arthur took Tiberius breathless Corse,
And sent it to the Senators at Rome,
With charge to say: This is the tribute due
Which Arthur ought, as time hereafter serves,
He'll pay the like again: the whiles he rests
Your debtor thus. But O! this this sweéte success
Pursued with greater harms, turned soon to sour.
For lo: when foreign soils and seas were past
With safe return, and that the King should land:
Who, but his only son (O outrage rare)
With huge host withstood him at the shore?
There were prepared the foreign aides from far,
There were the borrowed powers of divers Kings,
There were our parents, brethren, sons and kin,
Their wrath, their ire, there Mordred was thy rage.
Where erst we sought abroad for foes to foil,
Behold, our Fates had sent vs foes unsought.
When foreign Realms supplanted want supply:
O blessed Home, that hath such boon in store.
But let this part of Arthurs prowess lurk,
Nor let it ever appear by my report,
What monstrous mischiefs rave in civil wars.
O rather let due tears, and wailings want:
Let all in silence sink, what hence ensued.
What best deserves mention here, is this:
That Mordred vanquished trusted to his flight,
That Arthur each where victor is returned.
And lo: where Mordred comes with heavy head,
He wields no slender weight that wields a Crown.
ANd hath he won? Be Stronds &amp; shores possessed?
Is Mordred foiled? the realm is yet vnwonne:
And Mordred lives reserved for Arthurs death:
Well: t'was my first conflict: I knew not yet
What wars required: but now my sword is fleshed,
And taught to gore and bath in hoatest blood.
Then think not Arthur that the Crown is won:
Thy first success may rue our next assault.
Even at our next encounter (hap when twill)
I vow by Heaven, by Earth, by Hell, by all,
That either thou, or I, or both shall 〈◊〉.
Nought should be rashly vowed against your sire.
Whose breast is freé from rage may soon b'aduisde.
The best redress for rage is to relent.
Tic better for a King to kill his foes.
So that the Subjects also judge them foes.
The Subjects must not judge their Kings decrees.
The Subjects force is great.
Greater the Kings.
The more you may, the more you ought to fear.
He is a fool, that fears what he may.
Not what you may, but what you ought is just,
He that amongst so many, so unjust,
Seeks to be just, seeks peril to him self.
A greater peril comes by breach of laws.
The Laws doe licence as the Sovereign lists.
Lest ought he list, whom laws doe licence most.
Imperial power abhors to be restrained.
As much doe meaner rooms to be compelled.
The Fates have heaved and raised my force on high.
The gentler should you press those, that are low.
I would be feared:
The cause why Subjects hate.
A Kingdom's kept by fear.
And lost by hate.
He fears as man himself, whom many fear.
The timorous Subject dares attempt no chaundge.
What dares not desperate dread?
What torture threats.
O spare, it were saffer to be loved.
As safe
To be obaide.
Whiles you command but well.
Where Rulers dare command but what is well:
Power is but prayer, commandment but request.
If power be ioynde with right, men must obey.
My will must go for right.
If they assent.
My sword shall force assent:
No Gods forbid.
What? shall I stand whiles Arthur sheads my blood?
And must I yield my neck unto the Axe?
Whom Fates constrain, let him forgo his bliss:
But he that neédlesse yields unto his bane,
When he may shun, doth well deserve to loose
The good he cannot use: who would sustain
A baser life, that may maintain the best?
We cannot part the Crown: A regal Throne
Is not for two: The Sceptre fits but one.
But whether is the fitter of vs two,
That must our swords decern: and shortly shall.
How much were you to be renowned more,
If casting off these ruinous attempts,
You would take care howe to supply the loss,
Which former wars, and foreign broils have wrought.
Howe to deserve the peoples hearts with peace,
With quiet rest, and deépe desired ease.
Not to increase the rage that long hath raignde,
Nor to destroy the realm, you seek to rule.
Your Father reared it up, you pluck it down.
You loose your Country whiles you win it thus:
To make it yours, you strive to make it none.
Where Kings impose too much, the commons grudge:
Goodwill withdraws, assent becomes but slow.
Must I to gain renown, incur my plague,
Or hoping praise sustain an exiles life?
Must I for Countries ease disease my self,
Or for their love despise my own estate?
No. Tic my hap that Britain serves my turn,
That fear of me doth make the Subjects crouch,
That what they grudge, they do constrained yield.
If their assents be slow, my wrath is swift,
Whom favour fails to bend, let fury break.
If they be yet to learn, let terror teach,
What Kings may doe, what Subjects ought to bear.
Then is a Kingdom at a wished staye,
When whatsoever the Sovereign wills, or nils,
Men be compelde as well to praise, as bear,
And Subjects wills enforced against their wills.
But who so seeks true praise, and just renown,
Would rather seek their praising hearts, then tongues.
True praise may happen to the basest groom,
A forced praise to none, but to a Prince.
I wish that most, that Subjects most rapine.
But yet where wars doe threaten your estate,
There needs friends to fortify your Crown.
Each Crown is made of that attractive mold,
That of it self it draws a full defence.
That is a just, and no vsupred Crown.
And better were an exiles life, then thus
Disloyally to wrong you Sire and Liedge.
Think not that impious crimes can prosper long,
A time they scope, in time they be repaid.
The hugest crimes bring best success to some.
Those some be rare.
Why may not I be rare?
It was their hap.
It is my hope.
But hope
May miss, where hap doth hurl.
So hap may hit,
Where hope doth aim.
But hap is last, and rules
The stern.
So hope is first, and hoists the sail.
Yet fear: the first and last doe sealed agreé.
Nay dare: the first and last have many means.
But cease at length: your speech molests me much:
My mind is fixed. Give Mordred leave to doe.
What Conan neither can allow, nor like.
But lo an Herald sent from Arthurs host:
Gods grant his message may portend our good.
YOUR Sire (O Prince) considering what distress,
The Realm sustains by both your mutual wars,
Hath sent your brother Gawin Albane King
To treat of truce, and to imparle of peace.
Speak brother: what commandment sends my Sire?
What message doe you bring? My life, or death?
A message far vnmeéte, most neédefull tho.
The Sire commands not, where the Son rebels:
His love descends too deépe to wish your death.
And mine ascends to high to wish his life.
Yet thus he offreth: though your faults be great,
And most disloyal to his deépe abuse:
Yet yeélde your self: he'il be as prone to grace,
As you to ruth: An Uncle, Sire, and Liedge.
And fitter were your due submission done,
Then wrongful wars to reeve his right and Realm.
It is my fault, that he doth want his right:
It is his own, to vex the Realm with wars.
It is his right, that he attempts to seéke:
It is your wrong▪ that drives him thereto.
It is his insatiate mind, that is not so content,
Which hath so many Kingdoms more besides.
The more you ought to tremble at his power.
The greater is my conquest, if I win.
The more your foil, if you should hap to loose.
For Arthurs fame, and vallure's such, as you
Should rather imitate, or at the least
Envy, if hope of better fancies failed.
For whereas Envy reigns, though it ripens,
Yet doth it fear a greater then it self.
He that envies the valor of his foe,
Detects a want of valor in himself.
He fondly fights, that fights with such a foe,
Where it were a shame to loose, no praise to win:
But with a famous foe, succeéde what will,
To win is great renown, to loose less foil.
His conquests, were they more, dismay me not:
The oftner they have beéne, the more they threat.
No danger can be thought both safe, and oft:
And who hath oftner waged wars then he?
Escapes secure him not: he owes the price:
Whom chance hath often mist, chance hits at length
Or, if that Chance have furthered his success,
So may she mine: for Chance hath made me king.
As Chance hath made you King, so Chance may change.
Provide for peace: that's it the highest piers,
No state except, even Conquerors ought to seéke.
Remember Arthurs strength, his conquests late,
His fiery mind, his high aspiring heart.
Mark then the odds: he expert, you untried:
He ripe, you greéne: yield you, whiles yet you may,
He will not yield: he wins his peace with wars.
If Chance may change, his Chance was last to win▪
The likelier now to loose: his haughty heart
And mind I know: I feéle mine own no less.
As for his strength, and skill, I leave to hap:
Where many meéte, it lies not all in one.
What though he vanquished have the Romaine troupes?
That boots him not: him self is vanquished here.
Then weigh your words again: if Conquerors ought
To seéke for peace: The Conquered must perforce.
But he'ill not yeélde, he'il purchase peace with wars.
Well: yield that will: I neither will, nor can:
Come peace, come wars, choose him: my danger's his,
His saffetie mine, our states doe stand alike.
If peace be good, as good for him, as me:
If wars be good, as good for me, as him.
What Cursed wars (alas) were those, wherein
Both son and sire should so oppose themselves?
Him, whom you now unhappy man pursue,
If you should win, your self would first bewail.
Give him his Crown, to keep it peril breeds.
The Crown Isle keep my self: ensue what will:
Death must be once: how soon, I lest respect.
He best provides that can beware in time,
Not why, nor when: but whence, and where he false.
What fool, to live a year or twain in rest,
Would loose the state, and honour of a Crown?
Consider then your Fathers grief, and want:
Whom you bereave of Kingdom, Realm, and Crown.
Trust me: a huge and mighty kingdom tic,
To bear the want of Kingdom, Realm, and Crown.
A common want, which works each worldlings woe,
That many have too much, but none enough.
It were his praise, could he be so content▪
Which makes you guilty of the greater wrong.
Wherefore think on the doubtful state of wars,
Where Mars hath sway, he keeps no certain course.
Sometimes he lets the weaker to prevail,
Some times the stronger stoups: hope, fear, and rage
With eylesse lot rules all, uncertain good,
Most certain harms, be his assured hippos.
No luck can last, now here, now their it lights:
No state alike, Chance blindly snatches all,
And Fortune makes guilty whom she lists.
Since therefore fear, and hope, and hap in wars
Be all obscure, till their success be seen:
Your speech doth rather drive me on to try,
And trust them all, mine only refuge now.
And fear you not so strange and uncouth wars?
No, were they wars that grew from out the ground.
Nor yet your sire so huge, your self so small?
The smallest axe may fell the hugest oak.
Nor that in felling him, your self may fall?
He falls well, that falling fells his foe.
Nor common Chance whereto each man is thrall?
Small manhood were to turn my back to Chance,
Nor that, if Chance afflict, kings brooke it not?
I bear no breast so vnpreparde for harms.
Even that I hold the kingliest point of all,
To brooke afflictions well: And by how much
The more his state and tottering Empire sagges,
To fix so much the faster foot on ground.
No fear but doth foreiudge, and many fall
Into their Fate, whiles they doe fear their Fate.
Where courage quails, the fear exceeds the harm,
Yea worse than war it self, is fear of war.
War seems sweet to such as have not tried:
But wisdom wills we should forecast the worst.
The end allows the act: that plot is wise,
That knows his means, and least relies on Chance.
Eschew the course where error lurks, their grows
But grief, where pain is spent, no hope to speed.
Strive not aboue your strength: for where your force
Is over matched with your attempts, it faints,
And fruitless leaves, what bootless it began.
All things are ruled in constant course: No Fate
But is foreset, The first day leads the last.
No wisdom then: but difference in conceit,
Which works in many men, as many minds.
You love the mean, and follow virtues race:
I like the top, and aim at greater bliss.
You rest content, my mind aspires to more:
In brief, you fear, I hope: you doubt, I dare.
Since then the sagest counsels are but strifes,
Where equal wits may wrest each side alike,
Let counsel go: my purpose must proceed:
Each likes his course, mine own doth like me best.
Wherefore ever Arthur breath, or gather strength,
Assault we him: least he assault vs first.
He either must destroy, or be destroyed.
The mischiefe's in the midst: catch he that can.
But will no reason rule that desperate mind?
A f••kle mind that every reason rules.
I rest resolved: and to my Sire say thus:
If here he stay but three days to an end,
And not forthwith discharge his band and host,
Tic Mordreds oath: assure himself to die.
But if he find his courage so to serve,
As for to stand to his defence with force:
In Cornwall if he dare, I'll try it out.
O strange contempt: like as the craggy rock,
Resists the streams, and flings the weltering waives
Aloof, so he reiects and scorns my words.
LO, where (as they decreéd) my faithful friends
Have kept their time, be all your powers repaird?
They be: and all with ardent minds to Mars.
They cry for wars, and longing for th'allarme
Even now they wish t'incounter with their foes.
What could be wished for more? Puissant King.
For your great help and valiant Irish force,
If I obtain the conquest in these wars,
Whereas my father claims a tribute due
Out of your Realm, I here renounce it quite.
And if assistance neéde in doubtful times,
I will not fail to aide you with the like.
It doth suffice me to discharge my Realm,
Or at the least to wreak me on my foes.
I rather like to live your friend and pier,
Then rest in Arthurs homage and disgrace.
Right noble Duke, through whom the Saxons vow
Their lives with mine, for my defence in wars:
If we prevail and may subdue our foes:
I will in lieu of your so high deserts,
Give you and yours all British lands that lie
Between the flood of Humber, and the Scots.
Besides as much in Kent as Horsus and
Hengistus had, when Vortigern was King.
Your gracious proffers I accept with thanks,
Not for the gain, but that the good desire
I have henceforth to be your subject here,
May thereby take effect: which I esteem
More then the rule I bear in Saxon soil.
(Renowned Lord) for your right hardy Pests,
And chosen warriors to maintain my cause,
If our attempts receive a good success,
The Albane Crown I give to you and yours.
Your highness bounty in so high degreé,
Were cause enough to move me to my best.
But sure your self, without regard of meéde,
Should find both me and mine at your command.
Lord Gilla, if my hope may take success,
And that I be thereby undoubted King,
The Cornish Dukedom I allot to you.
My Liedge to further your desired attempts,
I joyfully shall spend my dearest blood.
The rather, that I found the King your Sire
So heavy Lord to me, and all my stock.
Since then our rest is on it, and we agreéd
To war it out: what rests now but blows?
Drive Destnies on with swords, Mars frames the means,
Henceforth what Mordred may, now lies in you.
Ere long if Mars ensue with good success,
Look whatsoever it be, that Arthur claims,
By right, a wrong, or conquests gained with blood,
In Britain, or abroad is mine to give.
To show I would have said: I cannot give,
What every hand must give unto it self.
Whereof who lists to purchase any share,
Now let him seéke and win it with his Sword:
The Fates have laid it open in the field.
What Stars (O Heavens) or Poles, or Powers divine
Doe grant so great rewards for those that win?
Since then our common good, and each mans care
Requires our joint assistance in these toils:
Shall we not hazard our extremest hap,
And rather spend our Fates, then spare our foes?
The cause, I care for most, is chiefly yours:
This hand and hart shall make mine own secure.
That man shall seé me foiled by my self,
What ever he be, that seés my foe vnfoilde.
Fear not the field because of Mordreds faults,
Nor shrink one jot the more for Arthurs right.
Full safely Fortune guides many a guilt,
And Fates have none but wretches whom they wrench.
Wherefore make speéde to cheer your Soldiers harts,
That to their fires you yet may add more flames.
The side that seékes to win in civil wars,
Must not content it self with wonted heate.
WOuld God your highness had beéne more advised,
Ere too much will had drawn your wits too far:
Then had no wars indangerd you, nor yours,
Nor Mordreds cause required foreign care.
A troubled head: my mind revolts to fear,
And bears my body back: I inwards f•éle my fall.
My thoughts misgeue me much: down terror: I
Perceive mine end: and desperate though I must
Despise Despair, and somewhat hopeless hope.
The more I doubt, the more I dare: by fear
I find the fact is fittest for my fame.
What though I be a ruin to the Realm,
And fall my self therewith? No better end.
His last mishaps doe make a man secure.
Such was King Priams end, who, when he dyed,
Closed and wrapped up his Kingdom in his death.
A solemn pomp, and fit for Mordreds mind,
To be a grave and tomb to all his Realm.
Ye Princely Peéres extolled to seats of State,
Seéke not the fair, that soon will turn to foul:
Oft is the fall of high and hovering Fate,
And rare the room, which time doth not control.
The safest seat is not on highest hill,
Where winds, and storms, and thunders thumpe their ill.
Far safer were to follow sound advise,
Then for such pride to pay so dear a price.
The mounting mind that climes the haughty cliftes,
And soaring seékes the tip of lofty type,
Intoxicats the brain with guiddy drifts,
Then rolls, and reéles, and falls at length plum ripe.
Lo: heaving hie is of so small forecast,
To totter first, and tumble down at last.
Yet Paegasus still reares himself on hie,
And coltishly doth kick the clouds in Sky.
Who saw the grief engraven in a Crown,
Or knew the bad and bane whereto it's bound:
Would never stick to throw and fling it down,
Nor once vouchsafe to heave it from the ground.
Such is the sweéte of this ambitious power,
No sooner had, then turned eftsoones to sour:
Achieved with envy, exercised with hate,
Guarded with fear, supported with debate.
O restless race of high aspiring head,
O worthless rule both pitied and envied:
How many Millions to their loss you lead:
With love and lure of Kingdoms bliss untried?
So things untasted cause a quenchless thirst,
Which, were they known, would be refused first,
Yea, oft we seé, yet seéing cannot shone
The fact, we find as fondly dared, as donne.
1 IN the first Scene Cador and Howell incite and exhort Are∣thur unto war: Who moved with Fatherly affection to∣wards his son, notwithstanding their persuasions resolves upon peace.
2 In the second Scene, an Herald is sent from Mordred to com∣maund Arthur to discharge his armies under pain of death, or otherwise if he dare, to try it by Battle.
3 In the third Scene Arthur calls his Assistants and Soldiers together, whom he exhorted to pursue their foes.
4 In the fourth Scene Arthur between grief and despair recall∣ueth to war.
DVring the Music after the second Act. There came upon the stage two gentlemen attired in peaceable manner, which brought with them a Table, Carpet, and Cloth: and then having covered the Table they furnished it with incense on the one end, and banqueting dishes on the o∣there end: Next there came two gentlemen apparelled like Soldiers with two naked Swords in their hands, the which they laid a cross upon the Table. Then there came two sumptuously attired and warrelike, who, spying this preparation smelled the incense and tasted the banquet. During the which there came a Messenger and delivered certain letters to those two that fed on the daineties: who, after they had well viewed and perused the letters, furiously flung the banquet under feet▪ and violently snatching the Swords unto them, they hastily went their way. By the first two that brought in the banquet was meant the servant of Peace, by the second two were meant the servant of War: By the two last were meant Arthur and Cador, By the Messenger and his Letters was meant the defiance from Mordred.
IS this the welcome that my Realm prepares?
Be these the thanks I win for all my wars?
Thus to forbid me land? to slay my friends?
To make their blood distain my Country shores?
My son (belike) least that our force should faint
For want of wars, prepared vs wars himself.
He thought (perhaps) it mought impair our fame,
If none rebeld, whose fotle might praise our power.
Is this the fruit of Mordreds forward youth,
And tender age discreet beyond his years?
O false and guilfull life, O crafty world:
How cunningly conuaiest thou fraud unseen?
Thambicious seems meek, the wanton chaste,
Disguised vice for virtue vents it self.
Thus (Art•••) thus hath Fortune plaid her part,
Blind for thy weal, clear sighted for thy woe.
Thy kingdome's gone, thy phere affords no faith,
Thy son rebels, of all thy wonted pomp
No •ot is left, and Fortune hides her face.
No place is left for prosperous plight, mishaps
Have room and ways to run and walk at will.
Lo (Cador) both our states, your daughter's trust,
My sonn's respect, our hopes reposed in both.
The time (puissant Prince) permits not now
To moan our wrongs, or search each several sore.
Since Arthur thus hath ransacked all abroad,
What marvel first, if Mordred rave at home?
When far and near your wars had worn the world,
What wars were left for him, but civil wars,
All which requires revenge with sword and fire,
And to pursue your foes with presence force.
In just attempts Mars gives a rightful doom.
Nay rather (Cador) let them run their race,
And leave the Heavens revengers of my wrong.
Since Britains prosperous state is thus debasde
In servile sort to Mordreds cursed pride,
Let me be thrall, and lead a private life:
None can refuse the yoke his Country bears.
But as for wars, insooth my flesh abhors,
To bid the battle to my proper blood.
Great is the love, which nature doth enforce
From kin to kin, but most from sire to son.
The noble neck disdains the servile yoke,
Where rule hath pleased, subjection seems strange.
A King ought always to prefer his Realm,
Before the love he bears to kin or son.
Your Realm destroyed is near restored again,
But time may send you kine and sons enough.
How hard it is to rule th'aspiring mind,
And what a kingly point it seems to those,
Whose Lordly hands the stately Sceptre sways,
Still to pursue the drift they first decreed:
My wonted mind and kingdom lets me know.
Think not, but if you drive this hazard on,
He desperate will resolve to win or die:
Whereof who knows which were the greater guilt,
The sire to slay the son, or son the sire.
If bloody Mars doe so extremely sway,
That either son or sire must needs be slain,
Give Law the choice: let him die that deserves.
Each impotent affection notes a want.
No worse a vice then lenity in Kings,
Remiss indulgence soon undoes a Realm.
He teaches how to sin, that winks at sins,
And bids offend, that suffered an offence.
The only hope of leave increases crimes,
And he that pardoned one, emboldened all
To break the Laws. Each patience fostered wrongs.
But vice severely punished faints at foot,
And creeps no further off, then where it falls.
One sower example will prevent more vice,
Than all the best persuasions in the world.
Rough rigour looks out right, and still prevails:
Smooth mildness looks too many ways to thrive.
Wherefore since Mordreds crimes have wronged the Laws
In so extreme a sort, as is too strange:
Let right and justice rule with rigours aide,
And work his wrack at length, although too late:
That damning Laws, so damned by the Laws,
Hee may receive his deep deserved doom.
So let it fare with all, that dare the like:
Let sword, let fire, let torments be their end.
Severity upholds both Realm and rule.
Ah too severe, far from a Fathers mind.
Compassion is as fit for Kings as wrath.
Laws must not lower. Rule oft admitted ruth.
So hate, as if there were yet cause to love:
Take not their lives as foes, which may be friends.
To spoil my son were to despoil my self:
Oft, whiles we seek our foes, we seek our foils.
Let's rather seek how to allure his mind
With good deserts: deserts may win the worst.
Where Cato first had saved a thief from death,
And after was himself condemned to die:
When else not one would execute the doom,
Who but the thief did undertake the task?
If too much bounty work so bad effects
In thankless friends, what for a ruthless foe?
Let Laws have still their course, the ill disposed
Grudge at their lives, to whom they owe too much.
But yet where men with reconciled minds
Renew their love with recontinued grace,
Atonement frames them friends of former foes,
And makes the moods of swelling wrath to swag.
No faster friendship, than that grows from grief,
When melting minds with mutual ruth relent.
How close the severed skin vnites again,
When salves have smoothly heald the former hurts?
I never yet saw hurt so smoothly heald,
But that the scar bewraid the former wound:
Yea, where the salve did soonest close the skin,
The sore was oftner covered up than cured.
Which festering deep and filed within, at last
With sudden breach grew greater than at first,
What then for minds, which have revenging moods,
And ne'er forget the cross they forced bear?
Whereto if reconcilement come, it makes
The t'one secure, whiles t'other works his will.
Atonement sealed defeats, but oft defers
Revenge: beware a reconciled foe.
Well, what avails to linger in this life,
Which Fortune but reserues for greater grief?
This breath draws on but matter of mishap:
Death only frees the guiltless from anoies.
Who so hath felt the force of greedy Fates,
And dur'de the last decree of grisly death,
Shall never yield his captive arms to chains,
Ner drawn in triumph deck the victors pomp.
What mean these words? Is Arthur forced to fear,
Is this the fruit of your continual wars,
Even from the first remembrance of your youth?
My youth (I grant) and prime of budding years
Puffed up with pride and fond desire of praise,
Foreweéning nought what perils might ensue,
Adventured all, and roughed to will the reigns.
But now this age requires a sager course,
And will advised by harms to wisdom yeélds.
Those swelling spirits the self same cause which first
Set them on gog, even Fortunes favours quaild.
And now mine oftenest skips doe scare me most,
I fear the trappe, whereat I oft have tripped:
Experience tells me plain that Chance is frail,
And oft, the better past, the worse to come.
Resist these doubts: tic ill to yield to harms.
It is safest then to dare when most you fear.
As safe sometimes to fear, when most we dare.
A causeless courage gives repentance place.
If Fortune fawns.
Each way on me she frowns.
For win I, loose I, both procure my grief.
Put case you win, what grief?
Admit I doe,
What joy?
Then may you rule.
When I may 〈◊〉
To rule is much.
Small if we covet nought.
Who covets not a Crown.
He that discerns
The sword aloft.
That hangs fast.
But by
A hair.
Right holds it up.
Wrong pulls it do•
The Commons help the King.
They sometimes hurt.
At least the Peers.
Sealed, if allegiance want.
Yet Sovereignty.
Not, if allegiance fail.
Doube not, the Realm is yours.
T'was mine till now.
And shall be still.
If Mordred list.
It were we•
Your crown were won.
Perhaps tic bettes lost.
The name of rule should move a princely mind.
Trust me, bad things have often glorious names.
The greatest good that Fortune can afford.
A dangerous good that wisdom would eschew.
Yet weigh the hearesaie of the old renown,
And Fame the Wonderer of the former age:
Which still extols the facts of worthiest wights,
Preferring no deserts before your deeds.
Even she exhorts you to this new attempts,
Which left untried your winnings be but loss.
Small credit will be given of matters past
To Fame, the Flatterer of the former age.
Were all believed which antique bruit imports,
Yet wisdom weighs the peril joint to praise:
Rare is the Fame (mark well all ages gone)
Which hath not hurt the house it most enhaun'st.
Besides, Fame's but a blast that sounds a while,
And quickly stints, and then is quite forgot.
Look whatsoever our virtues have achieved,
The Chaos vast and greédy time devours.
To day all Europe rings of Arthurs praise:
T'wilbe as hushed, as if I ne'er had beéne.
What boots it then to venture life or limb,
For that, which neédes ever long we leave, or loose,
Can blind affection so much blear the wise,
Or love of graceless Son so witch the Sire?
That what concerns the honour of a Prince
With Countries good and Subjects just request,
Should lightly be contemned by a King?
When Lucius sent but for his tribute due,
You went with thirteéne Kings to root him out:
Have Romaines, for requiring but their own,
Abode your nine years brunts: Shall Mordred scope,
That wronged you thus in honour, Queéne, and Realm?
Were this no cause to stir a King to wrath,
Yet should your Conquests late achieved against Rome
Inflame your mind with thirst of full revenge.
Indeéde, continual wars have chafte our minds,
And good success hath bred impatient moods.
Rome puffs vs up, and makes vs too too fierce:
There, Britains, there we stand, whence Rome did fall.
Thou Lucius make me proud, thou heau'st my mind:
But what? shall I esteéme a Crown ought else,
Then as a gorgeous Crest of easelesse Helm,
Or as some brittel mould of glorious pomp,
Or glittering glass, which, whiles it shines, it breaks?
All this a sudden Chance may dash, and not
Perhaps with thirteéne Kings, or in nine years:
All may not find so slow and lingering Fates.
What, that my Country cries for due remorse
And some relief for long sustained toils?
By Seas and Lands I daily wrought her wreck,
And sparelesse spent her life on every foe.
Eche where my Soldiers perished, whilst I won:
Throughout the world my Conquest was their spoil.
A fair reward for all their deaths, for all
Their wars abroad, to give them civil wars.
What boots it them reserved from foreign foils
To die at home? What end of ruthelesse rage?
At least let age, and Nature worn to nought,
Provide at length their graves with wished groans.
Pity their hoary hairs, their feéble fists,
Their withered limbs, their strengths consumed in Camp.
Must they still end their lives amongst the blades?
Rests there no other Fate whiles Arthur reigns?
What deéme you me? a fury sedde with blood,
Or some Ciclopian borne and bred for brawls?
Think on the mind, that Arthur bears to peace:
Can Arthur please you no where but in wars?
Be witness Heavens how far it is from my mind,
Therewith to spoil or sack my native soil:
I cannot yeélde, it brookes not in my breast,
To seek her ruin, whom I erst have ruled.
What relics now so ever both civil broils,
And foreign wars have left, let those remain:
They are few enough, and Britains fall too fast.
LO here an Herald sent from Mordreds Camp,
A froward message, if I reed aright:
We mought not stir his wrath: perhaps this may:
Persuasions cannot move a Brit•ins mood,
And yet none sooner stung with present wrong.
Hail peérelesse Prince, whiles Fortune would, our King,
Though now bereft of Crown and former rule.
Vouchsafe me leave my message to impart,
No jot enforced, but as your Son affords.
If here you stay but threé days to an end,
And not forthwith discharge your bands and host,
It's Mordreds oath: Assure your self to die.
But if you find your courage so to serve,
As for to stand to your defence with force,
In Cornwall (if you dare) he'il try it out.
Is this the choice my Son doth send his Sire,
And must I die? Or try it if I dare?
To die were ill, thus to be dared is worse.
Display my standard forth, let Trump and Drum
Call Soldiers ne'er, to hear their Sovereigns heast.
O Friends and fellows of my weriest toils,
Which have borne out with me so many brunts,
And desperate storms of wars and brainsick Mars.
Lo now the hundredth month wherein we win.
Hath all the blood we spent in foreign Coasts,
The wounds, and deaths, and winters boad abroad,
Deserved thus to be disgraced at home?
All Britain rings of wars: No town, nor field
But swarms with armed troupes: the mustering trains
Stop up the streétes: no less a tumult's raised,
Then when Hengistus fell and Horsus fierce
With treacherous truce did overrun the Realm.
Each corner threatened Death: both far and ne'er
Is Arthur vexed. What if my force had failed,
And standard fallen, and ensigns all been torn,
And Roman troupes pursued me at the heéles,
With luckless wars assaid in foreign soils?
Now that our Fortune heaves vs up thus hie,
And Heavens themselves renew our old renown:
Must we be dared? Nay, let that Princocke come,
That knows not yet himself, nor Arthurs force,
That ne'er yet waged wars, that's yet to learn
To give the charge: Yea let that Princocke come,
With sudden Soldiers pampered up in peace,
And gowned troupes, and wantons worn with ease:
With sluggish Saxons crewe, and Irish kernes,
And Scottish aide, and false redshanked Pests,
Whose slaughters yet must teach their former foil.
They shall perceive with sorrow ever they part,
When all their toils be told, that nothing works
So great a wast and ruin in this age,
As doe my wars. O More•red blessed Son:
No doubt, these market mates so highly hired
Must be the stay of thy usurped state.
And least my head inclining now to years,
Should joy the rest, which yet it never reaped:
The Traitor Gilla, trained in treacherous jars,
Is chief in arms, to reeve me of my Realm.
What corner (ah) for all my wars shall shroud
My bloodless age? what seat for due deserts?
What town, or field for ancient Soldiers rest?
What house? What roof? What walls for wearied limbs?
Stretch out again, stretch out your conquering hands,
Still must we use the force so often used.
To those, that will pursue a wrong with wreak,
He gives all, that once denies the right.
Thou soil which erst Diana did ordain
The certain seat and bower of wandering Brute:
Thou Realm which ay I reverence as my Saint,
Thou stately Britain th'auncient tip of Troy,
Bear with my forced wrongs: I am not he,
That willing would impeach thy peace with wars.
Lo here both far and wide I Conqueror stand,
Arthur each where thine own, thy Liedge, thy King.
Condemn not mine attempts: he, only he
Is sole in fault, that makes me thus thy foe.
Here I renounce all leagues and treats of truce,
Thou Fortune henceforth art my guard and guide.
Hence peace, on wars, run Fates, let Mars be judge,
I erst did trust to right, but now to rage.
Go: tell the boy that Arthur fears no brags,
In vain he seeks to brave it with his Sire.
I come (Mordred) I come, but to thy pain.
Yea, tell the boy his angry father comes,
To teach a Noised both to die, and dare.
If we without offence (O greatest guide
Of British name? may pour our just complaints:
We most mislike that your too mild a mood
Hath thus withheld our hands and swords from strokes.
For what? were we behind in any help?
Or without cause did you misdoubt our force,
Or truth so often tried with good success?
Go to: Conduct your army to the field,
Place man to man, oppose vs to our foes:
As much we neéde to work, as wish your weal.
Seémes it so sour to win by civil wars?
Were it to gore with Pike my fathers braest,
Were it to rive and cleave my brothers head,
Were it to tear peécemeale my dearest child,
I would enforce my grudging hands to help.
I cannot term that place my native soil,
Whereto your trumpets send their warlike sounds.
If case required to batter down the Towers
Of any Town, that Arthur would destroy:
Yea, were it of Britains self, which most I rede:
Her bulwarks, fortress, rampires, walls and fence,
These arms should rear the Rams to run them down.
Wherefore ye Princes, and the rest my mates,
If what I have avert in all your names,
Be likewise such as stands to your content,
Let all your Yeas avow my promise true.
Yea, yea, &amp;c.
Wherein renowned King my self, or mine,
My life, my Kingdom, and all Denmark power
May serve your turn, account them all your own.
And whatsoever my force or Norway aide
 May help in your attempts, I vow it here.
As heretofore I always served your heast,
So let this day be judge of Gawins trust.
Either my brother Mordred dies the death
By mine assault, or I at least by his.
Since thus (my faithful mates) with vows alike,
And equal love to Arthurs cause you join
In common care, to wreak my private wrongs:
Lift up your Ensigns efts, stretch out your strengths,
Pursue your Fates, perform your hopes to Mars,
Lo here the last and outmost work for blades.
This is the time that all our valour craves.
This time by due desert restores again
Our goods, our lands, our lives, our weal and all.
This time declares by Fates whose cause is best,
This, this condemns the vanquished side of guilt.
Wherefore if for my sake you scorn your selves,
And spare no sword nor fire in my defence:
Then whiles my censure justifies your cause,
Fight, fight amain: and clear your blades from crime,
The Judge once changed, no wars are free from guilt.
The better cause gives vs the greater hope
Of prosperous wars, wherein if once I hap
To spy the wonted signs, that never failed
Their guide, your threatening looks, your fiery eyes,
And bustling bodies pressed to present spoil:
The field is won. Even then me thinks I see
The wonted wastes, and scattered heads of foes,
The Irish carcass kicked, and Pictes oppressed,
And Saxons slain, to swim in streams of blood.
I quake with hope. I can assure you all,
We never had a greater match in hand.
March on: delay no Fates whiles Fortune fawns,
The greatest praise of wars consists in speed.
SInce thus (victorious King) your Peéres, allies,
Your Lords, and all your powers be ready pressed,
For good, for bad, for whatsoever shall hap,
To spend both limb and life in your defence:
Cast of all doubts, and rest your self on Mars:
A hopeless fear forbids a happy Fate.
In sooth (good Cador) so our Fortune fares,
As neédes we must return to wonted force.
To wars we must: but such unhappy wars,
As yeéld no hope for right or wrong to scope.
My self foreseés the Fate, it cannot fall
Without our dearest blood: much may the mind
Of pensive Sire presage, whose Son so sins.
All truth, all trust, all blood, all bands be broke,
The seédes are sown that spring to future spoil,
My Son, my Nephew, yea each side my self,
Nearer then all (woe's me) too ne'er, my foe.
Well: it is my plague for life so lewdly led,
The price of guilt is still a heavier guilt.
For were it light, that even by birth my self
Was bad, I made my sister bad: nay were
That also light, I have begot as bad.
Yea worse, an heir assigned to all our sins.
Such was his birth: what base, what vulgar vice
Could once be looked for of so noble blood?
The deéper guilt descends, the more it roots:
The younger imps affect the huger crimes.
When many men assent to civil wars,
And yeélde a suffradge to enforce the Fates:
No man bethinks him of his own mishap,
But turns that luck unto an other's share.
Whereas if fear did first forewarn each foil,
Such love to fight would breéd no Brytains bane.
And better were still to preserve our peace,
Then thus to vent for peace through waging wars.
What folly to forgo such certain hippos,
And in their steed to feed uncertain hopes?
Such hopes as oft have puffed up many a Realm,
Till cross success hath pressed it down as deépe:
Whiles blind affection fetched from private cause
Misguiding wit hath maskt in wisedom's veil,
Pretending what in purpose it abhorred.
Peace hath threé foes encamped in our breasts,
Ambition, Wrath, and Envy: which subdued,
We should not fail to find eternal peace.
It is in our power to joy it all at will,
And few there be, but if they will, they may:
But yet even those, who like the name of peace,
Through fond desire rapine at peace it self.
Betweéne the hope whereof, and it it self,
A thousand things may fall: that further wars.
The very speéch sometimes and treats of truce,
Is slashed and cut a sunder with the sword.
Norsield the name of peace doth edge our minds,
And sharpens on our fury till we fight:
So that the mention made of love and rest
Is oft a whetstone to our hate and rage.
Lo here the end, that Kingly pomp imparts,
The quiet rest, that Princely palace plights.
Care upon care, and every day a new
Fresh rysiyg tempest tires the tossed minds.
Who strives to stand in pomp of Princely port,
On guiddy top and culme of slippery Court,
Finds oft a heavy Fate, whiles too much known
To all, he falls unknown unto himself.
Let who so else that list, affect the name,
But let me seéme a Potentate to none:
My slender bark shall ceeépe anenst the shore,
And shun the winds, that sweépe the weltering waives.
Proud Fortune ouerhippes the saffest Roads,
And seékes amidst the surging Seas those Keéles,
Whose lofty tops and tacklings touch the Clouds.
O base, yet happy Boors! O gifts of Gods
Scant yet perceived▪ when poudred Ermine robes
With secrete sighs mistrusting their extremes,
In batlefull breast forecast their foultring Fates,
And stir, and strive, and storm, and all in vain:
Behold, the Peasant poor with tattered coat,
Whose eyes a meaner Fortune feédes with sleépe,
How safe and sound the careless Snudge doth snore.
Low rooffed lurks the house of slender hap,
Costlesse, not gay without, scant clean within:
Yet safe: and oftner shrouds the hoary hairs,
Then haughty Turrets reared with curious art,
To harbour heads that wield the golden Crest.
With endless cark in glorious Courts and Towns,
The troubled hopes and trembling fears doe dwell.
1 IN the first Scene Gilds and Conan confer of the state of Britain.
2 In the Second Scene Nuntius makes report of the whole bat∣tail, with the death of Mordred and Arthurs and Cadors deadly wound.
3 In the third Scene Gilds and Conan lament the unfortunate state of the Country.
DVring the Music appointed after the third act, there came a Lady Co•••lie attired with a counterfeit Child in her arms, who walked softly the Stage. From an other place there came a King Crowned, who likew••• walked on an other part of the Stage. From a third place there came four Soul•••ers all armed, who spying this Lady and King, upon a sudden pursued the 〈◊〉 from whom they violently took her Child and flung it against the walls; 〈◊〉 in mournful sort wringing her hands passed her way. Then in like manner 〈◊〉 set on the King, tearing his Crown from his head, and casting it in peeeces 〈◊〉 feet drove him by force away; And so passed themselves over the Stage▪ 〈◊〉 this was meant the fruit of War, which spares neither man woman nor 〈◊〉 with the end of Mordreds usurped Crown.
LORD Conan, though I know how hard a thing
It is, for minds trained up in Princely Thrones,
To hear of ought against their humor's course:
Yet: since who forbids not offence,
If well he may, is cause of such offence:
I could have wished (and blame me not my Lord)
Your place and countnance both with Son and Sire,
Had more prevailed on either side, then thus
T'haue left a Crown in danger for a Crown
Through civil wars, our Countries wonted woe.
Whereby the Kingdom's wound still festring deépe,
Sucks up the mischiefe's humour to the hart.
The staggering state of Britains troubled brains,
Headsicke, and sore encumbered in her Crown,
With guiddy steps runs on a headlong race.
Whereto this tempest tend's, or where this storm
Will break, who knows? But Gods avert the worst.
Now surely (Gilds) as my duty stood,
Indifferent for the best to Son and Sire:
So (I protest) since these occasions grew,
That in the depth of my desire to please,
I more esteémde what honest faith required
In matters meéte for their estates and place:
Than how to feéde each fond affection prone
To bad effects, whence their disgrace mought grow.
And as for Mordreds desperate and disloyal plots,
They had beéne none, or fewer at the least,
Had I prevailed: which Arthur knows right well.
But even as Counters go sometimes for one,
Sometimes for thousands more, sometimes for none:
So men in greatest countnance with their King,
Can work by fit persuasion sometimes much:
But sometimes less: and sometimes nought at all.
Well: wee that have not spent our time in wars,
But bent our course at peace, and Countries weal,
May rather now expect what strange event,
And Chance ensues of these so rare attempts:
Then enter to discourse upon their cause,
And err as wide in words, as they in deédes.
And Lo: to satisfy your wish therein,
Where comes a Soldier sweating from the Camps.
THOU Echo shrill that hauntst the hollow hisses,
Leave off that wont to snatch the latter word:
Howl on a whole discourse of our distress,
Clip of no clause: sound out a perfect sense.
What fresh mishap (alas) what new annoy,
Removes our pensive minds from wonted woes,
And yet requires a new lamenting mood?
Declare: we joy to handle all our harms:
Our many griefs have taught vs still to morn.
But (ah) my tongue denies my speéch his aide:
Great force doth drive it forth: a greater keeps
It in. I rue surprised with woontlesse woes.
Speak on, what grief so ever our Fates afford.
Small griefs can speak: the great astonished stand.
What greater sins could hap, then what be past?
What mischiefs could be meant, more then were wrought?
And think you these to be an end to sins?
No. Crime proceédes: those made but one degreé.
What mischiefs erst were done, term sacred deédes:
Call nothing sin, but what hath since ensued.
A greater grief requires your tears: Behold
These fresh annoys: your last mishaps be stale.
Tell on (my friend) suspend our minds no more:
Hath Arthur lost? Hath Mordred won the field?
O: nothing less. Would Gods it were but so.
Arthur hath won: but we have lost the field.
The field? Nay all the Realm, and Britains bounds.
How so? If Arthur won, what could we loose?
You speak in clouds, and cast perplexed words.
Unfold at large: and sort out sorrows out.
Then list a while: this instant shall vnwrappe
Those acts, those wars, those hard events, that all
The future age shall eu'r have cause to curse.
Now that the time drew on, when both the Camps
Should meét in Cornwall fields th'appointed place:
The reckelesse troupes, whom Fates forbad to live
Till noon, or night, did storm and rave for wars.
They swarmde about their Guides, and clustering called
For signs to fight, and fierce with vprores •ell,
They onwards hayld the hastening hours of death.
A direful frenzy rose: each man his own,
And public Fates all heédlesse headlong flung.
On Mordreds side were sixty thousand men,
Some borrowed powers, some Britons bred at home.
The Saxons, Irish, Normans, Pictes, and Scots
Were first in place, the Brytanes followed last.
On Arthurs side there were as many more.
Islandians, Gothes, Noruegians, Albanes, Danes,
Were foreign aides, which Arthur brought from France,
A trusty troupe, and tried at many a trench.
That now the day was come, wherein our State
For aye should fall, whenceforth men might inquire
What Britain was: these wars thus near bewraide.
Nor could the Heavens no longer hide these harms,
But by prodigious signs portend our plagues.
For lo: er both the Camps encountering coapt,
The Skies and Poles opposed themselves with storms.
Both East, and West with tempests dark were dim'd,
And showers of Hail, and Rain outrageous powered.
The Heavens were rent, each side the lightnings flashed,
And Clouds with hideous clappes did thundering roar.
The armies all aghast did senseless stand,
Mistrusting much, both Force, and Foes, and Fates.
T'was harde to say, which of the two appalled
Them most, the monstrous ayre, or too much fear.
When Arthur spied his Soldiers thus amazed,
And hope extinct, and deadly dread drawn on:
My mates (quoth he) the Gods doe skowre the skies,
To seé whose cause and courage craves their care.
The Fates contend to work some strange event:
And Fortune seéks by storms in Heavens and Earth,
What pigeons she may play for my behoof.
Of whom she knows, she then deserves not well,
When lingering ought, she comes not at the first.
Thus said: rejoicing at his dauntless mind,
They all reuiude, and former fear recoylde.
By that the light of Titan's troubled beams
Had pearceing scattered down the drowping fogs,
And greeted both the Camps with mutual view:
Their choler swells, whiles fell disposed minds
Bounce in their breasts, and stir uncertain storms.
Then paleness wanne and sterne with chearelesse change,
Possessing bleak their lips and bloodless cheékes,
With troublous trembling shows their death is ne'er.
When Mordred saw the danger thus approached,
And boisterous throngs of Warriors threatening blood:
His instant ruins gave a nod at Fates,
And mind though prone to Mars, yet daunted paste.
The hart which promised erst a sure success,
Now throbs in doubts: nor can his own attempts,
Afford him fear, nor Arthurs yeélde him hope.
This passion lasts not long, he soon recalls
His ancient guise, and wonted rage returns.
He loathes delays, and scorched with Scepters lust,
The time and place, wherein he oft had wished
To hazard all upon extremest Chance,
He offred spies, and spied pursues with speéde.
Then both the Armies met with equal might,
This stirred with wrath, that with desire to rule:
And equal prowess was a spur to both.
The Irish King whirlde out a poysned Dart,
That lighting pierced deépe in Hovels brains,
A peérelesse Prince and ne'er of Arthurs blood.
Hereat the Air with uproar load resounds,
Which efts on mountains rough rebounding reares.
The Trumpets hoarse their trembling tunes doe tear▪
And thundering Drums their dreadful Larums ring.
The Standards broad are blown, and Ensigns spread,
And every Nation bends his wonted wars.
Some ne'er their foes, some further off doe wound,
With dart, or sword, or shaft, or pike, or spear,
The weapons hide the Heavens: a night composde
Of warrelike Engines ouershades the field.
From every side these fatal signs are sent:
And boisterous bangs with thumping thwacks fall thick.
Had both these Camps beéne of usurping Kings,
Had every man thereof a Mordred beéne,
No fiercelier had they fought for all their Crowns.
The murders meanelesse waxed, no art in fight,
Nor way to ward nor try each others skill,
But thence the blade, and hence the blood ensues.
But what? Did Mordreds eyes endure this sight?
They did. And he himself the spur of fiends
And Gorgons all, least any part of his
Escaped freé from guilt, inflamed their minds to wrath.
And, with a valor more, then Virtue yeélds,
He chearde them all, and at their back with long
Outreached spear, stirde up each lingering hand.
All fury like frounst up with frantic frets.
He bids them leave and shun the meaner sort,
He shows the Kings, and Britains noblest peers.
He was not now to seéke what blood to draw:
He knew what juice refreshed his fainting Crown.
Too much of Arthurs hart. O had he wist
How great a vice such virtue was as then.
In Civil wars, in rooting up his Realm?
O frantic fury, far from Ualures praise.
There fell Aschillus stout of Denmark King,
There valiant Gawin Arthurs Nephew dear,
And late by Angels death made Albane King,
By Mordreds hand hath lost both life and Crown.
There Gilla wounded Cador Cornish Duke,
In hope to win the Dukedom for his mead.
The Norway King, the Saxons Duke, and Pests,
In woeful sort fell grovelling to the ground.
There Prince and Peasant both lay hurled on heaps:
Mars frowned on Arthurs mates: the Fates waxed fierce,
And jointly ran their race with Mordreds rage.
But with what joy (alas) shall he return,
That thus returns, the happier for this field?
These odds endure not long, for Mars retires,
And Fortune pleased with Arthurs moderate fear,
Returns more full, and friendlier then her wont.
For when he saw the powers of Fates opposde,
And that the dreadful hour thus hastened on:
Perplexed much in mind, at length resolves,
That fear is covered best by daring most.
Then forth he pitched: the Saxon Duke withstood,
Whom with one stroke he headless sent to Hell.
Not far from thence he spied the Irish King,
Whose life he took as price of broken truce.
Then Cador foreword pressed, and happily met
The Traitor Gilla, worker of these wars,
Of whom by death he took his due revenge.
The remnant then of both the Camps concur,
They Britains all, or most: few Forreines left.
These wage the wars, and hence the deaths ensue.
Nor t'one, nor t'other side, that can destroy
His foes so fast, as tic it self destroyed.
The brethren broach their blood: the Sire his Sons,
The Son again would prove by too much Wrath,
That he, whom thus he slew, was not his Sire.
No blood nor kin can swag their ireful moods.
No foreign foe they seéke, nor care to find:
The Britains blood is sought on every side.
A vain discourse it were to paint at large
The several Fates, and foils of either side.
To tell what groans and sighs the parting Ghosts
Sent forth: who dying bare the fellest breast:
Who changed cheer at any Britains fall:
Who oftenest struck: who best bestowed his blade:
Who ventured most: who stood: who fell: who failed:
Th'effect declares it all: thus fared the field.
Of both these Hoists so huge and maine at first,
There were not left on either side a score▪
For Son, and Sire to win, and loose the Realm.
The which when Mordred saw, and that his Sire
Against foes, and Fares themselves would win the field▪
He sighed, and twixt despair and rage he cried,
Here (Arthur) here, and hence the Conquest comes:
Whiles Mordred lives, the Crown is yet vnwoonne.
Hereat the prince of prowess much amazed,
With thrilling tears, and countnance cast on ground,
Did groaning fetch a deépe and earnefull sigh.
Anon they fierce encountering both concurred,
With grisly looks, and faces like their Fates:
But despair minds, and inward moods unlike.
The Sire with mind to safeguard both, or t'one•
The Son to spoil the t'one, or hazard both.
No fear, nor fellnes failed on either side:
The wager lay on both their lives and bloods.
At length when Mordred spied his force to faint,
And felt him self oppressed with Arthurs strength,
(O haplesse lad, a match vnmeéte for him)
He loathes to live in that afflicted state,
And valiant with a forced Virtue, longs
To die the death▪ in which perplexed mind,
With grenning teéth, and crabbed looks he cries,
I cannot win: yet will I not be won.
What should we shun our Fates, or play with Mars,
Or thus defraud the wars of both our bloods?
Whereto doe we reserve our selves? Or why
Be we not sought ere this, amongst the dead?
So many thousands murdered in our cause,
Must we survive, and neither win nor loose?
The Fates that will not smile on either side,
May frown on both: So saying forth he flings,
And desperate runs on point of Arthurs Sword,
(A Sword (alas) prepared for no such use)
Whereon engoarde he glides, till ne'er approached,
With dying hand he hues his fathers head.
So through his own annoy, he noyes his Liedge▪
And gains by death access to daunt his Sire.
There Mordred fell, but like a Prince he fell.
And as a branch of great Pendragons graft
His life breaths out, his eyes forsake the Sun,
And fatal Clouds infer a lasting Clips.
There Arthur staggering scant sustained him self,
There Cador found a deep and deadly wound,
There ceased the wars, and there was Britain lost▪
There lay the chosen youths of Mars, there lay
The peérelesse Knights, Bellona's bravest train.
There lay the Mirrors rare of Martial praise,
There lay the hope and branch of Brute suppressed.
There Fortune laid the prime of Britains pride,
There laid her pomp, all topsy turuie turned.
COme cruel griefs, spare not to stretch our strengths,
Whiles bailefull breasts inuit our thumping fists.
Let every sign, that mournful passions work,
Express what piteous plights our minds amaze.
This day supplants what no day can supply,
These hands have wrought those wastes, that never age,
Nor all the brood of Brute shall ever repair.
That future men may joy the surer rest,
These wars prevent their birth, and nip their spring.
What Nations erst the former age subdued
With hourly toils to Britains yoke, this day
Hath set at large, and backwards turned the Fates.
Henceforth the Kernes may safely tread their bogs:
The Scots may now their inroads old renew,
The Saxon• well may vow their former claims,
And Danes without their danger drive vs out.
These wars found not the'ffect of wonted wars,
Nor doth their weight the like impression work:
There several Fates annoyed but several men,
Here all the Realm and people find one Fate.
What there did reach but to a Soldiers death,
Contains the death of all a Nation here.
These blades have given this Isle a greater wound,
Then time can heal. The fruit of civil wars:
A Kingdom's hand hath goard a Kingdom's heart,
When Fame shall blaze these acts in latter years,
And time to come so many ages hence
Shall efts report our toils and British pains:
Or when perhaps our Childrens Children read,
Our woeful wars displayed with skilful pen:
They'll think they here some sounds of future facts,
And not the ruins old of pomp long past.
Twill move their minds to ruth, and frame a fresh
New hopes, and fears, and vows, and many a wish,
And Arthurs cause shall still be favoured most.
He was the joy, and hope, and hap of all,
The Realms defence, the sole delay of Fates,
He was our wall and forte, twice thirteen years
His shoulders did the Britain state support.
Whiles yet he raignd, no foreign foes prevailed,
Nor once could hope to bind the Britain bounds:
But still both far and ne'er were forced to fly,
They thrall to vs, we to our selves were free.
But now, and henceforth aye, adieu that hope,
Adieu that pomp, that freedom, rule and all:
Let Saxons now, let Normans, Danes, and Scots.
Enjoy our meadows, fields, and pleasant plains:
Come, let vs fly to Mountains, Cliffs and Rocks,
A Nation hurt, and ne'er in case to heal.
Henceforth the weight of Fates thus fallen aside,
We res• secure from fear of greater foil:
Our leisure serves to think on former times,
And know what erst we were, who now are thus.
O Britains prosperous state were Heavenly powers
But half so willing to preserve thy peace,
As they are prone to plague thee for thy wars.
But thus (O Gods) yea, thus it likes you still.
When you decree to turn, and touse the world,
To make our errors cause of your decrees.
We fretting fume, and burning wax right wood,
We cry for swords, and harmful harness crave,
We rashly rave, whiles from our present rage,
You frame a cause of long foredeemed doom.
When Britain so desired her own decay,
That even her native brood would root her up:
Seemed it so huge a work, (O Heavens) for you
To tumble down, and quite subvert her state,
Unless so many Nations came in aide?
What thirst of spoil (O Fates?) In civil wars
Were you afraid to faint for want of blood?
But yet, O wretched state in Britains fond,
What needed they to stoop to Mordreds yoke,
Or fear the man themselves so fearful made?
Had they, but linked like friends in Arthurs bands,
And ioynde their force against the foreign foes:
These wars and civil sins had soon surceased,
And Mordred reft of rule had feared his Sire.
Would Gods these wars had drawn no other blood,
Then such as sproong from breasts of foreign foes:
So that the fountain, fed with chaungelesse course,
Had found no nearer vents for dearer juice.
Or if the Fates so thirst for British blood,
And long so deeply for our last decay:
O that the rest were spared and safe reserved,
Both Saxons, Danes, and Normans most of all.
Hereof when civil wars have worn vs out,
Must Britain stand, a borrowed blood for Brute.
When prosperous haps, and long continuing bliss,
Have past the ripeness of their budding grouth,
They fall and foulter like the mellow fruit,
Surcharged with burden of their own excess.
So Fortune wearied with our often wars,
Is forced to faint, and leave vs to our fates.
If men have minds presaging ought their harms,
If ever heavy heart foreweene her woe:
What Britain lives, so far removed from home,
In any Ayre, or Pole, or Coast abroad:
But that even now through Natures sole instinct,
He feels the fatal sword imbrue his breast,
Wherewith his native soil for aye is slain?
What hopes, and hippos lye wasted in these wars?
Who knows the foils he suffered in these fields?
IN the first scene Arthur and Cador returned deadly wounded and bewaild the misfortune of themselves and their Country, and are likewise bewailed of the Chorus.
In the second scene the Gho•st of Gorlois returns reioy∣cing at his reave•dge, and wishing ever after a happier Fate unto Britain, which done, he descends where he first rose.
SOunding the Music, four gentlemen all in black half armed, half un∣armed with black skarffes overthwart their shoulders should come upon the stage. The first bearing aloft in the one hand on the truncheon of a spear an Helmet, an arming sword, a Gauntlet, &amp;c. representing the Trophy: in the other hand a Target depicted with a mans hart sore wounded &amp; the blood gushing out, crowned with a Crown imp•real and a Laurel garland, thus writ∣ten in the top. En totum quote superest, signifying the King of Norway which spent himself and all his power for Arthur, and of whom there was lest nothing but his heart to enjoy the conquest that ensued. The second bearing in the one hand a silver vessel full of gold, pearls, and other jewels representing the Spolia: in the other hand a Target with an Olephant and Dragon thereon fiercely com∣bacting, the Dragon under the Olephant and sucking by his extreme heate the blood from him is crushed in pieces with the fall of the Olephant, so as both die at last, this written aboue, Victor, an Victus? representing the King of Denmark, who fell through Mordreds wound, having first with his soldiers destroyed the most of Mordreds army. The third bearing in the one hand a Pyramid with a Law∣rell wreath about it representing victory. In the other hand a Target with this devise: a man sleeping, a snake drawing near to sting him, a Leazard preventing the Snake by fight, the Leazard being deadly wounded awakes the man, who seeing the Leazard dying, pursues the Snake, and kills it, this written aboue, Tibi morimur. Signifying Gawin King of Albany slain in Arthurs defence by More∣dred, whom Arthur afterwards slew. The fourth bearing in the one hand a broken pillar, at the top thereof the Crown and Sceptre of the vanquished King, both broken asunder, representing the conquest over usurpation: in the o∣there hand a Target with two Cocks painted thereon, the one lying dead, the o∣there
with his wings broken, his eyes pecked out, and the blood every where gushing forth to the ground, he standing upon the dead Cock and crowing over him, with this emblem in the top, Qua vici, p•rdidi, signifying Cador deadly wounded by Gilla whom he slew. After these followed a King langui∣shing in complete Harness black, bruised &amp; battered unto him, besprinkled with blood. On his head a Laurel garland, leaning on the shoulders of two Heraults in mourning gowns &amp; hoods, th'on in Mars his coat of arms, the other in Arthurs, presenting Arthur victoriously but yet deadly wounded. there followed a page with a Target whereon was portraited a Pelican pecking her blood out of her breast to feed her young ones, through which wound she dies, this written in the top, Quafoui, perit, signifying Arthurs too much indulgence of Mordred, the cause of his death. All this represented the dismayed and unfortunate victory of Arthur, which is the matter of the Act ensuing.
COme Cador, as our friendship was most firm
Throughout our age, so now let's link as fast.
Thus did we live in wars, thus let vs dye
In peace, and arm in arm partake our Fates.
Our wounds, our greéfe, our wish, our hap alike,
Our end so near, all crave eche others help.
O King, behold the fruit of all our Fame:
Lo here our Pomp consumed with our selves,
What all our age with all our wars had won,
Lo here one day hath lost it all at once.
Well: so it likes the Heavens: thus Fortune gibes:
She hoists up to hurl the deeper down.
O sacred Prince: what sight is this we seé?
Why have the Fates reserved vs to these woes
Our only hope: the stay of all our Realm:
The pillar of our state: thus sore oppressed?
O would the Gods had favoured vs so much:
That, as we lived partakers of your pains,
And likewise joyed the fruit of your exploits:
So having thus bereft our Sovereigns bliss,
They had with more indifferent doom conioynd
The Subjects both, and Sovereigns bane in one.
It now (alas) ingendereth double greéfe,
To rue your want, and to bewail our woes.
Rue not my Britains what my rage hath wrought,
But blame your King, that thus hath rent your Realm.
My meanelesse moods have made the Fates thus fell,
And too much anger wrought in me too much.
For had impatient ire indu'rde abuse,
And yeélded where resistance threatened spoil?
I mought have lived in foreign coasts vnfoilde,
And six score thousand men had been vnmoande.
But wrong incensing wrath to take revenge
Preferred Chance before a better choice.
T'was Mordreds wrong and to unjust deserts
That justly mooude your Highness to such wrath:
Your claim required no less then those attempts:
Your cause right good was praised, and praide for most.
I claimed my Crown, the cause of claim was good,
The means to claim it in such sort was bad.
Yea: rather then my Realm and native soil
Should wounded fall, thus bruised with these wars:
I should have left both Realm, and right, and all:
Or dur'd the death ordained by •ordreds oath.
And yet so far as Mars could bide a mean,
You hatelesse sought the safeguard of them all.
Whereto the better cause, or badder Chance
Did draw, you still inclined: preferring oft
The weaker side, sometimes for love, sometimes
For right, (as Fortune swayed) your Son, your self.
So pity spared, what reason sought to spoil:
Till all at length, with equal spoil was spent.
Would Gods your mind had felt no such remorse,
And that your foes had no such favour found.
So mought your friends have had far frendlier Fates,
If Rebels for their due deserts had died.
The wickets death is safety to the just.
To spare the Traitors, was to spoil the true.
Of force he hurts the good, that helps the bad.
In that you sought your Countries gain, t'was well:
In that you shunned not her loss, t'was hard.
Good is the friend, that seeks to do vs good:
A mighty friend, that doth prevent our harms.
Well: so it was: it cannot be redressed:
The greater is my grief, that seés it so.
My life (I feel) doth fade, and sorrows flow,
The rather that my name is thus extinct.
In this respect, so Mordred did succeed,
O, that my self had fallen, and Mordred lived▪
That having conquered all my foes but him,
I mought have left you him, that conquered me.
O heavy wretched lot: to be the last
That falls, to view the burial of my Realm.
Where each man else hath fealt his several Fate,
I only pine oppressed with all their Fates.
Although your Highness do sustain such greé•e,
As needs enforces all your Realm to rue:
Yet since such ruth affords no relief,
Let due discretion swag each cureless sore,
And bear the harms, that run without redress.
The loss is ours, that loose so rare a Prince, 
You only •in, that see your foe here foe•lt.
A causeless foe. When wars did call me hence
He was in years but young, in wit too old.
As virtue shines most in comliest wights,
When inward gifts are decked with outward grace:
So did his wit and feature f•ede that hope,
Which falsely trained me to this woeful hap.
His mind transformed thus, I cannot choose
But long to see what change his face sustains.
My blood and kindred doubled in his birth,
Inspire•s a mixed, and t'wice descending love,
Which drives my dying veins to wish his view.
Unhealme his luckelesse head, set bare his face:
That face which erst pleased me and mine to much.
Seé (worthest King) the hope of all your Realm,
Had not his lust to rule prevented all.
I see (alas) I see (hide, hide again:
O spare mine eyes) a witness of my crimes:
A fearful vision of my former guilte:
A dreadful horror of a future doom:
A present gaul of mind. O happy they,
Whose spotless lives attain a dreadlesse death.
And thou, O haplesse boy, O spite of Fates,
(What mought I term thee, Nephew, Son, or both?)
Alas, how happy should we both have been,
If no ambitious thought had vexed thy head,
Nor thou thus st•med to reeve thy Fathers rule,
But stai•e thy time, and not forstalde vs both?
The hoot spurde youth that forced the forward steédes,
Whiles neédes he would his Fathers Chariot guide,
Neglecting what his Sire had said in charge,
The fires, which first he flung about the poles,
Himself at last most woeful wretch inflamed.
So to much love to hover in the Heavens
Made him to pay the price of rash attempts.
When• ruth, (ah,) rent the woeful Fathers hart,
That saw himself thus made a Sonnelesse Sire?
Well: since both Heavens and Hell conspired in one,
To make our ends a mirror to the world,
Both of incestious life, and wicked birth:
Would Gods the Fates that linked our faults alike,
Had also framed our minds of frendlier moulds:
That, as our linage had approached too near,
So our affections had not swaru'd to far.
Then mought I lived t'inlarge the Britains praise,
In rearing efts the first triumphant Troy
And after thou succeéding mine attempts,
Have spent thy courage in a juster cause.
But t'would not be: Ambition grew to great:
We could not join our minds: our Fates we ioynde:
And through thy blood, a way was made to mine.
And must we neédes (O worthiest Peéres) forgo,
By this untimely Fate our greatest hope?
That in your ripest years and likeliest time,
Your chiefest force should on this sudden fall?
Have you throughout your youth made Britains pomp
A Sovereign of so many Nations stout,
To th'end ere half your age untimely death
Should leave vs Subject to our wonted foils?
See▪ seé, our idle hopes, our brittle trust,
Our vain desires, our over fickle state.
Which, though a while they sail on quiet seas,
Yet sink in surge, ere they arrive to hod.
O woeful wars, O Mordreds cursed pride,
That thus hath wrought both King, and Kingdoms woe▪
Let plaints and mornings pass, set moans a part.
They made much of themselves: Yea too too much
They loved to live, that seéing all their Realm
Thus topsy turuey turned, would grudge to dye.
Yea sure: since thus (O Fates) your censure seems,
That freé from force of foreign foes, there rests,
That Mordred reap the glory of our deaths:
B'it so: drive on your doom, work your decreé:
We fearless bide what bane so ever you bid.
And though our ends thus hastened through your heasts,
Abruptly break the course of great attempts:
Yet go we not inglorious to the ground:
Set wish a part: we have performed enough.
The Irish King and Nation wilde we tamed:
The Scots and Pests, and Orcade Isles we wanne:
The Danes and Gothes and Friseland men, with all
The Isles inserted ne'er those Seas, And next
The Germaine King, and Saxons we subdued.
Not France, that could prevail against our force,
Nor lastly Rome, that rues her pride suppressed.
Each foreign power is parcel of our praise,
No titles want to make our foes afraid.
This only now I crave (O Fortune erst
My faithful friend) let it be soon forgot,
Nor long in mind, nor mouth, where Arthur fell▪
Yea: though I Conqueror die, and full of Fame:
Yet let my death and parture rest obscure.
No grave I neéde (O Fates) nor burial rights,
Nor stately hearce, nor tomb with haughty top:
But let my Carcass lurk: yea, let my death
Be ay unknown, so that in every Coast
I still be feared, and looked for every hour.
Lo here the end that Fortune sends at last
To him, whom first she heaved to highest hap.
The flatt•r•ng look wherewith he long 〈◊〉 le••
The smiling Fat•s, that oft had fed his Fame:
The many wars and Conquests, which he 〈◊〉▪
Are dashed at once: one day infers that foe•••,
Whereof so many years of yore were freé.
O willing world to magnify man's state•
O most unwilling to maintain the same.
Of all misfortunes and unhappy Fates,
Th'unhappiest seémes, to have beéne hapie once.
T'was Arthur sole, that never found his joys
Disturbed with woe, nor woes relieved with joy•.
In prosperous state all Heavenly powers aspi•'d•
Now made a wretch, not one, that spares his spoil.
Yea Fortunes self in this afflicted case,
Exacts a pain for long continued pomp.
She urges now the bliss of wonted weal,
And bears him down with weight of former Fam•.
His praises past be present shame: O tickle trust:
Whiles Fortune chops and changes every Chance▪
What certain bliss can we enjoy a live,
Unless, whiles yet our bliss endures, we die•
Yea: since before his last and outmost gasp,
None can be deemde a happy man or blessed,
Who dares commit him self to prosperous Fates,
Whose death prepared attends not hard at hand?
That since death must once determine all.
His life may sooner fly, then Fortune flit.
NOW Gorlois swag thy self. Pride hath his pay:
Murder his price: Adult'rie his desert:
Treason his meéde: Disloyalty his doom:
Wrong hath his wreak: and Guilt his guerdon bear••.
Not one abuse erst offered by thy foes
But since most sternely punished, is now purged.
Where thou did fall, even on the self same soil
Pendragon, Arthur, Mordred, and their stock,
Found all their foils: not one hath s•apt revenge:
Their line from first to last quite razed out.
Now rest content, and work no further plagues:
Let future age be freé from Gorlois Ghost.
Let Britain henceforth bath in endless weal.
Let Virgo come from Heaven, the glorious Star:
The Zodiac's joy: the Planets chief delight:
The hope of all the year: the ease of Skies:
The Aires relief, the comfort of the Earth.
That virtuous Virgo borne for Britains bli•••:
That peerless branch of Brute: that sweéte remain
Of Priam's state: that hope of springing Troy:
Which time to come, and many ages hence
Shall of all wars compound eternal peace,
Let her reduce the golden age again,
Religion, ease, and wealth of former world.
Yea, let that Virgo come and Saturnes reign,
And years oft ten times told expired in peace.
A Rule, that else no Realm shall ever find,
A Rule most rare, unheard, vnseéne, vnread,
The sole example that the world affords.
That (Britain) that Renown, yea that is thine.
B'it so: my wrath is wrought. Ye furies black
And ugly shapes, that houle in holes beneath:
Thou Orous dark, and deep Auernas nook,
With duskish dens out gnawn in gulfs below,
Receive your ghastly charge, Duke Gorlois Ghost:
Make room: I gladly thus revenged return.
And though your pain surpass▪ I greet them th•:
He hates each other Heaven, that haunteth Hell.
SEe heére by this the tickle trust of time:
The false affiance of each mortal force,
The wavering weight of Fates: the fickell trace,
That Fortune trips: the many mocks of life:
The cheerelesse change: the easelesse brunts and broils,
That man abides: the restless race he runs.
But most of all, seé héere the peérelesse pains:
The lasting pangs: the stintlesse greéfes: the tears:
The sighs: the groans: the fears: the hopes: the hates:
The thoughts and cares, that Kingly pomp impartes.
What follies then bewitch thambicious minds,
That thirst for Scepters pomp the well of woes?
Whereof (alas) should wretched man be proud,
Whose first conception is but Sin, whose birth
But pain, whose life but toil, and neédes must dye?
Sée heére the store of great Pendragons brood,
The to'ne quite dead, the to'ther hastening on,
As men, the Son but greene, the Sire but ripe:
Yet both forestalde ere half their race were run.
As Kings, the mightiest Monarchs in this age▪
Yet both suppressed and vanquished by themselves.
Such is the brittle breath of mortal man,
Whiles humane Nature works her daily wrackes:
Such be the crazed crests of glorious Crowns,
Whiles worldly powers like sudden puffs do pass.
And yet for one that goes, another comes,
Some borne, some dead: So still the store endures.
So that both Fates and common care proved
That men must needs be borne, and some must rule.
Wherefore ye Peéres, and Lordings lift aloft,
And whosoe'r in Thrones that judge your thralls:
Let not your Soueraingty heave you to hye,
Nor their subjection press them down too lowe.
It is not pride, that can augment your power,
Nor lowly looks, that long can keep them safe:
The Fates have found a way, whereby ere long
The proud must leave their hope, the meek their fear.
Who ere received such favour from aboue,
That could assure one day unto himself?
Him, whom the Morning found both stout and strong,
The Evening left all grovelling on the ground.
This breath and heate wherewith mans life is fed
Is but a flash, or flame, that shines a while,
And once extinct, is as it ne'er had been.
Corruption hourly frets the bodies frame,
Youth tends to age, and age to death by kind.
Short is the race, prefixed is the end,
Swift is the time, wherein mans life doth run.
But by his deeds t'extend renown and fame,
That only virtue works, which never fades.
Sat cytò, si sat benè: vtcun{que}:
Quote non dat spes, dat optio.

WHen this eternal substance of my soul,
Did ••ue imprisoned in my wanton •lesh:
Each in their •unction serving others need,
I was a Courtier in the Spanish Court.
My name was Don Andrea, my descent
Though not ignoble, yet inferior far
To gracious fortunes of my tender youth:
For there in prime and pride of all my years,
By duteous service and deserving love,
In secret I pos•est a worcester•hy dame,
Which hight sweet Bel-imperia by name.
But in the harvest of my summer joys,
Deaths winter nipped the blossoms of my bliss,
Forcing divorce betwixt my love and me.
For in the late conflict with Portugal,
My valour drew me into dangers mouth,
Till life to death made passage through my wounds.
When I was slain, my soul descended straight,
To pass the flowing stream of Acheron:
But churlish Charon only boatman there,
Said that my rites of burial not performed,
I might not sit amongst his passengers.
Ere Sol had slept three nights in The•is lap,
And slakte his smoking Chariot in her •loud:
By Don Whore•io our knight Marshals son,
My funerals and obsequies were done.
Then was the Feriman of hell content,
To pass me over to the slimy strond,
That leads to fell Auernus ugly waives:
There pleasing Cerberus with honied speech,
I past the perils of the foremost porch.
Not far from hence amidst ten thousand souls,
Sate Minos, Oecus, and Rhadamant,
To whom no sooner began I make approach,
To crave a passport for my wandering Ghost:
But Minos engraven leaves of Lottery,
Drew forth the manner of my life and death.
This knight (quoth he) both lived and died in love:
And for his love tried fortune of the wars,
And by wars fortune lost both love and life•.
Why then said Oecus, convey him hence,
To walk with lovers in our fields of love:
And spend the course of everlasting time,
Under greene myrtle trees and Cyprus shades.
No, no, said Rhadamant, it were not well,
With loving souls to place a Martialist,
He died in war, and must to martial fields:
Where wounded Hector lives in lasting pain,
And Achilles mermedons do scour the plain.
Then Minos mildest censor of the three,
Made this device to end the difference.
Send him (quoth he) to our infernal King:
To dome him as best seems his Majesty:
To this effect my passport straight was drawn.
In keeping on my way to Plutos Court,
Through dreadful shades of ever glooming night:
I saw more sights then thousand tongues can tell,
Or pens can write, or mortal harts can think.
Three ways there were, that on the right hand side,
Was ready way unto the foresaid fields,
Where lovers live, and bloody Mar•ialists,
But either sort contained within his bounds.
The left hand path declining fearfully,
Was ready downfall to the deepest hell.
Where bloody furies shakes their whips of steel,
And poor Ixion turns an endless wheel.
Where Usurers are choked with melting gold,
And wantons are imbraste with ugly snakes:
And murderers groan with never killing wounds,
And periurde wights scalded in boiling lead,
And all soul sins with torments ouerwhelmd▪
Twixt these two ways, I •rod the middle path,
Which brought me to the fair Elision greene.
In midst whereof there stands a stately Tower,
The walls of brass▪ the gates of Adamant.
Here finding Pluto with his Proserpine,
I showed my passport humbled on my knee.
Whereat fair Proserpine began to smile,
And begged that only she might give my doom.
Plu•o was pleased and sealed it with a kiss.
Forthwith (Revenge) she rounded thee in th'eare,
And bad thee lead me through the gates of Whore:
Where dreams have passage in the silent night.
No sooner had she spoke but we were here,
I wot not how, in twinkling of an eye.
THen know Andrea that thou art arrived,
Where thou shalt see the author of thy death:
Don Balthazar the Prince of Portugal.
Deprived of life by Bel-imperia:
Here sit we down to see the mystery,
And serve for Chorus in this tragedy.
NOw say L. General, how fares our Camp?
All well my sovereign Liege, except some few,
That are deceased by fortune of the war.
But what portends thy cheerful countenance,
And posting to our presence thus in hast?
Speak man, hath fortune given vs victory?
Victory my Liege, and that with little loss.
Our Portingals will pay vs tribute then.
Tribute and wonted homage therewithal.
Then blessed be heaven, and guitar of the heavens,
From whose fair influence such justice flows.
O multum dilecte Deo, t•b• militate ••her,
Et coniuratae curuato poplito gents
Succumbunt: rests•roar est victoria iuris.
Thanks to my loving brother of Castle.
But General, unfold in brief discourse,
Your form of battle and your wars success.
That adding all the pleasure of thy news,
Unto the height of former happiness▪
With deeper wage and greater dignity,
We may reward thy blissful chivalry.
Where Spain and Portugal do jointly knit
Their frontiers, leaning on each others bound:
There met our armies in their proud array,
Both furnished well, both full of hope and fear:
Both menacing alike with daring shows,
Both vaunting sundry colours of device,
Both cheerly sounding trumpets, drums and fifes.
Both raising dreadful clamours to the sky,
That valleis, hills, and rivers made rebound,
And heaven it self was frighted with the sound.
Our battles both were pitched in squadron form,
Each corner strongly •enst with wings of shot,
But ere we joined and came to push of Pike,
I brought a squadron of our readiest shot,
From out our rearward to begin the fight,
They brought another wing to encounter vs:
Mean while our ordinance plaid on either side,
And Captains strove to have their valours tried.
Don Pedro their chief horse men's Co••onell:
Did with his Cornet bravely make attempt,
To break the order of our battle• ranks.
But Don R•gero worthy man of war,
Marched forth against him with our Musk••ier•,
And stopped the malice of his fell approach.
While they maintain hot skirmish too and fro,
Both battles join and fall to handy blows.
They• violent shot resembling th'oceans rage,
When roa•ing loud and with a swelling ••de,
It beats upon the ra••piers of huge rocks,
And gapes to swallow neighbour bounding lands.
Now while Bellona rages here and there,
Thick storms of bullets ran like winters hail,
And shivered Lances dark the troubled air.
Pede pes &amp; cuspid cuspis,
Anni sonant anise fire petiturque viro.
On every side drop Captains to the ground,
And Soldiers some ill my••de, some slain outright:
Here falls a body scindred from his head,
There legs and arms lye bleeding on the grass,
Mingled with weapons and vnboweld steeds:
That scattering over spread the purple plain.
In all this turmoil three long hovres and more,
The victory to neither part inclined,
Till Don Andrea with his brave Lau•ciers,
In their maine battle made so great a breach,
That hal•e dismayed, the multitude ret•rde:
But Balthazar the Portingales young Prince,
Brought rescue and encouragde them to stay:
Heere-hence the fight was eagerly renewd,
And in that conflict was Andrea slain.
Brave man at arms, but weak to Balthazar.
Yet while the Prince insulting over him,
Breathed out proud vaunts, sounding to our reproach,
Friendship a•d hardy valour joined in one,
Pricked forth Horatio our Knight Marshals son,
To challenge forth that Prince in single fight:
Not long between these twain the fight endured,
But straight the Prince was beaten from his horse,
And for•st to yield him pr•sooner to his foe:
When he was taken, all the rest they fled,
And our Carbines pursued them to the death,
Till Phoebus waving to the western deep,
Our Trumpeters were charged to sound retreat.
Thanks good L. General for these good news,
And for some argument of more to come,
Take this and wear it for thy sovereigns sake.
But tell me now, •ast thou confirmed a peace?
No peace my Liege, but peace conditional,
That if with homage tribute be well paid,
The fury of your forces will be staide.
And to this peace their Viceroy hath subscribde.
And made a solemn vow that during life,
His tribute shall be truly paid to Spain.
These words, these deeds, become thy person well.
But now Knight Marshall •rolike with thy King,
For tic thy Son that wins this battles prize.
Long may he live to serve my sovereign liege,
And soon decay unless he serve my liege.
Not thou nor he shall dye without reward,
What means this wa•ning of this trumpets sound?
This tells me that your graces men of war,
Such as wars fortune hath reserved from death,
Come marching on towards your royal seat,
To show themselves before your Majesty,
For so I gave in charge at my depart.
Whereby by demonstration shall appear,
That all (except three hundred or few more)
Are safe returned and by their foes enriched.
A gladsome sight, I long to see them here.
They enter and pass by.
Was that the warlike Prince of Portugal,
That by our Nephew was in triumphled?
It was my Liege, the Prince of Portugal.
But what was he that on the other side,
Held him by th'arme as partner of the prize?
That was my son my gracious sovereign,
Of whom, though from his tender infancy,
My loving thoughts did never hope but well:
He never pleased his fathers eyes till now,
Nor filled my hart with ouercloying joys.
Go let them march once more about these walls,
That staying them we may confer and talk,
With our brave prisoner and his double guard.
Hieronimo, it greatly pleases vs,
That in our victory thou have a share,
By virtue of thy worthy sons exploit.
Bring hither the young Prince of Portugal,
The rest march on, but ere they be dismissed,
We will bestow on every soldier two ducats,
And on every leader ten, that they may know
Our largess welcomes them.
Welcome Don Balthazar, welcome Nephew,
And thou Horatio thou art welcome too:
Young Prince, although thy fathers hard misdeeds,
In keeping back the tribute that he owes,
Deserve but evil measure at our hands:
Yet shalt thou know that Spain is honourable.
The trespass that my Father made in peace,
Is now controlled by fortune of the wars:
And cards once dealt, it boots not ask why so,
His men are slain, a weakening to his Realm,
His colours ceased, a blot unto his name,
His Son distressed, a cursive to his hart,
These punishments may clear his late offence.
I Balthazar, if he observe this truce,
Our peace will grow the stronger for these wars:
Mean while live thou though not in liberty,
Yet free from bearing any servile yoke.
For in our hearing thy deserts were great,
And in our sight thy self art gracious.
And I shall study to deserve this grace.
But tell me, for their holding makes me doubt,
To which of these twain art thou prisoner.
To me my Liege.
To me my Sovereign.
This hand first took his courser by the rains.
But first my lance did put him from his horse.
••eased his weapon and enjoyed it first.
But first I forced him lay his weapons down,
Let go his arm upon our privilege.
Say worthy Prince, to whether did thou yield?
To him in courtesy, to this perforce:
He spake me fair, this other gave me strokes:
He promised life, this other threatened death:
He wan my love, this other conquered me:
And truth to say I yield my self to both.
But that I know your grace for just and wise,
And might seem partial in this difference,
Infor•t by nature and by law of arms,
My tongue should plead for young Horatios right.
He hunted well that was a Lyons death,
Not he that in a garment wore his skin:
So Hares may pull dead Lyons by the beard.
Content thee Marshall thou shalt have no wrong,
And for thy sake thy Son shall want no right.
Will both abide the censure of my doom?
I crave no better then your grace awards.
Nor I, although I sit beside my right.
Then by my judgment thus your strife shall end,
You both deserve and both shall have reward.
Nephew, thou took his weapon and his horse,
His weapons and his horse are thy reward.
Horatio thou did force him first to yield,
His ransom therefore is thy valours fee:
Appoint the sum as you shall both agree.
But Nephew thou shalt have the Prince in guard,
For thine estate best fitteth such a guest.
Horatios house were small for all his train,
Yet in regard thy substance passes his,
And that just guerdon may befall desert,
To him we yield the armour of the Prince.
How likes. Don Balthazar of this device?
Right well my Liege, if this proviso were,
That Don Horatio bear vs company,
Whom I admire and love for chivalry.
Horatio leave him not that loves thee so,
Now let vs hence to see our soldiers paid,
And feast our prisoner as our friendly guest.
Is our ambassador dispatcht for Spain?
Two days (my Liege) are past since his depart.
And tribute payment gone along with him?
I my good Lord.
Then rest we here a while in our unrest.
And feed our sorrows with some inward sighs,
For deepest cares break never into tears.
But wherefore sit I in a Regal throne,
This better fits a wretches endless moan.
Yet this is higher then my fortuues reach,
And therefore better then my state deserves.
I, I, this earth, Image of melancholy,
Seeks him whom fates adjudge to misery:
Here let me lye, now am I at the lowest.
Qvi iacet in terranon ha•et vnde cadet,
In me consumpsit verse fortunanocendo,
Nil superest vt jam posit obese magic.
Yes, Fortune may bereave me of my Crown:
Here take it now, let Fortune doe her worst,
She will not rob me of this sable weed,
O no, she envies none but pleasant things,
Such is the folly of despiteful chance:
Fortune is blind and sees not my deserts,
So is she deaf and hears not my laments:
And could she hear, yet is she wilful mad,
And therefore will not pity my dis•resse.
Suppose that she could pity me, what then?
What help can be expected at her hands?
Whose foot standing on a rolling stone,
And mind more mutable then fickle winds.
Why wail I then wheres hope of no redress•e?
O yes, complaining makes my grief seem less.
My late ambition hath distained my faith,
My breach of faith occasiond bloody wars,
Those bloody wars have spent my treasure,
And with my treasure my peoples blood,
And with their blood, my joy and best beloved,
My best beloved, my sweet and only Son.
O wherefore went I not to war my self?
The cause was mine I might have died for both:
My years were mellow, his but young and greene,
My death were natural, but his was forced.
No doubt my Liege but still the Prince survives.
Survives, I where?
In Spain, a prisoner by mischance of war.
Then they have •lain him for his fathers fault.
That were a breach to common law of arms.
They reck no laws that meditate revenge.
His ransoms worth will stay from foul revenge.
No, if he lived the news would soon be here.
Nay evil news fly faster still than good.
Tell me no more of news, for he is dead.
My sovereign pardon the Author of ill news,
And Isle bewray the fortune of thy Son.
Speak on, Isle guerdon thee what ere it be,
Mine ear is ready to receive ill news,
My hart grown hard against mischiefs battery,
Stand up I say and tell thy tale at large,
Then hear that truth which these mine eyes have seen.
When both the armies were in battle joined,
Don Balthazar amidst the thickest troupes,
To win renown, did wondrous feats of arms:
Amongst the rest I saw him hand to hand
In single fight with their Lord General.
Till Alexandro that here counterfeits,
Under the colour of a duteous friend,
Discharged his Pistol at the Princes back,
As though he would have slain their General.
But therewithal Don Balthazar fell down:
And when he fell then we began to fly,
But had he lived the day had sure been ours.
O wicked forgery: O traitorous miscreant.
Hold thou thy peace, but now Villuppo say,
Where then became the carcass of my Son?
I saw them drag it to the Spanish tents.
I, I, my nightly dreams have told me this:
Thou false, unkind, unthankful traitorous beast,
Wherein had Balthazar offended thee,
That thou should thus betray him to our foes?
Wast Spanish gold that bleared so thine eyes,
That thou could see no part of our deserts?
Perchance because thou art Terseraes Lord,
Thou had some hope to wear this Diatom,
If first my Son and then my self were slain:
But thy ambitious thought shall break thy neck.
I, this was it that made thee spill his blood,
But Isle now wear it till thy blood be spilt.
Vouchsafe (dread Sovereign to hear me speak.
A way with him, his sight is second hell,
Keep him till we determine of his death.
If Balthazar be dead, he shall not live.
Villuppo follow vs for thy reward.
Thus have I with an envious forged tale,
Deceived the King, betrayed mine enemy,
And hope for guerdon of my villainy.
Signior Horatio, this is the place and hour,
Wherein I must entreat thee to relate,
The circumstance of Don Andreas death:
Who living was my garlands sweetest flower,
And in his death hath buried my delights.
For love of him and service to your self,
I nill refuse this heavy doleful charge.
Yet tears and sighs, I fear will hinder me.
When both our Armies were enioynd in fight.
Your worthy chevalier amidst the thikst,
For glorious cause still aiming at the fairest,
Was at the last by young Don Balthazar,
Encountered hand to hand: their fight was long,
Their harts were great, their clamours menacing,
Their strength alike, their strokes both dangerous.
But wrathful Nemesis that wicked power,
Envying at Andreas praise and worth,
Cut short his life to end his praise and worth.
She, she her self disguised in armours mask,
(As Pallas was before proud Pergamus:)
Brought in a fresh supply of Halberdiers,
Which paunched his horse and dingd him to the ground,
Then young Don Balthazar with ruthless rage,
Taking advantage of his foes distress,
Did finish what his Halberdiers begun,
And left not till Andreas life was done.
Then though too late incensed with just remorse,
I with my band set foo•th against the Prince,
And brought him prisoner from his Halberdiers.
Would thou had slain him that so slew my love.
But then was Don Andreas carcass lost?
No, that was it for which I chiefly strove•,
Nor stepped I back till I recovered him:
I took him up and wound him in mine arms.
And welding him unto my private tent,
There laid him down and dewd him with my tears,
And sighed and sorrowed as became a friend.
But neither friendly sorrow, sighs nor tears,
Could win pale death from his usurped right.
Yet this I did▪ and less I could not doe:
I saw him honoured with due funeral,
This scarf I plucked from off his liveless arm,
And wear it in remembrance of my friend.
I know the scarf, would he had kept it still,
For had he lived he would have kept it still,
And worn it for his Bel-imperias sake:
For it was my favour at his last depart.
But now wear thou it both for him and me,
For after him thou hast deserved it best,
But for thy kindness in his life and death,
Be sure while Bel-imperias life endures,
She will be Don Horatios thankful friend.
And (Madame) Don Horatio will not slack,
Humbly to serve fair Bel-imperia.
But now if your good liking stand thereto,
•e crave your pardon to go seek the Prince,
For so the Duke your father gave me charge.
I, go Horatio, leave me here alone,
For solitude best fits my cheereles mood:
Yet what avails to wail Andreas death,
From whence Horatio proves my second love▪
Had he not loved Andria as he did,
He could not sit in Bel-imperias thoughts.
But how can love find harbour in my breast,
Till I revenge the death of my beloved.
Yes, second love shall further my revenge.
Isle love Horatio my Andreas friend,
The more to spite the Prince that wrought his end:
And where Don Balthazar that slew my love,
Himself now pleads for favour at my hands,
He shall in rigour of my just disdain,
Reap long repentance for his murderous deed:
For what wast else but murderous cowardice,
So many to oppress one valiant knight,
Without respect of honour in the fight?
And here he comes that murdered my delight.
Sister, what means this melancholy walk?
That for a while I wish no company.
But here the Prince is come to visit you,
That argues that he lives in liberty.
No Madame, but in pleasing servitude.
Your prison then belike is your conceit.
I by conceit my freedom is enthralde,
Then with conceit enlarge your self again•
What if conceit have laid my hart to gage?
Pay that you borrowed and recover it.
I die if it return from whence it lies.
A hartles man and live? A miracle.
I Lady, love can work such miracles.
Tush, tush my Lord, let go these ambages,
And in plain terms acquaint her with your love.
What boots complaint, when theirs no remedy?
Yes, to your gracious self must I complain,
In whose fair answer lies my remedy,
On whose perfection all my thoughts attend,
On whose aspect •nine eyes find beauties bower,
In whose translucent breast my hart is lodged.
Alas my Lord these are hut words of course.
And but devise to drive me from this place.
Madame, your Glove.
Thanks good Horatio, take it for thy pains.
Signior Horatio stooped in happy time.
I reaped more grace then I deserved or hoped.
My Lord, be not dismayed for what is past.
You know that women oft are humorous:
These clouds will overblow with little wind.
Let me alone, Isle scatt•r them my self:
Mean while let vs devise to spend the time,
In some delightful sports and revelling.
The King my Lords is coming hither straight,
To feast the Portugal Ambassador,
Things were in readiness before I came.
Then here it fits vs to attend the King,
To welcome hither our Ambassador,
And learn my Father and my Countries health.
See Lord Ambassador, how Spain entreats
Their prisoner Balthazar, thy Viceroys Son:
We pleasure more in kindness then in wars.
Sad is our King, and Portugal laments,
Supposing that Don Balthazar is slain.
So am I slain by beauties tyranny.
You see my Lord how Balthazar is slain.
I frolic with the Duke of Castles Son,
Wrapped every hour in pleasurs of the Court,
And grist with favours of his Majesty.
Put off your greetings till our feast be done,
Now come and sit with vs and taste our cheer.
Sit down young Prince, you are our second guest:
Brother sit down, and Nephew take your place,
Signior Horatio waite thou upon our cup,
For well thou hast deserved to be honoured.
Now Lordings fall too, Spain is Portugal,
And Portugal is Spain, we both are friends,
Tribute is paid, and we enjoy our right.
But where is old Hieronimo our Marshall,
He p•omised vs in honour of our guest,
To grace our banquet with some pompousiest.
Hieronimo, this mask contents mine eye,
Although I sound not well the mystery.
The first armed Knight that hung his Scutchin up,
Was English Robert Earl of Gloucester,
Who when king Stephen bore sway in Albion,
Arrived with five and twenty thousand men,
In Portugal, and by success of war,
Enforced the King then but a Saracen,
To bear the yoke of the English Monarchy.
My Lord of Portugal, by this you see,
That which may comfort both your King and you,
And make your late discomfort seem the less.
But say Hieronimo, what was the next?
The second Knight that hung his Scutchin up,
Was Edmond Earl of Kent in Albion,
When English Richard wore the Diadem.
He came likewise and razed Lisbon walls,
And took the King of Portugal in fight:
For which, and other such like service done,
He after was created Duke of York.
This is another special argument,
That Portugal may deign to bear our yoke,
When it by little England hath been yoked:
But now Hieronimo what were the last?
The third and last not least in our account,
Was as the restavaliant Englishman,
Brave Iohn of Ga•ned the Duke of Lancaster.
As by his Scutchin plainly may appear.
He with a puissant army came to Spain,
And took our King of Castle prisoner.
This is an argument for our Viceroy,
That Spain may not insult for her success,
Since English warriors likewise conquered Spain,
And made them bow their knees to Albion.
Hieronimo, I dtinke to thee for this devise.
Which hath pleased both the Ambassador and me:
Pledge me Hieronomo, if thou love the King.
My Lord, I fear we sit but ouer-long.
Unless our dainties were more delicate.
But welcome are you to the best we have.
Now let vs in that you may be dispatcht,
I think our council is already set.
Come we for this from depth of under ground,
To see him feast that gave me my deaths wound?
These pleasant sights are sorrow to my soul,
Nothing but league, and love and banqueting?
Be still Andrea ere we go from hence,
Isle turn their friendship into fell despite,
Their love to mortal hate, their day to night,
Their hope into despair, their peace to war,
Their joys to pain, their bliss to misery.
MY Lord, though Bel-imperia seem thus coy,
Let reason hold you in your wonted joy:
In time the savage B•ll sustains the yoke,
In time all haggard Hawks will stoop to lu•e,
In time small wedges cleave the hardest Oak,
In time the flint is appears with softest shower,
And she in time will fall from her disdain,
And rue the sufferance of your friendly pain.
No, she is wilder and more hard withal,
Then beast, or bird, or tree, or stony wall.
But wherefore blot I Bel-imperias name?
It is my fault, not she that merits blame.
My feature is not to content her sight,
My wodres are rude and work her no delight.
The lines I send her are but harsh and ill,
Such as doe drop from Pan and Mercies quill.
My presents are not of sufficient cost,
And being worthless all my labours lost.
Yet might she love me for my valiancy,
I but thats slandered by captivity.
Yet might she love me to content her fire:
I but her reason masters his desire.
Yet might she love me as her brothers friend,
I, but her hopes aim at some other end.
Yet might she love me to uproar her state,
I▪ but perhaps she hopes some nobler mate.
Yet might she love me as her beauteous thrall,
I, but I fear she cannot love at all.
My Lord, for my sake leave these ecstasies,
And doubt not but weal find some remedy,
Some cause there is that lets you not be loved:
First that must needs be known and then removed.
What if my Sister love some other Knight?
My summers day will turn to winters night.
I have already found a stratage me,
To sound the bottom of this doubtful theme▪
My Lord, for once you shall be ruled by me,
Hinder me not what ere you hear or see.
By force of fire means will I cast about,
To find the truth of all this question out.
Ho Pedringano.
Signior.
Vein que presto.
Hath your Lordship any service to command me?
I Pedringano service of import:
And not to spend the time in trifling words,
Thus stands the case; it is not long thou know,
Since I did shield thee from my fathers wrath,
For thy conveyance in Andreas love:
For which thou were adjudged to punishment▪
I stood betwixt thee and thy punishment:
And since, thou know how I have favoured thee▪
Now to these favours will I addereward,
Not with fair words, but store of golden coin,
And lands and living joined with dignities,
If thou but satisfy my just demand.
I'ell truth and have me for thy lasting friend.
What ere it be your Lordship shall demand,
My bounden duty bids me tell the truth.
If case it lye in me to tell the truth.
Then Pedringano this is my demand,
Whom loves my sister Bel-imperia?
For she reposes all her trust in thee:
Speak man and gain both friendship and reward,
I mean, whom loves she in Andreas place?
Alas my Lord, since Don Andreas death,
I have no credit with her as before,
And therefore know not if she love or no.
Nay if thou dally then I am thy foe,
And fear shall force what friendship cannot win.
Thy death shall bury what thy life conceals.
Thou die for more esteeming her then me.
Oh stay my Lord.
Yet speak the truth and I will guerdon thee,
And shield thee from what ever can ensue.
And will conceal what ere proceeds from thee,
But if thou dally once again, thou die.
If Madame Bel-imperia be in love.
What villain ifs and ands?
O stay my Lord, she loves Horatio.
What Don Horati• our Knight Marshals son?
Even him my Lord.
Now say, but how know thou he is her love?
And thou shalt find me kind and liberal:
Stand up I say, and fearless tell the truth.
She sent him letters which my self perusde,
Full fraught with lines and arguments of love,
Preferring him before Prince Balthazar.
Swear on this cross, that what thou says is true,
And that thou wilt conseale what thou hast told.
I swear to both by him that made vs all.
In hope thine oath is true, hears thy reward,
But if I prove thee periurde and unjust,
This very sword whereon thou took thine oath,
Shall be the worker of thy tragedy.
What I have said is true, and shall for me,
Be still concealed from Bel-imperia.
Besides your Honours liberality,
Deserves my duteous service, even till death.
Let this be all that thou shalt doe for me,
Be watchful when, and where these lovers meet,
And give me notice in some secret sort.
I will my Lord.
Then shalt thou find that I am liberal,
Thou know that I can more advance thy state
Then she, be therefore wise and fail me not.
Go and attend her as thy custom is,
Least absence make her think thou dost amiss.
Why so: T am arms quam ingenio:
Where words prevail not, violence prevails.
But gold doth more then either of them both.
How likes Prince Balthazar this stratagem?
Both well, and ill: it makes me glad and sad:
Glad, that I know the hinderer of my love,
Sad, that I fear she hates me whom I love.
Glad, that I know on whom to be revenged,
Sad, that sheele fly me if I take revenge.
Yet must I take revenge or dye my self,
For love resisted grows impatient.
I think Horatio be my destinde plague,
First in his hand he brandished a sword,
And with that sword he fiercely waged war,
And in that war he gave me dangerous wounds,
And by those wounds he forced me to yield,
And by my yielding I became his slave.
Now in his mouth he carries pleasing words,
Which pleasing words doe harbour sweet conceits,
Which sweet conceits are limed with sly deceits,
Which sly deceits smooth Bel-imperias ears,
And through her ears dive down into her hart,
And in her hart set him where I should stand.
Thus hath he tan my body by his force,
And now by slight would captivate my soul:
But in his fall isle tempt the destinies,
And either loose my life, or win my love.
Lets go my Lord, your staying stays revenge,
Doe you hut follow me and gain your love,
Her favour must be won by his remove.
Now Madame, since by favour of your love,
Our hidden smoke is turned to open flame:
And that with looks and words we feed our though▪
Two chief contents, where more cannot be had.
Thus in the midst of loves fair blandishments,
Why show you sign of inward lan guishments.
My hart (sweet friend) is like a ship at sea,
She wishes port, where riding all at ease,
She mad repair what stormy times have worn:
And leaning on the shore may sing with joy,
That pleasure follows pain, and bliss annoy.
Possession of thy love is th'onely port,
Wherein my hart with fears and hopes long tossed,
Each hour doth wish and long to make resort,
There to repair the joys that it hath lost:
And sitting safe to sing in Cupids quire,
That sweetest bliss is crown of loves desire.
O sleep mine eyes, see not my love prophande,
Be deaf my ears, hear not my discontent,
Dye hart, another joys what thou deserve.
Watch still mine eyes, to see this love disioynd,
Hear still mine ears, to hear them both lament,
Live hart to joy at fond Horatios fall.
Why stands Horatio speecheles all this while?
The less I speak, the more I meditate.
But whereon dost thou chiefly meditate?
On dangers past, and pleasures to ensue.
On pleasures past, and dangers to ensue.
What dangers, and what pleasures dost thou mean▪
Dangers of war, and pleasures of our love.
Dangers of death, but pleasures none at all.
Let dangers go, thy war shall be with me,
But such a warring, as breaks no bond of peace.
Speak thou fair words, isle cross them with fair words,
Send thou sweet looks, isle meet them with sweet looks▪
Write loving lines, isle answer loving lines,
Give me a kiss, isle countercheck thy kiss,
Be this our warring peace, or peaceful war.
But gracious Madame, then appoint the field,
Where trial of this war shall first be made.
Ambitious villain, how his boldness grows•▪
Then be thy fathers pleasant bower the field,
Where first we vowed a mutual amity:
The Court were dangerous, that place is safe:
Our hour shall be when Vesper gins to rise,
That summons home distressful travellers.
There none shall hear vs but the harmless birds.
Happily the gentle Nightingale,
Shall carroll vs a sleep ere we be ware.
And singing with th• prickle at her breast,
Tell our delight and mirthful dailiance.
Till then each hour will seem a year and more.
But honey sweet, and honourable love.
Return we now into your fathers sight,
Dangerous suspicion waits on our delight.
I, danger mixed with jealous despite,
Shall send thy soul into eternal night.
Brother of Castle, to the Princes love:
What says your daughter Bel-imperia?
Although she coy it as becomes her kind,
And yet dissemble that sheloues the Prince:
I doubt not I, but she will stoop in time.
And were she froward, which she will not be,
Yet herein shall she follow my advice,
Which is to love him or forgo my love.
Then Lord Ambassador of Portugal,
Advise thy King to make this marriage up,
For strengthening of our late confirmed league,
I know no better means to make vs friends.
Her dowry shall be large and liberal,
Besides that, she is daughter and half heir,
Unto our brother here Don Cip•i•,
And shall e•joy the moitie of his land.
Isle grace her marriage with an vnck•es gift,
And this it is, in case the match go forward,
The tribute which you pay shall be releast,
And if by Balthazar she have a Son,
He shall enjoy the kingdom after vs.
Isle make the motion to my sovereign Liege,
And work it if my counsel may prevail.
Doe so my Lord, and if he give consent,
I hope his presence here will honour vs,
In celebration of the nuptial day,
And let himself determine of the time.
Wilt please your grace co•mmand me ought besid?
Commend me to the King, and so farewell.
But wheres Prince Balthazar to take his leave?
That is performed already my good Lord.
Amongst the rest of what you have in charge,
The Princes ransom must not be forgot:
Thats none of mine, but his that took him prisoner,
And well his forwardness deserves reward.
I• was Horatio our Knight Marshals son.
Between vs theres a price already pitched,
And shall be sent with all convenient speed.
Then once again farewell my Lord.
Farewell my Lord of Castle and the rest.
Now brother, you must take some little pains,
To win fair Bel-imperia from her will:
Young Virgins must be ruled by their friends,
The Prince is amiable and loves her well,
If she neglect him and forgo his love,
She both will wrong her own estate and ours:
Therefore whiles I doe entertain the Prince,
With greatest pleasure that our Court affords,
Endeavour you to win your daughters thoughts,
If she give back, all this will come to nought.
Now that the night begins with sable wings,
To ouer-cloud the brightness of the Sun,
And that in darkness pleasures may be done:
Come Bel-imperia let vs to the bower,
And there in safety pass a pleasant hour.
I follow thee my love, and will not back,
Although my fainting hart controls my soul.
Why, make you doubt of Pedringanos faith?
No he is as trusty as my second self.
Go Pedringano watch without the gate,
And let vs know if any make approach.
In steed of watching isle deserve more gold.
By fetching Don Lorenzo to this match.
What means my love?
I know not what my self:
And yet my hart foretells me some mischance.
Sweet say not so, fair fortune is our friend,
And heavens have shut up day to pleasure vs.
The stars thou see hold back their twinkling shine,
And Luna hides her self to pleasure vs.
Thou hast prevailed, isle conquer my misdoubt,
And in thy love and council drown my fear:
I fear no more, love now is all my thoughts,
Why sit we not, for pleasure asks ease?
The more thou set within these levy bowers,
The more will Flora deck it with her flowers.
I but if Flora spy Horatio here,
Her jealous eye will think I sit too near.
Hark Madame how the birds record by night,
For joy that Bel-imperia sits in sight.
No Cupped counterfeits the Nightingale,
To frame sweet music to Horatios tale.
If Cupped sing, then Venus is nor far,
I thou art Venus or some fairer star.
If I be Venus thou must needs be Mars,
And where Mars reigns there must needs be war.
Then thus begin our wars put forth thy hand,
That it may combat with my ruder hand.
Set forth thy foot to try the push of mine.
But first my looks shall combat against thine.
Then ward thy self, I dart this kiss at thee.
Thus I retort the dart thou threw stat me.
Nay then to gain the glory of the field,
My twining arms shall yoke and make thee yield.
Nay then my arms are large and strong with▪
Thus Elms by vines are compassed till they fall.
O let me go, for in my troubled eyes,
Now moist thou read that life in passion dies.
O stay a while and I will dye with thee,
So shalt thou yield, and yet have conquered me.
Whose there Pedringano? we are betrayed.
My Lord away with her, take her aside,
O sir forbear, your valour is already tried.
Quickly dispatch my masters,
What will you murder me?
I thus, and thus, these are the fruits of love.
O save his life and let me dye for him,
O save him brother, save him Balthazar:
I loved Horatio but he loved not me.
But Balthazar loves Bel-imperia.
Although his life were still ambituous proud,
Yet is heat the highest now he is dead.
Murder, murder, help Hieronimo help.
Come stop her mouth away with her.
What out cries pluck me from my naked bed,
And chill my throbbing hart with trembling fear,
Which never danger yet could daunt before.
Who calls Hieronimo? speak, here I am:
I did not slumber, therefore was no dream,
No, no, it was some woman cried for help,
And here within this garden did she 〈◊〉
And in this garden must I rescue her:
But stay, what murdrous spectacle is this?
A man hanged up and all the murderers gone,
And in my bower to lay the guilt on me:
This place was made for pleasure not for death.
Those garments that he wears I o•t have seen,
Alas it is Horatio my sweet son.
O no, but he that meanwhile was my son,
O was it thou that called me from my bed,
O speak if any spark of life remain.
I am thy father, who hath slain my son?
What savage monster, not of humane kind,
Hath here been glutted with thy harmless blood?
And left thy bloody corpse dishonoured here,
For me amidst this dark and deathful shades,
To drown thee with an ocean of my tears.
O heavens, why made you night to cover sinue?
By day this deed of darkness had not been.
O earth why did thou not in time devour,
The wild profaner of this sacred bower.
O poor Horatio, what had thou misdoone?
To leese thy life ere life was new begun.
O wicked butcher what so ere thou were,
How could thou strangle virtue and desert?
Ay me most wretched that have lost my joy,
In leasing my Horatio my sweet boy.
My husbands absence makes my hart to throb,
Hieronimo.
Here Isabella, help me to lament,
For sighs are stopped, and all my tears are spent.
What world of grief, my son Horatio?
O wheres the author of this end•es woe.
To know the author were some ease of grief,
For in revenge my hart would find relief.
Then is he gone? and is my son gone too?
Ogush out tears, fountains and •louds of tears,
Blow sighs and raise an everlasting storm.
For outrage fits our cursed wre•chednes.
Sweet lovely Rose, ill plucked before thy time,
Fair worthy son, not conquered but betrayed:
Isle kiss thee now, for words with tears are stained.
And isle close up the glasses of his sight,
For once these eyes were only my delight,
See thou this handkercher bes•erd with blood,
It shall not from me till I take revenge:
See thou thoss wounds that yet are bleeding fresh,
Isle not entomb them till I have revenged:
Then will I joy amidst my discontent,
Till then my sorrow never shall be spent.
The heavens are just, murder cannot be hid,
Time is the author both of truth and right.
And time will bring this treachery to light.
Mean while good Isabella cease thy plaints,
Or at the least dissemble them a while,
So shall we sooner find the practise out,
And learn by whom all this was brought about.
Come Isabel now let vs take him up,
And bear him in from out this cursed place,
Isle say his dirge, singing fits not this case.
O a•quis mihi quas pulcbrum var educate herbs.
Misceat &amp; nostro detur, medicina dolor:
Aut siquifaciunt annum oblimia succos,
Prebeat, ipse ••tum magnam quicunque per orbem▪
Gramina Sol pulcbras effecit inluminis ores.
Ipse bibam quicqu•d meditatur saga venery,
Quicquid &amp; irra•i euecaca menia nectit.
Omnia perpetiar, le•bu• quoque dum scm•l•mnis,
Noster in extincto 〈◊〉 p•ct•ra sensus:
Ergo tuos occulos nunquam (mea vita) videb•.
Et •ua perpetuus sepeliuit lumina so••juice:
Emoriar tecum Sic, sic 〈◊〉 sub vmbras,
Ottoman absistam proper 〈…〉,
No mortem vindicta tuam jam nulla sequatur.
Here he throws it from him and bears the body away.
Broughtst thou me hither to increase my pain?
I looked that Balthazar should have been slain:
But tic my friend Horatis that is slain,
And they abuse fair Bel-imperia.
Or whom I doted more then all the world,
Because she loved me more then all the world.
Thou talk of harvest when the corn is greene,
The end is crown of every work well done:
The Sickle comes not till the corn be ripe.
Be still, and ere I lead thee from this place,
Isle show thee Balthazar in heavy case.
Unfortunate condition of Kings,
Seated amidst so many helpless doubts:
First we are placed upon extremest height,
And oft supplanted with exceeding heat,
But ever subject to the wheel of chance?
And at our highest never joy we so,
As we both doubt and dread our overthrow.
So strives not the waives with sundry winds,
As fortune toils in the affairs of kings,
That would be feared, yet fear to be beloved,
Sith fear or love to Kings is flattery•
For instance Lordings, look upon your King,
By hate deprived of his dearest s•nne,
The only hope of our success〈…〉 li•e.
I had not thought that Al•x•ndros hart,
Had been 〈◊〉 with such extr••me hate:
But now I see that words have several works,
And theres no credi••• the coun•en••••.
No, for my Lord, had you beheld the train,
That fained love had coloured in his looks,
When he in camp consorted Balthazar:
Far more inconstant had you thought the Sun,
That hourly coasts the center of the earth,
Then Alexandros purpose to the Prince.
No more Villuppo, thou hast said enough,
And with thy words thou slaiest our wounded thoughts.
Nor shall I longer dally with the world:
Procrastinating Alexandros death:
Go some of you and fetch the traitor forth,
That as he is condemned he may dye.
In such extremes, will nought but patience serve.
But in extremes, what patience shall I use?
Nor discontents it me to leave the world,
With whom there nothing can prevail but wrong.
Yet hope the best.
Tic Heaven is my hope.
As for the earth it is too much i•sect,
To yield me hope of any of her mould.
Why lingerie? bring forth that daring fe•nd,
And let him die for his accursed deed▪
Not that I fear the extra••tie of death,
For N•bless ca•not stoop to servile fear.
Doo • (O King) thus discontented live.
But this, O this torments my labouring soul,
That thus I die suspected of a sin,
Whereof, as heavens have known my secret thoughts,
So am I free from this suggestion.
No more I say, to the tortures, when?
Bind him, and burn his body in those flames,
That shall presigure those unquenched fierce,
Of Phlegiton prepared for his soul.
My guiltless death will be avenged on thee,
On thee Villuppo that hath malisde thus,
Or for thy meed, hast falsely me accnsde.
Nay Alexandro if thou menace me,
Isle lend a hand to send thee to the lake,
Where those thy words shall perish with thy works,
Injurious traitor, monstrous homicide.
Stay hold a while, and heer with pardon of his Majesty,
Lay hands upon Villuppo.
Ambassador, what news hath urged this sudden en∣trance?
Know sovereign L. that Balthazar doth live.
What says thou? lives Balthazar our son?
Your highness son, L. Balthazar doth live.
And well entreated in the Court of Spain:
Humbly commends him to your Majesty.
These eyes beheld, and these my followers,
With these the letters of the Kings commends.
Are happy witnesses of his highness health.
The King looks on the letters, and proceeds.
Thy son doth live, your tribute is received,
Thy peace is made, and we are satisfied:
The rest resolve upon as things proposde,
For both our honours and thy benefit.
These are his highness farther articles.
Accursed wretch to intimate these ills,
Against the life and reputation
Of noble Alexandro. come my Lord unbind him.
Let him unbind thee that is bound to death,
To make a quitall for thy discontent.
Dread Lord, in kindness you could do no less,
Upon report of such a damned fact:
But thus we see our innocence hath saved,
The hopeless life which thou Villuppo sought,
By thy suggestions to have massacred.
Say false Villuppo? wherefore did thou thus
Falsely betray Lord Alexandros life?
Him whom thou know, that no unkindness else,
But even the slaughter of our dearest son,
Could once have moved vs to have misconceived.
Say treacherous Villuppo, tell the King,
Or wherein hath Alexandro used thee ill?
Rent with remembrance of so foul a deed,
My guilty soul submits me to thy doom:
For not for Alexandros injuries,
But, forreward and hope to be preferred:
Thus have I shamelessly hazarded his life,
which villain shall be ransomed with thy deeth,
And not so mean torment as we here
Devised for him, who thou said slew our son:
But with the bitterest torments and extremes,
That may be yet invented for thine end:
Entreat me not, go take the traitor hence.
And Alexandro let vs honour thee,
With public notice of thy loyalty,
To end those things articulated here,
By our great L, the mighty king of Spain.
We with our council will deliberate,
Come Alexandro keep vs company.
Oh eyes, no eyes but fountains fraught with tears,
Oh life, no life, but lively form of death:
Oh world, no world but mass of public wrongs.
Confused and filed, with murder and misdeeds
Oh sacred heavens, if this unhallowed deed,
If this inhumane and barbarous attempt,
If this incompaeable murder thus,
Of mine, but now no more my son,
Shall unravelled and unrevenged pass,
How should we term your dealings to be just,
If you unjustly deal with those, that in your justice trust.
The night sad secretary to my mons,
With direful visions wake my vexed soul,
And with the wounds of my distressful son,
Solicit me for notice of his death.
The ugly feends do sally forth of hell,
And frame my steps to unfrequented paths,
And fear my hart with fierce inflamed thoughts.
The cloudy day my discontents records,
Early begins to register my dreams,
And drive me forth to seek the murderer,
Eyes, life, world, heavens, hell, night and day,
See, search, show, send, some man,
Some mean, that may:
Whats here? a letter, tush, it is not so,
A Letter written to Hieronimo.
For want of ink receive this bloody writ,
Me hath my hapless brother hid from thee,
Revenge thy self on Balthazar and him,
For these were they that murdered thy Son.
Hieronimo, revenge Horatios death,
And better fare then Bel-imperia doth.
What means this unexpected miracle?
My Son slain by Lorenzo and the Prince.
What cause had they Horatio to malign?
Or what might move thee Bel-imperia,
To accuse thy brother, had he been the mean?
Hieronimo beware, thou art betrayed,
And to entrap thy life this train is laid.
Advise thee therefore, be not credulous:
This is devised to endanger thee,
That thou by this Lorenzo should accuse,
And he for thy dishonour done, should draw
Thy life in question; and thy name in hate.
Dear was the life of my beloved Son,
And of his death behooves me be revenged:
Then hazard not thine own Hieronimo,
But live t'effect thy resolution.
I therefore will by circumstances try,
What I can gather to confirm this writ,
And harkening near the Duke of Castles house,
Close if I can with Belimperia,
To listen more, but nothing to bewray.
Now Pedringano.
Now Hieronimo.
Wheres thy Lady?
I know not, heers my Lord.
How now, whose this, Hieronimo?
My Lord.
He asks for my Lady Bel-imperia.
What to doo Hieronimo? The Duke my father hath
Upon some disgrace a while removed her hence,
But if it be ought I may inform her of,
Tell me Hieronimo, and isle let her know it.
Nay, nay my Lord, I thank you, it shall not need,
I had a suit unto her, but too late,
And her disgrace makes me unfortunate.
Why so Hieronimo? use me.
Oh no my Lord, I dare not, it must not be.
I humbly thank your Lordship.
Why then farewell.
My grief no hart, my thoughts no tongue can tell.
Come hither Pedringano, see thou this?
My Lord, I see it, and suspect it too.
This is that damned villain Serberine,
That hath I fear reveled Horatios death.
My Lord, he could not, it was so lately done,
And since he hath not lest my company.
Admit he have not, his conditions such,
As fear of flattering words may make him false.
I know his humour, and there with repent,
That ere I used him in this enterprise.
But Pedringano, to prevent the worst,
And c•use I know thee secret as my soul,
Here for thy further satisfaction take thou this.
Gives him more gold.
And harken to me, thus it is devised:
This night thou must, and prithee so resolve,
Meet Serberine at S. Liugis Park,
Thou know tic here hard by behind the house,
There take thy stand, and see thou strike him sure,
For dye he must, if we do mean to live.
But how shall Serberine be there my Lord?
Let me alone, isle send to him to meet
The Prince and me, where thou must doe this deed.
It shall be done my L. it shall be done,
And isle go arm my self to meet him there.
When things shall alter, as I hope they will,
Then shalt thou mount for this, tbou know my mind.
My Lord.
Go sir to Serberine, and bid him forthwith,
Meet the Prince and me at S. Liugis Park,
Behind the house, this evening boy.
I go my Lord.
But sir, let the hour be eight a clock.
Bid him not fail.
I fly my Lord.
Now to confirm the complot thou hast cast,
Of all these practises, Isle spread the watch,
Upon precise commandment from the king,
Strongly to guard the place where Pedringano
This night shall murder hapless Serberine.
Thus must we work that will avoid distrust,
Thus must we practise to prevent mishap,
And thus one ill, another must expulse.
This sly enquiry of Hieronimo for Bel-imperia, breeds suspi∣tion,
And this suspicion boads a further ill.
As for my self, I know my secret fault,
And so doe they, but I have dealt for them.
They that for coin their souls endangered
To save my life, for coin shall venture theirs:
And better its that base companions dye,
Then by their life to hazard our good haps.
Nor shall they live for me, to fear their faith:
Isle trust my self, my self shall be my friend,
For dye they shall, slaves are ordained to no other end.
Now Pedringano bid thy pistol hold,
And hold on Fortune, once more favour me,
Give but success to mine at tempting spirit,
And let me shift for taking of mine aim:
Here is the gold, this is the gold proposde,
It is no dream that I adventure for,
But Pedringano is possessed thereof.
And he that would not strain his conscience,
For him that thus his liberal purse hath stretched,
Unworthy such a favour may he fail,
And •••hinge, want when such as I prevail.
As for the fear of apprehension,
I know, if need should be, my noble Lord
Will stand between me and ensuing harms.
Besides, this place is free from all suspect:
Here therefore will I stay and take my stand.
I wonder much to what intent it is,
That we are thus expressly charged to watch?
Tic by commandment in the Kings own name.
But we were never wont to watch and ward,
So near the Duke his brothers house before.
Content your self, stand close, theres somewhat int▪
Here Serberine attend and stay thy pace,
For here did Don Lorenzos Page appoint,
That thou by his command should meet with him.
How fit a place if one were so disposed,
Me thinks this corner is to close with one.
Here comes the bird that I must cease upon,
Now Pedringano or never play the man.
I wonder that his Lordship stays so long,
Or wherefore should he send for me so late?
For this Serberine, and thou shalt ha'te.
So, there he lies, my promise is performed.
Hark Gentlemen, this is a Pistol-shot.
And hears one slain, stay the murderer.
Now by the sorrows of the souls in hell,
Who first lays hand on me, isle be his Priest,
Sir, confess, and therein play the Priest,
Why hast thou thus unkindly kilt the man?
Why, because he walked abroad so late.
Come sir, you had been better kept your bed,
Then have committed this misdeed so late.
Come to the Marshals with the murderer.
On to Hieronimos, help me here,
To bring the murdered body with vs too.
Hieronimo, carry me before whom you will,
What ere he be isle answer him and you,
And doe your worst, for I defy you all.
How now my Lord, what makes you rise so soon?
Fear of preventing our mishaps too late.
What mischief is it that we not mistrust?
Our greatest else, we least mistrust my Lord,
And in expected harms do hurt vs most.
Why tell me Don Lorenzo, tell me man,
If ought concerns our honour and your own?
Nor you nor me my Lord, but both in one.
For I suspect, and the presumptions great,
That by those base confederates in our fault,
Touching the death of Don Horatio:
We are betrayed to old Hieronimo.
Betrayed Lorenzo, tush it cannot be.
A guilty conscience urged with the thought,
Offormer evils, easily cannot err:
I am persuaded, and dissuade me not,
That else revealed to Hieronimo.
And therefore know that I have cast it thus:
But hears the Page, how now, what news with thee?
My Lord, Serberine is slain.
Who? Serberine my man.
Your Highness man my Lord.
Speak Page, who murdered him?
He that is apprehended for the fact.
Who?
Pedringano.
Is Serberine slain that loved his Lord so well?
Injurious villame, murderer of his friend.
Hath P•dringano murdered Serberine?
My Lord, let me entreat you to take the pains,
To exasperate and hasten his revenge.
With your complaints unto my L. the King.
This their dissention breeds a greater doubt.
Assure thee Don Lore•nzo he shall dye,
Or else his Highness hardly shall deny.
Mean while, isle haste the Marshall Sessions,
For die he shall for this his damned deed.
Why so, this fits our former policy,
And thus experience bids the wise to deal.
I lay the plot, he prosecutes the point,
I set the trap, he breaks the worthless twigs,
And sees not that wherewith the bird was limde.
Thus hopeful men that mean to hold their own,
Must look like fowlers to their dearest friends.
He runs to kill whom I have help to catch,
And no man knows it was my reaching fetch.
Tic hard to trust unto a multitude,
Or any one in mine opinion,
When men themselu•s their secrets will reveal.
Boy.
My Lord.
Whats he?
I have a letter to your Lordship.
From whence?
From Pedring ano that's imprisoned.
So, he is in prison then?
I my good Lord.
What would he with vs?
He writes vs here to stand good L. and help him in distress.
Tell him I have his letters, know his mind,
And what we may let him assure him of.
Fellow, be gone: my boy shall follow thee.
This works like wax, yet once more try thy wits,
Boy, go convey this purse to Pedring •n•,
Thou know the prison, closely give it him:
And be advised that •one be there about.
Bid him be merry still, but secret:
And though the Marshall sessions be to day,
Bid him not doubt of his delivery.
Tell him his pardon is already signed,
And thereon bid him boldly be resolved:
For were he ready to be turned off,
As tic my will the uttermost be tried:
Thou with his pardon shalt attend him still,
Show him this box, tell him his pardons int,
But opent not, and if thou love thy life:
But let him wisely keep his hopes unknown,
He shall not want while Don Lorenzo lives: away.
I go my Lord, I run.
But sir, see that this be cleanly done.
Now stands our fortune on a tickle point,
And now or never ends Lorenzos doubts.
One only thing is vneffected yet,
And thats to see the Executioner,
But to what end? I list not trust the Air
With utterance of our pretence therein.
For fear the privy whispring of the wind,
Convey our words amongst unfriendly ears,
That lye too open to advantages.
Et qual que voglio It nessun le sa,
Intendo io qual mi bassara.
My Moister hath forbidden me to look in this box, and
by my troth tic likely, if he had not warned me, I should not
have had so much idle time: for wee mens-kinde in our mi∣noritie,
are like women in their uncertainty, that they are
most forbidden, they will soonest attempt: so I now. By my
bare honesty hears nothing but the bare empty box: were
it not sin against secrecy, I would say it were a piece of gen∣tlemanlike
knavery. I must go to Pedring•no, and tell him
his pardon is in this box, nay, I would have sworn it, had I
not seen the contrary. I cannot choose but smile to think,
how the villain will flout the gallows, scorn the audience,
and descant on the hangman, and al presuming of his pardon
from hence. Wilt not be an odd jest, for me to stand and
grace every jest he makes, pointing my finger at this box: as
who would say, mock on, heers thy warrant. First not a scur∣uie
jest, that a man should jest himself to death. Alas poor
Pedringano, I am in a sort sorry for thee, but if I should be
hanged with thee, I cannot weep.
Thus must we toil in other men's extremes,
That know not how to remedy our own,
And doe them justice, when unjustly we:
For all our wrongs can compass no redress.
But shall I never live to see the day,
That I may come (by justice of the heavens)
To know the cause that may my cares allay?
This toils my body, this consumes age,
That only I to all men just must be,
And neither Gods nor men be just to me.
Worthy Hieronimo, your office asks,
A care to punish such as doe transgress.
So first my duty to regard his death,
Who when he lived deserved my dearest blood:
But come, for that we came for lets begin,
For here lies that which bids me to be gone.
Bring forth the Prisoner for the Court is set.
Gramercy boy, but it was time to come,
For I had written to my Lord anew,
A nearer matter that concerns him,
For fear his Lordship had forgotten me:
But sith he hath remembered me so well,
Come, come, come on, when shall we to this gear.
Stand forth thou monster, murderer of men,
And here for satisfaction of the world,
Confess thy folly and repent thy fault,
For ther's thy place of execution.
This is short work, well, to your Marshallship
First I confess, nor fear I death therefore,
I am the man, it was I slew Serberine.
But sir, then you think this shall be the place,
Where we shall satisfy you for this gear?
I Pedringano.
Now I think not so.
Peace impudent, for thou shalt find it so.
For blood with blood, shall while I sit as judge,
Be satisfied, and the law discharged.
And though my self cannot receive the like,
Yet will I see that others have their right.
Dispatch, the faults approved and confessed,
Hnd by our law he is condemned to die.
Come on sit, are you ready?
To doo what, my fine officious knave?
To go to this gear.
O sir, you are to forward, thou would fine furnish
me with a halter, to disfurnish me of my habit.
So I should go out of this gear my raiment, into that gear
the rope.
But Hangman, now I spy your knavery, isle not change with∣out
boot, thats fl•t.
Come Sir.
So then I must up.
No remedy.
Yes, but there shall be for my coming down.
Indeed heers a remedy for that.
How? be turned off.
I truly, come are you ready.
I pray sir dispatch, the day goes away.
What doe you hang by the hour, if you doo, I may
chance to break your old custom.
Faith you have reason, for I am like to break your
young neck.
Dost thou mock me hangman, pray God I be not
preserved to break your knaves pate for this.
Alas sir, you are a foot too low to reach it, and I
hope you will never grow so high while I am in the
office.
Sir, dost see yonder boy with t•e box in his hand?
What, he that points to it with his finger.
I that companion.
I know him not, but what of him?
Dost thou think to live till his old doublet will
make thee a new truss?
I, and many a fair year after, to truss up many
an honester man then either thou or he.
What hath he in his box as thou think?
Faith I cannot tell, nor I care not greatly.
Me thinks you should rather hearken to your souls health.
Why sir Hangman? I take it, that that is good for
the body, is likewise good for the soul: and it may
be, in that box is balm for both.
Well, thou art even the merriest piece of mans flesh
that ere gronde at my office door.
Is your roaguery become an office with a knaves
name?
I, and that shall all they witness that see you seal it
with a thieves name.
I prithee request this good company to pray with
me.
I mary sir, this is a good motion: my masters, you
see heers a good fellow.
Nay, nay, now I remember me, let them alone till
some other time, for now I have no great need.
I have not seen a wretch so impudent,
O monstrous times where murders set so light,
And where the soul that should be shrinde in heaven▪
Solely delights in interdicted things,
Still wandering in the thorny passages,
That intercepts it self of happiness.
Murder, O bloody monster, God forbid,
A fault so foul should scope unpunished.
Dispatch and see this execution done,
This makes me to remember thee my son.
Nay soft, no hast.
Why, wherefore stay you, have you hope of life?
Why I.
As how?
Why Rascal by my pardon from the King.
stand you on that, then you shall off with this.
So Executioner, convey him hence,
But let his body be unburied.
Let not the earth be choked or infect.
With that which heavens contemns and men neglect.
Where shall I run to breath abroad my woes,
My woes whose weight hath wearied the earth?
Or mine exclaims that have surcharged the air,
With ceasles plaints, for my deceased son?
The blustering winds conspiring with my words,
At my lament have moved the levels trees.
Disrobed the meadows of their flowered greene,
Made mountains marsh with spring tides of my tears,
And broken through the brazen gates of hell,
Yet still tormented is my tortured soul,
With broken sighs and restless passions,
That winged mount, and hovering in the air,
Beat at the windows of the brightest heavens,
Soliciting for justice and revenge:
But they are placed in those imperial heights,
Where countermurde with walls of diamond,
I find the place impregnable, and they
Resist my woes, and give my words no way.
O Lord sir, God bless you sir, the man sir Petergade,
Sir, he that was so full of merry conceits.
Well, what of him?
O Lord sir, he went the wrong way, the fellow had
a fair commission to the contrary. Sir, here is his pas∣port,
I pray you sir, we have done him wrong.
I warrant thee, give it me.
you will stand between the gallows and me.
I, I.
I thank your L. worship.
And yet though some what nearer me concerns,
I will to ease the grief that I sustain,
Take truce with sorrow while I read on this.
My Lord, I write as mine extremes required,
That you would labour my delivery:
If you neglect, my life is desperate,
And in my death I shall reveal the troth.
You know my Lord, I slew him for your sake,
And was confeder ate with the Prince and you,
Won by rewards and hopeful promises,
I hope to murder Don Horatio too.
Help he to murder mine Horatio,
And actors in th'accursed Tragedy.
Wast thou Lorenzo, Balthazar and thou,
Of whom my Son, my Son deserved so well,
What have I heard, what have mine eyes beheld?
O sacred heavens, may it come to pass,
That such a monstrous and detested deed,
So closely smootherd, and so long concealed,
Shall thus by this be venged or reueald.
Now see I what I durst not then suspect,
That Bel-imperias Letter was not fainde,
Nor fained she though falsely they have wronged,
Both her, my self, Horati•, and themselves.
Now may I make compare twixt hers and this,
Of every accident, I near could find
Till now, and now I feelingly perceive,
They did what heaven unpunished would not leave.
O false Lorenzo, are these thy flattering looks?
Is this this honour that thou did my Son?
And Balthazar bane to thy soul and me,
Was this the ransom he reserved thee for?
Woe to the cause of these constrained wars,
Woe to thy baseness and captivity,
Woe to thy birth, thy body and thy soul,
Thy cursed father, and thy conquered self:
And band with bitter execrations be
The day and place where he did pity thee.
But wherefore waste I mine unfruitful words?
When nought but blood will satisfy my woes:
I will go plain me to my Lord the King,
And cry aloud for justice through the Court.
Wearing the flints with these my withered feet,
And either purchase justice by entreats,
Or tire them all with my revenging threats.
So that you say this herb will purge the eye
And this the head, ah but none of them will purge the hart:
No, theirs no medicine left for my disease,
Nor any physic to recur the dead:
Horatio, O wheres Horatio.
Good Madam, affright not thus your self,
With outrage for your son Horatio.
He sleeps in quiet in the Elision fields.
Why did I not give you gowns and goodly things,
Bought you a whistle and a whipstalke too▪
To be revenged on their villainies.
Madame these humours doe torment my soul.
My soul, poor soul thou talks of things
Thou know not what, my soul hath silver wings,
That mounts me up unto the highest heavens,
To heaven, I there sits my Whore•tio,
Backed with a troup offiery Cherubins,
Dancing about his newly healed wounds
Singing sweet hymns and chanting heavenly notes,
Rare harmony to greet his innocence,
That died, I died a mirror in our days.
But say, where shall I find, the men, the murderers,
That flew Horatio, whether shall I run,
To find them out, that murdered my Son.
What means this outrage that is offred me?
Why am I thus sequestered from the Court?
No notice, shall I not know the cause,
Of this my secret and suspicious else?
Accursed brother, unkind murderer.
Why bends thou thus thy mind to martyr me?
Hieronimo▪ why writ I of thy wrongs?
Or why art thou so slack in thy revenge?
Andrea, O Andrea that thou saw,
Me for thy friend Horatio handled thus,
And him for me thus causeles murdered.
Well, force perforce, I must constrain my self,
To patience, and apply me to the time,
Till heaven as I have hoped shall set me free.
Come Madame Bel-imperia, this may not be,
Boy, talk no further, thus far things go well,
Thou art assured that thou saw him dead?
Or else my Lord I live not.
Thats enough.
As for his resolution in his end,
Leave that to him with whom he soiourns now.
Here, take my ring, and give it Christophill,
And bid him let my Sister be enlarged,
And bring her hither straight.
This that I did was for a policy,
To smooth and keep the murder secret,
Which as a nine days wonder being ore-blowne,
My gentle Sister will I now enlarge.
And time Lorenzo, for my Lord the Duke,
You heard enquired for her yesternight.
Why? and my Lord, I hope you heard me say,
Sufficient reason, why she kept away.
But thats all one, my Lord, you love her?
I.
Then in your love beware, deal cunningly,
Salve all suspicions, only sooth me up,
And if she hap to stand on terms with vs,
As for her sweet hart, and concealment so,
lest with her gently, under fained jest
Are things concealed, that else would breed unrest.
But here she comes.
Now Sister.
Sister, no thou art no brother, but an enemy.
Else would thou not have used thy Sister so,
First, to affright me with thy weapons drawn,
And with extremes abuse my company:
And then to hurry me like whirlewinds rage,
A midst a crew of thy confederates:
And clap me up where none might come at me,
Nor I at any to reveal my wrongs.
What matting fury did possess thy wits?
Or wherein first that I offended thee?
A dues you better Bel-imperia,
For I have done you no disparagement:
Unless by more discretion then deser•'d,
I sought to save your honour and mine own.
Mine honour, why Lorenzo, where in first,
That I neglect my reputation so,
As you, or any need to rescue it.
His highness and my Father were resolved,
To come confer with old Hieronimo,
Concerning certain matters of estate,
That by the Viceroy was determined.
And wherein was mine honour touched in that?
Have patience Bel-imperia, hear the rest.
Me next in sight as messenger they sent,
To give him notice that they were so nigh:
Now when I came consorted with the Prince,
And unexpected in an Arbour there,
Found Bel-imperia with Horatio.
How than?
Why then remembering that old disgrace,
Which you for Don Andrea had endured,
And now were likely longer to sustain,
By being found so meanly accompanied:
Thought rather, for I knew no readier mean,
To thrust Horatio forth my fathers way.
And carry you obscurely some where else,
Least that his highness should have found you there.
Even so my Lord, and you are witness,
That this is true which he entreats of.
You (gentle brother) forged this for my sake,
And you my Lord, were made his instruement:
A work of worth, worthy the noting too.
But whats the cause that you concealed me since?
Your melancholy Sister since the news,
Of your first favourite Don Andreas death,
My Fathers old wrath hath exasperate.
And better wast for you being in disgrace,
To absent your self and give his fury place.
But why had I no notice of his ire?
That were to add more fuel to your fire.
Who burnt like A•an• for Andreas loss.
Hath not my Father then enquired for me?
Sister he hath, and thus excusde I thee.
But Bel-imperia, see the gentle prince,
Look on thy love, behold young Balthazar.
Whose passions by thy presence are increased,
And in whose melancholy thou majesty see,
Thy hate, his love: thy flight, his following thee.
Brother you are become an Orator,
I know not I, by what experience,
Too politic for me, past all compare,
Since last I saw you, but content your self,
The Prince is meditating higher things,
Tic of thy beauty then that conquers Kings.
Of those thy tresses Ariadnes twines,
Where with my liberty thou hast surprised▪
Of that thine ivory front my sorrows map,
Wherein I see no haven to rest my hope.
Toloue, and fear, and both at once my Lord,
In my conceit, are things of more import,
Then women's wits are to be busied with.
Tic I that love.
Whom?
Bel-imperia.
But I that fear.
Whom?
Bel-imperia.
Fear your self?
I brother.
How?
As those, that what they love, are loath, and fear to loose.
Then fair, let Balthazar your keeper be,
No, Balthazar doth fear as well as we.
Est tree••ulo met•• pauidum 〈…〉,
Et vanum stolidae proditionis opus.
Nay, and you argue things so eunningly,
Weal go continue this discourse at Court,
Led by the loadstar of her heavenly looks,
Wends poor oppressed Baltbazar,
As ore the mountains walks the wanderer,
Uncertain to effect his Pilgrimage.
By your leave Sir.
Good leave have you, nay, I pray you go,
For isle leave you, if you can leave me so.
Pray you which is the next way to my L. the Dukes.
The next way from me.
To his house we mean.
O hard by, tic yon house that you see.
You could not tell vs, if his Son were there.
Who, my Lord Lorenzo?
I Sir.
He goes in at one door and comes out at another.
Oh forbear, for other talk for vs far fitter were.
But if you be importunate to know,
The way to him, and where to find him out,
Then list to me, and Isle resolve your doubt.
There is a path upon your left hand side,
That leads from a guilty conscience,
Unto a forest of distrust and fear.
A darksome place and dangerous to pass,
There shall you meet with melancholy thoughts,
Whose baleful humours if you but uphold,
It will conduct you to despair and death:
Whose rocky cliffs, when you have once beheld,
Within a huge dale of lasting night,
That kind'ed with the worlds iniquities,
Doth cast up filthy and detested fumes.
Not far from thence where murderers have built,
A habitation for their cursed souls:
There in a brazen Cauldron fixed by Io•e,
In his fell wrath upon a sulphur flame:
Your selves shall find Lorenzo bathing him,
In boiling lead and blood of innocents.
Ha, ha, ha.
Ha, ha, ha: why ha, ha, ha. Farewell good ha, ha, ha.
Doubtless this man is passing lunatic,
Or imperfection of his age doth make him dote.
Come, lets away to seek my Lord the Duke.
Now Sir, perhaps I come and see the King,
The King sees me, and fine would hear my suit.
Why is not this a strange and seld seen thing.
That standers by with toys should strike me mute.
Go too, I see their shifts, and say no more,
Hieronimo, tic time for thee to trudge.
Down by the dale that flows with purple gore,
Stands a fiery Tower, there sits a judge,
Upon a seat of steel and molten brass:
And twixt his teeth he holds a fire-brand,
That leads unto the lake where hell doth stand.
Away Hieronimo to him be gone:
Heel doe thee justice for Horatios death.
Turn down this path thou shalt be with him strait,
Or this, and then thou need not take thy breath.
This way, or that way: soft and fair, not so:
For if I hang or kill my self, lets know
Who will revenge Horatios murder then?
No, no, fie no: pardon me, isle none of that:
This way isle take, and this way comes the King,
And here Isle have a fling at him thats flat.
And Baltbazar isle be with thee to bring,
And thee Lorenzo, hears the King, nay, stay,
And here, I here, there goes the hare away.
Now show Ambassador what our Viceroy saith,
Hath hee received the articles we sent?
Justice, O justice to Hieronimo.
Back, see thou not the King is busy?
O, is he so.
Who is he that interrupts our business?
Not I, Hieronimo beware, go by, go by.
Renowned King he hath received and read,
Thy kingly proffers, and thy promised league,
And as a man extremely ouer-ioyd,
To hear his Son so Princely entertained,
Whose death he had so solemnly bewailde.
This for thy further satisfaction,
And kingly love, he kindly lets thee know:
First, for the marriage of his Princely Son,
With Bel-imperia thy beloved Niece,
The news are more delightful to his soul,
Then myrrh or incense to the offended heavens.
In person therefore will he come himself,
To see the marriage rites solemnised,
And in the presence of the Court of Spain,
To knit a sure inexecrable band,
Of Kingly love, and everlasting league,
Betwixt the Crowns of Spain and Portugal.
There will he give his Crown to Balthazar,
And make a Queen of Bel-imperia.
Brother, how like you this our Vice-roies love?
No doubt my Lord, it is an argument
Of honourable care to keep his friend,
And wondrous zeal to Balthazar his son?
Nor am I least indebted to his graee,
That bends his liking to my daughter thus.
Now last (dread Lord) heer• hath his highness sent,
Although he send not that his Son return,
His ransom due to Don Horatio.
Horatio, who calls Horatio?
And well remembered, thank his Majesty.
Here, see it given to Horatio.
Justice, O justice, justice, gentle King.
Who is that? Hieronimo?
Justice, O justice, O my son, my son,
My Son whom nought can ransom or redeem•.
Hieronimo, you are not well advised.
A way Lorenzo hinder me no more,
For thou hast made me bankrupt of my bliss:
Give me my son, you shall not ransom him.
Away, isle rip the bowels of the earth,
And Ferry over to th'Elizian plains,
And bring my Son to show his deadly wounds.
Stand from about me, isle make a pickax of my poniard,
And here surrender up my Marshalship:
For Isle go marshall up the feends in hell,
To be avenged on you all for this.
What means this outrage? will none of you re∣strain
his fury?
Nay soft and fair, you shall not need to strive,
Needs must he go that the devils drive.
What accident hath hoped Hieronimo?
I have not seen him to demean him so.
My gracious Lord, he is with extreme pride,
Conceived of young Horatio his Son,
And covetous of having to himself,
The ransom of the young Prince Bal•hazar.
Distract and in a manner lunatic.
Believe me Nephew we are sorry fort,
This is the love that Fathers bear their sons:
But gentle brother, go give to him this gold,
The Princes ransom, let him have his due,
For what he hath Whore••• shall not want,
Happily Hieronimo hath need thereof.
But if he be thus helpless•y distract,
Tic requisite his office be resignde,
And given to one of more discretion.
We shall increase his molanchollie so.
Tic best that we see further in it first:
Till when, our self will exempt the place.
And Brother, now bring in the Ambassador,
That he may be a witness of the match.
Twixt Balthazar and Bel-imperia.
And that we may prefix a certain time.
Wherein the marriage shall be solemnised,
That we may have thy Lord the Vice-roy here.
Therein your highness highly shall content,
His Majesty, that longs to hear from hence.
On then, and hear you Lord Ambassador.
Vindicta mihi.
I, heaven will be revenged of every ill,
Nor will they suffer murder vnrepaide:
Then stay Hieronimo, attend their will,
For mortal men may not appoint their time.
Perscelus semper tuinm est ss•eri•us iter.
Strike, and strike home, where wrong is offred thee,
For evils unto else conductors be.
And death's the worst of resolution.
For he that thinks with patienco to contend,
To quiet life, his life shall easily end.
Fata si mis•r•s iuuant habes salutem:
Fata si vitam negant, habes sepulchrum.
If destiny thy miseries doe ease,
Then hast thou health, and happy shalt thou be:
If destiny deny thee life 〈◊〉.
Yet shalt thou be assured of a tomb:
If neither, yet let this thy comfort be,
Heaven covers him that hath no burial,
And to conclude, I will revenge his death,
But how? not as the vulgar wits of men,
With open, but ineuitableils▪
As by a secret, yet a certain mean,
Which under kindeship will be cloaked best.
Wise men will take their opportunity,
Closely and safely fitting things to time:
But in extremes advantage hath no time.
And therefore all times fit not for revenge:
Thus therefore will I res ime in unrest,
Dissembling quiet in unquietness,
Not seeming that I know their villainies:
That my simplicity may make them think,
That ignorantly I will letall slip:
For ignorance I wot, and •ell they know,
〈◊〉 malorum iners est.
Nor ought avails it me to menace them,
Who as a wintry storm upon a plain,
Will bear me down with their nobility.
No, no, Hieronimo, thou must enjoin
Thine eyes to observation, and thy •ung
To milder speeches, then thy spirit affords,
Thy hart to patience, and thy hands to rest,
Thy Cap to cut•ie, and thy knee to bow,
Till to 〈◊〉 thou know when, where, and how.
How now, what noise, what coil is that you keep?
Here are a sort of poor Petitioners,
That are importunate and it shall please you sir,
That you should plead their cases to the King.
That I should plead their several actions,
Why let them enter, and let me see them.
Enter three Citizens and an old Man.
So I tell you this for learning and for law,
Theres not any advocate in Spain,
That can prevail, or will take half the pain,
That he will in pursuit of equity.
Come near you men that thus importune me,
Now must I bear a face of gravity,
For thus I used before my Marshalship,
To plead in causes as Corrigedor.
Come on sirs, whats the matter?
Sir an Action.
Of Battery?
Mine of debt.
Give place.
No sir, mine is an action of the case.
Mine an Eiectione firm by a Lease.
Content you sirs, are you determined,
That I should plead your several actions?
I sir, and hears my declaration,
And here is my band.
And here is my lease.
But wherefore stands yon silly man so mute,
With mournful eyes and hands to heaven vprearde?
Come hither father, let me know thy cause.
O worthy sir, my cause but slightly known,
May move the harts of warlike Myrmy dons,
And melt the Corsicke rocks with ruthful tears.
Say Father, tell me whats thy suit?
No sir, could my woes
Give way unto my most distressful words,
Then should I not in paper as you see,
With ink bewray, what blood began in me.
Whats here? the humble supplication
Of Don Bazulto for his murdered son.
I Sir.
No sir, it was my murdered son, oh my son.
My son, oh my son 〈◊〉.
But mine, or thine, 〈◊〉 be content.
Here, take my hand-kercher and wipe thine eyes,
Whiles wretched I, in thy mishaps may see,
The lively portraict of my dying self,
O no, not this, Horatio this was thine,
And when I died it in thy dearest blood,
This was a token twixt thy soul and me,
That of thy death revenged I should be.
But here, take this, and this, what my purse?
I this and that, and all of them are thine,
For all as one are our extremities.
Oh, see the kindness of Hieronimo.
This gentleness shows him a Gentleman.
See, see, oh see thy shame Hieronimo,
See here a loving Father to his son:
Behold the sorrows and the sad laments▪
That he delivers for his sons dicease.
If loves effects so strives in lesser things,
If love enforce such moods in meaner wits,
If love express such power in poor estates:
Hieronimo, When as a raging Sea,
Tossed with the wind and tide ore turn then
The upper billows course of waives to keep,
Whilst lesser waters labour in the deep.
Then shame thou not Hieronimo to neglect,
The sweet revenge of thy Horatio.
Though on this earth justice will not be found:
Isle down to hell and in this passion,
Knock at the dismal gates of Plutos Court,
Getting by force as once Alcides did,
A troupe of furies and tormenting hags,
To torture Don Lorenzo and the rest.
Yet least the triple headed porter should,
Deny my passage to the slimy strond:
The 〈◊〉 Poet thou shalt counterfeit:
Come on old Father be my Orphe•s,
And if thou can no notes upon the Harp,
Then sound the burden of thy fore harts grief,
Till we do gain that Proserpine may grant,
Revenge on them that murdered my Son,
Then will I rent and tear them thus and thus,
Shivering their limbs in pieces with my teeth.
Oh sir my Declaration.
Save my bond.
Save my bond.
Alas my lease, it cost me ten pound,
And you my Lord have torn the same.
That can not be, I gave it never a wound,
Show me one drop of blood fall from the same:
How is it possible I should stay it then,
Tush no, run after, catch me if you can.
And art thou come Horatio from the depth,
To ask for justice in this upper earth?
To tell thy Father thouart unrevenged,
To wring more tears from Isabellas eyes?
Whose lights are dimd with ouer-long laments.
Go back my son, complain to Oecus,
For hears no justice, gentle boy be gone.
For justice is exiled from the earth:
Heronimo will bear thee company:
Thy mother cries on righteous Radamant,
For just revenge against the murderers.
Alas my L. whence spree•gs this troubled speech?
But let me look on my 〈◊〉:
Sweet boy how art thou changed in deaths black shade?
Had Proserpine no pity on thy youth?
But suffered thy fair crimson coloured spring,
With withered winter to be blasted thus?
Horatio, thou art older then thy Father:
Ah ruthless Father, that favour thus transforms
Ah my good Lord, I am not your young Son.
What, not my Son•e, thou then, a fury art,
Sent from the empty Kingdom of black night,
To summon me to make appearance:
Before grim Mynos and just Radamant.
To plague Hieronimo that is remiss,
And seeks not vengeance for Horatioes. death.
I am a grieved man and not a Ghost,
That came for justice for my murdered Son.
I, now I know thee, now thou name my Son,
Thou art the lively image of my grief,
Within thy face, my sorrows I may see.
Thy eyes are gummed with tears, thy cheeks are wan,
Thy forehead troubled, and thy muttring lips
Murmur sad words abruptly broken off,
By force of windy sighs thy spirit breathes,
And all this sorrow rises for thy Son:
And self same sorrow feel I for my Son.
Come in old man, thou shalt to Isabel,
Lean on my arm, I thee, thou me shalt stay,
And thou, and I, and she will sing a song:
Three parts in one, but all of discords framed,
Talk not of cords, but let vs now be gone,
For with a cord Horatio was slain.
Go Brother it is the Duke of Castles cause, salute the
Vice. roy in our name.
I go.
Go forth Don Pedro for thy Nephews sake,
And greet the Duke of Castle.
It shall be so.
And now to meet these Portaguise,
For as we now are, so sometimes were these,
Kings and commanders of the western Indies.
Welcome brave Vice-roy to the Court of Spain,
And welcome all his honourable train:
Tic not unknown to vs, for why you come,
Or have so kingly crossed the Seas:
Suffices it in this we note the troth,
And more then common love you lend to vs.
So is it that mine honourable No•ce,
For it beseems vs now that it be known,
Already is betrothed to Bal•hazar:
And by appointment and our condescend,
To morrow are they to be married.
To this intent we entertain thy self,
Thy followers, their pleasure, and our peace:
Speak men of Portugal, shall it be so?
If I, say so: if not, say flatly no.
Renowned King, I come not as thou think▪
With doubtful followers, unresolved men,
But such as have upon thine articles,
Confirmed thy motion and contented me.
Know sovereign, I come to solemnise
The marriage of thy beloved Niece,
Fair Bel-imperia with my Balthazar.
With thee my Son, whom sith I live to see▪
Here take my Crown, I give it her and thee,
And let me live a solitary life,
In ceaseless prayers,
To think how strangely heaven hath thee preserved.
See brother, see, how nature strives in him,
Come worthy Vice-roy and accompany
Thy friend, with thine extremities:
A place more private fits this princely mood.
Or here or where your highness thinks it good.
Nay stay Lo•enzo, let me talk with you,
See thou this entertainment of th•se Kings?
I doe my Lord, and joy to see the same.
And know thou why this meeting is?
For her my Lord, whom Bal•haz•r doth love,
And to confirm their promised marriage.
She is thy Sister?
Who Bel-imprria, I my gracious Lord,
And this is the day, that I have longed so happily to see.
Thou would be loath that any fa•lt of thine,
Should intercept her in her happiness.
Heavens will not let L•renzo err so much,
Why then Lorenzo listen to my words:
It is suspected and reported too,
That thou Lorenzo wrongst Hieronimo.
And in his suits towards his Majesty,
Still keepst him back, and seeks to cross his suit.
That I my Lord?
I tell thee Son my self have heard it said,
When to my sorrow I have been ashamed
To answer for thee, though thou art my son,
Lorenzo, know thou not the common love,
And kindness that Hieronimo hath won,
By his deserts within the Court of Spain?
Or see thou not the K. my brothers care,
In his behalf, and to procure his health?
Lorenzo, should thou thwart his passions,
And hee exclaim against thee to the King,
What honour were in this assembly,
Or what a scandal were among the Kings,
To hear Hieronimo exclaim on thee.
Tell me, and look thou tell me truly too,
Whence grows the ground of this report in Court.
My L. it lies not in Lorenzos power▪
To stop the vulgar liberal of their tongues:
A small advantage makes a water breach,
And no man lives that long contents all.
My self have seen thee busy to keep back,
Him and his supplications from the King.
Your self my L. hath seen his passions,
That ill beseemde the presence of a King,
And for I pitied him in his distress,
I held him thence with kind and courteous words,
As free from malice to Hieronimo,
As to my soul my Lord.
Hieronimo my son, mistakes thee then,
My gracious Father, believe me so he doth,
But whats a silly man distract in mind▪
To think upon the murder of his son:
Alas▪ how easy is it for him to err?
But for his satisfaction and the worlds,
It were good my L. that Hieronimo and I,
Were reconcilde, if he misconstrue me.
Lorenzo thou hast said, it shall be so,
Go one of you and call Hieronimo.
Come Bel-imperie, Balthazars content,
My sorrows ease and sovereign of my bliss,
Sith heaven hath or dainde thee to be mine:
Disperse those clouds and melancholy looks,
And clear them up with those thy Sun bright eyes,
Wherein my hope and heavens fai•e beauty lies.
My looks my Lord, are fitting for my love,
Which new begun, can show▪ brighter yet.
New kindled flames should burn as morning Sun.
But not too fast, least heate and all be done.
I see my Lord my Father.
Truce my love, I will go salute him.
Welcome Balthazar, welcome brave Prince•,
The pledge of Castles peace:
And welcome Bel-imperia, how now girl?
Wh• comes thou sadly to salute vs thus?
Content thy self for I am satisfied,
It is not now as when Andrea lived,
We have forgotten and forgiven that,
And thou art graced with a happier love,
But Balthazar here comes Hieronimo.
Isle have a word with him.
And wheres the Duke?
yonder.
Even so: what new device have they devised trow?
Poses Palabras, mild as the Lamb,
First I will be revenged? no, I am not the man.
Welcome Hieronimo.
Welcome Hieronimo.
Welcome Hieronimo.
My Lords I thank you for Horatio.
Hieronimo, the reason that I sent
To speak with you, is this.
What, so short?
Then isle be gone, I thank you fort:
Nay, stay Hieronimo, go call him son.
my father craves a word with you.
With me sir? why my L. I thought you had done.
No, would he had.
Hieronimo, I hear you find your self aggrieved at my Son,
Because you have not access unto the K•ing,
And say tic he that intercepts your suits.
Why, is not this a miserable thing my Lord?
Hieronimo, I hope you have no cause,
And would be loath that one of your deserts,
Should once have reason to suspect my Son,
Considering how I think of you my self.
Your son Lorenzo, whom, my noble Lord?
The hope of Spain, mine honourable friend?
Grant me the combat of them, if they dare.
Isle meet him face to face to tell me so.
These be the scandalous reports of such,
As loves not me, and hate my Lord too much.
Should I suspect Lorenzo would prevent,
Or cross my suit, that loved my Son so well.
My Lord, I am ashamed it should be said.
Hieronimo, I never gave you cause.
My good Lord, I know you did not.
There then pause, and for the satisfaction of the world,
Hieronimo frequent my homely house,
The Duke of Castle Ciprians ancient seat,
And when thou wilt, use me, my son, and it:
But here before Prince Balthazar and me,
Embrace each other, and be perfect friends.
I marry my Lord, and shall:
Friends (quoth he) see, Isle be friends with you all.
Specially with you my lovely Lord,
For divers causes it is sit for vs,
That we be friends, the world is suspicious,
And men may think what we imagine not.
Why this is friendly done Hieronimo.
And that I hope old grudges are forgot.
What else, it were a shame it shonld not be so.
Come on Hieronimo at my request,
Let vs entreat your company to day.
Your Lordships to command,
Pha: keep your way.
Chi m•fa? Pui Correzza Che non sule
Tradito viha otrade vule.
Awake Erictha, Cerberus awake,
Solicit Pluto gentle Pro•erpine,
To combat Achinon and Ericus in hell.
For near by Styx and Phlegeton:
Nor ferried Caron to the fiery lak•s,
Such fearful sights, as poor Andrea se•?
Re•enge awake.
Awake, for why?
Awake Revenge, for thou art ill advised,
Th•sleep, away, what, thou art warned to watch.
Content thy self, and doe not trouble me.
Awake Revenge, if love as love hath had,
Have yet the power or prevalence in hell,
Hieronimo with Lorenzo is ioynde in league,
And intercepts our passage to revenge:
Awake Revenge, or we are woe degone.
Thus worldlings ground what they have dreamd upon,
Content thy self Andrea, though I sleep,
Yet is my mood soliciting their souls,
Suffices thee that poor Hieronimo,
Cannot forget his son Horatio.
Nor dies Revenge although he sleep a while,
For in unquiet, quietness is faind:
And slumbering is a common worldly wile,
Behold Andrea for an instance how,
Revenge hath slept, and then imagine thou,
What tic to be subject to destiny.
Awake Revenge, reveal this mystery.
The two first the nuptial Torches boar,
As brightly burning as the mid-daies sun:
But after them doth Himen hie as fast,
Clothed in •able, and a Saffron robe,
And blows them out, and quenches them with blood,
As discontent that things continue so.
Suffices me thy meanings understood,
And thanks to thee and those infernal powers,
That will not tolerate a Lovers woe,
Rest thee for I will sit to see the rest.
Then argue not for thou hast thy request.
IS this the love thou bear Horatio?
Is this the kindness that thou counterfeits,
Are these the fruits of thine incessant tears?
Hieronimo, are these thy passions?
Thy protestations, and thy deep laments,
That thou were wont to weary men withal.
O unkind Father, O deceitful world,
With what excuses can thou show thy self?
With what dishonour, and the hate of men,
From this dishonour and the hate of men:
Thus to neglect the loss and life of him,
Whom both my letters, and thine own belief,
Assures thee to be causeless slaughtered.
Hieronimo, for shame Hieronimo:
Be not a History to after times,
Of such in gratitude unto thy Son.
Unhappy Mothers of such children then,
But monstrous Fathers, to forget so soon
The death of those, whom they with care and cost
Have tendered so, thus careless should be lost.
My self a stranger in respect of thee,
So loved his life, as still I wish their deaths,
Nor shall his death be unrevenged by me.
Although I bear it out for fashions sake:
For here I swear in sight of heaven and earth,
Should thou neglect the love thou should retain,
And give it over and devise no more,
My self should send their hateful souls to hell,
That wrought his downfall with extremest death.
But may it be that Bel-imperia
Vows such revenge as she hath daind to say:
Why then I see that heaven applies our drift,
And all the Saints doe sit soliciting
For vengeance on those cursed murderers
Madame tic true, and now I find it so,
I found a letter, written in your name,
And in that letter, how Horatio died.
Pardon, O pardon Bel-imperia,
My fear and care in not believing it,
Nor think, I thoughtless think upon a mean,
To let his death be unrevenged at full,
And here I vow, so you but give consent,
And will conceal my resolution,
I will ere long determine of their deaths,
That causeless thus have murderd my Son.
Hieronimo, I will consent, conceal,
And ought that may effect for thine avail,
Join with thee to revenge Horat•os death.
On then, whatsoever I devise,
Let me entreat you grace my practises.
For why, the plots already in mine head,
Here they are.
How now Hieronimo, what, courting Bel-imperi•▪
I my Lord, such courting as I promise you
She hath my hart, but you my Lord have hers.
But now Hieronimo or never we are to entreat your help.
My help, why my good Lords assure your selves of me.
For you have given me cause, I by my faith have you.
It pleased you at the entertainment of the Embassy∣dour,
To grace the King so much as with a show,
Now were your study so well furnished,
As for the passing of the first nights sport,
To entertain my Father with the like:
Or any such like pleasing motion,
Assure your self it would content them well.
Is this all?
I, this is all.
Why then isle fit you, say no more.
When I was young I gave my mind,
And plied my self to fruitless poetry:
Which though it profit the professor nought,
Yet is it passing pleasing to the world.
And how for that?
Marry my good Lord thus.
And yet me thinks you are too quick with vs.
When in Tolledo there I studied,
It was my chance to write a tragedy,
See here my Lords.
Which long forgot, I found this other day,
Now would your Lordships favour me so much,
As but to grace me with your acting it,
I mean each one of you to play a part,
Assure you it will prove most passing strange,
And wondrous plausible to that assembly.
What would you have vs play a Tragedy?
Why Narrow thought it no disparagement,
And Kings and Emperors have tan delight,
To make experience of their wits in plays?
Nay be not angry good Hieronimo,
The Prince but asked a question.
In faith Hieronimo and you be in earnest,
Isle make one.
And I another.
Now my good Lord, could you intrear,
Your Sister Bel-imperia to make one,
For whats a play without a woman in it?
Little entreaty shall serve me Hieronomo,
For I must needs be employed in your play.
Why this is well, I tell you Lordings,
It was determined to have been acted,
By Gentlemen and scholars too,
Such as could tell what to speak.
And now it shall be plaide by Princes and Courtiers
such as can tell how to speak:
If as it is our Country manner,
You will but let vs know the argument.
That shall I roundly: the Cronicles of Spain
Record this written of a Knight of Rodes,
He was betrothed and wedded at the length,
To one Perseda an Italian dame.
Whose beauty ravished all that her beheld,
Especially the soul of Soliman,
Who at the marriage way the chiefest guest.
By sundry means sought Soliman to win,
Persedas love, and could not gain the same.
Then began he break his passions to a friend,
One of his Pashas whom he held full dear,
Her had this Bashaw long solicited,
And saw she was not otherwise to be won,
But by her husbands death this Knight of Rodes.
Whom presently by treachery he slew,
She stirde with an exceeding hate therefore,
As cause of this slew Soliman.
And to escape the Pashas tyranny,
Did stab her self, and this the Tragedy.
O excellent.
But say Hieronimo what then became of him
That was the Bashaw?
Marry thus, moved with remorse of his misdeeds
Ran to a mountain top and hung himself.
But which of vs is to perform that part,
O, that will I my Lords, make no doubt of it▪
Isle play the murderer I warrant you,
For I already have conceited that.
And what shall I.
Great Soliman the Turkish Emperor.
And I.
Erastus the Knight of Rhodes,
And I.
Perseda, chaste and resolute.
And here my Lords are several abstracts drawn,
For each of you to note your parts,
And act it as occasion's offred you.
You must provide a turkish cap,
A black mustacio and a fashion.
You with a cross like to a Knight of Rhodes.
And Madame, you must attire your self,
Like Phoebe•, Flora, or the huntress,
Which to your discretion shall seem best.
And as for me my Lords Isle look to one,
And with the ransom that the Vice-roy sent,
So furnish and perform this tragedy,
As all the world shall say Hieronimo,
Was liberal in gracing of it so.
Hieronimo, me thinks a Comedy were better.
A Comedy, fie, comedies are fit for common wits
But to present a Kingly troupe withal,
Give me a stately written Tragedy.
Tragedy cother nato, fitting Kings,
Containing matter, and not common things.
My Lords, all this must be performed,
As •itting for the first nights revelling.
The Italian Tragedian• were so sharpe of wit,
That in one hours meditation,
They would perform any thing in action.
And well it may, for I have seen the like
In Paris, amongst the French Tragedians.
In Paris, mas and well remembered,
Theres one thing more that rests for vs to doo.
Whats that Hieronimo forget not any thing.
Each one of vs must act his part,
In unknown languages,
That it may breed the more variety.
As you my Lord in Latin, I in Greek,
You in Italian, and for because I know,
That Bel-imperia hath practised the French,
In courtly French shall all her phraises be.
You mean to try my cunning then Hieronimo.
But this will be a mere confusion,
And hardly shall we all be understood.
It must be so, for the conclusion
Shall prove the invention, and all was good:
And I my self in an Oration,
That I will have there behind a curtain,
And with a strange and wondrous show besides:
Assure your self shall make the matter known.
And all shall be concluded in one Scene,
For theres no pleasure tan in tediousness.
How like you this?
Why thus my Lord we must resolve,
To soothe his humours up.
On then Hieronimo, farewell till soon.
You'll ply this gear.
I warrant you.
Why so, now shall I see the fall of Babilon,
Wrought by the heavens in this confusion.
And if the world like not this tragedy,
Hard is the hap of old Hieronimo.
Tell me no more, O monstrous homicides,
Since neither piety nor pity moves
The King to justice or compassion:
I will revenge my self upon this place,
Where thus they murdered my beloved Son.
Down with these branches and th•se loathsome bows,
Of this unfortunate and fatal pine.
Down with them Isabella, •ent them up,
And burn the roots from whence the rest is sprung:
I will not leave a root, a stalk, a tree,
A bow, a branch, a blossom, nor a leaf,
No, not an herb within this garden Plot.
Accursed complot of my misery,
Fruitless for ever may this garden be.
Barren the earth, and blislesse whosoever,
Immagines not to keep it vnmanurde:
An Eastern wind comixt with noisome aires,
Shall blast the plants and the young saplings,
The earth with Serpents shall be• ••stered,
And passengers for fear to be infect,
Shall stand aloof, and looking at it, tell
There murdered did the son of Isabel.
I here he did, and here I him embrace,
See where his Ghost solicits with his wounds,
Revenge on her that should revenge his death,
Hieronimo make haste to see thy son,
For sorrow and despair hath scited me,
To hear Horatio plead with Radamant,
Make haste, Hieronimo to hold excusde.
Thy negligence in pursuit of their deaths,
Whose hateful wrath bereaved him of his breath▪
Ah nay, thou dost delay their deaths,
Forgives the murderers of thy noble son,
And none but I bestir me to no end,
And as I curse this tree from further fruit,
So shall my womb be cursed for his sake,
And with this weapon will I wound the breast,
The hapless breast that gave Horatio suck.
How now Hieroni•o wheres your fellows,
That you take all this pain?
O sir, it is for the Authors credit,
To look that all things may go well:
But good my Lord let me entreat your grace,
To give the King the copy of the play:
This is the argument of what we show.
I will Hieronimo.
One thing more my good Lord.
Whats that?
Let me entreat your grace,
That when the train are past into the gallery,
You would vouchsafe •o throw me down the key.
I will Hieronimo.
What are you ready Balthazar?
Bring a chair and a cushion for the King.
Well done Balthazar, hang up the title.
Our scene is Rhodes, what is your beard on?
Half on, the other is in my hand.
Dispatch for shame, are you so long?
Bethink thy self Hieronimo,
Recall thy wits, recompt thy former wrongs,
Thou hast received by murder of thy son.
And lastly, not least, how Isabel,
Once his mother and thy dearest wife:
All woe begone for him hath slain her s•lfe.
Behooves thee then Hieronimo to be revenged,
The plot is laid of dire revenge,
On then Hieronimo pursue revenge,
For nothing wants but acting of revenge.
Now Viceroy, shall we see the Tragedy,
Of Soliman the Turkish Emperor:
Performed of pleasure by your Son the Prince,
My Nephew Don Lorenzo, and my Niece.
Who, Bel-imperi•?
I, and Hieronimo our Marshall.
At whose request they deign to do it themselves.
These be our pastimes in the Court of Spain.
Here brother, you shall be the booke-keeper.
This is the argument of that they show.
BAshaw, that Rhodes is ours, yield heavens the honour,
And holy Mahomet our sacred Prophet:
And be thou graced with every excelence,
That Soliman can give, or thou desire.
But thy desert in conquering Rhodes is less,
Then in reserving this fair Christian Nymph
Perseda, blissful lamp of Excellence:
Whose eyes compel like powerful Adamant,
The warlike heart of Soliman to wait.
See Vice-Roy, that is Balt•azar your Son,
That represents the Emperor Solyman:
How well he acts his amorous passion.
I Bel-imperia hath taught him that.
That's because his mind tons all on Bel-imperia
What ever joy earth yields betide your Majesty.
Earth yields no joy without Persedaes love.
Let then Perseda on your grace attend.
She shall not wait on me, but I on her,
Drawn by the influence of her lights, I yield.
But let my friend the Rhodian knight come forth,
Erasto, dearer then my life to me,
That he may see Perseda my beloved.
Here comes Lorenzo, look up on the plot,
And tel me brother what part plays he?
Ah my Erasto, welcome to Perseda.
Thrice happy is Erasto, that thou lives,
Rhodes loss is nothing to Erastoes joy:
Sith his Perseda lives, his life survives.
Ah Bashaw, here is love between Erast•
And fair Perseda sovereign of my soul.
Remove Erasto mighty Solyman,
And then Perseda will be quickly won.
Erasto is my friend, and while he lives,
Perseda never will remove her love.
Let not Erasto live, to grieve great Soliman.
Dear is Erasto in our Princly eye.
But if he be your rival, let him die.
Why let him die, so love commands me.
Yet grieve I that Erasto should so die.
Erasto, Solyman salutes thee,
And lets thee wit by me his highness will:
Which is, thou should be thus employed.
Ay me Erasto, see Solyman Erastoes slain.
Yet lives Solyman to comfort thee.
Fair Queen of beauty, let not favour die,
But with a gracious eye behold his grief,
That with Persedaes beauty is increased.
If by Persedaes grief be not releast.
Tyrant, desist soliciting vain suits,
Relentless are mine ears to thy laments,
As thy butcher is pitiless and base,
Which seazd on my Erasto, harmless knight.
Yet by thy power thou think to command,
And to thy power Perseda doth obey:
But were she able, thus she would revenge
Thy treacheries on thee ignoble Prince:
And on herself she would be thus revenged
Well said old Marshal, this was bravely done.
But Bel-imperia plays Perseda well.
were this in earnest Bel-imperia,
You would be better to my Son then so.
But now what follows for Hieronimo?
Marry this follows for Hieronimo.
Here break we off our sundry languages,
And thus conclude I in our vulgar tongue.
Happily you think, but bootless are your thoughts,
That this is fabulously counterfeit,
And that we doo as all Tragedians doo.
To die to day, for (fashioning our scene)
The death of Aiax, or some Romaine peer,
And in a minute starting up again,
Revive to please to morrows audience.
No Princes, know I am Hieronimo,
The hopeless Father of a hapless Son,
Whose tongue is tuned to tell his latest tale,
Not to excuse gross errors in the play,
I see your looks urge instance of these words,
Behold the reason urging me to this,
See here my show, look on this spectacle:
Here lay my hope, and here my hope hath end:
Here lay my hart, and here my hart was slain:
Here lay my treasure, here my treasure lost:
Here lay my bliss, and here my bliss bereft.
But hope, hart, treasure, joy, and bliss:
All fled, failed, died, yea all deceit with this.
From forth these wounds came breath that gave me life,
They murdered me that made these fatal marks:
The cause was love, whence grew this mortal hate▪
The hate, Lorenzo and young Balthazar:
The love, my son to Bel-imperia.
But night the couerer of accursed crimes,
With pitchy silence hushed these traitors harms,
And lent them leave, for they had sorted leisure,
To take advantage in my Garden plot,
Upon my Son, my dear Horatio:
There merciless they butcherd up my boy,
In black dark night, to pale dim cruel death.
He shrikes, I heard, and yet me thinks I hear,
His dismal out-cry echo in the air:
With soonest speed I hasted to the noise,
Where hanging on a tree, I found my son.
Through girt with wounds, and slaughtered as you see,
And grieved I (think you) at this spectacle?
Speak Portaguise, whose loss resembles mine,
If thou can weep upon thy Balthazar,
Tic like I wailde for my Horatio.
And you my L. whose reconciled son,
Marched in a net, and thought him self unseen,
And rated me for brainsick lunacy,
With God amend that mad Hieronimo,
How can you brook our plays catastrophe?
And here behold this bloody hand-kercher▪
Which at Horatios death I weeping dipped,
Within the river of his bleeding wounds.
It as propitious, see I have reserved,
And never hath it left my bloody hart,
Soliciting remembrance of my vow.
With these, O these accursed murderers,
Which now performed, my hart is satisfied.
And to this end the Bashaw I became,
That might revenge me on Lorenzos life,
Who therefore was appointed to the part,
And was to represent the Knight of Rhodes,
That I might kill him more conveniently.
So Vice-roy was this Balthazar thy Son,
That Soliman, which Bel-imperia,
In person of Perseda murdered:
Sole appointed to that tragic part,
That she might sl•y him that offtended her.
Poor Bel-imperia •first her part in this,
For though the story saith she should have died,
Yet I of kindness, and of care to her,
Did otherwise determine of her end.
But love of him whom they did hate too much,
Did urge her resolution to be such.
And Princes now behold Hieronimo,
Author and actor in this Tragedy:
Bearing his latest fortune in his fist:
And will as resolute conclude his part,
As any of the Actors gone before.
And Gentles, thus I end my play,
Urge no more words, I have no more to say.
O hearken Vice-roy, hold Hieronimo,
Brother, my Nephew, and thy Son are slain.
We are betrayed, my Balthazar is slain,
Break op the doors, run save Hieronimo.
Hieronimo, doe but inform the King of these events,
Ypon mine honour thou shalt have no harm.
Vice-roy, I will not trust thee with my life,
Which I this day have offered to my Son:
Accursed wretch, why staiest thou him that was resolved to die?
Speak traitor, damned, bloody murderer speak,
For now I have thee I will make thee speak:
Why hast thou done this undeserving deed?
Why hast thou murdered my Balthazar?
Why hast thou butchered both my children thus▪
O good words, as dear to me was my Horatio,
As yours, or yours, or yours my L. to you.
My guiltless Son was by Lorenzo slain,
And by Lorenzo and that Balthazar,
Am I at last revenged thoroughly.
Upon whose souls may heavens be yet avenged,
With greater far then these afflictions.
But who were thy confederates in this?
That was thy daughter Bel-imperia.
For by her hand my Bal•hazar was slain
I saw her stab him.
Why speak thou not?
What lesser liberty can Kings afford
Then harmless silence? then afford it me:
Suffices I may not, nor I will not tell thee.
Fetch forth the tortures.
Traitor as thou art, isle make thee tell.
Indeed thou majesty torment me as his wretched Son,
Hath done in murdering my Horatio.
But never shalt thou force me to reveal,
The thing which I have vowed inviolate:
And therefore in despite of all thy threats,
Pleased with their deaths, and eased with their revenge:
First take my tongue, and afterwards my hart.
O monstrous resolution of a wretch,
See Vice-roy, hee hath bitten forth his tongue,
Rather then to reveal what we required.
Yet can he write.
And if in this he satisfy vs not,
We will devise the'xtreamest kind of death,
That ever was invented for a wretch.
Then he makes signs for a knife to mend his pen.
O he would have a knife to mend his Pen.
Here, and advise thee that thou write the troth,
Look to my brother, save Hieronimo.
He with a knife stabs the Duke and himself.
What age hath ever heard such monstrous deeds?
My brother and the whole succeeding hope,
That Spain expected after my decease,
Go bear his body hence that we may morn,
The loss of our beloved brothers death.
That he may be entom'd what ere befall,
I am the next, the nearest, last of all.
And thou Don Pedro do the like for vs,
Take up our hapless son untimely slain:
Set me with him, and he with woeful me,
Upon the maine mast of a ship vnmand,
And let the wind and tide hall me along,
To Sallas barking and untamed grief:
Or to the loath some poole of Acheron,
To weep my want for my sweet Balthazar,
Spain hath no refuge for a Portugal.
I, now my hopes have end in their effects,
When blood and sorrow finnish my desires:
Horatio murdered in his Fathers bower,
Wild Serberine by Pedringano slain,
False Pedringano hanged by quaint device,
Fair Isabella by her self misdone,
Prince Balthazar by Bel-imperia stabbed,
The Duke of Castle and his wicked Son,
Both done to death by old Hieronimo.
My Bel-imperia fallen as Dido fell,
And good Hieronimo slain by himself:
I these were spectacles to please my soul.
Now will I beg at lovely Proserpine,
That by the virtue of her Princely doom,
I may consort my friends in pleasing sort,
And on my foes wo•ke 〈◊〉 and sharpe revenge.
Isle lead my friend H•ratio through those fields,
Where never dying wars are still i•••de.
Isle lead fair Isabella to that train,
Where pity weeps but never feels pain.
Isle lead my Bel-imperia to those •oyes,
That vestal Virgins, and fair Queens possess,
Isle lead Hieronimo where Orpheus plays,
Adding sweet pleasure to eternal days.
But say Revenge, for thou must help or none,
Against the rest how shall my hate be shown?
This hand shall hale them down to deepest hell,
Where none but furies, bugs and tortures dwell.
Then sweet Revenge doo this at my request,
Let me be judge and doom them to unrest.
Let loose poor Titius from the vultures gripe,
And let Don Ciprian supply his room,
Place Don Lorenzo on Ixions wheel,
And let the lovers endless pains surcease:
Iuno forgets old wrath and grants him ease.
Hang Balthazar about Chineras neck,
And let him there be wai•e his bloody love,
Ripening at our joys that are aboue.
Let Serberine go roll the fatal stone,
And take from Siciphus his endless moan.
False Pedringaco for his treachery,
Let him be dragde through boiling Acheron,
And there live dying still in endless flames,
Blaspheming Gods and all their holy names.
Then haste we down to meet thy friends and foes,
To place thy friends in ease, the rest in woes.
For here, though death hath end their misery,
Isle there begin their endless Tragedy.

FRom jigging veins of riming mother wits,
And such conceits as clownage keeps in pay,
Weal lead you to the stately tent of War.
Where you shall hear the Scythian Tamburlaine:
Threatening the world with high astounding terms
And scourging kingdoms with his cōquering sword
View but his picture in this tragic glass,
And then applaud his fortunes as you please.
BRother Cosroe, I find my self agreeud,
Yet insufficient to express the same:
For it requires a great and thundering speech:
Good brother tell the cause unto my Lords,
I know you have a better wit than I.
Unhappy Persea, that in former age
Hast been the seat of mighty Conquerors,
That in their prowess and their policies,
Have triumphed over Affrike, and the bounds
Of Europe, where the Sun dares scarce appear,
For freezing meteors and coniealed cold:
Now to be ruled and governed by a man,
At whose byrth-day Cynthia with Saturn joint,
And Jove, the Sun and Mercury denied
To shed his influence in his fickle brain,
Now Turks and Tartars shake their swords at th••
Meaning to mangle all thy Provinces,
Brother, I see your meaning well enough.
And thorough your Planets I perceive you think,
I am not wise enough to be a king,
But I refer me to my noble men,
That know my wit, and can be witnesses:
I might command you to be slain for this,
Meander, might I not?
Not for so small a fault my sovereign Lord
I mean it not, but yet I know I might,
Yet live, yea, live, Mycetes wills it so:
Meander, thou my faithful Counsellor,
Declare the cause of my conceived grief,
Which is (God knows) about that Tamburlaine.
That like a Fox in midst of harvest time,
Doth pray vpnon my flocks of Passengers.
And as I hear, doth mean to pull my plumes,
Therefore tic good and meet for to be wise.
Oft have I heard your Majesty complain,
Of Tamburlaine, that sturdy Scythian thief,
That robs your merchants of Persepolis,
Treading by land unto the Western Isles,
And in your confines with his lawless train,
Daily commits incivil outrages.
Hoping (misled by dreaming prophesies)
To reign in Asia, and with barbarous Arms,
To make himself the Monarch of the East:
But ere he march in Asia, or display
His vagrant Ensign in the Persian fields,
Your Grace hath taken order by Theridimas,
Chardg'd with a thousand horse, to apprehend
And bring him Captive to your Highness throne,
Full true thou speak, &amp; like thy self my lord
Whom I may term a Demon for thy love.
Therefore tic best, if so it like you all,
To send my thousand horse incontinent,
To apprehend that paltry Scythian.
How like you this, my honourable Lords?
Is it not a kingly resolution?
It cannot choose, because it comes from you.
Then hear thy charge, valiant Theridimas
The chiefest Captain of Mycetes host,
The hope of Persea, and the very legs
Whereon our state doth lean, as on a staff,
That holds vs up, and foils our neighbour foes,
Thou shalt be leader of this thousand horse,
Whose foaming gall with rage and high disdain,
Have sworn the death of wicked Tamburlaine.
Go growning forth, but come thou smiling home,
As did Sir Paris with the Grecian Dame,
Return with speed, time passes swift away,
Our life is frail, and we may die to day.
Before the Moon renew her borrowed light,
Doubt not my Lord and gracious Sovereign,
But Tamburlaine, and that Tartarian rout,
Shall either perish by our warlike hands,
Or plead for mercy at your highness feet.
Go, stout Theridimas, thy words are swords
And with thy looks thou conquerest all thy foes:
I long to see thee back return from thence,
That I may view these milk-white steeds of mine.
All laden with the heads of killed men,
And from their knees, even to their hooves below,
Besmeared with blood, that makes a dainty show.
Then now my Lord, I humbly take my leave.
Therid. farewell ten thousand times,
Ah, Menaphon, why staiest thou thus behind,
When other men press forward for renown?
Go Menaphon, go into Scythia,
And foot by foot follow Theridamas:
Nay, pray you let him stay, a greater
Fits Menaphon, than warring with a Thief:
Create him Prorex of Africa,
That he may win the Babylonians hearts,
Which will revolt from Persian government,
Unless they have a wiser king than you.
Unless they have a wiser king than you?
These are his words, Meander set them down.
And ad this to them, that all Asia
Lament to see the folly of their King.
Well here I swear by this my royal seat.
You may doe well to kiss it then.
Embossed with silk as best beseems my state.
To be revenged for these contemptuous words.
O where is duty and allegiance now?
Fled to the Caspean or the Ocean maine?
What, shall I call thee brother? No, a foe,
Monster of Nature, shame unto thy stock,
That dare presume thy Sovereign for to mock.
Meander come, I am abused Meander.
How now my Lord, what, mated and amazed
To hear the king thus thraten like himself?
Ah Menaphon, I pass not for his threats,
The plot is laid by Persian Noble men,
And Captains of the Median garrisons,
To crown me Emperor of Asia,
But this it is that doth excruciate
The very substance of my vexed soul!
To see our neighbours that were wont to quake
And tremble at the Persian Monarchs name,
Now sits and laughs our regiment to scorn,
And that which might resolve me into tears:
Men from the farthest Equinoctial line,
Have swarmed in troops into the Eastern India:
Lading their ships with gold and precious stones:
And made their spoils from all our provinces.
This should entreat your highness to rejoice,
Since Fortune gives you opportunity,
To gain the title of a Conqueror,
By curing of this maimed Empery,
Affrike and Europe bordering on your land,
And continent to your Dominions:
How easily may you with a mighty host,
Pass into Graecia, as did Cirrus once.
And cause them to withdraw their forces home,
Least you subdue the pride of Christendom!
But Menaph. what means this trumpets sound
Behold, my Lord Ortigius, and the rest,
Bringing the Crown to make you Emperor.
Magnificent and mighty Prince Cosroe,
We in the name of other Persian states,
And commons of this mighty Monarchy,
Present thee with th'Emperiall Diadem.
The warlike Soldiers, &amp; the Gentlemen,
That heretofore have filled Persepolis
With Affrike Captains, taken in the field:
Whoose ransom made them march in coats of gold,
With costly jewels hanging at their ears,
And shining stones upon their lofty Crests,
Now living idle in the walled towns,
Wanting both pay and martial discipline.
Begin in troops to threaten civil war.
And openly exclaim against the King.
Therefore to stay all sudden mutinies,
We will invest your Highness Emperor:
Whereat the Soldiers will conceive more joy,
Then did the Macedonians at the spoil
Of great Darius and his wealthy host.
Well, since I see the state of Persea droop,
And languish in my brothers government:
I willingly receive th'mperiall crown,
And vow to wear it for my countries good:
In spite of them shall malice my estate.
And in assurance of desired success,
We here doo crown thee Monarch of the East,
Emperor of Asia, and of Persea,
Great Lord of Medea and Armenia:
Duke of Africa and Albany,
Mesopotamia and of Parthia,
East India and the late discovered Isles,
Chief Lord of all the wide vast Euxine sea,
And of the ever raging Caspian Lake:
Long live Cosroe mighty Emperor.
And Jove may never let me longer live,
Then I may seek to gratify your love,
And cause the soldiers that thus honour me,
To triumph over many Provinces.
By whose desires of discipline in Arms,
I doubt not shortly but to reign sole king,
And with the Army of Theridamas,
Whether we presently will fly (my Lords)
To rest secure against my brothers force.
We knew my Lord, before we brought the crown,
Intending your inuestion so near,
The residence of your despised brother,
The Lord would not be too exasperate,
To injure or suppress your worthy title.
Or if they would, there are in readiness
Ten thousand horse to carry you from hence,
In spite of all suspected enemies.
I know it well my Lord, &amp; thank you all,
Sound up the trumpets then,
God save the King.
COme lady, let not this appal your thoughts
The jewels and the treasure we have tan
Shall be reserved, and you in better state,
Than if you were arrived in Siria.
Even in the circle of your Fathers arms:
The mighty Sultan of Egyptia.
Ah Shepherd, pity my distressed plight,
(If as thou seem, thou art so mean a man)
And seek not to enrich thy followers,
By lawless rapine from a silly maid.
Who travailing with these Median Lords
To Memphis, from my uncles country of Medea,
Where all my youth I have vene governed,
Have past the army of the mighty Turk:
Bearing his privy signet and his hand:
To safe conduct vs thorough Africa:
And since we have arrived in Scythia,
Besides rich presents from the puissant Cham,
We have his highness letters to command
Aide and assistance if we stand in need.
But now you see these letters &amp; commands,
Are countermanded by a greater man:
And through my provinces you must expect
Letters of conduct from my mightiness,
If you intend to keep your treasure safe.
But since I love to live at liberty,
As easily may you get the Souldans crown,
As any prizes out of my precinct.
For they are friends that help to wean my state,
Till men and kingdoms help to strengthen it:
And must maintain my life exempt from servitude.
But tell me Madam, is your grace betrothed:
I am (my Lord,) for so you do import.
I am a Lord, for so my deeds shall prove,
And yet a shepherd by my Parentage:
But Lady, this fair face and heavenly hew,
Mud grace his bed that conquers Asia:
And means to be a terror to the world,
Measuring the limits of his Empery
By East and west, as Phoebus doth his course:
Lie here ye weeds that I disdain to wear,
This complete armour, and this curtle-axe
Are adiuncts more beseeming Tamburlaine.
And Madam, whatsoever you esteem
Of this success, and loss vnvallued,
Both may invest you Empress of the East:
And these that seem but silly country Swains,
May have the leading of so great an host,
As with their weight shall make the mountains quake.
Even as when windy exhalations,
Fighting for passage, tilt within the earth.
As princely Lions when they rouse themselves,
Stretching their paws, and threatening herds of Beasts.
So in his Armour looks Tamburlaine:
Me thinks I see kings kneeling at his feet,
And he with frowning brows and fiery looks,
Spurning their crowns from off their captive heads.
And making thee and me Techelles, kings,
That even to death will follow Tamburlaine.
Nobly resolved, sweet friends and followers,
These Lords (perhaps) do scorn our estimates:
And think we prattle with distempered spirits,
But since they measure our deserts so mean,
That in conceit bear Empires on our spears,
Affecting thoughts coequal with the clouds,
They shall be kept our forced followers,
Till with their eyes thee view vs Emperors.
The Gods, defenders of the innocent,
Will never prosper your intended drifts,
That thus oppress poor friendless passengers.
Therefore at least admit vs liberty,
Even as thou hop'st to be eternized,
By living Asias mighty Emperor.
I hope our Ladies treasure and our own,
May serve for ransom to our liberties:
Return our Mules and empty Camels back,
That we may travail into Siria,
Where her betrothed Lord Alcidamus,
Expects th'arriuall of her highness person.
And wheresoever we repose our selves,
We will report but well of Tamburlaine.
Disdains Zenocrate to live with me?
Or you my Lords to be my followers?
Think you I way this treasure more than you?
Not all the Gold in Indies wealthy arms,
Shall buy the meanest soldier in my train.
Zenocrate, lovelier than the Love of Jove,
Brighter than is the silver Rhodolfe,
Fairet than whitcst snow on Scythian hills,
Thy person is more worth to Tamburlaine,
Than the possession of the Persian Crown.
Which gracious starts have promised at my birth,
A hundredth Tartars shall attend on thee,
Mountrf on Steeds, swifter than Pegasus.
Thy Garments shall be made of Median silk,
Enchased with precious jewels of mine own:
More rich and valurous than Zenocrates.
With milke-white Hearts upon an Ivory sled,
Thou shalt be drawn amidst the frozen Pools,
And scale the ysie mountains lofty tops:
Which with thy beauty will be soon resolved.
My martial prises with five hundred men,
Wun on the fifty headed Vuolgas waives.
Shall all we offer to Zenocrate,
And then my self to fair Zenocrate.
What now? In love?
Techelles, women must be flaterrd.
But this is she with whom I am in love.
News, news.
How now, what's the matter?
A thousand Persian horsemen are at hand,
Sent from the King to overcome vs all.
How now my Lords of Egypt &amp; Zenocrate?
Now must your jewels be restored again:
And I that triumphed so be overcome.
How say you Lordings, Is not this your hope?
We hope your self will willingly restore thē.
Such hope, such fortune have the thousand horse.
Soft ye my Lords and sweet Zenocrate.
You must be forced from me ere you go:
A thousand horsemen: We five hundred foot?
An odds too great, for vs to stand against:
But are they rich: And is their armour good?
Their plumed helmes are wrought with beaten gold.
Their swords enameld, and about their necks
Hangs massy chains of gold down to the waste,
In every part exceeding brave and rich.
Then shall we fight courageously with them.
Or look you, I should play the Orator?
No: cowards and fainthearted runaways,
Look for orations when the foe is near.
Our swords shall play the Orators for vs.
Come let vs meet them at the mountain foot,
And with a sudden and an hot alarm
Drive all their horses headlong down the hill.
Come let vs march.
Stay Techelles, ask a parley first,
Open the Males, yet guard the treasure sure,
Lay out our golden wedges to the view,
That their reflexions may amaze the Perseans.
And look we friendly on them when they come:
But if they offer word or violence,
Weal fight five hundred men at arms to one,
Before we part with our possession.
And against the General we will lift our swords.
And either launch his greedy thirsting throat,
Or take him prisoner, and his chain shall serve
For Manackles, till he be ransomed home.
I hear them come, shall we encounter them?
Keep all your standings, and not stir a foot,
My self will bide the danger of the brunt.
Where is this Scythian Tamberlaine?
Whō seekst thou Persian? I am Taburlain.
Tamburlaine? A Scythian Shepherd, so embellished
With Natures pride, and richest furniture,
His looks do menace heaven and dare the Gods,
His fiery eyes are fixed upon the earth.
As if he now deuis'd some Stratagem:
Or meant to pierce Auernas darksome vaults.
To pull the triple headed dog from hell.
Noble and mild this Persian seems to be,
If outward habit judge the inward man,
His deep affections make him passionate.
With what a majesty he rears his looks:
In thee (thou valiant man of Persea)
I see the folly of thy Emperor:
Art thou but Captain of a thousand horse,
That vi Characters graven in thy brows,
And by thy martial face and stout aspect,
Deserve to have the leading of an host?
Forsake thy king and do but join with me
And we will triumph over all the world.
I hold the Fates bound fast in iron chains,
And with my hand turn Fortunes wheel about,
And sooner shall the Sun fall from his Sphere,
Than Tamburlaine be slain or overcome.
Draw forth thy sword, thou mighty man at Arms,
Intending but to rase my charmed skin:
And Jove himself will stretch his hand from heaven.
To ward the blow, and shield me safe from harm,
See how he rains down heaps of gold in showers.
As if he meant to give my Soldiers pay,
And as a sure and grounded argument,
That I shall be the Monarch of the East.
He sends this Sculdans daughter rich and brave,
To be my Queen and portly Empress,
If thou wilt stay with me, renowned man,
And lead thy thousand horse with my conduct,
Besides thy share of this Egyptian prise,
Those thousand horse shall sweat with martial spoil
Of conquered kingdoms, and of Cities sacked,
Both we will walk upon the lofty clefts,
And Christian Merchants that with Russian stems
Plow up huge furrows in the Caspian sea.
Shall veil to vs, as Lords of all the Lake.
Both we will reign as Consuls of the earth,
And mighty kings shall be our Senators,
Jove sometime masked in a Shepherds weed,
And by those steps that he hath scaled the heavens,
May we become immortal like the Gods.
Join with me now in this my mean estate,
(I cal it mean, because being yet obscure,
The Nations far removed admire me not)
And when my name and honour shall be spread,
As far as Bores claps his brazen wings,
Or fair Botëes sends his cheerful light.
Then shalt thou be Competitor with me,
And sit with Tambulaine. in all his majesty.
Not Harms Prolocutor to the Gods,
Could use persuasions more pathetic.
Nor are Apollos Oracles more true,
Then thou shalt find my vaunts substantial.
We are his friends, and if the Persian king
Should offer present Duke domes to our state,
We think it loss to make exchange for that,
We are assured of by our friends success.
And kingdoms at the least we all expect.
Befits the honour in assured conquests:
Where kings shall crouch unto our conquering swords,
And hostess of soldiers stand amazed at vs,
When with their fearful tongues they shall confess
Theise are the men that all the world admires,
What strong enchantments tice my yielding soul
Are these resolved noble Scythians?
But shall I prove a Traitor to my King?
No, but the trusty friend of Tamburlaine.
Won with thy words, &amp; conquered with thy looks,
I yield my self, my men &amp; horse to thee:
To be partaker of thy good or ill,
As long as life maintains Theridamas.
Theridamas my friend, take here my hand.
Which is as much as if I swore by heaven,
And call'd' the Gods to witness of my vow,
Thus shall my heart be still combined with thine,
Until our bodies turn to Elements:
And both our souls aspire celestial thrones.
Techelles, and Casino, welcome him.
Welcome renowned Persian to vs all.
Long may theridamas remain with vs.
These are my friends in whō I more rejoice,
Than doth the King of Persea in his Crown:
And by the love of Pyllades and Orestes,
Whose statutes we adore in Scythia,
Thy self and them shall never part from me,
Before I crown you kings in Asia.
Make much of them gentle Theridamas,
And they will never leave thee till the death.
Nor thee, nor them, thrice noble Tambutlain
Shall want my heart to be with gladness pierced
To do you honour and security.
A thousand thanks worthy theridamas:
And now fair Madam, and my noble Lords,
If you will willingly remain with me,
You shall have horrors, as your merits be:
Or else you shall be forced w••h slavery.
We yield unto thee happy Tamburlaine
For you then Madam, I am out of doubt
I must be pleased perforce, wretched Zenocrate.
THus far are we towards Theridamas,
And valiant Tamburlaine, the man of fame,
The man that in the forehead of his fortune,
Bears figures of renown and miracle:
But tell me, that hast seen him, Menaphon,
What stature wields he, and what personage:
Of stature tall, and straightly fashioned,
Like his desire, lift upwards and divine,
Sa large of limbs, his joints so strongly knit,
Such breadth of shoulders as might mainly bear
Old Atlas burden, twixt his manly pitch,
A pearl more worth, then all the world is placed:
Wherein by curious sovereignty of Art,
Are firt his piercing instruments of sight:
Whose fiery circles bear encompassed
A heaven of heavenly bodies in their Spheres:
That guides his steps and actions to the throne.
Where honour sits invested royally:
Pale of complexion: wrought in him with passion,
Thrirsting with sovereignty with love of arms,
His lofty brows in folds, do figure death,
And in their smoothness, amity and life:
About them hangs a knot of Amber heir.
Wrapped in curls, as fierce Achilles was,
On which the breath of heaven delights to play,
Making it dance with wanton majesty:
His arms and singers long and snowy,
Betokening valour and excess of strength:
In every part proportioned like the man,
Should make the world subdued to Tamburlaine.
Well hast thou portrait in thy terms of life,
The face and personage of a wondrous man:
Nature doth strive with Fortune and his stars,
To make him famous in accomplished worth:
And well his merits show him to be made:
His Fortunes m•ester, and the king of men.
That could persuade at such a sudden pinch,
With reasons of his valour and his life,
A thousand sworn and ouermatching foes:
Then when our powers in points of swords are joined
And closed in compass of the killing bullet,
Though straight the passage and the port be made,
That leads to Palace of my brothers life,
Proud is his fortune if we pierce it not.
And when the princely Persian Diadem,
Shall ouerway his weary witless head,
And fall like mellowed fruit, with shakes of death,
In fair Persea noble tamburlaine
Shall be my Regent, and remain as King:
In happy hour we have set the Crown
Upon your kingly head, that seeks our honour,
In joining with the man, ordained by heaven
To further every action to the best.
He that with Shepherds and a little spoil,
Durst in disdain of wrong and tyranny,
Defend his freedom against a Monarchy.
What will he doe supported by a king:
Leading a troop of Gentlemen and Lords,
And stuffed with trasure for his highest thoughts,
And such shall wait on worthy Tamburlaine.
Our army will be forty thousand strong,
When Tamburlain and brave Theridamas
Have met vs by the river Araris:
And all conioin'd to meet the witless King.
That now is marching near to Parthia.
And with unwilling soldiers faintly armed,
To seek revenge on me and Tamburlaine.
To whom sweet Menaphon, direct me straight.
I will my Lord.
COme my Meander, let vs to this gear,
I tel you true my heart is swollen with wrath,
On this same thievish villain tamburlaine.
And of that false Cosroe, my traitorous brother
Would it not grieve a King to be so abused.
And have a thousand horsemen tan away?
And which is worst to have his Diadem
Sought for by such scald knaucs as love him net.
I think it would: well then, by heavens I swear,
Aurora shall not peep out of her doors,
But I will have Cosroe by the head,
And kill proud Tamburlaine with point of sword.
Tell you the rest (Meander) I have said.
Then having past Armenian deserts now,
And pitch our tents under the Georgian hills.
Whose tops are covered with Tartarian thieves,
That lie in ambush, waiting for a pray:
What should we doe but bid them battle straight,
And rid the world of those detested troops;
Least if we let them linger here a while,
They gather strength by power of fresh supplies.
This country swarntes with vile outrageous men,
That live by rapine and by lawless spoil,
Fit Soldiers for the wicked Tamburlaine.
And he that could with gifts and promises.
Inveigle him that lead a thousand horse,
And make him false his faith unto his King,
Will quickly win such as are like himself.
Therefore cheer up your minds, prepare to fight,
He that can take or slaughter tamburlaine,
Shall rule the Province of Albany.
Who brings that Traitors head theridamas,
Shall have a government in Medea:
Beside the spoil of him and all his train:
But if Cosroe (as our Spiels say,
And as we know) remains with tamburlaine,
His Highness pleasure is that he should live,
And be reclaimed with princely lenity.
An hundred horsemen of my company
Srowting abroad upon these champion plains,
Have vtew'd the army of the Scythians,
Which make reports it far exceeds the Kings.
Suppose they be in number infinite,
Yet being void of Martial discipline,
All running headlong after greedy spoils:
And more regarding gain than victory:
Like to the cruel brothers of the earth,
Sprung of the teeth of Dragons venomous,
Their careless swords shall launch their fellows threats
And make vs triumph in their overthrow.
Was there such brethren, sweet Meander, say
That sprung of teeth of Dragons venomous.
So Poets say, my Lord.
And tic a pretty toy to be a Poet.
Well, well (Meander) thou art deeply read:
And having thee, I have a jewel sure:
Go en my Lord, and give your charge I say,
Thy wit will make vs Conquerors to day.
Then noble soldiers, to entrap these thieves,
That live confounded in disordered troops,
If wealth or riches may prevail with them,
We have our Camels laden all with gold:
Which you that be but common soldiers,
Shall fling in every corner of the field:
And while the base borne Tartars take it up,
You fighting more for honour than for gold,
Shall massacre those greedy minded slaves.
And when their scattered army is subdued:
And you march on their slaughtered carcasses,
Share equally the gold that bought their lives,
And live like Gentlemen in Persea,
Strike up the Drum and march corragiously,
Fortune her self doth sit upon our Crests.
He tells you true, my masters, so he does.
Drum{is}, why sound ye not whē Meand. speak{is}.
NOw worthy Tamburlaine, have I reposed,
In thy approved Fortunes all my hope,
What think thou man, shall come of our at∣tempts.
For even as from assured oracle,
I take thy doom for satisfaction.
And so mistake you not a whit my Lord.
For Fates and Oracles, heaven have sworn,
To roialise the deeds of tamburlaine:
And make them blessed that share in his attempts.
And doubt you not, but if you favour me,
And let my Fortunes and my valour sway,
To some direction in your martial deeds,
The world will strive with hostess of men at arms.
To swarm unto the Ensign I support,
The host of Xerxes, which by fame is said
To drink the mighty Parthian Araris,
Was but a handful to that we will have.
Our quivering Lances shaking in the air,
And bullets like Ioues dreadful Thunderbolts,
Enroled in flames and fiery smoldering mists,
Shall threat the Gods more than Cyclopian wars,
And with our Sun-bright armour as we march,
Weel chase the Stars from heaven, and dim their eyes
That stand and muse at our admired arms.
You see my Lord, what working words he hath.
But when you see his actions stop his speech,
Your speech will stay, or so extol his worth,
As I shall be commended and excusde
For turning my poor charge to his direction.
And these his two renowned friends my Lord,
Would make one thrust and strive to be retained
In such a great degree of amity.
With duty not with amity we yield
Our utmost service to the fair Cosroe.
Which I esteem as portion of my crown.
Vsumeasane and techelles both,
When she that rules in Rhamnis golden gates,
And makes a passage for all prosperous Arms:
Shall make me solely Emperor of Asia,
Then shall your meeds and valour be advanced
To rooms of honour and Nobility.
Then haste Cosroe to be king alone.
That I with these my friends and all my men,
May triumph in our long expected Fate,
The King your Brother is now hard at hand,
Meet with the fool, and rid your royal shoulders
Of such a burden, as outwaies the sands
And all the craggy rocks of Caspea.
My Lord, we have discovered the enemy
Ready to chardge you with a mighty army.
Come tamburlain, now whet thy winged sword
And lift thy lofty arm into the clouds,
That it may reach the King of Parses crown,
And set it safe on my victorious head.
See where it is, the keenest Cutle-axe.
That ere made passage thorough Persian Arms,
These are the wings shall make it fly as swift,
As doth the lightening: or the breath of heaven,
And kill as sure as it swiftly flies.
Thy words assure me of kind success:
Go valiant Soldier, go before and charge
The fainting army of that foolish King.
Vsumeasane and techelles come,
We are enough to scarre the enemy,
And more than needs to make an Emperor.
Accursed be he that first invented war,
They knew not, ah, they knew not simple men,
How those were hit by pelting Cannon shot,
Stand staggering like a quivering Aspen leaf,
Fearing the force of Bores boisterous blasts.
In what a lamentable case were I,
If Nature had not given me wisdoms lore?
For Kings are clouts that every man shoots at,
Our Crown the pin that thousands seek to cleave,
Therefore in policy I think it good
To hide it close: a goodly Stratagem,
And far from any man that is a fool.
So shall not I be known, or if I bee,
They cannot take away my crown from me.
Here will I hide it in this simple hole.
What fearful coward straggling from the camp
When Kings themselves are present in the field.
Thou least.
Base villain, dare thou give the lie?
Away, I am the King: go, touch me not.
Thou breakst the law of Arms unless thou kneel.
And cry me mercy, noble King.
Are you the witty King of Persea?
I marie am I: have you any suite to me?
I would entreat you to speak but three wise words.
So I can when I see my time.
Is this your Crown?
I, Did thou ever see a fairer?
You will not sell it, will ye?
Such another word, and I, will have thee executed.
Come give it me.
No, I took it prisoner.
You lie, I gave it you.
Then tic mine.
No, I mean, I let you keep it.
Well, I mean you shall have it again.
Here take it for a while, I lend it thee,
Till I may see thee hemmed with armed men.
Then shalt thou see me pull it from thy head:
Thou art no match for mighty Tamburlaine.
O Gods, is this tamburlaine the thief,
I marvel much he stole it not away.
Hold thee Cosroe, wear two imperial Crowns.
Thinks thee Invested now as royally,
Even by the mighty hand of tamburlaine,
As if as many kings as could encompass thee,
With greatest pomp had crowned thee Emperor.
So do I thrice renowined man at arms,
And none shall keep the crown but tamburlaine:
Thee doo I make my Regent of Persea,
And General Lieutenant of my Armies.
Meander, you that were our brothers Guide,
And chiefest Counsailor in all his acts,
Since he is yielded to the stroke of War,
On your submission we with thanks excuse,
And give you equal place in our affairs.
Most happy Emperor in humblest terms
I vow my service to your Majesty.
With utmost virtue of my faith and duty.
Thanks good Meander, then Cosroe reign
And govern Persea in her former pomp:
Now send Embassage to thy neighbor Kings,
And let them know the Persian King is changed:
From one that knew not what a King should do,
To one that can command what longs thereto:
And now we will to fair Persepolis,
With twenty thousand expert soldiers.
The Lords and Captains of my brothers camp,
With little slaughter take Meanders course,
And gladly yield them to my gracious rule:
Ortigius and menaphon, my trusty friends,
Now will I gratify your former good,
And grace your calling with a greater sway.
And as we ever and at your behoof,
And sought your state, all honour it deserved,
So will we with our powers and our lives,
Endeavour to preserve and prosper it.
I will not thank thee (sweet Ortigius)
Better replies shall prove my purposes.
And now, Lord tamburlaine, my brothers Camp
I leave to thee, and to theridamas,
To follow me to fair Persepolis.
Then will we march to all those Indian Mines,
My witless brother to the Christians lost:
And ransom them with fame and usury.
And till thou overtake me tamburlaine,
(Staying to order all the scattered troops)
Farewell Lord Regent, and his happy friends,
I long to sit upon my brothers throne,
Your Majesty shall shortly have your wish.
And ride in triumph through Persepolis.
And ride in triumph through Persepolis?
Is it not brave to be a King, techelles?
Vsumeasane and theridamas,
Is it not passing brave to be a King,
And ride in triumph through Persepolis?
O my Lord, tic sweet and full of pomp.
To be a King, is half to be a God.
A God is not so glorious as a King:
I think the pleasure they enjoy in heaven
Can not compare with kingly joys in earth,
To wear a Crown enchac'd with pearl and gold,
Whose virtues carry with it life and death,
To ask, and have: command, and be obeyed.
When looks breed love, with looks to gain the prize;
Such power attractive shines in princes eyes.
Why say theridamas, wilt thou be a king?
Nay, though I praise it, I can live without it.
What says my other friends, will you be kings?
I, if I could with all my heart my Lord.
Why, that's well said techelles, so would I,
And so would you my masters, would you not?
What then my Lord?
Why then Casinos shall we wish for ought
The world affords in greatest novelty,
And rest attmplesse faint and destitute?
Me thinks we should not, I am strongly moved,
That if I should desire the Persian Crown,
I could attain it with a wondrous ease,
And would not all our soldiers soon consent,
If we should aim at such a dignity?
I know they would with our persuasions.
Why then theridamas, Isle first assay,
To get the Persian Kingdom to my self:
Then thou for Parthia, they for Scythia and Medea.
And if I prosper, all shall be as sure,
As if the Turk, the Pope, Affrike and Greece,
Came creeping to vs with their crowns apace.
Then shall we send to this triumphing King,
And bid him battle for his novel Crown?
Nay quickly then, before his room be hot.
Twil prove a pretty jest (in faith) my friends.
A jest to chardge on twenty thousand men?
I judge the purchase more important far.
Judge by thy self theridamas, not me,
For presently techelles here shall haste,
To bid him battle ere he pass too far,
And lose more labour than the gain will quite.
Then shalt thou see the Scythian tamburlaine,
Make but a jest to win the Persian crown.
techelles, take a thousand horse with thee,
And bid him turn his back to war with vs,
That only made him King to make vs sport.
We will not steal upon him cowardly,
But give him warning and more warriors.
Haste the techelles, we will follow thee.
What saith theridamas?
Go on for me.
What means this devilish shepherd to aspire
With such a Giantly presumption.
To cast up hills against the face of heaven:
And dare the force of angry Iupiter.
But as he thrust them underneath the hills,
And pressed out fire from their burning jaws:
So will I send this monstrous slave to hell,
Where flames shall ever feed upon his soul.
Some powers divine, or else infernal, mixed
Their angry seeds at his conception:
For he was never sprung of human race,
Since with the spirit of his fearful pride,
He dares so doubtlessly resolve of rule.
And by profession be ambitous.
What God or Feend, or spirit of the earth,
Or Monster turned to a manly shape,
Or of what mould or mettel he be made,
What star or state soever govern him,
Let vs put on our meet encountering minds,
And in detesting such a devilish Thief,
In love of honour &amp; defence of right,
Be armed against the hate of such a foe,
Whether from earth, or hell, or heaven he grow.
Nobly resolved, my good Ortygius.
And since we all have sucked one wholesome air,
And with the same proportion of Elements,
Resolve, I hope we are resembled,
Vowing our loves to equal death and life,
Let's cheer our soldiers to encounter him,
That grievous image of ingratitude:
That fiery thirster after Soueraingtie:
And burn him in the fury of that flame,
That none can quince but blood and Empery.
Resolve my Lords and loving soldiers now,
To save your King and country from decay:
Then strike up Drum, and all the Stars that make
The loathsome Circle of my dated life,
Direct my weapon to his barbarous heart,
That thus opposes him against the Gods,
And scorns the Powers that govern Persea.
Barbarous and bloody Tamburlaine,
Thus to deprive me of my crown and life.
Treacherous and false theridamas,
Even at the morning of my happy state,
Scarce being seated in my royal throne,
To work my downfall and untimely end.
An uncouth pain torments my grieved soul,
And death arrests the organ of my voice.
Who entering at the breach thy sword hath made,
Sacks every vain and artier of my heart,
Bloody and insatiate Tamburlain.
The thirst of reign and sweetness of a crown,
That caused the eldest son of heavenly Ops,
To thrust his doting father from his chair,
And place himself in the Imperial heaven,
Moved me to manage arms against they state,
What better president than mighty Jove?
Nature that framed vs of four Elements,
Warring within our breasts for regiment,
Doth teach vs all to have aspiring minds:
Our souls, whose faculties can comprehend
The wondrous Architecture of the world:
And measure every wandering planets course.
Still climbing after knowledge infinite,
And always mooing as the restless Spheres.
Wills vs to wear our selves and never rest.
Until we reach the ripest fruit of all.
That perfect bliss and sole felicity.
The sweet fruition of an earthly crown.
And that made me to join with tamburlain
For he is gross and like the massy earth,
That moos not upwards, nor by princely deeds
Doth mean to soar aboue the highest sort.
And that made vs the friends of Tamburlaine.
To lift our swords against the Persian King.
For as when Jove did thrust old Saturn down.
Neptune and Dis gained each of them a Crown.
So do we hope to reign in Asia,
If tamburlain be placed in Persea.
The strangest men that ever nature made,
I know not how to take their tyrannies.
My bloodless body waxes chill and cold,
And with my blood my life slides through my wound.
My soul begins to take her flight to hell.
And sommons all my senses to depart:
The heat and moisture which did feed each other,
For want of nourishment to feed them both.
Is dry and cold, and now doth ghastly death
With greedy talents gripe my bleeding hart,
And like a Harpyr tires on my life.
Theridamas and Tamburlaine, I die,
And fearful vengeance light upon you both.
Not all the curses which the furies breathe,
Shall make me leave so rich a prize as this:
Teridamas, techelles, and the rest,
Who think you now is king of Persea?
Tamburlaine, tamburlaine.
Though Mars himself the angry God of arms,
And all the earthly Potentates conspire,
To dispossess me of this Diadem:
Yet will I wear it in despite of them,
As great commander of the Eastern world,
If you but say that tamburlaine shall reign.
Long live tamburlaine, and reign in Asia.
So, now it is more surer on my head,
Than if the Gods had held a Parliament:
And all pronounced me king of Persea.
GReat Kings of Barberry, and my portly Bassos,
We hear, the Tartars &amp; the Eastern thieves
Under the conduct of one Tamburlaine,
Presume a bickering with your Emperor:
And thinks to rouse vs from our dreadful siege
Of the famous Grecian Constantinople.
You know our Army is invincible:
As many circumcised Turks we have,
And warlike bands of Christians renied,
As hath the Ocean or the Terrene sea
Small drops of water, when the Moon begins
To join in one her semi-circled horns:
Yet would we not be braved with foreign power,
Nor raise our siege before the Gretians yield.
Or breathless lie before the city walls.
Renowned Emperor, and mighty General
What if you sent the Bassos of your guard.
To charge him to remain in Asia.
Or else to threaten death and deadly arms,
As from the mouth of mighty Baiazeth.
Hie thee my Bassoe fast to Persea,
Tell him thy Lord the Turkish Emperor,
Dread Lord of Affrike, Europe and Asia.
Great King and conqueror of Grecia,
The Ocean, Terrene, and the cole-blacke sea,
The high and higest Monarch of the world.
Wills and Commands (for say not I entreat)
Not once to set his foot in Africa,
Or spread his colours in Grecia.
Least he incur the fury of my wrath.
Tell him, I am content to take a truce,
Because I hear he bears a valiant mind.
But if presuming on his silly power,
He be so mad to manage Arms with me,
Then stay thou with him, say I bid thee so.
And if before the Sun have measured heaven
With triple circuit thou regreet vs not,
We mean to take his mornings next arise.
For messenger, he will not be reclaimed,
And mean to fetch thee in despite of him.
Most great and puissant Monarch of the earth,
Your Bassoe will accomplish your behest:
And show your pleasure to the Persian.
As fits the Legate of the stately Turk.
They say he is the King of Persea.
But if he dare attempt to stir your siege,
It were requisite he should be ten times more,
For all flesh quakes at your magnificence.
True (Argier) and tremble at my looks.
The spring is hindered by your smoothering host,
For neither rain can fall upon the earth,
Nor Sun reflere his virtuous beams thereon.
The ground is mantled with such multitudes.
All this is true as holy Mahomet,
And all the trees are blasted with our breathes.
What thinks your greatness best to be achieved
In pursuit of the Cities overthrow?
I will the captive Pioners of Argier,
Cut of the water, that by leaden pipes
Runs to the city from the mountain Carnon,
Two thousand horse shall forage up and down,
That no relief or succour come by Land.
And all the sea my Galleys countermand.
Then shall our footmen lie within the trench,
And with their Cannons mouthed like Orcus gulf
Batter the walls, and we will enter in:
And thus the Grccians shall be conquered.
MAdam Zenocrate, may I presume
To know the cause of these unquiet fits:
That work such trouble to your wonted rest:
Tic more then pity such a heavenly face
Should by hearts sorrow wax so wan and pale.
When your offensive rape by tamburlaine,
(Which of your whole displeasures should be most)
Hath seemed to be digested long ago.
Although it be digested long ago
As his exceeding favours have deserved,
And might content the Queen of heaven as well:
As it hath changed my first conceived disdain.
Yet since a farther passion feeds my thoughts,
With ceasclesse and discorsolate conceits.
Which dies my looks so lifeless as they are.
And might, if my extremes had fuel events,
Make me the ghastly counterfeit of death.
Eternal heaven sooner be dissolved.
And all that pierces Phoebes silver eye,
Before such hap fall to zenocrate.
Ah, life, and soul still hover in his Breast.
And leave my body senseless as the earth.
Or else unite you to his life and soul,
That I may live and die with tamburlain.
With tamburlaine? Ah fair zenocrate.
Let not a man so vile and barbarous,
That holds you from your father in despite,
And keeps you from the honours of a Queen.
Being supposed his worthless Concubine.
Be honoured with your love, but for necessity.
So now the mighty Sultan hears of you,
Your Highness needs not doubt but in short time,
He will with Tamburlaines destruction
Redeem you from this deadly servitude.
leave to wound me with these words.
And speak of tamburlaine as he deserves:
The entertainment we have had of him,
Is far from villainy or servitude.
And might in noble minds be counted princely.
How can you fancy one that looks so fierce,
Only disposed to martial Stratagems?
Who when he shall embrace you in his arms,
Will tell how many thousand men he slew.
And when you look for amorous discourse,
Will rattle forth his facts of war and blood.
Too harsh a subject for your dainty ears.
As looks the sun through Nilus flowing stream,
Or when the morning holds him in her arms.
So looks my Lordly love, fair tamburlaine:
His talk much sweeter than the Muses song,
They sung for honour against Pierides.
Or when Minerua did with Neptune strive,
And higher would I rear my estimate,
Than Iuno sister to the highest God.
If I were matched with mighty tamburlaine,
Yet be not so inconstant in your love,
But let the young Arabian live in hope,
After your rescue to eioy his choice.
You see though first the King of Persea
(Being a Shepherd) seemed to love you much,
Now in his majesty he leaves those looks,
Those words of favour, and those comfortings,
And gives no more than common courtesies.
Thence rise the tears that so distain my checks,
Fearing his love through my unworthiness.
Betrayed by fortune and suspicious love.
Threatened with frowning wrath and jealousy.
Surprise d with fear of hideous revenge.
I stand aghast: but most astonished
To see his choler shut in secrete thoughts,
And wrapped in silence of his angry soul.
Upon his brows was portrait ugly death,
And in his eyes the fury of his hart.
That shine as Comets, menacing revenge,
And casts a pale complexion on his cheeks.
As when the Sea-man sees the Hyades
Gather an army of Cemerian clouds,
(Austere and Aquilon with winged Steads
All sweating, tilt about the watery heavens,
With shivering spears enforcing thunderclaps.
And from their shields strike flames of lightening)
All fearful folds his sails, and sounds the maine,
Lifting his prayers to the heavens for aid,
Against the terror of the winds and waives.
So fares Agydas for the late felt frowns
That sent a tempest to my daunted thoughts,
And makes my soul divine her overthrow.
See you Agidas how the King salutes you.
He bids you prophecy what it imports.
I prophesied before and now I prove,
The killing frowns of jealousy and love.
He needed not with words confirm my fear,
For words are vain where working tools present
The naked action of my threatened end.
It says, Agydas, thou shalt surely die.
And of extremities elect the least,
More honour and less pain it may procure,
Toddy by this resolved hand of thine,
Than stay the torments he and heaven have sworn.
Then haste Agydas, and prevent the plagues:
Which thy prolonged Fates may draw on thee:
Go wander free from fear of Tyrants rage.
Removed from the Torments and the hell:
Wherewith he may excruciate thy soul.
And let Agidas by Agidas die.
And with this stab slumber eternally.
Vsumeasane, see how right the man
Hath hit the meaning of my Lord the King.
Faith, and techelles, it was manly done;
And since he was so wise and honourable,
Let vs afford him now the bearing hence.
And crave his triple worthy burial.
Agreed Casino, we will honour him.
BAssoe, by this thy Lord and moister knows,
I mean to meet him in Bithynia:
see how he comes? Tush. Turks are full of brags
And menace more than they can well perform:
He meet me in the field and fetch thee hence?
Alas (poor Turk) his fortune is to weak,
T'incounter with the strength of Tamburlaine.
View well my Camp, and speak indifferently,
Doo not my captains and my soldiers look
As if they meant to conquer Africa.
Your men are valiant but their number few,
And cannot terrify his mighty host,
My Lord, the great Commander of the world,
Besides fifteen contributory kings,
Hath now in arms ten thousand Janissaries,
Mounted on lusty Mauritanian Steeds.
Brought to the war by men of Tripoly.
Two hundred thousand footmen that have served
In two set battles fought in Grecia:
And for the expedition of this war,
If he think good, can from his garrisons,
Withdraw as many more to follow him.
The more he brings, the greater is the spoil,
For when they perish by our warlike hands,
We mean to seat our footmen on their Steeds.
And rifle all those stately Ianisars.
But will those Kings accompany your Lord?
Such as his Highness please, but some must stay
To rule the provinces he late subdued.
Thē fight courageously, their crowns are yours
This hand shall set them on your conquering heads:
That made me Emperor of Asia.
Let him bring missions infinite of men,
Vnpeopling Western Africa and Greece:
Yet we assure vs of the victory.
Even he that in a trice vanquished two kings,
More mighty than the Turkish Emperor:
Shall rouse him out of Europe, and pursue
His scattered army till they yield or die.
Well said theridamas, speak in that mood,
For Will and Shall best fitteth Tamburlain,
Whose smiling stars gives him assured hope
Of martial triumph, ere he meet his foes:
I that am termed the Scourge and Wrath of God,
The only fear and terror of the world,
Will first subdue the Turk, and then enlarge
Those Christian Captives, which you keep as slaves,
Burdening their bodies with your heavy chames.
And feeding them with thin and slender fare,
That naked row about the Terrene sea.
And when they chance to breath and rest a space,
Are punished with Bastones so grievously,
That they lie panting on the Galleys side.
And strive for life at every stroke they give,
These are the cruel pirates of Argeire,
That damned train, the scum of Africa.
Inhabited with straggling Runagates,
That make quick havoc of the Christian blood.
But as I live that town shall curse the time
That Tamburlaine set foot in Africa:
Bassos and Janissaries of my Guard,
Attend upon the person of your Lord,
The greatest Potentate of Africa.
Techelles, and the rest prepare your swords
I mean t'incounter with that Baiazeth.
Kings of Fesse, Moroccus and Argier,
He calls me Baiazeth, whom you call Lord.
Note the presemption of this Scythian slave:
I tell thee villain, those that lead my horse
Have to their names tytles of dignity,
And dare thou bluntly call me Baiazeth?
And know thou Turk, that those which lead my horse,
Shall lead thee Captive thorough Africa.
And dare thou bluntly call me tamburlaine?
By Mahomet, my Kinsmans sepulchre.
And by the holy Alcaron I swear,
He shall be made a chaste and lustlesse Eunuchs•,
And in my Sarell tend my Concubines:
And all his Captaincs that thus stoutly stand,
Shall draw the chariot of my Empress.
Whom I have brought to see their overthrow.
By this my sword that conquered Persea,
Thy fall shall make me famous through the world:
I will not tell thee how Isle handle thee,
But every common soldier of my Camp
Shall smile to see thy miserable state.
What means the mighty Turkish Emperor
To talk with one so base as tamburlaine.
Ye Moors and valiant men of Barberry.
How can ye suffer these indignities.
Leave words and let them feel your lances points.
Which glided through the bowels of the Greeks.
Well said my stout contributory kings,
Your threefold army and my huge host,
Shall swallow up these base borne Perseans,
Puissant, renowned and mighty tamburlain,
Why stay we thus prolonging all their lives?
I long to see those crowns won by our swords
That we may reign as kings of Africa.
What Coward wold not fight for such a prize?
Fight all courageously and be you kings.
I speak it, and my words are oracles.
Zabina, mother of three braver boys,
Than Hercules, that in his infancy
Did posh the jaws of Serpents venomous:
Whose hands are made to gripe a warlike Lance.
Their shoulders broad, for complete armour fit,
Their limbs more large and of a bigger size
Than all the brats ysprong from Typhons loins:
Who, when they come unto their fathers age,
Will batter Turrets with their manly sists.
And on thy head wear my Imperial crown,
Until I bring this sturdy tamburlain,
And all his Captains bound in captive chains.
Such good success happen to Baiazeth,
zenocrate, the loveliest Maid alive,
Fairer than rocks of pearl and precious stone,
The only Paragon of tamburlaine,
Whose eyes are brighter than the Lamps of heaven.
And speech more pleasant than sweet harmony:
That with thy looks can clear the darkened Sky:
And calm the rage of thundering Iupiter:
Sit down by her: adorned with my Crown,
As if thou were the Empress of the world.
Stir not zenocrate until thou see
Me march victoriously with all my men,
Triumphing cuer him and these his kings.
Which I will bring as Vassals to thy feet.
Till then take thou my crown, vaunt of my worth,
And manage words with her as we will arms.
And may my Love, the king of Persea
Return with victory, and free from wound.
Now shalt thou feel the force of Turkish arms,
Which lately made all Europe quake for searc:
I have of Turks, Arabians, Moors and Jaws
Enough to cover all Bythinia,
Let thousands die, their slaughtered Carcasses
Shall serve for walls and bulwarks to the rest:
And as the heads of Hydra, so my power
Subdued, shall stand as mighty as before:
If they should yield their necks unto the sword,
Thy soldiers arms could not endure to strike
So many blows as I have heads for thee.
Thou know not (foolish hardy Tamburlaine)
What tic to meet me in the open field,
That leave no ground for thee to march upon.
Our conquering swords shall marshal vs the way
We use to march upon the slaughtered foe:
Trampling their bowels with our horses hooffes:
Brave horses, bred on the white Tartarian hills:
My Camp is like to Iulius Caesars host,
That never fought but had the victory:
Nor in Pharsalia was there such hot war,
As these my followers willingly would have:
Legions of Spirits fleeting in the air,
Direct our Bullets and our weapons points
And make our strokes to wound the senseless lure,
And when she sees our bloody Colours spread.
Then Victory begins to take her flight,
Resting her self upon my milk-white Tent:
But come my Lords, to weapons let vs fall.
The field is ours, the Turk, his wife and all.
Come Kings and Bassos let vs glut our swords
That thirst to drink the feeble Perseans blood.
Base Concubine, must thou be placed by me
That am the Empress of the mighty Turk?
Disdainful Turks and unreverend Boss,
Call thou me Concubine that am betrothed
Unto the great and mighty tamburlaine?
To tamburlaine the great Tartarian thief?
Thou wilt repent these lavish words of thine,
When thy great Bassoe, moister and thy self.
Must plead for mercy at his kingly feet,
And sue to me to be your Advocates.
And sue to thee? I tell thee shameless girl,
Thou shalt be Laundress to my waiting maid.
How lik'st thou her Ebea, will she serve?
Madame, she thinks perhaps she is too fine.
But I shall turn her into other weeds.
And make her dainty fingers fall to work.
hearst thou Anippe, how thy drudge doth talk,
And how my slave, her mistress menaces.
Both for their sauciness shall be employed,
To dress the common soldiers meat and drink.
For we will scorn they should come ne'er our selves.
Yet sometimes let your highness send for thē
To do the work my chamber maid disdains.
Ye Gods and powers that govern Persea.
And made my lordly Love her worthy King:
Now strengthen him against the Turkish Baiazeth,
And let his foes like flocks of fearful Roes,
Pursued by hunters, fly his angry looks,
That I may see him issue Conqueror.
Now Mahomet, solicit God himself,
And make him rain down murdering shot frō heaven
To dash the Scythians brains, and strike them dead,
That dare to manage arms with him,
That offered jewels to thy sacred shrine.
When first he warred against the Christians.
By this the Turks lie weltering in their blood sound,
And tamburlaine is Lord of Africa:
Thou art deceived, I heard the Trumpets
As when my Emperor overthrew the Greeks:
And led them Captive into Africa.
Straight will I use thee as thy pride deserves:
Prepare thy self to live and die my slave.
If Mahomet should come from heaven and swear,
My royal Lord is slain or conquered.
Yet should he not persuade me otherwise.
But that he lives and will be Conqueror.
Now king of Bassos, who is Conqueror?
Thou, by the fortune of this damned foil,
Where are your stout contributory kings?
We have their crowns their bodies strowe the field.
Each man a crown? why kingly fought in faith
Deliver them into my treasury.
Now let me offer to my gracious Lord.
His royal Crown again, so highly won:
Nay take the Turkish Crown from her, zen.
And crown me Emperor of Africa.
No tamburlain, though now thou gat the best
Thou shalt not yet be Lord of Africa.
Give her the Crown Turks you were best.
Injurious villains, thieves, runagates,
How dare you thus abuse my Majesty?
Here Madam, you are Empress, she is none,
Not now theridamas, her time is past:
The pillars that have bolstered up those terms,
Are fallen in clusters at my conquering feet.
Though he be prisoner, he may be ransomed:
Not all the world shall ransom Baiazeth.
Ah fair zabina, we have lost the field.
And never had the Turkish Emperor
So great a foil by any foreign foe.
Now will the Christian nusc rents be glad,
Ringing with joy their superstitious belles:
And making bonfires for my overthrow.
But ere I die those foul Idolaters
Shall make me bonfires with their filthy bones,
For though the glory of this day be lost.
Affrik and Greece have garrisons enough
To make me Sovereign of the earth again.
Those walled garrisons will I subdue,
And write my self great Lord of Africa:
So from the East unto the furthest West,
Shall tamburlain extend his puissant arm.
The Galls and those piling Briggandines,
That yearly sail to the Venetian gulf,
And hover in the straights for Christians wrack,
Shall lie at anchor in the Isle Assent.
Until the Persian Fleet and men of war,
Sailing along the Oriental sea,
Have fetched about the Indian continent:
Even from Persepolis to Mexico,
And thence unto the straights of Iubalter:
Where they shall meet, and join their force in one
Keeping in awe the Bay of Portugal.
And all the Ocean by the British shore:
And by this means Isle win the world at last.
Yet set a ransom on me tamburlaine.
What, think thou tamburlain esteems thy gold,
Isle make the kings of India ere I die,
Offer their mines (to sew for peace) to me,
And dig for treasure to appease my wrath:
Come bind them both and one lead in the Turk.
The Turks let my Loves maid lead away.
Ah villains, dare ye touch my sacred arms.
O Mahomet, Oh sleepy Mahomet.
O cursed Mahomet that make vs thus
The slaves to Scythians rude and barbarous.
Come bring them in, &amp; for this happy cōquest
Triumph, and solemnise a martial feast.
AWake ye men of Memphis, hear the clange
Of Scythian trumpets, hear the Basilisks,
That roaring, shake Damascus turrets down,
The rogue of Volga holds zenocrate,
The Souldans daughter for his Concubine,
And with a troop of thieves and vagabonds.
Hath spread his colours to our high disgrace:
While you faint-hearted base Egyptians,
Lie slumbering on the flowery banks of Nile,
As Crocodiles that vnaffrighted rest,
While thundering Cannons rattle on their Skins.
Nay (mighty Sultan) did your greatness see
The frowning looks of fiery Tamburlaine,
That with his terror and imperious eyes,
Commands the hearts of his associates,
It might amaze your royal majesty.
Villain. I tell thee, were that tamburlaine,
As monstrous as Gorgon, prince of Hell,
The Sultan would not start a foot from him.
But speak, what power hath he?
Mighty Lord,
Three hundred thousand men in armour clad,
Upon their prancing Steeds, didainfully
With wanton paces trampling on the ground.
Five hundred thousand footmen threatening shot,
Shaking their swords, their spears and iron bills,
Enuironing their Standard round, that stood
As bristle-pointed as a thorny wood.
Their warlike Engines and munition
Exceed the forces of their martial men.
Nay could their nūbers countervail the stars
Or ever drisling drops of April snowers,
Or withered leaves that Autume shakes down.
Yet would the Sultan by his conquering power:
So scatter and consume them in his rage,
That not a man should live to rue their fall,
So might your highness, had you time to sort
Your fighting men, and raise your royal host.
But tamburlaine, by expedition
Advantage takes of your vnreadinesse.
Let him take all th'aduantages he can,
Were all the world conspired to sight for him,
Nay, were he Devil, as he is no man,
Yet in revenge of fair Zenocrate,
Whom he detameth in despite of vs,
This arm should send him down to Erebus.
To shroud his shame in darkness of the night.
Pleases your mightiness to understand,
His resolution far exceeds all:
The first day when he pitches down his tents,
White is their hew, and on his silver crest
A snowy Feather spangled white he bears,
To signify the mildness of his mind.
That satiate with spoil refuses blood:
But when Aurora mounts the second time,
As red as scarlet is his furniture,
Then must his kindled wrath bee quenched with blood.
Not sparing any that can manage arms:
But if these threats move not submission.
Black are his colours, black Pavilion,
His spear, his shield, his horse, his armour, plumes,
And Jetty Feathers menace death and hell,
Without respect of Sex, degree or age.
He raceth all his foes with fire and sword.
Merciless villain, Peasant ignorant,
Of lawful arms, or martial discipline:
Pillage and murder are his usual trades.
The slave usurps the glorious name of war.
See Capolin the fair Arabian king,
That hath been disappointed by this slave:
Of my fair daughter, and his princely Love:
May have fresh warning to go war with vs,
And be revenged for her dispardgement.
BRing out my footstool.
Ye holy Priests of heavenly Mahomet,
That sacrificing slice and cut your flesh,
Staining his Altars with your purple blood:
Make heaven to frown and every fired star
To suck up poison from the moorish Fens,
And pour it in this glorious Tyrants throat.
The chiefest God first moouer of that Sphere,
Enchased with thousands ever shining lamps,
Will sooner burn the glorious frame of Heaven.
Then it should so conspire my overthrow.
But Villain, thou that wish this to me,
Fall prostrate on the lowe disdainful earth.
And be the footstool of great Tamburlain,
That I may rise into my royal throne.
First shalt thou rip my bowels with thy sword,
And sacrifice my heart to death and hell,
Before I yield to such a slavery.
Base villain, vassal, slave to Tamburlaine:
Unworthy to embrace or touch the ground.
That bears the honour of my royal weight.
Stoop villain, stoop, stoop for so he bids,
That may command thee piecemeal to be torn,
Or scattered like the lofty Cedar trees,
Struck with the voice of thundering Iupiter.
Then as I look down to the damned Feends.
Feends look on me, and thou dread God of hell.
With Evan Sceptre strike this hateful earth,
And make it swallow both of vs at once.
Now clear the triple region of the air,
And let the majesty of heaven behold
Their Scourge and Terror tread on Emperors,
Smile Stars that reigned at my nativity:
And dim the brightness of their neighbor Lamps,
Disdain to borrow light of Cynthia,
For I the chiefest Lamp of all the earth,
First rising in the East with mild aspect,
But fired now in the Meridian line,
Will send up fire to your turning Spheres,
And cause the Sun to borrow light of you.
My sword stroke fire from his coat of steel,
Even in Bythinia, when I took this Turk:
As when a fiery exhalation
Wrapped in the bowels of a freezing cloud,
Fighting for passage, make the Welkin crack,
And casts a flash of lightning to the earth.
But ere I march to wealthy Persea,
Or leave Damascus and th'Egyptian fields,
As was the fame of Clymeus brain-sicke son,
That almost brent the Axeltree of heaven,
So shall our swords, our lances and our shot.
Fill all the air with fiery meteors.
Then when the Sky shall wax as red as blood,
It shall be said, I made it red my self,
To make me think of nought but blood and war.
Unworthy king, that by thy cruelty,
Unlawfully usurp the Persian seat:
Dare thou that never saw an Emperor,
Before thou met my husband in the field,
Being thy Captive, thus abuse his state,
Keeping his kingly body in a Cage,
That rooffes of gold, and sun-bright Palaces,
Should have prepared to entertain his Grace?
And treading him beneath thy loathsome feet,
Whose feet the kings of Africa have kissed.
You must devise some tormēt worse, my Lord
To make these captives reine their lavish tongues.
zenocrate, look better to your slave:
She is my Handmaids slave, and she shall look
That these abuses flow not from her tongue:
Chide her Anippe.
Let these be warnings for you then my slave,
How you abuse the person of the king:
Or else I swear to have you whipped stark naked.
Great tamburlaine, great in my overthrow,
Ambitious pride shall make thee fall as low.
For treading on the back of Baiazeth,
That should be horsed on four mighty kings.
Thy names and tytles, and thy dignities
Are fled from Baiazeth, and remain with me,
That will maintain it against a world of Kings.
Put him in again.
Is this a place for mighty Baiazeth?
Confusion light on him that helps thee thus.
There whiles he lives, shall Baiezeth be kept,
And where I go be thus in triumph drawn:
And thou his wife shalt feed him with the scraps
My seruitures shall bring the from my board.
For he that gives him other food than this:
Shall sit by him and starve to death himself.
This is my mind, and I will have it so.
Not all the Kings and Emperors of the Earth:
If they would lay their crowns before my feet,
Shall ransom him, or take him from his cage.
The ages that shall talk of Tamburlain,
Even from this day to Platoes wondrous year,
Shall talk how I have handled Baiazeth.
These Mores that drew him from Bythinia,
To fair Damascus, where we now remain,
Shall lead him with vs wheresoever we go.
Techelles, and my loving followers,
Now may we see Damascus lofty towers,
Like to the shadows of Pyramids,
That with their beauties graced the Memphion fields▪
The golden stature of their feathered bird
That spreads her wings upon the city walls,
Shall not defend it from our battering shot.
The townsmen mask in silk and cloth of gold.
And every house is as a treasury.
The men, the treasure, and the town is ours.
Your tents of white now pitched before the gates
And gentle flags of amity displayed.
I doubt not but the Governor will yield,
Offering Damascus to your Majesty.
So shall he have his life, and all the rest.
But if he stay until the bloody flag
Be once advanced on my vermilion Tent,
He dies, and those that kept vs out so long.
And when they see me march in black array,
With mournful streamers hanging down their heads,
Were in that city all the world contained.
Not one should scope: but perish by our swords.
Yet would you have some pity for my sake,
Because it is my countries, and my Fathers.
Not for the world Zenocrate, if I have sworn:
Come bring in the Turk.
ME thinks we march as Meliager did,
Environed with brave Argolian knights:
To chase the savage Caldonian Boar,
Or Cephalus with lusty The bane youths.
Against the Woolfe that angry Themis sent.
To waste and spoil the sweet Aonian fields.
A monster of five hundred thousand heads,
Compact of Rapine, Piracy, and spoil.
The Scum of men, the hate and Scourge of God,
Raves in Egyptia, and annoys vs.
My Lord it is the bloody Tamburlaine.
A sturdy Felon and a base-bred Thief.
By murder raised to the Perse an Crown.
That dares control vs in our Territories.
To tame the pride of this presumotuous Beast,
Join your Arabians with the Souldans power:
Let vs unite our royal bands in one,
And hasten to remove Damascus siege.
It is a blemish to the Majesty
And high estate of mighty Emperors,
That such a base usurping vagabond
Should brave a king, or wear a princely crown.
Renowned Sultan, have ye lately heard
The overthrow of mighty Baiazeth,
About the confines of Bythinia?
The slavery wherewith he persecutes
The noble Turk and his great Empress.
I have, and sorrow for his bad success:
But noble Lord of great Arabia,
Be so persuaded, that the Sultan is
No more dismayed with tidings of his fall,
Than in the haven when the Pilot stands
And views a strangers ship rent in the winds,
And shivered against a craggy rock,
Yet in compassion of his wretched state,
A sacred vow to heaven and him I make,
Confirming it with lbis holy name,
That Tamburlaine shall rue the day, the hour,
Wherein he wrought such ignominious wrong.
Unto the hallowed person of a prince,
Or kept the fair zenocrate so long.
As Co•tubine, I fear to feed his •used.
Let grief and fury hasten on revenge,
Let Tamburlaine for his offences feel
Such plagues as heaven and we can pour on him.
I long to break my spear upon his crest,
And prove the weight of his victorious arm:
For Fame I fear hath been too prodigal:
In sounding through the world his partial praise:
Capolin, hast thou surveyed our powers.
Great Emperors of Egypt and Arabia.
The number of your hostess united is,
A hundred and fifty thousand horse,
Two hundred thousand foot, brave men at arms,
Courageous and full of hardiness:
As frolic as the hunters in the chase:
Of savage beasts amid the desert woods.
My mind presages fortunate success,
And tamburlaine, my spirit doth foresee
The utter ruin of thy men and thee.
Then rear your standards, let your soun∣ding Drums
Direct our Soldiers to Damascus walls.
Now Tamburlaine, the mighty Sultan comes,
And leads with him the great Arabian King.
To dim thy baseness and obscurity.
Famous for nothing but for theft and spoil,
To race and scatter thy inglorious crew,
Of Scythians and slavish Persians.
NOw hang our bloody colours by Damascus.
Reflexing hues of blood upon their heads.
While they walk quivering on their city walls,
Half dead for fear before they feel my wrath:
Then let vs freely banquet and carouse
Full bowls of wine unto the God of war,
That means to fill your helmets full of gold▪
And make Damascus spoils as rich to you,
As was to Iason Colchos golden fleece.
And now Baiazeth, hast thou any stomach?
I, such a stomach (cruel tamburlane) as I could
Willingly feed upon thy blood-raw hart.
Nay, thine own is easier to come by, pluck out that,
And twil serve thee and thy wife: Well zenocrate,
techelles, and the rest, fall to your victuals.
Fall to, and never may your meat digest,
Ye Furies that can mask invisible,
Dive to the bottom of Auernas poole,
And in your hands bring hellish poison up.
And squeeze it in the cup of tamburlain.
Or winged snakes of Lerna cast your stings,
And leave your venoms in this Tyrants dish.
And may this banquet prove as ominous,
As Prognes to th'adulterous Thracian King.
That fed upon the substance of his child.
My Lord, how can you suffer these outrageous curses
By these slaves of yours?
To let them see (divine zenocrate)
I glory in the curses of my foes.
Having the power frō the Imperial heaven,
To turn them al upon their proper heads.
I pray you give them leave Madam, this speech is a goodly refreshing to them.
But if his highness would let them be fed, it would doe them more good.
Sir, why fall you not too, are you so daintily brought up, you cannot eat your own flesh?
First legions of devils shall tear thee in pieces.
Villain, know thou to whom thou speak
O let him alone: here, eat sir, take it from my swords point, or Isle thrust it to thy heart.
He stamps it under his feet my Lord.
Take it up Villain and eat it, or I will make thee slice the browns of thy arms into carbonadoes, and eat them.
Nay, it were better he kilt his wife, &amp; then she shall be sure not to be starved, &amp; he be provided for a months victual before hand.
Here is my dagger, dispatch her while she is fat, for if she live but a while longer, she will fall into a comsumption with fretting, and then she will not bee worth the eating.
Dost thou think that Mahomet will suffer this
Tic like he will, when he cannot let it.
Go to, fall to your meat: what not a bit? belike he hath not been watered to day, give him some drink.
Fast and welcome sir, while hunger make you eat. How now zenocrate, doth not the Turk and his wife make a goodly show at a banquet?
Yes. my Lord.
Me thinks, tic a great deal better than a con∣sort of music.
Yet music would doe well to cheer up ze∣nocrate: pray thee tel, why art thou so sad? If thou wilt have a song, the Turk shall strain his voice: but why is it?
My lord, to see my fathers town besieged,
The country wasted where my self was borne,
How can it but afflict my very soul?
If any love remain in you my Lord,
Or if my love unto your majesty
May merit favour at your highness hands,
Then raise your siege from fair Damascus walls,
And with my father take a friendly truce.
Zenocrate, were Egypt Ioues own land,
Yet would I with my sword make Jove to sto•pe,
I will confute those blind Geographers
That make a triple region in the world,
Excluding Regions which I mean to trace
And with this pen reduce them to a Map.
Calling the Provinces, Cities and towns
After my name and thine zenocrate:
Here at Damascus will I make the Point
That shall begin the Perpendicular.
And would thou have me buy thy Fathers love
With such a loss? Tell me zenocrate?
Honour still weight on happy tamburlaine:
Yet give me leave to plead for him my Lord.
Content thy self, his person shall be safe.
And all the friends of fair Zenocrate,
If with their lives they will be pleased to yield,
Or may be forced to make me Emperor.
For Egypt and Arabia must be mine.
Feed you slave, thou moist think thy self happy to be fed from my trencher.
My empty stomach full of idle heat,
Draws bloody humours from my feeble parts,
Preserving life, by hasting cruel death.
My veins are pale, my sinews hard and dry,
My joints benumbed, unless I eat, I die.
Eat Baiazeth, Let vs live in spite of them,
Looking some happy power will pity and enlarge vs.
Here Turk, wilt thou have a clean trencher?
I Tyrant, and more meat.
Soft sir, you must be dieted, too much eating will make you surfeit.
So it would my lord, specially having so small a walk, and so little exercise.
Theridamas, techelles and Casino, here are the cates you desire to finger, are they not?
I (my Lord) but none save kings must feed with these.
Tic enough for vs to see them, and for tam∣burlaine only to enjoy them.
Well, Here is now to the Sultan of Egypt the King of Arabia, and the Governor of Damascus. Now take these three crowns, and pledge me, my con∣tributorie Kings.
I crown you here (Theridamas) King of Argier: Techelles King of Fesse, and Vsumeasane King of Morocus. How say you to this (Turk) these are not your contributory kings.
Nor shall they long be thine, I warrant them.
Kings of Argier, Morocus, and of Fesse.
You that have marched with happy Tamburlaine,
As far as from the frozen place of heaven.
Unto the watery mornings ruddy hour.
And thence by land unto the Torrid Zone,
Deserve these tytles I endow you with.
By value and by magnanimity.
Your byrthes shall be no blemish to your fame.
For virtue is the fount whence honour springs.
And they are worthy she invested kings.
And since your highness hath so well vouchsafed,
If we deserve them not with higher meeds
Then erst our states and actions have retained,
Take them away again and make vs slaves.
Well said Theridamas, when holy Fates
Shall stablish me in strong Egyptia.
We mean to travail to th'Antatique Pole,
Conquering the people underneath our feet.
And be renowned, as never Emperors were.
zenocrate, I will not crown thee yet,
Until with greater honours I be graced.
Still doth this man or rather God of war,
Batt•r our walls, and beat our Turrets down
And to resist with longer stubbornness,
Or hope of rescue from the Souldans power,
Were but to bring our wilful overthrow,
And make vs desperate of our threatened lives:
We see his tents have now been altered,
With terrors to the last and cruellest hew:
His cole-blacke colours every where advanced,
Threaten our city with a general spoil:
And if we should with common rites of Arms,
Offer our safeties to his clemency,
I fear the custom proper to his sword,
Which he observes as parcel of his fame:
Intending so to terrify the world,
By any innovation or remorse,
Will never be dispensed with till our deaths,
Therefore, for these our harmless virgins sakes,
Whose honours and whose lives rely on him:
Let vs have hope that their unspotted prayers
Their blubbered cheeks and hearty humble mons
Will melt his fury into some remorse:
And use vs like a loving Conqueror.
If humble suites or imprecations,
(uttered with tears of wretchedness and blood,
Shed from the heads and hearts of all our Sex.
Some made your wives, and some your children)
Might have entreated your obdurate breasts.
To entertain some care of our securities.
Whiles only danger beat upon our walls,
These more than dangerous warrants of our deat•
Had never been erected as they bee,
Nor you depend on such weak helps as we
Well, lovely Virgins, think our count••s care
Our love of honour loath to be enthral'd
To foreign powers, and rough imperious yokes:
Would not with too much cowardice or fear,
Before all hope of rescue were denied,
Submit your selves and vs to servitude.
Therefore in that your safeties and our own
Your honours, liberties and lives were weighed
In equal care and balance with our own,
Endure as we the malice of our stars.
The wrath of Tamburlain, and power of wars.
Or be the means the ouerweighing heavens
Have kept to qualify these hot extremes.
And bring vs pardon in your cheerful looks.
Then here before the majesty of heaven,
And holy Patrones of Egyptia,
With knees and hearts submissive we entreat,
Grace to our words and pity to our looks
That this devise may prove propitious,
And through the eyes and ears of tamburlaine,
Convey events of mercy to his heart:
Grant that these signs of victory we yield
May bind the temples of his conquering head,
To hide the folded furrows of his brows,
And shadow his displeased countenance,
With happy looks of ruth and lenity,
Leave vs my Lord, and loving countrymen,
What simple Virgins may persuade, we will.
Garewell (sweet Virgins) on whose safe return
Depends our city, liberty, and lives.
WHat, are the Turtles afraid out of their nests?
Alas poor fools, must you be first shall feel
The sworn destruction of Damascus.
They know my custom: could they not as well
Have sent ye out, when first my milkwhite flags
Through which sweet mercy threw her gentle beams
Reflexing them on your disdainful cies:
As now when fury and incensed hate
Flings slaughtering terror from my coalblack tents.
And tells for truth, submissions comes too late.
Most happy King and Emperor of the earth.
Image of Honour and Nobility.
For whom the Powers divine have made the world.
And on whose throne the holy Graces sit.
In whose sweet person is comprised the Sum
Of natures Skill and heavenly majesty.
Pity our plights, O pity poor Damascus:
Pity old age, within whose silver hairs
Honour and reverence evermore have reigned,
Pity the marriage bed, where many a Lord
In prime and glory of his loving joy.
Embraces now with tears of ruth and blood,
The jealous body of his fearful wife,
Whose cheeks and hearts so punished with conceit,
To think thy puissant never stayed arm
Will part their bodies, and prevent their souls
From heavens of comfort, yet their age might bear,
Now wax all pale and withered to the death,
As well for grief our ruthless Governor
Have thus refused the mercy of thy hand,
(Whose sceptre Angels kiss, and Furies dread)
As for their liberties, their loves or lives,
O then for these, and such as we our selves,
For vs, for infants, and for all our bloods,
That never nourished thought against thy rule,
Pity, O pity, (sacred Emperor)
The prostrate service of this wretched town.
And take in sign thereof this gilded wreath,
Whereto each man of rule hath given his hand,
And wished as worthy subjects happy means,
To be inuesters of thy royal brows,
Even with the true Egyptian Diadem.
Virgins, in vain ye labo•• to prevent
That which mine honour swears shall be performed:
Behold my sword, what see you at the point?
Nothing but fear and fatal steel my Lord.
Your fearful minds are thick and misty then
For there sits Death, there sits imperious Death.
Keeping his circuit by the slicing edge.
But I'am pleased you shall not see him there,
He now is seated on my horsmens spears:
And on their points his fleshless body feches.
Techelles, straight go charge a few of them
To chardge these Dames, and show my servant death:
Sitting in scarlet on their armed spears.
O pity vs.
Away with them I say and show them death.
I will not spare these proud Egyptians.
Nor change my Martial observations,
For all the wealth of Gehons golden waives.
Or for the love of Venus, would she leave
The angry God of Arms, and lie with me.
They have refused the offer of their lives,
And know my customs are as peremptory
As wrathful Planets, death, or destiny.
What, have your horsemen shown the virgins Death?
They have my Lord, and on Damascus walls
Have hoisted up their slaughtered carcases.
A sight as baneful to their souls I think
As are Thessalian drugs or Mithradate.
But go my Lords, put the rest to the sword.
Ah fair Zenocrate, divine Zenocrate,
Fair is too foul an Epithet for thee,
That in thy passion for thy countries love,
And fear to see thy kingly Fathers harm,
With hair discheweld wip'st thy watery cheeks:
And like to Flora in her mornings pride,
Shaking her silver treshes in the air.
Rain'st on the earth resolved pearl in showers,
And sprinklest Saphyrs on thy shining face,
Where Beauty, mother to the Muses sits,
And comments volumes with her Ivory pen:
Taking instructions from thy flowing eyes,
Eyes when that Ebena steps to heaven.
In silence of thy solemn Evenings walk.
Making the mantle of the richest night.
The Moon, the Planets, and the Meteors light,
There Angels in their crystal armours fight
A doubtful battle with my tempted thoughts,
For Egypt freedom and the Souldans life:
His life that so consumes Zenocrate,
Whose sorrows lay more siege unto my saule,
Than all my Army to Damascus walls.
And neither Perseans Sovereign, nor the Turk
Troubled my senses with conceit of foil,
So much by much, as doth zenocrate.
What is beauty saith my sufferings then?
If all the pens that ever poets held,
Had fed the feeling of their masters thoughts,
And every sweetness that inspired their harts,
Their minds, and muses on admired theames:
If all the heavenly Quintessence they still
From their immortal flowers of Poesy,
Wherein as in a mirror we perceive
The highest reaches of a human wit.
If these had made one Poems period
And all combined in Beauties worthiness,
Yet should there hover in their restless heads,
One thought, one grace, one wonder at the least,
Which into words no virtue can digest:
But how unseemly is it for my Sex
My discipline of arms and Chivalry,
My nature and the terror of my name.
To harbour thoughts effeminate and faint?
Save only that in / Beauties just applause,
With whose instinct the soul of man is touched.
And every warrior that is rapt with love,
Of fame, of valour, and of victory
Must needs have beauty beat on his conceits,
I thus conceiving and subduing both:
That which hath stopped the tempest of the Gods,
Even from the fiery spangled veil of heaven,
To feel the lovely warmth of shepherds flames,
And march in cottages of strewn weeds,
Shall give the world to note for all my birth,
That Virtue solely is the sum of glory,
And fashions men with true nobility.
Who's within there? 
Hath Baiazeth been fed to day?
I, my Lord.
Bring him forth, &amp; let vs know if the town be ransacked.
The town is ours my Lord, and fresh supply
Of conquest, and of spoil is offered vs:
Thats well techelles, what's the news?
The Sultan and the Arabian king together
March on vs with such eager violence,
As if there were no way but one with vs.
No more there is not I warrant thee techelles
We know the victory is ours my Lord,
But let vs save the reverend Souldans life,
For fair Zenocrate, that so laments his state.
That will we chiefly see unto, theridamas.
For sweet zenocrate, whose worthiness
Deserves a conquest over every hart:
And now my footstool, if I loose the field,
You hope of liberty and restitution:
Here let him stay my masters from the tents,
Till we have made vs ready for the field.
Pray for vs Baiazeth, we are going.
Go, never to return with victory:
Millions of men encompass thee about.
And gore thy body with as many wounds,
Sharpe forked arrows light upon thy horse:
Furies from the black Cocitus lake,
Break up the earth, and with their firebrands,
Enforce thee run upon the baneful pikes.
Volleys of shot pierce through thy charmed Skin.
And every bullet dipped in poisoned drugs,
Or roaring Cannons sever all thy joints.
Making thee mount as high as Eagles soar.
Let all the swords and Lances in the field,
Stick in his breast, as in their proper rooms,
At every pore let blood comme dropping forth.
That lingering pains may massacre his heart.
And madness send his danmed soul to hell.
Ah fair zabina, we may curse his power,
The heavens may frown, the earth for anger quake,
But such a Star hath influence in his sword,
As rules the Skies, and countermands the Gods,
More than Cymerian Styx or Destiny:
And then shall we in this detested guise,
With shame, with hunger, and with horror ay
Griping our bowels with retorqued thoughts,
And have no hope to end our ecstasies.
Then is there left no Mahomet, no God,
No Feend, no Fortune, nor no hope of end?
To our infamous monstrous slaueries:
Gape earth, and let the Feends infernal view,
As hell, as hopeless and as full of fear
As are the blasted banks of Erebus:
Where shaking ghosts with ever howling groans,
Hover about the ugly Ferriman, to get a passage to E∣lisiā
why should we live, O wretches, beggars slaves
Why live we Baiazeth, and build up nests,
So high within the region of the air,
By living long in this oppression,
That all the world will see and laugh to scorn.
The former triumphs of our mightiness,
In this obscure infernal servitude:
O life more loathsome to my vexed thoughts,
Than noisome parbreak of the Stygian Snakes,
Which fills the nookes of Hell with standing air,
Infecting all the Ghosts with cureless griefs:
O dreary Engines of my loathed sight,
That sees my crown, my honour and my name,
Thrust under yoke and thraldom of a thief.
Why feed ye still on days accursed beams,
And sink not quite into my tortured soul.
You see my wife, my Queen and Empress,
Brought up and propped by the hand of fame,
Queen of fifteen contributory Queens,
Now thrown to rooms of black objection,
Smeared with blots of basest drudgery:
And Vileness to shame, disdain, and misery:
Accursed Baiazeth, whose words of ruth,
That would with pity cheer zabinas heart:
And make our souls resolve in ceasles tears,
Sharp hunger bites upon and gripes the root:
From whence the issues of my thoughts doe break,
O poor zabina, O my Queen, my Queen,
Fetch me some water for my burning breast,
To cool and comfort me with longer date,
That in the shortened sequel of my life,
I may pour forth my soul into thine arms,
With words of love: whose moaning intercourse
Hath hitherto bin staid, with wrath and hate
Of our expreslesse band inflections:
Sweet Baiazeth, I will prolong thy life,
As long as any blood or spark of breath
Can quench or cool the torments of my grief.
Now Baiazeth, abridge thy baneful days,
And beat thy brains out of thy conquered head:
Since other means are all forbidden me,
That may be ministers of my decay.
O highest Lamp of euerliuing Jove,
Accursed day infected with my griefs,
Hide now thy stained face in endless night,
And shut the windows of the lightsome heavens,
Let ugly darkness with her rusty coach
Engyrt with tempests wrapped in pitchy clouds,
Smother the earth with never fading mists:
And let her horses from their nostrils breathe
Rebellious winds and dreadful thunderclaps:
That in this terror tamburlaine may live.
And my pined soul resolved in liquid ay,
May still excruciat his tormented thoughts.
Then let the stony dart of senseless cold,
Pierce through the center of my withered heart,
And make a passage for my loathed life.
What do mine eyes behold, my husband dead?
His Skul al riuin in twain, his brains dashed out?:
The brains of Baiazeth, my Lord and Sovereign?:
O Baiazeth, my husband and my Lord,
O Baiazet, O Turk, O Emperor, give him his liquor Not I, bring milk and fire, and my blood I bring him again, tear me in pieces, give me the sword with a ball of wildefire upon it. Down with him, down with him. Go to my child, away, away, away. Ah, save that Infant, save him, save him. I, even I speak to her, the Sun was down. Streamers white. Red, Black, here here, here. Fling the meat in his face. Tamburlaine, tamburlaine, Let the soldiers be buried. Hell, death, tamburlain, Hell, make ready my Coch, my chair, my jewels, I come, I come, I come.
Wretched Zenocrate, that lives to see,
Damascus walls died with Egytian blood.
Thy Fathers subjects and thy countrymen:
Thy streets strewn with dissevered joints of men,
And wounded bodies gasping yet for life.
But most accursed, to see the Sun-bright troop
Of heavenly virgins and unspotted maids,
Whose looks might make the angry God of arms,
To break his sword, and mildly treat of love,
On horsmens Lances to be hoisted up,
And guiltlesly endure a cruel death.
For every fell and stout Tartarian Stead,
That stamped on others with their thundering hooves
When al their riders chardg'd their quivering spears
Began to check the ground, and rain themselves:
Gazing upon the beauty of their looks:
Ah Tamburlaine, were thou the cause of this
That tearm'st Zenocrate thy dearest love?
Whose lives were dearer to Zenocrate
Than her own life, or ought save thine own love.
But see another bloody spectacle.
Ah wretched eyes, the enemies of my hart,
How are ye glutted with these grievous objects,
And tell my soul more tales of bleeding ruth?
See, se Anippe if they breathe or no.
No breath nor sense, nor motion in them both
Ah Madam, this their slavery hath Enforced,
And ruthless cruelty of Tamburlaine.
Earth cast up fountains from thy entrails,
And wet thy cheeks for their untimely deaths:
Shake with their weight in sign of fear &amp; grief:
Blush heaven, that gave them honour at their birth,
And let them die a death so barbarous.
Those that are proud of fickle Empery,
And place their chiefest good in earthly pomp:
Behold the Turk and his great Empress.
Ah tamburlaine, my love, sweet tamburlaine,
That fights for Scepters and for slippery crowns,
Behold the Turk and his great Empress,
Thou that in conduct of thy happy stars,
Sleep every night with conquest on thy brows,
And yet would shun the wavering turns of war,
In fear and feeling of the like distress,
Behold the Turk and his great Empress.
Ah mighty Jove and holy Mahomet,
Pardon my Love, oh pardon his contempt,
Of earthly fortune, and respect of pity,
And let not conquest ruthlessly pursewde
Be equally against his life incensed,
In this great Turk and haplesse Empress.
And pardon me that was not moved with ruth,
To see them live so long in misery:
Ah what may chance to thee zenocrate?
Madam content your self and be resolved,
Your Love hath fortune so at his command,
That she shall stay and turn her wheel no more,
As long as life maintains his mighty arm,
That fights for honour to adorn your head.
What other heavy news now brings Philemus?
Madam, your father and the Arabian king,
The first affecter of your excellence,
Comes now as Turnus against Ones did.
Armed with lance into the Egyptian fields,
Ready for battle against my Lord the King.
Now shame and duty, love and fear presents
A thousand sorrows to my martyred soul:
Whom should I wish the fatal victory,
When my poor pleasures are divided thus,
And racked by duty from my cursed heart:
My father and my first betrothed love,
Must fight against my life and present love:
Wherein the change I use condemns my faith,
And makes my deeds infamous through the world.
But as the Gods to end the Troyans toil,
Preuent'd Turnus of Lauinia.
And fatally enriched Ones love.
So for a final Issue to my griefs,
To pacify my country and my love,
Must Tamburlaine by their resistless powers,
With virtue of a gentle victory,
Conclude a league of honour to my hope,
Then as the powers divine have preordainde,
With happy safety of my fathers life,
Send like defence of fair Arabia.
What cursed power guides the murdering hands,
Of this infamous Tyrants soldiers.
That no escape may save their enemies:
Nor fortune keep them selves from victory.
Lye down Arabia, wounded to the death,
And let Zenocrates fair eyes behold
That as for her thou bear these wretched arms.
Even so for her thou die in these arms:
Leaving thy blood for witness of thy love.
Too dear a witness for such love my Lord,
Behold Zenocrate, the cursed object
Whose Fortunes never mastered her griefs:
Behold her wounded in conceit for thee,
As much as thy fair body is for me.
Then shall I die with full contented heart,
Having beheld divine Zenocrate,
Whose sight with joy would take away my life,
As now it brings sweetness to my wound,
If I had not bin wounded as I am.
Ah that the deadly pangs I suffer now,
Would lend an hours license to my tongue:
To make discourse of some sweet accidents
Have chanced thy merits in this worthless bondage.
And that I might be privy to the state,
Of thy deserved contentment and thy love:
But making now a virtue of thy sight,
To drive all sorrow from my fainting soul:
Since Death denies me further cause of joy.
Deprived of care, my heart with comfort dies.
Since thy desired hand shall close mine eyes.
Come happy Father of Zenocrate,
A title higher than thy Souldans name:
Though my right hand have thus enthralled thee
Thy princely daughter here shall set thee free.
She that hath calmed the fury of my sword.
Which had ere this bin bathed in streams of blood,
As vast and deep as Euphrates or Nile.
O sight thrice welcome to my joyful soul.
To see the king my Father issue safe,
From dangerous battle of my conguering Love.
Well met my only dear Zenocrate,
Though with the loss of Egypt and my Crown.
It was I my lord that gat the victory,
And therefore grieve not at your overthrow.
Since I shall render all into your hands.
And ad more strength to your dominions
Then ever yet confirmed th'Egyptian Crown.
The God of war resigns his rome to me,
Meaning to make me General of the world,
Jove viewing me in arms, looks pale and wan,
Fearing my power should pull him from his throne,
Where ere I come the fatal sisters sweat,
And grisly death by running to and fro,
To doo their ceassles homage to my sword:
And here in Africa where it seldom rains,
Since I arrived with my triumphat host,
Have swelling clouds drawn from wide gasping wounds.
Been oft resolved in bloody purple showers,
A meteor that might terrify the earth,
And make it quake at every drop it drinks:
Millions of souls sit on the banks of Styx,
Waiting the back return of Charons boat,
Hell and Elision swarm with ghosts of men,
That I have sent from sundry foughten fields.
To spread my fame through hell and up to heaven:
And see my Lord, a sight of strange import,
Emperors and kings lie breathless at my feet,
The Turk and his great Empress as it seems,
Left to themselves while we were at the fight.
Have desperately dispatcht their slavish lives:
With them Arabia too hath left his life,
Al sights of power to grace my victory:
And such are objects fit for Tamburlaine.
Wherein as in a mirror may be seen,
His honour, that consists in shedding blood,
When men presume to manage arms with him.
Mighty hath God &amp; Mahomet made thy hand
(Renowned tamburlain) to whom all kings
Of force must yield their crowns and Emperies,
And I am pleased with this my overthrow:
If as beseems a person of thy state,
Thou hast with honour used Zenocrate.
Her state and person wants no pomp you see,
And for all blot of foul inchastity,
I record heaven, het heavenly self is clear:
Then let me find no further time to grace
Her princely Temples with the Persian crown:
But here these kings that on my fortunes wait:
And have been crowned for proved worthiness,
Even by this hand that shall establish them,
Shall now, adjoining al their hands with mine,
Invest her here my Queen of Persea,
What saith the noble Sultan and Zenocrate:
I yield with thanks and protestations
Of endless honour to thee for her love.
Then doubt I not but fair Zenocrate
Will soon consent to satisfy vs both.
Else should I much forget my self, my Lord,
Then let vs set the crown upon her head,
That long hath lingered for so high a seat.
My hand is ready to perform the deed,
For now her marriage time shall work vs rest:
And her's the crown my Lord, help set it on
Then sit thou down divine Zenocrate,
And here we crown thee Queen of Persea,
And all the kingdoms and dominions
That late the power of Tamburlaine subdued:
As Iuno, when the Giants were suppressed,
That darted mount aines at her brother Jove:
So looks my Love, shadowing in her brows
Triumphs and Trophies for my victories:
Or as Latonas daughter bent to arms,
Adding more courage to my conquering mind,
To gratify the sweet zenocrate,
Egyptians, Moors and men of Asia,
From Barberry unto the Westeme Indie,
Shall pay a yearly tribute to thy Sire.
And from the bounds of Africa to the banks
Of Ganges, shall his mighty arm extend.
And now my Lords and loving followers,
That purchased kingdoms by your matiall deeds,
Cast off your armour, put on scarlet robes.
Mount up your royal places of estate,
Environed with troops of noble men,
And there make laws to rule your provinces:
Hang up your weapons on Alcides post,
For Tamburlaine takes truce with al the world,
Thy first betrothed, Love Arabia,
Shall we with honour (as beseems) entomb,
With this great Turk and his fair Empress:
Then after all these solemn Exequies,
We will our celebrated rites of marriage solemnise,

THe general welcomes Tamburlain received,
When he arrived last upon our stage,
Hath made our Poet pen his second part▪
Where death cuts off the progress of his pomp.
And murdrous Fates throws al his triumphs down,
But what became of fair Zenocrate,
And with how many cities sacrifice
He celebrated her said funeral,
Himself in presence shall unfold at large.
EGregious Viceroys of these Eastern parts
Placed by the issue of great Baiazeth:
And sacred Lord the mighty Calapine:
Who lives in Egypt, prisoner to that slave,
Which kept his father in an iron cage:
Now have we marched from fair Natolia
Two hundred leagues, and on Danubius banks,
Our warlike host in complete armour rest,
Where Sigismond the king of Hungary
Should meet our person to conclude a truce.
What? Shall we parley with the Christian?
Or cross the stream, and meet him in the field.
King of Natolia, let vs treat of peace,
We all are glutted with the Christians blood,
And have a greater foe to fight against,
Proud Tamburlaine, that now in Asia,
Near Guyrons head doth set his conquering feet,
And means to fire Turkey as he goes:
Against him my Lord must you address your power.
Besides, king Sigismond hath brought from Christendom,
More then his Camp of stout Hungarians,
Sclauonians, Almans, Rutters, Muffs, and Danes,
That with the Holbard, Lance, and murdering Axe,
Will hazard that we might with surety hold.
Though from the shortest Northern Parallel,
Vast Gruntland compassed with the frozen sea,
Inhabited with tall and sturdy men,
Giants as big as huge Polypheme:
Millions of Soldiers cut the Arctic line,
Bringing the strength of Europe to these Arms.
Our Turkey blades shall glide through al their throats,
And make this champion mead a bloody Fen,
Danubius stream that runs to Trebizon,
Shall carry wrapped within his scarlet waives,
As martial presents to our friends at home.
The slaughtered bodies of these Christians.
The Terrene main wherein Danubius false,
Shall by this battle be the bloody Sea.
The wandering Sailors of proud Italy,
Shall meet those Christians fleeting with the tide,
Be ating in heaps against their Argoses.
And make fair Europe mounted on her bull,
Trapt with the wealth and riches of the world,
Alight and wear a woeful mourning weed.
Yet stout Orcanes, Prorex of the world,
Since Tamburlaine hath mustered all his men,
Marching from Cairon northward with his camp,
To Alexandria, and the frontier towns,
Meanung to make a conquest of our land:
Tic requisite to parley for a peace
With Sigismond the king of Hungary:
And save our forces for the hot assaults
Proud Tamburlaine intends Natolia.
Viceroy of Byron, wisely hast thou said:
My realm, the Center of our Empery
Once lost, All Turkie would be overthrown:
And for that cause the Christians shall have peace.
Slauonians, Almains, Rutters, Muffs, and Danes
Fear not Orcanes, but great Tamburlaine.
Nor he but Fortune that hath made him great.
We have revolted Gracious, Albanees,
Cicilians, Jaws, Arabians, Turks, and Moors,
Natolians, Sorians, black Egyptians,
Illicians, Thracians, and Bythimans,
Enough to swallow forceless Sigismond
Yet scarce enough t'encounter Tamburlaine,
He brings a world of people to the field,
From Scythia to the Oriental Plage
Of India, where raging Lantchidol
Beats on the regions with his boisterous blows,
That never sea-man yet discovered:
All Asia is in Arms with tamburlaine,
Even from the midst of fiery Cancers Tropic,
To Amazonia under Capricorn.
And thence as far as Archipelago.
All Affrike is in Arms with tamburlaine.
Therefore Viceroys the Christians must have peace.
ORcanes (as our Legates promised thee)
Wee with our Peers have crossed Danubius,
to treat of friēdly peace or deadly war:
Take which thou wilt, for as the Romans used stream
I here present thee with a naked sword,
Wilt thou have war, then shake this blade at me,
If peace, restore it to my hands again:
And I will sheath it to confirm the same.
Stay Sigismond, forgetst thou I am he
That with the Cannon shook Vienna walls.
And made it dance upon the Continent:
As when the massy substance of the earth,
Quiver about the Axeltree of heaven.
Forgetst thou that I sent a shower of darts
Mingled with powdered shot and fethered steel
So thick upon the blink-ei'd Burghers heads,
That thou thy self, then County-Pallatine,
The king of Boheme, and the Austrich Duke,
Sent Heralds out, which basely on their knees
In all your names desired a truce of me?
Forgetst thou, that to have me raise my siege,
Wagons of gold were set before my tent:
Stamped with the princely Foul that in her wings
Caries the fearful thunderbolts of Jove,
How can thou think of this and offer war?
Vienna was besieged, and I was there,
Then County-Pallatine, but now a king:
And what we did, was in extremity:
But now Orcanes, view my royal host,
That hides these plains, and seems as vast and wide,
As doth the Desert of Arabia.
To those that stand on Badgeths lofty Tower,
Or as the Ocean to the Travailer
That rests upon the snowy Appenines:
And tell me whether I should stoop so low,
Or treat of peace with the Natolian king?
Kings of Natolia and of Hungarie,
We came from Turkey to confirm a league,
And not to dare ooh other to the field:
A friendly parley might become ye both.
And we from Europe to the same intent,
Which if your General refuse or scorn,
Our Tents are pitched, our men stand in array.
Ready to charge you ere you stir your feet.
So pressed are we, but yet if Sigismond
Speak as a friend, and stand not upon terms,
Here is his sword, let peace be ratified
On these conditions specified before,
Drawn with advise of our Ambassadors.
Then here I sheath it, and give thee my hand,
Never to draw it out, or manage arms
Against thy self or thy confederates:
But whilst I live will be at truce with thee.
But (Sigismond) confirm it with an oath,
And swear in sight of heaven and by thy Christ.
By him that made the world and saved my soul
The son of God and issue of a Maid,
Sweet Iesus Christ, I solemnly protest,
And vow to keep this peace inviolable.
By sacred Mahomet, the friend of God,
Whose holy Alcaron remains with vs,
Whose glorious body when he left the world,
Closed in a coffin mounted up the air,
And hung on stately Mecas Temple roof,
I swear to keep this truce imnolable:
Of whose conditions, and our solemn oaths
Signed with our hands, each shall retain a scroll,
As memorable witness of our league.
Now Sigismond, if any Christian King
Encroche upon the confines of thy realm,
Send word, Orcanes of Natolia
Confirmed this league beyond Danubius stream,
And they will (trembling) sound a quick retreat,
So am I feared among all Nations.
If any heathen potentate or king
Invade Natolia, Sigismond will send
A hundred thousand horse trained to the war,
And backed by stout Lancers of Germany.
The strength and sinews of the imperial seat.
I thank thee Sigismond, but when I war,
All Asia Minor, Africa, and Greece
Follow my Standard and my thundering Drums:
Come let vs go and banquet in our tents:
I will dispatch chief of my army hence
To fair Natolia, and to Trebizon,
To stay my coming against proud Tamburlaine,
Friend Sigismond, and peers of Hungary,
Come banquet and carouse with vs a while,
And then depart we to our territories.
SWeet Almeda, pity the ruthful plight
Of Callapine, the son of Baiazeth,
Born to be Monarch of the Western world:
Yet here detained by cruel Tamburlaine.
My Lord I pity it, and with my heart
With your release, but he whose wrath is death,
My soueraigue Lord, renowned tamburlain.
Forbids you further liberty than this.
Ah were I now but half so eloquent
To paint in words, what Isle perform in deeds,
I know thou would depart from hence with me.
Not for all Affrike, therefore move me not.
Yet hear me speak my gentle Almeda.
No speech to that end, by your favour sir.
By Cario runs.
No talk of running, I tell you sir.
A little further, gentle Almeda.
Well sir, what of this?
By Cario runs to Alexandria Bay,
Darotes streams, wherein at anchor lies
A Turkish Gally of my royal fleet,
Waiting my coming to the river side,
Hoping by some means I shall be releast,
Which when I come aboard will hoist up sail,
And soon put forth into the Terrene sea:
Where twirt the Ifles of Cyprus and of Create,
We quickly may in Turkish seas arrive.
Then shalt thou see a hundred kings and more
Upon their knees, all bid me welcome home.
Amongst so middy crowns of burnished gold,
Choose which thou wilt, all are at thy command,
A thousand Galleys manned with Christian slaves
I freely give thee, which shall cut the straights,
And bring Armados from the coasts of Spain,
Fraughted with gold of rich America:
The Grecian virgins shall attend on thee,
Skilful in music and in amorous lays:
As fair as was Pigmalions Ivory girl,
Or lovely Io metamorphosed.
With naked; Negros shall thy coach be drawn,
And as thou rid'st in triumph through the streets,
The pavement underneath thy chariot wheels
With Turkey Carpets shall be covered:
And cloth of Arras hung about the walls,
Fit objects for thy princely eye to pierce.
A hundred Bassos clothed in crimson silk
Shall ride before the on Barbarian Steeds:
And when thou goosed, a golden Canopy
Enchac'd with precious stones, which shine as bright
As that fair vail that covers all the world:
When Phoebus leaning from his hemisphere,
Descends downward to th'Antipodes.
And more than this, for all I cannot tell.
How far hence lies the Galley, say you?
Sweet Almeda, scarce half a league from hence.
But need we not be spied going aboard?
Betwixt the hollow hanging of a hill
And crooked bending of a craggy rock,
The sails wrapped up, the mast and tacklings down,
She lies so close that none can find her out,
I like that well: but tel me my Lord, if I should let you go, would you bee as good as your word? Shall I be made a king for my labour?
As I am Callapine the Emperor,
And by the hand of Mahomet I swear,
Thou shalt be crowned a king and be my mate,
Then here I swear, as I am Almeda,
Your Keeper under Tamburlaine the great,
(For that's the style and title I have yet)
Although he sent a thousand armed men
To intercept this haughty enterprise,
Yet would I venture to conduct your Grace,
And die before I brought you back again.
Thanks gentle Almeda, then let vs haste,
Least time be past, and lingering let vs both.
When you will my Lord, I am ready,
Even straight: and farewell cursed Tambur∣lain.
Now go I to revenge my fathers death.
NOw bright zenocrate, the worlds fair eye,
Whose beams illuminate the lamps of heauē,
Whose cheerful looks do clear the cloudy air
And cloth it in a crystal livery,
Now rest thee here on fair Larissa Plains,
Where Egypt and the Turkish Empire parts,
Between thy sons that shall be Emperors,
And every one Commander of a world.
Sweet tamburlain, when wilt thou leave these arms
And save thy sacred person free from scathe:
And dangerous chances of the wrathful war.
When heaven shall cease to move on both the poles
&amp; when the ground whereon my soldiers march
Shall rise aloft and touch the horned Moon,
And not before my sweet zenocrate:
Sit up and rest thee like a lovely Queen.
So, now she sits in pomp and majesty:
When these my sons, more procious in mine eyes
Than all the wealthy kingdoms I subdued:
Placed by her side, look on their mothers face,
But yet me thinks their looks are amorous,
Not martial as the sons of Tamburlaine
Water and ayre being simbolisde in one:
Argue their want of courage and of wit,
Their hair as white as milk and soft as Down.
Which should be like the quills of Porcupines.
As black as Jet, and hard as Iron or steel,
Bewrays they are too dainty for the wars.
Their fingers made to quaver on a Lute,
Their arms to hang about a Ladies neck:
Their legs to dance and caper in the air:
Would make me think them Bastards, not my sons,
But that I know they issued from thy womb,
That never looked on man but Tamburlaine.
My gracious Lord, they have their mothers looks
But whē they list, their cōquering fathers hart:
This lovely boy the youngest of the three,
Not long ago bestride a Scythian Scoot:
Trotting the ring, and tilting at a glove:
Which when he tainted with his slender rod,
He reigned him straight and made him so curuet,
As I cried out for fear he should have fallen,
Well done my boy, thou shalt have shield and lance
Armour of proof, horse, helm, &amp; Cuttle-axe
And I will teach thee how to charge thy foe,
And harmless run among the deadly pikes.
If thou wilt love the wars and follow me,
Thou shalt be made a King and reign with me.
Keeping in iron cages Emperors.
If thou exceed thy elder Brothers worth,
And shine in complete virtue more than they,
Thou shalt be king before them, and thy seed
Shall issue crowned from their mothers womb,
Yes father, you shall see me if I live,
Have under me as many kings as you,
And march with such a multitude of men,
As all the world shall tremble at their view.
These words assure me boy, thou art my son,
When I am old and cannot manage arms,
Be thou the scourge and terror of the world,
Why may not I my Lord, as well as he,
Be termed the scourge and terror of the world?
Be al a scourge and terror to the world,
Or else you are not sons of Tamburlaine.
But while my brothers follow arms my lord
Let me accompany my gracious mother,
They are enough to conquer all the world
And you have won enough for me to keep.
Bastardly boy, sprung frō some cowards lions:
And not the issue of great Tamburlaine,
Of all the provinces I have subdued
Thou shalt not have a foot, unless thou bear
A mind corragious and invincible:
For he shall wear the crown of Persea,
Whose head hath deepest scars, whose breast most wounds,
Which being wroth, sends lightning from his eyes.
And in the furrows of his frowning brows,
Harbors revenge, war, death and cruelty:
For in a field whose superfluities
Is covered with a liquid purple veil,
And sprinkled with the brains of slaughtered men,
My royal chair of state shall be advanced:
And he that means to place himself therein
Must armed wade up to the chin in blood.
My Lord, such speeches to our princely sons,
Dismays their minds before they come to prove
The wounding troubles angry war affords.
No Madam, these are speeches fit for vs,
For if his chair were in a sea of blood,
I would prepare a ship and sail to it.
Ere I would loose the title of a king,
And I would strive to swim through pools of blood,
Or make a bridge of murdered Carcases,
Whose arches should be framed with bones of Turks,
Ere I would loose the title of a king.
Well lovely boys, you shall be Emperors both
Stretching your conquering arms from east to west:
And sirha, if you mean to wear a crown,
When we shall meet the Turkish Deputy
And all his Viceroys, snatch it from his head,
And cleave his Pericranion with thy sword.
If any man will hold him, I will strike,
And cleave him to the channel with my sword,
Hold him, and cleave him too, or Isle cleave thee
For we will march against them presently.
Theridamas, Techelles, and Casino
Promised to meet me on Larissa plains
With hostess apiece against this Turkish crew,
For I have sworn by sacred Mahomet,
To make it parcel of my Empery,
The trumpets sound Zenocrate, they come.
WElcome Theridamas, king of Argier,
My Lord the great and migh∣tie Tamburlain,
Arch-Monarke of the world, I offer here,
My crown, my self, and all the power I have,
In all affection at thy kingly feet.
Thanks good theridamas.
Under my colours march ten thousand Greeks
And of Argier and Affriks frontier towns,
Twice twenty thousand valiant men at arms,
All which have sworn to sack Natolia:
Five hundred Briggandines are under sail,
Meet for your service on the sea, my Lord,
That launching from Argier to Tripoly,
Will quickly ride before Natolia:
And batter down the castles on the shore.
Well said Argier, receive thy crown again.
KIngs of Morocus and of Fesse, welcome.
Magnificent &amp; peerless Tamburlaine,
I and my neighbor King of Fesse have brought
To aide thee in this Turkish expedition,
A hundred thousand expert soldiers:
From Azamor to Tunic near the sea,
Is Barberry unpeopled for thy sake,
And all the men in armour under me,
Which with my crown I gladly offer thee.
Thanks king of Morocus, take your crown a∣gain.
And mighty Tamburlaine, our earthly God,
Whose looks make this inferior world to quake,
I here present thee with the crown of Fesse,
And with an host of Moors trained to the war,
Whose coalblack faces make their foes retire,
And quake for fear, as if infernal Jove
Meaning to aid them in this Turkish arms,
Should pierce the black circumference of hell,
With ugly Furies bearing fiery flags,
And millions of his strong tormenting spirits:
From strong Tesella unto Biledull,
All Barberry is unpeopled for thy sake.
Thanks king of Fesse, take here thy crown a∣gain
Your presence (loving friends and fellow kings)
Makes me to surfeit in conceiving joy,
If all the crystal gates of Ioues high court
Were opened wide, and I might enter in
To see the state and majesty of heaven,
It could not more delight me than your sight.
Now will we banquet on these plains a while,
And aster march to Turkey with our Camp,
In number more than are the drops that fall
When Bores rents a thousand swelling clouds,
And proud Orcanes of Natolia,
With all his viceroys shall be so afraid,
That though the stones, as at Deucalions flood,
Were turned to men, he should be overcome:
Such lavish will I make of Turkish blood,
That Jove shall send his winged Messenger
To bid me sheath my sword, and leave the field:
The Sun unable to sustain the sight,
Shall hide his head in thetis watery lap,
And leave his steeds to fair Boetes charge:
For half the world shall perish in this fight:
But now my friends, let me examine ye,
How have ye spent your absent time from me:
My Lord our men of Barberry have marched
Four hundred miles with armour on their backs,
And lain in leagre fifteen months and more,
For since we left you at the Souldans court,
We have subdued the Southern Guallatia,
And all the land unto the coast of Spain.
We kept the narrow straight of Gibraltar,
And made Canary cal vs kings and Lords,
Yet never did they recreate themselves,
Or cease one day from war and hot alarms,
And therefore let them rest a while my Lord.
They shall Casino, and tic time in faith.
And I have marched along the river Nise
To Machda, where the mighty Christian Priest
Called Iohn the great, sits in a milk-white robe,
Whose triple Mitre I did take by force,
And made him swear obedience to my crown.
From thence unto Cazates did I march,
Where Amazonians met me in the field:
With whom (being women) I vouchsafed a league,
And with my power did march to zansibar
The Western part of Affrike, where I viewed.
The Ethiopian sea, rivers and lakes:
But neither man nor child in al the land:
Therefore I took my course to Manico.
Where unresisted I removed my camp:
And by the coast of Byather at last,
I came to Cubar, where the Negros dwell,
And conquering that, made haste to Nubia,
There having sacked Borno the Kingly seat,
I took the king, and lead him bound in chains
Unto Damasco, where I staid before.
Well done Techelles: what saith Theridamas:
I left the confines and the bounds of Afrik
And made a voyage into Europe,
Where by the river Tyros I subdued
Stoke, Padalia, and Codemia.
Then crossed the sea and came to Oblia.
And Negro Silua, where the Devils dance,
Which in despite of them I set on fires
From thence I crossed the Gulf, call by the name
Mare magioré, of th'inhabitantes;
Yet shall my soldiers make no period
Until Natolia kneel before your feet.
Then will we triumph, banquet and carouse,
Cooks shall have pensions to provide vs eats,
And glut vs with the dainties of the world,
Lachrima Christi and Calabrian wines
Shall common Soldiers drink in quaffing boules,
I, liquid gold when we have conquered him.
Mingled with corrall and with oriental pearls:
Come let vs banquet and carouse the whiles.
NOw say my Lords of Bud and Bohemia,
What motiō is it that inflames your thoughts,
And stirs your valures to such sudden arms?
Your Majesty remembers I am sure
What cruel slaughter of our Christian bloods,
These heathnish Turks and Pagans lately made,
Betwixt the city Zula and Danubius
How through the midst of Verna and Bulgaria
And almost to the very walls of Rome,
They have not long since massacred our Camp,
It rests now then that your Maiesly
Take all advantages of time and power,
And work revenge upon these Infidels:
Your Highness knows for Tamburlaines repair,
That strikes a terror to all Turkish hearts,
Natolia hath dismissed the greatest part
Of all his army, pitched against our power
Betwixt Cutheia and Orminius mount:
And sent them marching up to Belgasar,
Acantha, Antioch, and Caesaria,
To aid the kings of Sorry and Jerusalem.
Now thou my Lord, advantage take hereof,
And issue suddenly upon the rest:
That in the fortune of their overthrow,
We may discourage all the pagan troop,
That dare attempt to war with Christians.
But calls not then your Grace to memory
The league we lately made with king Orcanes,
Confirmed by oath and Articles of peace,
And calling Christ for record of our truss?
This should be treachery and violence,
Against the grace of our profession.
No whit my Lord: for with such Infidels,
In whom no faith nor true religion rests,
We are not bound to those accomplishments,
The holy lawés of Christendom enjoin:
But as the faith which they profanely plight
Is not by necessary policy,
To be esteemed assurance for our selves,
So what we vow to them should not infringe
Our liberty of arms and victory.
Though I confess the oaths they undertake,
Breed little strength to out security,
Yet those infirmities that thus defame
Their faiths, their honours, and their religion,
Should not give vs presumption to the like,
Our faiths are sound, and must be consummate,
Religious, righteous, and inviolate.
Assure your Grace tic superstition
To stand so strictly on dispensiue faith:
And should we lose the opportunity
That God hath given to avenge our Christians death
And scourge their foul blasphemous Paganism:
As fell to Saule, to Balaam and the rest,
That would not kill and curse at Gods command,
So surely will the vengeance of the highest
And jealous anger of his fearful arm
Be poured with rigour on our sinful heads,
If we neglect this offered victory.
Then arm my Lords, and issue suddenly,
Giving commandment to our general host,
With expedition to assail the Pagan,
And take the victory our God hath given.
GAzellus, Vribassa, and the rest,
Now will we march from proud Orminus mount
To fair Natolia, where our neighbour kings
Expect our power and our royal presence,
T'incounter with the cruel tamburlain,
That nigh Larissa sways a mighty host,
And with the thunder of his martial tools
Makes Earthquakes in the hearts of men and heaven,
And now come we to make his sinews shake,
With greater power than erst his pride hath felt,
An hundred kings by scores will bid him arms,
And hundred thousands subjects to each score:
Which if a shower of wounding thunderbolts
Should break out off the bowels of the clouds
And fall as thick as hail upon our heads,
In partial aid of that proud Scythian,
Yet should our courages and steeled crests,
And numbers more than infinite of men,
Be able to withstand and conquer him.
Me thinks I see how glad the christian King
Is made, for joy of your admitted truce:
That could not but before be terrified:
With unacquainted power of our host.
Arm dread Sovereign and my noble Lords
The treacherous army of the Christians,
Taking advantage of your slender power,
Comes marching on vs, and determines straight,
To bid vs battle for our dearest lives.
Traitors, villains, damned Christians,
Have I not here the articles of peace,
And solemn covenants we have both confirmed,
He by his Christ, and I by Mahomet:
Hell and confusion light upon their heads,
That with such treason seek our overthrow,
And cares so little for their prophet Christ.
Can there be such deceit in Christians,
Or treason in the fleshly heart of man,
Whose shape is figure of the highest God?
Then if there be a Christ, as Christians say,
But in their deeds deny him for their Christ:
If he be son to euerliuing Jove,
And hath the power of his outstretched arm,
If he be jealous of his name and honour,
As is our holy prophet Mahomet,
Take here these papers as our sacrifice
And witness of thy servants perjury.
Open thou shining veil of Cynthia
And make a passage from the imperial heaven
That he that sits on high and never sleeps,
Nor in one place is circumscriptible,
But every where fills every Continent,
With strange infusion of his sacred vigour,
May in his endless power and purity
Behold and avenge this Traitors perjury.
Thou Christ that art esteemed omnipotent,
If thou wilt prove thy self a perfect God,
Worthy the worship of all faithful hearts,
Be now revenged upon this Traitors soul,
And make the power I have left behind
(Too little to defend our guiltless lives)
Sufficient to discomfort and confound
The trustless force of those false Christians.
To arms my Lords, on Christ still let vs cry,
If there be Christ, we shall have victory.
Discomfited is all the Christian host,
And God hath thundered vengeance from on high,
For my accursed and hateful perjury.
O just and dreadful punisher of sin,
Let the dishonour of the pains I feel,
In this my mortal well deserved wound,
End all my penance in my sudden death,
And let this death wherein to sin I die,
Conceive a second life in endless mercy.
Now lie the Christians bathing in their bloods,
And Christ or Mahomet hath been my friend.
See here the perjured traitor Hungary,
Bloody and breathless for his villainy.
Now shall his barbarous body be a pray
To beasts and fowls, and al the winds shall breath
Through shady leaves of every senseless tree,
Murmurs and hisses for his heinous sin.
Now scaldes his soul in the Tartarian streams,
And feeds upon the baneful tree of hell,
That zoacum, that fruit of bitterness,
That in the midst of fire is engraft,
Yet flourishes as Flora in her pride,
With apples like the heads of damned Feends,
The Devils there in chains of quencelesse flame,
Shall lead his soul through Orcus burning gulfs
From pain to pain, whose change shall never end:
What says thou yet Gazellus to his foil:
Which we referd to justice of his Christ,
And to his power, which here appears as full
As rays of Cynthia to the clearest sight?
Tic but the fortune of the wars my Lord,
Whose power is often proved a miracle.
Yet in my thoughts shall Christ be honoured,
Not doing Mahomet an injury,
Whose power had share in this our victory:
And since this miscreant hath disgraced his faith,
And died a traitor both to heaven and earth,
We will both watch and ward shall keep his trunk
Amidst these plains, for Fowls to pray upon.
Go Vribassa, give it straight in charge.
I will my Lord.
And now Gazellus, let vs haste and meet
Our Army and our brother of Jerusalem,
Of So•, Trebizon and Amasia,
And happily with full Natolian bowls
Of Greekish wine now let vs celebrate
Our happy conquest, and his angry fate.
Black is the beauty of the brightest day,
The golden balle of heavens eternal fire,
That danced with glory on the silver waives:
Now wants the fuel that inflamed his beams
And all with faintness and for foul disgrace,
He binds his temples with a frowning cloud,
Ready to darken earth with endless night:
Zenocrate that gave him light and life,
Whose eyes shot fire from their Ivory bowers,
And tempered every soul with lively heat,
Now by the malice of the angry Skies,
Whose jealousy admits no second Mate,
Draws in the comfort of her latest breath
All dassed with the hellish mists of death.
Now walk the angels on the walls of heaven,
As Sentinels to warn th'immortall souls,
To entertain divine Zenocrate.
Apollo Cynthia, and the ceaslesse lamps
That gently looked upon this loathsome earth,
Shine downwards now no more, but deck the heavens
To entertain divine Zenocrate.
The crystal springs whose taste illuminates
Refined eyes with an eternal sight,
Like tried silver runs through Paradise
To entertain divine zenocrate.
The Cherubins and holy Seraphins
That sing and play before the king of kings,
We all their voices and their instruments
To entertain divine Zenocrate.
And in this sweet and currious harmony,
The God that tunes this music to our souls:
Holds out his hand in highest majesty
To entertain divine Zenocrate.
Then let some holy trance convey my thoughts,
Up to the palace of th'imperiall heaven:
That this my life may be as short to me
As are the days of sweet Zenocrate:
Physicians, will no physic do her good?
My Lord, your Majesty shall soon perceive▪
And if she pass this fit, the worst is past.
Tell me, how fares my fair Zenocrate:
I fare my Lord, as other Emperesses,
That when this frail and transitory flesh,
Hath sucked the measure of that vital air
That feeds the body with his dated health,
Wanes with enforced and necessary change.
May never such a change transform my love
In whose sweet being I repose my life,
Whose heavenly presence beautified with health,
Gives light to Phoebus and the fixed stars,
Whose absence make the sun and Moon as dark
As when opposde in one Diameter:
Their Spheres are mounted on the serpents head,
Or else descend to his winding train:
Live still my Love and so conserve my life,
Or dieng, be the anchor of my death.
Live still my Lord, O let my sovereign live,
And sooner let the fiery Element
Dissolve, and make your kingdom in the Sky,
Than this base earth should shroud your majesty:
For should I but suspect your death by mine,
The comfort of my future happiness
And hope to meet your highness in the heavens,
Turned to despair, would break my wretched breast,
And fury would confound my present rest.
But let me die my Love, yet let me die,
With love and patience let your true love die:
Your grief and fury hurts my second life,
Yet let me kiss my Lord before I die,
And let me die with kissing of my Lord.
But since my life is lengthened yet a while,
Let me take leave of these my loving sons,
And of my Lords whose true nobility
Have merited my latest memory:
Sweet sons farewell, in death resemble me,
And in your lives your fathers excellence.
Some music, and my fit will cease my Lord.
Proud fury and intollorable fit,
That dares torment the body of my Love,
And scourge the Scourge of the immortal God:
Now are those Spheres where Cupped used to sit,
Wounding the world with wonder and with love,
Sadly supplied with pale and ghastly death:
Whose darts do pierce the Center of my soul,
Her sacred beauty hath enchanted heaven,
And had she lived before the siege of Troy,
Helen, whose beauty sommond Greece to arms,
And drew a thousand ships to Tenedos,
Had not been named in Homers Iliads:
Her name had been in every line he wrote:
Or had those wanton Poets, for whose birth
Old Rome was proud, but gasde a while on her,
Nor Lesbia, nor Corrinna had been named,
zenocrate had been the argument
Of every Epigram or Elegy.
What, is she dead? Techelles, draw thy sword,
And wound the earth, that it may cleave in twain,
And we descend into the infernal vaults,
To hail the fatal Sisters by the hair,
And throw them in the triple more of Hell,
For taking hence my fair zenocrate.
Casino and theridamas to arms,
Raise Caualieros higher than the clouds:
And with the cannon break the frame of heaven,
Batter the shining palace of the Sun,
And shiver all the starry strmament:
For amdrous Jove hath snatched my love from hence,
Meaning to make her stately Queen of heaven,
What God so ever holds thee in his arms,
Giving thee Nectar and Ambrosia,
Behold me here divine zenocrate,
Raving, impatient, desperate and mad,
Breaking my steeled lance, with which I burst
The rusty beams of Ianus Temple doors,
Letting out death and tyrannising war:
To march with me under this bloody flag,
And if thou pettiest Tamburlain the great,
Come down from heaven and live with me again.
Ah good my Lord be patient, she is dead,
And all this raging cannot make her live,
If words might serve, our voice hath rent the air,
If tears, our eyes have watered all the earth:
If grief, our murdered harts have strained forth blood
Nothing prevails, for she is dead my Lord.
For she is dead: thy words doo pierce my soul
Ah sweet theridamas, say so no more,
Though she be dead, yet let me think she lives,
And feed my mind that dies for want of her:
Where ere her soul be, thou shalt stay with me
Embalmed with Cassia, Amber Greece and Mire,
Not lapped in lead but in a sheet of gold,
And till I die thou shalt not be entered.
Then in as rich a tomb as Mausolus,
We both will rest and have one Epitaph
Writ in as many several languages,
As I have conquered kingdoms with my sword,
This cursed town will I consume with fire,
Because this place bereft me of my Love:
The houses burnt, will look as if they mourned
And here will I set up her stature,
And march about it with my mourning camp,
Drooping and pining for zenocrate.
CAlepinus Cyricelibes, otherwise Cybelius, son and successive heir to the late mighty Empe∣roar Baiazeth, by the aid of God and his friend Mahomet, Emperor of Natolia, Jerusalem,
Trebizon, Sorry, Amasia, Thracia, Illyria, Carmo∣nia And al the hundred and thirty Kingdoms late con∣tributory to his mighty father. Long live Callepinus, Emperor of Turkey.
Thrice worthy kings of Natolia, and the rest,
I will requite your royal gratitudes
With all the benefits my Empire yields:
And were the sinews of th'imperiall seat
So knit and strengthened, as when Baiazeth
My royal Lord and father filled the throne,
Whose cursed fate hath so dismembered it,
Then should you see this Thief of Scythia,
This proud usurping king of Persea,
Do vs such honour and supremacy,
Bearing the vengeance of our fathers wrongs,
As all the world should blot our dignities
Out of the book of base borne infamies.
And now I doubt not but your royal cares
Hath so provided for this cursed foe,
That since the heir of mighty Baiazeth
(An Emperor so honoured for his virtues)
Revives the spirits of true Turkish hearts,
In grievous memory of his fathers shame,
We shall not need to nourish any doubt,
But that proud Fortune, who hath followed long
The martial sword of mighty Tamburlaine,
Will now retain her old inconstancy,
And raise our honours to as high a pitch
In this our strong and fortunate encounter,
For so hath heaven provided my escape,
From al the cruelty my soul sustained,
By this my friendly keepers happy means,
That Jove sir char dg'd with pity of our wrongs,
Will pour it down in showers on our heads:
Scourging the pride of cursed tamburlain.
I have a hundred thousand men in arms,
Some, that in conquest of the perjured Christian.
Being a handful to a mighty host,
Think them in number yet sufficient,
To drink the river Nile or Euphrates,
And for their power, ynow to win the world.
And I as many from Jerusalem,
Iudaea, Gaza, and Scalonians bounds,
That on mount Sinay with their ensigns spread,
Look like the parti-coloured clouds of heaven,
That show fair weather to the neighbor morn.
And I as many bring from Trebizon,
Chio Famastro and Amasia,
All bordring on the Mare-major sea:
Riso, Sancina, and the bordering towns,
That touch the end of famous Euphrates.
Whose courages are kindled with the flames,
The cursed Scythian sets on all their towns,
And vow to burn the villains cruel heart.
From Sorry with seventy thousand strong,
Tan from Aleppo, Soldino, Tripoly,
And so unto my city of Damasco,
I march to meet and aide my neigbor kings,
All which will join against this Tamburlain,
And bring him captive to your highness feet.
Our battle then in martial manner pitched,
According to our ancient use, shall bear
The figure of the semi-circled Moon:
Whose horns shall sprinkle through the tainted air,
The poisoned brains of this proud Scythian.
Well then my noble Lords, for this my friend,
That freed me from the bondage of my foe:
I think it requisite and honourable,
To keep my promise, and to make him king,
That is a Gentleman (I know) at least.
That's no matter sir, for being a king,
For Tamburlain came up of nothing.
Your Majesty may choose some pointed time,
Performing all your promise to the full:
Tic nought for your majesty to give a kingdom.
Then will I shortly keep my promise Almeda
Why, I thank your Majesty.
SO, burn the turrets of this cursed town,
Flame to the highest region of the air:
And kindle heaps of exhalations,
That being fiery meteors, may presage,
Death and destruction to th'inhabitants
Over my Zenith hang a blazing star,
That may endure till heaven be dissolud,
Fed with the fresh supply of earthly dregs,
Threatening a death and famine to this land,
Flieng Dragons, lightning, fearful thunderclaps,
singe these fair plains, and make them seem as black
As is the Island where the Furies mask
Compassed with Lethe, Styx and Phlegeton,
Because my dear Zenocrate is dead.
This Pillar placed in memory of her,
Where in Arabian, Hebrew, Greek, is writ
This town being burnt by Tamburlaine the great,
Forbids the world to build it up again.
And here this mourful streamer shall be placed
Wrought with the Persian and Egyptian arms,
To signify she was a princess borne,
And wife unto the Monarch of the East.
And here this table as a Register
Of all her virtues and perfections.
And here the picture of zenocrate,
To show her beauty, which the world admired,
Sweet picture of divine Zenocrate,
That hanging here, will draw the Gods from heaven:
And cause the stars fixed in the Southern arc,
Whose lovely faces never any viewed,
That have not past the Centers latitude.
As Pilgrims travail to our Hemisphere.
Only to gaze upon Zenocrate.
Thou shalt not beautify Larissa plains.
But keep within the circle of mine arms.
At every town and castle I besiege,
Thou shalt be set upon my royal tent.
And when I meet an army in the field,
Whose looks will shed such influence in my camp,
As if Bellona, Goddess of the war
Threw naked swords and sulphur balls of fire,
Upon the heads of all our enemies.
And now my Lords, advance your spears again,
Sorrow no more my sweet Casino now:
Boys leave to morn, this town shall ever morn,
Being burnt to cinders for your mothers death.
If I had wept a sea of tears for her,
It would not ease the sorrow I sustain.
As is that town, so is my heart consumed,
With grief and sorrow for my mothers death.
My mothers death hath mortified my mind,
And sorrow stops the passage of my speech.
But now my boys, leave off, and •first to me,
That mean to teach you rudiments of war:
Isle have you learn to sleep upon the ground,
March in your armour throw watery Fens,
Sustain the scorching heat and freezing cold,
Hunger and cold right adiuncts of the war.
And after this, to scale a castle wall,
Besiege a fort, to undermine a town,
And make whole cities caper in the air.
Then next, the way to fortify your men,
In champion grounds, what figure serves you best,
For with the quinque-angle form is meet,
Because the corners there may fall more flat:
Whereas the Fort may fittest be assailed,
And sharpest where th'assault is desperate.
The ditches must be deep, the Counterscarps
Narrow and steep, the walls made high and broad,
The Bulwarks and the rampires large and strong,
With Caualieros and thick counterforts,
And room within to lodge six thousand men.
It must have privy ditches, countermines,
And secret issuing to defend the ditch.
It must have high Argins and covered ways
To keep the bulwark fronts from battery,
And Parapets to hide the Muscatiers:
Casemates to place the great Artillery,
And store of ordinance that from every flank
May scour the outward curtains of the Fort,
Dismount the Cannon of the adverse part,
Murder the Foe and save their walls from breach.
When this is learned for service on the land,
By plain and easy demonstration,
Isle teach you how to make the water mount,
That you may dryfoot march through lakes &amp; pools,
Deep rivers, havens, creeks, and little seas,
And make a Fortress in the raging waives,
Fenced with the concave of a monftrous rock,
Invincible by nature of the place.
When this is done, then are ye soldiers,
And worthy sounes of Tamburlain the great,
My Lord, but this is dangerous to be done,
We may be slain or wounded ere we learn.
Villain, art thou the son of Tamburlaine,
And fear to die, or with a Curtle-axe
To hew thy flesh and make a gaping wound:
Hast thou beheld a peal of ordinance strike
A ring of pikes, mingled with shot and horse,
Whose shattered limbs, being tossed as high as heaven,
Hang in the air as thick as sunny motes,
And can thou Coward stand in fear of death:
Hast thou not seen my horsemen charge the foe,
Shot through the arms, cut overthwart the hands,
Dieng their lances with their streaming blood,
And yet at night carouse within my tent,
Filling their empty veins with aerie wine,
That being concocted, turns to crimson blood,
And wilt thou shun the field for fear of wounds:
View me thy father that hath conquered kings,
And with his host march round about the earth,
Quite void of scarce, and clear from any wound,
That by the wars lost not a dram of blood,
And see him lance his flesh to teach you all.
A wound is nothing be it ne'er so deep,
Blood is the God of Wars rich livery.
Now look I like a soldier, and this wound
As great a grace and majesty to me,
As if a chair of gold enamelled,
Enchac'd with Diamonds, Sapphires, Rubies
And fairest pearl of wealthy India
Were mounted here under a Canopy:
And I sat down, clothed with the massy robe,
That late adorned the Affrike Potentate.
Whom I brought bound unto Damascus walls.
Come boys and with your fingers search my wound,
And in my blood wash all your hands at once,
While I sit smiling to behold the sight.
Now my boys, what think you of a wound?
I know not what I should think of it,
Me thinks tic a pitiful sight.
Tic nothing: give me a wound father.
And me another my Lord.
Come sir, give me your arm.
Here father, cut it bravely as you did your own
It shall suffice thou dare abide a wound
My boy, Thou shalt not loose a drop of blood,
Before we meet the army of the Turk.
But then run desperate through the thickest throngs,
Dreadlesse of blows, of bloody wounds and death:
And let the burning of Larissa walls
My speech of war, and this my wound you see
Teach you my boys to bear courageous minds,
Fit for the followers of great tamburlaine.
Vsumeasane now come let vs march
Towards Techelles and Theridamas,
That we have sent before to fire the towns,
The towers and cities of these hateful Turks,
And hunt that Coward, faintheart, runaway,
With that accursed traitor Almeda,
Till fire and sword have found them at a bay.
I long to pierce his bowels with my sword,
That hath betrayed my gracious Sovereign,
That cursed and damned Traitor Almeda.
Then let vs see if coward Calapine
Dare levy arms against our puissance,
That we may tread upon his captive neck,
And treble all his fathers slaueries.
THus have wee marched Northward from Tamburlaine,
Unto the frontier point of Sorry:
And this is Balsera their chiefest hold,
Wherein is all the treasure of the land.
Then let vs bring our light Artillery,
Minions, Fauknets, and Sakars to the trench,
Filling the ditches with the walls wide breach,
And enter in, to seize upon the gold:
How say ye Soldiers, Shall we not?
Yes, my Lord, yes, come lets about it,
But stay a while, summon a parley, Drum,
It may be they will yield it quietly,
Knowing two kings, the friend to tamburlain,
Stand at the walls, with such a mighty power.
What requier you my masters?
Captain, that thou yield up thy hold to vs.
To you. Why, do you think me weary of it?
Nay Captain, thou art weary of thy life,
If thou withstand the friends of Tamburlain.
These Pioners of Argier in Africa,
Even in the ca•os face shall raise a hill
Of earth and faggots higher than thy Fort,
And over thy Argins and covered ways
Shall play upon the bulwarks of thy hold
Volleys of ordinance till the breach be made,
That with his ruin fills up all the trench.
And when we enter in, not heaven it self
Shall ransom thee, thy wife and family.
Captain, these Moors shall cut the leaden pipes,
That bring fresh water to thy men and thee,
And lie in trench before thy castle walls:
That no supply of victual shall come in,
Nor issue forth, but they shall die:
And therefore Captain, yield it quietly.
Were you that are the friends of Tamburlain
Brothers to holy Mahomet himself,
I would not yield it: therefore doo your worst.
Raise mounts, batter, entrench, and undermine,
Cut off the water, all conuoies that can,
Yet I am resolute, and so farewell.
Pioners away, and where I stuck the stake,
Entrench with those dimensions I prescribed:
Cast up the earth towards the castle wall,
Which till it may defend you, labour low:
And few or none shall perish by their shot.
We will my Lord.
A hundred horse shall scout about the plains
To spy what force comes to relieve the hold.
Both we (theridamas) will entrench our men,
And with the Iacobs staff measure the height
And distance of the castle from the trench,
That we may know if our artillery
Will carry full point blank unto their walls.
Then see the bringing of our ordinance
Along the trench into the battery,
Where we will have Galleons of six foot broad,
To save our Cannoniers from musket shot,
Betwixt which, shall our ordinance thunder forth,
And with the breaches fall, smoke, fire, and dust,
The crack, the Echo and the soldiers cry
Make deaf the air, and dim the Crystal Sky.
Trumpets and drums, alarm presently,
And soldiers play the men, the holds is yours.
Come good my Lord, &amp; let vs haste frō hence
Along the cave that leads beyond the foe,
No hope is left to save this conquered hold.
A deadly bullet gliding through my side,
Lies heavy on my heart, I cannot live.
I feel my liver pierced and all my veins,
That there begin and nourish every part,
Mangled and torn, and all my entrails bathed
In blood that strains from their orifex.
Farewell sweet wife, sweet son farewell, I die.
Death, whether art thou gone that both we live:
Come back again (sweet death) &amp; strike vs both:
One minute end our days, and one sepulchre
Contain our bodies: death, why comn'st thou not:
Well, this must be the messenger for thee,
Now ugly death stretch out thy Sable wings,
And carry both our souls, where his remains.
Tell me sweet boy, art thou content to die?
These barbarous Scythians full of cruelty,
And Moors, in whom was never pity found,
Will hew vs piecemeal, put vs to the wheel,
Or else invent some torture worse than that,
Therefore die by thy loving mothers hand,
Who gently now will lance thy Ivory throat,
And quickly rid thee both of pain and life.
Mother dispatch me, or Isle kill my self,
For think ye I can live, and see him dead:
Give me your knife, good mother) or strike home:
The Scythiens shall not tyrannise on me.
Sweet mother strike, that I may meet my father.
Ah sacred Mahomet, if this be sin,
Entreat a pardon of the God of heaven,
And purge my soul before it come to thee.
How now Madam, what are you doing?
Killing my self, as I have done my son,
Whose body with his fathers I have burnt,
Least cruel Scythians should dismember him.
It was bravely done, and like a soldiers wife,
Thou shalt with vs to Tamburlaine the great,
Who when he hears how resolute thou were,
Will match thee with a viceroy or a king.
My Lord deceased, was dearer unto me,
Than any Viceroy, King or Emperor.
And for his sake here will I end my days.
But Lady go with vs to Tamburlaine,
And thou shalt see a man greater •••n Mahomet.
In whose high looks is much more majesty
Than from the Concave superficies.
Of Ioues vast palace the imperial Orb,
Unto the shinining bower where Cynthia sits,
Like lovely thetis in a Crystal robe,
That treads Fortune underneath his feet,
And makes the mighty God of arms his slave:
On whom death and the fatal sisters waite,
With naked swords and scarlet liveries:
Before whom (mounted on a Lions back)
Rhammusia bears a helmet full of blood,
And strowes the way with brains of slaughtered men▪
By whose proud side the ugly furies run.
Harkening when he shall bid them plague the world,
Over whose zenith clothed in windy air,
And Eagles wings joined to her feathered breast,
Fame hovered, sounding of her golden Trump:
That to the adverse poles of that straight line,
Which measures the glorious frame of heaven,
The name of mighty Tamburlain is spread:
And him fair Lady shall thy eyes behold. Come.
Take pity of a Ladies ruthful tears,
That humbly craves upon her knees to stay,
And cast her body in the burning flame,
That feeds upon her sons and husbands flesh.
Madam, sooner shall fire consume vs both,
Then scorch a face so beautiful as this.
In frame of which, Nature hath showed more skill,
Than when she ga•e eternal Chaos form,
Drawing from it the shining Lamps of heaven.
Madam, I am so far in love with you,
That you must go with vs, no remedy.
Then carry me I care not where you will,
And let the end of this my fatal journey,
Be likewise end to my accursed life.
No Madam, but the beginning of your joy,
Come willingly, therefore.
Soldiers now let vs meet the General,
Who by this time is at Natolia,
Ready to charge the army of the Turk.
The gold, the silver, and the pearl ye got,
Rifling this Fort, divide in equal shares:
This Lady shall have twice so much again,
Out of the coffers of our treasury.
Renowned Emperor, mighty Callepine,
Gods great lieutenant over all the world:
Here at Alepo with an host of men
Lies Tamburlaine, this king of Persea:
In number more than are the quivering leaves
Of Ides forest, where your highness hounds,
With open cry pursues the wounded Stag:
Who means to girt Natolias walls with siege,
Fire the town and overrun the land.
My royal army is as great as his,
That from the bounds of Phrigia to the sea
Which washes Cyprus with his brinish waives,
Covers the hills, the valleys and the plains.
Viceroys and Peers of Turkey play the men,
Whet all your swords to mangle Tamburlain
His sons, his Captains and his followers,
By Mahomet not one of them shall live.
The field wherein this battle shall be fought,
For ever, term, the Perseans sepulchre,
In memory of this our victory.
Now, he that calls himself the scourge of Jove,
The Emperor of the world, and earthly God,
Shall end the warlike progress he intends,
And travail headlong to the lake of hell:
Where legions of devils knowing he must die
Here in Natolia, by your highness hands)
All brandishing their brands of quenchless fire,
Streching their monstrous paws, grin with their teeth.
And guard the gates to entertain his soul.
Tel me Viceroys the number of your men,
And what our Army royal is esteemed.
From Palestine and Jerusalem,
Of Hebrews, three score thousand fighting men
Are come since last we showed your majesty.
So from Arabia desert, and the bounds
Of that sweet land, whose brave Metropolis
Reedified the fair Semyramis,
Came forty thousand warlike foot and horse,
Since last we numbered to your Majesty.
From trebizon in Asia the less,
Naturalised Turks and stout Bythinians
Came to my bands full fifty thousand more,
That fighting, knows not what retreat doth mean,
Nor ere return but with the victory,
Since last we numbered to your majesty.
Of Sorians from Halla is repaired
And neighbor cities of your highness land,
Ten thousand horse, and thirty thousand foot,
Since last we numbered to your majesty:
So that the Army royal is esteemed
Six hundred thousand valiant fighting men.
Then welcome Tamburlaine unto thy death.
Come puissant Viceroys, let vs to the field,
(The Perseans Sepulchre) and sacrifice
Mountains of breathless men to Mahomet.
Who now with Jove opens the firmament,
To see the slaughter of our enemies.
HOw now Casino? See a knot of kings,
Sitting as if they were a telling titles.
My Lord, your presence makes them pale and wan.
Poor souls they look as if their deaths were near.
Why, so he is Casino, I am here,
But yet Isle sane their lives and make them slaves.
Ye petty kings of Turkey I am come,
As Hector did into the Grecian camp.
To ouerdare the pride of Groecia.
And set his warlike petson to the view
Of fierce Achilles, rival of his fame,
I doe you honour in the simile.
For if I should as Hector did Achilles,
(The worthiest knight that ever brandish sword)
Challenge in combat any of you all,
I see how fearfully ye would refuse,
And fly my glove as from a Scorpion.
Now thou art fearful of thy armies strength,
Thou would with over match of person fight,
But Shepherds issue, base borne tamburlaine,
Think of thy end, this sword shall lance thy throat.
Villain, the shepherds issue, at whose birth
Heaven did afford a gracious aspect,
And joined those stars that shall be opposite,
Even till the dissolution of the world;
And never meant to make a Conqueror;
So famous as is mighty Tamburlain:
Shall so torment thee and that Callapine,
That like a roguish runaway, suborned
That villain there, that slave, that Turkish dog,
To false his service to his Sovereign,
As ye shall curse the birth of Tamburlaine.
Rail not proud Scythian, I shall now revenge
My fathers vile abuses and mine own.
By Mahomet he shall be tied in chains,
Rowing with Christians in a Brigantine,
About the Grecian Isses to rob and spoil:
And turn him to his ancient trade again.
Me thinks the slave should make a lusty thief.
Nay, when the battle ends, al we will meet,
And sit in council to invent some pain,
That most may vex his body and his soul:
Sirha, Callapine, Isle hang a clog about
your neck for running away again, you shall not trow∣ble me thus to come and fetch you.
But as for you (Viceroy) you shall have bits,
And harnessed like my horses, draw my coch:
And when ye stay, be lashed with whips of wier,
Isle have you learn to feed on provender,
And in a stable lie upon the planks:
But Tamburlaine, first thou shalt kneel to vs
And humbly crave a pardon for thy life.
The common soldiers of our mighty host
Shall bring thee bound unto the Generals tent.
And all have jointly sworn thy cruel death,
Or bind thee in eternal torments wrath.
Well sirs, diet your selves, you know I shall have occasion shortly to journey you.
See father, how Almeda the Jailer looks upon vs.
Villain, traitor, damned fugitive,
Isle make thee wish the earth had swallowed thee:
See thou not death within my wrathful looks.
Go villain, cast thee headlong from a rock,
Or rip thy bowels, and rend out thy heart,
T'appease my wrath, or else Isle torture thee,
Searing thy hateful flesh with burning irons,
And drops of scalding lead, while all thy joints
Be racked and beat asunder with the wheel,
For if thou lives, not any Element
Shall shroud thee from the wrath of tamburlaine
Well, in despite of thee he shall be king:
Come Almeda, receive this crown of me,
I here invest thee king of Ariadan,
Bordering on Mare Roso near to Meca.
What, take it man.
Good my Lord, let me take it.
Dost thou ask him leave: Hēre, take it.
Go too sirha, take your crown, and make up the half dozen.
So sirha, now you are a king you must give arms.
So he shall, and we are thy head in his Scutcheon:
No, let him hang a bunch of keys on his stan∣derd, to put him in remembrance he was a Jailer, that when I take him, I may knock out his brains with them, and lock you in the stable, when you shall come
sweating from my chariot.
Away, let vs to the field, that the villain may be slain.
Sirha, prepare whips, and bring my chariot to my Tent: For as soon as the battle is done, Isle ride in triumph through the Camp.
How now ye pety kings, lo, here are Bugs
Will make the hair stand upright on your heads,
And cast your crowns in slavery at their feet.
Welcome theridamas and techelles both,
See ye this rout, and know ye this same king:
I, my Lord, he was Calapines keeper.
Well, now you see hee is a king, look to him theridamas, when we are fighting, least hee hide his crown as the foolish king of Persea did.
No Tamburlaine, hee shall not be put to that Exigent, I warrant thee.
You know not sir:
But now my followers and my loving friends,
Fight as you ever did, like Conquerors,
The glory of this happy day is yours:
My sterne aspect shall make fair Victory,
Hovering betwixt our armies, light on me,
Laden with Laurel wreathes to crown vs all.
I smile to think, how when this field is fought,
And rich Natolia ours, our men shall sweat
With carrieng pearl and treasure on their backs,
You shall be princes all immediately:
Come fight ye Turks, or yield vs victory.
No, we will meet thee slavish tāburlain.
NOw in their glories shine the golden crowns
Of these proud Turks, much like so many suns
That half dismay the majesty of heaven:
Now brother follow we our fathers sword,
That flies with fury swifter than our thoughts,
And cuts down armies with his conquerings wings,
Call forth our laisie brother from the tent,
For if my father miss him in the field,
Wrath kindled in the furnace of his breast,
Will send a deadly lightening to his heart.
Brother, ho, what, given so much to sleep
You cannot leave it, when our enemies drums
And rattling cannons thunder in our ears
Our proper ruin, and our fathers foil:
Away ye fools, my father needs not me,
Nor you in faith, but that you will be thought
More childish valorous than manly wise:
If half our camp should sit and sleep with me,
My father ware enough to scar the foe:
You doo dishonour to his majesty,
To think our helps will doe him any good.
What, dare thou then be absent frō the fight,
Knowing my father hates thy cowardice,
And oft hath warned thee to be still in field,
When he himself amidst the thickest troops
Beats down our foes to flesh our taintlesse swords.
I know sir, what it is to kill a man,
It works remorse of conscience in me,
I take no pleasure to be murderous,
Nor care for blood when wine will quench my thirst.
O cowardly boy, fie for shame, come forth.
Thou dost dishonour manhood, and thy house.
Go, go tall stripling, fight you for vs both,
And take my other toward brother here,
For person like to prove a second Mars,
Twill please my mind as well to hear both you
Have won a heap of honour in the field,
And left your slender carcasses behind,
As if I lay with you for company.
You will not go then:
You say true.
Were all the lofty mounts of Zona mundi,
That fill the midst of farthest Tartary,
Turned into pearl and proffered for my stay,
I would not bide the fury of my father:
When made a victor in these haughty arms.
He comes and finds his sons have had no shares
In all the honours he proposde for vs.
Take you the honour, I will take my ease,
My wisdom shall excuse my cowardice:
I go into the field before I need:
The bullets fly at random where they list.
And should I go and kill a thousand men,
I were as soon rewarded with a shot,
And sooner far than he that never fights.
And should I go and do nor harm nor good,
I might have harm, which all the good I have
Joined with my fathers crown would never cure.
Isle to cards: Perdicas.
Here my Lord.
Come, thou and I will go to cards to drive away the time.
Content my Lord, but what shall we play for?
Who shall kiss the fairest of the Turks Con∣cubines first, when my father hath conquered them.
Agreed in faith.
They say I am a coward, (Perdicas) and I fear as little their tara, tantaras, their swords or their cannons, as I doe a naked Lady in a net of gold, and for fear I should be afraid, would put it off and come to bed with me.
Such a fear (my Lord) would never make ye retire.
I would my father would let me be put in the front of such a battle once, to try my valour.
What a coil they keep, I believe there will be some hurt done anon amongst them.
See now ye slaves, my childrē stoops your pride
And leads your glories sheep-like to the sword.
Bring them my boys, and tel me if the wars
Be not a life that may illustrate Gods,
And tickle not your Spirits with desire
Still to be trained in arms and chivalry:
Shall we let go these kings again my Lord
To gather greater numbers against our power,
That they may say, it is not chance doth this,
But matchless strength and magnanimity.
No, no Amyras, tempt not Fortune so,
Cherish thy valour still with fresh supplies:
And glut it not with stale and daunted foes,
But wher's this coward, villain, not my son,
But traitor to my name and majesty.
Image of sloth, and and picture of a slave,
The obloquy and scorn of my renown,
How may my hart, thus fired with mine eyes,
Wounded with shame, and killed with discontent,
Shroud any thought may hold my striving hands
From martial justice on thy wretched soul.
Yet pardon him I pray your Majesty.
Let al of vs entreat your highness par∣don
Stand up, ye base unworthy soldiers,
Know ye not yet the argument of Arms?
Good my Lord, let him be forgiven for once,
And we will force him to the field hereafter.
Stand up my boys, and I will teach ye arms,
And what the jealousy of wars must doe.
O Samarcanda, where I breathed first,
And joyed the fire of this martial flesh,
Blush, blush fair city, at thine honours foil,
And shame of nature with Iaertis stream,
Embracing thee with deepest of his love,
Can never wash from thy distained brows.
Here Jove, receive his fainting soul again,
A Form not meet to give that subject essence,
Whose matter is the flesh of Tamburlain,
Wherein an incorporeal spirit moos,
Made of the mould whereof of thy self consists.
Which makes me valiant, proud, ambitious,
Ready to levy power against thy throne,
That I might move the turning Spheres of heauē,
For earth and al this aerie region
Cannot contain the state of Tamburlaine.
By Mahomet, thy mighty friend I swear,
In sending to my issue such a soul,
Created of the massy dregs of earth,
The scum and tartar of the Elements,
Wherein was neither courage, strength or wit,
But folly, sloth, and damned idleness:
Thou hast procured a greater enemy,
Than he that darted mountains at thy head.
Shaking the burden mighty Atlas bears:
Whereat thou trembling hid'st thee in the air.
Clothed with a pitchy cloud for being seen.
And now ye cankered cures of Asia,
That will not see the strength of Tamburlaine,
Although it shine as brightly as the Sun.
Now you shall feel the strength of Tamburlain,
And by the state of his supremacy,
Approve the difference twixt himself and you.
Thou show the difference twixt our selves and thee.
In this thy barbarous damned tyranny.
Thy victories are grown so violent,
That shortly heaven, filled with the meteors
Of blood and fire thy tyrannies have made,
Will pour down blood and fire on thy head:
Whose scalding drops will pierce thy seething brains,
And with our bloods, revenge our bloods on thee.
Villains, these terrors and these tyrannies
(If tyrannies wars justice ye repute)
I execute, enioin'd me from aboue:
To scourge the pride of such as heaven abhors,
Nor am I made Arch-monark of the world,
Crowned and invested by the hand of Jove,
For deeds of bounty or nobility:
But since I exercise a greater name,
The Scourge of God and terror of the world,
I must apply my self to fit those tearnies,
In war, in blood, in death, in cruelty,
And plague such Peasants as resisting me,
The power of heavens eternal majesty.
Theridamas, techelles, and Casino,
Ransack the tents and the pavilions
Of these proud Turks, and take their Concubines.
Making them bury this effeminate brat,
For not a common Soldier shall defile
His manly fingers with so faint a boy.
Then bring those Turkish harlots to my tent,
And Isle dispose them as it likes me best,
Mean while take him in.
We will my Lord.
O damned monster, nay a Feend of Hell,
Whose cruelties are not so harsh as thine,
Nor yet imposo, with such a bitter hate.
Revenge it Radamanth and Oecus,
And let your hates extended in his pains,
Expel the hate wherewith he pains our souls.
May never day give virtue to his eyes,
Whose sight composde of fury and of fire
Doth send such sterne affections to his heart,
May never spirit, vain or Artier feed
The cursed substance of that cruel heart,
But (wanting moisture and remorseful blood)
Dry up with anger, and consume with heat.
Well, bark ye dogs, Isle bridle al your tongues
And bind them close with bits of burnished steel,
Down to the channels of your hateful throats,
And with the pains my rigour shall inflict,
Isle make ye roar, that earth may echo forth
The far resounding torments ye sustain,
As when an heard of lusty Cymbrian Bulls,
Run mourning round about, the Femals miss,
And stung with fury of their following,
Fill all the air with troublous bellowing:
I will with Engines, never exercised,
Conquer, sack, and utterly consume
Your cities and your golden palaces,
And with the flames that beat against the clouds
Incense the heavens. and make the stars to melt,
As if they were the tears of Mahomet
For hot consumption of his countries pride:
And till by viston, or by speech I hear
Immortal Jove say, Cease my Tamburlaine,
I will persist a terror to the world,
Making the Meteors, that like armed men
Are seen to march upon the towers of heaven,
Run tilting round about the firmament,
And break their burming Lances in the air,
For honour of my wondrous victories.
Come bring them in to our Pavilion.
Distressed Olympia, whose weeping eyes
Since thy arrival here beheld no Sun,
But closed within the compass of a tent,
Hath stained thy cheeks, &amp; made thee look like death
Devise some means to rid thee of thy life.
Rather than yield to his detested suit,
Whose drift is only to dishonour thee.
And since this earth, dewed with thy brinish tears,
Affords no herbs, whose taste may poison thee,
Nor yet this jeer, beat often with thy sighs,
Contagious smells, and vapors to infect thee,
Nor thy close Cave a sword to murder thee,
Let this invention be the instrument.
Well met Olympia, I sought thee in my tent
But when I saw the place obscure and dark,
Which with thy beauty thou wast wont to light,
Enraged, I ran about the fields for thee,
Supposing, amorous Jove had sent his son,
The winged Harms, to convey thee hence:
But now I find thee, and that fear is past.
Tell me Olympia, wilt thou grant my suit?
My Lord and husbands death, with my sweet sons,
With whom I buried al affections,
Save grief and sorrow which torment my heart,
Forbids my mind to entertain a thought
That tends to love, but meditate on death,
A fitter subject for a pensive soul.
Olympia, pity him, in whom thy looks
Have greater operation and more force
Than Cynthias in the watery wilderness,
For with thy view my joys are at the full,
And eb again, as thou departst from me.
Ah, pity me my Lord, and draw your sword,
Making a passage for my troubled soul,
Which beats against this prison to get out,
And meet my husband and my loving son.
Nothing, but still thy husband and thy son?
Leave this my Love, and listen more to me,
Thou shalt be stately Queen of fair Argier,
And clothed in costly cloth of massy gold,
Upon the marble turrets of my Court
Sit like to Venus in her chair of state,
Commanding all thy princely eye desires,
And I will cast off arms and sit with thee,
Spending my life in sweet discourse of love.
No such discourse is pleasant in mine eaxes,
But that where every period ends with death,
And every line begins with death again:
I cannot love to be an Empress.
Nay Lady, then if nothing will prevail,
Isle use some other means to make you yield,
Such is the sudden fury of my love,
I must and will be pleased, and you shall yield:
Come to the tent again.
Stay good my Lord, and will you save my honour,
Isle give your Grace a present of such price,
As all the world cannot afford the like.
What is it.
An ointment which a cunning Alcumist
Distilled from the purest Balsamum,
And simplest extracts of all Minerals,
In which the essential form of Marble stone,
Tempered by science metaphysical,
And Spells of magic from the mouths of spirits,
With which if you but noint your tender Skin,
Nor Pistol, Sword, nor Lance can pierce your flesh.
Why Madam, think ye to mock me thus palpably?
To prove it, I will noint my naked throat,
Which when you stab, look on your weapons point,
And you shall se't rebated with the blow.
Why gave you not your husband some of it, if you loved him, and it so precious?
My purpose was (my Lord) to spend it so,
But was prevented by his sudden end.
And for a present easy proof hereof,
That I dissemble not, try it on me,
I will Olympia, and will keep it for
The richest present of this Eastern world.
Now stab my Lord, and mark your weapons point
That will be blunted if the blow be great.
Here then Olympia.
What, have I slain her? Villain, stab thy self:
Cut off this arm that murdered my Love:
In whom the learned Rabies of this age,
Might find as many wondrous miracles,
As in the Theory of the world.
Now Hell is fairer than Elision,
A greater Lamp than that bright eye of heaven,
From whence the stars doo borrow all their light
Wanders about the black circumference,
And now the damned souls are free from pain,
For every Fury gazes on her looks:
Infernal Dis is courting of my Love,
Inventing masks and stately shows for her,
Opening the doors of his rich treasorie,
To entertain this Queen of chastity,
Whose body shall be combed with all the pomp
The treasure of my kingdom may afford.
HOlla, ye pampered Jade of Asia:
What, can ye draw but twenty miles a day,
And have so proud a chariot at your heals,
And such a Coachman as great Tamburlaine?
But from Asphaltis, where I conquered you,
To Byron here where thus I honour you:
The horse that guide the golden cie of heaven,
And blow the morning from their nosterils,
Making their fiery gate aboue the clouds,
Are not so honoured in their Governor,
As you (ye slaves) in mighty Tamburlain.
The headstrong Jade of Thrice, Alcides tamed,
That King Egeus fed with human flesh,
And made so wanton that they knew their strengths,
Were not subdued with valour more divine,
Than you by this unconquered arm of mine.
To make you fierce, and fit my appetite,
You shall be fed with flesh as raw as blood,
And drink in pails the strongest Muscatel:
If you can live with it, then live, and draw
My chariot swifter than the racking clouds:
If not, then die like beasts, and fit for nought
But perches for the black and fatal Ravens.
Thus am I right the Scourge of highest Jove,
And see the figure of my dignity,
By which I hold my name and majesty.
Let me have coach my Lord, that I may ride,
And thus be drawn with these two idle kings.
Thy youth for bids such ease my kingly boy,
They shall to morrow draw my chariot,
While these their fellow kings may be refreshed,
O thou that swaiest the region under earth,
And art a king as absolute as Jove,
Come as thou did in fruitful Scicilie,
Surveying all the glories of the land:
And as thou took the fair Proserpina,
Joying the fruit of Ceres garden plot,
For love, for honour, and to make het Queen,
So for just hate, for shame, and to subdue
This proud contemner of thy dreadful power,
Come once in fury and survey his pride,
Haling him headlong to the lowest hell.
Your Majesty must get some bits for these,
To bridle their contemptuous cursing tongues,
That like unruly never broken Jade,
Break through the hedges of their hateful mouths,
And pass their fixed bounds exceedingly.
Nay, we will break the hedges of their mouths
And pull their kicking colts out of their pastures,
Your Majesty already hath devised
A mean, as fit as may be to restrain
These coltish coach-horse tongues from blasphemy.
How like you that sir king? why speak you not?
Ah cruel Brat, sprung from a tyrants loins,
How like his cursed father he begins,
To practise taunts and bitter tyrannies?
I Turk, I tel thee, this same Boy is he,
That must (advanced in higher pomp than this)
Rifle the kingdoms I shall leave vnsackt.
If Jove esteeming me too good for earth,
Raise me to match the fair Aldeboran,
Aboue the threefold Ostracism of heaven,
Before I conquer all the triple world.
New fetch me out the Turkish Concubines,
I will prefer them for the funeral
They have bestowed on my abortive son.
Where are my common soldiers now that fought
So Lion-like upon Asphaltis plains?
Here my Lord.
Hold ye tal soldiers, take ye Queens apiece
(I mean such Queens as were kings Concubines)
Take them, divide them and their jewels too,
And let them equally serve all your turns.
We thank your majesty.
Brawl not (I warn yon for your lechery,
For every man that so offends shall die,
Injurious tyrant, wilt thou so defame
The hateful fortunes of thy victory,
To exercise upon such guiltless Dames,
The violence of thy common Soldiers lust.
Live content then (ye slaves) and meet not me
With troops of harlots at your sloothful heals
O pity vs my Lord, and save our honours.
Are ye not gone ye villains with your spoils?
O merciless infernal cruelty.
Save your honours? it were but time indeed,
Lost long before you knew what honour meant.
It seems they meant to conquer vs my Lord,
And make vs jesting Pageants for their Trulls.
And now themselves shall make our Pageant,
And common soldiers jest with all their Truls,
Let them take pleasure soundly in their spoils,
Till we prepare our march to Babylon,
Whether we next make expedition.
Let vs not be idle then my Lord,
But presently be pressed to conquer it.
We will techelles, forward then ye Jade:
Now crouch ye kings of greatest Asia,
And tremble when ye hear this Scourge will come,
That whips down cities, and controwleth crowns,
Adding their wealth and treasure to my store,
The Euxine sea North to Natolia,
The Terrene west, the Caspian north north-east,
And on the south Sinus Arabicus.
Shall al be laden with the martial spoils
We will convey with vs to Persea.
Then shall my native city Samarcanda
And crystal waives of fresh Iaertis stream,
The pride and beauty of her princely seat,
Be famous through the furthest continents,
For there my Palace royal shall be placed:
Whose shining Turrets shall dismay the heavens,
And cast the fame of Ilions Tower to hell.
Thorough the streets with troops of conquered kings,
Isle ride in golden armour like the Sun,
And in my helm a triple plume shall spring,
Spangled with Diamonds dancing in the air,
To note me Emperor of the threefold world.
Like to an almond tree ymounted high,
Upon the lofty and celestial mount,
Of every greene Selinus quaintly dect
With blooms more white than Hericinas brows,
Whose tender blossoms tremble every one,
At every little breath that thorough heaven is blown:
Then in my coach like Saturnes royal son,
Mounted his shining chariots, gilt with fire.
And drawn with princely Eagles through the path,
Paved with bright Crystal, and enchac'd with stars,
When all the Gods stand and gazing at his pomp.
So will I ride through Samarcanda streets,
Until my soul dissevered from this flesh,
Shall mount the milk-white way and meet him there.
To Babylon my Lords, to Babylon.
WHat saith Maximus?
My Lord, the breach the enemy hath made
Gives such assurance of our overthrow,
That little hope is left to save our lives,
Or hold out city from the Conquerors hands.
Then hang out flags (my Lord of humble truce,
And satisfy the peoples general prayers,
That Tamburlains intollorable wrath
May be suppressed by our submission.
Villain, respects thou more thy slavish life,
Than honour of thy country or thy name?
Is not my life and state as dear to me,
The citic and my native countries weal,
As any thing of price with thy conceit?
Have we not hope, for all our battered walls,
To live secure, and keep his forces out,
When this our famous lake of Limnasphaltis
Makes walls a fresh with every thing that falls
Into the liquid substance of his stream,
More strong than are the gates of death or hell,
What faintness should dismay our courages,
When we are thus defenced against our Foe,
And have no terror but his threatening looks?
My Lord, if ever you did deed of truth,
And now will work a refuge to our lives,
Offer submission, hang up flags of truce,
That Tambur lain may pity our distress,
And use vs like a loving Conqueror,
Though this be held his last days dreadful siege,
Wherein he spares neither man nor child,
Yet are there Christians of Georgia here,
Whose state he ever pitied and relieved:
Will get his pardon if your grace would send.
How is my soul environed,
And this eternisde city Babylon,
Filled with a pack of faintheart Fugitives,
That thus entreat their shame and servitude?
My Lord, if ever you will win our hearts,
Yield up the town, save our wives and children:
For I will cast my self from off these walls,
Or die some death of quickest violence,
Before I bide the wrath of Tamburlaine.
Villains, cowards, Traitors to our state,
Fall to the earth, and pierce the pit of Hell,
That legions of tormenting spirits may ver
Your slavish bosoms with continual pames,
I cate not, nor the town will never yield
As long as any life is in my breast.
Thou desperate Governor of Babylon,
To save thy life, and vs a little labour,
Yield speedily the city to our hands,
Or else be sure thou shalt be forced with pains,
More exquisite than ever Traitor felt.
Tyrant, I turn the traitor in thy throat,
And will defend it in despite of thee.
Call up the soldiers to defend these walls.
Yield foolish Governor, we offer more
Than ever yet we did to such proud slaves,
As durst resist vs till our third days siege:
Thou see vs pressed to give the last assault,
And that shall bide no more regard of parley.
Assault and spare not, we will never yield.
The stately buildings of fair Babylon,
Whose lofty Pillars, higher than the clouds,
Were wont to guide the seaman in the deep.
Being carried thither by the cannons force,
Now fill the mouth of Limnasphaltes lake,
And make a bridge unto the battered walls,
Where Belus, Ninus and great Alexander
Have rode in triumph, triumphs Tamburlaine,
Whose chariot wheels have burst the Assirians bones,
Drawn with these kings on heaps of carcasses,
Now in the place where fair Semiramis,
Courted by kings and peers of Asia,
Hath trod the Meisures, do my soldiers march,
And in the streets, where brave Assyrian Dames
Have rid in pomp like rich Saturnia,
With furious words and frowning visages,
My horsemen brandish their unruly blades.
Who have ye there my Lords?
The sturdy Governor of Babylon,
That made vs all the labour for the town,
And used such slender reckoning of you majesty.
Go bind the villain, he shall hang in chains,
Upon the ruins of this conquered town,
Sirha, the view of our vermilion tents,
Which threatened more than if the region
Next underneath the Element of fire,
Were full of Commits and of blazing stars,
Whose flaming trains should reach down to the earth
Could not affright you, no, nor I my self,
The wrathful messenger of mighty Iouc,
That with his sword hath quailed all earthly kings.
Could not perswadé you to submission,
But still the ports were shut: villain I say,
Should I but touch the rusty gates of hell,
The triple headed Cerberus would howl,
And wake black Jove to crouch and kneel to me.
But I have sent volleys of shot to you,
Yet could not enter till the breach was made,
Nor if my body could have stopped the breach,
Should thou have anted, cruel tamburlaine:
Tic not thy bloody tents can make me yield,
Nor yet thy self, thè anger of the highest,
For though thy cannon shook the city walls,
My heart did never quake, or courage faint.
Well, now Isle make it quake, go draw him up,
Hang him up in chains upon the city walls,
And let my soldiers shoot the slave to death.
Vile monster, borne of some infernal hag,
And sent from hell to tyrannise on earth,
Do all thy wurst, nor death, nor Tamburlaine,
Torture or pain can daunt my dreadlesse mind.
Up with him then, his body shall be scard.
But Tamburlain, in Lymnasphaltis lake,
There lies more gold than Babylon is worth,
Which when the city was besieged I hid,
Save but my life and I will give it thee.
Then for all your valour, you would save your life,
Where about lies it?
Under a hollow bank, right opposite
Against the Western gate of Babylon.
Go thither some of you and take his gold,
The rest forward with execution,
Away with him hence, let him speak no more:
I think I make your courage something quail,
When this is done, we'll march from Babylon,
And make our greatest haste to Persea:
These Jade are broken winded, and half tired,
Vnharnesse them, and let me have fresh horse:
So, now their best is done to honour me,
Take them, and hang them both up presently.
Wild Tyrant, barbarous bloody Tamburlain
Take them away Theridamas, see them dispatcht.
I will my Lord.
Come Asian Viceroys, to your tasks a while
And take such fortune as your fellows felt.
First let thy Scythyan horse tear both our limbs
Rather then we should draw thy chariot.
And like base slaves abject our princely minds
To vile and ignominious servitude.
Rather lend me thy weapon Tamburlain,
That I may sheath it in this breast of mine,
A thousand deaths could not torment our hearts
More than the thought of this doth vex our souls.
They will talk still my Lord, if you doe not bridle them.
Bridle them, and let me to my coach.
See now my Lord how brave the Captain hangs.
Tic brave indeed my boy, well done,
Shoot first my Lord, and then the rest shall follow.
Then have at him to begin withal.
Yet save my life, and let this wound appease
The mortal fury of great Tamburlain.
No, though Asphaltis lake were liquid gold,
And offered me as ransom for thy life,
Yet should thou die, shoot at him all at once.
So now he hangs like Bagdets Governor,
Having as many bullets in his flesh,
As there be breaches in her battered wall.
Go now and bind the Burghers hand and foot,
And cast them headlong in the cities lake:
Tartars and Perseans shall inhabit there,
And to command the city, I will build
A Citadel, that all Africa
Which hath been subject to the Persian king,
Shall pay me tribute for, in Babylon.
What shall be done with their wives and i will∣drone my Lord.
Techelles, Drown them all, man, woman, and child,
Leave not a Babylonian in the town.
I will about it straight, come Soldiers.
Now Casino, wher's the Turkish Alcaron,
And all the heaps of superstitious books,
Found in the Temples of that Mahomet?
Whom I have thought a God, they shall be burnt.
Here they are my Lord.
Well said, let there be a fire presently,
In vain I see men worship Mahomet,
My sword hath sent millions of Turks to hell.
Slew all his Priests, his kinsmen, and his friends,
And yet I live untouched by Mahomet:
There is a God full of revenging wrath,
From whom the thunder and the lightning breaks,
Whose Scourge I am, and him will I obey.
So Casino, fling them in the fire.
Now Mahomet, if thou have any power,
Come down thy self and work a miracle,
Thou art not worthy to be worshipped,
That suffers flames of fire to burn the writ
Wherein the sum of thy religion rests.
Why send 'st thou not a furious whirlwind down,
To blow thy Alcaron up to thy throne,
Where men report, thou sitt'st by God himself,
Or vengeance on the head of Tamburlain,
That shakes his sword against thy majesty.
And spurns the Abstracts of thy foolish laws.
Well soldiers, Mahomet remains in hell,
He cannot hear the voice of Tamburlain,
Seek out another Godhood to adore,
The God that sits in heaven, if any God,
For he is God alone, and none but he.
I have fulfil'd your highness will, my Lord,
Thousands of men drowned in Asphal•is Lake,
Have made the water swell abore the banks,
And fishes feed by human carcasses,
Amazed, swim up and down upon the waives,
As when they swallow Assafitida,
Which makes them fleet aloft and gasp for air,
Well then my friendly Lords what now re∣mains
But that we leave sufficient garrison
And presently depart to Persea,
To triumph after all our victories.
I, good my Lord, let vs in hast to Persea,
And let this Captain be removed the walls,
To some high hill about the city here.
Let it be so, about it soldiers:
But stay, I feel my self distempered suddenly.
What is it dares distemper Tamburlain?
Something techelles but I know not what,
But forth ye vassals, what so ere it be,
Sickness or death can never conquer me.
KIng of Amasia, now our mighty host,
Marches in Asia mayor where the streams,
Of Euphrates and Tigris swiftly runs,
And here may we behald great Babylon,
Circled about with Limnasphaltis Lake,
Where tamburlaine with all his army lies,
Which being faint and weary with the siege,
Wee may lie ready to encounter him.
Before his host be full from Babylon,
And so revenge our latest grievous loss,
If God or Mahomet send any aide.
Doubt not my lord, but we shall conquer him
The Monster that hath drink a sea of blood,
And yet gapes still for more to quench his thirst,
Our Turkish swords shall headlong send to hell,
And that vile Carcass drawn by warlike kings,
The Fowls shall eat, for never sepulchre
Shall grace that base-borne Tyrant tamburlaine.
When I record my Parents slavish life,
Their cruel death, mine own captivity,
My Viceroys bondage under tamburlaine,
Me thinks I could sustain a thousand deaths,
To be revenged of all his Villainy.
Ah sacred Mahomet, thou that hast seen,
Millions of Turks perish by Tamburlaine,
Kingdoms made waste, brave cities sacked &amp; burnt,
And but one host is left to honour thee.
And thy obedient servant Callapine,
And make him after all these overthrows,
To triumph over cursed Tamburlaine.
Fear not my Lord, I see great Mahomet
Clothed in purple clouds, and on his head
A Chaplet brighter than Apollos crown,
Marching about the air with armed men,
To join with you against this Tamburlaine.
Renowned General mighty Callapine,
Though God himself and holy Mahomet,
Should come in person to resist your power,
Yet might your mighty host encounter all,
And pull proud Tamburlaine upon his knees,
To sue for mercy at your highness feet,
Captain the force of Tamburlaine is great,
His fortune greater, and the victories
Wherewith he hath so sore dismayed the world,
Are greatest to discourage all our drifts,
Yet when the pride of Cynthia is at full,
She wains again, and so shall his I hope,
For we have here the chief selected men
Of twenty several kingdoms at the least:
Nor ploughmen, Priest, nor Merchant stays at home.
All Turkie is in arms with Callapine.
And never will we sunder camps and arms,
Before himself or his be conquered.
This is the time that must eternize me,
For conquering the Tyrant of the world.
Come Soldiers, let vs lie in wait for him
And if we find him absent from his camp,
Or that it be reioin'd again at full,
Assail it and be sure of victory.
Weep heavens, and vanish into liquid tears
Fall stars that govern his nativity,
And summon al the shining lamps of heaven
To cast their bootless fires to the earth.
And shed their feeble influence in the air.
Muffle your beauties with eternal clouds,
For hell and darkness pitch their pitchy tents,
And Death with armies of Cymerian spirits
Gives battle against the heart of Tamburlaine.
Now in defiance of that wonted love,
Your sacred virtues poured upon his throne,
And made his state an honour to the heavens,
These cowards invisibly assail his soul,
And threaten conquest on our Sovereign:
But if he die, your glories are disgraced,
Earth droopes and says, that hell in heaven is placed,
O then ye Powers that sway eternal seats,
And guide this massy substance of the earth,
If you retain desert of holiness,
As your supreme estates instruct our thoughts,
Be not iuconstant, careless of your fame,
Bear not the burden of your enemies joys,
Triumphing in his fall whom you aduaimst,
But as his birth, life, health and majesty
Were strangely blessed and governed by heaven,
So honour heaven till heaven dissolved be,
His birth, his life, his health and majesty.
Blush heaven to loose the honour of thyname,
To see thy footstool set upon thy head,
And let no baseness in thy haughty breast,
Sustain a shame of such inexcellence:
To see the devils mount in Angels throanes,
And Angels dive into the pools of hell.
And though they think their painful date is out,
And that their power is puissant as Ioues,
Which makes them manage arms against thy state,
Yet make them feel the strength of Tamburlain,
Thy instrument and note of Maisty.
Is greater far than they can thus subdue.
For if he die, thy glory is disgraced,
Earth droopes and says that hell in heaven is placed.
What daring God torments my body thus,
And seeks to conquet mighty Tamburlaine,
Shall sickness prove me now to be a man,
That have been termed the terror of the world?
Techelles and the rest, come take your swords,
And threaten him whose hand afflicts my soul,
Come let vs march against the powers of heaven,
And set black streamers in the firmament,
To signify the slaughter of the Gods,
Ah friends, what shall I doe I cannot stand,
Come carry me to war against the Gods,
That thus envy the health of Tamburlaine,
Ah good my Lord, leave these iinpatient words,
Which ad much danger to your malady.
Why shall I sit and languish in this pain,
No, strike the drums, and in revenge of this,
Come let vs chardge our spears and pierce his breast,
Whose shoulders bear the Axis of the world,
That if I perish, heaven and earth may fade,
theridamas, haste to the court of Jove,
Will him to send Apollo hither straight,
To cure me, or Isle fetch him down my self.
Sit still my gracious Lord, this grief will cease,
And cannot last, it is so violent.
Not last techelles, no, for I shall die,
See where my slave, the ugly monster death
Shaking and quivering, pale and wan for fear,
Stands aiming at me with his murdering dart,
Who flies away at every glance I give,
And when I look away, comes stealing on:
Villain away, and hie thee to the field,
I and mine army come to lode thy bark
With souls of thousand mangled carcasses,
Look where he goes, but see, he comes again
Because I stay, techelles let vs march,
And weary Death with bearing souls to hell.
Pleases your Majesty to drink this potion.
Which will abate the fury of your fit,
And cause some milder spirits govern you.
Tel me, what think you of my sickness now?
I viewed your urine, and the Hipostates
Thick and obscure doth make your danger great,
Your veins are full of accidental heat,
Whereby the moisture of your blood is dried,
The Humidum and Calor, which some hold
Is not a parcel of the Elements,
But of a substance more divine and pure,
Is almost clean extinguished and spent.
Which being the cause of life, imports your death.
Besides my Lord, this day is Critical,
Dangerous to those, whose Chrisis is as yours:
Your Artiers which along the veins convey
The lively spirits which the heart engenders
Are partcht and void of spirit that the soul
Wanting those Organnons by which it moos,
Can not endure by argument of art.
Yet if your majesty may escape this day,
No doubt, but you shall soon recover all.
Then will I comfort all my vital parts,
And live in spite of death aboue a day.
My Lord, young Callapine that lately fled from your majesty, hath now gathered a fresh Army, and
hearing your absence in the field, offers to set upon vs presently.
See my Physicians now, how Jove hath sent,
A present medicine to recur my pain:
My looks shall make them fly, and might I follow,
There should not one of all the villains power
Live to give offer of another fight.
I joy my Lord, your highness is so strong,
That can endure so well your royal presence,
Which only will dismay the enemy.
I know it will Casino: draw you slaves,
In spite of death I will go show my face.
Thus are the villains, cowards fled for fear,
Like Summers vapours, vanished by the Sun.
And could I but a while pursue the field,
That Callapine should be my slave again.
But I perceive my martial strength is spent,
In vain I strive and rail against those powers,
That mean t'inuest me in a higher throne,
As much too high for this disdainful earth.
Give me a Map, then let me see how much
Is left for me to conquer all the world,
That these my boys may finish all my wants,
Here I began to march towards Persea,
Along Armenia and the Caspian sea,
And thence unto Bythinia, where I took
The Turk and his great Empress prisoners,
Then marched I into Egypt and Arabia,
And here not far from Alexandria,
Whereas the Terren and the red sea meet,
Being distant less than still a hundred leagues,
I meant to cut a channel to them both,
That men might quickly sail to India.
From thence to Nubia near Borno Lake,
And so along the Ethiopian sea,
Cutting the Tropic line of Capricorn,
I conquered all as far as Zansibar,
Then by the Northern part of Africa.
I came at last to Graecia, and from thence
To Asia, where I stay against my will,
Which is from Scythia, where I first began,
Backward and forwards ne'er five thousand leagues,
Look here my boys, see what a world of ground,
Lies westward from the midst of Cancers line,
Unto the rising of this earthly globe,
Whereas the Sun declining from our sight,
Begins the day with our Antipodes:
And shall I die, and this unconquered?
Lo here my sons, are all the golden Mines,
Inestimable drugs and precious stones,
More worth than Asia, and the world beside,
And from th'Antartique Pole, Eastward behold
As much more land, which never was descried,
Wherein are rocks of Pearl, that shine as bright
As all the Lamps that beautify the Sky,
And shall I die, and this unconquered?
Here lovely boys, what death forbids my life,
That let your lives command in spite of death.
Alas my Lord, how should our bleeding harts
Wounded and broken with your Highness grief,
Retain a thought of joy, or spark of life?
Your soul gives essence to our wretched subjects.
Whose matter is incorporoat in your flesh.
Your pains do pierce our souls, no hope sir∣uiues,
For by your life we entertain our lives,
But sons, this subject not of force enough,
To hold the fiery spirit it contains,
must part, imparting his impressions,
By equal portions into both your breasts:
My flesh divided in your precious shapes,
Shall still retain my spirit, though I die,
And live in all your seeds immortally:
Then now remove me, that I may resign
My place and proper title to my son:
First take my Scourge and my imperial Crown,
And mount my royal chariot of estate,
That I may see thee crowned before I die,
Help me (my Lords) to make my last remove.
A woeful change my Lord, that daunts our thoughts,
More than the ruin of our proper souls.
Sit up my son, let me see how well
Thou wilt become thy fathers majesty.
With what a flinty bosom should I joy.
The breath of life, and burden of my soul,
If not resolved into resolved pains,
My bodies mortified lineaments
should exercise the motions of my heart,
Pierced with the joy of any dignity?
O father, if the unrelenting ears
Of death and hell be shut against my prayers,
And that the spiteful influence of heaven.
Deny my soul fruition of her joy,
How should I step or stir my hateful feet,
Against the inward powers of my heart,
Leading a life that only strives to die,
And plead in vain, unpleasing soueranity.
Let not thy love exceed thine honour son,
Nor bar thy mind that magnanimity,
That nobly must admit necessity;
Sit up my boy, and with those silken rains,
Bridle the steeled stomachs of those Jade.
My Lord, you must obey his majesty,
Since Fate commands, and proud necessity.
Heavens witness me, with what a broken hart
And damned spirit I ascend this seat,
•nd send my soul before my father die,
His anguish and his burning agony.
Now fetch the hearse of fair Zenocrate,
Let it be placed by this my fatal chair,
And serve as parcel of my funeral.
Then feels your majesty no sovereign ease,
Nor may our hearts all drowned in tears of blood,
Joy any hope of your recovery?
Casino no, the Monarch of the earth,
And eielesse Monster that torments my soul,
Cannot behold the tears ye shed for me,
And therefore still augments his cruelty.
Then let some God oppose his holy power,
Against the wrath and tyranny of death,
That his teare-thyrsty and unquenched hate,
May be upon himself reuerberate.
Now eyes, enjoy your latest benefit,
And when my soul hath virtue of your sight,
Pierce through the •••fin and the sheet of gold,
And glut your longings with a heaven of joy.
So, reign my son, scourge and control those slaves
Guiding thy chariot with thy Fathers hand.
As precious is the charge thou vndertak'st
As that which Clymens brainsick son did guide,
When wandering Phoebes Ivory cheeks were scorched
And all the earth like AEtna breathing fire:
Be warned by him, then learn with awful eye
To sway a throne as dangerous as his:
For if thy body thrive not full of thoughts
As pure and fiery as Phyteus beams,
The nature of these proud rebelling Jade
Will take occasion by the slenderest hair,
And draw thee piecemeal like Hyppolitus,
Through rocks more steep and sharp than Caspian cliftes.
The nature of thy chariot will not bear
A guide of baser temper than my self,
More then heavens coach, the pride of Phaeton.
Fa••••l my boys, my dearest friends, farewell,
My body feels, my soul doth weep to see
Your sweet desires deprived my company,
For Tamburlaine, the Scourge of God must die.
Meet heaven &amp; earth, &amp; here let al things end
For earth hath spent the pride of all her fruit,
And heaven consumed his choicest living fire.
Let earth and heaven his timeless death deplore,
For both their words will equal him no more,

