Grave Senators and Fathers of this State,
Our strange protractions &amp; unkind delays
where weighty wars doth cal vs out to fight
Our factious wits to please aspiring Lords,
You see hath added power unto our foes,
And hazarded rich Phrigia and Bithinia,
With all our Asian Holds and Cities too:
Thus Scilla seeking to be General,
(Who is invested in our Consuls Pall)
Hath forced murders in a quiet State:
The cause whereof even Pompey may complain,
Who seeking to advance a climbing friend,
Hath lost by death a sweet and courteous son.
Who now in Asia but Mithridates,
Laughs at these fond discentions I complain?
While we in wrangling for a General,
Forsake our friends, forestall our forward war,
And leave our Legions full of dalliance,
VVaighting our idle wills at Capua.
Fie Romaines, shall the glories of your names,
The wondrous beauty of this Capitol,
Perish through Scillas insolence and pride,
As if that Rome were robbed of true renown,
And destitute of warlike Champions now?
Lo here the man, the rumour of whose fame,
Hath made Hiberia tremble and submit;
See Marius that in managing estate,
Through many cares and troubles he hath past,
And spent his youth, upon whose reverend head
The milke-white pledge of wisdom sweetly spreds:
He six times Consul, fit for peace or war,
Sits drooping here content to brooke disgrace,
Who glad to fight through follies of his foes
Sighs for your shame whilst you abide secure;
And I that see and should recur these wrongs,
Through Pompeys late vacation and delay,
Have left to publish him for General,
That merits better titles far than these:
But (Nobles) now the final day is come,
When I your Tribune studying for renown,
Pronounce and publish Marius General,
To lead our Legions against Mithridates,
And crave (grave Fathers) signs of your content,
Believe me Noble Romains, &amp; grave Se∣nators,
This strange election, and this new made Law,
Will witness our unstable government,
And dispossess Rome of her Empery;
For although Marius be renownd in Arms,
Famous for prowess, and grave in warlike drifts,
Yet may the sunne-shine of his former deeds
Nothing eclipse our Scillas dignity:
By lot and by election he was made,
Chief General against Mithridates,
And shall we then abridge him of that Rule;
T were injury to Scilla and to Rome:
Nor would the height of his all daring mind,
Brooke to the death so vile and foul disgrace.
Why Pompey, as if the Senate had not power
To appoint, dispose, &amp; change their Generals:
Rome shall belike be bound to Scillas Rule,
Whose haughty pride and swelling thoughts puffed up,
Foreshowes the reaching to proud Tarquins state:
Is not his lingering to our Romaine loss
At Capua where he braves it out with feasts,
Made known think you unto the Senate here?
Yes Pompey, yes: and hereof are we sure
If Romaines State on Scillas pride should lie,
Romes Conquests would to Pontus Regions fly:
Therefore grave and renowned Senators,
(Pillars that bear and hold our Rule aloft,
You stately, true, and rich Pyramids)
Descend into the depth of your estates,
Then shall you find that Scilla is more fit,
To Rule in Rome domestic affairs,
Then have the Conquest of Bithinia,
Which if once got, heel but by death forgo,
Therefore I say Marius our General.
Lo thus we strive abroad to win renown,
And nought regard at home our waning states;
Brutus I say the many brave exploits,
The warlike Acts that Scilla hath atchieude,
Shows him a soldier and a Romaine too,
Whose care is more for Country than himself:
Scilla nill brooke that in so many wars,
So hard adventures and so strange extremes,
Hath borne the palm and prize of victory,
Thus with dishonour to give up his charge:
Scilla hath friends and soldiers at command,
That first will make the towers of Rome to shake,
And force the stately Capitol to dance,
Yer any rob him of his •used renown:
Then we that through the Caspian shores have run,
And spread with ships the Oriental Sea,
At home shall make a murder of our friends,
And massaker our dearest Countrymen.
The power of Scilla nought will veil against Rome,
And let me die Lucretius ere I see,
Our Senate dread for any private man,
Therefore Renownd Sulpitius send for Scilla back,
Let Marius lead our men in Asia.
The Law, the Senate wholly doth affirm,
Let Marius lead our men in Asia.
Cynna affirms the Senates Censure just,
And saith let Marius lead the Legions forth.
Honour and victory follow Marius steps,
For him doth Granius wish to fight for Rome.
why then you sage and ancient Syres of Rome,
Sulpitius here again doth publish forth,
That Marius by the Senate here is made,
Chief General to lead the Legions out,
Against Mithridates and his Competitors,
Now victory for honour of Rome follow Marius.
Sage and imperial Senators of Rome,
Not without good advisement have you seen,
Old Marius silent during your discourse:
Yet not for that he feared to plead his cause,
Or raise his honour trodden down by age,
But that his words should not allure his friends,
To stand on stricter terms for his behoof:
Six times the Senate by election hath,
Made Marius Consul over warlike Rome,
And in that space nor Rome nor all the world,
Could ever say that Marius was untrue,
•hese silver hairs that hang upon my face,
Are witnesses of my unfeigned zeal,
The Cymbrians that yer-while invaded France,
And held the Romaïne Empire in disdain,
Lay all confounded under Marius sword,
Fierce Scipio the mirror once of Rome,
whose loss as yet my inward soul bewails,
Being asked who should succeed and bear his Rule,
Even this (quote he) shall Scipios armour bear,
And therewithal clapped me upon the back:
If then grave Lords, my former passed youth,
was spent in bringing Honours into Rome,
Let then my age and latter date of years,
Be sealed up for honour unto Rome.
Scilla, what means these Arms and warlike troops
These glorious Ensigns and these fierce Alarms,
Tic proudly done to brave the Capitol.
These Arms Sulpitius are not borne for hate,
But maintenance of my confirmed state:
I come to Rome with no seditious thoughts,
Except I find too froward injuries.
But wisdom would you did forbear,
To yield these flight suspicions of contempt,
where as this Senate studies high affairs.
what serious matters have these Lords in hand?
The Senators with full decree appoint,
Old Marius for their Captain General,
To lead thy Legions into Asia,
And fight against the fierce Mithridates.
To Marius? Jolly stuff: why then I see,
Your Lordships mean to make a babe of me.
Tic true Scilla the Senate hath agreed,
That Marius shall those bands and Legions bear,
which you now hold against Mithridates.
Marius shall lead them then, if Scilla said not no,
And I shall bea Consuls shadow then,
Trustless Senators and ungrateful Romaines,
For all the Honours I have done to Rome,
For all the spoils I brought within her walls,
Thereby for to enrich and raise her pride,
Repay you me with this ingratitude:
You know unkind, that Scillas wounded Helm,
Was ne'er hung up or once distained with rust:
The Marcians that before me fell amain,
And like to winter hail on every side,
Unto the City Nuba I pursued,
And for your sakes were thirty thousand slain:
The Hippinians and the samnits scilla brought,
As Tributaries unto famous Rome:
I, where did scilla ever draw his sword,
Or lift his warlike hand aboue his head
For Romaines cause but he was Conqueror:
And now (vnthankeful) seek you to disgrade,
And tear the plumes that scillas sword hath won.
Marius I tell thee scilla is the man,
Disdains to stoop or veil his pride to thee;
Marius I say thou moist nor shalt not have,
The charge that unto scilla doth belong,
Unless thy sword could tear it from my hart,
Which in a thousand folds impels the same.
And scilla hereof be thou full assured,
The honour whereto mine undaunted mind,
And this grave senate hath enhanced me,
Thou nor thy followers shall derogate,
The spence of years that Marius hath ore-past,
Inforraine broils and civil mutinies,
Hath taught him this, that one unbridled foe,
My former fortunes never shall oregoe.
Marius, I smile at these thy foolish words,
And credit me should laugh outright I fear,
If that I knew not how thy froward age,
Doth make thy sense as feeble as thy joints.
Scilla, Scilla, Marius years hath taught
Him how to pluck so proud a yonkers plumes,
And know these hairs that dangle down my face,
In brightness like the silver Rodope:
Shall add so haughty courage to my mind,
And rest such piercing objects against thine eyes,
That maskt in folly, age shall force thee stoop.
And by my hand I swear ere thou shalt maze me so,
My soul shall perish but Isle have thy beard,
Say grave Senators shall Scilla be your General.
No the Senate, I and Rome her self agrees▪
Ther's none but Marius shall be General.
Therefore Scilla these daring tea•mes unfit,
Beseem not thee before the Capitol.
Beseem not me? Senators advise you,
Scilla hath vowed whose vows the heavens record,
Whose oaths hath pierced and searched the deepest vast,
I and whose protestations reign on earth:
This Capitol wherein your glories shine,
Was ne'er so pressed and throng de with scarlet gowns,
As Rome shall be with heaps of slaughtered souls
Before that Scilla yield his titles up,
Isle mate his streets that peer into the clouds,
Burnished with gold and Ivory pillors fair,
Shining with Jasper, Jet, and Ebony,
All like the palace of the morning sun,
To swim within a sea of purple blood
Before I loose the name of General.
These threats against thy country and these Lords.
Scilla proceeds from forth a Traitorshart,
Whose head I trust to see advanced up
On highest top of all this Capitol:
As erst was many of thy progeny,
Before thou vaunt thy victories in Rome.
Graybeard, if so thy hart and tongue agree,
Draw forth thy Legions and thy men at arms,
Rear up thy standard and thy steeled Crest,
And meet with Scilla in the fields of Mars,
And try whose fortune makes him General.
I take thy word: Marius will meet thee there,
And prove thee Scilla a Traitor unto Rome,
And all that march under thy traitorous wings,
Therefore they that love the Senate and Marius
Now follow him.
And all that love Scilla come down to him,
For the rest let them follow Marius
And the Devil himself be their Captain.
Scilla, I come to thee,
Scilla, Lucretius will die with thee,
Thanks my Noble Lords of Rome.
Stay Scilla, hear Anthony breath forth,
The pleading plaints of sad declining Rome.
Anthony, thou know thy honey words doo pierce,
And move the mind of Scilla to remorse:
Yet neither words nor pleadings now must serve,
When as mine honour calls me forth to fight,
Therefore sweet Anthony be short for Scillas hast.
For Scillas hast, O whither wilt thou fly?
Tell me my Scilla what dost thou take in hand?
What wars are these thou stirrest up in Rome?
What fire is this is kindled by thy wrath!
A fire that must be quenched by Romaines blood,
A war that will confound our Empery,
And last an Act of foul impiety.
Brute beasts nill break the mutual law of love,
And birds affection will not violate,
The senseless trees have concord amongst themselves,
And stones agree in links of amity,
If they my Scilla brooke not to have jar,
What then are men that against themselves doo war•
Thoult say my Scilla honour stirs thee up:
First honour to infringe the laws of Rome?
Thoult say perhaps the titles thou hast won,
It were dishonour for thee to forgo:
O, is there any height aboue the high,
Or any better than the best of all?
Art thou not Consul? Art thou not Lord of Rome?
What greater Tytles should our Scilla have?
But thou wilt hence, thou wilt fight with Marius
The man, the Senate, I and Rome hath chose.
Think this before, thou never left aloft,
And latest fall thy warlike hand down,
But thou dost raze and wound thy City Rome:
And look how many slaughtered souls he slain,
Under thy Ensigns, and thy conquering Lance,
so many murders make thou of thy self.
Enough my Anthony, for thy honied tongue
VVasht in a syrup of sweet Conservatiues,
Drives confused thoughts through scillas mind,
Therefore suffice thee, I may nor will not hear,
so farewell Anthony, honour calls me hence,
scilla will fight for glory and for Rome.
See Noble Anthony the trustless state of rule,
The stayles hold of matchless sovereignty,
Now fortune bears Rome into the Clouds,
To throw her down into the lowest hells,
For they that spread her glory through the world,
Are they that tea•e her proud triumphant plumes:
The hart-burning pride of proud Tarquinius,
Rooted from Rome the sway of kingly ma•e,
And now this discord newly set abroach,
Shall ease our Consuls and our Senates down.
Unhappy Rome and Romaines thrice accursed,
That oft with triumphs silt your City walls,
With kings and conquering Rulers of the world,
Now to eclipse in top of all thy pride,
Through civil discords and domestic broils:
O Romaines weep the tears of sad lament,
And rent your sacred Robes at this exchange,
For Fortune makes our Rome a banding ball,
Tossed from her hand to take the greater fall.
O whence proceeds these foul ambitious thoughts,
That fires men's harts and makes them thirst for Rule:
Hath sovereignty so much be witched the minds
Of Romaines: that their former busied cares
Which erst did tire in seeking Cities good,
Must now be changed to ruin of her walls?
Must they that •eard her stately Temples up,
Deface the sacred places of their Gods?
Then may we wail and wring our wretched hands,
Sith both our Gods, our temples and our walls,
Ambition makes fell fortunes spiteful t•nils.
Why whither fly you Romaines,
What mischief makes this flight?
Stay good my friends, stay dearest Countrymen.
Stay let vs hear what our Lord Scilla saith.
What will you leave your chieftains Romains the••
And loose your Honours in the gates of Rome?
What shall our Country see, and Scilla rue,
These Coward thoughts so fixed and firmd in you?
What are you come from Capua to proclaim,
Your hearts treasons in this happy town?
What wi•l you stand and gaze with shameless looks,
Whilst Marius butchering knife assails our throe••s?
Are you the men, the hopes, the stairs of state?
Are you the soldiers pressed for Asia?
Are you the wondered Legions of the world,
And will you fly these shadows of resist?
Well Romaines I will perish through your pride,
That thought by you to have returned in pomp.
And at the least your General shall prove,
Even in his death your treasons and his love.
Lo this the wreath that shall my body bind,
Whilst Scilla sleeps with honour in the field:
And I alone within these colours shut,
Will blush your dastard follies in my death,
So farewell hartles soldiers and untrue,
That leave your Scilla who hath loved you.
Why fellow soldiers shall we fly the field,
And carelessly forsake our General?
What shall our vows conclude with no avail?
First die sweet friends, and shed your purple blood,
Before you lose the man that wills you good.
Then to it brave Italians out of hand:
Scilla we come with fierce and de•dly blows,
To avenge thy wrongs and vanquish all thy toes.
You Romaine soldiers, fellow mates in Arms,
The blind fold Mistress of uncertain chance,
Hath turned these traitorous c••mers from the top,
And seated Scilla in the chiefest place.
The place beseeming Scilla and his mind,
For were the throne where matchless glory sits,
Impaled with furies threatening blood and death,
Begirt with famine and those fatal fears
That dwell below amidst the dreadful vast:
Tut Scillaes sparkling eyes should dim with clear
The burning brands of their consuming light,
And master fancy with a forward mind,
And mask ripening fear with awful power.
For men of baser mettle and conceit
Cannot conceive the beauty of my thought.
I crowned with a wreath of warlike state,
Imagine thoughts more greater than a crown,
And yet befitting well a Roman mind.
Then gentle ministers of all my hopes,
That with your swords made way unto my wish,
Hearken the fruit of your courageous fight,
In spite of all these Roman Base•sks,
That seek to quell vs with their currish looks,
We will to Pontus weal have gold my harts,
Those oriental pearls shall deck our brows:
And you my gentle •rends, you Roman peers,
Kind Pompey worthy of a Consuls name.
You shall abide the father of the state,
Whilst these brave lads Lucretius and I,
In spite of all these brawling Senators,
Will, shall, and dare attempt on Asia,
And drive Mithridates from out his doors.
I Scilla, these are words of mickle worth,
Fit for the master of so great a mind:
Now Rome must stoop, for Marius and his friends
Have left their arms, and trust unto their heals.
But Pompey, if our Spanish Jennets feet
Have learnt to post it of their mother wind,
I hope to nip upon the gray beards heals,
Till I have cropped his shoulders from his head.
As for his son, the proud aspiring boy,
His beardless face and wanton smiling brows,
Shall (if I catch him) deck yond Capitol:
The father, son, the friends, and soldiers all,
That •awne on Marius, shall with fury fall.
And what event shall all these troubles bring?
This: Scilla in fortune will exceed a king.
But friends and soldiers, with dispersed bands
Go seek out Marius fond confederates:
some post along those unfrequented paths,
That tracked by nookes unto the neighbring sea:
Murder me Marius, and maintain my life.
And that his favourites in Rome may learn
The difference betwixt my fawn and frown,
Go cut them short, &amp; shed their hateful blood,
To quench these furies of my froward mood.
Lo scilla where our senators approach,
Perhaps to gratulate thy good success.
I that perhaps was fitly placed there:
But my Lucretius, these are cunning Lords,
Whose tongues are tipped with honey to deceive:
As for their hearts, if outward eyes may see them,
The devil scarce with mischief might agree them.
Good fortune to our Consul, worthy scilla.
And why not General against the king of Pontus?
And general against the king of Pontus.
sirrha, your words are good, your thoughts are ill,
Each milk white hair amidst this mincing beard,
Compared with millions of thy treacherous thoughts,
Would change their hew through vigour of thy hate.
But did not pity make my fury thrall,
This sword should finish hate, thy life and all.
I pre thee Granius, how doth Marius?
As he that bids a thrall to thee and fate,
Living in hope as I and others doo,
To catch good fortune, and to cross thee too.
Both blunt and bold but too much Mother wit;
To play with fire where •urie streams about,
Curtal your tale fond man cut of the rest:
But here I will dissemble for the best.
Scilla my years hath taught me to discern,
Betwixt ambitious pride and Princely zeal,
And from thy youth these Pee•es of Rome have marked,
A rash revenging hammer in thy brain,
Thy tongue adorned with flowing eloquence,
And yet I see imprinted in thy brows,
A fortunate but froward governance.
And though thy rival Marius mated late,
By backward working of his wretched fate
Is fallen, yet Scilla mark what I have seen
Even here in Rome the Fencer Spectacus,
Hath bin as fortunate as thou thy self:
But when that Crassus sword assayed his crest,
The fear of death did make him droop for woe.
You saw in Rome this brawling •encore die,
When Spectacus by Crassus was subdewd:
Why so, but sir I hope you will apply,
And say like Spectacus that I shall die?
Thus peevish old discoursing by a fire,
Amidst their cups will prate how men aspire:
Is this the greeting Romans that you give,
Unto the Patron of your Monarchy?
Lucretius shall I play a pretty jest.
What Scilla will, what Roman dare withstand▪
A brief and pleasing answer by my head,
Why tell me Granius dost thou talk in sport?
No Scilla my discourse is resolute,
Not kind to please thy fond and cursed thoughts:
For were my tongue betrayed with pleasing words,
To feed the humours of thy haughty mind:
I rather wish the rot should root it out.
The bravest brawler that I ever heard,
But soldiers since I see he is oppressed
With crooked choler, and our Artists teach,
That fretting blood will press through opened veins,
Let him that hath the keenest sword arrest,
The gray-beard and cut off his head in jest.
Soldiers lay hands on Granius.
Is this the guerdon then of good advise?
No but the means to make fond men more wise,
Tut I have wit, and carry warlike tools,
To charm the scolding prate of wanton •ooles,
Tell me of Fencers and a tale of Fate?
No, scilla thinks of nothing but a state.
Why scilla I am armed the worst to try.
I pray thee then Lucretius let him die.
Beshrow me Lords but in this jolly vim,
It were pity but the prating fool were slain:
I fear me Pluto will be wroth with me,
For to detain so grave a man as he.
But seek not scilla in this quiet state,
To work revenge upon an aged man,
A senator, a sovereign of this town.
The more the Cedar climes the sooner down•
And did I think the proudest man in Rome,
Would winch at that which I have wrought or done,
I would and can control his insolence.
Why senators, is this the true reward,
VVherewith you answer Princes for their pain,
As when this sword hath made our City free,
A braving mate should thus distemper me?
But Lepidus and fellow senators,
I am resolude and will not brooke your taunts,
Who wrongs scilla, let him look for stripes.
I but the milder passions show the 〈◊〉
For as the leaf doth beautify the tree,
The pleasant flowers bedeck the painted spring,
Even so in men of greatest reach and power,
A mild and piteous thought augments renown▪
Old Anthony did never see my Lord,
A swelling shower that did continue long,
A climbing tower that did not taste the wind,
A wrathful man not wasted with repent,
I speak of love my Scilla, and of joy
To see how fortune lends a pleasant gale,
Unto the spreading sails of thy desires:
And loving thee must counsel thee withal,
For as by cutting fruitful vines increase,
So faithful counsels works a Princes peace.
Thou honey talking father speak thy mind.
My Scilla scarce those tears are dried up,
That Romaine Matrons wept to see this war:
Along the holy streets the hideous groans,
Of murdered men infect the weeping air:
Thy foes are •led not overtaken yet,
And doubtful is the hazard of this war:
Yea doubtful is the hazard of this war,
For now our Legions draw their wasteful swords,
To murder whom? Even Romaine Citizens.
To conquer whom? Even Romaine Citizens.
Then if that Scilla love these Citizens,
If care of Rome, if threat of foreign foes,
If fruitful counsels of thy forward friends
May take effect, go fortunate and drive,
The king of Pontus out of Asia,
Least while we dream on civil mutinies,
Our wary foes assail our City walls.
My long concealed thoughts Mark Anthony,
Must seek discovery through thy pliant words:
Believe me Scilla civil mutinies,
Must not obscure thy glories and our names:
Then sith that factious Marius is suppressed,
Go spread thy colours midst the Asian fields,
Mean while my self will watch this Cities weal.
Pompey I know thy love, I mark thy words,
And Anthony thou hast a pleasing vain,
But senators I hammer in my head,
With every thought of honour some revenge:
Speak what shall Scilla be your General?
We doo decree that Scilla shall be General:
And wish you Scillas weal and honour too▪
We wish both Scillas weal and honour too
Then take away the scandal of this state,
Banish the name of Tribune out of town,
Proclaim false Marius and his other friends.
Foe men and traitors to the state of Rome,
And I will wend and work so much by force,
As I will master false Mithridates,
The name of Tribune hath continued long.
So shall not Lepidus if he withstand me.
Sir you see the head of Granius,
Watch you his hap unless you change your words,
Pompey now please me Pompey grant my suit.
Lictors proclaim this our undaunted doom,
we will that Marius and his wretched sons,
His friends Sulpitius, Claudius and the rest
Beheld for traitors, and acquit the men
That shall endanger there unlucky lines,
And henceforth Tribunes name and state shall cease,
Grave Senators how like you this decree?
Even as our Consuls wish, so let it be▪
Then Lepidus all friends in faith for me,
So leave I Rome to Pompey and my friends,
Resolved to manage those our Asian wars,
Frolic brave Soldiers wee must •oote it now,
Lucretius you shall bide the b•not 〈◊〉 me,
Pompey farewell, and farewell Lepidu•.
Mark Anthony I leave thee to thy books,
study for Rome and scillas Royalty.
But by my sword I wrong this graybeards head,
Go sir place it on the Capitol:
Aiust promotion fit for scillaes foe.
Lordings farewell, come soldiers let vs go.
scilla farewell and happy be thy chance,
Whose war both Rome and Romaines must a duaunce.
My Lord the course of your unstaid fate,
Made weak through that your late unhappy fight,
VVithdrawes our wills that f•in would work your weal:
For long experience and the change of times,
The innocent suppressions of the just
In leaning to forsaken men's relief,
Doth make vs fear lest our unhappy town,
should perish through the angry Romaines sword.
Lords of Minturnum when I shapd my course,
To fly the danger of pursuing death,
I left my friends, and all alone attained
(In hope of succours) to this little town,
Relying on your courtesies and truth.
What foolish fear doth then amaze you thus?
O Marius, thou thy self, thy son, thy friends,
Are banished and exiles out of Rome,
Proclaimed for traitors, rest of your estates,
Adiudgde to death with certain warrantize.
should then so small a town my Lord as this,
Hazard their fortunes to supply your wants?
Why Citizens, and what is Marius?
I tell you not so base as to despair,
Yea able to withstand ingratitudes.
Tell me of foolish laws decreed at Rome,
To please the angry humours of my foe:
Believe me Lords I know and am assured,
That magnanimity can never fear,
And fortitude so conquer silly fate,
As scilla when he hopes to have my head,
May hap ere long on sudden lose his own.
A hope beseeming Marius, but I fear,
Too strange to have a short and good event.
Why sir Pausanius have not you beheld,
Companion plains fulfild with greater foes,
Than is that wanton milke-sop natures scorn.
Base minded men to live in perfect hope,
Whose thoughts are shut within your cottage eves,
Refuse not Marius that must favour you:
For these are parts of unadvised men,
With present fear to lose a perfect friend,
That can, will, may control, command, subdue,
That braving boy that thus bewitches you.
How gladly would we succour you my Lord,
But that we fear.
What? the Moone-shine in the water.
Thou wretched stepdame of my fickle state,
Are these the guerdons of the greatest minds,
To make them hope and yet betray their hap,
To make them clime to overthrow them straight?
Accursed thy wreak, thy wrath, thy bale, thy wheel,
That makst me sigh the sorrows that I feel.
Untrodden paths my feet shall rather trace,
Than wrest my succours from inconstant hands.
Rebounding Rocks shall rather ring my ruth,
Than these Companion piles where terrors bide.
And nature that hath lift my throne so hie,
Shall witness Marius triumphs if he die.
But s•ee that gave the Lictors rod and axe,
To wait my six times Consulship in Rome,
will not pursue where erst she flattered so,
Minturnum then farewell for I must go,
But think for to repent you of your no.
Nay stay my Lord and deign in private here,
To weight a message of more better worth,
Your age and travels must have some relief,
And be not wroth, for greater men than we
Have feared Rome and Romaine tirranie.
You talk it now like men confirmed in faith,
well let me try the fruits of your discourse,
For care my mind and pain my body wrongs.
Then Fauorinus shut his Lordship up,
within some secret chamber in the state,
Mean while we will consult to keep him safe,
And work some secret means for his supply.
Be trusty Lords, if not I can but die. 
Poor hapless Romaine, little •ottest thou,
The weary end of thine oppressed life.
Why my Pausanius, what imports these words?
Oh Lucius age hath printed in my thoughts,
A memory of many troubles past,
The greatest towns and Lords of Asia,
Have stood on tickle terms through simple truth,
The Rhodian records weil can witness this.
Then to prevent our means of overthrow,
Find out some stranger that may suddenly,
Enter the chamber where as Marius lies,
And cut him short, the present of whose head
Shall make the Romaines praise vs for our truth,
And Scilla pressed to grant vs privilege.
A barbarous act to wrong the men that trust,
In Countries cause in justice proves just.
Come Lucius let not silly thought of right,
Subject our City to the Romaines might:
For why you know in Marius only end,
Rome will reward and scilla will be 〈◊〉,
Yet all successions will vs disco•mend.
The way ward Lady of this wicked world.
That leads in luckless triumph wretched men,
My Romaine friends hath forced our desires,
And framed our minds to brooke too base relief,
What land or Lybian desert is unsought,
To find my father Marius and your friend:
Yea they whom true relent could never touch,
These fierce Numidians hearing our mishaps,
Weep floods of moan to wail our wretched fates.
Thus we that erst with terrors did attained,
The Bactrian bounds and in our Romaine wars,
Enforced the barbarous borderers of the Alps,
To tremble with the terrors of our looks.
Now fly poor men affrighted with our harms,
Seeking amidst the desert rocks and dens,
For him that meanwhile in our Capitol,
Even with a beck commanded Asia.
Thou woeful son of such a famous man,
Unsheathe thy sword, conduct these warlike men
To Rome, unhappy Mistress of our harms:
And there since tyrants power hath thee oppressed,
And robbed thee of thy father, friends and all,
So die undaunted, killing of thy foes,
That were the offspring of these wretched woes.
Why how now Marius, will you mate vs thus;
That with content adventure for your love?
Why Noble youth resolve your self on this,
That son and father both have friends in Rome•
That seek old Marius rest and your relief.
Lectorius, friends are geason now adays,
And grow to fume before they taste the fire:
Adversities bereaving mans a•ails,
They fly like feathers dallying in the wind,
They rise like bubbles in a stormy rain,
Swelling in words and flying faith and deeds.
How fortunate art thou my lovely Lord,
That in thy youth moist reap the fruits of age,
And having lost occasions hold-fast now,
Moist learn hereafter how to entertain her well:
But sudden hopes doo swarm about my hart,
Be merry Romaines see where from the Coast,
A weary messenger doth post him fast.
It should be Cinnas slave or else I err,
For in his forehead I behold the scar,
Wherewith he makes still his barbarous swains.
Oh stay him good Lectorius for me seem,
His great post hast some pleasure should present.
Sir art thou of Rome?
Perhaps Sir no?
Without perhaps say Sir is it so?
This is Lectorius Marius friend I trow,
Yet were I best to learn the certainty,
Lest some dissembling foes should me disery.
Sir leave off this foolish dalliance,
Lest with my sword I wake you from your trance.
Oh happy man, Oh labours well atchieude,
How hath this chance my weary limbs reuiude:
Oh Noble Marius, Oh Princely Marius.
what means this Peasant by his great rejoice.
Oh worthy Romaine, many months have past,
Since Cinna now the Consul and my Lord,
Hath sent me forth to seek thy friends and thee:
All Libia with our Romaine Presidents,
Numidia full of unfrequented ways,
These weary limbs have trod to seek you out,
And now occasion pitying of my pains,
I late arrived upon this wished shore,
Found out a Sailor borne in Capua,
That told me how your Lordship past this way,
A happy labour worthy some reward,
How fares thy master? whats the news at Rome?
Pull out the pike from off this javelin to••
And there are tidings for these Lords and thee,
A policy beseeming Cynna well:
BEing Consul (for the welfare both of father and 〈◊〉, wish other thy accomplices) I have under an honest policy 〈◊〉 my instalment in the Consulship, caused all Scillas friends that were indifferent with the other neighbring Cities to revolt: Oc∣tauius my fellow Consul with the rest of the Senate mistrusting me, and hearing how I sought to unite the old Citizens with the new, hath wrought much trouble, but to no effect. I hope the soldiers of Capua shall follow our faction, for Scilla hearing of these hurly-burlies is •o•ting homeward very fortunate in his wars against Mithridates. And it is to be feared, that some of his friends here have certified him of my proceedings, and pur∣pose to restore you. Cethegus and Lectorius I hear say are with you. Censorinus and Albino•nus will shortly visit you. There∣fore hast and seek out your father, who is now as I hear about Minturnum. Levy what power you can with all expedition•, and stay not.
Yea Fortune, shall young Marius clime aloft,
Then woe to my ripening foes in Rome,
And if I live (sweet Queen of change) thy shrines,
Shall shine with beauty midst the Capitol,
Lectorius, tell me what were best be done.
To sea my Lord, seek your warlike Sire,
Send back this peasant with your full pretence,
And think already that our pains have end,
Since Cynna with his followers is your friend.
Yea Romans we will furrow through the some
Of swelling floods, and to the sacred Twins
Make sacrifice to shield our ships from storms.
Follow me Lords, come gentle messenger,
Thou shalt have gold and glory for thy pains.
Upbraiding Senators bewitched with wit,
That term true justice innovation:
You ministers of Scillas mad conceits,
Will Consuls think you stoop to your controls?
These younger Citizens, my fellow Lords,
Bound to maintain both Marius and his son.
Crave but their due, and will be held as good
For privilege, as those of elder age:
For they are men conformd to feats of arms,
That have both wit and courage to command.
These favourites of Octauius, what with age
And palsies shake their javelins in their hands,
Like hartlesse men attainted all with fea•e:
And should they then ouer-top the youth.
No, nor this Consul, nor Mark An•honey,
Shall make my followers faint, or loose their right,
But I will have them equal with the best.
Why then the Senates name (whose reverence
Hath blast our virtues midst the Western Isle)
Must be obseurde by Cynnas forced power.
O Citizens, are laws of Country left?
Is justice banished from this Capitol?
Must we poor fathers see your trooping bands
Enter the sacred Synod of this state.
Oh brutish fond presumptions of this age,
Rome would the mischiefs might obscure my life,
So I might counsel Consuls to be wise.
Why Countrymen wherein consists this strife?
Forsooth the younger Citizens will rule,
The old men's heads are dull and addle now:
And in elections youth will bear the sway?
O Cynna, see I not the woeful fruits
Of these ambitious stratagems begun,
Each flattering tongue that dallies pretty words,
Shall change our fortunes and our states at once.
Had I ten thousand tongues to talk the care,
So many eyes to weep their woeful miss,
So many pens to write these many wrongs:
My tongue your thoughts, my eyes your tears should move,
My pen your pains by reasons should approve.
Why Anthony, seal up those sugared lips,
For I will bring my purpose to effect.
Doth Cynna like to interrupt me then?
I Cynna sir, will interrupt you now,
I tell thee Mark, old Marius is at hand,
The very patron of this happy law,
Who will revenge thy cunning eloquence.
I talk not I to please or him or thee,
But what I speak, I think and practice too:
It were better Scilla learnt to mend in Rome,
Than Marius come to tyrannise in Rome.
Nay Marius shall not tyrannise in Rome,
Old Citizens, as Scilla late ordained,
King Tullius laws shall take their full effect,
The best and aged men shall in their choice,
Both bear the day and firm election.
Oh brave Octauius you will beard me then,
The elder Consul and old Marius friend,
And these Italian freemen must be wronged.
First shall the fruit of all thine honours fail,
And this my poniard shall dispatch thy life.
Such insolence was never seen in Rome:
Nought wants here but name to make a King.
Strike villain if thou list, for I am pressed,
To make as deep a surrow in thy breast.
The young men's voices shall prevail my lords.
And we will firm our honours by our bloods.
O false ambitious pride in young and old:
Hark how the heavens our follies hath controlled.
What shall we yield for this religious fear?
If not religious fear, what may repress
These wicked passions, wretched Citizens.
O Rome, poor Rome, unmeet for these misdeeds,
I see contempt of heavens will breed a cross:
Sweet Cynna govern rage with reverence.
O fellow Citizens, be more advised.
We charge you Consuls now diss•lu• the Court
The Gods contemn this brawl and ciui•l i•rres.
We will submit our honours to their wills:
You ancient Citizens come follow me.
High Jove himself hath done too much for thee,
Else should this blade abate thy royalty.
Well young Italian Citizens take hart,
He is at hand that will maintain your right:
That entering in these fatal gates of Rome,
Shall make them tremble that disturb you now.
You of Preneste and of Formiae,
With other neighbring Cities in Companion,
Prepare to entertain and succour Marius.
For him we live, for him we mean to die.
Have these Minturnians then so cruelly,
Presumd so great injustice against their friends?
I Marius, all our Nobles have decreed
To send thy head a present unto Rome.
A Tantals present it will prove my friend,
Which with a little smarting stress will end
Old Marius life, when Rome it self at last,
Shall rue my loss, and then revenge my death.
But tell me Jailer, could thou be content,
In being Marius for to brooke this wrong.
The high estate your Lordship once did wield,
The many friends that fawnd when fortune smiled,
Your great promotions, and your mighty wealth:
These (were I Marius) would amate me so,
As loss of them would vex me more than death.
Is Lordship then so great a bliss my friend?
No title may compare with princely rule.
Are friends so faithful pledges of delight?
What better comforts than are faithful friends?
Is wealth a mean to lengthen lives content?
Where great possessions bide, what care can tutch?
These stales of fortune are the common plagues▪
That still mislead the thoughts of simple men.
The shepherd swain that midst his country cote,
Deludes his broken slumbers by his toil,
Thinks Lordship sweet, where care with lordship dwelt
The trustful man that builds on trothles vows,
Whose simple thoughts are crossed with scornful nays,
Together weeps the loss of wealth and friend:
So Lordship, friends, wealth, spring and perish fast,
Where death alone yields happy life at last.
O gentle governor of my contents,
Thou sacred chieftain of our Capitol,
Who in thy crystal orbs with glorious gleam•,
Lendst looks of pity mixed with majesty,
See woeful Marius careful for his son,
Careless of lordship, wealth or worldly means,
Content to live, yet living still to die:
Whose nerues and veins, whose sinews by the sword
Must loose their workings through distempering stroke:
But yet whose mind in spite of fate and all,
Shall live by fame although the body fall.
Why mourns Marius this recurelesse chance?
I pre thee Jailer would thou gladly die?
If needs, I would.
Yet were you loath to try.
Why noble Lord, when goods, friends, fortune fail
What more than death might woeful man avail?
Who calls for death (my friend) for all his scorns,
With Aesops slave will leave his bush of thorns.
But since these traitrous Lords will have my head,
Their Lordships here upon this homely bed,
Shall find me sleeping, breathing forth my breath;
Till they their shame, and I my fame attain by death.
Live gentle Marius to revenge my wrong,
And sirrha see they stay not ouer-long.
For he that erst hath conquered kingdoms many,
Disdains in death to be subdued by any.
The most undaunted words that ever were.
The mighty thoughts of his imperious mind,
Do wound my hart with terror and remorse.
Tic desperate, not perfect nobleness,
For to a man that is prepared to die,
The heart should rent, the sleep should leave the eye:
But say Pedro, will you doo the deed?
Mon monsieurs pearl sang dieu, me will make a trow so large in ce belly, dat he sal cry hough come vne pore∣ceau. Featre delay, il a true me fad•e, hee kill my modre. Faith a my trot mon espee: •oral fey dun sol dat, Sau, sau, Ieieuera, come il font pary, me will make a spitch-cock• of his persona.
If he have slain thy father and thy friends,
The greater honour shall betide the deed:
For to revenge on righteous estimate,
Beseems the honour of a French mans name.
Mes messiers, de fault auoir argent, me no point de argent, no point kill Marius.
Thou shalt have forty crowns, will that content thee?
Quarante accuse, per le pied de Madam, me give more dan four to se pretty damosele, dat have le dulces tet∣tinos, leleures cymbrines. Oh they be fines.
Great is the hire and little is the pain,
Make therefore quick dispatch, and look for gain.
See where he lies in drawing on his death,
Whose •ies by gentle slumber sealed up,
Present no dreadful visions to his hart.
Bien monsieur, le demourera content. Maries tu es mort. Speak die preres in die sleep, for me sall cut off your head from your espaules before you wake. Queen es sty, what kind a man be dis.
Why what delays are these, why gaze ye thus?
Nostre dame, Iesu estiene, oh my seniors der be a great diable in ce eyes, queen dart de flame, and with de voice d'un bear, cries out, Villain dare you kill Marius. Ie trem∣ble: aide me seniors, autrement I shall be murdered.
What sudden madness daunts this stranger thus?
Oh me no can kill Marius, me no dare kill Mari∣us: adieu messiers, me be dead si ie touche Marius, Marius est vne diable. Iesu Maria saua moi. 
What fury haunts this wretch on sudden thus?
Ah my Pausanius I have often heard,
That yonder Marius in his infancy
Was borne to greater fortunes than we deem:
For being scarce from out his cradle crept,
And sporting prettily with his compeers,
On sudden seven young Eagles soard amain,
And kindly perched upon his tender lap.
His parents wondering at this strange event,
Took counsel of the Southsaiers in this,
Who told them that these seven-fold Eagles flight,
Fore figured his seven times Consulship:
And we our selves (except bewitched with pride)
Have seen him six times in the Capitol
Accompanied with rods and axes too.
And some divine instinct so presses me,
That sore I tremble till I set him free.
The like assaults attained my wandering mind.
Seeing our bootless war with matchless fate,
Let vs entreat him to forsake our town,
So shall we gain a friend of Rome and him:
But mark how happily he doth awake.
What, breath I yet pore man, with mounting sight
Choking the rivers of my restless eyes?
Or is their rage restraind with matchless ruth?
See how amazed these angry Lords behold
The poor confused looks of wretched Marius.
Minturnians why delays your headsman thus
To finish up this ruthful tragedy?
Far be it Marius from our thoughts or hands
To wrong the man protected by the Gods:
Live happy (Marius) so thou leave our town.
And must I wrestle once again with fate?
Or will these Princes dally with mine age?
No matchless Roman, thine approved mind
That erst hath altered our ambitious wrong
Must flourish still, and we thy servants live
To see thy glories like the swelling tides
Exceed the bounds of Fate and Roman rule.
Yet leave vs Lord, and seek some safer shed,
Where more secure thou moist prevent mishaps:
For great pursuits and troubles thee await.
Ye piteous powers that with successful hopes,
And gentle counsels thwart my deep despairs:
Old Marius to your mercies recommends
His hap, his life, his hazard and his son.
Minturnians, I will hence, and you shall fly
Occasions of those troubles you expect.
Dream not on dangers that have faud my life:
Lordings adieu, from walls to woods I wend,
To hills, dales, rocks, my wrong for to commend.
Fortune vouchsafe thy many cares to end.
You men of Rome, my fellow mates in Arms,
Whose three years prowess, policy, and war,
One hundredth three score thousand men at Arms
Hath overthrown and murdered in the field:
Whose valours to the Empire hath restored,
All Grecia, Asia, and Ionia.
With Macedonia subject to our foe:
You see the froward customs of our state,
Who measuring not our many toils abroad,
Sit in their Cells imagining our harms,
Replenishing our Romaine friends with fear.
Yea, Scilla worthy friends, whose fortunes, toils,
And stratagems these strangers may report,
Is by false Cynna and his factious friends.
Reveled, condemned, and crossed without a cause.
Ye• (Romaines) Marius must return to Rome,
Of purpose to upbraid your General.
But this vnd•unted mind that never droopt:
This forward body formed to suffer toil,
Shall hast to Rome where every foe shall rue,
The rash disgrace both of my self and you:
And may it be that those seditious brains,
Imagine these presumptuous purposes?
And may it be? why man and wilt thou doubt,
Where Scilla deigns these dangers to aver•e?
Sirrha except not so, misdoubt not so,
See here Ancharius letters read the lines,
And say Lucretius that I favour thee,
That dare but suspect thy General,
The case concealed hath moved the more misdoub•,
Yet pardon my presumptions worthy Scilla,
That to my grief have read these hideous harms,
Tut my Lucretius, fortunes ball is tossed,
To form the story of my fatal power:
Rome shall repent, babe, mother, shall repent,
Air weeping cloudy sorrows shall repent,
wind breathing many sighings shall repent
To see those storms concealed in my breast,
Reflect the hideous flames of their unrest:
But words are vain, and cannot quell our wrongs,
Brief periods serve for them that needs must postit.
Lucullus since occasion calls me hence,
And all our Romaine senate think it meet,
That thou pursue the wars I have begun,
As by their letters I am certified,
I leave thee Fimbrias Legions to conduct,
with this proviso, that in ruling still,
You think on Scilla and his courtesies.
The weighty charge of this continued war,
Though strange it seem, and over great to wield,
I will accept it so the Army please.
Happy &amp; fortunate be Lucullus our General.
If he be Scillas friend, else not at all:
For otherwise the man were ill bested,
That gaining glories straight should lose his head.
But soldiers since I neatly must to Rome,
Bacillus virtues shall have recompense.
Lo here the wreath Valerius for thy pains,
Who first did enter Archilous trench:
This pledge of virtue sirrha shall approve,
Thy virtues, and confirm me in thy love.
Happy be Scilla, if no foe to Rome.
I like no iffs from such a simple groom,
I will be happy in despite of state,
And why? because I never feared fate.
But come Arcathius for your fathers sake,
Enjoin your fellow Princes to their tasks,
And help to succour these my weary bones.
Tut blush not man, a greater state than thou,
Shall pleasure Scilla in more baser sort.
Aristion is a jolly timberd man,
Fit to conduct the chariot of a King.
Why be not squeamish, for it shall go hard,
But I will give you all a great reward.
Humbled by fate like wretched men we yield
Arcathius these are fortunes of the field.
Believe me these brave Captives draw by art,
And I will think upon their good desert.
But stay you strangers, and respect my words,
Fond hartles men, what folly have I seen:
For fear of death can Princes entertain
Such bastard thoughts, that now from glorious arms
Vouchsafe to draw like oxen in a plough.
Arcathius I am sure Mithridates
Will hardly brooke the scandal of his name:
It were better in Picaeo to have died
Aristion, than amidst our legions thus to draw.
I tell thee Scilla, captives have no choice,
And death is dreadful to a caytiue man.
In such imperfect metals as is yours.
But Romans that are still allurde by fame,
Choose rather death than blemish of their name,
But I have ha•t, and therefore will reward you.
Go soldiers, with as quick dispatch as may be,
Hasten their death, and bring them to their end,
And say in this that Scilla is your friend.
Oh ransom thou our lives sweet conquero•▪
Fie foolish men, why fly you happiness,
Desire you still to lead a servile life.
Dare you not buy delights with little pains.
Well, for thy fathers sake Arcathius,
I will prefer thy triumphs with the rest.
Go take them hence, and when we meet in hell,
Then tell me Princes if I did not well.
Lucullus, thus these mighty foes are down,
Now strive thou for the king of Pontus crown.
I will to Rome, go thou, and with thy train,
Pursue Mithridates till he be slain.
With fortunes help, go calm thy countries woes
Whilst I with these seek out our mighty foes.
Thou that hast walked with troops of flocking friends,
Now wander midst the labyrinth of woes,
Thy best repast with many sighing ends,
And none but fortune all these mischiefs knows.
Like to these stretching mountains clad with snow,
No sun-shine of content my thoughts approaches:
High spyre their tops, my hopes no height do know,
But mount so high as time their tract reproaches:
They find their spring, where winter wrongs my mind:
They weep their brookes, I wast my cheeks with tears.
Oh foolish fate, too froward and unkind,
Mountains have peace, where mournful be my years:
Yet high as they my thoughts some hopes would borrow,
But when I count the evening end with sorrow.
Death in Minturnum threatened Marius head,
Hunger in these Numidian mountains dwells:
Thus with prevention having mischief fled,
Old Marius finds a world of many hells.
Such as poor simple wits have oft repent,
But I will quell by virtues of the mind.
Long years misspent in many luckless chances,
Thoughts full of wroth, yet little worth succeeding,
These are the means for those whom fate aduances:
But I, whose wounds are fresh, my hart still bleeding,
Lives to entreat this blessed boon from fate,
That I might die with grief to live in state.
Six hundredth sons with solitary walks,
I still have sought for to delude my pain,
And friendly Echo answering to my talks,
Rebounds the accent of my ruth again:
She (courteous Nymph) the woeful Roman pleases,
Else no consorts but beasts my pains appeases.
Each day she answers, in yond neighbring mountain,
I doo expect reporting of my sorrow,
Whilst lifting up her lockes from out the fountain,
She answers to my questions even and morrow:
Whose sweet rebounds my sorrows to remove,
To please my thoughts I mean for to approve.
Sweet Nymph draw ne'er thou kind &amp; gentle Echo. Echo.
What help to ease my weary pains have I? I.
What comfort in distress to calm my griefs? griefs.
Sweet Nymph these griefs are grown before I thought so? I thought so.
Thus Marius lives disdained of all the Gods. Oats.
With deep despair late overtaken wholly. Oly.
And will the heavns be never well appeased? appeased.
What mean have they left me to cure my smart? art.
Nought better fits old Marius mind then war, then war.
Then full of hope say Echo, shall I go? go.
Is any better fortune then at hand, at hand.
Then farewell Echo, gentle Nymph farewell. farewell.
Oh pleasing folly to a pensive man.
Well I will rest fast by this shady tree.
VVaiting the end that f•te allotted me. sit down.
My countrymen and favourites of Rome,
This melancholy desert where we meet,
Resembles well young Marius restless thoughts.
Here dreadful silence, solitary caves,
No chirping birds with solace singing sweetly,
Are harboured for delight: but from the oak
Levels and sapless through decaying age,
The sc•tch-owle chants her fatal boding lays.
Within my breast, care, danger, sorrow dwells,
Hope and revenge sit hammering in my hart,
The baleful babes of angry Nemesis
Disperse their furious fires upon my soul.
Fie Marius, are you discontented still,
When as occasion favours your desire?
Are not these noble Romans come from Rome?
Hath not the state resold your father home?
And what of this, what profit may I reap,
That want my father to conduct vs home.
My Lord, take hart, no doubt this stormy slawe
That Neptune sent to cast vs on this shore.
Shall end these discontentments at the last.
Whom see mine eyes, what is not yon my son?
what solitary father walk there?
It is my son, these are my friends I see:
what have forepining cares, so changed me?
Or are my looks; distempred through the pains
And agonies that issue from my hart?
Fie Marius, frolic man, thou must to Rome,
There to revenge thy wrongs and weight thy tomb.
Now fortune frown, &amp; palter if thou please,
Romans behold my father and your friend.
Oh father.
Marius thou art fitly met:
Albinouanus and my other friends,
What news at Rome? what fortune brought you hither?
My Lord, the Consul Cynna hath restored
The doubtful course of your betrayed state,
And waits you prresent swift approach to Rome,
Your foe man Scilla posted very fast,
With good success from Pontus to prevent
Your speedy entrance into Italy.
The neighbring Cities are your very friends,
Nought rests my Lord, but you depart from hence.
How many desert ways hath Marius sought,
How many Cities have I visited,
To find my father, and relieve his wants?
My son, I quite thy travels with my love,
And Lords and Citizens we will to Rome,
And join with Cynna have your shipping here?
What are these soldiers bent to die with me?
Content to pledge our lives for Marius.
My Lord, here in the next adjoining port,
Our ships are rigd and ready for to sail.
Then let vs sail unto Hetruria,
And cause our friends the Germanes to revolt,
And get some Tuscans to increase our power.
Deserts farewell come Romans let vs go,
A scourge for Rome that hath depressed vs so,
WHat helps my Lords to ouerhale these care•?
What means or motions may these mischief end?
You see how Cynna that should succour Rome,
Hath levied arms to bring a traitor in.
O worthless traitor, woe to thine and thee,
That thus disquieted both Rome and vs.
Octauius these are scourges for our sins,
These are but ministers to heap our plagues:
These mutinies are gentle means and ways,
Whereby the heavns our heavy errors charms,
Then with content and humbled eyes, behold
The crystal shining globe of glorious Jove:
And since we perish through our own misdeeds,
Go let vs flourish in our frutefull prayers.
Midst these confusions mighty men of Rome,
Why wast we out these troubles all in words,
Weep not your harms, but wend we straight so arms,
Lo Dis•in spoiled, see Marius at our gate▪
And shall we die like milksops dreaming thus?
A bootless war to see our •o •ntrey spoiled.
Fruteles is dalliance whereas dangers bee.
My Lord, may courage wait on conquered men?
I even in death most courage doth appear.
Then wa•ting death I mean to seat me here,
Hoping that Consuls name and fear of laws,
Shall justify my conscience and my cause,
Now sirrha, what confused looks are these,
What tidings bring thou of dreriment?
My Lords, the Consul Cynna with his fre•••
Have let in Marius by Via Appia,
Whose soldiers wast and murder all they meet,
Who with the Consul and his other friends
With expedition hastes to this place.
Then to the downfall of my happiness,
Then to the ruin of this City Rome.
But if mine inward ruth were laid in sight,
My streams of tears should drown my foes despite.
Courage Lord Anthony, if Fortune please,
She will and can these troubles soon appease.
But if her backward frowns approach vs no,
Resolve with vs with honour for to die.
No storm of fate shall bring my sorrows down,
But if that Fortune list, why let her frown.
Where state's oppressed by cruel tyrants bee,
Old Anthony, there is no place for thee.
Hark, by this thundering noise of threatening drums,
Marius with all his faction hither comes.
Then like a traitor he shall know ere long,
In levying arms he doth his country wrong.
And have we got the goal of honour now,
And in despite of Consuls entered Rome?
Then rouse thee Marius, leave thy ruthful thoughts:
And for thy many toils and cares sustained,
Afflict thy foes with twice as many pains.
Go soldiers seek out Bebius and his friends,
Attilius, Munitorius with the rest,
Cut off their heads, for they did cross me once:
And if your care can compass my decree,
Remember that same fugitive Mark Anthony,
Whose fatal end shall be my frutefull peace.
I tell thee Cynna, nature arms beasts
With just revenge, and lends in their kinds
Sufficient warlike weapons of defence:
If then by nature beasts revenge their wrong,
Both heavens and nature grant me vengeance now,
Yet whilst I live and suck this subtle air
That lends breathing coolness to my lights,
The register of all thy righteous acts,
Thy pains, thy toils, thy travels for my sake,
Shall dwell by kind impressions in my hart,
And I with links of true unfeigned lone
Will locke these Roman favourites in my breast,
And live to hazard life for their relief.
My Lord, your safe and swift return to Rome,
Makes Cynna fortunate and well appaid,
Who through the false suggestions of my foes,
Was made a coffer of a Consul here:
Lo where he sits commanding in his throve,
That wronged Marius, me, and all these Lords.
To quite his love, Cynna let me alone,
How fare these Lords that lumping pouting proud
Imagine how to quell me with their looks.
No welcome sirs, is Marius thought so base?
Why stand you looking babies in my face?
Who welcomes me, him Marius makes his friend:
Who lours on me, him Marius means to end.
Happy and fortunate thy return to Rome.
And long Marius live with fame in Rome.
I thank you courteous Lords that are so kind.
But why endures your Grace that braving mate
To sit and face vs in his robes of state.
My son he is a Consul at the least,
And gravity becomes Octauius best.
But Cynna would in yonder empty seat,
You would for Marius freedom once entreat.
Avaunt thou traitor, proud and insolent,
How dare thou press no•e civil government.
Why Master Consul, are you grown so hot?
He have a present cooling card for you.
Be therefore well advised, and move me not:
For though by you I was exiled from Rome,
And in the desert from a Princes seat
Left to bewail ingratitudes of Rome.
Though I have known your thirshe throats have longed
To bain their selves in my distilling blood.
Yet Marius Si•s, hath pity joined with power:
Lo here the Imperial Ensign which I wield,
That waueth mercy to my wishers well:
And more see here the dangerous trot of war,
That at the point is steeld with ghastly death.
Thou exile, threaten thou a Consul then?
Lictors, go draw him hence: such braving mates,
Are not to boast their arms in quiet states.
Go draw me hence. What no relent Octauius▪
My Lord what hart in durate with revenge,
Could leave this losel, threatening murder thus?
Vouchsafe me leave to taint that traitors seat
With flowing streams of his contagious blood.
The fathers son, I know him by his talk,
That scolds in words when fingers cannot walk.
But Jove I hope will one day send to Rome
The blessed Patron of this Monarchy,
Who will revenge injustice by his sword▪
Such braving hopes, such cursed arguments,
So strict command, such arrogant controwles.
Suffer me Marius, that am Consul now,
To doo thee justice, and confound the wretch▪
Cynna, you know I am a private man,
That still submit my censures to your will.
Then soldiers draw this traitor from the throne,
And let him die, for Cynna wills it so.
I now my Cynna, noble Consul speaks,
Octauius, your checks shall cost you dear.
And let me die for Cynna wills it so?
Is then the reverence of this robe contemnnd?
Are these associates of so small regard?
Why then Octauius willingly consents,
To entertain the sentence of his death.
But let the proudest traitor work his will,
I fear no strokes, but here will sit me still.
Since justice sleeps, since tyrants reign in Rome,
Octauius longs for death to die for Rome.
Then strike him where he sits, then hale him hence.
Heavens punish Cynnas pride and thy offence.
Now is he fallen that threatened Marius,
Now will I sit and plead for Marius.
Thou dost me justice Cynna, for you see
These peers of Rome have late exiled me.
Your Lordship doth injustice to accuse
Those who in your behalf did not offend.
We grieve to see the aged Marius
Stand like a private man in view of Rome.
Then bid him sit, and lo an empty place,
Revoke his exile, firm his government,
And so prevent your farther detriment,
We will account both Marius and his friends,
His son and all his followers free in Rome:
And since we see the dangerous times at hand,
And here of Scillas confidence and hast,
And know his hate and ranco• to these Lords,
And him create for Consul to prevent
The policies of Scilla and his friends.
Then both confirmed by state and full consent,
The rods and axe to Marius I present,
And here invest thee with the Consuls pall.
Long, fortunate and happy life betide
Old Marius in his seuenfold Consulship.
And so let Marius live and govern Rome,
As cursed Scilla never look on Rome.
Then ply•de in Consuls throne, you Roman states
Resold from banishment by your decrees,
Enstald in this imperial seat to rule,
Old Marius thanks his friends and favourites:
From whom this final favour he requires,
That seeing Scilla by his murthrous blade
Brought fierce seditions first to head in Rome,
And forced laws to banish innocents:
I crave by course of reason and desert,
That he may be proclaimed as erst was I,
A traitor and an enemy of Rome:
Let all his friends be banished out of town:
Then cutting off the branch where troubles spring,
Rome shall have peace and plenty in her walls.
In equity it needs must be my friends,
That one be guilty of our common harms:
And since that Marius is accounted free,
Scilla with all his friends must traitors bee.
My fathers reasons Romans are of force:
For if you see and live not too secure,
You know that in so great a state as this,
Two mighty foes can never well agree.
Then let vs seek to please our Consul first,
And then prepare to keep the exile out.
Cynna, as Marius and these Lords agree,
Firm this Edict, and let it pass for me.
Then Romans, in the name of all this state,
I here proclaim and publish this decree:
That Scilla with his friends, allies and all▪
Are banished exiles, traitors unto Rome.
And to extinguish both his name and state,
We will his house be raced to the ground,
His goods confiscate: this our censures is.
Lictors proclaim this in the market place,
And see it executed out of hand.
Now see I Senators, the thought, the care,
The virtuous zeal that leads your toward minds,
To love your friends and watch your common good:
And now established Consul in this place,
Old Marius will foresee aduenient harms:
Scilla the scourge of Asia as we hear
Is pressed to enter Italy with sword,
He comes in pomp to triumph here in Rome,
But Senators you know the wavering wills,
Of foolish men I mean the common sort,
Who through report of innouatio•s,
Or flattering humours of well tempered tongues,
Will change and draw a second mischief on:
I like your care, and will my self apply
To aim and level at my countries weal.
To intercept these errors by advice,
My son young Marius, Cethegus and my friends,
Shall to Preneste to prevent and stop
The speedy purpose of our forward foe.
Mean while ourselves will fortify this town,
This beauty of the world, this maiden town,
Where streaming Tybris with a pleasant tide,
Leads out the stately buildings of the world.
Marius my hope, my son, you know your charge,
Take those Iberian legions in your train,
And we will spare some Cymbrians to your use,
Remember thou art Marius son, and dream
On nought but honour and a happy death.
I go my Lord in hope to make the world
Report my service, and my duty too,
And that proud challenger of Asia,
Shall find that Marius son hath force and wit.
Go thou as fortunate as Greeks to Troy
As glorious as Alcides in thy toils,
As happy as Sertorius in thy fight,
As valiant as A chilles in thy might.
Go glorious, valiant, happy, fortunate,
As all those Greeks and him of Roman state.
Traitors why drag you thus a Princes wife,
As if that beauty were a thrall to fate.
Are Romans grown more barbarous than Greeks,
That hale more greater than Cassandra now?
The Macedonian Monarch was more kind,
That honoured and relieud in warlike camp
Darius mother, daughters and his wife,
But you unkind to Rome•e Ladies now,
Perhaps as constant as the Asian Queens,
For they subdued had friendship in disgrace,
Where we unconquered live in woeful case.
What plaintiff pleas presents that Lady there•
Why soldiers, make you prisners here in Rome?
Dread Consuls, we have found Cornelia here,
And Scillas daughter posting out of town.
Ladies of worth, both beautiful and wise,
But •ere allied unto my greatest foe:
Yet Marius mind that never meant disgrace,
More likes their courage than their c•mely face.
Are you Cornelia Madame, Scillas wife?
I am Cornelia Scillas wife: what there?
And is this Fuluia Scillas daughter too▪
And this is Fuluia Scillas daughter too.
Two welcome guests in whom the majesty
of my conceit and courage must consist:
What think you Senators and countrymen?
See here are two the fairest stars of Rome,
The dearest dainties of my warlike foe,
Whose lives upon your censures d•o consist.
Dread Consul the continuance of their lives,
Shall egg on Scilla to a greater hast.
And in bereaving of their vital breath,
Your grace shall force more fury from your foe:
Of these extremes we leave the choice to you.
Then think that some strange fortune shall ensue,
Poor Fuluia, now thy happy days are done,
In steed of marriage pomp, the fatal lights
Of funerals must mask about thy bed.
Nor shall thy fathers arms with kind embrace
Hem in thy shoulders trembling now for fear.
I see in Marius looks such tragedies,
As fear my hart, and fountains fills mine eyes.
Fie Fuluia, shall thy fathers daughter faint
Before the threats of dangers shall approach?
Dry up those tears, and like a Roman maid,
Be bold and silent till our foe have said.
Cornelia wise unto my traitor foe?
What gadding mood hath forced thy speedy slight,
To leave thy country, and forsake thy friends?
Accursed Marius, off-spring of my pains,
Whose furious wrath hath wrought thy countries woe▪
What may remain for me or mine in Rome,
That see the tokens of thy tyrannies?
Vile monster, robbed of virtue, what revenge
Is this, to wreak thine anger on the walls?
To race our house, to banish all our friends,
To kill the rest, and captive vs at last?
Think thou by barbarcos deeds to boast thy state,
Or spoiling Scilla to depress his hate?
No Marius, but for every drop of blood
And inch of wrong he shall return thee two.
Madame, in danger wise dome doth advise,
In humble terms to reconcile our foes.
She is a woman Flaccus, let her talk,
That breath forth bitter words in steed of blows,
And in regard of that unmodest man,
Thou should desist from outrage and revenge.
What, can your Grace endue•e these cursed scoffs!
Why my Lectorius, I have ever learnt,
That Ladies cannot wrong me with upbraids.
Then let her talk, and my concealed hate,
Shall heap revengement upon Scillas pate.
Let fevers first afflict thy feeble age,
Let palsies make thy stubborn fingers faint,
Let humours streaming from thy moistened brains
With clouds of dimness choke thy fretful eyes,
Before these monstrous harms assail my sire,
Bier Lady Fuluia, you are gaily red,
Your mother well may boast you for her own,
For both of you have words and scoffs at will:
And since I like the compass of your wit,
My self will stand, and Ladies you shall sit:
And if you please to wade in farther words,
Lets see what brawls your memories affords.
Your Lordships passing mannerly iniest,
But that you may perceive we smell your drift,
We both will sit and countenance your shift.
Where constancy and beauty doo consort,
There Ladies threatenings turned to merry sport.
How fare these beautiful, what well at ease?
As ready as at first for to displease.
For full confirmed that we shall surely die,
We wait our ends with Roman constancy.
why think you Marius hath confirmed your death!
What other fruit may spring from tyrants hands!
In faith then Ladies, thus the matter stands,
Since you mistake my love and courtesy,
Prepare your selves, for you shall surely die.
I Marius, now I know thou dost not he▪
And that thou moist unto thy lasting blame,
Extinguish in our deaths thy wished fame.
Grant vs this boon that making choice of death,
We may be freed from fury of thine ire,
An easy boon, Ladies I condescend,
Then suffer vs in private chamber close
To meditate a day or two alone:
And tyrant if thou find vs living then,
Commit vs straight unto thy slaughtering men.
Ladies I grant, for Marius nill deny,
A suit so easy, and of such import:
For pity were that Dames of constancy,
Should not be agents of their misery.
Lectorius, hark, dispatch.
Lo Fuluia, now the latest doom is fixed,
And nought remains but constant Roman harts,
To bear the brunt of irksome furies spite,
Rouse thee my dear, and daunt those faint conceits,
That trembling stand aghast at bitter death:
Bethink thee now that Scilla was thy sire,
Whose courage heaven nor fortune could abate.
Then like the off-spring of fierce Scillas house,
Pass with the thrice renowned Phrigian Dame,
As to thy marriage, so unto thy death:
For nought to wretches is more sweet than death.
Madam confirmed as well to die as live,
Fuluia awaits nothing but her death.
Yet had my father known the course of change,
Or seen our loss by lucky augury,
This tyrant nor his followers had lived,
To joy the ruin of fierce Scillas house.
But Lady, they that dwell on fortunes call,
No sooner rise, but subject are to fall.
Marius I doubt not but our constant ends,
Shall make thee wail thy tyrants government.
When tyrants rule doth breed my care &amp; woe
Then will I say two Ladies told me so.
But here comes Lectorius,
Now my Lord, have you brought those things.
I have noble Consul.
Now Ladies, you are resolute to die.
I Marius, for terror cannot daunt vs:
Tortors were framed to dread the baser eye,
And not t'appall a princely majesty.
And Marius lives to triumph ore his foes,
That train where warlike troops amidst the plains,
And are enclosed and hemd with shining arms,
Not to appa• such princely Majesty.
Virtue sweet Ladies is of more regard
In Marius mind where honour is inthronde,
Than Rome or rule of Roman Empery.
The bands that should combine your snow white wrests,
Are these which shall adorn your milk white necks:
The private cel•s where you shall end your lives,
Is Italy, is Europe, nay the world:
Th'Lux•neon sea, and fierce Sicilian Gulf,
The river Ganges and Hydaspis stream,
She'll level lye, and smooth as crystal ice:
Whilst Fuluia and Cornelia pass thereon:
The soldiers that should guard you to your deaths,
Shall be five thousand gallant youths of Rome,
In purple robes cross bard with pales of gold,
Mounted on warlike coursers for the field,
Fet from the mountain tops of Cortia,
Or bred in hills of bright Sardinia,
Who shall conduct and bring you to your Lord,
I unto Scilla L•dies shall you go,
And tell him Marius ho•ds within his hands,
Ho••r for Ladies, for Ladies rich reward,
But as for Silla and for his compeers
Who dare against Marius vaunt their gold•n c•acts,
Tell him for them old Marius holds revenge,
And in his hands both triumphs life and death.
Doth Marius use with glorious words to jest,
And mock his captives with these glossing terms?
No Ladies, Marius hath sought for honour with his sword,
And holds disdain to triumph in your false.
Live Cornelia, live fair and fairest Fuluia:
If you have done or wrought me injury,
Scilla shall pay it through his misery.
So gracious (famous Consul) are thy words,
That Rome and we shall celebrate thy worth,
And Scilla shall confess himself overcome.
If Ladies prayers or tears may move the heavens,
Scilla shall vow himself old Marius friend.
Ladies for that I nought at all regard,
Scilla's my foe, Isle triumph over him,
For other conquest glory doth not win.
Therefore come on, that I may send you unto Scilla,
Sirrha, dally not with vs, you know where he is.
O sir, a quart is a quart in any mans purse, and drink is drink, and can my master live without his drink I pray you?
You have a master then sirrha?
Have I master thou scondrell? I have an Orator to my master, a wise man to my master. But fellows, I must make a parenthesis of this pint pot, for words make men dry: now by my troth I drink to Lord Anthony.
Fellow soldiers, the weakness of his brain hath made his tongue walk largely, we shall have some novelties by and by.
Oh most surpassing wine, thou marow of the vine,
More welcome unto me, than whips to scholars bee,
Thou art and ever was a means to mend an ass,
Thou make some to sleep, and many mo to weep,
And some be glad &amp; merry, with heigh down derry, derry.
Thou make some to stumble, and many mo to fumble:
And me have pinkie nine, more brave and jolly wine:
What need I praise thee mo, for thou art good with heigh ho
If wine then be so good, I pree thee for thy part,
Tell vs where Lord Anthony is, &amp; thou shalt have a quart.
First shall the snow be black, &amp; pepper lose his smack
And stripes forsake my back, first merry drunk with sack,
I will go boast and track, and all your costards crack,
Before I doo the knack shall make me sing alack:
Alack the old man is weary, for wine hath made him mer∣rye: with a heigh ho.
I pre thee leave these rymes, and tell vs where thy master is.
Faith where you shall not bee unless ye go with me. But shall I tell them so? O no sir, no, no, no, the man hath many a foe, as far as I doo know: you doo not flour me I trow. See how this licor fumes, &amp; how my force pre∣sumes. You would know where Lord Anthony is? I per∣ceiue you. Shall I say he is in yond farm house? I deceive you. Shall I tell you this wine is for him? the gods forfend, and so I end. Go fellow fighters theres a bob for ye.
My masters, let vs follow this clown, for que∣stionles this grave orator is in yonder farm house. But who comes yonder?
I wonder why my peasant stays so long,
And with my wonder hastes on my woe,
And with my woe I am assailed with fear,
And by my fear await with faintful breath
The final period of my pains by death.
Yonds the man we seek for (soldiers) unsheathe your swords, and make a riddance of Marius ancient en∣my.
Master fly, fly, or else you shall die: a plague on this wine hath made me so fine, and will you not be gone, then Isle leave you alone, and sleep upon your woe, with a lamentable heigh ho.
Betrayed at last by witless oversight,
Now Anthony, prepare thy self to die:
Lo where the monstrous ministers of wrath
Menace thy murder with their naked swords.
Anthony well met, the Consul Marius with o∣there confederate Senators, have adjudged thee death, there∣fore prepare thy self, and think we favour thee in this little protraction.
Immortal powers that know the painful cares,
That weight upon my poor distressed hart,
O bend your brows and level all your looks
Of dreadful awe upon these daring men.
And thou sweet niece of Atlas on whose lips
And tender tongue, the pliant Muses sit,
Let gentle course of sweet aspiring speech,
Let honey flowing terms of weary woe,
Let frutefull figures and delightful lines
Enforce a spring of pity from their eyes,
Amass the murthrous passions of their minds,
That they may favour woeful Anthony.
Oh countrymen what shall become of Rome,
When reverend duty droops through disgrace?
Oh Countrymen, what shall become of Rome,
When woeful nature widow of her joys,
VVeepes on our walls to see her laws depressed?
Oh Romaines hath not Anthonies discourse,
Sealed up the Mouths of false seditious men,
Assoild the doubts and quaint controls of power;
Releeud the mournful matron with his pleas?
And will you seek to murder Anthony?
The Lions brooke with kindness their relief,
The sheep reward the shepherd with their fleece:
Yet Romans seek to murder Anthony.
Why what enchanting terms of art are these?
That force my hart to pity his distress.
His action, speech, his favour, and his grace,
My rancor rage and rigour doth deface.
So sweet his words that now of late me seems
His art doth draw my soul from out my lips.
What envious eyes reflecting nought but rage,
What barbarous hart refreshed with nought but blood,
That rents not to behold the senseless trees
In doily season drooping without leaves?
The shepherd sighs upon the barren hills
To see his bleating lambs with faintfull looks.
Behold the valleys robbed of springing flowers,
That meanwhile wont to yield them yearly food.
Even meanest things exchangd from former state,
The virtuous mind with some remorse doth mate.
Can then your eyes with thundering threats of rage,
Cast furious gleams of anger upon age?
Can then your harts with furies mount so hie,
As they should harm the Roman Anthony?
I far more kind than senseless tree have le•t
A kindly •ap to our declining 〈◊〉,
And like a careful shepherd have foreseen
The heavy dangers of this City Rome,
And made the citizens the happy flock
Whom I have fed with counsels and advice,
But now those lockes that for their reverend white,
Surpass the down on Aesculapius chin:
But now that tongue whose terms and fluent stile
For number past the hoists of heavenly fires:
But now that head within whose 〈◊〉 brains
The Queen of flowering eloquence did •w•h:
These lockes, this tongue, this head, the life and all,
To please a tyrant traitrously must fall.
Why how now soldiers is he living yet?
And will you be bewitched with his words?
Then take this fee false Orator from me,
Elizium best beseems thy faintfull limbs.
Oh blissful pain, now Anthony must die,
Which served and loud Rome and her Empery.
Go curtal off that neck with present stroke,
And straight present it unto Marius.
Even in this head did all the Muses dwell:
The bees that sate upon the Gracious lips,
Distild their honey on his tempered tongue.
The crystal dew of fair Castalian springs,
With gentle floatings trickled on his brains:
The Graces kissed his kind and courteous brows,
Apollo gave the beauties of his harp,
And melodies unto his pliant speech.
Leave these presumptuous praises, countrymen,
And see Lectorius pensive where he comes,
Lo here my Lord the head of Anthony,
See here the guerdon fit for Marius foe,
Whom dread Apollo prosper in his rule.
Oh Romans, Marius sleeps among the dead,
And Rome laments the loss of such a friend.
A sudden and a woeful chance my Lord,
Which we intent fine would understand.
Though swollen with sighs my hart for sorrow burst,
And tongue with tears and plaints be choked up,
Yet will I furrow forth with forced breath
A speedy passage to my pensive speech.
Our Consul Marius, worthy soldiers,
Of late within a pleasant plot of ground,
Sate down for pleasure •ere a crystal spring,
Accompanied with many Lords of Rome:
Bright was the day, and on the spredding trees
The frolic citizens of forest lung
Their lays and merry notes on perching boughs:
When suddenly appeared in the East,
Seven mighty Eagles with their talents fierce,
Who waving oft about our Consuls head,
At last with hideous cry did s•are away.
When suddenly old Marius all aghast,
With reverent smile determinde with a sigh
The doubtful silence of the standers by.
Romans (said he) old Marius now must die.
These seven fair Eagles, birds of mighty Jove,
That at my birth day on my cradle sate,
Now at my last day arm me to my death:
And lo I feel the deadly pangs approach.
What should I more? in brief, with many prayers
For Rome, his son, his goods and lands disposed,
Our worthy Consul to our wonder did.
The City is amazed, for Scilla hastes
To enter Rome with fury, sword, and fire.
Go, place that head upon the Capitol,
And to your wards, for dangers are at hand.
Had we foreseen this luckless chance before,
Old Anthony had lived and breathed yet.
Now Romans after all these mutinies,
Seditions, murders, and conspiracies,
Imagine with unpartial harts at last
What fruit proceed from these contentious brawls▪
Your streets, where erst the fathers of your state
In robes of purple walked up and down,
Are strewd with mangled members, streaming blood.
And why? the reasons of this ruthful wrack,
Are your seditious innovations,
Your fickle minds inclined to foolish change.
Ungrateful men, whilst I with tedious pain
In Asia sealed my duty with my blood,
Making the fierce Dardanians faint for fear,
Spredding my colours in Galatia,
Dipping my sword in the Enetans blood,
And foraging the fields of Phocida.
You called my foe from exile with his friends,
You did proclaim me traitor here in Rome,
You racde my house, you did deface my friends,
But brawling wolves, you cannot byte the moon,
For Scilla lives so forward to revenge,
As woe to those that sought to doo me wrong.
I now am entered Rome in spite of force,
And will so hamper all my cursed foes,
As be he Tribune, Consul, Lord or Knight
That hates Scilla, let him look to die.
And first to make an entrance to mine ire,
Bring me that traitor Carbo out of hand.
Oh Scilla, in revenging injuries,
Inflict the pain where first offence did spring,
And for my sake establish peace in Rome,
And pardon these repentant Citizens.
Pompey, I love thee Pompey, and consent
To thy request, but Romans have regard,
Least ouer-reaching in offence again,
I load your shoulders with a double pain.
But Pompey see where jolly Carbo comes
•ooting it featly, like a mighty man,
What no 〈◊〉 sirrha to your Lord?
My Lord? No Scilla, he that thrice hath borne
The •am of Consul scorns to stoop to him,
Whose hart doth hammer nought but mutinies.
And doth your Lordship then disdain to stoop
I to mine equal Pompey as thou art.
Thine equal villain, no he is my friend,
Thou but a poor anatomy of bones,
Casde in a knavish tawny withered skin:
Wilt thou not stoop? art thou so stately then?
Scilla, I honour gods, not foolish men.
Then bend that withered bough that will not break
And soldiers cast him down before my feet:
Now prating sir, my foot upon thy neck,
He be so bold to give your Lordship check.
Believe me soldiers, but I ouer-reach,
Old Carbos neck at first was made to stretch.
Though body bend, thou tyrant most unkind,
Yet never shalt thou humble Carbos mind.
oh sir, I know for all your warlike pith,
A man may ma••e your worship with a with.
You sirrha levied arms to doo me wrong:
You brought your legions to the gates of Rome:
You fought it out in hope that I would faint.
But sirrha now betake you to your books,
Entreat the God to save your sinful soul.
For why this carcass must in my behalf
Go feast the ravens that serve our augurs turn.
Me thinks I see already how they wish,
To bait their beaks in such a jolly dish.
Scilla thy threats and scoffs amate me not:
I pre thee let thy murthrers ha•e me hence,
For Carbo rather likes to die by sword,
Than live to be a mocking stock to thee.
The man hath hast good soldiers take him hence,
It would be good to alter his pretence.
But be advised, that when the fool is slain,
You part the head and body both in twain.
I know that Carbo longs to know the cause,
And shall: thy body for the ravens, thy head for daw•.
O matchless ruler of our Capitol,
Behold poor Rome with grave and piteous eye,
Ful-fild with wrong and wretched tyranny.
Tut the proud mans prayer will never pierce the sky.
But whether press these mincing Senators?
We press with prayers, we come with more• full teaser▪
Entreating Scilla by those holy bands
That links fair Iuno with her thundering Jove,
Even by the bounds of hospitality,
To pity Rome afflicted through thy wrath.
Thy soldiers (Scilla) murder innocents.
O whither will thy lawless surie stretch,
If little ruth ensue thy countries harms.
Gay words Narbonus, full of eloquence,
Accompanied with action and conceit.
But I must teach thee judgment therewithal.
Dare thou approach my presence that hast borne
Thine arms inspight of Scilla and his friends?
I tell thee foolish man thy judgment wanted
In this presumptuous purpose that is past:
And loitering scholar, since you fail in art,
Isle learn you judgment shortly to your smart▪.
Dispatch him soldiers, I must see him die.
And you Carinna, Carbos ancient friend,
Shall follow straight your heedles General.
And Scipio were it not I loud thee well.
Thou should accompany these slaves to hell:
But get you gone, and if you love your self,
Pardon me Scilla, pardon gentle Scilla.
Sirrha, this gentle name was kind too late,
And shadowed in the shrouds of biting hate.
Dispatch: why so, good fortune to my friends,
As for my foes, even such shall be their ends.
Convey them hence Metellus, gentle Metellus,
Fetch me Sertorius from Iberia,
In doing so, thou stand me in stead,
For sore I long to see the traitors head.
I go confirmed to conquer him by sword,
or in the exploit to hazard life and all.
Now Pompey let me see, those Senators
Are dangerous stops of our pretended state,
And must be curtald least they grow too proud,
I doo proscribe just forty Senators,
Which shall be leaders in my tragedy.
And for our Gentlemen are over proud,
Of them a thousand and six hundredth die,
A goodly army meet to conquer hell.
Soldiers perform the course of my decree,
Their friends my foes, their foes shall be my friends,
Go sell their goods by trumpet at your wills,
Mean while Pompey shall see and Rome shall rue,
The miseries that shortly shall ensue.
Oh endless course of needy mans avail,
What silly thoughts, what simple policies
makes man presume upon this traitorous life?
Have I not seen the depth of sorrow once,
And then again have kissed the Queen of chance,
Oh Marius thou Tilli•juice and thy friends,
Hast seen thy foe discomfited in fight.
But now the stars have formed my fin•ll harms,
My father Marius lately dead in Rome,
My foe with honour doth triumph in Rome,
My friends are dead and banished from Rome,
I Marius father friends more blessed then thee:
They dead, I live, I thralled they are free,
Here in Preneste am I cooped up,
Amongst a troop of hunger sty•ued men.
Set to prevent false Scillaes fierce approach.
But now exempted both of life and all.
Well Fortune since thy fleeting change, hath cast
Pore Marius from his hopes and true dossiers,
My resolution shall exceed thy power,
Thy coloured wings steeped in purple blood,
Thy blinding wreath distained in purple blood,
Thy royal Robes washed in my purple blood
Shall witness to the world thy thirst of blood,
And when the tyrant Scilla shall expect
To see the son of Marius stoop for fear,
Then then, Oh then my mind shall well appear,
That scorn my life and hold mine honour dear.
Hark how these murderous Romaine viperlike,
Seek to betray their fellow Citizens,
Oh wretched world from whence with speedy slight,
True love, true zeal, true honour late is fled.
What makes my Lord so careless and secure,
To leave the breach and here lament alone?
Not fear my friend for I could never fly,
But study how with honour for to die,
I pray thee cal the chiefest Citizens.
I must advise them in a weighty cause,
Here shall they meet me and until they come,
I will go view the danger of the breach.
Say Tuditanus, did thou ever see
So desperate defence as this hath been:
As in Numidia Tigers wanting food,
Or as in Libia Lions full of ire,
So fa•e these Romans on Preneste walls.
Their valor Tuditanus and resist,
The man like fight of younger Marius,
Makes me amazed to see their miseries,
And pity them although they be my foes▪
What said I foes? O Rome with ruth I see
Thy state consumed through folly and dissention.
Well sound a p•rle, I will see if words
Can make them yield, which will not fly for strokes?
What seeks this Roman warrior at our hands?
That seeks he Marius, that he wishes thee:
An humble hart, and then a happy peace.
Thou see thy fortunes are depressed and down,
Thy vitals spent, thy soldiers weak with want,
The breach laid open ready to assault,
Now since thy means and maintenance are done,
Yield Marius, yield, Prenestians be advised,
Lucretius is advised to favour you.
I pre thee Marius mark my last advice.
Relent in time, let Scilla be thy friend:
So thou in Rome moist lead a happy life,
And those with thee shall pray for Marius still.
Lucretius, I consider on thy words,
Stay there a while thou shalt have answer straight.
Apollo grant that my persuasions may,
Preserve these Roman soldiers from the sword.
My friends and citizens of Preneste town,
You see the wayward working of our stars,
Our harts confirmed to fight, our victuals spent.
If we submit, its Scilla must remit,
A tyrant, traitor, enemy to Rome,
Whose hart is guarded still with bloody thoughts.
These flattering vows Lucretius here avows,
Are pleasing words to colour poisoned thoughts▪
What will you live with shame, or die with fame?
A famous death, my Lord delights vs most.
We of thy faction (Marius) are resolved
To follow thee in life and death together.
Words full of worth, beseeming noble minds
The very Balsamum to mend my woes.
Oh countrymen, you see Companion spoiled,
A tyrant threatening mutinies in Rome,
A world dispoyld of virtue, faith and trust.
If then no peace, no liberty, no faith,
Conclude with me, and let it be no life.
Live not to see your tender infants slain,
These stately towers made level with the land,
This body mangled by our enemies sword:
But full resolved to doo as Marius doth,
Unsheathe your poniards, and let every friend,
Bethink him of a souldierlike farewell.
Sirrha, display my standard on the walls,
And I will answer yond Lucretius,
Who loves Marius, now must die with Marius▪
What answer will your Lordship then return v•▪
Lucretius, we that know what Scilla is,
How dissolute, how trothles and corrupt:
In brief conclude to die before we yield:
But so to die (Lucretius mark me well)
As loath to see the fury of our swords
Should murder friends and Roman citizens.
Pie countrymen, what fury doth infect
Your warlike bosoms, that were wont to fight
With foreign foes, not with Companion friends?
Now unadvised youth must counsel old:
For governance is banished out of Rome.
Woe to that bough from whence these blooms are sprung,
Woe to that Aetna, vomiting this fire:
Woe to that brand, consuming Countries weal:
Woe to that Scilla, careless and secure,
That gapes with murder for a Monarchy.
Go second Brutus with a Roman mind,
And kill that tyrant: and for Marius sake
Pity the guiltless wives of these your friends,
Preserve their weeping infants from the sword,
Whose fathers seal their honours with their bloods.
Farewell Lucretius, first I press in place
To let thee see a constant Roman die,
Prenestians, lo a wound, a fatal wound,
The pain but small, the glory passing great.
Prenestians see a second stroke: why so.
I feel the dreeping dimness of the night,
Closing the coverts of my careful eyes.
Follow me friends: for Marius now must die
With fame, in spite of Scillas tyranny.
We follow thee our chiefetaine even in death,
Our town is thine Lucretius: but we pray
For mercy for our children and our wives.
O save my form Lucretius, let him live,
A wondrous and bewitched constancy,
Beseeming Marius pride and haughty mind,
Come let vs charge the breach, the town is ours
Both male and female put them to the sword:
So please you Scilla, and fulfil his word.
Now Romans we have brought Preneste low,
And Marius sleeps amidst the dead at last.
So then to Rome my countrymen with joy,
Where Scilla weights the tidings of our fight,
Those prisners that are taken, see forth with
With warlike javelins you put them to death.
Come let vs march, see Rome in sight my harts,
Where Scilla weights the tidings of our war.
Romans you know, and to your griefs have seen
A world of troubles hatched here at home,
Which through prevention being well-nigh crossed
By worthy Scilla and his warlike band:
I Consul with these fathers think it meet
To fortify our peace and Cities weal,
To name some man of worth that may supply
Dictators power and place, whose majesty
Shall cross the courage of rebellious minds,
What think you Romans, will you condescend?
Nay Flaccus, for their profits they must yield,
For men of mean condition and conceit
Must humble their opinions to their lords,
And if my friends and Citizens consent
Since I am borne to manage mighty things,
I will (though loath) both rule and govern them.
I speak not this as though I wish to reign,
But for to know my friends: and yet again
I merit Romans •are more grace than this.
I countrymen, if Scillas power and mind•
If Scillas virtue courage and device,
If Scillas friends and fortunes merit fame,
〈…〉 should 〈◊〉 Dictators name.
What think you Citizens, why stand ye mute•puns;
Shall Scilla be Dictator here in Rome?
By full consent Scilla shall be Dictator.
Then in the name of Rome I here present
The rods and axes into Scillas hand,
And fortunate prove Scilla our Dictator.
My fortunes Flaccus cannot be impeached,
For at my birth the planets passing kind
Could entertain no retrograde aspects.
And that I may with kindness quite their love,
My countrymen I will prevent the cause,
Against all the false encounters of mishap.
You name me your Dictator, but prefix
No time, no course, but give me leave to rule,
And yet exempt me not from your revenge:
Thus by your pleasures being 〈◊〉 aloft,
Straight by your furies I should quickly fall.
No Citizens, who reads Scillas mind,
Must form my titles in another kind.
Either let Scilla be Dictator ever,
Or flatter Scilla with these titles never.
Perpetual be thy glory and renown,
Perpetual Lord Dictator shalt thou bee.
Hereto the Senate frankly doth agree.
Then so shall scilla reign you Senators,
Then so shall Scilla rule you Citizens:
As Senators and Citizens that please me
Shall be my friends, the rest cannot disease me▪
But see whereas Lucretius is returned.
Welcome brave Romaine where is Marius?
Are these Prenestians put unto the sword.
The City noble Scilla raced is,
And Marius dead not by our swords my Lord,
But with more constancy than Cato died,
What constancy and but a very boy,
Why then I see he was his fathers son,
But let vs have this constancy described.
After our fearce assaults, and their resist,
Our siege, their salying out to stop our trench:
Labour and hunger raining in the town,
The younger Marius on the Cities wall,
Vouchsafed an interparle at the last:
Wherein with constancy and courage too,
He boldly armed his friends him self to death:
And spreading of his colours on the wall,
For answer said he could not brooke to yield,
Or trust a tyrant such as Scilla was.
What did the bransicke boy upbraid me so?
But let vs hear the rest Lucretius.
And after great perswsasions to his friends
And worthy resolution of them all:
He first did sheath his poniard in his breast,
And so in order dyed all the rest.
Now by my sword this was a worthy jest,
Yet silly boy I needs must pity thee,
Whose noble mind could never mated bee,
Believe me countrymen a sudden thought,
A sudden change in Scilla now hath wrought.
Old Marius and his son were men of name,
Nor Fortunes laughs, nor lowers their minds could tame,
And when I count their fortunes that are past,
I see that death confirmed their fems at last.
Then he that strives to manage mighty things,
Amidst his triumphs gains a troubled mind.
The greatest hope the greater harm it brings:
And pore men in content their glory find.
If then content be such a pleasant thing,
Why leave I country life to live a king?
Yet Kings are Gods and make the proudest stoop,
Ye but themselves are still pursued with ha••
And men were made to mount and then to droop,
Such chances wait upon uncertain fate,
That where she kisses once she quells twice,
Then who so lives content is happy wise.
What motion moves this Philosophy?
Oh Scilla see the Ocean ebbs and floats.
The spring-time wanes when winter draws no.
I, these are true and most assured notes.
Inconstant chance such tickle turns hath le•t.
As who so fears no fall, must seek content.
Whilst graver thoughts of honour should allure thee
What makes scilla muse and mutter thus?
I that have past amidst the mighty troops
Of armed legions through a world of war,
Doo now bethink me Flaccus on my chance,
How I alone where many men were slain,
In spite of Fate am come to Rome again,
And •o I wield the reuer end stiles of state,
Yea, Scilla with a beck could break thy neck,
What Lo•• of Rome hath d•r•e as much as I?
Yet Flaccus kn•wst thou not that I must die?
The laboring sisters on the weary Loombs,
Have drawn my webb of life at length, I know:
And men of wit must think upon their tombs.
For beasts wit careless steps to 〈…〉:
Where men whose thoughts and honours, clime on hie,
Living with fame, must learn, with fame to die.
What le•s my Lord in governing this state,
To live in rest, and die with honour too?
What lets me Pompey? why my courteous friend,
Can he remain secure that wields a charge?
Or think of wit when •lattrers doo commend?
Or be advised that careless runs at large?
•o Pompey, honey words makes foolish minds,
And po•re the greatest wit with error blinds.
〈◊〉 I murdered Ant•o••e thy friend,
Romans: some here have lost at my command
Their Fathers, Mothers, Brothers, and Allies,
And think you Scilla thinking these misdeeds,
Be thinks not on your grudges and mislike?
Yes Countrymen I bear them still in mind.
Then Pompey were I not a silly man,
To leave my Rule and trust these Romans than?
Your Grace hath small occasions of 〈◊〉,
Nor seek these Citizens for your disclaim.
But Pompey now these reaching plumes of pride,
That mounted up my fortunes to the Clouds,
By grave conceits shall straight be laid aside,
And scilla thinks of far more simple shrouds.
For having tried occasion in the throne,
Isle see if she dare frown when state is gone.
Lo senators, the man that sate aloft,
Now deigns to give inferiors highest place.
Lo here the man whom Rome ripened oft,
A private man, content to brooke disgrace,
Romans, lo here the axes, rods and all,
Isle master fortune, least she make me thrall.
Now who so list accuse me, tell my wrongs,
Upbraid me in the presence of this state.
Is none these •olly Citizens among,
That will accuse or say I am ingrate.
Then will I say and boldly boast my chances,
That nought may force the man whom Fate aduances.
what means scilla in this sullen mood,
To leave his titles on the sudden thus?
Consul I mean with calm and quiet mind,
To pass my days while happy death I find.
What greater wrong, than leave thy country so?
Both it and life must scilla leave in time.
Yet during life have care of Rome and vs.
O wanton world that flatterst in thy prime,
And breathe balm and poison mixed in one.
See •ow these wavering Romaines wished my reign,
That why loom sought and sought to have me slain,
My Countrymen this City wants no store
Of Fathers warriors to supply my room,
So grant me peace and I will die for Rome.
These are very indiscreet counsels neighbor Poppy, and I will follow your misaduisement.
I tell you goodman Curtal the wench hath wrong, oh vain world, oh foolish men, could a man in na∣ture cast a wench down, and disdain in nature to lift his up again? could he take away •ir dishonesty without bouncing up the banes of matrimony? oh learned Poet well did thou write •ustian verse.
These maids are daws that go to the laws and a babe in the belly.
Tut man tic the way the world must follow, for maids must be kind, good husbands to find.
But mark the fierce if they swell before, it will grieve them sore. but see yondes Master scilla, faith a pretty fellow is a.
what seeks my countrymen? what would my friends?
Nay sir your kind words shall not serve the turn, why think you to thrust your soldiers into our kindred with your courtesies sir.
I tel you Master scilla my neighbour will have the Law, he had the right he will have the wrong for therein dwells the Law.
what desires these men of Rome?
Neighbour sharpen the edge told of your wits upon the whetstone of indiscretion that your words may shave like the rasers of Palermo, you have learning with ignorance therefore speak my tale.
Then worshipful Master Scilla, be it known un∣to you, that my neighbours daughter Doritie was a maid of restority, fair fresh and fine as a merry cup of wine. Her eyes like two potcht eggs, great and goodly her legs, but mark my doleful ditty, alas for woe and pity: a soldier of yours upon a bed of flowers, gave her such a fall, as she lost maidenhead and all. And thus in very good time I end my rudefull time.
And what of this my friend, why seek you me,
Who have resignd my titles and my state
To live a private life as you doo now?
Go move the Consul Flaccus in this cause,
Who now hath power to execute the laws.
And are you no more Master dix cator, nor G•∣neralitie of the soldiers?
My powers doo cease, my titles are resignd,
Have you signed your titles? O base mind, that being in the powles steeple of honour, hast cast thy self in∣to the sink of simplicity. Fie beast, were I a king, I would day by day suck up white bread and milk, and go a jetting in a •acket of si•ke, my meat should be the curds, my drink should be the whey, and I wold have a mincing lass to love me every day.
Nay goodman Curtal, your discretions are ve∣rye simple, let me cramp him with a reason. Sirrha, whether is better good ale or small beer? Alas see his implicitie that cannot answer me: why I say ale.
And so say I neighbor.
Thou hast reason, ergo say I tic better be a King than a clown. Faith master Scilla, I hope a man may now call ye knave by authority.
With what impatience h•are I these upbraids
That meanwhile plagued the least offence with death.
Oh Scilla these are stales of destiny,
By some upbraids to try thy constancy.
My friends these scorns of yours perhaps will move,
The next Dictator shun to yield his state,
For fear he find as much as Scilla doth.
But Flaccus, to prevent their further wrong,
Vouchsafe some Lictor may attach the man,
And doo them right that thus complain abuse.
Sirrha, go you and bring the soldier
That hath so loosely leant to lawless lust,
We will have means sufficient be assured
To cool his heate, and make the wanton chaste.
We thank your mastership: come neighbour, let vs iog, faith this news will set my daughter Dorothy a gog.
Grave Senators and Romans, now you see
The humble bent of Scillas changed mind.
Now will I leave you Lords, from courtly train
To dwell content amidst my country cave,
Where no ambitious humours shall approach▪
The quiet silence of my happy sleep.
Where no delicious Iouisance or toys,
Shall tickle with delight my tempered ears,
But wearying out the lingering day with toil,
Tyring my veins and furrowing of my soul.
The silent night with slumber stealing on
Shall locke these careful closets of mine eyes.
Oh had I known the height of happiness,
Or bent mine eyes upon my mother earth:
Long since O Rome had Scilla with rejoice
Forsaken arms to lead a private life.
But in this humbleness of mind my Lord,
Whereas experience prooude and Art doo meet.
How happy were these fair Italian fields,
If they were graced with so sweet a sun:
Then I for Rome and Rome with me requires,
That Scilla will abide and govern Rome.
O Flaccus, if th'Arabian Phoenix strive
By natures warning to renew her kind,
When soaring no the glorious eye of heaven,
She from her cinders doth revive her sex.
Why should not Scilla learn by her to die?
That carst have been the Phoenix of this land.
And drawing near the sunne-shine of content,
Perish obscure to make your glories grow.
For as the higher trees do shield the shrubs,
From posting Phlegons warmth and breathing fire,
So mighty men obscure each others fame,
And make the best deservers fortunes game.
But ah what sudden few•es doo affright?
What apparitious fantasies are these?
Oh let me rest sweet Lords, for why me thinks,
Some fatal spells are sounded in mine ears.
Subsequitur tua •ors: priuari lumine Scillam,
Numina Parcarum •am fera precipiunt.
Precipiunt fera jam Parcarum numina, Scillam,
Lumine priuari, morse tua subsequitur,
Elysium petis, ô foelix! &amp; fatidici astri:
Praescius Heroas, ô petis innumeros!
Innumeros petis ô Heroas! praescius astri
Fatidici: &amp; foelix, ô petis Elisium!
Ergóne post dulces annos properantia fata?
Ergóne jam tenebrae pramia lucis erunt?
Ottoman, vt vitae fortunam gloria mortise
Vincat, in extremo funere content olor.
How fares my Lord? what dreadful thoughts are these
What doubtful answers on a sudden thus?
Pompey the man that made the world to stoop,
And •ottered fortune in the chains of power,
Must droop and draw the Chariot of Fate
Along the darksome banks of Acheron.
The heavens have warned me of my present fall.
Oh call Cornelia forth, let Scilla see
His daughter Fuluia ere his eyes be shut.
Why Scilla, where is now thy wonted hope
In greatest hazard of unstaid chance?
What shall a little biting blast of pain
Blemish the blossoms of thy wonted pride?
My Flaccus, worldly joys and pleasures fade,
In constant time like to the fleeting tide
With endless course mans hopes doth ouer-beare?
Nought now remains that Scilla fine would have,
But lasting fame when body lies in grave.
How fares my Lord? how doth my gentle Scilla?
Ah my Cornelia passing happy now.
Free from the world, allied unto the heavens,
Not curious of uncertain chances now.
Words full of woe still adding to my grief,
A cureless cross of many hundredth harms.
Oh let not Rome and poor Cornelia loose,
The one his friend, the other her delight.
Cornelia, man hath power by some instinct
And gracious revolution of the stars,
To conquer kingdoms not to master fate:
For when the course of mortal life is run,
Then Clotho ends the web his sister spun.
Pompey, Lord Flaccus, fellow senators,
In that I feel the faintfull dews of death
steeping mine eyes within their chilly wet,
The care I have of wife and daughter both,
Must on your wisdoms happily •elie,
With equal distribution see you part,
My lands and goods betwixt these lovely twain,
Only bestow a hundred thousand Sestercies,
Upon my friends and fellow soldiers.
Thus having made my final testament,
Come Fuluia let thy father lay his hand,
Upon thy lovely bosom and entreat
A virtuous boon and favour at thy hands.
Fair Roman maid, see that thou wed thy fairs,
To modest virtuous and delightful thoughts:
Let Rome in viewing thee behold thy sire,
Honour Cornelia from whose fruitful woombe,
Thy plenteous beauties sweetly did appear,
And with this Lesson lovely maid farewell.
oh tedious and unhappy chance for me.
Content thee Fuluia, for it needs must bee.
Cornelia I must leave thee to the world,
And by those loves that I have lent thee o••,
In mutual wedlock rytes and happy war.
Remember Scilla in my Fuluia still:
Consul farewell, my Pompey I must hence,
And farewell Rome, and Fortune now I bless thee,
That both in life and death would not oppress me,
oh hideous storms of never daunted fate,
Now are those eyes whose sweet reflections cooled
The smothered rancors of rebellious thoughts
Clad with the sable mantles of the nig•t.
And like the tree that robbed of sun and showers
Mourns desolate withouten leaf or sap:
so poor Cornelia late bereft of love,
Sits sighing, hapless, ioyles and forlorn.
Gone is the flower that did adorn our fields,
Fled are those sweet reflections of delight,
Dead is my Father, Fuluia dead is hee
In whom thy life, for whom thy death must bee.
Ladies, to tyre the time in restless moan
Were tedious unto friends and nature too,
Suffices you that Scilla so is dead,
As fame shall sing his power though life be fled.
Then to conclude his happiness my Lords,
Determine where shall be his Funeral.
Even there where other Nobles are entered.
Why Lepidus what Roman ever was,
That merited so high a name as hee?
Then why with simple pomp and funeral
Would you entomb so rare a paragon?
An urn of gold shall hem his ashes in,
The Vestal virgins with their holy notes
Shall sing his famous (though too fatal) death,
I and my Fuluia with dispersed hair
Will weight upon this noble Romans hearse.
And Fuluia clad in black &amp; mournful pale
Will weight upon her fathers funeral.
Come bear we hence this trophy of renown,
Whose life, whose death was far from fortunes frown,
Deo iuuante, nil nocet liuor malus:
Et non iuuante nil la labour grauis.

Simo discourses unto his late Bondsman, first
of the honest life of his son: And afterword of his falling in love:
Lastly he discloses for what cause he feigns a mar∣riage for
him.
SIrs, have in these things: dispatch. So∣sia
stay thou héere. I will speak a word or two with thée.
I know your mind already, you would have these things well
hand∣led.
Nay, it is an other manner of matter.
What is it sir? that my science can stand you in more
stead than this comes to?
There is no néede of that science, for this matter
which I am now about: But faithfulness and secrecy, which I always
noted to bée in thée, are the sciences I have néede of
now.
I long to know what is your will with mée.
Thou wotst how reasonable and easy a bondage thou
had with me, ever since the time I bought thée of a little one:
and by cause thou did thy service honest∣lie, and with good will, lo,
of a Bond slave I made thee my frée man, so as I rewarded thée
with the very best thing I had.
I remember it well.
I repent me not of that I did.
Master, I am glad if I have done, or doe, any service that
may please you, and I thank you with  all my heart that you
take it in good worth: But yet this spéech of yours troubles
mée: for this manner of ripping up things past, is as it were an
upbraiding to one unmindful of a good turn done him: but speak at a word
what is your will with mée.
So will I doe, only this I tell thée first and
foremost: This marriage which thou wéenest to be certain, is but a
fained marriage.
For what cause doo you pretend it than?
Thou shalt hear all the matter from the begin∣ning, so
shalt thou understand both my sons life, and my purpose, and also
what I would have thée do in this behalf. When my son grew to
man estate, it lay in his power to live more at random, for till than, how
could a man know his nature, or discern his dis∣position, while as
tender yéeres, fearfulness, and his Master, kept him under.
It is true Sir.
That which all young men for the most parts do applying
their minds to some kind of study or other, as either to horses, and
horsemanship: or to kéepe hounds for hunting, or to study
Philosophy: he gave him∣self specially, to none of these things more
than other, and yet was reasonably well séene in them all: I was
glad of it.
And good cause why, for I hold it a very com∣modious
matter in a mans life, Not to go too far in any thing.
In this sort was the manner of his life, even gently to
bear, and take all in good worth, at all men's hands that he kept company
with: betaking himself to doo as they did, and to follow their studies and
exercises: Not thwarting any man, nor at any time putting furth himself
before his companions, so as a man might full easily purchase praise, and
not be envied, and also furnish himself with fréends.
He took him to a wise course of living, for now a days,
Flatry gains Friends, and Truth gets Foes.
In the mean time, a certain woman of excel∣lent beauty, and
in the flower of age, came from An∣dross, (now thrée
yéeres since) to dwell héere, in our neigh∣borhod,
béeing thereto driven thorough very poverty, and the small reckoning
that was made of her among her own kindred.
Alas I fear mée, that this woman of Intros,
might be cause of some euell.
At the first, she lived chastely, sparingly, and
hardly, earning her living by wool and web. But af∣terwards resorted, now
one lover, and then an other, promising reward unto her, and as all are
naturally given full soon to leave of labour and follow lust, even so
this woman accepted the offers, and then she began the gain.
They which then loved her (as it fell out) carried my son
thither, in company with them. I straight way imagined with my self:
without doubt he is caught for a bird: he hath his errand: I watched their
Pages betimes in the morning, as they were wont to come thence, or go thither:
I oftimes asked, ho Sir boy, tell mée if thou be a good fellow, who
yesterday had his pleasure of Chrysis, (for so was the name of
her of An∣dross.)
I perceive you.
They would say, either Phedria, or Clinia,
or No∣ceratus: for these thrée than loved her all at once.
But what did Pamphilus, ho? (What, said they) Mary he supped and
payed his share. I was well apaid of this. In like sort, I made enquiry
at an other time, and could not find, that Pamphilus was any way
touched with dishonesty. Therefore I thought I had suffice∣ent trial of
him, and that he was a notable Pattern of Chastity: for he that hath to doe
with men of such  conditions, and yet is not moved in mind that
way, one wold think hee might full well have the rule and
•…uyding of his own life. Now over
and besides that this liked my self well, lo all other men also, even
with one consent, gave al the commendations that might be, and praised my
happy state, in that I 〈◊〉 a
son, en∣duet with so good wit and government. What néede I make
many words? Chromes stirred up by this good report, came of him
self unto me, to the end to match his only daughter in marriage to my
son, and that with a •…rye large
dowry: I was well pleased withal: promised him my son: and this very
day was appoin∣ted for the marriage.
Why than what lets, that it is not made ac∣cordingly?
That shall thou hear: shortly after within few days that
their things were a doing, this Chrysis our neighbour dyed.
O happy chance, you have now made mée glad, for
still I doubted the worst of that Chrysis.
Than specially my son used thither, ever and anon in
company with those which loved Chrysis: he was as busy as the
best, in setting furth the burial: being all this while very sad: and now
and than, would even shed tears with them for company: well, this also
liked mée welinough: for thus thought I: hée that upon small
acquaintance and familiarity, takes this women's death so grievously at the
hart? what if hee had loved her himself? or how would he take on for me his
father? so as I took all this to have proceeded of a good nature, and gentle
hart. To bée bréfe, I my self likewise for his sake go
furth to the burial, mistrusting no ill in the world.
O what followed?
Thou shalt know by and by. The Coars is brought furth: we
pass along with it: Anon I chuance  to cast mine eye (among
the women there) upon an od young damsel, of such favour.
What, so good?
Yea Sosia, of such modest and sober
countenance and so passing beautiful to look too, as there could not
possibly bée more in a woman: who than to my séeming, made
greater sorrow than any of the rest: And for that she excelled all the
other women, bearing a face worthy an honest woman and well borne, I get me
to the waiting maids and ask what shée might bee: They tell
mée that shée is sister unto Chris•… That went by and by, to the very
hart of me. Out alas, this is it I wist not of: hence grew those tears of
his: here is shée whom hée pitied so.
O how greatly I fear whereto your tale tends.
Well, on goes the coars still: wée follow after: we
are come to the place of burial: it is put into the fire: They wéepe.
In the mean space, this sister whom I told you of, rushed headlong to
the flame with no small jeopardy: whereat my son Pamphilus being
sore frigh∣ted, did than lo, bewray his love which hée had cun∣ningly
cloaked and kept secrete all this while: hee runs unto her, and takes her
about the middle: My swéete hart Glycerie (quoth hee) what do
you? why go you about to cast away your self? with that, shée
caste her self weeping, and leaning upon him so familiarly, as a man
might easily perceive their old accustomed love.
What, say you so?
I return thence angry and disquieted in mind, &amp; yet
had I not cause sufficiēt to chide him: for he mought have said: father
what have I done? What punish∣meant have I deserved? or wherein have I
offended? The maid which wilfully would have thrown her self into the fire,
I stayed and saved her life: This were an honest excuse.
It is well considered of you: for if you would chide him
which helped to save ones life, what would you doo to him that wrought ones
harm or mischief?
The next day following, Chromes came to me exclaming
what a shameful Act it was, that Pam∣philus (as he had found out
for certenty) used this strāge nought pack even as his wife: I
straight way de∣nyed that there was any such matter, he earnestly
af∣firms that it was so: well, in the end I parted from him, as one then
utterly refusing to match his Daugh∣la to my son.
Did you not then rebuke your Son for it?
No, nor this was not cause great enough to rebuke him.
How so I pray you?
Hée inought have answered thus: Father you your
self have set a time when these things shall cease: iwis it is not
long hence that I must live after an others pleasure: suffer me than, now
in the mean while to live as I list my self.
What occasion then is left to rebuke him?
Mary, if for cause of this love hée shall refuse
to take a wife, Than lo, for that offence will I first cor∣rect him to begin
with all. And now my endeavour is this, that by means of this fained marriage,
I may have unfeigned cause to rebuke him, if he doo not agrée to it:
And with all that the naughty knave Dauus, if he have any subtle
device, may spend it now, while his craft can doo no harm: whom I verily
believe will labour with tooth and nayl, to the uttermost that in him lies,
and so much the rather that he may work me a displeasure, than for any
care hee hath to follow my sons fancy.
Why so?
Ask you why so? An ill mind, an ill meaning:
whom if I shall perciue, But what néede I use many 
words, and if so be it, all doe fall out as I would, that there be no let or
delay in my son Pamphilus: Than rests that I entreat
Chromes for his Daughter, and that I hope to bring to pass well
enough. Now is it thy part to set on a good face in faining this same
mar∣riage: to make Dauus thoroughly afraid, and to be a watch over my
son, espying what he doth, and where∣of Dauus and he do
consult together.
You have said enough. I will sée to it: wée
may now go in.
Go thou first, I will come anon.
The father having found out that his Son is in love,
pre∣tends a marriage for him, he threatened Dauus with punishment if he
shall go about any deceit to hinder the marriage.
THere is no doubt of this, but that my Son will refuse to
have a wife: I no∣ted such fear er while in Dauus, as soon as he
hard that there was a mar∣riage towards: but lo where he comes forth
himself.
I marveled if this matter should pass away so, and
still I feared whereto my Masters long gen∣tlenes  would grow
at length: who after he heard that shée whom hee thought of, should
not bée given in marriage to his son, did, (notwithstanding) never
speak word to an• of vs, nor
yet was any thing moved at it.
But now hee will, and that, as I wéene to thy
cost.
His purpose was to have vs brought under hand into fools
paradise, to the end that now hoping the best, and having cast of all
fear, wée should suddenly bee taken napping, in such sort, as
wée might not have time to bethink vs how to prevent the marriage. A
subtle fox I warrant him.
What prates this Gallowelapper?
Good Lord my moister is here, and I saw him not till
now.
Dauus?
Now, what is the matter?
Come your way hither to mée.
What a Devil will hée have?
What is that thou talk of?
Whereof should I talk?
Ask thow whereof? Sir, the report is that my son
is in love.
Yea no doubt the world cares much for that.
Nay, but dost thou mind what I speak to thee or not?
Yes truly I mind it well enough.
Well, for mée now to go search and fifth out that
mat∣la, were but the part of a harde father: for what he did heretofore,
pertains nothing at all to me: so long as he took time convenient for it,
I suffered him to fulfil his desire. Now it is high time for him to lead
an other life, and change his manners. And therefore I require, or if it be
reason I desire thée Dauos, that now at length he do
return into the right way.
What mean you by this?
All men that bée in love, can ill away to have wives
appointed them by others.
So they say.
Then if one take a knave for his scholmaister in that
behalf, The love sick mind of the scholar is by him commonly applied to
all naughtiness.
Truly I understand you not.
No, dost thou not?
No, I am plain Dauus, and not Oedipus [the
rea∣der of Riddels.]
Wilt thou then that I speak the rest of my mind
plainly.
Yea a Gods name.
If I shall perceive that thou go about to work a∣ny deceit
this day, to the end to break of this mar∣riage, or that thou wilt therein
show how sly and craf∣tie a companion thou art: I will kudgill thee well
and thriftily, and then cast thee into the grinding house to grind till
thou die: with this covenant and condition, that if I take thée out
thence, then I my self to grind in thy place. What, hast thou
understood me now? or dost thou not yet understand this neither?
Yes full well, you went now very plainly to the matter, and
nothing about the bush.
I could rather bear any abuse at thy hands, than bée
deluded in this matter.
Yet good words I pray you sir.
What, dost thou laugh me to scorn? I sée I am
not a whit deceived in thée: But I tell thée this, that thou be
not over rash, and that thou moist not hereafter say but thou had a
fair warning.
In this scene Dauus deliberated whether it be best for
him to aid Pamphilus, or to obey the old man.
IN good earnest Dauus it is no time now to be flow
and fluggish, so far as I per∣ceiued of late by the old mans speech
tou∣ching the marriage: which if it bee not cunningly provided for and
prevented, will cast either me or my moister clean under foot: And yet I
wot not in the world what to doo: whether I shall help Pamphilus,
or else listen af∣la the old man. If I leave him helpless, I fear me yt will
cost him his life: Contrariwise, if I aid and fur∣there him, than stand I
in fear of the old mans threat∣ning, whom yt is a hard matter to beguile: for
first and foremost, he knows certainly of this same love, and being at
deadly fewd with me, he watches least I go about some guile to hinder the
marriage: if hée shall sée any such matter by mée, I
am utterly undone: or if the Toy take him in the head, hée will find
some cause or other, and so bée it right or wrong, he will tum∣ble
me headlong into the grinding house: Now over and besides these
mischiefs, this comes also in the very
•icke: This same woman an of
Intros whether she be wife to Pamphilus, or but his love, I
know not, but great with child she is by him: And it is a world to hear
their presumption: They fare as they were lunatic, and not love sick,
for be it boy or girl that she shall be delivered of, they are determined
to bring it  
up. And now they fine betwixt themselves an od
péece of craft, that this Glycerie is a free borne woman of
A∣thens: There was a good while since (say they) a certain old Merchant
which suffered shipwreck at the Isle of Intros, who afterword died
there: and that shée being then a small succourless child cast
on the shore, should (forsooth) bée fostered by
Chrysis father: A trim fable. In good faith me thinks it sounds
nothing like troth, and yet this feigned devise pleases them well. But lo
where Mysis comes furth from her. Now will I go get me hence to the
market place to méete with Pamphilus, least his father come
upon him unawares with this ma∣riage matter.
MYSIS declares the cause of her coming furth from
Glyce∣rye: And here Terence g•ues a
lesson, That such espe∣cially as have charge of weighty business,
ought to es∣chew immoderate drinking of wine, concluding that a drunkard can
do nothing rightly.
ARchillis, I heard you a pretty while since, bid
that Lesbia should be brought hither: In very truth she is a
drunken harebraynd woman, and far unfit to take charge of a woman in travail
of her first child: yet nevertheless I will bring her: See how ernest
the old Trot is, to have her here, and all because she is a drinking
Gossip of hers. God grant my Mistress safe and spéedy
deliverance, and that any other miscarry under the hands of the Tip∣sie 
 Midwiefe, rather than shée: But what is the matter that
I sée Pamphilus so much out of quiet, I fear me all is not
well: I will stay, and know whither this his trooble of mind, bring not
some hey∣uy news.
This scene contains the grief of Pamphilus as touching the
marriages where likewise he promises to keep faith∣full touch with
Glycerie, yea, whether his father will or no, if cause so require.
IS this a point of good nature, or a kind¦lie déede?
Is this the part of a Father?
What might that be?
O the faith of God and man, what can be greater spite than
this? he had purposed with himself to marry me to a wife to day: ought not
I have known so much before hand? had it not bin méete to have made
me pri∣uie to it long ere this?
Wo is me (silly wench that I am,) what
news doo I hear?
What means Chromes, who having once denied to give
me his daughter to wife, doth he now change his mind in that, because he
séeth me still one manner of man? Doth he deal so ouerthwartly,
to thend to part me from Glycerie, forlorn man that I am? which, if
it come to pass, I am clean cast away. Alas, alas, is there any man
living so rest of all grace  and good fortune as my self? O
Lord God, shall I by no means be able to avoid the Alliance of
Chromes? How many ways am I despised and set at nought? All
things were done and past, and so, I that was re∣fused am sought for
again, and wherefore, without it be as I suspect, they cloak some
secret fault in her, and because she cannot be shifted to any other,
they would thrust her on me.
These words do astony me for fear, (silly wench
that I am)
But what should I now say of my father? is it fit he go
so carelessly to work about so great a matter? who passing by me
crewhile at the market place, spake to me in this sort:
Pamphilus; thou must be married to day: Get the home and make
thée ready. It séemed to me he said, Get thee away quickly
and hang thy self. I was utterly amazed: Think ye that I could bring furth
one word, or make any excuse for my self, were it wrong, false, or never
so foolish? I became quite dumb. But had I wist so much before, if one
should now ask me, what would I then have don, surely some∣what I would
have don, rather than doo as I did. But now whereto shall I first betake
me? I am cumbred with so many cares, which diversely hale my mind to &amp;
fro, what with love &amp; pity toward this woman, The grief I conceive of
this marriage, and the shame I incur with my father, who hitherto so
gently suffered me to do what I would, (and shall I now gainsay him?)
That wo is me, I wot not what to do.
I fear me wretch whereto this doubtful pang will
break in the end, so as now it is very needful that either he come and
speak with my Mistress himself, or else that I say somewhat to him as
touching her. For while his mind hangs thus in doubt, it is carried
héere, and there, with the least thing in the world.
Who talks héere? O Mysis, welcome.
God save you moister Pamphilus.
How doth thy mistress?
Doo you not know? she is in labour with child: And for this
the silly woman takes care and thought, because heretofore your marriage was
appointed to bée made as this day: Moreover she is in great fear
least you will forsake her.
O Lord, should I find in my hart to do so? Alas poor
soul, should I suffer her to bée deceived thorough me, which
committed her whole trust unto me, and even put her life in my hands? Shall I
deal so by her (whom I have entirely loved as my wife) that through
néed and necessity her chaste behaviour and well ordered life
should be corrupted and changed? No, I will never doo it.
I would not fear at all, if it lay only in you, but I fear
how you will be able to hide the brunt of your father.
What, dost thou think me so faint hearted, or moreover,
so unkind, or discourteous, or so cruel, as that neither our daily
familiarity, nor love, nor yet ve∣rye shame, can move me nor put mée
in mind to kéepe promise with her?
This one thing I wot well: shée hath deserved that
you should be mindful of her.
That I should be mindful of her? O Mysis
Mysis, those words of Chrysis remain yet printed in my
mind, which she spake unto mée, as touching Gly∣cerie:
Being néere the point of Death, she calls mée to her: I came,
and after you were gone aside and no body left but wée two: thus
shée began: Friend Pam∣philus, you sée of what beauty
and yéeres this same maiden is: neither are you to bée told,
what incon∣uenience these two things are unto her, both for sa∣uing her
honesty and her stock: And therefore I pray you by this right hand of
yours, and your honesty:  I beséech you also on your
faith and troth, and in res∣pect of the solitary state of this maiden,
that you will neither part her from you, nor forsake her: even as I have
loved you as mine own brother, and as shée al∣ways estéemed
you alone aboue all men living, and was in all things ready at your
commandment. I bequeath you to her, as husband, friend, tutor, and fa∣there.
These our goods I commit unto you, and charge you with them of trust.
Hereupon shée delivered Glyce∣rye unto me in way of
marriage, and by and by gave up the Ghost: I received Glycerie of
her, and having once received her, I will keep her still.
Truly I hope no less.
But why art thou come from her?
I go for the midwife.
Hye thée apace: and hearst thou mée? beware
thou speak not one word of the marriage, least that also increase
her grief.
O, I understand you.
CARINVS understanding that Philumena shall be married to
Pamphilus: entreats Pamphilus that he doo not marry her. Here Carinus and
Byrria are purposely brought in, least that Philumena should not bee
e∣steamed of at all.
BYrria, what say thou? shall shée
bée married this day to Pamphilus?
Yea, even so.
How know thou?
I heard it of Dauus but a little while since, at
the market place.
Wo is mée unhappy man, for as my mind was held
betwéene hope and fear ever till now: so now that all hope is past,
even worn and wearied with care, it is utterly dismayed.
I pray you Sir for Gods sake, sith you cannot have what
you would, that you will have what you may.
There is nothing that I will have but Philu∣mena.
Alas how much better were it for you, to séeke to
wear this love out of your mind, than to utter furth such
spéeches, whereby your desire is kindled more and more in vain.
Wée can all lightly when wee are in health, give good
counsel to such as are sick: But if thou were in my case, thou
would sing mée a new song.
Well, go too then, doo as you list.
But to where I sée Pamphilus, I am
de∣termined to prove all manner of ways before I dye.
What will he now doo?
This same man will I entreat, him will I ear∣nestly
beséech, to him will I discover my love: I be∣léeue 
 I shall get him to put of the marriage, at least, for a few
days longer: and in the mean space I hope somewhat may be done.
That somewhat, will prove just nothing.
But how think thou Byrria, were I best go to
him or not?
Yes, what else? though you obtain nothing at his hands, that
yet hée may think you ready to make him cuckold, if hée do marry
her.
Go get thée hence knave, with a mischief to
thée for thy peevish suspicion.
I see Carinus: God spéede sir.
O Pamphilus, God save you: I come to you
re∣questing at your hands, hope, health, help, and coun∣sail.
In good faith I am neither a méete man to give
counsel, nor yet have wherewith to help an o∣there: but what is your
matter?
Do you marry to day?
So the talk goes.
Pamphilus if you do so, then shall you never
sée mée alive after this day.
Why, how so?
Alas I fear to utter it: I pray thée Byrria
doe thou tell it him.
I will.
What is it?
He is in love with your Bride.
Now in good faith hée is not of my mind: but come
néere and tel me Carinus, hath there been any further matter
betwéene you and her?
O, Alas Pamphilus, no.
Mary sir I would there had.
Now I heartily beséech you, even for the love and
friendship betwixt you and mée: first and foremost, that you do not
marry her at all.
Truly I will do my best endeavour.
But if you may not otherwise choose, or that this marriage
be according to your own hart:
According to my hart?
Yet at least wise, prolong it for a day or two, while I
get mée away somewhither, that I may not behold it.
Nay but listen to mée now Carinus, I hold it
in no wise the part of an honest man, to pike a thank where none is due
unto him: God wot I am more desirous to be rid of this marriage, than you are
to obtain it.
You have revived my spirits.
Now if either your self, or Byrria here, can do
ought in the matter, be doing, fine, find out and pro∣cure the means that
you may have her: I for my part will so handle the matter, as shée
may not bée marri∣ed to mée.
I have my desire.
Oh, in very good time do I sée Dauus,
whose advise I use altogether.
But in good sooth thou wilt tell mée nothing,
ex∣cept such things as are not worth the knowing: dost thou not get
thée hence.
Yes truly, and that with a very good will.
DAVVS having gathered by sundry signs and conjectures the
unlikelihood of the marriage, seeks all the town over for Pamphilus, &amp;
rejoices out of measure.
O Good God, what good news doo I bring with me, But where
shall I now find Pamphilus, that I may release him from that
fear he is in, and fill his hart with joy.
He is
very méery, what the mat∣la is I know not.
It is nothing to any purpose, he hath not yet understood of
this mischief.
Whom I verily beléeue, if he have yet hard of the
marriage prepared for him.
Doo
you not hear what he saith?
That he is beside himself, séeking for me all
the Town over. But where shall I seek for him, or whi∣there shall I now
first go?
What, doo you linger to speak to him?
Well, I go my ways.
Dauus, come hither, stay.
Who calls me? O my Master Pamphilus, you are the
man I look for. Well met Carinus: I find you both in good time, even
you two I would speaks with all.
Dauus, I am a forlorn man.
But yet listen to me a little.
I am cast away.
I wot what you fear.
Truly and my lief is in hazard in very déede.
I wot also what you fear.
I must be married.
And that I know too.
Yea but too day.
You dull me with too many words, and yet I know the matter
already. You fear least you must marry Philumena: And you
(Carinus) take care how you may marry her.
Thou hast hit the nail on the head.
That same is it.
And in that, is there no danger at all: I war∣rant you.
I pray thée for Gods sake, rid me presently out of
this fear, poor wretch that I am.
Lo, I put you out of fear, Chromes will not at this
time give you his daughter to wife.
How know thou so much?
I know it full well: your father met me ere∣while and told me
that he would marry you this day to a wiefe, besides many things else,
which now is no time to rehearse. By and by I hasted me and ran eve∣rye foot to
the market place, to tel you of this: and when I could not find you there, I
got me up, on a high standing, and looked round about me, you were no where
to be séene. By chance I spied Byrria this mans servant,
I ask him for you, he said he saw you not. This troubled me: Then I
bethink me what to doo: and as I was returning thence, I fell to mistrust
whether there were any marriage towards or no, I remembered there was very
small provision of meat: he himself was very sad: The marriage was to
be made on the sudden, This did not hang well to∣gether.
What of all this?
I presently got me to Chromes house, and be∣ing
come thither, there was no body stirring about the door, I was glad of
that.
You say well.
Tell on.
I stay there a while, and could sée no body either 
 going in, or coming out, I went my ways in, and looked
narrowly, there was never an elderly woman, no tryming up of the house, no
stir or preparation.
I grant you, it is great likelihood.
Nay but doo these things séeme to agrée
with a marriage matter?
No Dauus, as I guess.
Guess say you? you take your mark amiss: The matter is
out of al doubt: Moreover, as I was coming thence, I met with Chromes
boy, carrying potherbs and a halpwoorth of small fish for the old mans
supper.
Dauus, I am rid out of danger this day by thy means.
Truly but you are never the néerer.
How can that be? for surely Chromes will not give
his daughter in marriage to him.
O wise woodcok, as though it must néedes follow, if
he give not his Daughter to him, that therefore you shall marry her: unless
you sée better unto it, and un∣less you make suit to the old
mans fréends, you do but throw your cap in the wind.
You advise me well, I will go thither, al∣though in good
faith, this hope hath deceived me alre∣die more than once or twice.
Farewell.
DAVVS earnestly prays and persuades Phamphilus, to
say unto his father that he will marry.
WHat means my father then? why doth he dissemble with
vs?
Mary I shall tel you, if so be it he be now in a chafe
because Chromes will not marry his daughter unto you: Then lo, may
he think with himself that he doth you wrong: But yet he will think it no
wrong at all, before such time as he shall perceive how your mind is
settled towards marriage. But if you shall refuse to marry, then will he
lay all the fault upon you, and then will be old stir and hurleburly.
What would thou have me to doo? that I should
yéeld to marry?
O master consider, he is your father, it is hard to
withstand him: Moreover this Glycerie is a love woman, he will
quickly pick a quarrel against her, and so turn her packing out of
town:
May he turn her away?
Yes, out of hand.
Then I pray thée Dauus what shall I doo?
Say to your father that you will marry.
Alas.
Why, what is the matter?
Should I say so?
Why not?
I will never doe it.
Never deny it.
Never doo thou persuade me to it.
Do but consider what will follow of this.
This will follow, that I shall be shut from Glycerie, and
tied up to this woman.
Not so: Mary I wene your father will say thus much to you:
I will have you to marry a wife to day. You shall say, I will: And then I
pray you what cause shall he have to chide you? By this means you shall
make all his devises which now are of force, to be then altogether frivolous:
and that without any danger to your self: for this is without all
question, that Chre∣mes will not marry his daughter unto you: And
for more surety, you shall not cease to use Glyceries comp∣ny
still as you have done, least happily he should alter his mind. Tell your
father that you are willing to marry, so as when he would be angry with you,
he may have no cause: for as for that vain hope of yours (imagining thus
with your self: Tush, it is no dāger for me to withstand my father, No
man will marry his daughter unto a man of my manners) I shall easily put
you out of that hope: he will find out a poor and mean marriage for you,
rather than he will suffer you to be spilt by harlots. But if he shall
perceive that you are well content with this marriage, you shall make him
reckless of the matter, he will seek an other wife for you at leisure, and
in the mean space some good fortune will fall.
Dost thou think so?
Nay surely there is no doubt of that.
Yea, but take héede whereto thou persuade me.
What, are you not yet resolved?
Well, I will say so to my father: but we must take
héede, that he understand not of the child I have  by
Glycerie, for I have promised to bring it up.
O notable hold déede.
Shée earnestly besought mée to give her my
faith and troth on this, that so shée might bée sure I
would not forsake her.
Well, it shall bée cared for. But your father is here
hard by, beware that hée do not find you sad.
In this scene bee devises practised of both sides:
Dauus puts Pamphilus in mind that hee doe not fear or faint, but that he
be provided what to say to his father.
I Come again to sée what they are a doing or
consulting.
Hée makes sure account that
you will refuse to marry: he hath studied by himself, and is now come
out of some solitary corner, hoping he hath de∣uised talk wherewith
hée may bring you beside your self: Therefore sée that
your wits bée your own.
I will doo as well as I may.
Moister, credit mée in this: I say unto you that
your father will not give you one evil word to day, if you doo but say that
you will marry.
BYRRIA watches Pamphilus: Pamphilus answeareth his father
that hee is ready in all things at his commaun∣demeaned. Byrria makes report
thereof to Carmus.
MY moister gave mée commandment, that setting
all business aside, I should watch Pamphilus this day, to thend I
might learn what hée did as touching the marriage: and that is the
matter I am now come after him hither: but lo where he is with Dauus,
here hard at hand. I will do that, that I come for.
I sée them both present before
my face.
Hem, look to your self.
Pamphilus.
Turn suddenly
toward him as though you were not aware of his coming.
Oh father.
Well handled of you.
I will have thée to bée married to day, as I
told thée before.
Now fear I of our side, how this man will
answer.
Neither in this thing, nor in any thing else, shall you find
any let or delay, in me.
Out alas.
He hath never a word more to say.
What did he answer?
Thou dost as becomes thée, in that I obtain with
thy good will, ye thing which I require at thy hands.
did not I say true?
As far as I héere, my master is like to leap
be∣side his wife.
Now go thy ways in, that there be no tarrying for thée
when néede is.
I go.
Is there no trust to be put in any man, for any thing in the
world? 
That same is a true saying which is commonly used: Every
man wishes more good to himself than to an other. I my self have
séene that same maiden, and I remember she was of a good love∣lie
favour: Therefore I blame not Pamphilus so much though he had
leaver, lye colling of her himself a nights, than that my Moister
should: well, I will go show all to my Moister, that for these ill
news he may give me ill language.
IN this scene Dauus and Simo deceive one an other: which is
worth the noting.
NOw thinks the old man verily, that I bring some
fly shift to beguile him, and that I stayed here therefore of purpose.
What saith Dauus?
Truly even as much now as be∣fore.
What, is it nothing thou says?
Nothing at all.
But I had hoped to hear somewhat.
I perceive the matter fell out otherwise than
he thought for, and that troubles the man.
Can thou tell mée truth?
Why, nothing readier.
Is my son any thing gréeued at this marriage, in
respect of the love and familiarity betwixt him and this strange
harlotry?
No certainly, or if he be, his gréefe is but for two or
three days (perceive you mée?) and than it is don: for hée will
take a right course with himself, as tou∣ching that matter.
I commend him for it.
While he might, &amp; while it stood with his youth∣full
yéeres, he gave himself to love: nor then neither, but secretly:
for he took héede that it should not at any time bring him to ill
name, even as became a manly man to do. Now it is méete for him to have
a wife, hée hath settled his mind on marriage.
Mée thought that he was somewhat sad.
Not a whit for this matter, but there is some cause why he
is not well pleased with you.
What is that?
A trifling matter.
What is it, I say?
Nothing in effect.
But yet tell me what it is?
He saith that there is too much niggardnes used in this
matter.
What, by mée?
Yea by you. Hée scarcely (quoth hée)
bestowed for∣tie pence in cates, and doth hée séeme to marry
his son to a wife: what man of calling (of my fréendes and
e∣qualles) shall I bid to my wedding feast, as the case now stands? And
you likewise, here be it spoken, are too much sparing indéede,
which I do not commend in you.
Sir hold you your peace.
I have moved his patience.
I will sée those things cared for well enough: but
what is the meaning of this? what is it that this de∣ceitfull knave goes
about? surely if any thing happen otherwise than well, even that same
varlet is the chéefe woorker of it.
SIMO, thorough his overmuch wiliness, is notably deceived,
thin∣king the birth of the child to bee a fained matter: which indeed was
nothing less.
IN good sooth
Lesbia, it is very true as you say: one shall hardly find a man
that is faithful and true of his word to a woman.
This maid belongs to her of Intros, how says
thou?
Shée doth so.
And yet this young man Pamphilus.
What says
shée?
Was as good as his word.
What?
I would to God that either the old man were deaf, or
that prattling wench dumb.
For were it man child or woman child that my mistress were
delivered of, hée took order for the nur∣sing of it.
O the king of heaven, what is this I hear? Why, all is past
help, at least if it bee true that this maid tells.
He is a good natured young man, by your saying.
Yea of an excellent good nature: But doo you foal∣low me in
presently, that she néede not to stay for you.
I come after you.
What remedy now may I find for this
mischéefe?
What means this? doth he dote so much on this strange
harlot indéede? Now I perceive how this gear cottons: I scarce
found it out now at last, foolish man that I am.
What doth he say that he hath found out?
That knave séekes to abuse me with this falsehood
first and foremost. They fine that this queen is brought a bed, to thend
that so they may drive Chromes from giving his daughter.
Oh lady Iuno Lucina, help and
save mée I beséech thée.
Whup hoyda: what in all the hast? sée a foolish
devise: as soon as she heard me at the door, shée straight
falls in labour: Dauus, this was not half cunningly contrived of
thée, each thing in his due time.
What, by mée?
Why make you it so strange, have you forgot your
scholar?
I wot not what you say.
If this knave had set his craft a brooch against me
unawares, and in a marriage meant in good earnest: what pranks would
hée than have played mée, trow you? But now, be it upon his
peril: as for me I am safe.
LESBIA coming furth, shows the state of Glycery lying
in childbed: and withal appoints a drink to be ge∣uen her, thereby imitating
the Physicians, which are wont to prescribe unto the sick, what they
shall eat and drink. Lastly, Simo and Dauus are at variance about the
birth of the child.
HItherto Archillis I sée all good signs
of health in her, that are usual &amp; ought to bée in a woman in her
case: Now first and foremost, cause you those things to be washed,
and then give her that drink, and the same quantity that I ap∣appointed for
her. I will come back again hither by and by. Before god there is a jolly
bouncing boy borne unto Pamphilus: Now I pray God send him long to
live, because he hath so honest a man to his father, who had care &amp;
conscience not to deal amiss with this kind hearted young woman.
And who that knew thée, would not judge this al∣so to
be a craft of thy budget.
And what is that, I pray you?
Shée did not will them while she was in the
house, to doo what was néedefull for the woman that lies in, but after
she was come furth, she kept a prattling out of the stréet, unto
them which were within doors. Why Dauus, am I so little set by of
thée? Or I pray thée, doo I séeme so fit a man, for
thée to séeke to beguile, with such manifest fraud and
falsehood? At least wise thou dost  thy diligence, so as
I may well séeme to bée put in fear by thée: Surely if I
had known it before.
Now
in good faith this man beguiles himself, I doo not.
Why, did I not give thée straight charge to the
contrary? did I not threaten thée with punishment, that thou
should not doo it? did it fear thée a whit? what hath it booted?
Shall I now give thée credit in this: that shée there, is
brought a bed of child by Pam∣philus?
O, ho, I
sée now wherein he is deceived: I wot well what I will doo.
Dost thou not answer mée?
What should you give mée credit? as though it was
not told you before, that these things would come so to pass.
Did any body tell mée so?
Why than, did you of your self, find that this is a fained
matter?
Hée laughs mée to scorn.
No doubt it was told you before, for how else should it come
upon you to suspect it?
How? marry because I knew thée.
As who should say, it was done by my devise.
Yea I am well assured of that.
Well sir, you doo not yet thoroughly know what manner of man
I am.
Doo not I know thée knave?
But when I begin to tell you any thing, you straight way
think that I go about to beguile you.
That is a lye.
So as in good faith, now a days, I dare not scarce open my
lips to you.
This one thing I am sure of, that here is no wo∣man
delivered of child.
Have you understood so? But nevertheless ere it 
 be long, the child shall be brought here and laid before the
door: Moister, I tel you of it now before hand, that you may certainly know
what will follow: least here∣after you should say, that this was don by
the counsel or craft of Dauus: And I would in any wise, that
this evil opinion which you have of mée, were clean out of your
mind.
How came thou to know this?
I heard it, and I beléeue it be true.
There be many things mo than one, which cause me to
conjecture as I doo: Even now, is the first time that this queen declared
her self to be with child by Pam∣philus, which is but a false
devise. Moreover, now that she sées preparation at home for the
wedding, the maid forsooth, in all hast is sent for the midwife to come
to her, and withal to bring also a child with her.
Well, without that it come so to pass that you do
sée the child with your own eyes, nothing will hinder the course
of this marriage.
What say thou? when thou once vnderstoodest that
they purposed such a matter, why did thou not than presently tell it
unto Pamphilus?
Why than, who else hath withdrawn him from these harlots but
my self? for certainly we all know how excéedingly he loved this
woman. Now he is desi∣rous to have a wife, and as for that matter, let
mée a∣lone withal: yet nevertheless go you on forward still with
this marriage as you doo: and I hope God will prosper it.
Very well, go thy ways in, stay there till I come: and
provide what is néedfull. 
He could not drive it in∣to my head, to make me
beléeue all this, neither am I certain whether all that hée told
me be true or no: But I pass not greatly for that. Marry the matter I
stand most upon, is the promise which my son himself made unto me:
Now will I go méete with Chromes:  I will entreat
him for his daughter to my son in marriage, and if I doo obtain her, why
should I make any more daying for the matter, but marry them out of the way?
for as touching my sons promise, I have no doubt at all, if hée
shall refuse to perform it, but I may full rightly compel him to it. But
lo yonder where Chromes himself comes towards mée, even in
as good time as may be.
In this scene, by means of Chromes and Simo meeting
together, the fained marriage is become a marriage in good earnest.
GOD save you neighbour Chromes.
O sir, you are the only man I sought.
And I you.
You com as well as I could wish: There have some bin with
me, which told me they heard you say that my daughter should this day be
married to your son: Now the matter I come for, is to sée, whether
you, or they, do dote.
Hear me a word, or two, and you shall soon know both
what I desire of you, and also what you require of me.
I hear you, go too, speak your mind.
Chromes I beséech you for Gods sake, and
for our frendships sake begun betwixt vs from our childhood, and grown
together with our years: I beseech you as you love your only daughter, &amp;
as you tender my son,  whom it lies in you chéefely to
save or to spill, yt you will help me now in this matter, and like as the
mar∣riage should have bin, that so now, it may be made up betwixt them.
Tush, never pray mée so much, as though you could
not obtain this at my hands but by much pray∣ing: Doo you think mée now
an other manner of man, than I was then, when I promised my daughter unto
you? If it be a matter profitable for both parts, that this marriage be made,
then cause his furthwith to be sent for. But if there grow of this, more
harm than good, as well to the one as to the other: Then my desire is, that
you will consider of the matter indifferently for both parts, even no
otherwise than if she were your daughter, and that I were father unto
Pamphilus.
Yea Chromes, even so is my meaning, and there∣fore
doo I request that it may be effected. Neither would I request it at your
hands, if the matter if self did not give me good occasion.
What may that be?
Mary sir, my son and Glycerie are fallen
out.
I hear you.
Nay, but so far fallen out, as I hope they may be quite
set a sunder.
Tush, it is but a Tale.
Nay, without dowt it is as I say.
Yea forsooth, thus, as I shall tell you, The falling
out of Lovers, is a Renewing of Love.
Alas, I pray you then, let vs now prevent that, while time is,
and while his hot love is allied with bit∣la words: Let vs couple him to a
wife, before that this naughty parks shrewd crafts, and fained tears, doo
work again his lovesick mind, unto pity and com∣passion: I hope
(Chromes) that being once reclaimed, by means of good company and
honest wedlock, he will afterword, with cas, wind himself out of these
mischéefs.
It séemes so to you, but I think it neither
possi∣ble for him to continue with this wife, nor yet for me to be able to
endure it.
How can you know that, until you have made trial of it?
Yea mary, but it is a shrewd matter to make that Trial upon
my daughter.
Well yet, the very worst and uttermost of all, can be but
a divorce or separation, if any such matter should happen, as God
forbid it should: But contrary∣wise, if by this means he doo amend and
become a new man, sée than how many commodities ensue: First and
foremost, you shall restore to your fréend his son: next, you
shall find a sure son in law to your self, and lastly, a stayed
husband to your daughter.
What? say you so? If you be persuaded that this is
expedient, I for my part, will not have you hen∣dred of any good turn that I
may afford you.
Chromes, not without good cause have I always set most
store by you of any man.
But what said you erewhile?
What?
How came you to know, that they be at jar betwéene
themselves?
Even Dauus himself, the chéefe of their
privy Council, did tell it me. And he likewise persuades me to hasten
this marriage, as much as I may: Think you he would have done this, unless
he were sure that my son desires the same? You shall hear him your
self, by and by. Holo sirs, call me out Dauus hither. But
sée yonder where he comes furth of him self.
Dauus fawning upon the old man, doth persuade him to make
up the marriage, little thinking that it should come to pass in deed:
But whē he perceives that Si∣mo deals in good earnest with Chromes as
touching his daughter: he is then much perplexed, and clean beside
himself.
I was coming to you.
well, what is the matter?
Why is not the bride sent for? it waxes now very late.
Doo you not héere him. Well Dauus, I stood
somewhat in fear of thée erewhile, least thou (as the common sort
of servants are wont) should by craft and knavery have deceived me, in
respect that my son is in love.
Alas sir, should I have don such a déede?
I was of that beléefe, and therefore fearing such a
matter, I kept secret from my son and thée, that which now I will
tell thée.
What is it?
Thou shalt know, for now in a manner, I begin to have some
trust in thée.
At last then, you know what manner of man I am.
This marriage, was not meant to have bin made
indéede.
What, was it not?
No, but I feigned it of purpose, that I might thoroughly
try you.
What, is it true sir?
It is even so as I tell thée.
Sée, I could never perceive so much. O notable
policy.
Nay but listen to me, as soon as I bade thée go
hence in, this man met me in excellent good time.
Out alas, are we not clean cast a way?
I show him all that thou toldst me erewhile.
What is this I héere?
I entreat him for his daughter, and with much a doo I obtain
her.
I am utterly undone.
Ho, what say thou?
I say it is excellently well don.
Now is there no let or delay on this mans behalf.
I will straight go hence to bid every thing be made ready,
and so bring word hither again.
Now Dauus I pray thée, sith thou alone
hast brought this marriage for mée to pass:
Yea truly, I, and none else.)
That thou wilt yet moreover labour my sons amendment.
In déede I will doo what I can.
Thou moist now well do it, especially while he is netteled
at the heart.
Well, set your mind at rest.
Go to then, But where is he now?
It is marvel if he be not at home.
I will go to him, and tell him my mind in the same
sort, as I told it thée.
I am a forlorn creature, what shall kéepe me but
that I must go hence straight into the grinding house to prison? No
prayer or entreaty will serve, I have now brought all out of frame: I have
deceived my master: I have forced a marriage on my Masters son: I was
the cause yt the marriage shall be made to day, even quite unhoped for of
ye old man, &amp; clean contrary to the mind of Pamphilus.
Sée these goodly crafts of mine: had I not  busied my
self, there had happened no harm at all: 
But
lo yonder I sée him himself, I am but a dead ma•…: I would to God héere were
some place, where I •…ight throw
my self down headlong.
PAMPHILVS takes on very much, that by following the
de∣ceitfull devise of Dauus, he made answer to his fa∣there that he would
marry.
WHere is that same mischéeuous varlet, which hath
clean undone mée?
Now Lord have mercy upon mée.
And yet I confess, this that hath happened, is even good
enough for mée, when I would bée so sottish, and so ve∣rye
a dolt, as to commit my whole estate and welfare unto a prating villain.
Therefore I reap a just reward for my folly. But he shall never scope
scotfrée with it.
I am sure to bée safe enough for ever
hereafter, if I may but now avoid this mischéefe.
But what may I now say to my father? shall I now refuse
marriage, and yet promised erewhile that I would marry? with what face dare I
doo that? I wot not what to doo with my self.
Truly nor I neither, what to doo with my self: yet
this is it I am fully resolved upon, I will tell him that I shall
presently find out some remedy, and so put of my punishment yet a
little while.
Oh.
Now hée sées mée.
Come hither you honest man: how say you sir,
sée you not how I (poor soul) am bestad by means of your
devises?
But I will remedy it by and by.
Wilt thou remedy it?
Yes certainly moister Pamphilus.
Yes, even as thou did of late.
Nay rather better, I hope.
O, should I credit thée vile hangman? can thou
recover a matter full of trouble, and past all hope of help? Out alas, what
a sure stay had I of thée, who this day, out of my greatest
quietness, hast forced mée into a marriage spite of my téeth?
did I not tell thee it would come thus to pass?
You did so.
What then art thou worthy of?
Hanging. But yet suffer mée a little to come to my
self, I will straight way séeke out some help.
Alas that I have not leisure to punish thée as I
would: it is now time for mée to sée to my self, and not to
be avenged of thée.
This scene doth chiefly contain the angry speeches of
Carinus a∣against Pamphilus.
IS this a thing credible, or worcester∣thy to be spoken of, that
there should be so much perverseness in any man, as to delight in
evil, and to séeke his own commodity, even by the discommodity of
an other? Is this kind of people to be trusted? Nay certainly, those are
the very worst kind of people, who are somewhat shamefaced in denying a
Request, but af∣terward, when time requires performance of their pro∣mises,
Then of necessity, they bewray themselves and falter, and yet the
matter it self drives them then to a flat denial: Then is their
spéech void of all shame and honesty, as thus: who are you sir?
What friend of mine are you? why should you desire my swéete hart?
O sir, hear you me, I love you well, but my self bet∣la.
Nevertheless, if you ask where is truth and trusti∣nes of promise,
they are never a whit ashamed. Now they are not a frayd to deny, when as they
ought to perform: And yet are they then afraid, when they should not. But
what shall I doo? Is it best that I go to him, to taunt and take him up
for this injury? I shall give him shrewd words his fill: But one may
say to me, thou shalt be never the néere: yes very much: without
doubt I shall anger every vain in his hart, and withal shall ease mine
own mind.
Carinus, I have unawares (without God help vs) even clean
cast away both you and my self.
Yea, unawares: is it so indéede? Now at last you
have got an excuse: Tush, thou hast broken thy faith and promise.
Why, what excuse now at last?
What, would thou yet again deceive me now, with those
subtle spéeches of thine?
Why, what is the matter with you now?
Mary after I had told you that I was in love with
Philumena, forsooth it pleased you to like her well for your
self: Wo is me woeful wretch, who estéemed the honesty of thy
mind by mine own.
You mistake the matter.
Why, and dost thou not think this yet a joy perfect enough
for thée, unless thou moist make a tame fool of me that am in love,
and feed me with vain hope? well, take her to thée.
Should I take her? Alack, full little do you know, in how great
troobles I am wrapped, unhappy man that I am: and what care and anguish, this
my Tormen∣tor hath put me to, with his devises.
Why, is that such a marueill? he takes en∣sample by
you.
Well, you would not say this, if you knew either me, or my
love.
I know you were at words with your father of late, and that is
the matter he is now displeased with you, but yet he could not cōpel you
to marry her to day.
Yea and by how much the more you are eg∣norant of my heaviness:
This same marriage was not meant or intended for me, neither did any man
mo∣tion, now at this time, to procure a wife for me.
I wot well, you are compelled to it even of your own
frée will.
Abide, you wot not yet how the case stands.
Yes certainly, I wot full well that you will marry her.
Why do you thus kill my hart? hear me what I shall say to
you: he never ceased, pressing, pursue∣ding, and praying me so
long, till at last he enforced me to say unto my father, that I would marry
her.
What man did this?
Dauus.
What, Dauus?
Yea, hée brought all out of square.
Wherefore did hée so?
I wot not in the world, without that God were highly offended
with mée, in that I followed his counsel.
Dauus, Did thou doo this?
Yes.
Ho, what say thou villain? Now I pray God give thee a
mischéeuous end as thou hast deser∣ued. Why I pray thee tell me,
if all the enemies hée hath in the world would have wished to force a
mar∣ryage upon him, what other counsel could they have given him than
this?
Well, I am deceived, but not discouraged.
I know it well.
The matter came not well to pass this way, now wee will
take an other course, unless you be of opine∣on, that because it had
ill success at the first: that there∣fore this evil may not now be
remedied at the last.
Yes mary may it, for I verily believe if thou doo bend thy
whole endeavour unto it, thou wilt make for me two marriages of one.
Moister Pamphilus, this I owe unto you of duty, as
being your servant: even day and night to labours to my uttermost with
might and maine, and to hazard my life to doo you good withal: it is your
part, if ought hath happened otherwise than was looked for, to pardon
mée. Be it that my doings prosper not: Why yet I doo my true intent:
Or find you some better reme∣die your self, and let not mée either
make or meddle withal.
That is it I desire: set mée again in the same
state thou fondest me.
I will.
But it must be don by and by.
Alas, but yet stay a little, Glyceries door
creaks.
That is nothing to thée.
Yet I would know.
What, still more staying?
Well, I will presently find you out a devise for
this.
HERE Pamphilus makes promise unto Mysis that he will no∣for
forsake Glycerie: yea though he shall procure all men to be his enemies for
it.
Wheresoever your friend Pamphilus be, I will
furthwith séeke him out, and bring him with me: In the mean time
(dere hart) doo not you vex your self with thought.
Mysis?
Who is there? O master Pamphilus, you méete
me in very good time.
What is the matter with thée?
My mistress bad me pray you for Gods sake, if you love her,
that you will come to her, now out of hand. She saith that she longs much
to sée you.
Out alas, I am a forlorn man? This mis∣chéefe
begins now again a fresh: Is it méete that both I and she
(silly souls) should be thus vexed and dis∣quieted 
thorough thy means? for doubtless that is the cause she now sends for
mée, having understood of the marriage I am towards.
Concerning which matter truly, full easily mought we have
bin at quiet, if this knave had not bu∣sted himself.
Go too, if he be not mad enough of himself, doo thou prick
him forward.
Truly forsooth, and even that is the cause that the
woeful woman is in sorrow for.
Mysis I swear to thée by all the Gods,
that I will never forsake her, no not if I wist, I should have all men
living mine enemies for it. I have desi∣red this woman in my hart:
Shée is fallen to my lot: wée are alike in manners and condition:
farewell they, that would set vs two a sunder. There shall none part her
from me, but only death.
I am now come to my self.
No not the answer of God Apollo can be true∣er
than this. Mary I would fine (if it may bée) that my father shall not
think, that I withstood the going forward of this marriage: But if it may
not bée, then will I go the plain way to work, that he may think that
I did withstand it. What manner of man do I seem?
Even as forlorn a creature as my self.
I séeke for counsel.
Thou art a valiant man.
Dauus I know whereabout thou goosed.
Well, certainly I will bring this to pass for you.
It is more than time it were don.
I have it but even now to doo.
What is it?
That thou deceive not thy self, I have it for this mans
behoof, and not for thine.
That is sufficient for me.
Tell mée I pray thée, what is that thou wilt
doo?
I fear me, this day will scant serve me to doo my
business: Think not than, that I am now at lei∣sure to discourse:
Therefore get yée both away hence, for yée doo but trouble
mée.
I will go sée Glycerie.
And what will you? whither away hence?
Wilt thou have me say the truth?
Nay, now he begins to tell me some long tale.
But what shall become of mée?
Why thou shameless man, is it not well for thée, that
I gain thée one little days respite, in that I doo prolong his
marriage?
O Dauus, yet notwithstanding.
What then?
That I may attain to marry her.
Sée a fool.
Well, look thou come hither to me, if so hée thou
may doo any good in the matter.
To what end shall I come? I can do nothing.
But yet if thou may doo ought.
Well, go too, I will come.
If thou moist doo any thing, thou shalt find me at
home.
Mysis doo thou stay here a little for
mée, till I come furth again.
Wherefore?
For a thing that must néedes be don.
Hye thee apace.
I tell thée, I will bée here again by and
by.
DAVVS brings the child before Simoes door, to thend to drive
Chromes back from accomplishing the marriage. And this scene consists
more in gesture, then in utterance.
WHat, can one be sure of nothing in this world? O Lord God,
I still thought, that this Pamphilus was my mistress
chéefest joy, as being her friend, her lo∣for, her husband, and one
ready to serve her turn in all assays. But now (a∣lack forlorn woman,)
what gréefe takes she for his sake? without doubt there is more
harm in this, than there was good in the other. But lo, Dauus comes
furth. Abide fellow, what is that, I pray thée? whither away carry
thou the child?
Mysis, now must I néeds have thée
show thy rea∣die wit and cunning in this matter.
Where about goosed thou?
Take this same child of me quickly, and lay it down before
our door.
What I pray thée, on the bare ground?
Take thée some herbs of this alter, and straw
un∣der it.
And why doest not thou doo it thy self?
Because if perhaps I shall be driven to swear to my
moister, that I laid it not there: That then I  may swear
with a safe conscience.
I perceive you. But yet tell me, I pray thée, how is it
come upon thee to be so holy now of late?
Go too, bestir thée, that thou may know further
of my mind, what I will doo. O good Lord.
Why, what now?
The Brides father is come, and hath preuen∣ted me. Now I leave
of my purpose which I first intended.
I wot not what thou say.
I will now make as though I came this other way on the right
hand: Sée that thou bée ready to an∣swear and uphold my talk,
in every point as shall bée néedfull.
I perceive not at all, what thou intend to doo. But if
there bée any thing that my help may stand you in stead, or that
thou sée further into the matter than I doo: I will stay here,
least you should be hind∣red of any benefit by my default.
CHROMES hears that Glycerie hath a child by Pam∣philus, and
withal that she is a free borne woman of Athens: by which means, he is
quite with∣drawn from the marriage.
NOw that I have made all things in a readiness for my
daughters marriage, I am come again that I may cause her to be sent for.
But what have we here? In good faith it is a child: woman did thou lay
this same child here?
Whether is this
fellow gon?
What, wilt thou not answer me?
Alack he is no where in sight, wo is me (poor wench) the
fellow is gon his ways, and left me here.
Good Lord of
heaven, what hurleburley is yonder at the market? how much people is there at
strife? without it be that corn be at a high price, I wot not in the world
what to make of it.
I pray you sir, why did you leave me here all alone?
How now, what tale is this of a roasted horse? Nay but
hear thou me Mysis, whose child is this? or who brought it
hither?
Art thou well in thy wits, that ask me this
question?
Whom then should I ask, séeing here is no body
else?
I marvel whence it should be?
Wilt thou not tell me what I ask?
Alas.
Come thy way hither on my right hand.
Thou rauest, did not thou thy self?—
Hushed, be not so hard for thy ears as to speak one
word more than I shall ask thée.
Thou raylest.
Whence is this child? speak out aloud.
From among you.
Ha ha ha, it is a wonder no doubt, if a hoore play a
shameless part.
This
maid belongs to her of Intros for ought I can perceive.
Doo we séeme such fit copesmates for you to mock
and dally withal?
I came in time.
Bestur thée quickly, and take a way the child hence
from the door. 
Abide still, sée thou stir not a
foot out of the place thou standst in.
I pray God a very vengeance light on thée, that so
dost terrify me, poor wretch that I am.
Doo I speak to thée or not?
What would thou?
And dost thou yet ask me what? I pray the whose child
hast thou laid here? Tel me.
Dost not thou know?
Let pass what I know, and tell me what I ask.
It is yours among you.
Which of vs owes it?
Pamphilus.
Ho, what said thou? Is it Pamphilus
child?
Why I pray thée and is it not?
I sée I did well
always to shun this same mar∣riage.
O notable prank worthy of punishment.
What exclaming make thou?
Why, did not I sée this same child brought unto you
yesterday in the evening?
O thou brazen feast fellow.
At least I saw
Gammer Canthara with her clothes tuckt about her, carrying somewhat
in her lap.
In good faith yet I thank GOD with all my hart, 
that there were some frée women of the city, at my mis∣tres
deliverance.
Without doubt she knew not him, for whose cause she
takes this matter in hand. If Chromes shall sée this same
child, laid héere before the door, then will he not give his daughter
in marriage: Ah, in good sooth he will give her so much the sooner.
But in good
sooth he will not.
Now be thou well assured of this, that if thou do not take
away the child, I will by and by spurn it into the midst of the street,
where I will trample thée also in the dirt.
In good sadness fellow, thou art not well in thy
wits.
One deceitful devise brings an other to light: I hear now
such whispering among them, that this same Glycerie is
frée borne of Athens.
What is this?
So as he shall be driven by law to marry her.
Why I pray thée, and is she not frée of this
City indéede?
I sée I was well nigh fallen into a shrewd
spore∣ting game unawares.
Who talks here? O Chromes, you come, in as good
time as may be: hear me what I shall say.
I have heard every word already.
What, have you hard all this talk?
I tell thee I hard all from the beginning.
I pray you and have you hard it in déede? fie, out
upon these lewd pranks: Now should this same queen be had hence into
Bridewell. This same is the man thou dost mock: think not then, that thou
mock∣est Dauus.
Alas for me unhappy wench that I am: In good sooth, old
father, I have told nothing but truth.
I know the whole matter already: but is Simo
within.
Yes.
Touch me
not thou varlet. By God if I tell not all this unto Glicerie, [neuer
credit me.]
Why thou foolish wench, thou perceives not what is
don.
What should I perceive?
This man is the brides father: it might not other∣wise be
compassed, to make him vnderstād these things that we would have
him.
Why then, thou should have told me so before.
I pray thée now, and dost thou think but small
difference betwéene that, that one doth in good earnest, and that
which is done for the nones.
CRITO coming from Andres to Athens, inquires whether
Glycerie have found out who be her parents or no: and understanding that
she hath not yet found them, hee is therewith much grieved, because that
matter doth hinder his enjoying of the goods fallen unto him by Gly∣ceries
death.
IT was told me, that héere in this stréete,
dwelt Chrysis, who chose ra∣there in this town to gather goods with
dishonesty, than to lead an honest poor life, in her own country. By
whose death, those same goods, by right of law, are come to me. But I
sée now of whom I may  enquire. God spéede
you.
I pray you whom doo I sée? Is not this
Crito, cousin germain to Chrysis? it is even he.
O Mysis, God save you.
And you too good Crito.
Alack for pity, and is Chrysis dead
indéede?
Yea truly forsooth, we poor souls are undone by his
death.
Why, what do you? how goes the world with you here, all
well?
What we? Truly (as the proverb goes) Wee doo as wee may,
sith wee may not as wee would.
How fares Glycerie, hath she found out yet who be
her parents here?
Would God she had.
Why than, &amp; hath she not yet? Than in an il hour am I
come hither. For in good faith if I had known this, I would never have set
foot forward in this jour∣ney. For she hath ever bin held and reputed for
Chrysis own sister. She is in present possession of al
that ye other had. And now, for me a stranger to go follow suits and
brables in law, how easy and profitable a matter were that for me here to
doo, even the examples of others doo foreshew me. Besides that, I cannot
but think, that she hath now some friend and defender, for she was of
méetely good age and stature, when she went from vs. I should be
exclaimed upon to bée a beggarly fogger, gréedily hunting after
heritage. And moreover, it were no reason to spoil her of that she
hath.
O Gaffar Crito, in good sooth full well dost thou
kéepe thy old wont still.
Well, sith I am come hither, bring me to her, that I may yet
sée her.
With a very-good will.
I will follow these, but I would not for any thing, that the
old man should now sée me.
SIMO earnestly desires to effect the marriage: Chromes on
the other side utterly renounceth Pamphilus for his son in law, because
hee hath a child by Glycerie.
WELL neighbour Simo, you have now had trial enough
and enough again, of my love and friendship towards you. I began to enter
into danger far e∣nough for you. Now at length cease your entreating: for
while I bent my self to follow your fancy, I had well nigh cast away my
daughter.
Nay rather (neighbour Chromes) I most instant∣lie
request and beseech you, that you will now per∣form in déede, the
good turn that ere while you promi∣sed me on your word.
See how unreasonable you are, respecting your own
desire: so you may bring to pass what you would have, you neither
regard a mean in curtsy, nor yet consider what you request at my
hands: for if you did, you would (now at last) give over to surcharge me
with your unreasonablenes.
With what unreasonablenes?
Why, &amp; do you ask me with what? mary sir, you
enforced me thus far, that to a loose young man anting∣led  in
love with a strange harlot, and utterly misliking marriage, I should give
my daughter to wife, to be in daily discord, and uncertain state of
wedlock, to thend that with her travail, and trooble, I might heal your
sons disease. You obtained this at my hands, and I went about it while
there was any boot: now it boots not, you must therefore bear with me. They
say, that same woman is frée born of this City. She is deliue∣red
of a child. Séeke to vs no further.
I beseech you for Gods sake, not to give your mind to
credit those, whose greatest profit grows by my sons lewdest
living: All this, is but forged and framed for the nones, by reason of this
marriage: when the cause why they do this, is once taken away, Then they will
cease.
You are deceived, for I my self saw her maid chiding and
brawling with Dauus.
I grant you.
Nay but in right good earnest, when as neither of them both
was aware of my being there.
I beléeue it well, and that they would do so,
Dauus foretold me a pretty while since, but I wot not how,
otherwise than I meant, I forgot to tell you so much.
SIMo hearing by Dauus, that there was one come, which
offer∣med Glycerie to be free borne of Athens: in a great rage, causes Dauus
to be had into prison fast bound. And here∣in, Terence doth lively
express the usual manner both of an angry father, and also of an
angry master.
AT my word, now (at length) set your hart at rest:
Sée where
Dauus is.
Whence comes
he?
What thorough my help, and yonder stranger.
What
knavery is that?
I have not séene a méeter man, a more
season∣ble coming, nor a fitter time.
Whom doth
this varlet prays thus?
Now all is out of danger.
Why doo I linger to speak to him?
My
master is here, what shall I do.
O, all hail to you honest man.
Now master, and master Chromes, all things be in
a redines within.
O it is trimly don of you.
Now send for him when you will.
Very well surely: that is the cause forsooth he is now
absent: Nay but answer me to this, what business hast thou there?
Who, I?
Yea.
What, I?
Yea, you sir.
I went in but even now.
As though I asked how long ago it was.
Your son and I went in together.
Why than, and is Pamphilus within? I am still vexed
unhappy man that I am. Why thou hang∣man thou, did not thou tell me that
they are fallen at debate.
So they are.
What makes he there than?
What
think you that he is a doing? he is sure chiding with her.
Nay but master Chromes, you shall here me tel you
of a notable strange matter: I wot not what old man is come yonder even now,
but to look to, he is a sub∣stantiall and wary man: if you saw his
face, you would take him for a right honest man. In his count∣nonce is sad
gravity, and his words do sound of truth.
What tidings bring thou?
Nothing forsooth but what I hard him say.
And what saith he, I pray you?
Mary that he knows Glycerie to be a frée
born woman of Athens.
Hola howh, Dromo, Dromo.
What is the matter?
Dromo.
Why, here me sir.
If thou speak one word more—Dromo.
I beseech you here me.
What would you have sir?
Hoise up this knave on thy back, and cary him in as fast
as thou can.
Whom?
Dauus.
Wherefore?
Because I will have it so, take him away I say.
What have I don sir?
Away with him.
If you do find that I told you any lye, kill me furth
right.
I will not here one word: I shall set thée in a
beat by and by, I warrant thée.
What, notwithstanding I say nothing but Troth?
Yea
nevertheless, sir sée thou that he be kept fast fetterd:
and hear thou me? bind his hands and féete together, 
Now sir go to: By God if I live this day to an end,
I will teach thée and him both, what danger it is for the one of you to
beguile his master, and for the other to deceive his father.
Tush man, be not in so great a rage.
O Chromes, do you not pity me, to sée what
re∣uerend regard my son hath towards me? and that I should take so much
travail for such a son? Well go to Pamphilus: Come out here
Pamphilus, Is there no shame in thée?
SIMO sharply rebukes his son: who confessing his
fault, submit∣teeth himself wholly unto his fathers pleasure, Chromes
en∣deuoreth to appease thextreame Rage of Simo.
WHo calls me? O I am undone, it is my father.
What says thou? thou arrand—
Fie, go to the matter, and cease your evil language.
Yea as though there could be any name to ill for this fellow.
Now sir, doo you say the same too? Is Glycerie frée
bone of this City?
So it is reported.
So it is reported? O wonderful impudence, doth he consider
what he saith, think you? is he any thing sorry for his misdéede?
Nay but sée, doth his colour a∣ny whit change, or show any sign
of shamefastness? is it meet he should be so unruly, as that contrary
to the custom of his cuntrimen, contrary to law, and con∣trary to the mind
of his father, hée doo labour to have that same naughty pack, even to
his utter infamy and reproach?
Wo is me, forlorn man that I am.
O Pamphilus, Pamphilus, dost thou now per∣ceiue
that, and never before? Long since iwis, long since, when thou gave thy
mind so lewdly, as that by one mean or other thou must fulfil thy
lust: lo, even that very first day, had this bin truly said of
thée. But what mean I? why do I vex and disquiet my self? why doo
I consume my self with care? why doo I wear my old age, with sorrowing
for his madness? is it, that I should suffer punishment for his faults?
Nay rather, let him have her: and farewell hée: let him live with her
and spare not.
My good father.
What my good father? as who should say, you have any
néede of this father: why, you have got you house, and wife, and
children, and all maugre your fathers hart. There be also those brought,
which af∣firm that same queen to be frée borne of this city: well, you
shall have the victory.
Father, may I speak a word or two?
What wilt thou say to me?
O Simo, yet hear him.
I hear him Chromes? what should I hear him?
Why man, yet give him leave to speak.
Well go too, he may speak, I let hm not.
Father, I confess I love that same woman: and if that
be an offence, I confess that also. I sub∣mit  my self
into your hands father, lay upon me what charge you will: command me. Is it
your plea∣sure I should marry a wife? will you have mée forgo this
woman? well, I will bear all as I may. Only this I beséech you, not
to beléeue that this old man is come hither by my appointment. Give me
leave to cléere my self, and that I may bring the man here before
your face.
That thou moist bring him here?
Yea Father, suffer. mée.
He craves but reason, give him leave.
Let me obtain this much at your hands.
I am content. Chromes, I yéeld to any thing,
so that I find not my self to be deceived by this fell∣low.
Small punishment contents a father, for a great offence
in his son.
In this scene Crito of Athens meets both with Simo and
Chre∣mes, whereby the whole error of the comoedy is laid opē: for here,
Glycerie is manifested to be the daughter of Chromes.
Cease to pray me, any one of these re∣spects, shall
cause mée to doo it: as ei∣there for your own sake, or for that the
matter is truth, or in respect that I wish well to Glycerie.
What, is it Crito of Intros that I doo
sée? Truly it is hée indéede. Welcome Cri∣to: 
 what make you at Athens, being here such a stran∣ger?
It is so fallen out. But is this Simo?
This same is hée.
What, is it for mée thou ask? why sir,
dost thou say that Glycerie is frée borne of this
City?
Dost thou deny it?
What, and art thou come so well provided
in∣déede.
Why so?
Ask thou why? shalt thou doo this, and scope
un∣punished? dost thou toll here into thy snare, young men void of
experience, and honestly brought up? Art thou hée that
féedest furth their minds with intysing &amp; fair
promising?
Abide, art thou well in thy wits?
And dost thou make marriages betwixt them and the harlots
that they are in love withal?
Alas I am undone, I
fear me the stranger will have never a word to say.
Simo, if you knew this man thoroughly, you would not
think so of him: this is an honest man.
May this fellow be an honest man? comes he this day so
jump in the very time of this marriage: and could he come never before now? why
Chromes, is this a man to bée beléeued?
Were I not afraid of my father, I could tell him that which
would satisfy him in this point well y∣nough.
Ho fogging knave.
What?
O Crito bear with him, this is his fashion.
Nay let him consider what he is: As for me, if hée
procéede to call mée at his pleasure, hée shall hear
that, that shall bée little to his liking. Doo I let that same
marriage? or doo I ought at all pass  for it? 
Thou
dost not bear thy gréefe patiently: for as touching what I spake,
whether it bée true or false that you heard, may soon be
known.
A certain man of Athens, a good while since,
suf∣fringe Shipwreck, was cast on shore at Intros, to∣gether
with that same Glycerie, as than a little child. This man being
than in néede &amp; necessity: by chance first arrived at the
house of Chrysis father.
Now he begins a fable.
Suffer him to go on.
What, even so indéede? hée interrupts me.
Go on with your tale.
Moreover, hée which received him into his house, was
my Cousin: there did I hear the man himself say, that hée was of
Athens: and in that house he died.
What was his name?
would you know his name so quickly? Pha∣nia.
Out alas to day.
In good sooth, I take it, his name was Phania. This
I am well assured of, that he said he was a 
Rhamnusian.
O the King of heaven.
Yea Chromes, there were than many other in
An∣dross, which hard him say the same.
Would to God it were no otherwise than I hope for. But tell
me this Crito, what said he than as touching the girl? did
hée say that shée was his daughter?
No.
Whose than?
His brothers daughter.
Without dowt she is mine.
What say you?
Nay what says thou?
Listen to this gear Pamphilus.
What think you of this?
That same Phania was my brother.
I knew the man, and I wot well he was your bro∣there.
He flying hence, for fear of the war, takes his way after
me into Asia, and than he was afraid to leave her here behind him.
Since which time, I never hard what became of him till now.
I am well nigh beside my self, my mind is so whelmed,
with fear, hope, Joy, and with wont∣ring at so great, and so sudden good
hap.
Now in good faith, I am glad that by many proofs she is
found to be your daughter.
Father I beléeue it well.
But there remains yet one doubt, which sore troubles
me.
You are well worthy to be hated for your péeuish
preciseness: you make a doubt where all is as plain as a pack stiff.
What is that you doubt of?
Her name falls not out right.
Truly she had an other name, when she was a child.
What name? Cannot you remember it Crito?
I am calling it to mind.
Shall I suffer this mans memory to be a hinderance unto my
wished joy, when as I may help my self in this point? no, I will not
suffer it. Lo you hear Cremes, the name you séeke for, is
Passibula.
That same is she.
Is it even she.
she hath told it me her own self a thousād times.
Chromes, I wene you believe that we all rejoice at this.
Yea so God me help, doo I believe it.
Father, what remains now to be don?
The matter it self hath reconciled me a good while
since.
O an excellent father. Chromes altered no∣thing as
touching my wife, but that I may still enjoy her, as I have don.
Mary and good cause why. Unless your father say
otherwise.
Only, as touching the dowry.
Yea marry, that.
Pamphilus her dowry is five hundred pound.
I accept it.
I will now hye me to my daughter, and you Crito, go with me:
for I believe she never knew me.
And why doo you not rather cause her to be brought hither to
you?
You put vs well in mind, I will present∣lie cause
Dauus to go about that matter.
He cannot.
How so?
Mary because he hath a great matter of his own, which
touches him néerer.
What is that?
He lies bound in prison.
Father, then is he wrongfully bound.
Not so, I commanded it.
I beseech you, command that he be let loose.
Go to, be it so.
But make hast than.
I go in straight way.
O Blissful and happy day that this is.
PAMPHILVS declares unto Dauus, how that Glycerie is found to
be free borne of Athens, &amp; that he shall marry her Likewise Carinus
shows unto Pamphilus, that by his means, he also may obtain Philumena
at Chromes hands. This Scene brings an other son in law to Chromes: least
that either Carinus should depart away sorrowful, or that Philumena
should be left unprovided for.
I I am come furth, to sée what
Pamphilus is a doing: but lo where he is.
Perhaps some body would think that I scant believe this to
be true, but I will have it to be true, as it is in déede. I suppose
that therefore the life of the Gods is everlasting, because pleasures do
proper∣lie belong unto them: for mine own part, I am in heaven al ready, if so
be it, no grief of mind doo intermingle with this joy. But now what man
should I most spe∣cially desire to méete withal, to whom I
might show all that hath happened.
What great joy is
that?
Lo, I see Dauus: There is no man living that I
would fainer have: for I am sure that he, of all other, will unfeignedly
rejoice at my joy and gladness.
whereabout here, is Pamphilus?
Dauus.
What man is that?
It is I.
O my master Pamphilus.
Thou wotst not what hath happened to me.
Very true, but I wot well what hath happened to my self.
And so doo I too.
Yea it came to pas after the common course of the world,
that you knew of the evil that happened to me, sooner than I knew of the good
that happened to you.
My swéete love Glycerie, hath found out who
be her parents.
O happy chance.
What is
that?
Her father is a very special friend of ours.
Who is that?
Chromes.
You say well.
Neither is there any let or tarriance, but that I may marry her
out of hand.
What, doth he not dream trow you, that which his
mind ran upon being awake?
Now moreover Dauus, as touching the child.
Tush let it alone, God doth specially provide for it aboue
all other children.
I
am a made man, if this be true: I will sure speak with him.
What man is there? O Carinus, you come to me, even as
well as heart can wish.
It is well.
What, have you heard the matter?
Yes every whit: Go to, have some respect of me, now in the
time of your prosperity: I know that Chromes is now yours
altogether, and will doo all that you will have him doo.
I wot it full well: but it would be too long for vs, to tarry
and look for his coming furth:
Therefore follow me along this way: he is now
with∣in with Glicerie. Dauus go thou thy way home: hye thée, go
for company to bring her away hence. Why dost thou stand still? why
goosed thou not?
I am going.
Do not stay looking for their coming out: for
shée shall be betrothed within: and if any thing more remain to be
don, it shall bée dispatcht within also.
Now clap hands, and rejoice.
Here is to be understood that as Pamphilus hath Glycerie to
wife: Even so Carinus likewise hath Philumena, the other Dough∣la of
Chromes.

HEre I advance my shield and hang it up,
To challenge him who ever dare deny,
That one of those thrée London Ladies rare
Ought not of right be matched with Policy:
A London Lord, the which I represent.
Pom. And pomp provides his challenge in his word,
(Glory sans peer) claiming the one of them,
Not by compulsion, but by common right,
Yet maugre men my shield is here aduaunc'd
For one matchless, a London Lady best
Beséemeth Pomp (a London Lord) to have.
Pleasure hath soared as doth his ympreze show,
To lo•ke alooffe on earthly Ladies all,
Yet never could my curious eye discern
A Dame of worth, for Londons Pleasures love,
But one, and she doth shine as silver Do.
Of self bred soil, of London is her race,
For whom in challenge I my shield advance.
Thus each in honour of his Mistress
And in regard of his well daring mind,
Hath here ymprizde the challenge of his right:
But Lordings both, and brethren bred and sworn,
A caution must be had in this conceit,
That all our thoughts aspire not to one heaven,
Nor all our ships do sail for one self haven,
I mean that all our suites and services
We tend and tender to one only Dame,
All choosing one, refusing the other two.
A great mislike amongst vs that might breed.
I seek but one and her unto my self.
And one with I sans partner of my loves.
It stands with honour to be sole or none.
Whom love thou pleasure?
Hark ye. 
Lush, ye lie.
If my moister were a soldier, that word wold have the stab.
Well Will, still you'll be a saucy Scab.
Why Pleasure? Pomp hath chosen Lucres love.
Why pomp? But pleasure honours Lucre most.
And policy may Lady Lucre gain
Before you both: but let vs not contend,
For Nemo doth the Ladies prisoners keep,
Though they were slandered late with Liberty•
And marriage to three far borne Foreigners.
Then first it fits we practise their release,
And sée them, and by sight our liking place,
For yet we love as Gossips tell their tales,
By hearsay: Fame, not Favour hath vs yet inflamed.
Lord policy with reason hath discuss pleasure consent, and so our love shall hold.
Ye never found that Londons Pleasure erred
From reason, or from pomp and policy.
Come on sir boy, attend you well your charge, 
Wait in this place to watch and ward this shield,
If any man in honour of his love,
So hardy be with stroke of sword to attained
This shield, and challenge him that hereby challenges,
Say for thy Lord as should a trusty Page,
That policy doth dare him to perform
A hardier task than common challengers.
If he demand what policy may be,
A Lord of London say, one of the three.
And you (sir boy) for pomp perform the like, 
Bid him that dare this Ympreze batter once,
Be well advised he be no beggars brat,
Nor base of courage, nor of bad conceit:
To match himself with such magnificence,
As fits Lord pomp of London for his love:
Call if he come that can encounter me,
Or move me not for each envious swad.
Will, be not wanton nor of wayward mood, 
Waite as doo these, use faith and diligence,
And mark him well that dare disdain this shield,
Which Londons Lord that pleasure hath to name,
Hath here aduaunc'd in honour of his Dame.
I bid thée mark him well, what ever he be,
That Londons pleasure doth in malice scorn,
For he's a Rascal, or a stranger borne.
Good boy mark well his gesture and his look,
His eye, his gate, his weapon and attire,
And dog him to his lodging, or his den,
For I will make him scomme and scorn of men,
No better boy than Will, when Will is pleased,
Be pleased my boy, and so be my good Will.
And so good boys farewell, look to your charge,
Watch well good Wit, who scorns Londons policy,
Be wary Wit, for thou can well discern.
Wealth watch for pomp for thou can well defend
Will can do something too when pleases him.
Will is a good boy where better is none. 
Nay Wit were the best boy if will were gone.
Nay wealth is the best boy, sirs let that alone.
I wise he saith true will, this wealth's a gay lad,
I care not for him, curmudgeonly Swad.
Well, miss me a while &amp; you'll go near to be sad.
Will, ye are will fool, if of him ye be not glad.
Nay wit if thou want him, thou'ilt go near to be mad.
To keep vs still quiet, I would other talk we had,
I hope with•l not fall out being none but we three.
If Wealth were away, Wit and Will would agree.
Nay, Wit and will are at strife, when ther's no body but we.
Let pass, and of our shields (sirs) let's make a little glee,
what gives thy moister here? a Buzzard or a Ryte.
Wit, you show your self a Gentleman by g•ssing so right,
A Buzzard? thou Buzyard, Wit, hast no more skill
Then take a Falcon for a Buzzard.
O be quiet good Will:
It was but for sport, for I know the bird else,
Thou might see it was no Buzzard man by the bells:
What's the reason of this Falcon, I pray thee Will show.
Thou know that a Falcon wares hie, and stoups low,
So doth pleasure.
And what's the word?
Pour temps, for time.
A very pretty one, I would it were in rime.
In rime Wit, why so?
Because it wants reason.
Look for my fist Wit, if ye rap out such treason.
Treason, to what, boy?
To my masters bird.
Now Will my thumb wags, it was but to his word.
Tic a pleasant Gentleman, this young mast. Wit,
Your moister hath something too, I pray ye what's it.
Look will, and guess.
Tic a Load in a shell.
I had as léeue ye had said, a Frog in a well.
Is it not a great Butterfly, Will, can thou t•ll?
What is it in sadness?
A Tortoise my boy, whose shell is so hard, that a laden •art may go over and not break it, and so she is safe within, and where∣soever she goes, she bears it on her back, needing neither other succour or shelter but her shell: the word underneath her is Prove∣dens securus, the provident is safe, like to the Tortoise, armed with his own defence, and defended with his own armour: in shape somewhat round, signifying compass, wherein always the provident foresee to keep themselves within their own compass, my boy.
wittily spoken, now welds moist. hath got a Daffadowndilly.
If Will had not been wilful, now he might have said a Lily, whose glory is without comparison, and beauty matchless. for Solomon the most sumptuo•s King that ever was, was never comparable in glory with the Lily, neither is there any cities match∣able with the pomp of London, mistake me not good boys, that this pomp tends to pride, yet London hath enough, but my Lord pomp doth rightly represent the stately magnificence and sumptuous e∣state without pride or vain glory to London accommodate, and there∣fore the word is well applied to the ympreze (Glory sans peer) for that the Lilly is neither proud of the beauty, nor vainglorious of th• pomp: No more is London, but if it be joyful of any thing, it is of the peace and plenty, both flowing from two such fountains as becomes not vs to name. Now therefore, my g•od boys, know that my My∣ster is rather Magnificence than pomp in bad sense, and rather pomp than Pride in the best sense.
And my Lord is not pleasure sprung of Voluptuousness, but of such honourable and honest kind conceit, as heaven &amp; humanity well brookes and allows pleasure pleasing not perniti•us.
Who would have thought that will had been philosophous, But what means the word pour temps in the shield, for time?
Wit, shall I cal thee fool? the best pleasure of al lasts but a time,
For of all pleasures most pleasing to sight,
Me thinks there is none to the Falcons hie slight,
Yet diseases end it, the breach of a wing,
Nay, the breach of a feather spoils that sweet thing:
And so my moister hath the vantage will ye or no, pomp and pleasure may be il.
May not policy be bad?
Wit, well overtaken by Will that crafty Lad.
A crafty Goose, the Gander gives him health,
Bad police's seldom found in so Christian a common wealth,
As London is I trust, where my moister is a Lord.
And ours so too.
Well, let vs acco•d, for wit's a good thing, yet may be il applied
•nd so may wealth, be it employed in pride,
And will worst of all, when it disdains a guide.
A Jack an Apes hath wit.
And so he hath Will.
But he never hath wealth: now ye are both still.
Yes, he wears a chain.
Well spoke, and like a bearward.
If ye be Non plus let the matter fall.
Wit, dost thou see? thus goes wealth away with al.
Let's reason no further for we shall have glee,
Here is a challenger to our shields, step we aside.
He will eat them I think, for he gapes very wide.
Say nothing to him, and ye shall see the fool go by.
Sir, gape not so wide for fear of a fly.
Fly, flame flourish: why? Can a fly doo hurt?
Yea, have ye not heard that the fly hath her spleen
And the Ant her gall?
My Uncle hath so I wean, for its an angry old fellow
When his gall runs over: children good day,
Whose pretty lads are you three?
Three, are ye sure?
Isle not swear till I have told you: one, two, three.
I beshrew thee.
Me boy, why? I am beshrewed already, for I am married.
Then thou hast a wife?
Yea, I would thou had her, if thou could stay her tongue,
I thy wise man? Why, I am too young.
And I am too old, but in good ernest good boys, be not angry,
that I cal you boys, for ye are no men yet, ye have no beards
And yet I have séene boys angry for being called boys:
Forsooth they would be called youths: well, yet a boy is a boy
And a youth is a your•: well, if ye be not ashamed of the boy,
Good boys, whose ••yes are ye?
No whit ashamed sir of that that we are, nor ashamed at all of those whom we serve, for boys we be, and as we be, we serve the three Lords of London, to weet, policy, pomp, and pleasure.
A pretty spoken Child and of a pretty wit.
VVit's his name indeed, are ye one of his Godfathers, ye hit it so right?
It is more then I know, then is thy name wit boy? Now of mine honesty welcome, for I have wanted thee a great while.
Welcome sir, how so? why do ye entertain me so kindly? I cannot dwell with you for I have a moister already.
So have I too, but she learns me little wit: my wife I mean Well, al this while I stand here my wares are not abroad, and so I may loose both my customers and market.
Wares sir, have ye wares? what wares do ye sell?
Truly Child, I sell Ballads: soft, whose wares are these that are up already? I paid rent for my standing, and other folks wares shall be placed before mine, this is wise indeed.
O, the fineness of the wares (man) deserve to have good place.
They are fine indéed, who sells them, can ye tell? Is he frée?
Our masters be, we wait on this ware, and yet we are no chapman.
Chapman, no that's true, for you are no men, neither Chapman nor chopmen, nor chipmen nor shipmen, but if ye be chappers, chop∣pers or chippers, ye are but chapboyes, and chapboyes ye are double.
Double, how is it? Teach me that and you will make me laugh a little.
And me a little:
And me a little.
Then your three little laughs will make one great laugh:
True, for if three fools were one fool, that were a great fool. But how are we double chapboies?
Because ye have two chaps, an upper chap and a nether chap.
Ha, ha, ha.
Ha, ha, ha.
Ha, ha, ha.
You said you would laugh but a little, but you laugh a great deal, why doo ye laugh so much?
Because your wit was so great in expounding your meaning
Ye, you may see it is a good thing to have wit.
I thank you sir.
And what say you to wealth?
wealth? Marie wealth is better.
I thank you sir.
And how say ye to will?
Indéed, good will is a great matter,
Yea betwéene a maid and a bachelor.
Why? you are not in love boy?
yes but I am, and in charity too.
Charity? alas poor child, thou in charity•, ha, ha, now must I laugh.
But you laugh a great while, and you laugh very loud,
Then I ow you nothing for laughing, &amp; you hear me the 〈◊〉
But now laugh not we.
No, you may be maddle, coddle: well here is thrée passing fine lads, if a man were able to keep them all: let me see wealth, oh that's a swéet lad: then wit, oh that's a sine lad: Will, oh that's a pretty lad. Will, wit, and wealth, God lend ye health. I would I could guile •heir masters of two of them. If I had Fraud here that served Lady Lu∣cre, he would teach me: he would teach me to tice one of them from his moister: which of them now, if a man should steal one? will? Nay, I care not for will outsep he be good will: Wit, a pretty child, but a man can not live by wit: wealth, yea marie sir, I would I could win that wealth, for then I néed neither will, nor wit, nor I need sell no Ballad• but live like a mouse in a mill and have another to grind my meal• for me, Isle have a fling at one of them anon.
Do you not forget your self gaffar.
Have you not wares to sell gaffar?
When doo you show gaffar?
Well remembered pretty lads, ye may sée, children can teach old folks, I am an unthrift indeed: well, my wares shall out now. But sir•, how sell ye your wares, how many of these for a great?
Our wares are not to be sold.
Not for silver nor gold? why hang they then in the open market?
To be seen, not bought.
Then they are like ripe plummes upon a rich mans trée that set men's téeth a watering when they be not to bee bought: but what call ye these things?
Scutchions.
Cushens, alas it were pity to sit on such fine cu•hens: but come my boys if you'il buy any of my wares, her's my stall, and Il• open and show strait.
What dainty fine Ballad have you now to be sold?
Marie child, I have chipping Norton a mile from Chapel other heath, A lamentable ballad of burning the Popes dog: The swéet Ballade of the Lincoln shire bagpipes, And Peggy and Willy, But now he is dead and gone: Mine own sweet Willy is laid in his grave la, la, la, lan ti dan derry, dan da dan, lan ti dan, dan tan derry, dan do.
It is a doleful discourse, and sung as dolefully.
Why, you can not mend it, can ye?
What will you lay on that? For I my self dare lay six groats to six of your bald Ballads, that you your self shall say I sing bet∣la than you.
What a brag boy is this to comparison with a man, but boy boy, I will not lay six Ballads to six groats, but I will lay six Bal∣lades to six ierkes at your buttocks, that you shall not sing so well as I.
That I shall not? No, possible you will not let me sing.
I not let you? Is that spoken like wit? It is spoken like a Woodcock, how can I stay thee if thou wilt sing out thy throat?
Well then, to our bargain, six Ballads to six stripes, and who shall keep stakes?
Neither of your companions, for that's ask my fellow if I be a thief.
Will you keep the stakes your self?
Best of all, for I mean plainly and will pay if I loose, her's my six Ballads, they bee ready: now how shall I come by your six stripes boy?
Down with your bréeches, Isle fetch a rod and deliver them straight.
Nay then I care not if thou keep stakes.
You speak too late gaffar, having challenged pre-eminence.
Then let's lay no wager but sing for good fellowship.
Agreed, who shall begin?
O boy, who is the elder? Hast thou not heard give Flounders to thy elder?
You mistake the fish, trust me I am sure tic give place, but begin with good grace.
Now sirs, which singes best?
Tush, your copesmetés shall not judge: friend, what say you, which of vs sings best?
To s•y truth ther's but had choice, How will you sell the ballad you sang, for Isle not buy the voice.
Why wilt thou not buy my voice?
Because it will cost me more money to buy sallet oil to kéep it frō rusting, than it is worth: but I pray ye honest man, what'• this?
Read and then shalt see.
I cannot read.
Not read &amp; brought up in London, wru•st thou never to schols
Yes, but I would not learn.
Thou wast the more fool: if thou cannot read Isle tel thy•, this is Tarltons picture: did thou never know Tarlton▪
No: what was that Tarlton? I never knew him.
What was be: a prentice in his youth of this honourable ci∣tie, God be with him: when he was young he was leaning to the trade that my wife uses now, and I have used, vide lice shirt, water-bearing: I wis he hath tossed a Tankard in Cornehil er now, if thou knew him not I will not cal thée ingram, but if thou knew not him, thou knew no body: I warrant her's two crackropes knew him.
I dwelt with him.
Did thou? now give me thy hand, I love thée the better.
And I too sometime.
you child, did you dwell with him sometime?
wit dwelt with him indeed, as appeared by his rime,
And served him well, and will was with him now &amp; than, but soft, thy name is wealth, I think in earnest he was little acquainted with th•e O it was a fine fellow as ere was borne, there will never come his like while the earth can corn. O passing fine Tarlton I would thou had lined yet.
He might have some, but thou show small wit, there is no such fineness in the picture that I see.
And thou art no Cinque Port man, thou art not wit free,
the fineness was within, for without he was plain,
But it was the merriest fellow and had such jests in store,
that if thou had seen him, thou would have laughed thy hart sore.
Because of thy praise, what's the price of the picture.
Isle tell thee my lad, come hither, if thou wilt be ruled by me thou shalt pay nothing, Isle give it thée, if thou wilt dwell with me, and I promise thee this counsel is for thy prefarming, had not thou better serve a free man of the City, and learn a trade to live ano∣there day, than to be a serving boy in thy youth and to have no oc∣cupation in thine age, I can make thee free if thou wilt be my prone∣tice.
Why, wealth is free every where, what néed I serve you•. My Lord is a freeman if that may doo me good.
I cry ye mercy M. boy, then your moister is frée of the lords company and you serve him that ye may be a Lord when ye come out of your years.
Wealth is a proud boy, gaffar what say you to mée?
Thy name is wit, wilt thou dwell with me?
If I like your name and science, perchance wee'il agree
Nay, my name &amp; mine honesty is al one, it is well known He's a very fool that cannot beguile me, for my name is simplicity.
Coads gaffar were not you a meal-man once and dwelt with Lady Conscience?
Yes, for want of a better.
What, a better man?
No, for want of a better mistress, she was as very a fool as I We dwelt so long together that we went both on begging.
Indeed they that use a good conscience cannot suddenly be rich, But Isle not dwell with ye, you are too simple a moister for me.
Nor Isle not dwell with you for all this worlds treasure.
No, why whom serve you Will?
I serve my Lord pleasure.
And whom serve you wit?
I serve my Lord policy·
And whom serve you wealth?
I serve my Lord pomp.
You should be served al with my Lord Birchley if you were well served, these lads are so lordly that louts care not for them: for wealth serves Pomp, Wit serves policy, and will serves pleasure. wealth, will you buy this picture for your Lord?
No, it's too has a Present for pomp.
And policy seldom regards such a trisle.
Come on gaffar, come on, I must be your best chapman,
Isle buy it for pleasure, hold, there is a great:
Gramercy good will, my wife shall love thee still,
And since I can neither get Wit nor wealth,
Let my wife have her will, and let me have my health.
God forgive me, I think I never name her, but it conjures her, look
where she comes, be mannerly boys that she knock ye not with her
staff: kéepe your own counsel, and Isle make ye laugh.
What doo ye lack, what lack ye.
Stand away these boys from my wares,
Get ye from my stall, or Isle wring you by the ears.
Let my customers sée the wares: what lack ye what would ye hau• bought.
You have customers enough and if they were ought,
What do ye with these boys here to filtch away your ware?
You show all your wit, you'il ne'er have more care.
Content ye good wife, we doo not f•ltch, but buy.
I meant not you, young moister, Gods blessing on your heart
You have bought indeed sir I see, for your part.
Be these two young Gentlemen of your company,
Buy Gentlemen, buy ballads to make your friends merry.
To stand long with your burden, me thinks you should be weary
True Gentlemen, but you may sée poor painful penury
Is fine to carry thrée Tankards for a penny.
But husband I say, come not home to dinner, its Ember day,
You must eat nothing till night, but fast and pray.
I shall loose my draught at Conduit, and therefore Isle away.
Young Gentlemen God be with ye.
Wife, must I not dine to day?
No sir by my say. 
If I must not eat, I mean to drink the more.
What I spare in bread, in ale Isle set on the skore.
How say ye my lade? And doo I not speak wisely?
Me thinks ye doo, and it's pretty, that simplicity
Hath gotten to his wife plain painful Penury.
Yea, I thank God though she be poor and scarce cleanly, yet she is homely, careful and comely.
Must the Scutchions hang still?
One within. yea, let them alone.
Farewell Moister simplicity.
Farewell good M. boys en heartily, en heartily, heartily.
And hear ye will, I thank you for your hansel truly.
Pretty lads, hark ye sirs how? will, wit, wealth.
What's the matter you call vs back so suddenly.
I forgot to ask you whither your thrée Lords of London be courtiers or Cittiners?
Citizens borne and courtiers brought up: Is this all? Fare∣well. 
Citizens borne and Courtiers brought up, I think so, for they that be borne in London are half Courtiers before they see the Court, for finesse and manerlinesse oh passing, my manners and misbe∣hauiour is mended half in half since I gave over being a meal-man and came to dw•ll in London: ye may see Time doth much, Time wears out iron horshooes: Time tears out milstones: Time sea∣sons a pudding well, and Time hath made me a frée man, as free to bear water and sell Ballads, as the best of our copulation: I would have thought once my horse should have been frée as soon as my self, and sooner too, for he would have stombled with a sack of meal and lien along in the channel with it when hee had done, and that some calls fréedome, but it's but a dirty fréedome, but ye may sée, bad whore∣ses were but •ades in those days: But soft, here comes customers: What lack ye, what is it ye lack, what lack ye? Come along and buy nothing: fine Ballads, new Ballads, what lack ye?
My Lords come on, what suits have you to me?
Renowned Nemo, the most only one
That draws no breath but of th'eternal air,
That know our suit before we bound to speak
For thou art the very O•isle of thoughts:
Whose virtues doo encompass thee about,
As th'aire surrounds this m•ssie globe of earth.
Who hast in power what ever pleases thee,
And can bestow much more than we may crave,
To thee we seek, to thée on knées we sue,
That thou wilt deign from thraldom to release,
Those lovely Dames, that London Ladies are.
What, those thrée caitiefs long ago condemned?
Love, Lucre, Conscience, well deserving death,
Being corrupt with all contagion:
The spotted Ladies of that stately town.
Love, Lucre, Conscience we of thée desire,
Which in thy self hast all perfection,
Accomplished with all integrity:
And neatest no help so doe what pleases thee,
Who hold Fame and Fortune both thy slaves,
And doest compel the Destinies draw the coatch:
To thée we sue, sith power thou hast thereto,
To set those Ladies at their liberty.
At liberty, thou spotless Magistrate•,
That of the cause dost carry all regard,
Careless of bribes, of birth and parentage,
Because thy self art only borne to bliss,
Bless vs so much that Lords of London are,
That those thrée Ladies borne and bred with vs
May by our suites, release of thraldom ••nd.
Release my Lords? why seek ye their realise?
That have perpetual prison for their doom.
But Nemo can from thence redéeme them all.
Their deeds were cause, not Nemo of their thral.
Yet Nemo was the Judge that sentence gave.
But Nemo never spilled, whom he could save:
Thou from perpetual prison moist revoke.
Death hath no power against him to strike a stroke
Thou only mild and courteous sir, vouchsafe
To grant our suit, and set those Ladies free.
What's your purpose in this earnest suit?
To marie them, and make them honest wives.
But may it be that men of your regard,
Lords of such fortune, and so famous place,
Will link your selves with Ladies so forlorn,
And so disteined with more then common crimes?
Marriage doth make amends for many amiss.
And love doth cover hears of combrous evils.
And doth forget the faults that were before.
Mean as you say, ye need to say no more.
In token that we mean what we have said,
Lo here our shields the prizes of our love:
To challenge all except thy self that dare
Deny those Ladies to be ours by right.
Woo them &amp; win them, win them &amp; wear thē too,
I shall both comfort and discourage you my Lords,
The comfort's this, of all those former crimes·
Wherewith the world was wont those dames to charge
I have them cléer'd and made them all as free
As they were borne: no blemish left to sée.
But the discourage (gentle Lords) is this,
The time of their endurance hath been long,
Whereby their clothes of cost and curious stuff
Are worn to rags, and give them much disgrace.
Alas good Ladies, was there none that sued
For their release, before we took't in hand?
Yes, divers for fair L•cre sought release,
And some for Love would fine have paid the sées,
But silly Conscience sat without regard,
In Sorrows dungeon, sighing by her self:
W•each when I saw that some did sue for Love,
And most for Lucre, none for Conscience:
A vow I made, which now I shall perform,
Till some should sue to have release for all,
Judged as they were, they should remain in thrail:
But you that crave their fréedomes all at once
Shall have your suit, and see them here ere long,
A little while you must have p•tience,
And leave this place: go in my Lords before.
Becomes vs to waite on Nemo still,
Not so: but Lordings, •he condition more
You promise me, sith they are in my power,
I shall dispose them when they are released
Upon you three, as I shall think it best.
Doe but command and we shall all subscribe.
Then go your ways, for I have here to do. 
Sorrow draw near, to morrow bring thou forth
Love, Lucre, Conscience, whom thou hast in thrall,
Upon these stones to sit, and take the air,
But set no watch or spyall what they doo. 
How happy may we call this merry day my mates, Wherein we meet, that once were desperate, I think, ever to have seen one another, when Nemo that upright Judge had by impriso∣ning our Mistresses, banished vs (by setting such diligēt watch for vs) out of London, and almost out of the world. But live we yet? And are we met? and near our old seat? Usury is it thou? Let me see, or hath some other stolen thy face? Speak thou man?
No Fraud, though many have counterfeited both thee &amp; me,
We are our selves yet, and no changelings I see:
And why should thou ask me man if I live:
The silly Ass can not feed on harder forage than usury,
She upon thistles, and I upon a browne crust of a month old.
So that Usury and an ass are two of the profitablest beasts that a man can kéepe, yet th'one hath sharper teeth than the other.
But what means Dissimulation? He droopes me thinks, What cheer man? Why cousin, frolic a fit, art thou not glad of this meeting? What's the cause of thy melancholy?
Not melancholic, but musing how it comes to pass that we are thus fortunate to méet as we doo.
Isle tell thee why we met, because we are no mountains.
But ye are as ill, for ye are monsters.
And men may meet though mountains cannot.
In token that this meeting is joyful to vs all,
Let vs embrace altogether with harts joy and affection.
I see many of these old proverbs prove true, tic merry when knaves meet:
How sir, whats that?
If a man had a casting net, he might catch all you.
Art not thou Simplicity?
Goodman Simp. for I am married, &amp; it like your maistership,
And you are mast. Fraud too, a pox on your worship.
I sée, a fox and a false knave have all one luck, the better for banning,
And many of you crafty knaves live merilyer than we honest men.
Sir, bridle your tongue if you'il be welcome to our c•mpany
No girds nor old grudges, but congratulate this méeting,
And sirs, if you say it, let's tel how we have lived since our parting.
O it is great pity.
What? to tell how we have lived:
No, that ye doo live.
Yet again sir. Usury, as for thée it were folly to ask, for thou lives but too well, but Dissimulation and simony, how have you two lived? discourse I pray you heartily.
Faith even like two mice in an amberie that eat up all the meat, and when they have done, gnaw holes in the cupbord.
Fraud, after my scoping away at the Sessions where I shifted as thou know in thrée sundry shapes, one of a Friar, and they can dissemble: another like a woman, and they doo little else: the third as a Saint and a Devil, and so is a woman. I was banished out of Lone∣don by Nemo, to the country went I, amongst my old friends and never better loved than among the russet coats: once in a month I stole in other market day to Leaden-hall and about, and sometime to VVestminster hall. Now hearing some speech, that the Ladies should be sued for, for I am come in hope of my old intertaiment, supposing my self not known of many, and hoping the three Lords will pre∣uaile in their suit, and I to serve one of them.
He shall doo well that gives thee a coat, but he should do bet∣la, that could take of thy skin.
And I have been a travailer abroad in other realms, for here I am so cried out against by preachers (and yet some ministers that be none, could be content to use me) that I was glad to be gone now in some other lands, and not very far of, I am secretly fostered, sa∣uing in Scotland, and the low Countries, they are reformed, they can not abide me. Well now and then hither I came stealing over sea, and hearing as you here intend as you doo.
And for mine own part, amongst artificers and among•• a few bad cons•ienced Lawyers, I have found such ente•tainment, as doth pass, yet would I with Lucre fine be •s I was.
Fraud is as ill as a cut-purse, by the mass.
And for Usury, the longer I live, the greater love I find Yet would I be with Lucre, again to please my mind.
Heir's a good fellow too, one of our acquaintance, how hast thou lived Simplicity?
More honestly then all the rest of thy company: for when I might beg no longer, as begging was but bad, for you c•son'd me once of an alms, I fell to tankard bearing▪ &amp; so •os a wife of the same science. painful penury, then got I my fréedom, and feeling my shoulder grow weary of the tankard, set up an easier trade to sell balla•s.
Had thou a stock to set up withal?
Wise enough to tell you, I, &amp; yonder's my stal, but bewar• I loose nothing, for if I do, Isle lay it straight to some of you, for I saw none so like the•ues I promise you, since I set up.
Ye are a wiseman when your nose is in the cup, but soft who comes here? step wee close aside, for these be the three Ladies for my life brought out of prison by their k•eper, let vs be whist and we shall hear and s•e all, Sir you must say nothing.
not till ye speak for I am afraid of him that's with ye women•n▪
O Sorrow when? when sorrow wilt thou cease
To blow the spark that burns my troubled soul?
To féede the worm that stings my fainting breast,
And sharp the stéele that goares my dieng heart?
My thoughts are thorns, my tears hot drops of lead,
I plain, I pine, I die, yet never dead.
If world would end, my woe should but begin,
Lo, this the case of Conscience for her sin:
And sin the food wherewith my worm was fed,
That sting• me now to death, yet never dead.
Yet never dead, and yet Love doth not th••,
Love that to loss in life her folly lent,
Folly the food whereon her frailty fed,
Frailty the milk that Natures breast did go•e,
Life, loss and folly, frailty, food and kind,
Worm, sting, thorns, fire and torment to the mind,
Life but a breath, and folly but a flower,
Frailty clay, dust the food, that fancy scorns,
Love a sweet bait to cover losses sower.
Flesh breeds the fire that kindles lustful thorns,
Lust, fire, bait, scorn, dust, flower, and feeble breath
Die, quench, deceive, fly, fade, and yield to death,
To death? O good, if death might finish all,
We die each day, and yet for death we cal.
For death we call, yet death is still in sight,
Lucre doth sealed in drops of melting gold,
Accusing Rust, calls on eternal might,
Where flames consume, and yet we fréeze with cold:
Sorrow adds Sulphur unto Furies heat,
And chops them ye, whose chattering teeth do beat,
But sulphur, snow, flame, frost nor hideous crieng
Can cause them die, that ever are in dying.
Nor make the pain diminish or increase,
sorrow is slack, and yet will never cease.
When Sorrow cease, Shame shall then begin,
With those that wallow senseless in their sin:
But Ladies I have drawn you from my Den,
To open air to mitigate some moan.
Conscience, sit down upon that sweating stone,
And let that Flint (love) serve thee for a seat,
And Lady Lucre, on that stone rest you.
And Ladies thus I leave you here alone,
Morn ye, but moan not, I shall absent be,
Yet good it were sometime to think on me. 
Comfort it is to think on Sorrow past.
Sorrow remains when joy is but a blast.
A blast of wind is worlds felicity,
A blasting wind and full of misery.
O Conscience, thou hast most tormented me.
Me hath thy worm O Conscience, story too déep.
But more my self my thoughts tormented have
Than both of you in sorrows sullen cave.
From whence drawn forth I find but little rest,
A seat uneasy, wet, and scalding hot,
On this hard stone hath sorrow me assigned,
and on my seat my self I frozen fin•.
No flint more harde, no y•e more cold then this.
I think my seat some mineral stone to be.
I cold from it, it draws heat from me.
Ladies consent, and we our seats will view.
Dare we for shame our stained faces show.
My double face is single grown again.
My spots are gone, my skin is smooth and plain.
Doffe we our veils and greet this gladsom light.
The •haser of glome sorrows heavy might.
Hail cheerful air and clearest crystal sky.
Hail shining sun and fairest firmament,
Comfort to those that time in woe have spent.
Upon my weeping stone is set remorse in brazen letters.
And on this Flint in lead is Charity.
In golden letters on my stone is Care.
Then Lucre fits upon the stone of care.
And Conscience on the Marble of remorse,
Love on the flint of frozen Charity,
Ladies alas, what tattered souls are we?
Sorrow our hearts, &amp; time our clothes hath torn
Then sit we down like silly souls forlorn•,
And hide our faces that we be not known,
For Sorrows plagues tormented me no more,
Than will their fight that knew me heretofore.
then will their sight that knew vs heretofore
Draw ruth and help from them for our relief:
For our relief? for Conscience and for Love,
No help, small ruth that our distress may move:
O Conscience thou would lead me to despair,
But that I see the way to hope is fair,
And Hope to heaven directs a ready way,
And heaven to help is pressed, to them that pray.
That pray with faith, and with vnsain'd remorse•
For true belief and tears make prayer of force:
Then •eile our selves, and silent let vs stay, till heavens shall please to send some friends this way:
Ladies unmasked, blush not for base attire,
Here are none but friends and servants all, deer Lady Lucre,
Dearer unto vs than daily breath we draw from sweetest air;
Dearer then life, dearer then heaven it self,
Deign to discover those alluring lamps,
Those lovely eyes more clear than Venus Star,
Whose bright aspects worlds wonder do produce,
Vnueile I say that, beauty more divine,
than Nature (save in thée) did ever paint:
that we sworn slaves unto our mistr•sse, may
Once more behold those stately lovely looks,
And doo those duties which vs well beseems,
Such duties as we all desire to doe.
I know that tongue Lucre, beware of Fraud.
Of Fraud? Indéed by spéech it should be he. Fra. what séekest tho•
Lucre, to honour thée with wit, with worth, with life, with al I have, to be thy servant as I was before, to get thée clothes, and what thou want else.
No Fraud, farewell, I must be won no more, to keep such servants as I kept before.
Swéet Lady Lucre, me thou majesty accept.
How art thou called?
Simon.
I? No, sir, Conscience saith.
No Lucre, now beware, false not thy faith,
For Simoni's subject to perpetual curse.
As you two have sped, I would desire to spéed no worse•,
Make you a suit, you may chance to spéed better:
Not I, for of al, my tongue is best known,
But if I speak, it shall be to her that was once mine own•:
Good Lady Love, thou little know the grief•
that I thy friend sustain for thy distress,
And less believe what care I have of thée:
Look up good Love, and to supply thy wants,
Ask what thou wilt, and thou shalt have of me,
Of me that joy more in thy liberty,
Than in this life our light that comforts me.
O gall in honey, serpent in the grass,
O bifold fountain of two bitter streams,
Dissimulation fed with Vipers flesh,
Whose words are oiled, whose déedes the darts of death:
Thy tongue I know, that tongue that me be guiled,
Thy self a Devil, made me a Monster wild.
From thee well known, well may I bless my self,
Dear bought repentance bids me shun thy snare.
O happy Love, if now thou can beware.
Marie, but hear ye motley-beard, I think this blindfold buzz∣zardly hedge-wench spoke to ye, she knows ye though she see ye not, hark ye, you women, if you'il go to the alehouse, Isle bestow two p•ts on ye, and we'il get a pair of Card• and some company, and win• twenty pots more, for you play the best at a game called smelling of the four knaves that ever I saw.
Four? soft, yet they have not smelt thée.
No, I am one more than is in the deck, but you'il bee smeld as soon as ye begin to speak, Isle see what they'il say to me: hear ye you women, wives, widows, maids, men's daughters, What shall I cal ye? these four fellows (hark ye, shall I cal ye ••afty knaves) make me beléeue that you are the three that were the three fair La∣dies of London.
Gentle Simplicity we are unhappy they.
Now ye bad fellows, which of ye had such a word as gentle fir•▪
Bad fellows ye Rascal? If ere you bring me pawn Isle pinch ye for that word.
I cry you mercy M. Injury, M. usury I meant not you,
If you mean vs, we may be even with ye too.
Tut, I knew you an Ostler, and a thief beside, you have rubbed my horse heels er now for al your pri•e: but Ladies, if ye be the thrée ladies, which of ye dwelt in Kent street? one of ye did, but I know not which is she, ye look all so like broom-wenches, I was once her seruāt, Isle ne'er be ashamed of her though I be rich, &amp; I she be poor, yet if she that hath been my dame, or he that hath bin my m•ester come in place, Isle speak to thē sure, Isle do my duty, which is Lady Consc?
Even I am she Simplicity.
I am glad ye are out of prison, I thought ye had forgot me,
I went a begging from you till •he beatles snapped me up, now I am free and keep a stall of Ba•lades, I may buy and sell, I would you had as good a gown now as I ca•ried once of yours to pawn to Usury here.
Gramercy good •imp wilt thou be with me now?
No I thank you heartily, Isle beg no more, I can not be with ye though I would for I am married to painful penury: Look now my proud stately masters, I may if I will, &amp; you would if ye might.
No, not dwell with such a beggar as Conscience.
No, Fraud ne'er loved Conscience since he was an Ostler.
Who cares for Conscience but dies a beggar?
That will not Usury do, he will first take 3. score pound in the hundred.
love, look on me and I will give thee clothes.
I will no more by thee be so disguised.
Ye doe the wiser, for his face looks like a cloakbacke:
In thy aff•ctions I had once a place:
Those fond affections wrought me soul disgrace,
Isle make amends, if ought amiss were done:
Who once are burned, the fire will ever shun.
And yet once burned to warm again may prove:
Not at thy fire, I will be perfect love?
I promise you the wenches have learned to answer wittily,
Her's many fair proffers to Lucre, and love,
But who clothes poor Conscience, she may sit long enough.
I will cloth her straight:
Will you moister Usury, that's honestly spoke.
Ha, that's no gramercy to cloth her with another mans cloak,
But I see you have a craft in the doing M. Usury,
Usury cou•rs Conscience with Frauds cloak very cunningly.
Alas who loads m• shoulders with this heavy weed,
Fie, how it stinks, this is perfumed indeed,
Marie gap goody Conscience, indeed I doo you wrong,
But Isle quickly right it, my cloak shall not cumber you long.
All this while Lucre knows not I am here,
But now will I to her, mark how I sp•ed.
Lady the fairest that Nature ever formed,
Lodestone of Love, that draws •ff•ctions dart•.
The only object to all human eyes,
And sole destred Dainty of the world,
thy Vassal here, a virtue in thy néede
Whom thou by license of the law moist use,
tenders himself, and all his services
to doe thy will in duty as to fore,
Glad of thy freedom as his proper life.
Lady Lucre, you love an apple, take heed the Caterpill•• consume not your fruit.
Why who is it that makes this latest suit?
Tic usury.
Great is the service he hath done for me,
But Usury now I may not deal with thee.
the Law allows me Madam, in some sort.
But God and I would have thy bounds cut short.
For you I reck not, but if God me hate,
Why doth the Law allow me in some rate?
Usury slanders both Law and state,
the Law allows not though it tolerate,
And thou art sure be shut out at heaven gate.
You were ever nice, no matter what you pra•e:
Then it will be with him as it is at a great man• house in dinner time: he that knocks when the door is shut comes too late,
Well Usury, Fraud, and Simony
Dissimulation hearken unto me,
My tongue (although in memory it be greene)
Cannot declare what horrors I have seen,
He can it enter into mortal ears
Unmortified: the furies, f•res and fears.
the shrikes, the groans, the tortures and the pains,
that any soul for each of you sustains.
No pen can write, how Conscience hath me scourged.
When with your faults my soul she ever urged:
Arithmetic doth fail to number all,
the plagues of sorrow in the Den of thrall:
then tempt me not, nor trouble me no more,
I must not use you as I did before,
If you be found within fair Londons gate.
You must to prison, whence we came of late.
Conscience will accuse ye if ye be in sight.
That scurvy Conscience works vs all the spite:
Well Lucre, yet in thée we have delight.
Yonder come some, we must take our flight. 
Birds of a feather will fly together, but when they be taken then are they baken, yonder comes a customer, Isle to my stall:
Love, Lucre, and Conscience, blind man buff to you all.
Conscience, Love, Lucre, Ladies al what chéere?
How doo ye like the seats you sit upon.
O pure unspotted Nemo sole paragon,
Of Love, of Conscience and perfection,
The Marble of Remorse I sit upon
Sweats scalding drops, like bitter brinish tears.
So should remorse when Conscience feels her gilt
But gentle Love how féelest thou thy flint?
O sharp and cold, I fréeze unto my seat,
The Flint holds fire, and yet I feel no heat,
But am benumbed and frozen every joint.
O Love, so cold is charity in these times:
Lucre, how sit you?
Upon a heavy stone, not half so cold, not half so hot as theirs,
But of some secrete power, for I do find and sensibly I féele,
That I from it exhale an earthly cold,
And it from me doth draw a kindly heat.
Such force hath Care of Lucre in it self,
To cool the heart and draw the vital spirits,
And such the true condition of you thrée:
Remorse of Conscience, Charity of Love,
And Care of Lucre, such your uses be:
But Ladies now your sorrow lay aside,
Frolic fair Dames, an unexpected good
Is imminent through me unto you all:
Thrée Lords there be your native countrymen,
In London bred, as you your selves have been.
Which covet you for honourable wives,
And presently will come to visit you,
Be not abashed at your base attire,
I shall provide you friends to deck you all.
If I command, stand up, else sit you still. 
Lo, where they come: my Lords the Dames be here.
Why are they wimpled? shall they not unmask theme
It is for your sake, for Policy they doo it:
Much may their fortune and their feature be.
But what it is we cannot thus discern.
You shall in time Lord Pomp, be yet consent.
Their same is more then cause or reason would,
May one of these be pleasures paragon?
Pleasure, be pleased and use no prejudice.
Madams stand up, mislike not their attire,
That shall be mended as your selued desire.
Their port, and their proportion well content•.
Right stately dames, if they were well attir'•:
May we not sée their beauty what it is?
Yes Lordings yes, Lucre, lift up thy veil.
Of beauty excellent.
Of rare perfection.
A dainty face.
Unmask Love.
Swéete love indéed.
A lovely face.
A gallant grace.
Conscience, uncover.
Beauty divine.
A face angelical.
Swéet creature of the world.
Enough for once, Ladies sit down again:
As cunning chapman do by curious wares, 
Which seldom shown do most inflame the mind,
So must I deal, being dainty of these Dames,
Who seldom séen shall best allure these Lords:
A while my Lords, I leave you with these thrée,
Converse, confer on good conditions,
I will right soon return with such good friends
As it concerns to cloth these dainty one•
If any in my absence visit them,
Know their intent, and use your skill therein. 
Ladies, to call to mind your former lives
Were to recount your sorrows on a row,
Omitting then what you have been or bee,
What you may be Isle speak, so it please you,
Wives to vs thrée, Ladies to London Lords,
pomp, Pleasure policy, men of such regard,
As shall you guard from evil, once matched with vs,
And Policy presents this good to you.
With Londons Pomp may one of you be joined,
Possessing more than Fortune can afford,
Fortune's a fool, but heavenly providence
Guards Londons pomp, and her that shall be his:
And Londons pleasure, peerless in delights,
Will deign to make one of these Dames his own,
Who may with him in more contentment live,
Than ever did the Quéene of Ethiope.
Though silence Lords, our modesty enforce,
Nemo can tel the secretes of our thoughts,
Nemo that women's minds can constant kéepe,
He shall for vs you answer good my Lords,
I speak for al, though il beseeming me. 
You speak but well: My Lords step we aside
To note these fellows, what they do intend.
Nemo can tel, for he doth follow them. 
Ladies to you, to some of you, we come,
Sent from such friends as much affect your good,
With garments, and with complements of cost
Accordant well to dames of such degree: I come to Lucre.
I to love am sent with no less cost then could be got for coin
Which with my message I deliver would,
Could I discern which of these Dames were she,
Friend, I am Love, what bring thou there to me?
Beware good Love, from whom and what thou take.
No whispering friend, but show it openly,
The matter good, you need not be ashamed:
From whom comes thou?
That I conceile from any but from love,
From whom come you sir?
That shall lucre know, and none but she.
Then speak aloud, for whispering here is barred.
Then neither will I do nor speak at al.
Then I will speak and tel what you are both,
Thy self art Falsehood, and art sent from Fraud,
To compass Lucre with a cloak of craft,
With lawn of lies, and call of golden guile.
Pack you my friend, for if you stay a while
You shall return no more to him that sent you.
Thou from Dissimulation art sent,
And bring a gown of glossing, lived wish lust,
A Vardingale of haine boast, and fan of flattery,
A Ruff of riot, and a cap of pride,
And double dealing is thy name and office both.
Falsehood, let's go, we are deciphered.
Lucre, thou loosest here a priucely gift. 
lucre consumes being won by Fraud or shift,
Thus Lords you sée how these are qualified,
And how these Ladies shun that sharp rebuke,
Which some deserve by taking of such toys,
As women weak are tempted soon with gifts,
But here they come that must these Ladies deck.
lucre, arise, come from the stone of Care:
Fair lucre, lo what honest Industry
To thée hath brought, to deck thy dainty self,
Lucre by honest Industry achieved
Shall prosper, flourish, and continue long, 
Come to thy chamber to attire thée there.
Thou majesty depart with honest Industry.
And Love arise from Charities cold Flint,
Pure Zeal hath purchased robes to cover Love,
Whiles love is single, Zeal shall her attire
With kind affection, mortifying lust,
Come love with me these garments to put on:
love, follow zeal and take his ornaments. 
Rise Conscience from that Marble of Remorse,
That wéeping stone that scaldes thy partched skin,
sincerity such robes for thée hath brought,
As best beséemes good Conscience to adorn•:
Come follow, that thou moist go put them on,
For Conscience clothed by sincerity,
Is armed well against the enemy.
Follow him Consc. fear not, thou art right. 
Most reverend Nemo thanks for this good sight, lucre is clothed by honest Industry.
love by pure zeal.
And Conscience by sincerity.
Lordings, thus have you séene them at the first,
And thus you sée them, trust me, at the worst,
Depart we now, come hence a day or two,
And sée them decked as dainty Ladies should,
And make such choice as may content you al.
Thanks righteous Nemo we the London Lords
Only to thée our selves acknowledge bound. 
Come on gentle husband, let vs lay our heads together, our purses together, and our reckonings together, to sée whether wee win or loose, thrive or not, go forward or backward, doo you keep a book or a skore?
A skore wife? you mean for the Alehouse, doo you not? I would have her examine me thereof no further, for I am in too far there, more then I would she should know.
I mean no alehouse skore, but a note of your wares, let me sée, First you began to set up with a Royal, how much money have ye? what ware, and what gain?
I have five shillings in money, two shillings in wares, or thereabout, and I owe two shillings and eight pence upon the skore, how much is that? five shillings, two shillings, and two shillings and eight pence.
That is nine shillings and eight pence, so we are worse by a
a great then when we began, well once again Isle set ye up, here is four groats I have got by bearing water this week, make up your stock, and run no more behind▪ Who comes here?
What lack ye? What d•• ye lack?
Me lack• da moons pour de frene very seen French knack da feign gold buttoone, de brave bugle lace, a da feign gold ring•, you be free man, me vn' Fortiner, you buy a me ware, you gain teene pound by lay out téene shelleng•.
Wife, what hard luck have we that cannot make x. shillings now to gain x. pound: why, x. pound would set vs up for ever.
Husband sée the ware, &amp; if ten shilling will buy it, it shall go hard but we will make that money: Friend, show my husband your wares
Look you dere mastra de seen buttoone de la gold, de ring• de gold, de bugle sheane, two shelleng vne dozen de buttoone, vne shell∣linga vne Ring, tic worth x, shelleng, but mastra &amp; mattress me mus∣sa make money to go over in my own country, but me loose teen• pound pour hast to go next tide or to morrow.
Here is five shillings buy them of this stranger.
Friend you have not stolen them, but you make them, well, Isle buy them ithe open market, and then I care not, here is ten shil∣lings, deliver me the wares.
Déer mastra, oh poor necessity make me selpour grand, grand loss, you shall gain x. pound at least, gore boy.
What's your name?
Mechant, I think I am even with ye now for calling me O∣stler, you'il thrive well with such bargains, if ye buy, ye know not what, Fraud hath fitted ye with worse than your ballads.
You'il warrant them gold sir,
Wee, so good goll as you pay for: Adieu Monster. 
Adieu Monster: Adieu fool, sell such gold buttons &amp; rings for so little money, good Lord what pennyworths these strangers can af∣ford: now wife let me see, x. pound, when we have ten pound, we'il have a large shop, and sell all manner of wares, and buy more of these, and get ten pound more, and then ten pound, and ten pound, and twenty pound, then thou shalt have a taffeta hat and a guarded gown, and I a gown and a new cap, and a strike doublet, and a fair house.
I thank ye husband, well, till then look well to your• wares, and Isle ply my waterbearing and save and get, and get and save till we be rich, but bring these wares home every night with ye:
Tush, I shall sell them before night for ten pound, you wife, you, I may tel you I am glad this French fellow came with these wares, we had fallen to eramining the Ale-skore else, and then wee had fallen cut, and the ale wife and my wife had scolded: Well, a man may see, he that's ordained to be rich, shall be rich: you woman. 
From whence good Lords grew this hot argument?
Thou know already, yet if thou wilt hear,
For this we strive: fond pleasure makes account
Somming his bills without an auditory,
That Lady Lucre ought of right be his.
So I affirm, and so I will maintain
That Lady Lucre ought of right be his.
So I affirm, and so I will maintain
That pleasure ought by right Dame Lucre have,
To bear the charge of sports and of delights.
Nay to support the haughty magnificence
And lordly Pomp of Londons excellence,
Befits it rather Lucre join with me,
By whom her honour shall be most advanced.
More fit for pomp than pleasure, but most fit
That Policy with Lucre should be matched,
As guerdon of my studies and my cares
And high employments in the common wealth:
What pleasure can be fostered without cost:
What Pomp or port without respect of gain•
What policy without preferment lives?
Pleasure must have Lucre:
pomp hath need of Lucre:
policy merits lucre:
Pleasure dies without Lucre,
Pomp decays without Lucre,
policy droopes without lucre:
Thus Lords you show your imperfections:
Subject to passions, straining honours bounds,
Be well advised, you promised to be ruled,
And have those Dames, by me disposed to you,
But since I see that human humours oft
Makes men forgetful of their greater good.
Be here a while, Dame lucre shall be brought
By me, to choose which Lord she likes best,
So you allow her choice with patience. 
Go, we abide thy doom till thy return,
If lucre be not mad she will be mine,
If she regard her good she will be mine.
If she love happy life, she will be mine,
Women love Pleasure.
Women love Pomp.
Women use Policy: and here she comes that must decide the doubt.
Conscience content thee with a quaint conceit,
Conceile thy name to work a special good,
Thou art not known to any of these Lords,
By face or feature, till they hear thy name,
Which must be lucre for a fine device,
And Conscience clear indeed's the greatest gain,
Lo, Lordings here fair lucre whom ye love:
lucre, the choice is left unto thy self,
Which of these three thou wilt for husband choose.
The modesty that doth our sex beseem
Forbids my tongue therein to tell my thought,
But may it please my Lords to pardon me,
Which of you three shall deign to make such choice,
Him shall I answer to his own content,
If lucre please to match with Policy,
She shall be mistress over many men.
If lucre like to match with Londons Pomp,
In stately port all others she shall pass.
If pleasure may for wife fair lucre gain,
Her life shall be an earthly Paradise.
Lo, Lucre, men, and port, and pleasant life
Are here propounded, Which wilt thou accept?
Lord policy, Love were the only choice
Me thinks for you, that all your cares employ
And studies for the love of common wealth,
For you Lord pleasure, Conscience were a wife,
To measure your delights by reasons rule,
In recreation Conscience help to use.
Were Conscience half so sweet as is thy self,
Her would I seek with suites and services.
No less accomplished in perf•ction
Is Conscience, then this Lady I protest,
But on this Dame hath pleasure fixed his hart,
And this or death the period of his love.
Lucre with pomp most aptly might combine
Lucre, or Love if case thou wilt be mine,
Let pass thy name, thy self doe I desire,
Thee will I have except thy self deny,
With thee to live▪ or else for thee to die.
What if I deny?
Then will I have her.
If we deny?
So much the rather.
The rather in d•spite of vs? Not so.
My Lords, no quarrel, let t•is Lady go,
And if ye trust me. Isle content ye both,
pleasure, this is not lucre:
She's Luc•e unto me: but be she Love or Consciēce, this is she.
Whom you will, have?
Spite of the Devil, I will.
Must it not be my Lord if I agrée?
Agree.
Some further proo•e it fits of you to sée:
Receive a pawn, my hart, my hand, and oath,
To be thy own in love, in faith, and troth.
Thus you are fast, and yet my self am frée:
I know in ruth thou wilt me not refuse:
I know not that, but other Isle not choose.
It is enough, Lord pleasure, do not fear,
Conscience will use you as becomes her best.
And art thou Conscience? welcommer to me than either love or Lucre,
God send grace I be,
My Lords be pleased, ere long shall you be sped,
As much to your contents as pleasure is,
Say but the word▪ my self shall soon present
Lucre and love, well worthy such as you.
Right thankfully those favours we'il receive,
My Lords, if your affairs in present be not great
Greater than any, save regard of life,
Yea even the greatest of the common wealth,
Prepare ye to withstand a stratagem,
Such as this Land nor London ever knew.
The Spanish forces Lordings are prepared,
In bravery and boast, beyond all bounds
T'inuade, to win, to conquer all this land.
They chiefly aim at Londons stately pomp,
At Londons pleasure, wealth and policy.
Intending to despoil her of them all,
And over all those lovely Ladies three.
Love, lucre, Conscience, peerless of the rarest price.
to tyrannise and carry hardest hand.
From Spain they come with Engine and intent
to slay, subdue, to triumph and torment:
My self (so heaven would) spiel of them had,
And Diligence, dear Lords, they call my name.
If you vouchsafe to credit my report,
You do me right, and to your selves no wrong,
Provided, that you arm you, being warned.
Diligence, thy service shall be known,
and well rewarded: Nemo, for a time
Conceal this Dame, and live secure vnséene,
Let vs alone whom most it doth concern,
to meet and match our ever wéening foes.
Nemo keep close, and Conscience pray for vs.
Bée gone and recommend vs to our God.
My Lords, if ever, show your honours now,
Those proud usurping Spanish tyrants come,
To reeve from you what you doo most regard,
to take away your credit and your fame.
to race and spoil our right renowned town:
And if you love or lucre doo regard,
Or have of Conscience any kind of care,
The world shall witness by this action,
And of the love that you to vs pretend,
In this, your valour shall assurance give:
More would I speak, but danger's in delay,
You know my mind, and heavens record my thoughts,
When I with prayers for you will penetrate,
And will in heart be present in your fight:
Now pleasure, show what you will doo for me.
I will be turned to pain for thy sweet sake.
Fair Conscience fear not, but assure thy self
What kind affection we so ever bear
to Love and Lucre, in this action
Chiefly for thée our service shall be done.
For Conscience sake more than for Lucre now,
For Love and Consciēce, not despising Lucre.
Only for Conscience will I hazard all.
And I from hence will her convey a space,
Till you return with happy victory. 
Farewell my Lords, for me my Lords, for me.
Diligence, what number may there be?
A mighty host, and chiefly led by three,
Who brave it out in show, as men assured
Of victory, sans venture, or repulse.
How néere be they?
So néere my Lords, that each delay is death,
Stand on your guard, they come as challengers,
to bruise your shields, and bear away your prize,
Mounting the seas, and measuring the land
With strong imaginations of success,
Well, Diligence go get in readiness
Men and munition, bid our pages ply
To see that all our furniture be well,
W•t, Wealth and Will to further wars be fit, 
My Lords, I would I might advise ye now,
To carry as it were a careless regard,
Of these Castilians, and their accustomed bravado:
Lord Pomp, let nothing that's magnificall,
Or that may tend to Londons graceful state
Be unperformed. As shows and solemn feast•,
Watches in armour, triumphs, Cresset-lightes,
Bonefiers, belles, and peals of ordinance.
And pleasure, see that plays be published,
Mai-games and masks, with mirth and minstrels,
Pageants and school-feastes▪ bears, and puppit plays,
My self will muster upon Mile-end gréene,
As though we saw, and feared not to be séene:
Which will their spies in such a wonder set,
To see vs reck so little such a foe,
Whom all the world admires, save only we:
And we respect our sport more than his spite,
That Iohn the Spaniard will in rage run mad,
To see vs bend like Oaks with his vain breath.
In this device such liking I conceive,
As London shall not lack what pomp can doe,
And well I know that worthy Citizens
Doe carry minds so frank and bountiful,
As for their honour they will spare no cost:
Especially, to let their enemy know.
Honour in England, not in Spain doth grow.
And for the time that they in pleasure spend,
Tic limmitted to such an honest end,
Namely, for recreation of the mind,
With no great cost, yet liberal in that kind,
That pleasure vows with all delights he can
To doe them good, till death to be their man.
Of policy they trial have at large:
Then let vs go and each man to his charge▪
I sir? Why alas I bought them of a stranger, an old French man for good gold, and to be worth ten pound, for so be told me, I have good witness, for my own wife was by, and lent me part of the money.
And what did they cost you?
Ten shillings every penny.
That argues you are guilty: Why? could ye buy so many rings and buttons of gold think ye for ten shillings? Of whom did ye buy them?
Of an old French man, the old French disease take him.
And where dwells that old French man?
In France I think, for he told me he was to go over the next tide, or the next day, my wife can tell as well as I, if ye think I lie, for she was by.
A good answer, he dwells in France and you dwell here, and for ut•ering copper for gold you are like to loose both your ears upon the pillory, and b•sides loose your freedom.
Nay, if I loose my ears, I care not for my fréedome, kéepe you my freedom, so I may kéepe my ears, is there no remedy for this M. Usury?
None, except you can find out that old French man.
Peradventure I can, if you'il let me go into France to seek him:
So we may loos• you, and never see him, nay that may not be.
You have a good pawn there, good moister Usury be good unto me.
N•y, now Isle pinch ye, you villain, ye know how ye have ever used me, but now off goes your ears at least,
Nay▪ good moister Usury take all my goods and l•t me go,
What's the matter Usury, that this poor knave cries so:
O Moister Fraud, speak to him to let me go:
Fraud? Ye villain, cal me not by my name, and ye shall sée I will speak to him to l•t ye go free: Usury, of al old fellowship let this
poor knave pack, if the matter be not too heinous.
No sir, his fault is odious, look here what stuff hee would vt∣la for gold, flat copper, &amp; he saith, he bought them of an old frenchman
But thou did not sell them, did thou?
No sir, I would have but laid them to pawn for five pounds to him.
That was more than they be worth, I promise thée a foul matter, well, thou must loose thy ware and be glad to escape, so Usury, at my request ye shall let the poor man go.
Well, for this once I will, sir, get ye packing, and take héede of such a piece of work again while ye live.
There is divers péeces of work in that box, pray ye give me some of my goods again, a ring or something.
Not an inch, and be glad ye scope as ye doe,
Alas, I am undone, ther's al the wealth &amp; stock I have.
Do ye long to loose your ears, be gone ye foolish knave.
I thank ye Moister Fraud: Isle not go so far, but Isle be néere to hear and see what the meaning of these fellows in this canvas should be, for I know Fraud, Dissimulation, and simony to be those thrée: here I think I am vnséene. 
Usury, thank me for this go•d booty, for it is I that holy ye to it, for I sold them to him for gold indéed in the shape of an old French artificer, come give me half for I deserve it, for my part was the first beginning of this Comedy, I was ever afraid, least the fool should have known me, for ye see now though disguised, hee cal∣me by my name.
Did a so? I am glad I have found the french man, now Isle raise the street, but Isle have my wares again, &amp; prove ye as ye were, ever both false knaves I believe. 
Kill him, stab him, out villain, he will betray vs all.
What a fool were you to speak before •e was gone, now you have lost your part of this too, for he will go complain, you will bee sought for, and I made to restore these things again.
Not if thou be wise, thou wilt not tarry the reckoning, for see thou not vs three? Dissimulation simony and my self?
Yes: What means these canvas suites? Will ye be Sailors?
Usury make one, this is our intent: let's sée that none hear
vs now: the Spaniards are coming thou hear with great power, here is no living for vs in London, men are grown so full of consci∣ence and religion, that Fraud, Dissimulation and Simony are disc∣phered, and being deciphered are also despised: and therefore wee will slip to the sea, and meet and join with the enemy, and if they con∣quere as they may, for they are a great army by report, our credit may rise again with them, if they fail and retire, we may either go with them and live in Spain, where we and such good fellows are tolerated and used, or come sitly again hither, so long as none knows but friends.
But will you do thus you two?
And thou too I hope, why, what should we do?
Whatsoever ye doe, be not traitors to your native country.
Tic not our native country, thou know, I Simony am a Roman, Dissimulation a Mongrel, half an Italian, half a Dutchman Fraud so too, half French, and half Scottish: and thy parents were both Jaws, though thou were borne in London, and here Vsu∣rye thou art cried out against by the preachers: join with vs man to better thy state, for in Spain preaching touches vs not.
•o better my state, nay, to alter my state, for here where I am, I know the government, here can I live for all their threatening, if strangers p•avail, I know not their laws nor their usage, they may bée oppressor, &amp; take al I have, and it is like they are so, for they s••k that's not their own. Therefore here will I stay sure, to keep what I have, rather than be a traitor upon hap and had I wist: and stay you if ye be wise, and pray as I pray, that the preachers and all other good men may die, and then we shall flourish, but never trust to strangers courtesy.
We shall trust but to our friends &amp; kin, yo'il not go with vs, yet for old acquaintance ke•p counsel, betray vs not, for we'il be gone to sea, I am afraid yen foolish knave have belayed the stréets for vs.
Let me go before ye, if any such thing be, Isle give ye inkling. 
Do, farewell Usury: and as he goes one way, we'il go another, follow sirs, n•for trust a shrinker, if he be your own brother. 
Fealty, thou faithful Herald of our town,
Thou true truce-kéeper, and sure friend in peace,
Take down our shields, and give them to our boys:
Now Fealty, prepare thy wits for war, 
To parley with the proud Castillians
Approaching fast the frontiers of our coast:
Wit, here, my Page in every message shall
Attend on thee, to note them and their déedes:
I néed not tel thée, they are poor and proud,
Vaunters, vaineglorious, tyrants, truce-breakers,
Envious, ireful, and ambitious,
For thou hast found their facing and their brags,
Their backs, their coffers, and their wealth, their rag•,
But let me tell thee what we crave of thée,
To scan with judgment what their leaders be,
To note their presence and observe their grace,
And truly to advertise what they seem,
Whether to be experienced in arms,
Or men of name those three that lead the rest,
the rest refer we to thy own conceit,
I hope in this my duty to discharge, as heretofore
Clubs, clubs, nay come neighbours come, for here they bee, here I left them, arrant thieves, rogues, cosoners, I charge ye as you will answer, prebend them, for they have undone me, and robbed me, and made me the poorest free man that ever kept a ballad stall:
I charge ye keep the peace and lay down your wea∣pons:
Who raised this tumult? Speak, what means this stir?
O I am undone, robbed, spoiled of all my stock, let me see, where be they? Keep every street and door, samine all that comes for Fraud that cosoner.
Masters, what mean you in these troublous times to keep this coil?
Alas my Lord, her's a poor man robed, or cosoned.
I am robed O my boys, my pretty boys, I am undone, saw ye no thieves, nor no crafty knaves, what be all these?
Simplicity, away, these be our Lords, offend them not for fear.
I séeke not them, I séeke for Fraud that robed me.
Go seek else where, for here's no place for such.
My friends depart, and qualify this stir,
And see peace kept within the walls I charge ye.
I will my Lord, come
we came too late to find your losses. 
Pray for me my boys, I thin• 〈◊〉 shall hang my self I come ever too late to speed.
Now Lords, let Honours fire inflame on? thoughts,
And let vs arm our courage with our cause,
And so dispose our selves to welcome them,
Doe me the favour (if I may entreat)
To be the first to front the foe in face,
The Vauntgard let be Policies this once,
Pomps the maine baittaile pleasures the Rereward:
And so bestow vs if you think it good.
I think it good, and time that it were done.
I think it good, and wish the enemy come.
And here they come, as brave as Philips son,
And his Ephestion, wont to be arrayed
In glittering gold, and party coloured plumes,
With curious pendents on their Lances Axed,
Their shields Ymprez'd with gilt copertiments,
Their Pages careless, plaieng at their backs,
As if with conquest they triumphing came.
If they be conquered greater is their shame,
But Diligence go post along the coast,
To tell the news, and look to welcome them,
Let vs alone: My Lords you hear the news,
More words were vain, I know ye well resolved. 
And here they come, Oh proud Castillians.
My Lords, what mean these gallants to perform,
Come these Castilian Cowards but to brave?
Doo all these mountains move to breed a mouse?
Fealty, go fetch their answer resolute
How they dare be so bold, and what they dare doo here.
What would thou Herald?
Parley with those thrée, Herald.
They scorn to grace so mean a man as thou with parley or with presence.
Do they scorn? what, are thy masters, Monarchs every one?
Or be they Gods? or rather be they Devils?
Scorn they a Heralds presence and his speech?
Name them, that I may know their mightiness,
And so avoid of duties some neglect.
Monarchs in minds, and Gods in high conceits,
That scorn you English, as the scomme of men,
Whom I no dare without their license name,
Fore whom thy duties all are few and base,
Imperious Spaniard, doo a Herald right.
Thy self art one, their Trowch man if thou be,
Be thou my Trunk, that I my message may
through thee convey to them from London Lords.
Base English groom, from beggars sent belike,
Who for their mate thée malapert account,
Dare I (think thou) these Lords magnificent,
Without their special pleasure understood,
Once move with message, or with show of speech?
More servile thou to loose a Heralds due,
That is in field a kings companion,
But if thou dare not my Embassage doo,
Stand by and stop not my access to them.
Rather will I return and know their minds.
Now boy, what news. 
The fearful Herald of yen famous crew
Durst not your message to his masters tell,
Till Fealty with contumelions words,
(Yet was the Spaniard brave and hot in terms)
Enforced him for their answer resolute. 
Which now belike our Herald shall receive,
For theirs comes to him.
It pleases them to be magnifical,
And of their special graces to vouchsafe
And counteruiew of Pages, and of shields.
A countermessage by vs Heralds done:
A favour which they seldom grant to foes,
Go thou for those, I meet thee will with these.
My Lords yen braving Spaniards wish
A counteruiew of Pages and of shields,
But what they mean or be I know not yet:
Happily you may by their ymprezes view,
Or I by parley some conjecture give,
So please it you your pages and your shields
With me to send, their Herald comes with theirs.
Our shields I reck not, but to send our Wealth
Accompanied with Wit and Will, no peril.
It is my wealth, but kéep him if they dare,
Isle fetch him double if they doo my Lords,
Boys, take our shields and spears, for they come on.
Veil Spaniard, couch thy Lance and pendent both, know where thou art? Here will we bear no braves
Down with your point, no loft borne Lances here
By any stranger be he foe or friend.
Well doest thou note the couching of thy Lance,
Mine had ere this else goar'd your Spanish skin.
Well done my boys, but now all reverence.
Advance again your Lances now my boys 
Dicito nobis ideo queen ades, quid sibi velint isthaec Amble∣mata? Dicito (inquam) lingo materna: nos enim omnes belle intelli∣gimus, quamuis Anglicè loqui dedignamur.
Then know Castillian Caualieros this,
The owners of these Emblems are three Lords
Those three that now are viewing of your shields,
Of London, our chief city are they Lords,
Policy, pomp, and pleasure be their names:
And they in honour of their mistresses,
Love, Lucre, Conscience, London Ladies thrée,
Emblazoned these Scutchens, challenging
Whom durst compare, or challenge one of them,
And Policy a Tortoise hath Emprez'd,
Encompassed with her shell, her native walls,
And providence securus is his word:
His page is Wit, his Mistress Lady Love.
pomp in his shield a Lily hath portrayed,
As paragon of beauty, and boon grace:
Glory sans peer his word, and true it is,
With Londons Pomp Castle cannot compare,
His Page is wealth, his mistress Lucre hight.
Pleasure, the dainty of that famous town,
A Falcon hath emblazoned, soaring hie,
To show the pitch that Londons Pleasure flies:
His word Pour temps, yet never stoups to train,
But unto Conscience, chosen for his dear.
His Page is Will, and thus th'effect you hear.
Buena buena per los Lutheranos Angleses.
Mala, mala per Catholicos Castillianos.
Loqueris Anglicè?
Maximè Domino.
Agedum, Go too then and declare thy Lords, their shields, their pages, and their purpose.
Speak man, fear not, though Spain use messengers il,
Tic Englands guise to entreat them courteously.
Three Caualieros Castillianos here,
Without Compeers in compass of this world:
Are come to conquer, as full well they shall
this mool-hill Isle, that little England hight,
With London that proud paltry market town,
And take those Dames Love, Lucre, Conscience
Prisoners, to use or force as pleases them.
The first (now quake) is Spanish Majesty,
That for his ympreze gives Queen Iunoes Bird,
Whose train is spangd with Argus hundred eyes,
the Quéene of Gods scorns not to grace him so.
His word is Non par illi, none his like:
Yet is his page or hench-man Modesty,
Lucre the Lady that shall be his prize:
And in his pendent on his Lances point,
Sir le Ciel his word, aboue the heavens.
Meanwhile indeed aboue the heavens he was,
Could be have kept him in that blessed state,
From thence for pride he fell to pit of pain,
And is he now become the pride of Spain?
And so his page not Modesty but Shame.
Well, on the rest.
Don Honour is the next grand peer of spain,
Whose ympreze is a Courser salient.
Of colour Sables, darkening air and earth,
Pressing the Globe with his disdainful foot.
And sallieng to aspire to rolling skies,
Non sufficit orbs is his haughty word,
The world suffices not high Hono•• thoughts,
And on the pendent fixed en his Lance,
A hand is catching at the sunny beams:
&amp; gloriam Phoebe, and the Suns bright coatch.
Honour would guide, if he might have his will.
His Page is Action tempering still with state.
Himself Ambition, whom the heavens do hate,
and Love the Lady that he hopes to gain,
His thoughts distract from foul distempered brain
Proves him the very firebrand of Spain:
And in his shield his black disordered beast,
Scaling the skies, scornful to tread the ground,
And both his words, proud words prove perfectly
Action his page to be but Treachery,
Ever attendant on Ambition: but to the third.
The third ground Cavalier is Government,
Severe in Justice, and in judgment déepe:
His ympreze is a naked Infant goar'd
Upon a Lance, signifing, severity.
His word, pour sangue, for blood of enemies
He bends his sorces: on his pendent is
A Lyger licking of a bleeding heart:
And Cura Cruor is the word thereon,
His care's for blood of those that dare resist:
Yet hight his Page that follows him, Regard,
and he for Conscience to this conquest comes.
The Government of spain is Tyranny,
as doo his ympreze and his words declare,
His Page is Terror: for a Tyrant fears
His death, in diet, in his bed, in sleep,
In conscience: Spite the Spanish tyranny
Hath shed a sea of most unguilty blood: Well, what's the end?
The end is best you yield, submitting you to mercy of these Lords.
Before we fight? soft sic, ye brave too fast.
Castilians, know that Englishmen will knock, but say.
Doth Spanish Pride for Londons Lucre gape,
And would their Tyranny Conscience captive have?
Doth their Ambition Londons love affect?
All this they will, and pray upon your town,
And give your lands away before your face:
alas, what's England to the power of spain?
a Molehil, to be placed where it pleases them.
But in this Molehil many Plsmyres be,
All which will sting before they be removed,
What is thy name?
Shealty,
An Irish word, signifieng liberty, rather remissness, looseness if ye will, why hath thy coat a burning ship behind?
to signify ye burning of your fléet by vs Castilliās.
It rather means your common wealth's on fire,
about your ears, and you were best look home,
a common wealth's compared to a ship,
If yours do flame, your country is hot, beware.
I see Castilians, that you marvel much
at this same Emblem of the Olive tree
Upon my back: Lo this it signifies.
Spain is in wars, but London lives in peace,
Your native fruit doth wither on your soil,
and prospers where it never planted was.
This Londons Fealty doth avouch for truth,
Herald of war, and Porter of their peace,
Command ye me no service to my Lords.
Quid tibi cum domini mox seruient misery nobis: diseede.
Quid mihi cum dominic seruietis misery maize▪
shealty, say unto yen Thrasos thrée.
The Lords of London dare them to the field,
Wittieng their pride and their Ambition,
Scorning their Tyranny, and yet fearing this,
That they are come from home and dare not fight,
But if they dare in joint or several arms,
Battle or combat, him that Lucre seeks,
Your Spanish pride, him dare I from the rest.
That bloody cur, your Spanish Tyranny,
That Londons Conscience would force with cruelty,
I challenge him for Conscience sake to fight,
a Lord of London, and I pleasure hight.
And shealty, when Citizens dare them thus,
Judge what our Nobles and our courtiers dar•▪
Say if thou wilt that Londons policy
Discerns that proud Ambition of sp•••e,
And for he comes inflamed with Lone•••s love,
In combat let him conquer me and have her,
this is Loves favour, I her servant am.
This Lucres favour, Pomp for her will fight.
this Conscience favour, she my mistress is.
You craven English •n your donghils crow.
You Spanish Pheasants crow upon your perch,
But when we fire your coats about your ears,
And take your ships before your walled towns,
We make a donghill of your rotten bones,
And cram our chickens with your grains of gold.
You will not yéeld?
Yes, the last month.
Farewell. 
Vade.
Herald, how now?
Yen proud Castillians look for your service.
So do we for theirs: but Fealty, can thou declare to me the cause why all their pages follow them, when ours in shows do ever go before.
In war they follow, and the Spaniard is warring in mind
But that's not now the cause, yen three are Pride, Ambition Tyranny.
shame follows pride, as we a proverb have,
pride goes before, and shame comes after,
Treachery ever attends upon Ambiton.
And Terror always with a fearful watc•,
Doth wait upon il conscienced Tyranny:
But why stay we to give them space to breath:
Come, Courage, let vs charge them all at once.
What braving cowards these Castillians be,
My Lords let's hang our Scutchens up again,
And shroud our selves but not far off vnséene,
To prove if that may draw them to some deed,
Be it but to batter our ymprezed shields.
Agréed, here Fealty, hang them up a space.
Facing, faint-hearted, proud and insolent,
That bear no edge within their painted sheaths,
That durst not strike our silly patient shields.
Up have they set their own, sée if we dare
Batter on them, and beat their braving Lords.
Let them not yonder hang vnbackt, my Lords.
With good advise, that we be not surprised, and good enough.
My self will onset give on Prides, at your Peacock sir.
At Tyrannies will I bestow my blow, wishing the moister.
I at Ambitions strike, have at his pampered Jade.
Fuoro Viliagos, fuoro Lutheranos Angleses, fuoro sa, sa, sa.
Their shields are ours, they fled away with shame,
But Lordings, whiles the stratageum is fresh,
And memory of their misfortune greene,
Their hearts yet fainting with the novel grief,
Let vs pursue them flieng, if you say it,
Happily, we may prevent their passage yet.
With spéed and héede the matter must be done,
Therefore you Policy shall our leader be.
The day is ours, fair Ladies let vs joy,
The joyful day that all men may rejoice,
Yet only I am thankful for this good.
And your good day at hand approaches fast.
Wherein you shall be joint to thrée such Lords,
As all the cities under heavens bright cope,
Cannot with all their glory match in worth,
Lucre, Lord Pomp a victor comes to thee:
Love, look thou for Lord policy as well:
And Conscience for her well reformed Fere,
pleasure, that only made his choice of her.
Upon that day triumphant shall we feast,
Wherein (Madams) your honours nil be least.
Against their coming might my read be hard,
Prepare would we garlands of Laurel greene,
To welcome them, more for the common good,
Than for affection private that we bear.
To meet them coming will not be amiss,
But what know we how they will take such work,
Report may be much more than there is cause,
We may them méete and gréet with joyful hearts,
And make them garlands when we know their minds.
And here they come with new ymprezed shields,
My Lords well met, and welcome from your foes.
Lord pomp, well met, and welcome home again.
Lord policy, well met, and welcome home again.
Lord pleasure, welcome with unfeigned heart.
Fair joy and Lady xx. thousand thanks.
Fair Love, and Lady, twice as many thanks·
Fair and beloved Lucre, though I speak last,
As kindly I thy welcome do accept,
As heart can think, pen write, or tongue can tell.
Now speak my Lords, how have ye sped?
Right well: thanks unto him yt gave the day to vs,
The pride of Spain was cloaked with Majesty,
And Shame his page, (nicknamed) Modesty,
Spanish Ambition, Honour would be called,
And Treachery his page, termed Action.
Their Tyranny was cleped Government,
Terror his page, was (falsely) named Regard,
But God aboue hath given them their reward.
They with dishonour left their shields behind,
The only prises purchased by vs now,
And those (fair Ladies) we present to you,
Love, this is thine, and he that gives it thee.
In lieu whereof your gift and her I give
Again to you, that merit more than both.
The greatest gift and good could me befall.
Fair lucre, lo, my present and my self.
Which I with Nemos license gladly take.
Take her Lord pomp, I give her unto thee,
Wishing your good may ten times doubled be.
the wished good this world could give to me.
Of duty I (my dear) must give thee this, that art my comfort and my earthly bliss.
Now Lords, I h•pe you are contented all,
pomp with his Lucre, policy with Love:
pleasure with Conscience, joy fall you from aboue:
And thus to you my promise is performed,
And I expect that yours as well be kept,
That present preparation may be made
to honour those with holy marriage rites,
that I in presence of the world may give
these as my daughters unto you my sons.
By my consent one day shall serve vs all,
Which shall be kept for ever festival.
And on that day in honour of these Dames,
these shields in triumph shall be borne about.
with pageants, plates, and what delights may be to entertain the time and company.
So it please you Lordings, me thinks it were méet,
that the Ladies took care to provide their own toys.
My self néede to help them, who know their minds well,
For I can kéepe women both quiet and constant.
It pleases vs well that you will take the pains.
Fair ones, for a while we betake you to your business.
Ladies, adieu. 
Beloved, farewell. 
It seems by this writing sir, you would serve me,
Is your name Skill? whom did you serve last?
An ill moister, my Lord, I served none but my self.
Have ye never served any heretofore?
Yes, divers my Lord, both beyond sea and here with your pa∣tience, my good Lord, not offending the same, I think I am your poor kinsman, your Lordship, policy, and I Skill, if it like ye.
You say very well, and it is very like, I will answer ye a∣non.
Is your name fair semblance that wish to serve me.
Please it your Lordship, fair semblance, I am well séen, though I say it, in sundry languages, méet for your Lordship, or any noble ser∣vice, to teach divers tongues, and other rare things.
I like ye very well, stay a while for your answer,
Moister Usury, I thank ye that ye offer me your service, it séemes to be for your old mistress sake, Lady lucre, stay but a while, I will answer you with reason.
How now my hearts, think ye we shall spéed.
Diligence, Come hither.
I cannot tell what you shall, but I am sure I shall.
I am as like as any of ye both.
Fraud.
Whist man, he's Skill.
Skill, Why doest thou séeke to serve Lady Love?
What profit will that he?
Cut hold thée content, Isle serve but a while, and serve mine own turn and away.
Moister Usury come hither, you desire to serve me, you have done Lady Lucre good service you say, but it was against God and Conscience you did it, neither ever in your life did ye any thing for Love: Well to be short, serve me you shall not, and I would I could banish you from London for ever, or keep you close prisoner, but that is not in me, but what is or may be, that strait you shall see: By policies counsel this shall be done, Diligence bring that iron, help me my Lords.
Give me the iron Pomp, Cousin Skill help to hold him,
Sir, policy gives you this mark, doo you sée,
A little x. standing in the midst of a great. C,
Meaning thereby to let all men understand,
that you must not take aboue bare x. pound in the hūdred at any hand,
And that too much too, and so be packing quietly:
And know that Londons Pomp is not sustained by usury,
But by well ventured merchandise and honest industry.
I would I had never seen ye, if this be your courtesy.
Now Cousin Skill, alias, filthy Fraud,
No kinsman to Policy, nor friend to the state.
In steed of serving me, Diligence take him to Newgate,
Ask not why, sir, but Diligence if he doe strive,
Raise the street he's unweaponed, and thou hast a weapon on:
And now Lords when ye will, about our affairs, let's be gone,
Agréed, but what's become of fair semblance my man.
A craf•ie villain, perceiving how we meant to Usury, slipped away.
All hail, all rain, all frost, &amp; all snow, be to you thrée Lord•s of London on a row:
Read my supplantation and my suit ye shall know,
Even for Gods sake aboue, and three Ladies sakes below.
M. Diligence, Do me favour, you know I am a gentleman.
Step aside till my Lords be gone, Isle doo for you what I can.
What's here my boy, what's here? pleasure, this suit is sure to you, for it's mad stuff, and I know not what it means.
Neither doe I: sir, your writing is so intricate, that you must speak your mind, otherwise, we shall not know your meaning.
You sue for three things here, and what be they tell them:
Cannot you thrée tell, and the suit to you thrée? I am glad a simple fellow yet, can go beyond you three great Lords of London.
Why my suite, look ye, is such a suite, as you are bound in honour to hear, for it is for the puppet like wealth, I would have no new or∣ders, nor new sciences set up in the city, whereof I am a poor frée∣man, and please ye, as ye may read in my bil there, simplicity fréeman. But my Lords, I would have three old trades, which are not for the common wealth, put down.
And after all this circumstance, sir what be they?
they be not thrée what lack yees, as what do ye lack, fine Lockerome, fine Canvas, or fine Holland cloth: or what lack ye, fine Ballads, fine Sonnets: or what lack ye, a purse or a glass, or a pair of fine knives: but they be three, have ye anies, which me thinks are neither sciences nor occupations, and if they be trades, they are ve∣rye malapert trades, and more than reason.
As how sir? Name them.
Will you banish them as readily as I can name them? the first is, h•ue ye any old iron, old male, or old horn•is?
And what fault find ye with this?
What fault? I promise ye a great fault, what have you or any man else to doo to ask me if I have any old iron? What if I have, or what if I have not? Why should you be so saucy to ask?
Why fool, tic for thy good to give thée money for that, that might lie and rust by thée.
No my Lord, no. I may not call you fool: it is to mark the houses where such stuff is, that against rebels rise, there is harness and weapon ready for them in such and such houses, and what then? the rusty weapon doth wound past surgery, and kills the Quéens good subjects: &amp; the rest of the old trash will make them guns too, so it is good luck to find old iron, but tic nought to keep it, and the trade is crafty, and now my L. policy, I speak to you, it were well to put it down.
Wisely said, which is your second? Is that as perilous?
Yea, and worse: It is, have ye any ends of gold and silue•? this is a perilous trade, covetous, and a ticement to murder, for, mark ye, If they that ask this should be evil given, as Gods forbod▪ they sée who hath this gold and silver, may not they come in the night break in at their houses, and cut their throats for it? I tell ye, gold and sell∣for hath caused as much mischief to be done as that, down with it.
they that have it need not show it.
tush, they need ask no such question, many a man hath delight
to show what he hath, the trad•'s a ticing trade, down with it:
Now your third sir:
that is the craftiest of all, wherein I am disbus's, for that goes under the colour of simplicity, have ye any wood to clean?
A perilous thing, what hurt is there in this sir?
O do you not perceive the subtlety? why sir, the Woodmongers hires these poor men to go up and down with their betles &amp; wed∣ges on their backs, crieng, have ye any wood to cleave, and laugh to see them travel so laden with wood and iron: now sir, if the poor men go two or thrée days and be not set a work (as sometimes they doo) the Woodmongers pay them and gain by it, for then know they there's no wood in the city, then raise they the price of billets so by, that the poor can buy none. Now sir, if these fellows were barred from as∣king, whether there were wood to cleave or not, the woodmongers néed not know but that there were wood, and so billets and faggots would be sold al at one rate, down with this trade, we shall sit a cold else my Lords.
I promise you a wise suit, and done with great discretion.
Yea, is it not? might ye not do well to make me of your counsel I beléeue I could spy more faults in a week, than you could mend in a month:
Well, for these three faults the time serves not now to redress:
No marie, for you three must be married suddenly, and your feast must be dres•:
Against which feast, repair you to Diligence, and hee shall appoint you furniture and money, and a place in the show, till when farewell. 
Farewell my Lords, farewell my three Lords, and remember that I have set each of ye a fault to mend: well, Isle go seek M. Diligēce that he may give me forty pence against the feast sir reverence:
what is it M. Fraud, ye would demand of me?
Sir this you know, though your self be a man of good recko∣ning, yet are ye known an off•er unto these thr•e Lords, and what discredit it were to me, being a noted m•n to pass through the streets with you being officer, or if any of my friends should suspect me with you, and dog vs, and see me committed to Newgate, I were utterly discredited, here is a purse sir, and in it two hundred Angels, look sir, you shall tell them.
Here are so indeed, what mean ye by this, I will not take these to let ye escape. 
I mean not so sir, nor I will not give half of them to be suf∣feared to escape, for I have done no offence, though it please them to im∣prision me, and it is but on commandment, I shall not stay long, but I will give you this purse and gold in pawn to be true prisoner, only give me leave to go some other way, and home to my lodging, for my boots and other necessaries, for there Isle leave word I am ridden out of town, and with al the hast that possibly I may, I will meet you at Newgate, and give you an Angel for your courtesy: there is the purse.
I hazard (as you know) my Lords displeasure herein, and yet to pleasure you I will venture this once, but I pray ye make hast that I be not shent, I would not for ten Angels it were known.
If I tarry aboue an hour, take that gold for your tarieng.
I do not fear that you'll forfeit so much for so little cause. 
My Lords of Lincoln, have you such title and such interest
To Love, Lucre, and Conscience, as ye say?
Who gave you leave to have access to them?
I am their father by adoption,
I never knew of Love twixt them and you:
And to perpetual prison they were doomed,
From whence I only might deliver them.
Which at the suit of three most matchless Lords,
Their countrymen, in London bred as they,
I have performed and freed them from their bonds,
And yet have bound them in their freedom too
To Policy, to pleasure, and to pomp,
Three Lords of London, whose they are in right,
Contracted wives, and done by my consent,
And even to morrow is the marriage day,
Except your coming stay or break it off,
I will go call their Lords to answer you,
The (pvnder covert Baron) meddle not. 
Fetch them Lord Nemo, we will here attend.
Attend we may, but unto little end,
The Ladies are in hucksters handling now,
I would I had my time in praieng spent,
That I in wooing Conscience did consume.
Here come the Lords, let's show good count∣nonce man.
Yet more ado before we can enjoy
The joys of marriage with our mistresses?
Be these the Lords that title doo pretend?
My Lords of Lincoln, so we hear you be.
What are your names?
Devotion, Desire, and Delight.
Which comes for Lucre?
I Desire.
Which for Conscience?
I Devotion.
Which for Love?
I Delight.
You shall be answered straight.
I can answer them quickly: ye cannot have them, nor ye shall not have them.
Stay pleasure, soft: My Lord Desire, you Lucre séeke, Desire of lucre (be it without reproach to you my Lord) is covetousness which cannot be separated long from that: read my Lord.
In golden letters on this stone is written Care.
Care with desire of lucre well agrees, the rather for that Londons Lucre may not be separated from Londons Pomp, so you may take that stone if ye will, but the Lady you cannot have.
And a stone is a cold comfor in steed of Lucre.
Devotion to Conscience (I speak now to you my Lord that are learned) is sorrow for sin, or in one word read.
On this sweating stone in brass is set Remorse.
And that is your portion, for Conscience is bestowed on Lone∣dons
Pleasure, because London makes a conscience what pleasure they use and admit, and what time they bestow therein, and to what end: s• my Lord Devotion, either that or nothing.
A stone is a hard lot in stod of a Lady.
My Lord Delight, that to delight in Love, you must I love, for making choice of mine. Love is my portion, and that Flint is yours.
Here in lead is written, Charity: and what of this?
If you be (as I doubt not) honest delight in love, then in the best sen•e, you can have but Charity, if you be (which I suspect not) o∣there Delight in Love, you must be noted for Concupiscence, and that you will blush to be: well Charity is your best, then that is your port∣on: For, mark ye, Londons policy joins with Londons Love: to show, that all our po•lice is for love of Londons common wealth: and so our love cannot be seper•te from our policy, you bear this.
A Flint's a hard change for so fair a wife.
And thus Lords, Desire of Lucre may take Care, Devotion of Conscience may have Remorse, and Delight of Love may have Charity, other recompense none.
And so we thrée leave you three with Care, Remorse, &amp; charity.
With Care and Remorse I swear, ye doo leave vs, but what charity I cannot tell.
Well. yet must we use Charity though we fail of our desire, and we are answered with such reason as is not to be gainsaid.
Indeed my Lord your calling is to persuade to Charity, but if I use patience, it shall be perforce.
Yet being so wisely warned, me thinks wée should be armed And take this in worth, that the world wonder no further, I will take up my hard burden of Remorse and be gone.
It is good to follow examples of good, Isle take this heavy burden of Care, and follow as I may.
Because Isle not be slagular, Isle frame my self to follow, ta∣king this cold portion of Charity as my share. 
Come on M. Didligence, I have been seeking ye, as a man should seek a load of hay in a néedles eye.
And why hast thou sought me (I pray thee) so earnestly?
Why? For this ointment, these shells, these pleasure, do ye not know this Countu• mountus cum this d• mihi?
What money, why? Do I owe thee any money?
Owe me? Tush, no man, what do ye talk of owing? Come, and yet I must have some certain sigillatum &amp; deliberatum in prae∣sentia. Doo you not understand sir? Forty pence and furniture by my Lord pomps pointment, against the wedding day: to bee one of the show-makers, I doe not say shoo-makers, and yet they be honest men.
I understand thée now, and thou shalt want neither money nor furniture for that: saw thou not Fraud lately?
No, a For ferit him, for if I could find him, I would make him fast enough for cosoning me of ten shillings for certain copper buttons and rings, I thought to have been a haberdasher, and he hath made me worse than a hay-maker.
I may say to thee in counsel, but Isle have no words of it, hee hath overreached me too: but if thou spy him first, let me understand, and if I see him first thou shalt have knowledge, for Isle tell thee, but laugh not, he showed me a purse with a hūdred pound in Angels, which he would deliver me in pawn to be my true prisoner, because for his credit, •e was loath to go with me through the stréetes to Newgate: I refused it at first, but at last by his entreaty I was content to take his pawn, and thinking he had given me the right purse of gold, he had another like it, which he gave me with counters, and so went a∣way, I never did see him since, but mum, no words of it.
No words quoth a, that's a state test, would you be coson'd so?
Well, so it is now, come follow me for thy furniture and mo∣ney. 
The coast is clear, come follow Fraud and fear not, for who can decipher vs in this disguise, thus may we shuffle• into the show with the rest, and see and not be seen, doing as they doo, that are at∣tired like our selves.
That is, to stand amongst them, and take as they take, torches or any thing to furnish the show, now if we we can pass but this day unseen, let to morrow shift for it s•lfe as it may, I promise thee Dis∣simulation thou art very formal.
Not more than thy self Fraud, I would thou saw thy picture
Picture here, picture there, let's follow our business. 
Strowe the fair flowers and herbs that be greene,
To grace the gaiest wedding that ever was seen.
If London list to look, the streets were ne'er so clean,
Except it was when best it might, in welcome of our Queen:
Three lovely Lords of London shall thr•e London Ladies wed,
Strowe sweetest flowers upon the stones, perfume the bridal bed.
Strowe the fair flowers. &amp;c.
These Lords and Ladies thus to church are gone,
An honoured action to solemnise there,
With greater joy will they return anon,
Than Caesar did in Rome his Laurel wear.
Lord policy hath Love unto his Fere.
Lord pomp hath Lucre to maintain his port,
Lord pleasure Conscience to direct his sport.
Usury is marked to be known,
Dissimulation like a shadow fléetes,
And Simony is out of knowledge grown,
And Fraud vnfound in London but by fits.
Simplicity with painful penury sits.
For Hospitality that was wont to feed him,
Was slain long since and now the poor doo néed him.
That Hospitality was an honest man,
But had few friends (alas) if he had any,
But Usury which cut his throat as than
Was succoured, and sued for by many.
Would Liberality had been by thy side,
Then Hospitality, thou had never died.
But what mean I, one of the marriage train,
To morn for him will ne'er be had again.
His Ghost may walk to mock the people rude:
Ghosts are but shadows, and doe sense delude:
I talk too long, for so this lovely crew
Are coming back, and have performed their due.
O Lady Conscience that art married to Lord pleasure,
Help thy servant simplicity to recover his lost treasure:
A boon my Lords, all for Love and Lucre sake,
Even as you are true Lords, help a false lout to take,
Thou shalt have help, speak, what is the matter?
Sée you yen fellow with the torch in his hand?
One the falsest villain that is in this land,
Let him be laid hold on that he run not away,
And then ye shall hear what I have to say.
Diligence bring him bether, good Lords and Ladies stay,
O Moister Fraud, welcome to the buts,
Now Isle have my ten shillings in spite of your guts,
The French Tanker consume ye, you were an old Frenchman,
Da goll buttoone, goll renga, bugle lase, you coson'd me than,
My Lords I beseech ye that at tyborne he may •otter,
For in steed of gold, the villain sold me copper.
Is this true M. Skill?
It is true in a sort my Lord, I thought to bee pleasant with him being my old acquaince, and disguised my self like an old French
Artificer and having a few copper knacks, I sold them to him to make sport for ten shillings, which money I am content to pay him again so shall he have no loss though he have made a little sport.
First give him an Angel before my face. Simplicity, art thou pleased?
Truly I am pleased to take a good Angel for ten shillings, speciouslie of such a debtor as M. Fraud: but now I am to bee pleased otherwise, that is, to see him punished, I promise ye the people love him well, for they would leave work and make half •whole•ay to see him hanged.
That his punishment may please thee the better, thou shalt pu∣nish him thy self: he shall be bound fast to yen post, and thou shalt bee blindfold, and with thy torch shalt run as it were at tilt, charging thy light against his lips, and so (if thou can) burn out his tongue, that it never speak more guile.
O Singulariter Nominatiuo, wise Lord pleasure: Genetiuo bind him to that post, Datiuo, give me my torch, Accusat. For I say he's a cosoner. La. O give me room to run at him. Oblate. take and blind me. Pluraliter, per omnes casus. Laugh all you to see me in my choler adust to burn and to broil that false Fraud to dust.
Wisely performed, but soft sirs, where is Fraud? O noble vile∣lain, gone whiles we beheld the other: Who loosed him? Who let him slip? well, one day he will pay for all: vnblind Simplicity.
How now, Have I beated his lips? have I warmed his nose? and scorched his face? Let me see, how looks the villain? Have I burned him?
Thou hast done more, for thou hast quite consumed him into nothing, look, here is no sign of him, no not so much as his ashes.
Very few ashes if there be any, ye may see what a hot thing anger is, I think that the Torch did not waste him so much as my wrath: well, al London, nay, all England is beholding to me, for putting Fraud out of this world, I have consumed him &amp; brought him to nothing
&amp; Isle tread his ashes under my feet, yt no more Frauds shall ever spring of them: But let me sée, I shall have much anger, for the Tanners will miss him in their leather, the Tailors in cutting out of garments, the Shoo-maker in closing, the Tipsters in filling pots, and the very o∣stermen to mingle their oysters at Billinsgate, yet it is no matter the world is well rid of such a crafty knave.
Well now thou art satisfied, I wish all here as well contented,
And we my Lords that praise this happy day,
Fall wee on knees and humbly let vs pray.
First that from heaven upon our gracious Queen,
All manner blessings may be multiplied,
That as her reign most prosperous hath been,
During worlds length so may it still abide,
And after that with saints be glorified·
Lord grant her here health, hearts-ease, joy and mirth.
And heaven at last, after long life on earth.
Her counsel wise, and Nobles of this land
Bless, and preserve O Lord with thy right hand.
On all the rest that in this Land doo dwell,
Chiefly in London, Lord pour down thy grace,
Who living in thy fear and dying well,
In heaven with Angels they may have a place.

