GEntlemen, so nice is the world, that for apparel there is no fashion, for Music no instrument, for diet no deli∣cate, for plays no invention but breeds society before noon, and contempt before night.
Come to the Tailor, hee is gone to the Painters, to learn howe more cunning may lurk in the fashion, then can bee expressed in the making. Ask the Musici∣once, they will say their heads ache with devising notes beyond Ela. Enquire at Ordinaries, there must be sallets for the Ita∣lian; picktooths for the Spaniard; pots for the German; pore∣ridge for the Englishman. At our exercises, Soldiers call for Tragedies, their object is blood: Courtiers for Commodities, their subject is love: Countrymen for Pastorals, Shepherds are their Saints. Traffic and travel hath woven the na∣ture of all Nations into ours, and made this land like Arras, full of devise, which was Broade-cloth, full of workman∣ship.
Time hath confounded our minds, our minds the mat∣la, but all comes to this pass, that what heretofore hath
been served in several dishes for a feast, is now minced in a charger for a Gallimaufrey. If wee present a mingle-mangle, our fault is to be excused, because the whole world is become an Hodgepodge.
Wee are jealous of your judgements, because you are wise; of our own performance, because we are imperfect; of our Au∣thors device, because he is idle. Only this doth encourage vs, that presenting our studies before Gentlemen, though they receive an inward mislike, wee shall not be hist with an open disgrace.
Stirps rudis vrtica est: stirps generosa, rosa.
MIdas, where the Gods bestow benefits they ask thanks, but where they receive good turns they give rewards. Thou hast filled my belly with meat, mine ears with music, mine eyes with wonders. Baccnus of all the Gods is the best fellow, and Midas amongst men a king of fellows. All thy grounds are vineyards, thy corn grapes, thy cham∣bers sellers, thy household stuff standing cups: and therefore ask any thing it shall be granted. Would thou have the pipes of thy conducts to run wine, the vdders of thy beasts to drop nectar, or thy trees to bud ambrosia? Desire thou to be fortunate in thy love, or in thy victories famous, or to have the years of thy life as many as the hairs on thy head? Nothing shall be de∣need, so great is Bacchus, so happy is Midas.
Bacchus, for a king to beg of a God it is no shame, but to ask with advise, wisdom; give me leave to consult: least desiring things aboue my reach, I bee fired with Phaeton: or against nature, &amp; be drowned with Icarus: &amp; so perishing, the world shall both laugh and wonder, crying, Magnis tamen excidit ausis.
Consult, Bacchus will consent.
Now my Lords, let me hear your opinions, what wish may make Midst most happy, and his Sub∣jests best content?
Were I a king I would wish to possess my mi∣stress, for what sweetness can there be found in life, but love? whose wounds the more mortal they are to the heart, the more immortal they make the possessors: and
who knows not that the possessing of that must bee most precious, the pursuing whereof is so pleasing.
Love is a pastime for children, breeding no∣thing but folly, and nourishing nothing but idleness. I would wish to be monarch of the world, conquering kingdoms like villages, and being greatest on the earth be commander of the whole earth: for what is there that more tickles the mind of a king, then a hope to bee the only king, wringing out of every country tribute, and in his own to sit in triumph. Those that call con∣querors ambitious, are like those that tea•no thrift co∣uetousnes, cleanliness pride, honesty preciseness. Com∣maund the world, Midas, a greater thing you cannot desire, a less you should not.
What say you Mellacrites?
Nothing, but that these two have said nothing. I would wish that eueriething I touched might turn to gold: this is the sinews of war, and the sweetness of peace. Is it not gold that makes the chastest to yield to lust, the honestest to lewdness, the wisest to folly, the faithfullest to deceit, and the most holy in heart, to be most hollow of hart? In this word Gold are all the po∣wers of the gods, the desires of men, the woonders of the world, the miracles of nature, the losenes of for∣tune and triumphs of time. By gold may you shake the courts of other Princes, and have your own settled, one spade of gold undermines faster then an hundred mat∣tocks of steel. Would one be thought religious &amp; de∣vote? Quantum quisque sua nummorum servant in arse, tan∣tum habit &amp; fidei: Religions balance are golden bags. Desire you virtue? querenda pecunia primum est, virtus post nummos: the first stair of virtue is money. Doth any thirst after gentry, and wish to be esteemed beau∣tiful?
&amp; genus &amp; formam regina pecunia donate: king Coin hath a mint to stamp gentlemen, and art to make amia∣blenes. I deny not but love is sweet, and the marrow of a mans mind, that to conquer kings is the quintes∣sense of the thoughts of kings: why ţhen follow both, Aurea sunt ver• nuns saecula, plurimus euro venit honos, euro conciliatur amor: it is a world for gold, honour and love are both taken up on interest. Doth Midas determine to tempt the minds of true Subjects? to draw them from obedience to treachery, from their allegiance and oaths to treason and perjury? quid non mortalia pectora cogit aurisacra fems? what holes doth not gold bore in men's hearts? Such virtue is there in gold, that being bred in the barrenest ground, and trodden under foot, it mounts to sit on Princes heads. Wish gold Midas, or wish not to be Midas. In the council of the gods, was not Anubis with his long nose of gold, preserred be∣fore Neptunes, whose stature was but brass? And Aescu∣lapius more honoured for his golden beard, then Apollo for his sweet harmony?
To have gold and not love, (which cannot be purchased by gold) is to be a slave to gold.
To possess mountains of gold, and a mistress more precious then gold, and not to command the world, is to make Midst new prentice to a mint, and Iorneiman to a woman
To enjoy a fair Lady in love, and want fair gold to give: to have thousands of people to fight, and no penny to paye, will make ones mistress wilde, and his soldiers tame. Iupiter was a god, but he knew gold was a greater: and flew into those grates with his golden wings, where he could not enter with his Swans wings. What staide Atlantas course with Hippoma•••?
an apple of gold; what made the three goddesses strive? an apple of gold. If therefore thou make not thy mistress a goldfinch, thou may chance to find her a wagtail: believe me, Res est ingeniosa dare. Besides, how many gates of cities this golden key hath opened, we may re∣member of late, and ought to fear hereafter. That iron world is worn out, the golden is now come, Sub Jove nuns mundus iussa sequare Iouis.
Gold is but the guts of the earth.
I had rather have the earths guts, then the Moons brains. What is it that gold cannot cōmand, or hath not conquered? Justice her self, that sits wimpled about the eyes, doth it not because she will take no gold, but that she would not be seen blushing when she takes it: the balance she holds are not to weie the right of the cause, but the weight of the bribe: she will put up her naked sword if thou offer her a gol∣den scabbard.
Cease you to dispute, I am determined. It is gold, Bacchus, that Midst desires, let every thing that Midst touches be turned to gold, so shalt thou bless thy guest, and manifest thy godhood. Let it be gold Bacchus.
Midas thy wish cleaves to thy last word. Take up this stone.
Fortunate Midst. It is gold Mellacrites, gold, it is gold.
This stick.
Gold Mellacrites, my sweet boy al is gold: for ever honoured be Bacchus, that aboue measure hath made Midst fortunate.
If Midst be pleased Bacchus is, I will to my tem∣ple with Silenus, for by this time there are many to offer
unto me sacrifices: Paenam pro munere posses.
Come my Lords, I will with gold pave my court, and deck with gold my turrets, these petty lands near to Phrygia shall totter, and other kingdoms be tur∣ned topsy turuie: I will command both the affections of men, and the fortunes. Chastity will grow cheap where gold is not thought dear. Celia, chaste Celia shall yield. You my Lords shall have my hands in your houses, turning your brazen gates to fine gold. Thus shall Midst be monarch of the world, the direr of for∣tune, the commander of love. Come let vs in.
We follow, desiring that our thoughts may be touched with thy finger, that they also may become gold.
Well I fear the event, because of Bacchus last words, paenam pro munere posses.
Tush, he is a drunken god, else he would not have given so great a gift. Now it is done, I care not for any thing he can doe.
THou serve Mellacrites, and I his daughter, which is the better man?
The Masculine gender is more worthy then the feminine, therefore Licio backare.
That is when those two genders are at jar, but when they belong both to one thing, then.
What then?
Then they agree like the fiddle and the stick.
Pulchrè sanè. Gods blessing on thy blew nose, but Licio, my mistress is a proper woman.
I but thou know another properties.
I care not for her qualities, so I may embrace her quantity.
Are you so peart?
I and so expert, that I can as well tel the thoughts of a women's heart by her eyes, as the change of the weather by an almanac.
Sir boy you must not be saucy.
No, but faithful and serviceable.
Lock up your lips or I will lop them off. But sir∣rha, for thy better instructions I will unfold every wrin∣kle of my mistress disposition.
I pray thee doe.
But for this time I will only handle the head and purtenance.
Nothing else?
Why, will not that be a long hours work to de∣scribe, that is almost a whole days work to dress?
Proceed.
First, she hath a head as round as a tennis ball.
I would my bed were a hazard.
Why?
Nothing, but that I would have her head there among other balls.
Video, pro Intelligo. Then hath she an hawk eye.
O that I were a partridge head.
To what end?
That she might tire with her eyes on my coun∣tenance.
Would thou be hanged?
Scilicet.
Well, she hath the tongue of a Parrot?
Thats a leaden dagger in a velvet iheath, to
have a black tongue in a fair mouth.
Tush, it is not for the blackness, but for the bab∣ling, for every hour she will cry walk knave, walk.
Then will I mutter, a rope for Parrot, a rope.
So moist thou be hanged, not by the lips, but by the neck. Then sir hath she a calves tooth.
O monstrous mouth! I would then it had been a sheep eye, and a neates tongue.
It is not for the bigness, but the sweetness: all her teeth are as sweet as the sweet tooth of a calfe.
Sweetly meant.
She hath the ears of a Want.
Doth she want ears?
I say the ears of a Want, a Mole, thou dost want wit to understand me. She will hear though she be no∣for so low on the ground.
Why then if one ask her a question, it is likely she will hearken to it.
Hearken thou after that, she hath the nose of a sow.
Then belike there she wears her wedding ring.
No, she can smell a knave a mile off.
Let vs go farther Licio, she hath both vs in the wind.
She hath a bettle brow.
What, is she beetle browed?
Thou hast a beetle head, I say the brow of a bee∣tle, a little fly, whose brow is as black as velvet.
What lips hath she?
Tush, the lips are no part of the head, only made for a double leaf door for the mouth.
What is then the chin?
That is only the threshold to the door.
I perceive you are driven to the wall that stands behind the door, for this is ridiculous: but now you can say no more of the head, begin with the purtenances, for that was your promise.
The purtenances, it is impossible to reckon them up, much less to tell the nature of them. Hoods, front∣lets, wires, caules, curling-irons, periwigs, bodkins, fill∣lets, hairlaces, ribbons, roles, knotstrings, glasses, combs, caps, hats, coifs, kerchers, clothes, earerings, borders, crippins, shadows, spots, and so many other trifles, as both I want the words of art to name them, time to vt∣la them, and wit to remember them: these be but a few notes.
Notes quoth you, I note one thing.
What is that?
That if every part require so much as the head, it will make the richest husband in the world ache at the heart.
But soft here comes Pipenetta, what news?
I would not be in your coats for any thing.
Indeed if thou shouldest rigge up and down in our jackets, thou would be thought a very tomboy.
I mean I would not be in your cases.
Neither shalt thou Pipenetta, for first, they are too little for thy body, and then too fair to pull over so foul asking.
These boys be droonk, I would not be in your takings.
I think so, for we take nothing in our hands but weapons, it is for thee to use needles and pins, a sam∣pler, not a buckler.
Nay then wee shall never have done, I mean I would not be so coursed as you shall be.
Worse and worse. Wee are no chase (pretty mops,) for Decree we are not, neither red nor fallow, because we are Bachelors, and have not cornu copy, we want heads: Hares we cannot be, because they are male one year, and the next female, we change not our sex: Badgers we are not, for our legs are one as long as ano∣there: and who will take vs to be Foxes, that stand so ne'er a goose, and bite not?
Fools you are, and therefore good game for wise men to hunt: but for knaves I leave you, for ho∣nest wenches to talk of.
Nay stay sweet Pipenetta, we are but disposed to be merry.
I marvel how old you will be before you be dis∣posed to be honest. But this is the matter, my master is gone abroad, and wants his page to wait on him: my mistress would rise, and lacks your worship to fetch her hair.
Why, is it not on her head?
Me thinks it should, but I mean the hair that she must wear to day.
Why, doth she wear any but her own?
In faith sir no, I am sure it is her own when she pays for it. But do you hear the strange news at the Court?
No, except this be it, to have ones hair lie all night out of the house from ones head.
Tush, every thing that Midst touches is gold.
The devil it is.
Indeed gold is the devil.
Thou art deceived wench, angels are gold. But is it true?
True? Why the meat that he tutcheth turns to
gold, so doth the drink, so doth his raiment.
I would he would give me a good box on the ear, that I might have a golden cheek.
How happy shall we be if hee would but stroke our heads, that we might have golden hairs. But let vs all in, least he lose the virtue of the gift before wee taste the benefit.
If he take a cudgel and that turn to gold, yet bea∣ting you with it, you shall only feel the weight of gold
What difference to be beaten with gold, and to be beaten gold?
As much as to say, drink before you go, and go before you drink.
Come let vs go, least we drink of a dry cup for our long tarrying.
Fair Caelia, thou see of gold there is face∣tie, of love there cannot.
If thou should wish that whatsoe∣for thou thought might be love, as Midst what ever he touched might be gold, it may be love would bee as loathsome to thine ears, as gold is to his eyes, and make thy heart pinch with melancholy, as his guts doe with famine.
No sweet Caelia, in love there is variety.
Indeed men vary in their love.
They vary their love, yet change it not.
Love and change are at variance, therefore if they vary, they must change.
Men change the manner of their love, not the humour: the means how to obtain, not the mistress
they honour. So did Iupiter, that could not entreat Danes by golden words, possess his love by a golden shower, not altering his affection, but using art.
The same Iupiter was an Eagle, a Swan, a Bull, and for every Saint a new shape, as men have for every mistress a new shadow. If you take example of the gods, who more wanton, more wavering? if of your selves, being but men, who will think you more constant then gods? Eristus, if gold could have allured mine eyes, thou know Midst that commands all things to bee gold, had conquered: if threats might have feared my heart, Midst being a king, might have commanded my affections: if love, gold, or authority might have enchanted me, Midst had obtained by love, gold, and authority, Quorum si singula nostram flectere non po∣tyrant, potuissent omnia mentem.
Ah Caelia, if kings say they love, and yet dissemble, who dare say that they dissemble, and not love? They command the affections of others yield, and their own to be believed. My tears which have made furrows in my cheeks, and in mine eyes fountains: my sighs, which have made of my heart a furnace, and kindled in my head flames: my body that melts by piecemeal, and my mind that pines at an instant, may witness that my love is both unspotted, &amp; unspeakable, Quorum si singula duram flectere non pot∣rant, deberent omnia meant•m. But soft, here comes the Princess, with the rest of the Lords.
Mellacrites, I cannot tell whether I should more mislike thy council, or Midst consent, but the covetous humour of you both I contemn and wonder at, being unfit for a king, whose honour should consist in liberality, not greediness; and unworthy the calling
of Mellacrites, whose fame should rise by the Soldiers god, Mars, not by the merchants god, Gold.
Madam, things past cannot be recalled, but re∣panted; and therefore are rather to be pitied than puny∣shed. It now behooves vs how to redress the misery∣ble estate of our king, not to dispute of the occasion. Your highness sees, and without grief you cannot see, that his meat turns to massy gold in his mouth, and his wine slideth down his throat like liquid gold: if he touch his robes they are turned to gold, and what is not that touches him, but becomes gold?
I Mellacrites, if thy tongue had been turned to gold before thou gave our king such council, Midst heart had been full of ease, and thy mouth of gold.
If my advise had taken place, Midst that now sits over head and ears in crowns, had worn upon his head many kings crowns, and been conqueror of the world, that now is commander of dross. That greediness of Mellacrites, whose heart-stringes are made of Plutus purse-stringes, hath made Midst a lump of earth, that should be a god on earth; and thy effeminate mind Eristus, whose eyes are stitched on Caelias face, and thoughts gyude to her beauty, hath bred in all the court such a tender wantonness, that nothing is thought of but love, a passion proceeding of beastly lust, and co∣loured with a courtly name of love. Thus whilst we follow the nature of things, we forget the names. Since this unsatiable thirst of gold, and intemperate humour of lust crept into the kings court, Soldiers have begged alms of Artificers, and with their helmet on their head been glad to follow a Lover with a glove in his hat, which so much abates the courage of true Captains, that they must account it more honourable, in the court
to be a coward so rich and amorous, than in a camp to be valiant, if poor and maimed. He is more favoured that pricks his finger with his mistress needle, then hee that breaks his lance on his enemies face: and he that hath his mouth full of fair words, than he that hath his body full of deep scars. If one be old, &amp; have silver hairs on his beard, so he have golden ruddocks in his bags, he must be wise and honourable. If young and have curled locks on his head, amorous glances with his eyes, smooth speeches in his mouth, every Ladies lap shall be his pillow, every Ladies face his glass, every Ladies ear a sheath for his flatteries; only Soldiers, if they be old, must beg in their own countries; if young, try the fortune of wars in another. Hee is the man; that being let blood caries his arm in a scarf of his mistress favour, not he that bears his leg on a stilt for his Countries safety.
Stay Martius, though I know love to grow to such losenes, and hoarding to such misery, that I may rather grieve at both, than remedy either: yet thy any∣mating my father to continual arms, to conquer crowns, hath only brought him into imminent danger of his own head. The love hee hath followed, I fear unnatural; the riches he hath got, I know vnmeasura∣ble; the wars he hath levied, I doubt unlawful; hath drawn his body with gray hairs to the graves mouth; and his mind with eating cares to desperate determi∣nations: ambition hath but two steps, the lowest blood; the highest envy: both these hath my unhappy father climbed, digging mines of gold with the lives of men, and now envied of the whole world, is environed with enemies round about the world, not knowing that am∣bition hath one heel nailed in hell, though she stretch
her finger to touch the heavens. I would the Gods would remove this punishment, so that Midst would be penitent. Let him thrust thee, Eristus with thy love, into Italy, where they honour lust for a God, as the Ae∣gyptians did dogs: thee, Mellacrites with thy greedi∣nes of gold, to the utmost parts of the West, where all the guts of the earth are gold: and thee, Martius, that soundest but blood and terror, into those barbarous Nations, where nothing is to be found but blood and terror. Let Phrygia be an example of chastity, not lust; liberality, not covetousness; valour, not tyranny. I wish not your bodies banished, but your minds, that my fa∣there and your king, may be our honour, and the worlds wonder. And thou Caelia, and all you Ladies, learn this of Sophronia, that beauty in a minute is both a blossom and a blast: Love, a worm which seeming to live in the eye, dies in the hart. You be all young, and fair, endeavour all to be wise &amp; virtuous, that when, like roses, you shall fall from the stalk, you may be gathered &amp; put to the still.
Madam, I am free from love, and unfortunate to be beloved.
To be free from love is strange, but to think scorn to be beloved, monstrous.
Eristus, thy tongue doth itch to talk of love, and my ears tingle to hear it. I charge you all, if you owe any duty to your king, to go presently unto the temple of Bacchus, offer praise-giftes, and sacrifice, that Midst may be released of his wish, or his life: this I en∣treat you, this Midst commands you. Jar not with your selves, agree in one for your king, if ever you took Midst for your lawful king.
Madam we will go, and omit nothing that
duty may perform, or pains.
Go speedily, least Midst die before you re∣turn: and you Caelia shall go with me, that with talk we may beguile the time, and my father think of no meat.
I attend.
AHmy girl, is not this a golden world?
It is all one as if it were lead with me, and yet as golden with me as with the king, for I see it, and feel it not, he feels it, &amp; enjoys it not.
Gold is but the earths garbadge, a weed bred by the sun, the very rubbish of barren ground.
Tush Licio, thou art unlettered, al the earth is an egg, the white, silver, the yolk, gold.
Why thou fool, what hen should lay that egg?
I warrant a Goose.
Nay I believe a Bull.
Blirt to you both, it was laid by the Sun.
The Sun is rather a cock than a hen.
Tic true girl, else how could Titan have troaden Daphne?
I weep over both your wits, if I prove in every respect no difference between an egg and gold, will you not then grant gold to be an egg?
Yes, but I believe thy idle imagination will make it an addle egg.
Let vs hear. Proceed Doctor egg.
Gold will be cracked: A common saying, a cracked crown.
I thats a broken head.
Nay then I see thou hast a broken wit.
Well, suppose gold will crack.
So will an eg.
On.
An egg is roasted in the fire.
Well.
So is gold tried in the fire.
Forth.
An egg (as Physicians say) will make one lusty.
Conclude.
And who knows not that gold will make one frolic?
Pipenetta this is true, for it is called egg, as a thing that doth egg on, so doth gold.
Let vs hear all.
Eggs potcht are for a weak stomach, &amp; gold boiled, for a consuming body.
Spoken like a Physician.
Or a fool of necessity.
An egg is eaten at one sup, and a portague lost at one cast.
Gamester-like concluded.
Eggs make custards, and gold makes spoons to eat them.
A reason dowe-baked.
O! the oven of his wit was not throwly heated.
Only this odds I find between money and eggs, which makes me wonder, that being more pence in the world than eggs, that one should have three eggs for a penny, and not three pence for an egg.
A wonderful matter, but your wisdom is over∣shot in your comparison, for eggs have chickens, gold hath none.
Mops I pity thee, gold hath eggs, change an an∣gel into ten shillings, and all those pieces are the angels eggs.
He hath made a spoke, wilt thou eat an egg? but soft, here come our masters, let vs shrink aside.
A short answer, yet a sound, Bacchus is pithy and pitiful.
In Pactolus go bathe thy wish, and thee,
Thy wish the waives shall have, and thou be free.
I understand no Oracles, shall the water turn every thing to gold, what then shall become of the fish: shall he be free from gold? what then shall become of vs, of his crown, of our Country? I like not these riddles.
Thou Martius art so warlike, that thou would cut of the wish with a sword, not cure it with a salve: but the Gods that can give the desires of the heart, can as easily withdraw the torment. Suppose Vulcan should so temper thy sword, that were thy heart never so vale∣ant, thine arm never so strong, yet thy blade should never draw blood, would not thou wish to have a weaker hand, and a sharper edge?
Yes.
If Mars should answer thee thus, go bath thy sword in water, and wash thy hands in milk, and thy sword shall cleave adamant, and thy heart answer the sharpness of thy sword, would not thou try the con∣clusion?
What else?
Then let Midst believe till he have tried, and think that the Gods rule as well by giving remedies, as granting wishes. But Eristus is mum.
Caelia hath sealed his mouth.
Caelia hath sealed her face in my heart, which I am no more ashamed to confess, than thou that Mars hath made a scarre in thy face Martius. But let vs in to the king. Sir boys you wait well.
We durst not go to Bacchus, for if I see a grape, my head aches.
And if I find a cudgel Isle make your should∣ders ache.
And you Licio, wait on your self.
I cannot choose sir, I am always so near my self.
Isle be as near you as yourskin presently.
IN Pactolus go bathe thy wish and thee,
Thy wish the waives shall have, and thou be free.
Miserable Midst, as unadvised in thy wish, as in thy suc∣cesse unfortunate. O unquenchable thirst of gold, which turns men's heads to lead, and make them blockish; their hearts to iron, and make them covetous; their eyes to delight in the view, and make them blind in the use. I that did possess mines of gold, could not bee contented till my mind were also a mine. Could not the treasure of Phrygia, nor the tributes of Greece, nor mountains in the East, whose guts are gold, satisfy thy mind with gold? Ambition eats gold, &amp; drin∣keth blood; climbs so high by other men's heads, that she breaks her own neck. What should I doo with a world of ground, whose body must be content with seven foot of earth? or why did I covet to get so ma∣no crowns, having my self but one head? Those that took small vessels at the sea, I accounted Pirates; and
my self that suppressed whole Fleets, a Conqueror: as though robberies of Midst might masque under the names of triumphs, and the traffic of other Nations bee called treachery. Thou hast pampered up thy self with slaughter, as Diomedes did his horse with blood; so unsatiable thy thirst, so heavy thy sword. Two books have I always carried in my bosom, calling them the dagger, and the sword; in which the names of all Prin∣ces, Noblemen, and Gentlemen were dedicated to slaughter, or if not (which worse is) to slavery. O my Lords, when I call to mind my cruelties in Lycaonia, my usurping in Getulia, my oppression in Sola: then do I find neither mercies in my conquests, nor colour for my wars, nor measure in my taxes. I have written my laws in blood, and made my Gods of gold; I have caused the mothers wombs to bee their childrens tombs, cradles to swim in blood like boats, and the temples of the Gods a stews for strumpets. Have not I made the sea to groan under the number of my ships: and have they not perished, that there was not two left to make a number? Have I not thrust my sub∣jests into a Camp, like oxen into a Cart; whom having made slaves by unjust wars, I use now as slaves for all wars? Have not I enticed the subjects of my neigh∣bore Princes to destroy their natural Kings? like moods that eat the cloth in which they were bred, like vipers that gnaw the bowels of which they were borne, and like woormes that consume the wood in which they were engendered? To what kingdom have not I pre∣tended claim? as though I had been by the Gods created heir apparent to the world, making every tri∣fl a title; and all the territories about me, traitors to me. Why did I wish that all might bee gold I touched,
but that I thought all men's hearts would bee touched with gold, that what policy could not compass, nor prowes, gold might have commanded, and conque∣red. A bridge of gold did I mean to make in that Island where all my navy could not make a breach. Those I∣lands did I long to touch, that I might turn them to gold, and my self to glory. But unhappy Midst, who by the same means perishes himself, that he thought to conquer others: being now become a shame to the world, a scorn to that petie Prince, and to thy self a consumption. A petie Prince, Midst? no, a Prince protected by the Gods, by Nature, by his own virtue, and his Subjects obedience. Have not all treasons been discovered by miracle, not counsel? that doo the Gods challenge. Is not the Country walled with huge waives? that doth Nature claim. Is hee not through the whole world a wonder, for wisdom and temperance? that is his own strength. Doe not all his Subjects (like Bees) swarm to preserve the King of Bees? that their loyalty mainteineth. My Lords, I faint both for lack of food, &amp; want of grace. I will to the ri∣for, where if I be rid of this intolerable disease of gold, I will next shake off that intemperate desire of govern∣meant, and measure my Territories, not by the great∣ness of my mind, but the right of my Succession.
I am not a little sorry, that because all that your Highness touches turns to pure gold, and therefore all your Princely affections should be con∣uerted to dross. Doth your Majesty begin to melt your own Crown, that should make it with other Monarchies massy? Begin you to make incloasure of of your mind, and to debate of inheritance, when the sword proclaims you conqueror? If your Highness
heart be not of kingdom proof, every pelting Prince will batter it. Though you lose this garish gold, let your mind be still of steel, and let the sharpest sword decide the right of Scepters.
Every little king is a king, and the title con∣sisteth not in the compass of ground, but in the right of inheritance.
Are not conquests good titles?
Conquests are great thefts.
If your Highness would be advised by me, then would I rob for kingdoms, and if I obtained, fain would I see him that dared call the Conqueror a thief.
Martius, thy council hath shed as much blood as would make another sea. Valour I cannot call it, and barbarousnesse is a word too mild. Come Mellaorites, let vs go, and come you Eristus, that if I obtain mercy of Bacchus, wee may offer Sacrifice to Bacchus. Martius, if you be not disposed to go, dis∣pose as you will of your self.
I will humbly attend on your Highness, as still hoping to have my hearts desire, and you your height of honour.
AH Licio, a bots on the Barber, ever since I consigned him of the golden beard I have had the toothache.
I think Motto hath poisoned thy gummes.
It is a deadly pain.
I knew a dog run mad with it.
I believe it Licio, and thereof it is that they cal it a dogged pain. Thou know I have tried all old wo∣men's medicines, and cunning men's charms, but interim my teeth ache.
I am glad I have heard the wags, to be quittance for overhearing vs. We will take the vantage, they shall find vs quick Barbers. Isle tel Motto my master, and then we will have Quid pro quo, a tooth for a beard.
Licio, to make me merry I pray thee go forward with the description of thy mistress: thou must begin now at the paps.
Indeed (Petulus) a good beginning for thee, for thou can eat pap now, because thou can bite no∣thing else. But I have not mind on those matters. If the king lose his golden wish, wee shall have but a brazen Court, but what became of the beard, Petulus?
I have pound it, for I durst not coin it.
What doest thou pay for the pawning?
Twelve pence in the pound for the month.
What for the herbage?
It is not at herbage.
Yes Petulus, if it be a beard it must be at herbadge, for a beard is a badge of hair; and a badge of hair, hairbadge.
Dello, thou know Midst touched his beard, and it was gold.
Well.
That the Pages consent me of it.
No lie.
That I must be revenged.
In good time.
Thou know I have taught thee the knack∣ing of the hands, the tickling on a mans hairs, like the tuning of a Cittern.
True.
Besides, I instructed thee in the phrases of our eloquent occupation, as how sir will you be trimmed? will you have your beard like a spade, or a bodkin? a penthouse on your upper lip, or an allie on your chin? allow curl on your head like a Bull, or dangling lock like a spaniel? your moustaches sharp at the ends, like shomakers aules, or hanging down to your mouth like Goats flakes? your loue-locks wreathed with a silken twist, or shaggy to fall on your shoulders?
I confess you have taught me Tulle de or atore, the very art of trimming.
Well for all this I desire no more at thy hands, than to keep secrete the revenge I have prepared for the Pages.
O sir, you know I am a Barber, and cannot tittle tattle, I am one of those whose tongues are swelled with silence.
Indeed thou should be no blab, because a bar∣ber, therefore be secrete. Was it not a good cure Dello, to ease the toothache, and never touch the tooth?
O master, he that is your patient for the tooth∣ach, I warrant is patient of all aches.
I did but rub his gummes, and presently the room evaporated.
Deus bone, is that word come into the Barbers basin.
I sir and why not? My master is a Barber and a Surgeon.
In good time.
O Motto, I am almost dead with the toothache, al my gummes are swollen, and my teeth stand in my head like thorns.
It may be that it is only the breding of a beard, and being the first beard, you shall have a hard travel.
Old fool, doest thou think hairs will breed in my teeth?
As likely sir, for any thing I know, as on your chin.
O teeth, ô torments, ô torments, ô teeth!
May I but touch them Dello, Isle teach his tong to tel a tale, what villainy it is to cousin one of a beard, but stand not thou nigh, for it is odds when he spits, but that all his teeth fly in thy face.
Good Motto give some ease, for at thy coming in, I ouer-heard of a cure thou had done.
My teeth: I will not have this pain, thats certain.
I, so did you ouer-heare me, when you cos∣ned me of a beard: but I forget all.
My master is mild and merciful: and merciful, because a Barber, for when he hath the throat at com∣maund, you know hee takes revenge but on a silly hair.
How now Petulus, do they still ache?
I Motto.
Let me rub your gummes with this leaf.
Doe Motto, and for thy labour I will requite thee. Out rascal, what hast thou done? al my nether teeth are lose, and wag like the keys of a pair of virginals.
O sir, if you will, I will sing to them, your mouth being the instrument.
Doe Dello.
Out villen, thou bitest. I cannot tune these fire∣ginal keys.
They were the Jacks aboue, the keys beneath were easy.
A bots on your Jacks and Jaws too.
They were virginals of your masters making.
O my teeth, good Motto what will ease my pain?
Nothing in the world, but to let me lay a gol∣den beard to your chin.
It is at pawn.
You are like to fetch it out with your teeth, or go without your teeth.
Motto withdraw thy self, it may be thou shalt draw my teeth; attend my resolution. A doubtful dispute, whether I were best to loose my golden beard, or my bone tooth? Help me Lycio to determine.
Your teeth ache Petulus, your beard doth not.
I but Lycio, if I part from my beard, my heart will ache.
If your tooth be hollow it must be stopped, or pulled out; and stop it the Barber will not, without the beard.
My heart is hollow too, and nothing can stop it but gold.
Thou can not eat meat without teeth.
Nor buy it without money.
Thou moist get more gold, if thou loose these, more teeth thou can not.
I but the golden beard will last me ten years in porridge, and then to what use are teeth?
If thou want teeth, thy tongue will catch cold.
Tic true, and if I lack money my whole body may go naked. But Lycio, let the Barber have his beard, I will have a device (by thy help) to get it again, &amp; a cousinage beyond that, maugre his beard.
Thats the best way, both to ease thy pains,
and try our wits.
Barber, eleven of my teeth have gone on a Jury, to try whether the beard bee thine, they have chosen my tongue for the foreman, which cries, guilty.
Gilded, nay boy, al my beard was gold. It was not guilt, I will not be so ouer-matcht.
You cannot pose my master in a beard. Come to his house you shall sit upon twenty, all his cushions are stuffed with beards,
Let him go home with thee, ease him, and thou shalt have thy beard.
I am content, but I will have the beard in my hand to be sure.
And I thy finger in my mouth to be sure of ease.
Agreed.
Dello, sing a song to the tune of my teeth do ache.
I will.
LAdies, here must we attend the happy return of my father, but in the mean season what pa∣stem shall we use to pass the time? I will agree to any, so it be not to talk of love.
Then sleep is the best exercise.
Why Suauia, are you so light, that you must chat of love; or so heavy, that you must needs sleep? Penelope in the absence of her Lord beguiled the days with spinning.
Indeed she spun a fair thread, if it were to make a string to the bow wherein she drew herwoers.
Why Suauia, it was a bow which she knew to be aboue thy strength, and therein she shewde her wit.
Queen latus arguerit corneus arcus erat: it was made of horn madam, and therein she shewde her meaning.
Why, doest thou not think she was chaste?
Yes, of all her wooers.
To talk with thee is to lose time, not well to spend it, how say you Amerula, what shall we do?
Tel tales.
What say you Caelia?
Sing.
What think you Camilla?
Dance.
You see Suauia, that there are other things to keep one from idleness; besides love: nay that there is nothing to make idleness, but love.
Well, let me stand by and feed mine own thoughts with sweetness, whilst they fill your eyes and ears, with songs and dancings.
Amerula, begin thy tale.
There dwelt sometimes in Phrygia, a Lady very fair, but passing froward, as much marvelled at for beu∣tie, as for peevishness misliked. Hie she was in the instep, but short in the heel; strait laced, but loose bodied. It came to pass, that a gentleman, as young in wit as years, and in years a very boy, chanced to glance his eyes on her, &amp; there were they dazzled on her beauty, as larks that are caught in the Sun with the glittering of a glass. In her fair looks were his thoughts entangled, like the birds of Canary, that fall into a silken net. Dote he did without measure, and die he must without her love. She on the other side, as one that knew her good, began to look askance, yet felt the passions of love ea∣ting into her heart, though she dissembled them with her eyes.
Ha, ha, he.
Why laugh thou?
To see you (Madame) so tame as to be brought to hear a tale of love, that before were so wild you would not come to the name; and that Amerula could devise how to spend the time with a tale, only that she might not talk of love, and now to make love only her tale.
Indeed I was overshot in judgment, and she in discretion. Amerula, another tale or none, this is too lovely.
Nay let me hear any woman tell a tale of x. lines long without it tend to love, &amp; I will be bound never to come at the Court. And you Caelia that would fain trip on your petitoes; can you persuade me totake delight to dance, &amp; not love? or you that cannot rule your feet, can guide your affections, having the one as unstaid as the other unsteady: dancing is love sauce, therefore I dare be so saucy, as if you love to dance, to say you dance for love. But Camilla she will sing, whose voice if it should utter her thoughts, would make the tune of a hart out of tune. She that hath crochets in her head, hath also love conceits. I dare swear she harpeth not only on plain song: &amp; before you (Sophronia) none of them all use plain dealing; but because they see you so curious they frame themselves counterfeit. For my self, as I know honest love to bee a thing inseparable from our sex, so doo I think it most allowable in the Court; unless we would have all our thoughts made of Church-worke, and so carry a holy face, and a hole∣low hart.
Ladies, how like you Suauia in her loving vain?
Wé are content at this time to sooth her in her vanity.
She casts all our minds in the mould of her own head, and yet erreth as far from our mea∣nings, as she doth from her own modesty.
Amerula, if you were not bitter, your name had been ill bestowed: but I think it as lawful in the Court to bee counted loving and chaste, as you in the Temple to seem religious, and be spiteful.
I marvel you will reply any more Am∣rule, her tongue is so nimble it will never lye still.
The liker thy feet Camilla, which were taught not to stand still.
So, no more Ladies: let our coming to sport not turn to spite. Love thou Suauia, if thou think it sweet: sing thou Caelia for thine own content: tell thou tales, and dance thou Camilla: and so every one using his own delight, shall have no cause to be discontent. But here cōmeth Martius &amp; the rest. What news Martius of my Sovereign and Father Midst?
Madam, he no sooner bathed his limbs in the river, but it turned to a golden stream, the sands to fine gold, and all to gold that was cast into the water. My∣das dismayed at the sudden alteration, assayed again to touch a stone, but he could not alter the nature of the stone. Then went we with him to the Temple of Bac∣choose, where we offred a lance wreathed about with y∣uie. Garlands of ripe grapes, and skins of Wolves and Panthers, and a great standing cup of the water, which so lately was turned to gold. Bacchus accepted our gifts, commanding Midst to honour the Gods, and also in wishing to bee as wise, as he meant to have
made him fortunate.
Happy Sophronia, that hast lived to hear these news, and happy Midst, if thou live better to govern thy fortune. But what is become of our king?
Midst overjoyed with this good fortune, de∣termined to use some solace in the woods; where, by chance we roufed a great bore, he eager of the sport, outrid vs: and wee thinking hee had been come to his Palace some other way, came our selves the next way. If he be not returned, he cannot be long: we have also lost our pages, which we think are with him.
The Gods shield him from all harms: the woods are full of Tigers, and he of courage: wilde beasts make no difference between a king &amp; a clown; nor hunters in the heat of their pastime, fear no more the fiersnes of the boar, thā the fearfulness of the hare. But I hope well, let vs in to see all well.
PAn wilt thou contend with Apollo, who tunes the heavens, and makes them all hang by har∣money? Orpheus that caused trees to move with the sweetness of his harp, offreth yearly homage to my lute: so doth Orion, that brought Dolphins to his su∣gred notes; and Amphion, that by music reared the walls of Thebes. Only Pan with his harsh whistle (which makes beasts shake for fear, not men dance for joy) seeks to compare with Apollo.
Pan is a God, Apollo is no more. Comparisons cannot bee odious, where the Deities are equal. This pipe (my sweet pipe) was once a Nymph, a fair
Nymph; once my lovely Mistress, now my heavenly music. Tell me Apollo, is there any instrument so sweet to play on, as ones Mistress? Had thy lute been of laurel, and the strings of Daphnes hair; thy tunes might have been compared to my notes: for then Daphne would have added to thy stroke sweetness, &amp; to thy thoughts melody.
Doth Pan talk of the passions of love? of the passions of divine love? O, how that word Daphne wounds Apollo, pronounced by the barbrous mouth of Pan. I fear his breath will blast the fair Greene, if I dazzle not his eyes, that he may not behold it. Thy pipe a Nymph? some hag rather, hinting these shady groves, and desiring not thy love, but the fellowship of such a monster. What God is Pan but the god of beasts, of woods, and hills? excluded from heaven, and in earth not honoured. Break thy pipe, or with my sweet lute will I break thy heart. Let not love enter into those savage lips, a word for Jove, for Apollo, for the heaven∣lie gods, whose thoughts are gods, &amp; Gods are all love.
Apollo, I told thee before that Pan was a God, I tell thee now again, as great a god as Apollo, I had al∣most said a greater: and because thou shalt know I care not to tel my thoughts, I say a greater. Pan feels the pas∣sions of love deeply engraven in his heart, with as fair Nymphs, with as great fortune, as Apollo, as Neptune, as Jove; and better than Pan can none describe love. Not Apollo, not Neptune, not Jove. My Temple is in Are∣cadie, where they burn continual flames to Pan. In Arcade is mine Oracle, where Erato the Nymph geeueth answers for Pan. In Arcade the place of Love, is the honour of Pan. I but I am God of hills. So I am Apollo, and that of Hills
so high, as I can pry into the juggling of the highest Gods. Of woods? So I am Apollo, of woods so thick, that thou with thy beams can not pierce them. I knew Apolloes prying, I knew mine own jealousy. Sun and shadow cousin one another. Be thou Sun still, the shadow is fast at thy heals Apollo. I as near to thy love, as thou to mine. A Carter with his whistle &amp; his whip in true ear, moos as much as Phoebus with his fiery chariot, and winged horses. Loue-leaues are as well for country porridge, as heavenly nectar. Love made Iupiter a goose, and Neptune a swine, and both for love of an earthly mistress. What hath made Pan, or any God on earth (for gods on earth can change their shapes) turn themselves for an heavenly Goddess? Believe me Apollo, our groves are pleasanter than your heavens, our Milk-maides than your Goddesses, our rude ditties to a pipe than your sonnets to a lute. Here is flat faith amo amas; where you cry, ô vtinam amarent vel non amassem. I let pass (Apollo) thy hard words, as calling Pan monster; which is as much, as to call all monsters: for Pan is all, Apollo but one. But touch thy strings, and let these Nymphs decide.
Those Nymphs shall decide, unless thy rude speech have made them deaf: as for any other aun∣swear to Pan, take this, that it becomes not Apollo to answer Pan. Pan is all, and all is Pan; thou art Pan and all, all Pan and tinkerly. But to this music, where∣in all thy shame shall be seen, and all my skill.
In the chase, I lost all my company, and mis∣sed the game too, I think Midst shall in all things be unfortunate.
What is he that talks?
Midst the unfortunate King of Phrygia.
To be a King is next being to a God. Thy for∣tune is not bad: what is thy folly?
To abuse a God.
An ungrateful part of a King. But Midst, see∣ing by chance thou art come, or sent by some God of purpose; none can in the earth better judge of Gods, than Kings. Sit down with these Nymphs. I am A∣polo, this Pan, both Gods. We contend for sovereign∣tie in Music. Seeing it happens in earth, we must be judged of those on earth; in which there are none more worthy than Kings and Nymphs. Therefore give ear, that thy judgment err not.
If Gods you be, although I dare wish nothing of Gods, being so deeply wounded with wishing; yet let my judgment prevail before these Nymphs, if we agree not, because I am a King.
There must be no condition, but judge My∣das, and judge Nymphs.
Then thus I begin both my song and my play.
O divine Apollo, ô sweet consent!
If the God of Music should not be aboue our reach, who should?
I like it not.
Now let me tune my pipes. I cannot pipe &amp; sing, thats the odds in the instrument, not the art: but I will pipe and then sing; and then judge both of the art and instrument.
Hast thou done Pan?
I, and done well, as I think.
Now Nymphs, what say you?
Wee all say that Apollo hath showed himself
both a God, and of music the God; Pan himself a rude Satire, neither keeping measure, nor time; his piping as far out of tune, as his body out of form. To thee divine Apollo, wee give the prize and reave∣rinse.
But what says Midst?
Me thinks theres more sweetness in the pipe of Pan, than Apolloes lute; I brooke not that nice tickling of strings, that contents me that makes one start. What a shrillness came into mine ears out of that pipe, and what a goodly noise it made? Apollo, I must needs judge that Pan deserves most praise.
Blessed be Midst, worthy to be a God: these girls, whose ears doo but itch with daintiness, gene the verdict without weighing the virtue; they have been brought up in chambers with soft music, not where I make the woods ring with my pipe, Midst.
Wretched, unworthy to bee a King, thou shalt know what it is to displease Apollo. I will leave thee but the two last letters of they name, to be thy whole name; which if thou can not guess, touch thine cares, they shall tell thee.
What hast thou done Apollo? the ears of an Ass upon the head of a King?
And well worthy, when the dullness of an ass is in the ears of a King.
Help Pan, or Midst perishes.
I cannot undo what Apollo hath done, nor give thee any amends, unless to those ears thou wilt have added these horns.
It were very well, that it might bee hard to judge whether he were more Ox or Ass.
Farewell Midst.
Midst farewell.
I warrant they bee dainty ears, nothing can please them but Pans pipe.
He hath the advantage of all ears, except the mouse; for else theres none so sharpe of hearing, as the Ass. Farewell Midst.
Midst farewell.
Farewell Midst.
Ah Midst, why was not thy whole body metamorphosed, that there might have been no part left of Midst? Where shall I shroud this shame? or how may I bee restored to mine old shape? Apollo is angry: blame not Apollo, whom being God of music thou did both dislike and dishonour; preferring the barbarous noise of Pans pipe, before the sweet melo∣lode of Apolloes lute. If I return to Phrygia, I shall bee pointed at; if live in these woods, fauage beasts must be my cōpanions: &amp; what other companions should My∣das hope for than beasts, being of all beasts himself the dullest? Had it not bin better for thee to have perished by a golden death, than now to lead a beastly life? Un∣fortunate in thy wish, unwise in thy iudgmēt; first a gol∣den fool, now a leaden ass. What will they say in Les∣boss (if happily these news come to Lesbos?) If they come Midst? yes, report flies as swift as thoughts, gathe∣ring wings in the air, &amp; dubling rumours by her own running, insomuch as having here the ears of an ass, it will there be told, all my hairs are asseseares. Then will this bee the by-word; Is Midst that sought to bee Mo∣narch of the world, become the mock of the world? are his goldē mines turned into water, as free for every one that will fetch, as for himself, that possessed thē by wish? Ah poor Midst, are his conceits become blockish,
his counsels unfortunate, his judgements unskilful? Ah foolish Midst, aiust reward, for thy pride to wax poor, for thy overweening to wax dull, for thy am∣bition to wax humble, for thy cruelty to say, Sis{que} mi∣ser semper, nec sis miserabilis vlli. But I must seek to co∣for my shame by art, least being once discovered to these petty Kings of Mysia, Pisidia and Galatia, they all join to add to mine Asses ears, of all the beasts the dullest, a sheep heart, of all the beasts the fearfullest: and so cast lots for those Kingdoms, that I have won with so many lives, &amp; kept with so many envies.
Emus what the Nymphs meant, that so sang in the groves, Midst of Phrygia hath Asses ears.
I marvel not, for one of them plainly told me he had Asses ears.
I, but it is not safe to say it: he is a great King, &amp; his hands are longer than his ears: therefore forvs that keep sheep, it is wisdom enough to tell sheep.
Tic true, yet since Midst grew so mischievous, as to blur his diadem with blood, which should gli∣ster with nothing but pity; and so miserable, that hee made gold his god, that was framed to be his slave, ma∣no broad speeches have flown abroad: in his own Country they stick not to call him Tyrant, and else where usurper. They flatly say, that he eats into o∣there dominions, as the sea doth into the land, not know∣wing, that in swallowing a poor Island as big as Lesbos, he may cast up three territories thrice as big as Phrygia:
for what the sea wins in the marsh, it loses in the sand.
Take me with you, but speak softly, for these reeds may have ears, and hear vs.
Suppose they have, yet they may be without tongues, to bewray vs.
Nay let them have tongues too, wee have eyes to see that they have none, and therefore if they hear, &amp; speak, they know not from whence it comes.
Well, then this I say, when a Lion doth so much degenerate from Princely kind, that he will borrow of the beasts, I say he is no Lion, but a monster; pieced with the craftiness of the fox, the cruelty of the tiger, the ravening of the woolfe, the dissembling of Hyena, he is worthy also to have the ears of an ass.
He seeks to conquer Lesbos, and like a foo∣lish gamester, having a bagfull of his own, ventures it all to win a great of another.
Hee that fishes for Lesbos, must have such a wooden net, as all the trees in Phrygia will not serve to make the cod, nor all the woods in Pisidia provide the corks.
Nay, he means to angle for it with an hook of gold, and a bait of gold, and so to strike the fish with a pleasing bait, that will slide out of an open net.
Tush, tush, those Ilanders are too subtle to nibble at craft, and too richet to swallow treasure: if that be his hope, he may as well dive to the bottom of the sea, and bring up an Anchor of a thousand weight, as plod with his gold to corrupt a people so wise. And besides, a Nation (as I have heard) so valiant, that are re∣dier to strike than ward.
More than al this Amintas (though we dare not
so much as mutter it,) their king is such a one as daze∣leth the clearest eyes with Majesty, daunts the vali∣antest hearts with courage, and for virtue fills all the world with wonder. If beauty go beyond sight, con∣fidence aboue valour, and virtue exceed miracle, what is it to be thought, but that Midst goes to undermine that by the simplicity of man, that is fastened to a rock, by the providence of the gods.
We poor commons (who tasting war, are made to relish nothing but taxes) can do nothing but grieve, to see things unlawful practised, to obtain things impossible. All his mines doe but gilde his comb, to make it glister in the wars, and cut ores that are for∣ced to follow him in his wars.
Well, that must be borne, not blamed, that can∣not be changed: for my part, if I may enjoy the fleece of my silly flock with quietness, I will never care three flocks for his ambition.
Let this suffice, we may talk too much, and being ouer-heard, be all undone. I am so jealous, that me thinks the very reeds bow down, as though they listened to our talk: and soft, I hear some coming, let vs in, and meet at a place more meet.
IS not hunting a tedious occupation?
I and troublesome, for if you call a dog a dog, you are undone.
You be both fools, and besides, base-min∣ded, hunting is for kings, not peasants. Such as you,
are unworthy to be hounds, much less huntsmen, that know not when a hound is fleet, fair flewde, and well hanged, being ignorant of the deepenesse of a hounds mouth, and the sweetness.
Why I hope sir a cures mouth is no deeper than the sea, nor sweeter than a honey comb.
Pretty cockscomb, a hound will swalow thee as easily, as a great pit a small pebble.
Indeed hunting were a pleasant sport, but the dogs make such barking, that one cannot hear the hounds cry.
Isle make thee cry. If I catch thee in the forest thou shalt be leashed.
Whats that?
Doest thou not understand their language?
Not I.
Tic the best Calamance in the world, as casilie deciphered, as the characters in a nutmeg.
I pray thee speak some.
I will.
But speak in order or Isle pay you.
To it Petulus.
There was a boy leashed on the single, because when he was embossed, he took soil.
Whats that:
Why, a boy was beaten on the tail with a lea∣thern thong, because when he somde at the mouth with running, he went into the water.
This is worse than fustian, mum you were best. Hunting is an honourable pastime, and for my part, I had as leife hunt a dear in a park, as court a Lady in a chamber.
Give me a pastie for a Park, and let me
shake off a whole kennel of teeth for hounds, then shalt thou see a notable champing, after that will I carouse a boule of wine, and so in the stomach let the Venison take soil.
He hath laid the plot to be prudent, why tic pa∣sty crust, eat enough and it will make you wise, an old proverb.
I, and eloquent, for you must tipple wine freely, &amp; foecundi calices quem non fecere disertum.
Fecere dizardum. Leave off these toys, and let vs seek out Midst, whom we lost in the chase.
Isle warrant hee hath by this started a covey of Bucks, or roused a scull of Pheasants.
Treason to two brave sports, hawking &amp; hun∣ting, thou shouldest say, start a hare, rouse the dear, spring the partridge.
Isle warrant that was devised by some Country swad, that seeing a hare skip up, which made him start, he presently said, he started the hare.
I, and some lubber lying besides a spring, &amp; seeing a partridge come by, said he did spring the partridge.
Well, remember all this.
Remember all? nay then had we good memo∣ries, for there be more phrases than thou hast hairs, but let me see, I pray thee whats this about thy neck?
A bugle.
If it had stood on thy head I should have called it a horn. Well, tic hard to have ones brows imbroide∣red with bugle.
But can thou blow it?
What else?
But not away.
No, twil make Bores out of breath, to blow his horns away.
There was good blowing Isle warrant before they came there.
Well, tic a shroud blow.
Spare your winds in this, or Isle wind your necks in a cord: but soft I heard my masters blast.
Some have felt it.
Thy mother when such a fly blow was bust out; but I must be gone, I perceive Midst is come. Ex.
Then let not vs tarry, for now shall we shave the Barbers house. The world will grow full of wiles see∣ing Midst hath lost his golden wish.
I care not, my head shall dig devises, and my tongue stamp them; so as my mouth shall be a mynt, and my brains a mine.
Then help vs to cousin the Barber.
The Barber shall know every hair of my chin to be as good as a choakpeare for his purse.
I Marvel what Midst means to bee so melan∣choly since his hunting.
It is a good word in Midst, otherwise I should term it in another blockishnes. I cannot tell whether it bee a sowernesse commonly incident to age, or a se∣uerenesse particular to the Kings of Phrygia, or a suspi∣tion cleaving to great Estates; but me thinks he see∣meth so jealous of vs al, and becomes so ouerth wart to all others, that either I must conjecture his wits are not his own, or his meaning very hard to some.
For my part, I neither care nor wonder, I see all his expeditions for wars are laid in water: for now
when he should execute, he begins to consult; and suf∣fers the enemies to bid vs good morrow at our own doors, to whom wee long since might have given the last Good night in their own beds. Hee wears (I know not whether for warmth or wantonness) a great Tiara on his head, as though his head were not heavy enough, unless hee loaded it with great rolls: an at∣tyre never used (that I could hear of) but of old wo∣men, or pelting priests. This will make Pisidia wan∣ton, Lycaonia stiff, all his Territories wavering; and hee that hath coutcht so many Kingdoms in one Crown, will have his Kingdom scattered into as ma∣no Crowns, as he possesses Countries. I will rouse him up, and if his ears be not Asses ears, I will make them tingle. I respect not my life, I know it is my duty, and certainly I dare swear War is my pro∣fession.
Martius, we will all join: and though I have been (as in Phrygia they term) a brave Courtier, that is, (as they expound it) a fine Lover; yet will I set both aside, Love and Courting, and follow Martius: for never shall it bee said, Bella gerant alij, semper E∣ristus amet.
And I (Martius) that honoured gold for a god, and accounted all other gods but lead, will follow Mar∣tius, and say; Vilius argentum est aur•, virtutibus aurum.
My Lords, I give you thanks, and am glad: for there are no stouter soldiers in the world, than those that are made of lovers, nor any more liberal in wars, than they that in peace have been covetous. Then doubt not, if courage and coin can prevail, but wee shall prevail; &amp; besides, nothing can prevail but for∣tune. But here comes Sophronia, I will first talk with her.
Madame, either our King hath no ears to hear, or no care to consider, both in what state we stand being his subjects, and what danger he is in being our King. Du∣tie is not regarded, courage contemned; altogether careless of vs, and his own safety.
Martius, I mislike not thy plain dealing: but pity my Fathers trance; a trance I must call that, where nature cannot move, nor counsel, nor music, nor physic, nor danger, nor death, nor all. But that which makes me most both to sorrow and wonder, is that music (a methridat for melancholy) should make him mad; crying still, La name{que} modo Pan &amp; Apollo no∣cent. None hath access to him but Motto, as though me∣lancholy were to be shau'n with a razor, not cured with a medicin. But stay, what noise is this in those reeds?
What sound is this? who dares utter that he hears?
I dare Mellacrites, the words are plain, Midst the King hath asses ears.
This is strange, and yet to be told the King.
So dare I Camilla: for it concerns me in du∣tie, &amp; vs all in discretion. But soft, let vs hearken better.
Midst of Phrygia hath asses ears.
This is monstrous, &amp; either portends some mis∣chief to the king, or unto the state confusion. Midst of Phrygia hath asses ears? It is unpossible, let vs with speed to the king to know his resolutiō, for to some oracle he must send. Till his majesty be acquainted with this mat∣la, wee dare not root out the reeds; himself must both hear the sound, and guess at the reason.
Unfortunate Midst, that being so great a king, there should out of the earth spring so great a shame.
It may bee that his wishing for gold, be∣ing but dross of the world, is by all the Gods accoun∣ted foolish, and so discovered out of the earth: for, a King to thirst for gold in steed of honour, to pre∣far heaps of worldly coin before triumphs in warlike Conquests, was in my mind no Princely mind.
Let vs not debate the cause, but seek to pre∣uent the snares; for in my mind it foretells that which wounds my mind. Let vs in.
SOphronia, thou see I am become a shame to the world, and a wonder. Mine ears glow. Mine ears? Ah miserable Midst, to have such ears as make thy checks blush, thy head monstrous, and thy hart desperate? Yet in blushing I am impudent, for I walk in the streets; in deformity I seem comely, for I have left off my Tiara; and my heart the more heavy it is for grief, the more hope it conceives of recovery.
Dread Sovereign and loving Sire, there are nine days past, and therefore the wonder is past; there are many years to come, and therefore a reme∣die to bee hoped for. Though your cares belong, yet is there room left on your head for a diadem: though they resemble the ears of the dullest beast, yet should they not daunt the spirit of so great a King. The Gods dally with men, kings are no more: they disgrace kings, lest they should be thought gods: sacrifice pleases them,
so that if you know by the Oracle what God wrought it, you shall by humble submission, by that God be re∣leased.
Sophronia, I commend thy care and courage, but let me hear these reeds, that these loathsome ears may be glutted with the report, and that is as good as a remedy.
Midst of Phrygia hath asses ears.
Midst of Phrygia hath asses ears? So he hath, unhappy Midst. If these reeds sing my shame so load, will men whisper it softly? No, all the world al∣ready rings of it and as impossible it is to staye the rue∣more, as to catch the wind in a net that blows in the jeer; or to stop the wind of al men's mouths that breathe out jeer. I will to Apollo, whose Oracle must be my doom, and I fear me, my dishonour, because my doom was his, if kings may disgrace gods. and gods they dis∣grace, when they forget their duties.
What saith Midst?
Nothing, but that Apollo must determineal, or Midst see ruin of al. To Apollo will I offer an Ivory lute for his sweet harmony, and berries of bays as black as icat, for his love Daphne, pure simples for his physic, and continual incense for his prophesying.
Apollo may discover some odd riddle, but not give the redress, for yet did I never hear that his ore∣cles were without doubtfulness, nor his remedies with out impossibilities. This superstition of yours is able to bring errors among the common sort, not ease to your discontented mind.
Dost thou not know Martius, that when Bacchus commanded me to bathe my self in Pactolus, thou thoughtedst it a mere mockery, before with thine
eyes thou saw the remedy.
I, Bacchus gave the wish, and therefore was like also to give the remedy.
And who knows whether Apollo gave me these ears, and therefore may release the punishment. Well, reply not, for I will to Delphos: in the mean time let it be proclaimed, that if there be any so cunning, that can tell the reason of these reeds creaking, he shall have my daughter to his wife, or if she refuse it, a Dukedom for his pains: and withal, that whosoever is so bold as to say that Midst hath asses ears, shall presently lose his.
Dear father then go forwards, prepare for the sacrifice, and dispose of Sophronia as it best pleases you.
Come let vs in.
WHat a rascal was Motto to cousin vs, and say there were thirty men in a room that would undo vs, and when all came to all, they were but table-men.
I and then to geeue vs an inuentorie of all his goods, only to redeem the beard, but we will be even with him; and Isle be forsworn but Isle be revenged.
And here I vow by my concealed beard, if ever it chance to be discovered to the world, that it may make a pike divined, I will have it so sharp pointed, that it shall stab Motto like a poynado.
And I protest by these hairs on my head, which are but casualties, for alas who knows not how soon they are lost, Autumn shaves like a razor: if these locks
be rooted against wind and weather, spring and fall, I swear they shall not be lopped, till Motto by my kna∣very be so bald, that I may write verses on his scalp. In witness whereof I eat this hair: now must thou Petulus kiss thy beard, for that was the book thou sue∣rest by.
Nay I would I could come but to kiss my chin, which is as yet the cover of my book, but my word shall stand. Now let vs read the inuentorie, weal share it equally.
What else?
An inuentorie of all Mottoes moveable baddes and goods, as also of such debts as are owing him, with such household stuff as cannot be removed. Inprimis, in the bed-chamber, one fowl wife, &amp; five small children.
Isle not share in that.
I am content, take thou all. These be his move∣able baddes.
And from me they shall be remoueables.
Item in the servants chamber, two pair of cursed queens tongues.
Tongs thou would say.
Nay they pinch worse than tongs.
They are movables Isle warrant.
Item, one pair of horns in the bridechamber, on the beds head.
The beasts head, for Motto is stuffed in the head, and these are among unmovable goods.
Well, Foelix quem faciunt alien pericula cautum, hap∣pie are they whom other men's horns do make to be∣ware. Item, a broken pate owing me by one of the Cole house, for notching his head like a ches-boorde. Take thou that, and I give thee al the rest of his debts.
Noli me tangiers, I refuse the executorship, be∣cause I will not meddle with his desperate debts. Item, an hundred shrewd turns owing me by the Pages in the Court, because I will not trust them for trimming.
Thats due debt.
Well, because Motto is poor, they shall be paid him cum recumbentibus. All the Pages shall enter into re∣cognisance, but ass, Pipenetta chants it.
Hey ho, would I were a witch, that I might be a Duchess.
I know not whether thy fortune is to be a Dut∣ches, but sure I am thy face serves thee well for a witch, whats the matter?
The matter, marry tic proclaimed, that who soever can tell the cause, and the reeds song, shall either have Sophronia to wife, or (if she refuse it) a Dukedom for his wisdom. Besides, whosoever saith, that Midst hath asses ears, shall lose theirs.
Isle be a Duke, I find honour to bud in my head, and me thinks every joint of mine arms, from the shoulder to the little finger, says send for the Herald. Mine arms are all armoury, gulls, sables, azure, or, vert, pur, post, pare, &amp;c.
And my heart is like a harth where Cupped is ma∣king a fire, for Sophronia shall be my wife: me thinks Ve∣nus and Nature stand with each of them a pair of bell∣lowes, the one cooling my lowe birth, the other kind∣ling my lofty affections.
Apollo will help me because I can sing.
Mercury me, because I can lie.
All the Gods me, because I can lie, sing, swear, and love. But soft, here comes Motto, now shall we have
a fit time to be revenged, if by devise we can make him say, Midst hath asses ears.
Let vs not seem to bee angry about the Inuen∣tory, and you shall see my wit to bee the hangman for his tongue.
Why fools, hath a Barber a tongue?
Weal make him have a tongue, that his teeth that look like a comb shall bee the cizzars to cut it off.
I pray let me have the odd ends. I fear no∣thing so much as to be tongue tawde.
Thou shalt have all the shauings, and then a wo∣mans tongue ympt with a Barbers, will prove a razor or a raser.
How now Motto, what all a mort?
I am as melancholy as a cat.
Melancholy? marie gup, is melancholy a word for a barbers mouth? thou should say, heavy, dull, and doltish: melancholy is the creast of Courtiers arms, and now every base companion, being in his muble fubles, says he is melancholy.
Motto, thou should say thou art lumpish. If thou encroach upon our courtly terms, weal troūce thee: belike if thou should spit often, thou would call it the room. Motto, in men of reputation &amp; credit it is the room; in such mechanical mushrumpes, it is a catarre, a pose, the water evil. You were best wear a velvet patch on your temples too.
What a world it is to see eggs forwarder than cocks? these infants are as cunning in diseases, as I that have run them over all, backward and forward. I tell you boys, it is melancholy that now troubles me.
My master could tickle you with diseases, and that old ones, that have continued in his Ancestors bones these three hundred years. He is the last of the family that is left uneaten.
What meanst thou Dello?
He means you are the last of the stock alive, the rest the worms have eaten.
A pox of those saucy worms, that eat men before they be dead.
But tell vs Motto, why art thou sad?
Because al the Court is sad.
Why are they sad in Court?
Because the King hath a pain in his ears.
Belike it is the wennes.
It may be, for his ears are swollen very big.
Ten to one Motto knows of the asses ears.
If he know it, we shall: for it is as hard for a bar∣bar to keep a secrete in his mouth, as a burning coal in his hand. Thou shalt see me wring it out by wit. Motto, it was told me that the King will discharge you of your office, because you cut his ear when you last trimd him.
Tic a lye; and yet if I had, he might well spare an inch or two.
It will out, I feel him coming.
Master, take heed, you will blab alanone, these wags are crafty.
Let me alone.
Why Motto, what difference between the kings ears, and thine?
As much as between an asses ears and mine.
O, Motto is modest; to mitigate the matter, hee calls his own ears, asses ears.
Nay, I mean the Kings are asses ears.
Treason, treason!
I told you master, you have made a fair hand; for now you have made your lips cizars to cut off your ears.
Perij, unless you pity me, Motto is in a pit.
Nay Motto, treason is a worse pain than toothache.
Now Motto, thou know thine ears are ours to command.
Your servants, or handmaids.
Then will I lead my maid by the hand.
Out villen, thou wringst too hard.
Not so hard as he bit me.
Thou see boy we are both mortal. I enjoy mine ears, but durante placito; nor thou thy finger, but faint dento.
Yea Motto, hast thou Latin?
Alas, he that hath drawn so many teeth, and never asked Latin for a tooth, is ill brought up.
Well Motto, let vs have the beard, without co∣vine fraud, or delay, at one entire payment, &amp; thou shalt scope a payment.
I protest by cizars, brush and comb, basin, ball and apron, by razor, eare-pike and rubbing cloa∣these, and all the tria sequuntur triaes in our secret occu∣potion (for you know it is no blabbing art) that you shall have the beard, in manner and form following. Not only the golden beard and every hair, (though it be not hair) but a dozen of beards, to stuff two do∣zen of cushions.
Then they be big ones.
They be half a yard broad, and a nail, three quarters long, and a foot thick; so sir shall you
find them stuffed enough, and soft enough. All my mi∣stress lines that she dries her clothes on, are made on∣lie of Moustache stuff. And if I durst tell the truth, as lusty as I am here, I lye upon a bed of beards; a bots of their bristles, and they that owe them, they are har∣der than flocks.
A fine discourse: well Motto, we give thee mer∣cie, but we will not loose the beard. Remember now our snuentorie. Item, wee will not let thee go out of our hands, till we have the beard in our hands.
Then follow.
THis is Delphos. Sacred Apollo, whose Ore∣cles be all divine, though doubtful: aun∣swear poor Midst, and pity him.
I marvel there is no answer.
Fond Midst, how can thou ask pity of him whom thou hast so much abused; or why dost thou a∣buse the world, both to seem ignorant in not acknow∣lodging an offence; and impudent, so openly to crave pardon. Apollo will not answer, but Midst must not cease. Apollo, divine Apollo, Midst hath asses ears, yet let pity sink into thine ears, and tell when he shall be free from this shame, or what may mitigate his sin?
Tush, Apollo is tuning his pipes, or at barley∣break with Daphne, or assaying on some Shepherds coat, or taking measure of a serpents skin. Were I Midst, I would rather cut these ears off close from my head, than stand whimpring before such a blind God.
Thou art barbrous not valiant. Gods must bee
entreated, not commanded: thou would quench fire with a sword, and ad to my shame (which is more than any Prince can endure) thy rudeness, (which is more than any sensible creature would follow.) Divine Apollo what shall become of Midst? Accept this lute, these ber∣ries, these simples, these tapers; if Apollo take any delight in music, in Daphne, in physic, in eternity.
When Pan Apollo in music shall excel, 
Midst of Phrygia shall lose his Asses ears;
Pan did Apollo in music far excel,
Therefore king Midst wears Asses ears:
Unless he shrink his stretching hand from Lesbos,
His ears in length, at length shall reach to Delphos.
It were good to expound these oracles, that the learned men in Phrygia were assembled, otherwise the remedy will be as impossible to be had, as the cause to be sifted.
I foresaw some old saw, which should be dout∣full. Who would gad to such gods, that must be hono∣red if they speak without sense: and the Oracle won∣dred at, as though it were aboue sense?
No more Martius, I am the learned in Phry∣gee to interpret these Oracles and though shame hath hitherto caused me to conceal it, now I must unfold it by necessity. Thus destiny brings me, not only to be cause of all my shame, but reporter. Thou Sophronia, and you my Lords, hearken; When I had bathed my self in Pactolus, and saw my wish to float in the waives, I wished the waives to overflow my body, so melanco∣lie my fortune made me, so mad my folly: yet by hun∣ting I thought to ease my heart. And coming at last to the hill Tmolus, I perceived Apollo and Pan conten∣ding for excellence in music: among Nymphs they required also my judgment. I (whom the loss of gold made discontent, and the possessing desperate) either
dnlled with the humours of my weak brain, or deceived by thickness of my deaffe ears, preferred the harsh noise of Pans pipe, before the sweet stroke of Apollos Lute, which caused Phoebus in justice (as I now confess, and then as I saw in anger) to set these ears on my head, that have wrong so many tears from mine eyes. For stretching my hands to Lesbos, I find that all the Gods have spurnde at my practises, and those Lands scorned them. My pride the gods disdain; my policy men: my mines have bin emptied by soldiers, my soldiers spoiled by wars, my wars without success, because usurping, my usurping without end, because my ambi∣tion aboue measure. I will therefore yield my self to Bac∣choose, and acknowledge my wish to be vanity. to Apol∣lo, and confess my judgment to be foolish: to Mars, and say my wars are unjust: to Diana, and tell my af∣fection hath been unnatural. And I doubt not, what a God hath done to make me know my self, al the gods will help to undo, that I may come to my self.
Is it possible that Midst should be so overshot in judgment? Unhappy Midst, whose wits melt with his gold, and whose gold is consumed with his wits.
What talks Sophronia to her self?
Nothing, but that since Midst hath confessed his fault to vs, he also acknowledge it to Apollo.
I will Sophronia. Sacred Apollo, things passed cannot be recalled, repented they may be: behold, My∣das not only submitting himself to punishment, but confessing his peevishness, being glad for shame to call that peevishness, which indeed was folly. Whatsoever Apollo shall command, Midst will execute.
Then attend Midst. I accept thy submission, and sacrifice, so as yearly at this temple thou offer Sa∣crifice
in submission: withal, take Apollos council, which if thou scorn, thou shalt find thy destiny. I will not speak in riddles, all shall be plain, because thou art dull, but all certain, if thou be obstinate.
Weigh not in one balance gold and justice.
With one hand wage not war and peace.
Let thy head be glad of one Crown.
And take care to keep one friend.
The friend that thou would make thy foe.
The kingdom thou would make the world
The hand that thou doest arm with force.
The gold that thou doest think a god
Shall conquer, fall, shrink short, be common:
With force, with pride, with fear, with traffic.
If this thou like, shake off an Asses ears:
If not, for ever shake an Asses ears.
Apollo will not reply.
It may be Sophronia, that neither you, nor any else, understand Apollo, because none of you have the hart of a king: but my thoughts expound my fortunes, and my fortunes hang upon my thoughts. That great Apollo, that joined to my head Asses ears, hath put into my heart a Lions mind. I see that by obscure shadows, which you cannot discern in fresh colours. Apollo in the depth of his dark answer, is to me the glistening of a bright sun. I perceive (and yet not too late) that Les∣boss will not be touched by gold, by force it cannot: that the Gods have pitched it out of the world, as not to bee controlled by any in the world. Though my hand bee gold, yet I must not think to span over the maine O∣cean. Though my soldiers be valiant, I must not there∣fore think my quarrels just. There is no way to nail the crown of Phrygia fast to my daughters head, but in letting the crowns of others sit in quiet on theirs,
Midst?
How dare thou reply seeing me resolved? thy counsel hath spilt more blood than all my soldiers lances, let none be so hardy as to look to cross me. Sa∣cred Appollo; if sacrifice yearly at thy temple, and sub∣mission hourly in mine own Court, if fulfilling thy counsel, and correcting my councellors, may shake off these Asses ears, I here before thee vow to shake off al envies abroad, and at home all tyranny.
Honoured be Apollo, Midst is restored.
Fortunate Midst, that feelst thy head light∣ned of dull ears, and thy heart of deadly sorrows. Come my Lords, let vs repair to our Palace, in which Apol∣lo shall have astately statue erected: every month will we solemnise there a feast, and here every year a sacri∣fice. Phrygia shall be governed by Gods, not men, least the Gods make beasts of men. So my counsel of war shall not make conquests in their own conceits, nor my counsellors in peace make me poor, to enrich them selves. So blessed be Apollo, quiet be Lesbos, happy be Midst: and to begin this solemnity, let vs sing to A∣polo, for, so much as Music, nothing can content A∣polo.

GRacious and Great, that we so boldly dare,
('Mo•gst other Plays that now in fashion are)
To present this; writ many years agony,
And in that Age, thought second unto none;
We humbly c•ave your pardon: we pursue
The story of a rich and famous Jew
Who lived in Malta: you shall find him still,
In all his p•oiects, a sound Macheuill;
And that's •is Character: He that hath past
So many Ce•sures, is now come at last
To have your princely Ears, grace you him; then
You crown• the Action, and renown the pen.
IT is our fear (dread Sovereign) we have bin
Too te•ious; neither can't be less than sin
To wrong your Princely patience: If we have,
(Thus lo• dejected) we your pardon crave:
And if ought here offend your ear or sight,
We one•y Act, and Speak, what others write.
WE 〈…〉 pass this Stage,
But by the best of Poets in that ag•
The Malta-Jew had being, and was made;
And He, then by the best of  Actors played:
In Hero and Lender, one did gain
A lasting memory: in Tamberlaine,
This Jew, with others many: the other man
The Attribute of peerless, being a man
Whom we may rank with (doing no one wrong)
Proteus for shapes, and Roseius for a tongue,
So could he speak, so vary; nor is it hate
To merit: in  him who doth personate
Our Jew this day, nor is it his ambition
To exceed, or equal, being of condition
More modest; this is all that he intends,
(And that too, at the vrgence of some friends)
To prove his best, and if none here gainsay it,
The part he hath studied, and intends to play it.
IN Graving, with Pigmalion to contend;
Or Painting, with Apelles; doubtless the end
Must be disgrace: our Actor did not so,
He only aimed to go, but not out go.
Nor think that this day any prize was plaid,
Here were no bett• at all, no wagers laid;
All the ambition that his mind doth swell,
Is but to hear from you, (by me) it was well.
ALbeit the world think Macheuill is dead,
Yet was his soul but flown beyond the Alps,
And now the Guise is dead, is come from Franc•
To view this Land, and frolic with his friends.
To some perhaps my name is odious,
But such as love me, guard me from their tongues,
And let them know that I am Macheuill,
And weigh not men, and therefore not men's words:
Admired I am of those that hate me most.
Though some speak openly against my books,
Yet will they read me, and thereby attain
To Peters Chair: And when they cast me off;
Are poisoned by my climbing followers.
I count Religion but a childish Toy,
And hold there is no sin but Ignorance.
Birds of the Air will tell of murders past;
I am ashamed to hear such fooleries:
Many will talk of Title to a Crown.
What right had Caesar to the Empire?
Might first made Kings, and Laws were then most sure
When like the Drone•us they were writ in blood.
Hence comes it, that a strong built Citadel
Commands much more then letters can import:
Which maxim had Phaleris observed,
H'had never bellowed in a brazen Bull
Of great ones envy; of the poor petty wites,
Let me be envied and not pitied!
But whither am I bound, I come not, I,
To read a lecture here in Britain,
But to present the Tragedy of a Jew,
Who smiles to see how full his bags are cramb'd
Which money was not got without my means.
I crave but this, Grace him as he deserves,
And let him not be entertained the worse
Because he favours me.
So that of thus much that return was made:
And of the third part of the Persian ships,
Th•re was the venture summed and satisfied.
As for those Samintes, and the men of Vzz,
That bought my Spanish Oils, and Wines of Greece,
Here have I pursed their paltry siluerbings.
Fie; what a trouble tic to count this trash.
Well fare the Arabians, who so richly pay,
The things they traffic for with wedge of gold,
Whereof a man may easily in a day
Tell that which may maintain him all his life.
The needy groom that never fingered great,
Would make a miracle of thus much coin:
But he whose steele-bard co••ers are cramb'd full,
And all his life time hath bin tired,
Wearying his fingers ends with telling it,
Would in his age be loath to labour so,
And for a pound to sweat himself to death:
Give me the Merchants of the Indian Mines,
That trade in mettle of the purest mould;
The wealth Moor•, that in the Eastern rocks
Without control can pick his riches up,
And in his house heap pearl like pibble-stones:
Receive them free, and sell them by the weight,
Bags of fiery Opals, Sapphires, Amatists,
Iacints, hard Topas, grasse-greene Emeralds,
Beauteous Rubies, sparkling Diamonds,
And seildsene costly stones of so great price,
As one of them indifferently rated,
And of a C•rrect of this quantity,
May serve in peril of calamity
To ransom great Kings from captivity.
This is the ware wherein consists my wealth:
And thus me thinks should men of judgment frame
Their means of traffic from the vulgar trade,
And as their wealth increases, so enclose
In •mite riches in a little room.
But now how stands the wind?
Into what corner peers my Halcions bill?
H•, to the East? yes: See how stands the Vanes?
East and by-South: why then I hope my ships
I sent for Egypt and the bordering Isles
Are gotten up by Nilus winding banks:
Mine Argosy from Alexandria,
Laden with Spice and Silks, now under sail,
Are smoothly gl•ding down by Candy shore
To Malta, through our Mediterranean sea.
But who comes hear? How now.
Barabas, thy ships are safe,
Riding in Malta Rhode: And all the Merchants
With other Merchandise are safe arrived,
And have sent me to know whether your self
Will come and custom them.
The ships are safe thou say, and richly fraught.
They are.
Why then go bid them come ashore,
And bring with them their bills of entry:
I hope our credit in the Custom-house
Will serve as well as I were present there.
Go send '•m threescore Camels, thirty Mules,
And twenty Waggons to bring up the ware.
But art thou master in a ship of mine,
And is thy credit not enough for that?
The very Custom barely comes to more
Then many Merchants of the Town are worth,
And therefore far exceeds my credit, Sir.
Go tell 'em the Jew of Malta sent thee, man.
Tush, who amongst 'em knows not Barrabas?
I go.
So then, there's somewhat •ome.
Sir, which of my ships art thou Master off?
Of the Speranza, Sir.
And saw thou not mine Argosy at Alexandria
Thou could not come from Egypt, or by Cairo
But at the entry there into the sea,
Where Nilus pays his tribute to the maine,
Thou needs must sail by Alexandria.
I neither saw them, nor inquired of them.
But this we heard some of our sea-men say,
They wondered how you durst with so much wealth
Trust such a crazed Vessel, and so far.
Tush; they are wise, I know her and her strength:
By go, go thou thy ways, discharge thy Ship,
And bid my Factor bring his loading in.
And yet I wonder at •his Argosy,
Thine Argosy from Alexandria,
Know Barabas doth ride in Malta Rhode.
Laden with riches, and exceeding store
Of Persian silks, of gold, and Orient Perle:
How chance you came not with those other ship•
That sailed by Egypt?
Sir we saw 'em not.
Belike they coasted round by Candy shore
About their Oils, or other businesses.
But it was ill done of you to come so far
Without the aid or conduct of their ships.
Sir, we were wafted by a Spanish Fleet
That never le•t vs till within a league,
That had the Galleys of the Turk in chase.
Oh they were going up to Sicily: well, go
And bid the Merchants and my men dispatch
And come ashore, and see the fraught discharged.
I go.
Thus trowles our fortune in by land and Sea,
And thus are wee on enery side enriched:
These are the Blessings promised to the Jaws,
And herein was old Abrams happiness:
What more may Heaven doe for earthly man
Then thus to power out plenty in their laps,
Ripping the bowels of the earth for them,
Making the Sea their servants, and the winds
To drive their substance with successful blasts?
Who hates me but for my happiness?
Or who is honoured now but for his wealth?
Rather had I a Jew be hated thus,
Then pitied in a Christian poverty:
For I can see no fruits in all their faith,
But malice, falsehood, and excessive pride,
Which me thinks fits not their profession.
Happily some haplesse man hath conscience,
And for his conscience lives in beggary.
They say we are a scattered Nation:
I cannot tell, but we have scrambled up
More wealth by far then those that brag of faith.
There's Kirriab Iairim, the great Jew of Greece,
Obit in Bairseth, No•es in Portugal,
My self in Malta, some in Italy,
Many in France, and wealthy every one:
I, wealthier far then any Christian.
I must confess we come not to be Kings:
That's not our fault: Alas, our number's few,
And Crowns come either by succession
Or urged by force; and nothing violent,
Oft have I heard tell, can be permanent.
Give vs a peaceful rule, make Christians Kings,
That thirst so much for Principality.
I have no charge, nor many children,
But one sole Daughter, whom I hold as dear
As Agamemnon did his Iphigen:
And all I have is hers. But who comes here?
Tush, tell not me it was done of policy.
Come therefore let vs go to Barrabas;
For he can counsel best in these affairs;
And here he comes.
Why how now Countrymen?
Why flock you thus to me in multitudes?
What accident's betided to the Jaws?
A Fleet of warlike Galleys, Barabas,
Are come from Turkey, and lye in our Rhode:
And they this day sit in the Counsell-house
To entertain them and their Embassy.
Why let 'em come, so they come not to war;
Or let 'em war, so we be conquerors:
Nay, let 'em combat, conquer, and kill all,
So they spare me, my daughter, and my wealth.
Were it for confirmation of a League,
They would not come in warlike manner thus.
I fear their coming will afflict vs all.
Fond men, what dream you of their multitudes?
What need they treat of peace that are in league?
The Turks and those of Malta are in league.
Tut, tut, there is some other matter in it.
Why, Barabas, they come for peace or war.
Happily for neither, but to pass along
Towards Venice by the Adriatic Sea;
With whom they have attempted many times,
But never could effect their Stratagem.
And very wisely said, it may be so.
But there's a meeting in the Senate-house,
And all the Jaws in Malta must be there.
Vmh; All the Jaws in Malta must be there?
I, like enough, why then let every man
Provide him, and be there for fashion-sake.
If any thing shall there concern our state
Assure your selves I'll look unto my self.
I know you will; well brethren let vs go.
Let's take our leaves; Farewell good Barabas.
Doe so; Farewell Zaareth, farewell Temainte.
And Barabas now search this secret out.
Summon thy senses, call thy wits togethre:
These silly men mistake the matter clean.
Long to the Turk did Malta contribute;
Which Tribute all in policy, I fear,
The Turks have let increase to such a sum,
As all the wealth of Malta cannot pay;
And now by that advantage thinks, belike,
To seize upon the Town: I, that he seeks.
How ere the world go, I'll make sure for one,
And seek in time to intercept the worst,
Warily guarding that which I ha got.
Ego mihimet sum semper proximas.
Why let 'em enter, let 'em take the Town.
Now Bassos, what demand you at our hands?
Know Knights of Malta, that we came from Rhodes
From Cyprus, Candy, and those other Isles
That lye betwixt the Mediterranean seas.
What's Cyprus, Candy, and those other Isles
To vs, or Malta? What at our hands demand ye?
The ten years tribute that remains unpaid.
Alas, my Lord, the sum is over-great,
I hope your Highness will consider vs.
I wish, grave Governors it were in my power
To favour you, but it is my fathers cause,
Wherein I may not, nay I dare not dally.
Then give vs leave, great Selim-Calymath.
Stand all aside, and let the Knights determine,
And send to keep our Galleys vnder-saile,
For happily we shall not tarry here:
Now Governors how are you resolved?
Thus: Since your hard conditions are such
That you will needs have ten years tribute past,
We may have time to make collection
Amongst the Inhabitants of Malta for it.
That's more then is in our Commission.
What Callapine a little courtesy.
Let's know their time, perhaps it is not long;
And it is more Kingly to obtain by peace
Then to enforce conditions by constraint.
What respit ask you Governors?
But a month.
We grant a month, but see you keep your promise.
Now launch our Galleys back again to Sea,
When•re we'll attend the respit you have t•no,
And for the money send our messenger.
Farewell great Governors, and brave Knights of Malta.
And all good fortune wait on Calymath.
Go one and call those Jaws of Malta hither:
Were they not summoned to appear to day.
They were, my Lord, and here they come.
Have you determined what to say to them?
Yes, give me leave, and Hebrwes now come near.
From the Emperor of Turkey is arrived
Great Selim-Calymath, his Highness son,
To levy of vs ten years tribute past,
Now then here know that it concerns vs:
Then good my Lord, to keep your quiet still,
Your Lordship shall doe well to let them have it.
Soft Barabas, there's more longs too't than so.
To what this ten years tribute will amount
That we have cast, but cannot compass it
By reason of the wars, that robbed our store;
And therefore are we to request your aid.
Alas, my Lord, we are no soldiers:
And what's our aid against so great a Prince?
Tut, Jew, we know thou art no soldier;
Thou art a Merchant, and a monied man,
And it is thy money, Barabas, we seek.
How, my Lord, my money?
Thine and the rest.
For to be short, amongst you 'tmust be had,
Alas, my Lord, the most of vs are poor.
Then let the rich increase your portions:
Are strangers with your tribute to be taxed?
Have strangers leave with vs to get their wealth?
Then let them with vs contribute.
How, equally?
No, Jew, like infidels.
For through our sufferance of your hateful lives,
Who stand accursed in the sight of heaven,
These taxes and afflictions are befal'ne,
And therefore thus we are determined;
Read there the Articles of our decrees.
First, the tribute money of the Turks shall all be
Levied amongst the Jaws, and each of them to pay one
Half of his estate.
How, half his estate? I hope you mean not mine.
Read on.
Secondly, hee that denies to pay, shall straight be∣come
A Christian.
How a Christian? Hum, what's here to doe?
Lastly, he that denies this, shall absolutely lose al he has.
Oh my Lord we will give half.
Oh earth-mettall'd villains, and no Hebrews born!
And will you basely thus submit your selves
To leave your goods to their arbitrament?
Why Barabas wilt thou be christened•
No, Governor, I will be no convertite.
Then pay thy half.
Why know you what you did by this device?
Half of my substance is a Cities wealth.
Governor, it was not got so easily;
Nor will I part so slightly therewithal.
Sir, half is the penalty of our decree,
Either pay that, or we will seize on all.
Corpo di deo; stay, you shall have half,
Let me be used but as my brethren are.
No, Jew, thou hast denied the Articles,
And now it cannot be recalled.
Will you then steal my goods?
Is theft the ground of your Religion?
No, Jew, we take particularly thine
To save the ruin of a multitude:
And better one want for a common good,
Then many perish for a private man:
Yet Barrabas we will not banish thee,
But here in Malta, where thou go•st thy wealth,
Live still; and if thou can, get more.
Christians; what, or how can I multiply?
Of nought is nothing made.
From nought at first thou can to little wealth,
From little unto more, from more to most:
If your first curse fall heavy on thy head,
And make thee poor and scorn•d of all the world,
It is not our fault, but thy inherent sin.
What? bring you Scripture to confirm your wrong?
•reach m• not out of my possessions.
Some• Jaws are wicked, as all Christians are:
But say the Tribe that I descended of
Were all in general cast away for sin,
Shall I be tried by their transgression?
The man that deals righteously shall live:
And which of you can charge me otherwise?
Out wretched Barabas, sham'st thou not thus
To justify thy self, as if we knew not
Thy profession? If thou rely upon thy righteousness,
Be patient and thy riches will increase.
Excess of wealth is cause of covetousness:
And covetousness, oh it is a monstrous sin.
I, but theft is worse: tush, take not from me then,
For that is theft; and if you rob me thus,
I must be forced to steal and compass more.
Grave Governors, list not to his exclames:
Convert his mansion to a Nunnery,
His house will harbour many holy Nuns.
It shall be so: now Officers have you done?
I, my Lord, we have seized upon the goods
And wares of Barabas, which being valued
Amount to more then all the wealth in Malta.
And of the other we have seized half.
Then we'll take order for the residue.
Well then my Lord, say, are you satisfied?
You have my goods, my money, and my wealth,
My ships, my store, and all that I enjoyed;
And having all, you can request no more;
Unless your unrelenting flinty hearts
Suppress all pity in your stony breasts,
And now shall move you to bereave my life.
No, Barabas, to stain our hands with blood
Is far from vs and our profession.
Why I esteem the injury far less,
To take the lives of miserable men,
Then be the causers of their misery,
You have my wealth the labour of my life,
The comfort of mine age, my childrens hope,
And therefore ne'er distinguish of the wrong.
Content thee, Barabas, thou hast nought but right.
Your extreme right does me exceeding wrong:
But take it to you in the devils name.
Come, let vs in, and gather of these goods
The money for this tribute of the Turk.
It is necessary that be looked unto:
For if we break our day, we break the league,
And that will prove but simple policy.
I, policy? that's their profession,
And not simplicity, as they suggest.
The plagues of Egypt, and the curse of heaven,
Earths barrenness, and all men's hatred
Inflict upon them, thou great Primes Motor.
And here upon my knees, striking the earth,
I ban their souls to everlasting pains
And extreme tortures of the fiery deep,
That thus have dealt with me in my distress.
Oh yet be patient, gentle Barabas.
Oh silly brethren, borne to see this day!
Why stand you thus vnmou'd with my laments?
Why weep you not to think upon my wrongs?
Why pine not I, and dye in this distress?
Why, Barabas, as hardly can we brooke
The cruel handling of our selves in this:
Thou see they have taken half our goods.
Why did you yield to their extortion?
You were a multitude, and I but one,
And of me only have they taken all.
Yet brother Barabas remember Iob,
What tell you me of Iob? I wot his wealth
Was written thus: he had seven thousand sheep,
Three thousand Camels, and two hundred yoke
Of labouring Oxen, and five hundred
She Asses: but for every one of those,
Had they been valued at indifferent rate,
I had at home, and in mine Argosy
And other ships that came from Egypt last,
As much as would have bought his beasts and him,
And yet have kept enough to live upon;
So that not he, but I may curse the day,
Thy fatal birth-day, forlorn Barabas;
And henceforth wish for an eternal night,
That clouds of darkness may enclose my flesh,
And hide these extreme sorrows from mine eyes:
For only I have toiled to inherit here
The months of vanity and loss of time,
And painful nights have bin appointed me.
Good Barabas be patient.
I, I pray leave me in my patience.
You that were ne'er possessed of wealth, are pleased with want.
But give him liberty at least to morn,
That in a field amidst his enemies,
Doth see his soldiers slain, himself disarmed,
And knows no means of his recovery:
I, let me sorrow for this sudden chance,
It is in the trouble of my spirit I speak;
Great injuries are not so soon forgot.
Come, let vs leave him in his ireful mood,
Our words will but increase his ecstasy.
On then: but trust me it is a misery
To see a man in such affliction:
Farewell Barabas.
I, fare you well.
See the simplicity of these base s•aves,
Who for the villains have no wit themselves,
Think me to be a senseless lump of clay
That will with every water wash to dirt:
No, Barabas is borne to better chance,
And framed of finer mold then common men,
That measure nought but by the present time.
A reaching thought will search his deepest wits,
And cast with cunning for the time to come:
For evils are apt to happen every day
But whither wends my beauteous Abigall?
Oh what has made my lovely daughter sad?
What? woman, moan not for a little loss:
Thy father has enough in store for thee.
Not for my self, but aged Barabas:
Father, for thee lamented Abigaile:
But I will learn to leave these fruitless tears.
And urged thereto with my afflictions,
With fierce exlaimes run to the Senate-house,
And in the Senate reprehend them all,
And rent their hearts with tearing of my hair,
Till they reduce the wrongs done to my father.
No, Abigail, things past recovery
Are hardly cured with exclamations.
Be silent, Daughter, sufferance breeds ease,
And time may yield vs an occasion
Which on the sudden cannot serve the turn.
Besides, my girl, think me not all so fond
As negligently to forgo so much
Without provision for thy self and me.
Ten thousand Portagnes, besides great Perles,
Rich costly Jewels, and Stones infinite,
Fearing the worst of this before it fell,
I closely hid.
Where father?
In my house my girl.
Then shall they ne'er be seen of Barrabas:
For they have seized upon thy house and wares.
But they will give me leave once more, I trow,
To go into my house.
That may they not:
For there I left the Governor placing Nuns,
Displacing me; and of thy house they mean
To make a Nunnery, where none but their own sect
Must enter in; men generally barred.
My gold, my gold, and all my wealth is gone.
You partial heavens, have I deserved this plague?
What will you thus oppose me, luckless Stars,
To make me desperate in my poverty?
And knowing me impatient in distress
Think me so mad as I will hang my self,
That I may vanish ore the earth in ayre,
And leave no memory that ever I was.
No, I will live; nor loath I this my life:
And since you leave me in the Ocean thus
To sink or swim, and put me to my shifts,
I'll rouse my senses, and awake my self.
Daughter, I have it: thou perceiu'st the plight
Wherein these Christians have oppressed me:
Be ruled by me, for in extremity
We ought to make bar of no policy.
Father, what ever it be to injure them
That have so manifestly wronged vs,
What will not Abigall attempt?
Why so; then thus, thou toldst me they have turned my house
Into a Nunnery, and some Nuns are there.
I did.
Then Abigall, there must my girl
Entreat the Abbasse to be entertained.
How, as a Nun?
I, Daughter, for Religion
Hides many mischiefs from suspicion.
I, but father they will suspect me there.
Let 'em suspect, but be thou so precise
As they may think it done of Holiness.
Entreat 'em fair, and give them friendly speech,
And seem to them as if thy sins were great,
Till thou hast gotten to be entertained.
Thus father shall I much dissemble.
Tush, as good dissemble that thou never mean
As first mean truth, and then dissemble it,
A counterfeit profession is better
Then unseen hypocrisy.
Well father, say I be entertained,
What then shall follow?
This shall follow then;
There have I hid close underneath the plank
That runs along the upper chamber floor,
The gold and Jewels which I kept for thee.
But here they come; be cunning Abigall.
Then father go with me.
No, Abigall, in this
It is not necessary I be seen.
For I will seem offended with thee for it.
Be close, my girl, for this must fetch my gold.
Sisters, we now are almost at the new made Nun∣nary.
The better; for we love not to be seen:
It is 30 winters long since some of vs
Did stray so far amongst the multitude.
But, Madam, this house
And waters of this new made Nunnery
Will much delight you.
It may be so: but who comes here?
Grave Abbasse, and you happy Virgins guide,
Pity the state of a distressed Maid.
What art thou daughter?
The hopeless daughter of a haplesse Jew,
The Jew of Malta, wretched Barabas;
Sometimes the owner of a goodly house,
Which they have now turned to a Nunnery.
Well, daughter, say, what is thy suit with vs?
Fearing the afflictions which my father feels,
Proceed from sin, or want of faith in vs,
I'd pass away my life in penitence,
And be a Novice in your Nunnery,
To make atonement for my labouring soul.
No doubt, brother, but this proceeds of the spirit.
I, and of a moving spirit too, brother; but come,
Let vs entreat she may be entertained.
Well, daughter, we admit you for a Nun.
First let me as a Novice learn to frame
My solitary life to your straight laws,
And let me lodge where I was wont to lye,
I doe not doubt by your divine precepts
And mine own industry, but to profit much.
As much I hope as all I hid is worth.
Come daughter, follow vs.
Why how now Abigall, what make thou
Amongst these hateful Christians?
Hinder her not, thou man of little faith,
For she has mortified her self.
How, mortified I
And is admitted to the Sister-hood.
Child of pordition, and thy fathers shame,
What wilt thou doe among these hateful fiends?
I charge thee on my blessing that thou leave
These devils, and their damned heresy.
Father give me—
Nay back, Abigall,
And think upon the Jewels and the gold•
The board is marked thus that covers it.
Away accursed from thy fathers sight.
Barabas, although thou art in mis-belee•e,
And wilt not see thine own afflictions,
Yet let thy daughter be no longer blind.
Blind, Fryer, I wreck •o• thy persuasions.
The board is marked thus † that covers i••
For I had rather dye, then see her thus.
Wilt thou forsake me too in my distress,
Seduced Daughter, Go forget n•t.
Becomes it Jaws to be so credulo•s,
To morrow early Il'e be at th• doors.
No come not at me, if thou wilt be damned,
Forget me, see me not, and so 〈…〉
Farewell, Remember to morrow morning.
Out, out thou wretch.
Whose this? Fair Abigall the rich Jaws daugh∣la
Become a Nun, her fathers sudden fall
Has humbled her and brought her down to this:
Tut, she were fitter for a tale of love
Then to be tired out with Orisons:
And better would she far become a bed
Embraced in a friendly lovers arms,
Then rise at midnight to a solemn mass.
Why how now Don Medias, in a dump?
Believe me, Noble Lodowicke, I have seen
The strangest sight, in my opinion,
That ever I beheld.
What wast I prethe?
A fair young maid scarce 14 years of age,
The sweetest flower in Citherea's field,
Cropped from the pleasures of the fruitful earth,
And strangely metamorphis'd Nun.
But say, What was she?
Why the rich Jaws daughter.
What Barabas, whose goods were lately seized?
Is she so fair?
And matchless beautiful;
As had you seen her it would have moved your heart,
Tho countermined with walls of brass, to love,
Or at the least to pity.
And if she be so fair as you report,
It were time well spent to go and visit her:
How say you, shall we?
I must and will, Sir, there's no remedy.
And so will I too, or it shall go hard.
Farewell Medias.
Farewell Lodowicke.
THus like the sad presaging Raven that tolls
The sick mans passeport in her hollow beak,
And in the shadow of the silent night
Doth shake contagion from her sable wings;
Vexed and tormented runs poor Barabas
With fatal curses towards these Christians.
The uncertain pleasures of swift-footed time
Have tan their flight, and left me in despair;
And of my former riches rests no more
But bare remembrance; like a soldiers scar,
That has no further comfort for his maim.
Oh thou that with a fiery pillar led
The sons of Israel through the dismal shades,
Light Abrahams off-spring; and direct the hand
Of Abigall this night; or let the day
Turn to eternal darkness after this:
No sleep can fasten on my watchful eyes,
Nor quiet enter my distempered thoughts,
Till I have answer of my Abigall.
Now have I happily espied a time
To search the plank my father did appoint;
And here behold (unseen) where I have found
The gold, the perles, and Jewels which he hid.
Now I remember those old women's words,
Who in my wealth wud tell me winters tales,
And speak of spirits and ghosts that glide by night
About the place where Treasure hath bin hid:
And now me thinks that I am one of those:
For whilst I live, here lives my souls sole hope,
And when I dye, here shall my spirit walk.
Now that my fathers fortune were so good
As but to be about this happy place;
It is not so happy: yet when we parted last,
He said he wud attend me in the morn.
Then, gentle sleep, where ever his body rests,
Give charge to Morpheus that he may dream
A golden dream, and of the sudden walk,
Come and receive the Treasure I have found.
Birn para todos, my ga nada no er:
As good go on, as fit so sadly thus.
But stay, what star shines yonder in the East?
The Loadstar of my life, if Abigall.
Who's there?
Who's that?
Peace, Abigal, it is I.
Then father here receive thy happiness.
Hast thou't?
Here,
Hast thou't?
There's more, and more, and more.
Oh my girl,
My gold, my fortune, my felicity;
Strength to my soul, death to mine enemy;
Welcome the first beginner of my bliss:
Oh Aigal, Abigal, that I had thee here too,
Then my desires were fully satisfied,
But I will practise thy enlargement thence:
Oh girl, oh gold, oh beauty, oh my bl•sse!
Father, it draws towards midnight now,
And about this time the Nuns begin to wake;
To ••aun suspicion, therefore, let vs part.
Farewell my •oy, and by my fingers take
A kiss from hi• that sends it from his soul.
Now Phoebus op the eye-lids of the day,
And for the Raven wake the morning Lark,
That I may hover with her in the Ayre;
Singing ore these, as she does ore her young.
H•rmoso Pi•••r, de les D•nirch.
Now Captain tell vs whither thou art bound?
Whence is thy ship that anchors in our Rhoad?
And why thou came ashore without our leave?
Governor of Malta, hither am I bound;
My Ship, the flying Dragon, is of Spain,
And so am I, Delbosco is my name;
Vizadmirall unto the Catholic King.
It is true, my Lord, therefore entreat him well.
Our fraught is Gracious, Turks, and Africa Moors.
For late upon the coast of Corsica,
Because we veiled not to the Spanish Fleet,
Their creeping Galleys had vs in the chase:
But suddenly the wind began to rise,
And then we left, and took, and fought at ease:
Some have we fired, and many have we sunk;
But one amongst the rest became our prize:
The Captain's slain, the rest remain our slaves,
Of whom we would make sale in Malta here.
Martin del Bosco, I have heard of thee;
Welcome to Malta, and to all of vs;
But to admit a sale of these thy Turks
We may not, nay we dare not give consent
By reason of a Tributary league.
Delbosco, as thou love and honour'st vs,
Persuade our Governor against the Turk;
This truce we have is but in hope of gold,
And with that sum he craves might we wage war.
Will Knights of Malta be in league with Turks,
And buy it basely too for sums of gold?
My Lord, Remember that to Europ's shame,
The Christian Isle of Rhodes, from whence you came,
Was lately lost, and you were stated here
To be at deadly enmity with Turks
Captain we know it, but our force is small:
What is the sum that Calymath requires?
A hundred thousand Crowns.
My Lord and King hath title to this Isle,
And he means quickly to expel you hence;
Therefore be ruled by me, and keep the gold:
I'll write unto his Majesty for aid,
And not depart until I see you free.
On this condition shall thy Turks be sold.
Go Off•ers and set them straight in show.
Bosco, thou shalt be Malta's General;
We and our warlike Knights will follow thee
Against these barbarous misbelieving Turks.
So shall you imitate those you succeed:
For when their hideous force environed Rhodes,
Small though the number was that kept the Town,
They fought it out, and not a man •uruiu'd
To bring the haplesse news to Christendom.
So will we fight it out; come, let's away:
Proud-daring Calymath, instead of gold,
We'll send the bullets wrapped in smoke and fire:
Claim tribute where thou wilt, we are resolved,
Honour is bought with blood and not with gold.
This is the Market-place, here let 'em stand:
Fear not their sale, for they'll be quickly bought.
Every ones price is written on his back,
And so much must they yield or not be sold.
Here comes the Jew, had not his goods bin seized,
He'de give vs present money for them all.
In spite of these swine-eating Christians,
(Vnchosen Nation, never circumcised;
Such as poor villains were ne'er thought upon
Till Titus and Vespasian conquered vs.)
Am I become as wealthy as I was:
They hoped my daughter would ha bin a Nun;
But she's at home, and I have bought a house
As great and fair as is the Governors;
And there in spite of Malta will I dwell:
Having Fernezes hand, whose heart I'll have;
I, and his sons too, or it shall go hard.
I am not of the Tribe of Levy, I,
That can so soon forget an injury.
We Jaws can fawn like Spaniels when we please;
And when we grin we bite, yet are our looks
As innocent and harmless as a Lambs.
I learned in Florence how to kiss my hand,
Heave up my shoulders when they call me dog,
And duck as low as any bare-foot Friar,
Hoping to see them starve upon a stall,
Or else be gathered for in our Synagogue;
That when the offering-Bason comes to me,
Even for charity I may spit intoo't.
Here comes Don Lodowick• the Gouernor's son,
One that I love for his good fathers sake.
I hear the wealthy Jew walked this way;
I'll seek him out, and so insinuate,
That I may have a sight of Abigall;
For Don Medias tells me she is fair.
Now will I show my self to have more of the Ser∣pent
Then the Dove; that is, more knave than fool.
Yond walks the Jew, now for fair Abigall.
I, I, no doubt but shoe's at your command.
Barabas, thou know I am the Governors son.
I wud you were his father too, Sir, that's al the harm
I wish you: the slave looks like a hogs cheek new findg'd.
Whither walk thou Barabas?
No further: it is a custom held with vs,
That when we speak with Gentiles like to you,
We turn into the Ayre to purge our selves:
For unto vs the Promise doth belong.
Well, Barabas, can help me to a Diamond?
Oh, Sir, your father had my Diamonds.
Yet I have one left that will serve your turn:
I mean my daughter:—but ever he shall have her
I'll sacrifice her on a pile of wood.
I ha the poison of the City for him, and the
White leprosy.
What sparkle does it give without a foil?
The Diamond that I talk of, ne'er was foiled:
But when he touches it, it will be foiled:
Lord Lodowicke, it sparkles bright and fair.
Is it square or pointed, pray let me know.
Pointed it is, good Sir,— but not for you.
I like it much the better.
So doe I too.
How shows it by night?
Out shines Cinthia's rays:
You'll like it better far a nights than days.
And what's the price?
Your life and if you have it. — Oh my Lord
We will not larre about the price; come to my house
And I will gived your honour— with a vengeance.
No, Barabas, I will deserve it first.
Good Sir, your father has deserved it at my hands,
Who of mere charity and Christian ruth,
To bring me to religious purity,
And as it were in Catechising sort,
To make me mindful of my mortal sins,
Against my will, and whether I would or no,
Seized all I had, and thrust me out a doors,
And made my house a place for Nuns most chaste.
No doubt your soul shall reap the fruit of it.
I, but my Lord, the harvest is far off:
And yet I know the prayers of those Nuns
And holy Fryers, having money for their pains,
Are wondrous; and indeed doe no man good:
And seeing they are not idle, but still doing,
It is likely they in time may reap some fruit,
I mean in fullness of perfection.
Good Barabas glance not at our holy Nuns.
No, but I doe it through a burning zeal,
Hoping ere long to set the house a fire;
For though they doe a while increase and multiply,
I'll have a saying to that Nunnery.
As for the Diamond, Sir, I told you of,
Come home and there's no price shall make vs part,
Even for your Honourable fathers sake.
It shall go hard but I will see your death,
But now I must be gone to buy a slave.
And, Barabas, I'll bear thee company.
Come then, here's the marketplace; whats the price
Of this flaue, 200 Crowns? Do the Turk weigh so much?
Sir, that's his price.
What, can he steal that you demand so much?
Belike he has some new trick for a purse;
And if he has, he is worth 300 plots.
So that, being bought, the Towne-seale might be got
To keep him for his life time from the gallows.
The Sessions day is critical to thieves,
And few or none scope but by being purged.
Ratest thou this Moore but at 200 plots?
No more, my Lord.
Why should this Turk be dearer then that Moore?
Because he is young and has more qualities.
What, hast the Philosophers stone? and thou hast,
Break my head with it, I'll forgive thee.
No Sir, I can cut and shave.
Let me see, sir, are you not an old shauer?
Alas, Sir, I am a very youth.
A youth? I'll buy you, and marry you to Lady va∣nity
If you doe well.
I will serve you, Sir.
Some wicked trick or other. It may be under colour
Of shaving, thou'lt cut my throat for my goods.
Tell me, hast thou thy health well?
I• passing well.
So much the worse; I must have one that's •ickly,
And be but for sparing vittles: it is not a stone of beef a day
Will maintain you in these chops; let me see one
That's some what leaner.
Here's a leaner, how like you him?
Where was thou borne?
In Trace; brought up in Arabia.
So much the better, thou art for my turn,
An hundred Crowns; I'll have him; there's the coin.
Then mark him, Sir, and take him hence.
I, mark him, you were best, for this is he
That by my help shall doe much villainy.
My Lord farewell: Come Sir you are mine.
As for the Diamond it shall be yours;
I pray, Sir, be no stranger at my house,
All that I have shall be at your command.
What makes the Jew and Lodewicke so private?
I fear me it is about fair Abigall.
Yonder comes Don Medias, let vs stay;
He loves my daughter, and she holds him dear:
But I have sworn to frustrate both their hopes,
And be revenged upon the —Governor.
This Moore is comeliest, is he not? speak son.
No, this is the better, mother, view this well.
Seem not to know me here before your mother
Lest she mistrust the match that is in hand:
When you have brought her home, come to my house;
Think of me as thy father; Son farewell.
But wherefore talked Don Lodowick with you?
Tush man, we talked of Diamonds, not of Abigal.
Tell me, Medias, is not that the Jew?
As for the Comment on the Machabees
I have it, Sir, and it is at your command.
Yes, Madam, and my talk with him was
About the borrowing of a book or two.
Converse not with him, he is cast off from hey∣uen.
Thou hast thy Crowns, fellow, come let's away.
Sir, Jew, remember the book.
Marry will I, Sir.
Come, I have made a reasonable market, let's away.
Now let me know thy name, and there withal
Thy birth, condition, and profession.
Faith, Sir, my birth is but mean, my name's Ithimer,
My profession what you please.
Hast thou no Trade? then listen to my words,
And I will teach that shall stick by thee:
First be thou void of these affections,
Compassion, love, vain hope, and hartlesse fear,
Be moved at nothing, see thou pity none,
But to •hy self smile when the Christians moan.
Oh brave, master, I worship your nose for this.
As for my self, I walk abroad a nights
And kill sick people groaning under walls:
Sometimes I go about and poison wells;
And now and then, to cherish Christian thieves,
I am content to lose some of my Crowns;
That I may, walking in my Gallery,
See 'em go pinioned along by my door.
Being young I studied Physic, and began
To practise first upon the Italian;
There I enric'd the Priests with burials,
And always kept the Sexton's arms in ur
With digging graves and ringing dead men's knels:
And after that was I an Engineer,
And in the wars twixt France and Germanie,
Under pretence of helping Charles the fifth,
Slew friend and enemy with my stratagems.
Then after that was I an Usurer,
And with extorting, cozening, forfeiting,
And tricks belonging unto Brokery,
I filled the Iailes with Bankrouts in a year,
And with young Orphans planted Hospitals,
And every Moon made some or other mad,
And now and then one hang himself for grief,
Pinning upon his breast along great Scroll
How I with interest tormented him.
But mark how I am blessed for plaguing them,
I have as much coin as will buy the Town.
But tell me now, How hast thou spent thy time?
Faith, Master, in setting Christian villages on fire,
Chaining of Eunuchs, binding gally-slaues.
One time I was an Hostler in an Inn,
And in the night time secretly-would I steal
To travellers Chambers, and there cut their throats:
Once at Jerusalem, where the pilgrims kneeled,
I strewn powder on the Marble stones,
And therewithal their knees would ranckle, so
That I have laughed agood to see the cripples
Go limping home to Christendom on stilts.
Why this is something: make account of me
As of thy fellow; we are villains both:
Both circumcised, we hate Christians both:
Be true and secret, thou shalt want no gold.
But stand a•id, here comes Don Lodowicke.
Oh Barabas well met; where is the Diamond
You told me of?
I have it for you, Sir; please you walk in with me:
What, ho, Abigall; open the door I say.
In good time, father, here are letters come
From Ormus, and the Post stays here within.
Give me the letters, daughter, doe you hear?
Entertain Lodowicke the Governors son
With all the courtesy you can afford;
Provided, that you keep your Maiden-head.
Use him as if he were a Philist•••.
Dissemble, swear, protest, vow to lo•e him,
He is not of the seed of Abraham.
I am a little busy, Sir, pray pardon me.
Abigall, bid him welcome for my sake.
For your sake and his own he's welcome hither.
Daughter, a word more; kiss him, speak him fair,
And like a cunning Jew so cast about,
That ye be both made sure ever you come out.
Oh father, Don Medias is my love.
I know it: yet I say make love to him;
Doe, it is requisite it should be so.
Nay on my life it is my Factors hand,
But go you in, I'll think upon the account:
The account is made, for Lodowicke dyes.
My Factor sends me word a Merchant's fled
That owes me for a hundred Tun of Wine:
I weigh it thus much; I have wealth enough.
For now by this has he kissed Abigall;
And she vows love to him, and hee to her.
As sure as heaven rained Manna for the Jaws,
So sure shall he and Don Medias dye:
His father was my chiefest enemy.
Whither goes Don Medias? stay a while.
Wither but to my fair love Abigall?
Thou know, and heaven can witness it is true,
That I intend my daughter shall be thine.
I, Barabas, or else thou wrong'st me much:
Oh heaven forbid I should have such a thought.
Pardon me though I weep; the Governors son
Will, whether I will or no, have Abigall:
He sends her letters, bracelets, jewels, rings.
Does she receive them?
She? No, Medias, no, but sends them back,
And when he comes, she lockes her self up fast;
Yet through the key• hole will he talk to her,
While she runs to the wi•dow looking out
When you should come and hale him from the door•
Oh treacherous Lodowicke!
Even now as I came home, he slipped me in,
And I am sure he is with Abigall.
I'll rouse him thence.
Not for all Malta, therefore sheath your sword;
If you love me, no quarrels in my house;
But st•ale you in, and seem to see him not;
I'll give him such a warning ever he goes
As he shall have small hopes of Abigall.
Away, for here they come,
What hand in hand, I cannot suffer this.
Medias, as thou love me, not a word.
Well, let it pass, another time shall serve.
Barabas, is not that the widows son?
I, and take heed, for he hath sworn your death.
My death? what is the base borne peasant mad?
No, no, but happily he stands in fear
Of th•t which you, I think, ne'er dream upon,
My daughter here, a paltry silly girl.
Why loves she Don Medias?
Doth she not with her smiling answer you?
He has my heart, I smile against my will.
Barabas, thou know I have loved thy daughter long.
And so has she done you, even from a child.
And now I can no longer hold my mind.
Nor I the affection that I bear to you
This is thy Diamond, tell me, shall I have it?
Win it, and wear it, it is yet un•oiled,
Oh but I know your Lordship wud disdain
To marry with the daughter of a Jew:
And yet I'll give her many a golden cross
With Christian posies round about the ring.
It is not thy wealth, but her that I esteem,
Yet crave I thy consent.
And mine you have, yet let me talk to her;
This off-spring of Cain, this Iebusite
That never tasted of the Passeouer,
Nor ever shall see the land of Canaan,
Nor our Mossies that is yet to come,
This gentle Magot Lodowicke I mean,
Must be deluded: let him have thy hand,
But keep thy heart till Don Medias comes.
What shall I be betrothed to Lodowicke?
It's no sin to deceive a Christian;
For they them s•lues hold it a principle,
Faith is not to be held with Heretics;
But all are Heretics that are not Jaws;
This follows well, and therefore daughter fear not.
I have entreated her, and she will grant.
Then gentle Abigal plight thy faith to me.
I cannot choose, seeing my father bids:
Nothing but death shall part my love and me.
Now have I that for which my soul hath longed.
So have not I, but yet I hope I shall.
Oh wretched Abigal, what hast thee done?
Why on the sudden is your colour changed?
I know not, but farewell, I must be gone.
Stay her, but let her not speak one word more.
Mute a the sudden; here's a sudden change.
Oh muse not at it, it is the Hebrews guise,
That maidens new betrothed should weep a while•
Trouble her not, sweet Lodowicke depart:
She is thy wife, and thou shalt be mine heir.
Oh, is it the custom, then I am resolved:
But rathe let the brightsome heavens be dim,
And Natures beauty choke with stifeling clouds,
Then my fair Abigal should frown on me.
There comes the villain, now I'll be revenged.
Be quiet Lodowicke, it is enough
That I have made thee sure to Abigal.
Well, let him go.
Well, but for me, as you went in at doors
You had bin stabbed, but not a word on it now;
Here must no speeches pass, nor swords be drawn.
Suffer me, Barabas, but to follow him.
No; so shall I, if any hurt be done,
Be made an accessory of your deeds;
Revenge it on him when you meet him next.
For this I'll have his heart.
Doe so; lo here I give thee Abigall.
What greater gift can poor Medias have?
Shall Lodowicke rob me of so fair a love?
My life is not so dear as Abigall.
My heart misgives me, that to cross your love,
Hoe's with your mother, therefore after him.
What, is he gone unto my mother?
Nay, if you will, stay till she comes her self.
I cannot stay; for if my mother come,
She'll dye with grief.
I cannot take my leave of him for tears:
Father, why have you thus incensed them both?
What's that to thee?
I'll make 'em friends again.
You'll make 'em friends? are there not Jaws
Enough in Malta.
But thou must dote upon a Christian?
I will have Don Medias, he is my love.
Yes, you shall have him: Go put her in.
I, I'll put her in.
Now tell me, Ithimore, how lik'st thou this?
Faith Master, I think by this
You purchase both their lives; is it not so?
True; and it shall be cunningly performed.
Oh, master, that I might have a hand in this.
I, so thou shalt, it is thou must doe the deed:
Take this and bear it to Medias straight,
And tell him that it comes from Lodowicke.
It is poisoned, is it not?
No, no, and yet it might be done that way:
It is a challenge feigned from Lodowicke.
Fear not, I'll so set his heart a fire, that he
Shall verily think it comes from him.
I cannot choose but like thy readiness:
Yet be not rash, but doe it cunningly.
As I behave my self in this, employ me hereafter.
Away then.
So, now will I go in to Lodowicke,
And like a cunning spirit feign some lye,
Till I have set 'em both at enmity.
SInce this Town was besieged, my gain grows cold
The time has bin, that but for one bare night
A hundred Ducats have bin freely given:
But now against my will I must be chaste.
And yet I know my beauty doth not fail.
From Venice Merchants, and from Padua,
Were wont to come rare wetted Gentlemen,
Scholars I mean, learned and liberal;
And now, save Pilia-borza, comes there none,
And he is very seldom from my house;
And here he comes.
Hold thee, wench, there's something for thee to spend.
It is silver, I disdain it.
I, but the Jew has gold,
And I will have it or it shall go hard.
Tell me, how came thou by this?
Faith, walking the back lanes through the Gar∣dens
I chanced to cast mine eye up to the Jaws counting-house
Where I saw some bags of money, and in the night I
Clambered up with my hooks, and as I was taking
My choice, I heard a rumbling in the house; so I took
Only this, and run my way: but here's the Jaws man.
Hide the bag.
Look not towards him, let's away:
Zoon's what a looking thou keep,
Thou'lt betraye's anon.
O the sweetest face that ever I beheld! I know she is
A Courtesan by her attire: now would I give a hundred
Of the Jaws Crowns that I had •uch a Concubine.
Well, I have delivered the challenge in such sort,
As meet they will, and fighting dye; brave sport.
This is the place, now Abigall shall see
Whether Medias holds her dear or no.
What, dares the villain write in such base terms?
I did it, and revenge it if thou dare.
Oh bravely fought, and yet they thrust not home.
Now Lodowicke, now Medias, so;
So now they have showed themselves to be tall fellows.
Part 'em, part 'em.
I, part 'em now they are dead: Farewell, farewell.
What sight is this? my Lodowicke slain!
These arms of mine shall be thy Sepulchre.
Who is this? my son Medias slain!
Oh Lodowicke! had thou perished by the Turk,
Wretched Ferneze might have veng'd thy death.
Thy son slew mine, and I'll revenge his death.
Look, Katherine, look, thy son gave mine these woūds
O leave to grieve me, I am grieved enough.
Oh that my sighs could turn to lively breath;
And these my tears to blood, that he might live.
Who made them enemies?
I know not, and that grieves me most of all.
My son loved thine.
And so did Lodowicke him.
Lend me that weapon that did kill my son,
And it shall murder me.
Nay Madam stay, that weapon was my son's,
And on that rather should Ferneze dye.
Hold, let's inquire the causers of their deaths,
That we may avenge their blood upon their heads.
Then take them up, and let them be interred
Within one sacred monument of stone;
Upon which Altar I will offer up
My daily sacrifice of sighs and tears,
And with my prayers pierce impartial heavens,
Till they the causers of our smarts,
Which forced their hands divide united hearts:
Come, Katherine, our losses equal are,
Then of true grief let vs take equal share.
Why was there ever seen such villainy, so neatly
Plotted, and so well performed? both held in hand, and
Flatly both beguiled.
Why how now Ithimore, why laugh thou so?
Oh, Mistress, ha ha ha.
Why what ail thou?
Oh my master.
Ha.
Oh Mistress! I have the bravest, gravest, secret, subtle
Bottle-nos'd knave to my Master, that ever Gentleman had
Say, knave, why rail upon my father thus?
Oh, my master has the bravest policy.
Wherein?
Why, know you not?
Why no.
Know you not of Media &amp; Don Lodowick disaster?
No, what was it?
Why the devil invented a challenge, my Mr. writ it,
And I carried it, first to Lodowicke, and impr•mis to Media.
And then they met, as the story says,
In doleful wise they ended both their days.
And was my father furtherer of their deaths?
Am I Ithimore?
Yes.
So sure did your father write, &amp; I cary the challenge.
Well, Ithimore, let me request thee this,
Go to the new made Nunnery, and inquire
For any of the Friars of St. Joins,
And say, I pray them come and speak with me.
I pray, mistress, will you answer me to one question?
Well, sir, what is it?
A very feeling one; have not the Nuns fine sport
With the Friars now and then?
Go to, sir sauce, is this your question? get ye gon
I will forsooth, Mistress.
Hard-hearted Father, unkind Barabas,
Was this the pursuit of thy policy?
To make me show them favour severally,
That by my favour they should both be slain?
Admit thou lou'dst not Lodowicke for his sin,
Yet Don Medias ne'er offended thee:
But thou were set upon extreme revenge,
Because the Prior dispossessed thee once,
And could not avenge it, but upon his son,
Nor on his son, but by Medias means;
Nor on Medias, but by murdering me.
But I perceive there is no love on earth,
Pity in Jaws, nor piety in Turks.
But here Comes cursed Ithimore with the Friar.
Virgo, salve.
When duck you?
Welcome grave Friar• Ithamore begone,
Know, holy Sir, I am bold to solicit thee.
Wherein?
To get me be admitted for a Nun.
Why Abigal it is not yet long since
That I did labour thy admition,
And then thou did not like that holy life.
Then were my thoughts so frail &amp; vnconfirm'd,
And I was chained to follies of the world:
But now experience, purchased with grief,
Has made me see the difference of things.
My sinful soul, alas, hath paced too long
The fatal Labyrinth of misbeleefe,
Far from the Son that gives eternal life.
Who taught thee this?
The Abbasse of the house,
Whose zealous admonition I embrace:
Oh therefore, Iacomi, let me be one,
Although unworthy of that Sister-hood.
Abigal I will, but see, thou change no more,
For that will be most heavy to thy soul.
That was my father's fault.
Thy father's, how?
Nay, you shall pardon me: oh Barabas,
Though thou deserve hardly at my hands,
Yet never shall these lips bewray thy life.
Come, shall we go?
My duty waits on you.
What, Abigall become a Nun again?
False, and unkind; what hast thou lost thy father?
And all unknown, and unconstrained of me,
Art thou again got to the Nunnery?
Now here she writes, and wills me to repent.
Repentance? Spurca: what pretends this?
I fear she knows (it is so) of my device
In Don Medias and Lodovicoes deaths:
If so, it is time that it be seen into:
For she that varies from me in belief
Gives great presumption that she loves me not;
Or loving, doth dislike of something done:
But who comes here? Oh Ithimore come near;
Come near my love, come near thy masters life,
My trusty servant, nay, my second life;
For I have now no hope but even in thee;
And on that hope my happiness is built:
When saw thou Abigall?
To day.
With whom?
A Friar.
A Friar? false villain, he hath done the deed.
How, Sir?
Why made mine Abigall a Nun.
That's no lye, for she sent me for him.
Oh unhappy day,
False, credulous, inconstant Abigall!
But let 'em go: And Ithimore, from hence
Ne'er shall she grieve me more with her disgrace;
Ne'er shall she live to inherit ought of mine,
Be blessed of me, nor come within my gates,
But perish underneath my bitter curse
Like Cain by Adam, for his brother's death.
Oh master.
Ithimore, entreat not for her, I am moved,
And she is hateful to my soul and me:
And least thou yield to this that I entreat,
I cannot think but that thou hat'st my life.
Who I, master? Why I'll run to some rock and
Throw my self headlong into the sea; why I'll doe any
Thing for your sweet sake.
Oh trusty Ithimore; no servant, but my friend;
I here adopt thee for mine only heir,
All that I have is thine when I am dead,
And whilst I live use 〈◊〉; spend as my self;
Here take my keys, I'll give 'em thee anon•
Go buy thee garments: but thou shalt not want:
Only know this, that thus thou art to doe:
But first go fetch me in the pot of Rice
That for our supper stands upon the fire.
I hold my head my master's hungry: I go Sir.
Thus every villain ambles after wealth
Although he ne'er be richer then in hope:
But hue•h't.
Here it is, Master.
Well said, Ithimore; what hast thou brought
The Ladle with thee too?
Yes, Sir, the proverb says, he that eats with the devil
Had need of a long spoon, I have brought you a Ladle.
Very well, Ithimore, then now be secret•
And for thy sake, whom I so dearly love,
Now shalt thou see the death of Abigall,
That thou may freely live to be my heir.
Why, master, will you poison her with a mess of rice
Porridge that will preserve life, make her round &amp; plump,
And batten more then you are aware.
I but Ithimore see thou this?
It is a precious powder that I bought
Of an Italian in An••na once,
Whose operation is to bind• infect,
And poison deeply: yet not appear
In forty hours after it is ta•e.
How master?
Thus Ithimore:
This Even they use in Malta here (it is called
Saint Iagues Even) and then I say they use
To send their Alms unto the Nunneries:
Among the rest bear this, and set it there;
There's a dark entry where ••ey take it in,
Where they must neither see the messenger,
Nor make enquiry who hath sent it them.
How so?
Belike there is some Ceremony in it.
There Ithimore must thou go place this plot:
Stay, let me spice it first.
Pray doe, and let me help you Mr. Pray let me taste first.
Prethe doe: what say thou now?
Troth Mr. I'm loath such a pot of pottage should be spoiled.
Peace, Ithimore, it is better so then spared.
Assure thy self thou shalt have broth by the eye.
My purse, my Coffer, and my self is thine.
Well, master, I go.
Stay, first let me stir it Ithimore.
As fatal be it to her as the draught
Of which great Alexander drunk, and dyed:
And with her let it work like Borgias wine,
Whereof his sire, the Pope, was poisoned.
In few, the blood of Hydra, Lerna's bane;
The joyce of Hebon, and Cocitus breath,
And all the poisons of the Stygian poole
Break from the fiery kingdom; and in this
Vomit your venom, and inuenome her
That like a fiend hath left her father thus.
What a blessing has he giu'nt? was ever pot of
Rice porridge so sa•c't? what shall I doe with it?
Oh my sweet Ithimore go set it down
And come again so soon as thou hast done,
For I have other business for thee.
Here's a drench to poison a whole stable of
Flanders mares: I'll carryit to the Nuns with a powder.
And the horse pestilence to boot; away.
I am gone.
Pay me my wages for my work is done.
Isle pay thee with a vengeance Ithamore.
Welcome great Bashaws, how fares C•llymath,
What wind drives you thus into Malta rhode?
The wind that blows all the world besides,
Desire of gold.
Desire of gold, great Sir?
That's to be gotten in the Western Inde:
In Malta are no golden Minerals.
To you of Malta thus saith Calymath:
The time you took for respite, is at hand,
For the performance of your promise past;
And for the Tribute-mony I am sent.
Bashaw, in brief, shalt have no tribute here,
Nor shall the Heathens live upon our spoil:
First will we race the City walls our selves,
Lay waste the Island, hew the Temples down,
And shipping of our goods to Sicily,
Open an entrance for the wasteful sea,
Whose billows beating the resistless banks,
Shall overflow it with their refluence.
Well, Governor, since thou hast broke the league
By ••at denial of the promised Tribute,
Talk not of racing down your City walls,
You shall not need trouble your selves so far,
For Selim-Calymath shall come himself,
And with brasse-bullets batter down your Towers,
And turn proud Malta to a wilderness
For these intolerable wrongs of yours; And so farewell.
Farewell:
And now you men of Malta look about,
And let's provide to welcome Calymath:
Close your Portcullis, charge your Basilisks,
And as you profitably take up Arms,
So now courageously encounter them;
For by this Answer, broken is the league,
And nought is to be looked for now but wars,
And nought to vs more welcome is then wars.
Oh brother, brother, all the Nuns are sick,
And Physic will not help them, they must dye.
The Abbasse sent for me to be con•est:
Oh what a sad confession will there be?
And so did fair Maria send for me:
I'll to her lodging; hereabouts she lies.
What, all dead save only Abigall?
And I shall dye too, for I feel death coming.
Where is the Friar that conversed with me?
Oh he is gone to see the other Nuns.
I sent for him, but seeing you are come
Be you my ghostly father; and first know,
That in this house I lived religiously,
Chaste, and devout, much sorrowing for my sins,
But ever I came —
What then?
I did offend high heaven so grievously,
As I am almost desperate for my sins:
And one offence torments me more then all.
You knew Medias and Don Lodowicke?
Yes, what of them?
My father did contract me to 'em both:
First to Don Lodowicke, him I never loved;
Medias was the man that I held dear,
And for his sake did I become a Nun.
So, say how was their end?
Both jealous of my love, envied each other:
And by my father's practice, which is there
Set down at large, the Gallants were both slain.
Oh monstrous villainy:
To work my peace, this I confess to thee:
Reveal it not, for then my father dyes.
Know that Confession must not be reueal'd,
The Canon Law forbids it, and the Priest
That makes it known, being degraded first,
Shall •e condemned, and then sent to the fire,
So I have heard; pray therefore keep it close,
Death seizes on my heart, ah gentle Friar
Convert my father that he may be saved,
And witness that I dye a Christian.
I, and a Virgin too, that grieves me most:
But I must to the Jew and exclaim on him,
And make him stand in fear of me.
Oh brother, all the Nuns are dead, let's bury them.
First help to bury this, then go with me
And help me to exclaim against the Jew.
Why? what has he done?
A thing that makes me tremble to unfold.
What h•a he crucified a child?
No, but a worse thing: it was told me in shr•ft,
Thou know it is death and if it be reueal'd.
Come let's away.
THere is no music to a Christians knell:
How sweet the Bells ring now the Nuns are dead
That sound at other times like Tinkers pans?
I was afraid the poison had not wrought;
Or though it wrought, it would have done no good,
For every year they swell, and yet they li•e;
Now all are dead• not one remains alive.
That's brave Mr. but think you it will not be known
How can it if we two be secret.
For my part fear you not.
I'd cut thy throat if I did.
And reason too; but here's a royal Monastery hard
By, good master let me poison all the Monks.
Thou shalt not need, for now the Nuns are dead,
They'll dye with grief.
Doe you •ot sorrow for your daughters death?
No, but I gr•eve because she lived so long an Hebrew Catho diabola.
Borne, and would become a Christian.
Look, look, Mr. here come two religious Caterpil∣lers.
I smelt 'em ever they came.
God-a-mercy nose; come let's begone.
Stay wicked Jew, repent, I say, and stay.
Thou hast offended, therefore must be damned.
I fear they know we sent the poisoned broth.
And so doe I, master, therefore speak 'em fair.
Barabas, thou hast —
I, that thou hast —
True, I have money, what though I have?
Thou art a —
I, that thou art a —
What needs all this? I know I am a Jew.
Thy daughter —
I, thy daughter, —
Oh speak not of her, then I dye with grief.
Remember that —
I, remember that —
I must needs say that I have been a great usurer.
Thou hast committed —
Fornication? but that was in another Country:
And besides, the Wench is dead.
I, but Barabas remember Medias and Don Lodowick.
Why, what of them?
I will not say that by a forged challenge they met.
She has confessed, and we are both undone;
My bosom inmates, but I must dissemble.
Oh holy Friars, the burden of my sins
Lye heavy on my soul; then pray you tell me,
Is it not too late now to turn Christian?
I have been zealous in the Jewish faith,
Hard hearted to the poor•, a covetous wretch,
That would for Lucars sake have sold my soul.
A hundred for a hundred I have •an;
And now for store of wealth may I compare
With all the Jaws in Ma•ta; but what is wealth?
I am a Jew, and therefore am I lost.
Would penance serve for this my sin,
I could afford to whip my self to death.
And so could I; but penance will not serve.
To fast, to pray, and wear a shirt of hair,
And on my knees creep to Jerusalem,
Cellars of Wine, and Sollers full of Wheat,
Ware-houses stuffed with spices and with drugs,
Whole Chests of Gold, in Bulloine, and in Coin,
Besides I know not how much weight in Pearl
Orient and round, have I within my house;
At Alexandria, Merchandise vnsold:
But yesterday two ships went from this Town,
Their voyage will be worth ten thousand Crowns.
In Floe•ence, Venice, Antwerpe, London, Civil,
Frankeford, Lubecke, Mosco, and where not,
Have I debts owing; and in most of these,
Great sums of money lying in the bancho;
All this I'll give to some religious house
So I may be baptised and live therein.
Oh good Barabas come to our house.
Oh no, good Barabas come to our house.
And Barabas, you know —
I know that I have highly sinned,
You shall convert me, you shall have all my wealth.
Oh Barabas, their Laws are strict.
I know they are, and I will be with you.
They wear no shirts, and they go bare-foot too.
Then it is not for me; and I am resolved
You shall confess me, and have all my goods.
Good Barabas come to me.
You see I answer him, and yet he stays;
Rid him away, and go you home with me.
I'll be with you to night.
Come to my house at one a clock this night.
You hear your answer, and you may be gone.
Why go get you away.
I will not go for thee.
Not, then I'll make thee go.
How, dost call me rogue?
Part 'em, master, part 'em.
This is mere frailty, brethren, be content.
Friar Barnardine go you with Ithimore.
You know my mind, let me alone with him;
Why does he go to thy house, let him begone.
I'll give him something and so stop his mouth.
I never heard of any man but he
Maligned the order of the Iacobines:
But doe you think that I believe his words?
Why Brother you converted Abigall;
And I am bound in charity to requite it,
And so I will, oh Iocome, fail not but come.
But Barabas who shall be your godfathers,
For presently you shall be shrived.
Marry the Turk shall be one of my godfathers,
But not a word to any of your Covent.
I warrant thee, Barabas.
So now the fear is past, and I am safe:
For he that shrived her is within my house,
What if I murdered him ever Iocoma comes?
Now I have such a plot for both their lives,
As never Jew nor Christian knew the like:
One turned my daughter, therefore he shall dye;
The other knows enough to have my life,
Therefore it is not requisite he should live.
But are not both these wise men to suppose
That I will leave my house, my goods, and all,
To fast and be well whipped; I'll none of that.
Now Friar Bernardine I come to you,
I'll feast you, lodge you, give you fair words,
And after that, I and my trusty Turk —
No more but so: it must and shall be done.
Ithimore, tell me, is the Friar asleep?
Yes; and I know not what the reason is•
Doe what I can he will not strip himself,
Nor go to bed, but sleeps in his own cloth•
I fear me he mistrusts what we intend.
No, it is an order which the Friars use:
Yet if he knew our meanings, could he scope?
No, none can hear him, cry he ne'er so loud.
Why true, therefore did I place him there:
The other Chambers open towards the street.
You loiter, master, wherefore stay we thus?
Oh how I long to see him shake his heals.
Come on, sir, off with your girdle, make a hansom noose;
Friar awake.
What doe you mean to strangle me?
Yes, because you use to confess.
Blame not vs but the proverb, Confess &amp; be hanged
Pull hard.
What, will you save my life?
Pull hard, I say, you would have had my goods.
I, and our lives too• therefore pull amain.
It is neatly done, Sir, here's no print at all.
Then is it as it should be, take him up.
Nay, Mr. be •ul'd by me a little; so, let him lean
Upon his staff; excellent, he stands as if he were begging of Bacon.
Who would not think but that this Friar lived?
What time a night is it now, sweet Ithimore?
Towards one.
Then will not Iocoma 〈◊〉 long from hence.
This is the hour wherein I shall proceed;
Oh happy hour, wherein I shall convert
An Infidel, and bring his gold into our treasury.
But soft, is not this Bernardine? it is;
And understanding I should come this way,
Stands here a purpose, meaning me some wrong,
And intercept my going to the Jew; Bernardine;
Wilt thou not speak? thou think I see thee no•;
Away• I'd wish thee, and let me go by:
No, wilt thou not? nay then I'll force my way;
And see• staff stands ready for the purpose:
As thou lik'st that, stop me another time.
Why how now Iocoma, what hast thou done?
Why stricken him that would have stroke at me.
Who is it Bernardine? now out alas, he is slain.
I, Mr. he's slain; look how his brains drop out on's nose.
Good sirs I have don't, but nobody knows it but
You two, I may escape.
So might my man and I hang with you for com∣pany.
No, let vs bear him to the Magistrates.
Good Barabas let me go.
No, pardon me, the Law must have his course.
I must be forced to give in evidence,
That being importuned by this Ber•ardin•
To be a Christian, I shut him out,
And there he sate: now I to keep my word,
And give my goods and substance to your house,
Was up thus early; with intent to go
Unto your Friery, because you staid.
Fie upon 'em, Mr. will you turn Christian, when
Holy Friars turn devils and murder one another.
No, for this example I'll remain a Jew:
Heaven bless me; what, a Friar a murderer?
When shall you see a Jew commit the like?
Why a Turk could •a done no more.
To morrow is the Sessions; you shall to it.
Come Ithimore, let's help to take him hence.
Villains, I am a sacred person, touch me not.
The Law shall touch you, we'll but lead you, we•
Alas I could weep at your calamity.
Take in the staff too, for that must be shown:
Law wills that each particular be known.
Pilia-borza, did thou meet with Ithimore?
I did.
And did thou deliver my letter?
I did.
And what think thou, will he come?
I think so, and yet I cannot tell, for at the reading of
The letter, he looked like a man of another world.
Why so?
That such a base slave as he should be saluted by such
A tall man as I am, from such a beautiful dame as you.
And what said he?
Not a wise word, only gave me a nod, as who should say, Is it even so; and so I left him, being driven to a Non-plus at the critical aspect of my terrible countenance.
And where did meet him?
Upon mine own free-hold within 40 foot of the Gallows, conning his neck-verse I take it, looking of a Friars Execution, whom I saluted with an old hempen proverb, Hide tibi, cras mihi, and so I left him to the mercy Of the Hangman: but the Exercise being done, see where He comes.
I never knew a man take his death so patiently as This Friar; he was ready to leap off ever the halter was About his neck; and when the Hangman had put on his Hempen Tippet, he made such haste to his prayers, as if Hee had had another Cure to serve; well, go whither He will, I'll be none of his followers in haste:
And now I think on it, going to the execution, a fellow
Met me with a moustaches like a Ravens wing, and
A Dagger with a hilt like a warming-pan, and he
Gave me a letter from one Madam Bellamira,
Saluting me in such sort as if he had meant to make
Clean my Boots with his lips; the effect was, that
I should come to her house, I wonder what the reason is;
It may be she sees more in me than I can find in
My self: for she writes further, that she loves me
Ever since she saw me, and who would not requi•e such
Love• he•e's her house, and here she comes, and now
Would I were gone, I am not worthy to look upon her.
This is the Gentleman you writ to.
Gentleman, he flouts me, what gentry can be in a
Poor Turk of ten pence? I'll be gone.
Is it not a sweet faced youth, Pilia?
Again, sweet youth; did not you, Sir, bring the sweet
Youth a letter?
I did Sir, and from this Gentlewoman, who as my
Self, &amp; the rest of the family, stand or fall at your service.
Though women's modesty should hale me back,
I can with-hold no longer; welcome sweet love.
Now am I clean, or rather foully out of the way.
Whither so soon?
I'll go steal some money from my Master to
Make me handsome:
Pray pardon me, I must go see a ship discharged.
Can thou be so unkind to leave me thus?
And ye did but know how she loves you, Sir.
Nay, I care not how much she loves me;
Sweet Allamira, would I had my Masters wealth for thy sake:
And you can have it, Sir, and if you please.
If it were aboue ground I could, and would have it;
But hee hides and buries it up as Partridges doe
Their eggs, under the earth.
And is it not possible to find it out?
By no means possible.
What shall we doe with this base villain then?
Let me alone, doe but you speak him fair:
But you know some secrets of the Jew, which if they were
Reueal'd, would doe him harm.
I, and such as — Go to, no more,
I'll make him send me half he has, &amp; glad he scopes so too.
Pen and Ink:
I'll write unto him, we will have money strait.
Send for a hundred Crowns at least.
Ten hundred thousand crowns,— Mr. Barabas.
Write not so submissively, but threatening him.
Sir Barabas, send me a hundred crowns.
Put in two hundred at least.
I charge thee send me 300 by this bearer, and this
Shall be your warrant; if you doe not, no more but so.
Tell him you will confess.
Otherwise I'll confess all, vanish and return in a Twinckle.
Let me alone, I'll use him in his kind.
Hang him Jew.
Now, gentle Ithimore, lye in my lap.
Where are my Maids? provide a running Banquet;
Send to the Merchant, bid him bring me silks,
Shall Ithimore my love go in such rags?
And bid the Jeweller come hither too.
I have no husband, sweet, I'll marry thee.
Content, but we will leave this paltry land,
And sail from hence to Greece, to lovely Greece,
I'll be thy Iason, thou my golden Fleece;
Where painted Carpets o'er the meads are hurled,
And Bacchus vineyards ore-spread the world:
Where Woods and Forests go in goodly greene,
I'll be Atones, thou shalt be Loves Queen.
The Meads, the Orchards, and the Primrose lanes,
Instead of Sedge and Reed, bear Sugar Canes:
Thou in those Groves, by Dis aboue,
Shalt live with me and be my love.
Whi•her will I not go with gentle Ithimore?
How now? hast thou the gold?
Yes.
But came it freely, did the Cow give down her milk freely?
At reading of the letter, he stared &amp; stamped, &amp; turned
Aside, I took him by the sterd, &amp; looked upon him thus;
Told him he were best to send it, then he hugged &amp; embraced me•
Rather for fear then love.
Then like a Jew he laughed &amp; jeered, and told me he
loved me for your sake, &amp; said what a faithful servant you had bin.
The more villain he to keep me thus:
Here's goodly apparel, is there not?
To conclude, he gave me ten crowns.
But ten? I'll not leave him worth a gray great, give
Me a Reame of paper, we'll have a kingdom of gold for it.
Write for 500 Crowns.
Sir Jew, as you love your life send me 500 crowns,
And give the Bearer 100. Tell him I must have it.
I warrant your worship shall have it.
And if he ask why I demand so much, tell him,
I scorn to write a line under a hundred crowns.
Yo•'d make a rich Poet, Sir. I am gone.
Take thou the money, spend it for my sake.
It is not thy money, but thy self I weigh:
Thus Bellamira esteems of gold;
But thus of thee. —
 —
That kiss again; she runs division of my lips.
What an eye she casts on me?
It twinckles like a Star.
Come my dear love, let's in and sleep together.
Oh that ten thousand nights were put in one,
That wee might sleep seven years together before
We wake.
Come Amorous wag, first banquet and then sleep.
Barabas send me 300 Crowns.
Plain Barabas: oh that wicked Courtesan!
He was not wont to call me Barabas.
Or else I will confess: I, there it goes:
But if I get him Coupe de Gorge, for that
He sent a shaggy tottered staring slave,
That when he speaks, draws out his grisly beard,
And winds it twice or thrice about his ear;
Whose face has bin a grind-stone for men's swords,
His hands are hacked, some fingers cut quite off;
Who when he speaks, grunts like a hog, and looks
Like one that is employed in Catzerie,
And crosbiting such a Rogue
As is the husband to a hundred whores:
And I by him must send three hundred crowns.
Well, my hope is, he will not stay there still;
And when he comes: Oh that he were but here!
Jew, I must ha more gold.
Why want thou any of thy tale?
No; but 300 will not serve his turn.
Not serve his turn, Sir?
No Sir; and therefore I must have 500 more.
I'll rather —
Oh good words, Sir, and send it you were best, see,
There's his letter.
Might he not as well come as send; pray bid him
Come &amp; fetch it, what hee writes for you, ye shall have straight.
I, and the rest too, or else —
I must make this villain away: please you dine
With me, Sir, &amp; you shall be most heartily poisoned.
No god-a-mercy, shall I have these crowns?
I cannot doe it, I have lost my keys.
Oh, if that be all, I can pick op your locks.
Or climb up to my Counting-house window:
You know my meaning.
I know enough, and therefore talk not to me of your
Counting-house, the gold, or know Jew it is in my power to hang thee•
I am betrayed.
It is not 500 Crowns that I esteem,
I am not moved at that: this angers me,
That he who knows I love him as my self
Should write in this imperious vain? why Sir,
You know I have no child, and unto whom
Should I leave all but unto Ithimore?
Here's many words but no crowns; the crowns.
Commend me to him, Sir, most humbly,
And unto your good mistress as unknown.
Speak, shall I have 'vm, Sir?
Sir here they are.
Oh that I should part with so much gold!
Here take 'em, fellow, with as good a will —
—As I •nd see thee hanged; oh, love stops my breath:
Never loved man servant as I doe Ithimore.
I know it, Sir.
Pray when, Sir, shall I see you at my house?
Soon enough to your cost, Sir:
Fare you well.
Nay to thine own cost, villain, if thou come.
Was ever Jew tormented as I am?
To have a shag-rag knave to come
300 Crowns, and then 500 Crowns?
Well, I must seek a means to rid 'em all,
And presently: for in his villainy
He will tell all he knows and I shall dye for it. I have it.
I will in some disguise go see the slave,
And how the villain revels with my gold.
I'll pledge thee, love, and therefore drink it off.
Say thou me so? have at it; and doe you hear?
Go to, it shall be so.
Of that condition I will drink it up; here's to thee.
Nay, I'll have all or none.
There, if thou love me doe not leave a drop.
Love thee, fill me three glasses.
Three and fifty dozen, I'll pledge thee,
Knauely spoke, and like a Knight at Arms.
Hey Riuo Castiliano, a man's a man.
Now to the Jew.
Ha to the Jew, and send me money you were best.
What wudst thou doe if he should send thee none?
Doe nothing; but I know what I know,
He's a murderer.
I had not thought he had been so brave a man.
You knew Medias and the Governors son, he and
I kilt 'em both, and yet never touched 'em.
Oh bravely done.
I carried the broth that poisoned the Nuns, and he
And I snicle hand too fast, strangled a Friar.
You two alone.
We two, and it was never known, nor never shall
Be for me.
This shall with me unto the Governor.
And fit it should: but first let's ha more gold•
Come gentle Ithimore, lye in my lap.
Love me little, love me long, let music rumble,
Whilst I in thy incoomy lap doe tumble.
A French Musician, come let's hear your skill?
Must tuna my Lute for sound, twang twang first.
Wilt drink French-man, here's to thee with a —
Pox on this drunken hick-vp.
Gramercy Monsieur.
Prethe, Pilia-borza, bid the Fiddler give me
The posy in his hat there.
Sir, you must give my mistress your posy.
A voustre commandment Madam.
How sweet, my Ithimore, the flowers smell.
Like thy breath, sweet-hart, no violet like 'em.
Foh, me thinks they stink like a Holly-Hoke.
So, now I am revenged upon 'em all.
The scent thereof was death, I poisoned it.
Play, Fiddler, or I'll cut your cats guts into chitterlings
Pardon moi, be no in tune yet; so now, now all be in.
Give him a crown, and fill me out more wine.
There's two crowns for thee, play.
How liberally the villain gives me mine own gold.
Me thinks he fingers very well.
So did you when you stole my gold.
How swift he runs.
You run swifter when yon threw my gold out of
My Window.
Musician, hast been in Malta long?
Two, three, four month Madam.
Dost not know a Jew, one Barabas?
Very mush, Monsieur, you no be his man.
His man?
I scorn the Peasant, tell him so.
He knows it already.
It is a strange thing of that Jew, he lives upon
Pickled Grasshoppers, and sau•'d Mushrumbs.
What a slaue's this?
The Governor feeds not as I doe.
He never put on clean shirt since he was circumcised
Oh rascal! I change my self twice a day.
The Hat he wears, Iudas left under the Elder
When he hanged himself.
It was sent me for a present from the great Cham.
A misty slave he is;
Whether now, Fiddler?
Pardon moi, Monsieur, we be no well.
Farewell Fiddler: One letter more to the Jew.
Prethe sweet love, one more, and write it sharp.
No, I'll send by word of mouth now;
Bid him deliver thee a thousand Crowns, by the same
Token, that the Nuns loved Rice, that Friar Bernardine
Slept in his own clothes,
Any of 'em will doe it.
Let me alone to urge it now I know the meaning.
The meaning has a meaning; come let's in:
To undo a Jew is charity, and not sin•
NOw, Gentlemen, betake you to your Arms,
And see that Malta be well fortified;
And it behooves you to be resolute;
For Calymath having hovered here so long,
Will win the Town, or dye before the walls.
And dye he shall, for we will never yield.
Oh bring vs to the Governor.
Away with her, she is a Courtesan.
What ever I am, yet Governor hear me speak;
I bring thee news by whom thy son was slain:
Medias did it not, it was the Jew.
Who, besides the slaughter of these Gentlemen,
Poisoned his own daughter and the Nuns,
Strangled a Friar, and I know not what
Mischief beside.
Had we but proof of this.
Strong proof, my Lord, his man's now at my
Lodging that was his Agent, he'll confess it all.
Go fetch him straight, I always feared that Jew.
I'll go alone, dogs do not hale me thus.
Nor me neither, I cannot out-run you Constable, oh my belly.
One dram of powder more had made all sure,
What a damned slave was I?
Make fires, heat irons, let the rack be fetched.
Nay stay, my Lord, 'tmay be he will confess.
Confess; what mean you, Lords, who should confess?
Thou and thy Turk; it was you that slew my son.
Guilty, my Lord, I confess; your son and Medias
Were both contracted unto Abigall,
Forged a counterfeit challenge.
Who carried that challenge?
I carried it, I confess, but who writ it?
Marry even he that strangled Bernardine, poisoned the
Nuns, and his own daughter.
Away with him, his sight is death to me.
For what, you men of Malta, hear me speak;
She is a Courtesan and he a thief,
And he my bondsman, let me have law,
For none of this can prejudice my life:
Once more away with him; you shall have law.
Devils doe your worst, I live in spite of you.
As these have spoke so be it to their souls:
I hope the poisoned flowers will work anon.
Was my Medias murdered by the Jew?
Ferueze, it was thy son that murdered him.
Be patient, gentle Madam, it was he,
He forged the daring challenge made them fight.
Where is the Jew, where is that murderer?
In prison till the Law has past on him.
My Lord, the Courtesan and her man are dead;
So is the Turk, and Barabas the Jew.
Dead?
Dead, my Lord, and here they bring his body.
This sudden death of his is very strange.
Wonder not at it, Sir, the heavens are just•
Their deaths were like their lives, then think not of 'em
Since they are dead, let them be buried.
For the Jaws body, throw that o'er the walls,
To be a prey for Vultures and wild beasts.
So, now away and fortify the Town.
What, all alone? well fare sleepy drink.
I'll be revenged on this accursed Town;
For by my means Calymath shall enter in.
I'll help to slay their children and their wives,
To fire the Churches, pull their houses down,
Take my goods too, and seize upon my lands:
I hope to see the Governor a slave,
And, rowing in a Gally, whipped to death.
Whom have we there, a spy?
Yes, my good Lord, one that can spy a place
Where you may enter, and surprise the Town:
My name is Barabas; I am a Jew.
Art thou that Jew whose goods we heard were sold
For Tribute-mony?
The very same, my Lord:
And since that time they have hired a slave my man
To accuse me of a thousand villainies:
I was imprisoned, but escaped their hands.
Did break prison?
No, no:
I drank of Poppy and cold mandrake juice;
And being asleep, belike they thought me dead,
And threw me o'er the walls• so, or how else,
The Jew is here, and rests at your command.
It was bravely done: but tell me, Barabas,
Can thou, as thou report, make Malta ours?
Fear not, my Lord, for here against the Truce,
The rock is hollow, and of purpose dug,
To make a passage for the running streams
And common channels of the City.
Now whilst you give assault unto the walls,
I'll lead 500 soldiers through the Vault,
And rise with them in the middle of the Town,
Open the gates for you to enter in,
And by this means the City is your own.
If this be true, I'll make thee Governor.
And if it be not true, then let me dye.
Thou'st doomed thy self, assault it presently.
Now veil your pride you captive Christians,
And kneel for mercy to your conquering foe:
Now whore's the hope you had of haughty Spain?
Ferneze, speak, had it not been much better
To kept thy promise then be thus surprised?
What should I say, we are captives and must yield.
I, villains, you must yield, and under Turkish yokes
Shall groaning bear the burden of our ire;
And Barabas, as erst we promised thee,
For thy desert we make the Governor,
Use them at thy discretion.
Thanks, my Lord.
Oh fatal day to fall into the hands
Of such a Traitor and unhallowed Jew!
What greater misery could heaven inflict?
It is our command: and Barabas, we give
To guard thy person, these our Janissaries:
Entreat them well, as we have used thee.
And now, brave Pashas, come, we'll walk about
The ruined Town, and see the wrack we made:
Farewell brave Jew, farewell great Barabas.
May all good fortune follow Calymath.
And now, as entrance to our safety,
To prison with the Governor and these
Captains, his consorts and confederates.
Oh villain, Heaven will be revenged on thee.
A way, no more, let him not trouble me.
Thus hast thou gotten, by thy policy,
No simple place, no small authority,
I now am Governor of Malta; true,
But Malta hates me, and in hating me
My life's in danger, and what boots it thee
Poor Barabas, to be the Governor,
When as thy life shall be at their command?
No, Barabas, this must be looked into;
And since by wrong thou got Authority,
Maintain it bravely by firm policy,
At least unprofitably lose it not:
For he that lives in Authority,
And neither gets him friends, nor fills his bags,
Lives like the Ass that Aesope speaks of,
That labours with a load of bread and wine,
And leaves it off to snap on Thistle tops:
But Barabas will be more circumspect.
Begin betimes, Occasion's bald behind,
Slip not thine opportunity, for fear too late
Thou seek for much, but can not compass it
Within here.
My Lord?
I, Lord, thus ••aves will learn•
Now Governor stand by there, wait within,
This is the reason that I sent for thee;
Thou see thy life, and Malta's happiness,
Are at my Arbitrament; and Barabas
At his discretion may dispose of both:
Now tell me, Governor, and plainly too,
What think thou shall become of it and thee?
This; Barabas, since things are in thy power,
I see no reason but of Malta's wrack,
Nor hope of thee but extreme cruelty,
Nor fear I death, nor will I flatter thee.
Governor, good words, be not so furious;
It is not thy life which can aua•le me ought,
Yet you doe live, and live for me you shall:
And as for Malta's ruin, think you no•
It were slender policy for Barabas
To dispossess himself of such a place?
For sith, as once you said, within this Isle
In Malta here, that I have got my goods,
And in this City still have had success,
And now at length am grown your Governor,
Your selves shall see it shall not be forgot:
For as a friend not known, but in distress,
I'll rear up Malta now remediless.
Will Barabas recover Malta's loss?
Will Barabas be good to Christians?
What wilt thou give me, Governor, to procure
A dissolution of the slavish Bands
Wherein the Turk hath yoked your land and you?
What will you give me if I render you
The life of Calymath, surprise his men,
And in an out house of the City shut
His soldiers, till I have consumed 'em all with fire?
What will you give him that procures this?
Doe but bring this to pass which thou pretend,
Deal truly with vs as thou intimatest,
And I will send amongst the Citizens
And by my letters privately procure
Great sums of money for thy recompense:
Nay more, doe this, and live thou Governor still.
Nay, doe thou this, Ferneze, and be free;
Governor, I enlarge thee, live with me,
Go walk about the City, see thy friends:
Tush, send not letters to 'em, go thy self,
And let me see what money thou can make;
Here is my hand that I'll set Malta free:
And thus we ca•t it: To a solemn feast
I will inuit young Selim-Calymath,
Where be thou present only to perform
One stratagem that I'll impart to thee,
Wherein no danger shall betide thy life,
And I will warrant Malta free for ever.
Here is my hand, believe me, Barabas,
I will be there, and doe as thou desire;
When is the time?
Governor, presently.
For Callymath, when he hath viewed the Town,
Will take his leave and sail toward, Ottoman,
Then will I, Barabas, about this coin,
And bring it with me to thee in the evening.
Doe so, but fail not; now farewell Ferneze
And thus far roundly goes the business:
Thus loving neither, will I live with both,
Making a profit of my policy;
And he from whom my most advantage comes,
Shall be my friend.
This is the life we Jaws are used to lead;
And reason too, for Christians doe the like:
Well, now about effecting this device:
First to surprise great Selims soldiers,
And then to make provision for the feast,
That at one instant all things may be done,
My policy detests prevention:
To what event my secret purpose drives,
I know; and they shall witness with their lives.
Thus have we viewed the City, seen the sack,
And cau•'d the ruins to be new repaired,
Which with our Bombards shot and Basilisk,
We rent in sunder at our entry:
And now I see the Situation,
And how secure this conquered Island stands
Environed with the mediterranean Sea,
Strong contermin'd with other petty Isles;
And toward Calabria backed by Sicily,
Two lofty Turrets that command the Town.
When Siracusian Dionisius reigned;
I wonder how it could be conquered thus?
From Barabas, Malta's Governor, I bring
A message unto mighty Calymath;
Hearing his Sovereign was bound for Sea,
To sail to Turkey, to great Ottamon,
He humbly would entreat your Majesty
To come and see his homely Citadel,
And banquet with him ever thou leave the Isle.
To banquet with him in his Citadel,
I •ear me, Messenger, to feast my train
Within a Town of war so lately pillaged,
Will be too costly and too troublesome:
Yet would I gladly visit Barabas.
For well has Barabas desern'd of vs.
Solemn, for that, thus saith the Governor,
That he hath in store a Pearl so big,
So precious, and withal so orient,
As be it valued but indifferently,
The price thereof will serve to entertain
Solemn and all his soldiers for a month•
Therefore he humbly would entreat your Highness
Not to depart till he has feasted you.
I cannot feast my men in Malta walls,
Except he place his Tables in the streets.
Know, Solemn, that there is a monastery
Which stands as an out-house to the Town;
There will he banquet them, but thee at home,
With all thy Pashas and brave followers.
Well, tell the Governor we grant his suit,
We'll in this Summer Evening feast with him.
I shall, my Lord,
And now, bold Pashas, let vs to our Tents,
And meditate how we may grace vs best
To solemnise our Governors great feast.
In this, my Countrymen, be ruled by me,
Have special care that no man sally forth
Till you shall hear a Culuerin discharged
By him that bears the Linstocke, kindled thus;
Then issue out and come to rescue me,
For happily I shall be in distress,
Or you released of this servitude.
Rather then thus to live as Turkish thrals,
What will we not adventure?
On then, begone.
Farewell grave Governor.
How stand the cords? How hang these hinges, fast?
Are all the Cranes and Pulleys sure?
All fast.
Leave nothing loose, all leveled to my mind.
Why now I see that you have Art indeed.
There, Carpenters, divide that gold amongst you:
Go swill in bowls of Sack and Muscadine:
Down to the Cell•r, taste of all my wines.
We shall, my Lord, and thank you:
And if you like them, drink your fill and dye:
For so I live, perish may all the world.
Now Selim-Calymath return me word
That thou wilt come, and I am satisfied.
Now sir, what, will he come?
He will; and has commanded all his men
To come ashore, and march through Malta streets,
That thou moist feast them in thy Citadel.
Then now are all things as my wish wud have 'em,
There wants nothing but the Governors pelf,
And see he brings it: Now, Governor, the sum.
With free consent a hundred thousand pounds.
Pounds say thou, Gouer•or, well since it is no more
I'll satisfy my self with that; nay, keep it still,
For if I keep not promise, trust not me.
And Governor, now partake my policy:
First for his Army, they are sent before,
Entered the Monastery, and underneath
In several places are field-pieces pitched,
Bombards, whole Barrels full of Gunpowder,
That on the sudden shall dissever it,
And batter all the stones about their ears,
Whence none can possibly escape alive:
Now as for Calymath and his consorts,
Here have I made a dainty Gallery,
The floor whereof, this Cable being cut,
Doth fall asunder; so that it doth sink
Into a deep pit past recovery.
Here, hold that knife, and when thou see he comes,
And with his Pashas shall be blithely set,
A warning-peece shall be shot off from the Tower,
To give thee knowledge when to cut the cord,
And fire the house; say, will not this be brave?
Oh excellent! here, hold thee, Barabas,
I trust thy word, take what I promised thee.
No, Governor, I'll satisfy thee first,
Thou shalt not live in doubt of any thing.
Stand close, for here they come: why, is not this
A kingly kind of trade to purchase Towns
By treachery, and sell 'em by deceit?
Now tell me, worldlings, underneath the sum,
If greater falsehood ever h•s bin done.
Come, my Companion-Bashawes, see I pray
How busy Barrabas is there aboue
To entertain vs in his Gallery;
Let vs salute him, Save thee, Barabas.
Welcome great Calymath.
How the slave jeers at him?
Will it please thee, mighty Selim-Calymath,
To ascend our homely stayres?
I, Barabas, come Pashas, attend.
Stay, Calymath;
For I will show thee greater courtesy
Then Barabas would have afforded thee.
Sound a charge there.
How now, what means this
Help, help me, Christians, help.
See Calymath, this was deuis'd for thee.
Treason, treason Pashas, fly.
No, Solemn, doe not fly;
See his end first, and fly then if thou can.
Oh help me, Solemn, help me, Christians.
Governor, why stand you all so pitiless?
Should I in pity of thy plaints or thee,
Accursed Barabas; base Jew relent:
No, thus I'll see thy treachery repaid,
But wish thou had behau'd thee otherwise.
You will not help me then?
No, villain, no.
And villains, know you cannot help me now.
Then Barabas breath forth thy latest fate,
And in the fury of thy torments, strive
To end thy life with resolution:
Know, Governor, it was I that slew thy son;
I framed the challenge that did make them meet•
Know, Calymath, I aimed thy overthrow,
And had I but escaped this stratagem,
I would have brought confusion on you all,
Damned Christians, dogs, and Turkish Infidels;
But now begins the extremity of heat
To pinch me with intolerable pangs:
Dye life, fly soul, tongue curse thy •ill and dye:
Tell me, you Christians, what doth this portend?
This train he laid to have entrapped thy life;
Now Solemn note the unhallowed deeds of Jaws:
Thus he determined to have handled thee,
But I have rather chose to save thy life.
Was this the banquet he prepared for vs?
Let's hence, lest further mischief be pretended.
Nay, Solemn, stay, for since we have th•e here,
We will not let thee part so suddenly:
Besides, if we should let thee go, ell's one,
Nor with thy Galleys could thou not get hence,
Without fresh men to rigge and furnish them.
Tush, Governor, take thou no care for that,
My men are all aboard,
And doe attend my coming there by this.
Why hardst thou not the trumpet sound a charge?
Yes, what of that?
Why then the house was fired,
Blown up, and all thy soldiers massacred.
Oh monstrous treason!
A Iewe• courtesy:
For he that did by treason work our fall,
By treason hath delivered thee to vs:
Know therefore, till thy father hath made good
The ruins done to Malta and to vs,
Thou can not part: for Malta shall be freed,
Or Solemn ne'er return to Ottoman.
Nay rather, Christians, let me go to Turkey
In person there to meditate your peace;
To keep me here will nought advantage you.
Content thee, Calymath, here thou must stay,
And live in Malia prisoner; for come cal• •he world
To rescue thee, so will we guard vs now
〈◊〉 sooner shall they drink the Ocean dry,
Then conquer Malta, or endanger vs.
So march away, and let due praise be given
Neither to Fate nor Fottune, but to Heaven.

Honour the spur that pricks the prince∣lie mind,
To follow rule and climb the stately chair,
With great desire inflames the Portin∣gall,
An honourable and courageous king,
To undertake a dangerous dreadful war,
And aide with christian arms the barbarous Moore,
The Negro Muly Hamet that with-holds
The kingdom from his uncle Abdilmelec,
Whom proud Abdallas wronged,
And in his throne instals his cruel son,
That now usurps upon this prince,
This brave Barbarian Lord Muly Molocco.
The passage to the crown by murder made,
Abdallas dies, and deisnes this tyrant king,
Of whom we treat sprung from the Arabian moore
Black in his look, and bloody in his deeds,
And in his shirt stained with a cloud of gore,
Presents himself with naked sword in hand,
Accompanied as now you may behold,
With devils cotted in the shapes of men.
Like those that were by kind of murder mumd,
Sit down and see what heinous stratagems
These damned wits contrive. And lo alas
How like poor lambs prepared for sacrifice;
This traitor king hales to their longest home,
These tender Lords his younger brethren both.
His brethren thus in fatal bed behearst,
His fathers brother of too light belief.
This Negro puts to death by proud command.
Say not these things are faind, for true they are,
And understand how eager to enjoy
His fathers crown this vnbeleeuing Moore
Murdering his uncle and his brethren,
Triumphs in his ambitious tyranny,
Till Nemesis high mistress of revenge,
That with her scourge keeps all the world in awe,
With thundering drums awakes the God of war,
And calls the furies from Auernus crags,
To range and rage and vengeance to inflict
Vengeance on this accursed Moore for sin,
And now behold how Abdelmelec comes,
Uncle to this unhappy traitor king,
Armed with great aide that Amurath had sent,
Great Amurath Emperor of the East,
For service done to Sultan Solimon,
Under whose colours he had served in field,
Flying the fury of this Negroes father,
That wronged his brethren to install his son.
Sit you and see this true and tragic war,
A modern matter full of blood and ruth,
Where three bold kings confounded in their height,
Fell to the earth contending for a crown,
And call this war The battle of Alcazar.
Alhaile Argerd Zareo and ye Moors,
Salute the frontiers of your native home,
Cease rattling drums, and Abdilmelec here
Throw up thy trembling hands to heavens throne
Pay to thy God due thanks and thanks to him
That strengthens thee with mighty gracious arms,
Against the proud usurper of thy right,
The royal seat and crown of Barbary,
Great Amurath great Emperor of the world,
The world bear witness how I do adore
The sacred name of Amurath the great.
Calcepius Bassa, Bassa Calcepius
To thee and to thy trusty band of men
That carefully attend vs in our camp,
Picked soldiers comparable to the guard
Of Mermidons, that kept Achilles tent
Such thanks we give to thee and to them all,
As may concern a poor distressed king
In honour and in princely courtesy.
Courteous and honourable Abdelmelec,
We are not come at Amuratbs command,
As mercenary men to serve for pay,
But as sure friends by our great master sent
To gratify and to remunerate,
Thy love, thy loyalty, and forwardness,
Thy service in his fathers dangerous war,
And to perform in view of all the world,
The true office of right and royalty,
To see thee in thy kingly chair inthronde,
To settle and to seat thee in the same,
To make thee Emperor of this Barbary,
Are come the viceroys and sturdy Janissaries
Of Amurath, son to Sultan Solimon.
Long live my Lord the sovereign of my heart,
Lord Abdilmelecke whom the God of kings,
The mighty Amurath hath happy made,
And long live Amurath for this good deed.
Our Moors have seen the silver moons to wane,
In banners bravely spreading over the plain,
And in this semicircles have descried
All in a golden field a star to rise,
A glorious comet that begins to blase,
Promising happy sorting to vs all.
Brave man at arms whom Amurath hath sent
To sow the lawful true succeeding seed
In Barbary, that bows and groans withal
Under a proud usurping tyrants m•se,
Right thou the wrongs this rightful king hath borne.
Distressed ladies and ye dames of Fesse,
Sprung from the true Arabian Muly Xarif
The loadstar and the honour of our line,
Now clear your watery eyes, wipe tears away,
And cheerfully give welcome to these arms,
Amurath hath sent scourges by his men,
To whip that tyrant traitor king from hence,
That hath usurped from vs, and maimd you all.
Soldiers sith rightful quarrels aid
Successful are, and men that manage them
Fight not in fear as traitors and their pheres
That you may understand what arms we bear,
What lawful arms against our brothers son,
In sight of heaven, even of mine honours worth,
Truly I will dehuer and discourse
The sum of all. Descended from the line
Of Mahomet, our grandfather Mulizaref
With store of gold and treasure leaves Arabia,
And strongly plants himself in Barberry,
And of the Moors that now with vs do wend,
Our grandfather Mulizaref was the first,
From him well woe ye Muly Mahamet Xeque,
Who in his life time made a perfect law,
Confirmed with general voice of all his peers
That in his kingdom should successively
His sons succeed. Abdullas was the first
Eldest of fair Abdelmenen the second,
And we the rest my brother and my self,
Abdullas raignd his time. But see the change,
He labours to invest his son in all,
To disanull the law our father made,
And dis-inherite vs his brethren,
And in his life time wrongfully proclaims,
His son for king that now contends with vs,
Therefore I crave to reobtaine my right
That Muly Mahamet the traitor holds,
Traitor and bloody tyrant both at once,
That murdered his younger brethren both,
But on this damned wretch, this traitor king,
The Gods shall pour down showers of sharp revenge.
And thus a matter not to you unknown
I have delivered. Yet for no distrust
Of loyalty my well-beloved friend,
But that the occasions fresh in memory
Of these encumbers, so may move your minds,
As for the lawful true succeeding prince,
Ye neither think your lives nor honours dear
Spent in a quarrel just and honourable.
Such and no other we repute the cause,
That forwardly for thee we undertake,
Thrice puissant and renowned Abdilmelec,
And for thine honour, safety and crown,
Our lives and honours frankly to expose,
To all the dangers that our war attends,
As freely and as resolutely all,
As any Moore whom thou command most.
And why is Abdilmelec then so slow
To chastise him with fury of the sword,
Whose pride doth swell to sway beyond his reach,
Follow this pride then with fury of revenge.
Of death, of blood, of wreak, and deep revenge.
Shall Rubin Arches frame her tragic songs,
In blood, in death, in murder and misdeed,
This heavens malice did begin and end.
Rubin these rights to Abdelmunens ghost,
Have appears by this to Plutos grave below,
The bells of Pluto ring revenge amain.
The furies and the fiends conspire with thee,
War bids me draw my weapons for revenge
Of my deep wrongs, and my dear brothers death.
Sheath not your swords you solders of A∣murath,
Sheath not your swords you Mores of Barberry
That fight in right of your anointed king,
But follow to the gates of death and hell,
Pale death and hell to entertain his soul.
Follow I say to burning Phlegiton,
This traitor tyrant and his companies.
Heave up your swords against these stony holds,
Wherein these barbarous rebels are enclosed,
Called for is Abdilmelec by the Gods,
To sit upon the throne of Barbary.
Bassa great thanks the honour of the Turks.
Forward brave Lords unto this rightful war,
How can this battle but successful be,
Where courage meets with a rightful cause?
Go in good time my best beloved Lord,
Successful in thy work thou undertakes.
Pisano, take a cornet of our horse,
As many argolets and armed pikes,
And with our carriage march away before
By Scyras, and those plots of ground
That to Moroccus leads the lower way.
Our enemies keep upon the mountain tops,
And have encamped themselves not far from Fesse,
Madame, gold is the glue, sinews, and strength of war,
And we must see our treasure may go safe,
Away.
Now boy whats the news?
The news my Lord is war, war and
revenge.
And if I shall declare the circumstance.
Tic thus.
Rubyn our uncles wife that wrings her hands
For Abdilmunens death, accompanied
With many dames of Fesse in mourning weeds,
Near to Argier encountered Abdilmelec,
That bends his force puffed up with Amuraths aide,
Against your holds and castles of defence.
The younger brother Muly Mahamet Seth,
Greets the great Bassa, that the king of Turks.
Sends to invade your right and royal realm,
And basely beg revenge, arch-rebels all,
To be inflict upon our progeny.
Why boy, is Amuraths Bassa such a bug,
That he is marked to do this doubt deed?
Then Bassa locke the winds in wards of brass,
Thunder from heaven damn wretched men to death
Bar all the offices of Saturnes sons,
Be Pluto then in hell and bar the fiends,
Take Neptunes force to thee and calm the seas,
And execute Ioues justice on the world,
Convey Tamberlaine into our Affrike here,
To chastise and to menace lawful kings,
Tamberlaine triumph not, for thou must die
As Philip did, Caesar, and Caesars peers.
The Bassa grossly flattered to his face,
And Amuraths praise advanced aboue the sound
Upon the plains, the soldiers being spread,
And that brave guard of sturdy Janissaries,
That Amurath to Abdilmelec gave,
And bad him boldly be to them as safe,
As if he slept within a walled town,
Who take them to their weapons threatening revenge.
Bloody revenge, bloody revengeful war.
Away, and let me hear no more of this,
Why boy, are we successors to the great Abdilmelec,
Descended from the Arabian Muly Zarif,
And shall we be afraid of Bassas and of bugs,
Raw head and bloody bone?
Boy, see here this semitarie by my side,
Sith they begin to bath in blond,
Blood be the theme whereon our time shall tread,
Such slaughter with my weapon shall I make,
As through the stream and bloody channels deep,
Our Moors shall sail in ships and pinnaces,
From Tangiers shore unto the gates of Fesse.
And of those slaughtered bodies shall thy son,
A huge tower erect like Nemrods frame,
To threaten those unjust and partial Gods,
That to Abdallas lawful seed deny,
Along, a happy, and triumphant reign.
Fly king of Fesse, king of Moroccus fly,
Fly with thy friends Emperor of Barberry,
O fly the sword and fury of the foe,
That rages as the romping lioness,
In rescue of her yonglings from the bear,
Thy towns and holds by numbers basely yield,
Thy land to Abdilmelecs rule resigns,
Thy carriage and thy treasure taken is
By Amuraths soldiers, that have sworn thy death,
Fly Amuraths power, and Abdilmelecs threats,
Or thou and thine look here to breath your last.
Villain, what dreadful sound of death &amp; flght
Is this, where with thou doest afflict our ears?
But if there be no safety to abide
The favour, fortune, and success of war.
Away in hast, roll on my chariot wheels
Restless, till I be safely set in shade
Of some unhaunted place, some blasted grove
Of deadly hue, or dismal cyprestree,
Far from the light or comfort of the Sun,
There to curse heaven, and he that heaves me hence,
To seek as Envy at Cecropes gate,
And pine the thought and terror of mishaps,
Away.
Now war begins his rage and ruthless rain,
And Nemesis with bloody whip in hand,
Thunders for vengeance on this Negro moore.
Nor may the silence of the speechlesle night,
Divine Architects of murders and misdeeds.
Of tragedies, and tragic tyrannies,
Hide or contain this barbarous cruelty
Of this usurper to his progeny.
Hark Lords, as in a hollow place a far,
The dreadful shrikes and clamours that resound,
And sound revenge upon this trai•ors soul,
Traitor to kin and kind, to Gods and men.
Now Nemesis upon her doubling drum,
Moude with this ghastly moan, this sad complaint,
Larumes aloud into Alectoseares,
And with her thundering wakes whereas they lie,
In cave as dark as hell, and beds of steel,
The furies just imps of dire revenge,
Revenge cries Abdilmelecs grieved ghost,
And rouses with the terror of this noise
These nymphs of Erybus. Wreak and revenge
Ring out the souls of his unhappy brethren,
And now start up these torments of the world,
Waked with the thunder of Ramusians drum,
And fearful echoes of these grieved ghosts,
Alecto with her brand and bloody torch,
Megaera with her whip and snaky hair,
Tysiphone with her fatal murdering iron,
These three conspire, these three complain &amp; moan,
Thus Muly Mahamet is a counsel held,
To wreak the wrongs and murders thou hast done.
By this imagine was this barbarous Moore
Chased from his dignity and his diadem,
And lives forlorn among the mountain shrubs,
And makes his food the flesh of savage beasts.
A mureths soldiers have by this instald
Good Abdelmelec in his royal seat,
The dames of Fesse and ladies of the land,
In honour of the son of Soliman,
Erect a statue made of beaten gold,
And sing to Amurath songs of lasting praise.
Muly Mahamets fury overruled,
His cruelty controlled, and priderebukt,
Now at last when sober thoughts renude,
Care of his kingdom and desired crown,
The aide that once was offered and refused
By messenge•s, he furiously employs,
Sebastians aide brave king of Portugal,
He forward in all arms and chivalry
Hearkens to his Ambassadors, and grants
What they in letters and by words entreat.
Now listen lordings now begins the game,
Sebastians tragedy in this tragic war.
Now hath the Sun displayed his golden beams,
And dusky clouds dispersed, the welkin clears,
Wherein the twenty coloured rainbow shows,
After this fight happy and fortunate,
Wherein our Moors have lost the day,
And victory adorned with fortunes plumes,
Alights on Abdelmelecs glorious creast,
Here find we time to breath, and now begin
To pay thy due and duties thou doest owe,
To heaven and earth, to Gods and Amurath.
And now draw near, and heaven and earth give ear
Give ear and record heaven and earth with me,
Ye Lords of Barbary hearken and attend,
Hark to the words I speak, and vow I make,
To plant the true succession of the crown,
Lo Lords, in our seat royal to succeed,
Our only brother here we doo install,
And by the name of Muly Mahamet Seth,
Entitle him true heir unto the crown,
Ye Gods of heaven gratulate this deed,
That men on earth may therewith stand content.
Lo thus my due and duty is done, I pay
To heaven and earth, to Gods and Amurath.
Renowned Bassa, to remunerate
Thy worthiness and magnanimity,
Behold the noblest ladies of the land,
Bring present tokens of their gratitude.
Rubin that breaths but for revenge,
Bassa by this commends her self to thee
Resign the token of her thankfulness
To Amurath the God of earthly kings,
Doth Rubin give and sacrifice her son,
Not with sweet smoke of fire, or sweet perfume,
But with his fathers sword, his mothers thanks
Doth Rubin give her son to Amurath.
As Rubin gives her son, so we our selves
To Amurath give, and fall before his face.
Bassa, wear thou the gold of Barbary,
And glister like the palace of the Sun,
In honour of the deed that thou hast-dun.
Well worthy of the aide of Amurath,
Is Ab dilmelec and these noble dames,
Rubin thy son I shall ere long bestow,
Where thou doest him bequeath in honours fee,
On Amurath, mighty Emperor of the East,
That shall receive the imp of royal race,
With cheerful looks and gleams of princely grace,
This chosen guard of Amuraths Janissaries,
I leave to honour and attend on thee,
King of Morocco conqueror of thy foes,
True king of Fesse, Emperor of Barbary,
Muly Molocco live and keep thy seat,
In spite of fortunes spite or enemies threats,
Ride Bassa now, bold Bassa homeward ride,
As glorious as great Pompey in his pride.
Welcome to Lisborne valiant Catholikes,
Welcome brave English-men to Portugal,
Most reverent primate of the Irish Church.
And noble Stukeley famous by thy name,
Welcome, thrice welcome to Sebastians town,
And welcome English captains to you all,
It joys vs to see his holiness fleet,
Cast encore happily upon our coast.
These welcomes worthy governor of Lis∣borne,
Argue an honourable mind in thee,
But treat of our misfortune therewithal,
To Ireland by pope Gregories command,
Were we all bound, and therefore thus embarked,
To land our forces there at unawares,
Conquering the land for his holiness,
And so restore it to the Roman faith,
This was the cause of our expedition,
And Ireland long ere this had bin subdued,
Had not foul weather brought vs to this bay.
Under correction, are ye not all Englishmen,
And longs not Ireland to that kingdom Lords?
Then may I speak my conscience in the cause,
Sance scandal to the holy sea of Rome,
Vnhonorable is this expedition,
And misbeseeming yoo to meddle in.
Lord governor of Lisborne understand,
As we are Englishmen, so are we men,
And I am Stukley so resolude in all,
To follow rule, honour and Empery,
Not to be bent so strictly to the place,
Wherein at first I blew the fire of life,
But that I may at liberty make choice,
Of all the continents that bounds the world,
For why? I make it not so great desert
To be begot or borne in any place,
Sith thats a thing of pleasure and of ease,
That might have bin performed else-where as well.
Follow what your good pleasure will,
Good Captain Stukley be it far from me
To take exceptions beyond my privilege.
Yet captain give me leave to speak,
We must affect our country as our parents,
And if at any time wealianate
Our love or industry from doing it honour,
It must respect effects and touch the soul,
Matter of conscience and religion,
And not desire of rule or benefit.
Well said Bishop, spoken like your self,
The reverent lordly bishop of saint Asses.
The bishop talks according to his coat,
And takes not measure of it by his mind,
You see he hath it made thus large and wide,
Because he may convert it as he list,
To any form may fit the fashion best,
Captain you do me wrong to descant thus,
Upon my coat or double conscience,
And cannot answer it in another place.
Tic but in jest, Lord bishop put it up,
And all as friends deign to be entertained,
As my ability here can make provision,
Shortly shall I conduct you to the king,
Whose welcomes evermore to strangers are,
Princely and honourable as his state becomes.
Thanks worthy governor, come bishop come
Will you show fruits of quarrel and of wrath,
Come let vs in with my Lord of Lisborne here,
And put all conscience into one carouse,
Letting it out again, as we may live.
There shall no action pass my hand or sword,
That cannot make a step to gain a crown,
No word shall pass the office of my tong,
That sounds not of affection to a crown,
No thought have being in my lordly breast,
That works not every way to win a crown,
Deeds, words and thoughts shall all be as a kings,
My chiefest company shall be with kings,
And my deserts shall counterpoise a kings,
Why should not I then look to be a king?
I am the marks how of Ireland made,
And will be shortly king of Ireland,
King of a mole-hill had I rather be,
Than the richest subject of a monarchy,
Huff it brave mind, and never cease t'aspire,
Before thou reign sole king of thy desire
Where art thou boy, where is Calypolis?
O deadly wound that passes by mine eye,
The fatal prison of my swelling heart!
O fortune constant in inconstancy!
Fight earth-quakes in the entrails of the earth,
And Eastern whirl-windes in the hellish shades,
Some foulecontagion of the infected heaven,
Blast all the trees, and in their cursed tops,
The dismal night raven and tragike owl
Breed, and become fore-tellers of my fall,
The fatal ruin of my name and me,
Adders and serpents hiss at my disgrace,
And wound the earth with anguish of their stings,
Now Abdelmelee, now triumph in Fesse,
Fortune hath made thee king of Barberry.
Alas my Lord, what boots these huge exclaim
To advantage vs in this distressed estate,
Opittie our perplexed estate my Lord;
And turn all curses to submiss complaints,
And those complaints to actions of relief,
I faint my Lord, and nought may cursing plaints
Refresh the fading substance of my life.
Faint all the world, consume and be accursed,
Since my state faints and is accursed.
Yet patience Lord to conquer sorrows so.
What patience is for him that lacks his crown•
There is no patience where the loss is such,
The shame of my disgrace hath put on wings,
And swiftly flies about this earthly ball,
Care thou to live then fond Calypolis,
When he that should give essence to thy soul,
He on whose glory all thy joy should stay,
Is soulelesse, glorylesse, and desperate,
Crying for battle, famine, sword and fire,
Rather then calling for relief or life.
But be content, thy hunger shall have end,
Famine shall pine to death and thou shalt live,
I will go hunt these cursed solitaries,
And make the sword and target here my hound,
To pull down lyons and untamed beasts.
Tush mother, cherish your vnheartie soul,
And feed with hope of happiness and ease,
For if by valour or by policy,
My kingly father can be fortunate,
We shall be Ioues commanders once again,
And flourish in a three-fold happiness.
His majesty hath sent Sebastian
The good and harmless king of Portugal,
A promise to resign the royalty
And kingdom of Morocco to his hands,
But when this haughty offer takes effect,
And works affiance in Sebastian,
My gracious Lord warned wisely to advise,
I doubt not but will watch occasion,
And take her fore-top by the slenderest hair,
To rid vs of this miserable life.
Good madame cheer your self, my Fathers wife,
He can submit himself and live below,
Make show of friendship, promise, vow and swear,
Till by the virtue of his fair pretence,
Sebastian trusting his integrity,
He makes himself possessor of such fruits,
As grow upon such great advantages.
But more dishonour hangs on such misdeeds,
Than all the profit their return can bear,
Such secret judgements hath the heavens imposde
Upon the drooping state of Barbary,
As public merits in such lewd attempts,
Hath drawn with violence upon our heads.
Hold thee Calypolis feed and faint no more,
This flesh I forced from a lioness,
Meat of a princess, for a princess meat,
Learn by her noble stomach to esteem
Penury plenty, in extremest dearth,
Who when she saw her foragement bereft,
Pined not in melancholy or childlish fear,
But as brave minds are strongest in extremes,
So she redoubling her former force
Rangde thorough the woods, and rent the breeding vaults
Of proudest savages to save her self,
Feed then and faint not fair Calypolis,
For rather than fierce famine shall prevail,
To gnaw thy entrails with her thorny teeth,
The conquering lioness shall attend on thee,
And lay huge heaps of slaughtered carcases
As bulwarks in her way to keep her back.
I will provide thee of a princely osprey,
That as she flies over fish in pools,
The fish shall turn their glistening bellies up,
And thou shalt take thy liberal choice ofall,
Ioues stately bird with wide commanding wings
Shall hover still about thy princely head,
And beat down foul by shoal into thy lap,
Feed then and faint not fair Calypolis.
Thanks good my Lord, and though my sto∣macke be
Too queasy to digest such bloody meat,
Yet strength I it with virtue of my mind,
I doubt no whit but I shall live my Lord.
Into the shades then fair Calypolis,
And make thy son and Negros here good cheer,
Feed and be fat that we may meet the foe
With strength and terror to revenge our wrong.
Call forth those Moors, those men of Bar∣barie.
That came with letters from the king of Fesse.
Ye warlike lords and men of chivalry,
Honourable Ambassadors of this high regent,
Hark to Sebastian king of Portugal:
These letters sent from your distressed Lord,
Torn from his throne by Abdilmelecs hand,
Strengthened and raised by furious Amurath,
Imports a kingly favour at our hands,
For aide to reobtaine his royal seat,
And place his fortunes in their former height.
For quitall of which honourable arms,
By these his letters he doth firmly vow,
Wholly to yield and to surrender up
The kingdom of Maroccus to our hands,
And to become to vs contributory,
And to content himself with the realm of Fesse,
These lines my Lords writ in extremity,
Contain therefore but during fortunes date,
How shall Sebastian then believe the same?
Viceroys, and most christian king of Pore∣tugall,
To satisfy thy doubtful mind herein,
Command forthwith a blazing brand of fire
Be brought in presence of thy majesty,
Then shalt thou see by our religious vows
And ceremonies most inviolate
How firm our sovereigns protestations are,
Behold my Lord, this binds our faith to thee.
In token that great Muly Mahamets hand
Hath writ no more than his stout heart allows,
And will perform to thee and to thine heirs,
We offer here our hands into this flame,
And as this flame doth fasten on this flesh,
So from our souls we wish it may consume
The heart of our great Lord and sovereign
Muly Mahamet king of Barbary,
If his intent agree not with his words.
These ceremonies and protestations
Suffices vs ye Lords of Barbary,
Therefore return this answer to your king,
Assure him by the honour of my crown,
And by Sebastians true unfeigned faith
He shall have aide and succour to recover,
And seat him in his former empery,
Let him rely upon our princely word,
Tell him by August we will come to him,
With such a power of brave impatient minds,
As Abdelmelec and great Amurath
Shall tremble at the strength of Portugal.
Thanks to the renowned king of Portugal
On whose stout promises our state depend.
Barbarians go glad your distressed king,
And say Sebastian lives to right his wrong,
Duke of Auero call in those English-men,
Don Stukley, and those Captains of the fleet
That lately landed in our bay of Lisborne.
Now breath Sebastian, and in breathing blow
Some gentle gale of thy new formed joys,
Duke of Auero, it shall be your charge,
To take the muster of the Portuguese,
And bravest bloods of all our country,
Lewes de Sylua you shall be dispatcht
With letters unto Philip king of Spain,
Tell him we crave his aide in this behalf,
I know our brother Philip nill deny
His furtherance in this holy christian war,
Duke of Barceles as thy ancestors
Have always loyal bin to Portugal,
So now in honour of thy toward youth,
Thy charge shall be to Anwerpe speedily,
To hire vs mercenary men at arms,
Promise them princely pay, and be thou sure
Thy word is ours, Sebastian speaks the word.
I beseech your majesty employ me in this war.
Christopher de Tauera, next unto my self
My good Efestian, and my bedfellow,
Thy cares and mine shall be alike in this,
And thou and I will live and die together.
And now brave English-men to you,
Whom angry storms have put into our bay,
Hold not your fortune ere the worse in this,
We hold our strangers honours in our hand,
And for distressed frank and free relief,
Tell me then Stukley, for thats thy name I trow,
Wilt thou in honour of thy countries fame,
Hazard thy person in this brave exploit,
And follow vs to fruitful Barbary,
With these six thousand soldiers thou hast brought
And choicely picked through wanton Italy,
Thou art a man of gallant personage,
Proud in thy looks, and famous every way,
Frankly tell me, wilt thou go with me?
Courageous king, the wonder of my thoughts
And yet my Lord, with pardon understand,
My self and these, whom weather hath enforced,
To lie at road upon thy gracious coast,
Did bend our course and made amain for Ireland.
For Ireland Stukley, thou mistakst me won∣derous much,
With seven ships, two pinnaces, and six thousand men,
I tell thee Stukley, they are far too weak,
To violate the Queen of Irelands right,
For Irelands Queen commands Englands force,
Were every ship ten thousand on the seas,
Mand with the strength of all the Eastern kings,
Conveying all the monarchs of the world,
To invade the Island where her highness reigns,
It were all in vain, for heavens and destinies
Attend and wait upon her Majesty,
Sacred, imperial, and holy is her seat,
Shining with wisdom, love and mightiness.
Nature that every thing imperfect made,
Fortune that never yet was constant found,
Time that defaces every golden show,
Dare not decay, remove, or be impure,
Both nature, time and fortune, all agree,
To bless and serve her royal majesty,
The wallowing Ocean hems her round about,
Whose raging floods do swallow up her foes,
And on the rocks their ships in pieces split,
And even in Spain where all the traitors dance,
And play themselves upon a sunny day,
Securely guard the west part of her Isle,
The South the narrow Britain sea begirts,
Where Veptune sits in triumph, to direct
Their course to hell that aim at her disgrace,
The Germaine seas along the East do run,
Where Nenus banquets all her water Nymphs,
That with her beauty glancing on the waives,
Disdains the check of fair Proserpina,
Advise thee then proud Stukley ere thou pass,
To wrong the wonder of the highest God,
Sith danger, death and hell doth follow thee,
Thee and them all that seek to danger her.
If honour be the mark whereat thou aimst,
Then follow me in holy christian wars,
And leave to seek thy Countries overthrow.
Rather my Lord, let me admire these words,
Than answer to your firm objections,
His holiness Pope Gregory the seventh,
Hath made vs four the leaders of the rest,
Amongst the rest my Lord, I am but one,
If they agree Stukley will be the first
To die with honour for Sebastian.
Tell me Lord Bishop, Captains tell me all,
Are you content to leave this enterprise,
Against your country and your country men,
To aide Mahamet king of Barbary?
To aide Mahamet king of Barbary,
Tic against our vows great king of Portugal.
Then Captains what say you?
I say my Lord as the Bishop said,
We may not turn from conquering Ireland.
Our country and our country-men will con∣damn
Vs worthy of death, if we neglect our vows.
Consider Lords you are now in Portugal,
And I may now dispose of you and yours.
Hath not the wind and weather given you up,
And made you captives to our royal will?
It hath my Lord, and willingly wee yield
To be commanded by your majesty,
But if you make vs voluntary men,
Our course is then direct for Ireland.
That course will we direct for Barberry,
Follow me Lords, Sebastian leads the way,
To plant the christian fath in Africa.
Saint George for England, and Ireland now adieu,
For here Tom Stukley shapes his course anue.
Lo thus into a lake of blood and gore,
The brave courageous king of Portugal
Hath drenched himself, and now prepares amain
With sails and oars to cross the swelling seas,
With men and ships, courage and canon shot,
To plant this cursed Moore in fatal hour,
And in this Catholic case the king of Spain
Is called upon by sweet Sebastian.
Who surfeiting in prime time of his youth,
Upon ambitious poison dies thereon.
By this time is the Moore to Tangiers come,
A city longing to the Portugal,
And now doth Spain promise with holy face,
As favouring the honour of the cause,
His aide of arms, and leuies men apace,
But nothing less than king Sebastians good
He means, yet at Sucor de Tupea.
He met some say in person with the Portugal,
And treats of a marriage with the king,
But ware ambitious wiles and poisned eyes,
There was nor aide of arms nor marriage,
For on his way without those Spaniards king Seba∣stian went.
Honourable Lords, Ambassadors of Spain,
The many favours by our meetings done
From our beloved and renowned brother,
Philip the Catholic king of Spain
Say therefore good my Lord Ambassador,
Say how your mighty master minded is,
To propagate the fame of Portugal.
To propagate the fame of Portugal,
And plant religious truth in Africa,
Philip the great and pussant king of Spain,
For love and honour of Sebastians name,
Promises aide of arms and swears by vs
To doe your majesty all the good he can,
With men, munition, and supply of war,
Of Spaniards proud in king Sebastians aide,
To spend their bloods in honour of their Christ.
And farther to manifest unto your majesty
How much the Catholic king of Spain affects
This war with Moors and men of little faith,
The honour of your everlasting praise,
Behold to honour and enlarge thy name,
He makes offer of his daughter Isabel,
To link in marriage with the brave Sebastian,
And to enrich Sebastians noble wife,
His majesty with promise to resign
The titles of the Islands of Moloccus,
That by his royalty in Iudah he commands
These favours with unfeigned love and zeal,
Vows king Philip to king Sebastian.
And God so deal with king Sebastians soul
As justly he intends to fight for Christ,
Nobles of Spain, sith our renowned brother,
Philip the king of honour and of zeal,
By you the chosen Orators of Spain,
The offer of the holds he makes
Are not so precious in our account,
As is the peerless dame whom we adore,
His daughter, in whose loyalty consists
The life and honour of Sebastian.
As for the aide of arms he promises,
We will expect, and thankfully receive
At Cardis, as we sail along the coast.
Sebastian clap thy hands for joy,
Honoured by this meeting and this match,
Go Lords and follow to the famous war
Your king, and be his fortune such in all,
As he intends to manage arms in right.
Sit fast Sebastian, and in this work
God and good men labour for Portugal,
For Spain disguising with a double face,
Flatters thy youth and forwardness good king,
Philip whom some call the catholic king,
I fear me much thy faith will not be firm,
But disagree with thy profession.
What then shall of these men of war be∣come,
Those numbers that do multiply in Spain?
Spain hath a vent for them and their supplies,
The Spaniard ready to embark himself,
Here gathers to a head, but all to sure,
Flanders I fear shall feel the force of Spain,
Let Portugal fare as he may or can,
Spain means to spend no powder on the moors.
If kings doo dally so with holy oaths,
The heavens will right the wrongs that they sustain,
Philip if these forgeries be in thee,
Assure thee king, twill light on thee at last,
And when proud Spain hopes soundly to prevail,
The time may come that thou and thine shall fail.
The Portugal lead with decoining hope,
Hath raised his power, and received our foe
With honourable welcomes and regard,
And left his country bounds, and hither bends,
In hope to help Mahamet to a crown,
And chase vs hence, and plant this Negro moore
That clads himself in coat of hammerd steel,
To heave vs from the honour we possess,
But for I have my self a soldier bin,
I have in pity to the Portugal
Sent secret messengers to counsel him.
As for the aide of Spain whereof they hoped,
We have dispatcht our letters to their prince,
To crave that in a quarrel so unjust,
He that entitled is the Catholic king,
Would not assist a careless christian prince,
And as by letters we are let to know,
Our offer of the seven holds we made,
He thankfully receines, with all conditions,
Differing in mind far from all his words
And promises to king Sebastian,
As we would wish, or you my Lords desire.
What rests then but Abdelmelec may
Beat back this proud inuading Portugal,
And chastise this ambitious Negro moore
With thousand deaths for thousand damned deeds.
Forward Zareo and ye manly moors,
Sebastian see in time unto thy self,
If thou and thine misled doe thrive amiss,
Guiltless is Abdilmelec of thy blood.
Captain, we have received Letters from the king.
That with such signs and arguments of love,
We entertain the king of Barbary,
That marches toward Tangiers with his men,
The poor remainders of those that fled from Fesse,
When Abdilmelec got the glorious day,
And stald himself in his imperial throne.
Lord governor, we are in readiness
To welcome and receive this haplesse king,
Chased from his land by angry A murath,
And if the right rest in this lusty Moore,
Bearing a princely heart vnvanquishable,
A noble resolution than it is,
In brave Sebastian our christian king,
To aide this Moore with his victorious arms,
Thereby to propagate religious truth,
And plant his springing praise in Africa.
But when arrives this brave Sebastian,
To knit his forces with this manly Moore,
That both in one, and one in both may join
In this attempt of noble consequence?
Our men of Tangiers long to see their king,
Whose princely face that like the summers son,
Glads all these hither parts of Barbary.
Captains, he comes hetherward amain,
Top and top gallant, all in brave array
The 26. day of June he left the bay of Lisborne,
And with all his fleet at Cardis happily he
Arrived in Spain the eight of July, tarrying for the aide
That Philip king of Spain had promised,
And fifteen days he there remained aboard,
Expecting when this Spanish force would come,
Nor stepped a shore as he were going still:
But Spain that meant and minded nothing less,
pretends a sudden fear and care to keep
His own from A muraths fierce invasion,
And to excuse his promise to our king,
For which he storms as great A chilles erst.
Lying for want of wind in Aldest gulf,
And hoisted up his sails and anchors weighs,
And hetherward he comes, and looks to meet
This manly Moore, whose case he undertakes,
Therefore go we to welcome and rescue,
With canon shot, and shouts of young and old,
This fleet of Portuguese and troupe of Moors.
Muly Mahamet king of Barbary
Well met, and welcome to our town of Tangiers,
After this sudden shock and haplesse war,
Welcome brave Queen of Moors, repose thee here,
Thou and thy noble son, and soldiers all,
Ropose you here in king Sebastians town.
Thus far in honour of thy name and aide
Lord Mahamet, we have adventured
To win for thee a kingdom, for our selves
Fame, and performance of those promises,
That in thy faith and royalty thou hast
Sworn to Sebastian king of Portugal,
And thrive it so with thee as thou doest mean,
And mean thou so as thou doest wish to thrive,
And if our Christ for whom in chief we fight,
Hereby to enlarge the bounds of christendom,
Favour this war, and as I do not doubt,
Send victory to light upon my crest.
Brave Moore I will advance thy kingly son,
And with a diadem of pearl and gold,
Adorn thy temples and enrich thy head,
O brave Sebastian noble Portugal,
Renowmd and honoured ever moist thou bee,
Triumpher over those that menace thee.
The hellish prince grim Pluto with his mace
Ding down my soul to hell, and with this soul
This son of mine the honour of my house,
But I perform religiously to thee,
That I have holily erst vndertane,
And that thy Lords and Captains may perceive
My mind in this single and pure to be,
As pure as is the water of the brooke,
My dearest son to thee I doo engage,
Receive him Lord in hostage of my vow,
For even my mind presages to my self,
That in some slavish sort I shall behold
Him dragde along this running river shore,
A spectacle to dant the pride of those
That climb aloft by force, and not by right.
Nor can it otherwise befall the man
That keeps his seat and sceptre all in fear,
That wears his crown in eye of all the world,
Reputed theft and not inheritance.
What title then hath Abdilmelec here,
To bar our father or his progeny,
Right royal prince, hereof you make no doubt,
Agreeing with your wholesome christian laws,
Help then courageous Lord with hand and sword,
To clear his way, whose lets are lawless men,
And for this deed ye all shall be renowmd,
Renowmd and chronicled in books of fame,
In books of fame and characters of brass,
Of brass may beaten gold, fight then for fame,
And find the Arabian Muly Hamet here,
Adventurous, bold, and full of rich reward.
Brave boy, how plain this princely mind in thee
Argues the height and honour of thy birth,
And well have I observed thy forwardness,
Which being tendered by your majesty,
No doubt the quarrel opened by the mouth
Of this young prince vnpartially to vs,
May animate and hearten all the host,
To fight against the devil for Lord Mahamet.
True Stukley, and so freshly to my mind,
Hath this young prince reduced his fathers wrong,
That in good time I hope this honours fire,
Kindled already with regard of right,
Bursts into open flames, and calls for wars,
Wars, wars to plant the true succeeding prince.
Lord Mahamet, I take thy noble son
A pledge of honour, and shall use him so.
Lord Lodowicke, and my good Lord of Auero
See this young prince conveyed safe to Messegon,
And there accompanide as him fitteth best,
And to this war prepare ye more and less,
This rightful war, that Christians God will bless.
Now hardened is this haplesse heathen prince,
And strengthened by the arms of Portugal,
This Moore, this murderer of his progeny.
And war and weapons now, and blood and death
Wait on the counsels of this cursed king:
And to a bloody banquet he invites
The brave Sebastian and his noble peers.
In fatal hour arrived this peerless prince,
To loose his life, his life and many lives
Of lusty men, courageous Portuguese,
Drawn by ambitious golden looks,
Let fame of him no wrongful censure sound,
Honour was object of his thoughts, ambition was his ground.
Now tell me Celybin, what doth the e∣nemie?
The enemy dread lord, hath left the town
Of Areil, with a thousand soldiers armed,
To guard his fleet of thirteen hundred sail,
And mustering of his men before the walls,
He found he had two thousand armed horse,
And fourteen thousand men that serve on foot,
Three thousand pioners, and a thousand cochmen,
Besides a number almost numberless
Of drudges, Negroes, slaves and Muleteers,
Horse-boies, laundresses and courtesans,
And fifteen hundred waggons full of stuff
For noble men, brought up in delicate.
Alas good king, thy fore-sight hath bin small
To come with women into Barbary,
With laundress, with baggage, and with trash,
Numbers unfit to multiply thy host.
Their payment in the camp is passing slow,
And victuals scarce, that many faint and die.
But whether marches he in all this hast?
Some thinks he marches hetherward,
And means to take this city of Alcazar.
Unto Alcazar, O inconstant chance!
The brave and valiant king of Portugal
Quarters his power in four battalions,
A front the which, to welcome vs withal,
Are six and thirty roaring pieces placed,
The first consisting of light armed horse,
And of the garrisons from Tangiers brought
Is lead by Alvaro Peers de Tauero,
The left or middle battle of Italians,
And Germane horse-men Stukley doth command,
A warlike Englishman sent by the pope,
That vainly calls himself Marks of Ireland.
Alonjo Aquilaz conducts the third,
That wing of Germaine soldiers most consists.
The fourth legion is none but Portuguese,
Of whom Lodeuico Caesar hath the chiefest charge,
Besides there stand six thousand horse
Bravely attired, pressed where need requires.
Thus have I told your royal majesty,
How he is placed to brave his fight.
But whore's out nephew Muly Mahamet?
He marches in the middle, guarded about
With full five hundred hargubuze on foot,
And twice three thousand needless armed pikes.
Great sovereign, vouchsafe to hear me speak,
And let Zareos counsel now prevail,
Whilst time doth serve, and that these Christians dare
Approach the field with warlike Ensigns spread,
Let vs in hast with all our forces meet,
And hem them in, that not a man escape,
So will they be advised another time,
How they doo touch the shore of Barbary.
Zareo, hear our resolution,
And thus our forces we will first dispose,
Hamet my brother with a thousand shot
On horse-backe, and choice harguebuziers all,
Having ten thousand with spear and shield,
Shall make the right wing of the battle up,
Zareo you shall have in charge the left,
Two thousand argolets and ten thousand horse,
The maine battle of harguebuze on foot,
And twenty thousand horse-men in their troupes,
My self inuirond with my trustie'gard
Of Janissaries, fortunate in war,
And toward Arzil will we take our way,
If then our enemy will balke our force,
In Gods name let him, it will be his best,
But if he level at Alcazar walls,
Then beat him back with bullets as thick as hail,
And make him know and rue his oversight,
That rashly seeks the ruin of this land.
Why tell me Lords, why left ye Portugal,
And crossed the seas with vs to Barbary,
Was it to see the country and no more,
Or else to slay before ye were assailed?
I am ashamed to think that such as you,
Whose deeds have bin renowned heretofore,
Should slack in such an act of consequence,
We come to fight, and fighting vow to die,
Or else to win the thing for which we came,
Because Abdilmelec as pitying vs,
Sends messages to counsel quietness,
You stand amazed and think it sound advise,
As if our enemy would wish vs any good,
No, let him know we scorn his courtesy,
And will resist his forces what so ere.
Cast fear aside, my self will lead the way,
And make a passage with my conquering sword
Knee deep in blood of these accursed Moors,
And they that love my honour follow me.
Were you as resolute as is your king,
Alcazar walls should fall before your face,
And all the force of this Barbarian Lord
Should be confounded, were it ten times more.
So well become these words a kingly mouth
That are of force to make a coward fight,
But when advice and prudent fore-sight
Is joined with such magnanimity,
Troupes of victory and kingly spoils
Adorn his crown, his kingdom, and his fame.
We have descried upon the mountain tops
A huge company of inuading Moors,
And they my lord, as thick as winters hail,
Will fall upon our heads at unawares,
Best then betimes t'auoide this gloomy storm,
It is in vain to strive with such a stream.
Behold thrice noble Lord, vncalde I come,
To counsel where necessity commands,
And honour of undoubted victory,
Makes me exclime upon this dastard flight.
Why king Sebastian, wilt thou now fore-slow,
And let so great a glory slip thy hands?
Say you doo march unto Tarissa now,
The forces of the foe are come so nigh,
That he will let the passage of the river,
So unawares you will be forced to fight.
But know O king, and you thrice valiant Lords,
Few blows will serve, I ask but only this,
That with your power you march into the field,
For now is all the army resolute,
To leave the traitor helpless in the fight,
And fly to me as to their rightful prince,
Some horse-men have already lead the way,
And vow the like for their companions,
The host is full of tumult and of fear.
Then as you come to plant me in my seat,
And to enlarge your fame in Africa,
Now, now or never bravely execute
Your resolution sound and honourable,
And end this war together with his life,
That doth usurp the crown with tyranny.
Captains, you hear the reasons of the king,
Which so effectually have appears wine ears,
That I am fully resolute to fight,
And who refuses now to follow me,
Let him be ever counted cowardly.
Shame be his share that flies when kings do fight,
Auero lays his life before your feet.
For my part Lords, I cannot sell my blood
Dearer than in the company of kings.
Now have I set these Portuguese a work,
To hew a way for me unto the crown,
Or with your weapons here to dig your graves,
You dastards of the night and Erybus,
Fiends, Fairies, hags that fight in beds of steel,
Range through this army with your iron whips,
Drive forward to this deed this christian crew,
And let me triumph in the tragedy,
Though it be sealed and honoured with my blood,
Both of the Portugal and barbarous Moore,
Ride Nemesis, ride in thy fiery cart,
And sprinkle gore amongst these men of war,
That either party eager of revenge,
May honour thee with sacrifice of death,
And having bathed thy chariot wheels in blood,
Descend and take to thy tormenting hell,
The mangled body of that traitor king,
That scorns the power and force of Portugal.
Then let the earth discover to his ghost,
Such tortures as usurpers feel below,
Racked let him be in proud lxions wheel,
Pined let him be with Tantalus endless thirst,
Pray let him be to Tisons greedy bird,
Wearied with Sisiphus immortal toil,
And lastly for revenge, for deep revenge,
Whereof thou goddess and deuiser art,
Damned let him be, damned and condemned to bear
All torments, tortures, plagues and pains of hell.
Ill be to him that so much ill bethinks,
And ill betide this foul ambitious Moore,
Whose wily trains with smoothest course of speech.
Hath tide and tangled in a dangerous war,
The fierce and manly king of Portugal.
Now throw the heavens forth their lightning flames,
And thunder over Affrickes fatal fields,
Blood will have blood, foul murder scope no scourge.
At last descends fame as Iris,
To finish fainting Didoes dying life,
Fame from her stately bout doth descend,
And on the tree as fruit new ripe to fall,
Places the crowns of these unhappy kings,
That erst she kept in eye of all the world.
Now sire stars and streaming comets blaze,
That threat the earth and princes of the same.
Fire, fire about the axiltree of heaven,
Who orles round, and from the foot of Casyopa
In fatal hour consumes these fatal crowns,
Down false the diadem of Portugal,
The crowns of Barberry and kingdoms fall,
Ay me, that kingdoms may not stable stand,
And now approaching near the dismal day,
The bloody day wherein the battles join,
Monday the fourth of August seventy eight,
The sun shines wholly on the parched earth,
The brightest planet in the highest heaven,
The heathens eager bent against their foe,
Give onset with great ordnance to the war.
The christians with great noise of canon shot,
Send angry onsets to the enemy.
Give ear and hear how war begins his song,
With dreadful clamours, noise, and trumpets sound.
Alarms within, let the chambers be discharged, then enter to the battle, and the Moors fly.
Skirmish still then enter Ab dilmelec in his chair, Za∣rio and their train.
Say on Zareo, tell me all the news,
Tell me what fury ranges in our camp,
That hath enforced our Moors to turn their backs.
Zareo say, what chance did bode this ill,
What ill enforced this dastard cowardice?
My Lord, such chance as wilful war affords
Such chances and misfortunes as attend
On him, the God of battle and of arms,
My Lord, when with our ordinance fierce we sent
Our Moors with smaller shot as thick as hail,
Follows apace to charge the Portugal,
The valiant Duke the devil of Auero,
The bane of Barberry, fraughted full of ire
Breaks through the ranks, and with five hundred horse
All men at arms, forward and full of might,
Assaults the middle wing, and puts to flight
Eight thousand Harquebush that served on foot,
And twenty thousand Moors with spear &amp; shield:
And therewithal the honour of the day.
Ah Abdelmelec dost thou live to hear
This bitter process of this first attempt?
Labour my Lords to renew our force,
Of fainting Moors, and fight it to the last.
My horse Zareo, O the goal is lost,
The goal is lost, thou King of Portugal
Thrice happy chance it is for thee and thine
That heavens abates my strength and calls me hence.
My sight doth fail, my soul, my feeble soul
Shall be releaste from prison on this earth:
Farewell vain world for I have played my part.
Brave Abdelmelec, thou thrice noble Lord,
Not such a wound was given to Barberry,
Had twenty hoists of men been put to sword
As death, pale death with fatal shaft hath given.
Lo dead is he, my brother and my King
Whom I might have revived with news I bring.
His honours and his types he hath resignde
Unto the world, and of a manly man
Lo, in a twinkling a senseless stock we see.
You trusty soldiers of this warlike King,
Be counsel de now by vs in this advise,
Let not his death be bruited in the camp,
Least with the sudden sorrow of the news,
The army wholly be discomfited.
My Lord Zareo thus I comfort you,
Our Moors have bravely borne themselves in fight
Likely to get the honour of the day
If ought may gotten be where loss is such.
Therefore in this apparel as he dyed
My noble brother will we here advance,
And set him in his chair with cunning props,
That our Barbarians may behold their King
And think he doth repose him in his Tent.
Right politic and good is your advice.
Go then to see it speedily performed.
Brave Lord, if Barberry recover this,
Thy soul with joy will sit and see the sight.
See thou not Stukley, O Stukley see thou not
The great dishonour done to Christendom?
Our cheerful onset crossed in springing hope,
The brave and mighty prince, Duke of Auero
Slain in my sight, now joy betide his ghost,
For like a lyon did he bear himself.
Our battles are all now disordered,
And by our horses strange retiring back,
Our middle wing of foot-men ouer-rod.
Stukley, alas I see my ouer-sight,
False hearted Mahamet, now to my cost,
I see thy treachery, warned to beware
A face so full of fraud and villainy.
Villain, a horse.
Oh my Lord, if you return you die.
Villain I say, give me a horse to fly,
To swim the river villain, and to fly.
Where shall I find some unfrequented place,
Some uncouth walk where I may curse my fill,
My stars, my dam, my planets and my nurse,
The fire, the air, the water, and the earth,
All causes that have thus conspired in one,
To nourish and preserve me to this shame,
Thou that were at my birth predominate,
Thou fatal star, what planet ere thou be,
Spit out thy poison bad, and all the ill
That fortune, fate or heaven may bode a man.
Thou Nurse unfortunate, guilty of all:
Thou mother of my life that broughtst me forth,
Cursed moist thou be for such a cursed son,
Cursed be thy son with every curse thou hast,
Ye Elements of whom consists this clay,
This mass of flesh, this cursed crazed corpse,
Destroy, dissolve, disturb, and dissipate,
What water, earth, and air conieald.
Oh my Lord, these rulthlesse Moors pursue you at the heals,
And come amain to put you to the sword.
A horse, a horse, villain a horse,
That I may take the river straight and fly,
Here is a horse my Lord,
As swiftly paced as Pegasus,
Mount thee thereon, and save thy self by flight.
Mount me I will,
But may I never pass the river till I be
Revenged upon thy soul accursed Abdilmelec,
If not on earth, yet when we meet in hell,
Before grim Minos, Rodamant, and Eocus,
The combat will I crave upon thy ghost,
And drag thee thorough the loathsome pools,
Of Lethes, Sticks, and fiery Phlegiton.
Stand traitor, stand ambitious English-man,
Proud Stukley stand, and stir not erethou die,
Thy forwardness to follow wrongful arms,
And leave our famous expedition erst,
Intended by his holiness for Ireland,
Foully hath here betrayed, and tide vs all
To ruthless fury of our heathen foe,
For which as we are sure to die,
Thou shalt pay satisfaction with thy blood.
A uant base villains, twit ye me with shame
Or infamy of this injurious war?
When he that is the judge of right and wrong
Determines battle as him pleases best.
But sith my stars bode me this tragic end
That I must perrish by these barbarous Moors,
Whose weapons have made passage for my soul
That breaks from out the prison of my breast,
Ye proud malicious dogs of Italy
Strike on, strike down this body to the earth
Whose mounting mind stoops to no feeble stroke.
Why suffer we this English man to live?
Villain bleed on, thy blood in channels run
And meet with those whom thou to death hast done
Thus Stukley slain with many a deadly stab,
Dyes in these desert fields of Africa.
Hark friends, and with the story of my life
Let me beguile the torment of my death.
In Englands London Lordings was I borne,
On that brave Bridge, the bar that thwarts the Thames.
My golden days, my younger careless years,
Were when I touched the height of Fortunes wheel,
And lived in affluence of wealth and ease.
Thus in my Country carried long aloft,
A discontented humour drove me thence
To cross the Seas to Ireland, then to Spain,
There had I welcome and right royal pay
Of Phillip, whom some call the Catholic King,
There did Tom Stukley glitter all in gold,
Mounted upon his Jennet white as snow,
Shining as Phoebus in King Phillips Court,
There like a Lord, famous Don Stukley lived,
For so they called me in the Court of Spain
Till for a blow I gave a Bishops man,
A strife began rise between his Lord and me,
For which, we both were banished by the King.
From thence, to Rome rides Stukley all a flaunt
Received with royal welcomes of the Pope.
There was I graced by Gregory the great,
That then created me Marquis of Ireland.
Short be my tale, because my life is short,
The coast of Italy and Rome I left.
Then was I made Lieutenant General
Of those small Forces that for Ireland went,
And with my companies embarked at Austria
My Sails I spread, and with these men of war
In fatal hour at Lishborne we arrived.
From thence to this, to this hard exigent
Was Stukley driven to fight or else to dye,
Dared to the field, that never could endure
To hear God Mars his drum, but he must march.
Ah sweet Sebastian, had thou been well advised
Thou might have managed arms successfully.
But from our Cradles we were marked all
And destinate to dye in Affric here.
Stukley, the story of thy life is told,
Here breath thy last and bid thy friends farewell.
And if thy Countries kindness be so much,
Then let thy Country kindly ring thy knell.
Now go, and in that bed of honour dye
Where brave Sebastians breathless Course doth lye.
Here ends Fortune, rule, and bitter rage:
Here ends Tom Stukleys pilgrimage.
Retreat is sounded through our Camp, &amp; now
From battles fury cease our conquering Moors,
Pay thanks to heaven with sacrificing fire,
Alcazar and ye towns of Barbary.
Now hast thou sit as in a trance and seen,
To thy souls joy and honour of thy house,
The trophes and the triumphs of thy men,
Great Abdilmelec and the God of kings,
Hath made thy war successful by thy right,
His friends whom death and fates hath tan from thee,
Lo this was he that was the peoples pride,
And cheerful Sun-shine to his subjects all,
Now have him hence, that royally he may
Be buried and imbalmd, as is meet.
Zareo, have you thorough the camp proclaimed
As erst we gave in charge?
We have my Lord, and rich rewards pro∣post
For them that find the body of the king,
For by those guard that had him in their charge,
We understand that he was done to death,
And for his search two prisoners Portuguese
Are set at large to find their royal king.
But of the traitrous Moore you hear no news.
That fled the field and sought to swim the ford?
Not yet my Lord, but doubtless God will tell
And with his finger point out where he hints.
So let it rest, and on this earth bestow
This princely coarse, till further for his funerals
We provide.
From him to thee as true succeeding prince,
With all allegiance, and with honours tips,
In name of all thy people and thy land,
We give this kingly crown and diadem.
We thank you all, and as my lawful right,
With Gods defence and yours shall I keep.
As gave your grace in charge, right royal prince,
The fields and sandy plains we have surveyed,
And even among the thickest of his Lords,
The noble king of Portugal we found
Wrapped in his colours coldly on the earth,
And done to death with many a mortal wound.
Lo here my Lords, this is the earth and clay,
Of him that erst was mighty king of Portugal,
There let him lie, and you for this be free,
To make return from hence to christendom.
Long live the mighty king of Barberry.
Welcome my friend, what body hast thou there?
The body of the ambitious enemy,
That squandered all this blood in Africa,
Whose malice sent so many souls to hell,
The traitor Muly Mahamet doo I bring,
And for thy slave I throw him at thy feet.
Zareo give this man a rich reward,
And thanked be the God of just revenge,
That he hath given our foe into our hands,
Beastly, unarmed, slavish, full of shame,
But say, how came this traitor to his end?
Seeking to save his life by shameful flight,
He mounts on a hot Barbarian horse,
And so in purpose to have past the stream,
His headstrong stead throws him from out his seat,
Where diving oft for lack of skill to swim,
It was my chance alone to see him drowned.
Whom by the heals I dragd from out the poole,
And hither have him brought thus filed with mud.
A death too good for such a damned wretch,
But sith our rage and rigour of revenge,
By violence of his end prevented is,
That all the world may learn by him to avoid,
To hall on princes to injurious war,
His skin we will be parted from his flesh,
And being stifned out and stuffed with straw,
So to deter and fear the lookers on.
From any such soul fact or bad attempt,
Away with him.
And now my Lords, for this christian king,
My Lord Zareo, let it be your charge,
To see the soldiers tread a solemn march.
Trailing their pikes and Ensigns on the ground,
So to perform the princes funerals.

