SInce cruel Heavens
against me obstinate,
Since all mishaps
of the round engine doo
Conspire my harm:
since mē, since powers divine
Air, earth, and Sea
are all injurious:
And that my Queen her self, in whom I lived,
The Idol of my heart, doth me pursue;
It's meet I dye. For her have I forgone
My Country, Caesar unto war provoked
(For just revenge of Sisters wrong my wife,
Who moved my Queen (ay me!) to jealousy)
For love of her, in her allurements caught
Abandoned life, I honour have despised,
Disdained my friends, and of the stately Rome
Despoilde the Empire of her best attire,
Contemned that power that made me so much feared,
Aslaue become unto her feeble face.
O cruel, traitress, woman most unkind,
Thou dost, forsworn, my love and life betray:
And giu'st me up to rageful enemy,
Which soon (ô fool!) will plague thy perjury.
Yielded Pelusium on this countries shore,
Yielded thou hast my Ships and men of war,
That nought remains (so destitute am I)
But these same arms which on my back I wear.
Thou should have had them too, and me unarmed
Yielded to Caesar naked of defence.
Which while I bear let Caesar never think
Triumph of me shall his proud chariot grace
Not think with me his glory to adorn,
On me alive to use his victory.
Thou only Cleopatra triumph hast,
Thou only hast my freedom servile made,
Thou only hast me vanquished: not by force
(For forced I cannot be) but by sweet baits
Of thy eyes graces, which did gain so fast
upon my liberty, that nought remained.
None else henceforth, but thou my dearest Queen,
Shall glory in commanding Antonie.
Have Caesar fortune and the Gods his friends,
To him have Jove and fatal sisters given
The Sceptre of the earth: he never shall
Subject my life to his obedience.
But when that death, my glad refuge, shall have
Bounded the course of my vnstedfast life,
And frozen corps under a marble cold
Within tombs bosom widow of my soul:
Then at his will let him it subject make:
Then what he will let Caesar doo with me:
Make me limb after limb be rent: make me
My burial take in sides of Thracian wolte.
Poor Antonie! alas what was the day,
The days of loss that gained thee thy love!
Wretch Antonie! since Maegaera pale
With Snaky hairs enchained thy misery.
The fire thee burnt was never Cupids fire
(For Cupped bears not such a mortal brand)
It was some furies torch, Orestes torch,
Which sometimes burnt his mother-murdering soul
(When wandering mad, rage boiling in his blood,
He sled his fault which followed as he fled)
kindled within his bones by shadow pale
Of mother slain returned from Stygian lake.
Antony, poor Antony! since that day
Thy old good hap did far from thee retire.
Thy virtue dead: thy glory made alive
So oft by martial deeds is gone in smoke:
Since then the Bays so well thy forehead knew
To Venus myrtles yielded have their place:
Trumpets to pipes: field tents to courtly bowers:
Lances and Pikes to dances and to feasts.
Since then, ô wretch! in stead of bloody wars
Thou should have made upon the Parthian Kings
For Romaine honour filed by Crassus foil,
Thou threw thy Curiace off, and fearful helm,
With coward courage unto Aegipts Queen
In haste to run, about her neck to hang
Languishing in her arms thy I doll made:
In sum given up to Cleopatras eyes
Thou break at length frō thence, as one encharm'd
Breaks from th'enchaunter that him strongly held.
For thy first reason (spoiling of their force
the poisned cups of thy fair Sorceress)
Recurred thy spirit: and then on every side
Thou made again the earth with Soldiers swarm
All Asia hid: Euphrates banks do tremble
To see at once so many Romans there
Breath horror, rage, and with a threatening eye
In mighty squadrons cross his swelling streams.
Nought seen but horse, and fire sparkling arms:
Nought heard but hideous noise of muttring troops,
The Parts, the Mede, abandoning their goods
Hide them for fear in hills of Hircanie,
Redoubting thee. Then willing to besiege
The great Phraate head of Media,
Thou campedst at her walls with vain assault,
Thy engines fit (mishap!) not thither brought,
So long thou stai'st, so long thou dost thee rest,
So long thy love with such things nourished
Reframes, reforms it self and stealingly
Retakes his force and rebecomes more great.
For of thy Queen the looks, the grace, the words,
Sweetness, allurements, amorous delights,
Entered again thy soul, and day and night,
In watch, in sleep, her Image followed thee:
Not dreaming but of her, repenting still
That thou for war had such a gods left.
Thou care no more for Parts, nor Parthian bow,
Sallies, assaults, encounters, shocks, alarms,
For ditches, rampires, wards, entrenched grounds:
Thy only care is sight of Nilus streams,
Sight of that face whose gilefull semblant doth
(Wandering in thee) infect thy tainted hart.
Her absence thee besots: each hour, each hour
Of stay, to thee impatient seems an age.
Enough of conquest, praise thou deem enough,
If soon enough the bristled fields thou see
Of fruitful Aegipt, and the stranger flood
Thy Queens fair eyes (another Pharos) lights.
Returned lo, dishonoured, despised,
In wanton love a woman thee misleads
Sunk in foul sink: mean while respecting nought
Thy wife Octauia and her tender babes,
Of whom the long contempt against thee whets
The sword of Caesar now thy Lord become.
Lost thy great Empire, all those goodly towns
Reverenced thy name as rebels now thee leave:
Rise against thee, and to the ensigns flock
Of conquering Caesar, who enwalles thee round
Caged in thy hold, scarce moister of thy self,
Late moister of so many Nations.
Yet, yet, which is of grief exrreamest grief,
Which is yet of mischief highest mischief,
It's Cleopatra alas! alas, it's she,
It's she augments the torment of thy pain,
Betrays thy love, thy life alas!) betrays,
Caesar to please, whose grace she seeks to gain:
With thought her crown to save and fortune make
Only thy foe which common ought have been.
If her I always loved, and the first flame
Of her heart-killing love shall burn me last:
Justly complain I she disloyal is,
Nor constant is, even as I constant am,
To comfort my mishap, despising me
No more, then when the heavens favoured me.
But ah! by nature women wau' ring are,
Each moment changing and rechanging minds.
Unwise, who blind in them, thinks loyalty
Ever to find in beauties company.
The boiling tempest still
makes not Sea waters some:
nor still the Northern blast
disquiets quiet streams:
Nor who his chest to fill
sails to the morning beams,
on waives wind tosses fast
still kepes his ship from home.
Nor Jove still down doth cast
inflamed with bloody ire
on man, on tree, on hill,
his darts of thundering fire.
nor still the heat doth last
on face of parched plain.
nor wrinkled cold doth still
on frozen furrows reign.
But still as long as we
in this low world remain,
mishapps our daily mates
our lives doe entertain:
and woes which bear no dates
still perch upon our heads,
none go but straight will be
some greater in their steads.
Nature made vs not free
When first she made vs live:
When we began to be,
To be began our woe:
Which growing evermore
As dying life doth grow,
Do more and more vs grieve,
And tire vs more and more.
No stay in fading states,
For more to height they retch,
Their fellow miseries.
The more to height do stretch.
They cling even to the crown,
And threatening furious wise
From tirannizing pates
Do often pull it down.
In vain on waives vntride
To shun them go we should
To Scythes and Massagetes
Who near the Pole reside:
In vain to boiling sands
Which Phoebus battery beats,
For with vs still they would
Cut seas and compass lands.
The darkness no more sure
To join with heavy night:
The light which guilds the days
To follow Titan pure:
No more the shadow light
The body to ensue:
Then wretchedness always
Vs wretches to pursue.
O blessed who never breathed,
Or whom with pity moved,
Death from his cradle reau'de,
And swaddled in his grave:
And blessed also he
(As curse may blessing have)
Who low and living free
No princes charge hath proved.
By stealing sacred fire.
Prometheus then unwise,
prouking Gods to ire,
the heap of ills did stir,
and sickness pale and cold
our end which onward spur,
to plague our hands too bold
to filch the wealth of skies.
In heavens hate since then
of ill with ill enchained
we race of mortal men
full fraught our breasts have borne
and thousand thousand woes
our heavenly souls now thorne,
which free before from those
no! earthly passion pained.
War and wars bitter cheer
now long time with vs stay,
and fear of hated foe
still still increases sore:
our harms worse daily grow,
less yesterday they were
then now, and will be more
to morrow then to day.
What horrible fury, what cruel rage,
O Aegipt so extremely thee torments?
Hast thou the Gods so angered by thy fault?
Hast thou against them some such crime conceived.
That their ingrained hand lift up in threats
They should desire in thy heart blood to bathe?
And that their burning wrath which noght cā quēch
Should pitiless on vs still lighten down?
We are not heaven out of the monst'rous mass
Of Giantes those, which heavens wrack conspired:
Ixions race, false praetor of his loves:
Nor yet of him who fained lightnings found:
Nor cruel Tantalus, nor bloody Atreus,
Whose cursed banquet for Thyestes plague
Made the beholding Sun for horror turn
His back, and backward from his course return:
And hastening his wing-footed horses race
Plunge him in sea for shame to hide his face:
While sulleine night upon the wondering world
For mid-daies light her starry mantle cast.
But what we be, what ever wickedness
By vs is done, Alas! with what more plagues,
More eager torments could the Gods declare
To heaven and earth that vs they hateful hold?
With soldiers, strangers, horrible in arms
Our land is hid, our people drowned in tears.
But terror here and horror, nought is seen:
And present death prising our life each hour.
Hard at our ports and at our porches waits
Our conquering foe: harts fail vs, hopes are dead:
Our Queen laments: and this great Emperor
Sometime (would now they did) whom worlds did fear
Abandoned, betrayed, now minds no more
But from his evils by hast'ned death to pass.
Come! you poor people ti'rde with ceasles plaints
With tears and sighs make morunfull sacrfice
On Ices altars: not our selves to save,
But soften Caesar and him piteous make
To vs, his pray: that so his lenity
May change our death into captivity.
Strange are the evils the fates on vs have brought,
O but alas! how far more strange the cause!
Love, love (alas, who ever would have thought?)
Hath lost this Realm inflamed with his fire.
Love, playing love, which men say kindles not
But in soft hearts, hath ashes made our towns.
And his sweet shafts, with whose shot none are killed,
Which ulcer not, with deaths our lands have filled,
Such was the bloody, murdering, hellish love
Possessed thy hart fair false guest Priams son,
Firing a brand which after made to burn
The Trojan towers by Graecians ruinate.
By this love, Priam, Hector, Troilus,
Memnon, Deiphaebus, Glancus, thousands mo.
Whom red Scamanders armour clogged streams
Rolled into Seas, before their dates are dead.
So plague he, so many tempests raises,
So murdering he, so many Cities raises,
When insolent, blind, lawless, orderles,
With made delights our sense he entertains.
All knowing Gods our wrecks did vs fortell
By signs in earth, by signs in starry Spheres,
Which should have moved vs, had not destiny
With too strong hand warped our misery.
The Comets flaming through the scat'red clouds
With fiery beams, most like vnbroaded hairs:
The fearful dragon whistling at the banks:
And holy Apis ceasles bellowing
(As never erst) and shedding endless tears:
Blood raining down frō heaven in vnknow'n showers:
Our Gods dark faces over cast with woe,
And dead men's Ghosts appearing in the night.
Yea even this night while all the City stood
Oppressed with terror, horror, servile fear,
Deep silence over all: the sounds were heard
Of divers songs, and diverse instruments,
Within the void of air: and howling noise,
Such as mad Bacchus priests in Bacchus feasts
On Nice make: and (seemed) the company,
Our City lost, went to the enemy.
So we forsaken both of Gods and men,
So are we in the mercy of our foes:
And we henceforth obedient must become
To laws of them who have vs overcome.
Lament we our mishaps,
Drown we with tears our woe:
For Lamentable hippos
Lamented easy grow:
and much less torment bring
then when they first did spring.
We want that woeful song,
wherewith wood-musiques Queen
doth ease her woes, among,
fresh springtimes bushes greene,
on pleasant branch alone
renewing ancient moan.
We want that monefull sound,
that prattling Progne makes
on fields of Thracian ground,
or streams of Thracian lakes:
to amped her breast of pain
for Itys by her slain.
Though Halcyons do still,
bewailing Ceyx lot,
the Seas with plainings fill
which his dead limbs have got,
not ever other grave
then tomb of waives to have:
And though the bird in death
that most Meander loves:
so sweetly sighs his breath
when death his fury proves,
as almost softs his heart,
and almost blunts his dart:
Yet all the plaints of those,
nor all their tearful larmes,
cannot content our woes,
nor serve to wail the harms,
in soul which we, poor we.
to feel enforced be.
Nor they of Phoebus bred
in tears can doo so well,
they for their brother shed,
who into Padus fell,
rash guide of chariot clear
surueiour of the year.
Nor she whom heavenly powers
to weeping rock did turn,
whose tears distill in showers,
and show she yet doth morn,
wherewith his top to Skies
mount Sipylus doth rise.
Nor weeping drops which flow
from bark of wounded tree,
that Mirrhas shame doth show
with ours compared may be,
to quench her loving fire
who durst embrace her fire.
Nor all the howlings made
on Cybels sacred hill
By Eunukes of her trade,
Who Atys, Atys still
with doubled cries resound,
which Echo makes rebound.
Our plaints no limits stay,
nor more then do our woes:
both infinitely stray
and neither measure knows
In mea sure let them plain:
Who measnr'd griefs sustain.
That I have thee betrayed, dear Antonie,
My life, my soul, my sun? I had such thought?
That I have thee betrayed my Lord, my King?
That I would break my vowed faith to thee?
I aue thee? deceive thee? yield thee to the rage
Of mighty foe? I ever had that hart?
Rather sharpe lightning lighten on my head:
Rather may I to deepest mischief fall:
Rather the opened earth devour me:
Rather fierce Tigers feed them on my flesh:
Rather, ô rather let our Nilus send,
To swallow me quick, some weeping Crocodile.
And did thou then suppose my royal heart
Had hatched, thee to ensnare, a faithless love?
And changing mind, as Fortune changed cheer,
I would weak thee, to win the stronger, loose?
O wretch! ô caitiue! ô too cruel hap!
And did not I sufficient loss sustain
Loosing my Realm, loosing my liberty,
My tender of-spring, and the joyful light
Of beamy Sun, and yet, yet loosing more
Thee Antony my care, if I loose not
What yet remained? thy love alas! thy love,
More dear then Sceptre, children, freedom, ligh•
So ready I to row in Charons barge,
Shall leese the joy of dying in thy love:
So the sole comfort of my misery
To have one tomb with thee is me bereft.
So I in shady plains shall plain alone,
Not (as I hoped) companion of thy moan,
O height of grief! Eras why with Continual cries
Your griefull harms doo you exasperate?
Torment your self with murdering complaints;
Strain your weak breast so oct, so vehemently?
Water with tears this fair al ablaster?
With sorrows sting so many beauties wound?
Come of so many Kings want you the hart
Bravely, stoutly, this tempest to resist?
My eu'lls are wholly unsupportable,
No human force can them withstand, but death.
To him that strives nought is impossible.
In striving lies no hope of my mishapps.
All things do yield to force of lovely face.
My face too lovely cause my wretched case.
My face hath so entrapped, so cast vs down,
That for his conquest Caesar may it thank,
Causing that Antonie one army lost
The other wholly did to Caesar yield.
For not enduring (so his amorous sprite
Was with my beauty fired) my shameful flight,
Soon as he saw from rank wherein he stood
In hottest fight, my Galleys making sail:
Forgetful of his charge (as if his soul
Unto his Ladies soul had been enchained)
He left his men, who so courageously
Did leave their lives to gain him victory.
And careless both of fame and armies loss
My oared Galleys followed with his ships
Companion of my flight, by this base part
Blasting his former flourishing renown.
Are you therefore cause of his overthrow?
I am sole cause: I did it, only I.
Fear of a woman troubled so his sprite?
Fire of his love was by my fear inflamed.
And should he then to war have led a Queen?
Alas! this was not this offence, but mine.
Antony (ay me! who else so brave a chief!)
Would not I should have taken Seas with him:
But would have lest me fearful woman far
From common hazard of the doubtful war.
O that I had believed! now, now of Rome
All the great Empire at our beck should bend.
All should obey, the vagabonding Scythes,
The feared Germans, back-shooting Parthians,
Wandering Numidians, Britons far removed,
And tawny nations scorched with the Sun.
But I cared not: so was my soul possessed,
(To my great harm) with burning jealousy:
Fearing least in my absence Antony
Should leaving me retake Octauia.
Such was the rigour of your destiny.
Such was my error and obstinacy.
But since Gods would not, could you do withal?
Always from Gods good haps, not harms, do fall.
And have they not all power on men's affairs?
They never bow so low, as worldly cares.
But leave to mortal men to be disposed
Freely on earth what ever mortal is.
If we therein sometimes some faults commit,
We may them not to their high majesties,
But to our selves impute; whose passions
Plunge vs each day in all afflictions.
Wherewith when we our souls do thorned feel,
Flattering our selves we say they dest'nies are:
That gods would have it so, and that our care
Could not impeach but that it must be so.
Things here below are in the heavens begot,
Before they be in this our wordle borne:
And never can our weakness turn awry
The stailesse course of powerful destiny.
Nought here force, reason, human providence,
Holy devotion, noble blood prevails:
And Jove himself whose hand doth heavens rule,
Who both to gods and men as King Commands,
Who earth (our firm support) with plenty stores,
Mouses air and sea with twinkling of his eye,
Who all can doe, yet never can undo
What once hath been by their hard laws decreed.
When Trojan walls, great Neptunes workmanship.
Environed were with Greeks, and Fortunes whele
Doubtful ten years now to the camp did turn,
And now again towards the town returned.
How many times did force and fury swell
In Hectors veins egging him to the spoil
Of conquered foes, which at his blows did fly,
As fearful sheep at feared wolves approach:
To save (in vain: for why? it would not be)
Poor walls of Troy from adversaries rage,
Who died them in blood, and cast to ground
Heaped them with bloody burning carcases.
No, Madame, think, that if the ancient crown
Of your progenitors that Nilus ruled,
Force take from you; the Gods have willed it so,
To whom oft times Princes are odious.
They have to every thing an end ordained;
All worldly greatness by them bounded is:
Some sooner, later some, as they think best:
None their decree is able to infringe.
But, which is more, to vs disastred men
Which subject are in all things to their will,
Their will is hid: nor while we live, we know
How, or how long we must in life remain.
Yet must we not for that feed on despair,
And make vs wretched ere we wretched be:
But always hope the best, even to the last,
That from our selves the mischief may not grow.
Then, Madame, help your self, leave of in time
Antonies wrack, left it your wrack procure:
Retire you from him, save from wrathful rage
Of angry Caesar both your Realm and you.
You see him lost, so as your amity
Unto his evils can yield no more relief.
You see him ruined, so as your support
No more henceforth can him with comfort raise.
With-draw you from the storm: persist not still
To loose your self: this royal diadem
Regain of Caesar.
Sooner shining light
Sall leave the day, and darkness leave the night:
Sooner moist currents of tempestuous seas
Shall wave in heaven, and the nightly troops
Of stars shall shine within the foaming waives,
Then I thee, Antony, Leave in deep distress.
I am with thee, be it thy worthy soul
Lodge in thy breast, or from that lodging part
Crossing the ioyles lake to take her place
In place prepared for men Demigods.
Live, if thee please, if life be loathsome die:
Dead and alive, Antony, thou shalt see
Thy princess follow thee, follow, and lament,
Thy wrack, no less her own then was thy weal.
What helps his wrack this euer-lasting love?.
Help, or help not, such must, such ought I prove.
Ill done to loose your self, and to no end.
How ill think you to follow such a friend?
But this your love nought mitigates his praine.
Without this love I should be inhumaine.
Inhumaine he, who his own death pursues.
Not inhumaine who miseries eschues.
Live for your sons.
Nay for their father die.
Hardharted mother!
Wife kindhearted I.
Then will you them deprive of royal right?
Do I deprive them? no, it's dest'nies might.
Do you not them deprive of heritage,
That give them up to adversaries hands,
A man forsaken fearing to forsake,
Whom such huge numbers hold environed?
T'abandon one against whom the frowning world
Banded with Caesar makes conspiring war.
The less ought I to leave him lest of all.
A friend in most distress should most assift.
If that when Antonie great and glorious
His legions led to drink Euphrates streams,
So many Kings in train redoubting him;
In triumph raised as high as highest heaven;
Lord-like disposing as him pleased best,
The wealth of Greece, the wealth of Asia:
In that fair fortune had I him exchanged
For Caesar, then, men would have counted me
Faithless, inconstant, light: but now the storm,
And blustering tempest driving on his face,
Ready to drown, Alas! what would they say?
What would himself in Platos mansion say?
If, I whom always more then life he loved,
If I, Who am his heart, who was his hope,
Leave him, forsake him (and perhaps in vain)
Weakly to please who him hath overthrown?
Not light, inconstant, faith less should I be,
But vile, forsworn, of treachrous cruelty.
Cruelty to shun you selfe-cruell are:
Selfe-cruell him from cruelty to spare.
Our first affection to ourselfe is due.
He is my self.
Next it extends unto
Our children, friends, and to our country soil.
And you for some respect of wifely love,
(Albee scarce wifely) loose your native land,
Your children, friends, and (which is more) your life,
With so strong charms doth love bewitch our wits:
So fast in vs this fire once kindled flames.
Yet if his harm by yours redress might have,
With mine it may be closed in darksome grave.
And that, as Alcest to her self unkind,
You might exempt him from the laws of death.
But he is sure to die: and now his sword
Already moisted is in his warm blood,
Helpless for any succour you can bring
Against deaths sting, which he must shortly feel.
Then let your love be like the love of old
Which Carian Queen did nourish in his heart
Of his Mausolus: build for him a tomb
Whose stateliness a wonder new may make.
Let him, let him have sumptuous funerals:
Let grave thereon the horror of his fights:
Let earth be buried with unburied heaps.
Frame their Pharsaly, and discouloured stream's
Of deep Enipeus: frame the grassy plain,
Which lodged his camp at siege of Mutiny.
Make all his combats, and courageous acts:
And yearly plays to his praise institute:
Honour his memory: with doubled care
Breed and bring up the children of you both
In Caesars grace: who as a noble Prince
Will leave them Lords of this most glorious realm.
What shame were that? ah Gods! what infamy?
With Antony in his good haps to share,
And ouerliue him dead: deeming enough
To shed some tears upon a widow tomb?
The after-liuers justly might report
That I him only for his Empire loved
And high estate: and that in hard estate
I for another did him lewdly leave?
Like to those birds wafted with wandering wings.
From foreign lands in spring-time here arrive:
And live with vs so long as Somers heate,
And their food lasts, then seek another soil.
And as we see with ceaslesse fluttering
Flocking of seelly flies a brownish cloud
To vintag'd wine yet working in the tonne:
Not parting thence while they sweet liquor taste:
After, as smoke, all vanish in the air,
And of the swarm not one so much' appear.
By this sharpe death what profit can you win?
I neither gain nor profit seek therein.
What praise shall you of after-ages get?
Nor praise, nor Glory in my cares are set.
What other end ought you respect, then this?
My only end my only duty is.
Your duty must upon some good be founded?
On virtue it, the only good, is grounded.
What is that Virtue?
That which vs beseems.
Outrage our selves? who that beseeming deems?
Finish I will my sorrows dieng thus.
Minish you will your glories doing thus.
Good friends I pray you seek not to revoke
My fixed intent of following Antony.
I will die. I will die: must not his life,
His life and death by mine be followed?
Mean while, dear sisters, live: and while you live,
Do often honour to our loved Tombs.
Straw them with flowers: and sometimes happily
The tender thought of Antony your Lord
And me poor soul to tears shall you inuit,
And our true loves to doleful voice commend.
And think you Madame, we from you will part?
Think you alone to feel deaths ugly dart?
Think you to leave vs? and that the same sun
Shall see at once you dead, and vs alive?
Weal die with you: and Clotho pitiless
Shall vs with you in hellish boat embark:
Ah live, I pray you: this disastred woe
Which racks my heart, alone to me belongs:
My lot longs not to you: servants to be
No shame, no harm to you, as is to me.
Live sisters, live, and seeing his suspect
Hath causeless me in sea of sorrows drowned,
And that I cannot live, if so I would,
Nor yet would leave this life, if so I could,
Without his love: procure me, Diomed,
That against poor me he be no more incensed.
Wrest out of his conceit that harmful doubt,
That since his wrack he hath of me conceived
Though wrong conceived: witness you reverent Gods,
Barking Anubis, Apis bellowing.
Tell him, my soul burning, impatient,
Forlorn with love of him, for certain seal
Ofher true loyalty my corpse hath left,
Tencrease of dead the number numberless,
Go then, and if as yet he me bewail,
If yet for me his heart one sigh fourth breathe
Blessed shall I be: and far with more content
Depart this world, where so I me torment.
Mean season vs let this sad tomb enclose,
Attending here till death conlude our woes.
I will obey your will.
So the desert
The Gods repay of thy true faithful heart.
And is it not pity, Gods, ah Gods of heaven
To see from love such hateful fruit to spring?
And is it not pity that this firebrand so
Lays waste the trophes of Philippe fields?
Where are those sweet alluremēts, those sweet looks,
Which gods the ̄ selves right hart sick would have made
What doth that beauty, rarest gift of heaven,
Wonder of earth? Alas! what do those eyes?
And that sweet voice all Asia understood,
And sunburned Africa wide in deserts spread?
Is their force dead? have they no further power?
Can not by them Octauius be suppriz'd?
Alas! if Jove in midst of all his ire,
With thunderbolt in hand some land to plague,
Had cast his eyes on my Queen, out of hand
His Plaguing bolt had fallen out of his hand:
Fire of his wrath into vain smoke should turn,
And other fire within his breast should burn.
Nought lives so fair. Nature by such a work
Her self, should seem, in workmanship hath past.
She is all heavenly: never any man
But seeing his was ravished with her sight.
The Alabaster covering of her face,
The coral coullor his two lips ingrains,
Her beamy eyes, two Suns of this our world,
Of his fair hair the fine and flaming gold,
Her brave straight stature, and her winning parts
Are nothing else but fierce, fetters, darts.
Yet this is nothing th'enchaunting skills
Of her celestial Spirit, his training speech,
Her grace, his majesty, and forcing voice,
Whither she it with fingers speech consort,
Or hearing sceptred kings ambassadors
Answer to each in his own language make.
Yet now at need it aides her not at all
With all these beauties, so her sorrow stings.
Darkened with woe her only study is
To weep, to sigh, to seek for loneliness.
Careless of all, his hair disordered hangs:
His charming eyes whence murdering looks did fly,
Now rivers grown', whose wellspring anguish is,
Do trickling wash the marble of his face.
His fair discovered breast with sobbing swollen
Self cruel she still martyred with blows,
Alas! It's our ill hap, for if his tears
She would convert into her loving charms,
To make a conquest of the conqueror,
(As well she might, would she his force employ)
She should vs safety from these ills procure,
His crown to his, and to his race assure.
Unhappy he, in whom selfe-succour lies,
Yet selfe-forsaken wanting succour dies.
O sweet fertile land, wherein
Phoebus did with breath inspire
man who men did first begin,
formed first of Nilus mire.
whence of Arts the eldest kinds,
earths most heavenly ornament,
were as from their fountain sent
to enlight our misty minds.
whose gross sprite frō endless time
as in darkened prison pente,
never did to knowledge clime.
Where the Nile, our father good,
father-like doth never miss
yearly vs to bring such food,
as to life required is:
visiting each year this plain,
and with fat slime cou'ring it,
which his seven mouths do spit,
as the season comes again.
making thereby greatest grow
busy reapers joyful pain,
when his floods do highest flow.
Wandering Prince of rivers thou,
honour of the Aethiops land,
of a Lord and moister now
thou a slave in awe must stand.
now of Tiber which is spread
less in force, and less in fame
reverence thou must the name,
whom all other rivers dread,
for his children swollen in pride,
who by conquest seek to tread
round this earth on every side.
Now thou must begin to send
tribute of thy watery store,
as sea paths thy steps shall bend,
yearly presents more and more.
thy fat skumme, our fruitful corn,
piled from hence with thievish hāds
all unclothed shall leave our lands
into foreign country borne.
which puffed up with such a pray
shall thereby the praise adorn
of that sceptre Rome doth sway.
Nought thee helps thy horns to hide
far from hence in unknown groūds,
that thy waters wander wide,
yearly breaking banks, and bounds.
and that thy Skie-coullor'd brooks
through a hundred peoples pass,
drawing plots for trees and grass
with a thousand turn's and crookes.
whom all weary of their way
thy throats which in wideness pass
power into their mother Sea.
Nought so happy haplesse life
in this world as freedom finds:
nought wherein more sparks are rise
to inflame courageous minds.
but if force must vs enforce
needs a yoke to undergo,
under foreign yoke to go
Still it proves a bondage worse.
and doubled subjection
see we shall, and feel, and know
subject to a stranger grown.
From hence forward for a King,
whose first being from this place
should his breast by nature bring
care of country to embrace,
We at surly face must quake
of some Romaine madly bent:
who our terror to augment.
his Proconsuls axe will shake.
driving with our Kings from hence
our established government,
justice sword, and laws defence.
Nothing worldly of such might
but more mighty Destiny,
by swift Times unbridled flight,
makes in end his end to see.
every thing Time overthrows,
nought to end doth steadfast stay.
his great sith mowes all away
as the stalk of tender rose.
only immortality
of the heavens doth it oppose
against his powerful Deity.
One day there will come a day
which shall quail they fortunes flower
and thee ruined low shall lay
in some barbarous Princes power.
when the pittie-wanting fire
shall, O Rome, thy beauties burn,
and to humble ashes turn
thy proud wealth and rich attire,
those guilt roofs which turretwise,
justly making envy morn,
threaten now to pearce Skies.
As thy forces fill each land
harvests making here and there,
reaping all with ravening hand
they find growing any where:
from each land so to thy fall,
multitudes repair shall make,
from the common spoil to take
what to each mans shaire may fall.
fingered all thou shalt behold:
no jot left for tokens sake
that thou were so great of old.
Like unto the ancient Troy
whence derived thy founders be,
conquering foe shall thee enjoy,
and a burning pray in thee.
for within this turning ball
this we see, and see each day:
all things fixed ends do stay,
ends to first beginnings fall.
&amp; that nought, how strong or strāge
chaungeles doth endure always,
But endures fatal change.
Lucil. sole comfort of my bitter case,
The only trust, the only hope I have,
In last despair: Ah is not this the day
That death should me of life and love bereave?
What waite I for that have no refuge left,
But am sole remnant of my fortune left?
All leave me, fly me: none, no not of them
Which of my greatness greatest good received,
Stands with my fall: they seem as now ashamed
That heretofore they did me ought regard:
They draw them back, showing they followed me,
Not to partake my harm's, but cousin me.
In this our world nothing is steadfast found,
In vain he hopes, who here his hopes doth ground.
Yet nought afflicts me, nothing kills me so,
As that I so my Cleopatra see
Practise with Caesar, and to him transport
My flame, her love, more dear then life to me.
Believe it not: Too high a heart she bears,
Too princely thoughts.
Too wise a head she wear
Too much inflamed with greatness, evermore
Gaping for our great Empires government.
So long time you her constant love have tri'de.
But still with me good fortune did abide.
Her changed love what token makes you know?
Pelusium lost, and Action overthrow,
Both by her fraud: my well appointed fleet,
And trusty Soldiers in my quarrel armed,
Whom she, false she, in stead of my defence,
Came to persuade, to yield them to my foe:
Such honour Thyre done, such welcome given,
Their long close talks I neither knew, nor would,
And treacherous wrong Alexas hath me donne,
Witness too well her perjured love to me.
But you O Gods (if any faith regard)
With sharpe revenge her faithless change reward.
The dole she made upon our overthrow,
Her realm given up for refuge to our men,
Her poor attire when she devoutly kept
The solemn day of her nativity,
Again the cost and prodigal expense
Showed when she did your birth day celebrate,
Do plain enough her heart unfeigned prove,
Equally touched, you loving, as you love.
Well; be her love to me or false, or true,
Once in my soul a cureless wound I feel.
I Jove: nay burn in fire of her love:
Each day, each night his Image haunts my mind,
Her self my dreams: and still I tired am,
And still I am with burning pincers nipped.
Extreme my harm: yet sweeter to my sense
Then boiling Torch of jealous torments fire:
This grief, nay rage, in me such stir doth keep,
And thorns me still, both when I wake and sleep.
Take Caesar conquest, take my goods, take he
Th'onor to be Lord of the earth alone,
My sons, my life bent headlong to mishapps:
No force, so not my Cleopatra take.
So foolish I, I cannot her forget,
Though better were I banished her my thought.
Like to the sick whose throat the fevers fire
Hath vehemently with thirsty drought inflamed,
Drinks still, albee the drink he still desires
Be nothing else but fuel to his flame.
He cannot rule himself: his health's respect
Yealdeth to his distempered stomachs heate.
Leave of this love, that thus renews your woe.
I do my best, but ah! can not do so.
Think how you have so brave a captain been,
And now are by this vain affection fallen.
The ceasles thought of my felicity
Plunges me more in this adversity.
For nothing so a man in ill torments,
As who to him his good state represents.
This makes my rack, my anguish, and my woe
Equal unto the hellish passions grow,
When I to mind my happy puisance call
Which erst I had by warlike conquest won,
And that good fortune which me never left,
Which hard disastre now hath me bereft.
With terror tremble all the world I made
At my sole word, as Rushes in the streams
At waters will: I conquered Italy,
I conquered Rome, that nations so redoubt.
I Bare (mean while besieging Mutiny)
Two consuls armies for my ruin brought.
Bathed in their blood, by their deaths witnessing
My force and skill in matters Martial.
To wreak thy uncle, unkind Caesar, I
With blood of enemies the banks embrued
Of stained Enipeus, hindering his course
Stopped with heaps of piled carcases:
When Cassius and Brutus ill betide
Marched against vs, by vs twice put to flight,
But by my sole conduct: for all the time
Caesar hart-sicke with fear and fever lay.
Who knows it not? and how by every one
Fame of the fact was given to me alone.
There sprang the love, the never changing love,
Wherein my heart hath since to yours been bound:
There was it, my Lucill, you Brntus sau'de,
And for your Brutus Antony, you found.
Better my hap in gaining such a friend,
Then in subduing such an enemy.
Now former virtue dead doth me forsake,
Fortune engulfs me in extreme distress:
She turns from me her smiling countenance,
Casting on me mishap upon mishap,
Left and betrayed of thousand thousand friends,
Once of my suit, but you Lucill are left
Remaining to me steadfast as a tower
In holy love, in spite of fortunes blasts.
But if of any God my voice be heard,
And be not vainly scatt' red in the heavens,
Such goodness shall not glorilesse be lost.
But coming ages still there of shall boste.
Men in their friendship ever should be one,
And never ought with fickle Fortune shake,
Which still removes, nor will, nor knows the way,
Her rolling bowl in one sure state to stay.
Wherefore we ought as borrowed things receive
The goods light she lends vs to pay again:
Not hold them sure, nor on them build our hopes
As on such goods as cannot fail, and fall:
But think again, nothing is dureable,
Virtue except, our never failing host:
So bearing sail when favouring winds do blow,
As frowning tempests may vs least dismay
When they on vs do fall: not ouer-glad
With good estate, nor ouer-grieu'd with bad.
Resist mishap.
Alas! it is too strong.
Mishaps oft times are by some comfort borne:
But these, ay me! whose weights oppress my hart,
Too heavy lie, no hope can them relieve.
There rests no more, but that with cruel blade
For lingering death a hasty way be made.
Caesar, as heir unto his fathers state.
So will his Fathers goodness imitate,
To you ward: whom he know's allied in blood,
Allied in marriage, ruling equally
The Empire with him, and with him making war
Have purged the earth of Caesars murderers.
You into portions parted have the world
Even like coheirs their heritages part:
And now with one accord so many years
In quiet peace both have your charges ruled.
Blood and alliance nothing do prevail
To cool the thirst of hot ambitious breasts:
The son his Father hardly can endure,
Brother his brother, in one common Realm.
So fervent this desire to Command:
Such jealousy it kindles in our hearts,
Sooner will men permit another should
Love her they love then wear the crown they wear.
All laws it breaks, turns all things upside down:
Amity, kindred, nought so holy is
•ut it defiles. A monarchy to gain
None cares which way, so he may it obtain.
Suppose he Monarch be and that this world
No more acknowledge sundry Emperors,
That Rome him only fear, and that he join
The east with west, and both at once do rule:
Why should he not permit you peaceably
Discharged of charge and Empires dignity,
Private to live reading Philosophy,
In learned Greece, Spain, Asia, any land?
Never will he his Empire think assured
While in this world Mark Antony shall live.
Sleepeles Suspicion, Pale distrust, cold fear
Always to princes company do bear
Bred of reports: reports which night and day
Perpetual guests from court go not away.
He hath not slain your brother Lucius,
Nor shortened hath the age of Lepidus,
Albeit both into his hands were fallen,
And he with wrath against them both inflamed.
Yet one, as Lord in quiet rest doth bear.
The greatest sway in great Iberia:
The other with his gentle Prince retains
Of highest Priest the sacred dignity.
He fears not them, their feeble force he knows.
He fears no vanquished overfilled with woes.
Fortune may change again.
A down-cast foe
Can hardly rise, which once is brought so low.
All that I can is donne: for last assay
(When all means failed) I to entreaty fell,
(Ah coward creature!) whence again repulsed
Of combat I unto him proffer made:
Though he in prime, and I by feeble age
Mightily weakened both in force and skill.
Yet could not he his coward heart advance
Basely afraid to try so praiseful chance.
This makes me plain, makes me my self accuse,
Fortune in this her spiteful force doth use
Against my gray hairs: in this unhappy I
•opine at heavens in my hippos pitiless.
Aman, a woman both in might and mind,
In Mars his school who never lesson learned,
Should me repulse, chase, ouerthow, destroy,
Me of such fame, bring to so low an ebb?
Alcides blood, who from my infancy
With happy prowess crowned have my praise
Witness thou Gaul unused to servile yoke,
Thou valiant Spain, you fields of Thessalie
With millions of mourning cries bewailed,
Twice watered now with blood of Italy.
Witness may Afrique, and of conquered world
All four quarters witnesses may be.
For in what part of earth inhabited,
Hungry of praise have you not ensigns spread?
Thou know rich Aegipt (Aegipt of my deeds
Fair and foul subject) Egypt ah! thou know
How I behau'd me fighting for thy king,
When I regainde him his rebellious Realm:
Against his foes in battle showing force,
And after fight in victory remorse.
Yet if to bring my glory to the ground,
Fortune had made me overthrown by one
Of greater force, of better skill then I:
One of those Captains feared so of old,
Camel, Marcellus, Worthy Scipio,
This late great Caesar, honour of our state,
Or that great Pompei aged grown in arms;
That after harvest of a world of men
Made in a hundred battles, fights, assaults,
My body thorough appears with push of pike
Had vomited my blood, in blood my life,
In midst of millions fellows in my fall:
The less her wrong, the less should my woe:
Nor she should pain, nor I complain me so.
No, no, whereas I should have died in arms,
And vanquished oft new armies should have armed,
New battles given, and rather lost with me
All this whole world submitted unto me:
A man who never saw enlaced pikes
With bristled points against his stomach bent,
Who fears the field, and hides him cowardly
Dead at the very noise the soldiers make.
His virtue, fraud, deceit, malicious guile,
His arms the arts that false Vlisses used,
Known at Modena, where the Consuls both
Death-wounded were, and wounded by his men
To get their army, war with it to make
Against his faith, against his country soil,
Of Lepidus, which to his succours came,
To honour whom he was by duty bound,
The Empire he usurped: corrupting first
with baits and bribes the most part of his men.
Yet me hath overcome, and made his pray,
And state of Rome, with me hath overcome.
Strange! one disordered act at Actium
The earth subdued, my glory hath obscured.
For since, as one whom heavens wrath attaints
With fury caught, and more then furious
Vexed with my evils, I never more had care
My armies lost, or lost name to repair:
I did no more resist.
all wars affairs,
But battles most, daily have their success
Now good, now ill: and though that fortune have
Great force and power in every worldly thing,
Rule all, do all, have all things fast enchained
Unto the circle of his turning wheel:
Yet seems it more then any practise else
She doth frequent Bellonas bloody trade:
And that his favour, wavering as the wind,
His greatest power therein doth oftenest show.
Whence grows, we daily see, who in their youth
G•tt honour there, do loose it in their age,
Vanquished by some less warlike then themselves:
Whom yet a meaner man shall overthrow.
His use is not to lend vs still her hand,
But sometimes headlong back a gain to throw,
When by his favour she hath vs extolled
Unto the top of highest happiness.
well ought I curse within my grieved soul,
Lamenting day and night, this senseless love,
Whereby my fair enticing foe entrapped
My hedelesse Reason, could no more escape.
It was not fortunes ever changing face:
It was not Dest niece chaungles Violence
Forged my mishap. Alas! who doth not know
They make, nor mar, nor any thing can doe.
Fortune, which men so fear, adore, detest,
Is but a chance whose cause vnknow'n doth rest.
Although oft times the cause is well perceived,
But not th'effect the same that was conceived.
Pleasure, nought else, the plague of this our life,
Our life which still a thousand plagues pursue,
Alone hath me this strange disastre spun,
Fallen from a soldier to a chamberer,
Careless of virtue, careless of all praise.
Nay, as the fatted swine in filthy mire
With glutted heart I wallowed in delights,
All thoughts of honour trodden under foot.
So I me lost: for finding this sweet cup
Pleasing my taste, vnwife I drunk my fill,
And through the sweetness of that poisons power
By steps I drove my former wits astray.
I made my friends, offended me forsake,
I help my foes against my self to rise.
I robbed my subjects, and for followers
I saw my self be set with flatterers.
Mine idle arms fair wrought with spiders work,
My scattred men without their ensigns strayed:
Caesar mean while who never would have dared
To cope with me, me suddenly despis'de,
Took hart to fight, and hop'de for victory
On one so gone, who glory had forgone.
Enchanting pleasure Venus sweet delights
Weaken our bodies, ouer-cloud our sprights,
Trouble our reason, from our hearts out chase
All holy virtues lodging in their place:
Like as the cunnig fisher takes the fish
By traitor bait whereby the hooks is hid:
So Pleasure serves to vice in steed of food
To bait our souls thereon too liquorishe.
This poison deadly is alike to all,
But on great kings doth greatest outrage work,
Taking the royal scepters from their hands,
Thence forward to be by some stranger borne:
While that their people charged with heavy loads
Their flatt'rers pill, and suck their mary dry,
Not ruled but left to great men as a pray,
While this fond Prince himself in pleasur's drowns
Who hears nought, sees noght, doth nought of a king
Seming himself against himself conspired.
Then equal Justice wanders banished,
And in her seat sitts greedy Tyranny.
Confused disorder troubles all estates,
Crimes without fear and outrages are done.
Then mutinous Rebellion shows her face,
Now hid with this, and now with that pretence,
Provoking enemies, which on each side
Enter at ease, and make them Lords of all.
The hurtful works of pleasure here behold,
The wolf is not so hurtful to the fold,
Frost to the grapes, to ripened fruit the rain:
As pleasure is to princes full of pain.
There needs no proof, but by the Assyrian king,
On whom that Monster woeful wrack did bring.
There needs no proof, but by unhappy I,
Who lost my empire, honour, life thereby,
Yet hath this ill so much the greater force,
As scarcely any do against it stand:
No not the Demigods the old world knew,
Who all subdued, could Pleasures power subdue.
Great Hercules, Hercules once that was
Wonder of earth and heaven, matchless in might,
Who An•eus, Lie•us, Geryon overcame,
Who drew from hell the triple-headed dog,
Who Hydra killed, vanquished Achelous,
Who heavens weight on his strong shoulders bare;
Did he not under Pleasures burden bow?
Did he not Captive to this passion yield,
When by his Captive, so he was inflamed,
As now your self in Cleopatra burn?
Slept in his lapp, his bosom kissed and kissed,
With base unseemly service bought her love,
Spinning at distaff, and with sinewy hand
Winding on spindles thread, in maids attire?
His conquering club at rest on wall did hang:
His bow vnstringd he bent not as he used:
Upon his shafts the weaving spiders spun:
And his hard cloak the fretting moths did pierce.
The monsters free and fearless all the time
Throughtout the world the people did torment.
And more and more increasing day by day
Scorned his weak heart become a mistress play.
In only this like Hercules am I,
In this I prove me of his lineage right:
In this himself, his deeds I show in this:
In this, nought else, my ancestor he is.
But go we: die I must, and with brave end
Conclusion make of all foregoing harms:
Die, die I must: I must a noble death,
A glorious death unto my succour call:
I must deface the shame of time abused,
I must adorn the wanton loves I used,
With some courageous act: that my last day
By mine own hand my spots may wash away.
Come dear Lucill: alas! why weep you thus!
This mortal lot is common to vs all.
We must all die, each doth in homage owe
Unto that God that shared the Realms below
Ah sigh no more: alas! appease your woes,
For by your grief my grief more eager grows,
Alas, with what tormenting fire
Vs martyred this blind desire
to stay our life from flieng!
How ceasleslie our minds doth rack,
How heavy lies upon our back
This dastard fear of dieng!
Death rather healthful succour gives,
Death rather all mishapps relieves
That life upon vs throws:
And ever to vs death unclose
The door whereby from cureless woes
Our weary soul out goes.
What Goddess else more mild then she
To bury all our pain can be,
What remedy more pleasing?
Our pained hearts when dolor stings,
And nothing rest, or respite brings,
What help have we more easing?
Hope which to vs doth comfort give,
And doth our fainting harts revive,
Hath not such force in anguish:
For promising a vain relief
She oft vs fails in midst of grief,
And helpless lets vs languish.
But Death who call on her at need
Doth never with vain semblant feed,
But when them sorrow pains,
So riddes their souls of all distress
Whose heavy weight did them oppress,
That not one grief remains.
Who fearless and with courage bold
Can Acherons black face behold,
Which muddy water bears:
And crossing over in the way
Is not amazed at Perruque gray
Old rusty Charon wears?
Who void of dread can look upon
The dreadful shades that Rome alone,
On banks where sound no voices:
Whom with his fire-brands and her Snakes
No whit afraid Alecto makes,
Nor triple-barking noises:
Who freely can himself dispose
Of that last hour which all must close,
And leave this life at pleasure:
This noble freedom more esteems,
And in his heart more precious deems,
Then crown and kingly treasure,
The waives which Bores blasts turmoil
And cause with foaming fury boil,
Make not his heart to tremble:
Nor brutish broil, when with strong head
A rebel people madly led
Against their Lords assemble:
Nor fearful face of Tyrant wood,
Who breaths but threats, &amp; drinks but blood,
No, nor the hand which thunder,
The hand of Jove which thuder bears,
And ribs of rocks in sunder tears,
Tears mountains sides in sunder:
Nor bloody Marses butchering bands,
Whose lightnings desert lay the lands
Whom dusty clouds do cover:
From of whose armour sun-beames fly,
And under them make quaking lie
The plains whereon they hover:
Nor yet the cruel murth'ing blade
Warm in the moist bowels made
Of people pell mell dieng
In some great City put to sack
By savage Tyrant brought to wrack,
At his cold mercy lieng.
How abject him, how base think I,
Who wanting courage can not dye
When need him thereto calls?
From whom the dagger drawn to kill
The cureless griefs that vex him still
For fear and faintness falls?
O Antony with thy dear mate
Both in misfortunes fortunate!
Whose thoughts to death a spiring
Shall you protect from victors rage,
Who on each side doth you encage,
To triumph much desiring.
That Caesar may you not offend
Nought else but death can you defend,
Which his weak force derideth.
And all in this round earth contained,
Powr'les on them whom once enchained
Auernus prison hides:
Where great Psammetiques ghost doth rest,
Not with infernal pain possessed,
But in sweet fields detained:
And old Amasis soul likewise,
And all our famous Ptolemies
That meanwhile on vs reigned.
You euer-liuing Gods which all things hold
Within the power of your celestial hands,
By whom heate, cold, the thunder, and the wind,
The properties of enter changing mon'ths
Their course and being have; which do set down
Of Empires by your destined decree
The force, age, time, and subject to no change
Change all, reserving nothing in one state:
You have advanced, as high as thundering heaven
The Romaines greatness by Bellonas might:
Maistring the world with fearful violence,
Making the world widow of liberty.
Yet at this day this proud exalted Rome
Despoiled, captived, at one mans will doth bend:
Her Empire mine, her life is in my hand,
As Monarch I both world and Rome command;
Do all, can all; forth my commandment cast
Like thundering fire from one to other Pole
Equal to Jove: bestowing by my word
Happs and mishaps, as Fortunes King and Lord.
No town there is, but up my Image sets,
But sacrifice to me doth daily make:
Whither where Phoebus join his mourning steeds,
Or where the night them weary entertains,
Or where the heat the Garamants doth scorch,
Or where the cold from Bores breast is blown:
All Caesar do both awe and honour bear,
And crowned Kings his very name doth fear.
Antony knows it well, for whom not one
Of all the Princes all this earth do rule,
Arms against me: for all redoubt the power
which heavenly powers on earth have made me bear.
Antony, he poor man with fire inflamed
A women's beauties kindled in his heart.
Rose against me, who longer could not bear
My sisters wrong he did so ill entreat:
Seeing her left while that his lewd delights
Her husband with his Cleopatra took
In Alexandria, where both nights and days
Their time they passed in nought but loves and plays
All Asias forces into one he drew,
And forth he set upon the azured waives
A thousand and a thousand Ships, which filled
With Soldiers, pikes, with targets, arrows, darts,
Made Neptune quake, and all the watery troupes
Of Glanques, and Tritons lodged at Actium,
But mighty Gods, who still the force withstand
Of him, who causeless doth another wrong,
In less then moments space reduced to nought
All that proud power by Sea or land he brought.
Presumptuous pride of heigh and haughty sprite,
Voluptuous care of fond and foolish love,
Have justly wrought his wrack: who thought he held
(By overweening) Fortune in his hand.
Of vs he made no count, but as to play,
So fearless came our forces to assay.
So sometimes fell to Sons of mother earth,
Which crawled to heaven war on the God to make,
Olymp on Pelion, Ossa on Olymp,
Pindus on Ossa loading by degrees:
That at hand strokes with mighty clubs the might
On mossy rocks the Gods make tumble down:
When mighty Jove with burning anger chafed,
Disbraind with him Gyges and Briareus,
Blunting his darts upon their bruised bones.
For no one thing the Gods can less abide
In deeds of men, then Arrogance and pride.
And still the proud, which too much takes in hand,
Shall foulest fall, where best he thinks to stand.
Right as some Palace, or some stately tower,
Which ouer-lookes the neighbour buildings round
In scorning wise, and to the stars up grows,
Which in short time his own weight overthrows.
What monstrous pride, nay what impiety
Incensed him onward to the Gods disgrace?
When his two children, Cleopatras brats,
To Phoebe and her brother he compared,
Latonas race, causing them to be called
The Sun and Moon? Is not this folly right
And is not this the Gods to make his foes?
And is not this himself to work his woes?
In like proud sort he cause his head to leese
The Jewish king Antigonus, to have
His Realm for balm, that Cleopatra loved,
As though on him he had some treason proved.
Lidia to her, and Siria he gave,
Cyprus of gold, Arabia rich of smells:
And to his children more Cilicia,
Parth's, Medes, Armenia, Phaenicia:
The kings of kings proclaming them to be,
By his own word, as by a sound decree.
What? Robbing his own country of her due
Triumphed he not in Alexandria,
Of Artabasus the Armenian King,
Who yielded on his perjured word to him?
Nay, never Rome more injuries received,
Since thou, ô Romulus, by flight of birds
With happy hand the Romaine walls did build,
Then Antonyes fond loves to it hath done.
Nor ever war more holy, nor more just,
Nor undertaken with more hard constraint,
Then is this war: which were it not, our state
Within small time all dignity should loose:
Though I lament (thou Sun my witness art,
And thou great Jove) that it so deadly proves:
That Romaine blood should in such plenty flow,
Watering the fields and pastures where we go.
What Carthage in old hatred obstinate,
What Gaul still barking at our rising state,
What rebel Samnite, what fierce Phyrrhus power,
What cruel Mithridate, what Parts hath wrought
Such woe to Rome? whose common wealth he had,
(Had he been victor) into Egypt brought.
Surely the Gods, which have this city built
Steadfast to stand as long as time endures,
Which keep the Capitol, of vs take care,
And care will take of those shall after come,
Have made you victor, that you might redress
Their honour grown by passed mischiefs less.
The seely man when all the Greekish Sea
His fleet had hid, in hope me sure to drown,
Me battle gave: where fortune in my stead,
Repulsing him his forces disaraied.
Himself took flight, soon as his love he saw
All wanne through fear with full sails fly away.
His men, though lost, whom none did now direct,
With courage fought fast grappled ship with ship,
Charging, resisting, as their oars would serve,
With darts, with swords, with pikes, with fiery flames.
So that the darkened night her starry veil
Upon the bloody sea had ouer-spred,
Whilst yet they held: and hardly, hardly then
They fell to flieng on the wauie plain,
All full of soldiors overwhelmed with waives.
The air throughout with cries &amp; groans did sound:
The sea did blush with blood: the neighbour shores
Groaned, so they with shipwrecks pestered were,
And floating bodies left for pleasing food
To birds, and beasts, and fishes of the sea,
You know it well Agrippa.
Mete it was
The Romaine Empire so should ruled be,
As heaven is ruled: which turning over vs,
All under things by his example turns.
Now as of heaven one only Lord we know:
One only Lord should rule this earth below.
When one self power is common made to two
Their duties they nor suffer will, nor doe.
In quarrel still, in doubt, in hate, in fear;
Mean while the people all the smart do bear.
Then to the end none, while my days endure,
Seeking to raise himself may succours find,
We must with blood mark this our victory,
For just example to all memory
Murder we must, until not one we leave,
Which may hereafter vs of rest be reeve.
Mark it with murders? Who of that can like?
Murders must use, who doth assurance seek.
Assurance call you enemies to make?
I make no such, but such away I take.
Nothing so much as rigour doth displease.
Nothing so much doth make me live at ease.
What ease to him that feared is of all?
Feared to be, and see his foes to fall.
Commonly fear doth breed and nourish hate.
Hate without power comes commonly too late.
A feared Prince hath oft his death desired
A Prince not feared hath oft his wrong conspired.
No guard so sure, no forte so strong doth prove.
No such defence, as is the peoples love.
Nought more unsure more weak, more like the wind,
Then Peoples favour still to change inclined.
Good Gods! what love to gracious prince men bear!
What honour to the Prince that is severe!
Nought more divine then is Benigntie.
Nought likes the Gods as doth Severity.
Gods all forgive.
On faults they pains do lay.
And give their goods.
Oft times they take away
They wreak them not, ô Caesar, at each time
That by our sins they are to wrath provoked.
Neither must you (believe, I humbly pray)
Your victory with cruelty defile.
The Gods it gave, it must not be abused,
But to the good of all men mildly used,
And they bethank'd: that having given you grace
To reign alone, and rule this earthly mass,
They may hence-forward hold it still in rest,
All scattered power united in one breast.
But what is he that breathless comes so fast,
Approaching vs, and going in such hast?
He seems afraid: and under his arm I
(But much I err) a bloody sword espy.
I long to understand what it may be.
He hither comes: it's best we stay and see.
What good God now my voice will reinforce,
That tell I may to rocks, and hills, and woods,
To waives of sea, which dash upon the shore,
To earth, to heaven, the woeful news I bring?
What sudden chance thee towards vs hath brought
A lamentable chance. O wrath of heavens!
O Gods too pitiless!
What monstrous hap
Wilt thou recount?
Alas too hard mishap!
When I but dream of what mine eyes beheld,
My hart doth freeze, my limbs do quivering quake,
I senseless stand, my breast with tempest tossed
Kills in my throat my words, ere fully borne.
Dead, dead he is: be sure of what I say,
This murdering sword hath made the man away.
Alas my heart doth cleave, pity me rackes,
My breast doth pant to hear this doleful tale.
Is Antony then dead? to death, alas!
I am the cause despair him so compelled.
But soldior of his death the manner show,
And how he did this living light forgo.
When Antony no hope remaining saw
How war he might, or how agreement make,
Saw him betrayed by all his men of war
In every fight as well by sea, as land;
That not content to yield them to their foes
They also came against himself to fight:
Alone in court he began himself torment,
Accuse the Queen, himself of his lament,
Called his untrue and traitress, as who sought
To yield him up she could no more defend:
That in the harms which for his sake he bare,
As in his blissful state, she might not share.
But she again, who much his fury feared,
Gat to the tombs, dark horrors dwelling place:
Made lock the doors, and pull the hearses down.
Then fell she wretched, with his self to fight.
A thousand plaints, a thousand sobs she cast
From his weak breast which to the bones was torn.
Of women his the most unhappy called,
Who by his love, his woeful love, had lost
His realm, his life, and more the love of him,
Who while he was, was all his woes support.
But that she faultless was she did invoke
For witness heaven, and air, and earth, and sea.
Then sent him word, she was no more alive,
But lay enclosed dead within her tomb.
This he believed; and fell to sigh and groan,
And crossed his arms, then thus began to moan.
Poor hopeless man!
What dost thou more attend
Ah Antony! why dost thou death defer.
Since Fortune thy professed enemy,
Hath made to die, who only made thee live?
Soon as with sighs hee had these words up closed,
His armour he vnlaste and cast it off,
Then all disarmed he thus again did say:
My Queen, my heart, the grief that now I feel.
Is not that I your eyes, my Sun, do loose,
For soon again one tomb shall vs conjoin:
I grieve, whom men so valorous did deem,
Should now, then you, of lesser valour seem.
So said, forthwith he Eros to him called,
Eros his man; summoned him on his faith
To kill him at his need. He took the sword,
And at that instant stabbed therewith his breast,
And ending life fell dead before his feet.
O Eros thanks (quoth Antony) for this
Most noble act, who pow'rles me to kill,
On thee hast done, what I on me should do.
Of speaking thus he scarsce had made an end,
And taken up the bloody sword from ground,
But he his body pierced; and of red blood
A gushing fountain all the chamber filled.
He staggred at the blow, his face grew pale,
And on a couch all feeble down he fell,
Sounding with anguish: deadly cold him took,
As if his soul had then his lodging left
But he revived, and marking all our eyes,
Bathed in tears, and how our breasts we beat
For pity, anguish, and for bitter grief,
To see him plunged in extreme wretchedness:
He prayed vs all to haste his lingering death:
But no man willing, each himself withdrew.
Then fell he new to cry and vex himself,
Until a man from Cleopatra came,
Who said from his he had commandment
To bring him to his to the monument.
The poor soul at these words even rapt with joy
Knowing she lived, prayed vs him to convey
Unto his Lady. Then upon our arms
We bare him to the Tomb, but entered not.
For she who feared captive to be made,
And that she should to Rome in triumph go,
Kept close the gate but from a window high
Cast down a corde, wherein he was impackt.
Then by his women's help the corps she raised,
And by strong arms into his window drew.
So pitiful a sight was never seen.
Little and little Antony was pulled,
Now breathing death: his beard was all unkempt,
His face and breast al bathed in his blood.
So hideous yet, and dieng as he was,
His eyes half-clos'd upon the Queen he cast:
Held up his hands, and help himself to raise,
But still with weakness back his body fell.
The miserable lady with moist eyes,
With hair which careless on his forehead hong,
With breast which blows had bloodily benumbed,
With stooping head, and body down-ward bent,
Enlist his in the corde, and with all force
This life-dead man courageously vprais'd,
The blood with pain into his face did flow,
His sinews stiff, her self did breathless grow.
The people which beneath in flocks beheld,
Assisted her with gesture, speech, desire:
Cried and encouraged her, and in their souls
Did sweat, and labour, no whit less then she.
Who never tired in labour, held so long
Helped by her women, and his constant heart,
That Antony was drawn into the tomb,
And there (I think) of dead augments the sum.
The city all to tears and sighs is turned,
To plaints and outcries horrible to hear:
Men, women, children, hoary-headed age
Do all pell mell in house and street lament,
Scratching their faces, tearing of their hair,
Wringing their hands, and martyring their breasts
Extreme their dole: and greater misery
In sacked towns can hardly ever be.
Not if the fire had scaled the highest towers:
That all things were of force and murder full;
That in the streets the blood in rivers streamed;
The son his sire saw in his bosom slain,
The sire his son: the husband and rest of breath
In his wives arms, who furious runs to death.
Now my breast wounded with their piteous plaints
I left their town, and took with me this sword,
Which I took up at what time Antony
Was from his chamber carried to the tomb:
And brought it you, to make his death more plain,
And that thereby my words may credit gain.
Ah Gods what cruel hap! poor Antony,
Alas hast thou this sword so long time borne
Against thy foe, that in the end it should
Of thee his Lord the cursed murth'rer be?
O Death how I bewail thee! we (alas!)
So many wars have ended, brothers, friends,
Companions, cousins, equals in estate:
And must it now to kill thee be my fate?
Why trouble you your self with bootless grief?
For Antony why spend you tears in vain?
Why darken you with dole your victory?
Me seems your self your glory do envy.
Enter the town, give thanks unto the Gods.
I cannot but his tearefull chance lament,
Although not I, but his own pride the cause,
And unchaste love of this Egyptian.
But best we sought into the tomb to get,
Lest she consume in this amazed case
So much rich treasure, with which happily
Despair in death may make his feed the fire:
Suffering the flames his Jewels to deface,
You to defraud, his funeral to grace.
Send then to his, and let some mean be used
With some devise so hold her still alive,
Some fair large promises: and let them mark
Whither they may by some fine cunning slight
Enter the tombs. Caesar. Let Proculeius go,
And feed with hope his soul disconsolate.
Assure his so, that we may wholly get
Into our hands his treasure and her self.
For this of all things most I do desire
To keep her safe until our going hence:
That by his presence beautified may be
The glorious triumph Rome prepares for me.
Shall ever civil bate
gnaw and devour our state?
shall never we this blade,
our blood hath bloody made,
lay down? these arms down lay
as robes we wear always?
but as from age to age.
so pass from rage to rage?
Our hands shall we not rest
to bath in our own breast?
and shall thick in each land
our wretched trophies stand,
to tell posterity,
what mad Impiety
our stony stomachs led
against the place vs bred?
Then still must heaven view
the plagues that vs pursue.
and every where descry
Heaps of vs scattred lie,
making the stranger plains
fat with our bleeding rains,
proud that on them their grave
so many legious have.
And with out fleshes still
Neptune his fishes fill
and drunk with blood from blue
the sea take blushing hue:
as juice of Tyrian shell,
when clarified well
to wolle of finest fields
a purple gloss it yields.
But since the rule of Rome,
to one mans hand is come,
who governs without mate
his now united state,
late jointly ruled by three
enuieng mutually,
whose triple yoke much woe
on Latines necks did throw:
I hope the cause of jar,
and of this bloody war,
and deadly discord gone
by what we last have done:
our banks shall cherish now
the branchie pale-hew'd bow
of Olive, Pallas praise,
in stead of barren bays.
And that his temple door,
which bloody Mars before
held open, now at last
old Ianus shall make fast:
and rust the sword consume,
and spoiled of waving plume,
The useless morion shall
on crook hang by the wall.
At least if war return
It shall not here sojourn,
to kill vs with those arms
were forged for others harms:
but have their points addressed,
against the Germans breast,
The Parthians feigned flight,
the Biscaines martial might.
Old Memory doth there
painted on forehead wear
our Fathers praise: thence torn
our triumphs bays have worn:
thereby our matchless Rome
meanwhile of Shepeheards come
raised to this greatness stands,
the Queen of foreign lands.
Which now even seems to face
the heavens, her glories place:
nought resting under skies
that dares affront her eyes.
So that she needs but fear
the weapons Jove doth bear,
who angry at one blow
may her quite overthrow.
O cruel fortune! ô accursed lot!
O plaguy love! ô most detested brand!
O wretched joys! ô beauties miserable!
O deadly state! ô deadly royalty!
O hateful life! ô Queen most lamentable!
O Antony by my fault buriable!
O hellish work of heaven! alas! the wrath
Of all the Gods at once on vs is fallen.
Unhappy Queen! ô would I in this world
The wandering light of day had never seen?
Alas! of mine the plague and poison I
The crown have lost my ancestors me left,
This Realm I have to strangers subject made,
And robbed my children of their heritage.
Yet this is nought (alas!) unto the price
Of you dear husband, whom my snares entrapped:
Of you, whom I have plagued, whom I have made
With bloody hand a guest of mouldy tomb:
Of you, whom I destroyed, of you, dear Lord,
Whom I of Empire, honour, life have spoiled.
O hurtful woman! and can I yet live,
Yet longer live in this Ghost-haunted tomb?
Can I yet breath! can yet in such annoy,
Yet can my soul within this body dwell?
O Sisters you that spin the thredes of death!
O Styx! ô Plegethon! you brookes of hell!
O Imps of Night!
Live for your childrens sake:
Let not your death of kingdom them deprive.
Alas what shall they do who will have care?
Who will preserve this royal race of yours?
Who pity take? even now me seems I see
These little souls to servile bondage fallen,
And borne in triumph.
Ah most miserable!
Their tender arms with cursed cord fast bound
At their weak backs.
Ah Gods what pity more!
Their seely necks to ground with weakness bend
Never on vs, good Gods, such mischief send.
And pointed at with fingers as they go.
Rather a thousand deaths.
Lastly his knife
Some cruel catiue in their blood imbrue.
Ah my heart breaks. By shady banks of hell,
By fields whereon the lonely Ghosts do tread,
By my foul, and the soul of Antony
I you beseech, Euphron, of them have care.
Be their good Father, let your wisdom let
That they fall not into this Tyrants hands.
Rather conduct them where their friezed locks
Black Aethiops to neighbour Sun do show;
On wauie Ocean at the waters will;
On barren cliffs of snowy Caucasus;
To Tigers swift, to Lions, and to Bears;
And rather, rather unto every coast,
To every land and sea: for nought I fear
As rage of him, whose thirst no blood can quench.
Adieu dear children, children dear adieu:
Good Ices you to place of safety guide,
Far from our foes, where you your lives may lead
In free estate devoid of servile dread.
Remember not, my children, you were borne
Of such a Princely race: remember not
So many brave Kings which have Egipt ruled
In right descent your ancestors have been:
That this great Antony your father was,
Hercules blood, and more then he in praise.
For your high courage such remembrance will,
Seeing your fall with burning rages fill.
Who knows if that your hands false Destiny
The Scepters promised of imperious Rome,
In stead of them shall crooked shepehookes bear,
Needles or forks, or guide the carte, or plough?
Ah learn t'endure: your birth and high estate
Forget, my babes, and bend to force of fate.
Farewell, my babes, farewell my heart is closed,
With pity and pain, my self with death enclosed,
My breath doth fail. Farewell for evermore,
Your Sire and me you shall see never more.
Farewell sweet care, farewell.
Madame Adieu.
Ah this voice kills me. Ah good Gods! I swooned.
I can no more, I die.
Madame, alas!
And will you yield to woe? Ah speak to vs.
Come Children.
We come.
Follow we our chance.
The Gods shall guide vs.
O too cruel lot!
O too hard chance! Sister what shall we do,
What shall we do, alas! if murdering dart
Of death arrive while that in slumbering swooned
Half dead she lie with anguish overgone?
Her face is frozen.
Madame for Gods love
Leave vs not thus: bid vs yet first farewell.
Alas! weep over Antony: Let not
His body be without due rites entombed.
Ah, ah.
Madame.
Ay me!
How faint she is?
My Sisters, hold me up. How wretched I,
How cursed am: and was there ever one
By Fortunes hate into more dolours thrown?
Ah, weeping Niobe, although thy heart
Beholds it self enwrapped in causefull woe
For thy dead children, that a senseless rock
With grief become, on Sipylus thou stand
In endless tears: yet did thou never feel
The weights of grief that on my heart do lie.
Thy Children thou, mine I poor soul have lost,
And lost their Father, more then them I wail,
Lost this fair realm; yet me the heavens wrath
Into a stone not yet transformed hath.
Phaetons sisters, daughters of the Sun,
Which wail your brother fallen into the streams
Of stately Po: the Gods upon the banks
Your bodies to banke-louing Alders turned.
For me, I sigh, I ceasles weep, and wail,
And heaven pitiless laughs at my woe,
Revives, renews it still: and in the end
(Oh cruelty!) doth death for comfort lend.
Die Cleopatra then no longer stay
From Antony, who thee at Styx attends:
Go join thy Ghost with his, and sob no more
Without his love within these tombs enclosed.
Alas! yet let vs weep, lest sudden death
From him our tears, and those last duties take
Unto his tomb we owe.
Ah let vs weep
While moisture lasts, then die before his feet.
Who furnish will mine eyes with streaming tears
My boiling anguish worthily to wail,
Wail thee Antony, Antony my heart?
Alas, how much I weeping liquor want!
Yet have mine eyes quite drawn their Condits dry
By long beweeping my disastred harms.
Now reason is that from my side they suck
First vital moisture, then the vital blood.
Then let the blood from my sad eyes outflow,
And smoking yet with thine in mixture grow.
Moist it, and heat it new, and never stop,
All watering thee, while yet remains one drop.
Antony take our tears: this is the last
Of all the duties we to thee can yield,
Before we die.
These sacred obseques
Take Antony, and take them in good part.
O Goddess thou whom Cyprus doth adore,
Venus of Phaphos, bent to work vs harm
For old Iulus brood, if thou take care
Of Caesar, why of vs take thou no care?
Antony did descend, as well as he,
From thine own Son by long enchained line:
And might have ruled by one and self same fate,
True Trojan blood, the stately Romaine state.
Antony, poor Antony, my dear soul,
Now but a block, the booty of a tomb,
Thy life thy heat is lost, thy colour gone,
And hideous paleness on thy face hath seized.
Thy eyes, two Suns, the lodging place of love,
Which yet for tents to warlike Mars did serve,
Locked up in lidds (as fair days cheerful light
Which darkness flies) do winking hide in night.
Antony by our true loves I thee beseech,
And by our hearts sweet sparks have set on fire,
Our holy marriage, and the tender ruth
Of our dear babes, knot of our amity:
My doleful voice thy ear let entertain,
And take me with thee to the hellish plain,
Thy wife, thy friend: hear Antony, ô hear
My sobbing sighs, if here thou be, or there.
Lived thus long, the winged race of years
Ended I have as Destiny decreed.
Flourished and reigned, and taken just revenge
Of him who me both hated and despised.
Happy, alas too happy: if of Rome
Only the fleet had hither never come.
And now of me an Image great shall go
Under the earth to bury there my woe.
What say I? where am I? ô Cleopatra,
Poor Cleopatra, grief thy reason reaues.
No, no, most happy in this hapless case,
To die with thee, and dieng thee embrace:
My body ioynde with thine, my mouth with thine,
my mouth, whose moisture burning sighs have dried
To be in one self tomble, and one self chest,
And wrapped with thee in one self sheet to rest.
The sharpest torment in my heart I feel
Is that I stay from thee, my heart, this while.
Die will I straight now, now straight will I die,
And straight with thee a wandering shade will be,
Under the Cypress trees thou haunt'st alone,
Where brookes of hell do falling seem to moan.
But yet I stay, and yet thee ouerliue,
That ere I die due rites I may thee give.
A thousand sobs I from my breast will tear,
With thousand plaints thy funerals adorn:
My hair shall serve for thy oblations,
My boiling tears for thy effusions,
Mine eyes thy fire: for out of them the flame
(Which burnt thy heart on me enamoured) came.
Weep my companions, weep, and from your eyes
Rain down on him of tears a brinish stream.
Mine can no more, consumed by the coals
Which from my breast, as from a furnace rise.
Martyr your breasts with multiplied blows,
With violent hands tear of your hanging hair,
Outrage your face: alas! why should we seek
(Since now we die) our beauties more to keep?
I spent in tears, not able more to spend,
But kiss him now, what rests me more to doe?
Then let me kiss you, you fair jets, my light,
Front seat of honour, face most fierce, most fair!
O neck, ô arms, ô hands, ô breast where death
(O mischief) comes to choke up vital breath.
A thousand kisses, thousand thousand more
Let you my mouth for honours farewell give:
That in this office weak my limbs may grow,
Fainting on you, and fourth my soul may flow.

WElcome to Bradford, martial gentlemen,
L. Bonfild, &amp; sir Gilbert Armstrong both,
And all my troops, euē to my basest groom,
Courage and welcome; for the day is ours:
Our cause is good, it is for the lands avail:
Then let vs fight, and dye for Englands good.
We will, my Lord.
As I am Henrie Momford, Kendals Earl,
You honour me with this assent of yours,
And here upon my sword I make protest,
For to relieve the poor, or dye myself:
And know, my Lords, that Iames, the King of Scots,
Wars hard upon the borders of this land:
Here is his Post: say, Iohn Taylor,
What news with King Iames?
War, my Lord: tell, and good news I trow:
For king Iame vows to meet you the 26. of this month.
God willing, marie doth he sir.
My friends, you see what we have to win.
Well, Iohn, commend me to king Iames,
And tell him I will meet him the 26. of this month,
And all the rest: and so farewell.
why standst thou as a man in dumps?
Courage: for if I win, Isle make thee Duke:
I Henry Momford will be King my self,
And I will make thee Duke of Lancaster,
And Gilbert Armestrong Lord of Doncaster.
Nothing, my Lord, makes me amazed at all,
But that our soldiers finds our victuals scant:
We must make havoc of those country Swains:
For so will the rest tremble and be afraid,
And humbly send provision to your camp.
My Lord Bonfild gives good advice,
They make a scorn and stand upon the King:
So what is brought, is sent from them perforce;
Ask Mannering else.
What say thou, Mannering?
When as I showed your high commission,
They made this answer,
Only to send provision for your horses.
Well, hye thee to Wakefield, bid the Town
To send me all provision that I want;
Least I, like martial Tamberlaine, lay waste
Their bordering Countries,
And leaving none alive that contradicts my Commission.
Let me alone, my Lord, Isle make them
Veil their plumes: for whatsoere he be,
The proudest Knight, Justice, or other, that gainsaid
Your word, He clap him fast, to make the rest to fear.
Doe so Nick: hye thee thither presently,
And let vs hear of thee again to morrow.
Will you not remove, my Lord?
No: I will lye at Bradford all this night,
And all the next: come, Bonfield, let vs go,
And listen out some bonny lasses here.
M. Mannering, stand aside, whilst we confer
What is best to doe.
Townsmen of Wakefield, the Earl of Kendall
Here hath sent for victuals;
And in aiding him, we show our selves
No less than traitors to the King:
Therefore let me hear, Townsmen,
What is your consents.
Even as you please we are all content.
Then M. Mannering we are resolved.
As howe?
Marriesir, thus.
We will send the Earl of Kendall no victuals,
Because he is a traitor to the King;
And in aiding him we show our selves no less.
Why, men of Wakefield, are you waxen mad;
That present danger cannot whet your wits,
Wisely to make provision of your selves?
The Earl is thirty thousand men strong in power,
And what town so ever him resist,
He lays it flat and level with the ground:
Ye silly men, you seek your own decay:
Therefore send my Lord such provision as he wants,
So he will spare your town, and come no nearer
Wakefield then he is.
Master Mannering, you have your answer,
You may be gone.
Well, Woodroffe, for so I guess is thy name,
Isle make thee curse thy overthwart denial;
And all that sit upon the bench this day,
Shall rue the hour they have withstood my Lords
Commission.
Doe thy worst, we fear thee not.
See you these seals? before you pass the town,
I will have all things my Lord doth want,
Inspire of you.
Proud dapper Jack, veil bonnet to
The bench,
That represents the person of the King;
Or sir, Isle lay thy head before thy feet.
Why, who art thou?
Why, I am George a Greene,
True liegeman to my King,
Who scorns that men of such esteem as these,
Should brooke the braves of any traitorous squire:
You of the bench, and you my fellow friends,
Neighbours, we subjects all unto the King,
We are English borne, and therefore Edwards friends,
Voude unto him even in our mothers womb,
Our minds to God, our hearts unto our King,
Our wealth, our homage, and our carcases,
Be all King Edwards: then sir, we have
Nothing left for traitors, but our swords,
Whetted to bathe them in your bloods,
And dye against you, before we send you any victuals.
Well spoken, George a Greene.
Pray let George a Greene speak for vs.
Sir you get no victuals here,
Not if a hoof of beef would save your lives.
Fellow, I stand amazed at thy presumption:
Why, what art thou that dare gainsay my Lord,
Knowing his mighty puissance and his stroke?
Why, my friend, I come not barely of my self:
For see, I have a large Commission.
Let me see it, sir.
Whose seals be these?
This is the Earl of Kendals seal at arms,
This Lord Charnel Bonfields,
And this sir Gilbert Armestrongs.
I tell thee, sir, did good King Edwards son
Seal a commission against the King his father,
Thus would I tear it in despite of him,
Being traitor to my Sovereign.
What? hast thou torn my Lord; Commission?
Thou shalt rue it, and so shall all Wakefield.
What, are you in choler? I will give you pills
To cool your stomach.
See thou these seals?
Now by my fathers soul, which was a yeoman,
When he was alive, eat them,
Or eat my daggers point, proud squire.
But thou doest but jest, I hope.
Sure that shall you see, before we two part.
Well, and there be no remedy, so George,
One is gone: I pray thee no more now.
O sir, if one be good, the others cannot hurt.
So sir, now you may go tell the Earl of Kendall,
Although I have rent his large Commission,
Yet of courtesy I have sent all his seals
Back again by you.
Well, sir, I will doe your arrant.
Now let him tell his Lord, that he hath
Spoke with George a Greene,
Right pinner of merry Wakefield town,
That hath physic for a fool,
Pills for a traitor that doth wrong his Sovereign.
Are you content with this that I have done?
I, content, George:
For highly hast thou honoured Wakefield town,
In cutting of proud Mannering so short.
Come, thou shalt be my welcome guest to day;
For well thou hast deserved reward and favour.
Now gentle father list unto thy son,
And for my mothers love,
That erst was blithe and bonny in thine eye,
Grant one petition that I shall demand.
What is that, my Cud?
Father, you know the ancient enmity of late,
Between the Musgroues and the wily Scots,
Whereof they have other,
Not to leave one alive that strides a lance.
O Father, you are old, and waning age unto the grave:
Old William Musgroue, which meanwhile was thought,
The bravest horseman in all Westmerland,
Is weak, and forced to stay his arm upon a staff,
That •arst could wield a lance:
Then, gentle Father, resign the hold to me;
Give arms to youth, and honour unto age.
Avaunt, false hearted boy, my joints doe quake,
Even with anguish of thy very words.
Hath William Musgroue seen an hundred years?
Have I been feared and dreaded of the Scots,
That when they heard my name in any road,
They fled away, and posted thence amain?
And shall I dye with shame now in mine age?
No, Cud, no, thus resolve I,
Here have I lived, and here will Musgroue dye.
Now, gētle Grime, God a mercy for our good chere,
Our fare was royal, and our welcome great;
And sith so kindly thou hast entertained vs,
If we return with happy victory,
We will deal as friendly with thee in recompense.
Your welcome was but duty, gentle Lord:
For wherefore have we given vs our wealth,
But to make our betters welcome when they come?
O, this goes hard when traitors must be flattered:
But life is sweet, and I cannot withstand it.
God (I hope) will revenge the quarrel of my King.
What said you, Grime?
I say, sir Gilbert, looking on my daughter,
I curse the hour that ere I got the girl:
For sir, she may have many wealthy suitors,
And yet she disdains them all, to have
Poor George a Greene unto her husband.
On that, good Grime, I am talking with thy
Daughter;
But she in quirks and quiddities of love,
Sets me to school, she is so ouerwise.
But, gentle girl, if thou wilt forsake
The pinner, and be my love, I will advance thee high:
To dignify those hairs of amber hew,
Isle grace them with a chaplet made of pearl,
Set with choice rubies, sparks, and diamonds,
Planted upon a velvet hood to hide that head,
Wherein two sapphires burn like sparkling fire:
This will I doe, fair Bettris, and far more,
If thou wilt love the Lord of Doncaster.
Heigh ho, my heart is in a higher place,
Perhaps on the Earl, if that be he,
See where he comes, or angry or in love;
For why, his colour looks discontent.
Come, Nick, follow me.
Howe now, my Lord? what news?
Such news, Bonfild, as will make thee laugh,
And fret thy fill, to hear how Nick was used:
Why, the Justices stand on their terms;
Nick, as you know, is haughty in his words;
He laid the law unto the Justices,
With threatening braves, that one looked on another,
Ready to stoop: but that a churl came in,
One George a Greene, the pinner of the town.
And with his dagger drawn laid hands on Nick,
And by no beggars swore that we were traitors,
Rent our Commission, and upon a brave,
Made Nick to eat the seals, or brooke the stab:
Poor Mannering afraid, came posting hither straight.
Oh lovely George, fortune be still thy friend,
And as thy thoughts be high, so be thy mind,
In all accords, even to thy hearts desire.
What says fair Bettris?
My Lord, she is praying for George a Greene:
He is the man, and she will none but him.
But him? why, look on me, my girl:
Thou know, that yesternight I courted thee,
And swore at my return to wed with thee:
Then tell me, love, shall I have all thy fair?
I care not for Earl, nor yet for Knight,
Nor Baron that is so bold:
For George a Greene the merry pinner,
He hath my heart in hold.
Bootless, my Lord, are many vain replies.
Let vs hye vs to Wakefield, and send her the pinners head.
It shall be so. Grime, gramercy,
Shut up the daughter, bridle her affects,
Let me not miss her when I make return:
Therefore look to her, as to thy life, good Grime.
I warrant you, my Lord.
And Bettris, leave a base pinner, for to love an Earl,
Fine would I see this pinner George a Greene.
It shall be thus:
Nick Mannering shall lead on the battle,
And we three will go to Wakefield in some disguise:
But howsoever, Isle have his head to day.
Why, Iohnie: then the Earl of Kendall is blithe,
And hath brave men that troupe along with him.
I marie, my liege, and hath good men
That come along with him,
And vows to meet you at Scrasblesea, God willing.
If good S. Andrew lend King Iame leave,
I will be with him at the pointed day.
But soft: whose pretty boy art thou?
Sir, I am son unto Sir Iohn a Barley,
Eldest and all that ere my mother had,
Edward my name.
And whither art thou going, pretty Ned?
To seek some birds, and kill them, if I can:
And now my scholemaster is also gone:
So have I liberty to ply my bow:
For when he comes, I stir not from my book.
Lord Hums, but mark the visage of this child;
By him I guess the beauty of his mother:
None but Laeda could breed Helena.
Tell me, Ned, who is within with thy mother.
Not but her self and household servants, sir:
If you would speak with her, knock at this gate.
Iohnie, knock at that gate.
O, I am betrayed: what multitudes be these?
Fear not, fair Iane: for all these men are mine,
And all thy friends, if thou be friend to me:
I am thy lover Iames the King of Scots,
That oft have sued and wooed with many letters,
Painting my outward passions with my pen,
When as my inward soul did bleed for woe:
Little regard was given to my suit,
But happily thy husbands presence wrought it:
Therefore, sweet Iane, I fitted me to time;
And hearing that thy husband was from home,
Am come to crave what long I have desired.
Nay, soft you, sir, you get no entrance here,
That seek to wrong sir Iohn a Barley so,
And offer such dishonour to my mother.
Why, what dishonour, Ned?
Though young, yet often have I heard
My father say,
No greater wrong than to be made cuckold.
Were I of age, or were my body strong,
Were he ten Kings, I would shoot him to the heart,
That should attempt to give sir Iohn the horn.
Mother, let him not come in,
I will go lie at lockie Millers house.
Stay him.
I, well said, Ned, thou hast given the King
His answer:
For were the ghost of Caesar on the earth,
Wrapped in the wonted glory of his honour,
He should not make me wrong my husband so:
But good King Iames is pleasant, as I guess,
And means to try what humour I am in;
Else would he never have brought an host of men,
To have them witness of his Scottish lust.
Iane, in faith, Iane.
Never reply: for I protest by the highest
Holy God,
That doometh just revenge for things amiss,
King Iames of all men shall not have my love.
Then list to me, Saint Andrew be my boot,
But Isle rase thy castle to the very ground,
Unless thou open the gate, and let me in.
I fear thee not, King Iamie, doe thy worst:
This castle is too strong for thee to scale:
Besides, to morrow will sir Iohn come home.
Well, Iane, since thou disdain King Iames love,
Isle draw thee on with sharpe and deep extremes:
For by my fathers soul, this brat of thine
Shall perish here before thine eyes,
Unless thou open the gate, and let me in.
O deep extremes: my heart begins to break:
My little Ned looks pale for fear.
Cheer thee, my boy, I will doe much for thee.
But not so much, as to dishonour me.
And if thou die, I cannot live, sweet Ned.
Then dye with honour, mother, dying chaste.
I am armed:
My husbands love, his honour, and his same,
Joins victory by virtue.
Now, King Iames, if mothers tears cannot allay thine ire,
Then butcher him, for I will never yield:
The son shall dye, before I wrong the father.
Why then he dyes.
My Lord, Musgroue is at hand.
Who, Musgroue? The devil he is. Come,
My horse.
Now, King Iames, thou art my prisoner.
Not thine, but fortunes prisoner.
Father, the field is ours: their colours we
Have seized:
And Hums is stain: I slew him hand to hand.
God and Saint George.
O father, I am sore athirst.
Come in, young Cud, come and drink thy fill:
Bring in King Iame with you as a guest:
For all this broil was cause he could not enter.
The sweet content of men that live in love,
Breeds fretting humours in a restless mind,
And fancy being checked by fortunes spite,
Grows too impatient in her sweet desires:
Sweet to those men whom love leads on to bliss,
But sour to me, whose hap is still amiss.
Marie amen, sir.
Sir, what doe you cry, Amen at?
Why, did not you talk of love?
Howe doe you know that?
Well, though I say it that should not say it,
There are few fellows in our parish,
So nettled with love, as I have been of late.
Sir, I thought no less, when the other morning,
You rose so early to go to your wenches.
Sir, I had thought you had gone about my honest business.
Trow you have hit it: for master, be it known
To you,
There is some good will betwixt Madge the Sousewife,
And I,
Marie she hath another lover.
Can thou brooke any rivals in thy love?
A rider? no, he is a sow-gelder, and goes a foot.
But Madge pointed to meet me in your wheat close.
Well, did she meet you there?
Never make question of that:
And first I saluted her with a greene gown,
And after fell as hard a wooing,
As if the Priest had bin at our backs, to have married vs.
What, did she grant?
Did she grant? Never make question of that:
And she gave me a shirt coler,
Wrought over with no counterfeit stuff.
What, was it gold?
Nay, it was better than gold.
What was it?
Right Coventry blew,
Who had no sooner come there, but wot you who
came by.
No, who?
Clim the sow-gelder.
Came he by?
He spied Madge and I sit together,
He leapt from his horse, laid his hand on his dagger, and
Began to swear.
Now I seeing he had a dagger,
And I nothing but this twig in my hand,
I gave him fair words and said nothing.
He comes to me and takes me by the bosom,
You hoorsen shu, said he, hold my horse,
And look he take no cold in his feet.
No marie shall he sir, quoth I,
Isle lay my cloak underneath him:
I took my cloak, spread it all along,
And his horse on the midst of it.
Thou clown, did thou set his horse upon
Thy cloak?
I, but mark how I served him:
Madge and he was no sooner gone down into the ditch,
But I plucked out my knife,
Cut four pools in my cloak, and made his horse stand
On the bare ground.
It was well done: now sir, go and survey my fields:
If you find any cattle in the corn, to pound with them.
And if I find any in the pound,
I shall turn them out.
Now we have put the horses in the corn,
Let vs stand in some corner for to hear,
What braving terms the pinner will breathe,
When he spies our horses in the corn.
O master where are you? we have a prise.
A prise, what is it?
Three goodly horses in our wheat close.
Three horses in our wheat close? whose be they?
Marie thats a riddle to me: but they are there:
Velvet horses, and I never saw such horses before. As my
duty was, I put off my cap, and said as follows:
My masters, what doe you make in our close?
One of them hearing me ask what he made there, held up
his head and neighed, and after his manner laughed as heartily
as if a mare had been tied to his girdle. My masters, said I,
it is no laughing matter; for if my master take you here, you
go, as round as a top, to the pound. Another untoward
jade hearing me threaten him to the pound, and to tell you
of them, cast up both his heals, and let such a monstrous
great fart; that was as much as in his language to say, A fart
for the pound, and a fart for George a Greene. Now I
hearing this, put on my cap, blew my horn, called them
all jade, and came to tell you.
Now sir, go and drive me those three horses
To the pound.
Doe you hear? I were best take a constable
With me.
Why so?
Why, they being gentlemen's horses, may stand on their
Reputation, and will not obey me.
Go doe as I bid you, sir.
Well, I may go.
Whither away, sir?
Whither away? I am going to put the horses
In the pound.
Sir, those three horses belong to vs, and we put
Them in, and they must tarry there, and eat their fill.
Stay, I will go tell my master.
Hear you, master? we have another prise:
Those three horses be in your wheat close still,
And here be three geldings more.
What be these?
These are the masters of the horses.
Now, gentlemen, I know not your degrees,
But more you cannot be, unless you be Kings,
Why wrong you vs of Wakefield with your horses?
I am the pinner, and before you pass,
You shall make good the trespass they have done.
Peace, saucy mate, prate not to vs:
I tell thee, pinner, we are gentlemen.
Why sir, so may I sir, although I give no arms.
Thou? howe art thou a gentleman?
And such is my master, and he may give as good
Arms, as ever your great grandfather could give.
Pray thee let me hear howe?
Marie my master may give for his arms,
The picture of April in a greene jerkin,
With a rooke on one fist, and an horn on the other:
But my master gives his arms the wrong way;
For he gives the horn on his fist:
And your grandfather, because he would not lose his
Arms,
Wears the horn on his own head.
Well pinner, sith our horses be in,
In spite of thee they now shall feed their fill,
And eat until our leasures serve to go.
Now by my fathers soul,
Were good king Edwards horses in the corn,
They shall amend the seath or kiss the pound,
Much more yours sir, whatsoere you be.
Why man, thou know not vs,
We do belong to Henry Momford Earl of Kendal,
Men that before a month be full expired,
Will be king Edwards betters in the land.
King Edwards better, rebel, thou least.
Villain, what hast thou done? thou hast stroke
An Earl.
Why what care I? A poor man that is true,
Is better then an Earl, if he be false:
Traitors reap no better favours at my hands.
I, so me thinks, but thou shalt dear aby this blow.
Now or never lay hold on the pinner.
Stay, my Lords, let vs parley on these broils:
Not Hercules against two, the proverb is,
Nor I against so great a multitude.
Had not your troupes come marching as they did,
I would have stopped your passage unto London:
But now Isle fly to secret policy.
What doest thou murmur, George?
Marie this, my Lord, I muse,
If thou be Henrie Momford Kendals Earl,
That thou wilt doe poor G. a Greene this wrong,
Ever to match me with a troupe of men.
Why doest thou strike me then?
Why my Lord, measure me but by your self:
Had you a man had served you long,
And heard your foe misuse you behind your back,
And would not draw his sword in your defence,
You would cashier him.
Much more, king Edward is my king:
And before Isle hear him so wronged,
Isle die within this place,
And maintain good whatsoever I have said.
And if I speak not reason in this case,
What I have said Isle maintain in this place.
A pardon my Lord for this pinner,
For trust me he speaks like a man of worth.
Well, George, wilt thou leave Wakefield and
Wend with me,
Isle freely put up all and pardon thee.
I my Lord, considering me one thing,
You will leave these arms and follow your good king.
Why George, I rise not against king Edward,
But for the poor that is oppressed by wrong,
From whence came you? where doe you dwell?
I am, forsooth, a semsters maid hard-by,
That hath brought work home to your daughter.
Nay, are you not some crafty queen,
That comes from George a Greene, that rascal,
With some letters to my daughter?
I will have you searched.
Alas, sir, it is Hebrue unto me,
To tell me of George a Greene, or any other:
Search me good sir,
And if you find a letter about me,
Let me have the punishment that is due.
Why are you muffled? I like you the worse
For that.
I am not, sir, ashamed to show my face,
Yet loath I am my cheeks should take the air,
Not that I am chary of my beauties hue,
But that I am troubled with the tooth-ach sore.
A pretty wench of smiling countenance,
Old men can like, although they cannot love,
I, and love, though not so brief as young men can.
Well, go in, my wench, and speak with my daughter.
I wonder much at the Earl of Kendall,
Being a mighty man, as still he is,
Yet for to be a traitor to his king,
Is more then God or man will well allow:
But what a fool am I to talk of him?
My mind is more here of the pretty lass:
Had she brought some forty pounds to town.
I could be content to make her my wife:
Yet I have heard it in a proverb said,
He that is old, and marries with a lass,
Lies but at home, and proves himself an ass.
How now, my wench, how first? what not a word?
Alas, poor soul, the tooth-ach plagues her sore.
Well, my wench, here is an Angel for to buy thee
And I pray thee use mine house,
The oftner the more welcome: farewell.
O blessed love, and blessed fortune both.
But Bettris, stand not here to talk of love,
But hye thee straight unto thy George a Greene:
Never went Roe-bucke swifter on the downs,
Then I will trip it till I see my George.
Come away Ienkin.
Come, here is his house. Where be you, ho?
Who knocks there?
Here are two or three poor men, father,
Would speak with you.
Pray give your man leave to lead me fort
Go, Ienkin, fetch him forth.
Come, old man.
Father, here is three poor men come to question
Thee a word in secrete that concerns their lives.
Say on my sons.
Father, I am sure you hear the news,
How that the Earl of Kendal wars against the king,
Now father we three are Gentlemen by birth,
But younger brethren that want revenues,
And for the hope we have to be preferred,
If that we knew that we shall win,
We will march with him:
If not, we will not march a foot to London more.
Therefore good father, tell vs what shall happen,
Whether the King or the Earl of Kendal shall win.
The king, my son.
Art thou sure of that?
I, as sure as thou art Henry Momford,
The one L. Bonfild, the other sir Gilbert.
Why this is wondrous, being blind of sight,
His deep perseverance should be such to know vs.
Magic is mighty, and foretells great matters:
In deed Father, here is the Earl come to see thee,
And therefore good father fable not with him.
Welcome is the Earl to my poor cell,
And so are you my Lords: but let me counsel you,
To leave these wars against your king,
And live in quiet.
Father, we come not for advice in war,
But to know whether we shall win or leese.
Lose gentle Lords, but not by good king Edward:
A baser man shall give you all the foil.
I marie father, what man is that?
Poor George a Greene the pinner.
What shall he?
Pull all your plumes, and sore dishonour you.
He, as how?
Nay, the end tries all, but so it will fall out.
But so it shall not by my honour Christ.
Isle raise my camp, and fire Wakefield town,
And take that servile pinner George a Greene,
And butcher him before king Edwards face.
Good my Lord be not offended,
For I speak no more then art reveals to me:
And for greater proof,
Give your man leave to fetch me my staff.
Ienkin, fetch him his walking staff.
Here is your walking staff.
Isle prove it good upon your carcases:
A wiser wizard never met you yet,
Nor one that better could foredoome your fall:
Now I have singled you here alone,
I care not though you be three to one.
Villain, hast thou betrayed vs?
Momford, thou least, never was I traitor yet;
Only deuis'd this guile to draw you on,
For to be combatants.
Now conquer me, and then march on to London:
Least you be torn in pieces with she devils:
Mistress Bettris, once, twice, thrice.
Oh is this no cunning?
Is this my love, or is it but her shadow?
I this is the shadow, but here is the substance.
Tell me sweet love, what good fortune
Brought thee hither:
For one it was that favoured George a Greene.
Both love &amp; fortune brought me to my George,
In whose sweet sight is all my hearts content.
Tell me sweet love, how came thou from thy
Fathers?
A willing mind hath many slips in love:
It was not I, but Wily thy sweet boy.
And where is Wily now?
In my apparel in my chamber still.
Ienkin, come hither: Go to Bradford,
And listen out your fellow Wily.
Come, Bettris, let vs in,
And in my cottage we will sit and talk.
Brother of Scotland, I doe hold it hard,
Seeing a league of truce was late confirmed
Twixt you and me, without displeasure offered,
You should make such invasion in my land,
The vows of kings should be as oracles,
Not blemished with the stain of any breach,
Chiefly where fealty and homage wills it.
Brother of England, rub not the sore afresh,
My conscience grieves me for my deep misdeed,
I have the worst, of thirty thousand men,
There escaped not full five thousand from the field.
Gramercy, Musgroue, else it had gone hard.
Cud, Isle quite thee well ere we two part
But had not his old Father William Musgroue
Plaid twice the man, I had not now been here,
A stronger man I seldom felt before,
But one of more resolute valiancy,
Treads not I think upon the English ground.
I wot well, Musgroue shall not lose his hier.
And it please your grace, my father was
Five score and three at Midsommer last past,
Yet had king Iamie been as good as George a Greene,
Yet Billy Musgroue would have fought with him.
As George a Greene, I pray thee, Cud,
Let me question thee,
Much have I heard since I came to my crown,
Many in manner of a proverb say,
Were he as good as G. a Green, I would strike him sure:
I pray thee tell me, Cud, can thou inform me,
What is that George a Greene.
Know, my Lord, I never saw the man,
But mickle talk is of him in the Country.
They say he is the Pinner of Wakefield town,
But for his other qualities, I let alone.
May it please your grace, I know the mā too well.
Too well, why so, Warwick?
For once he swingde me, till my bones did ache.
Why, dares he strike an Earl?
An Earl my Lord, nay he will strike a king,
Be it not king Edward.
For stature he is framed,
Like to the picture of stout Hercules,
And for his carriage passes Robin Hood.
The boldest Earl or Baron of your land,
That offered scath unto the town of Wakefield,
George will arrest his pledge unto the pound,
And who so resisted bears away the blows,
For he himself is good enough for three.
Why this is wondrous, my L. of Warwick,
Sore do I long to see this George a Greene.
But leaving him, what shall we do, my Lord,
For to subdue the rebels in the North?
They are now marching up to Doncaster.
Soft, who have we there?
Here is a traitor, the Earl of Kendal.
Aspiring traitor, how dare thou once
Cast thine eyes upon thy Sovereign,
That honoured thee with kindness and with favour?
But I will make thee buy this treason dear.
Good my Lord.
Reply not, traitor.
Tell me, Cuddy, whose deed of honour
Won the victory against this rebel.
George a Greene the Pinner of Wakefield.
George a Greene, now shall I hear news
Certain what this Pinner is:
Discourse it briefly, Cuddy, how it befell.
Kendall and Bonfild, with sir Gilbert Armstrong,
Came to Wakefield Town disguised.
And there spoke ill of your grace,
Which George but hearing, field them at his feet,
And had not rescue come into the place,
George had slain him in his close of wheat.
But Cuddy, can thou not tell
Where I might give and grant some thing,
That might please, &amp; highly gratify the pinners thoughts?
This at their parting George did say to me,
If the king vouchsafe of this my service,
Then gentle Cud kneel upon thy knee,
And humbly crave a boon of him for me.
Cud, what is it?
It is his will your grace would pardon them,
And let them live although they have offended.
I think the man strives to be glorious.
Well, George hath craved it, and it shall be granted,
Which none but he in England should have gotten.
Live Kendall, but as prisoner,
So shalt thou end thy days within the tower.
Gracious is Edward to offending subjects.
My Lord of Kend. you are welcome to the court.
Nay, but ill come as it false out now,
I, ill come in deed, were it not for George a Greene,
But gentle king, for so you would aver,
And Edwards betters, I falute you both,
And here I vow by good Saint George,
You will gain but little when your sums are counted.
I sore doe long to see this George a Greene:
And for because I never saw the North,
I will forthwith go see it:
And for that to none I will be known,
We will disguise our selves and steal down secretly,
Thou and I king Iames, Cud, and two or three,
And make a merry journey for a month.
Away then, conduct him to the tower.
Come on king Iames my heart must needs be merry,
If fortune make such havoc of our foes.
Why is not lovely Marian blithe of cheer?
What ails my Leman that she gins to lower?
Say good Marian why art thou so sad.
Nothing, my Robin, grieves me to the heart,
But whenever I doe walk abroad,
I hear no songs but all of George a Greene,
Bettris his fair Leman passes me.
And this my Robin gaules my very soul.
Content, what wreakes it vs though George a
Greene be stout,
So long as he doth proffer vs no scath?
Envy doth seldom hurt but to it self,
And therefore, Marian, smile upon thy Robin.
Never will Marian smile upon her Robin,
Nor lie with him under the green wood shade,
Till that thou go to Wakefield on a greene,
And beat the Pinner for the love of me.
Content thee, Marian, I will ease thy grief,
My merry men and I will thither stray,
And here I vow that for the love of thee,
I will beat George a Greene, or he shall beat me.
As I am Scarlet, next to little Iohn,
One of the boldest yeomen of the crew,
So will I wend with Robin all along,
And try this Pinner what he dares do.
As I am Much the Millers son,
That left my Mill to go with thee,
And nill repent that I have done,
This pleasant life contents me,
In ought I may to doe thee good,
Isle live and die with Robin Hood.
And Robin, Marian she will go with thee,
To see fair Bettris how bright she is of blue.
Marian, thou shalt go with thy Robin.
Bend up your bows, and see your strings be tight,
The arrows keen, and every thing be ready,
I shall be turned out of mine office.
What is that, sir?
Whenever I go to fight with any body,
I use to flourish my staff thrice about my head
Before I strike, and then show no favour.
Well sir, and till then I will not strike thee.
Well sir, here is once, twice, here is my hand,
I will never doe it the third time.
Why then I see we shall not fight.
Faith no: come, I will give thee two pots
Of the best Ale, and be friends.
Faith I see it is as hard to get water out of a flint,
As to get him to have about with me:
Therefore I will enter into him for some good cheer:
My friend, I see thou art a faint hearted fellow,
Thou hast no stomach to fight,
Therefore let vs go to the Alehouse and drink.
Well, content, go thy ways and say thy prayers,
Thou scapst my hands to day.
Tell me sweet love, how is thy mind content,
What can thou brooke to live with George a Greene?
Oh George, how little pleasing are these words?
Came I from Bradford for the love of thee?
And left my father for so sweet a friend?
Here will I live until my life doe end.
Happy am I to have so sweet a love.
But what are these come tracing here along?
Three men come striking through the corn,
My love.
Back again, you foolish travellers,
For you are wrong, and may not wend this way.
That were great shame.
Now by my soul, proud sir,
We be three tall yeomen, and thou art but one:
Come, we will forward in despite of him.
Leap the ditch, or I will make you skip.
What, cannot the hie way serve your turn,
But you must make a path over the corn?
Why, art thou mad? dare thou encounter three?
We are no babes, man, look upon our limbs.
Sir, the biggest limbs have not the stourest hearts.
Were ye as good as Robin Hood, and his three merry men,
Isle drive you back the same way that ye came.
Be ye men, ye scorn to encounter me all at once,
But be ye cowards, set upon me all three,
And try the Pinner what he dares perform.
Were thou as high in deeds,
As thou art haughty in words,
Thou well might be a champion for a king:
But empty vessels have the loudest sounds,
And cowards prattle more than men of worth.
Sir, dare thou try me?
I sir, that I dare.
How now? what art thou down?
Come, sir, I am next.
Come sir, now to me, spare me not,
For Isle not spare thee.
Make no doubt, I will be as liberal to thee.
Stay, George, for here I doo protest,
Thou art the stoutest champion that ever I laid
Hands upon.
Soft you sir, by your leave you lye,
You never yet laid hands on me.
George, wilt thou forsake Wakefield,
And go with me,
Two liveries will give thee every year,
And forty crowns shall be thy see.
Why, who art thou?
Why, Robin Hood:
I am come hither with my Marian,
And these my yeomen for to visit thee.
Robin Hood? next to king Edward
Art thou leefe to me:
Welcome, sweet Robin, welcome, maid Marian.
And welcome, you my friends.
Will you to my poor house,
You shall have wafer cakes your fill,
A piece of beef hung up since Martlemas,
Mutton and veale, if this like you not,
Take that you find, or that you bring for me.
Godamercies, good George,
Isle be thy guest to day.
Robin, therein thou honour me.
Isle lead the way.
Come on, king Iames, now wee are
Thus disguised,
There is none (I know) will take vs to be kings:
I think we are now in Bradford,
Where all the merry shoemakers dwell.
Down with your staves, my friends,
Down with them.
Down with our staves? I pray thee, why so?
My friend, I see thou art a stranger here,
Else would thou not have questioned of the thing.
This is the town of merry Bradford,
And here hath been a custom kept of old,
That none may bear his staff upon his neck,
But trail it all along throughout the town,
Unless they mean to have about with me.
But hear you sir, hath the king
Granted you this custom?
King or Kaiser, none shall pass this way,
Except King Edward,
No not the stoutest groom that haunts his court:
Therefore down with your staves.
What were we best to do?
Faith, my Lord, they are stout fellows.
And because we will see some sport,
We will trail our staves.
Hear thou, my friend?
Because we are men of peace and travellers,
We are content to trail our staves.
The way lies before you, go along.
See George, two men are passing
Through the town,
Two lusty men, and yet they trail their staves.
Robin, they are some peasants
Tricked in yeomans weeds. Hello, you two travellers.
Call you vs, sir?
I, you. Are ye not big enough to bear
Your bats upon your necks,
But you must trail them along the streets?
Yes sir, we are big enough, but here is a custom
Kept, that none may pass his staff upon his neck,
Unless he trail it at the weapons point.
Sir, we are men of peace, and love to sleep
In our whole skins, and therefore quietness is best.
Base minded peasants, worthless to be men,
What, have you bones and limbs to strike a blow,
And be your hearts so faint, you cannot fight?
Were not for shame, I would shrub your shoulders well,
And teach you manhood against another time.
Well preached sir Jack, down with your staff.
Do you hear my friends? and you be wise,
Keep down your staves,
For all the town will rise upon you.
Thou speak like an honest quiet fellow.
But hear you me, In spite of all the swains
Of Dradford town, bear me your staves upon your necks,
Or to begin withal, Isle baste you both so well,
You were never better basted in your lives.
We will hold up our staves.
What, have you any more?
Call all your town forth, cut, and longtaile.
What, George a Greene, is it you?
A plague found you,
I think you longed to swinge me well.
Come George, we will crush a pot before we part.
A pot you slave, we will have an hundred.
Here, Will Perkins, take my purse,
Fetch me a stand of Ale, and set in the Market place,
That all may drink that are athirst this day,
For this is for a free to welcome Robin Hood
To Bradford town.
Here Robin, sit thou here: for thou art the best man
What is that?
Hark in your ear.
Go your ways and do it.
Come down on your knees, I have got it.
Let vs hear what it is first.
Mary, because you have drunk with the king,
And the king hath so graciously pledged you,
You shall be no more called Shoemakers.
But you and yours to the worlds end,
Shall be called the trade of the gentle craft.
I beseech your majesty reform this
Which he hath spoken.
I beseech your worship consume this
Which he hath spoken.
Confirm it, you would say.
Well, he hath done it for you, it is sufficient.
Come, George, we will go to Grime,
And have thy love.
I am sure your worship will abide:
For yonder is coming old Musgroue,
And mad Cud his son.
Master, my fellow Wily comes dressed like a woman,
And master Grime will marry Wily: Here they come.
Which is thy old father, Cud?
This, if it please your majesty.
Ah old Musgroue, kneel up,
It fits not such gray hairs to kneel.
Long live my Soueragine,
Long and happy be his days:
Vouchsafe, my gracious Lord, a simple gift,
At Billy Musgroues hand:
King Iames at Meddellom castle gave me this,
This won the honour, and this give I thee.
Godamercie, Musgroue, for this friendly gift,
And for thou feldst a king with this same weapon,
This blade shall here dub valiant Musgroue knight.
Alas what hath your highness done? I am poor.
To mend thy living take thou Meddellom castle,
The hold of both: and if thou want living, complain,
Thou shalt have more to maintain thine estate.
George, which is thy love?
This, if please your majesty.
Art thou her aged father?
I am, and it like your majesty.
And wilt not give thy daughter unto George?
Yes, my Lord, if he will let me marry
With this lovely lass.
What say thou, George?
With all my heart, my Lord, I give consent.
Then do I give my daughter unto George.
Then shall the marriage scone be at an end.
Witness, my Lord, if that I be a woman,
For I am Wily, boy to George a Greene,
Who for my master wrought this subtle shift.
What, is it a boy? what say thou to this Grime?
Mary, my Lord, I think this boy hath
More knavery, than all the world besides.
Yet am I content that George shall both have
My daughter and my lands.
Now George, it rest I gratify thy worth:
And therefore here I doe bequeath to thee,
In full possession half that Kendal hath,
And what as Bradford holds of me in chief,
I give it frankly unto thee for ever.
Kneel down George.
What will your majesty do?
Dub thee a knight, George.
I beseech your grace, grant me one thing.
What is that?
Then let me live and die a yeoman still:
So was my father, so must live his son.
For tic more credit to men of base degree,
To do great deeds, than men of dignity.
Well, be it so George.
I beseech your grace dispatch with me,
And set down my ransom.
George a Greene, set down the king of Scots
His ransom.
I beseech your grace pardon me,
It passes my skill.
Do it, the honor's thine.
Then let king Iames make good
Those towns which he hath burnt upon the borders,
Give a small pension to the father less,
Whose fathers he cause murdered in those wars,
Put in pledge for these things to your grace,
And so return. King Iames, are you content.
I am content: and like your majesty,
And will leave good castles in security.
I crave no more. Now George a Greene,
Isle to thy house: and when I have supped, Isle go to Ask,
And see if Iane a Barley be so fair,
As good King Iames reports her for to be.
And for the ancient custom of Veil staff, keep it 〈◊〉
Claim privilege from me:
If any ask a reason why? or how?
Say, English Edward veiled his staff to you.

THus to our grief the obsequies performed
Of our (too late) deceased and dearest Queen,
Whole soul I hope, possessed of heauēly joys,
Doth ride in triumph mōgst the Cherubins;
Let vs request your grave advice, my Lords,
For the disposing of our princely daughters,
For whom our care is specially employed,
As nature binds to advance their states,
In royal marriage with some princely mates:
For wanting now their mothers good advice,
Under whose government they have received
A perfect pattern of a virtuous life:
Left as it were a ship without a sterne,
Or silly sheep without a Pastors care;
Although our selves doe dearly tender them,
Yet are we ignorant of their affairs:
For fathers best do know to govern sons;
But daughters steps the mothers counsel turns.
A son we want for to succeed our Crown,
And course of time hath cancelled the date
Of further issue from our withered loins
One foot already hangs in the grave,
And age hath made deep furrows in my face:
The world of me, I of the world am weary,
And I would fain resign these earthly cares,
And think upon the welfare of my soul:
Which by no better means may be effected,
Then by resigning up the Crown from me,
In equal dowry to my daughters three.
A worthy care, my Liege, which well declares,
The zeal you bare unto our quondam Queen:
And since your Grace hath licensed me to speak,
I censure thus▪ Your Majesty knowing well,
What several Suitors your princely daughters have,
To make them eche a Jointer more or less,
As is their worth, to them that love profess.
No more, nor less, but even all alike,
My zeal is fixed, all fashiond in one mould:
Wherefore unpartial shall my censure be,
Both old and young shall have alike for me.
My gracious Lord, I heartily do wish,
That God had lent you an heir indubitate,
Which might have set upon your royal throne,
When fates should loose the prison of your life,
By whose succession all this doubt might cease;
And as by you, by him we might have peace.
But after-wishes ever come too late,
And nothing can revoke the course of fate:
Wherefore, my Liege, my censure deems it best,
To match them with some of your neighbour Kings,
Bordring within the bounds of Albion,
By whose united friendship, this our state
May be protected against all foreign hate.
Herein, my Lords, your wishes sort-with mine,
And mine (I hope) do sort with heavenly powers:
For at this instant two near neighbouring Kings
Of Cornwall and of Cambria, motion love
To my two daughters, Gonorill and Ragan.
My youngest daughter, fair Cordella, vows
No liking to a Monarch, unless love allows,
She is solicited by divers Peers;
But none of them her partial fancy hears.
Yet, if my policy may her beguile,
Isle match her to some King within this Isle,
And so establish such a perfect peace,
As fortunes force shall ne'er prevail to cease.
Of vs &amp; ours, your gracious care, my Lord,
Deserves an everlasting memory,
To be inrol'd in Chronicles of fame,
By neuer-dying perpetuity:
Yet to become so provident a Prince,
Lose not the title of a loving father:
Do not sorce love, wherefancy cannot dwell,
Lest streams being stopped, aboue the banks do swell.
I am resolved, and even now my mind
Doth meditate a sudden stratagem,
To try which of my daughters loves me best:
Which till I know, I cannot be in rest.
This granted, when they jointly shall contend,
Eche to exceed the other in their love:
Then at the vantage will I take Cordella,
Even as she doth protest she loves me best,
Isle say, Then, daughter, grant me one request,
To show thou love me as thy sisters doe,
Accept a husband, whom my self will woo.
This said, she cannot well deny my suit,
Although (poor soul) her senses will be mute:
Then will I triumph in my policy,
And match her with a King of Brittany.
Isle to them before, and bewray your secrecy.
Thus fathers think their children to beguile,
And oftentimes themselves do first repent,
When heavenly powers do frustrate their intent.
I marvel, Ragan, how you can endure
To see that proud pert Peat, our youngest sister,
So slightly to account of vs, her elders,
As if we were no better then her self!
We cannot have a quaint device so soon,
Or new made fashion, of our choice invention;
But if she like it, she will have the same,
Or study newer to exceed vs both.
Besides, she is so nice and so demure;
So sober, courteous, modest, and precise,
That all the Court hath work enough to do,
To talk how she exceeds me and you.
What should I do? would it were in my power,
To find a cure for this contagious ill:
Some desperate medicine must be soon applied,
To dim the glory of her mounting fame;
Else ere't belong, she'll have both prick and praise,
And we must be set by for working days.
Doe you not see what several choice of Suitors
She daily hath, and of the best degree?
Say, amongst all, she hap to fancy one,
And have a husband when as we have none:
Why then, by right, to her we must give place,
Though it be ne'er so much to our disgrace.
By my virginity, rather then she shall have
A husband before me,
Isle marry one or other in his shirt:
And yet I have made half a grant already
Of my good will unto the King of Cornwall.
Swear not so deeply (sister) here cōmeth my L. Skalliger▪
Something his hasty coming doth import.
Sweet Princesses, I am glad I met you here so luckily,
Having good news which doth concern you both,
And craves speedy expedition.
For Gods sake tell vs what it is, my Lord,
I am with child until you utter it.
Madam, to save your longing, this it is:
Your father in great secrecy to day,
Told me, he means to marry you out of hand,
Unto the noble Prince of Cambria;
You, Madam, to the King of Cornwalls Grace:
Your younger sister he would fain bestow
Upon the rich King of Hibernia:
But that he doubts, she hardly will consent;
For hitherto she ne'er could fancy him.
If she do yield, why then, between you three,
He will divide his kingdom for your dowries.
But yet there is a further mystery,
Which, so you will conceal, I will disclose.
What ever thouspeakst to vs, kind Skalliger,
Think that thou speak it only to thy self.
He earnestly desires for to know,
Which of you three do bear most love to him,
And on your loves he so extremely dotes,
As never any did, I think, before.
He presently doth mean to send for you,
To be resolved of this tormenting doubt:
And look, whose answer pleases him the best,
They shall have most unto their marriages.
O that I had some pleasing Mermaids voice,
For to enchant his senseless senses with!
For he supposes that Cordella will
(Striving to go beyond you in her love)
Promise to do what ever he desires:
Then will he straight enjoin her for his sake,
The Hibernian King in marriage for to take.
This is the sum of all I have to say;
Which being done, I humbly take my leave,
Not doubting but your wisdoms will foresee,
What course will best unto your good agree.
Thanks, gentle Skalliger, thy kindness undeserved,
Shall not be unrequited, if we live.
Now have we fit occasion offred vs,
To be revenged upon her unperceived.
Nay, our revenge we will inflict on her,
Shall be accounted piety in vs:
I will so flatter with my doting father,
As he was ne'er so flattred in his life.
Nay, I will say, that if it be his pleasure,
To match me to a beggar, I will yield:
For why, I know what ever I do say,
He means to match me with the Cornwall King.
Isle say the like: for I am well assured;
What ever I say to please the old mans mind.
Who dotes, as if he were a child again;
I shall enjoy the noble Cambrian Prince:
Only, to feed his humour, will ••ffice,
To say, I am content with any one
Whom heel appoint me; this will please him more.
Then ever Apolloes music pleased Jove.
I smile to think, in what a woeful plight
Cordella will be, when we answer thus:
For she will rather dye, then give consent
To join in marriage with the Irish King:
So will our father think, she loves him not,
Because she will not grant to his desire,
Which we will aggravate in such bitter terms,
That he will soon convert his love to hate:
For he, you know, is always in extremes.
Not all the world could lay a better plot,
I long till it be put in practice.
Perillus, go seek my daughters,
Will them immediately come and speak with me.
I will, my gracious Lord.
Oh, what a combat feels my panting heart,
Twixt childrens love, and care of Common weal!
How dear my daughters are unto my soul,
None knows, but he, that knows my thoughts &amp; secret deeds.
Ah, little do they know the dear regard,
Wherein I hold their future state to come:
When they securely sleep on beds of down,
These aged eyes do watch for their behalf:
While they like wantons sport in youthful toys,
This throbbing heart is appears with dire annoys.
As doth the Sun excceed the smallest Star,
So much the fathers love exceeds the child's.
Yet my complaints are causeless: for the world.
Affords not children more conformable:
And yet, me thinks, my mind presages still
I know not what: and yet I fear some ill.
Well, here my daughters come me: I have found out
A present means to rid me of this doubt.
Our royal Lord and father, in all duty,
We come to know the tenor of your will,
Why you so hastily have sent for vs?
Dear Gonorill, kind Ragan, sweet Cordella
Ye flourishing branches of a Kingly stock,
Sprung from a tree that once did flourish greene,
Whose blossoms now are nipped with Winters frost,
And pale grym death doth wait upon my steps,
And summons me unto his next Assizes.
Therefore, dear daughters, as ye tender the safety
Of him that was the cause of your first being,
Resolve a doubt which much molests my mind,
Which of you three to me would prove most kind;
Which loves me most, and which at my request
Will soonest yield unto their fathers hest.
I hope, my gracious father makes no doubt
Of any of his daughters love to him:
Yet for my part, to show my zeal to you,
Which cannot be in windy words rehearsed,
I prize my love to you at such a rate,
I think my life inferior to my love.
Should you enjoin me for to tie a millstone
About my neck, and leap into the Sea,
At your command I willingly would doe it:
Yea, for to doe you good, I would ascend
The highest Turret in all Brittany,
And from the top leap headlong to the ground:
Nay, more, should you appoint me for to marry
The meanest vassal in the spacious world,
Without reply I would accomplish it:
In brief, command what ever you desire,
And if I fail, no favour I require.
O, how thy words revive my dying soul!
O, how I doe abhor this flattery!
But what saith Ragan to her fathers will?
O, that my simple utterance could suffice,
To tell the true intention of my heart,
Which burns in zeal of duty to your grace,
And never can be quenched, but by desire
To show the same in outward for wardnesse.
Oh, that there were some other maid that durst
But make a challenge of her love with me
Id make her soon confess she never loved
Her father half so well as I doe you.
I then, my deeds should prove in plainer case.
How much my zeal abounds to your grace:
But for them all, let this one mean suffice,
To ratify my love before your eyes:
I have right noble Suitors to my love,
No worse then Kings, and happily I love one:
Yet, would you have me make my choice anew,
Id bridle fancy, and be ruled by you.
Did never Philomel sing so sweet a note.
Did never flatterer tell so false a tale.
Speak now, Cordalla, make my joys at full,
And drop down Nectar from thy honey lips.
I cannot paint my duty forth in words,
I hope my deeds shall make report for me:
But look what love the child doth owe the father,
The same to you I bear, my gracious Lord.
Here is an answer answerlesse indeed:
Were you my daughter, I should scarcely brooke it.
Dost thou not blush, proud Peacock as thou art,
To make our father such a slight reply?
Why how now, Minion, are you grown so proud;
Doth our dear love make you thus peremptory:
What, is your love become so small to vs,
As that you scorn to tell vs what it is:
Do you love vs, as every child doth love
Their father? True indeed, as some,
Who by disobedience short their fathers days,
And so would you; some are so father-sick,
That they make means to rid them from the world;
And so would you: some are indifferent,
Whether their aged parents live or dye;
And so are you. But did thou know, proud girl,
What care I had to foster thee to this,
Ah, then thou would say as thy sisters do:
Our life is less, then love we owe to you.
Dear father, do not so mistake my words,
Nor my plain meaning be misconstrued;
My tongue was never used to flattery.
You were not best say I flatter: if you do,
My deeds shall show, I flatter not with you.
I love my father better then thou can.
The praise were great, spoke from another mouth:
But it should seem your neighbours dwell far off.
Nay, here is one, that will confirm as much
As she hath said, both for my self and her.
I say, thou dost not wish my fathers good.
Dear father.—
Peace, bastard Imp, no issue of King Leir,
I will not hear thee speak one tittle more.
Call not me father, if thou love thy life,
Nor these thy sisters once presume to name:
Look for no help henceforth from me nor mine;
Shist as thou wilt, and trust unto thy self:
My Kingdom will I equally divide
Twixt thy two sisters to their royal dowre,
And will bestow them worthy their deserts:
This done, because thou shalt not have the hope,
To have a child's part in the time to come,
I presently will dispossess my self,
And set up these upon my princely throne.
I ever thought that pride would have a fall.
Plain dealing, sister: your beauty is so sheen,
You need no dowry, to make you be a Queen.
Now whither, poor forsaken, shall I go,
When mine own sisters tryumphin my woe:
But unto him which doth protect the just,
In him will poor Cordella put her trust.
These hands shall labour, for to get my spending;
And so isle live until my days have ending.
Oh, how I grieve, to see my Lord thus fond,
To dote so much upon vain flattering words.
Ah, if he but with good advice had weighed,
The hidden tenure of her humble speech,
Reason to rage should not have given place,
Nor poor Cordella suffer such disgrace.
Dissuade me not, my Lords, I am resolved,
This next fair wind to sail for Brittany,
In some disguise, to see if flying fame
Be not too prodigal in the wondrous praise
Of these three Nymphs, the daughters of King Leir.
If present view do answer absent praise,
And eyes allow of what our ears have heard,
And Venus stand auspicious to my vows,
And Fortune favour what I take in hand;
I will return seized of as rich a prize
As Iason, when he wanne the golden fleece.
Heavens graūt you may; the match were full of honour,
And well beseeming the young Gallian King.
I would your Grace would favour me so much,
As make me partner of your Pilgrimage.
I long to see the gallant British Dames,
And feed mine eyes upon their rare perfections:
For till I know the contrary, Isle say,
Our Dames in France are far more fair then they.
Lord Mumford, you have saved me a labour,
In offering that which I did mean to ask:
And I most willingly accept your company.
Yet first I will enjoin you to observe
Some few conditions which I shall propose.
So that you do not tie mine eyes for looking
After the amorous glances of fair Dames:
So that you do not tie my tongue from speaking,
My lips from kissing when occasion serves,
My hands from congees, and my knees to bow
To gallant Girls; which were a task more hard,
Then flesh and blood is able to endure:
Command what else you please, I rest content.
To bind thee from a thing thou can not leave,
Were but a mean to make thee seek it more:
And therefore speak, look, kiss, salute for me;
In these my self am like to second thee.
Now hear thy task. I charge thee from the time
That first we set sail for the British shore,
To use no words of dignity to me,
But in the friendliest manner that thou can,
Make use of me as thy companion:
For we will go disguised in Palmers weeds,
That no man shall mistrust vs what we are.
If that be all, isle fit your turn, I warrant you. I am some kin to the Blunts, and I think, the bluntest of all my kin∣dred; therefore if I bee too blunt with you, thank your self for praying me to be so.
Thy pleasant company will make the way see me short.
It rests now, that in my absence hence,
I do commit the government to you
My trusty Lords and faithful Counsellors.
Time cutteth off the rest I have to say:
The wind blows fair, and I must needs away.
Heavens send your voyage to as good effect,
As we your land do purpose to protect.
But how far distant are we from the Court?
Some twenty miles, my Lord, or thereabouts.
It seems to me twenty thousand miles:
Yet hope I to be there within this hour.
Then are you like to ride alone for me.
I think, my Lord is weary of his life.
Sweet Gonorill, I long to see thy face,
Which hast so kindly gratified my love.
Get a fresh horse: for by my soul I swear,
I am past patience, longer to forbear
The wished sight of my beloved mistress,
Dear Ragan, stay and comfort of my life.
Now what in Gods name doth my Lord intend?
He thinks he ne'er shall come it's journeys end.
I would he had old Dedalus waxen wings,
That he might fly, so I might stay behind:
For ever we get to Troynouant, I see,
He quite will tyre himself, his horse and me.
Brother of Cambria, we greet you well,
As one whom here we little did expect.
Brother of Cornwall, met in happy time:
I thought as much to have met with the Sultan of Persia,
As to have met you in this place, my Lord.
No doubt, it is about some great affairs,
That makes you here so slenderly accompanied.
To say the truth, my Lord, it is no less,
And for your part some hasty wind of chance
Hath blown you hither thus upon the sudden.
My Lord, to break off further circumstances,
For at this time I cannot brooke delays:
Tell you your reason, I will tell you mine.
In faith content, and therefore to be brief;
For I am sure my haste's as great as yours:
I am sent for, to come unto King Leir,
Wh by these present letters promises
His eldest daughter, lovely Gonorill,
To me in marriage, and for present dowry,
The moity of half his Regiment.
The Ladies love I long ago possessed:
But until now I never had the fathers.
You tell me wonders, yet I will relate
Strange news, and henceforth we must brothers call;
Witness these lines: his honourable age,
Being weary of the troubles of his Crown,
His princely daughter Ragan will bestow
On me in marriage, with half his Seigniories,
Whom I would gladly have accepted of,
With the third part, her complements are such.
If I have one half, and you have the other,
Then between vs we must needs have the whole.
The hole! how mean you that? Zlood, I hope,
We shall have two holes between vs.
Why, the whole Kingdom.
I, that's very true.
What then is left for his third daughters dowry,
Lovely Cordella, whom the world admires?
Tic very strange, I know not what to think,
Unless they mean to make a Nun of her.
'T were pity such rare beauty should be hid
Within the compass of a Cloisters wall:
But howsoe're, if Leirs words prove true,
It will be good, my Lord, for me and you.
Then let s haste, all danger to prevent,
For fear delays doe alter his intent.
Sister, when did you see Cordella last,
That pretty piece, that thinks none good enough
To speak to her, because (sir-reuerence)
She hath a little beauty extraordinary?
Since time my father warned her from his presence,
I never saw her, that I can remember.
God giver her joy of her surpassing beauty;
I think, her dowry will be small enough.
I have incensed my father so against her,
As he will never be reclaymd again.
I was not much behind to do the like.
Faith, sister, what moves you to bear her such good will?
In truth, I think, the same that moves you;
Because she doth surpass vs both in beauty.
Beshrew your fingers, how right you can guess:
I tell you true, it cuts me to the heart.
But we will keep her low enough, I warrant,
And clip her wings for mounting up too hye.
Who ever hath her, shall have a rich marriage of her.
She were right fit to make a Parsons wife:
For they, men say, do love fair women well,
And many times doe marry them with nothing.
With nothing! marry God forbid: why, are there any such?
I mean, no money.
I cry you mercy, I mistook you much:
And she is far too stately for the Church;
Sheele lay her husbands Benefice on her back,
Even in one gown, if she may have her will.
In faith, poor soul, I pity her a little.
Would she were less fair, or more fortunate.
Well, I think long until I see my Morgan,
The gallant Prince of Cambria, here arrive.
And so do I, until the Cornwall King
Present himself, to consummate my joys.
Peace, here comes my father.
Cease, good my Lords, and sue not to reverse
Our censure, which is now irrevocable▪
We have dispatched letters of contract
Unto the Kings of Cambria and of Cornwall;
Our hand and seal will justify no less:
Then do not so dishonour me, my Lords,
As to make shipwreck of our kingly word.
I am as kind as is the Pelican,
That kills itself, to save her young ones lives:
And yet as jealous as the princely Eagle,
That kills her young ones, if they-do but dazzle
Upon the radiant splendour of the Sun.
Within this two days I expect their coming.
But in good time, they are arrived already.
This haste of yours, my Lords, doth testify
The fervent love you bear unto my daughters:
And think your selves as welcome to King Leir,
As ever Pryams children were to him.
My gracious Lord, and father too, I hope,
Pardon, for that I made no greater haste:
But were my horse as swift as was my will,
I long ere this had seen your Majesty.
No other scuse of absence can I frame,
Then what my brother hath informed your Grace:
For our undeserved welcome, we do vow,
Perpetually to rest at your command.
But you, sweet Love, illustrious Gonorill,
The Regent, and the Sovereign of my soul,
Is Cornwall welcome to your Excellence?
As welcome, as Lender was to Hero,
Or brave Aeneas to the Carthage Queen:
So and more welcome is your Grace to me.
O, may my fortune prove no worse then his,
Since heavens do know, my fancy is as much.
Dear Ragan, say, if welcome unto thee,
All welcomes else will little comfort me.
As gold is welcome to the covetous eye,
As sleep is welcome to the Traveller,
As is fresh water to sea-beaten men,
Or moistened showers unto the parched ground,
Or any thing more welcomer then this,
So and more welcome lovely Morgan is.
What rests then, but that we consummate,
The celebration of these nuptial Rites?
My Kingdom I do equally divide.
Princes, draw lots, and take your chance as falls.
These I resign as freely unto you,
As erst by true succession they were mine.
And here I do freely dispossess my self,
And make you two my true adopted heirs:
My self will soiorne with my son of Cornwall,
And take me to my prayers and my beads.
I know, my daughter Ragan will be sorry,
Because I do not spend my days with her:
Would I were able to be with both at once;
They are the kindest Gytles in Christen dome.
I have bin silent all this while, my Lord,
To see if any worthier then my self,
Would once have spoke in poor Cordellaes cause:
But love or fear ties silence to their tongs.
Oh, hear me speak for her, my gracious Lord,
Whose deeds have not deserved this ruthless doom,
As thus to disinherit her of all.
Urge this no more, and if thou love thy life:
I say, she is no daughter, that doth scorn
To tell her father how she loves him.
Who ever speaks hereof to me again,
I will esteem him for my mortal foe.
Come, let vs in, to celebrate vith joy,
The happy Nuptials of these lovely pairs.
Ah, who so blind, as they that will not see
The near approach of their own misery?
Poor Lady, I extremely pity her:
And whilst I live, eche drop of my heart blood,
Will I strain forth, to do her any good.
My Lord, how do you brook this British ayre
My Lord? I told you of this foolish humour,
And bound you to the contrary, you know.
Pardon me for once, my Lord; I did forget.
My Lord again? then let's have nothing else,
And so be cane for spies, and then tic well.
Swounds, I could bite my tongue in two for angered
For Gods sake name your self some proper name.
Call me Trofillus: Isle call thee Denapoll.
Might I be made the Monarch of the world,
I could not hit upon these names, I swear.
Then call me Will, isle call thee Jack.
Well, be it so, for I have well deserved to be called lack.
Stand close; for here a British Lady cōmeth:
A fairer creature ne'er mine eyes beheld.
This is a day of joy unto my sisters,
Wherein they both are married unto Kings;
And I, by birth, as worthy as themselves,
Am turned into the world, to seek my fortune.
How may I blame the fickle Queen of Chance.
That makes me a pattern of her power?
Ah, poor weak maid, whose imbecility
Is far unable to endure these brunts.
Oh, father Leir, how dost thou wrong thy child,
Who always was obedient to thy will!
But why accuse I fortune and my father?
No, no, it is the pleasure of my God:
And I do willingly embrace the rod.
It is no Goddess; for she doth complaint
On fortune, and th'vnkindnesse of her father.
These costly robes ill fitting my estate,
I will exchange for other meaner habit.
Now if I had a Kingdom in my hand,
I would exchange it for a milkmaids smock and petticoat,
That she and I might shift our clothes together.
I will betake me to my thread and Needle,
And earn my huing with my fingers ends.
O brave! God willing, thou shalt have my custom,
By sweet S. Denis, here I sadly swear,
For all the shirts and night gear that I wear.
I will profess and vow a maidens life.
Thē I protest thou shalt not have my custom.
I can forbear no longer for to speak:
For if I do, I think my heart will break.
Sblood, Will, I hope you are not in love with my Sēpster.
I am in such a labyrinth of love,
As that I know not which way to get out.
You'll ne'er get out, unless you first get in,
I prithee lack, cross not my passions.
Prithee Will, to her, and try her patience.
Thou fairest creature, whatsoere thou art,
That ever any mortal eyes be held,
Vouchsafe to me, who have o'reheard thy woees,
To show the cause of these thy sad laments.
Ah Pilgrims, what avails to show the cause,
When there's no means to find a remedy?
To utter grief, doth ease a heart o'er charged.
To touch a sore, doth aggravate the payne.
The silly mouse, by virtue of her teeth,
Released the princely Lyon from the net.
Kind Palmer, which so much defir'st to hear
The tragic tale of my unhappy youth:
Know this in brief, I am the haplesse daughter
Of Leir, sometimes King of Btittany.
Why, who debars his honourable age,
From being still the King of Brittany?
None, but himself hath dispossessed himself,
And given all his Kingdom to the Kings
Of Cornwall and of Cambria, with my sisters.
Hath he given nothing to your lovely self?
He loved me not, &amp; therfote gave me nothing,
Only because I could not flatter him:
And in this day of triumph to my sisters,
Doth Fortune triumph in my overthrow.
Sweet Lady, say there should come a King,
As good as either of your sisters husbands,
To crave your love, would you accept of him?
Oh, doe not mock with those in misery,
Nor do not think, though fortune have the power,
To spoil mine honour, and debase my state,
That she hath any interest in my mind:
For if the greatest Monarch on the earth,
Should sue to me in this extremity,
Except my heart could love, and heart could like,
Better then any that I ever saw,
His great estate no more should move my mind,
Then mountains move by blast of every wind.
Think not, sweet Nymph, tic holy Palmers guise,
To grieved souls fresh torments to devise:
Therefore in witness of my true intent,
Let heaven and earth bear record of my words:
There is a young and lusty Gallian King,
So like to me, as I am to my self,
That earnestly doth crave to have thy love,
And join with thee in Hymens sacred bonds.
The like to thee did ne'er these eyes behold;
Oh live to add new torments to my grief:
Why did thou thus entrap me unawares?
Ah Palmer, my estate doth not befit
A kingly marriage, as the case now stands.
Meanwhile when as I lived in honours height,
A Prince perhaps might postulate my love:
Now misery, dishonour and disgrace,
Hath light on me, and quite reversed the case.
Thy King will hold thee wise, if thou surcease
The suit, whereas no dowry will ensue.
Then be advised, Palmer, what to do:
Cease for thy King, seek for thy self to woo.
Your birth's too high for any, but a King.
My mind is low enough to love a Palmer,
Rather then any King upon the earth.
O, but you never can endure their life,
Which is so straight and full of penury.
O yes, I can, and happy if I might:
Isle hold thy Palmers staff within my hand,
And think it is the Sceptre of a Queen.
Sometime isle set thy Bonnet on my head,
And think I wear a rich imperial Crown.
Sometime isle help thee in thy holy prayers,
And think I am with thee in Paradise.
Thus isle mock fortune, as she mocks me,
And never will my lovely choice repent:
For having thee, I shall have all content.
It were sin to hold her longer in suspense,
Since that my soul hath vowed she shall be mine.
Ah, dear Cordella, cordial to my heart,
I am no Palmer, as I seem to be,
But hither come in this unknown disguise,
To view th'admired beauty of those eyes.
I am the King of Galley, gentle maid,
(Although thus slenderly accompanied)
And yet thy vassal by imperious Love,
And sworn to serve thee everlastingly.
What ever you be, of high or low descent,
Ell's one to me, I do request but this:
That as I am, you will accept of me,
And I will have you whatloe're you be:
Yet well I know, you come of royal race,
I see such sparks of honour in your face:
Have Paliners weeds such power to win fair Ladies?
Faith, then I hope the next that falls is mine:
Upon condition I no worse might speed,
I would for ever wear a Palmers weed.
I like an honest and plain dealing wench,
That swears (without exceptions) I will have you.
These foppets, that know not whether to love a man or no, ex∣cept they first go ask their mothers leave, by this hand, I hate them ten times worse then poison.
What rests then our happiness to procure?
Faith, go to Church, to make the matter sure.
It shall be so, because the world shall say,
King Leirs three daughters were wedded in one day:
The celebration of this happy chance,
We will defer, until we come to France.
I like the wooing, that's not long a doing.
Well, for her sake, I know what I know:
Isle never marry whilst I live,
Except I have one of these British Ladies,
My humour is alienated from the maids of France.
The King hath dispossessed himself of all,
Those to advance, which scarce will give him thanks:
His youngest daughter he hath turned away,
And no man knows what is become of her.
He soiournes now in Cornwall with the eldest,
Who flattred him, until she did obtain
That at his hands, which now she doth possesses
And now she sees hee hath no more to give,
It grieves her heart to see her father live.
Oh, whom should man trust in this wicked age,
When children thus against their parents rage?
But he, the mirror of mild patience,
Puts up all wrongs, and never gives reply:
Yet shames she not in most opprobrious sort,
To call him fool and dotard to his face,
And sets her Parasites of purpose oft,
In scoffing wise to offer him disgrace.
Oh iron age! O times! O monstrous, wild,
When parents are contemned of the child!
His pension she hath half restrained from him,
And will, ever long, the other half, I fear:
For she thinks nothing is bestowed in vain,
But that which doth her fathers life maintain.
Trust not alliance; but trust strangers rather,
Since daughters prove disloyal to the father.
Well, I will counsel him the best I can:
Would I were able to redress his wrong.
Yet what I can, unto my utmost power,
He shall be sure of to the latest hour.
I prithee, Skalliger, tell me what thou think:
Could any woman of our dignity
Endure such quips and peremptory taunts,
As I do daily from my doting father?
Doth't not suffice that I him keep of alms,
Who is not able for to keep himself?
But as if he were our better, he should think
To check and snap me up at every word.
I cannot make me a new fashioned gown,
And set it forth with more then common cost;
But his old doting doltish withered wit,
Is sure to give a sense less check for it.
I cannot make a banquet extraordinary,
To grace my self, and spread my name abroad,
But he, old fool, is captious by and by,
And saith, the cost would well suffice for twice.
Judge then, I pray, what reason first, that I
Should stand alone charged with his vain expense,
And that my sister Ragan should go free,
To whom he gave as much, as unto me?
I prithee, Skalliger, tell me, if thou know,
By any means to rid me of this woe.
Your many favours still bestowed on me,
Bind me in duty to advise your Grace,
How you may soonest remedy this ill.
The large allowance which he hath from you,
Is that which makes him so forget himself:
Therefore abridge it half, and you shall see,
That having less, he will more thankful be:
For why, abundance makes vs forget
The fountains whence the benefits do spring.
Well, Skalliger, for thy kind advice herein,
I will not be ungrateful, if I live:
I have restrained half his portion already,
And I will presently restrain the other,
That having no means to relieve himself,
He may go seek elsewhere for better help.
Go, viperous woman, shame to all thy sex:
The heavens, no doubt, will punish thee for this:
And me a villain, that to curry favour,
Have given the daughter counsel against the father.
But vs the world doth this experience give,
That he that cannot flatter, cannot live.
Father, what ails you to be so sad?
Me thinks, you frolic not as you were wont.
The nearer we do grow unto our graves,
The less we do delight in worldly joys.
But if a man can frame himself to mirth,
It is a mean for to prolong his life.
Then welcome sorrow, Leirs only friend,
Who doth desire his troubled days had end.
Comfort your self, father, here comes your daughter,
Who much will grieve, I know, to see you sad.
But more doth grieve, I fear, to see me live.
My Gonorill, you come in wished time,
To put your father from these pensive dumps.
In faith, I fear that all things go not well.
What, do you fear, that I have angered him?
Hath he complaynd of me unto my Lord:
Isle provide him a piece of bread and cheese;
For in a time heel practise nothing else,
Then carry tales from one unto another.
Tic all his practise for to kindle strife,
Twixt you, my Lord, and me your loving wife:
But I will take an order, if I can,
To cease th'effect, where first the cause began.
Sweet, be not angry in a partial cause,
He ne'er complaynd of thee in all his life.
Father, you must not weigh a women's words.
Alas, not I: poor soul, she breeds young bones,
And that is it makes her so tuteliy sure.
What, breeds young bones already! you will make
An honest woman of me then, belike.
O wild old wretch! who ever heard the like,
That seeks thus his own child to defame?
I cannot stay to hear this discord sound.
For any one that loves your company,
You may go pack, and seek some other place,
To sow the seed of discord and disgrace.
Thus, say or do the best that ever I can,
Tic wrested straight into another sense.
This punishment my heavy sins deserve,
And more then this ten thousand thousand times:
Else aged Leir them could never find
Cruel to him, to whom he hath bin kind.
Why do I ouer-liue my self, to see
The course of nature quite rouerst in me?
Ah, gentle Death, if ever any wight
Did wish thy presence with a perfect zeal:
Then come, I pray thee, even with all my heart,
And end my sorrows with thy fatal dart.
Ah, do not so disconsolate your self,
Nor dew your aged cheeks with wasting tears.
What man art thou that take any pity
Upon the worthless state of old Leir?
One, who doth be are as great a share of grief,
As if it were my dearest fathers case.
Ah, good my friend, how ill art thou advised,
For to consort with miserable men:
Go learn to flatter, where thou may in time
Get favour amongst the mighty, and so climb;
For now I am so poor and full of want.
As that I ne'er can recompense thy love.
What's got by flattery, doth not long endure;
And men in favour live not most secure.
My conscience tells me, if I should forsake you,
I were the hatefulst excrement on the earth:
Which well do know, in course of former time,
How good my Lord hath bin to me and mine.
Did I ererayse thee higher then the rest
Of all thy ancestors which were before?
I ne'er did seek it; but by your good Grace,
I still enjoyed my own with quietness,
Did I ere give thee living, to increase
The due revenues which thy father left?
I had enough, my Lord, and having that,
What should you need to give me any more?
Oh, did I ever dispossess my self,
And give thee half my Kingdom in good will:
Alas, my Lord, there were no reason, why
You should have such a thought, to give it me.
Nay, if thou talk of reason, then be mute;
For with good reason I can thee confute.
If they, which first by natures sacred law,
Do owe to me the tribute of their lives;
If they to whom I always have bin kind,
And bountiful beyond comparison;
If they, for whom I have undone my self,
And brought my age unto this extreme want,
Do now reject, contemn, despise, abhor me,
What reason moves thee to sorrow for me:
Where reason fails, let tears confirm my love,
And speak how much your passions do me move.
Ah, good my Lord, condemn not all for one:
You have two daughters left, to whom I know
You shall be welcome, if you please to go.
Oh, how thy words add sorrow to my soul,
To think of my unkindness to Cordella!
Whom causelesle I did dispossess of all,
Upon th'vnkind suggestions of her sisters:
And for her sake, I think this heavy doom
Is fallen on me, and not without desert:
Yet unto Ragan was I always kind,
And gave to her the half of all I had:
It may be, if I should to her repair,
She would be kinder, and entreat me fair.
No doubt she would, &amp; practise ere't be long,
By force of Arms for to redress your wrong.
Well, since thou doest advise me for to go,
I am resolved to try the worst of wo.
How may I bless the hour of my nativity,
Which bodeth unto me such happy Stars!
How may I thank kind fortune, that vouchsafes
To all my actions, such desired event!
I rule the King of Cambria as I please:
The States are all obedient to my will;
And look what ere I say, it shall be so;
Not any one, that dares answer no.
My eldest sister lives in royal state,
And wants nothing fitting her degreet
Yet hath she such a cooling card withal,
As that her honey savours much of gall,
My father with her is quarter-master still,
And many times restrains her of her will:
But if he were with me, and served me so,
Id send him packing some where else to go,
Id entertain him wi•• such slender cost,
That he should quickly wish to change his host.
Ah, Gonorill, what dire unhappy chance
Hath sequestered thy father from our presence,
That no report can yet be heard of him:
Some great unkindness hath bin offred him,
Exceeding far the bounds of patience:
Else all the world shall never me persuade,
He would forsake vs without notice made.
Alas, my Lord, whom doth it touch so near,
Or who hath interest in this grief, but I,
Whom sorrow had brought to her longest home,
But that I know his qualities so well?
I know, he is but stolen upon my sister
At unawares, to see her how she fares,
And spend a little time with her, to note
How all things go, and how she likes her choice:
And when occasion serves, heel steal from her,
And unawares return to vs again.
Therefore, my Lord, be frolic, and resolve
To see my father here again ever long.
I hope so too; but yet to be more sure,
Isle send a Post immediately to know
Whether he be arrived there or no.
But I will intercept the Messenger,
And temper him before he doth depart,
With sweet persuasions, and with sound rewards,
That his report shall ratify my speech,
And make my Lord cease further to inquire.
If he be not gone to my sisters Court,
As sure my mind presages that he is,
He happily may, by travelling unknown ways,
Fall sick, and as a common passenger,
Be dead and buried: would God it were so well;
For then there were no more to do, but this,
He went away, and none knows where he is,
But say he be in Cambria with the King,
And there exclaim against me, as he will:
I know he is as welcome to my sister,
As water is into a broken ship.
Well, after him Isle send such thunderclaps
Of slander, scandal, and inuentedtales,
That all the blame shall be removed from me,
And unperceived rebound upon himself.
Thus with one nail another Isle expel,
And make the world judge, that I used him well.
My honest friend, whither away so fast?
To Cambria, Madam, with letters frō the king.
To whom?
Unto your father, if he be there.
Let me see them.
Madam, I hope your Grace will stand
Between me and my neck-verse, if I be
Called in question, for opening the Kings letters.
It was was I that opened them, it was not thou.
I, but you need not care: and so must I,
A handsome man, be quickly trust up,
And when a man's hanged, all the world cannot save him,
He that hangs thee, were better hang his father,
Or that but hurts thee in the least degree.
I tell thee, we make great account of thee.
I am o're-ioy'd, I surfeit of sweet words:
Kind Queen, had I a hundred lines, I would
Spend ninety nyne of them for you, for that word.
I, but thou would keep one life still,
And that's as many as thou art like to have.
That one life is not too dear for my good Queen; this sword, this buckler, this head, this heart, these hands, arms, legs, tripes, bowels, and all the members else whatsoever, are at your dispose; use me, trust me, command me: if I fail in any thing, tie me to a dung cart, and make a Scauengers horse of me, and whip me, so long as I have any skin on my back.
In token of further employment, take that.
A strong Bond, a firm Obligation, good in law, good in law: if I keep not the condition, let my neck be the forfey∣ture of my negligence.
I like thee well; thou hast a good tongue.
And as bad a tongue if it be set on it, as any Oysterwife at Billingsgate hath: why, I have made many of my neighbours forsake their houses with railing upon them, and go dwell else where; and so by my means houses have bin good cheap in our parish: My tongue being well whetted with choler, is more sharpe then a Razer of Palerno.
O, thou art a fit man for my purpose.
Commend me not, sweet Queen, before you try me. As my deserts are, so do think of me.
Well said, then this is thy trial: Instead of carrying the Kings letters to my father, carry thou these letters to my sister, which contain matter quite contrary to the other: there shall she be given to understand, that my father hath detracted her, given out slanderous speeches against her; and that hee hath most intolerably abused me, let my Lord and me at va∣riance, and made mutinies amongst the commons.
These things (although it be not so)
Yet thou must affirm them to be true,
With oaths and protestations as will serve,
To drive my sister out of love with him,
And cause my will accomplished to be.
This do, thou winced my favour for ever,
And make a hye way of preferment to thee
And all thy friends.
It suffices, conceit it is already done:
I will so toung-whip him, that I will
Leave him as bare of credit, as a Poulter
Leaves a Cony, when she pulls off his skin.
Yet there is a further matter.
I thirst to hear it.
If my sister thinks convenient, as my letters imports, to make him away, hast thou the heart to effect it?
Few words are best in so small a matter:
These are but trifles. By this book I will.
About it presently, I long till it be done,
I fly, I fly.
I have bin ouer-negligent to day,
In going to the Temple of my God,
To render thanks for all his benefits,
Which he miraculously hath bestowed on me,
In raising me out of my mean estate,
When as I was devoid of worldly friends,
And placing me in such a sweet content,
As far exceeds the reach of my deserts.
My kingly husband, my rrour of his time,
For zeal, for justice, kindness, and for care
To God, his subjects, me, and Common weal,
By his appointment was ordained for me.
I cannot with the thing that I do want;
I cannot want the thing but I may have,
Save only this which I shall ne'er obtain,
My fathers love, oh this I ne'er shall gain.
I would abstain from any nutriment,
And pine my body to the very bones:
Bare foot I would on pilgrimage set forth
Unto the furthest quarters of the earth,
And all my life time would I sackcloth wear,
And mourning-wise power dust upon my head:
So he but to forgive me once would please,
That his gray hairs might go to heaven in peace.
And yet I know not how I him offended,
Or wherein justly I have deserved blame.
Oh sisters! you are much to blame in this,
It was not he, but you that did me wrong.
Yet God forgive both him, and you and me,
Even as I doe in perfect charity.
I will to Church, and pray unto my Saviour,
That ere I dye, I may obtain his favour.
Rest on me, my Lord, and stay your self,
The way seems tedious to your aged limbs.
Nay, rest on me, kind friend, and stay thy self,
Thou art as old as I, but more kind.
Ah, good my Lord, it ill befits, that I
Should lean upon the person of a King.
But it fits worse, that I should bring thee forth,
That had no cause to come along with me,
Through these uncouth paths, and tirefull ways,
And never ease thy fainting limbs a whit.
Thou hast left all, I, all to come with me,
And I, for all, have nought to guerdon thee.
Cease, good my Lord, to aggravate my woes,
With these kind words, which cuts my heart in two,
To think your will should want the power to do.
Cease, good Perillus, for to call me Lord,
And think me but the shadow of my self.
That honourable title will I give,
Unto my Lord, so long as I do live.
Oh, be of comfort; for I see the place
Whereas your daughter keeps her residence.
And lo, in happy time the Cambrian Prince
Is here arrived, to gratify our coming.
Were I best speak, or sit me down and dye:
I am ashamed to tell this heavy tale.
Then let me tell it, if you please, my Lord:
Tic shame for them that were the cause thereof.
What two old men are those that seem so sad?
Me thinks, I should remember well their looks.
No, I mistake not, sure it is my father:
I must dissemble kindness now of force.
Father, I bid you welcome, full of grief,
To see your Grace used thus unworthily,
And ill befitting for your reverend age,
To come on foot a journey so endurable.
Oh, what disaster chance hath bin the cause,
To make your cheeks so hollow, spare and lean?
He cannot speak for weeping: for Gods love, come.
Let vs refresh him with some needful things,
And at more leisure we may better know,
Whence springs the ground of this unlooked for wo.
Come, father, ever we any further talk,
You shall refresh you after this weary walk.
Comes he to me with finger in the eye,
To tell a tale against my sister here?
Whom I do know, he greatly hath abused:
And now like a contentious crafty wretch,
He first begins for to complain himself,
When as himself is in the greatest fault.
Isle not be partial in my sisters cause,
Nor yet believe his doting vain reports:
Who for a trifle (safely) I dare say,
Upon a spleen is stolen thence away:
And here (forsooth) he hops to have harbour,
And to be moaned and made on like a child:
But ere't be long, his coming he shall curse,
And truly say, he came from bad to worse:
Yet will I make fair weather, to procure
Convenient means, and then isle strike it sure.
Now happily I am arrived here,
Before the stately Palace of the Cambrian King:
If Leir be here safe-seated, and in rest,
To rouse him from it I will do my best.
Now bags of gold, your virtue is (no doubt)
To make me in my message bold and stout.
The King of heaven preserve your Majesty.
And send your Highness everlasting reign.
Thanks, good my friend; but what imports thy message message▪
Kind greetings from the Cornwall Queen:
The residue these letters will declare.
How fares our royal sister?
I did leave her at my parting, in good health.
See how her colour comes and goes again,
Now red as scarlet, now as pale as ash:
She how she knits her brow, and bytes her lips,
And stamps, and makes a dumb show of disdain,
Mixed with revenge, and violent extremes.
Here will be more work and more crowns for me.
Alas, poor soul, and hath he used her thus
And is he now come hither, with intent
To set divorce betwixt my Lord and me?
Doth he give out, that he doth hear repore,
That I do rule my husband as I list,
And therefore means to alter so the case,
That I shall know my Lord to be my head▪
Well, it were best for him to take good heed,
Or I will make him hop without a head,
For his presumption, dotard that he is.
In Cornwall he hath made such mutinies,
First, setting of the King against the Queen;
Then stirring up the Commons against the King;
That had he there continued any longer,
He had bin called in question for his fact.
So upon that occasion thence he fled,
And comes thus silly stealing unto vs:
And now already since his coming hither,
My Lord and he are grown in such a league,
That I can have no conference with his Grace:
I fear, he doth already intimate
Some forged cauillations'gainst my state:
Tic therefore best to cut him off in time,
Lest slanderous rumours once abroad dispersed,
It is too late for them to be reversed.
Friend, as the tenor of these letters shows,
My sister puts great confidence in thee.
She never yet committed trust to me,
But that (I hope) she found me always faithful▪
So will I be to any friend of hers,
That hath occasion to employ my help.
Hast thou the heart to act a stratagem,
And give a stab or two, if need require?
I have a heart compact of Adamant,
Which never knew what melting pity meant.
I weigh no more the murdering of a man,
Then I respect the cracking of a Flea,
When I doe catch her biting on my skin.
If you will have your husband or your father,
Or both of them sent to another world,
Do but command me do it, it shall be done.
It is enough, we make no doubt of thee:
Meet vs to morrow here, at nyne a clock:
Mean while, farewell, and drink that for my sake.
I, this is it will make me do the deed:
Oh, had I every day such customers,
This were the gainefulst trade in Christendom!
A purse of gold given for a paltry stab!
Why, here is a wench that longs to have a stab.
Well, I could give it her, and ne'er hurt her neither.
When will these clouds of sorrow once disperse,
And smiling joy triumph upon thy brow:
When will this Scene of sadness have an end,
And pleasant acts ensue, to move delight?
When will my lovely Queen cease to lament,
And take some comfort to her grieved thoughts;
If of thy self thou daignst to have no care,
Yet pity me, whom thy grief makes despair.
O, grieve not you, my Lord, you have no cause:
Let not my passions move your mind a whit:
For I am bound by nature, to lament
For his ill will, that life to me first lent.
If so the stock be dried with disdain,
Withered and sere the branch must needs remain.
But thou art now graft in another stock;
I am the stock, and thou the lovely branch:
And from my root continual sap shall flow,
To make thee flourish with perpetual spring.
Forget thy father and thy kindred now,
Since they forsake thee like inhumane beasts,
Think they are dead, since all their kindness dies,
And bury them, where black oblivion lies.
Think not thou art the daughter of old Leir,
Who did unkindly disinherit thee:
But think thou art the noble Gallian Queen,
And wife to him that dearly loves thee:
Embrace the joys that present with thee dwell,
Let sorrow pack and hide her self in hell.
Not that I miss my country or my kin,
My old acquaintance or my ancient friends,
Doth any whit distemperate my mind,
Knowing you, which are more dear to me,
Then Country, kin, and all things else can be.
Yet pardon me, my gracious Lord, in this:
For what can stop the course of natures power?
As easy is it for foure-footed beasts,
To stay themselves upon the liquid ayre,
And mount aloft into the element,
And ouerstrip the feathered Fowls in flight:
As easy is it for the slimy Fish,
To live and thrive without the help of water:
As easy is it for the Blackamoore,
To wash the tawny colour from his skin,
Which all oppose against the course of nature,
As I am able to forget my father.
Mirror of virtue, Phoenix of our age!
Too kind a daughter for an unkind father,
Be of good comfort; for I will dispatch
Ambassadors immediately for Britain,
Unto the King of Cornwalls Court, whereas
Your father keeps now his residence,
And in the kindest manner him entreat,
That setting former grievances apart,
He will be pleased to come and visit vs.
If no entreaty will suffice the turn,
Isle offer him the half of all my Crown:
If that moves not, weal furnish out a Fleet,
And sail to Cornwall for to visit him;
And there you shall be firemly reconcilde
In perfect love, as erst you were ••fore.
Where tongue cannot suf••••••t thanks afford,
The King of heaven remunerate my Lord.
Only be blithe, and frolic (sweet) with me:
This and much more isle do to comfort thee.
It is a world to see now I am flush,
How many friends I purchase every where!
How many seeks to creep into my favour,
And kiss their hands, and bend their knees to me!
No more, here comes the Queen, now shall I know her mind,
And hope for to derive more crowns from her.
My friend, I see thou mind'st thy promise well,
And art before me here, me thinks, to day.
I am a poor man, and it like your Grace;
But yet I always love to keep my word.
Well, keep thy word with me, &amp; thou shalt see,
That of a poor man I will make thee rich.
I long to hear it, it might have bin dispatcht,
If you had told me of it yesternight.
It is a thing of right strange consequence,
And well I cannot utter it in words.
It is more strange, that I am not by this
Beside my self, with longing for to hear it.
Were it to meet the Devil in his den,
And try a bout with him for a scratched face,
Id undertake it, if you would but bid me.
Ah, good my friend, that I should have thee do,
Is such a thing, as I do shame to speak;
Yet it must needs be done.
Isle speak it for thee, Queen: shall I kill thy father?
I know tic that, and if it be so, say.
I.
Why, thats enough.
And yet that is not all.
What else?
Thou must kill that old man that came with him.
Here are two hands, for eche of them is one
And for eche hand here is a recompense
Oh, that I had ten hands by miracle,
I could tear ten in pieces with my teeth,
So in my mouth yould put a purse of gold.
But in what manner must it be effected?
To morrow morning ere the break of day,
I by a while will send them to the thicket,
That is about some two miles from the Court,
And promise them to meet them there my self,
Because I must have private conference,
About some news I have received from Cornwall.
This is enough, I know, they will not fail,
And then be ready for to play thy part:
Which done, thou may right easily escape,
And no man once mistrust thee for the fact:
But yet, before thou prosecute the act,
Show him the letter, which my sister sent,
There let him read his own indictment first,
And then proceed to exertion:
But see thou faint not; for they will speak fair.
Could he speak words as pleasing as the pipe
Of Mercury, which charmed the hundred eyes
Of watchful Argos, and enforced him sleep:
Yet here are words so pleasing to my thoughts,
As quite shall take away the sound of his.
About it then, and when thou hast dispatcht,
Isle find a means to send thee after him.
I wonder that the Messenger doth stay,
Whom we dispatcht for Cambria so long since▪
If that his answer do not please vs well,
And be do show good reason for delay,
Isle teach him how to dally with his King,
And to detain vs in such long suspense.
My Lord, I think the reason may be this:
My father means to come along with him▪
And therefore tic his pleasure he shall stay,
For to attend upon him on the way.
It may be so, and therefore till I know
The truth thereof, I will suspend my judgment.
And't like your Grace, there is an Ambassador
Arrived from Galley, and craves admittance to your Majesty.
From Galley? what should his message
Hither import? is not your father happily
Gone thither? well, whatsoere it be,
Bid him come in, he shall have audience.
What news from Galley? speak Ambassador.
The noble King and Queen of Galley first salutes,
By me, their honourable father, my Lord Leir:
Next, they commend them kindly to your Graces,
As those whose welfare they entirely wish,
Letters I have to deliver to my Lord Leir,
And presents too, if I might speak with him.
If you might speak with him? why, do you think,
We are afraid that you should speak with him?
Pardon me, Madam; for I think not so,
But say so only, cause he is not here.
Indeed, my friend, upon some urgent cause,
He is at this time absent from the Court:
But if a day or two you here repose.
Tic very likely you shall have him here,
Or else have certain notice where he is.
Are not we worthy to receive your message:
I had incharge to do it to himself.
It may be then twill not be done in haste.
How doth my sister brooke the ayre of France?
Exceeding well, and never sick one hour,
Since first she set her foot upon the shore.
I am the more sorry.
I hope, not so, Madam.
Did thou not say, that she was ever sick,
Since the first hour that she arrived there?
No, Madam, I said quite contrary.
Then I mistook thee.
Then she is merry, if she have her health.
Oh no, her grief exceeds, until the time,
That she be reconciled unto her father.
God continue it.
What, Madam?
Why, her health.
Amen to that: but God release her grief,
And send her father in a better mind,
Then to continue always so unkind.
Isle be a mediator in her cause,
And seek all means to expiate his wrath.
Madam, I hope your Grace will do the like.
Should I be a mean to exasperate his wrath
Against my sister, whom I love so dear? no, no.
To expiate or mitigate his wrath:
For he hath misconceived without a cause.
O, I, what else?
Tic pity it should be so, would it were other wise.
It were great pity it should be otherwise.
Then how, Madam?
Then that they should be reconcilde again.
It shows you bear an honourable mind.
It shows thy understanding to be blind,
And that thou had need of an interpreter:
Well, I will know thy message ere't be long,
And find a mean to cross it, if I can.
Come in, my friend, and frolic in our Court,
Till certain notice of my father come.
My Lord, you are up to day before your hour,
Tic news to you to be abroad sorathe.
Tic news indeed, I am so extreme: heavy,
That I can scarcely keep my eye-lids open.
And so am I, but I impute the cause
To rising sooner then we use to do.
Hither my daughter means to come disguised
Isle sit me down, and read until she come.
Sheele not belong, I warrant you, my Lords
But say, a couple of these they call good fellows.
Should step out of a hedge, and set upon vs,
We were in good case for to answer them.
It were not for vs to stand upon our hands▪
I fear, we scant should stand upon our legs.
But how should we do to defend our selves?
Even pray to God, to bless vs frō their hands:
For fervent prayer much ill hap withstands.
Isle sit and pray with you for company;
Yet was I ne'er so heavy in my life.
Were it not a mad jest, lest two or three of my professiō should meet me, and lay me down in a ditch, and play rob thiere with me, &amp; perforce take my gold away from me, whilst I act this stratagem, and by this means the gray beards should escape? Faith, when I were at liberty again, I would make no more to do, but go to the next tree, and there hang my self.
But stay, me thinks, my youths are here already,
And with pure zeal have prayed themselves asleep.
I think, they know to what intent they came,
And are provided for another world.
Now could I stab them bravely, while they sleep,
And in a manner put them to no payne;
And doing so, I showed them mighty friendship:
For fear of death is worse then death it self.
But that my sweet Queen willed me for to show
This letter to them, ere I did the deed.
Mass, they begin to stir: isle stand aside;
So shall I come upon them unawares.
I marvel, that my daughter stays so long.
I fear, we did mistake the place, my Lord.
God grant we do not miscarry in the place:
I had a short nap, but so full of dread,
As much amazes me to think thereof.
Fear not, my Lord, dreams are but fantasies,
And slight imaginations of the brain.
Persuade him so; but isle make him and you
Confess, that dreams do often prove too true.
I pray, my Lord, what was the effect of it?
I may go near to guess what it pretends.
Leave that to me, I will expound the dream.
Me thought, my daughters, Gonorill &amp; Ragan,
Stood both before me with such grim aspects,
Eche brandishing a Falchion in their hand,
Ready to lop a limb off where it fell,
And in their other hands a naked poniard,
Wherewith they stabbed me in a hundred places,
And to their thinking left me there for dead:
But then my youngest daughter, fair Cordella,
Came with a box of Balsam in her hand,
And powered it into my bleeding wounds,
By whose good means I was recovered well,
In perfect health, as erst I was before:
And with the fear of this I did awake,
And yet for fear my feeble joints quake.
Isle make you quake for something presently.
Stand, Stand.
We do, my friend, although with much ado.
Deliver, deliver.
Deliver vs, good Lord, from such as he.
You should have prayed before, while it was time,
And then perhaps, you might have escaped my hands:
But you, like faithful watch-men, fell asleep,
The whilst I came and took your Halberds from you▪
And now you want your weapons of defence,
How have you any hope to be delivered?
This comes, because you have no better stay,
But fall asleep, when you should watch and pray:
My friend, thou seem to be a proper man.
Sblood, how the old slave claws me by the elbow?
He thinks, belike, to scope by scraping thus.
And it may be, are in some need of money.
That to be false, behold my evidence.
If that I have will do thee any good,
I give it thee, even with a right good will.
Here, take mine too, &amp; wish with all my heart,
To do thee pleasure, it were twice as much.
Isle none of them, they are too light for me.
Why then farewell: and if thou have occasion
In any thing, to use me to the Queen,
It is like enough that I can pleasure thee.
Do you hear, do you hear, sir:
If I had occasion to use you to the Queen,
Would you do one thing for me I should ask?
I, any thing that lies within my power.
Here is my hand upon it, so farewell.
Hear you sir, hear you? pray, a word with you.
Me thinks, a comely honest ancient man
Should not dissemble with one for a vantage.
I know, when I shall come to try this gear,
You will recant from all that you have said.
Mistrust not him, but try him when thou wilt:
He is her father, therefore may do much.
I know he is, and therefore mean to try him:
You are his friend too, I must try you both.
Prithee do, prithee do.
Stay gray-beards then, and prove men of your words:
The Queen hath tied me by a solemn other,
Here in this place to see you both dispatcht:
Now for the safeguard of my conscience,
Do me the pleasure for to kill your selves:
So shall you save me labour for to do it,
And prove your selves true old men of your words.
And here I vow in sight of all the world,
I ne'er will trouble you whilst I live again.
Affright vs not with terror, good my friend,
Nor strike such fear into our aged hearts.
Play not the Cat, which dallies with the mouse;
And on a sudden makes her a pray:
But if thou art marked for the man of death
To me and to my Damion, tell me plain,
That we may be prepared for the stroke,
And make our selves fit for the world to come.
I am the last of any mortal race,
That ere your eyes are likely to behold,
And hither sent of purpose to this place,
To give a final period to your days,
Which are so wicked, and have lived so long,
That your own children seek to short your life.
Came thou from France, of purpose to do this?
From France? zoones, do I look like a Frenchman?
Sure I have not mine own face on; some body hath changed
faces with me, and I know not of it: But I am sure, my apparel
is all English. Sir, what meanest thou to ask that question?
I could spoil the fission o this face for anger. A French face!
Because my daughter, whom I have offended,
And at whose hands I have deserved as ill,
As ever any father did of child,
Is Queen of France, no thanks at all to me,
But unto God, who my injustice see.
If it be so, that she doth seek revenge,
As with good reason she may justly do,
I will most willingly resign my life,
A sacrifice to mitigate her ire:
I never will entreat thee to forgive,
Because I am unworthy for to live.
Therefore speak soon, &amp; I will soon make speed:
Whether Cordella willed thee do this deed?
As I am a perfect gentleman, thou speak French to me:
I never heard Cordellaes name before,
Nor never was in France in all my life:
I never knew thou had a daughter there,
To whom thou did prove so unkind a churl:
But thy own tongue declares that thou hast bin
A vile old wretch, and full of heinous sin.
Ah no, my friend, thou art deceived much:
For her except, whom I confess I wronged,
Through doting frenzy, and o're-ielous love.
There lives not any under heavens bright eye,
That can convict me of impiety.
And therefore sure thou dost mistake the mark:
For I am in true peace with all the world.
You are the fitter for the King of heaven:
And therefore, for to rid thee of suspense,
Know thou, the Queens of Cambria and Cornwall,
Thy own two daughters, Gonorill and Ragan,
Appointed me to massacre thee here.
Why would thou then persuade me, that thou art
In charity with all the world? but now
When thy own issue hold thee in such hate,
That they have hired me t'abbridge thy fate,
Oh, fie upon such vile dissembling breath,
That would deceive, even at the point of death.
Am I awake, or is it but a dream?
Fear nothing, man, thou art but in a dream,
And thou shalt never wake until dooms day,
By they, I hope, thou wilt have slept enough.
Yet, gentle friend, grant one thing ere I die.
Isle grant you any thing, except your lives.
Oh, but assure me by some certain token,
That my two daughters hired thee to this deed:
If I were once resolved of that, then I
Would wish no longer life, but crave to dye.
That to be true, in sight of heaven I swear.
Swear not by heaven, for fear of punishmēt:
The heavens are guiltless of such heinous acts.
I swear by earth, the mother of vs all.
Swear not by earth; for she abhors to bear
Such bastards, as are murderers of her sons.
Why then, by hell, and all the devils I swear.
Swear not by hell; for that stands gaping wide,
To swallow thee, and if thou do this deed.
I would that word were in his belly again,
It hath frighted me even to the very heart:
This old man is some strong Magician:
His words have turned my mind from this exploit.
Then neither heaven, earth, nor hell be witness;
But let this paper witness for them all.
Shall I relent, or shall I prosecute?
Shall I resolve, or were I best recant?
I will not crack my credit with two Queens,
To whom I have already past my word.
Oh, but my conscience for this act doth tell,
I get heavens hate, earths scorn, and pains of hell.
Oh just Iehoua, whose almighty power
Doth govern all things in this spacious world,
How can thou suffer such outrageous acts
To be committed without just revenge?
O viperous generation and accursed,
To seek his blood, whose blood did make them first!
Ah, my true friend in all extremity,
Let vs submit vs to the will of God:
Things past all sense, let vs not seek to know;
It is Gods will, and therefore must be so.
My friend, I am prepared for the stroke:
Strike when thou wilt, and I forgive thee here,
Even from the very bottom of my heart.
But I am not prepared for to strike.
Farewell, Perillus, even the truest friend,
That ever lived in adversity:
The latest kindness isle request of thee,
Is that thou go unto my daughter Cordella,
And carry her her fathers latest blessing:
Withal desire her, that she will forgive me;
For I have wronged her without any cause.
Now, Lord, receive me, for I come to thee,
And dye, I hope, in perfect charity.
Dispatch, I pray thee, I have lived too long.
I, but you are unwise, to send an errand
By him that never means to deliver it:
Why, he must go along with you to heaven:
It were not good you should go all alone.
No doubt, he shall, when by the course of nature,
He must surrender up his due to death:
But that time shall not come, till God permit.
Nay, presently, to bear you company.
I have a Passport for him in my pocket,
Already sealed, and he must needs ride Post.
The letter which I read, imports not so,
It only touches me, no word of him.
I, but the Queen commands it must be so,
And I am paid for him, as well as you.
I, who have borne you company in life,
Most willingly will bear a share in death.
It skills not for me, my friend, a whit,
Nor for a hundred such as thou and I.
Mary, but it doth, sir, by your leave; your good days are past: though it bee no matter for you, tic a matter for me, proper men are not so rife.
Oh, but beware, how thou dost lay thy hand
Upon the high anointed of the Lords
O, be advised ere thou dost begin:
Dispatch me straight, but meddle not with him.
Friend, thy commission is to deal with me,
And I am he that hath deserved all:
The plot was laid to take away my life:
And here it is, I do entreat thee take it:
Yet for my sake, and as thou art a man,
Spare this my friend, that hither with me came?
I brought him forth, whereas he had not bin,
But for good will to bear me company.
He left his friends, his country and his goods,
And came with me in most extremity.
Oh, if he should miscarry here and dye,
Who is the cause of it, but only I?
Why that am I, let that ne'er trouble thee.
O no, tic I. O, had I now to give thee
The monarchy of all the spacious world
To save his life, I would bestow it on thee:
But I have nothing but these tears and prayer,
And the submission of a bended knee. 
O, if all this to mercy move they mind,
Spare him, in heaven thou shalt like mercy find.
I am as hard to be moved as another, and yet
me thinks the strength of their persuasions stirs me
a little.
My friend, if fear of the almighty power
Have power to move thee, we have said enough:
But if thy mind be moveable with gold,
We have not presently to give it thee:
Yet to thy self thou may do greater good,
To keep thy hands still vndefilde from blood:
For do but well consider with thy self,
When thou hast finished this outrageous act,
What horror still will haunt thee for the deed:
Think this again, that they which would incense
Thee for to be the Butcher of their father,
When it is done, for fear it should be known,
Would make a means to rid thee from the world:
Oh, then art thou for ever tied in chains
Of everlasting torments to endure,
Even in the hottest hole of grisly hell,
Such pains, as never mortal tongue can tell.
O, heavens be thanked, he will spare my friend,
Now when thou wilt come make an end of me.
Oh, happy sight. He means to save my Lord.
The King of heaven continue this good mind.
Why stayst thou to do execution?
I am as wilful as you for your life:
I will not do it, now you do entreat me.
Ah, now I see thou hast some spark of grace.
Beshrew you for it, you have put it in me:
The parlosest old men, that ere I heard.
Well, to be flat, isle not meddle with you:
Here I found you, and here isle leave you:
If any ask you why the case so stands?
Say that your tongue as were better then your hands.
Farewell. If ever we together me,
It shall go hard, but I will thee regreet.
Courage, my Lord, the worst is overpassed;
Let vs give thanks to God, and hye vs hence.
Thou art deceived; for I am past the best,
And know not whither for to go from hence:
Death had bin better welcome unto me,
Then longer life to add more misery.
It were not good to return from whence we came,
Unto your daughter Ragan back again.
Now let vs go to France, unto Cordella,
Your youngest daughter, doubtless she will succour you.
Oh, how can I persuade myself of that,
Since the other two are quite devoid of love;
To whom I was so kind, as that my gifts,
Might make them love me, if it were nothing else?
No worldly gifts, but grace from God on hye,
Doth nourish virtue and true charity.
Remember well what words Cordella spake,
What time you asked her, how she loved your Grace.
Se said, her love unto you was as much,
As ought a child to bear unto her father.
But she did find, my love was not to her,
As should a father bear unto a child.
That makes not her love to be any less,
If she do love you as a child should do:
You have tried two, try one more for my sake,
Isle ne'er entreat you further trial make.
Remember well the dream you had of late,
And think what comfort it foretells to vs.
Come, truest friend, that ever man possessed,
I know thou counsailst all things for the best:
If this third daughter play a kinder part,
It comes of God, and not of my desert.
There is of late news come unto the Court,
That old Lord Leir remains in Cambria:
Isle hye me thither presently, to impart
My letters and my message unto him.
I never was less welcome to a place
In all my life time, then I have bin hither,
Especially unto the stately Queen,
Who would not cast one gracious look on me,
But still with lowering and suspicious eyes,
Would take exceptions at each word I spake,
And fain she would have undermined me,
To know what my Embassage did import:
But she is like to hop without her hope,
And in this matter for to want her will,
Though (by report) sheele have it in all things else.
Well, I will post away for Cambria:
Within these few days I hope to be there,
By this, our father understands our mind,
And our kind greetings sent to him of late;
Therefore my mind presages ere't be long,
We shall receive from Britain happy news.
I fear, my sister will dissuade his mind;
For she to me hath always bin unkind.
Fear not, my love, since that we know the worst,
The last means helps, if that we miss the first:
If he will not come to Galley unto vs,
Then we will sail to Britain unto him.
Well, if I once see Britain again,
I have sworn, isle ne'er come home without my wench,
And isle not be forsworn,
Isle rather never come home while I live.
Are you sure, Mumford, she is a maid still?
Nay, isle not swear she is a maid, but she goes for one:
I'll take her at all adventures, if I can get her.
I, thats well put in.
Well put in: nay, it was ill put in; for had it
Bin as well put in, as ere I put in, in my days,
I would have made her follow me to France.
Nay, you'd have bin so kind, as take her with you,
Or else, were I as she,
I would have bin so loving, as id stay behind you:
Yet I must confess, you are a very proper man,
And able to make a wench do more then she would do.
Well, I have a pair of slops for the nonce,
Will hold all your mocks.
Nay, we see you have a handsome hose.
I, and of the newest fashion.
More bobs, more: put them in still,
They'll serve instead of bombast, yet put not in too many,
lest the seames crack, and they fly out amongst you again:
you must not think to outface me so easily in my mistress quarrel,
who if I see once again, ten team of horses shall
not draw me away, till I have full and whole possession.
I, but one team and a cart will serve the turn.
Not only for him, but also for his wench.
Well, you are two to one, isle give you over:
And since I see you so pleasantly disposed,
Which indeed is but seldom seen, isle claim
A promise of you, which you shall not deny me:
For promise is debt, &amp; by this hand you promised it me.
Therefore you owe it me, and you shall pay it me,
Or isle sue you upon an action of unkindness.
Prithee, Lord Mumford, what promise did I make thee?
Faith, nothing but this,
That the next fair weather, which is very now,
You would go in progress down to the sea side,
Which is very near.
Faith, in this motion I will join with thee,
And be a mediator to my Queen.
Prithee, my Love, let this march go forward,
My mind foretells, twill be a lucky voyage.
Entreaty needs not, where you may cōmaund,
So you be pleased, I am right well content:
Yet, as the Sea I much desire to see;
So am I most unwilling to be seen.
Weal go disguised, all unknown to any.
Howsoever you make one, isle make another.
and I the third: oh, I am overjoyed!
See what love is, which gets with a word,
What all the world besides could ne'er obtain!
But what disguises shall we have, my Lord?
Faith thus: my Queen &amp; I will be disguised,
Like a plain country couple, and you shall be Roger
Our man, and wait upon vs: or if you will,
You shall go first, and we will wait on you.
It were more then time; this device is excellent.
Come le vs about it.
What strange mischance or unexpected hap
Hath thus deprived vs of our fathers presence?
Can no man tell vs what's become of him,
With whom we did converse not two days since?
My Lords, let every where light-horse be sent,
To scour about through all our Regiment.
Dispatch a Post immediately to Cornwall,
To see if any news by of him there;
My self will make a strict inquiry here,
And all about our Cities near at hand,
Till certain news of his abode be brought.
All sorrow is but counterfeit to mine,
Whose lips are almost sealed up with grief:
Mine is the substance, whilst they do but seem
To weep the less, which tears cannot redeem.
O, ne'er was heard so strange a misadventure,
A thing so far beyond the reach of sense,
Since no mans reason in the cause can enter.
What hath removed my father thus from hence?
O, I do fear some charm or invocation
Of wicked spirits, or infernal fiends,
Stirred by Cordella, moves this innovation,
And brings my father timeless to his end.
But might I know, that the detested Witch
Were certain cause of this uncertain ill,
Myself to France would go in some disguise,
And with these nails scratch out her hateful eyes:
For since I am deprived of my father,
I loath my life, and wish my death the rather.
The heavens are just, and hate impiety,
And will (no doubt) reveal such heinous crimes:
Censure not any, till you know the right:
Let him be Judge, that brings truth to light.
O, but my grief, like to a swelling tide,
Exceeds the bounds of common patience:
Nor can I moderate my tongue so much,
To conceal them, whom I hold in susect.
This matter shall be sifted: if it be she,
A thousand France shall not harbour her.
All happiness unto the Cambrian King.
Welcome, my friend, from whence is thy Embassage?
I came from Galley, unto Cornwall sent,
With letters to your honourable father,
Whom there not finding, as I did expect,
I was directed hither to repair.
Frenchman, what is thy message to my father?
My letters, Madam, will import the same,
Which my Commission is for to deliver.
In his absence you may trust vs with your letters.
I must perform my charge in such a manner,
As I have strict commandment from the King.
There is good packing twixt your King and you:
You need not hither come to ask for him,
You know where he is better then our selves.
Madam, I hope, not far off.
Hath the young murdresse, your outrageous Queen,
No means to colour her detested deeds,
In finishing my guiltless fathers days,
(Because he gave her nothing to her dowre)
But by the colour of a fayn'd Embassage,
To send him letters hither to our Court?
Go carry them to them that sent them hither,
And bid them keep their scrolls unto themselves:
They cannot blind vs with such slight excuse,
To smother up so monstrous wild abuse.
And were it not, it is against law of Arms,
To offer violence to a Messenger,
We would inflict such torments on thy self,
As should enforce thee to reveal the truth.
Madam, your threats no whit apall my mind,
I know my conscience guiltless of this act;
My King and Queen, I dare be sworn, are free
From any thought of such impiety:
And therefore, Madam, you have done them wrong,
And ill beseeming with a sisters love,
Who in mere duty tender him as much,
As ever you respected him for dowre.
The King your husband will not say as much.
I will suspend my judgment for a time,
Till more appearance give vs further light:
Yet to be plain, your coming doth enforce
A great suspicion to our doubtful mind,
And that you do resemble, to be brief,
Him that first robs, and then cries, Stop the thief.
Pray God some near you have not done the like.
Hence, saucy mate, reply no more to vs;
For law of Arms shall not protect thy tongue.
Ne'er was I offred such discourtesy;
God and my King, I trust, ere it be long,
Will find a mean to remedy this wrong,
How shall I live, to suffer this disgrace,
At every base and vulgar peasants hands?
It ill befitted my imperial state,
To be thus used, and no man take my part.
What should I do? infringe the law of Arms,
Were to my everlasting obloquy:
But I will take revenge upon his master,
Which sent him hither, to delude vs thus.
Nay, if you put up this, be sure, ere long,
Now that my father thus is made away.
Sheele come &amp; claim a third part of your Crown,
As due unto her by inheritance.
But I will prove her title to be nought
But shame, and the reward of Parricide,
And make her an example to the world,
For after-ages to admire her penance.
This will I do, as I am Cambriaes King,
Or lose my life, to prosecute revenge.
Come, first let's learn what news is of our father,
And then proceed, as best occasion fits.
My honest friends, we are ashamed to show
The great extremity of our present state,
In that at this time we are brought so low,
That we want money for to pay our passage.
The truth is so, we met with some good fellows,
A little before we came aboard your ship,
Which stripped vs quite of all the coin we had,
And left vs not a penny in our purses:
Yet wanting money, we will use the mean,
To see you satisfied to the uttermost.
Here is a good gown, it would become me passing well,
I should be fine in it.
Here is a good cloak, I marvel how I should look in it,
Faith, had we others to supply their room,
Though ne'er so mean, you willingly should have them.
Do you hear, sir? you look like an honest man;
Isle not stand to do you a pleasure: here's a good strōg motley ga∣berdine, cost me xiiij. good shillings at Billinsgate, give me your gown for it, &amp; your cap for mine, &amp; isle forgive your passage.
With al my heart, and xx. thanks.
Do you hear, sir? you shall have a better match thē he, because you are my friend: here is a good sheeps russet sea∣gown, will bide more stress, I warrant you, then two of his, yet for you seem to be an honest gentleman, I am content to chāge it for your cloak, and ask you nothing for your passage more.
My own I willingly would change with thee,
And think my self indebted to thy kindness:
But would my friend might keep his garment still.
My friend, isle give thee this new doublet, if thou wilt
Restore his gown unto him back again.
Nay, if I do, would I might ne'er eat powderd beef and mustard more, nor drink Can of good liquor whilst I live. My friend, you have small reason to seek to hinder me of my bargain: but the best is, a bargayne's a bargain.
Kind friend, it is much better as it is;
For by this means we may escape unknown;
Till time and opportunity do fit.
Hark, hark, they are laying their heads together,
Theile repent them of their bargain anon,
It were best for vs to go while we are well.
God be with you, sir, for your passage back again,
Isle use you as unreasonable as another.
I know thou wilt; but we hope to bring ready money
With vs, when we come back again.
Were ever men in this extremity,
In a strange country, and devoid of friends,
And not a penny for to help our selves?
Kind friend, what think thou will become of vs?
Be of good cheer, my Lord, I have a doublet,
Will yield vs money enough to serve our turns,
Until we come unto your daughters Court:
And then, I hope, we shall find friends enough.
Ah, kind Perillus, that is it I fear,
And makes me faint, or ever I come there.
Can kindness spring out of ingratitude?
Or love be reaped, where hatred hath bin sown?
Can Henbane join in league with Methridate?
Or Sugar grow in Wormwoods bitter stalk?
It cannot be, they are too opposite:
And so am I to any kindness here.
I have thrown Wormwood on the sugared youth,
And like to Henbane poisoned the Fount,
Whence flowed the Methridate of a child's goodwill:
I, like an envious thorne, have pricked the heart,
And turned sweet Grapes, to sour vnrelisht Sloes:
The causelesseire of my respectless breast,
Hath soured the sweet milk of dame Natures paps:
My bitter words have gauld her honey thoughts,
And weeds of rancour choked the flower of grace.
Then what remainder is of any hope,
But all our fortunes will go quite aslope?
Fear not, my Lord, the perfect good indeed,
Can never be corrupted by the bad:
A new fresh vessel still retains the taste
Of that which first is powered into the same:
And therefore, though you name yourself the thorn,
The weed, the gall, the henbane &amp; the wormwood;
Yet sheele continue in her former state,
The honey, milk, Grape, Sugar, Methridate.
Thou pleasing Orator unto me in wo,
Cease to beguile me with thy hopeful speeches
O join with me, and think of nought but crosses,
And then weal one lament another losses.
Why, say the worst, the worst can be but death,
And death is better then for to despair:
Then hazard death, which may convert to life;
Banish despair, which brings a thousand deaths.
Overcome with thy strong arguments, I yield,
To be directed by thee, as thou wilt:
As thou yeeldst comfort to my crazed thoughts,
Would I could yield the like unto thy body,
Which is full weak, I know, and ill apaid,
For want of fresh meat and due sustenance.
Alack, my Lord, my heart doth bleed, to think
That you should be in such extremity.
Come, let vs go, and see what God will send;
When all means fail, he is the surest friend.
This tedious journey all on foot, sweet Love,
Cannot be pleasing to your tender joints,
Which ne'er were used to these toilsome walks.
I never in my life took more delight
In any journey, then I do in this:
Ic did me good, when as we hoped to light
Amongst the merry crew of country folk,
To see what industry and pains they took,
To win them commendations amongst their friends.
Lord, how they labour to bestir themselves,
And in their quirks to go beyond the Moon,
And so take on them with such antike fits,
That one would think they were beside their wits!
Come away, Roger, with your basket.
Soft, Dame, here comes a couple of old youths,
I must needs make my self fat-with testing at them.
Nay, prithee do not, they do seem to be
Men much o'regone with grief and misery.
Let's stand aside, and harken what they say.
Ah, my Perillus, now I see we both
Shall end our days in this vntrustfull soil.
Oh, I do faint for want of sustenance:
And thou, I know, in little better case.
No gentle tree affords one taste of fruit,
To comfort vs, until we meet with men:
No lucky path conducts our luckless steps
Unto a place where any comfort dwells.
Sweet rest betide unto our happy souls;
For here I see our bodies must have end.
Ah, my dear Lord, how doth my heart lament,
To see you brought to this extremity!
O, if you love me, as you do profess,
Or ever thought well of me in my life,
Feed on this flesh, whose veins are not so dry,
But there is virtue left to comfort you,
O, feed on this, if this will do you good,
Isle smile for joy, to see you suck my blood.
I am no Caniball, that I should delight
To slake my hungry jaws with humane flesh:
I am no devil, or ten times worse then so,
To suck the blood of such a peerless friend.
O, do not think that I respect my life
So dearly, as I do thy loyal love.
Ah, Britain, I shall never see thee more,
That hast unkindly banished thy King:
And yet not thou dost make me to complain,
But they which were more near to me then thou.
What do I hear: this lamentable voice,
Me thinks, ere now I oftentimes have heard.
Ah, Gonorill, was half my Kingdoms gift
The cause that thou did seek to have my life:
Ah, cruel Ragan, did I give thee all,
And all could not suffice without my blood?
Ah, poor Cordella, did I give thee nought,
Nor never shall be able for to give?
O, let me warn all ages that ensues,
How they trust flattery, and reject the truth.
Well, unkind Girls, I here forgive you both,
Yet the just heavens will hardly do the like;
And only crave forgiveness at the end
Of good Cordella, and of thee, my friend;
Of God, whose Majesty I have offended,
By my transgression many thousand ways:
Of her, dear heart, whom I for no occasion
Turned out of all, through flatterers persuasion:
Of thee, kind friend, who but for me, I know,
Had never come unto this place of wo.
Alack, that ever I should live to see
My noble father in this misery.
Sweet Love, reveal not what thou art as yet,
Until we know the ground of this ill.
O, but some meat, some meat: do you not see,
How near they are to death for want of food?
Lord, which did help they servants at their need,
Or now or never send vs help with speed.
Oh comfort, comfort! yonder is a banquet,
And men and women, my Lord: be of good cheer;
For I see comfort coming very near.
O my Lord, a banquet, and men and women!
O, let kind pity mollify their hearts,
That they may help vs in our great extremes.
God save you, friends; &amp; if this blessed banquet
Affords any food or sustenance,
Even for his sake that saved vs all from death,
Vouchsafe to save vs from the gripe of famine.
Here father, sit and eat, here, sit &amp; drink:
And would it were far better for your sakes.
Isle give you thanks anon: my friend doth faint,
And needs present comfort.
I warrant, he ne'er stays to say grace:
O, theres no sauce to a good stomach.
The blessed God of heaven hath thought upon vs.
The thanks be his, and these kind courteous folk,
By whose humanity we are preserved.
And may that draught be unto him, as was
That which old Icon drank, which did renew
His withered age, and made him young again.
And may that meat be unto him, as was
That which Alias ate, in strength whereof
He walked forty days, and never fainted.
Shall I coneale me longer from my father?
Or shall I manifest my self to him?
Forbear a while, until his strength return,
Lest being overjoyed with seeing thee,
His poor weak senses should forsake their office,
And so our cause of joy be turned to sorrow.
What chere, my Lord? how do you feel your self?
Me thinks, I never ate such savoury meat:
It is as pleasant as the blessed Manna,
That raynd from heaven amongst the Israelites:
It hath recalled my spirits home again,
And made me fresh, as erst I was before.
But how shall we congratulate their kindness?
Infayth, I know no how sufficiently;
But the best mean that I can think on, is this:
Isle offer them my doublet in requital;
For we have nothing else to spare.
Nay, stay, Perillus, for they shall have mine.
Pardon, my Lord, I swear they shall have mine.
Ah, who would think such kindness should remain
Among such strange and unacquainted men:
And that such hate should harbour in the breast
Of those, which have occasion to be best?
Ah, good old father, tell to me thy grief,
Isle sorrow with thee, if not add relief.
Ah, good young daughter, I may call thee so;
For thou art like a daughter I did owe.
Do you not owe her still? what, is she dead?
No, God forbid: but all my interest's gone,
By showing my self too much unnatural:
So have I lost the title of a father,
and me be called a stranger to her rather.
Your title's good still; for tic always known,
A man may do as him list with his own.
But have you but one daughter then in all?
Yes, I have more by two, then would I had.
O, say not so, but rather see the end:
They that are bad, may have the grace to mend:
But how have they offended you so much?
If from the first I should relate the cause,
'T would make a heart of Adamant to weep;
And thou, poor soul, kind-hearted as thou art,
Dost weep already, ere I do begin.
For Gods love tell it, and when you have done,
Isle tell the reason why I weep so soon.
The know this first, I am a Britain borne,
and had three daughters by one loving wife:
And though I say it, of beauty they were sped;
Especially the youngest of the three,
For her perfections hardly matched could be:
On these I doted with a jealous love,
And thought to try which of them loved me best,
By asking them, which would do most for me?
The first and second flattred me with words,
And vowed they loved me better then their lives:
The youngest said, she loved me as a child
Might dō: her answer I esteemed most wild,
And presently in an outrageous mood,
I turned her from me to go sink or swim:
And all I had, even to the very clothes,
I gave in dowry with the other two:
And she that best deserved the greatest share,
I gave her nothing, but disgrace and care.
Now mark the sequel: When I had done thus,
I sojourned in my eldest daughters house,
Where for a time I was entreated well,
And lived in state sufficing my content:
But every day her kindness did grow cold,
Which I with patience put up well enough,
And seemed not to see the things I saw:
But at the last she grew so far incensed
With moody fury, and with causeless hate,
That in most wild and contumelious terms,
She bade me pack, and harbour some where else.
Then was I fain for refuge to repair
Unto my other daughter for relief,
Who gave me pleasing and most courteous words;
But in her actions showed her self so sore,
As never any daughter did before:
She prayed me in a morning out betime,
To go to a thicket two miles from the Court,
Pointing that there she would come talk with me:
There she had set a shaghayrd murdering wretch,
To massacre my honest friend and me.
Then judge your self, although my tale be brief,
If ever man had greater cause of grief.
Nor never like impiety was done,
Since the creation of the world begun.
And now I am constrained to seek relief
Of her, to whom I have bin so unkind;
Whose censure, if it do award me death,
I must confess she pays me but my due:
But if the show a loving daughters part,
It comes of God and her, not my desert.
No doubt she will, I dare be sworn she will.
How know you that, not knowing what she is?
My self a father have a great way hence,
Used me as ill as ever you did her;
Yet, that his reverend age I once might see,
Id creep along, to meet him on my knee.
O, no men's children are unkind but mine.
Condemn not all, because of others crime:
But look, dear father, look, behold and see
Thy loving daughter speaks unto thee.
O, stand thou up, it is my part to kneel,
And ask forgiveness for my former faults.
O, if you wish I should enjoy my breath,
Dear father rise, or I receive my death.
Then I will rise, to satisfy your mind,
But kneel again, till pardon be resignd.
I pardon you: the word beseems not me:
But I do say so, for to ease your knee.
You gave me life, you were the cause that I
Am what I am, who else had never bin.
But you gave life to me and to my friend,
Whose days had else, had an untimely end.
You brought me up, when as I was but young,
And far unable for to help my self.
I cast thee forth, when as thou wast but young,
And far unable for to help thy self.
God, world and nature say I do you wrong,
That can endure to see you kneel so long.
Let me break off this loving controversy,
Which doth rejoice my very soul to see.
Good father, rise, she is your loving daughter,
And honours you with as respective duty,
As if you were the Monarch of the world.
But I will never rise from off my knee,
Until I have your blessing, and your pardon
Of all my faults committed any way,
From my first birth unto this present day.
The blessing, which the God of Abraham gave
Unto the tribe of Iuda, light on thee,
And multiply thy days, that thou may see
Thy childrens children prosper after thee.
Thy faults, which are just none that I do know,
God pardon on high, and I forgive below.
Now is my heart at quiet, and doth leap
Within my breast, for joy of this good hap:
And now (dear father) welcome to our Court,
And welcome (kind Perillus) unto me,
Mirror of virtue and true honesty.
O, he hath bin the kindest friend to me,
That ever man had in adversity.
My tongue doth fail, to say what heart doth think,
I am so ravished with exceeding joy.
All you have spoke: now let me speak my mind,
And in few words much matter here conclude:
If ere my heart do harbour any joy,
Or true content repose within my breast,
Till I have rooted out this viperous sect,
And repossessed my father of his Crown,
Let me be counted for the periurdst man,
That ever spake word since the world began.
Let me pray to, that never prayed before;
If ere I resolute the British earth,
(As (ere't be long) I do presume I shall)
And do return from thence without my wench,
Let me be gelded for my recompense.
Come, let's to arms for to redress this wrong:
Till I am there, me thinks, the time seems long.
I feel a hell of conscience in my breast,
Tormenting me with horror for my fact,
And makes me in an agony of doubt,
For fear the world should find my dealing out.
The slave whom I appointed for the act,
I ne'er set eye upon the peasant since:
O, could I get him for to make him sure,
My doubts would cease, and I should rest secure.
But if the old men, with persuasive words,
Have saved their lives, and made him to relent;
Then are they fled unto the Court of France,
And like a Trumpet manifest my shame.
A shame on these white-liuerd slaves, say I,
That with fair words so soon are overcome.
O God, that I had bin but made a man;
Or that my strength were equal with my will!
These foolish men are nothing but mere pity,
And melt as butter doth against the Sun.
Why should they have preeminence over vs,
Since we are creatures of more brave resolve?
I swear, I am quite out of charity
With all the heartless men in Christendom.
A pox upon them, when they are afraid
To give a stab, or slit a paltry Wind-pipe,
Which are so easy matters to be done.
Well, had I thought the slave would serve me so,
My self would haūe bin executioner:
Tic now undone, and if that it be known,
Isle make as good shift as I can for one.
He that ripens at me, how ere it stands,
It were best for him to keep him from my hands.
Thus have we brought our army to the sea,
Whereas our ships are ready to receive vs:
The wind stands fair, and we in four hours sail,
May easily arrive on British shore,
Where unexpected we may them surprise,
And gain a glorious victory with ease.
Wherefore, my loving Countrymen, resolve,
Since truth and justice fights on our sides,
That we shall march with conquest where we go.
My self will be as forward as the first,
And step by step march with the hardiest wight:
And not the meanest soldier in our Camp
Shall be in danger, but isle second him.
To you, my Lord, we give the whole command
Of all the army, next unto our self,
Not doubting of you, but you will extend
Your wonted valour in this needful case,
Encouraging the rest to do the like,
By your approved magnanimity.
My Liege, tic needless to spur a willing horse,
Thats apt enough to run himself to death:
For here I swear by that sweet Saints bright eye,
Which are the stars, which guide me to good hap,
Either to see my old Lord crowned anew,
Or in his cause to bid the world adieu.
Thanks, good Lord Mumford, tic more of your good will,
Then any merit or desert in me.
And now to you, my worthy Country men,
Ye valiant race of Genouestan Gawles,
Surnamed Red-thanks, for your chivalry,
Because you fight up to the thanks in blood;
Show your selves now to be right Gawles indeed,
And be so bitter on your enemies,
That they may say, you are as bitter as Gall.
Gall them, brave Shot, with your Artillery:
Gall them, brave Halberds, with your sharp point Bills,
Each in their pointed place, not one, but all,
Fight for the credit of your selves and Gaul.
Then what should more persuasion need to those,
That rather with to deal, then hear of blows?
Let's to our ships, and it that God permit,
In four houressayle, I hope we shall be there.
And in five hours more, I make no doubt,
But we shall bring our wished desires about.
My honest friends, it is your turn to night,
To watch in this place, near about the Beacon.
And vigilantly have regard,
If any fleet of ships paste hitherward:
Which it you do, your office is to fire
The beacon presently, and raise the town.
I, I, I, fear nothing; we know our charge, I warrant: I have bin a watchman about this Beacon this xxx. year, and yet I ne'er see it stir, but stood as quietly as might be.
Faith neighbour, and you'll follow my vice, instead of watching the Beacon, we'll go to goodman Gennings, &amp; watch a pot of Ale and a rasher of Bacon: and if we do not drink our selves drunk, then so; I warrant, the Beacon will see vs when we come out again.
I, but how if some body excuse vs to the Captain?
I is no matter, isle prove by good reason that we watch the Beacon: ass for example.
I hope you do not call me ass by craft, neighbour.
No, no, but for example: Say here stands the pot of ale, thats the Beacon.
I, I, tic a very good Beacon.
Well, say here stands your nose, thats the fire.
Indeed I must confess, tic somewhat red.
I see come marching in a dish, half a score pieces of salt Bacon.
I understand your meaning, thats as much to say, half a score ships.
True, you construe right; presently, like a faithful watch man, I fire the Beacon; and call up the town.
I, thats as much as to say, you set your nose to the pot, and drink up the drink.
You are in the right; come, let's go fire the Beacon.
Now march our ensigns on the British earth,
And we are near approaching to the town:
Then look about you, valiant Countrymen,
And we shall finish this exploit with ease.
Th'ihabitants of this mistrustful place,
Are dead asleep, as men that are secure:
Here shall we skirmish but with naked men,
Devoid of sense, new waked from a dream,
That know not what our coming doth pretend,
Till they do feel our meaning on their skins:
Therefore assail: God and our right for vs.
Where are these villains that were set to watch,
And fire the Beacon, if occasion served,
That thus have suffered vs to be surprised,
And never given notice to the town?
We are betrayed, and quite devoid of hope,
By any means to fortify our selves.
Tic ten to one the peasants are overcome with drink and sleep, and so neglect their charge.
A whirl-wind carry them quick to a whirl-poole, That there the slaves may drink their bellies full.
This tic, to have the Beacon so near the Ale-house.
Out on ye, villains, whither run you now?
To fire the town, and call up the Beacon.
No, no, sir, to fire the Beacon.
What, with a pot of ale, you drunken Rogues?
You'll fire the Beacon, when the town is lost:
Isle teach you how to tend your office better.
Yield, yield, yield.
Reel? no, we do not reel:
You may lack a pot of Ale ere you dye.
But in mean space, I answer, you want none. Well, theres no dealing with you, you're tall men, &amp; well weapōd, I would there were no worse then you in the town.
A speaks like an honest man, my cholers past already. Come, neighbour, let's go.
Nay, first let's see and we can stand.
Fear not, my friends, you shall receive no hurt,
If you'll subscribe unto your lawful King,
And quite revoke your fealty from Cambria,
And from aspiring Cornwall too, whose wives
Have practiced treason against their fathers life.
Wee come in justice of your wronged King,
And do intend no harm at all to you,
So you submit unto your lawful King.
Kind Countrymen, it grieves me, that perforce,
I am constrained to use extremities.
Long have you here bin looked for, good my Lord,
And wished for by a general consent:
And had we known your Highness had arrived,
We had not made resistance to your Grace:
And now, my gracious Lord, you need not doubt,
But all the Country will yield presently,
Which since your absence have bin greatly taxed,
For to maintain their ouerswelling pride.
Weal presently send word to all our friends;
When they have notice, they will come apace.
Thanks, loving subjects; and thanks, worthy son,
Thanks, my kind daughter, thanks to you, my Lord,
Who willingly adventured have your blood,
(Without desert) to do me so much good.
O, say not so:
I have bin much beholding to your Grace:
I must confess, I have bin in some skirmishes,
But I was never in the like to this:
For where I was wont to meet with armed men,
I was now encountered with naked women,
We that are feeble, and want use of Arms,
Will pray to God, to shield you from all harms.
The while your hands do manage ceaseless toil,
Our hearts shall pray, the foes may have the foil.
Weal fast and pray, whilst you for vs do fight,
That victory may prosecute the right.
Me thinks, your words do amplify (my friends)
And add freth vigour to my willing limbs:
But hark, I hear the adverse Drum approach.
God and our right, Saint Denis, and Saint George,
Presumptuous King of Gawles, how dare thou
Presume to enter on our British shore?
And more then that, to take our towns perforce,
And draw our subjects hearts from their true King?
Be suit to buy it at as dear a price,
As ere you bought presumption in your lives.
Ore-daring Cornwall, know, we came in right.
And just revengement of the wronged King,
Whose daughters there, fell vipers as they are,
Have sought to murder and deprive of life:
But God protected him from all their spite,
And we are come in justice of his right.
Nor he nor thou have any interest here,
But what you win and purchase with the sword.
Thy slanders to our noble virtuous Queens,
We'll in the battle thrust them down thy throat,
Except for fear of our revenging hands,
Thou fly to sea, as not secure on lands.
Welshman, isle so f••rit you ere night for that word,
That you shall have no mind to croak so well this tweluemonth.
They lye, that say, we sought our fathers death.
Tic merely forged for a colours sake,
To set a gloss on your invasion.
Me thinks, an old man ready for to dye,
Should be ashamed to breach so foul a lye.
Fie shamelessly sister, so devoid of grace,
To call our father liar to his face.
Peace (Puritan) dissembling hypocrite,
Which art so good, that thou wilt prove stark nought:
Anon, when as I have you in my fingers,
Isle make you wish your self in Purgatory.
Nay, peace thou monster, shame unto thy sex:
Thou fiend in likeness of a humane creature.
I never heard a fouler spoken man.
Out on thee, viper, scum, filthy parricide,
More odious to my sight then is a Toad,
Know thou these letters?
Think you to outface me with your paltry scrolls?
You come to drive my husband from his right,
Under the colour of a forged letter.
Who ever heard the like impiety?
You are our debtor of more patience:
We were more patient when we stayed for you,
Within the thicket two long hours and more.
What hours? what thicket?
There, where you sent your servant with your letters,
Sealed with your hand, to send vs both to heaven,
Where, as I think, you never mean to come.
Alas, you are grown a child again with age,
Or else your senses dote for want of sleep.
Indeed you made vs rise betimes, you know,
Yet had a care we should sleep where you bade vs stay,
But never wake more till the latter day.
Peace, peace, old fellow, thou art sleepy still.
Faith, and if you reason till to morrow,
You get no other answer at their hands.
Tic pity two such good faces
Should have so little grace between them.
Well, let vs see if their husbands with their hands,
Can do as much, as they do with their tongs.
I, with their swords they'll make your tongue unsay
What they have said, or else they'll cut them out.
Too't, gallants, too't, let's not stand brawling thus.
The day is lost, our friends do all revolt,
And join against vs with the adverse part:
There is no means of safety but by flight,
And therefore isle to Cornwall with my Queen.
I think, there is a devil in the Camp hath haunted me to day: he hath so tyred me, that in a manner I can fight no more.
Zounds, here he comes, Isle take me to my horse.
Farewell (Welshman) give thee but thy due,
Thou hast a light and nimble pair of legs:
Thou are more in debt to them then to thy hands:
But if I meet thee once again to day,
Isle cut them off, and set them to a better heart.
Thanks be to God, your foes are overcome,
And you again possessed of your right.
First to the heavens, next, thanks to you, my son,
By whole good means I repossess the same:
Which if it please you to accept your self,
With all my heart I will resign to you:
For it is yours by right, and none of mine.
First, have you raised, at your own charge, a power
Of valiant Soldiers; (this comes all from you)
Next have you ventured your own persons scathe.
And lastly, (worthy Galley never stained)
My kingly title I by thee have gained.
Thank heavens, not me, my zeal to you is such,
Command my utmost, I will never grutch.
He that with all kind love entreats his Queen,
Will not be to her father unkind seen.
Ah, my Cordella, now I call to mind,
The modest answer, which I took unkind:
But now I see, I am no whit beguiled,
Thou loved me dearly, and as ought a child.
And thou (Perillus) partner once in woe,
Thee to requite, the best I can, Isle doe:
Yet all I can, I, were it ne'er so much,
Were not sufficient, thy true love is such.
Thanks (worthy Mumford) to thee last of all,
Not greeted last, 'caus• thy desert was small;
No, thou hast Lion-like laid on to day,
Chasing the Cornwall King and Cambria;
Who with my daughters, daughters did I say?
To save their lives, the fugitives did play.
Come, son and daughter, who did me advance,
Repose with me awhile, and then for France.

I Cannot see, Montanus, why it is feigned by the Poets, that Love sat upon the Chaos and created the world; since in the world there is so little love.
thou can not see that which cannot with reason be imagined; for it the divine virtues of Love, had dispersed themselves through the powers of the world, so forcibly as to make them take by his influence, the forms and qualities impressed within them, no doubt they could not c•se, but favour more of his Divinity.
I doe not think Love hath any spark of Divine∣tie in him; since the end or his being is earthly. In the blood is he begot by the frail fires of the eye, &amp; quench by the frailer shadows of thought. What reason have we then to soothe his humour with such zeal, and follow his fading delights with such passion.
We have bodies, Siluestris, and humane bodies; which in their 〈◊〉 natures being much more wretched then beasts, 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 more miserably then beasts pur∣sue their own 〈◊〉: And since it will ask longer la∣bore and study to subdue the powers of our blood, to the rule of the soul, then to satisfy them with the fruition of
our loves, let vs bee constant in the worlds errors, and seek our own torments.
As good yield indeed submissively, and satisfy part of our affections; as bee stubburne without ability to resist, and enjoy none of them: I am in worst plight, since I love a Nymph that mocks love.
And I one that hates love.
I, one that thinks her self aboue love.
Let vs not dispute whose mistress is most bad, since they be all cruel; nor which of our fortunes be most froward, since they bee all desperate. I will hang my Skut∣chin on this tree in honour of Ceres, and write this verse on the tree in hope of my success, Penelopen epsom perstes, mode tempore vinces. Penelope will yield at last: continue and conquer.
I this: Fructus abased faces cum bone teste caret. Fair faces lose their favours, if they admit no lovers.
But why studiest thou? What wilt thou write for thy Lady to read?
That which necessity makes me to endure, love reverence, wisdom wonder at. Riualem patienter h••e.
Come, let vs every one to our walks, it may be we shall meet them walking. 
It is time to hang up our Garlands, this is our harvest holiday, wee must both sing and dance in the honour of Ceres: of what colours or flowers is thine made of, Niobe?
Or Salamints, which in the morning are white, 〈◊〉 at noon, and in the Evening purple, for in my office∣tions
shall there be no staidness but in vnstaiedues: buy what is yours of, Nice?
Of Holly, because it is most holy, which lovely greene neither the Suns beams, nor the winds blasts can alter or diminish. But Celia, what Garland have you?
Mine all of Cypress leaves, which are broadest and beautifulest, yet bears the least fruit; for beauty makes the brightest show, being the slightest substance; and I am content to wither before I bee worn, and de∣privy my self of that which so many desire.
Come, let vs make an end, lest Ceres come and find vs slack in performing that which wee owe: But soft, some have been here this Morning before vs.
The amorous Foresters, or none, for in the woods they have eaten so much wake-Robin, that they cannot sleep for love.
Alas poor souls, how ill love founds in their lips, who telling a long tale of hunting, think they have bewrayed a sad passion of love!
Give them leave to love, since we have liberty to choose, for as great sport doe I take in coursing their tame hearts, as they doe pains in hunting their wilde Harts.
Niobe, your affection is but pinned to your tongue, which when you lift you can unloose▪ But let vs read what they have written: Penelope• epsom perstes mode tempore vinces. That is for you Nice, whom nothing will move, yet hope makes him hover.
A fond Hobby to hover over an Eagle.
But Foresters think all Birds to be Buntings. What's the next Fructus abased faces cum bone teste care•, Celia, the Forester gives you good counsel, take your pen∣••worth whiles the market serves.
I hope it will be market day till my deaths day.
Let me read to Ri••tem patienter babe, Heetou∣cheth
you, Niobe, on the quick, yet you see how patient he is in your constancy.
Inconstancy is a vice, which I will not swap for all the virtues; though I throw one off with my whole hand, I can pull him again with my little finger; let vs en∣courage them and write something; if they censure in fa∣uourably, we know them fools; if angrily, we will say they are fro•art.
I will begin. Cadet amor rebus, res age, tutus eris.
Indeed better to tell stars then be idle, yet bet∣la idle then ill employed; Mine this, Sat •the sifacies, sit been note mihi.
You care for nothing but a Glass, that is a flat∣terer.
Then all men are Glasses.
Some Glasses are true.
No men are; but this is mine: Victoriatecum stabit.
Thou gives hope.
He is worthy o••e, that is patient.
Let vs sing, and so attend on Ceres; for this day, although into her heart never entered any motion of love, yet usually to the Temple of Cupped, hee offered• vo white Doves, as entreating his favour, and one Eagle, as commanding his power. Praecibus{que} minaes regaliter addet.
What noise is this, what assembly, what Ido∣latrie Is the modesty of virgins turned to wantonness? The honour of Ceres accounted immortal? And Erisicthon ruler of this Forest, esteemed of no force? Impudent giglots, that you are, to disturb my game, or dare doe honour to any but Erisicthon. It is not your fair faces as smooth as lea•e, nor your enticing eyes, though they drew vron like Adamai•ts, nor your filed speeches, were they as for∣cible,
as Thessalides, that shall make me any way flexible.
Erisicthon, thy sterne looks joined with thy stout speeches; thy words as vnkembd as thy lockes, were able to affright men of bold courage, and to make vs silly girls frantic, that are full of fear; but know thou, Erisicthon, that were thy hands so vnstated as thy tongue, and th'one as ready to execute mischief, as the other to threa∣ten it; it should neither move our hearts to ask pity, or remove our bodies from this place; wee are the hand∣maids of divine Ceres, to fair Ceres is this holy tree dedi∣cated, to Ceres, by whose favour thy self lives, that are worthy to perish.
Are you addicted to Ceres, that in spite of Erisicthon you will use these sacrifices? No, immodest girls, you shall see that I have neither regard of your sex which men should tender, nor of your beauty which foolish love would dote on, nor of your goddess, which none but peevish girls reverence: I will destroy this tree in ••∣spite of all, and that you may see my hand execute, 〈◊〉 my heart intends; and that no mean may appea•e my malice, my last word shall bee the beginning of the first blow.
Our alas, what hath he done?
Our selves, I fear, must also minister matter to his fury.
Let him alone: but see, the tree powers our blood, and I hear a voice.
What voice? If in the tree there be any body, speak quickly, left the next blow hit the tale out of thy mouth.
Monster of men, hate of the heavens, and to the earth a burden, what hath chaste Fidelia committed? It is thy spite, Cupped, that having no power to wound my un∣sported mind, procurest means to mangle my tender by∣die, and by violēce to gash those sides, that enclose a heart dedicate to virtue: or is it that savage satire, that feeding his
sensual appetite upon lust, seeks now to quench it with blood, that being without hope to attain my love, hee may with cruelty end my life? Or doth Ceres, whose nymph I have been many years, in recompense of my inuiola∣ble saith, reward me with unspeakable torments? Divine Phoebus that pursued Daphne till she was turned to a Bay tree, ceased then to trouble her. I, the gods are pitti∣full; and Cineras, that with fury followed his daughter Mi∣ratio, till she was changed to a Mirretree, left then to prosecute her; yea parents are natural: Phoebus lemon∣ted the loss of his friend, Cineras of his child: but both gods, and men either forget or neglect the change of Fi∣delia; nay follow her after her change, to make her more miserable: so that there is nothing more hateful then to be chaste, whole bodies are followed in the world with lust, and prosecuted in the graves with tyranny. Whose minds the freer they are from vice, their bodies are in the more danger of mischief; so that they are not safe when they live, because of men's love; nor being changed, because of their hates; nor being dead, because of their defaming. What is that chastity which so few women study to keep, and both gods and men seek to violate? If only a na∣ked name, why are we so superstitious of a hollow found? If a rare virtue, why are men so careless of such an ex∣ceeding rareness: Go, Ladies, tell Ceres I am that Fide∣lia, that so long knit Garlands in her honour, and chased with a Satire, by prayer to the gods became turned to a tree, whole body now is grown over with rough bark, and whose golden lockes are covered with greene leaves; yet where ••nd nothing can alter, neither the fear of death, nor the torments. If Ceres seek no revenge, then let virginity be not only the scorn of Savage people, but the spoil. But alas, I feel my last blood to come, &amp; there∣fore must end my last breath. Farewell Ladies, whose lives are subject to many mischiefs; for if you be fair, it is hard to be chaste; if chaste, impossible to be safe; if you be young,
you will quickly bend; if bend, you are suddenly broken. If you be soul, you shall seldom be flattered: if you be not flattered, you will ever bee sorrowful. Beauty is a firm sicklenes, youth a feeble staidness, deformity a continue∣all sadness.
Thou monster, can thou hear this without grief?
Yea, and double your griefs with my blows.
Ah poor Fidelia, the express pattern of chasti∣tie, and example of misfortune.
Ah cruel Erisicthon, that not only defacest these holy trees, but murtherest also this chaste nymph.
Nymph or goddess it skills not, for there is none that Erisicthon cares for, but Erisicthon: let Ceres the Lady of your harvest revenge when she will, nay when she dares, and tell her this, that I am Erisicthon.
Thou art none of the gods.
No, a contemner of the gods.
And hope thou to escape revenge being but a man?
Yea, I care not for revenge being a man and Erisicthon.
Come, let vs to Ceres and complain of this un∣acquainted and incredible villain; if there bee power in her deity, in her mind pity, or virtue in virginity, this monster cannot escape. 
Doth Erisicthon offer force to my Nymphs, and to my deity disgrace? Have I stuffed his barnes with fruit∣full
grain, and doth hee stretch his hand against me with intolerable pride? So it is, Ceres, thine eyes may witness what thy Nymphs have told, here lies the tree hacked in pieces, and the blood scarce cold of the fairest virgin. If this bee thy cruelty, Cupped, I will no more hallow thy temple with sacred vows••t thy cankered nature, Erisicthon, thou shalt find as great misery, as thou show malice: I am resolved of thy punishment, and as speedy shall bee my revenge, as thy rigour barbarous. Tirtenae, on yonder lull where never grew grain nor lease, where nothing is but barrenesse and coldness, fear and paleness, lies famine, go to her, and say that Ceres commands her to gnaw on the bowels of Erisicthon, that his hunger may bee as unquenchable as his fury.
I obey, but how should I know her from others?
Thou can not miss of her, if thou remember but her name; and that can thou not forget, for that coming near to the place, thou shalt find gnawing in thy stomach. She lies gaping, and swallows noughe but ayre; her face pale and so lean, that as easily thou majesty, through the very skin behold the bone, as in a glass thy shadow; her hair long, black and shaggy; her eyes sunk so far into her head, that she looks out of the nape of her neck; her lips white and rough; her teeth hollow and red with rustiness; her skin so thin, that thou majesty as lively make an Anatomy of her body, as she were cut up with Chirurgiōs; her maw like a dry bladder, her heart swo•no big with wind, and all her bowels like snakes working in her body. This monster when thou shalthehold, tell her my mind, and return with speed.
I go, fearing more the sight of famine, then the force.
Take thou these few cares of corn, but let not 〈◊〉 so much as smell to them; and let her go aloose from thee: Now shall Erisicthon see that Ceres is a great goddess, as full of power as himself of pride; and as pit∣tiles,
as he presumptuous; how think you Ladies, is not this revenge apt for •o great injury?
Yes Madam: To let men see, they that contend with the gods, doe but confound themselves.
But let vs to the Temple of Cupped, and offer sacri∣fice; they that think it strange for chastime to humble it self to Cupped, know neither the power of love, nor t•e nature of virginity: th'one having absolute authority to command, the other difficulty to resist: and where such continual war is between love and virtue, there must bee some parties, and continual perils: Cupped was never conquered, and therefore must bee flattered; Virginity hath, and therefore must be humble.
Into my heart, Madam, there did never enter any motion of love.
Those that often say, they cannot love, or will not love, certainly they love. Did thou never see Cupped?
No, but I have heard him described at the full, and as I imagined, foolishly. First that he should bee a god blind and naked, with wings, with bow, with arrows, with free-brands; swimming sometimes in the Sea, &amp; play∣ing sometimes on the shore; with many other devices, which the Painters being the Poets Apes, have taken as great pains to shadow, as they to lie. Can I think that gods that command all things, would go naked? What should he doe with wings that knows not where to slice? Or what with arrows, that sees not howe to aim? The heart is a narrow marks go hit, and rather requires Angus eyes to take level, there a blind boy to shoot at random: If he were fire, the Sea would quench those coals, or the flame turn him into cinders.
Well Nice, thou shalt see him.
I fear Niobe hath felt him.
Not I, Madam, yet must I confess, that often∣times I have had sweet thoughts, sometimes hard con∣ceites, betwixt both a kind of yielding; I know not what.
But certainly I think it is not love: sigh I can, and 〈◊〉 ease in melancholy: smile I doe and take pleasure in ima∣gination, I feel in my self a pleasing pain, a chill heate, a delicate bitterness, how to term it I know not; with∣out doubt it may be love, sure I am it is not hate.
Niobe is tender hearted, whose thoughts are 〈◊〉 water, yielding to every thing, and nothing to bee seen.
Well, let vs to Cupped, and take•• •eede 〈◊〉 your stubbornness yo'i offend him not, whom by entry∣ties you ought to follow Dianas Nymphs were as cha•t as Ceres virgins, as fair, as wife: how Cupped tormented them, I had rather you should hear then feel, but this is truth, they all yielded to love: look not scornfully, my Nymphs, I say they are yielded to love. This is the tem∣ple, thou great god Cupped, whom the gods regard and men reverence, let it bee lawful for Ceres to offer her sa∣crifice.
Divine Ceres, Cupped accepts any thing, that comes from Ceres, which feeds my Sparrows with ripe corn, my Pigeons with wholesome seeds; and ho∣nourest my Temple with chaste virgins.
Then Love, to thee I bring these white and spot∣less Doves, in token that my heart is as free from any thought of love, as these from any blemish, and as clear in virginity, as these perfect in whiteness. But that my Nymphs may know both thy power and thy laws, and neither err in ignorance nor pride; let me ask some questions to instruct them that they offend not th••, who•e resist they cannot. In virgins what dost thou 〈◊〉 desire?
In those that are not in love, reverent thoughts of love, in those that be, faithful vows.
What doest thou most hate in virgins?
Pride in the beautiful, bitter taunts in the witty, 〈◊〉 in all.
What may protect my virgins that they 〈◊〉 no∣••r love?
That they be never idle.
Why did thou so cruelly torment all Dianas Nymph• wit• •ove?
Because they thought it impossible to love.
What is the substance of love?
Constancy and secrecy.
What the signs?
Sighs and tears.
What the causes?
Wit and idleness.
What the means?
Opportunity and Importunity.
What the end?
Happiness without end.
What require•• thou of men?
That only shall be known to men.
What 〈◊〉 for those that will not love?
To be deceived when they doe.
Well, Cupped, entreat my Nymphs with favour and though to love it be no vice, yet spotless virginity is the only virtue: let me keep their thoughts as chaste as their bodies, than Ceres may be happy, &amp; they praised.
Why, Ceres, doe you think that lust follows love? Ceres, lovers are chaste: for what is love, divine love, but the quintessence of chastity, and affections binding by heavenly motions, thou cannot bee undone by earthly means, 〈…〉 by any man?
〈…〉 continual sacrifice, warm vs with mild 〈…〉 wee seem immodest 〈…〉 •∣ble like stocks.
Ceres, 〈…〉 be light nor obstina•••, 〈…〉
and faithful; so shall your flames warm, but not burn, delight and never discomfort.
How say you, my Nymphs, doth not Cupped speak like a •o•▪ Counsel you I will not to love, but conjure you I •u•t that you be not disdainful, let vs in, and see how Er•sictson speeds; famine f•eth swiftly, and hath alrea∣die seized on his stomach.
Stay, cruel Nice, thou know not from whom thou fliest, and therefore fliest; I come not to offer vio∣lence, but that which is inviolable, my thoughts are as ho∣lie •s thy vows, and I as constant in love as thou in cruel∣tie: lust follows not my love as shadows doe bodies, but truth is woven into my love, as veins into bodies; let me touch this tender arm, and say my love is endless.
And to no end.
It is without spot.
And shall be without hope.
Dost thou disdain Love and his laws?
I doe not disdain that which I think is not, yet laugh at those that honour it if it be.
Time shall bring to pass, that Nice shall confess there is love.
Then also will love make me confess, that Nice 〈◊〉 a fool.
Is it folly to love, which the gods account ho∣nourable, and men esteem holy?
The gods make any thing lawful, because they be gods, and men honour shadows for substance, because they are men.
Both gods and men agree that love is a consu∣ming of the heart, and restoring a bitter death in a sweet life.
Gods doe know, and men should, that love is a consuming of wit, and restoring of folly, a staring blind∣ness, and a blind gazing.
Would thou allot me death?
No, but discretion.
Yield some hope.
Hope to despair.
Not so long as Nice is a woman.
Therein, Ramis, you show your self a man.
Why?
In flattering your self, that all women will yield.
All may.
Thou shalt swear that we cannot.
I will follow thee, and practise by denials to bee patient, or by disdaining die, and so be happy.
Though thou hast ouer-taken me in love, yet have I ouer-taken thee in running: fair Celia, yield to love, to sweet love.
Montanus, thou art mad, that having no breath almost in running so fast, thou wilt yet spend more in spea∣king so foolishly: yield to love! cannot, or if I doe, to thy love I will not.
The fairest Wolf chooses the foulest, if he bee faithfullest, and he that endures most grief, nor hee that hath most beauty.
If my thoughts were wolfish, thy hopes might be as thy comparison is, beastly.
I would thy words were, as thy looks are, lovely.
I would thy looks were, as thy affection is, blind.
Fair faces should have smooth hearts.
Fresh flowers have crooked roots.
Women's beauties will wane, and then no art can make them fair?
Men's follies will ever wax, and then what rea∣son can make them wise?
To be amiable and not to love, is like a painted Lady, to have colours, and no life.
To bee amorous, and not lovely, is like a plea∣sant fool full of words, and no deserts.
What call you deserts, what lovely▪
No lovelier thing then wit, no greater desert then patience.
Have not I an excellent wit?
If thou think sothy self, thou art an excellent fool.
Fool? No, Celia, thou shalt find me as wise, as I doe thee proud, and as little to digest thy taunts, as thou to brooke my love.
I thought, Montanus, that you could not de∣serve, when I told you what it was, Patience.
Sweet Celia, I will be patient and forget this.
Then want you wit, that you can be content to be patient.
A hard choice, if I take all well, to be a fool, if find fault, then to want patience.
The fortune of love, and the virtue is neither to have success, nor mean. Farewell.
Farewell, nay I will follow, and I know not how it comes to pass; disdain increases desire, and the farther possibility stands, the nearer approaches hope.
Polypus, Niobe, is ever of the colour of the stone it slicketh to, and thou ever of his humour thou talk with.
Find you fault that I love?
So many.
Would you have me like none?
Yes one.
Who shall make choice but my self?
My self.
For another to put thoughts into my head, were to pull the brains out of my head; take not measure of my affections, but weigh your own: the Oak finds no fault with the dew, because it also falls on the bramble. Believe me, Sell••str••, the only way to be mad, is to bee constant. Poets make their wreathes of Laurel, Ladies of sundry flowers.
Sweet Niobe, a river running into divers brookes becomes shallow, and a mind divided into sundry af∣fections, in the end will have none: what •oy can I take in the fortune of my love, when I shall know many to have the like favours? Turtles slocke by couples, and breed both joy and young ones.
But Bees in swarms, and bring forth wax and honey.
Why doe you covet many, that may find sweet∣ness in one?
Why had Argus an hundred eyes, and might have seen with one?
Because whilst he slept with some, he might wake with other some.
And I love many, because being deceived by the inconstancy of divers, I might yet have one.
That was but a device of Inno, that knew I•p••ors love.
And this a rule of Venus, that knew 〈◊〉 light•es.
The whole heaven hath but one Sun•••.
But stars ins••••.
The Rainbow is ever in one compass.
But of sundry colours.
A woman hath but one heart.
But a thousand thoughts.
My Lute, though it have many strings, makes a sweet consent, and a Ladies heart, though it harbour ma∣ny fancies, should embrace but one love.
The strings of my heart are tuned in a country∣rye key to your Lute, and make as sweet harmony in discords, as yours in concord.
Why, what strings are in Ladies hearts? Not the base.
There is no base string in a women's heart.
The mean?
There was never mean in women's heart.
The treble▪
Yea, the treble double and treble, and so are all my heart strings. Farewell.
Sweet Niobe, let vs sing, that I may die with the Swan.
It will make you sigh the more, and live wi•• the Salamich.
Are thy tunes fire?
Are yours death?
No, but when I have heard thy voice, I am con∣tent to die.
I will sing to content thee.
Inconstant Niobe! unhappy Siluestris! yet had I rather she should rather love all then none: for now though I have no certainty, yet doe I find a kind of sweetness.
Cruel Nice, borne to slaughter men!
Coy Celia, bred up in skoftes!
Wavering, yet witty Niobe, but are wee all mo••
Yea, and met withal, if your fortunes be answer∣able to mine, for I find my M•stress immovable, and the hope I have is to despair.
Mine in pride intolerable, who bids me look for no other comfort then contempt.
Mine is best of all, and worst, this is my hope, that either she will have many or none.
I fear our fortunes cannot thrive, for Erisicthon hath felled down the holy tree of Ceres, which will en∣crease in her choler, and in her Nymphs cruelty: let vs see whether our Garlands bee there which we hanged on that tree, and let vs hang our selves upon another.
A remedy for love irremoveable, but I will first see whether all those that love Niobe, do like in the mean season I will content my self with my share.
Here is the tree. O mischief scarce to be belee∣ued, in possible to be pardoned!
Pardoned it is not, for Erisicthon perishes with famine, and is able to starve those that look on him. Here hang our Garlands, something is written, read mine.
Cadet amor rebus, res age, tutus eris.
And mine.
Sat mihi si faces, sit been note mihi.
Now for my self,
Victoriatecum stabit scilicet.
You see their posies is as their hearts; and their hearts as their speeches, cruel, proud and wavering: let vs all to the Temple of Cupped, and entreat his favour, if not to obtain their loves, yet to revenge their hates, Cupped is a kind god, who knowing our vnsported thoughts, will punish them, or release vs. Wee will study what re∣avenge to have, that our pains proceeding of our own minds, then plagues may also proceed from theirs. Are you all agreed▪
I consent; but what if Cupped deny help?
Then he is no god.
But if he yield, what shall we ask?
Revenge.
Then let vs prepare our selves for Cupids sacrifice.
Come, Protea, dear daughter, that name must thou buy too dear, necessity causes thee to be sold, na∣ture must frame thee to be contented. Thou see in how short a space I have turned all my goods into my guts, where I feel a continual fire, which nothing can quench, my famine increases by eating, resembling the Sea which receives all things, and cannot bee filled: life is sweet, hunger sharpe, between them the contention must bee short, unless thou, Protea, prolong it. I have ac∣knowledged my offence against Ceres, make amends, I cannot, for the gods holding the balance in their hands, what recompense can equally weigh with their punish∣mints? Or what is hee that having but one ill thought of Ceres, that can race it with a thousand dutiful actions? such is the difference, that none can find defence: this is the odds, we miserable, and men, they immortal, and gods.
Dear father, I will obey both to sale and slaugh∣la, accounting it the only happiness of my life, should I live an hundred years, to prolong yours but one my∣••te: I yield father, chop and change me, I am ready, but first let me make my prayers to Neptune, and with∣draw
your self till I have done, long it shall not bee, now it must be.
Stay, sweet Protea, and that great god hear thy prayer, though Ceres stop her ears to mine.
Sacred Neptune, whose godhood conquered my maiden-head, bee as ready to hear my passions, as I was to believe thine, and perform that now I entreat, which thou did promise when thy self did love. Let not me bee a pray to this Merchant, who knows no other god then Gold, unless it bee falsely swearing by a god to get gold; let me, as often as I be bought for money, or pound for meat, be turned into a Bird, Hare, or Lamb, or any shape, wherein I may be safe, •o shall I preserve mine own honour, my fathers life, and never repent me of thy love, and now bestir thee, for of all men, I hate that Merchant, who, if he find my beauty worth one penny, will put it to use to gain ten, having no Religion in his mind, nor word in his mouth but money. Neptune, hear now or never. Father, I have done.
In good time, Protea, thou hast done, for lo, the Merchant keeps not only day, but hour.
If I had not been here, had I been forfeited•
No; Protea, but thy father famished. Here, Gen∣tleman, I am ready with my daughter.
Gentleman?
Yea, Gentleman, fair maid, my conditions make me no less.
Your conditions in deed brought in your obli∣gations, your obligations, your Usury, your Usury, your Gentry.
Why, doe you judge no Merchants Gentle∣men?
Yes, many, and some no men.
You shall be well entreated at my hands.
It may. Commmaunded I will not be.
If you be mine by bargain, you shall.
Father, hath this Merchant also bought my mind?
He cannot buy that, which cannot be sold.
Here is the money.
Here the maid: farewell, my sweet daughter, I commit thee to the gods, and this mans courtesy, who I hope will deal no worse with thee, then hee would have the gods with him, I must bee gone, left I doe starve as I stand.
Farewell, dear Father, I will not cease continue∣ally to pray to Ceres, for thy recovery.
You are now mine, Protea.
And mine own.
In will, not power.
In power if I will.
I perceive, Nettles gently touched, sting, but roughly handled, make no smart.
Yet roughly handled, Nettles are Nettles, and a Wasp is a Wasp, though •hee lose her sting.
But then they doe no harm.
Nor good.
Come with me, and you shall see, that Mar∣chants know their good, as well as Gentlemen.
Sure I am, they have Gentlemen's goods.
This is the Temple of our great god, let vs offer our sacrifice.
I am ready.
And I. Cupped, thou god of love, whose arrows have pierced our hearts, give ear to our plaints.
If you come to Cupped, speak boldly, so must lo∣uers, speak faithfully, so must speeders.
These ever burning Lamps, are signs of my never to be quenched flames; this bleeding heart, in which yet sticks the head of the golden shaft, is the lively pic∣ture of inward torments: mine eyes shall bedew thine Altars with tears, and my sighs cover thy Temple with a dark smoke, pity poor Ramis.
With this distaff have I spun, that my exerci∣ses may bee as womanish as my affections, and so did Her∣cules: and with this halter will I hang my self, if my for∣tunes answer not my deserts, and so did Iphis. Yo thee, divine Cupped, I present not a bleeding, but a bloodless heart, dried only with sorrow, and worn with faithful service.
This picture Toffer, carved with no other instrument then Love; pity poor Montanus.
This fan of Swans and Turtles feathers, is to∣ken of my truth and jealousy: jealousy, without which love is dotage, and with which love is madness, without the which love is lust, and with which love is folly. This heart, neither bleeding nor bloodless, but •wolne with
sighs, I offer to thy godhood, protesting, that all my thoughts are as my words without lust; and all my love, as my fortune without sweetness. This Garland of flowers, which hath all colours of the Rainbow, witnesses that my heart hath all torments of the world: pity poor Sell∣vestris.
I accept your offers not without cause, and won∣der at your loves, not without pleasure: but bee your thoughts as true as your words?
Thou Cupped, that gives the wound, know the heart, for as impossible it is to conceal our affections, as to resist thy force.
I know, that where mine arrow lights, there breeds love, but shooting every minute a thousand shafts, I know not on whose heart they light, though they fall on no place but hearts. What are your mistresses?
Ceres maidens: mine most cruel, which she calls constancy.
Mine most fair, but most proud.
Mine most witty, but most wavering.
Is the one cruel, the other coy, the third incon∣stant?
Too cruel.
Too coy.
Too fickle.
What do they think of Cupped?
One saith hee hath no eyes, because he hits hee knows not whom.
The other, that he hath no ears, to hear those that call.
The third, that he hath no nose, for savours are not found of lovers.
All, that hee hath no taste, because sweet and sower is all one.
All, that hee hath no sense, because pains are pleasures, and pleasures pains,
All, that he is a foolish god, working without rea∣son, and suffering the repulse without regard.
Dare they blaspheme my god-head, which Jove doth worship, Neptune reverence, and all the gods tremble at? To make them love, were a revenge too gentle for Cupped: to make you hate, a recompense too small for lo∣uers. But of that anon: what have you used in love?
All things that may procure love, gifts, words, oaths, sighs, and swounings.
What said they of gifts?
That affection could not bee bought with gold,
What of words?
That they were golden blasts, out of Leaden bellows.
What of oaths?
That Iupiter never swear true to In••.
What of sighs?
That deceit kept a forge in the hearts of fools.
What of swounings?
Nothing, but th•• they wished them deaths.
What reasons gave they, not to love?
Women's reasons, they would not, because they would not.
Well, then shall you see Cupped requite their rea∣sons with his rigour. What punishment doe you desire, that Cupped will deny?
Mine being so hard as stone, would I have tur∣ned to stone, that being to lovers pitt•less, she may to all the world be senseless.
Mine being so fair and so proud, would I have turned into some flower, that she may know beauty is as fading as grass, which being fresh in the morning, is wi∣thered before night.
Mine divine, Cupped, whose affection nothing can make stayed, let her be turned to that Bird, that •ueth only
by ayre, and dies if she touch the earth, because it is constant. The bird of Paradise, Cupped, that drawing in her bowels nothing but ayre, she may know her heart fed on nothing but fickleness.
Your revenges are reasonable, and shall bee granted. Thou Nisae, whose heart no tears could pearce, shalt with continual waives be wasted: in stead of thy fair hair, shalt thou have greene moss•e, thy face of fl••t, be∣cause thy heart is of marble, thine ears shall bee holes for fishes, whose ears were more deaf then fishes. Thou Ce∣lia whom beauty made proud, shalt have the fruit of beauty, that is, to fade whiles it is flourishing, and to blast before it is blown. Thy face, as fair as the Damask rose, shall perish like the Damask rose, the canker shall eat thee in the bud, and every little wind blow thee from the stalk, and then shall men in the morning wear thee in their Hats, and at night cast thee at their heals. Thou No∣obe, whom nothing can please (but that which most dis∣pleases Cupped, inconstancy) shalt only breathe and suck ayre for food, and wear feathers for silk, being more wavering then ayre, and lighter then feathers. This will Cupped doe. Therefore, when next you shall behold your Ladies, doe but send a faithful sigh to Cupped, and there shall arise a thick mist which Proserpine shall send, and in the moment you shall be revenged, and they changed, Cupped prove himself a great god, and they peevish girls.
With what sacrifice shall wee show our selves thankful, or how may we requite this benefit?
You shall yer•lie at my Temple offer true hearts, and hourly bestow all your wits in loving devices, think all the time lost, that is not spent in love, let your oaths be without number, but not without truth, your words full of alluring sweetness, but not of broad flattery, your at∣tires neat, but not womanish, your gifts of more price for the fine device, then the great value, and yet of
such value, that the device seem not beggarly, nor your selves blockish, be secrete that works miracles, bee constant that bring•th secrecy; this is all Cupped doth com∣maund. Away.
And to this we all willingly consent.
Now what r•stead, but revenge on them, that have practised malice on vs, let mine be any thing, seeing she will not be only mine.
Let vs not now stand wishing, but presently seek them out, using as great speed in following revenge, as we did in pursuing our love: certainly wee shall find them about Ceres tree, singing or sacrificing.
But shall we not go visit Erisicthon?
Not I, left hee eat vs, that devours all things; his looks are of force to famish: let vsin, and let all La∣dies beware to offend those in spite, that love them in honour, for when the Crow shall •et his foot in their eye, and the black Ox tread on their foot, they shall find their misfortunes to be equal with their deformities, and men both to loath, and laugh at them.
Come, Protea, tell me, how did thou escape from the Merchant?
Neptune, that great god, when I was ready to go with the Merchant into the ship, turned me to a Fisher∣man on the shore, with an Angle in my hand, and on my shoulder a net; the Merchant missing me, and yet fin∣ding me, asked me who I was, and whether I saw not a fair maiden? I answered no? Hee marue•ling and raging, was forced either to lose his passage, or secke for me a∣mong the Pebbles? To make short, a good wind caused him to go I know not whither, and me (thanks be to Nep∣tune) to return home.
Thou art happy, Protea, though thy Father bee mi•arable: and Neptune gracious, though Ceres cruel•thy escape from the Merchant, breeds in me life, joy, and fullness.
My father cannot be miserable, if Protea be hap∣pie, for by selling me every day, hee shall never want meat, nor I 〈◊〉 to escape. And now, Father, give me leave to enjoy my Petulius, that on this unfortunate shore still seeks me sorrowing.
Seek ••m, dear Protea; find and enjoy him; and live ever hereafter to th•no own comforts, that hast ••there•o been the preserver of mine.
Aye me, behold, a Siren haunts this shore, the gods forbid she should entangle my Petulius.
Accursed men, whose loves have no other mean then extremities, nor hates end but mischief.
Unnatural monster, no maid that accuses men, whose loves are built on truth, and whose hearts are removed by courtesy: I will hear the depth of her malice.
Of all creatures most unkind, most cunning, by whose subtilties I am half fish, half flesh, themselves be∣ing neither fish nor flesh, in love luke warm, in cruelty red hot, if they praise, they flatter; if flatter, deceive; if deceive, destroy.
She rails at men, but seeks to entangle them, this slight is prepared for my sweet Petulius, I will with∣draw my self close, for Petulius follows, hee will with∣out doubt be enamoured of her, enchanted hee shall not be, my charms shall countervail hers, it is he hath saved my Fathers life with money, and must prolong mine with love.
I marvel, Protea is so far before me, if she run, isle fly: sweet Protea, where art thou• it is Petulius calls Protea.
Here comes a brave youth, Now Siren, leave out nothing that may allure, thy golden lockes, thy en∣tising looks, thy tuned voice, thy subtle speech, thy fair promises, which never misled the heart of any but Vlisses.
What divine goddess is this? What sweet har∣money? My heart is ra•ished with such tickling thoughts, and mine eyes stayed with such a bewitching beauty, that I can neither find the means to remove my affection, nor to turn aside my looks. 
I yield to death, but with such delight, that I would not wish to live, unless it were to hear thy sweet lays.
Live still so thou love me: why stand thou ama∣zed at the word Love?
It is high time to prevent this mischief: Now Neptune, stand to thy promise, and let me take suddenly the shape of an old man; so shall I mar what she makes.
Not yet come to my self, or if I bee, I dare not credit mine ears. Love thee divine goddess? Vouchsafe I may honour thee, and live by the imagination I have of thy words and worthiness.
I am a goddess, but a Lady and a virgin, whose love if thou embrace, thou shalt live no less happy, then the gods in heaven.
Believe not this Enchantress (sweet youth) who retains the face of a Virgin, but the heart of a F•end, whose sweet tongue sheadeth more drops of blood, then it utters syllables.
Out dottrell, whose dim eyes cannot discern beauty, nor doting age judge of love.
If thou listen to her words, thou shalt not live to repent: for her malice is as sudden, as her joys are sweet.
Thy silver hairs are not so precious, as her golden lockes, nor thy crooked age of that estimation, as her flowering youth.
That old man measures the hot assault of love, with the cold skir••hes of age.
That young cruel resembles old Apes, who kill by culling; from the top of this Rock whereon she
sits, will she throw thee headlong into the Sea, whose song is the instrument of her witchcraft, never smiling but when she means to smite, and under the flattery of love, practises the shedding of blood.
What are thou, which so blasphemest this divine creature?
I am the Ghost of Vlisses, who continually hover about these places, where this Siren haunteth, to save those which otherwise should be spoiled: stop thine ears, as I did mine, and succour the fair, but by thy folly, the most unfortunate Protea.
Protea? What dost thou hear, Petulius? Where is Protea?
In this thicket, ready to hang her self, because thou care not for her, that did swear to follow: curse this hag• who only hath the voice and face of a Virgin, the rest all fish and feathers, and filth; follow me, and strongly stop thine ears, left the second encounter make the wound incurable.
Is this a Siren, and thou Vlisses? cursed be that hell∣lish carcass, and blessed be thy heavenly spirit.
I shrink my head for shame. O Vlisses, is it not e∣nough for thee to escape, but also to teach others? Sing and die, nay •ie, and never sing more.
Follow me at this door, and out at the other.
How am I delivered! the old man is vanished, and here for him stands Protea.
Here stands Protea, that hath saved thy life, thou must also prolong hers: but let vs into the woods, and there I will tell thee howe I came to Vlisses, and the sum of all my fortunes, which happily will breed in thee both love and wonder.
I will, and only love Protea, and never cease to wonder at Protea.
Cupped, thou hast transformed my Nymphs and incensed me, them to shapes unreasonable, me to anger immortal, for at one time I am both robbed of mine honour and my Nymphs.
Ceres, thy Nymphs were stubborn, and thy self speaking so imperiously to Cupped, somewhat stately. If you ask the cause in choler, Sic volo, sic iubeo: if in curt∣sie, Quae venue ex merito poena dolenda venit. They were dis∣dainefull, and have their deserts; thou Ceres, doest but govern the guts of men, I the hearts: thou seek to starve Erisicthon with thy ministered famine, whom his daughter shall preserve by my virtue love.
Thou art but a god Cupped.
No Ceres, but such a god as makes thunder fall out of Ioues hand, by throwing thoughts into his heart, and to bee more terrified with the sparkling of a Ladies eye, then men with the flashes of his lightning: such a god that hath kindled more fire in Neptunes bosom, then the whole Sea which he is king of can quench: such power have I, that Plutoes never dying fire, doth but scorch in respect of my flames. Diana hath felt some motions of love, Vesta doth, Ceres shall.
Art thou so cruel?
To those that resist, a Lyon, to those that sub∣mit, a Lamb.
Can thou make such difference in affection, and yet shall it all be love?
Yea, as much as between sickness and health, though in both bee life: those that yield and honour Cu∣bid, shall possess sweet thoughts, and enjoy pleasing wi∣shes: the other shall bee tormented with vain imaginati∣once and impossible hopes.
How may my Nymphs be restored?
If thou restore Erisicthon, they embrace their loves, and all offer sacrifice to me.
Erisicthon did in contempt hew down my sa∣cred tree.
Thy Nymphs did in disdain, scorn my con∣stant love.
Hee slew most cruelly my chaste Fidelia, whose blood lies yet on the ground.
But Diana hath changed her blood to fresh flowers, which are to be seen on the ground.
What honour shall he doe to Ceres? What amends can he make to Fidelia?
All Ceres grove shall he deck with Garlands, and account every tree holy; a stately monument shall hee erect, in remembrance of Fidelia, and offer yearly sa∣crifice.
What sacrifice shall I and my Nymphs offer thee? For I will doe any thing to restore my Nymphs, and honour thee.
You shall present in honour of my mother Venus, Grapes and Wheat, for Sine Cerere &amp; Baccho frigate Ve∣nus. You shall suffer your Nymphs to play, sometimes to be idle, in the favour of Cupped, for Otiasitollas, periere Cu∣pidinis arcus. So much for Ceres. Thy Nymphs shall make no vows to continue Virgins, nor use words to disgrace love, nor fly from opportunities that kindle affections: if they be chaste, let them not bee cruel; if fair, not proud; if loving not inconstant. Cruelty is for Tigers, pride for Peacocks, inconstancy for fools.
Cupped, I yield, and they shall: but sweet Cupped, let them not bee deceived by flattery, which takes the shape of affection, nor by lust, which is clothed in the habit of love; for men have as many slights to delude, as they have words to speak.
Those that practise deceit, shall perish: Cupped fa∣uoureth none but the faithful.
Well, I will go to Erisicthon, and bring him be∣fore thee.
Then shall thy Nymphs recover their fems, so as they yield to love.
They shall.
A strange discourse, Protea, by which I find the gods amorous, and Virgins immortal goddesses, full of cruelty, and men of unhappiness.
I have told both my Fathers misfortunes, grown by stoutness, and mine by weakness, his thwarting of Ceres, my yielding to Neptune.
I know, Protea, that hard iron falling into fire, wax∣eth soft, and then the tender heart of a Virgin being in love, must needs melt: for what should a fair young and witty Lady answer, to the sweet enticements of love, but,
I have heard too, that hearts of men stiffer then steel, have by love been made softer then wool, and then they cry,
Men have often fained sighs.
And women forged tears.
Suppose I love not.
Suppose I care not.
If men swear and lie, howe will you try their loves?
If women swear they love, how will you try their dissembling?
The gods put wit into women.
And nature deceit into men.
I did this but to try your patience.
Nor I, but to prove your faith. But see, Petulius, what miraculous punishments here are for deserts in love; this Rock was a Nymph to Ceres, so was this Rose, so that Bird.
All changed from their shapes?
All changed by Cupped, because they disdained love, or dissembled in it.
A fair warning to Protea; I hope she will love without dissembling.
An Item for Petulius, that hee delude not those that love him; for Cupped can also change men. Let 〈◊〉.
This goes luckily, that Cupped hath promised to restore our mistresses, and Ceres, that they shall accept our loves.
I did ever imagine, that true love would end with sweet joys, though •o was begun with deep sighs.
But how shall we look on them when we shall see them smile? We must, and perchance they will frown.
Push, let vs endure the bending of their fair brows, and the scorching of their sparkling eyes, so that we may possess at last the depth of their affections.
Possess? Never doubt it, for Ceres hath restored Erisicthon, and therefore will persuade with them, nay, command them.
If it come by commandment of Ceres, not their own motions, I rather they should hate: for what joy can there be in our lives, or in our loves sweetness, when every kiss shall bee sealed with a curse, and every kind word proceed of fear, not affection? enforcement is worse then enchantment.
Art thou so superstitious in love, that wast wont to be most careless? Let them curse all day, so I may have but one kiss at night.
Thou art worse then Siluestris, hee not content without absolute love, thou with indifferent.
But here comes Ceres with Erisicthon: let vs look demurely, for in her heart she hates vs deeply.
I will hallow thy woods with solemn feasts, and honour all thy Nymphs with due regard.
Well, doe so, and thank Cupped that commands, nay, thank my foolish Nymphs, that know not how to obey; here be the lovers ready at receipt: How now Gen∣tlemen, what seek you?
Nothing but what Ceres would find.
Ceres hath found those, that I would she had lost, vain lovers.
Ceres may lose that, that Cupped would save, true lovers.
You think so one of another.
Cupped knows so of vs all.
You might have made me a counsel of your loves.
I madame, if love would admit counsel.
Cupped, here is Erisicthon in his former state, restore my N•mphs to theirs, then shall they embrace these lovers, who wither out their youth.
Honoured bee mighty Cupped, that makes me live.
Honoured bee mighty Cupped, that makes me love.
And me.
What, more lovers yet? I think it bee impossible for Ceres to have any follow her in one hour, that is not in love in the next.
Erisicthon, bee thou careful to honour Ceres, and forget not to please her Nymphs. The faithful love of thy daughter Protea, hath wrought both pity in me to grant her desires, and to release thy pu•each•ants. Thou Petu∣liu• shalt enjoy thy love, becaused know thee loyal.
Then shall Petulius be most happy.
And Protea most fortunate.
But doe you, Ramis, continue your constant love, and you, Montanus, and you, Siluestris.
Nothing can alter our affections which increase, while the means decrease, and wax stronger in being weakened.
Then Venus, send down that shower, wherewith thou were wont to wath those that doe thee worship, and let love by thy beams, bee honoured in all the world and feared, wished for, and wondered at: here are thy Nymphs, Ceres.
Whom doe I see? Nice?
Divine Celia, fairer then ever she was!
My sweet Niobe.
Why stare you, my Nymphs, as amazed triumph rather because you have your shapes: this great god Cupped, that for your prides and follies changed, hath by my prayer and promise restored you.
You see, Ladies, what it is to make a mock of love, or a scorn of Cupped; see where your lovers stand, you must now take them for your husbands; this is my judge∣meant, this is Ceres promise.
Happy Ramis.
Happy Montanus.
Happy Siluestris.
Why speak you not, Nymphs? This must bee done, and you must yield.
Not I.
Nor I.
Nor I.
Not yield? Then shall Cupped in his fury turn you again to senseless, and shameful shapes.
Will you not yield? How say you Ramis? Doo your loves continue? Are your thoughts constant? &amp; yours Montanus? And yours Siluestris?
Mine most unspotted.
And mine.
And mine, Cupped, which nothing can alter.
And will you not yield, Virgins?
Not I, Cupped, neither doe I thank thee that I am restored to life, nor fear again to be changed to stone: for rather had I been worn with the continual beating of waives, then dulled with the importunities of men, whose open flatteries make way to their secret lusts, re∣taining as little truth in their hearts, as modesty in their words; how happy was Nice, which felt nothing, pined yet, not felt the consumption! unfortunate wench, that now
have ears to hear their cunning lies, and eyes to behold their dissembling looks! turn me, Cupped, again; for love I will not.
Miserable Ramis, unhappy to love, to change the Lady, accursed, and now lose her, desperate!
Nor I Cupped: well could I content my self to bud in the Summer, and to die in the Winter: for more good comes of the Rose, then can by love: when it is fresh, it hath a sweet favour, love a sour taste: the Rose when it is old, loses not his virtue; love when it is state waxes loathsome. The Rose distilled with fire yields swear water: love in extremities kindles jealousies: in the Rose how ever it be, there is sweetness; in love nothing but bit∣ternesse. If men look pale, and swear, &amp; sigh, then for∣sooth women must yield, because men say they love, as though our hearts were tied to their tongues, and we must choose them by appointment, our selves feeling no affecti∣on, and so have our thoughts bound prentices to their words: turn me again. Yield I will not.
Which way shalt thou turn thy self, since no∣thing will turn her heart? Die, Montanus, with shame and grief, and both infinite.
Nor I Cupped: let me hang always in the ayre, which I found more constant then men's words: happy Niobe, that touched not the ground where they go, but always holding thy beak in the ayre, did never turn back to behold the earth. In the heavens I saw an order∣lie course, in the earth nothing but disorderly love, and preuishnesse: turn me again, Cupped, for yield I will not.
I would my self were stone, flower, or foul, see∣ing that Nice hath a heart harder then stone, a face fairer then the Rose, and a mind lighter then feathers.
What have we here? Hath punishment made you perverse? Ceres, I vow here by my sweet mother Venus, that if they yield not, I will turn them again, not to
flowers, or stones, or birds, but to monsters, no less fill∣thie to be seen, then to bee named hateful: they shall creep that now stand, and be to all men odious, and bee to themselves (for the mind they shall retain) loath∣some.
My sweet Nymphs, for the honour of your sex, for the love of Ceres, for regard of your own country, yield to love, yield, my sweet Nymphs, to sweet love.
Shall I yield to him that practised my destructi∣on, and when his love was hottest, caused me to bee chaun∣general to a rock?
Nice, the extremity of love is madness, and to be mad is to bee senseless, upon that Rock did I resolve to end my life: fair Nice, forgive him thy change, that for himself provided a harder chance.
Shall I yield to him, that made so small account of my beauty, that he studied how he might never behold it again?
Fair Lady, in the Rose did I always behold thy colour, and resolved by continual gazing to perish, which I could not doe when thou wast in thine own shape, thou wast so coy and swift in flying from me.
Shall I yield to him that caused me have wings, that I might fly farther from him.
Sweet Niobe, the farther you did seem to bee from me, the nearer I was to my death, which to make it more speedy, wished thee wings to she into the ayre, and my self lead on my heals to sink into the Sea.
Well, my good Nymphs, yield let Ceres entreat you yield.
I am content, so as Ramis, when hee finds me cold in love, or hard in belief, hee attribute it to his own folly; in that I retain some nature of the Rock, he changed me into.
O my sweet Nice, bee what thou wilt, and let
all thy imperfections bee excused by me, so thou but say thou love me.
I doe.
Happy Ramis.
I consent, so as Montanus, when in the midst of his sweet delight, shall find some bitter ouerthwarts, im∣put it to his folly, in that he suffered me to be a Rose, that hath prickles with her pleasantness, as hee is like to have with my love shrewdness.
Let me bleed every minute with the prickles of the Rose, so I may enjoy but one hour the savour: love, fair Celia, and at thy pleasure comfort, and confound.
I doe.
Fortunate Montanus.
I yielded first in mind, though it bee my course last to speak: but if Siluestris find me not ever at home, let him curse himself that gave me wings to fly abroad, whose feathers if his jealousy shall break, my policy shall nip.
My sweet Niobe, fly whither thou wilt all day, so I may find thee in my nest at night, I will love thee, and belove thee.
I am glad you are all agreed, enjoy your loves, and every one his delight. Thou Erisicthon art restored of Ceres, all the lovers pleased by Cupped, she joyful, I honoured. Now, Ladies, I will make such unspotted love among you, that there shall bee no suspicion nor jar, no unkindness nor jealousy: but let all Ladies here∣after take heed, that they resist not love, which works wonders.
I will charm my Nymphs, as they shall neither
be so stately, as not to stoop to love, nor so light as pre∣sently to yield.
Here is none but is happy: but doe not as Hippo∣manes did, when by Venus ay• hee won Atlanta, defile her Temple with unchaste desire• •nd forgot to sacrifice vows. I will soar up into heave•, to settle the loves of the gods, that in earth have disposed the affections of men.
I to my harvest, whose corn is now come out of the blade, into the ear, and let all this amorous troupe to the temple of Venus, there to consummate what Cupped hath commanded.
Im the honour of Cupped, and Ceres, will solemn∣nize this feast within my house, and learn, if it be not too late, again to love. But you Foresters were unkind, that in all my maladies would not visit me.
Thou know, Erisicthon, that lovers visit none but their mistresses.
Well, I will not take it unkindly, since all ends in kindness.
Let it bee so; these lovers mind nothing what we say.
Yes, we attend on Ceres.
Well, doe.

HOw now fellow Frantic, what all a mort? Doth this sad∣nes become thy madness? What though wee have lost our way in the woods, yet never hang the head, as though thou had no hope to live till to morrow: for Fantastic and I will warrant thy life to night for twenty in the hundred.
Antique and Fantastic, as I am frolic franion, never in all my life was I so dead slain. What? to loose our way in the wood, without either fire or candle so vncom∣fortable? O coelum! O terra! O maria! O Neptune!
Why makes thou it so strange, seeing Cupped hath led our young master to the fair La∣die and she is the only Saint that he hath sworn to serve.
What rests then but wee com∣mit him to his wench, and each of vs take his stand up in a Tree, and sing out our ill fortune to the tune of O man in desperation.
Desperately spoken fellow Frolic in the dark: but seeing it falls out thus, let vs re∣hearse the old proverb.
Three merry men, and three merry men,
And three merry men be wee.
I in the wood, and thou on the ground,
And Jack sleeps in the tree.
Hush a dog in the wood, or a wooden dog, O comfortable hearing! I had even as live the Chamberlain of the white Horse had called me up to bed.
Either hath this trotting Cur gone out of his circuit, or else are we ne'er some village,
which should not be far off, for I perceive the glymring of a Gloworme, a Candle, or a Cats eye, my life for a half penny. In the name of my own father, be thou Ox or Ass that appea∣rest, tell vs what thou art.
What am I? Why I am Clunch the Smith, what are you, what make you in my la∣ritories
at this time of the night?
What doe we make dost thou ask? why we make faces for fear: such as if thy mortal eyes could behold, would make thee water the long seames of thy side slops, Smith.
And in faith Sir unless your hospitality doe relieve vs, wee are like to wander with a sorrowful hey ho, among the owlets, &amp; Hob∣goblins of the Forest: good Vulcan, for Cupids sake that hath cozened vs all: befriend vs as thou majesty, and command vs howsoever, wheresoever, whenever, in whatsoever, for e∣for and ever.
Well Masters it seems to me you have lost your way in the wood: in concede∣ration whereof, if you will go with Clunch to his Cottage, you shall have house room, and a good fire to sit by, although we have no bedding to put you in.
O blessed Smith, O bountiful Clunch.
For your further entertainment, it shall be as it may be, so and so.
Hark this is Ball my Dog that bids you all welcome in his own language, come take heed for stumbling on thethreshold, open door Madge take in guests.
Welcome Clunch &amp; good fellows al that come with my good mā for my good mans sake
come on sit down here is a piece of cheese &amp; a pudding of my own making.
Thanks Gimmal a good example for the wives of our town.
Gimmal thou and thy good man sit lovingly together, we come to chat and not to eat.
Well Masters if you will eat no∣thing take away: Come, what doo we to pass away the time? Lay a crab in the fire to roast for Lambes-wooll; what shall wee have a game at Trump or Ruff to drive away the time, how say you?
This Smith leads a life as mer∣rye as a King with Madge his wife; Sirrah Fro∣like, I am sure thou art not without some round or other, no doubt but Clunch can bear his part.
Else think you me ill brought up, so set to it when you will.
WHen as the Rye reach to the chin,
And chopcherrie chopcherrie ripe within,
Strawberries swimming in the cream,
And school boys playing in the stream:
Then O, then O, then O my true love said,
Till that time come again,
She could not live a maid.
This sport dooes well: but me thinks Gimmal, a merry winters tale would drive a∣way the time trimly, come I am sure you are not without a score.
I faith Gimmal a tale of an hour long were as good as an hours sleep.
Look you Gimmal, of the Giant and the Kings Daughter, and I know not what, I have seen the day when I was a little one, you might have drawn me a mile after you with such a discourse.
Well, since you be so importu∣nate, my good man shall fill the pot and get him to bed, they that ply their work must keep good hours, one of you go lye with him, he is a clean skinned man I tell you, without either spain or windgall, so I am content to drive a∣way the time with an old wives winters tale.
No better hay in Devonshire, a my word Gimmal, Isle be one of of your audience.
And I another thats flat.
Then must I to bed with the good man, Bonanox Gimmal, God night Frolic.
Come on my Lad, thou shalt take thy unnatural rest with me.
Yet this vantage shall we have of them in the morning, to bee ready at the sight thereof extempore.
Now this bargain my Masters must I make with you, that you will say hum &amp; ha to my tale, so shall I know you are awake.
Content Gimmal that will we doo.
Once upon a time there was a King or a Lord, or a Duke that had a fair daugh∣la, the fairest that ever was; as white as snow, and as red as blood: and once upon a time his daughter was stolen away, and hee sent all his men to seek out his daughter, and hee sent so long, that he sent all his men out of his Land.
Who dressed his dinner then?
Nay either hear my tale, or kiss my tail.
Well sed, on with your tale Gimmal.
O Lord I quite forgot, there was a Conjurer, and this Conjurer could doo anything, and hee turned himself into a great Dragon, and carried the Kings Daughter away in his mouth to a Castle that hee made of stone, and there he kept his I know not how long, till at last all the Kings men went out so long, that his two Brothers went to seek his. O I forget: she (he I would say) turned a proper young man to a Bear in the night, and a man in the day, and keeps by a cross that parts three several ways, &amp; he made his Lady run mad: gods me bones who comes here?
Soft Gimmal, here some come to tell
your tale for you.
Let them alone, let vs hear what they will say.
Upon these chalky Cliffs of Albion
We are arrived now with tedious toil,
And compassing the wide world round about
To seek our sister, to seek fair Delya forth,
Yet cannot we so much as hear of his.
O fortune cruel, cruel &amp; unkind,
Unkind in that we cannot find our sister;
Our sister hapless in his cruel chance:
Soft who have we here.
Now father God be your speed, What doo you gather there?
Hips and Hawes, and sticks and straws, and things that I gather on the ground my son.
Hips and Hawes, and sticks and straws, why is that all your food father?
Yea son.
Father, here is an Alms penny for me, and if I speed in that I go for, I will give thee as good a Gown of gray as ever thou did wear.
And Father here is another alms penny for me, and if I speed in my journey, I will give thee a Palmers staff of ivory, and a scallop shell of beaten gold.
Was she fair?
I the fairest for white, and the pu∣rest for red, as the blood of the Dear, or the driven snow:
Then hark well and mark well, my old spell:
Be not afraid of every stranger,
Start not aside at every danger:
Things that seem are not the same,
Blow a blast at every flame:
For when one flame of fire goes out,
Then comes your wishes well about:
If any ask who told you this good,
Say the white Bear of Englands wood.
Brother heard you not what the old man said:
Be not afraid of every stranger,
Start not aside for every danger:
Things that seem are not the same,
Blow a blast at every flame:
If any ask who told you this good,
Say the white Bear of Englands wood.
Well if this doo vs any good,
Welfare the white Bear of Englands wood.
Now sit thee here &amp; tel a heavy tale.
Sad in thy mood, and sober in thy cheer,
Here sit thee now and to thy self relate,
The hard mishap of thy most wretched state.
In Thessalie I lived in sweet content,
Until that Fortune wrought my overthrow;
For there I wedded was unto a dame,
That lived in honour, virtue, love, and fame:
But Sacrapant that cursed sorcerer,
Being besotted with my beauteous love:
My dearest love, my true betrothed wife,
Did seek the means to rid me of my life.
But worse than this, he with his chanting spells,
Did turn me straight unto an ugly Bear;
And when the sun doth settle in the west,
Then I begin to don my ugly hide:
And all the day I sit, as now you see,
And speak in riddles all inspirde with rage,
Seeming an old and miserable man:
And yet I am in April of my age.
See where Venelya my betrothed love,
Runs matting all enraged about the woods;
All by his cursed and enchanting spells.
But here comes Lampriscus my discontented neighbour. How now neighbour, you look toward the ground as well as I, you muse on something.
Neighbour on nothing, but on the matter I so often moved to you: if you do any thing for charity, help me; if for neighbourhood or brotherhood, help me: never was one so combered as is poor Lampryscus: and to be∣gin, I pray receive this pot of Honey to mend
your fare.
Thanks neighbor, set it down,
Honey is always welcome to the Bear.
And now neighbour let me here the cause of your coming.
I am (as you know neigh∣bore) a man unmarried, and lived so unquietly with my two wives, that I keep every year holy the day wherein I buried thē both; the first was on saint Andrews day; the other on saint Lukes.
And now neighbour, you of this country say, your custom is out: but on with your tale neighbour.
By my first wife, whose tongue wea∣ried me alive, and sounded in my ears like the clapper of a great Bell, whose talk was a conti∣nuall torment to all that dwelt by her, or lived nigh her, you have heard me say I had a hand∣some daughter.
True neighbour.
She it is that afflicts me with her continual clamours, and hangs on me like a Bur: poor she is, and proud she is, as poor as a sheep new shorn, and as proud of her hopes, as a Peacock of her tail well grown.
Well said Lampryscus, you speak it like an Englishman.
As cursed as a wasp, and as froward as a child new taken from the mothers teat, she is to my age, as smoke to the eyes, or as vi∣negar to the teeth.
Holily praised neighbour, as much for the next.
By my other wife I had a daughter, so hard favoured, so foul and ill faced, that I think a grove full of golden trees; and the leaves of Rubies and Diamonds, would not bee a dowry answerable to her deform∣tie.
Well neighbour, now you have spoke, here me speak; send them to the Well for the water of life: there shall they find their fortunes unlooked for; Neighbour farewell.
Farewell and a thousand, and now goes poor Lampryscus to put in execution this excellent counsel.
Why this goes round without a fid∣ling stick; but doo you hear Gimmal, was this the man that was a Bear in the night, and a man in the day?
I this is hee; and this man that came to him was a beggar, and dwelt upon a greene. But soft, who comes here? O these are the harvest men; ten to one they sing a song of mowing.
All ye that lovely lovers be, pray you for me,
Lo here we come a sowing, a sowing,
And sow sweet fruits of love:
In your sweet hearts well may it prove.
Gimmal, what is he?
O this is one that is going to the conjurer, let him alone, here what he says.
Now by Mars and Mercury, Iupiter and Ianus, Sol and Saturnus, Venus and Vesta, Pallas and Proserpina, and by the honour of my house Polimackeroeplacydus, it is a wonder to see what this love will make silly fellows aduen∣ture, even in the wane of their wits, and infancy of their discretion. Alas my friend what fortune calls thee forth to seek thy fortune among brazen gates, enchanted towers, fire and Brim∣stone, thunder and lightning. Beauty I tell thee is peerless, and she precious whom thou af∣fastest: do off these desires good countryman, good friend run away from thy self, and so soon as thou can, forget her; whom none must inherit but he that can monsters tame, la∣boures achieve, riddles absolve, loose enchant∣mints, murder magic, and kill conjuring: and that is the great and mighty Huanebango.
Hark you sir, hark you; First know I have here the flirting feather, and have given the Parish the start for the long stock: Now sir if it bee no more but running through a little lightning and thunder, and riddle me riddle me whats this, Isle have the wench from the Con∣juror if he were ten Conjurers.
I have abandoned the Court and ho∣nourable company, to doo my deuoyre against this sore Sorcerer and mighty Magician: if this Lady be so fair as she is said to bee, she is mine, she is mine, Mouse, mea, meum, in contemptum omnium Grammaticorum.
O falsum Latinum! the fair maid is minum, cum apurtinantibus giblets and all.
If she bee mine, as I assure my self the heavens will doo somewhat to reward my worthiness; she shall bee allied to none of the meanest gods; but bee invested in the most fa∣mous stock of Huanebango Polimackeroeplaci∣dus, my Grandfather: my father Pergopolyneo: my mother, Dyonora de Sardynya: famously descended.
Doo you hear sir; had not you a Cousin, that was called Gustecerydis?
Indeed I had a Cousin, that sometime followed the Court infortunately, and his name Bustegustecerydis.
O Lord I know him well: hee is the
knight of the neates feet.
O he loved no Capon better, he hath oftentimes deceived his boy of his dinner, that was his fault good Bustegustecerydis.
Come shall we go along? Soft, here is an old man at the Cross, let vs ask him the way thither. Ho, you Gaffer, I pray you tell where the wise man the Conjurer dwells?
Where that earthly Goddess kee∣peth his abode; the commander of my thougts, and fair Mistress of my heart.
Fair enough, and far enough from thy fingering son.
I will follow my Fortune after mine own fancy, and doo according to mine own discretion.
Yet give some thing to an old man before you go.
Father me thinks a piece of this Cake might serve your turn.
Yea son.
Huanabango gives no Cakes for Alms, ask of them that give gifts for poor Beggars. Fair Lady, if thou were once shri∣ned in this bosom, I would buckler thee hara∣tantara.
Father doo you see this man, you little think heel run a mile or two for such a Cake,
or pass for a pudding, I tell you father hee has kept such a begging of me for a piece of this Cake, whoo he comes upon me with a super∣fantiall substance, and the foison of the earth, that I know not what he means: If hee came to me thus, and said, my friend Booby or so, why I could spare him a piece with all my heart; but when he tells me how God hath enriched me aboue other fellows with a Cake: why hee makes me blind and deaf at once: Yet father here is a piece of Cake for you as harde as the world goes.
Thanks son, but list to me,
He shall be deaf when thou shalt not see;
Farewell my son things may so hit,
Thou moist have wealth to mend thy wit.
Farewell father, farewell; for I must make hast after my two hand sword that is gone before.
The day is clear, the Welkin bright and gray,
The Lark is merry, and records his notes;
Each thing rejoices underneath the Sky,
But only I whom heaven hath in hate:
Wretched and miserable Sacrapant,
In Thessalie was I borne and brought up,
My mother Meroe hight a famous Witch,
And by his cunning I of his did learn,
To change and alter shapes of mortal men.
There did I turn my self into a Dragon,
And stole away the Daughter to the King;
Fair Delya, the Mistress of my heart:
And brought his hither to revive the man,
That seems young and pleasant to behold,
And yet is aged, crooked, weak and numb.
Thus by enchanting spells I doo deceive,
Those that behold and look upon my face;
But well may I bid youthful years adieu:
See where she coms from whence my sorrows grow,
How now fair Delya where have you bin?
At the foot of the Rock for run∣ning water, and gathering roots for your din∣ner sir.
Ah Delya, fairer art thou than the run∣ning water, yet harder far than steel or Ada∣mant.
Will it please you to sit down sir.
I Delya, sit &amp; ask me what thou wilt, thou shalt have it brought into thy lap.
Then I pray you sir let me have the best meat from the king of Englands table, and the best wine in all France, brought in by the ve∣riest knave in all Spain.
Delya I am glad to see you so pleasant,
well sit thee down.
Spread table spread; meat, drink &amp; bred
Ever may I have, what I ever crave:
When I am spread, for meat for my black cock,
And meat for my red.
Here Delya, will ye fall to.
Is this the best meat in England?
Yea.
What is it?
A chine of English beef, meat for a king
And a kings followers.
Is this the best wine in France?
Yea.
What Wine is it?
A cup of neat wine of Orleans,
That never came near the brewers in England.
Is this the veriest knave in all Spain?
Yea.
What is he a Fryer?
Yea a Friar indefinite, &amp; a knave infinite.
Then I pray ye sir Friar tell me before you go, which is the most greediest English∣man?
The miserable and most covetous Usurer.
Hold thee there Friar,
But soft who have we here, Delia away begone.
Delya away, for beset are we,
But heaven or hell shall rescue her for me.
Brother, was not that Delya did appear?
Or was it but her shadow that was here?
Sister, where art thou? Delya come again
He calls, that of thy absence doth complain.
Call out Calypha that she may hear,
And cry aloud, for Delya is near.
Near.
Near, O where, hast thou any tidings?
Tidings.
Which way is Delya then, or that, or this?
This.
And may we safely come where Delia is
Yes.
Brother remember you the white
Bear of Englands wood:
Start not a side for every danger,
Be not afraid of every stranger;
Things that seem, are not the same.
Brother, why do we not thē coragiously enter.
Then brother draw thy sword &amp; follow me.
What brother dost thou fall?
I, and thou to Calypha.
away with them,
Go cary them straight to Sacrapantos cell,
There in despair and torture for to dwell;
These are Thenores sons of Thessaly,
That come to seek Delya their sister forth:
But with a potion, I to her have given,
My arts hath made her to forget her self.
He remooues a turf, and shows a light in a glass.
See here the thing which doth prolong my life
With this enchantment I do any thing.
And till this fade, my skill shall still endure,
And never none shall break this little glass,
But she that's neither wife, widow, nor maid.
Then cheer thy self, this is thy destiny,
Never to die, but by a dead mans hand.
Tell me Time, tell me just Time,
When shall I Delia see?
When shall I see the loadstar of my life?
When shall my wandering course end with her sight?
Or I but view my hope, my hearts delight.
Father God speed, if you tell fortunes, I pray good father tell me mine.
Son I do see in thy face,
Thy blessed fortune work apace;
I do perceive that thou hast wit,
Beg of thy fate to govern it,
For wisdom governed by advise,
Makes many fortunate and wise.
Bestow thy alms, give more than all,
Till dead men's bones come at thy call:
Farewell my son, dream of no rest,
Till thou repent that thou did best.
This man hath left me in a Labyrinth,
He bids me give more than all,
Till dead men's bones come at thy call:
He bids me dream of no rest,
Till I repent that I do best.
You may be ashamed, you whore∣son scald Sexton and Churchwarden, if you had any shame in those shameless faces of yours, to let a poor man lie so long aboue ground vnbu∣ried. A rot on you all, that have no more com∣passion of a good fellow when he is gone.
What would you have vs to bury him, and to answer it our selves to the par∣rich?
Parish me no parishes, pay me my fees, and let the rest run on in the quarters ac∣counts, and put it down for one of your good deeds a Gods name, for I am not one that cu∣riously stands upon merits.
You whoreson sodden headed sheepes-face, shall a good fellow do less service and more honesty to the parish, &amp; will you not when he is dead let him have Christmas burial.
Peace Corebus, assure as Jack was Jack, the frollickst frannion amongst you, and I VViggen his sweet sworn brother, Jack shall have his funerals, or some of them shall lie on Gods dear earth for it, thats once.
VViggen I hope thou wilt do no more then thou dare answer.
Sir, sir, dare or dare not, more or less, answer or not answer, do this, or have this.
Help, help, help, VViggen sets upon the parish with a Pike staff.
Hold thy hands good fellow.
Can you blame him sir, if he take Jacks part against this shake rotten parish that will not bury Jack.
Why what was that Jack?
Who Jack sir, who our Jack sir? as good a fellow as ever trod upon Nets lea∣there.
Look you sir, he gave four score and nineteen mourning gowns to the parish when he died, and because he would not make them up a full hundred, they would not bury him; was not this good dealing?
Oh Lord sir how he lies, he was not worth a half penny, and drunk out every penny: and now his fellows, his drunken companions, would have vs to bury him at the
charge of the parish, and we make many such matches, we may pull down the steeple, sell the Belles, and thatche the chancel: he shall lie a∣above ground till he dance a galliard about the churchyard for Steeuen Loache.
Sic argumentaris domino Loache; and we make many such matches, we may pull down the steeple, sell the Belles, and thatche the chancel: in good time sir, and hang your selves in the Bell ropes when you have done, Domino oponens praepono tibi hanc questionem, whether will you have the ground broken, or your pates broken: first, for one of them shall be done presently, and to begin mine, isle seal it upon your cockescome.
Hold thy hands, I pray thee good fellow be not too hasty.
You Capons face, we shall have you turned out of the parish one of these days, with never a tatter to your arse, then you are in worse taking then Jack.
Faith and he is bad enough: this fell∣low does but the part of a friend, to seek to bu∣rye his friend; how much will bury him?
Faith, about some fifteen or six∣teene shillings will bestow him honestly.
I even there abouts sir.
Here hold it then, and I have left me but one poor three half pence; now do I
remember the words the old man spake at the cross; bestow all thou hast, and this is all, till dead men's bones comes at thy call, hear hold it, and so farewell.
God, and all good, bee with you sir; nay you cormorants, isle bestow one peal of Jack at mine own proper costs and charges.
You may thank God the long staff and the bilbow blade, crossed not your cockes-combe; well weal to the church stile, and have a pot, and so trill lyll.
Come lets go.
But hark you gimmal, me thinks this Jack bore a great sway in the parish.
O this Jack was a marvelous fell∣low, he was but a poor man, but very well be∣loned: you shall see anon what this Jack will come to.
Soft, who have wee here? our amo∣rous harvest stars.
I, I, let vs sit still and let them alone.
Lo here we come a reaping, a reaping,
To reap our harvest fruit,
And thus we pass the year so long,
And never be we mute.
Soft, who have we here?
O this is a choleric gentleman, all you that love your lives, keep out of the smell of his two hand sword: now goes he to the conjurer.
Me thinks the Conjurer should put the fool into a Juggling box.
Fee, fa, fume, here is the Englishman,
Conquer him that can, came for his lady bright,
To prove himself a knight,
And win her love in fight.
Who haw moister Bango are you here? hear you, you had best sit down here, and beg an alms with me.
Hence base cullion, here is he that commands ingress and egress with his weapon, and will enter at his voluntary whosoever∣ever saith no.
No.
So with that they kissed, and spoiled the edge of as good a two hand sword, as ever God put life in; now goes Corebus in, spite of the conjurer.
Away with him into the open fields,
To be a ravening pray to Crows and Kites:
And for this villain let him wander up &amp; down
In nought but darkness and eternal night.
Heer hast thou slain Huā a slashing knight
And robbed poor Corebus of his sight.
Hence villain hence.
Now I have unto Delya given a potion of for∣getfulnes,
That when she comes she shall not know his Brothers:
Lo where they labour like to Country slaves,
With spade and mattock on this enchanted ground.
Now will I call his by another name,
For never shall she know his self again,
Until that Sacrapant hath breathed his last.
See where she comes.
Come hither Delya take this god,
Here hard at hand two slaves do work and dig for gold,
Gore them with this &amp; thou shalt have enough.
Good sir I know not what you mean.
She hath forgotten to be Delya,
But not forgot the same she should forget:
But I will change his name.
Fair Berecynthia so this Country calls you,
Go ply these strangers wench they dig for gold
O heavens! how am I beholding to
this fair young man.
But I must ply these strangers to their work.
See where they come.
O Brother see where Delya is.
O Delya happy are we to see thee here.
What tell you me of Delya prating swains?
I know no Delya nor know I what you mean,
Ply you your work or else you are like to smart.
Why Delya know thou not thy Brothers here?
We come from Thessalie to seek thee forth,
And thou deceive thy self for thou art Delya.
Yet more of Delya, then take this and smart:
What fine you shifts for to defer your labour?
Work villains work, it is for gold you dig.
Peace brother peace, this wild enchanter
Hath ravished Delya of his senses clean,
And she forgets that she is Delya.
Leave cruel thou to hurt the miserable;
Dig brother dig, for she is hard as steel.
Here they dig &amp; descry the light under a little hill.
Stay brother what hast thou descried?
Away &amp; touch it not, it is some thing, that my Lord hath hidden there. she covers it again.
Well sed, thou plyest these Pyoners
well, go get you in you labouring slaves.
Come Berecynthia, let vs in likewise,
And hear the Nightingale record his notes.
Now for a husband, house and home, God send a good one or none I pray God: My father hath sent me to the well for the water of life, and tells me if I give fair words I shall have a husband.
But here comes Celanta my sweet sister, Isle stand by and hear what she says.
My father hath sent me to the well for water, and he tells me if I speak fair, I shall have a husband and none of the worst: Well though I am black I am sure all the world will not forsake me, and as the old proverb is though I am black, I am not the devil.
Marry gup with a murren, I know wherefore thou speak that, but go thy ways home as wise as thou came, or Isle set thee home with a wanion.
I think this be the curstest queen in the world, you see what she is, a little fair, but as proud as the devil, and the veriest vixen that lives upon Gods earth. Well Isle let his alone, and go home and get another Pitcher, and for all this get me to the well for water.
Once again for a husband, &amp; in faith Celanta I have got the start of you; Belike hus∣bands grow by the Well side; now my father says I must rule my tongue: why alas what am I then? a woman without a tongue, is as a soul∣dier without his weapon; but isle have my wa∣la and be gon.
Gently dip, but not too deep,
For fear you make the golden bird to weep,
Fair maiden white and red,
Stroke me smooth, and comb my head,
And thou shalt have some cockell bread.
What is this, fair maiden white &amp; red,
Comb me smooth, and stroke my head:
And thou shalt have some cockell bread.
Cockell call thou it boy, faith isle give you cockell bread.
Phylyda phylerydos, Pamphylyda florida flortos,
Dub dud a dub, bounce quoth the guns, with a sulpherous huff snuff:
Waked with a wench, pretty peat, pretty love, and my sweet pretty pigsny;
Just by thy side shall sit surnamed great Huane∣bango
Safe in my arms will I keep thee, threat Mars or thunder Olympus.
Foe, what greasy groom have wee here? Hee looks as though hee crept out of the backside of the well; and speaks like a Drum perished at the West end.
O that I might but I may not, wo to my destiny therefore;
Kiss that I clasp but I cannot, tell me my de∣stony wherefore?
Whoop now I have my dream, did you never hear so great a wonder as this? Three blue beans in a blue bladder, rattle blad∣der rattle.
Isle now set my countenance and to his in prose, it may be this rim ram ruff, is too rude an encounter.
Let me fair Lady if you be at leisure, revel with your sweetness, and rail upon that cow∣ardly Conjurer, that hath cast me or congealed me rather into an unkind sleep and polluted my Carcass.
Laugh, laugh Zantyppa, thou hast thy fortune, a fool and a husband under one.
Truly sweet heart as I seem, a∣bout some twenty years, the very April of mine age.
Why what a prating Ass is this?
His Coral lips, his crimson chin,
His silver teeth so white within:
His golden locks his rolling eye,
His pretty parts let them go by:
Hey ho hath wounded me,
That I must die this day to see.
By gogs bones thou art a flouting knave, His Coral lips, his crimson chin: call will∣shaw.
True my own and my own be¦cause mine, &amp; mine because mine ha ha: Aboue a thousand pounds in possibility, and things fit∣ting
thy desire in possession.
The Sott thinks I ask of his lands, Lobb be your comfort, and Cuckold bee your destiny: Hear you sir; and if you will have vs, you had best say so betime.
True sweet heart and will royallize thy progeny with my pedigree.
Wretched Eumenides, still unfortunate,
Envied by fortune, and forlorn by Fate;
Here pine and die wretched Eumenides.
Die in the spring, the April of my age?
Here sit thee down, repent what thou hast don
I would to God that it were ne'er begone.
You are well overtaken sir.
Who's that?
You are heartily well met sir.
Forbear I say, who is that which pin∣cheth me?
Trusting in God good Master Eume∣nides, that you are in so good health as all your friends were at the making hereof: God give you God morrow sir, lack you not a neat handsome and cleanly young Lad, about the age of fifteen or sixteen years, that can run
by your horse, and for a need make your Ma∣stershippes shoes as black as ink, howe say you sir.
Alas pretty Lad, I know not how to keep my self, and much less a servant, my pretty boy, my state is so bad.
Content your self, you shall not bee so ill a Master but isle bee as bad a servant: Tut sir I know you though you know not me; Are not you the man sir, deny it if you can sir, that came from a strange place in the land of Catita, where Jack a napes flies with his tail in his mouth, to seek out a Lady as white as snow, and as red as blood; ha, ha, have I touched you now.
I think this boy be a spirit,
How know thou all this?
Tut are not you the man sir, deny it if you can sir, that gave all the money you had to the burying of a poor man, and but one three-halfe-pence left in your purse: Content you sir, Isle serve you that is flat.
Well my Lad since thou art so impor∣nate, I am content to entertain thee, not as a servant; but a copartner in my journey. But whither shall we go for I have not any money more than one bare three halfe-pence.
Well Master content your self, for if my divination bee not out, that shall bee
spent at the next Inn or alehouse we come too: for moister I know you are passing hungry; therefore isle go before and provide dinner un∣till that you come, no doubt but you'll come fair and softly after.
I, go before, isle follow thee.
But doo you hear moister, doo you know my name?
No I promise thee not yet.
Why I am Jack.
Jack, why be it so then.
How say you sir, doo you please to sit down?
Hostess I thank you, I have no great stomach.
Pray sir, what is the reason your my∣ster is so strange, doth not this meat please him.
Yes Hostess, but it is my masters fashi∣on to pay before hee eats, therefore a recko∣ning good hostess.
Marry shall you sir presently.
Why Jack what dost thou mean, thou know I have not any money: therefore sweet Jack tell me what shall I doo.
Well moister look in your purse.
Why faith it is a folly, for I have no money.
Why look you moister, doo so much for me.
Alas Jack my purse is full of money.
Alas, moister, does that word belong to this accident? why me thinks I should have seen you cast away your cloak, and in a bra∣uado danced a galliard round about the cham∣ber; why moister, your man can teach you more wit than this, come hostess, cheer up my moister.
You are heartily welcome: and if it please you to eat of a fat Capon, a fairer bird, a finer bird, a sweeter bird, a crisper bird, a neater bird, your worship never eat off.
Thanks my fine eloquent hostess.
But hear you moister, one word by the way, are you content I shall be halfes in all you get in your journey?
I am Jack, here is my hand.
Enough moister, I ask no more.
Come Hostess receive your money, and I thank you for my good entertainment.
You are heartily welcome sir.
Come Jack whether go we now?
Mary moister to the conjurers presently.
Content Jack: Hostess farewell.
Come my duck come: I have now
got a wise, thou art fair, art thou not?
My Corebus the fairest alive, make no doubt of that.
Come wench, are we almost at the well.
I Corebus we are almost at the Well now, isle go fetch some water: sit down while I dip my pitcher in.
Gently dip: but not too deep;
For fear you make the gouldē beard to weep.
Fair maiden white and red,
Comb me smooth, and stroke my head:
And thou shalt have some cockell bread.
Gently dip, but not too deep,
For fear thou make the gouldē beard to weep.
Fair maid, white, and red,
Comb me smooth, and stroke my head;
And every hair, a sheaue shall be,
And every sheaue a golden tree.
Oh see Corebus I have combed a great deal of gold into may lap, and a great deal of corn.
Well said wench, now we shall have just enough, God send vs coiners to coin our gold: but come shall we go home sweet heart?
Nay come Corebus I will lead you.
So Corebus things have well hit,
Thou hast gotten wealth to mend thy wit.
Come away moister come,
Go along Jack, isle follow thee, Jack, they say it is good to go cross legged, and say his prayers backward: how says thou?
Tut never fear moister, let me alone, here sit you still, speak not a word. And be∣cause you shall not be enticed with his inchan∣ting speeches; with this same wool isle stop your ears: and so moister sit still, for I must to the Conjurer.
How now, what man art thou that sits so sad
Why dost thou gaze upon these stately trees,
Without the leave and will of Sacrapant?
What not a word but mum,
Then Sacrapant thou art betrayed.
What hand invades the head of Sacrapāt?
What hateful fury doth envy my happy state?
Then Sacrapant these are thy latest days,
Alas my veins are numd, my sinews shrink,
My blood is appears, my breath fleeting away,
And now my timeless date is come to end:
He in whose life his actions hath been so soul,
Now in his death to hell defends his soul.
Oh Sir are you gon: now I hope we shall have some other coil. Now moister how like you this; the Conjurer hee is dead, and vows never to trouble vs more. Now get you to your fair Lady, and see what you can doo with her: Alas he hears me not all this while; but I will help that.
How now Jack, what news?
Here moister, take this sword and dig with it, at the foot of this hill.
How now Jack, what is this?
Moister, without this the Conjurer could do nothing, and so long as this light lasts, so long doth his art endure, and this being out, then doth his art decay.
Why then Jack I will soon put out this light.
I moister, how?
Why with a stone isle break the glass, and then blow it out.
No moister you may as soon break the Smiths Anfill, as this little viol; nor the big∣gest blast that ever Bores blew, cannot blow out this little light; but she that is neither maid,
wife, nor widow. Moister, wind this horn; and see what will happen.
So moister, how like you this; this is she that ran matting in the woods, his be∣trothed love that keeps the cross, and now this light being out, all are restored to their for∣mer liberty. And now moister to the Lady that you have so long looked for.
God speed fair maid sitting alone there is once.
God speed fair maid; there is twice:
God speed fair maid, that is thrice.
Not so good sir, for you are by.
Enough moister, she hath spoke, now I will leave her with you.
Thou fairest flower of these western parts:
Whose beauty so reflected in my sight,
As doth a Crystal mirror in the son:
For thy sweet sake I have crossed the frozen Rhine,
Leaving fair Po, I sailed up Danuby,
As far as Saba whose enhancing streams,
Cuts twixt the Tartars and the Russians,
These have I crossed for thee fair Delia:
Then grant me that which I have sud for long.
Thou gentle knight, whose fortune is so good:
To find me out, and set my brothers free,
My faith, my heart, my hand, I give to thee.
Thanks gentle Madame: but here comes Jack, thank him, for he is the best friend that we have.
How now Jack, what hast thou there?
Mary moister, the head of the conjurer.
Why Jack that is impossible, he was a young man.
Ah moister, so he deceived them that beheld him: but hee was a miserable, old, and crooked man; though to each mans eye he see∣med young and fresh, for moister; this Conjurer took the shape of the old man that kept the cross: and that old man was in the likeness of the Conjurer. But now moister wind your horn.
Welcome Erestus, welcome fair Venelia,
Welcome Thelea, and Kalepha both,
Now have I her that I so long have sought,
So saith fair Delia, if we have your consent.
Valiant Eumenides thou well deserve
To have our favours: so let vs rejoice,
That by thy means we are at liberty.
Here may we joy each in others sight,
And this fair Lady have her wandering knight.
So moister, now ye think you have done: but I must have a saying to you; you know you and I were partners, I to have half in all you got.
Why so thou shalt Jack.
Why then moister draw your sword, part your Lady, let me have half of her pre∣sently.
Why I hope Jack thou dost but jest, I promised thee half I got, but not half my Lady.
But what else moister, have you not gotten her, therefore divide her straight, for I will have half there is no remedy.
Well ere I will falsify my word unto my friend, take her all, here Jack isle give her thee.
Nay neither more nor less Moister, but even just half.
Before I will falsify my faith unto my
friend, I will divide his, Jack thou shalt have half.
Bee not so cruel unto our sister gentle Knight.
O spare fair Delia she deserves no death.
Content your selves, my word is past to him, therefore prepare thy self Delya for thou must die.
Then farewell world, adieu Eume∣nides.
Stay Master, it is sufficient I have tried your constancy: Do you now remember since you paid for the burying of a poor fellow.
I very well Jack.
Then Master thank that good deed, for this good turn, and so God be with you all.
Jack what art thou gone?
Then farewell Jack.
Come brothers and my beauteous Delya,
Erestus and thy dear Venelia:
We will to Thessalie with joyful hearts.
Agreed, we follow thee and Delya.
What Gimmal, a sleep?
By the Mas son tic almost day, and my windows shuts at the Cocks crow.
Doo you hear Gimmal, me thinks this Jack bore a great sway amongst them.
O man, this was the ghost of the poor man, that they kept such a coil to bury, &amp; that makes him to help the wandering knight so much: But come let vs in, we will have a cup of ale and a tossed this morning and so depart.
Then you have made an end of your tale Gimmal?
Yes faith: When this was done I took a piece of bread and cheese, and came my way, and so shall you have too before you go, to your breakfast.

SIr Hugh, persuade me not: I will make a Star-Chamber matter of it, if hee were twenty Sir Iohn Falstoffs, he shall not abuse Robert Shallow Esquire.
In the County of Gloucester, Justice of Peace and Coram.
I (Cousin Slender) and Cust-alorum.
I, and Rato lorum too; and a Gentleman borne (Master Parson) who writes himself Armigero, in any Bill, Warrant, Quittance, or Obligation, Armigero.
I that I doe, and have done any time these three hundred years.
All his successors (gone before him) hath don't: and all his Ancestors (that come after him) may: they may give the dozen white Lucas in their Coat.
It is an old Coat.
The dozen white Louses doe become an old Coat well: it agrees well peasant: It is a familiar beast to man, and signifies Love.
The Luse is the fresh-fish, the salt-fish, is an old Coat.
I may quarter (Cos).
You may, by marrying.
It is marring indeed, if he quarter it.
Not a whit.
Yes per-lady: if he he's a quarter of your coat, there is but three Skirts for your self, in my simple con∣gestures; but that is all one: if Sir Iohn Falstaff have committed disparagements unto you, I am of the Church and will be glad to do my benevolence, to make atone∣mints and compromises between you.
The Council shall hear it, it is a Riot.
It is not meet the Council hear a Riot: there is no fear of Got in a Riot: The Council (look you) shall desire to hear the fear of Got, and not to hear a Riot: take your viza-ments in that.
Ha; of my life, if I were young again, the sword should end it.
It is petter that friends is the sword, and end it: and there is also another device in my praine, which peradventure prings goot discretions with it. There is Anne Page, which is daughter to Master Thomas Page, which is pretty virginity.
Mistress Anne Page? she has browne hair, and speaks small like a woman.
It is that ferry person for all the world, as just as you will desire, and seven hundred pounds of Monies, and Gold, and Silver, is her Grand-sire upon his deaths-bed, (Got deliver to a joyful resurrections) give, when she is able to overtake seventeen years old. It were a goot motion, if we leave our pribbles and prabbles, and desire a marriage between Master Abraham, and Mistress Anne Page.
Did her Grand-sire leave her seven hundred pound?
I, and her father is make her a petter penny.
I know the young Gentlewoman, she has good gifts.
Seven hundred pounds, and possibilities, is goot gifts.
Well, let vs see honest Mr Page: is Falstaff there?
Shall I tell you a lye? I doe despise a liar, as I doe despise one that is false, or as I despise one that is not true: the Knight Sir Iohn is there, and I beseech you be ruled by your well-willers: I will peat the door for Mr. Page. What hoe? Got-plesse your house here.
Who's there?
Here is go't's pleasing and your friend, and In∣stice Shallow, and here young Master Slender: that perad∣uentures shall tell you another tale, if matters grow to your likings.
I am glad to see your Worships well: I thank you for my Venison Master Shallow.
Master Page, I am glad to see you: much good doe it your good heart: I wished your Venison better, it was ill killed: how doth good Mistress Page? and I thank you always with my heart, la: with my heart.
Sir, I thank you.
Sir, I thank you: by yea, and no I doe.
I am glad to see you, good Master Slender.
How do's your fallow Greyhound, Sir, I heard say he was out-run on Cotsall.
It could not be judged, Sir.
You'll not confess: you'll not confess.
That he will not, it is your fault, it is your fault: it is a good dog.
A Cur, Sir.
Sir: hoe's a good dog, and a fair dog, can there be more said? he is good, and fair. Is Sir Iohn Falstaff here?
Sir, hee is within: and I would I could doe a good office between you.
It is spoke as a Christians ought to speak.
He hath wronged me (Master Page.)
Sir, he doth in some sort confess it.
If it be confessed, it is not redressed; is not that so (M. Page?) he hath wronged me, indeed he hath, at a word he hath: believe me, Robert Shallow Esquire, saith he is wronged.
Here comes Sir Iohn.
Now, Master Shallow, you'll complain of me to the King?
Knight, you have beaten my men, killed my dear, and broke open my Lodge.
But not kissed your Keepers daughter?
Tut, a pin: this shall be answered.
I will answer it strait, I have done all this:
That is now answered.
The Council shall know this.
It were better for you if it were known in coun∣cell: you'll be laughed at.
Pauca verb; (Sir Iohn) good worts.
Good worts? good Cabbage; Slender, I broke your head: what matter have you against me?
Marry sir, I have matter in my head against you, and against your cony-catching Rascals, Bardolf, Nym, and Pistol.
You Banbery Cheese.
I, it is no matter.
How now, Mephostophilus?
I, it is no matter.
Slice, I say; pauca. pauca: Slice, that's my humour.
Whore's Simple my man? can you tell, Cousin?
Peace, I pray you: now let vs understand: there is three Umpires in this matter, as I understand; that is, Master Page (fidelicet Master Page,) &amp; there is my self, (fidelicet my self) and the three party is (lastly, and fi∣nally) mine Host of the Gater.
We three to hear it, &amp; end it between them.
Ferry goo't, I will make a priefe of it in my note-booke, and we will afterwards orke upon the cause, with as great discreetly as we can.
Pistol.
He hears with ears.
The Teuill and his Tam: what phrase is this? he hears with ear? why, it is affectations.
Pistol, did you pick M. Slanders purse?
I, by these gloves did hee, or I would I might never come in mine own great chamber again else, of seven groats in mill-sixpences, and two Edward Shoe∣uelboords, that cost me two shilling and two pence a piece of Yead Miller: by these gloves.
Is this true, Pistol?
No, it is false, if it is a picke-purse.
Ha, thou mountain Foreigner: Sir Iohn, and Master mine, I combat challenge of this Latin Bilbo: word of denial in thy libras here; word of denial; froth, and scum thou least.
By these gloves, then it was he.
Be advised sir, and pass good humours: I will say marry trap with you, if you run the nut-hooks hue∣more on me, that is the very note of it.
By this hat, then he in the red face had it: for though I cannot remember what I did when you made me drunk, yet I am not altogether an ass.
What say you Scarlet, and Iohn?
Why sir, (for my part) I say the Gentleman had drunk himself out of his five sentences.
It is his five senses: fie, what the ignorance is.
And being fop, sir, was (as they say) cashiered: and so conclusions past the Careers.
I, you spake in Latin then to: but it is no mat∣la; Isle ne'er be drunk whilst I live again, but in honest, civil, godly company for this trick: if I be drunk, Isle be drunk with those that have the fear of God, and not with drunken knaves.
So got-udge me, that is a vertuons mind.
You hear all these matters denied, Gentlemen; you hear it.
Nay daughter, carry the wine in, we'll drink within.
Oh heaven: This is Mistress Anne Page.
How now Mistress Ford?
Mistress Ford, by my troth you are very well met: by your leave good Mistress.
Wife, bid these gentlemen welcome: come, we have a hot Venison pasty to dinner; Come gentle∣men, I hope we shall drink down all unkindness.
I had rather then forty shillings I had my book of Songs and Sonnets here: How now Simple, where have you been? I must wait on my self, must I? you have not the book of Riddles about you, have you?
Book of Riddles? why did you not lend it to Alice Short-cake upon Alhallowmas last, a fortnight a∣fore Michaelmas.
Come Cos, come Cos, we stay for you: a word with you Cos: marry this, Cos: there is as it were a ten∣der, a kind of tender, made a farre-off by Sir Hugh here: doe you understand me?
I Sir, you shall find me reasonable; if it be so, I shall doe that that is reason.
Nay, but understand me.
So I doe Sir.
Give ear to his motions; (Mr. Slender) I will description the matter to you, if you be capacity of it.
Nay, I will doe as my Cozen Shallow says: I pray you pardon me, he's a Justice of Peace in his Coun∣try, simple though I stand here.
But that is not the question: the question is concerning your marriage.
I, there's the point Sir.
Marry is it: the very point of it, to Mi. An Page.
Why if it be so; I will marry her upon any rea∣sonable demands.
But can you affection the 'o-man, let vs command to know that of your mouth, or of your lips: for divers Philosophers hold, that the lips is parcel of the mouth: therefore precisely, cā you carry your good will to ye maid?
Cousin Abraham Slender, can you love her?
I hope sir, I will do as it shall become one that would doe reason.
Nay, got's Lords, and his Ladies, you must speak possitable, if you can carry-her your desires towards her.
That you must:
Will you, (upon good dowry) marry her?
I will doe a greater thing then that, upon your request (Cousin) in any reason.
Nay conceive me, conceive me, (sweet Cos): what I doe is to pleasure you (Cos:) can you love the maid?
I will marry her (Sir) at your request; but if there bee no great love in the beginning, yet Heaven may decrease it upon better acquaintance, when wee are married, and have more occasion to know one ano∣there: I hope upon familiarity will grow more content: but if you say mary-her, I will mary-her, that I am freely dissolved, and dissolutely.
It is a fery discetion-answere; save the fall is in the'ord, dissolutely: the ort is (according to our mea∣ning) resolutely: his meaning is good.
I: I think my Cousin meant well.
I, or else I would I might be hanged (la.)
Here comes fair Mistress Anne; would I were young for your sake, Mistress Anne.
The dinner is on the Table, my Father desires your worships company.
I will wait on him, (fair Mistress Anne.)
Od's plessed-wil: I will not be absēce at the grace.
Will it please your worship to come in, Sir?
No, I thank you forsooth, heartily; I am very well.
The dinner attends you, Sir.
I am not a-hungry, I thank you, forsooth: go, Sirha, for all you are my man, go wait upon my Cousin Shallow: a Justice of peace sometime may be beholding to his friend, for a Man; I keep but three Men, and a Boy yet, till my Mother be dead: but what though, yet I live like a poor Gentleman borne.
I may not go in without your worship: they will not sit till you come.
In faith, isle eat nothing: I thank you as much as though I did.
I pray you Sir walk in.
I had rather walk here (I thank you) I bruised my shin the other day, with playing at Sword and Dag∣ger with a Master of Fence (three veneys for a dish of stewed Prunes) and by my troth, I cannot abide the smell of hot meat since. Why doe your dogs bark so? be there Bears in the Town?
I think there are, Sir, I heard them talked of.
I love the sport well, but I shall as soon quarrel at it, as any man in England: you are afraid if you see the Bear loose, are you not?
I indeed Sir.
That's meat and drink to me now: I have seen Sackerson loose, twenty times, and have taken him by the Chain: but (I warrant you) the women have so cried and shrunk at it, that it past: But women indeed, cannot abide'em, they are very ill-favoured rough things.
Come, gentle M. Slender, come; we stay for you.
Isle eat nothing, I thank you Sir.
By cock and pie, you shall not choose, Sir: come, come.
Nay, pray you lead the way.
Come on, Sir.
Mistress Anne: your self shall go first.
Not I Sir, pray you keep on.
Truly I will not go first: truely-la: I will not doe you that wrong.
I pray you Sir.
Isle rather be unmannerly, then troublesome: you doe your self wrong indeede-la.
Go your ways, and ask of Doctor Caius house, which is the way; and there dwells one Mistress Quickly; which is in the manner of his Nurse; or his dry-Nurse; or his Cooke; or his Laundry; his Washer, and his Ringer.
Well Sir.
Nay, it is petter yet: give her this letter; for it is a'oman that altogethers acquaintāce with Mistress Anne Page; and the Letter is to desire, and require her to soli∣cite your Masters desires, to Mistress Anne Page: I pray you be gon: I will make an end of my dinner; ther's Pip∣pins and Cheese to come.
Mine Host of the Garter?
What says my Bully Rooke? speak scholarly, and wisely.
Truly mine Host; I must turn away some of my followers.
Discard, (bully Hercules) cashier; let them wag; trot, trot.
I sit at ten pounds a week.
You're an Emperor (Caesar, Kaiser and Pheazar) I will entertain Bardolf: he shall draw; he shall tap; said I well (bully Hector?)
Doe so (good mine Host.
I have spoke: let him follow: let me see thee froth, and live: I am at a word: follow.
Bardolf, follow him: a Tipster is a good trade: an old Cloak, makes a new Jerkin: a withered Serving-man, a fresh Tipster: go, adieu.
It is a life that I have desired: I will thrive.
O base hungarian wight: wilt you the spigot wield.
He was gotten in drink: is not the humour cōceited?
I am glad I am so acquit of this Tinderbox: his Thefts were too open: his filching was like an unskilful Singer, he kept not time.
The good humour is to steal at a minutes rest.
Convey: the wise it call: Steal? foh: a fico for the phrase.
Well sirs, I am almost out at heals.
Why then let Kibes ensue.
There is no remedy: I must conicatch, I must shift.
Young Ravens must have food.
Which of you know Ford of this Town?
I ken the wight: he is of substance good.
My honest Lads, I will tell you what I am about.
Two yards, and more.
No quips now Pistol: (Indeed I am in the waste two yards about: but I am now about no waste: I am a∣bout thrift) briefly: I doe mean to make love to Fords wife: I spy entertainment in her: she discourses: she carves: she gives the leer of invitation: I can construe the action of her familiar stile, &amp; the hardest voice of her behaviour (to be englished rightly) is, I am Sir Iohn Falstafs.
He hath studied her will; and translated her will: out of honesty, into English.
The Anchor is deep: will that humour pass?
Now, the report goes, she has all the rule of her husbands Purse: he hath a legend of Angels.
As many devils entertain: and to her Boy say I.
The humour rises: it is good: humour me the angels.
I have writ me here a letter to her: &amp; here ano∣there to Pages wife, who even now gave me good eyes too; examined my parts with most judicious illiads: some∣times the beam of her view, gilded my foot: some∣times my portly belly.
Then did the Sun on dung-hill shine.
I thank thee for that humour.
O she did so course o'er my exteriors with such a greedy intention, that the appetite of her eye, did seem to scorch me up like a burning glass: here's another letter to her: She bears the Purse too: She is a Region in Guiana: all gold, and bounty: I will be Cheaters to them both, and they shall be Exchequers to me: they shall be my East and West Indies, and I will trade to them both: Go, bear thou this Letter to Mistress Page; and thou this to Mistress Ford: we will thrive (Lads) we will thrive.
Shall I Sir Pandarus of Troy become,
And by my side wear Steel? then Lucifer take all.
I will run no base humour: here take the humor-Letter; I will keep the hauior of reputation.
Hold Sirha, bear you these Letters tightly,
Sail like my Pinnasse to these golden shores.
Rogues, hence, avaunt, vanish like haile-stones; go,
Trudge; plod away in the hoof: seek shelter, pack:
Falstaff will learn the honour of the age,
French-thrift, you Rogues, my self, and skirted Page.
Let Vultures gripe thy guts: for gourd, and
Fullam holds: &amp; high and low beguiles the rich &amp; poor,
Tester isle have in pouch when thou shalt lack,
Base Phrygian Turk.
I have opperations,
Which be humours of revenge.
Wilt thou revenge?
By Welkin, and her Star.
With wit, or Steel?
With both the humours, I:
I will discuss the humour of this Love to Ford.
And I to Page shall eke unfold
How Falstaff (varlet vile)
His Dove will prove; his gold will hold,
And his soft couch defile.
My humour shall not cool: I will incense Ford to deal with poison: I will possess him with yellow∣ness, for the revolt of mine is dangerous: that is my true humour.
Thou art the Mars of Malcontents: I second thee: troop on.
What, Iohn Rugby, I pray thee go to the Case∣meant, and see if you can see my Master, Master Doctor Caius coming: if he doe (In faith) and find any body in the house; here will be an old abusing of Gods pati∣ence, and the Kings English.
Isle go watch.
Go, and we'll have a posit for it soon at night, (in faith) at the latter end of a Sea-cole-fire: An honest, willing, kind fellow, as ever servant shall come in house withal: and I warrant you, no tel-tale, nor no breed∣bate: his worst fault is, that he is given to prayer; hee is something peevish that way: but no body but has his fault: but let that pass. Peter Simple, you say your name is?
I: for fault of a better.
And Master Slander's your Master?
I forsooth.
Do's he not wear a great round Beard, like a Glovers pairing-knife?
No forsooth: he hath but a little wee face; with a little yellow Beard: a Caine coloured Beard.
A softly-sprighted man, is he not?
I forsooth: but he is as tall a man of his hands, as any is between this and his head: he hath fought with a Warrener.
How say you: oh, I should remember him: do's he not hold up his head (as it were?) and strut in his gate?
Yes indeed do's he.
Well, heaven send Anne Page, no worse fortune: Tell Master Parson Euans, I will doe what I can for your Master: Anne is a good girl, and I wish —
Out alas: here comes my Master.
We shall all be shent: Run in here, good young man: go into this Closet: he will not stay long: what Iohn Rugby? Iohn: what Iohn I say? go Iohn, go en∣quire for my Master, I doubt he be not well, that hee comes not home: (and down, down, adowne'a. &amp;c.
Vat is you sing? I doe not like des-toyes: pray you go and vetch me in my Closet, vnboyteene word; a Box, a greene-a-Box: do intend vat I speak? a greene-a-Box.
I forsooth isle fetch it you: I am glad hee went not in himself: if he had found the young man he would have bin horne-mad.
Fe, fe, fe, fe, maifoy, il feet for ehando, Ie man voi a le Court la grand affairs.
Is it this Sir?
Any met le au mon pocket, de-petch quickly:
Vere is dat knave Rugby?
What Iohn Rugby, Iohn?
Here Sir.
You are Iohn Rugby, and you are Jack Rugby:
Come, take-a-your Rapier, and come after my heel to the Court.
It is ready Sir, here in the Porch.
By my trot: I tarry too long: od's-me: que ay ie oublie: dere is some Simples in my Closet, dat I will not for the world I shall leave behind.
Ay-me, he'll find the young man there, &amp; be mad.
O Diable, Diable: vat is in my Closet?
Villainy, La-roone: Rugby, my Rapier.
Good Master be content.
Wherefore shall I be content-a?
The young man is an honest man.
What shall de honest man do in my Closet: dere is no honest man dat shall come in my Closet.
I beseech you be not so phlegmatic: hear the truth of it. He came of an errand to me, from Parson Hugh.
Vell.
I forsooth: to desire her to —
Peace, I pray you.
Peace-a-your tongue: speake-a-your Tale.
To desire this honest Gentlewoman (your Maid) to speak a good word to Mistress Anne Page, for my Ma∣ster in the way of Marriage.
This is all indeede-la: but isle ne'er put my finger in the fire, and need not.
Sir Hugh send-a you? Rugby, ballow me some paper: tarry you a littell-a-while.
I am glad he is so quiet if he had bin through∣lie moved, you should have heard him so loud, and so me∣lancholly: but notwithstanding man, Isle doe yo your Master what good I can: and the very yea, &amp; the no is, ye French Doctor my Master, (I may call him my Master, look you, for I keep his house; and I wash, •ing, brew, bake, scour, dress meat and drink, make the beds, and doe all my self.)
It is a great charge to come under one bodies hand.
Are you advised of that? you shall find it a great charge: and to be up early, and down later but notwith∣standing, (to tell you in your ear, I wold have no words of it) my Master himself is in love with Mistress Anne Page: but notwithstanding that I know Ans mind, that's neither here nor there.
You, lack 'Nape: giue-'a this Letter to Sir Hugh, by gar it is a challenge: I will cut his troat in de Park, and I will teach a souruy lack-a-nape Priest to meddle, or make: — you may be gon: it is not good you tarry here: by gar I will cut all his two stones: by gar, he shall not have a stone to throw at his dog.
Alas: he speaks but for his friend.
It is no matter'a ver dat: do not you tell-a-me dat I shall have Anne Page for my self? by gar, I will kill de Iack-Priest: and I have appointed mine Host of de Iarteer to measure our weapon: by gar, I will my self have Anne Page.
Sir, the maid loves you, and all shall bee well:
We must give folks leave to prate: what the good-ier.
Rugby, come to the Court with me: by gar, if I have not Anne Page, I shall turn your head out of my door: follow my heals, Rugby.
You shall have An-fooles head of your own: No, I know Ans mind for that: never a woman in Wind∣sor knows more of Ans mind then I doe, nor can doe more then I doe with her, I thank heaven.
Who's with in there, hoe?
Who's there, I troa? Come near the house I pray you.
How now (good woman) how dost thou?
The better that it pleases your good Worship to ask?
What news? how do's pretty Mistress Anne?
In truth Sir, and she is pretty, and honest, and gentle, and one that is your friend, I can tell you that by the way, I praise heaven for it.
Shall I doe any good think thou? shall I not loose my suit?
Troth Sir, all is in his hands aboue: but not∣withstanding (Master Fenton) Isle be sworn on a book she loves you: have not your Worship a wart aboue your eye?
Yes marry have I, what of that?
Well, thereby hangs a tale: good faith, it is such another Nan; (but (I detest) an honest maid as ever broke bread: wee had an hours talk of that wart; I shall never laugh but in that maids company: but (in∣deed) she is given too much to Allicholy and musing: but for you — well — go too —
Well: I shall see her to day: hold, there's mo∣ney for thee: Let me have thy voice in my behalf: if thou see her before me, commend me. —
Will I? I faith that wee will: And I will tell your Worship more of the Wart, the next time we have confidence, and of other wooers.
Well, fare-well, I am in great haste now.
Fare-well to your Worship: truly an honest Gentleman: but Anne loves hiim not: for I know Ans mind as well as another do's: out upon it: what have I forgot.
What, have escaped Loue-letters in the holly-day-time of my beauty, and am I now a subject for them? let me see?
Ask me no reason why I love you, for though Love use Rea∣son for his precision, hee admits him not for his Counsailour: you are not young, no more am I: go to then, there's sympathy: you are merry, so am I: ha, ha, then there's more sympathy: you love sack, and so do I: would you desire better sympathy? Let it suffice thee (Mistress Page) at the least if the Love of Soldier can suffice, that I love thee: I will not say pity me, it is not a Soldier-like phrase; but I say, love me:
By me, thine own true Knight, by day or night:
Or any kind of light, with all his might,
For thee to fight.
Iohn Falstaff.
What a Herod of Jury is this? O wicked, wicked world:
One that is well-nigh worn to pieces with age
To show himself a young Gallant? What an vnwaied
Behaviour hath this Flemish drunkard picked (with
The Devils name) out of my conversation, that he dares
In this manner assay me? why, hee hath not been thrice
In my Company: what should I say to him? I was then
Frugal of my mirth: (heaven forgive me:) why Isle
Exhibit a Bill in the Parliament for the putting down of men: how shall I be revenged on him? for revenged I will be? as sure as his guts are made of puddings.
Mistress Page, trust me, I was going to your house.
And trust me, I was coming to you: you look very ill.
Nay, Isle ne'er beleeee that; I have to show to the contrary.
Faith but you doe in my mind.
Well: I doe then: yet I say, I could show you to the contrary: O Mistress Page, give me some counsel.
What's the matter, woman?
O woman: if it were not for one trifling re∣spect, I could come to such honour.
Hang the trifle (woman) take the honour: what is it? dispense with trifles: what is it?
If I would but go to hell, for an eternal moment, or so: I could be knighted.
What thou least? Sir Alice Ford? these Knights will hack, and so thou should not alter the are∣tickle of thy Gentry.
Wee burn day-light: here, read, read: perceive how I might bee knighted, I shall think the worse of fat men, as long as I have an eye to make diffe∣rinse of men's liking: and yet hee would not swear:
praise women's modesty: and gave such orderly and wel-behaued reproof to al vncomelinesse, that I would have sworn his disposition would have gone to the truth of his words: but they doe no more adhere and keep place together, then the hundred Psalms to the tune of Green-sleeues: What tempest (I troa) threw this Whale, (with so many Tuns of oil in his belly) a'shoare at Windsor? How shall I bee revenged on him? I think the best way were, to entertain him with hope, till the wicked fire of lust have melted him in his own grease: Did you e∣for hear the like?
Letter for letter; but that the name of Page and Ford differs: to thy great comfort in this my∣stery of ill opinions, heere's the twyn-brother of thy Let∣la: but let thine inherit first, for I protest mine never shall: I warrant he hath a thousand of these Letters, writ with blank space for different names (sure more): and these are of the second edition: hee will print them out of doubt: for he cares not what hee puts into the press, when he would put vs two: I had rather be a Giantess, and lye under Mount Pelion: Well; I will find you twen∣tie lascivious Turtles ere one chaste man.
Why this is the very same: the very hand: the very words: what doth he think of vs?
Nay I know not: it makes me almost rea∣die to wrangle with mine own honesty: Isle entertain my self like one that I am not acquainted withal: for sure unless hee know some strain in me, that I know not my self, hee would never have boarded me in this fury.
Boarding, call you it? Isle bee sure to keep him aboue deck.
So will I: if hee come under my hatches, Isle never to Sea again: Let's bee revenged on him: let's appoint him a meeting: give him a show of comfort in his Suit, and lead him on with a fine baited delay, till hee hath pawned his horses to mine Host of the Garter.
Nay, I will consent to act any villainy against him, that may not sully the chariness of our honesty: oh that my husband saw this Letter: it would give eternal food to his jealousy.
Why look where he comes; and my good man too: hoe's as far from jealousy, as I am from go∣uing him cause, and that (I hope) is an unmeasurable di∣stance.
You are the happier woman.
Let's consult together against this greasy Knight: Come hither.
Well: I hope, it be not so.
Hope is a curtall-dog in some affairs:
Sir Iohn affects thy wife.
Why sir, my wife is not young.
He woos both high and low, both rich &amp; poor, both young and old, one with another (Ford) he loves the Gally-mawfry (Ford) perpend.
Love my wife?
With liver, burning hot: prevent:
Or go thou like Sir Action he, with
Ring-wood at thy heals: O, odious is the name.
What name Sir?
The horn I say: Farewell:
Take heed, have open eye, for thieves doe foot by night.
Take heed, ere summer comes, or Cuckoo-birds do sing.
Away sir Corporal Nim:
Believe it (Page) he speaks sense.
I will be patient: I will find out this.
And this is true: I like not the humour of lying: hee hath wronged me in some humours: I should have borne the humoured Letter to her: but I have a sword: and it shall bite upon my necessity: he loves your wife; There's the short and the long: My name is Corporal Nim: I speak, and I avouch; it is true: my name is Nim: and Falstaff loves your wife: adieu, I love not the hue∣more of bread and cheese: adieu.
The humour of it (quoth'a?) heere's a fellow frights English out of his wits.
I will seek out Falstaff.
I never heard such a drawling-affecting rogue.
If I doe find it: well.
I will not believe such a Cataian, though the Priest of the Town commended him for a true man.
It was a good sensible fellow: well.
How now Meg?
Whether go you (George?) hark you.
How now (sweet Frank) why art thou me∣lancholy?
I melancholy? I am not melancholy:
Get you home: go.
Faith, thou hast some crochets in thy head,
Now: will you go, Mistress Page?
Have with you: you'll come to dinner George? Look who comes yonder: she shall bee our Messenger to this paltry Knight.
Trust me, I thought on her: she'll fit it.
You are come to see my daughter Anne?
I forsooth: and I pray how do's good Mistress Anne?
Go in with vs and see: we have an hours talk with you.
How now Master Ford?
You heard what this knave told me, did you not?
Yes, and you heard what the other told me?
Doe you think there is truth in them?
Hang 'em slaves: I doe not think the Knight would offer it: But these that accuse him in his intent towards our wives, are a yoke of his discarded men: ve∣rye rogues, now they be out of service.
Were they his men?
Marry were they.
I like it never the better for that,
Do's he lye at the Garter?
I marry do's he: if hee should intend this voy∣age toward my wife, I would turn her loose to him; and what hee gets more of her, then sharpe words, let it lye on my head.
I doe not misdoubt my wife: but I would bee loath to turn them together: a man may be too confi∣dent: I would have nothing lye on my head: I cannot be thus satisfied.
Look where my ranting-Host of the Garter comes: there is either liquor in his pate, or money in his purse, when hee looks so merrily: How now mine Host?
How now Bully-Rooke: you're a Gentleman Cavalier Justice, I say.
I follow, (mine Host) I follow: Good-euen, and twe•tie (good Master Page.) Master Page, will you go with vs? we have sport in hand.
Tell him Caueleiro-Iustice: tell him Bully-Rooke.
Sir, there is a fray to be fought, between Sir Hugh the Welch Priest, and Caius the French Doctor.
Good mine Host of the Garter: a word with you.
What say thou, my Bully-Rooke?
Will you go with vs to behold it? My merry Host hath had the measuring of their weapons; and (I think) hath appointed them contrary places: for (be∣leeue me) I hear the Parson is no Easter: hark, I will tell you what our sport shall be.
Hast thou no suit against my Knight? my guest-Caualeire?
None, I protest: but Isle give you a pottle of burned sack, to give me recourse to him, and tell him my name is Broom: only for a •est.
My hand, (Bully:) thou shalt have egress and regress, (said I well?) and thy name shall be Broom. It is a merry Knight: will you go An-heires?
Have with you mine Host.
I have heard the French-man hath good skill in his Rapier.
Tut sir: I could have told you more: In these times you stand on distance: your Passes, Stoccado's, and I know not what: it is the heart (Master Page) it is here, it is here: I have seen the time, with my long-sword, I would have made you four tall fellows skip like Rats.
Here boys, here, here: shall we wag?
Have with you: I had rather hear them scold, then fight.
Though Page be a secure fool, and stands so firmly on his wives frailty; yet, I cannot put-off my o∣pinion so easily: she was in his company at Pages house: and what they made there, I know not. Well, I will look further into it, and I have a disguise, to sound Falstaff; if I find her honest, I loose not my labour: if she be other∣wise, it is labour well bestowed.
I will not lend thee a penny.
Why then the world's mine Oyster, which I, with sword will open.
Not a penny: I have been content (Sir,) you should lay my countenance to pawn: I have grated up∣on my good friends for three Reprieves for you, and your Coach-fellow Nim; or else you had looked through the grate, like a Gemini of Baboons: I am damned in hell, for swearing to Gentlemen my friends, you were good Soldiers, and tall-fellowes. And when Mistress Bright lost the handle of her Fan, I took't upon mine ho∣nor thou had it not.
Did not thou share? had thou not fifteen pence?
Reason, you rogue, reason: think thou Isle en∣danger my soul, gratis? at a word, hang no more about me, I am no gibbet for you: go, a short knife, and a throng, to your Manor of Pickt-hatch: go, you'll not bear a Letter for me you rogue? you stand upon your honour: why, (thou vnconfinable baseness) it is as much as I can doe to keep the terms of my hononor precise: I, I, I my self sometimes, leaving the fear of heaven on the left hand, and hiding mine honour in my necessity, am fine to shuffle: to hedge, and to lurch, and yet, you Rogue, will en-sconce your rags; your Cat-a-Moun∣taine-lookes, your red-lattice phrases, and your bold-beating-oathes, under the shelter of your honour? you will not doe it? you?
I doe relent: what would thou more of man?
Sir, here's a woman would speak with you.
Let her approach.
Give your worship good morrow.
Good-morrow, good-wife.
Not so and't please your worship.
Good maid then.
Isle be sworn,
As my mother was the first hour I was borne.
I doe believe the swearer; what with me?
Shall I vouch-safe your worship a word, or two?
Two thousand (fair woman) and isle vouchsafe thee the hearing.
There is one Mistress Ford, (Sir) I pray come a little nearer this ways: I my self dwell with M. Doctor Caius:
Well, on; Mistress Ford, you say.
Your worship says very true: I pray your worcester∣ship come a little nearer this ways.
I warrant thee, no-bodie hears: mine own people, mine own people.
Are they so? heauen-blesse them, and make them his Servants.
Well; Mistress Ford, what of her?
Why, Sir; shoe's a good-creature; Lord, Lord, your Worship's a wanton: well: heaven forgive you, and all of vs, I pray—.
Mistress Ford: come, Mistress Ford.
Marry this is the short, and the long of it: you have brought her into such a Canaries, as it is wonder∣full: the best Courtier of them all (when the Court lay at Windsor) could never have brought her to such a Ca∣nary: yet there has been Knights, and Lords, and Gen∣tlemen, with their Coaches; I warrant you Coach after Coach, letter after letter, gift after gift, smelling so sweet∣lie; all Musk, and so rushling, I warrant you, in silk and gold, and in such elegant terms, and in such wine and sugar of the best, and the fairest, that would have won any women's heart: and I warrant you, they could never get an eye-winke of her: I had my self twenty Angels given me this morning, but I defy all Angels (in any such sort, as they say) but in the way of honesty: and I warrant you, they could never get her so much as sip on a cup with the proudest of them all, and yet there has been Earls: nay, (which is more) Pensioners, but I warrant you all is one with her.
But what says she to me? be brief my good shee-Mercurie.
Marry, she hath received your Letter: for the which she thanks you a thousand times; and she gives you to notify, that her husband will be absence from his house, between ten and eleven.
Ten, and eleven.
I, forsooth: and then you may come and see the picture (she says) that you wot of: Master Ford her hus∣band will be from home: alas, the sweet woman leads an ill life with him: hoe's a very iealousie-man; she leads a very frampold life with him, (good hart.)
Ten, and eleven.
Woman, commend me to her, I will not fail her.
Why, you say well: But I have another mizzen∣ger to your worship: Mistress Page hath her hearty commendations to you to: and let me tell you in your ear, shoe's as fartuous a civil modest wife, and one (I tell you) that will not miss you morning nor evening prayer, as any is in Windsor, who ere bee the other: and she bade me tell your worship, that her husband is sell∣dome from home, but she hopes there will come a time. I never knew a woman so dote upon a man; surely I think you have charms, la: yes in truth.
Not I, I assure thee; setting the attraction of my good parts aside, I have no other charms.
Blessing on your heart for it.
But I pray thee tell me this: has Fords wife, and Pages wife acquainted each other, how they love me?
That were a jest indeed: they have not so little grace I hope, that were a trick indeed: But Mistress Page would desire you to send her your little Page of al loves: her husband has a marvelous infectiō to the little Page: and truly Master Page is an honest man: never a wife in Windsor leads a better life then she do's: doe what she will, say what she will, take all, pay all, go to bed when she list, rise when she list, all is as she will: and truly she deserves it; for if there be a kind woman in Windsor, she is one: you must send her your Page, no remedy.
Why, I will.
Nay▪ but doe so then, and look you, hee may come and go between you both: and in any case have a nay-word, that you may know one another mind, and the Boy never need to understand any thing; for it is not good that children should know any wickedness: old folks you know, have discretion, as they say, and know the world.
Farethee-well, commend me to them both: there's my purse, I am yet thy debtor: Boy, go along with this woman, this news distracts me.
This Puncke is one of Cupids Carriers,
Clap on more sails, pursue: up with your fights:
Give fire: she is my prize, or Ocean whelm them all.
Say thou so (old Jack) go thy ways: Isle make more of thy old body then I have done: will they yet look after thee? wilt thou after the expense of so much money, be now a gainer? good Body, I thank thee: let them say it is grossly done, so it bee fairly done, no matter.
Sir Iohn, there's one Master Broom below would fine speak with you, and be acquainted with you; and hath sent your worship a mornings draught of Sack.
Broom is his name?
I Sir.
Call him in: such Brooms are welcome to me, that ore' flows such liquor: ah ha, Mistress Ford and Mi∣stress Page, have I encompassed you? go to, via.
'Blesse you sir.
And you sir: would you speak with me?
I make bold, to press, with so little prepare∣tion upon you.
You're welcome, what's your will? give vs leave Drawer.
Sir, I am a Gentleman that have spent much, my name is Broom.
Good Master Broom, I desire more acquaintance of you.
Good Sir Iohn, I sue for yours: not to charge you, for I must let you understand, I think my self in better plight for a Lender, then you are: the which hath something emboldened me to this unseasoned intrusion: for they say, if money go before, all ways doe lye open.
Money is a good Soldier (Sir) and will on.
Troth, and I have a bag of money here trow∣bless me: if you will help to bear it (Sir Iohn) take all, or half, for easing me of the carriage.
Sir, I know not how I may deserve to bee your Porter.
I will tell you sir, if you will give me the hey∣ring.
Speak (good Master Broom) I shall be glad to be your Servant.
Sir, I hear you are a Scholar: (I will be brief with you) and you have been a man long known to me, though I had never so good means as desire, to make my self acquainted with you. I shall discover a thing to you, wherein I must very much lay open mine own im∣perfection: but (good Sir Iohn) as you have one eye up∣on my follies, as you hear them unfolded, turn another into the Register of your own, that I may pass with a reproof the easier, sith you your self know how easy it is to be such an offender.
Very well Sir, proceed.
There is a Gentlewoman in this Town, her husbands name is Ford.
Well Sir.
I have long loved her, and I protest to you, be∣stowed much on her: followed her with a doting obe∣seruance: Engrossed opportunities to meet her: feed e∣very slight occasion that could but nigardly give me sight of her: not only bought many presents to give her, but have given largely to many, to know what she would have given: briefly, I have pursued her, as Love hath pursued me, which hath been on the wing of all occasions: but whatsoever I have merited, either in my mind, or in my means, mead I am sure I have received none, unless Experience be a Jewel, that I have purcha∣sed at an infinite rate, and that hath taught me to say this,
" Love like a shadow flies, when substance Love pursues,
" Pursuing that that flies, and flying what pursues.
Have you received no promise of satisfaction at her hands?
Never.
Have you importuned her to such a purpose?
Never.
Of what quality was your love then?
Like a fair house, built on another mans ground, so that I have lost my edifice, by mistaking the place, where I erected it.
To what purpose have you unfolded this to me?
When I have told you that, I have told you all: Some say, that though she appear honest to me, yet in other places she enlarges her mirth so far, that there is shrewd construction made of her. Now (Sir Iohn) here is the heart of my purpose: you are a gentleman of ex∣cellent breeding, admirable discourse, of great admit∣tance, authentic in your place and person, generally allowed for your many war-like, court-like, and learned preparations.
O Sir.
Believe it, for you know it: there is money, spend it, spend it, spend more; spend all I have, only
give me so much of your time in enchange of it, as to lay an amiable siege to the honesty of this Fords wife: use your Art of wooing; win her to consent to you: if any man may, you may as soon as any.
Would it apply well to the vehemence of your affection that I should win what you would enjoy? Me∣thinks you prescribe to your self very preposterously.
O, understand my drift: she dwells so securely on the excellence of her honour, that the folly of my soul dares not present it self: she is too bright to be looked against. Now, could I come to her with any detection in my hand; my desires had instance and argument to commend themselves, I could drive her then from the ward of her purity, her reputation, her marriage-vow, and a thousand other her defences, which now are too-too strongly embattaild against me: what say you too't, Sir Iohn?
Master Broom, I will first make bold with your money: next, give me your hand: and last, as I am a gentleman, you shall, if you will, enjoy Fords wife.
O good Sir.
I say you shall.
Want no money (Sir Iohn) you shall want none.
Want no Mistress Ford (Master Broom) you shall want none: I shall be with her (I may tell you) by her own appointment, even as you came in to me, her assi∣stant, or goe-betweene, parted from me: I say I shall be with her between ten and eleven: for at that time the iealious-rascally-knaue her husband will be forth: come you to me at night, you shall know how I speed.
I am blessed in your acquaintance: do you know Ford Sir?
Hang him (poor Cuckoldly knave) I know him not: yet I wrong him to call him poor: They say the jealous wittolly-knaue hath masses of money, for the which his wife seems to me well-fauourd: I will use her as the key of the Cuckoldly-rogues Coffer, &amp; ther's my haruest-home.
I would you knew Ford, sir, that you might a∣uoid him, if you saw him.
Hang him, mechanicall-salt-butter rogue; I will stare him out of his wits: I will awe-him with my cud∣gell: it shall hang like a Meteor ore the Cuckolds horns: Master Broom, thou shalt know, I will predominate o∣for the peasant, and thou shalt lye with his wife. Come to me soon at night: Ford's a knave, and I will agree∣uate his stile: thou (Master Broom) shalt know him for knave, and Cuckold. Come to me soon at night.
What a damned Epicurian-Rascall is this? my heart is ready to crack with impatience: who says this is improvident jealousy? my wife hath sent to him, the hour is fixed, the match is made: would any man have thought this? see the hell of having a false woman: my bed shall be abused, my Coffers ransacked, my reputati∣on gnawn at, and I shall not only receive this villainous wrong, but stand under the adoption of abominable terms, and by him that does me this wrong: Terms, names: Amaimon sounds well: Lucifer, well: Barbason, well: yet they are Devils additions, the names of fiends: But Cuckold, Wittoll, Cuckold? the Devil himself hath not such a name. Page is an Ass, a secure Ass; hee will trust his wife, hee will not be jealous: I will rather trust a Fleming with my butter, Parson Hugh the Welsh∣man with my Cheese, an Irish-man with my Aqua-vitae-bottle, or a Thief to walk my ambling gelding, then my wife with her self. Then she plots, then she rum∣nates, then she devises: and what they think in their hearts they may effect; they will break their hearts but they will effect. Heaven bee praised for my jealousy: eleven of clock the hour, I will prevent this, detect my wife, bee revenged on Falstaff, and laugh at Page. I will about it, better three hours too soon, then a my∣nut too late: fie, fie, fie: Cuckold, Cuckold, Cuckold.
Sir.
Vat is the clock, Jack.
It is past the hour (Sir) that Sir Hugh promised to meet.
By gar, he has save his soul, dat he is no-come: hee has pray his Pebble well, dat he is no-come: by gar (Jack Rugby) he is dead already, if he be come.
Hee is wise Sir: hee knew your worship would kill him if he came.
By gar, de herring is no dead, so as I will kill him: take your Rapier, (Jack) I will tell you how I will kill him.
Alas sir, I cannot fence.
Villainy, take your Rapier.
Forbear: heir's company.
'Blesse thee, bully-Doctor.
'Saue you Mr. Doctor Caius.
Now, good Mr. Doctor.
Give you good-morrow, sir.
Vat be all you one, two, tree, four, come for?
To see thee fight, to see thee foigne, to see thee traverse, to see thee here, to see thee there, to see thee pass thy puncto, thy flock, thy reverse, thy distance, thy montant: Is he dead, my Ethiopian? Is he dead, my Fran∣cisco? ha Bully? what says my Esculapius? my Galien? my heart of Elder? ha? is he dead bully-Stale? is he dead?
By gar, he is de Coward-Iack-Priest of de world: he is not show his face.
Thou art a castalion king urinall: Hector of Greece (my Boy)
I pray you bear witness, that me have stay, six or seven, two tree hours for him, and hee is no∣come.
He is the wiser man (M. Docto) the is a curer of souls, and you a curer of bodies: if you should fight, you go against the hair of your professions: is it not true, Master Page?
Master Shallow; you have your self been a great fighter, though now a man of peace.
Body-kins M. Page, though I now be old, and of the peace; if I see a sword out, my finger itches to make one: though wee are Justices, and Doctors, and Church-men (M. Page) wee have some salt of our youth in vs, we are the sons of women (M. Page.)
It is true, Mr. Shallow.
It will be found so, (M. Page:) M. Doctor Caius, I am come to fetch you home: I am sworn of the peace: you have showed your self a wise Physician, and Sir Hugh hath shown himself a wise and patient Church∣man: you must go with me, M. Doctor.
Pardon, Guest-Iustice; a Mounseur: Mocke-water.
Mock-vater? vat is dat?
Mock-water, in our English tongue, is Valour (Bully.)
By gar, then I have as much Mock-vater as de Englishman: scuruy-Iack-dog-Priest: by gar, me will cut his ears.
He will Clapper-claw thee tightly (Bully.)
Clapper-de-claw? vat is dat?
That is, he will make thee amends.
By-gar, me doe look hee shall clapper-de-claw me, for by-gar, me will have it.
And I will provoke him to it, or let him wag.
Me tanck you for dat.
And moreover, (Bully) but first, Mr. Ghuest, and M. Page, &amp; eeke Cavalier Slender, go you through the Town to Frogmore.
Sir Hugh is there, is he?
He is there, see what humour he is in: and I will bring the Doctor about by the Fields: will it doe well?
We will doe it.
Adieu, good M. Doctor.
By-gar, me will kill de Priest, for he speak for a Iack-an-Ape to Anne Page.
Let him die: sheath thy impatience: throw cold water on thy Choler: go about the fields with me through Frogmore, I will bring thee where Mistress Anne Page is, at a Farm-house a Feasting: and thou shalt woo her: Cride-game, said I well?
By-gar, me dank you for dat: by gar I love you: and I shall procure he you de good Guest: de Earl, de Knight, de Lords, de Gentlemen, my patients.
For the which, I will be thy adversary toward Anne Page: said I well?
By-gar, it is good: vell said.
Let vs wag then.
Come at my heals, Jack Rugby.
I pray you now, good Master Slanders serving-man, and friend Simple by your name; which way have you looked for Master Caius, that calls himself Doctor of Physic.
Marry Sir, the pittie-ward, the Parke-ward: every way: old Windsor way, and every way but the Towne-way.
I most fehemently desire you, you will also look that way.
I will sir.
Please my soul: how full of Chollors I am, and trampling of mind: I shall be glad if he have deceived me: how melancholies I am? I will knog his Vrinalls a∣bout his knaves costard, when I have good opportunities for the orke: Please my soul: To shallow Ruiers to whose falls: melodious Birds sings Madrigals: There will we make our Peds of Roses: and a thousand fragrant posies. To shall∣low: Mercy on me, I have a great dispositions to cry. Melodious birds sing Madrigals: — When as I sat in Pa∣bilon: and a thousand vagrant Posies. To shallow, &amp;c.
Yonder he is coming, this way, Sir Hugh.
Hoe's welcome: To shallow Rivers, to whose false:
Heaven prosper the right: what weapons is he?
No weapons, Sir: there comes my Master, Mr. Shallow, and another Gentleman; from Frogmore, over the stile, this way.
Pray you give me my gown, or else keep it in your arms.
How now Master Parson? good morrow good Sir Hugh: keep a Gamester from the dice, and a good Student from his book, and it is wonderful.
Ah sweet Anne Page.
'Saue you, good Sir Hugh.
Please you from his mercy-sake, all of you.
What? the Sword, and the Word?
Doe you study them both, Mr. Parson?
And youthful still, in your doublet and hose, this raw-rumaticke day?
There is reasons, and causes for it.
We are come to you, to doe a good office, Mr. Parson.
Fery-well: what is it?
Yonder is a most reverend Gentleman; who (be-like) having received wrong by some person, is at most odds with his own gravity and patience, that ever you saw.
I have lived foure-score years, and upward: I never heard a man of his place, gravity, and learning, so wide of his own respect.
What is he?
I think you know him: Mr. Doctor Caius the renowned French Physician.
Got's-will, and his passion of my heart: I had as lief you would tell me of a mess of porridge.
Why?
He has no more knowledge in Hibocrates and Galen, and hee is a knave besides: a cowardly knave, as you would desires to be acquainted withal.
I warrant you, hoe's the man should fight with him.
O sweet Anne Page.
It appears so by his weapons: keep them a∣sunder: here comes Doctor Caius.
Nay good Mr. Parson, keep in your weapon.
So doe you, good Mr. Doctor.
Disarm them, and let them question: let them keep their limbs whole, and hack our English.
I pray you let-a-mee speak a word with your ear; vherefore will you not meet-a me?
Pray you use your patience in good time.
By-gar, you are de Coward: de Jack dog: Iohn Ape.
Pray you let vs not be laughing-stocks to other men's humours: I desire you in friendship, and I will one way or other make you amends: I will knog your Urinal about your knaves Cogs-combe.
Diablo: Jack Rugby: mine Host de Iarteer: have I not stay for him, to kill him? have I not at deplace I did appoint?
As I am a Christians-soule, now look your: this is the place appointed, Isle bee judgment by mine Host of the Garter.
Peace, I say, Galley and Gaul, French &amp; Welch, Soule-Curer, and Body-Curer.
I, dat is very good, excellant.
Peace, I say: hear mine Host of the Garter, Am I politi•ke? Am I subtle? Am I a Machiuell?
Shall I loose my Doctor? No, hee gives me the Potions and the Motions. Shall I loose my Parson? my Priest? my Sir Hugh? No, he gives me the Proverbs, and the No-verbes. Give me thy hand (Celestial) so: Boys of Art, I have deceived you both: I have directed you to wrong places: your hearts are mighty, your skins are whole, and let burned Sack be the issue: Come, lay their swords to pawn: Follow me, Lad of peace, follow, foal∣low, follow.
Trust me, a mad Host: follow Gentlemen, foal∣low.
O sweet Anne Page.
Have do I perceive dat? Have you make-a-de-sot of vs, ha, ha?
This is well, he has made vs his vlowting-stog: I desire you that we may be friends: and let vs knog our praines together to be revenge on this same scale scur∣uy-cogging-companion the Host of the Garter.
By gar, with all my heart: he promise to bring me where is Anne Page: by gar he deceive me too.
Well, I will smite his noddles: pray you follow.
Nay keep your way (little Gallant) you were wont to be a follower, but now you are a Leader: whether had you rather lead mine eyes, or eye your ma∣sters heals?
I had rather (forsooth) go before you like a man, then follow him like a dwarf.
O you are a flattering boy, now I see you'll be a Courtier.
Well met mistress Page, whether go you.
Truly Sir, to see your wife, is she at home?
I, and as idle as she may hang together for want of company: I think if your husbands were dead, you two would marry.
Be sure of that, two other husbands.
Where had you this pretty weather-cocke?
I cannot tell what (the dickens) his name is my husband had him of, what do you cal your Knights name sirrah?
Sir. Iohn Falstaff.
Sir. Iohn Falstaff.
He, he, I can never hit on's name; there is such a league between my goodman, and he: is your Wife at home indeed?
Indeed she is.
By your leave sir, I am sick till I see her.
Has Page any brains? Hath he any eyes? Hath he any thinking? Sure they sleep, he hath no use of them: why this boy will carry a letter twenty mile as easy, as a Canon will shoot point-blanke twelve score: hee pee∣ces out his wives inclination; he gives her folly motion and advantage; and now she's going to my wife, &amp; Fall∣staffes boy with her: A man may hear this shower sing in the wind; and Falstaffes boy with her: good plots, they are laid, and our revolted wives share damnation together. Well, I will take him, then torture my wife, pluck the borrowed veil of modesty from the so-see∣ming Mist. Page, divulge Page himself for a secure and wilful Action, and to these violent proceedings all my neighbours shall cry aim. The clock gives me my Qu, and my assurance bids me search, there I shall find Fall∣staff: I shall be rather praisd for this, then mocked, for it is as positive, as the earth is firm, that Falstaff is there: I will go.
Page, &amp;c. Well met Mr Ford.
Trust me, a good knot; I have good cheer at home, and I pray you all go with me.
I must excuse my self Mr Ford.
And so must I Sir,
We have appointed to dine with Mistress Anne,
And I would not break with her for more money
Then Isle speak of.
We have lingered about a match between An Page, and my cozen Slender, and this day wee shall have our answer.
I hope I have your good will Father Page.
You have Mr Slender, I stand wholly for you,
But my wife (Mr Doctor) is for you altogether.
I be-gar, and de Maid is loue-a-me: my nursh∣a-Quickly tell me so mush
What say you to young Mr Fenton? He capers, he dances, he has eyes of youth: he writes verses, hee speaks holiday, he smells April and May, he will carryit, he will carryit, it is in his buttons, he will carryit.
Not by my consent I promise you. The Gentle∣man is of no having, hee kept company with the wilde Prince, and Points: he is of too high a Region, he knows too much: no, hee shall not knit a knot in his fortunes, with the finger of my substance: if he take her, let him take her simply: the wealth I have waits on my consent, and my consent goes not that way.
I beseech you heartily, some of you go home with me to dinner: besides your cheer you shall have sport, I will show you a monster: Mr Doctor, you shall go, so shall you Mr Page, and you Sir Hugh.
Well, fare you well:
We shall have the freer wooing at Mr. Pages.
Go home Iohn Rugby, I come anon.
Farewell my hearts, I will to my honest Knight Falstaff, and drink Canary with him.
I think I shall drink in Pipe-wine first with him, Isle make him dance. Will you go, Gentles?
Have with you, to see this Monster.
What Iohn, what Robert.
Quickly, quickly: Is the Buck-basket —
I warrant. What Robin I say.
Come, come, come.
Here, set it down.
Give your men the charge, we must be brief.
Marry▪ as I told you before (Iohn &amp; Robert) be ready here hard-by in the Brew-house, &amp; when I so∣dainly call you, come forth, and (without any pause, or staggering) take this basket on your shoulders: yt done, trudge with it in all hast, and carry it among the Whit∣sters in Dotchet Mead, and there empty it in the muddy ditch, close by the Thames side.
You will do it?
I ha told them over and over, they lack no direction
Be gone, and come when you are called.
Here comes little Robin.
How now my Eyas-Musket, what news with you?
My M. Sir Iohn is come in at your back door (Mist. Ford, and requests your company.
You little Iack-a-lent, have you bin true to vs
I, Isle be sworn: my Master knows not of your being here: and hath threatened to put me into euerla∣sting liberty, if I tell you of it: for he swears he'll turn me away.
You're a good boy: this secrecy of thine shall be a Tailor to thee, and shall make thee a new dou∣blet and hose. Isle go hide me.
Do so: go tell thy Master, I am alone: Mi∣stress Page, remember you your Qu.
I warrant thee, if I do not act it, hiss me.
Go-too then: we will use this unwholesome humidity, this grosse-watry Pumpion; we'll teach him to know Turtles from Joys.
Have I caught thee, my heavenly Jewel? Why now let me die, for I have lived long enough: This is the period of my ambition: O this blessed hour.
O sweet Sir Iohn.
Mistress Ford, I cannot cog, I cannot prate (Mist. Ford) now shall I sin in my wish; I would thy Husband were dead, Isle speak it before the best Lord, I would make thee my Lady.
I your Lady Sir Iohn? Alas, I should bee a pitiful Lady.
Let the Court of France show me such another: I see how thine eye would emulate the Diamond: Thou hast the right arched-beauty of the brow, that becomes the Ship-tyre, the Tyre-valiant, or any Tire of Venetian admittance.
A plain Kerchief, Sir Iohn:
My brows become nothing else, nor that well neither.
Thou art a tyrant to say so: thou would make an absolute Courtier, and the firm fixture of thy foot, would give an excellent motion to thy gate, in a semi∣circled Farthingale. I see what thou were if Fortune thy foe, were not Nature thy friend: Come, thou can not hide it.
Believe me, ther's no such thing in me.
What made me love thee? Let that persuade thee. Ther's something extraordinary in thee: Come, I cannot cog, and say thou art this and that, like a-manie of these lisping-hauthorne buds, that come like women in men's apparel, and smell like. Bucklers-berry in simon∣ple time: I cannot, but I love thee, none but thee; and thou deserve it.
Do not betray me sir, I fear you love M. Page.
Thou might as well say, I love to walk by the Counter-gate, which is as hateful to me, as the reeke of a Lime-kill.
Well, heaven knows how I love you,
And you shall one day find it.
Keep in that mind, Isle deserve it.
Nay, I must tell you, so you doe;
Or else I could not be in that mind.
Mistress Ford, Mistress Ford: heere's Mistress Page at the door, sweating, and blowing, and looking wildely, and would needs speak with you presently.
She shall not see me, I will ensconce me behind the Arras.
Pray you do so, she's a very tattling woman. Whats the matter? How now?
O mistress Ford what have you done?
You're shamed, y' are overthrown, y' are undone for ever.
What's the matter, good mistress Page?
O weladay, mist. Ford, having an honest man to your husband, to give him such cause of suspicion.
What cause of suspicion?
What cause of suspicion? Out upon you:
How am I mistook in you?
Why (alas) what's the matter?
Your husband's coming hither (Woman) with all the Officers in Windsor, to search for a Gentle∣man, that he says is here now in the house; by your consent to take an ill advantage of his absence: you are undone.
It is not so, I hope.
Pray heaven it be not so, that you have such a man here: but it is most certain your husband's com∣ming, with half Windsor at his heals, to search for such a one, I come before to tell you: If you know your self clear, why I am glad of it: but if you have a friend here, convey, convey him out. Be not amazed, call all your senses to you, defend your reputation, or bid farewell to your good life for ever.
What shall I do? There is a Gentleman my dear friend: and I fear not mine own shame so much, as his peril. I had rather then a thousand pound he were out of the house.
For shame, never stand (you had rather, and you had rather:) your husband's here at hand, bethink you of some conveyance: in the house you cannot hide him. Oh, how have you deceived me? Look, here is a basket, if he be of any reasonable stature, he may creep in here, and throw foul linen upon him, as if it were going to bucking: Or it is whiting time, send him by your two men to Datchet-Meade:
He's too big to go in there: what shall I do?
Let me see it, let me see it, O let me see it:
Isle in, Isle in: Follow your friends counsel, Isle in.
What Sir Iohn Faistasse? Are these your Let∣ters, Knight?
I love thee, help me away: let me creep in here: isle never—
Help to cover your master (Boy:) Call your men (Mist. Ford.) You dissembling Knight.
What Iohn, Robert, Iohn; Go, take up these clothes here, quickly: Wher's the Cowle-staffe? Look how you drumble? Carry them to the Laundress in Dat∣chet mead: quickly, come.
'Pray you come ne'er: if I suspect without cause,
Why then make sport at me, then let me be your jest,
I deserve it: How now? Whether bear you this?
To the Laundress forsooth?
Why, what have you to doe whether they bear it? You were best meddle with buck-washing.
Buck I would I could wash my self of ye Buck:
Buck, buck, buck, I buck: I warrant you Buck,
And of the season too; it shall appear.
Gentlemen, I have dreamed to night, Isle tell you my dream: here, here, here bee my keys, ascend my Chambers, search, seek, find out: Isle warrant we'll unkennel the Fox. Let me stop this way first: so, now vncape.
Good master Ford, be contented:
You wrong your self too much.
True (master Page) up Gentlemen,
You shall see sport anon:
Follow me Gentlemen.
This is fery fantastical humours and jealousies.
By gar, it is no-the fashion of France:
It is not jealous in France.
Nay follow him (Gentlemen) see the issue of his search.
Is there not a double excellence in this?
I know not which pleases me better,
That my husband is deceived, or Sir Iohn.
What a taking was hee in, when your husband asked who was in the basket?
I am half afraid he will have need of washing: so throwing him into the water, will doe him a benefit.
Hang him dishonest rascal: I would all of the same strain, were in the same distress.
I think my husband hath some special suspicion of Falstaffs being here: for I never saw him so gross in his jealousy till now.
I will lay a plot to try that, and wee will yet have more tricks with Falstaff: his dissolute disease will scarce obey this medicine.
Shall we send that foolishion Carrion, Mist. Quickly to him, and excuse his throwing into the water, and give him another hope, to betray him to another punishment?
We will do it: let him be sent for to more∣row eight a clock to have amends.
I cannot find him: may be the knave bragged of that he could not compass.
Heard you that?
You use me well, M. Ford? Do you?
I, I do so.
Heaven make you better then your thoughts
Amen.
You do your self mighty wrong (M. Ford)
I, I: I must bear it.
If there be any pody in the house, &amp; in the cham∣bers, and in the coffers, and in the presses: heaven for∣give my sins at the day of judgment.
Be gar, nor I too: there is no-bodies.
Fie, fie, M. Ford, are you not ashamed? What spy∣rit, what devil suggests this imagination? I wold not ha your distemper in this kind, for ye wealth of Windsor castle.
It is my fault (M. Page) I suffer for it.
You suffer for a pad conscience: your wife is as honest a of mans, as I will desires among five thou∣sand, and five hundred too.
By gar, I see it is an honest woman.
Well, I promised you a dinner: come, come, walk in the Park, I pray you pardon me: I will hereafter make known to you why I have done this. Come wife, come Mi. Page, I pray you pardon me. Pray heartily pardon me.
Let's go in Gentlemen, but (trust me) we will mock him: I doe inuit you to morrow morning to my house to breakfast: after we'll a Birding together, I have a fine Hawk for the bush. Shall it be so:
Any thing.
If there is one, I shall make two in the Company
If there be one, or two, I shall make-a-theturd.
Pray you go, M. Page.
I pray you now remembrance to morrow on the lousy knave, mine Host.
Dat is good by gar, withal my heart.
A lousy knave, to have his gibes, and his moc∣keries.
I see I cannot get thy Fathers love,
Therefore no more turn me to him (sweet Nan.)
Alas, how then?
Why thou must be thy self.
He doth object, I am too great of birth,
And that my state being galled with my expense,
I seek to heal it only by his wealth.
Besides these, other bars he lays before me,
My Riots past, my wilde Societies,
And tells me it is a thing impossible
I should love thee, but as a property.
May be he tells you true.
No, heaven so speed me in my time to come,
Albeit I will confess, thy Fathers wealth
Was the first motive that I wooed thee (Anne:)
Yet wooing thee, I found thee of more value
Then stamps in Gold, or sums in sealed bags:
And it is the very riches of thy self,
That now I aim at.
Gentle M. Fenton,
Yet seek my Fathers love, still seek it sir,
If opportunity and humblest suite
Cannot attain it, why then hark you hither.
Break their talk Mistress Quickly,
My Kinsman shall speak for himself.
Isle make a shaft or a bolt on it, slid, tic but ventu∣ring.
Be not dismayed.
No, she shall not dismay me:
I care not for that, but that I am afraid.
Hark ye, M. Slender would speak a word with you
I come to him. This is my Fathers choice:
O what a world of wild ill-favoured faults
Looks handsome in three hundred pounds a year?
And how do's good Master Fenton?
Pray you a word with you.
Shoe's coming; to her Cos:
O boy, thou had a father.
I had a father (M. An) my uncle can tel you good jests of him: pray you Uncle tel Mist. Anne the jest how my Father stole two Geese out of a Pen, good Uncle.
Mistress Anne, my Cozen loves you.
I that I do, as well as I love any woman in Glo∣cestershire.
He will maintain you like a Gentlewoman.
I that I will, come cut and long-taile, under the degree of a Squire.
He will make you a hundred and fifty pounds jointure.
Good Moister Shallow let him woo for him∣self.
Marry I thank you for it: I thank you for that good comfort: she calls you (Cos) Isle leave you.
Now Master Slender.
Now good Mistress Anne.
What is your will?
My will? Odd's-hart-lings, that's a pretty jest indeed: I ne'er made my Will yet (I thank Hey∣uen:) I am not such a sickly creature, I give Heaven praise.
I mean (M. Slender) what wold you with me?
Truly, for mine own part, I would little or nothing with you: your father and my uncle hath made motion,: if it be my luck, so; if not, happy man bee his dole, they can tell you how things go, better then I can: you may ask your father, here he comes.
Now Mr Slender; Love him daughter Anne.
Why how now? What does Mr Fenter here?
You wrong me Sir, thus still to haunt my house.
I told you Sir, my daughter is disposed of.
Nay Mr Page, be not impatient.
Good M. Fenton▪ come not to my child.
She is no match for you.
Sir, will you hear me?
No, good M. Fenton.
Come M. Shallow: Come son Slender, in;
Knowing my mind, you wrong me (M. Fenton.)
Speak to Mistress Page.
Good Mist. Page, for that I love your daughter
In such a righteous fashion as I do,
Perforce, against all checks, rebukes, and manners,
I must advance the colours of my love,
And not retire. Let me have your good will.
Good mother, do not marry me to yond fool.
I mean it not, I seek you a better hus∣band.
That's my master, M. Doctor.
Alas I had rather be set quick in th earth,
And bowled to death with Turnips.
Come, trouble not your self good M.
Fenton, I will not be your friend, nor enemy:
My daughter will I question how she loves you,
And as I find her, so am I affected:
Till then, farewell Sir, she must needs go in,
Her father will be angry.
Farewell gentle Mistress: farewell Nan.
This is my doing now: Nay, said I, will you cast away your child on a Fool, and a Physician: Look on M. Fenton, this is my doing.
I thank thee: and I pray thee once to night,
Give my sweet Nan this Ring: there's for thy pains.
Now heaven send thee good fortune, a kind heart he hath: a woman would run through fire &amp; wa∣la for such a kind heart. But yet, I would my Moister had Mistress Anne, or I would M. Slender had her: or (in sooth) I would M. Fenton had her; I will do what I can for them all three, for so I have promised, and Isle bee as good as my word, but speciously for M. Fenton. Well, I must of another errand to Sir Iohn Falstaff from my two Mistresses: what a beast am I to slack it.
Bardolf I say.
Here Sir.
Go, fetch me a quart of Sack, put a tossed in it. Have I lived to be carried in a Basket like a barrow of butchers Offal? and to be thrown in the Thames? Well, if I be served such another trick, Isle have my brains 'tane out and buttered, and give them to a dog for a New-yeares gift. The rogues slighted me into the river with as little remorse, as they would have drowned a blind bitches Puppies, fifteen in th litter: and you may know by my size, that I have a kind of alacrity in sink∣ing: if the bottom were as deep as hell, I should down. I had been drowned, but that the shore was shelfy and shallow: a death that I abhor: for the water swells a man; and what a thing should I have been, when I had been swel'd? I should have been a Mountain of Mummy.
Here's M. Quickly Sir to speak with you.
Come, let me pour in some Sack to the Thames water: for my bellies as cold as if I had swallowed snow∣balls, for pills to cool the reins. Call her in.
Come in woman.
By your leave: I cry you mercy?
Give your worship good morrow.
Take away these Chalices:
Go, brew me a pottle of Sack finely.
With Eggs, Sir?
Simple of it self: Isle no Pullet-Spersme in my brewage. How now?
Marry Sir, I come to your worship from M. Ford.
Mist. Ford? I have had Ford enough: I was thrown into the Ford; I have my belly full of Ford.
Alas the day, (good-heart) that was not her fault: she do's so take on with her men; they mistook their erection.
So did I mine, to build upon a foolish Women's promise.
Well, she laments Sir for it, that it would yearn your heart to see it: her husband goes this morning a birding; she desires you once more to come to her, be∣tweene eight and nine: I must carry her word quickly, she'll make you amends I warrant you.
Well, I will visit her, tell her so: and bid her think what a man is: Let her consider his frailety, and then judge of my merit.
I will tell her.
Do so. Between nine and ten say thou?
Eight and nine Sir.
Well, be gone: I will not miss her.
Peace be with you Sir.
I marvel I hear not of Mr Broom: he sent me word to stay within: I like his money well. Oh, here be comes.
Bless you Sir.
Now M. Broom, you come to know
What hath past between me, and Fords wife.
That indeed (Sir Iohn) is my business.
M. Broom I will not lye to you,
I was at her house the hour she appointed me.
And sped you Sir?
very ill-fauouredly M. Broom.
How so sir, did she change her determination?
No (M. Broom) but the peaking Curnuto her hus∣band (M. Broom) dwelling in a continual larum of ielou∣sie, coms me in the instant of our encounter, after we had embraced, kissed, protested, &amp; (as it were) spoke the prologue of our Comedy: and at his heals, a rabble of his comp∣nions, thither provoked and instigated by his distemper, and (forsooth) to search his house for his wives Love.
What? While you were there?
While I was there.
And did he search for you, &amp; could not find you?
You shall hear. As good luck would have it, comes in one Mist. Page▪ gives intelligence of Fords ap∣proch: and in her invention, and Fords wives distraction, they conveyed me into a bucke-basket.
A Buck-basket?
Yes: a Buck-basket: ram'd me in with foul Shirts and Smocks, Socks, foul Stockings, greasy Napkins, that (Master Broom) there was the rankest compound of villainous smell, that ever offended no∣strill.
And how long lay you there?
Nay, you shall hear (Master Broom) what I hau• suffered, to bring this woman to evil, for your good: Being thus crammed in the Basket, a couple of Fords knaves, his Hinds, were called forth by their Mi∣stress, to carry me in the name of foul Clothes to Datchet-lane: they took me on their shoulders: met the jealous knave their Master in the door; who asked them once or twice what they had in their Bas∣ket? I quaked for fear least the Lunatic Knave would have searched it: but Fate (ordaining he should be a Cuckold) held his hand: well, on went hee, for a search, and away went I for foul Clothes: But mark the sequel (Master Broom) I suffered the pangs of three several deaths: First, an intolerable fright, to be detected with a jealous rotten Bell-weather: Next to be compassed like a good Bilbo in the circum∣ference of a Peck, hilt to point, heel to head. And then to be stopped in like a strong distillation with stink∣ing Clothes, that fretted in their own grease: think of that, a man of my Kidney; think of that, that am as subject to heate as butter; a man of conti∣nuall dissolution, and thaw: it was a miracle to scope suffocation. And in the height of this Bath (when I was more then half stewed in grease (like a Dutch∣dish) to be thrown into the Thames, and cooled, glowing-hot, in that serge like a Horse∣shoo; think of that; hissing hot: think of that (Master Broom.)
In good sadness Sir, I am sorry, that for my sake you have suffered all this.
My suite then is desperate: You'll undertake her no more?
Master Broom: I will be thrown into Etna, as I have been into Thames, ere I will leave her thus; her Husband is this morning gone a Birding: I have received from her another embassy of me∣ting: twixt eight and nine is the hour (Master Broom.)
It is past eight already Sir.
Is it? I will then address me to my appoint∣meant: Come to me at your convenient leisure, and you shall know how I speed: and the conclusion shall be crowned with your enjoying her: adieu: you shall have her (Master Broom) Master Broom, you shall cuckold Ford.
Hum: ha? Is this a vision? Is this a dream? doe I sleep? Master Ford awake, awake Master Ford: ther's a hole made in your best coat (Master Ford:) this it is to be married; this it is to have Linen, and Buck-baskets: Well, I will proclaim my self what I am: I will now take the Lecher: hee is at my house: hee cannot scope me: it is impossible hee should: hee can∣not creep into a halfe-penny purse, nor into a Pepper-Boxe: But least the Devil that guides him, should aide him, I will search impossible places: though what I am, I cannot avoid; yet to be what I would not, shall not make me tame: If I have horns, to make one mad, let the proverb go with me, Isle be horn∣mad.
Is he at M. Fords already think thou?
Sure he is by this; or will be presently; but truly he is very courageous mad, about his throwing into the water. Mistress Ford desires you to come so∣dainely.
Isle be with her by and by: Isle but bring my young man here to School: look where his Master comes; it is a playing day I see: how now Sir Hugh, no School to day?
No: Master Slender is let the Boys leave to play.
'Blessing of his heart.
Sir Hugh, my husband says my son pro∣fits nothing in the world at his Book: I pray you ask him some questions in his Accidence.
Come hither William; hold up your head; come.
Come-on Sirha; hold up your head; an∣swear your Master, be not afraid.
William, how many Numbers is in Nouns?
Two.
Truly, I thought there had bin one Number more, because they say od's-Nownes.
Peace, your tatlings. What is (Fair) William?
Pulcher.
Powlcats? there are fairer things then Powlcats, sure.
You are a very simplicity of man: I pray you peace. What is (Lapis) William?
A Stone.
And what is a Stone (William?)
A Peeble.
No; it is Lapis: I pray you remember in your praine.
Lapis.
That is a good William: what is he (William) that do's lend Articles.
Articles are borrowed of the Pronoun; and be thus declined. Singulariter nominatiuo hic haec, hoc.
Nominatiuo hig, hag, hog: pray you mark: geni∣tiuo huius: Well: what is your Accusatiue-case?
Accusatiuo hinc.
I pray you have your remembrance (child) Ac∣cusatiuo hinge, hang, hog.
Hang-hog, is latin for Bacon, I warrant you.
Leave your prables (of man) What is the Foci∣tiue case (William?)
O, Vocatiuo, O.
Remember William, Focatiue, is caret.
And that's a good root.
Of man, forbear.
Peace.
What is your Genitiue case plural (William?)
Genitiue case?
I.
Genitiue horum, harum, horum.
Vengeance of Genies case; fie on her; never name her (child) if she be a whore.
For shame of man.
You doe ill to teach the child such words: hee teaches him to hic, and to hac; which they'll doe fast enough of themselves, and to call horum; fie upon you.
Of man, art thou Lunaties? Hast thou no un∣derstandings for thy Cases, &amp; the numbers of the Gen∣ders? Thou art as foolish Christian creatures, as I would desires.
Prithee hold thy peace.
Show me now (William) some declensions of your Pronouns.
Forsooth, I have forgot.
It is Queen, que, quote; if you forget your Quies, your Ques, and your Quods, you must be preaches: Go your ways and play, go.
He is a better scholar then I thought he was.
He is a good sprag-memory: Farewell Mis. Page.
Adieu good Sir Hugh:
Get you home boy, Come we stay too long.
Mi. Ford, Your sorrow hath eaten up my suffe∣rance; I see you are obsequious in your love, and I pro∣fesse requital to a hairs breadth, not only Mist. Ford, in the simple office of love, but in all the accustrement, complement, and ceremony of it: But are you sure of your husband now?
Hoe's a birding (sweet Sir Iohn.)
What hoe, gossip Ford: what hoe.
Step into the chamber, Sir Iohn.
How now (sweet heart) whose at home besides your self?
Why none but mine own people.
Indeed?
No certainly: Speak louder.
Truly, I am so glad you have no body here.
Why?
Why woman, your husband is in his old lines again: he so takes on yonder with my husband, so rails against all married mankind; so curses all Eves daughters, of what complexion soever; and so buffets himself on the for-head: crying peere-out, peere-out, that any madness I ever yet beheld, seemed but tame∣ness, civility, and patience to this his distemper he is in now: I am glad the fat Knight is not here.
Why, do's he talk of him?
Of none but him, and swears he was ca∣ried out the last time hee searched for him, in a Basket: Protests to my husband he is now here, &amp; hath drawn him and the rest of their company from their sport, to make another experiment of his suspicion: But I am glad the Knight is not here; now he shall see his own foo∣lerie.
How near is he Mistress Page?
Hard by, at street end; he will be here anon.
I am undone, the Knight is here.
Why then you are utterly shamed, &amp; hoe's but a dead man. What a woman are you? Away with him, away with him▪ Better shame, then murder.
Which way should he go? How should I bestow him? Shall I put him into the basket again?
No, Isle come no more in th Basket:
May I not go out ere he come?
Alas: three of Mr. Fords brothers watch the door with Pistols, that none shall issue out: other∣wise you might slip away ere hee came: But what make you here?
What shall I do? Isle creep up into the chimney.
There they always use to discharge their Birding-peeces: creep into the Kill-hole.
Where is it?
He will seek there on my word: Neither Press, Coffer, Chest, Trunk, Well, Vault, but he hath an abstract for the remembrance of such places, and goes to them by his Note: There is no hiding you in the house.
Isle go out then.
If you go out in your own semblance, you die Sir Iohn, unless you go out disguised.
How might we disguise him?
Alas the day I know not, there is no wo∣mans gown big enough for him: otherwise he might put on a hat, a muffler, and a kerchief, and so escape.
Good hearts, devise something: any extremity, rather then a mischief.
My Maids Aunt the fat woman of Brain∣ford, has a gown aboue.
On my word it will serve him: shoe's as big as he is: and there's her thrum'd hat, and her muffler too: run up Sir Iohn.
Go, go, sweet Sir Iohn: Mistriis Page and I will look some linen for your head.
Quick, quick, we'll come dress you straight: put on the gown the while.
I would my husband would meet him in this shape: he cannot abide the old woman of Brain∣ford; he swears she's a witch, forbad her my house, and hath threatened to beat her.
Heaven guide him to thy husbands cud∣gell: and the devil guide his cudgel afterwards.
But is my husband coming?
I in good sadness is he, and talks of the basket too, howsoever he hath had intelligence.
We'll try that: for Isle appoint my men to carry the basket again, to meet him at the door with it, as they did last time.
Nay, but he will be here presently: let's go dress him like the witch of Brainford.
Isle first direct direct my men, what they shall doe with the basket: Go up, Isle bring linen for him straight.
Hang him dishonest Varlet,
We cannot misuse enough:
We'll leave a proof by that which we will doo,
Wives may be merry, and yet honest too:
We do not act that often, jest, and laugh,
It is old, but true, Still Swine eats all the draugh.
Go Sirs, take the basket again on your shoulders: your Master is hard at door: if hee bid you set it down, obey him: quickly, dispatch.
Come, come, take it up.
Pray heaven it be not full of Knight again.
I hope not, I had lief as bear so much lead.
I, but if it prove true (Mr. Page) have you any way then to vnfoole me again. Set down the basket villain: some body call my wife: Youth in a basket: Oh you Panderly Rascals, there's a knot: a gin, a pack, a conspiracy against me: Now shall the devil be shamed. What wife I say: Come, come forth: behold what ho∣nest
clothes you send forth to bleaching.
Why, this passes M. Ford: you are not to go loose any longer, you must be pinioned.
Why, this is Lunatics: this is mad, as a mad dog.
Indeed M. Ford, thy is not well indeed.
So say I too Sir, come hither Mistress Ford, Mi∣stress Ford, the honest woman, the modest wife, the virtue∣os creature, that hath the jealous fool to her husband: I suspect without cause (Mistress) do I?
Heaven be my witness you doe, if you suspect me in any dishonesty.
Well said Brazen-faced, hold it out: Come forth sirrah.
This passes.
Are you not ashamed, let the cloths alone.
I shall find you anon.
It is unreasonable; will you take up your wives clothes? Come, away.
Empty the basket I say.
Why man, why?
Master Page, as I am a man, there was one con∣uay'd out of my house yesterday in this basket: why may not he be there again, in my house I am sure he is: my Intelligence is true, my jealousy is reasonable, pluck me out all the linen.
If you find a man there, he shall dye a Fleas death.
Heir's no man.
By my fidelity this is not well Mr. Ford: This wrongs you.
Mr Ford, you must pray, and not follow the imaginations of your own heart: this is jealousies.
Well, hoe's not here I seek for.
No, nor no where else but in your brain.
Help to search my house this one time: if I find not what I seek, show no colour for my extremity: Let me for ever be your Table-sport: Let them say of me, as jealous as Ford, that searched a hollow Wall-nut for his wives Leman. Satisfy me once more, once more search with me.
What hoe (Mistress Page,) come you and the old woman down: my husband will come into the Chamber.
Old woman? what old women's that?
Why it is my maids Aunt of Brainford.
A witch, a Queen, an old cozening queen: Have I not forbid her my house. She comes of errands do's she? We are simple men, wee doe not know what's brought to pass under the profession of Fortune-telling. She works by Charms, by Spells, by the Figure, &amp; such dawbry as this is, beyond our Element: wee know no∣thing. Come down you Witch, you Hag you, come down I say.
Nay, good sweet husband, good Gentle∣men, let him strike the old woman.
Come mother Prat, Come give me your hand.
Isle Prat-her: Out of my door, you Witch, you Rag, you Baggage, you Poulcat, you Runnion, out, out: Isle conjure you, Isle fortune-tell you.
Are you not ashamed? I think you have killed the poor woman.
Nay he will do it, it is a goodly credit for you.
Hang her witch.
By yea, and no, I think the of man is a witch in∣deed: I like not when a of man has a great peard; I spy a great peard under his muffler.
Will you follow Gentlemen, I beseech you foal∣low: see but the issue of my jealousy: If I cry out thus upon no trail, never trust me when I open again.
Let's obey his humour a little further:
Come Gentlemen.
Trust me he beat him most pitifully.
Nay by the Mass that he did not: he beat him most vnpittifully, me thought.
Isle have the cudgel hallowed, and hung ore the Altar, it hath done meritorious service.
What think you? May we with the war∣rant of woman hood, and the witness of a good consci∣ence, pursue him with any further revenge?
The spirit of wantonness is sure scared out of him, if the devil have him not in fee-simple, with fine and recovery, he will never (I think) in the way of waste, attempt vs again.
Shall we tell our husbands how wee have served him?
Yes, by all means: if it be but to scrape the figures out of your husbands brains: if they can find in their hearts, the poor vnuertuous fat Knight shall be any further afflicted, wee two will still bee the mini∣sters.
Isle warrant, they'll have him publicly shamed, and me thinks there would be no period to the jest, should he not be publicly shamed.
Come, to the Forge with it, then shape it:
I would not have things cool.
Sir, the Germane desires to have three of your horses: the Duke himself will be to morrow at Court, and they are going to meet him.
What Duke should that be comes so secretly? I hear not of him in the Court: let me speak with the Gentlemen, they speak English?
I Sir? Isle call him to you.
They shall have my horses, but Isle make them pay: Isle sauce them, they have had my houses a week at command: I have turned away my other guests, they must come off, Isle sauce them, come.
It is one of the best discretions of a of man as e∣for I did look upon.
And did he send you both these Letters at an instant?
Within a quarter of an hour.
Pardon me (wife) henceforth do what you wilt:
I rather will suspect the Sun with gold,
Then thee with wantonness: Now doth thy honour stand
(In him that was of late an Heretike)
As firm as faith.
It is well, it is well, no more:
Be not as extreme in submission, as in offence,
But let our plot go forward: Let our wives
Yet once again (to make vs public sport)
Appoint a meeting with this old fat-fellow,
Where we may take him, and disgrace him for it.
There is no better way then that they spoke of.
How? to send him word they'll meet him in the Park at midnight? Fie, fie, he'll never come.
You say he has bin thrown in the Rivers: and has bin grievously peaten, as an old of man: me-thinkes there should be terrors in him, that he should not come: Me-thinkes his flesh is punished, hee shall have no de∣sires.
So think I too.
Devise but how you'll use him whē he comes,
And let vs two devise to bring him thither.
There is an old tale goes, that Herne the
Hunter (sometime a keeper here in Windsor Forest)
Doth all the winter time, at still midnight
Walk round about an Oak, with great rag'd-hornes,
And there he blasts the tree, and takes the cattle,
And make milch-kine yield blood, and shakes a chain
In a most hideous and dreadful manner.
You have heard of such a Spirit, and well you know
The superstitious idle-headed-Eld
Received, and did deliver to our age
This tale of Herne the Hunter, for a truth.
Why yet there want not many that do fear
In deep of night to walk by this Hernes Oak:
But what of this?
Marry this is our devise,
That Falstaff at that Oak shall meet with vs.
Well, let it not be doubted but he'll come,
And in this shape, when you have brought him thither,
What shall be done with him? What is your plot?
That likewise have we thought upon: &amp; thus:
Nan Page (my daughter) and my little son,
And three or four more of their growth, we'll dress
Like Urchins, Ouphes, and Fairies, greene and white,
With rounds of waxen Tapers on their heads,
And rattles in their hands; upon a sudden,
As Falstaff, she, and I, are newly met,
Let them from forth a saw-pit rush at once
With some diffused song: Upon their sight
We two, in great amazedness will fly:
Then let them all encircle him about,
And Fairy-like to pinch the unclean Knight;
And ask him why that hour of Fairy Revel,
In their so sacred paths, he dares to tread
In shape profane.
And till he tell the truth,
Let the supposed Fairies pinch him, sound,
And burn him with their Tapers.
The truth being known,
We'll all present our selves; dis-horne the spirit,
And mock him home to Windsor.
The children must
Be practised well to this, or they'll neu'r do it.
I will teach the children their behaviours: and I will be like a Iacke-an-Apes also, to burn the Knight with my Taber.
That will be excellent,
Isle go buy them vizards.
My Nan shall be the Queen of all the Fairies, finely attired in a robe of white.
That silk will I go buy, and in that time
Shall M. Slender steal my Nan away,
And marry her at Eaton: go, send to Falstaff straight.
Nay, Isle to him again in name of Broom,
He will tell me all his purpose: sure he will come.
Fear not you that: Go get vs properties
And tricking for our Fairies.
Let vs about it,
It is admirable pleasures, and ferry honest knaveries.
Go Mist. Ford,
Send quickly to Sir Iohn, to know his mind:
Isle to the Doctor, he hath my good will,
And none but he to marry with Nan Page:
That Slender (though well landed) is an Idiot:
And he, my husband best of all affects:
The Doctor is well monied, and his friends
Potent at Court: he, none but he shall have her,
Though twenty thousand worthier come to crave her.
What would thou have? (Boor) what? (thick skin) speak, breathe, discuss: brief, short, quick, snap.
Marry Sir, I come to speak with Sir Iohn Fall∣staff from M. Slender.
There's his Chamber, his House, his Castle, his standing-bed and truckle-bed: it is painted about with the story of the Prodigal, fresh and new: go, knock and call: he will speak like an Anthropophaginian unto thee: Knock I say.
There's an old woman, a fat woman gone up into his chamber: Isle be so bold as stay Sir till she come down: I come to speak with her indeed.
Ha? A fat woman? The Knight may be robbed: Isle call, Bully-Knight, Bully Sir Iohn: speak from thy Lungs Military: Art thou there? It is thine Host, thine Ephesian calls.
How now, mine Host?
Here's a Bohemian-Tartar taries the coming down of thy fat-woman: Let her descend (Bully) let her descend: my Chambers are honourable: Fie, privy∣cy? Fie.
There was (mine Host) an old-fat-woman even now with me, but she's gone.
Pray you Sir, was it not the Wise-woman of Brainford?
I marry was it (Mussel-shell) what would you with her?
My Master (Sir) my master Slender, sent to her seeing her go thorough the streets, to know (Sir) when∣there one Nim (Sir) that beguiled him of a chain, had the chain, or no.
I spake with the old woman about it.
And what says she, I pray Sir?
Marry she says, that the very same man that beguiled Master Slender of his Chain, cozon'd him of it.
I would I could have spoken with the Woman
her self, I had other things to have spoken with her too, from him.
What are they? let vs know.
I: come: quick.
I may not conceal them (Sir.)
Conceal them, or thou di'st.
Why sir, they were nothing but about Mistress Anne Page, to know if it were my Masters fortune to have her, or no.
It is, it is his fortune.
What Sir?
To have her, or no: go; say the woman told me so.
May I be bold to say so Sir?
I Sir: like who more bold.
I thank your worship: I shall make my Master glad with these tidings.
Thou are clearkly: thou art clearkly (Sir Iohn) was there a wise woman with thee?
I that there was (mine Host) one that hath taught me more wit, then ever I learned before in my life: and I paid nothing for it neither, but was paid for my lear∣ning.
Out alas (Sir) cozonage: mere cozonage.
Where be my horses? speak well of them var∣lotto.
Run away with the cozoners: for so soon as I came beyond Eaton, they threw me off, from behind one of them, in a slough of mire; and set spurs, and away; like three Germane-diuels; three Doctor Fau∣staffes.
They are gone but to meet the Duke (villain) doe not say they be fled: Germanes are honest men.
Where is mine Host?
What is the matter Sir?
Have a care of your entertainments: there is a friend of mine come to Town, tells me there is three Cozen-Iermans, that has consent all the Hosts of Readins, of Maidenhead; of Cole-brooke, of horses and money: I tell you for good will (look you) you are wise, and full of gibes, and vlouting-stocks: and it is not convenient you should be cozoned. Fare you well.
Ver' is mine Host de Iarteere?
Here (Master Doctor) in perplexity, and doubt∣full dilemma.
I cannot tell vat is dat: but it is tell-a-me, dat you make grand preparation for a Duke de Iamanie: by my trot: der is no Duke that the Court is know, to come: I tell you for good will: adieu.
Huy and cry, (villain) go: assist me Knight, I am undone: fly, run: huy, and cry (villain) I am un∣done.
I would all the world might be cozond, for I have been cozond and beaten too: if it should come to the ear of the Court, how I have been transformed; and how my transformation hath been washd, and cudgeld, they would melt me out of my fat drop by drop, and liquor Fishermens-boots with me: I warrant they would whip me with their fine wits, till I were as crestfallen as a dried pear: I never prospered, since I forswore my self at Primer•: well, if my wind were but long enough; I would repent: Now? Whence come you?
From the two parties forsooth.
The Devil take one party, and his Dam the other: and so they shall be both bestowed; I have suf∣fer'd more for their sakes; more then the villainous in∣constancy of mans disposition is able to bear.
And have not they suffered? Yes, I warrant; spe∣ciously one of them; Mistress Ford (good heart) is beaten black and blew, that you cannot see a white spot about her.
What tell thou me of black, and blew? I was beaten my self into all the colours of the Rain∣bow: and I was like to be apprehended for the Witch of Braineford, but that my admirable dexterity of wit, my counterfeiting the action of an old woman delivered me, the knave Constable had set me in the Stocks, in the com∣mon Stocks, for a Witch.
Sir: let me speak with you in your Chamber, you shall hear how things go, and (I warrant) to your content: here is a Letter will say somewhat: (good-hearts) what ado here is to bring you together? Sure, one of you do's not serve heaven well, that you are so crossed.
Come up into my Chamber.
Master Fenton, talk not to me, my mind is heavy: I will give over all.
Yet hear me speak: assist me in my purpose,
And (as I am a gentleman) isle give thee
A hundred pound in gold, more then your loss.
I will hear you (Master Fenton) and I will (at the least) keep your counsel.
From time to time, I have acquainted you
With the dear love I bear to fair Anne Page,
Who, mutually, hath answered my affection,
(So far forth, as her self might be her chooser)
Even to my wish; I have a letter from her
Of such contents, as you will wonder at;
The mirth whereof, so larded with my matter,
That neither (singly) can be manifested
Without the show of both: fat Falstaff
Hath a great Scene; the image of the jest
Isle show you here at large (hark good mine Host:)
To night at Hernes-Oke, just twixt twelve and one,
Must my sweet Nan present the Faerie-Queene:
The purpose why, is here: in which disguise
While other Jests are something rank on foot,
Her father hath commanded her to slip
Away with Slender, and with him, at Eaton
Immediately to Marry: She hath consented: Now Sir,
Her Mother, (even strong against that match
And firm for Doctor Caius) hath appointed
That he shall likewise shuffle her away,
While other sports are tasking of their minds,
And at the Deanery, where a Priest attends
Strait marry her: to this her Mothers plot
She seemingly obedient) likewise hath
Made promise to the Doctor: Now, thus it rests,
Her Father means she shall be all in white;
And in that habit, when Slender sees his time
To take her by the hand, and bid her go,
She shall go with him: her Mother hath intended
(The better to devote her to the Doctor;
For they must all be masked, and vizarded)
That quaint in greene, she shall be loose en-roab'd,
With Ribonds-pendant, flaring about her head;
And when the Doctor spies his vantage ripe,
To pinch her by the hand, and on that token,
The maid hath given consent to go with him.
Which means she to deceive? Father, or Mo∣there.
Both (my good Host) to go along with me:
And here it rests, that you'll procure the Vicar
To stay for me at Church, twixt twelve, and one,
And in the lawful name of marrying,
To give our hearts united ceremony.
Well, husband your device; Isle to the Vicar,
Bring you the Maid, you shall not lack a Priest.
So shall I evermore be bound to thee;
Besides, Isle make a present recompense.
Prithee no more prattling: go, Isle hold, this is the third time: I hope good luck lies in odd numbers: Away, go, they say there is Divinity in odd Numbers, either in nativity, chance, or death: away.
Isle provide you a chain, and Isle do what I can to get you a pair of horns.
Away I say, time wears, hold up your head &amp; mince. How now M. Broom? Master Broom, the mat∣la will be known to night, or never. Bee you in the Park about midnight, at Hernes-Oake, and you shall see wonders.
Went you not to her yesterday (Sir) as you told me you had appointed?
I went to her (Master Broom) as you see, like a poore-old-man, but I came from her (Master Broom) like a poore-old-woman; that same knave (Ford his hus∣band) hath the sinest mad devil of •jealousy in him (Ma∣ster Broom) that ever governed Frenzy. I will tell you, he beat me grievously, in the shape of a woman: (for in the shape of Man (Master Broom) I fear not Goliath with a Weavers beam, because I know also, life is a Shuttle) I am in hast, go along with me, Isle tell you all (Master Broom:) since I plucked Geese, plaide True•ned, and whipped Top, I knew not what it was to be beaten, till lately. Follow me, Isle tell you strange things of this knave Ford, on whom to night I will be revenged, and I will deliver his wife into your hand. Follow, strange things in hand (M. Broom) follow.
Come, come: we'll couch in th Castle-ditch, till we see the light of our Fairies. Remember son Slen∣der, my
I forsooth, I have spoke with her, &amp; we have a nay-word, how to know one another. I come to her in white, and cry Mum; she cries Budget, and by that we know one another.
That's good too: But what needs either your Mum, or her Budget? The white will decipher her well enough. It hath struck ten o'clock.
The night is dark, Light and Spirits will be∣come it well: Heaven prosper our sport. No man means evil but the devil, and we shall know him by his horns. Lets away: follow me.
Mr Doctor, my daughter is in green, when you see your time, take her by the hand, away with her to the Deauerie, and dispatch it quickly: go before into the Park: we two must go together.
I know vat I have to do, adieu.
Fare you well (Sir.) my husband will not rejoice so much at the abuse of Falstaff, as he will chafe at the Doctors marrying my daughter: But it is no mat∣la; better a little chiding, then a great deal of heart∣break.
Where is Nan now? and her troop of Fai∣ries? and the Welch-deuill Herne?
They are all couched in a pit hard by Hernes Oak, with obscured Lights; which at the very instant of Falstaffes and our meeting, they will at once display to the night.
That cannot choose but amaze him.
If he be not amazed he will be mocked: If he be amazed, he will every way be mocked.
We'll betray him finely.
Against such Lewdsters, and their lechery,
Those that betray them, do no treachery.
The hour drawes-on: to the Oak, to the Oak.
Trib, trib Fairies: Come, and remember your parts: be bold (I pray you) follow me into the pit, and when I give the watch-'ords, do as I bid you: Come, come, trib, trib.
The Windsor-bell hath stroke twelve: the Mi∣nut drawes-on: Now the hot-bloodied-Gods assist me: Remember lou•, thou was it a Bull for thy Europe, Love set on thy horns. O powerful Love, that in some re∣spects makes a Beast a Man: in some other, a Man a beast. You were also (Iupiter) a Swan, for the love of Leda: O
omnipotent Love, how ne'er the God drew to the com∣plexion of a Goose: a fault done first in the form of a beast, (O Jove, a beastly fault:) and then another fault, in the semblance of a Foul, think on it (Jove) a fowle-fault. When Gods have hot backs, what shall poor men do? For me, I am here a Windsor Stag, and the fattest (I think) in th Forest. Send me a cool rut-time (Jove) or who can blame me to peace my Tallow? Who comes here? my Doe?
Sir Iohn? Art thou there (my Dear?)
My male-Deere?
My Doe, with the black Sued? Let the sky rain Potatoes: let it thunder, to the tune of Greene∣sleeves, haile-kissing Comfits, and snow Eringoes: Let there come a tempest of provocation, I will shelter me here.
Mistress Page is come with me (sweet hart.)
Divide me like a brib'd-Bucke, each a Haunch: I will keep my sides to my self, my shoulders for the fellow of this walk; and my horns I bequeath your husbands. Am I a Woodman, ha? Speak I like Herne the Hunter? Why, now is Cupped a child of conscience, he makes restitution. As I am a true spirit, welcome.
Alas, what noise?
Heaven forgive our sins.
What should this be?
Away, away.
I think the devil will not have me damned,
Least the oil that's in me should set hell on fire;
He would never else cross me thus.
Fairies black, gray, greene, and white,
You Moone-shine revellers, and shades of night.
You Orphan heirs of fixed destiny,
Attend your office, and your quality.
Crier Hob-goblyn, make the Fairy Oyes.
Elves, list your names: Silence you aerie toys.
Cricket, to Windsor-chimnies shalt thou leap;
Where fires thou find unraked, and hearths vnswept,
There pinch the Maids as blew as Bill-berry,
Our radiant Queen, hates Sluts, and Sluttery.
They are Fairies, he that speaks to them shall die,
Isle wink, and couch: No man their works must eye.
Wher's Bed? Go you, and where you find a maid
That ere she sleep has thrice her prayers said,
Raise up the Organs of her fantasy,
Sleep she as sound as careless infancy,
But those as sleep, and think not on their sins,
Pinch them arms, legs, backs, shoulders, sides, &amp; shins.
About, about:
Search Windsor Castle (Elves) within, and out.
Strew good •k• (Ouphes) on every sacred room,
That it may stand till the perpetual doom,
In state as wholesome, as in state it is sit,
Worthy the Owner, and the Owner it.
The several Chai• of Order, took you s•our
With juice of Balm; and every precious flower,
Each fair Instalment, Coat, and several Crest,
With loyal Blazon, evermore be blessed.
And Nightly-meadow-Fairies, look you sing
Like to the Garters-Compasse, in a ring,
The expressure that it bears: Greene let it be,
Mote fertile-fresh then all the Field to see:
And, Honey Soit Queen Mal-y-Pence, write
In Emrold-tuffes, Flowers purple, blew, and white,
Like Saphire-pearle, and rich embroidery,
Buckled below fair Knight-hoods bending knee;
Fairies use Flowers for their characterie.
Away, disperse: But till it is one a clock,
Our Dance of Custom, round about the Ok
Of Herne the Hunter, let vs not forget.
Pray you lock hand in hand: your selves in order set:
And twenty glow-wormes shall our Lanterns bee
To guide our Measure round about the Tree.
But stay, I smell a man of middle earth.
Heavens defend me from that Welsh Fairy,
Least he transform me to a piece of Cheese.
Wild worm, thou wast ore-look'd even in thy birth.
With Triall-fire touch me his finger end:
If he be chaste, the flame will back descend
And turn him to no pain: but if he start,
It is the flesh of a corrupted hart.
A trial, come.
Come: will this wood take fire?
Oh, oh, oh.
Corrupt, corrupt, and tainted in desire.
About him (Fairies) sing a scornful rime,
And as you trip, still pinch him to your time.
Fie on sinful fantasy▪ Fie on Lust, and Luxury:
Lust is but a bloody fire, kindled with unchaste desire,
Fed in heart whose flames aspire,
As thoughts do blow them higher and higher.
Pinch him (Fairies) mutually: Pinch him for his villainy.
Pinch him, and burn him, and turn him about,
Till Candles, &amp; Star-light, &amp; Moone-shine be out.
Nay do not fly, I think we have watched you now: Will none but Herne the Hunter serve your turn?
I pray you come, hold up the jest no higher.
Now (good Sir Iohn) how like you Windsor wives?
See you these husband? Do not these fair yokes
Become the Forest better then the Town?
Now Sir, whose a Cuckold now?
Mr Broom, Falstaffes a Knave, a Cuckoldly knave,
Here are his horns Master Broom:
And Master Broom, he hath enjoyed nothing of Fords, but his Buck-basket, his cudgel, and twenty pounds of money, which must be paid to Mr Broom, his horses are arrested for it, Mr Broom.
Sir Iohn, we have had ill luck: wee could never meet: I will never take you for my Love again, but I will always count you my Dear.
I do begin to perceive that I am made an Ass.
I, and an Ox too: both the proofs are ex∣tant.
And these are not Fairies▪ I was three or four times in the thought they were not Fairies, and yet the guiltiness of my mind, the sudden surprise of my powers, drove the grossenesse of the fop∣pery into a received belief, in despite of the teeth of all rime and reason, that they were Fairies. See now how wit may be made a Iacke-a-Lent, when it is upon ill employment.
Sir Iohn Falstaff, serve Got, and leave your desires, and Fairies will not pinse you.
Well said Fairy Hugh.
And leave you your jealousies too, I pray you.
I will never mistrust my wife again, till thou art able to woo her in good English.
Have I laid my brain in the Sun, and dri'de it, that it wants matter to prevent so gross ore-reaching as this? Am I ridden with a Welch Goat too? Shall I have a Coxcomb of Frizz? Tic time I were choked with a piece of toasted Cheese.
Cheese is not good to give putter; your belly is al putter.
Cheese, and Putter? Have I lived to stand at the taunt of one that makes Fritters of English? This is e∣nough to be the decay of lust and late-walking through the Realm.
Why Sir Iohn, do you think though wee would have thrust virtue out of our hearts by the head and shoulders, and have given our selves without scru∣ple to hell, that ever the devil could have made you our delight?
What, a hodge-pudding? A bag of flax?
A puffed man?
Old, cold, withered, and of intolerable en∣trails?
And one that is as slanderous as Satan?
And as poor as Iob?
And as wicked as his wife?
And given to Fornications, and to Taverns, and Sack, and Wine, and Metheglins, and to drinkings and swearings, and stirrings? Pribles and prables?
Well, I am your Theme: you have the start of me. I am dejected: I am not able to answer the Welch Flannel, Ignorance it self is a plummet ore me, use me as you will.
Marry Sir, we'll bring you to Windsor to one Mr Broom, that you have cozon'd of money, to whom you should have bin a Pander: over and aboue that you have suffered, I think, to repay that money will be a bi∣ting affliction.
Yet be cheerful Knight▪ thou shalt eat a pos∣set to night at my house, where I will desire thee to laugh at my wife, that now laughs at thee: Tell her Mr Slen∣der hath married her daughter.
Doctors doubt that;
If Anne Page be my daughter, she is (by this) Doctor Caius wife.
Whoa hoe, hoe, Father Page.
Son? How now? How now Son,
Have you dispatched?
Dispatched? Isle make the best in Gloftershire know on it: would I were hanged la, else.
Of what son?
I came yonder at Eaton to marry Mistress Anne Page, and she's a great lubberly boy. If it had not been in th Church, I would have swinged him, or hee should have swinged me. If I did not think it had been Anne Page, would I might never stir, and it is a Post-masters Boy.
Upon my life then, you took the wrong.
What need you tell me that? I think so, when I took a Boy for a Girl: If I had been married to him, (for all he was in women's apparel) I would not have had him.
Why this is your own folly,
Did not I tell you how you should know my daughter,
By her garments?
I went to her in greene, and cried Mum, and she cried budget, as Anne and I had appointed, and yet it was not Anne, but a Post-masters boy.
Good George be not angry, I knew of your purpose: turned my daughter into white, and in∣deed she is now with the Doctor at the Deanery, and there married.
Ver is Mistress Page: by gar I am cozoned, I ha married oon Garsoon, a boy; oon peasant, by gar. A boy, it is not An Page, by gar, I am cozened.
Why? did you take her in white?
I bee gar, and it is a boy: be gar, Isle raise all Windsor.
This is strange: Who hath got the right Anne?
My heart misgives me, here comes Mr Fenton.
How now Mr Fenton?
Pardon good father, good my mother pardon
Now Mistress:
How chance you went not with Mr Slender?
Why went you not with Mr Doctor, maid?
You do amaze her: hear the truth of it,
You would have married her most shamefully,
Where there was no proportion held in love:
The truth is, she and I (long since contracted)
Are now so sure that nothing can dissolve vs:
The offence is holy, that she hath committed,
And this deceit looses the name of craft,
Of disobedience, or vnduteous title,
Since therein she doth euitate and shun
A thousand irreligious cursed hours
Which forced marriage would have brought upon her.
Stand not amazed, here is no remedy:
In Love, the heavens themselves do guide the state,
Money buys Lands, and wives are sold by fate.
I am glad, though you have tan a special stand to strike at me, that your Arrow hath glanced.
Well, what remedy? Fenton, heaven give thee joy, what cannot be eschewed, must be embraced.
When night-dogges run, all sorts of Dear are chased.
Well, I will muse no further: Mr Fenton,
Heaven give you many, many merry days:
Good husband, let vs every one go home,
And laugh this sport ore by a Country fire,
Sir Iohn and all.
Let it be so (Sir Iohn:)
To Master Broom, you yet shall hold your word,
For he, to night, shall lye with Mistress Ford▪

IN delivering my son from me, I bury a se∣cond husband.
And I in going Madam, weep ore my fathers death anew; but I must attend his may∣sties command, to whom I am now in Ward, evermore in subjection.
You shall find of the King a husband Madame, you sir a father. He that so generally is at all times good, must of necessity hold his virtue to you, whose worthi∣ness would stir it up where it wanted rather then lack it where there is such abundance.
What hope is there of his Majesties amendment?
He hath abandoned his Physicians Madam, un∣der whose practises he hath persecuted time with hope, and finds no other advantage in the process, but only the loosing of hope by time.
This young Gentlewoman had a father, O that had, how sad a passage tic, whose skill was almost as great as his honesty, had it stretched so far, would have made nature immortal, and death should have play for lack of work. Would for the Kings sake hee were li∣uing, I think it would be the death of the Kings disease.
How called you the man you speak of Madam?
He was famous sir in his profession, and it was his great right to be so: Gerard de Narbon.
He was excellent indeed Madam, the King very lately spoke of him admiringly, and mourningly: hee was skilful enough to have lived still, if knowledge could be set up against mortality.
What is it (my good Lord) the King languishes of?
A Fistula my Lord.
I heard not of it before.
I would it were not notorious. Was this Gen∣tlewoman the Daughter of Gerard de Narbon?
His sole child my Lord, and bequeathed to my over looking. I have those hopes of her good, that her education promises her dispositions she inherits, which makes fair gifts fairer: for where an unclean mind car∣ries virtuous qualities, there commendations go with pity, they are virtues and traitors too: in her they are the better for their simpleness; she derives her honesty, and achieves her goodness.
Your commendations Madam get from her tears.
It is the best brine a Maiden can season her praise in. The remembrance of her father never approaches her heart, but the tirrany of her sorrows takes all livelihood from her cheek. No more of this Helena, go too, no more least it be rather thought you affect a sorrow, then to have—
I doe affect a sorrow indeed, but I have it too.
Moderate lamentation is the right of the dead, excessive grief the enemy to the living.
If the living be enemy to the grief, the excess makes it soon mortal.
Madam I desire your holy wishes.
How understand we that?
Be thou blessed Bertram, and succeed thy father
In manners as in shape: thy blood and virtue
Contend for Empire in thee, and thy goodness
Share with thy birth-right. Love all, trust a few,
Doe wrong to none: be able for thine enemy
Rather in power then use: and keep thy friend
Under thy own lifes key. Be checked for silence,
But never taxed for speech. What heaven more will,
That thee may furnish, and my prayers pluck down,
Fall on thy head. Farewell my Lord,
It is an unseasoned Courtier, good my Lord
Advise him.
He cannot want the best
That shall attend his love.
Heaven bless him: Farewell Bertram.
The best wishes that can be forged in your thoughts be servants to you: be comfortable to my mother, your Mistress, and make much of her.
Farewell pretty Lady, you must hold the cre∣dit of your father.
O were that all, I think not on my father,
And these great tears grace his remembrance more
Then those I shed for him. What was he like?
I have forgot him. My imagination
Carries no favour in it but Bertrams.
I am undone, there is no living, none,
If Bertram be away. It were all one,
That I should love a bright particular star,
And think to wed it, he is so aboue me
In his bright radiance and collateral light,
Must I be comforted, not in his sphere;
The ambition in my love thus plagues it self:
The hind that would be mated by the Lion
Must die for love. It was pretty, though a plague
To see him every hour to sit and draw
His arched brows, his hawking eye, his curls
In our hearts table: heart too capable
Of every line and trick of his sweet favour.
But now he's gone, and my idolatrous fancy
Must sanctify his Relics. Who comes here?
One that goes with him: I love him for his sake,
And yet I know him a notorious Liar,
Think him a great way fool, sole a coward,
Yet these fixed evils sit so fit in him,
That they take place, when Virtues steely bones
Looks bleak in th cold wind: withal, full oft we see
Cold wisdom weighting on superfluous folly.
Save you fair Queen.
And you Monarch.
No.
And no.
Are you meditating on virginity?
If you have some stain of soldier in you: Let me ask you a question. Man is enemy to virginity, how may we barricade it against him?
Keep him out.
But he assails, and our virginity though vali∣ant, in the defence yet is weak: unfold to vs some war∣like resistance.
There is none: Man setting down before you, will undermine you, and blow you up.
Bless our poor Virginity from underminers and blowers up. Is there no Military policy how Fire∣gins might blow up men?
Virginity being blown down, Man will quicklier be blown up: marry in blowing him down again, with the breach your selves made, you lose your City. It is not politic, in the Common-wealth of Nature, to preserve virginity. Loss of Virginity, is rational increase, and there was never Virgin go, till virginity was first lost. That you were made of, is met∣tall to make Virgins. Virginity, by being once lost, may be ten times found: by being ever kept, it is ever lost: it is too cold a companion: Away with it.
I will stand for it a little, though therefore I die a Virgin.
There's little can bee said in it, it is against the rule of Nature. To speak on the part of virginity, is to accuse your Mothers; which is most infallible diso∣bedience. He that hangs himself is a Virgin: Virgin∣tie murders it self, and should be buried in highways out of all sanctified limit, as a desperate Offendresse a∣against Nature. Virginity breeds mites, much like a Cheese, consumes it self to the very pairing, and so dies with feeding his own stomach. Besides, Virgin∣tie is peevish, proud, idle, made of selfe-loue, which is the most inhibited sin in the Cannon. Keep it not, you cannot choose but loose by it. Out with it: within ten year it will make it self two, which is a goodly in∣crease, and the principal it self not much the worse. Away with it.
How might one do sir, to loose it to her own liking?
Let me see. Marry ill, to like him that ne'er it likes. It is a commodity will lose the gloss with lying: The longer kept, the less worth: Off with it while it is vendible. Answer the time of request, Virginity like an old Courtier, wears her cap out of fashion, richly suited, but vnsuteable, just like the brooch &amp; the tooth∣pick, which were not now: your Date is better in your Pie and your Porridge, then in your cheek: and your virginity, your old virginity, is like one of our French withered pears, it looks ill, it eats drily, marry it is a withered pear: it was formerly better, marry yet it is a withered pear: Will you any thing with it?
Not my virginity yet:
There shall your Master have a thousand loves,
A Mother, and a Mistress, and a friend,
A Phoenix, Captain, and an enemy▪
A guide, a Goddess, and a Sovereign,
A Counsellor, a Traitoresse, and a Dear:
His humble ambition, proud humility:
His earring, concord: and his discord, dulcet:
His faith, his sweet disaster: with a world
Of pretty fond adoptious christendoms
That blinking Cupped gossips. Now shall he:
I know not what he shall, God send him well,
The Courts a learning place, and he is one.
What one in faith?
That I wish well, it is pity.
What's pity?
That wishing well had not a body in it,
Which might be felt, that we the poorer borne,
Whose baser stars do shut vs up in wishes,
Might with effects of them follow our friends,
And show what we alone must think, which never
Returns vs thanks.
Monsieur Paroles,
My Lord calls for you.
Little Helen farewell, if I can remember thee, I will think of thee at Court.
Monsieur Paroles, you were borne under a charitable star.
Under Mars I.
I especially think, under Mars.
Why under Mars?
The wars hath so kept you under, that you must needs be borne under Mars.
When he was predominant.
When he was retrograde I think rather.
Why think you so?
You go so much backward when you fight.
That's for advantage.
So is running away,
When fear proposes the safety:
But the composition that your valour and fear makes in you, is a virtue of a good wing, and I like the wear well.
I am so full of businesses, I cannot answer thee acutely: I will return perfect Courtier, in the which my instruction shall serve to naturalise thee, so thou wilt be capable of a Courtiers council, and un∣derstand what advice shall thrust upon thee, else thou die in thine unthankfulness, and thine ignorance makes thee away, farewell: When thou hast leisure, say thy prayers: when thou hast none, remember thy Friends:
Get thee a good husband, and use him as he uses thee: So farewell.
Our remedies oft in our selves do lye,
Which we ascribe to heaven: the fated sky
Gives vs free scope, only doth backward pull
Our slow designs, when we our selves are dull.
What power is it, which mounts my love so hye,
That makes me see, and cannot feed mine eye?
The mightiest space in fortune, Nature brings
To join like, likes; and kiss like native things.
Impossible be strange attempts to those
That weigh their pains in sense, and do suppose
What hath been, cannot be. Who ever strove
To show her merit, that did miss her love?
(The Kings disease) my project may deceive me,
But my intents are fixed, and will not leave me.
The Florentines and Senoys are by the ears,
Have fought with equal fortune, and continue
A braving war.
So tic reported sir.
Nay tic most credible, we here receive it,
A certainty vouched from our Cousin Austria,
With caution, that the Florentine will move vs
For speedy aid: wherein our dearest friend
Preiudicates the business, and would seem
To have vs make denial.
His love and wisdom
Approved so to your Majesty, may plead
For amplest credence.
He hath armed our answer,
And Florence is denied before he comes:
Yet for our Gentlemen that mean to see
The Tuscan service, freely have they leave
To stand on either part.
It well may serve
A nursery to our Gentry, who are sick
For breathing, and exploit.
What's he comes here.
It is the Count Rosignoll my good Lord,
Young Bertram.
Youth, thou bear thy Fathers face,
Frank Nature rather curious then in hast
Hath well composed thee: Thy Fathers moral parts
Moist thou inherit too: Welcome to Paris.
My thanks and duty are your Majesties.
I would I had that corporal soundness now,
As when thy father, and my self, in friendship
First tried out souldiership: he did look far
Into the service of the time, and was
Discipled of the bravest. He lasted long,
But on vs both did hoggish Age steal on,
And wore vs out of act: It much repairs me
To talk of your good father; in his youth
He had the wit, which I can well observe
To day in our young Lords: but they may jest
Till their own scorn return to them unnoted
Ere they can hide their levity in honour:
So like a Courtier, contempt nor bitterness
Were in his pride, or sharpness; if they were,
His equal had awaked them, and his honour
Clock to it self, knew the true minute when
Exception bid him speak: and at this time
His tongue obey d his hand. Who were below him,
He used as creatures of another place,
And bowed his eminent top to their low ranks,
Making them proud of his humility,
In their poor praise he humbled: Such a man
Might be a copy to these younger times;
Which followed well, would demonstrate them now
But goers backward.
His good remembrance sir
Lies richer in your thoughts, then on his tomb:
So in approof lives not his Epitaph,
As in your royal speech.
Would I were with him he would always say,
(Me thinks I hear him now) his plausiue words
He scattered not in ears, but grafted them
To grow there and to bear: Let me not live,
This his good melancholy oft began
On the Catastrophe and heel of pastime
When it was out: Let me not live (quoth hee)
After my flame lacks oil, to be the snuff
Of younger spirits, whose apprehensive senses
All but new things disdain; whose judgements are
Mere fathers of their garments: whose constancies
Expire before their fashions: this he wished.
I after him, do after him wish too:
Since I nor wax nor honey can bring home,
I quickly were dissolved from my hive
To give some Labourers room.
You're loved Sir,
They that least lend it you, shall lack you first.
I fill a place I know it: how long first Count
Since the Physician at your fathers died?
He was much famed.
Some six months since my Lord.
If he were living, I would try him yet.
Lend me an arm: the rest have worn me out
With several applications: Nature and sickness
Debate it at their leisure. Welcome Count,
My sonne's no dearer.
Thank your Majesty.
I will now hear, what say you of this gentle∣woman.
Madam the care I have had to even your con∣tent, I wish might be found in the Calendar of my past endeavours, for then we wound our Modesty, and make foul the clearness of our deservings, whenof our selves we publish them.
What doe's this knave here? Get you gone sir: the complaints I have heard of you I do not all be∣leeue, it is my slowness that I doe not: For I know you lack not folly to commit them, &amp; have ability enough to make such knaveries yours.
It is not unknown to you Madam, I am a poor fellow.
Well sir.
No madam,
It is not so well that I am poor, though many
of the rich are damned, but if I may have your Ladyships good will to go to the world, Isbell the woman and w will doe as we may.
Wilt thou needs be a beggar?
I doe beg your good will in this case.
In what case?
In Isbels case and mine own: service is no heri∣tage, and I think I shall never have the blessing of God, till I have issue a my body: for they say barnes are bless∣sings.
Tell me thy reason why thou wilt marry?
My poor body Madam requires it, I am driven onby the flesh, and hee must needs go that the devil drives.
Is this all your worships reason?
Faith Madam I have other holy reasons, such as they are.
May the world know them?
I have been Madam a wicked creature, as you and all flesh and blood are, and indeed I doe marry that I may repent.
Thy marriage sooner then thy wickedness.
I am out a friends Madam, and I hope to have friends for my wives sake.
Such friends are thine enemies knave.
Y' are shallow Madam in great friends, for the knaves come to doe that for me which I am a weary of: he that eres my Land, spares my team, and gives me leave to Inn the crop: if I be his cuckold hoe's my drudge; he that comforts my wife, is the cherisher of my flesh and blood; hee that cherishes my flesh and blood, loves my flesh and blood; he that loves my flesh and blood is my friend: ergo, he that kisses my wife is my friend: if men could be contented to be what they are, there were no fear in marriage, for young Charbon the Puritan, and old Poysam the Papist, how somere their hearts are severed in Religion, their heads are both one, they may ioule horns together like any Dear in th Herd.
Wilt thou ever be a foul mouthed and calum∣nious knave?
A Prophet I Madam, and I speak the truth the next way, for I the Ballad will repeat, which men full true shall find, your marriage comes by destiny, your Cuckoo sings by kind.
Get you gone sir, Isle talk with you more anon.
May it please you Madam, that hee bid Helen come to you, of her I am to speak.
Sir tell my gentlewoman I would speak with her, Helen I mean.
Was this fair face the cause, quoth she,
Why the Gracious sacked Troy,
Fond done, done, fond was this King Priams joy,
With that she sighed as she stood, bis
And gave this sentence then, among nine bad if one be good, among nine bad if one be good, there's yet one good in ten.
What, one good in ten? you corrupt the song sir.
One good woman in ten Madam, which is a pu∣rifying ath' song: would God would serve the world so all the year, weed find no fault with the tithe woman if I were the Parson, one in ten quoth a? and wee might have a good woman borne but ore every blazing star, or at an earthquake, it would mend the Lottery well, a man may draw his heart out ere a pluck one.
You'll begone sir knave▪ and doe as I command you?
That man should be at women's command, and yet no hurt done, though honesty be no Puritan, yet it will doe no hurt, it will wear the Surplice of humility over the blacke-Gowne of a big heart: I am go∣ing forsooth, the business is for Helen to come hither.
Well now.
I know Madam you love your Gentlewoman entirely.
Faith I doe: her Father bequeathed her to me, and she her self without other advantage, may lawful∣lie make title to as much love as she finds, there is more owing her then is paid, and more shall be paid her then sheele demand.
Madam, I was very late more near her then I think she wished me, alone she was, and did communicate to her self her own words to her own ears, she thought, I dare vow for her, they touched not any stranger sense, her matter was, she loved your Son; Fortune she said was no god∣desse, that had put such difference betwixt their two estates: Love no god, that would not extend his might only, where qualities were level, Queen of Fire∣gins, that would suffer her poor Knight surprised without rescue in the first assault or ransom after∣ward: This she delivered in the most bitter touch of sorrow that ere I heard Virgin exclaim in, which I held my duty speedily to acquaint you withal, since in the loss that may happen, it concerns you something to know it.
You have discharged this honestly, keep it to your self, many likelihoods informed me of this before, which hung so tottring in the balance, that I could neither believe nor misdoubt: pray you leave me, stall this in your bosom, and I thank you for your honest care: I will speak with you fur∣there anon.
Even so it was with me when I was young:
If ever we are natures, these are ours, this thorne
Doth to our Rose of youth righlie belong
Our blood to vs, this to our blood is borne,
It is the show, and seal of natures truth,
Where loves strong passion is impressed in youth,
By our remembrances of days forgone,
Such were our faults, or then we thought them none,
Her eye is sick on it, I observe her now.
What is your pleasure Madam?
You know Helen I am a mother to you.
Mine honourable Mistress.
Nay a mother, why not a mother? when I sed a mother
Me thought you saw a serpent, what's in mother,
That you start at it? I say I am your mother,
And put you in the Catalogue of those
That were enwombed mine, it is often seen
Adoption strives with nature, and choice breeds
A native slip to vs from foreign seeds:
You ne'er oppressed me with a mothers groan,
Yet I express to you a mothers care,
(Gods mercy maiden) dos it curd thy blood
To say I am thy mother? vvhat's the matter,
That this distempered messenger of wet?
The many coloured Iris rounds thine eye?
—Why, that you are my daughter?
That I am not.
I say I am your Mother.
Pardon Madam.
The Count Rosillion cannot be my brother:
I am from humble, he from honoured name:
No note upon my Parents, his all noble,
My Master, my dear Lord he is, and I
His servant live, and will his vassal die:
He must not be my brother.
Nor I your Mother.
You are my mother Madam, would you were
So that my Lord your son were not my brother,
Indeed my mother, or were you both our mothers,
I care no more for, then I doe for heaven,
So I were not his sister, cant no other,
But I your daughter, he must be my brother.
Yes Helen, you might be my daughter in law,
God shield you mean it not, daughter and mother
So strive upon your pulse; what pale again?
My fear hath caught your fondness! now I see
The mistrie of your loveliness, and find
Your salt tears head, now to all sense it is gross:
You love my son, invention is ashamed
Against the proclamation of thy passion
To say thou dost not: therefore tell me true,
But tell me then it is so, for look, thy cheeks
Confess it 'ton tooth to the other, and thine eyes
See it so grossly shown in thy behaviours,
That in their kind they speak it, only sin
And hellish obstinacy tie thy tongue
That truth should be suspected, speak, first so?
If it be so, you have wound a goodly clew:
If it be not, forsweare't how ere I charge thee,
As heaven shall work in me for thine avail
To tell me truly.
Good Madam pardon me.
Do you love my Son?
Your pardon noble Mistress.
Love you my Son?
Doe not you love him Madam?
Go not about; my love hath in it a bond
Whereof the world takes note: Come, come, disclose:
The state of your affection, for your passions
Have to the full appeach'd.
Then I confess
Here on my knee, before high heaven and you,
That before you, and next unto high heaven, I love your Son:
My friends were poor but honest, so's my love:
Be not offended, for it hurts not him
That he is loved of me; I follow him not
By any token of presumptuous suite,
Nor would I have him, till I doe deserve him,
Yet never know how that desert should be:
I know I love in vain, strive against hope:
Yet in this captious, and intemible Sieve.
I still pour in the waters of my love
And lack not to loose still; thus Indian like
Religious in mine error, I adore
The Sun that looks upon his worshipper,
But knows of him no more. My dearest Madam,
Let not your hate encounter with my love,
For loving where you doe; but if your self,
Whose aged honour cites a virtuous youth,
Did ever, in so true a flame of liking,
Wish chastely, and love dearly, that your Dian
Was both her self and love, O then give pity
To her whose state is such, that cannot choose
But lend and give where she is sure to loose;
That seeks not to find that, her search implies,
But riddle like, lives sweetly where she dies.
Had you not lately an intent, speak truly,
To go to Paris?
Madam I had.
Wherefore? tell true.
I will tell truth▪ by grace it self I swear:
You know my Father left me some prescriptions
Of rare and proved effects, such as his reading
And manifest experience, had collected
For general sovereignty: and that he wild me
In heedefull'st reservation to bestow them,
As notes, whose faculties inclusiue were,
More then they were in note: Amongst the rest,
There is a remedy, approved, set down,
To cure the desperate languishings whereof
The King is rendered lost.
This was your motive for Paris, was it, speak?
My Lord, your son, made me to think of this;
Else Paris, and the medicine, and the King,
Had from the conversation of my thoughts,
Happily been absent then.
But think you Helen,
If you should tender your supposed aide,
He would receive it? He and his Physicians
Are of a mind, he, that they cannot help him:
They, that they cannot help, how shall they credit
A poor unlearned Virgin, when the Schools
Embowel'd of their doctrine, have left off
The danger to it self.
There's something in it
More then my Fathers skill, which was the greatest
Of his profession, that his good receipt,
Shall for my legacy be sanctified
By the luckiest stars in heaven, and would your honour
But give me leave to try success, I'd venture
The well lost life of mine, on his Graces cure,
By such a day, an hour.
Dost thou believe it?
I Madam knowingly.
Why Helen thou shalt have my leave and love,
Means and attendants, and my loving greetings
To those of mine in Court, Isle stay at home
And pray Gods blessing into thy attempt:
Begone to morrow, and be sure of this,
What I can help thee to, thou shalt not miss.
Farewell young Lords, these warlike principles
Doe not throw from you, and you my Lords farewell:
Share the advice betwixt you, if both gain, all
The gift doth stretch it self as it is received,
And is enough for both.
It is our hope sir,
After well entered soldiers, to return
And find your grace in health.
No, no, it cannot be; and yet my heart
Will not confess he owes the malady
That doth my life besiege: farewell young Lords,
Whether I live or die, be you the sons
Of worthy French men: let higher Italy
(Those bated that inherit but the fall
Of the last Monarchy) see that you come
Not to woo honour, but to wed it, when
The bravest questant shrinks: find what you seek,
That fame may cry you loud: I say farewell.
Health at your bidding serve your Majesty.
Those girls of Italy, take heed of them,
They say our French, lack language to deny
If they demand: beware of being Captives
Before you serve.
Our hearts receive your warnings.
Farewell, come hither to me.
Oh my sweet Lord yt you will stay behind vs.
It is not his fault the spark.
Oh it is brave wars.
Most admirable, I have seen those wars.
I am commanded here, and kept a coil with,
Too young, and the next year, and it is too early.
And thy mind stand too't boy,
Steal away bravely.
I shall stay here the for-horse to a smock,
Creeking my shoes on the plain Masonry,
Till honour be bought up, and no sword worn
But one to dance with: by heaven, Isle steal away.
There's honour in the theft.
Commit it Count.
I am your accessory, and so farewell.
I grow to you, &amp; our parting is a tortured body.
Farewll Captain.
Sweet Monsieur Paroles.
Noble Heroes; my sword and yours are kin, good sparks and lustrous, a word good metals. You shall find in the Regiment of the Spinij, one Captain Spurio his sicatrice, with an Emblem of war here on his sinister cheek; it was this very sword entrenched it: say to him I live, and observe his reports for me.
We shall noble Captain.
Mars dote on you for his novices, what will ye doe?
Stay the King.
Use a more spacious ceremony to the Noble Lords, you have restrained your self within the List of too cold an adieu: be more expressiue to them; for they wear themselves in the cap of the time, there do muster true gate; eat, speak, and move under the influence of the most received star, and though the devil lead the measure, such are to be followed: after them, and take a more dilated farewell.
And I will doe so.
Worthy fellows, and like to prove most si∣newie sword-men.
Pardon my Lord for me and for my tidings.
Isle see thee to stand up.
Then here is a man stands that has brought his pardon,
I would you had kneeled my Lord to ask me mercy,
And that at my bidding you could so stand up.
I would I had, so I had broke thy pate
And asked thee mercy for it.
Good faith across, but my good Lord it is thus,
Will you be cured of your infirmity?
No.
O will you eat no grapes my royal fox?
Yes but you will, my noble grapes, and if
My royal fox could reach them: I have seen a medicine
That's able to breath life into a stone,
Quicken a rock, and make you dance Canary
With sprightly fire and motion, whose simple touch
Is powerful to erase King Pippin, nay
To give great Charlemain a pen in's hand
And write to her a loue-line.
What her is this?
Why doctor she: my Lord, there's one arrived,
If you will see her: now by my faith and honour,
If seriously I may convey my thoughts
In this my light deliverance, I have spoke
With one, that in her sex, her years, profession,
Wisdom and constancy, hath amazed me more
Then I dare blame my weakness: will you see her?
For that is her demand, and know her business?
That done, laugh well at me.
Now good Lafew,
Bring in the admiration, that we with thee
May spend our wonder too, or take off thine
By wondering how thou took it.
Nay, Isle fit you,
And not be all day neither.
Thus he his special nothing ever prologues.
Nay, come your ways.
This haste hath wings indeed.
Nay, come your ways,
This is his Majesty, say your mind to him,
A Traitor you doe look like, but such traitors
His Majesty seldom fears, I am Cresseds Uncle,
That dare leave two together, far you well.
Now fair one, do's your business follow vs?
I my good Lord,
Gerard de Narbon was my father,
In what he did profess, well found.
I knew him.
The rather will I spare my praises towards him,
Knowing him is enough on's bed of death,
Many receipts he gave me, chiefly one,
Which as the dearest issue of his practice
And of his old experience, the only darling,
He bad me store up, as a triple eye,
Safer then mine own two: more dear I have so,
And hearing your high Majesty is touched
With that malignant cause, wherein the honour
Of my dear fathers gift, stands chief in power,
I come to tender it, and my appliance,
With all bound humbleness.
We thank you maiden,
But may not be so credulous of cure,
When our most learned Doctors leave vs, and
The congregated College have concluded,
That labouring Art can never ransom nature
From her inaydible estate: I say we must not
So stain our judgment, or corrupt our hope,
To prostitute our past-cure malady
To empericks, or to dissever so
Our great self and our credit, to esteem
A senseless help, when help past sense we deem.
My duty then shall pay me for my pains:
I will no more enforce mine office on you,
Humbly entreating from your royal thoughts,
A modest one to bear me back again.
I cannot give thee less to be called grateful:
Thou thoughtst to help me, and such thanks I give,
As one near death to those that wish him live:
But what at full I know, thou know no part,
I knowing all my peril, thou no Art.
What I can doe, can doe no hurt to try,
Since you set up your rest against remedy:
He that of greatest works is finisher,
Oft does them by the weakest minister:
So holy Writ, in babes hath judgment shown,
When Judges have bin babes; great floods have flown
From simple sources: and great Seas have dried
When Miracles have by the greatest been denied.
Oft expectation fails, and most oft there
Where most it promises: and oft it hits,
Where hope is coldest, and despair most shifts.
I must not hear thee, fare thee well kind maid,
Thy pains not used, must by thy self be paid,
Proffers not took, reap thanks for their reward.
Inspired Merit so by breath is bard,
It is not so with him that all things knows
As it is with vs, that square our guess by shows:
But most it is presumption in vs, when
The help of heaven we count the act of men.
Dear sir, to my endeavours give consent,
Of heaven, not me, make an experiment.
I am not an Impostrue, that proclaim
My self against the level of mine aim,
But know I think, and think I know most sure,
My Art is not past power, nor you past cure.
Art thou so confident? Within what space
Hop'st thou my cure?
The greatest grace lending grace,
Ere twice the horses of the sun shall bring
Their fiery torcher his diurnal ring,
Ere twice in murk and occidental damp
Moist Hesperus, hath quenched her sleepy Lamp:
Or four and twenty times the Pilots glass
Hath told the thievish minutes, how they pass:
What is infirm, from your sound parts shall fly,
Health shall live free, and sickness freely dye.
Upon thy certainty and confidence,
What dare thou venture?
Tax of impudence,
A strumpets boldness, a divulged shame
Traduced by odious ballads: my maidens name
Seard otherwise, no worse of worst extended
With vildest torture, let my life be ended.
Methinks in thee some blessed spirit doth speak
His powerful sound, within an organ weak:
And what impossibility would slay
In common sense, sense saves another way:
Thy life is dear, for all that life can rate
Worth name of life, in thee hath estimate:
Youth, beauty, wisdom, courage, all
That happiness and prime, can happy call:
Thou this to hazard, needs must intimate
Skill infinite, or monstrous desperate,
Sweet practiser, thy Physic I will try,
That ministers thine own death if I die.
If I break time, or flinch in property
Of what I spoke, unpitied let me die,
And well deserved: not helping, death's my see,
But if I help, what doe you promise me.
Make thy demand.
But will you make it even?
I by my Sceptre, and my hopes of help.
Then shalt thou give me with thy kingly hand
What husband in thy power I will command:
Exempted be from me the arrogance
To choose from forth the royal blood of France,
My low and humble name to propagate
With any branch or image of thy state:
But such a one thy vassal, whom I know
Is free for me to ask, thee to bestow.
Here is my hand, the premises observed,
Thy will by my performance shall be served:
So make the choice of thy own time, for I
Thy resolved Patient, on thee still rely:
More should I question thee, and more I must,
Though more to know, could not be more to trust:
From whence thou can, how tended on, but rest
Unquestioned welcome, and undoubted blessed.
Give me some help here hoe, if thou proceed,
As high as word, my deed shall match thy deed.
Come on sir, I shall now put you to the height of your breeding.
I will show my self highly fed, and lowly taught, I know my business is but to the Court.
To the Court, why what place make you spe∣ciall, when you put off that with such contempt, but to the Court?
Truly Madam, if God have lent a man any man∣ners, hee may easily put it off at Court: hee that cannot make a leg, put off's cap, kiss his hand, and say no∣thing, has neither leg, hands, lip, nor cap; and in∣deed such a fellow, to say precisely, were not for the Court, But for me, I have an answer will serve all men.
Marry that's a bountiful answer that fits all questions.
It is like a Barbers chair that fits all buttocks, the pin buttock, the quatch-buttocke, the brawn but∣tocke, or any buttock.
Will your answer serve fit to all questions?
As fit as ten groats is for the hand of an Attur∣ney, as your French Crown for your taffeta punk, as Tibs rush for Toms fore-finger, as a pancake for Shroue-tuesday, a Morris for May-day, as the nail to his hole, the Cuckold to his horn, as a scolding queen to a wrangling knave, as the Nuns lip to the Friars mouth, nay as the pudding to his skin.
Have you, I say, an answer of such fitness for all questions?
From below your Duke, to beneath your Con∣stable, it will fit any question.
It must be an answer of most monstrous size, that must fit all demands.
But a trifle neither in good faith, if the learned should speak truth of it: here it is, and all that belongs to it. Ask me if I am a Courtier, it shall doe you no harm to learn.
To be young again if we could: I will bee a fool in question, hoping to bee the wiser by your an∣swer.
I pray you sir, are you a Courtier?
O Lord sir theres a simple putting off: more, more, a hundred of them.
Sir I am a poor friend of yours, that loves you.
O Lord sir, thick, thick, spare not me.
I think sir, you can eat none of this homely meat.
O Lord sir; nay put me too't, I warrant you.
You were lately whipped sir as I think.
O Lord sir, spare not me.
Doe you cry O Lord sir at your whipping, and spare not me? Indeed your O Lord sir, is very sequent to your whipping: you would answer very well to a whipping if you were but bound too't.
I ne'er had worse luck in my life in my O Lord sir: I see things may serve long, but not serve ever.
I play the noble huswife with the time, to enter∣taine it so merrily with a fool.
O Lord sir, why there't serves well again.
And end sir to your business: give Helen this,
And urge her to a present answer back,
Commend me to my kinsmen, and my son,
This is not much.
Not much commendation to them.
Not much imployement for you, you under∣stand me.
Most fruitfully, I am there, before my legegs.
Hast you again.
They say miracles are past, and we have our Philosophical persons, to make modern and familiar things supernatural and causeless. Hence is it, that we make trifles of terrors, ensconcing our selves into see∣ming knowledge, when we should submit our selves to an unknown fear.
Why it is the rarest argument of wonder, that hath shot out in our latter times.
And so it is.
To be relinquished of the Artists.
So I say both of Galen and Paracelsus.
Of all the learned and authentic fellows.
Right so I say.
That gave him out incurable.
Why there it is, so say I too.
Not to be helped.
Right, as it were a man assured of a—
Uncertain life, and sure death.
Just, you say well: so would I have said.
I may truly say, it is a novelty to the world.
It is indeed if you will have it in showing, you shall read it in what do ye call there.
A showing of a heavenly effect in an earth∣lie Actor.
That's it, I would have said, the very same.
Why your Dolphin is not lustier: fore me
I speak in respect—
Nay it is strange, it is very strange, that is the brief and the tedious of it, and he's of a most facineri∣os spirit, that will not acknowledge it to be the—
Very hand of heaven.
I, so I say.
In a most weak—
And debile minister great power, grear tran∣cendence, which should indeed give vs a further use to be made, then alone then recou'ry of the king, as to bee
Generally thankful.
I would have said it, you say well: here comes the King.
Lustique, as the Dutchman says: Isle like a maid the Better whilst I have a tooth in my head: why he's able to lead her a Carranto.
More du vinegar, is not this Helen?
Fore God I think so.
Go call before me all the Lords in Court,
Sit my preserver by thy patients side,
And with this healthful hand whose banished sense
Thou hast repealed, a second time receive
The confirmation of my promised gift,
Which but attends thy naming.
Fair Maid send forth thine eye, this youthful parcel
Of Noble Bachelors, stand at my bestowing,
Ore whom both Sovereign power, and fathers voice
I have to use; thy frank election make,
Thou hast power to choose, and they none to forsake.
To each of you, one fair and virtuous Mistress;
Fall when love please, marry to each but one.
I'd give bay curtal, and his furniture
My mouth no more were broken then these boys,
And writ as little beard.
Peruse them well:
Not one of those, but had a Noble father.
Gentlemen, heaven hath through me, restored the king to health.
We understand it, and thank heaven for you.
I am a simple Maid, and therein wealthiest
That I protest, I simply am a Maid:
Please it your Majesty, I have done already:
The blushes in my cheeks thus whisper me,
We blush that thou should choose, but be refused;
Let the white death sit on thy cheek for ever,
We'll ne'er come there again.
Make choice and see,
Who shuns thy love, shuns all his love in me.
Now Dian from thy Altar do I fly,
And to imperial love, that God most high
Do my sighs stream: Sir, will you hear my suite?
And grant it.
Thanks sir, all the rest is mute.
I had rather be in this choice, then throw Ames-ace for my life.
The honour sir that flames in your fair eyes,
Before I speak too threateningly replies:
Love make your fortunes twenty times aboue
Her that so wishes, and her humble love.
No better if you please.
My wish receive,
Which great love grant, and so I take my leave.
Do all they deny her? And they were sons of mine, I'd have them whipped, or I would send them to 'th Turk to make Eunuchs of.
Be not afraid that I your hand should take,
Isle never do you wrong for your own sake:
Blessing upon your vows, and in your bed
Find fairer fortune, if you ever wed.
These boys are boys of Ice, they'll none
have here: sure they are bastards to the English, the French ne'er got em.
You are too young, too happy, and too good
To make your self a son out of my blood.
Fair one, I think not so.
There's one grape yet, I am sure thy father drunk wine. But if thou best not an ass, I am a youth of fourteen: I have known thee already.
I dare not say I take you, but I give
Me and my service, ever whilst I live
Into your guiding power: This is the man.
Why then young Bertram take her shoe's thy wife.
My wife my Liege? I shall beseech your highness
In such a business, give me leave to use
The help of mine own eyes.
Know thou not Bertram what she he's done for me?
Yes my good Lord, but never hope to know why I should marry her.
Thou know she he's raised me from my sick∣lie bed.
But follows it my Lord, to bring me down
Must answer for your raising? I know her well:
She had her breeding at my fathers charge:
A poor Physicians daughter my wife? Disdain
Rather corrupt me ever.
Tic only title thou disdain in her, the which
I can build up: strange is it that our bloods
Of colour, weight, and heat, poured all together,
Would quite confound distinction: yet stands off
In differences so mighty. If she bee
All that is virtuous (save what thou dislike)
A poor Physicians daughter, thou dislike
Of virtue for the name: but doe not so:
From lowest place, whence virtuous things proceed,
The place is dignified by the doers deed.
Where great additions swell's, and virtue none,
It is a dropsied honour. Good a lone,
Is good without a name? Vileness is so:
The property by what is is, should go,
Not by the title. She is young, wise, fair,
In these, to Nature shoe's immediate heir:
And these breed honour: that is honours scorn,
Which challenges it self as honours borne,
And is not like the fire: Honours thrive,
When rather from our acts we them derive
Then our fore-goers: the mere words, a slave
Debauched on every tomb, on every grave:
A lying Trophy, and as oft is dumb,
Where dust, and damned oblivion is the Tomb.
Of honoured bones-indeed, what should be said?
If thou can like this creature, as a maid,
I can create the rest: Virtue, and she
Is her own dower: Honour and wealth, from me.
I cannot love her, nor will strive to do it.
Thou wrong'st thy self, if thou shold'st strive to choose.
That you are well restored my Lord, I'm glad:
Let the rest go.
My Honor's at the stake, which to defeat
I must produce my power. Here, take her hand,
Proud scornful boy, unworthy this good gift,
That dost in vile misprision shackle up
My love, and her desert: that can not dream,
We poising vs in her defective scale,
Shall weigh thee to the beam: That wilt not know,
It is in Vs to plant thine Honour, where
We please to have it grow. Cheek thy contempt:
Obey Our will, which travails in thy good:
Believe not thy disdain, but presently
Do thine own fortunes that obedient right
Which both thy duty owes, and Our power claims,
Or I will throw thee from my care for ever
Into the staggers, and the careless lapse
Of youth and ignorance: both my revenge and hate
Loosing upon thee, in the name of justice,
Without all terms of pity. Speak, thine answer.
Pardon my gracious Lord: for I submit
My fancy to your eyes, when I consider
What great creation, and what dole of honour
Flies where you bid it: I find that she which late
Was in my Nobler thoughts, most base: is now
The praised of the King, who so ennobled,
Is as it were borne so.
Take her by the hand,
And tell her she is thine: to whom I promise
A counterpoise: If not to thy estate,
A balance more replete.
I take her hand.
Good fortune, and the favour of the King
Smile upon this Contract: whose Ceremony
Shall seem expedient on the now borne brief,
And be performed to night: the solemn Feast
Shall more attend upon the coming space,
Expecting absent friends. As thou love her,
Thy loue's to me Religious: else, do's err.
Do you hear Monsieur? A word with you.
Your pleasure sir.
Your Lord and Master did well to make his re∣cantation.
Recantation? My Lord? my Master?
I: Is it not a Language I speak?
A most harsh one, and not to bee understood without bloody succeeding My Master▪
Are you Companion to the Count Rosillion?
To any Count, to all Counts: to what is man.
To what is Counts man: Counts moister is of another stile.
You are too old sir: Let it satisfy you, you are too old.
I must tell thee sirrah, I write Man: to which title age cannot bring thee.
What I dare too well do, I dare not do.
I did think thee for two ordinaries: to bee a pretty wise fellow, thou did make tolerable vent of thy travel, it might pass: yet the scarves and the ban∣nerets about thee, did manifoldlie dissuade me from be∣leaving thee a vessel of too great a burden. I have now found thee, when I loose thee again, I care not: yet art thou good for nothing but taking up, and that the ort scarce worth.
Had thou not the privilege of Antiquity up∣on thee.
Do not plundge thy self to far in anger, least thou hasten thy trial: which if, Lord have mercy on thee for a hen, so my good window of Lattice fare thee well, thy casement I need not open, for I look through thee. Give me thy hand.
My Lord, you give me most egregious indignity.
I with all my heart, and thou art worthy of it.
I have not my Lord deserved it.
Yes good faith, every dram of it, and I will not b•te thee a scruple.
Well, I shall be wiser.
Even as soon as thou can, for thou hast to pull at a smack a' th contrary. If ever thou be bound in thy scarf and beaten, thou shall find what it is to be proud of thy bondage, I have a desire to hold my ac∣quaintance with thee, or rather my knowledge, that I may say in the default, he is a man I know.
My Lord you do me most insupportable vexati∣on.
I would it were hell pains for thy sake, and my poor doing eternal: for doing I am past, as I will by thee, in what motion age will give me leave.
Well, thou hast a son shall take this disgrace off me; scurvy, old, filthy, scurvy Lord: Well, I must be patient, there is no fettering of authority. Isle beat him (by my life) if I can meet him with any conueni∣ence, and he were double and double a Lord. Isle have no more pity of his age then I would have of—Isle beat him, and if I could but meet him again.
Sir, your Lord and masters married, there's news for you: you have a new Mistress.
I most unfeignedly beseech your Lordship to make some reservation of your wrongs. He is my good Lord, whom I serve aboue is my master.
Who? God.
I sir.
The devil it is, that's thy master. Why do thou garter up thy arms a this fashion? Dost make hose of thy sleeves? Do other servants so? Thou were best set thy lower part where thy nose stands. By mine Honour, If I were but two hours younger, I'd beat thee: me∣think thou art a general offence, and every man should beat thee: I think thou wast created for men to breath themselves upon thee.
This is hard and undeserved measure my Lord.
Go too sir, you were beaten in Italy for picking a kernel out of a Pomegranate, you are a vagabond, and no true traveller: you are more saucy with Lords and honourable personages, then the Commission of your birth and virtue gives you Heraldry. You are not worth another word, else I'd call you knave. I leave you.
Good, very good, it is so then: good, very good, let it be concealed awhile.
Undone, and forfeited to cares for ever.
What's the matter sweet-heart?
Although before the solemn Priest I have sworn, I will not bed her.
What? what sweet heart?
O my Paroles, they have married me:
Isle to the Tuscan wars, and never bed her.
France is a dog-hole, and it no more merits,
The tread of a mans foot: too 'th wars.
There's letters from my mother: What the im∣port is, I know not yet.
I that would be known: too 'th wars my boy, too 'th wars:
He wears his honour in a box unseen,
That hugges his kickie wickie hear at home,
Spending his manly marrow in her arms
Which should sustain the bound and high curuet
Of Marses fiery steed: to other Regions,
France is a stable, wee that dwell in it Jade,
Therefore too 'th war.
It shall be so, Isle send her to my house,
Acquaint my mother with my hate to her,
And wherefore I am fled: Write to the King
That which I durst not speak. His present gift
Shall furnish me to those Italian fields
Where noble fellows strike: Wars is no strife
To the dark house, and the detected wife.
Will this Caprichio hold in thee, art sure?
Go with me to my chamber, and advice me.
Isle send her straight away: To morrow,
Isle to the wars, she to her single sorrow.
Why these balls bound, ther's noise in it. Tic hard
A young man married, is a man that's mart:
Therefore away, and leave her bravely: go,
The King he's done you wrong: but hush it is so.
My mother greets me kindly, is she well?
She is not well, but yet she has her health, she's very merry, but yet she is not well: but thanks be go∣uen she's very well, and wants nothing in th world: but yet she is not well.
If she be very well, what do's she aisle, that she's not very well?
Truly she's very well indeed, but for two things
What two things?
One, that she's not in heaven, whether God send her quickly: the other, that she's in earth, from whence God send her quickly.
Bless you my fortunate Lady.
I hope sir I have your good will to have mine own good fortune.
You had my prayers to lead them on, and to keep them on, have them still. O my knave, how do's my old Lady?
So that you had her wrinkles, and I her money,
I would she did as you say.
Why I say nothing.
Marry you are the wiser man: for many a mans tongue shakes out his masters undoing: to say nothing, to do nothing, to know nothing, and to have nothing, is to be a great part of your title, which is within a very little of nothing.
Away, the art a knave.
You should have said sir before a knave, the art a knave, that's before me the art a knave: this had been truth sir.
Go too, thou art a witty fool, I have found thee.
Did you find me in your self sir, or were you taught to find me?
The search sir was profitable, and much Fool may you find in you, even to the worlds pleasure, and the increase of laughter.
A good knave in faith, and well fed.
Madam, my Lord will go away to night,
A very serious business call's on him:
The great prerogative and rite of love,
Which as your due time claims, he do's acknowledge,
But puts it off to a compelled restraint:
Whose want, and whose delay▪ is strewed with sweets
Which they distill now in the curbed time,
To make the coming hour oreflow with joy,
And pleasure drown the brim.
What's his will else?
That you will take your instant leave a' th king,
And make this hast as your own good proceeding,
Strengthened with what Apology you think
May make it probable need.
What more commands hee?
That having this obtained, you presently
Attend his further pleasure.
In every thing I waite upon his will.
I shall report it so,
I pray you come sirrah.
But I hope your Lordship thinks not him a soldier.
Yes my Lord and of very valiant approof.
You have it from his own deliverance.
And by other warranted testimony.
Then my Dial goes not true, I took this Lark for a bunting.
I do assure you my Lord he is very great in know∣ledge, and accordingly valiant.
I have then sinned against his experience, and transgressed against his valour, and my state that way is dangerous, since I cannot yet find in my heart to repent: Here he comes, I pray you make vs friends, I will pur∣sue the amity.
These things shall be done sir.
Pray you sir whose his Tailor?
Sir?
O I know him well, I sir, hee sirs a good work∣man, a very good Tailor.
Is she gone to the king?
She is.
Will she away to night?
As you'll have her.
I have writ my letters, casketted my treasure,
Given order for our horses, and to night,
When I should take possession of the Bride,
And ere I doe begin.
A good Travailer is something at the latter end of a dinner, but on that lies three thirds, and uses a known truth to pass a thousand nothings with, should bee once hard, and thrice beaten. God save you Cap∣taine.
Is there any unkindness between my Lord and you Monsieur?
I know not how I have deserved to run into my Lords displeasure.
You have made shift to run into it, boots and spurs and all: like him that leapt into the Custard, and out of it you'll run again, rather then suffer question for your residence.
It may bee you have mistaken him my Lord.
And shall doe so ever, though I took him it's prayers. Fare you well my Lord, and believe this of me, there can be no kernel in this light Nut: the soul of this man is his clothes: Trust him not in matter of heavy consequence: I have kept of them tame, &amp; know their natures. Farewell Monsieur, I have spoken better of you, then you have or will to deserve at my hand, but we must do good against evil.
An idle Lord, I swear.
I think so.
Why do you not know him?
Yes, I do know him well, and common speech
Gives him a worthy pass. Here comes my clog.
I have sir as I was commanded from you
Spoke with the King, and have procured his leave
For present parting, only he desires
Some private speech with you.
I shall obey his will.
You must not marvel Helen at my course,
Which holds not colour with the time, nor does
The ministration, and required office
On my particular. Prepared I was not
For such a business, therefore am I found
So much unsettled: This drives me to entreat you,
That presently you take your way for home,
And rather muse then ask why I entreat you,
For my respects are better then they seem,
And my appointments have in them a need
Greater then shows it self at the first view,
To you that know them not. This to my mother,
Twill be two days ere I shall see you, so
I leave you to your wisdom.
Sir, I can nothing say,
But that I am your most obedient servant.
Come, come, no more of that.
And ever shall
With true observance seek to eeke out that
Wherein toward me my homely stars have failed
To equal my great fortune.
Let that go: my hast is very great. Farewell:
Hie home.
Pray sir your pardon.
Well, what would you say?
I am not worthy of the wealth I owe,
Nor dare I say it is mine: and yet it is,
But like a timorous thief, most fine would steal
What law does vouch mine own.
What would you have?
Something, and scarce so much: nothing indeed,
I would not tell you what I would my Lord: Faith yes,
Strangers and foes do sunder, and not kiss.
I pray you stay not, but in hast to horse.
I shall not break your bidding, good my Lord:
Where are my other men? Monsieur, farewell.
Go thou toward home, where I will never come,
Whilst I can shake my sword, or hear the drum:
Away, and for our flight.
Bravely, Coragio.
So that from point to point, now have you heard
The fundamental reasons of this war,
Whose great decision hath much blood let forth
And more thirsts after.
Holy seems the quarrel
Upon your Graces part: black and fearful
On the opposer.
Therefore we marvel much our Cousin France
Would in so just a business, shut his bosom
Against our borrowing prayers.
Good my Lord,
The reasons of our stare I cannot yield,
But like a common and an outward man,
That the great figure of a Counsel frames,
By self unable motion, therefore dare not
Say what I think of it, since I have found
My self in my uncertain grounds to fail
As often as I guest.
Be it his pleasure.
But I am sure the younger of our nature,
That surfeit on their ease, will day by day
Come here for Physic.
Welcome shall they bee:
And all the honours that can fly from vs,
Shall on them settle: you know your places well,
When better fall, for your avails they fell,
To morrow to 'th the field.
It hath happened all, as I would have had it, save that he comes not along with her.
By my troth I take my young Lord to be a ve∣rye melancholy man.
By what observance I pray you.
Why he will look upon his boot, and sing: mend the Ruff and sing, ask questions and sing, pick his teeth, and sing: I know a man that had this trick of melancholy hold a goodly Manor for a song.
Let me see what he writes, and when he means to come.
I have no mind to Isbell since I was at Court. Our old Lings, and our Isbels a' th Country, are nothing like your old Ling and your Isbels a' th Court: the brains of my Cupid's knocked out, and I begin to love, as an old man loves money, with no stomach.
What have we here?
In that you have there.
I have sent you a daughter-in-Law, she hath recovered the King, and undone me: I have wedded her, not bedded her, and sworn to make the not eternal. You shall hear I am run away, know it before the report come. If there bee breadth enough in the world, I will hold a long distance. My duty to you.
Your unfortunate son, Bertram.
This is not well rash and unbridled boy,
To fly the favours of so good a King,
To pluck his indignation on thy head,
By the misprising of a Maid too virtuous
For the contempt of Empire.
O Madam, yonder is heavy news within be∣tweene two soldiers, and my young Lady.
What is the matter.
Nay there is some comfort in the news, some comfort, your son will not be kilt so soon as I thought he would.
Why should he be killed?
So say I Madame, if he run away, as I hear he does, the danger is in standing too't, that's the loss of men, though it be the getting of children. Here they come will tell you more. For my part I only hear your son was run away.
Save you good Madam.
Madam, my Lord is gone, for ever gone.
Do not say so.
Think upon patience, pray you Gentlemen,
I have felt so many quirks of joy and grief,
That the first face of neither on the start
Can woman me vntoo't. Where is my son I pray you?
Madam he's gone to serve the Duke of Floe∣rinse,
We met him thitherward, for thence we came:
And after some dispatch in hand at Court,
Thither we bend again.
Look on his Letter Madam, here's my Passport.
This is a dreadful sentence.
Brought you this Letter Gentlemen?
I Madam, and for the Contents sake are sorry for our pains.
I prithee Lady have a better cheer,
If thou engross, all the griefs are thine,
Thou robst me of a moity: He was my son,
But I do wash his name out of my blood,
And thou art all my child. Towards Florence is he?
I Madam.
And to be a soldier.
Such is his noble purpose, and believe
The Duke will lay upon him all the honour
That good convenience claims.
Return you thither.
I Madam, with the swiftest wing of speed.
Till I have no wife, I have nothing in France,
It is bitter.
Find you that there?
I Madame.
It is but the boldness of his hand happily, which his heart was not consenting too.
Nothing in France, until he have no wife:
There's nothing here that is too good for him
But only she, and she deserves a Lord
That twenty such rude boys might tend upon,
And call her hourly Mistress. Who was with him?
A servant only, and a Gentleman: whlch I have sometime known.
Paroles was it not?
I my good Lady, hee.
A very tainted fellow, and full of wickedness,
My son corrupts a well derived nature
With his inducement.
Indeed good Lady the fellow has a deal of that, too much, which holds him much to have.
Y' are welcome Gentlemen, I will entreat you when you see my son, to tell him that his sword can never win the honour that he looses: more Isle entreat
you written to bear along.
We serve you Madam in that and all your worthiest affairs.
Not so, but as we change our courtesies,
Will you draw near?
Till I have no wife I have nothing in France.
Nothing in France until he has no wife:
Thou shalt have none Rossillion, none in France,
Then hast thou all again: poor Lord, is it I
That chase thee from thy Country, and expose
Those tender limbs of thine, to the event
Of the none-sparing war? And is it I,
That drive thee from the sportive Court, where thou
Was it shot at with fair eyes, to be the mark
Of smokey Musk•ts? O you leaden messengers,
That ride upon the violent speed of fire,
Fly with false aim, move the still-peering air
That sings with piercing, do not touch my Lord:
Who ever shoots at him, I set him there.
Who ever charges on his forward breast
I am the Caitiff that do hold him too't,
And though I kill him not, I am the cause
His death was so effected: Better it were
I met the ravine Lyon when he roared
With sharpe constraint of hunger: better it were,
That all the miseries which nature owes
Were mine at once. No come thou home Rossillion,
Whence honour but of danger wins a scarre,
As oft it looses all. I will be gone:
My being here it is, that holds thee hence,
Shall I stay here to do it? No, no, although
The ayre of Paradise did fan the house,
And Angles offic'd all: I will be gone,
That pitiful rumour may report my flight
To consolate thine ear. Come night, end day,
For with the dark (poor thief) Isle steal away.
The General of our horse thou art, and we
Great in our hope, lay our best love and credence
Upon thy promising fortune▪
Sir it is
A charge too heavy for my strength, but yet
We'll strive to bear it for your worthy sake,
To the extreme edge of hazard.
Then go thou for•h,
And fortune play upon thy prosperous helm
As thy auspicious mistress.
This very day
Great Mars I put my self into thy file,
Make me but like my thoughts, and I shall prove
A lover of thy drum, hater of love.
Alas! and would you take the letter of her:
Might you not know she would do, as she has done,
By sending me a Letter. Read it again.
I am S. Iaques Pilgrim, thither gone:
Ambitious love hath so in me offended,
That bare-foot plod I the cold ground upon
With sainted vow my faults to have amended.
Write, write, that from the bloody course of war,
My dearest Master your dear son, may hie,
Bless him at home in peace. Whilst I from far,
His name with zealous fervor sanctify:
His taken labours bid him me forgive:
I his despiteful Iuno sent him forth,
From Courtly friends, with Camping foes to live,
Where death and danger dogs the heals of worth.
He is too good and fair for death, and me,
Whom I my self embrace, to set him free.
Ah what sharpe stings are in her mildest words?
Rynaldo, you did never lack advice so much,
As letting her pass so: had I spoke with her,
I could have well diverted her intents,
Which thus she hath prevented.
Pardon me Madam,
If I had given you this at ouer-night,
She might have been ore-tane: and yet she writes
Pursuit would be but vain.
What Angel shall
Bless this unworthy husband, he cannot thrive,
Unless her prayers, whom heaven delights to bear
And loves to grant, repreeue him from the wrath
Of greatest Justice. Write, write Rynaldo,
To this unworthy husband of his wife,
Let every word weigh heavy of her worth,
That he does weigh too light: my greatest grief,
Though little he do feel it, set down sharply.
Dispatch the most convenient messenger,
When happily he shall hear that she is gone,
He will return, and hope I may that she
Hearing so much, will speed her foot again,
Led hither by pure love: which of them both
Is dearest to me, I have no skill in sense
To make distinction: provide this Messenger:
My heart is heavy, and mine age is weak,
Grief would have tears, and sorrow bids me speak.
Nay come,
For if they do approach the City,
We shall loose all the sight.
They say, the French Count has done
Most honourable service.
It is reported,
That he has taken their greatest Commander,
And that with his own hand he slew
The Dukes brother: we have lost our labour,
They are gone a contrary way• hark,
you may know by their Trumpets.
Come lets return again,
And suffice our selves with the report of it.
Well Diana, take heed of this French Earl,
The honour of a Maid is her name,
And no Legacy is so rich
As honesty.
I have told my neighbour
How you have been solicited by a Gentleman
His Companion.
I know that knave, hang him, one Paroles, a filthy Officer he is in those suggestions for the young Earl, beware of them Diana; their promises, entice∣mints, oaths, tokens, and all these engines of lust, are not the things they go under: many a maid hath been seduced by them, and the misery is example, that so terrible shows in the wrack of maiden-hood, cannot for all that dissuade succession, but that they are limed with the twigs that threatens them. I hope I need not to advise you further, but I hope your own grace will keep you where you are, though there were no further danger known, but the modesty which is so lost.
You shall not need to fear me.
I hope so: look here comes a pilgrim, I know she will lye at my house, thither they send one another, Isle question her. God save you pilgrim, whether are bound?
To S. Iaques la grand.
Where do the Palmers lodge, I do beseech you?
At the S. Francis here beside the Port.
Is this the way?
I marry first. Hark you, they come this way:
If you will tarry holy Pilgrim
But till the troops come by,
I will conduct you where you shall be lodged,
The rather for I think I know your hostess
As ample as my self.
Is it your self?
If you shall please so Pilgrim.
I thank you, and will stay upon your leisure.
you came I think from France?
I did so.
Here you shall see a Countryman of yours
That has done worthy service.
His name I pray you?
The Count Rossillion: know you such a one?
But by the ear that hears most nobly of him:
His face I know not.
What somere he is
He's bravely taken here. He stole from France
As it is reported: for the King had married him
Against his liking. Think you it is so?
I surely mere the truth, I know his Lady.
There is a Gentleman that serves the Count,
Reports but coursely of her.
What's his name?
Monsieur Paroles.
Oh I believe with him,
In argument of praise, or to the worth
Of the great Count himself, she is too mean
To have her name repeated, all her deserving
Is a reserved honesty, and that
I have not heard examined.
Alas poor Lady,
It is a hard bondage to become the wife
Of a detesting Lord.
I write good creature, wheresoever she is,
Her hart weighs sadly: this young maid might do her
A shrewd turn if she pleased.
How do you mean?
May be the amorous Count solicits her
In the unlawful purpose.
He does indeed,
And brokes with all that can in such a suite
Corrupt the tender honour of a Maid:
But she is armed for him, and keeps her guard
In honestest defence.
The gods forbid else.
So, now they come:
That is Anthonio the Dukes eldest son,
That Escalus.
Which is the Frenchman?
Hee,
That with the plume, it is a most gallant fellow,
I would he loved his wife: if he were honester
He were much goodlier. Is it not a handsome Gentleman
I like him well.
It is pity he is not honest: yonds that same knave
That leads him to these places: were I his Lady,
I would poison that vile Rascal.
Which is he?
That Jack an-apes with scarfs. Why is hee melancholy?
Perchance he•s hurt in th battle.
Loose our drum? Well.
He's shrewdly vexed at something. Look he has spied vs.
Marry hang you.
And your courtesy, for a ring-carrier.
The troop is past: Come pilgrim, I will bring you, Where you shall host: Of enjoined penitents
There's four or five, to great S. Iaques bound,
Already at my house.
I humbly thank you:
Please it this Matron, and this gentle Maid
To eat with vs to night, the charge and thanking
Shall be for me▪ and to requite you further,
I will bestow some precepts of this Virgin,
Worthy the note.
We'll take your offer kindly.
Nay good my Lord put him too't: let him have his way.
If your Lordship find him not a Hilding, hold me no more in your respect.
On my life my Lord▪ a bubble.
Do you think I am so far
Deceived in him.
Believe it my Lord, in mine own direct knowledge, without any malice, but to speak of him as my kinsman, hoe's a most notable Coward, an infi∣night and endless Liar, an hourly promise-breaker, the owner of no one good quality, worthy your Lordships entertainment.
It were fit you knew him, least▪ reposing too far in his virtue which he hath not, he might at some great and trusty business, in a maine danger, fail you.
I would I knew in what particular action to try him.
None better then to let him fetch off his drum, which you hear him so confidently under∣take to do.
I with a troop of Florentines will suddenly sir∣prize
him; such I will have whom I am sure he knows not from the enemy: wee will bind and hoodwink him so, that he shall suppose no other but that he is car∣ried into the Leaguer of the adversaries, when we bring him to our own tents: be but your Lordship present at his examination, if he do not for the promise of his life, and in the highest compulsion of base fear, offer to betray you, and deliver all the intelligence in his power against you, and that with the divine forfeit of his soul upon oath, never trust my judgment in any thing.
O for the love of laughter, let him fetch his drum, he says he has a stratagem for it: when your Lordship sees the bottom of this success in it, and to what mettle this counterfeit lump of ours will be mel∣ted if you give him not Iohn drums entertainment, your inclining cannot be removed. Here he comes.
O for the love of laughter hinder not the ho∣nor of his design, let him fetch off his drum in any hand.
How now Monsieur? This drum sticks sore∣lie in your disposition.
A pox on it, let it go, it is but a drum.
But a drum: First but a drum? A drum so lost. There was excellent command, to charge in with our horse upon our own wings, and to rend our own soldiers.
That was not to be blamed in the command of the service: it was a disaster of war that Caesar him self could not have prevented, if he had been there to command.
Well, wee cannot greatly condemn our suc∣cesse: some dishonour wee had in the loss of that drum, but it is not to be recovered.
It might have been recovered.
It might, but it is not now.
It is to be recovered, but that the merit of ser∣vice is seldom attributed to the true and exact perfor∣mer, I would have that drum or another, or hic in∣cet.
Why if you have a stomach, too't Monsieur: if you think your mystery in stratagem, can bring this instrument of honour again into his native quarter, be magnanimous in the enterprise and go on, I will grace the attempt for a worthy exploit: if you speed well in it, the Duke shall both speak of it, and extend to you what further becomes his greatness, even to the utmost syllable of your worthiness.
By the hand of a soldier I will undertake it.
But you must not now slumber in it.
Isle about it this evening, and I will presently pen down my dilemma's, encourage my self in my certainty, put my self into my mortal preparation: and by midnight look to hear further from me.
May I bee bold to acquaint his grace you are gone about it.
I know not what the success will be my Lord, but the attempt I vow.
I know the art valiant,
And to the possibility of thy souldiership,
Will subscribe for thee: Farewell.
I love not many words.
No more then a fish loves water. Is not this a strange fellow my Lord, that so confidently seems to undertake this business, which he knows is not to be done, damnes himself to do, &amp; dares better be damned then to do it.
You do not know him my Lord as we doe, certain it is that he will steal himself into a mans fa∣uour, and for a week escape a great deal of disco∣ries, but when you find him out, you have him ever af∣la.
Why do you think he will make no deed at all of this that so seriously hee dooes address himself unto?
None in the world, but return with an in∣uention, and clap upon you two or three probable lies: but we have almost embossed him, you shall see his fall to night; for indeed he is not for your Lordshippes re∣spect.
Weal make you some sport with the Fox ere we case him. He was first smoked by the old Lord Lafew, when his disguise and he is parted, tell me what a sprat you shall find him, which you shall see this ve∣rye night.
I must go look my twigs,
He shall be caught.
Your brother he shall go along with me.
Is it please your Lordship, Isle leave you.
Now will I lead you to the house, and show you
The Lass I spoke of.
But you say she's honest.
That's all the fault: I spoke with his but once,
And found her wondrous cold, but I sent to her
By this same Coxcomb that we have in th wind
Tokens and Letters, which she did resend,
And this is all I have done: She's a fair creature,
Will you go see her?
With all my heart my Lord.
If you misdoubt me that I am not she,
I know not how I shall assure you further,
But I shall loose the grounds I work upon.
Though my estate be fallen, I was well borne,
Nothing acquainted with these businesses,
And would not put my reputation now
In any staining act.
Nor would I wish you.
First give me trust, the Count he is my husband,
And what to your sworn counsel I have spoken,
Is so from word to word: and then you cannot
By the good aid that I of you shall borrow,
Err in bestowing it.
I should believe you,
For you have showed me that which well approves
Y' are great in fortune.
Take this purse of Gold,
And let me buy your friendly help thus far,
Which I will ouer-pay, and pay again
When I have found it. The Count he woes your daughter,
Lays down his wanton siege before her beauty,
Resolve to carry her: let her in fine consent
As we'll direct her how it is best to bear it:
Now his important blood will nought deny,
That she'll demand: a ring the County wears,
That downward hath succeeded in his house
From son to son, some four or five descents,
Since the first father wore it. This Ring he holds
In most rich choice: yet in his idle fire,
To buy his will, it would not seem too dear,
How ere repented after.
Now I see the bottom of your purpose.
You see it lawful then, it is no more,
But that your daughter ere she seems as won,
Desires this Ring; appoints him an encounter;
In fine, delivers me to fill the time,
Her self most chastely absent: after
To marry her, Isle add three thousand Crowns
To what is past already.
I have yielded:
Instruct my daughter how she shall persevere,
That time and place with this deceit so lawful
May prove coherent. Every night he comes
With Musickes of all sorts, and songs composed
To her unworthiness: It nothing steeds vs
To chide him from our eeues, for he persists
As if his life lay on it.
Why then to night
Let vs assay our plot, which if it speed,
Is wicked meaning in a lawful deed;
And lawful meaning in a lawful act,
Where both not sin, and yet a sinful fact.
But let's about it.
He can come no other way but by this hedge corner: when you sally upon him, speak what terrible Language you will: though you understand it not your selves, no matter: for we must not seem to understand him, unless some one among vs, whom wee must pro∣duce for an Interpreter.
Good Captain, let me be the Interpreter.
Art not acquainted with him? knows he not thy voice?
No sir I warrant you.
But what linsey wolsy hast thou to speak to vs again.
Even such as you speak to me.
He must think vs some band of strangers, in th adversaries entertainment. Now he hath a smack of all neighbouring Languages: therefore we must every one be a man of his own fancy, not to know what we speak one to another: so we seem to know, is to know straight our purpose: Choughs language, gabble enough, and good enough. As for you interpreter, you must seem very politic. But couch hoe, here hee comes, to be∣guile two hours in a sleep, and then to return &amp; swear the lies he forges.
Ten a clock: Within these three hours twill be time enough to go home. What shall I say I have done? It must bee a very plausiue invention that carries it. They begin to smoke me, and disgraces have of late, knocked too often at my door: I find my tongue is too foole-hardie, but my heart hath the fear of Ma•s before it, and of his creatures, not daring the reports of my tongue.
This is the first truth that ere thine own tongue was guilty of.
What the devil should move me to undertake the recovery of this drum, being not ignorant of the impossibility, and knowing I had no such purpose? I must give my self some hurts, and say I got them in ex∣ploit: yet slight ones will not carry it. They will say, came you off with so little? And great ones I dare not give, wherefore what's the instance. Tongue, I must put you into a Butter-womans mouth, and buy my self ano∣there of Baiazeths Mule, if you prattle me into these perils.
Is it possible he should know what hee is, and be that he is.
I would the cutting of my garments wold serve the turn, or the breaking of my Spanish sword.
We cannot afford you so.
Or the baring of my beard, and to say it was in stratagem.
It would not do.
Or to drown my clothes, and say I was stripped.
Hardly serve.
Though I swore I leapt from the window of the Citadel.
How deep?
Thirty fathom.
Three great oaths would scarce make that be believed.
I would I had any drum of the enemies, I would swear I recovered it.
You shall hear one anon.
A drum now of the enemies.
Throca movousus, cargo, cargo, cargo.
Cargo, cargo, cargo, villianda par corbo, cargo.
O ransom, ransom,
Do not hide mine eyes.
Boskos thromuldo boskos.
I know you are the Mu•kos Regiment,
And I shall loose my life for want of language.
If there be here German or Dane, Low Dutch,
Italian, or French, let him speak to me,
Isle discover that, which shall undo the Florentine.
Boskos vauvado, I understand thee, &amp; can speak thy tongue: Kerelybonto sir, betake thee to thy faith, for seventeen poniards are at thy bosom.
Oh.
Oh pray, pray, pray,
Manka re•any dulche.
Oscorbidulchos voliuorc•.
The General is content to spare thee yet,
And hoodwinked as thou art, will lead thee on
To gather from thee. Happily thou may inform
Something to save thy life.
O let me live,
And all the secrets of our camp Isle show,
Their force, their purposes: Nay, Isle speak that,
Which you will wonder at.
But wilt thou faithfully?
If I do not, damn me.
Acordo lent.
Come on, thou are granted space.
Go tell the Count Rossillion and my brother,
We have caught the woodcock, and will keep him muffled
Till we do hear from them.
Captain I will.
A will betray vs all unto our selves,
Inform on that.
So I will sir.
Till then Isle keep him dark and safely locked.
They told me that your name was Fontybell.
No my good Lord, Diana.
Titled Goddess,
And worth it with addition: but fair soul,
In your fine frame hath love no quality?
If the quick fire of youth light not your mind,
You are no Maiden but a monument
When you are dead you should be such a one
As you are now: for you are cold and sterne,
And now you should be as your mother was
When your sweet self•▪ was got.
She then was honest.
So should you be.
No:
My mother did but duty, such (my Lord)
As you owe to your wife.
No more a' that:
I prithee do not strive against my vows:
I was compelled to her, but I love thee
By loves own sweet constraint, and will for ever
Do thee all rights of service.
I so you serve vs
Till we serve you: But when you have our Roses,
You barely leave our thorns to prick our selves,
And mock vs with our bareness.
How have I sworn.
Tic not the many oaths that makes the truth,
But the plain single vow, that is vowed true:
What is not holy, that we swear not by,
But take the high'st to witness: then pray you tell me.
If I should swear by Ioues great attributes,
I loved you dearly, would you believe my oaths,
When I did love you ill? This he's no holding
To swear by him whom I protest to love
That I will work against him. Therefore your oaths
Are words and poor conditions, but unsealed
At lest in my opinion.
Change it, change it:
Be not so holy cruel: Love is holy,
And my integrity ne'er knew the crafts
That you do charge men with: Stand no more off,
But give thy self unto my sick desires,
Who then recovers. Say thou art mine, and ever
My love as it begins, shall so persevere.
I see that men make rope's in such a scarre,
That we'll forsake our selves. Give me that Ring.
Isle lend it thee my dear; but have no power
To give it from me.
Will you not my Lord?
It is an honour longing to our house,
Bequeathed down from many Ancestors,
Which were the greatest obloquy in th world,
In me to loose.
Mine Honours such a Ring,
My chastities the Jewel of our house,
Bequeathed down from many Ancestors,
Which were the greatest obloquy in th world,
In me to loose. Thus your own proper wisdom
Brings in the Champion honour on my part,
Against your vain assault.
Here, take my Ring,
My house, mine honour, yea my life be thine,
And Isle be bid by thee.
When midnight comes, knock at my cham∣ber window:
Isle order take, my mother shall not hear.
Now will I charge you in the band of truth,
When you have conquered my yet maiden-bed,
Remain there but an hour, nor speak to me:
My reasons are most strong, and you shall know them,
When back again this Ring shall be delivered:
And on your finger in the night, Isle put
Another Ring, that what in time proceeds,
May token to the future, our past deeds.
Adieu till then, then fail not: you have won
A wife of me, though there my hope be done.
A heaven on earth I have won by wooing thee.
For which, live long to thank both heaven &amp; me,
You may so in the end.
My mother told me just how he would woo,
As if she sate in's heart. She says, all men
Have the like oaths: He had sworn to marry me
When his wife's dead: therefore Isle lye with him
When I am buried. Since Frenchmen are so braid,
Marry that will, I live and die a Maid:
Only in this disguise, I think it no sin,
To cousin him that would unjustly win.
You have not given him his mothers letter.
I have delivered it an hour since, there is some thing in it that stings his nature: for on the reading it, he changed almost into another man.
He has much worthy blame laid upon him, for shaking off so good a wife, and so sweet a Lady.
Especially, hee hath incurred the everlasting displeasure of the King, who had even tuned his bounty to sing happiness to him. I will tell you a thing, but you shall let it dwell darkly with you.
When you have spoken it it is dead, and I am the grave of it.
Hee hath perverted a young Gentlewoman here in Florence, of a most chaste renown, &amp; this night he fleshes his will in the spoil of her honour: hee hath given her his monumental Ring, and thinks himself made in the unchaste composition.
Now God delay our rebellion as we are our selves, what things are we.
Merely our own traitors. And as in the common course of all treasons, we still see them reveal themselves, till they attain to their abhorred ends: so he that in this action contrives against his own Nobi∣lity in his proper stream, ore-flowes himself.
Is it not meant damnable in vs, to be Trum∣peters of our unlawful intents? We shall not then have his company to night?
Not till after midnight: for hee is dieted to his hour.
That approaches apace: I would gladly have him see his company anathomiz'd, that hee might take
a measure of his own judgements, wherein so curiously he had set this counterfeit.
We will not meddle with him till he come; for his presence must be the whip of the other.
In the mean time, what hear you of these Wars?
I hear there is an overture of peace.
Nay, I assure you a peace concluded.
What will Count Rossillion do then? Will he travail higher, or return again into France?
I perceive by this demand, you are not alto∣gether of his council.
Let it be forbid sir, so should I bee a great deal of his act.
Sir, his wife some two months since fled from his house, her pretence is a pilgrimage to Saint In∣ques le grand; which holy undertaking, with most au∣stere sanctimony she accomplished: and there residing, the tenderness of her Nature, became as a prey to her grief: in fine, made a groan of her last breath, &amp; now she sings in heaven.
How is this justified?
The stronger part of it by her own Letters, which makes her story true, even to the point of her death: her death it self, which could not be her office to say, is come: was faithfully confirmed by the Rector of the place.
Hath the Count all this intelligence?
I, and the particular confirmations, point from point, to the full arming of the verity.
I am heartily sorry that he will bee glad of this.
How mightily sometimes, we make vs com∣forts of our losses.
And how mightily some other times, wee drown our gain in tears, the great dignity that his valour hath here acquired for him, shall at home be en∣countred with a shame as ample.
The web of our life, is of a mingled yarn, good and ill together: our virtues would bee proud, if our faults whipped them not, and our crimes would dis∣pair if they were not cherished by our virtues.
How now? Whore's your master?
He met the Duke in the street sir, of whom hee hath taken a solemn leave: his Lordship will next morning for France. The Duke hath offered him Let∣ters of commendations to the King.
They shall bee no more then needful there, if they were more then they can commend.
They cannot be too sweet for the Kings tart∣ness, heere's his Lordship now. How now my Lord, i'st not after midnight?
I have to night dispatched sixteen businesses, a months length a piece, by an abstract of success: I have congied with the Duke, done my adieu with his nearest; buried a wife, mourned for her▪ writ to my La∣die mother, I am returning, entertained my Convoy, &amp; between these maine parcels of dispatch, affected ma∣ny nicer needs: the last was the greatest, but that I have not ended yet.
If the business bee of any difficulty, and this morning your departure hence, it requires hast of your Lordship.
I mean the business is not ended, as fearing to hear of it hereafter: but shall we have this dialogue between the Fool and the Soldier. Come, bring forth this counterfeit module, ha•s deceived me, like a double-meaning Prophesier.
Bring him forth, he's sate in th stocks all night poor gallant knave.
No matter, his heals have deserved it, in vsur∣ping his spurs so long. How does he carry himself?
I have told your Lordship already: The stocks carry him. But to answer you as you would be understood, hee weeps like a wench that had shed her milk, he hath confessed himself to Morgan, whom hee supposes to be a Friar, frō the time of his remembrance to this very instant disaster of his setting in th stocks: and what think you he hath confessed?
Nothing of me, he's a?
His confession is taken, and it shall bee read to his face, if your Lordship be in it, as I believe you are, you must have the patience to hear it.
A plague upon him, muffeld; he can say nothing of me: hush, hush.
Hoodman comes: Portotartarossa.
He calls for the tortures, what will you say without em.
I will confess what I know without constraint,
If ye pinch me like a Pasty, I can say no more.
Bosko Chimurcho.
Boblibindo chicurmurco.
You are a merciful General: Our General bids you answer to what I shall ask you out of a Note.
And truly, as I hope to live.
First demand of him, how many horse the Duke is strong. What say you to that?
Five or six thousand, but very weak and un∣serviceable: the troops are all scattered, and the Com∣manders very poor rogues, upon my reputation and credit, and as I hope to live.
Shall I set down your answer so?
Do, Isle take the Sacrament on it, how &amp; which way you will: ell's one to him.
What a past-sauing slave is this?
You're deceived my Lord, this is Monsieur Paroles the gallant militarist, that was his own phrase that had the whole theoricke of war in the knot of his scarf, and the practise in the chape of his dagger.
I will never trust a man again, for keeping his sword clean, nor believe he can have every thing in him, by wearing his apparel neatly.
Well, that's set down.
Five or six thousand horse I sed, I will say true, or thereabouts set down, for Isle speak truth.
He's very near the truth in this.
But I con him no thanks for it in the nature he delivers it.
Poor rogues, I pray you say.
Well, that's set down.
I humbly thank you sir, a truth's a truth, the Rogues are marvelous poor.
Demand of him of what strength they are a foot. What say you to that?
By my troth sir, if I were to live this present hour, I will tell true. Let me see, Spurio a hundred &amp;
fifty, Sebastian so many, Corambus so many, Iaques so many: Guiltian, Cosmo, Lodowicke, and Gratij, two hun∣dred fifty each: Mine own Company, Chitopher, Ʋau∣monte, Bentij, two hundred fifty each: so that the muster file, rotten and sound, upon my life amounts not to fife∣teene thousand pole, half of the which, dare not shake the snow from off their Cassocks, least they shake them∣selves to pieces.
What shall be done to him?
Nothing, but let him have thanks. Demand of him my condition: and what credit I have with the Duke.
Well that's set down: you shall demand of him, whether one Captain Dumaine bee in th Camp, a Frenchman: what his reputation is with the Duke, what his valour, honesty, and expertness in wars: or when∣there he thinks it were not possible with well-waighing sums of gold to corrupt him to a revolt. What say you to this? What do you know of it?
I beseech you let me answer to the particular of the intergatories. Demand them singly.
Do you know this Captain Dumaine?
I know him, a was a Botchers Prentice in Paris, from whence he was whipped for getting the Shrieues fool with child, a dumb innocent that could not say him nay.
Nay, by your leave hold your hands, though I know his brains are forfeit to the next tile that false.
Well, is this Captain in the Duke of Florences camp?
Upon my knowledge he is, and lousy.
Nay look not so upon me: we shall hear of your Lord anon.
What is his reputation with the Duke?
The Duke knows him for no other, but a poor Officer of mine, and writ to me this other day, to turn him out a' th band. I think I have his Letter in my pose∣ket.
Marry we'll search.
In good sadness I do not know, either it is there, or it is upon a file with the Dukes other Letters, in my Tent.
Here it is, heere's a paper, shall I read it to you?
I do not know if it be it or no.
Our Interpreter do's it well.
Excellently.
Dian, the Counts a fool, and full of gold.
That is not the Dukes letter sir: that is an ad∣uertisement to a proper maid in Florence, one Diana, to take heed of the allurement of one Count Rossillion, a foolish idle boy: but for all that very ruttish. I pray you sir put it up again.
Nay, Isle read it first by your favour.
My meaning in it I protest was very honest in the behalf of the maid: for I knew the young Count to be a dangerous and lascivious boy, who is a whale to Verge∣nity and devours up all the fry it finds.
Damnable both-sides rogue.
When he swears oaths, hid him drop gold, and take it:
After he scores, he never pays the score:
Half won is match well made, match and well make it,
He ne'er pays after debts, take it before,
And say a soldier (Dian) told thee this:
Men are to mell with, boys are not to kiss.
For count of this, the Counts a Fool• I know it,
Who pays before, but not when he does owe it.
Thine as he vowed to thee in thine ear,
He shall be whipped through the Army with this rime in's forehead.
This is your devoted friend sir, the manifold Linguist, and the army-potent soldier.
I could endure any thing before but a Cat, and now he's a Cat to me.
I perceive sir by your Generals looks, wee shall be fine to hang you.
My life sir in any case: Not that I am afraid to dye, but that my offences being many, I would repent out the remainder of Nature. Let me live sir in a dung∣on, in th stocks, or any where, so I may live.
We'll see what may bee done, so you confess freely: therefore once more to this Captain Dumaine: you have answered to his reputation with the Duke, and to his valour. What is his honesty?
He will steal sir an Egg out of a Cloister: for rapes and ravishments he paralels Nessus. Hee professes not keeping of oaths, in breaking em he is stronger then Hercules. He will lye sir, with such volubility, that you would think truth were a fool: drunkenness is his best virtue, for he will be swine-drunke, and in his sleep he does little harm, save to his bedclothes about him: but they know his conditions, and lay him in straw. I have but little more to say sir of his honesty, he he's eve∣rye thing that an honest man should not have; what an honest man should have, he has nothing.
I begin to love him for this.
For this description of thine honesty? A pox upon him for me, he's more and more a Cat.
What say you to his expertness in war?
Faith sir, he's led the drum before the Eng∣lish Tragedians: to belie him I will not, and more of his souldiership I know not, except in that Country, he had the honour to be the Officer at a place there called Mile-end, to instruct for the doubling of files. I would doe the man what honour I can, but of this I am not certain.
He hath out-villain'd villainy so far, that the rarity redeems him.
A pox on him, he's a Cat still.
His qualities being at this poor price. I need not to ask you, if Gold will corrupt him to revolt.
Sir, for a Cardecu he will sell the fee-simple of his salvation, the inheritance of it, and cut the entail from all remainders, and a perpetual succession for it perpe∣tually.
What's his Brother, the other Captain Dumain?
Why do's he ask him of me?
What's he?
Even a Crow a' th same nest: not altogether so great as the first in goodness, but greater a great deal in evil. He excels his Brother for a coward, yet his Brother is reputed one of the best that is. In a retreat hee out∣runs any Lackey; marry in coming on, hee he's the Cramp.
If your life be saved, will you undertake to betray the Florentine.
I, and the Captain of his horse, Count Rossillion.
Isle whisper with the General, and know his pleasure.
Isle no more drumming, a plague of all drums, only to seem to deserve well, and to beguile the suppo∣sition
of that lascivious young boy the Count, have I run into this danger: yet who would have suspected an am∣bush where I was taken?
There is no remedy sir, but you must dye: the General says, you that have so traitorously discovered the secrets of your army, and made such pestifferous re∣ports of men very nobly held, can serve the world for no honest use: therefore you must dye. Come heads∣man, off with his head.
O Lord sir let me live, or let me see my death.
That shall you, and take your leave of all your friends:
So, look about you, know you any here?
Good morrow noble Captain.
God bless you Captain Paroles.
God save you noble Captain.
Captain, what greeting will you to my Lord Lafew? I am for France.
Good Captain will you give me a Copy of the sonnet you writ to Diana in behalf of the Count Rossillion, and I were not a very Coward, I'd compel it of you, but far you well.
You are undone Captain all but your scarf, that has a knot on it yet.
Who cannot be crushed with a plot?
If you could find out a Country where but women were that had received so much shame, you might begin an impudent Nation. Fare ye well sir, I am for France too, we shall speak of you there.
Yet am I thankful: if my heart were great
It would burst at this: Captain Isle be no more,
But I will eat, and drink, and sleep as soft
As Captain shall. Simply the thing I am
Shall make me live: who knows himself a braggart
Let him fear this; for it will come to pass,
That every braggart shall be found an Ass.
Rust sword, cool blushes, and Paroles live
Safest in shame: being fooled, by fool'rie thrive;
There's place and means for every man alive.
Isle after them.
That you may well perceive I have not wronged you,
One of the greatest in the Christian world
Shall be my surety: for whose throne it is needful
Ere I can perfect mine intents, to kneel.
Time was, I did him a desired office
Dear almost as his life, which gratitude
Through flinty Tartars bosom would peep forth,
And answer thanks. I duly am informed,
His grace is at Marcellae, to which place
We have convenient convoy: you must know
I am supposed dead, the Army breaking,
My husband hies him home, where heaven aiding,
And by the leave of my good Lord the King,
We'll be before our welcome.
Gentle Madam,
You never had a servant to whose trust
Your business was more welcome.
Nor your Mistress
Ever a friend, whose thoughts more truly labour
To recompense your love: Doubt not but heaven
Hath brought me up to be your daughters dower,
As it hath fated her to be my motive
And helper to a husband. But O strange men,
That can such sweet use make of what they hate,
When saucy trusting of the cozened thoughts
Defiles the pitchy night, so lust doth play
With what it loathes, for that which is away,
But more of this hereafter: you Diana,
Under my poor instructions yet must suffer
Something in my behalf.
Let death and honesty
Go with your impositions, I am yours
Upon your will to suffer.
Yet I pray you:
But with the word the time will bring on summer,
When Briers shall have leaves as well as thorns,
And be as sweet as sharpe: we must away,
Our Wagon is prepared, and time revives vs,
Ell's well that ends well, still the fines the Crown;
What ere the course, the end is the renown.
No, no, no, your son was misled with a snipt taffeta fellow there, whose villainous saffron wold have made all the vnbak'd and dowy youth of a nation in his colour: your daughter-in-law had been alive at this hour, and your son here at home, more advance•d by the King, then by that red-tail'd humble Bee I speak of.
I would I had not known him, it was the death of the most virtuous gentlewoman, that ever Nature had praise for creating. If she had partaken of my flesh and cost me the dearest groans of a mother, I could not have owed her a more rooted love.
It was a good Lady, it was a good Lady. Wee may pick a thousand sallets ere wee light on such ano∣there herb.
Indeed sir she was the sweet Margerom of the sallet, or rather the herb of grace.
They are not herbs you knave, they are nose-hearbes.
I am no great Nabuchadnezar sir, I have not much skill in grace.
Whether doest thou profess thy self, a knave or a fool?
A fool sir at a women's service, and a knave at a mans.
Your distinction.
I would cousin the man of his wife, and do his service.
So you were a knave at his service indeed.
And I would give his wife my bauble sir to doe her service.
I will subscribe for thee, thou art both knave and fool.
At your service.
No, no, no.
Why sir, if I cannot serve you, I can serve as great a prince as you are.
Whose that, a Frenchman?
Faith sir a has an English maine, but his fisno∣my is more hotter in France then there.
What prince is that?
The black prince sir, alias the prince of dark∣ness, alias the devil.
Hold thee there's my purse, I give thee not this to suggest thee from thy master thou talk off, serve him still.
I am a woodland fellow sir, that always loved a great fire, and the master I speak of ever keeps a good fire, but sure he is the Prince of the world, let his No∣bilitie remain in's Court. I am for the house with the narrow gate, which I take to be too little for pomp to enter: some that humble themselves may, but the ma∣no will be too chill and tender, and theyle bee for the flowery way that leads to the broad gate, and the great fire.
Go thy ways, I begin to bee a weary of thee, and I tell thee so before, because I would not fall out with thee. Go thy ways, let my horses be well looked too, without any tricks.
If I put any tricks upon em sir, they shall bee Jade tricks, which are their own right by the law of Nature.
A shrewd knave and an unhappy.
So a is. My Lord that's gone made himself much sport out of him, by his authority hee remains here, which he thinks is a patent for his sauciness, and indeed he has no pace, but runs where he will.
I like him well, it is not amiss: and I was about to tell you, since I heard of the good Ladies death, and that my Lord your son was upon his return home. I moved the King my master to speak in the behalf of my daughter, which in the minority of them both, his Majesty out of a self gracious remembrance did first propose, his Highness hath promised me to doe it, and to stop up the displeasure he hath conceived against your son, there is no fitter matter. How do's your Ladyship like it?
With very much content my Lord, and I wish it happily effected.
His Highness comes post from Marcellus, of as able body as when he numbered thirty, a will be here to morrow, or I am deceived by him that in such intel∣ligence hath seldom failed.
Ir rejoices me, that I hope I shall see him ere I die. I have letters that my son will be here to night: I shall beseech your Lordship to remain with me, till they meet together.
Madam, I was thinking with what manners I might safely be admitted.
You need but plead your honourable privy∣ledge.
Lady, of that I have made a bold charter, but I thank my God, it holds yet.
O Madam, yonders my Lord your son with a patch of velvet on's face, whether there bee a scar un∣der't or no, the Velvet knows, but it is a goodly patch of Velvet, his left cheek is a cheek of two pile and a half, but his right cheek is worn bare.
A scarre nobly got,
Or a noble scarre, is a good liu'rie of honour,
So belike is that.
But it is your carbinado'd face.
Let vs go see
your son I pray you, I long to talk
With the young noble soldier.
Faith there's a dozen of em, with delicate fine hats, and most courteous feathers, which bow the head, and nod at every man.
But this exceeding posting day and night,
Must wear your spirits low, we cannot help it:
But since you have made the days and nights as one,
To wear your gentle limbs in my affairs,
Be bold you do so grow in my requital,
As nothing can unroot you. In happy time,
This man may help me to his Majesties ear,
If he would spend his power. God save you sir.
And you.
Sir, I have seen you in the Court of France.
I have been sometimes there.
I do presume sir, that you are not fallen
From the report that goes upon your goodness,
And therefore goaded with most sharpe occasions,
Which lay nice manners by, I put you to
The use of your own virtues, for the which
I shall continue thankful.
What's your will?
That it will please you
To give this poor petition to the King,
And aid me with that store of power you have
To come into his presence.
The Kings not here.
Not here sir?
Not indeed,
He hence removed last night, and with more hast
Then is his use.
Lord how we loose our pains.
Ell's well that ends well yet,
Though time seem so adverse, and means unfit:
I do beseech you, whither is he gone?
Marry as I take it to Rossillion,
Whither I am going.
I do beseech you sir,
Since you are like to see the King before me,
Commend the paper to his gracious hand,
Which I presume shall render you no blame,
But rather make you thank your pains for it,
I will come after you with what good speed
Our means will make vs means.
This Isle do for you.
And you shall find your self to be well thanked what ever falls more. We must to horse again, Go, go, provide.
Good Mr Lauatch give my Lord Lafew this let∣la, I have ere now sir been better known to you, when I have held familiarity with fresher clothes: but I am now sir muddied in fortunes mood, and smell somewhat strong of her strong displeasure.
Truly, Fortunes displeasure is but sluttish if it smell so strongly as thou speak of: I will henceforth eat no Fish of Fortunes buttering. Pre thee allow the wind.
Nay you need not to stop your nose sir: I spake but by a Metaphor.
Indeed sir, if your Metaphor stink, I will stop my nose, or against any mans Metaphor. Prethe get thee further.
Pray you sir deliver me this paper.
Foh, prithee stand away: a paper from fortunes close-stoole, to give to a Nobleman. Look here he comes himself.
Here is a purr of Fortunes sir, or of Fortunes Cat, but not a Muscat, that he's fallen into the unclean fish-pond of her displeasure, and as he says is muddied withal. Pray you sir, use the Carpe as you may, for he looks like a poor decayed, ingenious, foolish, rascally knave. I doe pity his distress in my smiles of comfort, and leave him to your Lordship.
My Lord I am a man whom fortune hath cruel∣lie scratched.
And what would you have me to doe? It is too late to pair her nails now. Wherein have you played the knave with fortune that she should scratch you, who of her self is a good Lady, and would not have knaves thrive long under? There's a Cardecu for you: Let the Justices make you and fortune friends; I am for other business.
I beseech your honour to hear me one single word▪
you beg a single penny more: Come you shall ha•t, save your word.
My name my good Lord is Paroles.
You beg more then word then. Cox my pas∣zion, give me your hand: How does your drum?
O my good Lord, you were the first that found me.
Was I insooth? And I was the first that lost thee.
It lies in you my Lord to bring me in some grace for you did bring me out.
Out upon thee knave, doest thou put upon me at once both the offiee of God and the devil: one brings thee in grace, and the other brings thee out. The Kings coming I know by his Trumpets. Sirrah, inquire fur∣there after me, I had talk of you last night, though you are a fool and a knave, you shall eat, go too, follow.
I praise God for you.
We lost a Jewel of her, and our esteem
Was made much poorer by it: but your son,
As mad in folly, lacked the sense to know
Her estimation home.
It is past my Liege,
And I beseech your Majesty to make it
Natural rebellion, done in th blade of youth,
When oil and fire, too strong for reasons force,
Ore-beares it, and burns on.
My honoured Lady,
I have forgiven and forgotten all,
Though my revenges were high bent upon him,
And watched the time to shoot.
This I must say,
But first I beg my pardon: the young Lord
Did to his Majesty, his Mother, and his Lady,
Offence of mighty note; but to himself
The greatest wrong of all. He lost a wife,
Whose beauty did astonish the survey
Of richest eyes: whose words all ears took captive,
Whose dear perfection, hearts that scorned to serve,
Humbly called Mistress.
Praising what is lost,
Makes the remembrance dear. Well, call him hither,
We are reconciled, and the first view shall kill
All repetition: Let him not ask our pardon,
The nature of his great offence is dead,
And deeper then oblivion, we do bury
The incensing relics of it. Let him approach
A stranger, no offender; and inform him
So it is our will he should▪
I shall my Liege.
What says he to your daughter,
Have you spoke?
All that he is, hath reference to your Highness.
Then shall we have a match. I have letters sent me, that sets him high in fame.
He looks well on it.
I am not a day of season,
For thou moist see a sun-shine, and a hail
In me at once: But to the brightest beams
Distracted clouds give way, so stand thou forth,
The time is fair again.
My high repented blames
Dear Sovereign pardon to me.
All is whole,
Not one word more of the consumed time,
Let's take the instant by the forward top:
For we are old, and on our quick'st decrees
The inaudible, and noiseless foot of time
Steals, ere we can effect them. You remember
The daughter of this Lord?
Admiringly my Liege, at first
I stuck my choice upon her, ere my heart
Durst make too bold a herald of my tongue:
Where the impression of mine eye enfixing,
Contempt his scornful Perspective did lend me,
Which warped the line, of every other favour,
Scorned a fair colour, or expressed it stolen,
Extended or contracted all proportions
To a most hideous object. Thence it came,
That she whom all men praised, and whom my self,
Since I have lost, have loved; was in mine eye
The dust that did offend it.
Well excused:
That thou did love her, strikes some scores away
From the great count: but love that comes too late,
Like a remorseful pardon slowly carried
To the great sender, turns a sour offence,
Crying, that's good that's gone: Our rash faults,
Make trivial price of serious things we have,
Not knowing them, until we know their grave,
Oft our displeasures to our selves unjust,
Destroy our friends, and after weep their dust:
Our own love waking, cries to see what's don,e
While shameful hate sleeps out the afternoon.
Be this sweet Helens knell, and now forget her.
Send forth your amorous token for fair Maudlin,
The maine consents are had, and here we'll stay
To see our widowers second marriage day:
Which better then the first, O dear heaven bless,
Or, ere they meet in me, O Nature cesse.
Come on my son, in whom my houses name
Must be digested: give a favour from you
To sparkle in the spirits of my daughter,
That she may quickly come. By my old beard,
And every hair that's on it, Helen that's dead
Was a sweet creature: such a ring as this,
The last that ere I took her leave at Court,
I saw upon her finger.
Hers it was not.
Now pray you let me see it. For mine eye,
While I was speaking, oft was fastened too't:
This Ring was mine, and when I gave it Helen,
I bad her if her fortunes ever stood
Necessitied to help, that by this token
I would relieve her. Had you that craft to reeve her
Of what should stead her most?
My gracious Sovereign,
How ere it pleases you to take it so,
The ring was never hers.
Son, on my life
I have seen her wear it, and she reckoned it
At her lives rate.
I am sure I saw her wear it.
You are deceived my Lord, she never saw it:
In Florence was it from a casement thrown me,
Wrapped in a paper, which contained the name
Of her that threw it: Noble she was, and thought
I stood engaged▪ but when I had subscribed
To mine own fortune, and informed her fully,
I could not answer in that course of Honour
As she had made the overture, she ceased
In heavy satisfaction, and would never
Receive the Ring again.
Platus himself,
That knows the tinct and multiplying med'cine,
Hath not in natures mystery more science,
Then I have in this Ring. It was mine, it was Helens,
Who ever gave it you: then if you know
That you are well acquainted with your self,
Confess it was hers, and by what rough enforcement
You got it from her. She called the Saints to surety,
That she would never put it from her finger,
Unless she gave it to your self in bed,
Where you have never come: or sent it vs
Upon her great disaster.
She never saw it.
Thou speak it falsely: as I love mine Honour,
And make connecturall fears to come into me,
Which I would fine shut out, if it should prove
That thou art so inhumane, twill not prove so:
And yet I know not, thou did hate her deadly,
And she is dead, which nothing but to close
Her eyes my self, could win me to believe,
More then to see this Ring. Take him away,
My fore-past proofs, how ere the matter fall
Shall taze my fears of little vanity,
Having vainly feared too little. Away with him,
We'll sift this matter further.
If you shall prove
This Ring was ever hers, you shall as easy
Prove that I husbanded her bed in Florence,
Where yet she never was.
I am wrap•d in dismal thinkings.
Gracious Sovereign.
Whether I have been too blame or no, I know not,
Here's a petition from a Florentine,
Who hath for four or five removes come short,
To tender it her self. I undertook it,
Vanquished thereto by the fair grace and speech
Of the poor suppliant, who by this I know
Is here attending: her business looks in her
With an importing visage, and she told me
In a sweet verbal brief, it did concern
Your Highness with her self.
Ʋpon his many protestations to marry me when his wife was dead, I blush to say it, he won me. Now is the Count Ros∣sillion a Widower, his vows are forfeited to me, and my honours payed to him. Hee stole from Florence, taking no leave, and I follow him to his Country for Justice: Grant it me, O King, in you it best lies, otherwise a seducer floe∣riches, and a poor Maid is undone.
Diana Copilot.
I will buy me a son in Law in a fair, and toule for this. Isle none of him.
The heavens have thought well on thee Lafew,
To bring forth this discovery, seek these suitors:
Go speedily, and bring again the Count.
I am afraid the life of Helen (Lady)
Was foully snatched.
Now justice on the doers.
I wonder sir, sir, wives are monsters to you,
And that you fly them as you swear them Lordship,
Yet you desire to marry. What woman's that?
I am my Lord a wretched Florentine,
Derived from the ancient Copilot,
My suite as I do understand you know,
And therefore know how far I may be pitied.
I am her Mother sir, whose age and honour
Both suffer under this complaint we bring,
And both shall cease, without your remedy.
Come hither Count, do you know these Wo∣men?
My Lord, I neither can nor will deny,
But that I know them, do they charge me further?
Why do you look so strange upon your wife?
She's none of mine my Lord.
If you shall marry
You give away this hand, and that is mine,
You give away heavens vows, and those are mine:
You give away my self, which is known mine:
For I by vow am so embodied yours,
That she which marries you, must marry me,
Either both or none.
your reputation comes too short for my daugh∣la, you are no husband for her.
My Lord, this is a fond and desperate creature,
Whom sometime I have laughed with: Let your highness
Lay a more noble thought upon mine honour,
Then for to think that I would sink it here.
Sir for my thoughts, you have them il to friend,
Till your deeds gain them fairer: prove your honour,
Then in my thought it lies.
Good my Lord,
Ask him upon his oath, if hee do's think
He had not my virginity.
What say thou to her?
She's impudent my Lord,
And was a common gamester to the Camp.
He do's me wrong my Lord: If I were so,
He might have bought me at a common price.
Do not believe him. O behold this Ring,
Whose high respect and rich validity
Did lack a Parallel: yet for all that
He gave it to a Commoner a' th Camp
If I be one.
He blushes, and it is hit:
Of six preceding Ancestors, that Gem
Conferred by testament to 'th sequent issue
Hath it been owed and worn. This is his wife,
That Ring's a thousand proofs.
Me thought you said
You saw one here in Court could witness it.
I did my Lord, but loath am to produce
So bad an instrument, his names Paroles.
I saw the man to day, if man he bee.
Find him, and bring him hither.
What of him:
He's quoted for a most pe fidious slave
With all the spots a' th world, taxed and debauched,
Whose nature sickens: but to speak a truth,
Am I, or that or this for what he'll utter,
That will speak any thing.
She hath that Ring of yours.
I think she has; certain it is I liked her,
And boarded her in th wanton way of youth:
She knew her distance, and did angle for me,
Matting my eagerness with her restraint,
As all impediments in fancies course
Are motives of more fancy, and in fine,
Her insuite coming with her modern grace,
Subdued me to her rate, she got the Ring,
And I had that which any inferior might
At Market price have bought.
I must be patient:
You that have turned off a first so noble wife,
May justly diet me. I pray you yet,
(Since you lack virtue, I will loose a husband)
Send for your Ring, I will return it home,
And give me mine again.
I have it not.
What Ring was yours I pray you?
Sir much like the same upon your finger.
Know you this Ring, this Ring was his of late.
And this was it I gave him being a bed.
The story then goes false, you threw it him
Out of a Casement.
I have spoke the truth.
My Lord, I do confess the ring was hers.
You boggle shrewdly, every feather starts you:
Is this the man you speak of?
I, my Lord.
Tell me sirrah, but tell me true I charge you,
Not fearing the displeasure of your master:
Which on your just proceeding, Isle keep off,
By him and by this woman here, what know you?
So please your Majesty, my master hath bin an honourable Gentleman. Tricks hee hath had in him, which Gentlemen have.
Come, come, to the purpose: Did hee love this woman?
Faith sir he did love her, but how.
How I pray you?
He did love her sir, as a Gent. loves a Woman.
How is that?
He loved her sir, and loved her not.
As thou art a knave and no knave, what an equi∣uocall Companion is this?
I am a poor man, and at your Majesties com∣mand.
Hoe's a good drum my Lord, but a naughty Orator.
Do you know he promised me marriage?
Faith I know more then Isle speak.
But wilt thou not speak all thou know?
Yes so please your Majesty: I did go between them as I said, but more then that he loved her, for in∣deed he was mad for her, and talked of Satan, and of Limbo, and of Furies, and I know not what: yet I was in that credit with them at that time, that I knew of their going to bed, and of other motions, as promising her marriage, and things which would derive me ill will to speak of, therefore I will not speak what I know.
Thou hast spoken all already, unless thou can say they are married, but thou art too fine in thy evidence, therefore stand aside. This Ring you say was yours.
I my good Lord.
Where did you buy it? Or who gave it you?
It was not given me, nor I did not buy it.
Who lent it you?
It was not lent me neither.
Where did you find it then?
I found it not.
If it were yours by none of all these ways,
How could you give it him?
I never gave it him.
This women's an easy glove my Lord, she goes off and on at pleasure.
This Ring was mine, I gave it his first wife.
It might be yours or hers for ought I know.
Take her away, I do not like her now,
To prison with her: and away with him,
Unless thou telst me where thou had this Ring,
Thou die within this hour.
Isle never tell you.
Take her away.
Isle put in bail my liedge.
I think thee now some common Customer.
By Jove if ever I knew man it was you.
Wherefore hast thou accused him al this while.
Because he's guilty, and he is not guilty:
He knows I am no Maid, and he will swear too't:
Isle swear I am a Maid, and he knows not.
Great King I am no strumpet, by my life,
I am either Maid, or else this old mans wife.
She does abuse our ears, to prison with her.
Good mother fetch my bail. Stay Royal sir,
The Jeweller that owes the Ring is sent for,
And he shall surety me. But for this Lord,
Who hath abused me as he knows himself,
Though yet he never harmed me, here I quit him.
He knows himself my bed he hath defiled,
And at that time he got his wife with child:
Dead though she be, she feels her young one kick:
So there's my riddle, one that's dead is quick,
And now behold the meaning.
Is there no exorcist
Beguiles the truer Office of mine eyes?
Is it real that I see?
No my good Lord,
It is but the shadow of a wife you see,
The name, and not the thing.
Both, both, O pardon.
Oh my good Lord, when I was like this Maid,
I found you wondrous kind, there is your Ring,
And look you, hears your letter: this it says,
When from my finger you can get this Ring,
And is by me with child, &amp;c. This is done,
Will you be mine now you are doubly won?
If she my Liege can make me know this clearly,
Isle love her dearly, ever, ever dearly.
If it appear not plain, and prove untrue,
Deadly divorce step between me and you.
O my dear mother do I see you living?
Mine eyes smell Onions, I shall weep anon:
Good Tom Drum lend me a handkercher.
So I thank thee, waite on me home, Isle make sport with thee: Let thy curtsies alone, they are scurvy ones.
Let vs from point to point this story know,
To make the even truth in pleasure flow:
If thou be yet a fresh vncropped flower,
Choose thou thy husband, and Isle pay thy dower.
For I can guess, that by thy honest aid,
Thou keptst a wife her self, thy self a Maid▪
Of that and all the progress more and less,
Resolduedly more leisure shall express:
All yet seems well, and if it end so meet,
The bitter past, more welcome is the sweet.
THe Kings a Beggar, now the Play is done,
All is well ended, if this suite be won,
That you express Content: which we will pay,
With strift to please you, day exceeding day:
Ours be your patience then, and yours our parts,
Your gentle hands lends vs, and take our hearts.

FResh Mayas son, fine witcrafts greatest God,
Herald of heaven, soul charming Mercury:
Tell, for thou witst, why these celestial powers
Are thus assembled in Boeotia.
Plenty srich Queen, cheerer of fainting souls,
Whose Altars are adorned with repent sheaves.
Know that security chief nurse of sin,
Hath bred contempt in all Boeotia.
The old are scorned of the wanton young,
Unhallowed hands, and harts impurer far,
Rend down the Altars sacred to the Gods.
Heaven is long suffering, and eternal Powers
Are full of pity to peruersest men:
which made the awful Ruler of the rest,
Summon this meeting of the heavenly States:
The first was Iupiter, Iuno with him,
Next Mars and Venus, him I know you knew not,
His Harness is converted to soft silk▪
His wars are only wantonings with her,
That scandalizeth heaven and heaps worlds hate,
Apollo next, then Bacchus belly-God,
And horned Vulcan forger of heavens fire,
The last poor Cynthia making woeful moan,
That she is left sweet virgin post alone.
I am but messenger, and must not denounce
Till the high senate of the Gods decreeit,
But sacred Ceres, if I may divine,
In heaven shall Venus vaunt but little time.
So pleased it mighty Jove the doom were just,
Amongst that holy train what needs there lust.
I see a sort of wondering gazing eyes,
That doo await the end of this conceit,
whom Mercury with waving of his rod,
And holy spells inioines to sit and see,
th'effectuall working of a Prophecy.
And Ceres sheds her sweetest swetes in plenty,
That while ye stay their pleasure may content ye.
Now doo I leave thee Mercury, and will into take my place,
Doo what thou can in wanton lusts disgrace.
Ceres I will, and now I am alone
will I advise me of a messenger
That will not faint: will not said I?
Nay shall not faint sent forth by Mercury.
I am resolved, the next I meet with be it he or she,
To doo this message shall be sent by me.
Hey down down a down a down,
hey down down a down a,
Our beauty is the bravest Lass in all the town a▪
For beauties sweet sake, I sleep when I should wake,
she is so nut browne a.
Her cheeks so red as a cherry, do make my hart full merry▪
So that I cannot choose in cobbling of my shoes,
but sing hey derrie derrie down derrie.
Go too Raph you'll still be singing love songs its your fashion.
Content your self wife, tic my own recantation,
No love song neither, but a carol in beauties condemnatiō
well year best leave singing and fall to work by &amp; by
while I to buy meat for our dinner to market doo hie.
And you were best leave your scolding to, &amp; get you a∣way.
And I come to you Raph, Isle course ye as I did a saturday
Course me snowns, I would thou durst come out of door,
And thou dost Isle knock thee on the head thou arrant thou.
was not this lustily spoken? I warrant she dare not come out
Isle see what yeele doo, where are ye goodman Lout?
O no body tell her that I am under the stool.
wheres this prating Ass, this dizzardly fool.
why here I am Dame, lets see what thou can say,
Bestir your Distaff, doo the worst ye may.
Alas that ever I was borne to see this sight,
My Raph is transformed to a wicked spright.
She lies in faith, I am here under the stool.
Let me alone Raph, hold thy peace thou fool▪
I am a sprite indeed, a fiend which will pursue thee still,
Until I take a full revenge of all thy proffered ill▪
And for thy former dealings to thy husband hath bin bad,
I charm thee and enchant thee queen,
Thou henceforth shalt be mad:
And never shall thy foolish brain cut off this frantic fit,
Till with thy hand unwillingly thou murder doe commit.
Nay she is mad enough already,
For she will doe nothing with me but fight,
And ye make his more mad, shele kill me out right.
Make me mad Raph, no faith Raph,
Though thou be a devil and a spright,
Ne'er toll the bell, Isle not be gossippe,
The child shall not be christened to night.
Go to the back-house for the boy,
Bid the tankerd bring the conduit home.
Isle buy no plumme porridge,
Isle not be made such a mom.
And because thou hast a fine rod Raph,
Isle look in thy purse by and by:
And if thou have any money in it,
wele drink the Devil dry, Devil dry, &amp;c.
Out of doubt she is mad indeed,
See what a coil she doth keep,
Raph she shall trouble none of vs, Isle charm her
fast a sleep.
Come Raph, lets go sleep, for thou must mend
Queen Guiniuers shoes to morrow.
I have a pillow of my own, Isle neither beg nor borrow.
So sleep thy fill, now Raph come forth to me.
Come forth quoth he marry God bless vs.
Now you have made my wife mad what shall become of me?
Fear not come forth, I mean no hurt to thee.
Well Isle trust you for once, what say ye.
Raph hie thee home, &amp; thou shalt find upon thy bed
Attire that for a prophets suit shall stand thee in good stead
A prophet thou must be and leave thy work a while.
A Prophet speaker? Ha, ha, ha, here is a coil.
What are you, I pray?
I am Mercury the Messenger of the Gods.
And I am Raph Cobbler, twixt vs there is some odds.
But hear ye God Markedy, have you tetoritie
To take a free man of his company,
And hinder him to be your Prophet speaker,
And when ye set him a work give him nothing for his labour.
I must charm him asleep, or he will still be prating.
Isle please thee well, I pre thee Raph sit down.
Now I am set, would I had a pot of ale.
We will have twain, but first attend my tale.
Not far hence stands Mars his Court,
to whom thus see thou say,
Mars though thou be a Cock of the game,
that wontst to croe by day,
And with thy sharpened spurs
the craven Cocks did kill and slay:
Sith now thou dost but prune thy wings,
and make thy feathers gay:
A dunghill Cock that cross by night,
shall silly thee betray,
And tread thy Hen, and for a time
shall carry her away.
And she by him shall hatch a Chic,
this Country to decay.
And for this pretty Pullets name
thou shalt the better learn:
When thou shalt only letters five
within one name discern,
Three vowels and two consonants,
which vovvels if thou scan,
Doth sound that which to every pa••
conducted every man.
Then call to mind this Prophecy,
for thats the bastards name:
Then rouse thy self, then reach thy sword,
and win thy wonted fame.
Now Raph awake, for I have done
the task for which I came.
Heigh ho, wake quoth you, I think tic time,
for I have slept soundly:
And me thought in my sleep this was God Markedy,
that had chanted my wife mad for good cause why.
Aboue me thought I saw God Shebiter,
that marlously did frown,
With a dart of fire in his hand
ready to throw it down.
Below me thought there were false knaves
walking like honest men very craftily:
And few or none could be plainly seen
to thrive in the world by honesty.
Me thought I saw one that was wondrous fat,
Pick two men's purses while they were striving for a gnat.
And some that dwelt in streets were large and fair,
Kept back shops to utter their baddest ware.
What meddle I with trades? Men masters and maids,
Yea and wives too and all are too too bad,
Be judged by my wife, that was never well till she ran mad.
But O the Baker, how he plaid false with the balance,
And ran away from the takers talents.
The Bruer was as bad, the Butcher as ill,
For its their trick to blow up lean meat with a quill▪
And with the stroke a Butcher gave an ox
that loud bellowing did make,
I lost sight of all the other tricks,
and so suddenly did wake.
But now must Raph trudge about his prophetation,
Faith ye shall hear me troll it out after my fashion.
Thus have I served in my Princes wars,
Against the Persian and the Asian Powers:
The cole-blacke Moore that revels in the Straights
Have I repelled with my loss of blood.
My scars are witness of my hard escapes:
My wrinkles in my face (made old by care,
When yet my years are in their chiefest prime)
Are glasses of my grief, lights of my languor,
That live disgraced, and have deserved honour.
I am the admiredst in Boeotia,
By honouring me thou shalt obtain preferment.
Unto the Gods and Prince doo soldiers honour,
And were thou one of these, I would adore thee.
I am of power more than all the Gods
To sit and rule the harts of all degrees.
They have in me content, as thou shalt see
A present instance in these entering men.
Hail to Contents divinest exelence.
Content our sweetest good, we doo salute thee▪
Though last I am not least in duteous kindness
To thee Content although thou be no God,
Yet greater in account than all of them.
But if ye knew his name were Olygoros, which signifies
Contempt, you would not mistake him, and name him Content.
O Mas scholar be patient, for though you like not my
name, you love my nature: and therefore Gentlemen forward
with the discourse intended at our last meeting: and in that con∣ference
this Gentleman a soldier, I presume will make one.
Being a soldier, his company is fit for any honest gen∣tleman,
and therefore welcome into our company.
I thank you sir.
〈2 pages missing〉
may say to you with some surplusage: my wood they bring
me home, my hay and corn in harvest: their cattle, servants,
sons, and selves, are at my command.
O jure, quaque injury.
Nay and you speak Latin, reach me my last.
Hark ye mas Scholar, harkeye.
The time shall come not long before the doom,
That in despite of Room,
Lat in shall lack,
And Greek shall beg with a wallet at his back.
For all are not sober that goes in black.
Go too scholar, theres a learning for your knack.
At my list can I rack their rents, set them to fines, bind
them to forfets, force them to what I please. If I build, they bee
my labourers: if bargain, on them I build: and for my good
look they are content to endure any travel.
But for all this ill and wrong,
Mark the Cobblers song.
The hie hill and the deep ditch,
Which ye digd to make your selves rich,
The chimneys so many, and alms not any,
The widows woeful cries,
And babes in street that lies,
The bitter sweat and pain
That tenants poor sustain,
Will turn to your bane I tell ye plain,
When burning fire shall rain,
And fill with botch and blaine
The sinew and each vain.
Then these poor that cry,
Being lifted up on hie,
When you are all forlorn,
Shall laugh you loud to scorn.
Then where will be the scholars allegories,
Where the Lawyer with his dilatories,
Where the Courtier with his bravery,
And the money monging mate with all his knavery▪
Bethink me can I no where else,
But in hell where Dives dwells.
But I see ye care not yet,
And think these words for me unfit,
And guess I speak for lack of wit:
Stand aside, stand aside, for I am disposed to spit.
Be quiet Cobbler, lets hear the Scholar speak!
I give him retoritie: to it.
What the Courtier dreamingly possesses, the Coun∣trey
Gentleman with curses, and the Soldier with cares: I
quietly enjoy without control. In my study I contemplate
what can be done in battles, &amp; with my pen hurt more than thou∣sands
doo with pikes, I strike him that sees me not.
I thought you were a proper man of your hands to come
behind one.
I see the height of heaven.
But thou make no hast thither.
I view the depth of hell.
Is there any room in hell for cursed wives and Cobblers
shops.
Content is my landlord, peace and quiet are my
companions, I am not with the Courtier bound to dance at∣tendance;
nor with the Countryman bind I others to attend
on me. I possess pleasure more than mortal, and my con∣templation
is only of the life immortal.
But you would bee glad to creep in credit in the
Court Scholar, and not be curious of the means, for all your
coyness.
I will not acquaint you sir with my intent, for they
are fools that in secret affairs are too familiar, know this, that
I intend to await occasion.
Faith Master Scholar yet it stands not with your
protestation.
Nor with you Soldier to be thus blunt
after your rude fashion.
Alas sir, you must needs be exelent: for Piers &amp; Plain
your poor tenants pray for ye: their bread and cheese is seldom
denied to any, when your small beer is scarce common to ma∣no.
You know what will be made of a fat ox as well as the Gre∣sier,
of the tallow as well as the Butcher, of a tod of wool as
well as the Stapler.
What hath any man to doe what I doe with mine
own?
I alls thine own that comes in thy hands.
Sir you would make enough of it in yours to.
I master Courtier, thats to deal as you doe.
This soldier is as rough as if he were in the field▪
Where you would be as tame.
Has a proud hart though a beggars habit.
Where I frequent this habit serves my turn: and as
goodly a sight were it to see you there in your silks, as the school∣ler
skirmishing in his long gown, or the country Gentleman ri∣ding
on a fat Ox with a mole spade on his neck.
What, riding running, braving, bralling,
I see ye pass not for a Prophets calling:
Therefore I will not bee so mad,
To cast Pearls to swine so bad.
Prithee Raph stay a little.
Little little seeing God, I shall see you in a spittle.
Your disputation being done Gentlemen, which hath
highly contented me? what will ye now doo?
Marry we will all to the eighteen pence Ordinary, how
say ye Gentlemen?
No sir, not I, tic too dear by my faith.
Why you shall be my guest for this once. How say
you master soldier?
No sir I must turn one of your meals into three.
And every one a sufficient banquet for me.
Faith and you had kept your news until now, ye
should have bin my guest▪ for your talk would have served well
for the table.
Thats a practise of thine own art: it makes thy com∣panie
borne withal, where otherwise thou were no fit guest, for
tales at some tables are as good as testerns.
Nay then I perceive ye grow choleric, come sirs,
Why Gentlemen, no farewell to your little God.
Suffice it without vain Ceremonies we show our
selves dutiful.
Tic enough, fare ye well.
Now soldier, what wilt thou doe?
Faith sir as I may.
Wilt thou serve me, and doe as I will thee, and thou
shalt not want.
No: for if thy name be Contempt as the Scholar said,
I abhor and defy thee.
Even as the child doth wormeseed hid in Raisons, which
of it self he cannot brooke: so thou can not abide my name,
but love my nature: for proof, wanting living ra••st on the Ci∣tie,
greeust at the country, yea grudgest at the King himself:
thou say thou art going to thy Patron Mars with a supplication
for bettring thy estate, and how, by war: where how many rapes,
wrongs and murders are committed, thy self be judge, all which
thou esteem not off, so thy own want be supplied.
Contempt herein thou reasonest like thy self,
Base minded men I know there are in field,
That doe delight in murder, rape and blood,
As there are tares in corn and weeds with flowers,
And envious snakes among the fleeting fish:
But for the noble soldier, he is just
To punish wrongs, protect the innocent,
VVeaken the tyrant▪ and confirm the right,
Want cannot make him basely mutinous,
Wealth cannot make him proudly insolent,
In honourable thoughts dwell his content,
And he is foe to all that love contempt.
Then Sateros thou art no mate for me
No, Upstart scorners are fit slaves for thee.
Clio a pen.
Both pen and quill I miss.
One Ostrich pen yet in my penner is,
Quickly take that and make a pen for me.
The feathers of a gluttonous bird show what the
we•rears be.
Melpomine lend me a pen.
Mine pierce too hard for your writing.
Quickly a pen, ha, ha, fond foolish men.
Fool? no fool neither though none of the wisest Dame,
But a Prophet one of Marlins kind I am.
Art thou a Prophet, whats thy name?
Raph Cob.
•er, speak out.
Ye ha it in faith.
A pen a pen in hast,
That I may write this Pageant ere it be past.
Comes there a Pageant by, Isle stand out of the greene
men's way for burning my vestment.
A pen good Clio, fie how ye make me stay.
Make shift awhile you shall have this straight way.
If I had a pen as I have none,
For I use no such tool,
Thou should have none an it,
For at my first coming thou caldst me fool.
A pen a pen, it will be gone incontinent.
Hold theres thy pen.
But are you the Gods of the Scriveners, that you
make pens so fast trow we.
O sisters shift we are betrayed,
Another man I see.
A silly man at your command,
Be not afraid of me.
No, no, tic the soldier, heel doo ye no hurt I war∣rant
ye.
To see a man come in this place,
It is so strange to vs,
As we are to be held excusde,
That are amazed thus.
But art thou a soldier?
Yea Lady.
The better welcome unto me.
Not so to me.
And what am I?
Be whist a while, Isle tell thee by and by.
Thats some mends yet for calling of me fool.
Thanks Ladies for your courtesies, but the sight of three
such Goddesses on the sudden, hath driven me into certain
muses.
certain muses.
Especially being alone so solitary in this wood.
In this wood.
Hark soldier some body mocks thee.
Moss thee.
Mocks me much.
Much.
Hold thy peace good Raph.
Good Raph.
Raph, thats my name indeed,
But how shall I call thee?
I call thee.
Dost thou: Mas and Isle come to thee, and
I knew where thou art.
Thou art.
Art: faith and thou be as pretty a wench as any of these
three, my mad wife shall never know that I play a mad part.
Part.
Part: Isle come.
Come.
Faith and I will, have at thee.
Thus are we well rid of one that would have troubled
our talk• and this artificial echo, hath told thee what we are:
certain muses dwelling in this wood, in number twice so many
more as we be here.
Your names good Ladies?
Mine Melpomine, hers Clio, this that writes Thalia.
Might I without offence entreat three things,
I should be greatly bound.
We will not deny thee three things, that can partici∣pate
to thee thousands.
First would I request of this Lady, whether she write
with this Ostrich quill of purpose, or for want of other.
Somewhat for want, but especially of purpose: the men
which now doe minister me matter to write, are ne'er of the na∣ture
of the Ostrich: who having the body of a bird, hath the
head of a beast: she is greedy, devouring and disgesting al things,
and builds his nest in sand: so are my worldlings, bodied and
feathered as birds to fly to heaven, but headed as beasts to ima∣gin
beastly things on earth: down to the which their Cam∣mels
necks doe draw their very noses: greedy are they deuou∣ring
the Orphans right, and disgesting the widows wrongs,
Foolish, forgetful and froward, building their nest on sand, which
the wind of heavens wrath or water of worldly affliction doth
scatter and wash away. Thus art thou answered for the first, de∣maund
the rest.
Next Ladies why doo you twain stand idle,
and let Thalia take the pain.
On geeres and gests the world is only set,
For me there is no work no tragic s•en,
Battles are done, the people live in rest,
They shed no tears but are secure past mean.
Why lend you not Thalia then some pens?
My pens are too too sharpe to fit his stile,
I shall have time to use them in a while.
But gentle Clio, me thinks your ink is dry.
It may be well, I have done writing I,
What did you register when you did write?
The works of famous Kings, and sacred Priests,
The honourable Acts of •eaders brave,
The deeds of Codri, and Horatij.
The love Licurgus bore to Spartans state,
The lives of ancient Sages and their saws,
Their memorable works, their worthy laws.
Now there is no such thing for to indite
But toys, that fits Thalia for to write.
A heavy tale good Lady you unfold,
Are there no worthy things to write as were of old.
Yes divers Princes make good laws,
But most men over slip them.
And divers dying give good gifts,
But their executors nip them.
Tisiphone is stepping to the stage, and she hath sworn
to whip them.
The third and last thing I require is if you can:
show me the mighty Mats his court.
VValke hence a slight shoot up the hill,
And thou shalt see his castle wall.
Ladies the gifts that I can give,
Is humbly thrice to thank you all.
Farewell pore soldier.
Thalia now wee are alone, tel vs what pageant it was you
called for pens even now so hastily, to end?
It was thus: You know the Gods long since sent down,
Pleasure from heaven to comfort men on earth,
Pleasure abused in country Court and town,
By speeches, gestures, and dishonest mirth,
Made humble suit that he to heaven might pass
Again, from world where he so wronged was.
His suit obtained, and ready he to clime,
Sorrow comes sneaking and performs his deed,
Snatches his Robe, and ever since that time,
Tic pain that masks disguised in pleasures weed▪
The Pageant's thus, with cost and cunning trim,
That worldlings welcome Pain in steed of him.
Loath was I that vnpend one jot of this should go,
Because I smile to see for weal, how sweetly men swill woe.
Woe is the first word I must write, beginning where
you end.
I have ink enough and pens good store.
Perhaps the world will mend.
I would it would.
Why if it should you fail in your account.
Then you perhaps will have some work.
Tush come lets mount the Mount.
VVaha how, wa how, holla how whoop: Did no body
see the mocking sprite, I am sure I have followed her up and
down all this day crying and calling while my throat is hoarse
again. Isle conjure her too but tic in vain, for knowledge hath
knocked that in the brain, but be it devil or be it spright, Isle call
again to have a sight. Ya ha how: Nay Isle call again.
Again, I and again too, I trow,
What night and day no rest but row?
Come if thou wilt go over Styx,
For if thou stay a while I think,
There will come so many my boat will sink,
Over styx I and over stones,
Here is a question for the nonce,
Why what art thou I pray thee tell?
Why Charon Ferriman of hell.
Why what a devil doo I with thee?
Three or four within: A boat, a boat, a boat.
Hark what a coil they keep, come if thou wilt to hell
with me.
A boat, a boat, a boat.
This should bee the voice of a woman, comes women
thither too.
why men &amp; women every hour, I know not what to do.
A Boat, a Boat, a Boat.
This should be the voice of some great man.
Why Popes and Prelates, Princes and Judges more than
I number can,
But the covetous misers they fret me to the gall,
I think they bring their money to hell,
For they way the devil and all.
Mas and may well be, for theres little money stirring on
the earth.
Charon a boat, a boat, Isle pay thee well for
thy hire.
Why what art thou that makst such hast?
The Ghost of a gray Friar.
So troubled with Nuns as never Friar was,
Therefore good Charon let me be first,
That over the Ford shall pas.
Come sir, thou hearst what a calling they keep wilt thou
go?
Why Charon this calling makes thee mad I guess,
Why I am no spirit but living Raph,
And God Markedie sends me of business.
Tush, if thou be sent of God, we cannot hold thee farewell.
Yet gentle Charon carry me?
Thee? Why what art thou, that living suest to go to hell?
The wretchedest man of wretches most that in this
wretched world doth dwell:
Despised, disdained, starved, whipped and scorned,
Pressed through despair my se•fe to quell,
I therefore covet to behold if greater torment be in hell:
All the voices, A boat, a boat, a boat.
I come, I come.
Nay I prithee let them tarry and harken to the pore.
Codrus I cannot help thee now, and yet I wish thee well,
Theres scarcely room enough for rich,
So that no pore can come to hell.
But when the ditch is dug down as clean as is the wall
That parted hell and purgatory, then if thou chance to cal:
Because I see as thou art pore thou art impatient,
To carry thee quickly unto hell Codrus •le be content.
And now the time will not bee long, for theirs commission gone▪
For workemē, that have power to make Elysium &amp; Limbo one,
And there are shipwrights sent for too, to build me up a bigger boat,
A boat said I? nay awhole hulk:
And that the same may safely flote,
Cocytus, Lethe, Phlegecon
Shall al be dug into Styx:
For where one wont to come to hell,
I tel thee now comes five or six.
For ignorance that wont to be,
Is wilful blindness now become.
So thou must come when room is made,
I tel thee yet there is no room.
I pre thee tel me one thing.
That I will Raph whats the matter?
Charon why doth thy face look so black, and thou use
so much the water?
O, night was my mother, this is his mark,
I cannot wash it off. Codrus farrow•l.
Charon Adieu.
Botesman?
High.
Theres a scoff, thats a waterman indeed.
Well I must to God Mars for all this,
I would I could meet my soldier again.
Even as the Eagle soars against the sun,
And spite of Phoebus shine, pries in his face:
Even as the swordfish meets the mighty Whale,
And puts the huge monster to disgrace,
So Emnius thoughts intending to aspire
Sore against the sun, and fleet in wrathful ire:
The Duke the sun that dazzles Emnius eyes,
The Duke the huge Whale that ouer-beares me,
But I will gaze and blind him too ere long,
And play the swordfish though he little fears me.
The less suspected sooner shall I strike him,
And this my reason is for I mislike him
His Daughter with enticing words is won mine own,
But I disdain her were she fairer far:
Tush tic for rule I cast and Princely throne,
The state of Prince, brighter than brightest star.
And who doth hinder Emnius but the Duke?
And therefore who should perish but the Duke?
Shortly a solemn hunting he entends,
And who but I•s put in chie•est trust?
Well Isle be trusty if my Pistol hold,
In love and kingdoms Jove will prove unjust.
He dead, I wed his Heir and only Daughter,
And so shall win a Crown by one mans slaughter.
Suppose he have been kind, liberal and free,
Why I confess it, but its my desire,
To be as able to bestow as hee,
And till I can my hart consumes in fire.
O sovereign glory, chiefest earthly good,
A Crown! to which who would not wade through blood.
Then ruthless of his life doo I resolve.
To wait my time till I have wrought his end,
He dies, the Duke shall die, and Emnius reign,
Were he my father or a dearer friend.
Tears shall not hinder, prayers shall not entreat me,
But in his throne by blood I soon will seat me.
Art thou one of God Mars his train?
Alas good father thou art lame,
To be a soldier far vnlustie,
Thy beard is gray thy armour rusty▪
Thy bill I think be broken too.
Friend make not thou so much ado•,
My lameness comes by war,
My armours rustiness comes by peace,
A maimed soldier made Mars his Porter,
Lo this am I: now questioning cease.
And what are you? A Painter with your pencil and
your colours brave?
No Painter but a Herald sirrha to decipher a Gentle∣man
from a knave.
Pray sir, can ye Gentleman and knave it both in one
man, and ye can sir, I pray you doo it in me.
Indeed I cannot in thy self,
For all is knave that is in thee.
Sing one two and three, sing after me,
And so shall we right well agree.
Sir take no heed what he doth say,
His foolish humour you doo see,
But tell me pray are you a Herald.
I am.
I should have rather took you to have been,
Appeals prentice, you were with colours so provided.
In ancient times have Heralds been esteemed,
And held companions for the greatest Kings.
Augustus Caesar made a law, so did Antonius too,
That without Heralds grave advice Princes should nothing
doo.
Well then was then, these times are as they be.
We now are fine to wait who grows to wealth,
And come to bear some office in a town.
And we for money help them unto Arms,
For what cannot the golden tempter doe?
A lamentable thing it is, but tell vs I entreat,
Where might we find adored Mars.
From hence sir you to Venus Court must pass,
Down the hill, the way is steep, smooth, sleek as any glass▪
Go by the door of Dalliance, and if you there him mis
Ask Niceness for she best can tell where his fair Lady is?
Both day and night the doors are op,
The strongest closet door is but of feathers made,
Rush boldly in, stand not to ask and never be afraid.
At Venus Court sir doe you say that Mars is to be found?
Gentleman we have told ye truth although unto our
harts it be a wound,
For searching as wee bid you sir,
No doubt a wondrous hap,
But you shall find God Mars a sleep,
On Lady Venus lap.
This one thing more, you cannot come
The way you thither pass:
Tic dangerous, the hills too sleep and slippery all as glass.
Take this of me, the fairest way from Venus Court is beggary.
There are more ways, but they are worse and threaten more ex∣treamitie.
I thats for such as thither pass,
Of pleasure and of will:
But these for other purpose go,
Doubt therefore sir no ill.
I thank you both that have vs warned by your skill.
I and Isle end with a Prophecy for your good will:
You think it is a pleasant jest,
To tell the times of peace and rest,
But hee that lives to ninety nine,
Into the hundreds shall decline,
Then shall they speak of a strange time:
For it will be a wondrous thing,
To see a Carter lodge with a King.
Towns shall be unpeopled seen,
And markets made upon the greene:
This will be as true I tell ye all,
As Cobblers use the thread and nil.
And so because that all men are but mortar,
I leave the paltry Herald and the Porter.
I pre thee come away, Gentlemen with thanks I take
my leave.
Adieu good sit.
Farewell unto you both.
Come Lady Love, now bore we Mars, thou mine I thine
beloude.
Ah my Contempt it will be spied too soon,
So shall our pleasures have a bitter end.
Provide some place for I am big with child,
And clean undone if Mars my guilt espy.
Sweet Venus be assured, I have that care
But you perchance will coylie scorn the place.
What its some Abbie or a Munnerie?
No they abound with much hypocrisy.
Is it a Gentleman's or a Farmers house?
Too much resort would there bewray your being.
Some Husbandmands, some Inn, some cleanly ale-house.
Neither of these, a Spittle lovely Love.
What where foul Lazers and loathed Lepors lie,
Their stink will chooke thy Venus and his babe.
Why gentle Venus I entreat ye be not over nice,
What think ye as the Proverb goes that beggars have no lice?
Proctors them selves in every Spittle house,
Have things as neat, as men of more account.
But I have seen even very mean men's wives,
Against their child-birth so provide for,
As all their husbands wealth was scarce the worth
Of the fine linnin used in that month.
And shall not Venus be as kindly used.
It must be as we may, Isle go provided
And spy my time slily to steal thee hence.
Away for Mars is come,
Welcome God Mars, where hath my love bin all this while?
Walking about th garden time for to beguile.
Whereas between nisenes your maid &amp; newfangle your man,
I heard such sport as for your part, would you had bin there than.
Quoth niceness to new fangle thou art such a Jack,
That thou deuisest forty fashions for my Ladies back.
And thou quoth he art so possessed with every fantike toy,
That following of my Ladies humour thou dost make his coy,
For once a day for fashion sake my Lady must be sick,
No meat but mutton or at most the pinion of a chic,
To day his own hair best becomes which yellow is as gold,
A periwigs better for to morrow, blacker to behod.
To day in pumps and cheverel gloves, to walk she will be bold.
To morrow cuffs and countenance for fear of catching cold.
Now is she barefaced to be seen, straight on his muffler goes,
Now is she huffed up to the crown, straight nulled to the nose.
These seven years trust me better sport I heard not to my mind▪
The Dialogue done, then down came I my Lady Love to find.
And thou hast found his all alone, half sickly by ill hap
Sit for a while Mars and lay thy head upon my lap,
I see my folks behind my back have much good talk of me.
And so they have.
They are too Idle: soft Mars doe you see,
I see some saucy mates press in: Now sirs what
would you have?
Be not offended sir, we seek God Mars.
Why and Mars have you found sir, whats your will
with him?
Are you he I cry you mercy, I promise you I took you
for a morris dancer you are so trim.
What says the villain?
If thou be Mars, the cause which makes me doubt, is that I see
thy body lapped in soft silk which was wont to bee clad in hard
steel, and thy head so childishly laid on a women's lap. Pardon
I humbly beseech thee, the plains of thy poor servant, and
vouchsafe to read my poor petition.
Rough shaped soldier enemy to love,
Why dost thou thirst so much for bloody war,
wherein the strong man by a stronger quilt,
Or reached far off by dastard darters arm,
Breathes forth his spirit with a bootless cry,
Leaving behind •is earths anatomy:
By war the Infant trampled under steeds,
Holds to his mother out his feeble hand,
And she is ravished while his yongling bleeds.
Yet to abide deaths stroke doth quaking stand.
The twice forced virgin like the wounded lamb,
Dejected at the mercy of the woolfe,
Holds up his throat in vain to bloody men,
That will not kill his while his beauty stays,
But stab her when her tears her fair decays:
Away thou bloody man, vex not my Lord,
By war true love is hindered and undone,
And Ladies laps left empty of their loves,
whose heads did beautify their tender knees.
You need not plain your laps full enough:
Fair Venus be propitious I will fight
To maintain true love and defend the right,
On that condition soldier I am won,
Receive this favour, Mars let it be done.
Sateros, I have received thy supplication, and sorrow
I cannot as I would give thee immediate comfort. If I should
oppose my self against the Gods, they would soon set fire on
my seat, Six double vs there are, three at liberty, three impriso∣ned,
and one their keeper: at liberty, wiliness, wrong and wan∣tonnes,
in prison, are war wreak and woe, their keeper is won∣der;
who once giving way to liberty for those he holds; shall set
thee and thy fellows on work: in mean time go thou to the
Duke of Booetia, commend vs to him, when he can he will im∣ploy
thee I am sure, let that be thy answer for this time, and so
good Sateros be contented.
I humbly take my leave adored Mars,
Prove a good night Raven Venus I entreat.
Farewell pore soldier wear that for my sake▪
Of both your Godheads duteous leave I take.
And when go you sir?
Who I? Good Lord there hangs a matter by.
why what are you? get gone or I will send thee gone▪
I pray you bear a while, gentle master mine,
And you shall hear my in speech I warrant?
Go too sir fool, lets hear what you can say.
And shall I warrant ye to your cost my Lady do-little▪
Mars though thou be a Cock of the game,
that wontst to croe by day,
And with thy sharpened spurs
the craven Cocks did kill and s•ay:
Sith now thou dost but prune thy wings,
and make thy feathers gay:
A dunghill Cock that cross by night,
shall silly thee betray,
And tread thy Hen, and for a time
shall carry her away.
And she by him shall hatch a Chic,
this Country to decay.
And for this pretty Pullets name
thou shalt the better learn:
When thou shalt only letters fin•
within one name discern,
Three vowels and two consonants,
which vovvels if thou scan,
Doth sound that which to every place
conducted every man.
Then call to mind this Prophecy,
for thats the bastards name:
Then rouse thy self, then reach thy sword,
and win thy wonted fame.
Now have I done the task for which I came,
And so farewell fine Master and nice Dame.
A dunghill cock to tread my hen?
Break forth ye hangrie powers,
And fill the world with bloodshed and with rage.
My Lord, my Love.
Venus I am abused.
Why will ye trust a fool when he shall speak,
And take his words to be as Oracles?
But hee hath tushed me near, and Isle revenge.
Aye me!
Revenge true Lovers wrongs immortal powers,
And ne'er let Lady trust a souldiet.
Why faintst thou Venus? why art thou distressed?
Look up my love, speak Venus, speak to me.
Nay let me die, sith Mars hath wronged me.
Thou hast not wronged me, Mars believes it not.
Yes, yes, base Cobblers utter Oracles,
And al are sooth fast words against pore Love,
I will believe no words, they are all false:
Only my Venus is as bright as heaven,
And firmer than the poles that hold up heaven.
Now comes your love too late, first have you slain
Her whom your honey words cannot recur again.
I will doe penance on my knees to thee,
And beg a kiss, that have bin so unkind,
And know you not, unkindness kills a woman?
I know it doth? sweet forgive my fault:
I will forgive ye now ye beg so hard,
But trust me next time Isle not be entreated.
Now hast thou cheard my drooping thoughts sweet love,
Let me lay down my head upon thy knee,
Sing one sweet song, thy voice will ravish me.
Folly come forth.
Anon forsooth.
Bid Niceness, New fangle, Dalliance and the rest bring
forth their Music Mars intends to sleep.
I will forsooth.
I think in deed that I shall quickly sleep,
Especially with Music and with song.
Sweet are the thoughts that harbour full content,
Delight full be the joys that know no care:
The sleeps are sound that are from dreams exempt,
Yet in chief svveetes lies hid a secret snare,
Where love is wacht by prying jealous eyes,
It fits the loved to be wary wise.
Peep, peep, Madam he is a sleep▪
Sleep on secure, let care not tush thy hart,
Leave to love his, that longs to live in change,
So wantons deal, when they their fairs impart
Rome thou abroad for I intend to range:
Yet wantons learn to guide your rolling eyes,
As no suspect by gazing may arise.
Hold on your Music, Folly leave thy play,
Come hither lay his head upon thy knee.
Fie what a loathed load was he to me.
Come my Content, lets dance about the place,
And mock God Mars unto his sleepy face.
Venus agreed, play vs a Galliard.
Why sings not Venus? his love I to hear,
Sweet let the Fife be further from mine ear,
Nay let the Fife play, else the Music fails.
What still so ne'er my ear, sweet Venus sing.
where is she?
Out fool, what doos my head upon thy knee?
Forsooth my Mistress bid me.
Wheres Venus, speak ye ribalds, harlots, fool••,
And never speak again except I see his:
Mars is impatient, find out Venus soon.
Or perrish slaves, before my angry wrath.
Nay a lady, Folly will live for all you.
Away ye fool, tell Venus of my rage.
And bid his come to Mars that now begins,
To doubt the Cobblers Prophecy.
My Lord we cannot find his any where.
Hence villains, seek the garden, search each place,
Mars will not suffer such abhord disgrace.
Wheres Venus Folly, prithee tell me fool?
Forsooth shees lun away wid a man called Contempt.
What hath Contempt robbed mighty Mars of love?
Hence fools and flatterers, fly you from my sight.
Mars with a kindled fire begins to burn,
Away ye hell hounds, Ministers of shame,
Vanish like smoke, for you are lighter far,
Against wantonness proclaim I open war.
Inconstant women I accuse your sex,
Of Folly, lightness, treachery and fraud,
You are the scum of ill, the scorn of good,
The plague of mankind, and the wrath of heaven,
The cause of envy, anger, murder, war,
By you the peopled towns are deserts made:
The deserts filled with horror and distress.
You laugh Hiena like, weep as the Crocodile,
One ruin brings your sorrow and your smile,
Hold on in lighnes, lust hath kindled fire,
The trumpets clang and roaring noise of Drums,
Shall drown the echoes of your weeping cries,
And powders smoke dim your enticing eyes.
These wanton ornaments for mockers fit,
Will Mars leave off, and suit himself in steel,
And strumpet Venus with that vile Contempt.
I will pursue unto the depth of hell.
Away with pity, welcome Ire and Rage,
Which nought but Venus ruin shall assuage.
Well doe I like your reasoning Gentlemen,
You for your learning, Sa•eros for Act,
The learned is preferred, the soldier shall not want,
But Sateros, ye must forbear a while,
I cannot yet employ ye as I would:
Mean time attend the Court you shall have pay
To my ability and your content.
Thanks to your highness.
Scholar lead him in.
Be kind to him he is a soldier.
Attend upon vs to our hunting Sateros,
We must have pleasant war anon with beasts.
When will these fellows make an end.
Depart my friends, I have a little business
With this pore man that doth attend to speak with me.
Fellow what is it thou wilt now reveal?
You are the Duke of all this land,
And this I wish ye understand;
That Princes give to many bred
Which wish them shorter by the head.
You have a Courtier Emnius named,
whose flattering tongue hath many blamed.
He lowteth low doth fawn and kneel,
Your worthy meaning for to feel.
And quaintly romes your person no,
willing to see it fall and die.
You have a Daughter fair and trim,
He loves her and she loves him.
Yet as the Fox doth win the Kid,
So are his secret treasons hid:
He dares not once his passions move,
For fear your highness should reprove.
Yet is it not your Daughter dear,
That he desires so fair and clear:
He covets your dignity,
And therefore this intends hee.
Today you mean to hunt in wood,
And for he doth pretend no good:
He hath with shot intended ill,
And means your noble Grace to kill:
I that desire for to explain,
The manner of your Graces pain.
Give counsel ere the deed be done,
That you may al deceiving shun:
I see that Emnius comes no,
My protestation quickly try.
And if you find as I have said,
That you should be by him betrayed:
Remember Raph the Cobbling knave,
You warning of this mischief gave,
So leave I you to search the slave.
My honourable Lord, the train attends,
All things are ready for your highness sport:
And I am sent from other of estate.
To pray your Grace to hast your wonted presence.
Emnius they must attend a while,
For I have secrets to impart with thee:
Say on my Honourable Lord to me.
Thou •••wit we must unto the wood.
True my most Gracious Lord.
Suppose there were a traitrous foe of mine,
What would thou doe to rid me from my fear?
Die on the traitor, and prepare his grave,
Before he should one thought of comfort have.
But tell me Emnius, did thou see a tree,
That bore fair fruit delighting to the eye,
And by the straightness of the trunk they grow too hie▪
would thou oppose thy self against the tree,
And work the downfall ere the fall should be.
I would regard no hight to claim the fruit
That should content me, but attempt to clime
The highest top of hight, or fall to death,
Alone and naked to obtain my will.
I am right joyous you are so resolude,
Such Courtiers should become a noble Prince.
But tell me Emnius had I any foe,
That secretly attempted my distress,
what secret weapon have ye to prevent?
Only my sword my Lord, that is my rest,
My resolution to defend your Grace.
And have you not a Dag to help me too.
A Dag my Lord?
I mand ••ie it not,
I know ye have a Dag prepared for me.
I have a Dag not for your Majesty.
Yes Emnius pour thy self into thy self,
And let thy own eyes be thy harts true witness.
worst thou this Dag to injure any beast?
Bear thou these bullets for a foemans life?
Or art thou bent against thy loyal Lord,
•o reeve his life that gives thee life and breath?
Against beasts my Lord doth Emnius like to deal,
He is not so beastly and abhominate,
As he delights to joy in treachery,
So smiles Hiena, when she will be guile,
And so with tears deceives the Crocodile.
Are not these tools prepared for my end?
Speak ill intending man, Ah Emnius?
Have I for this maintained thy estate,
Afforded all the favours I could yield,
To be rewarded with ingratitude,
with murder, treachery, and these attempts?
And all in hope to win my realm and child.
I will not show thy sin unto the world,
But as thou did intend, so shalt thou fall.
Receive thy death, desertfull man of death,
And perrish all thy treacherous thoughts with thee.
welcome my death, desertfull I confess,
Heavens Pardon my intent, your highness bless.
Heavens pardon thy intent, and so doe I,
Be true hereafter, now thou shalt not die.
Come follow vs Emnius, learn to know this lore,
Murder of meanest men brings shame, of Princes more.
O that same Cobbling Rogue that raving runs,
And matting aims at every hid intent,
Reueald this practise, but Isle stab the slave,
•nd he once dead the Dukes death will I have.
Be it known unto all people, that whereas Venus alias
lust, hath long challenged a pre-eminence in heaven, and been
adored with the name of a Goddess, the Sinode of the Gods
being assembled, in regard of his adulteries with Mars, disco∣red
by Phoebus, when in the face of heaven, they hoth were ta∣ken
in an iron net: wherein his wrong to Vulcan was apparent;
and since that, many other escapes considered. But lastly and
most especially, her public adultery she hath committed with
that base monster Contempt they have all consented, and to this
decree firmed; that no more shall Venus possess the title of a
Goddess, but be utterly excluded the compass of heaven: and
it shall be taken as great indignity to the Gods to give Venus a∣ny
other title than the detested name of lust, or strumpet Venus:
And whosoever shall adore Contempt or entertain him, shall be
reputed an enemy to the Gods. More, it is decreed that war
shall be raised against Booetia, and victory shall not fall on their
side, till the Cabin of Contempt be consumed with fire. Given
at Olimpus by Iupiter and the celestial Synod.
Ill tidings for my Lady these.
Ill news pore babe for thee.
What who are these?
I take ye to bee two of Venus virgins, are ye not?
Faith she is a pure virgin indeed,
For the child she had by Venus chaplin,
Is a big boy and follows the Father.
And so are you a maid too, are ye not?
For the girl you had by Mars his Captain,
Shees dead, and troubles not the Mother.
Then I perceive ye be both maids for the most part,
well for our maidenheads it skill not much.
For in the world I know are many such.
I Mercury I pray let that go,
wee are fair Venus maids, no more but so.
And in our Ladies cause we doe entreat
To know, if that be true thou did proclaim?
Or was it spoken but of policy,
To fright vs whom thou knew to be her maids.
As true as neither of you both are maids
So true it is, that I have uttered.
The sentence is set down, Venus exiled,
Aim poor babe for thee.
Whose child is that you bear so tenderly?
My Ladies child, begotten by contempt.
O is it so, and whether bear you it?
To nurse.
To whom?
Unto security.
Is it a boy or girl, I pray ye tell?
A girl it is.
Who were the godmothers?
We two are they.
Your names I crave.
Mine Rue and hers is Ina.
And whether name I pray ye bears the girl?
Both hers and mine.
And who is godfather?
Ingratitude that is likewise the grandfather.
Ruin otherwise called Ruin the child,
Contempt the father, Venus alias lust the mother,
Rue and Ina the godmother•,
Ingratitude the Oodfather and grandfather,
And Security the nurse,
Hears a brood that all Booetia shall curse.
Well damsels hie you hence, for one is coming nigh
Will tread your young one under foot.
Tic Mars, O let vs fly.
Now Mars thou seem like thy self,
Thy women's weeds cast off,
Which made thee be in heaven a scorn,
On earth a common scoff.
O Mercury how am I bound to thee,
That blazest forth this strumpets just reproof?
O could I find the harlot or her brood,
I would revenge me of indignities:
Now Mercury, I mind a prophecy
A simple fellow brought me on a day,
When wantoning upon her knee I lay,
How that a craven cock should tread my•e•,
And she should hatch a chic this country to dec•y,
The bastards name he told me too,
But it was riddle-wise,
Help me to search it Mercury,
I know thee quick and wise,
When I should only in a word
Five letters just discern
Three vowels and two consonants,
The name I soon should learn:
But those same vowels hee did bid▪
That I should duly scan,
And they would signify the way
That guides every man.
Hast thou not heard of such a thing?
Yes, and did send that prophecy,
And even as thou came hither
The bastard and the godmothers
Were in this place together.
Were they in deed, where are they now?
Isle search, Isle follow them.
Be patient Mars, they will be quickly found▪
Ruin is the bastards name. R.N. the consonants,
V. •. and A. the vowels be, and Via is the way.
Now have I found it Mercury, thou hast resolved 〈◊〉
I will raise war, I will aduenged bee,
Go with me Mercury, thou my revenge shalt see.
I will go and do my best for thee.
Tic true ô Duke, that I do say,
He still would make thy lie•• away,
He is too frolic and too lusty,
Thou too simple and too trusty,
Wars shall in thy land begin,
For pride, contempt, and other sin,
Nothing shall appease heavens ire,
Till the cabin of Contēpt be set on fire
And wantonness with lewd desire,
Be trampled under foot as mire,
The Cobbler has no more to say,
But for the peoples sins, good princes oft are ta•e away.
Well, God a mercy fellow, go thou in.
He raves my Lord, its ill advised of you
To suffer him so near your princely excellence.
His presence breeds me no offence.
What Raph, Raph, so fine you will not know your wife
What a gilden sword and a silver knife?
There, there Raph put it up.
Why so?
What so? Why where am I?
Faith where ye ha made a fair piece of work.
Lay hold on them, what violence is this,
To have one murdered even before our presence?
What cause had thou to kill this Gentleman?
None in the world, I never knew him I.
No faith shees mad, &amp; has been ever since I was
a prophet, and cause she saw a dagger without a sheath,
she even put it up in his belly.
Why what acquaintance hast thou with this womā?
O Lord sir, she has bin acquainted with me a great
while, with mine ears, with every part of me, why tic my
wife.
The likelier may it like your grace of his consent,
It were good they both did suffer punishment.
Commit them both, but she has long bin mad,
It may be heaven reserved her to this end.
Come sir, you and your wise must go to ward,
Till you be tried for clearness or con•ent.
O sir, whether you will I am content,
God Merkedy has served me prettily,
Has made my wife mad, and said she should not be well,
Till by her hand a traitor fell,
And I must even be hanged for company.
I doe not guess the woman guilty of this crime,
But the just heavens in their severity,
Have wrought this wreak for Ennius treachery.
Here is a messenger my gracious Lord,
That brings ill tidings to your quiet state.
What are they fellow, let vs hear thē speak. Spare not
The Argiues and the men of Thessaly,
With mighty powers are come upon your coast,
They burn, wast, spoil, kill, murder, make no spare,
Of feeble age, or harmless infant youth,
They vow to triumph in Booetia,
And make your Highness vassal to their will,
They threaten mightily, their power is mighty,
The people fall before them as the flowering grass
The mower with his sith cuts in the mead,
Help your poor people, and defend your state,
Else you, they, it, will soon be ruinate.
I will provide as far as heavenly powers,
And our abilities shall give consents;
Isle to the temple and power forth my prayers,
Mean while let Sateros be called for,
To muster up the people with all speed,
Now see I that this simple wetted man,
This poor plain Cobbler truly did divine,
The Gods when we refuse the common means
Sent by their oracles and learned priests,
Raise up some man contemptible and vile,
In whom they breath the pureness of their spirits,
And make him bold to speak and prophecy.
Welcome friend Sateros, you are fitly come,
The Duke intends that you shall lead to field
The powers of Boaetia against his foes,
Are you prepared, and willingly resolved?
Why you s• by your pen can do as well
I know tic nothing but Facsimile.
Soldier, stand not on that, discharge your duty,
The country needs our service and our counsel,
Isle doo my best, and do you your endeavour,
For public quiet and Booetias honour.
Well I forget your scorns given me in peace,
And rate all envy at an humble price,
Isle doe my duty, doe not you neglect,
Arms will not Art, Art should not arms reject.
A blessed concord, I will to the Duke,
And leave thee Sateros to thy glorious war.
O sir, I have bin seeking ye all day,
And greatly do I praise my fortune thus to meet ye.
In good time sir, be brief I pray.
You do remember me I hope.
Not very well I promise ye.
Lord sir, and you bee advised, I was one of them
that reasoned before contempt, when you defended war,
another a•te, one the court, and I the country.
I remember in deed such a reasoning, before that
vile monster Contempt, but you I have forgot.
O Lord sir yes, by that token we went afterword
to the Ordinary.
True, true, now I call ye mind, by this token I was
not able to reach commons, and so was cashiered out of
your company.
It was against my will In faith: ye saw I was ano∣there
mans guest.
Its no great matter. But whats your business with
me now, that you seek for me so hastily?
Marie sir there is wars toward, do ye not hear
on it?
Thats to too sure.
And I fear by reason of my wealth I shall bee
chosen for a Captain over some Companies.
And what of that?
Why I have no skill, and therefore would hire
you to serve in my place. Isle please ye well.
The Duke wants men sir, and therefore must ye
serve your self, though not as a captain, yet in a place fit∣ting
your person. You offer me money, why man Isle deal
kindly with ye, ye shall have some of me, bear take it, be not
nice. In the Dukes name I charge ye with horse and furni∣tu•e
to be ready to morrow by break of day, for the busi∣nes
asks speed.
But I hope ye will not deal so with me?
But I am sure I will, therefore dispatch on peril of
your life.
Why what alife is this, that such as I must serve?
Ashame on wars for me that ere they were.
Why now fellows, what are you?
What soldier, do not you know me?
Yes Raph but what are these?
Faith certain pu-fellowes of mine, that have bin
mued up, &amp; now the exclamation goes we shall have wars,
we are all set at liberty, and sent to you to be traild up.
Why were in prison?
I faith I prophesied so long, that I had like to have
bin hanged. My wife kilt the courtier man, that would have
kilt me &amp; the Duke to, but Isle be a prophet no longer thats
flat, after I have done being a soldier, Isle to cobbling a∣gain.
So doest thou well: But fellow tell me why were
thou in.
Faith sir for nothing but riding another mans horse.
That was but a small matter.
A thing of nothing, for when he had stolen him,
he were as good ride him as lead him in his hand.
Faith thats even the truth on it.
I think you all have bin of such condition▪
But now betake you to another course,
The Duke hath given you life and liberty,
Where otherwise your deed• deserved death,
If now you doo offend under my charge,
Look for no favour but the martial law,
Death on the next tree without all remission,
And if ye like not this I will return ye
From whence ye came to bide the doom of law,
Speak, will ye live and serve as true men should?
I, I, I.
I am sure ye take me for none of they number.
No Raph, thou shalt be still with me,
I have an host of worthy soldiers
Ready to march, to them now will I go,
Heavens and good fortune quell our furious foe.
Away thou strumpet, scandal of the world,
Cause of my sorrow, author of thy shame,
Follow me not, but wander where thou wilt,
In uncouth places loathed of the light,
Fit shroud to hide thy lustful body in,
Whose faire's distained with foul adulterous sin.
Ah my Content, prove not so much unkind,
To fly and leave thy love alone behind,
I will go with thee into hollow caves,
To desert to the dens of furious beasts,
I will descend with thee unto the grave,
Look on me love let me some comfort have.
Contempt still turns from Venus.
What not a word to comfort me in wo?
No look to give my dying heart some life?
Nothing but frowns, but lours, but scorns, disdains?
Woe to my pleasures that have brought these pains.
Have I for this set light the God of war,
Against whose frowns nor death nor heaven can stand,
Have I for this procured the angry Gods
To make me exile from all blessedness.
Have I for this lost honour and renown,
Become a scandal to the vulgar world,
And thus to be repaid• ah break my hart,
Had all these evils fallen upon my head,
And millions of more harms than heaven could heap,
Yet all were nothing, had not my Content,
Rewarded me thus vilely with Contempt.
Shape of co•lusion, mirror of deceit,
Fair form with foul deformities defiled.
Know that I am Contempt in nature scornful,
Foe to thy good, and fatal to thy life▪
That while •joyed in glory and account,
Disdained all virtue, and contemnd all vice.
Good, bad▪ were held with me of equal price.
And now the waning of my greatness comes,
Occasiond by thy love, whom Mars aspected,
And I that all despised am now rejected.
For which I thee reject, disdain and hate,
Wishing thee die a death disconsolate.
Yet once regard me as a thing regardless,
Thou art the abjects wretch alive esteemed,
I worse than vileness in the world am deemed:
I scorned, thou hated, each like other being,
Live we together void of other being.
Lightness of lightest things that vaunt of life,
Sprung from the froathie bubbles of the sea:
Leave to solicit him that loathes thy looks,
Spitting upon thy f•ces painted pride
I wi•l forsake thee, and in silence shroud
This loathed trunk despised and abhord,
So flies the murderer from the mangled limbs,
Left limles on the ground by his fell hand.
So runs the Tiger from the bloodless pray,
Which when his fell stomach is of hunger stancht.
Thou murdrer, Tiger, glutted with my fair,
Leaust me forsaken, map of grief and car•▪
O what is beauty humbled to the base,
That never had a care of civil thought?
O what is favour in an obscure place?
Like unto Pearls that for the swine are bought:
Beauty and favour where no virtue bides,
Proves foul, deformd, and like a shadow glides.
Ah that my woe could other women warn,
To love true wedlock or the virgins life:
For me too late, for them fit time to learn,
The honour of amaid and constant wife,
One is adored by Gods with holy rites,
The last like Lamps both earth and heaven lights.
But the foul horror of a harlots name,
Even of the Lecher counted as a scorn:
Whose forehead bears the mark of hateful shame,
Of the lust-louer hated and forlorn.
O such is Venus, so shall all such bee
As use base lust, and foul adultery.
Immortal mover of this glorious frame,
That circles vs about with wonder great,
Receive the offerings of our humble harts
And bodies prostrate on the lowly earth.
Our sins hath drawn the fury of thy wrath,
And turned our peace to misery and war:
But if repentant souls may purchase grace,
We crave it humbly, and intend to live,
Hereafter more reformd than wee have done.
For pride, we entertain humility:
For our presumption, due obedience:
Love for Contempt, and chastity for lust:
The Cabin of Contempt doth burn with •ire,
In which our sins are cast, and there consume.
Hear vs ye heavenly powers, help •e require,
And be propitious to the penitent.
Rise from the humble earth my Noble Lord,
Rise up ye Priests, Princes, and people rise,
And hear the gladsome tidings I unfold,
Of happy peace and glorious victory.
For that sweet voice offered to vs by man,
Cast sweetest incense into holy fires,
And while they burn, tell on thy happy news,
That wee may •ear and honour heavenly Powers.
When Sateros my Lord had brought your power,
In view of our presuming enemies:
And equal place was chosen for the field,
He sent a Herald, willing them restore,
The wrongs that in Booetia they had done,
And leave the Country, turning to their home,
Or else resolve on doubtful chance of war.
They proud, ambitious, covetous of gain,
Returned an answer filled with disdain.
Then was the signal given, and streamer•red,
Menacing blood on either side advance•e.
Drums, Fifes, and •rumpets drowned the cries of men,
That each where fell before their Foe-mens swords,
Mars there shout ruthless rage on either part,
And murder ranged thorough every rank.
Dust dimd the suns light, and the powders smoke,
Seemed like thick Clouds in ayre congluminate.
Thus was seven hours consumed, and doubtful chance
Sometime with vs, sometime with them abode:
Till at the length our General gave charge
To found retreat, which made the hopeful Foe,
Pursue regardless our retiring bands,
That being knit together in firm rank,
A fresh pursued their straggling followers.
Then fell their glory like the ripened corn,
Before the Cickle and the Reapers hand:
In brief, some fled, most slain, and many taken
Have left the honour to Booetia.
To heavens and Sateros return we thanks,
For thy reward receive this recompense:
Our selves will forward to salute our friends,
That fought for honour of Booetia.
Sound Drum and Trumpet notes triumphantly,
Heavens have the honour for this victory.
Thus Sateros have we assisted thee,
Our true sworn soldier, worthy man at Arms,
And the Booetian Duke hath heaven appeasde,
By firing false Contempt and loathed lust.
Mercury the son and messenger of •ove
With me shall pass unto my warlike house.
Go thou unto the Duke with all thy train,
That longs to see thee, and requi•e thy pain.
To mighty Mars and wary Mercury
Poor Sateros gives thanks and vows his duty.
Are ye here in faith? here is two on ye,
Raph Cobbler may curse the time that here knew your cōpany▪
What mine man?
I yours, what reason had you to make my wife mad?
I and so mad to kill one? and then make me a Prophet?
It was the secret judgment of the Gods, Sateros speak
to the Duke to think on him, and to remit his fault.
It shall be done.
Is this the Prophet?
I that it is, that told you your own when it was.
Sateros use him well.
Ne'er doubt you that: are ye bemembred since ye told
him, if ye set your self against the Gods they would drive you
out of heaven.
Well what of that?
Faith at that time the world might well have afforded
you a Cart to ride in.
Go too Rap▪ cease.
I, I, and great folk doo amiss,
Poor folk must hold their peace.
Mars shall we hence?
I, farewell Sateros.
Welcome brave soldier, welcome to you all,
Joy stops my words, I cannot speak my mind,
But in this triumph pass we to the Court,
Where you shall all receive your due de•jets.
Thanks Noble Lord.
What shall I doo then, and my wife?
I will provide for thee, and pardon her.
Faith then farewell the Court;
For now Isle not run and ride, nor no more abide,
But since my mad wife, has changed her mad life,
Isle even leave to be a Prophet speaker,
Take clouting leather and naule, and fall to my old trade of the
gentle craft the Cobbler.
I Raph that will be fittest for vs.
Come Sateros let me yet honour thee,
To whom the heavens have given great victory,
And took in worth our worthless sacrifice,
Wherein Contempt and L•st with old ingratitude,
Have perished like Fume that flies from fire.
March forward brave and worthy man at Arms▪
Thy deeds shall be rewarded worthily:
Embrace the Scholar, live you two as friends,
For Arms and Learning may not be at jar,
Counsel prevents, counsel prevails in war.
My thoughts are free from hate, let me not live,
When soldiers fail good Letters to defend.
Let every Scholar be a Soldiers friend,
As I am friend to thee and so will rest.
I so live, and ye are blessed.
How say thou Zealot is not that life best.
Then with due praise to heaven let vs depart,
Our State supported both by Arms and Art.

WHat means fair Britains mighty Conqueror
So suddenly to cast away his staff?
And all in passion, to forsake the tilt.
My Lord, this triumph we solemnise here,
Is for mere love to your increasing joys:
Only expecting cheerful looks for all.
What sudden pangs than moves your majesty,
To dim the brightness of the day with frowns?
Ah: good my Lords, misconstrue not the cause:
At least, suspect not my displeased brows
I amorously do bear to your intent:
For thanks and all that you can wish I yield.
But that which makes me blush and shame to tell,
Is cause why thus I turn my conquering eyes
To cowards looks and beaten fantasies.
Since wee are guiltless, wee the less dismay
To see this sudden change possess 〈◊〉 cheer:
For if it issue from your own conceits,
Bred by suggestion of some envious thoughts:
Your highness wisdom may suppress it straight.
Yet tell vs (good my Lord) what thought it is,
That thus bereaves you of your late content,
That in advise we may assist your grace,
Or bend our forces to revive your spirits.
Ah Marks Lubeck, in thy power it lies
To rid my bosom of these thraled dumps:
And therefore, good my Lords forbear awhile,
That we may parley of these private cares,
Whose strength subdues me more than all the world.
We go and wish thee private conference,
Public affects in this accustomed peace.
Now Marks must a Conqueror at arms
disclose himself thrald to unarmed thoughts,
And threatened of a shadow, yield to lust:
No sooner had my sparkling eyes beheld
The flames of beauty blazing on this piece,
But suddenly a sense of miracle
Imagined on thy lovely Masters face,
Made me abandon bodily regard,
And cast all pleasures on my wonted soul:
Then gentle Marks tell me what she is,
That thus thou honour on thy warlike shield.
And if thy love and interest be such,
As justly may give place to mine,
That if it be: my soul with honours wings
May fly into the bosom of my dear.
If not, close them and stoop into my grave.
If this be all renowned Conqueror:
Advance your drooping spirits, and revive
The wonted courage of your Conquering mind,
For this fair picture painted on my shield
Is the true counterfeit of lo•••… Blanch
Princes and daughter to the King of Danes:
Whose beauty and excess of ornaments
Deserves another manner of defence
Pomp and high person to attend her state,
Then Marks Lubeck any way presents.
Therefore her virtues I resign to thee,
Already shrinde in thy religious breast,
To be advanced and honoured to the full.
Nor bear I this an argument of love:
But to renown fair Blanch my Sovereigns child,
In every place where I by arms may do it.
Ah Marks, thy words bring heaven unto my soul,
And had I heaven to give for thy reward:
Thou should be thronde in no unworthy place.
But let my uttermost wealth suffice thy worth,
Which here I vow, and to aspire the bliss
That hangs on quick atchiuement of my love,
Thy self and I will travail in disguise,
To bring this Lady to our Britain Court.
Let VVilliam but bethink what may avail,
And let me die if I deny my aid.
Then thus the Duke Dirot and Therle Dimach
Will I leave substitutes to rule my Realm,
While mighty love forbids my being here,
And in the name of Sir Robert of VVindsor
Will go with thee unto the Danish Court.
Keep VVilliams secretes Marks if thou love him.
Bright Blanch I come, sweet fortune favour me,
And I will laud thy name eternally.
Come daughter we must learn to shake of pomp,
To leave the state that carst beseemd a Knight
And gentleman of no mean descent,
To undertake this homely millers trade:
Thus must we mask to save our wr•••ed lives,
Threatened by Conquest of this haplesse Yle:
Whose sad invasions by the Conqueror,
Have made a number such as we subject
Their gentle necks unto their stubborn yoke,
Of drudging labour and base peasantry.
Sir Thomas Godard now old Goddard is
Goddard the miller of fair Manchester.
Why should not I content me with this state?
As good Sir Edmund Trofferd did the f••isle.
And thou sweet Em must stoop to high estate.
To join with mine that thus we may protect
Our harmless lives, which led in greater port
Would be an envious object to our foes,
That seek to root all Britains Gentry
From bearing countenance against their tyranny.
Good Father let my full resolved thoughts,
Wi•h settled pa•iens to support this chance
Be some poor comfort to your aged soul:
For therein rests the height of my estate,
That you are pleased with this deiection,
And that all toils my hands may undertake,
May serve to work your worthiness content.
Thanks my dear Daughter: these thy pleasant words
Transfer my soul into a second heaven:
And in thy settled mind, my joys consist,
My state revived and I in former plight.
Although our outward pomp be thus abased,
And thralde to drudging, stay less of the world,
Let vs retain those honourable minds
There lately governed our superior state.
Wherein true gentry is the only mean
That makes vs differ from base millers borne:
Though we expect no knightly delicates,
Nor thirst in soul for former sovereignty.
Yet may our minds as highly scorn to stoop
To base desires of vulgars worldliness,
As if we were in our presedent way.
And lovely daughter, since thy youthful years
Must needs admit as young affections:
And that sweet love unpartial perceives
Her dainty subjects through every part,
In chief receive these lessons from my lips.
The true discoverers of a Virgins due
Now requisite, now that I know thy mind
Something inclined to favour Manuils suit,
A gentleman, thy Lover in protest:
And that thou moist not be by love deceived,
But try his meaning fit for thy desert,
In pursuit of all amorous desires,
Regard thine honour. Let not vehement sighs
Nor earnest vows importing fervent love,
Render thee subject to the wrath of lust:
For that transformed to former sweet delight,
Will bring thy body and thy soul to shame.
Chaste thoughts and modest conversations
Of proof to keep out all enchanting vows,
Vain sighs, forced tears, and pitiful aspects,
Are they that make deformed Ladies fair,
Poor wretch, and such enticing men,
That seek of all but only present grace,
Shall in perseverance of a Virgins due
Prefer the most refusers to the choice
Of such a soul as yielded what they thought.
But hoe: where is Trotter?
Wheres Trotter? why Trotter is here.
in faith, you and your daughter go up and down weeping,
And wamenting and keeping of a wamentation,
As who should say, the Mill would go with your wamenting.
How now Trotter? why complain thou so.
Why yonder is a company of young men and m•ydes Keep such a stir for their grist, that they would have it before my stones be ready to grind it. But in faith, I would I could break wind enough backward: you should not tarry for your grist I warrant you.
Content thee Trotter, I will go pacify them.
I wis you will when I cannot. Why look,
You have a Mill. Why, whats your Mill without me?
Or rather Mistress, what were I without you?
Nay Trotter, if you fall achyding, I will give you cuer.
I chide you dame to amend you.
You are too fine to be a Millers daughter:
For if you should but stoop to take up the told dish
You will have the cramp in your finger
At least ten weeks after.
Ah well said Trotter, teach her to play the good huswife
And thou shalt have her to thy wife, if thou can get her good will.
Ah words wherein I see Matrimony come load•n
With kisses to salute me: Now let me alone, to pick the Mill,
To fill the hopper to take the told to mend the sails,
Yea, and to make the mill to go with the very force of my love.
I come I come, in faith now you shall have your grist
Or else Trotter will trot and amble himself to death.
Lord Marks Lubecke welcome home,
Welcome brave Knight unto the Denmark King:
For Williams sake the noble Norman Duke,
So famous for his fortunes and success,
That graces him with name of Conqueror:
Right double welcome must thou be to vs.
And to my Lord the king shall I recount
Your graces courteous entertainment,
That for his sake vouchsafe to honour me
A simple Knight attendant on his grace.
But say Sir Knight, what may I call your name.
Robert Windsor and like your Majesty.
I tell thee Robert, I so admire the man,
As that I count it heinous guilt in him
That honours not Duke William with his heart.
Blanch, bid this stranger welcome, good my girl.
Sir, should I neglect your highness charge herein,
It might be thought of base discourtesy.
Welcome Sir Knight to Denmark heartily.
Thanks gentle Lady. Lord Marks, what is she?
That same is Blanch daughter to the King,
The substance of the shadow that you saw.
May this be she, for whom I crossed the Seas?
I am ashamed to think I was so fond.
In whom theirs nothing that contents my mind.
Ill head, worse featured, uncomely, nothing courtly.
Answered and ill favoured, a Colliers sanguine skin.
I never saw a harder favoured slut.
Love her? for what: I can no whit abide her.
Mariana, I have this day received letters
From Swethia, that lets me understand,
your ransom is collecting there with speed,
And shortly shall be hither sent to vs.
Not that I find occasion of mislike
My entertainment in your graces court,
But that I long to see my native home.
And reason have you Madam for the same:
Lord Marks I commit unto your charge
The entertainment of Sir Robert here,
Let him remain with you within the Court
In solace and disport, to spend the time.
I thank your hightnes, whose bounden I remain.
Unhappy Blanch, what strange effects are these
That works within my thoughts confusedly,
That still me thinks affection draws me on
To take, to like, nay more, to love this Knight.
A modest countenance, no heavy sullen look,
Not very fair, but ritchly decked with favour:
A sweet face, an exceeding dainty hand,
A body were it framed of wax
By all the cunning artists of the world
It could not better be proportioned.
How now Sir Robert? in a study man?
Here is no time for contemplation.
My Lord, there is a certain odd conceit,
Which on the sudden greatly troubles me.
How like you Blanch? I partly do perceive
The little boy hath played the wagg with you.
The more I look, the more I love to look.
Who says that Mariana is not fair?
Isle gage my gauntlet against the envious man,
That dares avow there lives her compare.
Sir Robert, you mistake your counterfeit.
This is the Lady which you came to see.
yea, my Lord: She is counterfeit in deed:
For there is the substance that best contents me.
That is my love. Sir Robert you do wrong me.
The better for you sir, she is your Love,
As for the wrong, I see not how it grows.
In seeking that which is an others right.
As who should say your love were privileged
That none might look upon her but your self.
These jars becomes not our familiarity,
Nor will I stand on terms to move your patience.
Why my Lord, am not I of flesh and blood as well as you?
Then give me leave to love as well as you.
To Love Sir Robert? but whom? not she I Love?
Nor stands it with the honour of my state,
To brooke corrivals with me in my love.
So Sir, we are thorough for that L.
Ladies farewell. Lord Marks, will you go?
I will find a time to speak with her I trow?
With all my heart. Come Ladies will you walk?
Ah Em the subject of my restless thoughts,
The Anvil whereupon my heart doth beat,
Framing thy state to thy desert,
Full ill this life becomes thy heavenly look,
Wherein, sweet love and virtue sits enthroned.
Bad world, where riches is esteemed aboue them both,
In whose base eyes nought else is bountiful.
A Millers daughter, says the multitude,
Should not be loved of a Gentleman.
But let them breath their souls into the ayre:
Yet will I still affect thee as my self,
So thou be constant in thy plighted vow.
But here comes one, I will listen to his talk.
Go William Conqueror and seek thy love.
Seek thou a minion in a foreign land
Whilst I draw back and court my love at home,
The millers daughter of fair Manchester
Hath bound my feet to this delight some soil:
And from her eyes do dart such golden beams,
That holds my heart in her subjection.
He ruminates on my beloved choice:
God grant he come not to prevent my hope.
But here is another, him yle listen to.
Nature unjust, in utterance of thy art,
To grace a peasant with a Princes fame:
Peasant am I so to misterme my love
Although a millers daughter by her birth:
Yet may her beauty and her virtues well suffice
To hyde the blemish of her birth in hell,
Where neither envious eyes nor thought can pierce,
But endless darkness ever smother it.
Go William Conqueror and seek thy love,
Whilst I draw back and court mine own the while:
Decking her body with such costly robes
As may become her beauties worthiness,
That so thy labours may be laughed to scorn,
And she thou seek in foreign regions,
Be darkened and eclipsed when she arrives,
By one that I have chosen nearer home.
What comes he to, to intercept my love?
Then hye thee Manuile to forestall such foes.
What now Lord Valingford are you behind?
The king had chosen you to go with him.
So chose he you, therefore I marvel much
That both of vs should linger in this sort.
What may the king imagine of our staye?
The king may justly think we are to blame:
But I imagined I might well be spared
And that no other man had borne my mind.
The like did I: in friendship then resolve
What is the cause of your unlooked for stay?
Lord Valingford I tell thee as a friend,
Love is the cause why I have stayed behind.
Love my Lord? of whom.
Em the millers daughter of Manchester.
But may this be?
Why not my Lord? I hope full well you know
That love respects no difference of state
So beauty serve to stir affection.
But this it is that makes me wonder most:
That you and I should be of one conceit
In such a strange unlikely passion.
But is that true? my Lord: I hope you do but jest.
I would I did: then were my grief the less.
Nay never grieve: for if the cause be such
To join our thoughts in such a Sympathy:
All envy set aside: let vs agree
To yield to eiders fortune in this choice.
Content say I, and what so ere befall,
Shake hands my Lord and fortune thrive at all.
Trotter where have you been?
Where have I been? why what signifies this.
A kerchief, doth it not?
What call you this I pray?
I say it is an Urinal.
Then this is mystically to give you to understand
I have been at the Phismicaries house.
How long hast thou been sick?
In faith, even as long as I have not been half well,
And that hath been a long time.
A loitering time I rather imagine.
It may be so: but the Phismicary tells me that you can help me
Why, any thing I can do for recovery of thy health,
Be right well assured of.
Then give me your hand
To what end.
That the ending of an old indenture
Is the beginning of a new bargain.
What bargain?
That you promised to do any thing to recover my health.
On that condition I give thee my hand.
Ah sweet Em.
How now Trotter? your masters daughter?
In faith I aim at the fairest,
Ah Em, sweet Em: fresh as the flower:
That hath pour to wound my heart,
And ease my smart, of me poor thief,
In prison bound.
So all your rhyme lies on the ground.
But what means this?
Ah mark the devise,
For thee my louefull sick I was, in hazard of my life
Thy promise was to make me whole, and for to be my wife.
Let me enjoy my love my dear,
And thou possess thy Trotter here.
But I meant no such matter.
Yes woos but you did, Isle go to our Parson Sir Iohn
And he shall mumble up the marriage out of hand.
But here comes one that will forbid the Banes.
Ah Sir you come too late.
What remedy Trotter.
Go Trotter, my father calls.
Would you have me go in, and leave you two here?
Why, dare thou not trust me?
Yes faith, even as long as I see you.
Go thy ways I pray thee heartily.
That same word (heartily) is of great force.
I will go: but I pray sir, beware you
Come not too near the wench.
I am greatly beholding to you
Ah Masters, sometime I might have said my love,
But time and fortune hath bereaved me of that,
And I am abject in those gracious eyes
That with remorse erst saw into my grief,
May sit and sigh the sorrows of my heart.
In deed my Manuile hath some cause to doubt,
When such a Swain is rival in his love.
Ah Em, were he the man that causes this mistrust,
I should esteem of thee as at the first.
But is my love in earnest all this while?
Believe me Em, it is not time to jest
When others joys, what lately I possessed.
If touching love, my Manuile charge me thus?
Unkindly must I take it at his hands,
For that my conscience clears me of offence.
Ah impudent and shameless in thy ill,
That with thy cunning and defraudfull tongue,
Seeks to delude the honest meaning mind:
Was never heard in Manchester before,
Of true lover then hath been betwixt vs twain:
And for my part how I have hazarded
Displeasure of my father and my friends
Thy self can witness. Yet notwithstanding this:
Two genlemen attending on Duke William
Mountney and Valingford, as I heard them named,
Oft times resort to see and to be seen,
Walking the street fast by thy fathers door,
Whose glancing eyes up to the windows cast,
Gives testies of their Masters amorous hart.
This Em is noted and too much talked on.
Some see it without mistrust of ill.
Others there are that scorning grynne thereat,
And saith, there goes the millers daughters wooers.
Ah me, whom chiefly and most of all it doth concern
To spend my time in grief and vex my soul,
To think my love should be rewarded thus,
And for thy sake abhor all women kind.
May not a maid look upon a man
Without suspicious judgment of the world?
If sight do move offence, it is the better not to see.
But thou did more inconstant as thou art,
For with them thou had talk and conference.
May not a maid talk with a man without mistrust?
Not with such men suspected amorous.
I grieve to see my Manuiles jealousy
Ah Em, faithful love is full of jealousy,
So did I love thee true and faithfully,
For which I am rewarded most unthankfully.
And so away? what in displeasure gone?
And left me such a bitter sweet to gnaw upon?
Ah Manuile, little wottest thou,
How near this parting goes to my heart.
Uncourteous love whose followers reapes reward,
Of hate, disdain, reproach and infamy,
The fruit of frantic, bedlome jealousy.
But here comes one of these suspicious men:
Witness my God without desert of me:
For only Manuile honour I in heart:
Nor shall unkindness cause me from him to start.
For this good fortune, Venus be thou blessed,
To meet my love, the mistress of my heart,
Where time and place gives opportunity
At full to let her understand my love.
Fair mistress, since my fortune sorts so well:
Hear you a word. What means this?
Nay stay fair Em.
I am going homewards, sir:
Yet stay sweet love to whom I must disclose
The hidden secrets of a lovers thoughts,
Not doubting but to find such kind remorse
As naturally you are inclined to.
The Gentle-man your friend Sir.
I have not seen him this four days at the least.
Whats that to me? I speak not sweet in person of my friend,
But for my self, whom if that love deserve
To have regard being honourable love:
Not base affects of loose lascivious love:
Whom youthful wantons play and dally with:
But that vnites in honourable bands of holy rytes,
And knits the sacred knot that Gods.
What mean you sir, to keep me here so long?
I cannot understand you by your signs.
You keep a prattling with your lips,
But never a word you speak that I can hear.
What is she deaf? a great impediment.
Yet remedies there are for such defects.
Sweet Em, it is no little grief to me,
To see where nature in her pride of art
Hath wrought perfections rich and admirable.
Speak you to me Sir?
To thee my only joy.
I cannot hear you.
Oh plague of Fortune: Oh hell without compare.
What boots it vs to gaze and not enjoy?
Fare you well Sir.
Fare well my love. Nay farewell life and all.
Could I procure redress for this infirmity,
It might be means she would regard my suit.
I am acquainted with the Kings Physicians:
Amongst the which, theres one mine honest friend,
Seignior Alberto, a very learned man.
His judgment will I have to help this ill.
Ah Em, fair Em, if Art can make thee whole:
Isle buy that sense for thee, although it cost me dear.
But Mountney: stay, this may be but deceit,
A matter fained only to delude thee.
And not unlike, perhaps by Valingford,
He loves fair Em as well as I.
As well as I? ah no, not half so well.
Put case, yet may he be thine enemy,
And give her counsel to dissemble thus.
Isle try the event, and if it fall out so?
Friendship farewell: Love makes me now a foe.
Trust me my Lord, I am sorry for your hurt.
Gramercy Madam: but it is not great:
Only a thrust, pricked with a Rapiers point.
How grew the quarrel my Lord?
Sweet Lady, for thy sake.
There was this last night two masks in one company,
My self the foremost: The other strangers were:
Amongst the which, when the Music began to sound the Measures,
Eche Mocker made choice of his Lady:
And one more forward than the rest stepped towards thee:
Which I perceiving thrust him aside, and took thee my self.
But this was taken in so ill part,
That at my coming out of the court gate, with jostling together,
It was my chance to be thrust into the arm.
The doer thereof because he was the original cause of the disorder
At that inconvenient time, was presently committed,
And is this morning sent for to answer the matter:
And I think here he comes. What Sir Robert of Windsor how now?
In faith my Lord a prisoner: but what ails your arm?
Hurt the last night by mischance.
What, not in the mask at the Court gate?
Yes trust me there.
Why then my Lord I thank you for my nights lodging.
And I you for my hurt, if it were so?
Keeper away, I discharge you of your prisoner.
Lord Marks, you offered me disgrace to shoulder me.
Sir I knew you not, and therefore you must pardon me
And the rather it might be alleged to me of
Mere simplicity, to see another dance with my Masters
disguised, and I my self in presence: but seeing it
Was our happs to damnify each other unwillingly,
Let vs be content with our harms,
And lay the fault where it was and so become friends.
In faith I am content with my nights lodging
If you be content with your hurt.
Not content that I have it, but content
To forget how I came by it.
My Lord, here comes Lady Blannch, lets away.
With good will, Lady you will stay?
Madam.
Mariana, as I am grieved with thy presence:
So am I not offended for thy absence,
And were it not a breach to modesty,
Thou shouldest know before I left thee.
How near is this humour to madness
If yon hold on as you begin, you
are in a pretty way to scolding.
To scolding huswife?
Madam here comes one,
There doth in deed. Fellow would thou have any thing with any body here?
I have a letter to deliver to the Lady Mariana.
Give it me.
There must none but she have it.
Go to foolish fellow.
And therefore to ease the anger I sustain,
Isle be so bold to open it, whats here?
Sir Robert greets you well?
Your Masters, his love, his life? Oh amorous man,
How he entertains his new Masters?
And bestows on Lubeck his od friend
A horn night capp to keep in his wit.
Madam though you have discourteously
Red my letter, yet I pray you give it me.
Then take it there, and there, and there.
How far doth this differ from modesty:
Yet will I gather up the pieces, which happily
May show to me the intent thereof
Though not the meaning.
Your servant and love sir Robert of Windsor
Alius William the Conqueror, wishes long health and happiness.
Is this William the Conqueror, shrouded under
The name of sir Robert of VVindsor?
Were he the Monarch of the world
He should not disposesse Lubeck of his Love.
Therefore I will to the Court, and there if I can
Close to be friends with Lady Blanch,
And thereby keep Lubeck my Love for my self:
And further the Lady Blanch in her suit as much as I may.
Jealousy that sharpes the lovers sight,
And makes him conceive and construe his intent,
Hath so bewitched my lovely Manuils senses,
That he misdoubts his Em that loves his soul.
He doth suspect corrivals in his love:
Which how untrue it is, be judge my God.
But now no more: Here comes Valingford:
Shift him off noww as thou hast done the other.
See how Fortune presents me with the hope I looked for.
Fair Em?
Who is that?
I am Valingford thy love and friend.
I cry you mercy Sir: I thought so by your speech.
What ails thy eyes?
Oh blind Sir, blind, stricken blind by mishap on a sudden.
But is it possible you should be taken on such a sudden?
Unfortunate Valingford to be thus crossed in thy love.
Fair Em, I am not a little sorry to see this thy hard hap:
Yet nevertheless, I am acquainted with a learned Physician,
That will do any thing for thee at my request.
To him will I resort, and enquire his judgment,
As concerning the recovery of so excellent a fence.
O Lord Sir: and of all things I cannot abide Physic:
The very name thereof to me is odious.
No? not the thing will doe thee so much good?
Sweet Em, hither I came to parley of love
Hoping to have found thee in thy wonted prosperity.
And have the gods so unmercifully thwarted my expectation?
By dealing so finisterly with thee sweet Em?
Good sir, no more, it fits not me
To have respect to such vain fantasies,
As idle love presents my ears withal,
More reason I should ghostly give my self,
To sacred prayers for this my former sin,
For which this plague is justly fallen upon me,
Then to harken to the vanities of love.
Yet sweet Em accept this jewel at my hand
Which I bestow on thee in token of my love.
A jewel sir, what pleasure can I have
In jewels, treasure, or any worldly thing
That want my sight that should decern thereof.
Ah sir I must leave you:
The pain of mine eyes is so extreme
I cannot long stay in a place. I take my leave.
Zounds, what a cross is this to my conceit?
But Valingford, search the depth of this devise.
Why may not this be fained subtlety,
By Mountneies invention, to the intent
That I seeing such occasion should leave off my suit,
And not any more persist to solicit her of love.
Isle try the event, if I can by any means perceive
The effect of this deceit to be procured by his means,
Friend Mountney the one of vs is like to repent our bargain.
Lady, since that occasion forward in our good
Presents place and opportunity:
Let me entreat your wonted kind consent
And friendly furtherance in a suite I have.
My Lord you know you need not to entreat,
But may command Mariana to her power
Be it no impeachment to my honest fame.
Free are my thoughts from such base villainy
As may in question Lady call your name:
Yet is the matter of such consequence
Standing upon my honourable credit,
To be effected with such zeal and secrecy,
As should I speak and fail my expectation
I would redound greatly to my prejudice.
My Lord wherein hath Mariana given you occasion
That you should mistrust or else be jealous of my secrecy.
Mariana, do not misconstrue of me:
I not mistrust thee, nor thy secrecy,
Nor let my love misconstrue my intent,
Nor think thereof but well and honourable.
Thus stands the case: Thou know from England
Hither came with me Robert of VVindsor, a noble man at Arms,
Lusty and valiant, in spring time of his years,
No marvel then though he prove amorous.
True my Lord, he came to see fair Blanch.
No Mariana, that is non it.
His love to Blanch was then extinct
When first he saw thy face.
Tic thee he loves: yea, thou art only she
That is masters and commander of his thoughts.
Well well my Lord, I like you, for such drifts
Put silly Ladies often to their shifts
Oft have I heard you say, you loved me well:
Yea, sworn the same, and I believed you to.
Can this be found an action of good faith,
Thus to dissemble where you found true love?
Mariana, I not dissemble on mine honour:
Nor fails my faith to thee. But for my friend,
For princely William, by whom thou shalt possess
The title of estate and Majesty,
Fitting thy love and virtues of thy mind,
For him I speak, for him do I entreat,
And with thy favour fully do resign
To him the claim and interest of my love.
Sweet Mariana then deny me not.
Love William, love my friend and honour me
Who else is clean dishonoured by thy means.
Borne to mishap, my self am only she,
On whom the Sun of Fortune never shined:
But Planets ruled by retrogard aspect,
Foretold mine ill in my nativity.
Sweet Lady seace, let my entreaty serve
To pacify the passion of thy grief,
Which well I know proceeds of ardent love.
But Lubeck now regards not Mariana:
Even as my life, so love I Mariana.
Why do you post me to another then?
He is my friend, and I do love the man.
Then will Duke VVilliam rob me of my Love?
No as his life Mariana he doth love.
Speak for yourself my Lord let him alone.
So do I Madam, for he and I am one.
Then loving you I do content you both.
In loving him you shall content vs both.
Me, for I crave that favour at your hands:
He for hopes that comfort at your hands.
Leave of my Lord, here comes the Lady Blanch.
Hard hap to break vs of our talk so soon,
Sweet Mariana doe remember me.
Thy Mariana cannot choose but remember thee.
Mariana well met, you are very forward in your Love?
Madam be it in secret spoken to your self,
If you will but follow the complot I have invented
you will not think me so forward
As your self shall prove fortunate.
As how?
Madam as thus: It is not unknown to you
That Sir Robert of Windsor,
A man that you do not little esteem,
Hath long importuned me of Love:
But rather then I will be found false
Or unjust to the Marks Lubeck,
I will as did the constant lady Penelope
Undertake to effect some great task.
What of all this?
The next time that Sir Robert shall come
In his wonted sort to solicit me with Love,
I will seem to agree and like of any thing
That the Knight shall demand so far forth
As it be no impeachment to my chastity:
And to conclude, point some place for to meet the man,
For my conveyance from the Denmark Court:
Which determined upon, he will appoint some certain time
For our departure: whereof you having intelligence,
You may soon set down a plot to were the English Crown.
And than?
What then?
If Sir Robert prove a King and you his Queen
How than?
Were I assured of the one, as I am persuaded
Of the other, there were some possibility in it.
But here comes the man.
Madam begone and you shall see
I will work to your desire and my content.
Con. Lady this is well and happily met,
Fortune hitherto hath been my foe,
And though I have oft sought to speak with you,
Yet still I have been crossed with sinister happs.
I cannot Madame tell a loving tale
Or court my Masters with fabulous discourses,
That am a soldier sworn to follow arms:
But this I bluntly let you understand,
I honour you with such religious Zeal
As may become an honourable mind.
Nor may I make my love the siege of Troye
That am a stranger in this Country.
First what I am, I know you are resolved,
For that my friend hath let you that to understand,
The Marks Lubeck to whom I am so bound,
That whilst I live I count me only his.
Surely you are beholding to the Marks,
For he hath been an earnest spokes-man in your cause.
And yields my Lady then at his request.
To grace Duke VVilliam with her gracious love?
My Lord I am a prisoner, and hard it were
To get me from the Court.
An easy matter to get you from the Court,
If case that you will thereto give consent.
Put case I should, how would you use me than?
Not otherwise but well and honourably.
I have at Sea a ship that doth attend,
Which shall forthwith conduct vs into England
Where when we are, I straight will marry thee.
We may not stay deliberating long
Least that suspicion, envious of our weal
Set in a foot to hinder our pretence.
But this I think were most convenient
To mask my face the better to scope unknown.
A good devise: till then, Farewell fair love.
But this I must entreat your grace,
You would not seek by lust unlawfully
To wrong my chaste determinations.
I hold that man most shameless in his sin
That seeks to wrong an honest Ladies name
Whom he thinks worthy of his marriage bed.
In hope your other is true,
I leave your grace till the appointed time.
O happy William, blessed in thy love:
Most fortunate in Marianaes love,
Well Lubeck well, this curtsy of thine
I will requite if God permit me life.
Valingford, so hardly I digest an injury
Thou hast proffered me, as were not that I detest to doe what stands
Not with the honour of my name,
Thy death should pay thy ransom of thy fault.
And Mountney, had not my revenging wrath
Incensed with more than ordinary love
been such for to deprive thee of thy life,
Thou had not lived to brave me as thou doest wretch as thou art,
wherein hath Valingford offended thee?
That honourable bond which late we did confirm
In presence of the Gods,
When with the Conqueror we arrived here
For my part hath been kept inviolably
Till now too much abused by thy villainy,
I am enforced to cancel all those bands,
By hating him which I so well did love.
Subtle thou art, and cunning in thy frawd,
That giving me occasion of offence,
Thou pickst a quarrel to excuse thy shame.
Why Valingford, was it not enough for thee
To be arrival twixt me and my love,
But counsel her to my no small disgrace,
That when I came to talk with her of love,
She should seem deaf, as feigning not to hear.
But hath she Mountney used thee as thou say?
Thou know too well she hath:
Wherein thou coldest not do me greater injury.
Then I perceive we are deluded both.
For when I offered many gifts of Gold and Jewels
To entreat for love, she hath refused them with a coy disdain,
Alleging that she could not see the Sun.
The same conjectured I to be thy drift,
That feigning so she might be rid of me.
The like did I by thee. But are not these natural imp∣diments?
In my conjecture merely counterfeit:
Therefore lets join hands in friendship once again,
Since that the jar grew only by conjecture.
With all my heart: Yet lets try the truth hereof.
With right good will. We will straight unto her father,
And there to learn whither it be so or no.
Come on my love, the comfort of my life:
Disguised thus we may remain unknown.
And get we once to Seas, I force not then,
We quickly shall attain the English shore.
But this I urge you with your former oath.
You shall not seek to violate mine honour,
Until our marriage rights be all performed.
Mariana, here I swear to thee by heaven,
And by the honour that I bear to Arms,
Never to seek or crave at hands of thee
The spoil of honourable chastity
Until we do attain the English coast,
Where thou shalt be my right espoused Queen.
In hope your oath proceeds from your heart,
Lets leave the Court, and betake vs to his power
That governs all things to his mighty will,
And will reward the just with endless joy,
And plague the bad with most extreme annoy.
Lady, as little tarriance as wee may,
Lest some misfortune happen by the way.
I tell you sir, it is no little grief to me,
You should so hardly conceit of my daughter,
Whose honest report, though I say it,
Was never blotted with any title of defamation.
Father Miller, the repair of those gentlemen to your house,
Hath given me great occasion to mislike.
As for those gentlemen, I never saw in them
Any evil entreaty. But should they have proffered it?
Her chaste mind hath proof enough to prevent it.
Those gentlemen are as honest as ever I saw:
For in faith one of them gave me six pence
To fetch a quart of Seck. See moister here they come.
Trotter, call Em, now they are here together,
Isle have this matter thoroughly debated.
Father, well met. We are come to confer with you.
Nay? with his daughter rather.
Thus it is father, we are come to crave your friendship in a matter.
Gentlemen as you are strangers to me,
Yet by the way of curtsy you shall demand
Any reasonable thing at my hands.
What is the matter so forward?
They came to crave his good will.
It is given vs to understand that your daughter
Is suddenly become both blind and deaf.
Marie God for bid, I have sent for her, in deed
She hath kept her chamber this three days.
It were no little grief to me if it should be so?
This is Gods judgment for her treachery.
Gentlemen I fear your words are two true:
See where Trotter comes leading of her.
What ails my Em, not blind I hope?
Mountney and Validgford both together?
And Manuile to whom I have faithfully vowed my love?
Now Em suddenly help thy self.
This is no dissembling Valingford.
If ir be? it is cunningly contrived of all sides.
Trotter lend me thy hand,
And as thou love me keep my counsel
And justify what so ever I say, and Isle largely requite thee.
Ah, thats as much as to say you would tell a monstrous,
Terrible, horrible, outrageous lie,
And I shall sooth it, no byr'lady.
My present extremity wills me, if thou love me Trotrer?
That same word love makes me to doe any thing.
Trotter wheres my father?
Why what a blind dunce are you, can you not see?
He stands right before you.
Is this my father?
Good father give me leave to sit
Where I may not be disturbed
Sith God hath visited me both of my sight and hearing.
Tell me sweet Em how came this blindness.
Thy eyes are lovely to look on,
And yet have they lost the benefit of their sight.
What a grief is this to thy poor father?
Good father let me vote stand as an open gazing stock to every one,
But in a place a lone as fits a creature so miserable.
Trotter lead her in, the utter overthrow
Of poor Goddardes joy and only solace.
Both blind and deaf, then is she no wife for me?
And glad am I so good occasion is happened:
Now will I away to Manchester
And leave these gentlemen to their blind fortune.
Since fortune hath thus spitefully crossed our hope,
Let vs leave this guest and harken after our King:
Who is at this day landed at Lirpoole.
Go my Lord Isle follow you.
Well, now Mountney is gone
Isle stay behind to solicit my love,
For I imagine that I shall find this but a fained invention
Thereby to have vs leave off our suits.
Well Lubeck well, it is not possible
But you must be consenting to this act?
Is this the man so highly you extolled?
And play a part so hateful with his friend?
Since first he came with thee into the court
What entertainment and what countenance
He hath received, none better knows than thou.
In recompense whereof he quites me well,
To steal away fair Mariana my prisoner,
Whose ransom being lately greed upon,
I am deluded of by this escape.
Besides, I know not how to answer it
When she shall be demanded home to Swethia.
My gracious Lord, conjecture not I pray
Worser of Lubeck than he doth deserve.
Your highness knows Mariana was my love,
Sole paragon and mistress of my thoughts.
Is it likely I should know of her departure,
Wherein there is no man injured more than I.
That carries reason Marks I confess.
Call forth my daughter. Yet I am persuaded
That she poor soul suspected not her going:
For as I hear: she likewise loved the man,
Which he to blame did not at all regard.
My Lord here is the Princess Mariana:
It is your daughter is conueyed away.
What, my daughter gone?
Now Marks your villainy breaks forth.
This match is of your making, gentle sir:
And you shall dearly know the price thereof.
Knew I thereof, or that there was intent
In Robert thus to steal your highness daughter:
Let heavens in Justice presently confound me.
Not all the protestations thou can use,
Shall save thy life. Away with him to prison.
And minion, otherwise it cannot be,
But you are an agent in this treachery.
I will revenge it thoroughly on you both.
Away with her to prison. Here is stuff in deed?
My daughter stolen away?
It boots not thus to disturb my self,
But presently to send to English William,
To send me that proud knight of Windsor hither,
Here in my Court to suffer for his shame:
Or at my pleasure to be punished there.
Withal, that Blanch be sent me home again,
Or I shall fetch her unto Windsors cost,
Yea, and VVilliams too if he deny her me?.
Could any cross, could any plague be worse?
Could heaven or hell? Did both conspire in one
To afflict my soul, invent a greater scourge
Then presently I am tormented with?
Ah Mariana cause of my lament:
Joy of my hart, and comfort of my life.
For thee I breath my sorrows in the ayre,
And tyre my self: for silently I sigh,
My sorrows afflicts me soul with equal passion.
Go to sirha, put up, it is to small purpose.
Hence villains hence, dare you lay your hands
Upon your Sovereign?
Well sir, we will deal for that.
But here comes one will remedy all this.
My Lord, watching this night in the camp,
We took this man, and know not what he is:
And in his company was a gallant dame,
A woman fair in outward show she seemed,
But that her face was maskte we could not see
The grace and favour of her countenance.
Tell me good fellow of whence and what thou art.
Why do you not answer my Lord?
He takes scorn to answer.
And take thou scorn to answer my demand?
Thy proud behaviour very well deserves
This misdemeanour at the worst be construed.
Why doest thou neither know, nor hast thou heard?
That in the absence of the Saxon Duke,
Demarch is his especial Substitute
To punish those that shall offend the laws.
In knowing this, I know thou art a traitor.
A rebel, and mutinous conspirator.
Why Demarch, know thou who I am?
Pardon my dread Lord the error of my sense,
And misdemeaner to your princely excellence.
Why Demarch, what is the cause my subjects are in arms?
Free are my thoughts my dread and gracious Lord
From treason to your state and common weal,
Only revengement of a private grudge
By Lord Dirot lately proffered me,
That stands not with the honour of my name,
Is cause I have assembled for my guard
Some men in arms that may withstand his force,
Whose settled malice aims at my life.
Where is Lord Dirot?
In arms my gracious Lord
Not past two miles from hence,
As credibly I am ascertained.
Well, come let vs go,
I fear I shall find traitors of you both.
In deed sir it would do very well
If you could entreat your father to come hither:
But if you think it be too far,
I care not much to take horse and ride to Manchester,
I am sure my daughter is content with either:
How says thou Elner art thou not?
As you shall think best I must be contented.
Well Elner farewell, only thus much,
I pray make all things in a readiness,
Either to serve here or to carry thither with vs.
As for that sir take you no care,
And so I betake you to your journey.
But soft what gentleman is this?
God speed sir, might a man crave a word or two with you
God forbid else sir, I pray you speak your pleasure.
The gentleman that parted from you, was he not
Of Manchester, his father living there of good account.
Yes mary is he sir: why doe you ask?
Belike you have had some acquaintance with him.
I have been acquainted in times past,
But through his double dealing,
I am grown weary of his company.
For be it spoken to you:
He hath been acquainted with a poor millers daughter,
And divers times hath promised her marriage.
But what with his delays and flouts,
He hath brought her into such a taking,
That I fear me it will cost her her life.
To be plain with you sir:
His father and I have been of old acquaintance,
And a motion was made,
Beteewene my daughter and his son,
Which is now thoroughly agreed upon
Save only the place appointed for the marriage,
Whether it shall be kept here or at Manchester,
And for no other occasion he is now ridden.
What hath he done to you?
That you should speak so ill of the man.
Oh gentlewoman I cry you mercy,
He is your husband that shall be.
If I knew this to be true?
He should not be my husband were he never so good:
And therefore, good father,
I would desire you to take the pains
To bear this gentleman company to Manchester
to know whether this be true or no.
Now trust me gentleman he deals with me very hardly,
Knowing how well I meant to him.
But I care not much to ride to Manchester
To know whether his fathers will be,
He should deal with me so badly.
Will it please you sir to go in, we will presently take horse &amp; away.
If it please you to go in
Isle follow you presently.
Now shall I be revenged on Manuile,
And by this means get Em to my wife.
And therefore I will straight to her fathers
And inform them both of all that is happened.
What news with the Denmark Ambassador?
Mary thus, the King of Denmark and my Sovereign
Doth send to know of thee what is the cause
That injuriously against the law of arms,
Thou hast stolen away his only daughter Blanch,
The only stay and comfort of his life.
Therefore by me he wills thee to send his daughter Blanch:
Or else forthwith he will levy such an host,
As soon shall fetch her in despite of thee.
Ambassador, this answer Iretorne thy King.
He wills me to send his daughter Blanch:
Saying I conveyed her from the Danish court,
That never yet did once as think thereof.
As for his menacing and daunting threats
I nill regard him nor his Danish power.
For if he come to fetch her forth my Realm,
I will provide him such abanquet here
That he shall have small cause to give me thanks.
Is this your answer then?
It is and so begone.
I go but to your cost.
Demarch our subjects erst levied in civil broils,
Mustard forthwith for to defend the Realm,
In hope whereof that we shall find you true,
We freely pardon this thy late offence.
Most humble thanks I render to your grace.
Alas gentleman, why should you trouble your self so much
Considering the imperfections of my daughter
Which is able to with-drawe the love of any man from her,
As already it hath done in her first choice.
Moister Manuile hath foraken her,
And at Chester shall be married to a mans daughter of no little wealth.
But if my daughter knew so much:
It would go very near her heart I fear me.
Father miller: such is the entire affection to your daughter,
As no misfortune whatsoever can alter.
My fellow Mountney thou see gave quicly over,
But I by reason of my good meaning
Am not so soon to be changed
Although I am borne off with scorns and denial.
Trust me sir I know not what to say,
My daughter is not to be compelled by me,
But here she comes herself: speak to her and spare not:
For I never was troubled with love matters so much before.
Good Lord shall I never be rid of this importunate man?
Now must I dissemble blindness again,
Once more for thy sake Manuile thus am I insorced,
Because I shall complete my full resolved mind to thee.
Father where are you?
Here sweet Em, answer this gentleman
That would so fain enjoy thy love.
Where are you sir? will you never leave
This idle and vain pursuit of love?
Is not England stord enought to content you?
But you must still trouble the poor
Contemptible maid of Manchester.
None can content me but the fair maid of Manchester.
I perceive love is vainly described,
That being blind himself,
Would have you likewise troubled with a blind wife,
Having the benefit of your eyes,
But neither follow him so much in folly,
But love one, in whom you may better delight.
Father Miller, thy daughter shall have honour
By granting me her love:
I am a Gentleman of king Williams Court,
And no mean man in king Williams favour.
If you be a Lord sir, as you say:
You offer both yourself and me great wrong:
Yours, as apparent in limiting your love so unorderly,
For which you rashly endure rapprochement:
Mine, as open and evident,
When being shut from the vanities of this world,
you would have me as an open gazing stock to all the world:
For lust, not love leads you into this error:
But from the one I will keep me as well as I can,
And yield the other to none but to my father,
As I am bound by duty.
Why fair Em, Manuile hath forsaken thee,
And must at Chester be married, which,
If I speak otherwise than true,
Let thy father speak what credibly he hath heard.
But can it be Manuile will deal so unkindly,
To reward my justice with such monstrous ungentleness.
Have I dissembled for thy sake?
And doest thou now thus requite it?
In deed these many days I have not seen him,
Which hath made me marvel at his long absence.
But father, are you assured of the words he spake,
were concerning Manuile?
In sooth daughter, now it is forth,
I must needs confirm it.
Moister Manuile hath forsaken thee,
And at Chester must be married
To a mans daughter of no little wealth.
His own father procures it,
And therefore I dare credit it,
And do thou believe it,
For trust me daughter it is so.
Then good father pardon the injury,
That I have don to you only causing your grief,
By ouer-fond affecting a man so trothlesse.
And you likewise sir, I pray hold me excused,
As I hope this cause will allow sufficiently for me:
My love to Manuile, thinking he would requite it,
Hath made me double with my father and you,
And many more besides,
Which I will no longer hyde from you.
That enticing speeches should not beguile me,
I have made my self deaf to any but to him.
And lest any mans person should please me more than his,
I have dissembled the want of my sight:
Both which shadows of my irrevocable affections,
I have not spared to confirm before him,
My father, and all other amorous solicitors.
Wherewith not made acquainted, I perceive
My true intent hath wrought mine own sorrow.
And seeking by love to be regarded,
Am cut of with contempt, and despised.
Tell me sweet Em hast thou but fained all this while for his love,
That hath so discourteously forsaken thee.
Credit me father I have told you the troth,
Wherewith I desire you and Lord Valingford not to be displeased
For ought else I shall say,
Let my present grief hold me excused.
But may I live to see that vngratfullman
Justly rewarded for his treachery?
Poor Em would think her self not a little happy,
Favour my departing at this instant,
For my troubled thought desires to meditate alone in silence
Will not Em show one chereful look on Valingford?
Alas sir, blame her not, you see she hath good cause,
being so handled by this gentleman:
And so Isle leave you, and go comfort my poor wench
As well as I may.
Farewell good father.
Rosilio, Is this the place whereas the Duke William should meet me?
It is, and like your grace.
Go captain away, regard the charge I gave:
See all our men be martialed for the fight.
Dispose the VVardes as lately was devised.
And let the prisoners under several guards
Be kept apart until you hear from vs.
Let this suffice, you know my resolution.
If William Duke of Saxon be the man,
That by his answer sent vs, he would send
Not words but wounds: not parleys but alarms,
Must be descider of this controversy.
Rosilio, stay with me, the rest begone.
All but Demarch go shroud you out of sight,
For I will go parley with the Prince my self.
Should Zweno by this parley call you forth,
Upon intent injuriously to deal:
This offered too much opportunity.
No no Demarch, that were abreach
Against the law of Arms: therefore begone,
And leave vs here alone.
I see that Zweno is moister of his word.
Zweno, VVilliam of Saxonie greeted thee
Either well oryll, according to thy intent.
If well thou wish to him and Saxonie,
He bids thee friendly welcome as he can.
If ill thou wish to him and Saxanie,
He must withstand thy malice as he may.
VVilliam, for other name and title give I none
To him, who were he worthy of those honours
That Fortune and his predecessors left,
I ought by right and human curtsy
To grace his style with Duke of Saxonie.
But for I find a base degenerate mind,
I frame my speech according to the man,
And not the state that he unworthy holds.
Herein Zweno dost thou abase thy state,
To break the peace which by our ancestors
Hath heretofore been honourably kept.
And should that peace for ever have been kept,
Had not thy self been author of the breach:
Nor stands it with the honour of my state,
Or nature of a father to his child,
That I should so be robbed of my daughter,
And not unto the utmost of my power
Revenge so intolerable an injury.
Is this the colour of your quarrel Zweno?
I well perceive the wisest men may err.
And think you I conueyed away your daughter Blanch?
Art thou so impudent to deny thou did?
When that the proof thereof is manifest?
What proof is there?
Thine own confession is sufficient proof.
Did I confess I stole your daughter Blanch?
Thou did confess thou had a Lady hence.
I have and do.
Why that was Blanch my daughter.
Nay, that was Mariana,
who wrongfully thou detain prisoner.
Shameless persisting in thy ill,
Thou doest maintain a manifest vntrothe,
As she shall justify unto thy teethe.
Rosilio fetch her and the Marks hither.
It cannot be I should be so deceived.
I heard this night among the soldiers,
That in their watch they took a pensive Lady:
Who at the appointment of the Lord Dirot is yet in keeping.
What she is I know not,
Only thus much, I ouer-hard by chance.
And what of this.
It may be Blanch the King of Denmarkes daughter.
It may be so: but on my life it is not?
Yet Demarch, go and fetch her straight.
Pleases your highness, here is the Marks and Mariana.
See here, Duke VVilliam, your competitors
That were consenting to my daughters scope.
Let them resolut you of the truth hearing,
And here I vow and solemnly protest,
That in thy presence they shall lose their heads:
Unless I here where as my daughter is.
O Marks Lubeck how it grieves me,
That for my sake thou shouldest endure these bonds.
Be judge my soul that feels the martyrdom.
Duke VVilliam, you know it is for your cause,
It pleases thus the King to misconceive of me,
And for his pleasure doth me injury.
May it please your hightnes,
Here is the Lady you sent me for,
Away Demarch, what tell thou me of Ladies?
I so detest the dealing of their sex,
As that I count a lovers state to be the base
And vildest slavery in the world.
What humours are these: here is a strange alteration.
See Duke William, is this Blanch or no?
You know her, if you see her I am sure.
Zweno I was deceived, yea utterly deceived,
Yet this is she: this same is Lady Blanch.
And for mine error, here I am content
To do whatsoever Zweno shall set down.
Ah cruel Mariana thus to use
The man which loved and honoured thee with his heart.
When first I came into your highness court,
And VVilliam often importing me of love:
I did devise to ease the grief your daughter did sustain,
She should meet Sir William masked as I it were.
This put in proof, did take so good effect,
As yet it seems his grace is not resolved,
But it was I which he conveyed away.
May this be true? It cannot be but true.
Was it Lady Blanch which I conveyed away?
Inconstant Mariana,
Thus to deal with him which meant to thee nought but faith.
Pardon dear father my follies that are past,
Wherein I have neglected me duty
Which I in reverence ought to show your grace,
For led by love I thus have gone astray,
And now repent the errors I was in.
Stand up dear daughter though thy fault desesues
For to be punished in the extremest sort.
Yet love that covers multitude of sins
Makes love in parents wink at childrens faults.
Suffices Blanch thy father loves thee so,
Thy follies past he knows but will not know.
And here Duke VVilliam take my daughter to thy wife.
For well I am assured she loves thee well.
A proper coniuntion: as who should say,
Lately come out of the fire,
I would go thrust my self into the flame.
Let Masters nice go Saint it where she list,
And coyly quaint it with dissembling face.
I hold in scorn the fooleries that they use,
I being free will never subject my self
to any such as she is underneath the Sun.
Refuse thou to take my daughter to thy wife?
I tel thee Duke, this rash denial
May bring more mischief on thee then thou can avoid.
Conceit hath wrought such general dislike
Through the false dealing of Mariana,
That utterly I doe abhor their sex.
They are all disloyal, inconstant, all unjust:
Who tries as I have tried,
And finds as I have found,
Will say theirs no such creatures on the ground.
Inconstant Knight, though some deserve no trust
Theirs others faithful, loving, loyal, &amp; just.
How now Lord Valingford what makes these women here?
Here be two women, may it please your grace,
that are contracted to one man,
And are in strife whether shall have him to their husband.
Stand forth women and say,
To whether of you did he first give his faith.
To me forsooth.
To me my gracious Lord.
Speak Manuile, to whether did thou give thy faith?
To say the troth: this maid had first my love.
Yea Manuile, but there was no witness by.
Thy conscience Manuile a hundred witnesses.
She hath stolen a conscience to serve her own turn.
But you are deceived, in faith he will none of you.
In deed, dred Lord, so dear I held her love,
As in the same I put my whole delight.
But some impediments which at that instant happened,
Made me forsake her quite,
For which I had her fathers frank consent.
What were the impediments?
Why she could neither hear nor see.
Now she doth both. Maiden, how were you cured:
Pardon my Lord, Isle tell your grace the troth,
Be it not imputed to me as discredit.
I loved this Manuile so much, that still methought
When he was absent did present to me
The form and feature of that countenance
Which I did shrine an idol in mine heart.
And never could I see a man methought
That equalled Manuile in my partial eye.
Nor was there any love between vs lost,
But that I held the same in high regard,
Until repair of some unto our house,
Of whom my Manuile grew thus jealous:
As if he took exception I vouchsafed
To hear them speak, or saw them when they came:
On which I straight took order with my self
To void the scruple of his conscience,
By counterfeiting that I neither saw nor heard,
Any ways to rid my hands of them.
All this I did to keep my Manuiles love,
Which he unkindly seeks for to reward.
And did my Em to keep her faith with me
Dissemble that she neither heard nor saw.
Pardon me sweet Em, for I am only thine.
Lay off thy hands, disloyal as thou art,
Nor shalt thou have possession of my love,
That can so finely shift thy matters off.
•ut case I had been blind and could not see,
As often times such visitations falls
That pleases God which all things doth dispose:
Shouldest thou forsake me in regard of that?
I tell thee Manuile, had thou been blind,
Or deaf, or dumb, or else what impediments
might befall to man, Em would have loved and kept,
And honoured thee: yea, begged if wealth had faylde
For thy relief.
Forgive me sweet Em.
I do forgive thee with my heart,
And will forget thee too if case I can:
But never speak to me, nor seem to know me.
Then farewell frost:
Well fare a wench that will.
Now, Elner I am thine own my girl.
Mine Manuile? thou never shalt be mine.
I so detest thy villainy.
That whilst I live I will abhor thy company.
Is it come to this? of late, I had choice of twain
On either side to have me to her husband:
And now am utterly rejected of them both.
My Lord this gentleman when time was
Stood some thing in our light,
And now I think it not a miss
To laugh at him that sometime scorned at vs.
Content my Lord, invent the form.
Then thus.
I see that women are not general evils.
Blanch is fair: Methinkes I see in her,
A modest countenance, a heavenly blush.
Zweno, receive a reconciled foe,
Not as thy friend, but as thy son in law,
If so that thou be thus content.
I joy to see your grace so tractable.
Here take my daughter Blanch,
And after my desease the Denmark crown.
Now sir, how stands the case with you?
I partly am persuaded as your grace is,
My lord, he is best at ease that medleth least.
Sir may a man be so bold,
As to crave a word with you?
Yea, two or three: what are they?
I say, this maid will have thee to her husband.
And I say this: and thereof will I lay an hundred pound.
And I say this: whereon I will lay as much.
And I say neither: what say you to that?
If that be true: then are we both deceived.
Why it is true, and you are both deceived.
In mine eyes, this is the proprest wench.
Might I advise thee, take her unto thy wife.
It seems to me, she hath refused him.
Why theres the spite.
If one refuse him, yet may he have the other.
He will ask but her good will, and all her friends.
Might I advise thee, let them both alone.
Yea, thats the course, and thereon will I stand.
Such idle love henceforth I will detest.
The Fox will eat no grapes, and why?
I know full well, because they hang too hye.
And may it be a Millers daughter by her birth?
I cannot think but she is better borne.
Sir Thomas Goddard hight this reverent man,
Famed for his virtues and his good success:
Whose fame hath been renowned through the world.
Sir Thomas Goddard welcome to thy Prince,
And fair Em, frolic with thy good father.
As glad am I to find Sir Thomas Goddard
As good Sir Edmund Treford on the plains:
He like a shepherd, and thou our country Miller.
And longer let not Goddard live a day,
Then he in honour loves his sovereign.
But say Sir Thomas, shall I give thy daughter?
Goddard and all that he hath,
Doth rest at the pleasure of your Majesty.
And what says Em to lovely Valingford?
It seemed he loved you well,
That for your sake durst leave his King.
Em rests at the pleasure of your highness:
And would I were a wife for his desert.
Then here Lord Valingford,
Receive fair Em.
Here take her, make her thy espoused wife.
Then go we in, that preparation may be made,
to see these nuptials solemnly performed.

