BArons of England, and my noble Lords;
Though God and Fortune have bereft from vs
Victorious Richard scourge of Infidels,
And clad this Land in stole of dismal hew:
Yet give me leave to joy, and joy you all,
That from this womb hath sprung a second hope,
A King that may in rule and virtue both
Succeed his brother in his Empery.
My gracious mother Queen, and Barons all;
Though far unworthy of so high a place,
As is the Throne of mighty Englands King;
Yet Iohn your Lord, contented uncontent,
Will (as he may) sustain the heavy yoke
Of pressing cares, that hang upon a Crown.
My Lord of Pembrooke and Lord Salsbury,
Admit the Lord Chattilion to our presence;
That we may know what Philip King of France
(By his Ambassadors) requires of vs.
Dare lay my hand that Elinor can guess
Whereto this weighty Embassade doth tend:
If of my nephew Arthur and his claim,
Then say, my Son, I have not missde my aim.
My Lord Chattilion, welcome into England:
How fares our brother Philip king of France?
His Highness at my coming was in health,
And willed me to salute your Majesty,
And say the message he hath given in charge.
And spare not man, wee are prepared to hear.
Philip, by the grace of God most Christian King of France, having taken into his garden &amp; protection Are∣thur D. of Britain son and heir to Ieffrey thine elder brother, requires in the behalf of the said Arthur, the kingdom of England, with the lordship of Ireland, Poi∣ters, Aniow, Toraine, Maine: and I attend thine answer.
A small request: belike hee makes account,
That England, Ireland, Poiters, Aniow, Toraine, Maine,
Are nothing for a King to give at once:
I wonder what he means to leave for me.
Tell Philip, he may keep his Lords at home,
With greater honour than to send them thus
On Embassades that not concern himself,
Or if they did, would yield but small return.
Is this thine answer?
It is, and too good an answer for so proud a mes∣sage.
Then King of England, in my Masters name,
And in Prince Arthur duke of Britains name,
I doe defy thee as an enemy,
And wish thee to prepare for bloody wars.
My Lord (that stands upon defiance thus)
Commend me to my nephew, tell the boy,
That I Queen Eleanor (his grandmother)
Upon my blessing charge him leave his Arms,
Whereto his head-strong mother pricks him so:
Her pride we know, and know her for a Dame
That will not stick to bring him to his end,
So she may bring herself to rule a realm.
Next, wish him to forsake the King of France,
And come to me and to his uncle here,
And he shall want for nothing at our hands.
This shall I do, and thus I take my leave.
Pembrooke, convey him safely to the sea,
But not in haste: for as we are advised,
We mean to be in France as soon as he,
To fortify such towns as we possess
In Aniow, Toraine, and in Normandy.
Please it your majesty, here is the shrive of North∣hamptonshire, with certain persons that of late commit∣ted a riot, and have appeald to your Majesty, beseeching your Highness for special cause to hear them.
Will them come near, and while wee hear the cause,
Go Salsbury and make provision,
We mean with speed to pass the Sea to France.
Say shrive, what are these men, what have they done?
Or whereto tends the course of this appeal?
Please it your majesty, these two brethren vnna∣turally falling at odds about their fathers living, have bro∣ken your Highness peace, in seeking to right their own wrongs without course of Law, or order of Justice, &amp; un∣lawfully assembled thēselues in mutinous manner, having committed a riot, appealing from trial in their country to your Highness: and here I Thomas Nidigate shrine of Nor∣thamptonshire do deliver them over to their trial.
My Lord of Essex, will thoffenders to stand forth, and tell the cause of their quarrel.
Gentlemen, it is the Kings pleasure that you dis∣cover your griefs, and doubt not but you shall have justice.
Please it your M. the wrong is mine: yet will I a∣bide all wrongs, before I once open my mouth t'vnrip the shameful slander of my parents, the dishonour of my self, &amp; the bad dealing of my brother in this princely assembly.
Then, by my Prince his leave, shall Robert speak,
And tell your Majesty what right I have
To offer wrong, as he accounts wrong.
My father (not unknown unto your Grace)
Received his spurs of Knighthood in the Field,
At kingly Richards hands in Palestine,
When as the walls of Icon gave him way:
His name sir Robert Fauconbridge of Mountbery.
What by succession from his Ancestors,
And warlike service under Englands Arms,
His living did amount to at his death
Two thousand marks revenue every year:
And this (my Lord) I challenge for my right,
As lawful heir to Robert-Fauconbridge.
If first-borne son be heir indubitate
By certain right of Englands ancient Law,
How should my self make any other doubt,
But I am heir to Robert Fauconbridge?
Fond youth, to trouble these our princely cares,
Or make a question in so plain a case:
Speak, is this man thine elder brother borne?
Please it your Grace with patience for to hear.
I not deny but he mine elder is,
Mine elder brother too: yet in such sort,
As he can make no title to the land.
A doubtful tale as ever I did hear,
Thy brother, and thine elder, and no heir:
Explain this dark Enigma.
I grant (my Lord) he is my mothers son,
Base borne, and base begot, no Fauconbridge.
Indeed the world reputes him lawful heir,
My father in his life did count him so,
And here my mother stands to prove him so:
But I (my Lord) can prove, and doe aver
Both to my mothers shame, and his reproach,
He is no heir, nor yet legitimate.
Then (gracious Lord) let Fauconbridge enjoy
The living that belongs to Fauconbridge.
And let not him possess another right.
Prove this, the land is thine by Englands law.
Ungracious youth, to rip thy mothers shame,
The womb from whence thou did thy being take,
All honest ears abhor thy wickedness,
But gold I see doth beat down Natures law.
My gracious Lord, and you thrice reverend Dame,
That see the tears distilling from mine eyes,
And scalding sighs blown from a rented heart:
For honour and regard of womanhood,
Let me entreat to be commanded hence.
Let not these ears here receive the hissing sound
Of such a viper, who with poisoned words
Doth masserate the bowels of my soul.
Lady, stand up, be patient for a while:
And fellow, say, whose bastard is thy brother?
Not for my self, nor for my mother now;
But for the honour of so brave a man,
Whom hee accuses with adultery:
Here I beseech your Grace upon my knees,
To count him mad, and so dismiss vs hence.
Nor mad, nor mazed, but well advised, I
Charge thee before this royal presence here
To be a bastard to king Richards self,
Son to your Grace, and brother to your Majesty.
Thus bluntly, and
Young man, thou need not be ashamed of thy kin,
Nor of thy Sire. But forward with thy proof.
The proof so plain, the argument so strong,
As that your Highness and these noble Lords,
And all (save those that have no eyes to see)
Shall swear him to be bastard to the king.
First, when my Father was Ambassador
In Germanie unto the Emperor,
The King lay often at my fathers house;
And all the realm suspected what befell:
And at my fathers backe-returne again
My mother was delivered, as tic sed,
Six weeks before the account my father made.
But more than this: look but on Philips face,
His features, actions, and his lineaments,
And all this princely presence shall confess,
He is no other but King Richards son.
Then gracious Lord, rest he King Richards son,
And let me rest safe in my Fathers right,
That am his rightful son and only heir.
Is this thy proof, and all thou hast to say?
I have no more, nor need I greater proof.
First, where thou said in absence of thy Sire
My brother often lodged in his house:
And what of that? base groom to slander him,
That honoured his Ambassador so much,
In absence of the man to cheer the wife?
This will not hold, proceed unto the next.
Thou say she teemde six weeks before her time,
Why good sir Squire, are you so cunning grown,
To make account of women's reckonings?
Spit in your hand and to your other proofs:
Many mischances happen in such affairs,
To make a woman come before her time.
And where thou say, he looks like the King,
In action, feature and proportion:
Therein I hold with thee, for in my life
I never saw so lively counterfeit
Of Richard Cordelion, as in him.
Then good my Lord, be you indiffrent Judge,
And let me have my living and my right.
Nay, hear you sir, you run away too fast:
Know you not, Omne simile non est item?
Or have read in. Hark ye good sir,
It was thus I warrant, and no otherwise,
She lay with sir Robert your father, and thought upon King Richard my son, and so your brother was formed in this fashion.
Madame, you wrong me thus to jest it out,
I crave my right: King Iohn, as thou art King,
So be thou just, and let me have my right.
Why (foolish boy) thy proofs are frivolous,
Nor can thou challenge any thing thereby.
But thou shalt see how I will help thy claim:
This is my doom, and this my doom shall stand
Irrevocable, as I am king of England.
For thou know not, weal ask of them that know,
His mother and himself shall end this strife:
And as they say, so shall thy living paste.
My Lord, herein I challenge you of wrong,
To give away my right, and put the doom
Unto themselves. Can there be likelihood
That she will loose?
Or he will give the living from himself?
It may not be my Lord. Why should it be?
Lords, keep him back, &amp; let him hear the doom.
Essex, first ask the Mother thrice who was his Sire?
Lady Margaret, widow of Fauconbridge,
Who was Father to thy Son Philip?
Please it your Majesty, Sir Rob. Fauconbridge.
This is right, ask my fellow there if I be a thief.
Ask Philip whose son he is.
Philip, who was thy Father?
Mas my Lord, and that's a question: and you had not taken some pains with her before, I should have desired you to ask my Mother.
Say, who was thy Father?
Faith (my Lord) to answer you, sure hee is my father that was nearest my mother when I was begotten, and him I think to be Sir Robert Fauconbridge.
Essex, for fashions sake demand again,
And so an end to this contention.
Was ever man thus wronged as Robert is?
Philip speak I say, who was thy father?
Young man how now, what art thou in a trance?
Philip awake, the man is in a dream.
Philippus atauis aedite Regibus.
What say thou Philip, sprung of ancient Kings?
Quo me repeat tempests?
What wind of honour blows this fury forth?
Or whence proceed these fumes of Majesty?
Me thinks I hear a hollow Echo sound,
That Philip is the son unto a King:
The whistling leaves upon the trembling trees,
Whistle in consort I am Richards son:
The bubbling murmur of the waters fall,
Records Philippus Regius filius:
Birds in their flight make music with their wings,
Filling the air with glory of my birth:
Birds, bubbles, leaves, and mountains, Echo, all
Ring in mine ears, that I am Richards son.
Fond man! ah whither art thou carried?
How are thy thoughts ywrapt in Honours heaven?
Forgetful what thou art, and whence thou came.
Thy Fathers land cannot maintain these thoughts,
These thoughts are far unfitting Fauconbridge:
And well they may; for why this mounting mind
Doth soar too high to stoup to Fauconbridge.
Why how now? know thou where thou art?
And know thou who expects thine answer here?
Wilt thou upon a frantic matting vain
Go loose thy land, and say thy self base borne?
No, keep thy land, though Richard were thy Sire,
What ere thou think, say thou art Fauconbridge.
Speak man, be sudden, who thy Father was.
Please it your Majesty, Sir Robert
Philip, that Fauconbridge cleaves to thy jaws:
It will not out, I cannot for my life
Say I am son unto a Fauconbridge.
Let land and living go, tic Honours fire
That makes me swear King Richard was my Sire.
Base to a King adds title of more State,
Than Knights begotten, though legitimate.
Please it your Grace, I am King Richards Son.
Robert revive thy heart, let sorrow die,
His faltering tongue not suffers him to lie.
What head-strong fury doth enchant my son?
Philip cannot repent, for he hath done.
Then Philip blame not me, thy self hast lost
By wilfulness, thy living and thy land.
Robert, thou art the heir of Fauconbridge,
God give thee joy, greater than thy desert.
Why how now Philip, give away thine own?
Madame, I am bold to make my self your nephew,
The poorest kinsman that your Highness hath:
And with this Proverb gin the world anew,
Help hands, I have no lands, Honour is my desire;
Let Philip live to show himself worthy so great a Sire.
Philip, I think thou knew thy Grandams mind:
But cheer thee boy, I will not see thee want
As long as Elinor hath foot of land;
Henceforth thou shalt be taken for my son,
And waite on me and on thine uncle here,
Who shall give honour to thy noble mind.
Philip kneel down, that thou moist thoroughly know
How much thy resolution pleases vs,
Rise up Sir Richard Plantaginet king Richards Son.
Grant heavens that Philip once may show him∣self
Worthy the honour of Plantaginet,
Or basest glory of a Bastards name.
Now Gentlemen, we will away to France,
To check the pride of Arthur and his mates:
Essex, thou shalt be Ruler of my Realm,
And toward the maine charges of my wars,
Isle cease the lasic Abbey lubbers lands
Into my hands to pay my men of war.
The Pope and Popelings shall not grease themselves
With gold and groats, that are the soldiers due.
Thus forward Lords, let our command be done,
And march we forward mightily to France.
Madame, I beseech you deign me so much lea∣sure as the hearing of a matter that I lōg to impart to you.
What's the matter Philip? I think your suit in secret, tends to some money matter, which you suppose burns in the bottom of my chest.
No Madam, it is no such suit as to beg or borrow,
But such a suit, as might some other grant,
I would not now have troubled you withal.
A Gods name let vs hear it.
Then Madam thus, your Ladyship sees well,
How that my scandal grows by means of you,
In that report hath rumord up and down,
I am a bastard, and no Fauconbridge.
This gross attained so tilted in my thoughts,
Maintaining combat to abridge mine ease,
That field and town, and company alone,
What so I doe, or wheresoever I am,
I cannot chase the slander from my thoughts.
If it be true, resolve me of my fire,
For pardon Madam, if I think amiss.
Be Philip Philip, and no Fauconbridge,
His father doubtless was as brave a man.
To you on knees, as sometime Phaeton,
Mistrusting sielly Merop for his sire,
Straining a little bashful modesty,
I beg some instance whence I am extraught.
Yet more ado to haste me to my grave,
And wilt thou too become a mothers cross?
Must I accuse my self to close with you?
Slander my self, to quiet your affects?
Thou moou'st me Philip with this idle talk,
Which I remit, in hope this mood will die.
Nay Lady mother, hear me further yet,
For strong conceit drives duty hence awhile:
Your husband Fauconbridge was father to that son,
That carries marks of Nature like the fire,
The son that blotteth you with wedlockes breach,
And holds my right, as lineal in descent
From him whose form was figured in his face▪
Can Nature so dissemble in her frame,
To make the one so like as like may be,
And in the other print no character
To challenge any mark of true descent?
My brothers mind is base, and too too dull,
To mount where Philip lodges his affects,
And his external graces that you view,
(Though I report it) counterpoise not mine:
His constitution plain debility,
Requires the chair, and mine the seat of steel.
Nay, what is he, or what am I to him?
When any one that knows how to carpe,
Will scarcely judge vs both one country borne.
This Madam, this, hath drove me from my self:
And here by heavens eternal lamps I swear,
As cursed Narrow with his mother did,
So I with you, if you resolve me not.
Let mothers tears quench out thy angers fire,
And urge no further what thou doest require.
Let sons entreaty sway the mother now,
Or else she dies: Isle not infringe my vow.
Unhappy task: must I recount my shame,
Blab my misdeeds, or by concealing die?
Some power strike me speechless for a time,
Or take from him a while his hearings use.
Why wish I so, unhappy as I am?
The fault is mine, and he the faulty fruit,
I blush, I faint, oh would I might be mute.
Mother be brief, I long to know my name.
And longing die, to shroud thy mothers shame.
Come Madame come, you need not be so loath,
The shame is shared equal twixt vs both.
First not a slackenesse in me, worthy blame,
To be so old, and cannot write my name.
Good mother resolve me.
Then Philip hear thy fortune, and my grief,
My honours loss by purchase of thy self,
My shame, thy name, and husbands secret wrong,
All maimd and stained by youths unruly sway.
And when thou know from whence thou art extraught,
Or if thou knew what suites, what threats, what fears,
To move by love, or massacre by death.
To yield with love, or end by loves contempt.
The mightiness of him that courted me,
Who tempered terror with his wanton talk,
That something may extenuate the guilt.
But let it not advantage me so much:
Upbraid me rather with the Roman dame,
That shed her blood to wash away her shame.
Why stand I to expostulate the crime
With pro &amp; country, now the deed is done?
When to conclude two words may tell the tale,
That Philips father was a princes son,
Rich Englands rule, worlds only terror he,
For honours loss left me with child of thee:
Whose son thou art, then pardon me the rather,
For fair King Richard was thy noble father.
Then Robin Fauconbridge I wish thee joy,
My sire a king, and I a landless boy.
Gods lady mother, the world is in my debt,
There's something owing to Plantaginet.
I marry sir, let me alone for game,
Isle act some wonders now I know my name.
By blessed Mary. Isle not sell that pride
For Englands wealth, and all the world beside.
Sit fast the proudest of my fathers foes,
Away good mother, there the comfort goes.
Now gin we broach the title of thy claim,
Young Arthur in the Albion territories,
Skaring proud Angiers with a puissant siege:
Brave Austria, cause of Cordelions death,
Is also come to aide thee in thy wars;
And all our Forces join for Arthurs right.
And, but for causes of great consequence,
Pleading delay till news from England come,
Twice should not Titan hide him in the West,
To cool the f•t-locks of his weary team,
Till I had with an unresisted shock
Controlled the manage of proud Angiers walls,
Or made a forfet of my fame to Chance.
May be that Iohn in conscience or in fear
To offer wrong where you impugn the ill,
Will send such calm conditions back to France,
As shall rebate the edge of fearful wars:
If so, forbearance is a deed, well done.
Ah mother, possession of a Crown is much,
And Iohn as I have heard reported of,
For present vantage would adventure far.
The world can witness, in his Brothers time,
He took upon him rule, and almost reign;
Then must it follow as a doubtful point,
That he will resign the rule unto his Nephew.
I rather think the menace of the world
Sounds in his ears, as threats of no esteem,
And sooner would he scorn Europe's power,
Than loose the smallest title he enjoys;
For questionless he is an Englishman.
Why are the English peerless in compare?
Brave Cavaliers as ere that Island bred,
Have lived and died, and dared, and done enough,
Yet never graced their country for the cause:
England is England, yielding good and bad,
And Iohn of England is as other Iohns.
Trust me young Arthur, if thou like my reed,
Praise thou the French that help thee in this need.
The Englishman hath little cause I trow,
To spend good speeches on so proud a foe.
Why Arthur here's his spoil that now is gone,
Who when he lived outrou'd his brother Iohn:
But hasty cures that lie so long to catch,
Come halting home, and meet their ouer-match.
But news comes now, here's the Ambassador.
And in good time, welcome my Lord Chattel∣lion:
What news? will Iohn accord to our command?
Be I not brief to tell your Highness all,
He will approach to interrupt my tale:
For one self bottom brought vs both to France.
He on his part will try the chance of war,
And if his words infer assured truth,
Will loose himself, and all his followers,
Ere yield unto the least of your demands.
The Mother Queen she takes on amain
Against Lady Constance, counting her the cause
That doth effect this claim to Albion,
Conjuring Arthur with a grandames care,
To leave his Mother; willing him submit
His state to Iohn, and her protection,
Who (as she saith) are studious for his good.
More circumstance the season intercepts:
This is the sum, which briefly I have shown.
This bitter wind must nip some-bodies spring:
Sudden and brief, why so, tic harvest weather.
But say Chattilion, what persons of account are with him?
Of England, Earl Pembrooke and Salisbury,
The only noted men of any name.
Next them, a bastard of the Kings deceased,
A hardy wild-head, tough and venturous,
With many other men of high resolve.
Then is there with them Elinor Mother Queen,
And Blanch her Niece, daughter to the King of Spain:
These are the prime birds of this hot adventure.
Me seems Iohn, an ouer-daring spirit
Effects some frenzy in thy rash approach,
Treading my Confines with thy armed troupes.
I rather looked for some submiss reply
Touching the claim thy Nephew Arthur makes
To that which thou unjustly dost usurp.
For that Chattilion can discharge you all,
I list not plead my Title with my tongue.
Nor came I hither with intent of wrong
To France or thee, or any right of thine;
But in defence and purchase of my right,
The town of Angiers: which thou dost begirt
In the behalf of Lady Constance son,
Whereto nor he nor she can lay just claim.
Yes (false intruder) if that just be just,
And head-strong usurpation put apart,
Arthur my Son, heir to thy elder brother,
Without ambiguous shadow of descent,
Is Sovereign to the substance thou withholdst.
Misgouernd gossip, stain to this resort,
Occasion of these vndecided jars,
I say (that know) to check thy vain suppose,
Thy son hath nought to do with that he claims.
For proof whereof, I can infer a Will,
That bars the way he urges by descent.
A Will indeed, a crabbed women's will,
Wherein the devil is an overseer,
And proud dame Elinor sole Executresse:
More wills than so, on peril of my soul,
Were never made to hinder Arthurs right.
But say there was, as sure there can be none,
The Law intends such testaments as void,
Where right descent can no way be impeached.
Peace Arthur peace, thy mother makes thee wings
To soar with peril after Icarus,
And trust me yongling for the Fathers sake,
I pity much the hazard of thy youth.
Beshrew you else how pitiful you are,
Ready to weep to hear him ask his own;
Sorrow betide such Grandames and such grief,
That minister a poison for pure love.
But who so blind, as cannot see this beam,
That you forsooth would keep your cousin down,
For fear his mother should be used too well?
I there's the grief, confusion catch the brain,
That hammers shifts to stop a Princes reign.
Impatient, frantic, common slanderer,
Immodest dame, vnnurtur'd quarreller,
I tell thee I, not envy to thy son,
But justice makes me speak as I have done.
But here's no proof that shows your son a king.
What wants, my sword shall more at large set down
But that may break before the truth be known.
Then this may hold till all his tight be shown.
Good words sir sauce, your betters are in place.
Not you sir doughty, with your Lyons case.
Ah joy betide his soul, to whom that spoil belonged:
Ah Richard, how thy glory here is wronged.
Me thinks that Richards pride &amp; Richards fall,
Should be a president t'affright you all.
What words are these? how do my sinews shake?
My fathers foe clad in my fathers spoil,
A thousand furies kindle with revenge,
This heart that choler keeps a consistory•,
Searing my inwards with a brand of hate:
How doth Alecto whisper in mine ears?
Delay not Philip, kill the villain straight,
Disrobe him of the matchless monument
Thy fathers triumph ore the Savages,
Base heardgroom, coward peasant, worse than a threshing slave,
What make thou with the Trophy of a king?
Sham'st thou not coistrel, loathsome dunghill swad,
To grace thy carcass with an ornament
Too precious for a Monarchs coverture?
Scarce can I temper due obedience
Unto the presence of my Sovereign,
From acting outrage on this trunk of hate:
But arm thee traitor, wronger of renown,
For by his soul I swear, my Fathers soul,
Twice will I not review the mornings rise,
Till I have torn that Trophy from thy back,
And split thy heart for wearing it so long.
Philip hath sworn, and if it be not done,
Let not the world repute me Richards son.
Nay soft sir bastard, hearts are not split so soon,
Let them rejoice that at the end doe win:
And take this lesson at thy foe-mans hand,
Pawn not thy life to get thy Fathers skin.
Well may the world speak of his knightly valour,
That wins this hide to wear a Ladies favour.
Ill may I thrive, and nothing brooke with me,
If shortly I present it not to thee.
Lordings forbear, for time is coming fast,
That deeds may try what words can not determine,
And to the purpose for the cause you come.
Me seems you set right in chance of war,
Yielding no other reasons for your claim,
But so and so, because it shall be so.
So wrong shall be subornd by trust of strength:
A tyrants practise to invest himself,
Where weak resistance gives wrong the way.
To check the which, in holy lawful arms,
I, in the right of Arthur, Geffreys son,
Am come before this city of Angiers,
To bar all other false supposed claim,
From whence, or howsoever the error springs.
And in his quarrel on my princely word,
Isle fight it out unto the latest man.
Know King of France, I will not be commanded
By any power or prince in Christendom,
To yield an instance how I hold mine own,
More than to answer, that mine own is mine,
But wilt thou see me parley with the Town,
And hear them offer me allegiance,
Fealty and homage, as true liege men ought.
Summon them, I will not believe it till I see it, and when I see it, Isle soon change it.
You men of Angiors, and as I take it my loyal subjects, I have summoned you to the walls: to dispute on my right, were to think you doubtful therein, which I am persuaded you are not. In few words, our brothers son, backed with the king of France, have beleagred your town upon a false pretended title to the same: in defence whereof I your liege Lord have brought our power to fence you from the Usurper, to free your intended servitude, and vt∣terly to supplant the foemen, to my right and your rest. Say then, who keep you the town for?
For our lawful King.
I was no less persuaded: then in Gods name o∣pen your gates, and let me enter.
And it please your Highness we control not your title, neither will wee rashly admit your entrance: if you be lawful King, with all obedience we keep it to your use, if not King, our rashness to be impeached for yielding, without more considerate trial: wee answer not as men lawless, but to the behoof of him that proves lawful.
I shall not come in then?
No my Lord, till we know more.
Then hear me speak in the behalf of Arthur son of Geffrey, elder brother to Iohn, his title manifest, with out contradiction, to the crown &amp; kingdom of England, with Angiers, &amp; divers towns on this side the sea: will you acknowledge him your liege Lord, who speaks in my word, to entertain you with all favours, as beseems a King to his subjects, or a friend to his welwillers: or stand to the peril of your contēpt, whē his title is proved by the sword.
We answer as before, till you have proved one right, we acknowledge none right, he that tries himself our Sovereign; to him will we remain firm subjects, and for him, and in his right we hold our town, as desirous to know the truth, as loath to subscribe before we know: more than this we cannot say, &amp; more than this we dare not do.
Then Iohn I defy thee, in the name and behalf of Arthur Plantaginet, thy king and cousin, whose right and patrimony thou detain, as I doubt not, ere the day end, in a set battle make thee confess; whereunto, with a zeal to right, I challenge thee.
I accept thy challenge, and turn the defiance to thy throat.
And art thou gone misfortune haunt thy steps,
And chill cold fear assail thy times of rest.
Morpheus leave here thy silent Eban cave,
Besiege his thoughts with dismal fantasies,
And ghastly objects of pale threatening Morse.
Affright him every minute with stern looks,
Let shadow temper terror in his thoughts,
And let the terror make the coward mad,
And in his madness let him fear pursuit,
And so in frenzy let the peasant die.
Here is the ransom that allaies his rage,
The first freehold that Richard left his son:
With which I shall surprise his living foes,
As Hectors statue did the fainting Greeks.
Iohn by the grace of God King of England, Lord of Ireland, Aniou, Toraine, &amp;c. demands once a∣gain of you his subjects of Angiers, if you will quietly sir∣render up the town into his hands?
Philip by the grace of God King of France, demands in the behalf of Arthur Duke of Britain, if you will surrender up the town into his hands, to the use of the said Arthur.
Herrolds go tell the two victorious Princes, that we the poor Inhabitants of Angiers, require a parley of their Majesties.
We go.
Harold, what answer doe the Townsmen send?
Will Angiers yield to Philip King of France?
The Townsmen on the walls accept your Grace.
And crave a parley of your Majesty.
You citizens of Angiers, have your eyes
Beheld the slaughter that our English bows
Have made upon the coward fraudful French?
And have you wisely pondered therewithal
Your gain in yielding to the English King?
Their loss in yielding to the English King.
But Iohn, they saw from out their highest towers
The Cheualiers of France and crosse-bow-shot
Make lanes of slaughterd bodies through thine host,
And are resolved to yield to Arthurs right.
Why Philip, though thou braust it fore the walls,
Thy conscience knows that Iohn hath won the field.
What ere my conscience knows, thy army feels
That Philip had the better of the day.
Philip indeed hath got the Lions case,
Which here he holds to Lymoges disgrace.
Base Duke to fly and leave such spoils behind:
But this thou knew of force to make me stay.
It fared with thee as with the mariner,
Spying the huge Whale, whose monstrous bulk
Doth bear the waives like mountains fore the wind,
That throws out empty vessels, so to stay
His fury, while the ship doth sail away.
Philip it is thine: and fore this princely presence,
Madame, I humbly lay it at your feet,
Being the first adventure I achieved,
And first exploit your Grace did me enjoin:
Yet many more I long to be enjoined.
Philip I take it, and I thee command
To wear the same as erst thy father did:
Therewith receive this favour at my hands,
T'incourage thee to follow Richards fame.
Ye Citizens of Angiers are ye mute?
Arthur or Iohn, say which shall be your King?
We care not which, if once we knew the right
But till we know, we will not yield our right.
Might Philip counsel two so mighty Kings,
As are the Kings of England and of France,
He would advise your Graces to unite
And knit your forces against these citizens,
Pulling their battered walls about their ears.
The Town once won, then strive about the claim,
For they are minded to delude you both.
Kings, Princes, Lords, &amp; Knights assembled here,
The Citizens of Angiers all by me
Entreat your Majesty to hear them speak:
And as you like the motion they shall make,
So to account and follow their advice.
Speak on, we give thee leave.
Then thus: whereas the young and lusty knight▪
Incites you on to knit your kingly strengths:
The motion cannot choose but please the good,
And such as love the quiet of the State.
But how my Lords, how should your strengths be knit?
Not to oppress your subjects and your friends,
And fill the world with brawls and mutinies:
But unto peace your forces should be knit
To live in Princely league and amity:
Doe this, the gates of Angiers shall give way,
And stand wide open to your hearts content.
To make this peace a lasting bond of love,
Remains one only honourable means,
Which by your pardon I shall here display.
Lewis the Dolphin and the heir of France,
A man of noted valour through the world,
Is yet unmarried: let him take to wife
The beauteous daughter of the king of Spain,
Niece to K. Iohn, the lovely Lady Blanch,
Begotten on his sister Eleanor.
With her in marriage will her uncle give
Castles and towers, as fitteth such a match.
The Kings thus joined in league of perfect love,
They may so deal with Arthur Duke of Britain,
Who is but young, and yet unmeet to reign,
As he shall stand contented every way.
Thus have I boldly (for the common good)
Delivered what the City gave in charge.
And as upon conditions you agree,
So shall we stand content to yield the Town.
A proper peace, if such a motion hold;
These Kings bear arms for me, and for my right,
And they shall share my lands to make them friends.
Son Iohn, follow this motion, as thou lo∣uest thy mother.
Make league with Philip, yield to any thing:
Lewis shall have my niece, and then be sure
Arthur shall have small succour out of France.
Brother of France, you hear the Citizens:
Then tell me, how you mean to deal herein.
Why Iohn, what can thou give unto thy Niece,
That hast no foot of land, but Arthurs right?
Bear lady Citizens, I like your choice,
A lovely damsel is the Lady Blanch,
Worthy the heir of Europe for her fear.
What kings, why stand you gazing in a trance?
Why how now Lords? accursed Citizens
To fill and tickle their ambitious ears,
With hope of gain, that springs from Arthurs loss.
Some dismal Planet at thy birth-day reigned,
For now I see the fall of all thy hopes.
Lady, and Duke of Britain, know you both,
The King of France respects his honour more,
Than to betray his friends and favourers.
Princess of Spain, could you affect my Son,
If we upon conditions could ago?
Swounds Madam, take an English Gentleman?
Slave as I was, I thought to have moved the match.
Grandam you made me half a promise once,
That Lady Blanch should bring me wealth enough,
And make me heir of store of English land.
Peace Philip, I will look thee out a wife,
We must with policy compound this strife.
If Lewis get her, well, I say no more:
But let the frolic Frenchman take no scorn,
If Philip front him with an English horn.
Lady, what answer make you to the K. of France?
Can you affect the Dolphin for your Lord?
I thank the King that likes of me so well,
To make me Bride unto so great a Prince:
But give me leave my Lord to pause on this,
Least being too too forward in the cause,
It may be blemish to my modesty.
Do you confer awhile about the Dower,
And I will school my modest Niece so well,
That she shall yield as soon as you have done.
I, theres the wretch that broached all this il,
Why fly I not upon the Beldams face,
And with my nails pull forth her hateful eyes.
Sweet mother cease these hasty matting fits:
For my sake, let my Grandam have her will.
O would she with her hands pull forth my heart,
I could afford it to appease these broils.
But (mother) let vs wisely wink at all,
Least farther harms ensue our hasty speech.
Brother of England, what dowry wilt thou give
Unto my son in marriage with thy Niece?
First Philip knows her dowry out of Spain,
To be so great as may content a King:
But more to mend and amplify the same,
I give in more ey thirty thousand marks.
For land I leave it to thine own demand.
Then I demand Volquesson, Torain, Main,
Poiters and Aniou, these five Provinces,
Which thou as King of England holdst in France:
Then shall our peace be soon concluded on.
No less then five such Provinces at once?
Mother what shall I do? my brother got these lands
With much effusion of our English blood:
And shall I give it all away at once?
Iohn give it him, so shalt thou live in peace,
And keep the residue sans jeopardy.
Philip, bring forth thy son, here is my niece,
And here in marriage I do give with her
From me and my successors English Kings,
Volquesson, Poiters, Aniou, Torain, Main,
And thirty thousand marks of stipend coin.
Now citizens, how like you of this match?
We joy to see so sweet a peace begun.
Lewis with Blanch shall ever live content.
But now King Iohn, what say you to the Duke?
Father, speak as you may in his behalf.
K. Iohn, be good unto thy Nephew here,
And give him somewhat that shall please you best.
Arthur, although thou trouble Englands peace
Yet here I give thee Britain for thine own,
Together with the Earldom of Richmont,
And this rich city of Angiers withal,
And if thou seek to please thine Uncle Iohn,
Shalt see my son how I will make of thee.
Now every thing is sorted to this end,
Lets in, and there prepare the marriage rites,
Which in S. Maries Chapel presently
Shall be performed ere this Presence part.
Madam good cheer, these drooping languishments
Add no redress to salve our awkward haps,
If heavens have concluded these events,
To small avail is bitter pensiveness:
Seasons will change, and so our present grief
May change with them, and all to our relief.
Ah boy, thy years I see are far too greene
To look into the bottom of these cares.
But I, who see the poise that weighs down
Thy weal, my wish, and all the willing means
Wherewith thy fortune and thy fame should mount.
What joy, what ease, what rest can lodge in me,
With whom all hope and hap doe disagree?
Yet Ladies tears, and cares, and solemn shows,
Rather then helps, heap up more work for woes.
If any power will hear a widows plaint,
That from a wounded soul implores revenge;
Send fell contagion to infect this clime,
This cursed country, where the traitors breath,
Whose perjury (as proud Briareus,)
Beleaguers all the Sky with mis-beleefe.
He promised Arthur, and he swear it too,
To fence thy right, and check thy fo-mans pride:
But now black-spotted Perjury as he is,
He takes a truce with Elnors damned brat,
And marries Lewis to her lovely Niece,
Sharing thy fortune, and thy birth-dayes gift
Between these lovers: ill betide the match.
And as they shoulder thee from out thine own,
And triumph in a widows tearefu•l cares:
So heavens cross them with a thriftless course,
Is all the blood yspilt on either part,
Closing the cranies of the thirsty earth,
Grown to a loue-game and a Bridal feast?
And must thy birth-right bid the wedding banes?
Poor helpless boy, hopeless and helpless too,
To whom misfortune seems no yoke at all.
Thy stay, thy state, thy imminent mishaps
Wounds thy mothers thoughts with feeling care,
Why look thou pale? the colour flies thy face:
I trouble now the fountain of thy youth,
And make it muddy with my doles discourse,
Go in with me, reply not lovely boy,
We must obscure this moan with melody,
Least worser wrack ensue our male-content.
This is the day, the long-desired day,
Wherein the Realms of England and of France
Stand highly blessed in a lasting peace.
Thrice happy is the Bridegroom and the Bride,
From whose sweet Bridal such a concord springs,
To make of mortal foes immortal friends.
Ungodly peace made by another war.
Unhappy peace, that ties thee from revenge,
Rouse thee Plantaginet, live not to see
The butcher of the great Plantaginet.
Kings, Princes, and ye Peers of either realms,
Pardon my rashness, and forgive the zeal
That carries me in fury to a deed
Of high desert, of honour, and of arms.
A boon (O Kings) a boon doth Philip beg
Prostrate upon his knee: which knee shall cleave
Unto the superficies of the earth,
Till France and England grant this glorious boon.
Speak Philip, England grants thee thy request.
And France confirms what ere is in his power.
Then Duke sit fast, I level at thy head,
Too base a ransom for my fathers life.
Princes, I crave the combat with the Duke
That braves it in dishonour of my sire.
Your words are past, nor can you now reverse
The Princely promise that revives my soul,
Whereat me thinks I see his sinews shake:
This is the boon (dread Lords) which granted once
Or life or death are pleasant to my soul;
Since I shall live and die in Richards right.
Base bastard, misbegotten of a King,
To interrupt these holy nuptial rites
With brawls and tumults to a Dukes disgrace;
Let it suffice, I scorn to join in fight,
With one so far unequal to my self.
A fine excuse, Kings if you will be Kings,
Then keep your words, and let vs combat it.
Philip, we cannot force the Duke to fight,
Being a subject unto neither Realm:
But tell me Austria, if an English Duke
Should dare thee thus, would thou accept the challenge?
Else let the world account the Austrich Duke
The greatest coward living on the earth.
Then cheer thee Philip, Iohn will keep his word,
Kneel down, in sight of Philip King of France,
And all these Princely Lords assembled here,
I gird thee with the sword of Normandy,
And of that Land I doe invest thee Duke:
So shalt thou be in living and in land
Nothing inferior unto Austria.
K. Iohn, I tell thee flatly to thy face,
Thou wrong'st mine honour: and that thou mai'st see
How much I scorn thy new made Duke and thee,
I flatly say, I will not be compelled:
And so farewell sir Duke of lowe degree,
Isle find a time to match you for this gear.
Stay Philip, let him go, the honours thine.
I cannot live unless his life be mine.
Thy forwardness this day hath joyed my soul,
And made me think my Richard lives in thee.
Lordings let's in, and spend the wedding day
In masks and triumphs, letting quarrels cease.
Stay king of France, I charge thee join not hands
With him that stands accursed of God and men.
Know Iohn, that I Pandulph Cardinal of Millaine, and Legate from the Sea of Rome, demand of thee in the name of our holy Father the Pope Innocent, why thou dost (con∣trary to the laws of our holy mother the Church, and our holy Father the Pope) disturb the quiet of the Church, and disanull the election of Stephen Langhton, whom his holy∣ness hath elected Archbishop of Canterbury: this in his holiness name I demand of thee?
And what hast thou or the Pope thy master to do to demand of me, how I employ mine own? Know sir priest, as I honour the Church and holy Church-men, so I scorn to be subject to the greatest Prelate in the world. Tell thy master so from me, and say, Iohn of England said it, that no∣for an Italian Priest of them all, shall either have tithe, told, or polling penny out of England; but as I am King, so will I reign next under God, supreme head both over spiritual and temporal: and he that contradicts me in this, Isle make him hop headless.
What K. Iohn, know you what you say, thus to blaspheme against our holy father the Pope?
Philip, though thou and all the Princes of Chri∣stendome suffer themselves to be abused by a Prelates sla∣very, my mind is not of such base temper. If the Pope will bee king of England, let him win it with the sword, I know no other title he can allege to mine inheritance.
Iohn, this is thine answer?
What then?
Then I Pandulph of Padua, Legate from the A∣postolike Sea, doe in the name of Saint Peter and his suc∣cessor our holy father Pope Innocent, pronounce thee ac∣cursed, discharging every of thy subjects of all duty and fealty that they doe owe to thee, and pardon and forgive∣ness of sin to those or them whatsoever, which shall car∣rye arms against thee, or murder thee: This I pronounce, and charge all good men to abhor thee as an excommu∣nicate person.
So sir, the more the fox is cursed the better a fares: if God bless me and my Land, let the Pope and his shave∣lings curse and spare not.
Furthermore, I charge thee Philip K. of France, and all the kings and princes of Christendom, to make war upon this miscreant: and whereas thou hast made a league with him, and confirmed it by oath, I doe in the name of our foresaid father the Pope, acquit thee of that oath, as unlawful, being made with an heretic; howe sai'st thou Philip, dost thou obey?
Brother of France, what say you to the Cardinal?
I say, I am sorry for your Majesty, requesting you to submit your self to the Church of Rome.
And what say you to our league, if I do not submit?
What should I say? I must obey the Pope.
Obey the Pope, and break your oath to God?
The Legate hath absolved me of mine oath:
Then yield to Rome, or I defy thee here.
Why Philip, I defy the Pope and thee,
False as thou art, and perjured King of France,
Unworthy man to be accounted King.
Giu'st thou thy sword into a Prelates hands?
Pandulph, where I of Abbots, Monks, and Friars
Have taken somewhat to maintain my wars,
Now will I take no more but all they have.
Isle rouse the lazy lubbers from their cells,
And in despite Isle send them to the Pops.
Mother come you with me, and for the rest
That will not follow Iohn in this attempt,
Confusion light upon their damned souls.
Come Lords, fight for your K. that fights for your good
And are they gone? Pandulph thy self shalt see
How France will fight for Rome and Romish rites.
Nobles to arms, let him not pass the seas,
Let's take him captive, and in triumph lead
The K. of England to the gates of Rome.
Arthur bestir thee man, and thou shalt see
What Philip K. of France will doe for thee.
And will your Grace upon your wedding day
Forsake your bride, and follow dreadful drums?
Nay, good my Lord, stay you at home with me.
Sweet heart content thee, and wee shall agree.
Follow my Lords, Lord Cardinal lead the way,
Drums shall be music to this wedding day.
Thus hath K. Richards son performed his vows,
And offred Austria's blood for sacrifice
Unto his fathers euerliuing soul.
Brave Cordelion, now my heart doth say,
I have deserved, though not to be thine heir,
Yet as I am, thy base begotten son,
A name as pleasing to thy Philips heart,
As to be called the Duke of Normandy.
Lie there a prey to every ravening foul:
And as my father triumphed in thy spoils,
And trod thine Ensigns underneath his feet,
So doe I tread upon thy cursed self,
And leave thy body to the fowls for food.
Thus hath the God of kings with conquering arm
Dispersed the foes to true succession,
Proud, and disturber of thy Countries peace,
Constance doth live to tame thine insolence,
And on thy head will now avenged be
For all the mischiefs hatched in thy brain.
Contemptuous Dame, irreverent Duchess thou,
To brave so great a Queen as Eleanor,
Base scold, hast thou forgot, that I was wife
And mother to three mighty English Kings?
I charge thee then, and you forsooth sir boy,
To set your Grandmother at liberty,
And yield to Iohn your Uncle and your King.
It is not thy words proud Queen shall carry it.
Nor yet thy threats proud Dame shall daunt my mind.
Sweet Grandam, and good mother leave these brawls.
Isle find a time to triumph in thy fall.
My time is now to triumph in thy fall,
And thou shalt know that Constance will triumph.
Good mother, weigh it is Queen Elinor,
Though she be captive, use her like her self.
Sweet Grandam bear with what my Mother says,
Your Highness shall be used honourably.
Lewis my Lord, Duke Arthur, and the rest,
To arms in hast, K. Iohn relies his men,
And gins the sight afresh: and swears withal
To loose his life, or set his mother free.
Arthur away, it is time to look about.
Why how now dame, what is your courage cooled?
No Elinor my courage gathers strength,
And hopes to lead both Iohn and thee as slaves:
And in that hope, I hale thee to the field.
Thus right triumphs, and Iohn triumphs in right:
Arth•r thou see, France cannot bolster thee:
Thy mothers pride hath brought thee to this fall.
But if at last nephew thou yield thy self
Into the gardance of thine uncle Iohn,
Thou shalt be used as becomes a Prince.
Uncle, my grandam taught her nephew this,
To bear captivity with patience.
Might hath prevailed, not right, for I am King
Of England, though thou wear the Diadem.
Son Iohn, soon shall wee teach him to for∣get
These proud presumptions, and to know himself.
Mother, he never will forget his claim,
I would he lived not to remember it.
But leaving this, we will to England now,
And take some order with our Popelings there,
That swell with pride and fat of lay men's lands.
Philip, I make thee chief in this affair,
Ransack the Abbeys, Cloisters, Priories,
Convert their coin unto my soldiers use:
And whatsoere he be within my Land,
That goes to Rome for justice and for law,
While he may have his right within the Realm,
Let him be judged a traitor to the State,
And suffer as an enemy to England.
Mother, wee leave you here beyond the seas,
As Regent of our Provinces in France,
While we to England take a speedy course,
And thank our God that gave vs victory.
Hubert de Burgh take Arthur here to thee,
Be he thy prisoner: Hubert keep him safe,
For on his life doth hang thy Sovereigns Crown,
But in his death consists thy Sovereigns bliss:
Then Hubert, as thou shortly hearst from me,
So use the prisoner I have given in charge.
Frolic young prince, though I your keeper be,
Yet shall your keeper live at your command.
As please my God, so shall become of me.
My son, to England, I will see thee shipped,
And pray to God to send thee safe ashore.
Now wars are done, I long to be at home,
To dive into the Monks and Abbots bags,
To make some sport among the smooth skinned Nuns,
And keep some revel with the fanzine Friars.
To England Lords, each look unto your charge,
And arm your selves against the Roman pride.
What, every man attached with this mishap?
Why frown you so, why droop ye Lords of France?
Me thinks it differs from a warrelike mind,
To lower it for a check or two of Chance.
Had Lymoges escaped the Bastards spite,
A little sorrow might have served our loss.
Brave Austria, heaven joys to have thee there.
His soul is safe and free from Purgatory▪
Our holy Father hath dispensed his sins,
The blessed Saints have heard our Orisons,
And all are mediators for his soul,
And in the right of these most holy wars,
His Holiness free pardon doth pronounce
To all that follow you against English heretikes,
Who stand accursed in our mother Church.
To aggravate the measure of our grief,
All male-content comes Constance for her Son.
Be brief good Madame, for your face imports
A tragic tale behind thats yet untold.
Her passions stop the organ of her voice,
Deep sorrow throbbeth mis-befalne events,
Out with it Lady, that our Act may end
A full Catastrophe of sad laments.
My tongue is tuned to story forth mishap:
When did I breath to tell a pleasing tale?
Must Constance speak? let tears prevent her talk:
Must I discourse? let Dido sigh and say,
She weeps again to hear the wrack of Troy:
Two words will serve, and then my tale is done:
Elnors proud brat hath robed me of my son.
Have patience Madame, this is chance of war:
He may be ransomed, we revenge his wrong.
Be it ne'er so soon, I shall not live so long.
Despair not yet, come Constance, go with me,
These clouds will fleet, the day will clear again.
Now Lewis, thy fortune buds with happy spring,
Our holy Fathers prayers effects this.
Arthur is safe, let Iohn alone with him,
Thy title next is fairst to Englands Crown:
Now stir thy father to begin with Iohn,
The Pope says I, and so is Albion thine.
Thanks my Lord Legate for your good conceit,
It is best we follow now the game is fair,
My father wants to work him your good words.
A few will serve to forward him in this,
Those shall not want: but let's about it then.
Come on you fat Franciscan, dally no longer, but show me where the Abbots treasure lies, or die.
Benedicamus Domini, was ever such an injury▪
Sweet S. Withhold of thy lenity, defend vs from extremity,
And hear vs for S. Charity, oppressed with austerity.
In nominee Domini, make I my homily,
Gentle gentility grieve not the Clergy.
Gray-gown'd good face, conjure ye,
ne'er trust me for a great
If this wast girdle hang thee not
that girds in thy coat.
Now bald and barefoot Bungie birds,
when up the gallows climbing,
Say Philip he had words enough,
to put you down with riming.
O pardon, O parce, S. Francis for mercy,
Shall shield thee from night-spels, and dreaming of devils,
If thou wilt forgive me, and never more grieve me,
With fasting and praying, and Hail Marie saying,
From black Purgatory, a penance right sorry:
Friar Thomas will warm you,
It shall never harm you.
Come leave off your rabble,
Sirs, hang up this losel.
For charity I beg his life,
Saint Francis chiefest Friar,
The best in all our Covent sir,
to keep a Vintners fire.
O strangle not the good old man,
my hostess oldest guest,
And I will bring you by and by
unto the Priors chest.
I, say thou so, &amp; if thou wilt the Friar is at liberty,
If not, as I am honest man, I hang you both for company.
Fr. Come hither, this is the chest, though simple to behold,
That wants not a thousand pound in silver and in gold.
My self will warrant full so much, I know the Abbots store,
Isle pawn my life there is no less, to have what ere is more.
I take thy word, the overplus unto thy share shall come,
But if there want of full so much, thy neck shall pay the sum.
Break up the Coffer, Friar.
Oh I am undone, fair Alice the Nun
Hath took up her rest in the Abbots chest.
Sancte benedicite, pardon my simplicity.
Fie Alice, confession will not salve this transgression.
What have we here, a holy Nun? so keep me God in health.
A smooth faced Nun (sor aught I know) is al the Abbots wealth.
Is this the Nunries chastity?
Beshrew me but I think
They go as oft to venery as niggards to their drink.
Why paltry Friar and Pander too, ye shameless shaven crown,
Is this the chest that held a hoard,
at least a thousand pound?
And is the hoard a holy whore?
well, be the hangman nimble,
He will take the pain to pay you home,
and teach you to dissemble.
Nun O spare the Friar Anthony,
a better never was
To sing a Dirige solemnly,
or read a morning mass.
If money be the means of this,
I know an ancient Nun,
That hath a hoard these seven years,
did never see the sun;
And that is yours, and what is ours,
so favour now be shown,
You shall command as commonly,
as if it were your own.
Your honour excepted.
I Thomas, I mean so.
From all save from Friars.
Good sir, doe not think so.
I think and see so:
why how came thou here?
To hide her from lay men.
Tic true sir, for fear.
For fear of the laity: a pitiful dred
When a Nun flies for succour to a fat Friars bed.
But now for your ransom my cloyster-bred conney,
To the chest that you speak of where lies so much money.
Fair sir, within this press, of plate and money is
The value of a thousand marks, and other thing by gis.
Let vs alone, and take it all, tic yours sir, now you know it.
Come on sir Friar, pick the locke, this gear doth cotton handsome,
That covetousness so cunningly must pay the lechers ran∣some.
What is in the hoard?
Friar Laurence my Lord, now holy water help vs,
Some witch or some devil is sent to delude vs:
Haud credo Laurentius, that thou should be pend thus
In the press of a Nun we are all undone,
And brought to discredence if thou be Friar Laurence,
 Amor vincit omnia, so Cato affirms,
And therefore a Friar whose fancy soon burns,
Because he is mortal and made of mould,
He omits what he ought, and doth more than he should.
How goes this gear? the Friars chest filled with
a falcon Nun.
The Nun again lockes Friar up,
to keep him from the Sun.
Belike the press is Purgatory,
or penance passing grievous:
The Friars chest a hell for Nuns!
how doe these dolts deceive vs?
Is this the labour of their lives, to feed and live at ease?
To revel so lasciviously as often as they please.
Isle mend the fault or fault my aim,
if I doe miss amending,
Tic better burn the Cloisters down,
than leave them for offending.
But holy you, to you I speak,
to you religious devil,
Is this the press that holds the sum,
to quit you for your evil?
I cry peccaui, parce me,
good sir I was beguiled.
Absolve sir for charity,
she would bee reconciled.
And so I shall, sirs bind them fast,
This is their absolution,
go hang them up for hurting them,
Haste them to execution.
O tempus edax rerum,
Give children books they tear them.
O vanitas vanitatis, in this waning aetatis,
At threescore well near, to go to this gear,
To my conscience a clog, to die like a dog.
Exaudi me Domino, siuis me parce
Dabo pecuniam, si habeo veniam.
To go and fetch it, I will dispatch it,
A hundred pound sterling, for my lives sparing.
Hoe, who is here? S. Francis be your speed,
Come in my flock, and follow me,
your fortunes I will reed.
Come hither boy, go get thee home,
and clime not over hie,
For from aloft thy fortune stands, in hazard thou shalt die.
God be with you Peter, I pray you come to our house a Sunday.
My boy show me thy hand, bless thee my boy,
For in thy palm I see a many troubles are ybent to dwell,
But thou shalt scope them all, and doe full well.
I thank you Peter, theres a cheese for your labour: my sister prays ye to come home, and tell her how many husbands she shall have, and she'll give you a rib of bacon.
My masters, stay at the towns end for me, Isle come to you all anon: I must dispatch some business with a Friar, and then Isle read your fortunes.
How now, a prophet! sir prophet whence are ye?
I am of the world and in the world, but live not as others, by the world: what I am I know, and what thou wilt be I know. If thou know me now, be answered: if not, enquire no more what I am.
Sir, I know you will be a dissembling knave, that deludes the people with blind prophecies: you are hee I look for, you shall away with me: bring away all the rabble, and you Friar Laurence, remember your ransom a hun∣dred pound, and a pardon for your self, and the rest; come on sir prophet, you shall with me, to receive a prophets re∣ward.
My masters, I have showed you what warrant I have for this attempt; I perceive by your heavy count∣nances, you had rather be otherwise employed, and for my own part, I would the King had made choice of some o∣there executioner: only this is my comfort, that a king com∣maunds, whose precepts neglected or omitted, threatened torture for the default. Therefore in brief, leave me, and be ready to attend the adventure: stay within that entry, and when you hear me cry, God save the King, issue suddenly forth, lay hands on Arthur, set him in this chair, wherein (once fast bound) leave him with me to finish the rest.
We go, though loath.
My Lord, will it please your Honour to take the benefit of the fair evening?
Gramercy Hubert for thy care of me,
In or to whom restraint is newly known,
The joy of walking is small benefit,
Yet will I take thy offer with small thanks,
I would not loose the pleasure of the eye.
But tell me courteous Keeper if thou can,
How long the King will have me tarry here.
I know not Prince, but as I guess, not long.
God send you freedom, and God save the King.
Why how now sirs, what may this outrage mean?
O help me Hubert, gentle Keeper help:
God send this sudden mutinous approach
Tend not to reeve a wretched guiltless life.
So sirs, depart, and leave the rest for me.
Then Arthur yield, death frowns in thy face,
What means this? good Hubert plead the case.
Patience young Lord, and listen words of woe,
Harmful and harsh, hells horror to be heard:
A dismal tale fit for a furies tongue.
I faint to tell, deep sorrow is the sound.
What, must I die?
No news of death, but tidings of more hate,
A wrathful doom, and most unlucky fate:
Deaths dish were dainty at so fell a feast,
Be deaf, hear not, its hell to tell the rest.
Alas, thou wrongst my youth with words of fear,
Tic hell, tic horror, not for one to hear:
What is it man if it must needs be done,
Act it, and end it, that the pain were gone.
I will not chant such dolor with my tongue,
Yet must I act the outrage with my hand.
My heart, my head, and all my powers beside,
To aide the office have at once denied.
Peruse this Letter, lines of treble woe,
Read ore my charge, and pardon when you know.
Hubert, these are to command thee, as thou tendrest our quiet in mind, and the estate of our person, that pre∣sently upon the receipt of our command, thou put out the eyes of Arthur Plantaginet.
Ah monstrous damned man! his very breath infects the elements.
Contagious venom dwells in his heart,
Effecting means to poison all the world.
Irreverent may I be to blame the heavens
Of great injustice, that the miscreant
Lives to oppress the innocents with wrong.
Ah Hubert! makes he thee his instrument,
To sound the trump that causes hell triumph?
Heaven weeps, the Saints do shed celestial tears,
They fear thy fall, and cite thee with remorse,
They knock thy conscience, moving pity there,
Willing to fence thee from the rage of hell:
Hell Hubert, trust me all the plagues of hell
Hangs on performance of this damned deed.
This scale, the warrant of the bodies bliss,
Ensures Satan chiefetaine of thy soul:
Subscribe not Hubert, give not Gods part away.
I speak not only for eyes privilege,
The chief exterior that I would enjoy:
But for thy peril, far beyond my pain,
Thy sweet souls loss, more than my eyes vain lack:
A cause internal, and eternal too.
Advise thee Hubert, for the case is hard,
To loose salvation for a Kings reward.
My Lord, a subject dwelling in the land
Is tied to execute the Kings command.
Yet God commands whose power reaches further,
That no command should stand in force to murder.
But that same Essence hath ordained a law,
A death for guilt, to keep the world in awe.
I plead, not guilty, treasonlesse and free.
But that appeal my Lord concerns not me.
Why thou art he that moist omit the peril.
I, if my Sovereign would omit his quarrel.
His quarrel is unhallowed false and wrong.
Then be the blame to whom it doth belong.
Why thats to thee if thou as they proceed,
Conclude their judgment with so vile a deed.
Why then no execution can be lawful,
If Judges dooms must be reputed doubtful.
Yes where in form of Law in place and time,
The offender is convicted of the crime.
My Lord, my Lord, this long expostulation,
Heaps up more grief, than promise of redress;
For this I know, and so resolude I end,
That subjects lives on Kings commands depend.
I must not reason why he is your foe,
But do his charge since he commands it so.
Then do thy charge, and charged be thy soul
With wrongful persecution done this day.
You rolling eyes, whose superficies yet
I doe behold with eyes that Nature lent:
Send forth the terror of your Moouers frown,
To wreak my wrong upon the murderers
That rob me of your fair reflecting view:
Let hell to them (as earth they wish to me)
Be dark and direful guerdon for their guilt,
And let the black tormentors of deep Tartary
Upbraid them with this damned enterprise,
Inflicting change of tortures on their souls.
Delay not Hubert, my orisons are ended,
Begin I pray thee, reeve me of my sight:
But to perform a tragedy indeed,
Conclude the period with a mortal stab.
Constance farewell, tormentor come away,
Make my dispatch the Tyrants feasting day.
I faint, I fear, my conscience bids desist:
Faint did I say? fear was it that I named:
My King commands, that warrant sets me free:
But God forbids, and he commands Kings,
That great Commander countercheckes my charge,
He stays my hand, he makes soft my heart.
Go cursed tools, your office is exempt,
Cheer thee young Lord, thou shalt not loose an eye,
Though I should purchase it with loss of life.
Isle to the King, and say his will is done,
And of the langor tell him thou art dead,
Go in with me, for Hubert was not borne
To blind those lamps that Nature polished so.
Hubert, if ever Arthur be in state,
Look for amends of this received gift,
I took my eiesight by thy courtesy,
Thou lentst them me, I will not be ingrate.
But now procrastination may offend
The issue that thy kindness undertakes:
Depart we Hubert to prevent the worst.
Now warlike followers, rests aught undone
That may impeach vs of fond oversight?
The French have felt the temper of our swords,
Cold terror keeps possession in their souls,
Checking their overdaring arrogance
For buckling with so great an overmatch,
The arch proud titled Priest of Italy,
That calls himself grand Vicar under God,
Is busied now with trentall obsequies,
Mass and months mind, dirge and I know not what,
To ease their souls in painful purgatory,
That have miscarried in these bloody wars.
Heard you not Lords when first his Holiness
Had tidings of our small account of him,
How with a taunt vaunting upon his toes,
He urged a reason why the English Ass
Disdained the blessed ordinance of Rome?
The title (reverently might I infer)
Became the Kings that erst have borne the load,
The slavish weight of that controlling Priest:
Who at his pleasure tempered them like wax
To carry arms on danger of his curse,
Banding their souls with warrants of his hand▪
I grieve to think how Kings in ages past
(Simply devoted to the Sea of Rome)
Have run into a thousand acts of shame.
But now for confirmation of our State,
Sith we have proind the more than needful branch
That did oppress the true well-growing stock,
It rests we throughout our Territories
Be reproclaimed and invested King.
My Liege, that were to busy men with doubts,
Once were you crowned, proclaimed, and with applause
Your city streets have echoed to the ear,
God save the King, God save our Sovereign Iohn.
Pardon my fear, my censure doth infer
Your Highness not deposde from regal State,
Would breed a mutiny in peoples minds,
What it should mean to have you crowned again.
Pembrooke, perform what I have bid thee do,
Thou know not what induces me to this.
Essex go in, and Lordings all be gone
About this task, I will be crowned anon.
What news, how do the Abbots chests?
Are Friars fatter than the Nuns are fair?
What cheer with Church-men, had they gold or no?
Tell me, how hath thy office took effect?
My Lord, I have performed your Highness charge:
The ease-bred Abbots, and the barefoot Friars,
The Monks, the Priors, and holy cloystred Nuns,
Are all in health, and were my Lord in wealth,
Till I had tithde and told their holy hoards.
I doubt not when your Highness sees my prize,
You may proportion all their former pride.
Why so, now sorts it Philip as it should:
This small intrusion into Abbey trunks,
Will make the Popelings excommunicate,
Curse, ban, and breathe out damned orisons,
As thick as haile-stones fore the Springs approach:
But yet as harmless and without effect,
As is the echo of a Cannons crack
Discharged against the battlements of heaven.
But what news else befell there Philip?
Strange news my Lord: within your territories
Near Pomfret is a prophet new sprung up,
Whose divination volleys wonders forth:
To him the Commons throng with Country gifts,
He sets a date unto the Beldams death,
Prescribes how long the Virgins state shall last,
Distinguishes the mooing of the heavens,
Gives limits unto holy nuptial rites,
Foretells famine, abounds plenty forth:
Of fate, of fortune, life and death he chats,
With such assurance, scruples put apart,
As if he knew the certain dooms of heaven,
Or kept a Register of all the Destinies.
Thou telst me marvels, would thou had brought the man,
We might have questioned him of things to come.
My Lord, I took a care of had-I-wist,
And brought the prophet with me to the Court,
He stays my Lord but at the Presence door:
Pleases your Highness, I will call him in.
Nay stay awhile, we'll have him here anon,
A thing of weight is first to be performed.
Lordings and friends supporters of our State,
Admire not at this unaccustomed course,
Nor in your thoughts blame not this deed of yours.
Once ere this time was I invested King,
Your fealty sworn as Liegemen to our state:
Once since that time ambitious weeds have sprung
To stain the beauty of our garden plot:
But heavens in our conduct rooting thence
The false intruders, breakers of worlds peace,
Have to our joy, made sunne-shine chase the storm.
After the which, to try your constancy,
That now I see is worthy of your names,
We craved once more your helps for to invest vs
Into the right that envy sought to wrack.
Once was I not deposde, your former choice;
Now twice been crowned and applauded King?
Your cheered action to install me so,
Infers assured witness of your loves,
And binds me over in a Kingly care
To render love with love, rewards of worth
To balance down requital to the full.
But thanks the while, thanks Lordings to you all:
Ask me and use me, try me and find me yours.
A boon my Lord, at vantage of your words
We ask to guerdon all our loyalties.
We take the time your Highness bids vs ask:
Please it you grant, you make your promise good,
With lesser loss than one superfluous hair
That not remembered falls from your head.
My word is past, receive your boon my Lords,
What may it be? Ask it, and it is yours.
We crave my Lord, to please the Commons with
The liberty of Lady Constance son:
Whose durance darkens your Highness right,
As if you kept him prisoner, to the end
Your self were doubtful of the thing you have.
Dismiss him thence, your Highness needs not fear,
Twice by consent you are proclaimed our King.
This if you grant, were all unto your good:
For simple people muse you keep him close.
Your words have searched the center of my thoughts,
Confirming warrant of your loyalties,
Dismiss your counsel, sway my state,
Let Iohn doe nothing, but by your consents.
Why how now Philip, what ecstasy is this?
Why casts thou up thy eyes to heaven so?
See, see my Lord, strange apparitions,
Glancing mine eye to see the Diadem
Placed by the Bishops on your Highness head,
From forth a gloomy cloud, which curtaine-like
Displayed it self, I suddenly espied
Five Moons reflecting, as you see them now:
Even in the moment that the crown was placed
Can they appear, holding the course you see.
What might portend these apparitions,
Unusual signs, forerunners of event,
Presagers of strange terrors to the world:
Believe me Lords, the object fears me much.
Philip thou toldst me of a Wizard but of late,
Fetch in the man to descant of this show.
The heavens frown upon the sinful earth,
When with prodigious unaccustomed signs
They spot their superficies with such wonder.
Before the ruins of Jerusalem,
Such meteors were the Ensigns of his wrath,
That hast'ned to destroy the faultfull town.
Is this the man?
It is my Lord.
Prophet of Pomfret, for so I hear thou art,
That calculat'st of many things to come:
Who by a power replete with heavenly gift,
Can blab the counsel of thy Makers will.
If fame be true, or truth be wronged by thee,
Decide in ciphering, what these five moons
Portend this clime, if they presage at all.
Breath out thy gift, and if I live to see
Thy divination take a true effect,
Isle honour thee aboue all earthly men.
The sky wherein these moons have residence,
Presents Rome the great Metropolis,
Where sits the Pope in all his holy pomp.
Four of the moons present four provinces,
To wit, Spain, Denmark, Germanie, and France,
That bear the yoke of proud commanding Rome,
And stand in fear to tempt the Prelates curse.
The smallest moon that whirls about the rest,
Impatient of the place he holds with them,
Doth figure forth this Island Albion,
Who gins to scorn the sea and seat of Rome,
And seeks to shun the Edicts of the Pope:
This shows the heaven, and this I doe aver
Is figured in the apparitions.
Why then it seems the heavens smile on vs,
Giving applause for leaving of the Pope.
But for they chance in our Meridian,
Doe they effect no private growing ill
To be inflicted on vs in this clime?
The moons effect no more than what I said:
But on some other knowledge that I have
By my prescience, ere Ascension day
Have brought the Sun unto his usual height,
Of Crown, Estate, and Royal dignity,
Thou shalt be clean despoiled and dispossessed.
False dreamer, perish with thy witched news,
Villain thou woundst me with thy fallacies:
If it be true, die for thy tidings price;
If false, for fearing me with vain suppose:
Hence with the Witch, hells damned secretary.
Locke him up sure: for by my faith I swear,
True or not true, the Wizard shall not live.
Before Ascension day: who should be cause hereof?
Cut off the cause, and then the effect will die.
Tut, tut, my mercy serves to maim my self,
The root doth live, from whence these thorns spring up,
I and my promise past for his deliu'rie:
Frown friends, fail faith, the devil go withal,
The brat shall die, that terrifies me thus.
Pembrooke and Essex, I recall my grant,
I will not buy your favours with my fear:
Nay murmur not, my will is law enough▪
I love you well, but if I loved you better,
I would not buy it with my discontent.
How now, what news with thee?
According to your highness strict command,
Young Arthurs eyes are blinded and extinct.
Why so, then he may feel the crown, but never see it.
Nor see nor feel, for of the extreme pain,
Within one hour gave he up the ghost.
What is he dead?
He is my Lord.
Then with him dies my cares.
Now joy betide thy soul.
And heavens revenge thy death.
What have you done my Lord? Was ever heard
A deed of more inhumane consequence?
Your foes will curse, your friends will cry revenge.
Unkindly rage, more rough than Northern wind;
To clip the beauty of so sweet a flower.
What hope in vs for mercy on a fault,
When kinsman dies without impeach of cause,
As you have done, so come to cheer you with,
The guilt shall never be cast me in my teeth.
And are you gone? The devil be your guide:
Proud rebels as ye are, to brave me so:
Saucy, uncivil, checkers of my will.
Your tongues give edge unto the fatal knife,
That shall have passage through your trayt'rous throats.
But hushed, breath not bugs words too soon abroad,
Lest time prevent the issue of thy reach.
Arthur is dead, I there the corzie grows:
But while he lived, the danger was the more;
His death hath freed me from a thousand fears,
But it hath purchased me ten times ten thousand foes.
Why all is one, such luck shall haunt his game,
To whom the devil owes an open shame:
His life a foe that leveled at my crown,
His death a frame to pull my building down.
My thoughts harped still on quiet by his end,
Who living aimed shrewdly at my room:
But to prevent that plea, twice was I crowned,
Twice did my subjects swear me fealty,
And in my conscience loved me as their liege,
In whose defence they would have pawned their lives.
But now they shun me as a Serpents sting,
A tragyke tyrant, sterne and pitiless,
And not a title follows after Iohn,
But butcher, blood-sucker, and murderer.
What planet governed my nativity,
To bode me sovereign types of high estate,
So interlaced with hellish discontent,
Wherein fell fury hath no interest?
Cursed be the crown, chief author of my care,
Nay cursed my will, that made the crown my care:
Cursed be my birth-day, cursed ten times the womb
That yielded me alive into the world.
Art thou there villain, furies haunt thee still,
For killing him whom all the world laments.
Why here's my Lord your Highness hand &amp; seal,
Charging on lives regard to do the deed.
Ah dull conceited peasant, know thou not
It was a damned execrable deed?
Show me a Seal? Oh villain, both our souls
Have sold their freedom to the thrall of hell,
Under the warrant of that cursed Seal.
Hence villain, hang thy self, and say in hell
That I am coming for a kingdom there.
My Lord, attend the happy tale I tell,
For heavens health send Satan packing hence
That instigates your Highness to despair.
If Arthurs death be dismal to be heard,
Bandy the news for rumours of untruth:
He lives my Lord, the sweetest youth alive,
In health, with eye sight, not a hair amiss.
This heart took vigour from this forward hand,
Making it weak to execute your charge.
What, lives he! Then sweet hope come home a∣gen,
Chase hence despair, the purveyor for hell.
Hye Hubert, tell these tidings to my Lords
That throb in passions for young Arthurs death:
Hence Hubert, stay not till thou hast reueald
The wished news of Arthurs happy health.
I go my self, the ioyfullst man alive
To story out this new supposed crime.

NOw help good hap to further mine intent,
Cross not my youth with any more extremes:
I venture life to gain my liberty,
And if I die, worlds troubles have an end.
Fear gins dissuade the strength of my resolve,
My hold will fail, and then alas I fall,
And if I fall, no question death is next:
Better desist, and live in prison still.
Prison said I? nay, rather death than so:
Comfort and courage come again to me,
Isle venture sure: tic but a leap for life.
Hoe, who is nigh? some body take me up.
Where is my mother? let me speak with her.
Who hurts me thus? speak hoe, where are you gone?
Ay me poor Arthur, I am here alone.
Why called I mother, how did I forget?
My fall, my fall, hath killed my mothers son.
How will she weep at tidings of my death?
My death indeed, O God, my bones are burst.
Sweet Iesu save my soul, forgive my rash attempt,
Comfort my mother, shield her from despair,
When she shall hear my tragic overthrow.
My heart controls the office of my tongue,
My vital powers forsake my bruised trunk,
I die I die, heaven take my fleeting soul,
And Lady mother all good hap to thee.
My Lords of Pembrooke and of Salisbury,
We must be careful in our policy,
To undermine the keepers of this place,
Else shall we never find the Princes grave.
My Lord of Essex, take no care for that,
I warrant you it was not closely done.
But who is this? lo Lords the withered flower,
Who in his life shined like the Mornings blush,
Cast out a door, denied his burial right,
A prey for birds and beasts to gorge upon.
O ruthful spectacle! O damned deed!
My sinews shake, my very heart doth bleed.
Leave childish tears brave Lords of England,
If water-floods could fetch his life again,
My eyes should conduit forth a sea of tears.
If sobs would help, or sorrows serve the turn,
My heart should volley out deep piercing plaints.
But bootless were it to breath as many sighs
As might eclipse the brightest Summers sun,
Here rests the help, a service to his ghost.
Let not the tyrant causer of this dole,
Live to triumph in ruthful massacres,
Give hand and heart, and Englishmen to arms,
Tic Gods decree to wreak vs of these harms.
The best advice: But who comes posting here?
Right noble Lords, I speak unto you all,
The King entreats your soonest speed
To visit him, who on your present want,
Did ban and curse his birth, himself and me,
For executing of his strict command.
I saw his passion, and at fittest time,
Assured him of his cousins being safe,
Whom pity would not let me doe to death:
He craves your company my Lords in haste,
To whom I will conduct young Arthur straight,
Who is in health under my custody.
In health base villain, were it not I leave the crime
To Gods revenge, to whom revenge belongs,
Here should thou perish on my rapiers point.
Call thou this health? such health betide thy friends,
And all that are of thy condition,
My Lords, but hear me speak, and kill me then,
If here I left not this young Prince alive,
Maugre the hasty Edict of the King,
Who gave me charge to put out both his eyes,
That God that gave me living to this hour,
Thunder revenge upon me in this place:
And as I tendered him with earnest love,
So God love me, and then I shall be well.
Hence traitor hence, thy counsel is herein.
Some in this place appointed by the King,
Have thrown him from this lodging here aboue,
And sure the murder hath bin newly done,
For yet the body is not fully cold.
How say you Lords, shall we with speed dispatch
Under our hands a packet into France,
To bid the Dolphin enter with his force,
To claim the kingdom for his proper right,
His title makes lawful strength thereto.
Besides, the Pope, on peril of his curse,
Hath bard vs of obedience unto Iohn,
This hateful murder, Lewis his true descent,
The holy charge that we received from Rome,
Are weighty reasons, if you like my reed,
To make vs all persevere in this deed.
My Lord of Essex, well have you advised,
I will accord to further you in this.
And Salisbury will not gainsay the same:
But aide that course as far forth as he can.
Then each of vs send straight to his allies,
To win them to this famous enterprise:
And let vs all yclad in Palmers weed,
The tenth of April at S. Edmunds Bury
Meet to confer, and on the altar there
Swear secrecy and aid to this advise.
Mean while, let vs convey this body hence,
And give him burial, as befits his state,
Keeping his months mind, and his obsequies
With solemn intercession for his soul.
How say you Lordings, are you all agreed?
The tenth of April at S. Edmunds Bury,
God letting not, I will not fail the time.
Then let vs all convey the body hence.
Disturbed thoughts, foredoomers of mine ill,
Distracted passions, signs of growing harms,
Strange prophecies of imminent mishaps,
Confound my wits, and dull my senses so,
That every object these mine eyes behold,
Seem instruments to bring me to my end.
Ascension day is come, Iohn fear not then
The prodigies this prattling Prophet threats.
Tic come indeed: ah were it fully past,
Then were I careless of a thousand fears.
The Dial tells me, it is twelve at noon.
Were twelve at midnight past, then might I vaunt,
False seers prophecies of no import.
Could I as well with this right hand of mine
Remove the Sun from our Meridian,
Unto the moonested circle of th'antipodes,
As turn this steel from twelve to twelve again,
Then Iohn, the date of fatal prophecies,
Should with the Prophets life together end.
But multi cadunt inter calicem supremaque libra.
Peter, unsay thy foolish doting dream,
And by the crown of England here I swear,
To make thee great, and greatest of thy kin.
King Iohn, although the time I have prescribed
Be but twelve hours remaining yet behind,
Yet doe I know by inspiration,
Ere that fixed time be fully come about,
King Iohn shall not be king as heretofore.
Vain buzzard, what mischance can chance so soon,
To set a king beside his regal seat?
My heart is good, my body passing strong,
My Land in peace, my enemies subdued,
Only my barons storm at Arthurs death,
But Arthur lives, I there the challenge grows,
Were he dispatched unto his longest home,
Then were the King secure of thousand foes.
Hubert, what news with thee, where are my Lords?
Hard news my Lord, Arthur the lovely prince,
Seeking to escape over the castle walls,
Fell headlong down, and in the cursed fall
He brake his bones, and there before the gate
Your barons found him dead, and breathless quite.
Is Arthur dead? then Hubert without more words hang the Prophet.
Away with Peter, villain out of my sight,
I am deaf, be gone, let him not speak a word.
Now Iohn, thy fears are vanished into smoke,
Arthur is dead, thou guiltless of his death.
Sweet youth, but that I strived for a crown,
I could have well afforded to thine age,
Long life, and happiness to thy content.
Philip what news with thee?
The news I heard was Peters prayers,
Who wished like fortune to befall vs all:
And with that word, the rope his latest friend,
Kept him from falling headlong to the ground.
There let him hang, and be the Ravens food,
While Iohn triumphs in spite of prophecies.
But whats the tidings from the Popelings now?
What say the Monks and Priests to our proceedings?
Or whore's the Barons that so suddenly
Did leave the king upon a false surmise?
The Prelates storm and thirst for sharp revenge:
But please your Majesty, were that the worst,
It little skilled: a greater danger grows,
Which must be weeded out by careful speed,
Or all is lost, for all is leveled at.
More frights and fears??? what ere thy tidings be,
I am prepared: then Philip, quickly say,
Mean they to murder, or imprison me,
To give my Crown away to Rome or France;
Or will they each of them become a King?
Worse than I think it is, it cannot be.
Not worse my Lord, but every whit as bad.
The Nobles have elected Lewis King,
In right of Lady Blanch, your niece, his wife:
His landing is expected every hour,
The Nobles, Commons, Clergy, all Estates,
Incited chiefly by the Cardinal,
Pandulph that lies here Legate for the Pope,
Think long to see their new elected King.
And for undoubted proof, see here my Liege,
Letters to me from your Nobility,
To be a party in this action:
Who under show of fained holiness,
Appoint their meeting at S. Edmunds Bury,
There to consult, conspire, and conclude
The overthrow and downfall of your State.
Why so it must be: one hour of content,
Matched with a month of passionate effects.
Why shines the Sun to favour this consort?
Why doe the winds not break their brazen gates,
And scatter all these perjured accomplices,
With all their counsels, and their damned drifts?
But see the welkin rolls gently on,
There's not a lowering cloud to frown on them;
The heaven, the earth, the sun, the moon and all,
Conspire with those confederates my decay.
Then hell for me, if any power be there,
Forsake that place, and guide me step by step,
To poison, strangle, murder in their steps
These traitors: oh that name is too good for them,
And death is easy: is there nothing worse,
To wreak me on this proud peace-breaking crew?
What say thou Philip? why assists thou not?
These curses (good my Lord) fit not the season:
Help must descend from heaven against this treason?
Nay thou wilt prove a traitor with the rest,
Go get thee to them, shame come to you all.
I would be loath to leave your Highness thus,
Yet you command, and I, though grieved, will go.
Ah Philip, whither go thou? come again.
My Lord, these motions are as passions of a mad man.
A mad man Philip, I am mad indeed,
My heart is mazed, my senses all foredone.
And Iohn of England now is quite undone.
Was ever King as I oppressed with cares?
Dame Eleanor my noble mother Queen,
My only hope and comfort in distress,
Is dead, and England excommunicate,
And I am interdicted by the Pope,
All Churches cursed, their doors are sealed up,
And for the pleasure of the Romish Priest,
The service of the Highest is neglected,
The multitude (a beast of many heads)
Doe wish confusion to their sovereign;
The Nobles blinded with ambitions fumes,
Assemble powers to beat mine Empire down,
And more than this, elect a foreign king.
O England, were thou ever miserable,
King Iohn of England sees thee miserable:
Iohn, tic thy sins that makes it miserable,
Quicquid delirunt Reges, plectuntur Achieve.
Philip, as thou hast ever loved thy King,
So show it now: post to S. Edmunds Bury,
Dissemble with the Nobles, know their drifts,
Confound their devilish plots, and damned devises.
Though Iohn be faulty, yet let subjects bear,
He will amend, and right the peoples wrongs.
A mother though she were unnatural,
Is better than the kindest step-dame is:
Let never Englishman trust foreign rule.
Then Philip show thy fealty to thy King,
And amongst the Nobles plead thou for the King.
I go my Lord: see how he is distraught,
This is the cursed Priest of Italy
Hath heaped these mischiefs on this haplesse land.
Now Philip, had thou Tullies eloquence,
Then might thou hope to plead with good success.
And art thou gone? success may follow thee:
Thus hast thou showed thy kindness to thy King.
Sir, in haste go greet the Cardinal,
Pandulph I mean, the Legate from the Pope.
Say that the King desires to speak with him.
Now Iohn bethink thee how thou moist resolve:
And if thou wilt continue Englands King,
Then cast about to keep thy Diadem;
For life and land, and all is leveled at.
The Pope of Rome, tic he that is the cause,
He curses thee, he sets thy subjects free
From due obedience to their Sovereign:
He animates the Nobles in their wars,
He gives away the Crown to Philips son,
And pardons all that seek to murder thee:
And thus blind zeal is still predominant.
Then Iohn there is no way to keep thy crown,
But finely to dissemble with the Pope:
That hand that gave the wound must give the salve
To cure the hurt, else quite incurable.
Thy sins are far too great to be the man
T'abolish Pope, and Poperie from thy Realm:
But in thy Seat, if I may guess at all,
A King shall reign that shall suppress them all.
Peace Iohn, here comes the Legate of the Pope,
Dissemble thou, and whatsoere thou sai'st,
Yet with thy heart wish their confusion.
Now Iohn, unworthy man to breath on earth,
That dost oppugn against thy mother Church:
Why am I sent for to thy cursed self?
Thou man of God, Vicegerent for the Pope,
The holy Vicar of S. Peters Church,
Upon my knees, I pardon crave of thee,
And doe submit me to the sea of Rome,
And vow for penance of my high offence,
To take on me the holy Cross of Christ,
And carry Arms in holy Christian wars.
No Iohn, thy crouching and dissembling thus
Cannot deceive the Legate of the Pope,
Say what thou wilt, I will not credit thee:
Thy Crown and Kingdom both are tan away,
And thou art cursed without redemption.
Accursed indeed to kneel to such a drudge,
And get no help with thy submission,
Unsheathe thy sword, and sley the misprowd priest
That thus triumphs ore thee a mighty King:
No Iohn, submit again, dissemble yet,
For Priests and Women must be flattered.
Yet holy Father thou thy self dost know,
No time too late for sinners to repent,
Absolve me then, and Iohn doth swear to do
The uttermost what ever thou demaundst.
Iohn, now I see thy hearty penitence,
I few and pity thy distressed estate,
One way is left to reconcile thy self,
And only one which I shall show to thee.
Thou must surrender to the sea of Rome
Thy Crown and Diadem, then shall the Pope
Defend thee from th'inuasion of thy foes.
And where his Holiness hath kindled France,
And set thy subjects hearts at war with thee,
Then shall he curse thy foes, and beat them down,
That seek the discontentment of the King.
From bad to worse, or I must loose my realm,
Or give my Crown for penance unto Rome:
A misery more piercing than the darts
That break from burning exhalations power.
What, shall I give my Crown with this right hand?
No: with this hand defend thy Crown and thee.
What news with thee?
Please it your Majesty, there is descried on the coast of Kent an hundred Sail of Ships, which of all men is thought to be the French fleet, under the conduct of the Dolphin, so that it puts the country in a mutiny, so they send to your Grace for succour.
How now Lord Cardinal, what's your best ad???uise?
These mutinies must be allied in time,
By policy or headstrong rage at least.
O Iohn, these troubles tyre thy wearied soul,
And like to Luna in a sad Eclipse,
So are thy thoughts and passions for this news.
Well may it be, when Kings are grieved so,
The vulgar sort work Princes overthrow.
K. Iohn, for not effecting of thy plighted vow,
This strange annoyance happens to thy Land:
But yet be reconciled unto the Church,
And nothing shall be grievous to thy state.
On Pandulph, be it as thou hast decreed,
Iohn will not spurn against thy sound advise,
Come lets away, and with thy help I trow,
My Realm shall flourish, and my Crown in peace.
Now sweet S. Edmund holy Saint in heaven,
Whose Shrine is sacred, high esteemed on earth,
Infuse a constant zeal in all our hearts,
To prosecute this act of mickle weight,
Lord Bewchampe say, what friends have you procured.
The L. Fits Water, L. Percie, and L. Rosse,
Vowed meeting here this day the leuenth hour.
Under the cloak of holy pilgrimage,
By that same hour on warrant of their faith,
Philip Plantagenet, a bird of swiftest wing,
Lord Eustauce, Vescy, Lord Crazy, and Lord Mowbrey,
Appointed meeting at S. Edmunds shrine.
Until their presence, Isle conceal my tale,
Sweet accomplices in holy Christian acts,
That venture for the purchase of renown,
Thrice welcome to the league of high resolve,
That pawn their bodies for their souls regard.
Now wants but the rest to end this work,
In Pilgrims habit comes our holy troupe
A furlong hence, with swift unwanted pace,
May be they are the persons you expect.
With swift unwanted gate, see what a thing is zeal,
That spurs them on with fervency to this shrine,
Now joy come to them for their true intent:
And in good time, here come the war-men all,
That sweat in body by the minds disease:
Hap and hearts-ease brave Lordings be your lot.
Amen my Lords, the like betide your luck,
And all that travel in a Christian cause.
Cheerely replied brave branch of Kingly stocko,
A right Plantagenet should reason so.
But silence Lords, attend our comings cause:
The servile yoke that pained vs with toil,
On strong instinct hath framed this conventicle,
To ease our necks of seruitudes contempt.
Should I not name the foeman of our rest,
Which of you all so barren in conceit,
As cannot level at the man I mean?
But lest Enigma's shadow shining truth,
Plainly to paint, as truth requires no art.
Th'effect of this resort imports this,
To root and clean extirpate tyrant Iohn,
Tyrant I say, appealing to the man,
If any here that loves him, and I ask,
What kindship, lenity, or Christian reign,
Rules in the man, to bar this soul impeach?
First I infer the Chesters banishment:
For reprehending him in most unchristian crimes???
Was special notice of a tyrants will.
But were this all, the devil should be saved,
But this the least of many thousand faults,
That circumstance with leisure might display.
Our private wrongs, no parcel of my tale
Which now in presence, but for some great cause
Might wish to him as to a mortal foe.
But shall I close the period with an act
Abhorring in the ears of Christian men,
His cousins death, that sweet unguilty child,
Untimely butcherd by the tyrants means,
Here are my proofs, as clear as gravel brooke,
And on the same I further must infer,
That who upholds a tyrant in his course,
Is culpable of all his damned guilt.
To show the which, is yet to be described.
My Lord of Pembrooke, show what is behind,
Only I say, that were there nothing else
To move vs, but the Popes most dreadful curse,
Whereof we are assured, if we fail,
It were enough to instigate vs all,
With earnestness ofsprite, to seek a mean
To dispossess Iohn of his regiment.
Well hath my Lord of Essex told his tale,
Which I aver??? for most substantial truth,
And more to make the matter to our mind,
I say that Lewis in challenge of his wife,
Hath title of an uncontrolled plea,
To all that longs to our English crown.
Short tale to make, the Sea Apostolike,
Hath offered dispensation for the fault.
If any be, as trust me none I know,
By planting Lewis in the Usurpers room:
This is the cause of all our presence here,
That on the holy Altar we protest,
To aid the right of Lewis with goods and life,
Who on our knowledge is in arms for England.
What say you Lords?
As Pembrooke saith, affirms Salisbury:
Fair Lewis of France that spoused Lady Blanch,
Hath title of an uncontrolled strength
To England, and what longs to the Crown:
In right whereof, as we are true informed,
The Prince is marching hitherward in arms.
Our purpose, to conclude that with a word,
Is to invest him as we may devise,
King of our country, in the tyrants stead:
And so the warrant on the Altar sworn,
And so the intent for which we hither came.
My Lord of Salisbury, I cannot couch
My speeches with the needful words of art,
As doth beseem in such a weighty work,
But what my conscience and my duty will,
I purpose to impart.
For Chesters exile, blame his busy wit,
That meddled where his duty quite forbade:
For any private causes that you have,
Me think they should not mount to such a height,
As to depose a King in their revenge.
For Arthurs death, K. Iohn was innocent,
He desperate was the deathsman to himself,
Which you, to make a colour to your crime, unjustly do im???put to his defiled,
But where fell traitorisme hath reside??ce,
There wants no words to set despite on work.
I say tic shame, and worthy all reproof,
To wrest such petty wrongs in terms of right,
Against a King anointed by the Lord.
Why Salsburie, admit the wrongs are true,
Yet subjects may not take in hand revenge,
And rob the heavens of their proper power,
Where sits he to whom revenge belongs.
And doth a Pope, a priest, a man of pride,
Give charters for the lives of lawful kings?
What can he bless, or who regards his curse,
But such as give to man, and take from God?
I speak it in the sight of God aboue,
There's not a man that dies in your belief,
But sells his soul perpetually to pain.
Aid Lewis, leave God, kill Iohn, please hell,
Make havoc of the welfare of your souls,
For here I leave you in the sight of heaven,
A troop of traitors, food for hellish fiends;
If you desist, then follow me as friends,
If not, then doe your worst, as hateful traitors.
For Lewis his right, alas tic too too lame,
A senseless claim, if truth be titles friend.
In brief, if this be cause of our resort,
Our pilgrimage is to the devils shrine.
I came not Lords, to troupe as traitors doe,
Nor will I counsel in so bad a cause:
Please you return, we go again as friends,
If not, I to my King, and you where traitors please.
A hot young man, and so my Lords proceed,
I let him go, and better lost than found.
What say you Lords, will all the rest proceed,
Will you all with me swear upon the Altar,
That you will to the death, be aid to Le. &amp; enemy to Iohn?
Every man lay his hand by mine, in witness of his harts ac???cord.
Well then, every man to arms to meet the king,
Who is already before London.
What news Herald?
The right Christian Prince my master, Lewis of France, is at hand, coming to visit your Honours, directed hither by the right honourable Richard Earl of Bigot, to con???far with your honours.
How near is his Highness?
Ready to enter your presence.
Fair Lords of England, Lewis salutes you all
As friends, and firm wel-willers of his weal,
At whose request, from plenty flowing France,
Crossing the Ocean with a Southern gale,
He is in person come at your commands,
To undertake and gratify withal,
The fullness of your favours proffered him.
But worlds brave men, omitting promises,
Till time be minister of more amends,
I must acquaint you with our fortunes course.
The heavens dewing favours on my head,
Have in their conduct safe with victory,
Brought me along your well manured bounds,
With small repulse, and little cross of chance,
Your City Rochester, with great applause,
By some divine instinct laid arms aside:
And from the hollow holes of Thamesis,
Echo apace replied, Viue la Roy.
From thence, along the wanton rolling glade
To Troynouant, your fair Metropolis,
With luck came Lewis, to show his troupes of France,
Waving our Ensigns with the dallying winds,
The fearful object of fell frowning war;
Where after some assault, and small defence,
Heavens may I say, and not my warlike troupe,
Tempered their hearts to take a friendly foe
Within the compass of their high built walls,
Giving me title, as it seemed they wish.
Thus fortune (Lords) acts to your forwardness,
Means of content, in lieu of former grief:
And may I live but to requite you all,
Worlds wish were mine, in dying noted yours.
Welcome the balm that closes up our wounds,
The sovereign medcine for our quick recur,
The anchor of our hope, the only prop,
Whereon depends our lives, our lands, our weal,
Without the which, as sheep without their heird,
(Except a shepherd winking at the wolf)
We stray, we pine, we run to thousand harms.
No marvel then, though with unwonted joy,
We welcome him that beats woes away.
Thanks to you all of this religious league,
A holy knot of Catholic consent.
I cannot name you Lordings, man by man,
But like a stranger unacquainted yet,
In general I promise faithful love:
Lord Bigot brought me to S. Edmunds shrine,
Giving me warrant of a Christian oath
That this assembly came ?????????
To swear according as your p???ckets showed,
Homage and loyal service to our self,
I need not doubt the surety of your wills,
Since well I know, for many of your sakes,
The towns have yielded on their own accords:
Yet for a fashion, not for misbeleefe,
My eyes must witness, and these ears must hear
Your oath upon the holy Altar sworn,
And after march, to end our comings cause.
That we intend no other than good truth,
All that are present of this holy league,
For confirmation of our better trust,
In presence of his Highness, swear with me,
The sequel that my self shall utter here.
I Thomas Plantaginet, Earl of Salisbury, swear upon the Altar, and by the holy army of Saints, homage and alle???geance to the right Christian Prince Lewis of France, as true and rightful King to England, Cornwall, &amp; Wales, and to their territories: in the defence whereof, I upon the holy Altar swear all forwardness. All the Eng. Lo. swear.
As the noble Earl hath sworn, so swear we all.
I rest assured on your holy oath,
And on this Altar in like sort I swear
Love to you all, and princely recompense
To guerdon your good wills unto the full.
And since I am at this religious shrine,
My good wel-willers give vs leave awhile,
To use some orisons our selves apart,
To all the holy company of heaven,
That they will smile upon our purposes,
And bring them to a fortunate event.
We leave your Highness to your good intent.
Now Vicount Melon, what remains behind?
Trust me these traitors to their Sovereign State,
Are not to be believed in any sort.
Indeed my Lord, they that infringe their oths,
And play the Rebels against their native King,
Will for as little cause revolt from you,
If ever opportunity incite them so:
For once forsworn, and never after sound,
There's no affiance after perjury.
Well Melon, well, let's smooth with the?? awhile,
Until we have as much as they can doe:
And when their virtue is exhaled dry,
Isle hang them for the guerdon of their help:
Mean while we'll use them as a precious poison,
To undertake the issue of our hope.
Tic policy (my Lord) to bait our hooks
With merry smiles, and promise of much weight:
But when your Highness needs them no more.
Tic good make sure work with them, lest indeed
They prove to you as to their natural King.
Trust me my Lord, right well have you ad???uisde,
Venom for use, but never for a sport
Is to be dallied with, lest it infect.
Were you instald, as soon I hope you shall:
Be free from traitors, and dispatch them all.
That so I mean, I swear before you all
On this same Altar, and by heavens power,
Theres not an English traitor of them all,
Iohn once dispatcht, and I fair Englands King,
Shall on his shoulders bear his head one day,
But I will crop it for their guilts desert:
Nor shall their heirs enjoy their Seigniories,
But perish by their parents foul amiss.
This have I sworn, and this will I perform,
If ere I come unto the height I hope.
Lay down your hands, and swear the same with me.
Why so, now call them in, and speak them fair,
A smile of France will feed an English fool.
Bear them in hand as friends, for so they be:
But in the heart like traitors as they are.
Now famous followers, chiefetaines of the world,
Have we solicited with hearty prayer
The heaven in favour of our high attempt.
Leave we this place, and march we with our power
To rouse the tyrant from his chiefest hold:
And when our labours have a prosprous end,
Each man shall reap the fruit of his desert.
And so resolved, brave followers let vs hence.
Thus Iohn, thou art absolved from all thy sins,
And freed by order from our Fathers curse.
Receive thy Crown again, with this proviso,
That thou remain true liegeman to the Pope,
And carry arms in right of holy Rome.
I hold the same as tenant to the Pope,
And thank your Holiness for your kindness shown.
A proper jest, when Kings must stoop to Friars,
Need hath no law, when Friars must be Kings.
Please it your majesty, the Prince of France,
With all the Nobles of your Graces Land
Are marching hitherward in good array.
Where ere they set their foot, all places yield:
Thy Land is theirs, and not a foot holds out
But Dover Castle, which is hard besieged.
Fear not king Iohn, thy kingdom is the Popes,
And they shall know his Holiness hath power,
To beat them soon from whence he hath to doe.
Pandulph, as gave his Holiness in charge,
So hath the Dolphin mustered up his troupes,
And won the greatest part of all this Land.
But ill becomes your Grace Lord Cardinal,
Thus to converse with Iohn that is accursed.
Lewes of France, victorious Conqueror,
Whose sword hath made this Island quake for fear;
Thy forwardness to fight for holy Rome,
Shall be remunerated to the full:
But know my Lord, K. Iohn is now absolved,
The Pope is pleased, the Land is blessed again,
And thou hast brought each thing to good effect.
It rests then that thou withdraw thy powers,
And quietly return to France again:
For all is done the Pope would wish thee doe.
But ell's not done that Lewes came to do.
Why Pandulph, hath king Philip sent his son
And been at such excessive charge in wars,
To be dismissed with words? king Iohn shall know,
England is mine, and he usurps my right.
Lewes, I charge thee and thy accomplices
Upon the pain of Pandulphs holy curse,
That thou withdraw thy powers to France again,
And yield up London and the neighbour towns
That thou hast tan in England by the sword.
Lord Cardinal, by Lewes princely leave,
It can be nought but usurpation
In thee, the Pope, and all the Church of Rome,
Thus to insult on Kings of Christendom,
Now with a word to make them carry arms,
Then with a word to make them leave their arms.
This must not be: Prince Lewes keep thine own,
Let Pope and Popelings curse their bellies full.
My Lord of Melun, what title had the Prince
To England and the Crown of Albion,
But such a title as the Pope confirmed:
The Prelate now lets fall his fained claim:
Lewes is but the agent for the Pope,
Then must the Dolphin cease, sith he hath ceased:
But cease or no, it greatly matters not,
If you my Lords and Barons of the Land
Will leave the French, and cleave unto our King.
For shame ye Peers of England suffer not
Your selves, your honours, and your land to fall:
But with resolved thoughts beat back the French,
And free the Land from yoke of servitude.
Philip, not so, Lord Lewes is our King,
And wee will follow him unto the death.
Then in the name of Innocent the Pope,
I curse the Prince and all that take his part,
And excommunicate the rebel Peers
As traitors to the King, and to the Pope.
Pandulph, our swords shall bless our selves again:
Prepare thee Iohn, Lords follow me your King.
Accursed Iohn, the Devil owes thee shame,
Resisting Rome, or yielding to the Pope, ell's one.
The devil take the Pope, the Peers, and France:
Shame be my share for yielding to the Priest.
Comfort thy self king Iohn, the Cardinal goes
Upon his curse to make them leave their arms.
Comfort my Lord, and curse the Cardinal,
Betake your self to arms, my troupes are pressed
To answer Lewes with a lusty shock:
The English archers have their quivers full,
Their bows are bent, the pikes are pressed to push:
Good cheer my Lord, King Richards fortune hangs
Upon the plume of warrelike Philips helm.
Then let them know his brother and his son
Are leaders of the Englishmen at arms.
Philip I know not how to answer thee:
But let vs hence, to answer Lewes pride.
O I am slain, Nobles, Salsbury, Pembrooke,
My soul is charged, hear me: for what I say
Concerns the Peers of England, and their State.
Listen, brave Lords, a fearful mourning tale
To be delivered by a man of death.
Behold these scars, the dole of bloody Mars
Are harbingers from natures common foe,
Citing this trunk to Tellus prison house;
Lifes charter (Lordings) lasts not an hour:
And fearful thoughts, forerunners of my end,
Bids me give physic to a sickly soul.
O Peers of England, know you what you do?
There's but a hair that sunders you from harm,
The hook is baited, and the train is made,
And simply you run doting to your deaths.
But lest I die, and leave my tale untold,
With silence slaughtering so brave a crew.
This I aver, if Lewes win the day,
There's not an Englishman that lifts his hand
Against King Iohn to plant the heir of France,
But is already damned to cruel death.
I heard it vowed; my self amongst the rest
Swore on the Altar aide to this Edict.
Two causes Lords, makes me display this drift,
The greatest for the freedom of my soul,
That longs to leave this mansion free from guilt:
The other on a natural instinct,
For that my Grandsire was an Englishman.
Misdoubt not Lords the truth of my discourse,
No frenzy, nor no brainsick idle fit,
But well advised, and wotting what I say,
Pronounce I here before the face of heaven,
That nothing is discovered but a truth.
Tic time to fly, submit your selves to Iohn,
The smiles of France shade in the frowns of death,
Lift up your swords, turn face against the French,
Expel the yoke that's framed for your necks.
Back warremen, back, disembowel not the clime,
Your seat, your nurse, your birth days breathing place,
That bred you, bears you, brought you up in arms.
Ah! be not so ingrate to dig your mothers grave,
Preserve your lambs and beat away the wolf.
My soul hath said, contritions penitence
Lays hold on mans redemption for my sin.
Farewell my Lords; witness my faith when we are met in heaven,
And for my kindness give me grave room here.
My soul doth fleet, worlds vanities farewell.
Now joy betide thy soul well-meaning man,
How now my Lords, what cooling card is this?
A greater grief grows now than erst hath been.
What counsel give you, shall we stay and die?
Or shall we home, and kneel unto the King.
My heart misgave this sad accursed news:
What have we done? fie Lords, what frenzy moved
Our hearts to yield unto the pride of France?
If we persevere, we are sure to die:
If we desist, small hope again of life.
Bear hence the body of this wretched man,
That made vs wretched with his dying tale,
And stand not wailing on our present harms,
As women wont: but seek our harms redress.
As for my self, I will in haste be gone:
And kneel for pardon to our sovereign Iohn.
I, there's the way, lets rather kneel to him,
Than to the French that would confound vs all.
Set down, set down the load not worth your pain,
For done I am with deadly wounding grief:
Sickly and succourless, hopeless of any good,
The world hath wearied me, and I have wearied it:
It loathes I live, I live and loathe my self.
Who pities me? to whom have I been kind?
But to a few; a few will pity me.
Why die I not? Death scorns so wild a prey.
Why live I not, life hates so sad a prize.
I sue to both to be retained of either,
But both are deaf, I can be heard of neither.
Nor death nor life, yet life and near the near,
Ymixt with death, biding I wot not where.
How fares my Lord, that he is carried thus?
Not all the aukeward fortunes yet befallen,
Made such impression of lament in me.
Nor ever did my eye attained my heart
With any object mooing more remorse,
Than now beholding of a mighty King,
Borne by his Lords in such distressed State.
What news with thee? if bad, report it straight???
If good, be mute, it doth but flatter me.
Such as it is, and heavy though it be,
To glut the world with tragic elegies,
Once will I breathe to aggravate the rest,
Another moan to make the measure full.
The bravest bow-man had not yet sent forth
Two arrows from the quiver at his side,
But that a rumour went throughout our Camp,
That Iohn was fled, the King had left the field.
At last the rumour scaled these ears of mine,
Who rather chose as sacrifice for Mars,
Than ignominious scandal by retire.
I cheered the troupes, as did the prince of Troy
His weary followers against the Mermidons,
Crying aloud, S. George, the day is ours.
But fear had captivated courage quite,
And like the Lamb before the greedy Wolf,
So heartless fled our war-men from the field.
Short tale to make, my self amongst the rest,
Was fine to fly before the eager foe.
By this time night had shadowed all the earth,
With sable curtains of the blackest hue,
And fenced vs from the fury of the French,
As Io from the jealous Iunoes eye,
When in the morning our troupes did gather head,
Passing the washes with our carriages,
The impartial tide deadly and inexorable,
Came raging in with billows threatening death,
And swallowed up the most of all our men,
My self upon a Galloway right free, well paced,
Out stripped the floods that followed wave by wave,
I so escaped to tell this tragic tale.
Grief upon grief, yet none so great a grief
To end this life, and thereby rid my grief.
Was ever any so unfortunate,
The right Idea of a cursed man,
As I, poor I, a triumph for despite,
My fever grows, what ague shakes me so?
How far to Sminstead, tell me, do you know?
Present unto the Abbot word of my repair.
My sickness rages, to tyrannise upon me,
I cannot live unless this fever leave me.
Good cheer my Lord, the Abbey is at hand,
Behold my Lord, the Churchmen come to meet you.
All health &amp; happiness to our sovereign lord the King.
Nor health nor happiness hath Iohn at all.
Say Abbot, am I welcome to thy house?
Such welcome as our Abbey can afford,
Your Majesty shall be assured of.
The King thou see is weak and very faint,
What victuals hast thou to refresh his Grace?
Good stote my Lord, of that you need not fear,
For Lincolneshire, and these our Abbey grounds
Were never fatter, nor in better plight.
Philip, thou never need to doubt of cates,
Nor King nor Lord is seated half so well,
As are the Abbeys throughout all the land,
If any plot of ground do pass another,
The Friars fasten on it strait:
But let vs in to taste of their repast,
It goes against my heart to feed with them,
Or be beholding to such Abbey grooms:
Is this the King that never loved a Friar?
Is this the man that doth contemn the Pope?
Is this the man that robed the holy Church,
And yet will fly unto a Friory?
Is this the King that aims at Abbeys lands?
Is this the man whom all the world abhors,
And yet will fly unto a Friorie?
Accursed be Swinstead Abbey, Abbot, Friars,
Monks, Nuns, and Clerks, and all that dwells therein,
If wicked Iohn escape alive away.
Now if that thou wilt look to merit heaven,
And be canonised for a holy Saint:
To please the world with a deserving work,
Be thou the man to set thy country free,
And murder him that seeks to murder thee.
Why are not you within to cheer the King?
He now begins to mend, and will to meat.
What if I say to strangle him in his sleep?
What, at thy Mumpsimus? away,
And seek some means for to pastime the King.
Isle set a dudgeon dagger at his heart,
And with a mallet knock him on the head.
Alas, what means this Monk to murder me?
Dare lay my life he will kill me for my place.
Isle poison him, and it shall ne'er be known,
And then shall I be chiefest of my house.
If I were dead indeed he is the next,
But Isle away, for why the Monk is mad,
And in his madness he will murder me.
My L.I cry your Lordship mercy, I saw you not.
Alas good Thomas do not murder me, and thou shalt have my place with thousand thanks.
I murder you! God shield from such a thought.
If thou wilt needs, yet let me say my prayers.
I will not hurt your Lordship good my Lord: but if you please, I will impart a thing that shall be benefi???ciall to vs all.
Wilt thou not hurt me holy Monk? say on.
You know my Lord, the King is in our house.
True.
You know likewise the King abhors a Friar.
True.
And he that loves not a Friar is our enemy.
Thou say true.
Then the King is our enemy.
True.
Why then should we not kill our enemy, and the king being our enemy, why then should we not kill the K.
O blessed Monk! I see God moves thy mind
to free this land from tyrants slavery.
But who dare venture for to do this deed?
Who dare? why I my Lord dare do the deed,
Isle free my Country and the Church from foes,
And merit heaven by killing of a King.
Thomas kneel down, and if thou art resolved,
I will absolve thee here from all thy sins,
For why the deed is meritorious.
Forward, and fear not man, for every month,
Our Friars shall sing a Mass for Thomas soul.
God and S. Francis prosper my attempt,
For now my Lord I go about my work.
Thus victory in bloody Laurel clad,
Follows the fortune of young Lodowike,
The Englishmen as daunted at our sight,
Fall as the foul before the Eagles eyes,
Only two crosses of contrary change
Do nip my heart, and vex me with unrest.
Lord Meluns death, the one part of my soul,
A braver man did never live in France.
The other grief, I that's a gall indeed,
To think that Dover Castle should hold out
Against all assaults, and rest impregnable.
Ye warrelike race of Francus Hectors son,
Triumph in conquest of that tyrant Iohn,
The better half of England is our own:
And towards the conquest of the other part,
We have the face of all the English Lords,
What then remains but overrun the land?
Be resolute my warrelike followers,
And if good fortune serve as she begins,
The poorest peasant of the realm of France
Shall be a master ore an English Lord.
Fellow, what news?
Pleases your Grace, the Earl of Salsbury, Pen???brooke, Essex, Clare, and Arundell, with all the Barons that did fight for thee, are on a sudden fled with all their pow???ers, to join with Iohn, to drive thee back again.
Lewes my Lord, why standst thou in a maze?
Gather thy troupes, hope not of help from France,
For all thy forces being fifty sail,
Containing twenty thousand soldiers,
With victual and munition for the war,
Putting them from Callis in unlucky time,
Did cross the seas, and on the Goodwin sands,
The men, munition, and the ships are lost.
More news? say on.
Iohn (my Lord ???ith all his scattered troops,
Flying the fury of your conquering sword,
As Pharaoh erst within the bloody sea,
So he and his environed with the tide,
On Lincoln washes all were overwhelmed,
The Barons fled, our forces cast away.
Was ever heard such unexpected news?
Yet Lodowike revive thy dying heart,
King Iohn and all his forces are consumed.
The less thou need the aid of English Earls,
The less thou need to grieve thy navies wrack,
And follow times advantage with success.
Brave Frenchmen armed with magnanimity,
March after Lewes, who will lead you on
To chase the Barons power that wants a head,
For Iohn is drowned, and I am Englands King.
Though our munition and our men be lost,
Philip of France will send vs fresh supplies.
Dispatch, dispatch, the King desires to eat,
Would a might eat his last for the love he bears to church men.
I am of thy mind too, and so it should be and we might be our own carvers.
I marvel why they dine here in the Orchard.
I know not, nor I care not. The King comes.
Come on Lord Abbot, shall we sit together?
Pleases your Grace sit down.
Take your places sirs, no pomp in penury, all beg???gers and friends may come, where Necessity keeps the house, courtesy is barred the table, sit down Philip.
My Lord, I am loath to allude so much to the pro???uerb, honours change manners: a king is a king, though For???tune do her worst, &amp; we as dutiful in despite of her frown, as if your highness were now in the highest tip of dignity.
Come, no more ado, and you tell me much of dignity, you'll mar my appetite in a surfeit of sorrow.
What cheer Lord Abbot, me thinks ye frown like an host that knows his guest hath no money to pay the reckoning?
No my Liege, if I frown at all, it is for I fear this cheer too homely to entertain so mighty a guest as your majesty.
I think rather, my Lord Abbot, you remember my last being here, when I went in progress for pouches, and the rancor of his heart breaks out in his countenance, to show he hath not forgot me.
Not so my Lord, you, and the meanest follower of his majesty, are heartily welcome to me.
Wassell my Liege, and as a poor Monk may say, welcome to Swinstead.
Begin Monk, and report hereafter thou wast ta???ster to a King.
As much health to your Highness as to mine own heart.
I pledge thee kind Monk.
The merriest draught that ever was drunk in England.
Am I not too bold with your Highness?
Not a whit, all friends and fellows for a time.
If the inwards of a toad be a compound of any proof: why so it works.
Stay Philip, whore's the Monk?
He is dead my Lord.
Then drink not Philip for a world of wealth.
What cheer my liege? your collor gins to change.
So doth my life: O Philip, I am poisoned.
The Monk, the Devil, the poison gins to rage,
It will depose my self a King from reign.
This Abbot hath an interest in this act.
At all adventures take thou that from me.
There lie the Abbot, Abbey, Lubber, Devil.
March with the Monk unto the gates of hell.
How fares my Lord?
Philip, some drink, oh for the frozen Alps,
To tumble on and cool this inward heate,
That rages as the fornace seven-fold hot.
To burn the holy tree in Babylon,
Power after power forsake their proper power,
Only the heart impugns with faint resist
The fierce invade of him that conquers Kings,
Help God, O pain! die Iohn, O plague
Inflicted on thee for thy grievous sins.
Philip, a chair, and by and by a grave,
My legs disdain the carriage of a King.
A good my Liege, with patience conquer grief,
And bear this pain with kingly fortitude.
Me thinks I see a catalogue of sin,
Wrote by a fiend in marble characters,
The least enough to loose my part in heaven.
Me thinks the Devil whispers in mine ears,
And tells me, tic in vain to hope for grace,
I must be damned for Arthurs sudden death,
I see I see a thousand thousand men
Come to accuse me for my wrong on earth,
And there is none so merciful a God
That will forgive the number of my sins.
How have I lived, but by another loss?
What have I loved, but wrack of others weal?
When have I vowed, and not infringed mine oath?
Where have I done a deed deserving well?
How, what, when, and where, have I bestowed a day,
That tended not to some notorious ill.
My life replete with rage and tyranny,
Craves little pity for so strange a death.
Or, who will say that Iohn deceased too soon?
Who will not say, he rather lived too long.
Dishonour did attained me in my life,
And shame attends Iohn unto his death.
Why did I scope the fury of the French,
And did not by the temper of their swords?
Shameless my life, and shamefully it ends,
Scorned by my foes, disdained of my friends.
Forgive the world and all your earthly foes,
And call on Christ, who is your latest friend.
My tongue doth falter: Philip, I tell thee man,
Since Iohn did yield unto the Priest of Rome,
Nor he nor his have prospred on the earth:
Cursed are his blessings, and his curse is bliss.
But in the spirit I cry unto my God,
As did the kingly prophet Dauid cry,
(Whose hands, as mine, with murder were attained)
I am not he shall build the Lord a house,
Or root these locusts from the face of earth:
But if my dying heart deceive me not,
From out these loins shall spring a kingly branch
Whose arms shall reach unto the gates of Rome,
And with his feet treads down the Strumpets pride,
That sits upon the chair of Babylon.
Philip, my heart strings break, the poisons flame
Hath overcome in me weak Natures power,
And in the faith of Iesu Iohn doth die.
See how he strives for life, unhappy Lord,
Whose bowels are divided in themselves.
This is the fruit of Poperie, when true Kings
Are slain and shouldered out by Monks and Friars.
Please it your Grace, the Barons of the Land,
Which all this while bare arms against the King,
Conducted by the Legate of the Pope,
Together with the Prince his Highness son,
Do crave to be admitted to the presence of the King.
Your Son, my Lord, young Henry craves to see
Your Majesty, and brings with him beside
The Barons that revolted from your Grace.
O piercing sight, he fumbles in the mouth,
His speech doth fail: lift up your self my Lord,
And see the Prince to comfort you in death.
O let me see my father ere he die:
O uncle, were you here, and suffered him
To be thus poysned by a damned Monk?
Ah he is dead, Father, sweet Father speak.
His speech doth fail, he hastes to his end.
Lords, give me leave to joy the dying King,
With sight of these his Nobles kneeling here
With daggers in their hands, who offer up
Their lives for ransom of their foul offence.
Then good my Lord, if you forgive them all,
Lift up your hand in token you forgive.
We humbly thank your royal Majesty,
And vow to fight for England and her King:
And in the sight of Iohn our sovereign Lord,
In spite of Lewes and the power of France,
Who hitherward are marching in all haste,
We crown young Henry in his fathers sted.
Help, help, he dies; Ah father! look on me.
K. Iohn, farewell: in token of thy faith,
And sign thou die the servant of the Lord,
Lift up thy hand, that we may witness here,
Thou died the servant of our Saviour Christ.
Now joy betide thy soul: what noise is this?
Help Lords, the Dolphin makes hitherward
With Ensigns of defiance in the wind,
And all our army stands at a gaze,
Expecting what their Leaders will command.
Let's arm our selves in young K. Henries right,
And beat the power of France to sea again.
Philip not so, but I will to the Prince,
And bring him face to face to parley with you.
Lord Salsbury, your self shall march with me.
So shall we bring these troubles to an end.
Sweet uncle, if thou love thy Sovereign,
Let not a stone of Swinstead Abbey stand,
But pull the house about the Friars ears:
For they have killed my Father and my King.
Lewes of France, young Henry Englands king
Requires to know the reason of the claim
That thou can make to any thing of his.
King Iohn that did offend, is dead and gone,
See where his breathless trunk in presence lies,
And he as heir apparent to the crown
Is now succeeded in his Fathers room.
Lewes, what law of arms doth lead thee thus,
To k??epe possession of my lawful right?
Answer; in fine, if thou wilt take a peace,
And make surrender of my right again,
Or try thy title with the dint of sword:
I tell thee Dolphin, Henry fears thee not.
For now the Barons cleave unto their King,
And what thou hast in England they did get.
Henry of England, now that Iohn is dead,
That was the chiefest enemy to France,
I may the rather be inducde to peace.
But Salsbury, and you Barons of the Realm,
This strange revolt agrees not with the oath
That you on Bury Altar lately swear.
Nor did the oath your Highness there did take
Agree with honour of the Prince of France.
My Lord, what answer make you to the King?
Faith Philip this I say: It boots not me,
Nor any Prince, nor power of Christendom
To seek to win this Island Albion,
Unless he have a party in the Realm
By treason for to help him in his wars.
The Peers which were the party on my side,
Are fled from me: then boots not me to fight,
But on conditions, as mine honour wills,
I am contented to depart the Realm.
On what conditions will your Highness yield?
That shall we think upon by more advice.
Then Kings &amp; Princes, let these broils have end,
And at more leisure talk upon the League.
Mean while to Worster let vs bear the King,
And there inter his body, as beseems.
But first, in sight of Lewes heir of France,
Lords take the Crown, and set it on his head,
That by succession is our lawful King.
Thus Englands peace begins in Henries reign,
And bloody wars are closed with happy league.
Let England live but true within it self,
And all the world can never wrong her State.
Lewes, thou shalt be bravely shipped to France,
For never Frenchman got of English ground
The twentieth part that thou hast conquered.
Dolphin, thy hand; to Worster we will march:
Lords all, lay hands to bear your Sovereign
With obsequies of honour to his grave:
If Englands Peers and people join in one,
Nor Pope, nor France, nor Spain can do them wrong.

MOst high and happy Princess, we must
tell you a tale of the Man in the Moon,
which if it seem ridiculous for the me∣thod,
or superfluous for the matter, or for the
means incredible, for three faults wee can
make but one excuse. It is a tale of the Man in
the Moon.
It was forbidden in old time to dispute of
Chimera, because it was a fiction, we hope in
our times none will apply pastimes, because
they are fancies; for there lives none under
the Sun, that knows what to make of the
Man in the Moon. VVee present neither Co∣medie,
nor Tragedy, nor story, nor any thing,
〈◊〉 whosoever hears may say this, Why
here is a tale of the Man in the Moon.
I Find Eumenides in all things
both variety to content, &amp; sa∣tietie
to glut, saving only in
my affections, which are so
stayed, and withal so stately,
that I can neither satis-fie my
hart with love, nor mine eyes
with wonder. My thoughts Eumenides are stitched to
the stars, which being as high as I can see; thou moist
imagine how much higher they are then I can reach.
If you be enamoured of any thing aboue the
Moon, your thoughts are ridiculous, for that things
immortal are not subject to affections, if allured or en∣chanted
with these transitory things under the Moon,
you show your self senseless, to attribute such lofty tie∣tles,
to such love trifles.
My love is placed neither under the Moon
nor aboue.
I hope you be not sotted upon the man in the
Moon.
No but settled, either to die, or possess the
Moon herself.
Is Endimion mad, or doe I mistake? doe you
love the Moon Endimion?
Eumenides the Moon.
There was never any so peevish to imagine the
Moon either capable of affection, or shape of a Mi∣stress:
for as impossible it is to make love fit to her humour
which no man knows, as a coat to her form, which
continues not in one bigness whilst she is measuring.
Cease of Endimion to feed so much upon fancies. That
melancholy blood must be purged, which draws you
to a dotage no less miserable then monstrous.
My thoughts have no veins, and yet unless
they be let blood, I shall perrish.
But they have vanities, which being refor∣med,
you may be restored.
O fair Cynthia, why doe others term thee un∣constant,
whom I have ever found unmovable? Iniu∣rios
time, corrupt manners, unkind men, who finding
a constancy not to be matched, in my sweet Mistress,
have christened her with the name of wavering, waxing,
and waning. Is she inconstant that keeps a settled
course, which since her first creation altered not one
minute in her moving? There is nothing thought more
admirable, or commendable in the sea, then the ebbing
and flowing, and shall the Moon, from whom the Sea
takes this virtue, be accounted fickle for increasing, &amp;
decreasing? Flowers in their buds, are nothing worth
till they be blown, nor blossoms accounted till they be
ripe fruit, and shall we then say they be changeable, for
that they grow from seeds to leaves, from leaves to
buds, from buds to their perfection? then, why be not
twigs that become trees, children that become men, and
Mornings that grow to Evenings, termed wavering, for
that they continue not at one stay? I but Cynthia, being
in her fulness, decays, as not delighting in her greatest
beauty, or withering when she should be most honou∣red.
When malice cannot object any thing, folly will,
making that a vice, which is the greatest virtue. What
thing (my Mistress excepted) being in the pride of her
beauty, &amp; latter minute of her age, that waxes young
again? Tell me Eumenides, what is hee that having a
Mistress of ripe years, &amp; infinite virtues, great honours,
and unspeakable beauty, but would wish that she
might grow tender again? getting youth by years, and
never decaying beauty, by time, whose fair face, ney∣there
the Summers blase can scorch, nor Winters blast
chappe, nor the numbering of years breed altering of
colours. Such is my sweet Cynthia, whom time cannot
touch, because she is divine, nor will offend because she
is delicate. O Cynthia, if thou shouldest always conti∣nu
at thy fulness, both Gods and men would conspire
to ravish thee. But thou to abate the pride of our office∣tions,
dost detract from thy perfections, thinking it suf∣ficient,
if once in a month we enjoy a glimpse of thy ma∣jest,
and then, to increase our griefs, thou dost de∣crease
thy gleams, coming out of thy royal robes,
wherewith thou dazelist our eyes, down into thy swath
clouts, beguiling our eyes. And then
Stay there Endimion, thou that committest I∣dolatry,
wilt straight blaspheme, if thou be suffered.
Sleep would doe thee more good then speech: the
Moon hears thee not, or if she doe, regards thee
not.
Vain Eumenides, whose thoughts never grow
higher thē the crown of thy head. Why trouble thou
me, having neither head to conceive the cause of my
love, or a hart to receive the impressions? follow thou
thine own fortunes, which creep on the earth, &amp; suf∣fer
me to fly to mine, whose fall though it be desperate,
yet shall it come by daring. Farewell
Without doubt Endimion is bewitched, other∣wise
in a man of such rare virtues, there could not har∣bore
a mind of such extreme madness. I will follow him,
least in this fancy of the Moon, he deprive himself of
the sight of the Sun.
Treacherous and most periurde Endimion, is
Cynthia the sweetness of thy life, and the bitterness of my
death? What revenge may be devised so full of shame,
as my thoughts are replenished with malice? Tell me
Floscula if falseness in love can possibly be punished with
extremity of hate. As long as sword, fire, or poison
may be hired, no traitor to my love shall live vnreuen∣general.
Were thy oaths without number, thy kisses with∣out
measure, thy sighs without end, forged to deceive
a poor credulous virgin, whose simplicity had been
worth thy favour and better fortune? If the Gods sit
unequal beholders of injuries, or laughers at Lovers de∣ceipts,
then let mischief be as well forgiven in women,
as perjury winked at in men.
Madame, if you would compare the state of
Cynthia with your own, and the height of Endimion
his thoughts, with the meandness of your fortune, you
would rather yield then contend, being between you
and her no comparison, and rather wonder then rage at
the greatness of his mind, being affected with a thing
more then mortal.
No comparison Floscula? and why so? is not
my beauty divine, whose body is decked with fair flow∣ers,
and veins are Vines, yielding sweet liquor to the
dullest spritz, whose ears are Corn, to bring strength,
and whose hears are grass, to bring abundance? Doth
not Frankincense, &amp; Mirth breath out of my nostrils,
and all the sacrifice of the Gods, breed in my bowels?
Infinite are my creatures, without which, neither thou
nor Endimion, nor any could love, or live.
But know you not fair Lady, that Cynthia
governs all things? Your grapes would be but dry
husks, your Corn but chafe, and all your virtues
vain, were it not Cynthia that preserves the one in the
bud, and nourishes the other in the blade, and by her
influence both comfort all things, and by her ado∣rite
commands all creatures; Suffer then Endimion
to follow his affections, though to obtain her be im∣possible,
and let him flatter himself in his own ima∣ginations,
because they are immortal.
Loath I am Endimion thou shouldest die, be∣cause
I love thee well, and that thou shouldest live it
grieves me, because thou love Cynthia too well. In
these extremities what shall I doe? Floscula no more
words, I am resolved. He shall neither live, nor die.
A strange practise, if it be possible.
Yes, I will entangle him in such a sweet net,
that he shall neither find the means to come out, nor
desire it. All allurements of pleasure will I cast before
his eyes, insomuch that he shall slake that love which he
now vows to Cynthia, and burn in mine, of which he
seems careless. In this languishing, between my a∣morose
devises, and his own loose desires, there shall
such dissolute thoughts take root in his head, and over
his hart grow so thick a skin, that neither hope of
preferment, nor fear of punishment, nor counsel of the
wisest, nor company of the worthiest, shall alter his hue∣more,
nor make him once to think of his honour.
A revenge incredible, and if it may be, vnna∣turall.
Hee shall know the malice of a woman, to
have neither mean, nor end, and of a woman deluded
in love, to have neither rule, nor reason. I can doe it, I
must, I will. All his virtues will I shadow with vices, his
person (ah sweet person) shall he deck with such rich
Robes, as he shall forget it is his own person, his sharp
wit (ah wit too sharpe, that hath cut off all my joys)
shall hee use, inflattering of my face, and devising Son∣nets
in my favour. The prime of his youth and pride
of his time, shall be spent in melancholy passions, care∣less
behaviour, untamed thoughts, and unbridled af∣fections.
When this is done what then, shall it conti∣nu
till his death, or shall he dote for ever in this de∣light?
Ah Floscula, thou rendest my hart in sunder,
in putting me in remembrance of the end.
Why if this be not the end, all the rest is to no
end.
Yet suffer me to imitate Iuno, who would
turn Iupiters lovers to beasts on the earth, though she
knew afterwards they should be stars in heaven.
Affection that is bred by enchantment, is like
a flower that is wrought in silk, in colour and form
most like, but nothing at all in substance or savour.
It shall suffice me if the world talk that I am
favoured of Endimion.
Well, use your own will, but you shall find
that love gotten with witch-craft, is as unpleasant, as
fish, taken with medicines unwholesome.
they that be so poor that they have
neither net nor hook, will rather poison dow then
pine with hunger: and she that is so oppressed with love,
that she is neither able with beauty, nor wit to obtain
her friend, will rather use unlawful means, then try
untolerable pains. I will doe it.
Then about it. Poor Endimion, what traps
are laid for thee, because thou honour one that all
the world wondered at. And what plots are cast to make
thee unfortunate, that studiest of all men to be the faith∣fullest.
Now our Masters are in love up to the ears,
what have wee to doe, but to be in knavery, up to the
crowns.
O that we had Sir Tophas that brave Squire,
in the midst of our mirth, &amp; ass atom, vvyl you see the
devil?
Epi.
Here sir.
I brooke not this idle humour of love, it tick∣leth
not my liver, from whence the Loue-mongers in
former age seemed to infer they should proceed.
Love sir may lye in your lunges, and I think it
doth, and that is the cause you blow, and are so purse.
Tush boy, I think it but some devise of the
Poet to get money.
A Poet? whats that?
Dost thou not know what a Poet is?
No.
Why fool, a Poet is as much as one should
say, a Poet. But soft, yonder be two Wrens, shall I
shoot at them?
They are two lads.
Larks or wrens, I will kill them.
Larks? are you blind? they are two little
Boys.
Birds, or boys, they are both but a pittance
for my breakfast, therefore have at them, for their
brains must as it were imbroder my bolts.
Stay your courage valiant Knight, for your
wisdom is so weary that it stays it self.
Why Sir Tophas have you forgotten your
old friends?
Friends? Nego argumentum.
And why not friends?
Because Amicitia (as in old Annuals we find)
is inter pares, now my pretty companions, you shall see
how unequal you be to me, but I will not cut you quite
off, you shall be my half friends, for reaching to my
middle, so far as from the ground to the wast I will be
your friend.
Learnedly. But what shall become of the rest
of your body, from the wast to the crown?
My children quote supra vos nihil ad vos, you must
think the rest immortal, because you cannot reach it.
Nay I tell ye my Moister is more then a man.
And thou less then a mouse.
But what be you two?
I am Samias, page to Endimion.
And I Dares, page to Eumenides.
Of what occupation are your Masters.
Occupation, you clown, why they are ho∣nourable,
and warriors.
Then are they my prentices.
Thine, and why so?
I was the first that ever devised war, and
therefore by Mars himself given me for my Arms a
whole Armoury, and thus I go as you see, clothed with
Artillery, it is not Silks (milksops) nor Tissues, nor the
fine wool of Cares, but iron, steel, swords, flame, shot,
terror, clamour, blood, and ruin, that rocks a sleep my
thoughts, which never had any other cradle, but cruel∣tie.
Let me see, doe you not bleed?
Why so?
Commonly my words wound.
What then doe your blows?
Not only confound, but also confound.
Howe dare thou come so near thy Moister
Epi? Sir Tophas spare vs.
You shall live. You Samias because you are
little. You Dares, because you are no bigger, and both
of you, because you are but two; for commonly I kill by
the dozen, and have for every particular adversary, a
peculiar weapon.
May we know the use for our better skill in
war?
You shall. Here is a burbolt for the ugly
beast the Black-bird.
A cruel sight.
Here is the Musket, for the untamed, (or as
the vulgar sort term it) the wilde Mallard.
O desperate attempt.
Nay my Moister will match them.
I if he catch them.
Here is a spear and shield, and both noses∣sarie,
the one to conquer, the other to subdue, or over∣come
the terrible Trout, which although he be under
the water, yet tying a string to the top of my spear, and
an engine of iron to the end of my lyne, I overthrow
him, and then herein I put him.
O wonderful war. Dares, did thou ever
hear such a dolt?
All the better, we shall have good sport here∣after,
if we can get leisure.
Leisure, I will rather loose my Masters ser∣vice
then his company, look howe hee stroutes; But
what is this, call you it your sword?
No, it is my Scimitar, which I by constructi∣on
often studying to be compendious, call my Smyter.
What, are you also learned sir?
Learned? I am all Mars and Ars.
Nay you are all Mass and Ass.
Mock you me? You shall both suffer, yet
with such weapons, as you shall make choice of the wea∣pone
wherewith you shall perrish. Am I all a mass or
lump, is there no proportion in me? Am I all Ass? is
there no wit in me. Epi, prepare thē to the slaughter.
I pray sir hear vs speak, we call you Mass,
which your learning doth well understand, is all Man,
for Mas maris is a man. Then As (as you know) is a
weight, and we for your virtues account you a weight.
The Latin hath saved your lives, the which
a world of silver could not have ransomde. I understand
you, and pardon you.
Well Sir Tophas we bid you farewell, &amp; at our
next meeting, we will be ready to doe you service.
I thank you. Dares I thank you, but
especially I thank you both.
Wisely. Come, next time weal have some
pretty Gentle-women with vs to walk, for without
doubt with them he will be very dainty.
Come let vs see what our Masters doe, it is
high time.
Now will I march into the field, where if I
cannot encounter with my foul enemies, I will with∣draw
my self to the River, &amp; there fortify for fish: for
there rests no minute free from fight.
Behold Floscula, we have met with the Wo∣man
by chance that wee sought for by travel; I will
break my mind to her without ceremony or circum∣stance,
least we loose that time in advise, that should be
spent in execution.
Use your discretion, I will in this case, neither
give counsel nor consent, for there cannot bee a thing
more monstrous, then to force affection by sorcery, nei∣there
doe I imagine any thing more impossible.
Tush Floscula, in obtaining of love, what im∣possibilities
will I not try? and for the winning of Endi∣mion,
what impieties will I not practise? Dipsas, whom
as many honour for age, as wonder at for cunning, listen
in few words to my tale, &amp; answer in one word to the
purpose, for that neither my burning desire can afford
long speech, nor the short time I have to stay many de∣lays.
Is it possible by herbs, stones, spells, incantan∣tation,
enchantment, exorcisms, fire, metals, plan∣nets,
or any practise to plant affection where it is not,
and to supplant it where it is?
Fair Lady, you may imagine that these whore
hears are not void of experience, nor the great name
that goes of my c•nning to bee without cause. I can
darken the Sun by my skill, and remove the Moon
out of her course; I can restore youth to the aged, and
make hills without bottoms; there is nothing that I can
not doe, but that only which you would have me doe,
and therein I differ from the Gods, that I am not able to
rule harts, for were it in my power to place affection by
appointment, I would make such evil appetites, such
inordinate lusts, such cursed desires, as all the world
should be filled both with superstitious heats, and ex∣treame
love.
Unhappy Tellus, whose desires are so des∣pirate,
that they are neither to be conceived of any cre∣ature,
nor to be cured by any art.
This I can, breed slackness in love, though
never root it out. What is he whom you love, &amp; what
she that he honours?
Endimion, sweet Endimion is he that hath my
hart, and Cynthia, too too fair Cynthia, the miracle of
Nature, of time, of Fortune, is the Lady that hee de∣lights
in, and dotes on every day, and dies for ten thou∣sand
times a day.
Would you have his love, either by absence
of sickness aslaked. Would you that Cynthia should mi∣struck
him, or be jealous of him without colour?
It is the only thing I crave, that seeing my
love to Endimion unspotted, cannot be accepted, his
truth to Cynthia (though it be unspeakable) may bee
suspected.
I will undertake it, and overtake him, that all
his love shall be doubted of, and therefore become des∣pirate:
but this will wear out with time, that treads
all things down but truth.
Let vs go.
I follow.
O Fair Cynthia, ô unfortunate Endimion. Why
was not thy birth as high as thy thoughts, or
her beauty less then heavenly? or why are not thine
honours as rare as her beauty? or thy fortunes as great as
thy deserts? Sweet Cynthia, how would thou be plea∣sed,
how possessed? will labours (patient of all extreme∣ties)
obtain thy love? There is no Mountain so steep
that I will not climb, no monster so cruel that I will
not tame, no action so desperate that I will not attempt.
Desire thou the passions of love, the sad and melan∣cholie
moods of perplexed minds, the not to be ex∣pressed
torments of racked thoughts? Behold my sad
tears, my deep sighs, my hollow eyes, my broken
sleeps, my heavy countenance. Would thou have
me vowed only to thy beauty and consume every
minute of time in thy service, remember my solitary
life, almost these seven years, whom have I entertai∣ned
but mine own thoughts, and thy virtues? What
company have I used but contemplation? Whom have
I wondered at but thee? Nay whom have I not contem∣ned,
for thee? Have I not crept to those on whom I
might have trodden, only because thou did shine up∣on
them? Have not injuries been sweet to me, if thou
vouchsafe I should bear them? Have I not spent my
golden years in hopes, waxing old with wishing, yet
wishing nothing but thy love. With Tellus, fair Tellus,
have I dissembled, using her but as a cloak for mine
affections, that others seeing my mangled and disorde∣red
mind, might think it were for one that loves me,
not for Cynthia, whose perfection allows no comp∣neon,
nor comparison.
In the midst of these distempred thoughts of mine,
thou art not only jealous of my truth, but careless, su∣specious,
and secure: which strange humour makes my
mind as desperate as thy conceits are doubtful. I am
none of those Wolves that bark most, when thou shy∣nest
brightest. But that fish, (thy fish Cynthia in the
flood Aranis) which at thy waxing is as white as the
driven snow, and at thy waning, as black as deepest
darkness. I am that Endimion (sweet Cynthia) that have
carried my thoughts in equal balance with my actions,
being always as free from imagining ill, as enterpry∣sing;
That Endimion, whose eyes never esteemed any
thing fair, but thy face, whose tongue termed nothing
rare but thy virtues, and whose hart imagined nothing
miraculous, but thy government. Yea that Endimion,
who diuorsing himself from the amiablenes of all La∣dies,
the bravery of all Courts, the company of al men,
hath chosen in a solitary Cell to live, only by feeding
on thy favour, accounting in the world (but thy self)
nothing excellent, nothing immortal; thus moist thou
see every vain sinew, muscle, and artery of my love, in
which there is no flattery, nor deceit; error, nor art.
But soft, here comes Tellus, I must turn my other
face to her like Ianus, least she be as suspicious as Juno.
Yonder I espy Endimion, I will seem to su∣spect
nothing but sooth him, that seeing I cannot obe∣taine
the depth of his love, I may learn the height of
his dissembling; Floscula and Dipsas, with-drawe your
selves out of our sight, yet be within the hearing of our
saluting; How now Endimion, always solitary? no com∣panie
but your own thoughts? no friend but melan∣cholie
fancies?
You know (fair Tellus) that the sweet re∣membrance
of your love, is the only companion of my
life, and thy presence, my paradise, so that I am not a∣lone
when no body is with me, and in heaven it self
when thou art with me.
Then you love me Endimion.
Or else I live not Tellus.
Is it not possible for you Endimion, to dissem∣ble?
Not Tellus, unless I could make me a woman.
Why, is dissembling joined to their sex inse∣parable?
as heate to fire, heaviness to earth, moisture to
water, thinness to ayre?
No, but found in their sex, as common, as
spots upon Doves, moles upon faces, Caterpillars upon
sweet apples, cobwebs upon fair windows.
Doe they all dissemble?
All but one.
Who is that?
I dare not tell. For if I should say you, then
would you imagine my flattery to be extreme, if ano∣there,
then would you think my love to be but indiffe∣rent.
You will be sure I shall take no vantage of
your words. But in sooth Endimion, without more cere∣monies,
is it not Cynthia?
You know Tellus, that of the Gods we are
forbidden to dispute, because their deities come not
within the compass of our reasons, and of Cynthia we
are allowed not to talk but to wonder, because her ver∣tues
are not within the reach of our capacities.
Why, she is but a woman.
No more was Venus.
She is but a virgin.
No more was Vesta.
She shall have an end.
So shall the world.
Is not her beauty subject to time?
No more then time is to standing still.
Wilt thou make her immortal?
No, but incomparable.
Take heed Endimion, lest like the Wrestler
in Olimpia, that striving to lift an impossible weight,
caught an incurable strain, thou by fixing thy thoughts
aboue thy reach, fall into a disease without al recur? But
I see thou art now in love with Cynthia.
No Tellus, thou know that the stately
Cedar, whose top reaches unto the clouds, never
bows his head to the shrubs that grow in the valley,
nor Ivy that climbs up by the Elm, can ever get hold
of the beams of the Sun; Cynthia I honour in all hue∣militia,
whom none ought, or dare adventure to love,
whose affections are immortal, &amp; virtues infinite. Suf∣fer
me therefore to gaze on the Moon, at whom, were
it not for thy self, I would die with wondering.
Come Samias, did thou ever hear such a
sighing, the one for Cynthia, the other for Simile, &amp; both
for moon shine in the water?
Let them sigh, and let vs sing, how say you gen∣tlewomen,
are not our Masters too far in love?
Their tongues happily are dipped to the root in
amorous words and sweet discourses, but I think their
hearts are scarce tipped on the side, with constant desires.
How say you Fauilla, is not love a lurcher, that
takes men's stomachs away that they cannot eat, their
spleen that they cannot laugh, their harts that they can∣not
fight, their eyes that they cannot sleep, and leaves
nothing but livers to make nothing but Lovers?
Away peevish boy, a rod were better under
thy girdle, than love in thy mouth: it will be a forward
Cock that crows in the shell.
Alas good old gentlewoman, how it become∣meth
you to be grave,
Fauilla though she be but a spark, yet is she
fire.
And you Scintilla bee not much more then a
spark, though you would be esteemed a flame.
It were good sport to see the fight between
two sparks.
Let them to it, and wee will warm vs by their
words.
You are not angry Fauilla?
That is Scintilla, as you list to take it.
That, that.
This it is to be matched with girls, who com∣ming
but yesterday from making of babies, would before
to morrow be accounted Matrons.
I cry your Matronship mercy; because your
Pantables bee higher with cork, therefore your feet
must needs be higher in the insteppes: you will be mine
elder, because you stand upon a stool, and I on the
flower.
Good, good.
Let them alone, and see with what countenance
they will become friends.
Nay, you think to bee the wiser, because you
mean to have the last word.
Step between them least they scratch. In faith
gentlewomen, seeing wee came out to bee merry, let not
your earring mar our jests: be friends, how say you?
I am not angry, but it spited me to see howe
short she was.
I meant nothing, till she would needs cross me.
Then so let it rest.
I am agreed.
And I, yet I never took any thing so unkindly
in my life.
Tys I have the cause, that never offered the
occasion.
Excellent and right like a woman.
A strange sight to see water come out of fire.
It is their property, to carry in their eyes, fire,
and water, tears and torches, and in their mouths, ho∣no
and gall.
You will be a good one if you live, but what
is yonder formal fellow?
Sir Tophas, sir Tophas, of whom we told you:
if you bee good wenches make as though you love him,
and wonder at him.
Wee will doo our parts.
But first let vs stand aside, and let him use his
garb, for all consists in his gracing.
Epi.
At hand sir.
How likest thou this Martial life, where no∣thing
but blood besprinkleth our bosoms? Let me see
be our enemies fat?
Passing fat: and I would not change this life to
be a Lord, and your self passes all comparison, for o∣there
Captains kill and beat, and there is nothing you
kill, but you also eat.
I will draw out their guts out of their bell∣lies,
and tear the flesh with my teeth, so mortal is my
hate, and so eager my vnstaunched stomach.
My master thinks himself the valiantest man
in the world if hee kill a wren: so warlike a thing he ac∣counted
to take away life, though it be from a Lark.
Epi, I find my thoughts to swell, and my spy∣rite
to take wings, in so much that I cannot continue
within the compass of so slender combats.
This passes.
Why is he not mad?
No, but a little vain glorious.
Epi.
Sir.
I will encounter that black and cruel en∣my,
that bears rough and vntewed lockes upon his
body, whose Sire throws down the strongest walls,
whose legs are as many as both ours, on whose head are
placed most horrible horns, by nature, as a defence from
all harms.
What mean you Master to be so desperate?
Honour inciteth me, and very hunger com∣pelleth
me.
What is that monster?
The Monster Ouis. I have said, let thy wits
work.
I cannot imagine it; yet let me see, a black enemy
with rough lockes it may be a sheep, and Ouis is a sheep:
his Sire so strong, a Ram is a sheep Sire: that being
also an engine of war, horns he hath, and four legs, so
hath a sheep: without doubt this monster is a black
sheep; Is it not a sheep that you mean?
Thou hast hit it, that Monster will I kill and
sup with.
Come let vs take him off Sir Tophas all hail.
Welcome children, I seldom cast mine eyes
so low as to the crowns of your heads, and therefore par∣don
me that I spake not all this while.
No harm done, here be fair Ladies come to
wonder at your person, your valour, your wit, the re∣port
whereof, hath made them careless of their own ho∣nurse,
to glut their eyes and harts upon yours.
Report cannot but injure me, for that not
knowing fully what I am, I fear she hath been a nig∣guard
in her praises.
No gentle knight, Report hath been prodigal,
for she hath left you no equal, nor her self credit, so
much hath she told, yet no more than we now see.
A good wench.
If there remain as much pity toward wo∣men,
as there is in you courage against your enemies, thē
shall we be happy, who hearing of your person, came to
see it, and seeing it, are now in love with it.
Love me Ladies? I easily believe it, but my
tough heart receives no impression with sweet words.
Mars may pearce it, Venus shall not paint on it.
A cruel saying.
Ther's a girl.
Will you cast these Ladies away, and all for a
little love? doo but speak kindly.
There cōmeth no soft syllable within my lips,
custom hath made my words bloody, and my hart bar∣barons:
that pelting word love, how waterish it is in my
mouth, it carries no sound, hate, horror, death, are spea∣ches
that nourish my spirits. I like honey but I care not
for the bees, I delight in music but I love not to play
on the bagpipes, I can vouchsafe to hear the voice of
women, but to touch their bodies I disdain it, as a thing
childish, and fit for such men as can digest nothing but
milk.
A hard heart, shall wee dye for your love, and
find no remedy.
I have already taken a surfeit.
Good master pity them.
Pity them Epi? no I do not think that this
breast shall be pestered with such a foolish passion. What
is that the gentlewoman carries in a chain?
Why it is a Squirrel.
A Squirrel? O Gods what things are made for
money.
Is not this gentleman ouerwise?
I could stay all day with him, if I feared not to
be shent.
Is it not possible to meet again.
Yes at any time.
Then let vs hasten home.
Sir Tophas, the God of war deal better with
you, than you doo with the God of love.
Our love we may dissemble, digest we cannot,
but I doubt not but time will hamper you, and help vs.
I defy time, who hath no interest in my heart:
come Epi. let me to the battle with that hideous beast,
love is pap and hath no relish in my taste, because it
is not terrible.
Indeed a black sheep is a perilous beast,
but let vs in till another time.
I shall long for that time.
No rest Endimion? still uncertain how to settle
thy steps by day, or thy thoughts by night? thy truth
is measured by thy fortune, and thou art judged vnfaith∣full
because thou art unhappy. I will see if I can beguile
my self with sleep, &amp; if no slumber will take hold in my
eyes, yet will I embrace the golden thoughts in my head,
and wish to melt by musing: that as Ebony, which no
fire can scorch, is yet cōsumed with sweet savours, so my
heart which cannot bee bent by the hardness of fortune,
may be bruised by amorous desires, On yonder bank
never grew any thing but Lunary, and hereafter I will
never have any bed but that bank. O Endimion, Tellus
was fair, but what avails Beauty without wisdom?
Nay Endimion she was wise, but what avails wisdom
without honour? She was honourable Endimion, belie
her not, I but howe obscure is honour without fortune?
Was she not fortunate whom so many followed? Yes,
yes, but base is fortune without Majesty: thy Majesty
Cynthia al the world knows and wondered at, but not
one in the world that can imitate it or comprehend it.
No more Endimion, sleep or dye; Nay die for to sleep
it is impossible, and yet I know not how it comes to
pass, I feel such a heaviness both in mine eyes and hart,
yt I am suddenly benumbed, yea in every iont: it may be
weariness, for when did I rest? it may bee deep melan∣choly,
for when did I not sigh? Cynthia, I so, I say Cynthia.
Little dost thou know Endimion when thou
shalt wake, for had thou placed thy heart as lowe in
love, as thy head lies now in sleep, thou might have
commanded Tellus, whom now in stead of a Mistress,
thou shalt find a tomb. These eyes must I seal up by
Art, not Nature, which are to be opened neither by Art
nor Nature. Thou that lie down with golden lockes,
shalt not awake until they bee turned to silver hairs:
and that chin, on which scarcely appears soft down,
shall be filled with brissles as hard as broom: thou shalt
sleep out thy youth and flowering time, and become dry
hay before thou knew thy self greene grass, &amp; ready
by age to step into the grave whē thou wake, that was
youthful in the Court when thou laidst thee down to
sleep. The malice of Tellus hath brought this to pass,
which if she could not have entreated of me by fair
means, she would have commanded by menacing, for
from her gather wee all our simples to maintain our
sorceries. Fan with this hemlock over his face, and
sing the enchantment for sleep, whilst I go in and fi∣nish
those ceremonies that are required in our Art: take
heed ye touch not his face, for the Fan is so seasoned
that who so it touches with a leaf shall presently dye,
and over whom the wind of it breaths, he shall sleep
for ever.
Let me alone, I will bee careful. What hap
had thou Endimion to come under the hands of Dipsas.
O fair Endimion, how it grieves me that that fair face
must be turned to a withered skin, &amp; taste the pains
of death before it feel the reward of love. I fear Tellus
will repent that which the heavens themselves seemed
to few, but I hear Dipsas coming, I dare not rapine,
least she make me pine, and rock me into such a deep
sleep, that I shall not awaked to my marriage.
How now, have you finished?
Yea.
Well then let vs in, and see that you doo not so
much as whisper that I did this, for if you do, I will turn
thy hairs to Adders, and all thy teeth in thy head to
tongues, come away, come away.
IS the report true, that Endimion is stricken into
such a dead sleep, that nothing can either wake
him or move him?
Too true Madame, and as much to be pitied
as wondered at.
As good sleep and doe no harm, as wake and
doe no good.
What makes you Tellus to bee so short? the
time was Endimion only was.
It is an old saying Madame, that a waking dog
doth a far off bark at a sleeping Lyon.
It were good Eumenides that you took a nap
with your friend for your speech begins to be heavy
Contrary to your nature Simile, which hath
been always accounted light.
What have we hear before my face, these un∣seemly
and malapert ouerthwarts? I will tame your
tongues, and your thoughts, and make your speeches an∣swerable
to your duties, and your conceits fit for my
dignity, else will I banish you both my person and the
world.
Pardon I humbly ask; but such is my vnspot∣ted
faith to Endimion, that whatsoever seems a needle
to prick his finger, is a dagger to wound my heart.
If you bee so dear to him, howe happens it
you neither go to see him, nor search for remedy for him?
I have seen him to my grief, and sought re∣cure
with despair, for that I cannot imagine who should
restore, him that is the wounder to all men: your high∣nes,
on whose hands the compass of the earth is at cōmaund,
(though not in possession) may show your self
both worthy your sex, your nature, and your favour, if
you redeem that honourable Endimion, whose ripe years
foretell rare virtues, and whose unmellowed conceits
promise ripe counsel.
I have had trial of Endimion, &amp; conceive greater
assurance of his age, then I could hope of his youth.
But timely Madam crookes that tree that will be
a camock, and young it pricks that will be a thorne, and
therefore he that began without care to settle his life, it
is a sign without amendment he will end it.
Presumptuous girl, I will make thy tongue
an example of unrecoverable displeasure, Corsets carry
her to the Castle in the Desert, there to remain and
weave.
Shall she work stories or poetries?
It skylleth not which, go to, in both, for she
shall find examples infinite in either, what punishment
long tongues have. Eumenides, if either the Sooth∣sayers
in Egipt, or the Enchanters in Thessaly, or the
Philosophers in Greece, or all the Sages of the world,
can find remedy, I will procure it, therefore dispatch
with al speed: you Eumenides into Thessalie. You Zon∣tes
into Greece, (because you are acquainted in Athens.)
You Panthon to Egypt, saying that Cynthia sends, and
if you will, commands.
On bowed knee I give thanks, and with wings
on my legs, I fly for remedy.
We are ready at your highness command, &amp;
hope to return to your full content.
It shall never be said that Cynthia, whose mercy
and goodness fills the heavens with joys, &amp; the world
with marvels, will suffer either Endimion or any to
perrish, if he may be protected.
Your Majesties words have been always
deeds, and your deeds virtues.
Here is the Castle (fair Tellus) in which you
must weave, till either time end your days, or Cynthia
her displeasure. I am sorry so fair a face should bee
subject to so hard a fortune, and that the flower of beau∣tie,
which is honoured in Courts, should here wither
in prison.
Corsets, Cynthia may restrain the liberty of
my body, of my thoughts she cannot, and therefore doe
I esteem my self most free, though I am in greatest
bondage.
Can you then feed on fancy, and subdue the
malice of envy by the sweetness of imagination.
Corsets, there is no sweeter music to the
miserable then despair, and therefore the more bitter∣ness
I feel, the more sweetness I find, for so vain were
liberty, and so unwelcome the following of higher for∣tune,
that I choose rather to pine in this Castle, then to
be a Prince in any other Court.
A humour contrary to your years, and nothing
agreeable to your sex: the one commonly allured with
delights, the other always with sovereignty.
I marvel Corsets that you being a Captain,
who should sound nothing but terror, and suck nothing
but blood, can find in your hart to talk such smooth
words, for that it agrees not with your calling to use
words so soft, as that of love.
Lady, it were unfit of wars to discourse with
womē, into whose minds nothing can sink but smooth∣nes;
besides, you must not think that Soldiers bee
so rough hewn, or of such knotty mettle, that beauty
cannot allure, and you being beyond perfection en∣chant.
Good Corsets talk not of love, but let me to
my labour: the little beauty I have, shall be bestowed on
my Loom, which I now mean to make my Lover.
Let vs in, and what favour Corsets can show,
Tellus shall command.
The only favour I desire, is now and then to
walk.
Epi.
Here sir.
Vnrigge me. Hey ho.
Whats that?
An interiection, whereof some are of more∣ning:
as eho, vah.
I understand you not.
Thou see me.
I.
Thou hearst me.
I.
Thou feel me.
I.
And not understand me?
No.
Then am I but three quarters of a Noun
substantive. But alas Epi, to tell thee the troth I am a
Noun Adiectiue.
Why?
Because I cannot stand without another.
Who is that?
Dipsas.
Are you in love?
No: but love hath as it were milked my thoughts,
and drained from my hart the very substance of my ac∣customed
courage; it works in my head like new
Wine, so as I must hoop my skonce with iron, least
my head break, and so I bewray my brains: but I pray
thee first discover me in all parts, that I may be like a
Lover, and then will I sigh and die. Take my gun,
and give me a gown: Caedant arma togae.
Here.
Take my sword and shield, and give me
beard, brush, and Cyssers: bella gerant ally tu pari semper
ama.
Will you be trimd sir?
Not yet: for I feel a contention within me,
whether I shall frame the bodkin beard or the bush. But
take my pike and give me pen: decor que puduit, scri∣bear
iussit amor.
I will furnish you sir.
Now for my bow and bolts, give me ink
and paper, for my Smiter a pen-knife: for Scalpellum
calami, atramentum, charta libelli, sint semper studies arma
parity maize.
Sir will you give over wars, &amp; play with that
babble called love?
Give over wars? no Epi, Militate omnis
amens, et habit sua castea Cupido.
Love hath made you very eloquent, but your
face is nothing fair.
Non formosus erat, sed erat facundus Vlisses.
Nay I must seek a new Moister if you can
speak nothing but verses.
Quicquid conabar decor versus erat. Epi, I
feel all Ouid de art amend lie as heavy at my heart as
a load of logs. O what a fine thin hair hath Dip∣sas,
what a pretty low forehead? What a tale &amp; state∣lie
nose? What little hollow eyes? What great and
goodly lips? Howe harmless she is being tooth∣less,
her fingers fat and short, adorned with long
nails like a Bitter. In howe sweet a proportion her
cheeks hang down to her breasts like dugs, and her
paps to her waste like bags. What a lowe sty∣ture
she is, and yet what a great foot she carries?
Howe thrifty must she be in whom there is no waste?
Howe virtuous is she like to be, over whom no man
can be jealous?
Stay Moister, you forget your self.
O Epi. even as a dish melts by the fire, so
doth my wit increase by love.
Pithily, and to the purpose, but what? begin
you to nod.
Good Epi let me take a nap: for as some
man may better steal a horse, then another look over
the hedge: so divers shall be sleepy when they would
fainest take rest.
Who ever saw such a woodcock, love Dipsas?
without doubt all the world will now account him va∣liant,
that ventures on her, whom none durst under∣take.
But here comes two wags.
Thy Moister hath slept his share.
I think he doth it because he would not pay
me my board wages.
It is a thing most strange, and I think mine
will never return, so that wee must both seek new
Masters, for we shall never live by our manners.
If you want Masters, join with me and serve
Sir Tophas, who must needs keep more men, because
he is toward marriage.
What Epi, wher's thy Moister?
Yonder sleeping in love.
Is it possible?
Hee hath taken his thoughts a hole lower, and
saith, seeing it is the fashion of the world, hee will veil
bonnet to beauty.
how is he attired?
Lovely.
Whom loves this amorous knight?
Dipsas.
That ugly creature? Why she is a fool, a
scold, fat, without fashion, and quite without favour.
Tush you be simple, my Ma. hath a good mar∣riage.
Good? as how?
Why in marrying Dipsas, hee shall have every
day twelve dishes of meat to his dinner, though there
be none but Dipsas with him. Four of flesh, four of fish,
four of fruit.
As how Epi?
For flesh these, woodcock, goose, bitter, &amp; rail.
Indeed he shall not miss, if Dipsas be there.
For fish these, crab, carpe, lump, and pouting.
Excellent, for of my word, she is both crabbish,
lumpish, and carping.
For fruit these, fritters, meddlers, hartichockes,
and Lady longings. Thus you see hee shall fare like a
King, though he be but a beggar.
Well Epi, dine thou with him, for I had ra∣there
fast then see her face. But see thy Ma. is a sleep, let
vs have a song to wake this Amorous knight.
Agreed.
Content.
Sleep is a binding of the senses, love a loosing.
Let vs hear him awhile.
There appeared in my sleep a goodly Owl,
who sitting upon my shoulder, cried twyt, twyt, &amp; be∣fore
mine eyes presented her self the express image
of Dipsas. I marveled what the Owl said, till at the last,
I perceived twyt twyt, to it, to it: only by contraction
admonished by this vision, to make account of my
sweet Venus.
Sir Tophas, you have ouer-slept your self.
No youth, I have but slept over my love.
Love? Why it is impossible, that into so no∣ble
and unconquered a courage, love should creep, ha∣uing
first a head as hard to pearce as steel, then to pass
to a hart armed with a shirt of male.
I but my Moister yawning one day in the Sun,
love crept into his mouth before he could close it, and
there kept such a tumbling in his body, that he was glad
to untruss the points of his hart, and entertain Love
as a stranger.
If there remain any pity in you, plead for
me to Dipsas.
Plead? Nay wee will press her to it. Let vs
go with him to Dipsas, and there shall wee have good
sport. But sir Tophas when shall we go? for I find my
tongue voluble, and my hart venturous, and all my self
like my self.
Come Dares, let vs not loose him till we find
our Masters, for as long as he lives, we shall lack nei∣there
mirth nor meat.
We will trauice. Will you go sir?
I praesequar.
Father, your sad musique being tuned
on the same key that my harde fortune is, hath so mel∣ted
my mind, that I wish to hang at your mouths
end, tell my life end.
These tunes Gentleman have I been accu∣stomed
with these fifty Winters, having no other house
to shroud my self, but the broad heavens, and so fa∣miliar
with me hath use made misery, that I esteem
sorrow my chiefest solace. And welcomes is that
guest to me, that can rehearse the saddest tale, or the
bloodiest tragedy.
A strange humour, might I enquire the
cause?
You must pardon me if I deny to tell it, for
knowing that the revealing of griefs, is as it were a re∣newing
of sorrow, I have vowed therefore to conceal
them, that I might not only feel the depth of euerla∣sting
discontentment, but despair of remedy? But
whence are you? What fortune hath thrust you to this
distress?
I am going to Thessalie, to seek reme∣die
for Endimion my dearest friend, who hath been
cast into a dead sleep, almost these twenty years, wax∣ing
old, and ready for the grave, being almost but
newly come forth of the cradle.
You need not for recur travel far, for who
so can clearly see the bottom of this Fountain, shall
have remedy for any thing.
That me thinks is unpossible, why what
virtue can there be in water?
Yes, who soever can shed the tears of a
faithful Lover, shall obtain any thing he would, read
these words engraven about the brim.
Have you known this by experience, or is it
placed here of purpose to delude men?
I only would have experience of it, and then
should there bee an end of my misery. And then
would I tell the strangest discourse that ever yet was
heard.
Ah Eumenides.
What lack you Gentleman, are you not well?
Yes Father, but a qualm that often com∣meth
over my hart doth now take hold of me, but did
never any Lovers come hither?
Lusters, but not Lovers; for often have I seen
them weep, but never could I hear they saw the boat∣tome.
Came there women also?
Some.
What did they see?
They all wept that the Fountain overflowed
with tears, but so thick became the water with their
tears, that I could scarce discern the brim, much
less behold the bottom.
Be faithful Lovers so scant?
It seems so, for yet heard I never of any.
Ah Eumenides, howe art thou perplex∣ed?
call to mind the beauty of thy sweet Mistress, and
the depth of thy never dying affections, howe oft hast
thou honoured her, not only without spot, but su∣spition
of falsehood? And howe hardly hath she re∣warded
thee, without cause or colour of despite?
Howe secrete hast thou been these seven years,
that hast not, nor once dare not, to name her for dis∣contenting
her? Howe faithful? that hast offered
to dye for her, to please her. Unhappy Eumeni∣des.
Why Gentleman did you once love?
Once? I Father and ever shall.
Was she unkind, and you faithful?
She of all women the most froward, and I of
all creatures the most fond.
You doted then, not loved: for affection is
grounded on virtue, and virtue is never peevish: or on
Beauty, and Beauty loves to be praised.
I but if all virtuous Ladies should yield to all
that be loving, or all amiable gentlewomen entertain all
that be amorous, their virtues would bee accounted vi∣ces,
and their beauties deformities, for that love can bee
but between two, and that not proceeding of him that
is most faithful, but most fortunate.
I would you were so faithful, that your tears
might make you fortunate.
Yea father, if that my tears clear not this foun∣taine,
then may you swear it is but a mere mockery.
So saith every one yet, that wept.
Ah, I faint, I dye. Ah sweet Simile let me a∣lone,
and dissolve by weeping into water.
This affection seems strange, if hee see no∣thing
without doubt this dissembling passes, for no∣thing
shall draw me from the belief.
Father, I plainly see the bottom, and there in
white marble engraven these words, Ask one for all,
and but one thing at all.
O fortunate Eumenides, (for so have I heard
thee call thy self) let me see, I cannot discern any such
thing. I think thou dream.
Ah Father thou art not a faithful lover, and
therefore can not behold it.
Then ask that I may be satisfied by the event,
and thy self blessed.
Ask? so I will: and what shall I doo but ask,
and whom should I ask but Simile, the possessing of
whose person, is a pleasure that cannot come within the
compass of comparison, whose golden lockes seem
most curious, when they seem most careless, whose
sweet looks seem most alluring, when they are most
chaste: and whose words the more virtuous they are,
the more amorous they bee accounted. I pray thee for∣tune
when I shall first meet with fair Simile, dash my
delight with some light disgrace, least embracing sweet∣ness
beyond measure, I take a surfeit without recur: let
her practise her accustomed coyness, that I may diet
my seife upon my desires: otherwise the fullness of my
joys will diminish the sweetness, and I shall perrish by
them before I possess them.
Why doe I trifle the time in words? The least minute
being spent in the getting of Simile, is more worth
then the whole world: therefore let me ask. What
now Eumenides? Whether art thou drawn? Hast thou
forgotten both friendship and duty? Care of Endimi∣on,
and the commandment of Cynthia? Shall hee dye
in a leaden sleep, because thou sleep in a golden
dream? I, let him sleep ever, so I slumber but one mi∣nut
with Simile. Love knows neither friendship
nor kindred.
Shall I not hazard the loss of a friend, for the obtay∣ning
of her for whom I would often loose my self?
Fond Eumenides, shall the enticing beauty of a most
disdainful Lady, bee of more force then the rare fide∣litie
of a tried friend? The love of men to women is
a thing common, and of course: the friendship of
man to man infinite, and immortal. Tush, Simile
doth possess my love. I but Endimion hath deser∣ued
it. I will help Endimion. I found Endimion un∣spotted
in his truth. I but I shall find Simile constant
in her love. I will have Simile. What shall I doe? Father
thy gray hairs are Ambassadors of experience. Which
shall I ask?
Eumenides, release Endimion, for all things
(friendship excepted) are subject to fortune: Love is
but an eye worm, which only tickles the head with
hopes, and wishes: friendship the image of eterni∣tie,
in which there is nothing moveable, nothing mis∣cheeuous.
As much difference as there is between
Beauty and Virtue, bodies and shadows, colours and
life: so great odds is there between love and friend∣ship.
Love is a Chameleon, which draws nothing into the
mouth but ayre, and nourishes nothing in the body
but lunges: believe me Eumenides, Desire dyes in the
same moment that Beauty sickens, and Beauty fades
in the same instant that it flourishes. When adversities
flow, then love ebbes: but friendship stands stiffly
in storms. Time draws wrinkles in a fair face, but
adds fresh colours to a fast friend, which neither
heate, nor cold, nor misery, nor place, nor destiny, can al∣la
or diminish. O friendship of all things the most rare,
and therefore most rare because most excellent, whose
comforts in misery is always sweet, and whose counsels
in prosperity are ever fortunate. Vain love, that only
coming near to friendship in name, would seem to
be the same, or better, in nature.
Father I allow your reasons, and will therefore
conquer mine own. Virtue shall subdue affections, wis∣dome
lust, friendship beauty. Mistresses are in every
place, and as common as Hares in Atho, Bees in Hybla,
fowls in the ayre: but friends to be found, are like the
Phoenix in Arabia, but one, or the Philadelphi in
Arays, never aboue two. I will have Endimion, sacred
Fountain, in whose bowels are hidden divine secrets, I
have increased your waters with the tears of unspotted
thoughts and therefore let me receive the reward you
promise: Endimion, the truest friend to me, and faith∣fullest
lover to Cynthia, is in such a dead sleep, that no∣thing
can wake or move him.
Dost thou see any thing?
I see in the same Pillar, these words:
When she whose figure of all is the perfectest, and never to
bee measured: always one, yet never the same: still incon∣stant,
yet never wavering, shall come and kiss Endimion in
his sleep, hee shall then rise, else never. This is strange.
What see you else?
There comes over mine eyes either a
dark mist, or upon the fountain a deep thickness:
for I can perceive nothing. But howe am I deluded?
or what difficult (nay impossible) thing is this?
Me thinks it easy.
Good father and howe?
Is not a circle of all Figures the perfectest?
Yes.
And is not Cynthia of all circles the most abso∣lute?
Yes.
Is it not impossible to measure her, who still
works by her influence, never standing at one
stay?
Yes.
Is she not always Cynthia, yet seldom in the
same bigness, always wavering in her waxing or way∣ning,
that our bodies might the better bee governed,
our seasons the daylier give their increase, yet never to
bee removed from her course, as long as the heavens
continue theirs?
Yes.
Then who can it bee but Cynthia, whose
virtues being all divine, must needs bring things
to pass that bee miraculous. Go, humble thy self to
Cynthia, tell her the success, of which my self shall bee
a witness. And this assure thy self, that she that sent
to find means for his safety, will now work her cun∣ning.
How fortunate am I, if Cynthia be she that may
doo it.
Howe fond art thou, if thou doo not believe
it?
I will hasten thither, that I may entreat on
my knees for succour, and embrace in mine arms my
friend.
I will go with thee, for unto Cynthia must I
discover all my sorrows, who also must work in me a
contentment.
May I now know the cause?
That shall bee as wee walk, and I doubt not
but the strangeness of my tale will take away the tedi∣ousnesse
of our journey.
Let vs go.
I follow.
I Marvel Corsets gives me so much liberty:
all the world knowing his charge to bee so
high, and his nature to bee most strange, who hath so
ill entreated Ladies of great honour, that he hath not suf∣feared
them to look out of windows, much less to
walk abroad: it may bee hee is in love with me, for
(Endimion, hard hearted Endimion, excepted) what is he
that is not enamourd of my beauty? But what respect
thou the love of all the world, Endimion hates thee. A∣las
poor Endimion, my maylce hath exceeded my love:
and thy faith to Cynthia, quenched my affections. Queen∣ched
Tellus? nay kindled them a fresh; in so much that
I find scorching flames, for dead embers, and cruel en∣counters
of war in my thoughts, in steed of sweet
parleys. Ah that I might once again see Endimion, ac∣cursed
girl, what hope hast thou to see Endimion? on
whose head already are grown gray hairs, and whose
life must yield to Nature, before Cynthia end her dis∣pleasure.
Wicked Dipsas, and most devilish Tellus, the
one for cunning too exquisite, the other for hate too in∣tolerable.
Thou wast commanded to weave the stories
&amp; Poetries, wherein were showed both examples &amp; pu∣nishments
of tattling tongues, and thou hast only imbro∣dered
the sweet face of Endimion, devises of love, melan∣choly
imaginations, and what not, out of thy work, that
thou should study to pick out of thy mind. But here
comes Corsets, I must seem yielding and stout, full of
mildness, yet tempered with a Majesty: for if I be too
flexible, I shall give him more hope then I mean, if too
froward, enjoy less liberty then I would, love him I can∣not,
&amp; therefore will practise that which is most country∣rye
to our sex, to dissemble.
Fair Tellus, I perceive you rise with the Lark,
and to your self sing with the Nightingale.
My Lord I have no play-fellow but fancy, be∣ing
barred of all company I must question with my
self, and make my thoughts my friends.
I would you would account my thoughts also
your friends, for they be such as are only busied in won∣dering
at your beauty, &amp; wisdom: &amp; some such as have
esteemed your fortune too hard, and divers of that kind
that offer to set you free, if you will set them free
There are no colours so contrary as white and
black, nor Elements so disagreeing as fire and water, nor
any thing so opposite as men's thoughts &amp; their words.
He that gave Cassandra the gift of prophesying
with the curse, that spake she never so true, she should
never be believed, hath I think poisoned the fortune of
men, that uttering the extremities of their inward passi∣once,
are always suspected of outward perjuries.
Well Corsets I will flatter my self, and believe
you. What would you doe to enjoy my love?
Set all the Ladies of the Castle free, and make
you the pleasure of my life: more I cannot doe, less
I will not.
These be great words, and fit your calling: for
Captains must promise things impossible. But will you
doe one thing for all.
Any thing sweet Tellus, that am ready for all.
You know that on the Lunary bank slay∣peth
Endimion.
I know it.
If you will remove him from that place by force,
and convey him into some obscure cave by policy, I
give you here the faith of an unspotted virgin, that you
only shall possess me as a lover, and in spite of ma∣lice,
have me for a wife.
Remove him Tellus? Yes Tellus, hee shall bee
removed, and that so soon, as thou shalt as much com∣mend
my diligence as my force. I go.
Stay, will your self attempt it?
I Tellus: as I would have none partaker of
my sweet love, so shall none be partners of my labours:
but I pray thee go at your best leisure, for Cynthia be∣ginneth
to rise, and if she discover our love we both pe∣rich,
for nothing pleases her but the fairness of verge∣night.
All things must bee not only without lust, but
without suspicion of lightness.
I will depart, and go you to Endimion.
I fly Tellus, being of all men the most for∣tunate.
Simple Corsets, I have set thee about a task being
but a man, yt the gods thēselues cannot perform: for little
dost thou know howe heavy his head lies, howe hard
his fortune: but such shifts must women have to de∣ceiue
men, and under colour of things easy, entreat that
which is impossible: otherwise we should be cūbred with
importunities, oaths, sighs, letters, and all implements
of love, which to one resolved to the contrary, are most
loathsome. I will in and laugh with the other Ladies at
Corsets sweating.
Will thy master never awake?
No, I think hee sleeps for a wager: but how
shall wee spend the time? Sir Tophas is so far in love
that he pines in his bed, and comes not abroad?
But here comes Epi, in a pelting chafe.
A pox of all false Proverbs, and were a Pro∣uerbe
a Page, I would have him by the ears.
Why art thou angry?
Why? you know it is said, the tide tarries no
man.
True.
A monstrous lye; for I was tide two hours, and
tarried for one to vnlose me.
Alas poor Epi.
Poor? No, no, you base conceited slaves, I am a
most complied Gentleman, although I bee in disgrace
with sir Tophas.
Art thou out with him.
I, because I cannot get him a lodging with
Endimion, hee would fine take a nap for forty or fifty
years.
A short sleep, considering our long life.
Is he still in love?
In love? why he doth nothing but make Sonnets.
Can thou remember any one of his Poems?
I, this is one. The beggar Love that knows not
where to lodge: At last within my hart when I slept, he
crept, I waked, and so my fancies began to fodge.
That's a very long verse.
Why the other was short, the first is called
from the thumb to the little finger, the second from the
little finger to the elbow, and some hee hath made to
reach to the crown of his head, and down again to the
soul of his foot: it is set to the tune of the black
Sans, ratio est, because Dipsas is a black Saint.
Very wisely, but pray thee Epi how art thou
complete, and being from thy Moister what occupati∣on
wilt thou take?
No my harts, I am an absolute Microcosmus, a
petty world of my self, my library is my head, for I
have no other books but my brains: my wardrobe on
my back, for I have no more apparel then is on my
body; my armoury at my fingers ends, for I use no other
Artillery then my nails; my treasure in my purse. Sie
omnia mea mecum porto.
Good.
Now sirs, my Palace is paved with grass, and
tiled with stars: for celo la queen non habit vrnam,
he that hath no house, must he in the yard.
A brave resolution, But how wilt thou spend
thy time?
Not in any Melancholy sort, for mine exercise
I will walk horses.
Too bad.
Why is it not said: It is good walking when
one hath his horse in his hand?
Worse, and worse, but how wilt thou live?
By angling; O tic a stately occupation to stand
four hours in a cold Morning, and to have his nose
bitten with frost, before his bait be mumbled with a
Fish.
A rare attempt, but wilt thou never travel?
Yes in a Western barge, when with a good
wind and lusty pugges, one may go ten miles in two
days.
Thou art excellent at thy choice, but what
pastime wilt thou use, none?
Yes the quickest of all.
What dice?
No, when I am in hast, xxj. games at Chess,
to pass a few minutes.
A life for a little Lord, and full of quickness.
Tush let me alone, but I must needs see if I
can find where Endimion lies, and then go to a cer∣taine
fountain hard by, where they say faithful Lovers
shall have althings they will ask. If I can find out any
of these, ego et Magister mouse erimus in tuto, I and my
Moister shall be friends. He is resolved to weep some
three or four payle-fuls, to avoid the rum of love
that wambleth in his stomach.
Shall we never see thy Moister Dares?
Yes, let vs go now, for to morrow Cynthia
will be there.
I will go with you. But howe shall wee see
for the Watch?
Tush let me alone, Isle begin to them. My∣sters
God speed you.
Sir boy, we are all sped already.
So me thinks, for they smell all of drink, like a
beggars beard.
But I pray sirs, may we see Endimion?
No, we are commanded in Cynthias name
that no man shall see him.
No man? Why we are but boys.
Mass neighbours hee says true, for if I
swear I will never drink my liquor by the quart, and
yet call for two pints, I think with a safe conscience I
may carouse both.
Pithily, and to the purpose.
Tush tush neighbours, take me with you.
This will grow hot.
Let them alone.
If I say to my wife, wife I will have no
Reysons in my pudding, she puts in Corance, small Rey∣sons
are Reysons, and boys are men. Even as my wife
should have put no Reysons in my pudding, so shall
there no boys see Endimion.
Learnedly.
Let Moister Constable speak: I think hee is
the wisest among you.
You know neighbours tic an an old said
saw, children and fools speak true.
True.
Well, there you see the men bee the
fools, because it is provided from the children.
Good.
Then say I neighbours, that children must
not see Endimion, because children &amp; fools speak true.
O wicked application.
Scurvily brought about.
Nay he sais true, &amp; therefore till Cynthia have
been here he shall not be uncovered. Therefore away.
A watch quoth you? a man may watch 7. years
for a wise word, &amp; yet go without it. Their wits are all
as rusty as their bills. But come on Ma. Constable. shall we
have a song before we go? Constable. With all my hart.
I am come in sight of the Lunary bank, with∣out
doubt Tellus dotes upon me, and cunningly that I
might not perceive her love, she hath set me to a
task that is done before it is begun. Endimion, you
must change your pillow, and if you be not weary of
sleep, I will carry you where at ease you shall sleep
your fill. It were good that without more ceremonies
I took him, least being espied, I be entrapped, and so in∣cur
the displeasure of Cynthia, who commonly sets
watch that Endimion have no wrong.
What now, is your Maistership so heavy? or are
you nayld to the ground? Not stir one whit? then
use all thy force though he feel it and wake. What
stone still? turned I think to earth, with lying so long
on the earth. Did not thou Corsets before Cynthia pull
up a tree, that forty years was fastened with roots and
wrethed in knots to the ground? Did not thou with
maine force pull open the iron Gates, which no Ram
or Engine could move? Have my weak thoughts made
braunfallen my strong arms? or is it the nature of love
or the Quintessence of the mind to breed numnesse, or
lythernesse, or I know not what, languishing in my
joints and sinews, being but the base strings of my
body? Or doth the remembrance of Tellus so refine
my spirits into a matter so subtle and divine, that the
other fleshie parts cannot work whilst they muse?
Rest thy self, rest thy self: nay rent thy self in pieces
Corsets, and strive in spite of love, fortune and nature,
to lift up this dulled body, heavier then dead, and
more senseless then death.
But what are these so fair fiends that cause my
hairs to stand upright, and spirits to fall down? hags,
out alas, Nymphs I crave pardon. Aye me, out what
doe I here.
You see Pythagoras what ridiculous opine∣once
you hold, and I doubt not but you are now of ano∣there
mind.
Madam, I plainly perceive that the perfec∣tion
of your brightness, hath pierced through the
thickness that covered my mind; in so much that I
am no less glad to be reformed, then ashamed to re∣member
my grosenes.
They are thrice fortunate that live in your
Palace, where Truth is not in colours but life, virtues
not in imagination, but execution.
I have always studied to have rather living
virtues then painted Gods, the body of Truth, then
the tomb. But let vs walk to Endimion, it may bee it
lies in your Arts to deliver him, as for Eumenides, I
fear he is dead.
I have alleged all the natural reasons I can
for such a long sleep.
I can doe nothing till I see him.
Coin Floscula, I am sure you are glad that
you shall behold Endimion.
I were blessed if I might have him recovered.
Are you in love with his person.
No, but with his virtue.
What say you Simile?
Madame, I dare say nothing for fear I of∣fend.
Belike you cannot speak except you bee
spiteful. But as good be silent as saucy. Panelion,
what punishment were fit for Simile, in whose speech
and thoughts, is only contempt and soreness?
I love not Madam to give any judgment. Yet
sith your highness commands, I think, to commit
her tongue close prisoner to her mouth.
Agreed; Simile, if thou speak this twelue-month,
thou shalt forfet thy tongue. Behold Endimion,
alas poor Gentleman, hast thou spent thy youth in
sleep, that once vowed all to my service. Hollow eyes?
gray hairs? wrinkled cheeks? and decayed limbs?
Is it destiny, or deceit that hath brought this to pass?
If the first, who could prevent thy wretched stars. If
the latter, I would I might know thy cruel enemy. I
favoured thee Endimion for thy honour, thy virtues, thy
affections: but to bring thy thoughts within the com∣pass
of thy fortunes, I have seemed strange, that I
might have thee stayed, and now are thy days ended
before my favour begin. But whom have we here,
is it not Corsets?
It is, but more like a Leopard then a man.
Awake him. Howe now Corsets, what make
you here? How came you deformed? Look on thy
hands, and then thou see the picture of thy face.
Miserable wretch, and accursed. How am I
deluded? Madame, I ask pardon for my offence, and
you see my fortune deserves pity.
Speak on, thy offence cannot deserve gre∣la
punishment: but see thou rehearse the truth, else
shalt thou not find me as thou wish me.
Madam, as it is no offence to be in love bee∣ing
a man mortal, so I hope can it be no shame to tell
with whom, my Lady being heavenly. Your May∣sty
committed to my charge fair Tellus, whose beau∣tie
in the same moment took my hart captive, that I
undertook to carry her body prisoner. Since that time
have I found such combats in my thoughts between
love and duty, reverence and affection, that I could
neither endure the conflict, nor hope for the conquest.
In love? A thing far vnsitting the name of
a Captain, and (as I thought) the tough and vnsmoo∣thed
nature of Corsets. But forth.
Feeling this continual war, I thought ra∣there
by parley to yield, then by certain danger to per∣rich,
I unfolded to Tellus the depth of my affections,
and framed my tongue to utter a sweet tale of love, that
was wont to found nothing but threats of war. She
too fair to be true, and too false for one so fair, after
a nice denial, practised a notable deceit, commanding
me to remove Endimion from this Cabin, and carry
him to some dark Cave, which I seeking to accom∣plish,
found impossible. And so by Fairies or fiends
have been thus handled.
Howe say you my Lords, is not Tellus
always practising of some deceits? In sooth Corsets
thy face is now too foul for a Lover, and thine hart
too fond for a Soldier. You may see when VVarri∣ors
become wantons, howe their manners alter with
their faces. Is it not a shame Corsets, that having
lived so long in Mars his Camp, thou shouldest now
bee rocked in Venus Cradle. Dost thou we are Cupids
Quiver at thy girdle, and make Lances of looks?
Well Corsets rouse thy self, and be as thou hast been,
and let Tellus who is made all of love, melt herself in her
own looseness.
Madam I doubt not but to recover my for∣mer
state, for Tellus beauty never wrought such love in
my mind, as now her deceit hath despite, and yet to
be revenged of a woman, were a thing then love it self
more womanish.
These spots Gentleman are to be worn out,
if you rub them over with this Lunarie, so that in
place where you received this maine, you shall find a
medicine.
I thank you for that. The Gods bless me
frō love &amp; these pretty Ladies that haunt this greene.
Corsets, I would Tellus saw your amiable face.
How spitefully Simile laughs, that dare
not speak.
Could you not stir Endimion with that
doubled strength of yours?
Not so much as his finger with all my force.
Pythagoras and Gyptes, what think you of Endi∣mion?
what reason is to be given, what remedy?
Madame it is impossible to yield reason for
things that happen not in compass of nature. It is most
certain, that some strange enchantment hath bound
all his senses.
What say you Gyptes.
With Pythagoras, that it is enchantment,
and that so strange that no Art can undo it, for that
heaviness argues a malice unremoveable in the En∣chauntresse,
and that no power can end it, till she die
that did it, or the heavens show some means more then
miraculous.
O Endimion, could spite it self devise a mischief
so monstrous as to make thee dead with life, and living
being altogether dead? Where others number their
years, their hours, their minutes, and steppe to age by
stairs, thou only hast thy years and times in a cluster,
being old before thou remember thou wast young.
No more Floscula, pity doth him no good, I
would any thing else might, and I vow by the vnspot∣ted
honour of a Lady he should not miss it: but is this
all Giptes, that is to be done?
All as yet. It may be that either the Enchaun∣tress
shall dye, or else be discovered, if either happen I
will then practise the utmost of my art. In the mean
season, about this Grove would I have a watch, and the
first living thing that touches Endimion, to be taken.
Corsets what say you, will you undertake this?
Good Madame pardon me, I was overtaken
too late, I should rather break into the midst of a
maine battle, then again fall into the hands of those
fair babies.
Well, I will provide others. Pithagoras and
Giptes, you shall yet remain in my Court, till I hear
what may be done in this matter.
Wee attend.
Let vs go in.
EVmenides hath told such strange tales, as I
may well wonder at them, but never believe
them.
The other old man, what a sad speech used he,
that caused vs almost all to weep. Cynthia is so desirous
to know the experiment of her own virtue, and so
willing to ease Endimions harde fortune, that she no so∣ner
heard the discourse, but she made her self in a rea∣dines
to try the event.
Wee willl also see the event, but whist here
comes Cynthia, with all her train: Let vs sneak in
amongst them.
Eumenides, it cannot sink into my head, that
I should bee signified by that sacred Fountain, for
many things are there in the world, to which those
words may bee applied.
Good Madame vouchsafe but to try, else shall
I think my self most unhappy, that I asked not my
sweet Mistress.
Will you not yet tell me her name?
Pardon me good Madame, for if Endimion
awake hee shall: my self have sworn, never to re∣ueale
it.
Well, let vs to Endimion. I will not be so state∣lie
(good Endimion) not to stoop to doe thee good: and
if thy liberty consist in a kiss from me, thou shalt have
it. And although my mouth hath been here tofore as
untouched as my thoughts, yet now to recover thy life,
(though to restore thy youth it be impossible) I will do
that to Endimion, which yet never mortal man could
bossed of heretofore, nor shall ever hope for hereafter.
Madame hee begins to stir.
Soft Eumenides, stand still.
Ah, I see his eyes almost open.
I command thee once again stir not: I will
stand behind him.
What doe I see, Endimion almost awake?
Endimion, Endimion, art thou deaf or dumb?
or hath this long sleep taken away thy memory? Ah
my sweet Eudimion, see thou not Eumenides? thy faith∣full
friend, thy faithful Eumenides, who for thy safety
hath been careless of his own content. Speak Endi∣mion,
Endimion, Endimion.
Endimion? I call to mind such a name.
Hast thou forgotten thy self Endimion? then do
I not marvel thou remember not thy friend. I tell thee
thou art Endimion, and I Eumenides: behold also Cyn∣thia,
by whose favour thou art awaked, and by whose
virtue thou shalt continue thy natural course.
Endimion, speak sweet Endimion, know
thou not Cynthia?
O heavens, whom doe I behold, fair Cynthia,
divine Cynthia?
I am Cynthia, and thou Endimion.
Endimion, What do I here? What, a gray beard?
hollow eyes? withered body: decayed limbs? and all
in one night?
One night? thou hast here slept forty years,
by what Enchantress as yet it is not known: and be∣hold
the twig to which thou laiedst thy head, is now be∣come
a tree, call thou not Eumenides to remembrance?
Thy name I doo remember by the sound, but
thy favour I doe not yet call to mind, only divine Cyn∣thia,
to whom time, fortune, destiny, &amp; death, are subject,
I see and remember, and in all humility, I regard and re∣uerence.
You have good cause to remember Eumeni∣des,
who hath for thy safety forsaken his own solace.
Am I that Endimion, who was wont in Court to
lead my life, and in Justs, turneys, and arms to exer∣cise
my youth? am I that Endimion?
Thou art that Endimion and I Eumenides, wilt
thou not yet call me to remembrance?
Ah sweet Eumenides, I now perceive thou art
hee, and that my self have the name of Endimion, but
that this should bee my body I doubt: for howe could
my curled lockes bee turned to gray hairs, and my
strong body to a dying weakness, having waxed old,
and not kowing it.
Well Endimion arise, a while sit down, for
that thy limbs are stiff, and not able to stay thee, and
tell what hast thou seen in thy sleep all this while?
What dreams, visions, thoughts, and fortunes? For it is
impossible, but in so long time, thou shouldest see
things strange.
Fair Cynthia I will rehearse what I have
seen, humbly desiring, that when I exceed in length,
you give me warning, that I may end: for to utter all
I have to speak would bee troublesome, although
happily the strangeness may somewhat abate the te∣diousnesse.
Well Endimion begin.
Me thought I saw a Lady passing fair, but
very mischievous, who in the one hand carried a
knife, with which she offered to cut my throat: and in
the other a looking-glasse, wherein seeing how ill anger
became Ladies, she refrained from intended violence.
She was accompanied with other Damsels, one of which
with a sterne countenance, &amp; as it were with a settled ma∣lice
engraven in her eyes, provoked her to execute mis∣chief:
an other with visage sad and constant only in
sorrow, with her arms crossed, and watery eyes, seemed
to lament my fortune, but durst not offer to prevent the
force. I started in my sleep, feeling my very veins to
swell, and my sinews to stretch with fear, and such a
cold sweat bedewed all my body, that death it self
could not be so terrible, as the vision.
A strange sight. Giptes at our better leisure
shall expound it.
After long debating with her self, mercy o∣uercame
anger, and there appeared in her heavenly face
such a divine Majesty, mingled with a sweet mildness,
that I was ravished with the sight aboue measure, and
wished that I might have enjoyed the sight without end,
and so she departed with the other Ladies, of which the
one retained still an unmovable cruelty, the other a
constant pity.
Poor Endimion, how wast thou affrighted?
What else?
After her immediately appeared an aged man,
with a beard as white as snow, crying in his hand a book
with three leaves, &amp; speaking as I remēber these words.
Endimion, receive this book with three leaves, in which
are contained counsels, policies, and pictures, and with
that he offered me the book, which I rejected: where∣with
moved with a disdainful pity, hee rent the first
leaf in a thousand shivers, the second time hee offered
it, which I refused also: at which bending his brows,
and pitching his eyes fast to the ground, as though they
were fixed to the earth, and not again to be removed:
then suddenly casting them up to the heavens, he tore in
a rage the second leaf, and offered the book only with
one leaf. I know not whether fear to offend, or desire
to know some strange thing, moved me: I took the
book, and so the old man vanished.
What did thou imagine was in the last
leaf?
There I portrait to life, with a cold quaking
in every joint. I beheld many wolves barking at thee
Cynthia, who having ground their teeth to bite, did
with striving bleed themselves to death. There might
I see ingratitude with an hundred eyes, gazing for be∣nefites,
and with a thousand teeth, gnawing on the
bowels wherein she was bred. Treachery stood all
clothed in white, with a smiling countenance, but
both her hands bathed in blood. Envy with a pale
and megar face, (whose body was so lean, that one
might tell all her bones, and whose garment was so
totterd, that it was easy to number every thread) stood
shooting at stars, whose darts fell down again
on her own face. There might I behold Drones,
or Beetles, I know not howe to term them creeping
under the wings of a princely Eagle, who being carried
into her nest, sought there to suck that vein,
that would have killed the Eagle. I mused that
things so base, should attempt a fact so barb∣rous,
or durst imagine a thing so bloody. And ma∣no
other things Madame, the repetition whereof, may
at your better leisure seem more pleasing: for. Bees
surfeit sometimes with honey, and the Gods are
glutted with harmony, and your highness may be dull∣led
with delight.
I am content to bee dieted, therefore let
vs in. Eumenides, see that Endimion bee well tended,
least either eating immoderatlie, or sleeping again
too long, hee fall into a deadly surfeit, or into his
former sleep.
See this also bee proclaimed, that whosoever will
discover this practise, shall have of Cynthia infinite
thanks, and no small rewards.
Ah Endimion, none so joyful as Floscula, of thy
restoring.
Yes Floscula, let Eumenides be somewhat glad∣der,
and doe not that wrong to the settled friendship of
a man, as to compare it with the light affection of a wo∣man.
Ah my dear friend Endimion suffer me to dye,
with gazing at thee.
Eumenides, thy friendship is immortal, and
not to be conceived, and thy good will Floscula, bet∣la
then I have deserved. But let vs all wait on
Cynthia: I marvel Simile speaks not a word.
Because if she doe, she loses her tongue.
But how prospered your love?
I never yet spake word since your sleep.
I doubt not but your affection is old, and your
appetite cold.
No Endimion, thine hath made it stronger, and
now are my sparks grown to flames, and my fancies
almost to frenzies: but let vs follow, and within wee
will debate all this matter at large.
Epi, love hath iustled my liberty from the
wall, and taken the upper hand of my reason.
Let me then trip up the heals of your office∣tion,
and thrust your goodwill into the gutter.
No Epi, Love is a Lord of misrule, and kee∣peth
Christmas in my corps.
No doubt there is good cheer: what dishes of
delight doth his Lordship feast you withal?
First, with a great platter of plum-porrige
of pleasure, wherein is stewed the mutton of mis∣trust.
Excellent love lap.
Then comes a Pie of patience, a Hen
of honey, a Goose of gall, a Capon of care, and
many other Viands, some sweet, and some sour,
which proves love to bee as it was said of, in old
years. Dulls venenum.
A brave banquet.
But Epi. I pray thee feel on my chin,
some thing prycketh me. What dost thou feel
or see.
There are three or four little hairs.
I pray thee call it my beard, howe shall I
bee troubled, when this young spring shall grow
to a great wood?
O sir your chin is but a quyller yet, you will be
most majestic when it is full fledge. But I marvel that
you love Dipsas that old Crone.
Agnosco veteris vestigia flame, I love the
smoke of an old fire.
Why she is so cold, that no fire can thaw her
thoughts.
It is an old goose Epi, that will eat no oats,
old Kine will kick, old Rats gnaw cheese, and old
sackes will have much patching. I prefer an old Cony
before a Rabbit sucker, and an ancient hen before a
young chicken peeper.
Argumentum ab antiquate, My master loves
antique work.
Give me a pippin that is withered like an
old wife.
Good sir.
Then, a contrario sequitur argumentum. Give
me a wife that looks like an old pippin.
Nothing hath made my master a fool, but flat
Scholarship.
Know thou not that old wine is best?
Yes.
And thou know that like will to like?
I.
And thou know that Venus loved the best
Wine.
So.
Then I conclude, that Venus was an old wo∣man
in an old cup of wine. For, est Venus in vines, eg∣nis
in igne fuit.
O lepidum caput, O mad cap master. You were
worthy to win Dipsas, were she as old again, for
in your love, you have worn the nap of your wit
quite off, and made it threadbare. But soft who comes
here?
My solicitors.
All hail sir Tophas, how feel you your self?
Stately in every joint, which the common
people term stiffness. Doth Dipsas stoop? will she
yield? will she bend?
O sir as much as you would wish, for her chin
almost touches her knees.
Moister, she is bent I warrant you.
What conditions doth she ask?
She hath vowed she will never love any
that hath not a tooth in his head less then she.
How many hath she?
One.
That goes harde Moister, for then you must
have none.
A small request, and agreeable to the gre∣uitie
of her years. What should a wise man doe with
his mouth full of bones like a channel house. The Tur∣tle
true hath ne'er a tooth.
Thy Moister is in a notable vain, that will
loose his teeth to be like a Turtle.
Let him loose his tongue to, I care not.
Nay you must also have no nails, for she
long since hath cast hers.
That I yield to, what a quiet life shall Dip∣sas
and I lead, when wee can neither byte nor scratch?
You may see youths, how age provides for peace.
How shall we doe to make him leave his love,
for we never spake to her?
Let me alone. She is a notable Witch, and
hath turned her maid Bagoa to an Aspen tree, for be∣wraying
her secretes.
I honour her for her cunning, for now when I am
weary of walking on two legs, what a pleasure may
she doe me to turn me to some goodly Ass, and help
me to four.
Nay then I must tell you the troth, her hus∣band
Geron is come home, who this fifty years hath had
her to wife.
What doe I hear? Hath she an husband?
Go to the Sixteen, and tell him desire is dead, and
will him to dig his grave. O heavens, an husband?
What death is agreeable to my fortune?
Be not desperate, and we will help you to
find a young Lady,
I love no grissels they are so brittle, they will
crack like glass, or so dainty, that if they bee touched,
they are straight of the fashion of wax: Animus maio∣rebus
instate. I desire old Matrons. What a sight would
it be to embrace one whose hair were as orient as the
pearl? whose teeth shall be so pure a watchet, that they
shall stain the truest Turks? whose nose shall throw
more beams from it then the fiery Carbuncle? whose
eyes shall be enuirond about with redness, exceeding
the deepest Coral? And whose lips might compare
with silver for the paleness? Such a one if you can help
me to, I will by peece-meale curtoll my affections to∣wards
Dipsas, and vvalke my swelling thoughts till
they be cold.
Wisely provided. How say you my friends,
will you angle for my Masters cause?
Most willingly.
If wee speed him not shortly, I will burn
my cap, we will serve him of the spades, and dig an
old wife out of the grave, that shall be answerable to his
gravity.
Youths adieu; hee that brings me first
news, shall possess mine inheritance.
What, is thy Moister landed?
Know you not that my Moister is Liber tenons?
Samias What's that?
A Free-holder. But I will after him.
And wee to hear what news of Endimion for
the conclusion.
Who would have thought that Tellus being
so fair by nature, so honourable by birth, so wise by
education, would have entered into a mischief to the
Gods so odious, to men so detestable, and to her friend
so malicious.
If Bagoa had not betrayed it, howe then
should it have come to light? But wee see that Gold
and fair words, are of force to corrupt the strongest
men; And therefore able to work silly women like
wax.
I marvel what Cynthia will determine in
this cause.
I fear as in all causes, hear of it in justice,
and then judge of it in mercy; for howe can it be that
she that is unwilling to punish her deadliest foes with
disgrace, will revenge injuries of her train with
death.
That old witch Dipsas in a rage, having
understood her practise to bee discovered, turned
poor Bagoa to an Aspen tree, but let vs make hast
and bring Tellus before Cynthia, for she was coming
out after vs.
Let vs go.
Dipsas, thy years are not so many as thy
vices, yet more in number then commonly nature doth
afford, or justice should permit. Hast thou almost
these fifty years practised that detested wickedness of
witchcraft? Wast thou so simple, as for to know the na∣ture
of Simples, of all creatures to be most sinful?
Thou hast threatened to turn my course awry, and
alter by thy damnable Art, the government that I now
possess by the eternal Gods. But know thou Dipsas,
and let all the Enchanters know, that Cynthia being
placed for light on earth, is also protected by the pow∣ers
of heaven. Breath out thou may words, gather
thou may herbs, find out thou moist stones agree∣able
to thine Art, yet of no force to appal my heart,
in which courage is so rooted, and constant persuasion
of the mercy of the Gods so grounded, that all thy
witch-craft I esteem as weak, as the world doth thy
case wretched.
This noble Gentleman Geron, once thy husband,
but now thy mortal hate, did thou procure to live
in a Desert, almost desperate. Endimion the flower
of my Court, and the hope of succeeding time, hast
thou bewitched by Art, before thou would suffer
him to flourish by nature.
Madam, things past may be repented, not
recalled: there is nothing so wicked that I have not
done, nor any thing so wished for as death. Yet among
al the things that I committed, there is nothing so much
torments my rented and ransacked thoughts, as that in
the prime of my husbands youth, I divorced him by my
devilish Art, for which, if to die might be amends,
I would not live till to morrow. If to live and still be
more miserable would better content him, I would wish
of all creatures to be oldest and ugliest.
Dipsas, Thou hast made this difference be∣tweene
me and Endimion, that being both young, thou
hast caused me to wake in melancholy, loosing the
joys of my youth, and him to sleep, not remembering
youth.
Stay, here comes Tellus, we shall now
know all.
I would to Cynthia thou coldest make as
good an excuse in truth, as to me thou hast done by wit.
Truth shall be mine answer, and therefore I
will not study for an excuse.
Is it possible Tellus, that so few years should
harbour so many mischiefs? Thy swelling pride have I
borne, because it is a thing that beauty makes blame∣less,
which the more it exceeds fairness in measure,
the more it stretches it self in disdain. Thy devises
against Corsets I smile at, for that wits the sharper they
are, the shrewder they are. But this unacquainted and
most unnatural practise with a vile Enchantress, a∣against
so noble a Gentleman as Endimion, I abhor, as a
thing most malicious, and will revenge, as a deed most
monstrous.
And as for you Dipsas, I will send you into the De∣serte
amongst wilde beasts, and try whether you can
cast Lyons, Tygars, Bores, and Bears, into as dead a
sleep as you did Endimion, or turn them to trees, as
you have done Bagoa. But tell me Tellus, what was the
cause of this cruel part, far unfitting thy sex, in which
nothing should be but simpleness: and much disagree∣ing
from thy face, in which nothing seemed to bee but
softness.
Divine Cynthia, by whom I receive my life, and
am content to end it. I can neither excuse my fault
without lying, nor confess it without shame; Yet
were it possible that in so heavenly thoughts as yours,
there could fall such earthly motions as mine, I would
then hope, if not to bee pardoned without extreme
punishment, yet to be heard without great marvel.
Say on Tellus, I cannot imagine any thing
that can colour such a cruelty.
Endimion, that Endimion in the prime of his
youth, so ravished my hart with love, that to obtain my
desires, I could not find means, nor to resit them
reason.
What was she that favoured not Endimion, being
young, wise, honourable, and virtuous; besides, what
mettle was she made of (be she mortal) that is not
affected with the spice, nay infected with the poison of
that (not to be expressed, yet always to be felt) Love?
which breaks the brains, and never brooseth the
brow: consumes the hart, and never touches the
skin: and makes a deep scar to be seen, be∣fore
any wound at all be felt. My hart too tender to
withstand such a divine fury, yielded to Love.
Madame I not without blushing confess, yielded to
Love.
A strange effect of love, to work such an
extreme hate. How say you Endimion, all this was for
love?
I say Madam then the Gods send me a wo∣mans
hate.
That were as bad, for then by contrary you
should never sleep. But on Tellus, let vs hear the
end.
Feeling a continual burning in all my bowels,
and a bursting almost in every vain, I could not smoo∣there
the inward fire, but it must needs bee per∣ceiued
by the outward smoke, and by the flying a∣broad
of divers sparks, divers judged of my scalding
flames.
Endimion as full of art as wit, marking mine eyes,
(in which hee might see almost his own,) my sighs,
by which he might ever hear his name sounded, aimed
at my hart, in which he was assured his person was im∣printed,
and by questions wrung out that, which was
ready to burst out. When he saw the depth of my
affections, he swear, that mine in respect of his, were as
fumes to Aetna, valleys to Alps, Ants to Eagles, and
nothing could be compared to my beauty but his love,
and eternity. Thus drawing a smooth shoe upon a
crooked foot, hee made me believe, that (which all of
our sex willingly acknowledge) I was beautiful. And
to wonder, (which indeed is a thing miraculous) that
any of his sex should be faithful.
Endimion, how will you clear your self?
Madam, by mine own accuser.
Well Tellus proceed, but briefly, least ta∣king
delight in uttering thy love, thou offend vs with
the length of it.
I will Madame quickly make an end of my
love &amp; my tale. Finding continual increase of my tor∣menting
thoughts, and that the enjoying of my love,
made deeper wounds then the entering into it. I could
find no means to ease my grief, but to follow Endi∣mion,
and continually to have him in the object of mine
eyes, who had me slave and subject to his love.
But in the moment that I feared his falsehood,
and fried my self most in mine affections, I found,
(ah grief, even then I lost my self.) I found him in
most melancholy and desperate terms, cursing his
stars, his state, the earth, the heavens, the world, and
all for the love of
Of whom? Tellus speak boldly.
Madame, I dare not utter for fear to of∣fend.
Speak I say; who dare take offence, if thou
be commanded by Cynthia?
For the love of Cynthia.
For my love Tellus, that were strange. Endi∣mion
is it true?
In all things Madame. Tellus doth not speak
false.
What will this breed to in the end? Well
Endimion, wee shall hear all.
I seeing my hopes turned to mishaps, and a
settled dissembling towards me, and an unmovable de∣sire
to Cynthia, forgetting both my self and my sex;
fell unto this unnatural hate; for knowing your ver∣tues
Cynthia to be immortal, I could not have an ima∣gination
to withdraw him. And finding mine own af∣fections
unquenchable, I could not carry the mind
that any else should possess what I had pursued. For
though in majesty, beauty, virtue, and dignity, I al∣ways
humbled and yielded my self to Cynthia, yet in
affections, I esteemed my self equal with the Gods∣ses,
&amp; all other creatures according to their states with
my self. For stars to their bigness have their lights, and
the sun hath no more. And little pitchers when they
can hold no more, are as full as great vessels that run
over. Thus Madam in all truth, have I uttered the un∣happiness
of my love, and the cause of my hate, yeel∣ding
wholly to that divine judgment which never erred
for want of wisdom, or envied for too much partiality.
How say you my Lords to this matter? But
what say you Endimion, hath Tellus told troth?
Madame in all things, but in that she said I
loved her, and swore to honour her.
Was there such a time when as for my love
thou did vow thy self to death, and in respect of it
loathed thy life? speak Endimion, I will not revenge it
with hate.
The time was Madam and is, and ever shall be
that I honoured your highness aboue all the world, but
to stretch it so far as to call it love, I never durst. There
hath none pleased mine eye but Cynthia, none deligh∣ted
mine ears but Cynthia, none possessed my hart but
Cynthia. I have forsaken all other fortunes to follow
Cynthia, and here I stand ready to die if it please Cyn∣thia.
Such a difference hath the Gods set between our
states, that all must be duty, loyalty, and reverence,
nothing (without it vouchsafe your highness) be termed
love. My unspotted thoughts, my languishing body,
my discontented life, let them obtain by princely fa∣uour
that, which to challenge they must not presume,
only wishing of impossibilities: with imagination of
which, I will spend my spirits, and to my self that no
creature may hear, softly call it love. And if any urge
to utter what I whisper, then will I name it honour. From
this sweet contēplation if I be not drinen, I shall live of al
men the most content, taking more pleasure in mine a∣general
thoughts, then ever I did in my youthful actions.
Endimion, this honourable respect of thine, shall be
christened love in thee, &amp; my reward for it favour. Perse∣for
Endimion in loving me, &amp; I account more strength
in a true hart, then in a walled City. I have laboured to
win all, and study to keep such as I have won, but
those that neither my favour can move to continue
constant, nor my offered benefits get to bee faith∣full,
the Gods shall either reduce to truth, or revenge
their treacheries with justice. Endimion continue as thou
hast begun, and thou shalt find that Cynthia shines
not on thee in vain.
Your Highness hath blessed me, and your
words have again restored my youth: me thinks I
feel my joints strong, and these mouldy hairs to
molt, &amp; all by your virtue Cynthia, into whose hands the
Balance that weighs time &amp; fortune, are committed.
What young again? then it is pity to pu∣nish
Tellus.
Ah Endimion, now I know thee and ask par∣don
of thee: suffer me still to wish thee well.
Tellus, Cynthia must command what she will.
Endimion, I rejoice to see thee in thy former
estate.
Good Floscula, to thee also am I in my former
affections.
Endimion, the comfort of my life, howe am I
ravished with a joy matchless, saving only the enjoy∣ing
of my mistress.
Endimion, you must now tell who Eumenides
shrineth for his Saint.
Simile Madame.
Simile Eumenides? is it Simile? the very wasp
of all women, whose tongue stings as much as an Ad∣ders
tooth?
It is Simile, Cynthia: the possessing of whose
love, must only prolong my life.
Nay sith Endimion is restored, wee will have
all parties pleased. Simile, are you content after so long
trial of his faith, such rare secrecy, such unspotted love,
to take Eumenides? Why speak you not? Not a word?
Silence Madame consents: that is most true.
It is true Endimion. Eumenides, take Simile.
Take her I say.
Humble thanks Madame, now only doe I be∣gin
to live.
A harde choice Madame, either to be married
if I say nothing, or to lose my tongue if I speak a word.
Yet doe I rather choose to have my tongue cut out, then
my heart distempered: I will not have him.
Speaks the Parrot? she shall nod hereafter
with signs: cut off her tongue, nay her head, that ha∣uing
a servant of honourable birth, honest manners, 〈◊〉
true love, will not be persuaded.
He is no faithful I 〈…〉or then
would he have asked his Mistress.
Had he not been faithful, he had never seen
into the fountain, and so lost his friend and Mistress.
Thine own thoughts sweet Simile, witness a∣against
thy words, for what hast thou found in my life
but love? and as yet, what have I found in my love but
bitterness? Madame pardon Simile, and let my tongue
ransom hers.
Thy tongue Eumenides? what should thou live
wanting a tongue to blaze the beauty of Simile. Well
Simile, I will not command love, for it cannot bee en∣forced:
let me entreat it.
I am content your Highness shall command,
for now only do I think Eumenides faithful, that is will∣ling
to lose his tongue for my sake: yet loath, because it
should doe me better service. Madame, I accept of Eu∣menides.
I thank you Simile.
Ah happy Eumenides, that hast a friend so faith∣full,
and a mistress so fair: with what sudden mischief
will the Gods daunt this excess of joy? Sweet Simile,
I live or dye as thou wilt.
What shall become of Tellus? Tellus you know
Endimion is vowed to a service, from which death cannot
remove him. Corsets casts still a lovely looks to∣wards
you, how say you will have your Corsets, and so re∣ceiue
pardon for all that is past?
Madame most willingly.
But I cannot tel whether Corsets, be agreed.
I Madame more happy to enjoy Tellus then
the Monarchy of the world.
Why she caused you to be pinched with Fairies.
I but her fairness hath pinched my hart more
deeply.
Well enjoy thy love. But what have you
wrought in the Castle Tellus?
Only the picture of Endimion.
Then so much of Endimion as his picture
comes to, possess and play withal.
Ah my sweet Tellus, my love shall be as thy
beauty is, matchless.
Now it rests Dipsas, that if thou wilt for∣swear
that vile Art of Enchanting, Geron hath pro∣missed
again to receive thee, otherwise if thou be wed∣ded
to that wickedness, I must and will see it punished to
the uttermost.
Madam, I renounce both substance and sha∣dow
of that most horrible and hateful trade, vowing to
the Gods continual penance, and to your highness o∣bedience.
Howe say you Geron, will you admit her to
your Wife?
I with more joy then I did the first day: for
nothing could happen to make me happy, but only her
forsaking that lewd and detestable course. Dipsas I im∣brace
thee.
And I thee Geron, to whom I will hereafter
recite the cause of these my first follies.
Well Endimion, nothing rests now but
that we depart. Thou hast my favour, Tellus her friend,
Eumenides in Paradise with his Simile, Geron contented
with Dipsas.
Nay soft, I cannot handsomely go to bed
without Bagoa.
Well Sir. Tophas, it may bee there are more
virtues in me then my self knows of, for Endimion
I awaked, and at my words he waxed young, I will try
whether I can turn this tree again to thy true love.
Turn her to a true love or false, so she be a
wench I care not.
Bagoa, Cynthia puts an end to thy harde
fortunes, for being turned to a tree for revealing a truth,
I will recover thee again, if in my power be the effect
of truth.
Bagoa? a bots upon thee.
Come my Lords let vs in, you Gyptes and
Pythagoras, if you cannot content your selves in our
Court, to fall from vain follies of Philosophers, to such
virtues as are here practised, you shall be entertained
according to your deserts, for Cynthia is no stepmother
to strangers.
I had rather in Cynthias Court spend ten
years, then in Greece one hour.
And I choose rather to live by the sight of
Cynthia, then by the possessing of all Egipt.
Then follow.
We all attend.
A Man walking abroad, the wind and
Sun strove for sovereignty, the one
with his blast, the other with his beams.
The wind blew hard, the man wrapped his
garmēt about him harder: it blustred more
strongly, he then girt it fast to him: I cannot
prevail said the wind. The Sun casting
her Crystal beams, began to warm the
man: he vnlosed his gown. yet it shined
brighter: he then put it off. I yield said
the wind, for if thou continue shining, he
will also put off his cote.
Dread Sovereign, the malicious that
seek to overthrow vs with threats, do but
stiffen our thoughts, and make them stir∣dier
in storms: but if your Highness vouch
safe with your favourable beams to glance
upon vs, we shall not only stoop, but with
all humility, lay both our hands and
hearts, at your Majesties feet.

BOY, there are three
things that make my
life miserable, a thread
bare purse, a cursed wife,
&amp; a fool to my heir.
Dromio. Why then
sir, there are three medicines for these three mala∣ladies:
a pikestaff to take a purse on the high way,
a holy wand to brush choler frō my mistress tong,
and a young wench for my young master: so that as
your Worship being wise begot a fool, so he bee∣ing
a fool may tread out a wise man.
I but Dromio, these medicines bite hot
on great mischiefs, for so might I have a rope about
my neck, horns upon my head, and in my house
a litter of fools.
Then sir you had best let some wise man sit
on your son, to hatch him a good wit: they say,
if ravens sit on hens eggs the chickens will be black,
and so forth.
Why boy, my son is out of the shell,
and is grown a pretty cock.
Carve him master, &amp; make him a capon,
else all your breed will prove cockescombes.
I marvel he is such an ass, hee takes it
not of his father.
He may for any thing you know.
Why villain dost thou think me a fool?
O no sir, neither are you sure that you are
his father.
Rascal, doest thou imagine thy mistress
nought of her body?
No, but fantastical of her mind, and it may
be, when this boy was begotten she thought of a
fool, &amp; so conceived a fool, your self being ve∣rye
wise, and she surpassing honest.
It may be, for I have heard of an Aethio∣peon,
that thinking of a fair picture, brought forth
a fair lady, and yet no bastard.
You are well read sir, your son may be
a bastard and yet legitimate, your self a cuckold, &amp;
yet my mistress virtuous, all this in conceit.
Come Dromio, it is my grief to have such
a son that must inherit my lands.
He needs not sir, Isle beg him for a fool.
Vile boy, thy young master?
Let me have in a device.
Isle have thy advice, and if it fadge, thou
shalt eat, thou shalt sweat, play till thou sleep, and
sleep till thy bones ache.
I marie, now you tickle me, I am both hun∣gre,
gamesome, &amp; sleepy, and all at once, Isle break
this head against the wall but Isle make it bleed good
matter.
Then this it is, thou know I have but
one son, and he is a fool.
A monstrous fool.
A wife and she an arrand scold.
Ah master I smell your device, it will be ex∣cellent.
Thou can not know it till I tell it.
I see it through your brains, your hair is
so thin, and your scull so transparent, I may sooner
see it than hear it.
Then boy hast thou a quick wit, and I a
slow tongue, but what first?
Marie either you would have your wives
tong in your sons head, that he might bee a prating
fool, or his brains in his brain pan, that she might
be a foolish scold.
Thou dreamst Dromio, there is no such
matter, thou know I have kept him close, so that
my neighbours think him to be wise, and her to be
temperate, because they never heard them speak.
Well.
Thou know that Stellio hath a good farm
and a fair daughter, yea so fair, that she is mewed
up, and only looks out at the windows, least she
should by some roisting courtier be stolen away.
So sir.
Now if I could compass a match between
my son and Stellios daughter by conference of
vs parents, and without theirs, I should be blessed▪
he coosned, and thou for ever set at liberty.
A singular conceit.
Thus much for my son. Now for my
wife, I would have this kept from her, else shall I not
be able to keep my house from smoke, for let it
come to one of her ears, &amp; then wo to both mine:
I would have her go to my house into the Coun∣try
whilst we conclude this, and this once done, I
care not if her tong never have done: these if thou
can effect, thou shalt make thy master happy.
Think it done, this noddle shall coin such
new device as you shall have your son married
pie to morrow.
But take heed, that neither the father nor
the maid speak to my son, for then his folly will
mar all.
Lay all the ear on me, Subleuabo te onere, I
will rid you of a fool.
Wilt thou rid me for a fool?
Tush, quarrel not.
Then for the dowry, let it bee at least two
hundredth ducats, and after his death the farm.
What else?
Then let vs in, that I may furnish thee with
some better counsel, and my son with better ap∣apparel.
Let me alone, I lack but a wag more to
make of my counsel, and then you shall see an ex∣quisite
coosnage, &amp; the father more fool than the
son. But hear you sir, I forgot one thing.
Whats that?
Nay, Expellas furca licit vsque recurret.
Whats the meaning?
Why though your sons folly bee thrust up
with a pair of horns on a fork, yet being natural
it will have his course.
I pray thee no more, but about it.
Risio, my daughter is passing amiable, but ve∣rye
simple.
You mean a fool sir.
Faith I implie so much.
Then I apply it fit: the one she takes of her
father, the other of her mother, now you may bee
sure she is your own.
I have penned her up in a chamber, having
only a window to look out, that youths seeing
her fair cheeks, may be enamoured before they
hear her fond speech. How likest thou this head?
There is very good workmanship in it, but
the matter is but base, if the stuff had been as good
as the mold, your daughter had been as wise as she
is beautiful
Doest thou think she took her foolishness
of me?
I, &amp; so cunningly, that she toke it not frō you.
Well, Quote nature dedit tollere nemo potest.
A good evidence to prove the fee-simple of
your daughters folly.
Why?
It came by nature, and if none can take it a∣way,
it is perpetual.
Nay Riscio, she is no natural fool, but in this
consists her simplicity, that she thinks herself
self subtle in this her rudeness, that she imagines
she is courtly, in this the ouershooting of her self,
that she ouerweeneth of her self.
Well, what follows?
Risio this is my plot, Memphio hath a pretty
stripling to his son, whom with cockring he hath
made wanton, his girdle must be warmde, the ayre
must not breath on him, he must lie a bed till noon,
and yet in his bed break his fast, that which I doe
to conceal the folly of my daughter, that doth hee
in too much cockering of his son. Now Risio how
shall I compass a match between my girl and
his boy?
Why with a pair of compasses, and bring
them both into the circle, He warrant the'il match
themselves.
Tush, plot it for me, that never speaking one
to another, they be in love one with another, I like
not solemn wooing, it is for courtiers, let country
folks believe others reports as much as their own
opinions.
O then, so it be a match you care not.
Not I, nor for a match neither, were it not I
thirst after my neighbours farm.
A very good nature. Well, if by flat wit I
bring this to pass, whats my rewerd?
Whatsoever thou wilt ask.
Isle ask no more than by my wit I can get in
the bargain.
Then about it.
If I come not about you never trust me, Isle
seek out Dromio, the counsellor of my conceit.
It is unneighbourly done to suffer your son
since hee came from school to spend his time in
love, and unwisely done to let him hover over my
daughter, who hath nothing to her dowry but her
needle, &amp; must prove a Sempster, nor he any thing
to take to but a Grammar, and cannot at the best be
but a schoolmaster.
Prisius, you bite and whine, wring me on the
withers, and yet winch your self, it is you that go
about to match my girl with my boy, she being
more fit for seames than for marriage, and hee for a
rod than a wife.
Her birth requires a better bridegroom than
such a groom.
And his bringing up another gate marriage
than such a minion.
Marie gup, I am sure he hath no better bread
than is made of wheat, nor worn siner cloth than
is made of woll, nor learned better manners than
are taught in schools.
Nor your minx had no better grandfather
than a Tailor, who (as I have heard) was poor and
proud: nor a better father than your self, unless
your wife borrowed a better to make her daughter
a Gentlewoman.
Twit not me with my ancestors, nor my wives
honesty, if thou doest.
Hold thy hands still thou had best, &amp; yet it
is impossible now I remēber, for thou hast the palsy
My hands shake so, that were thou in place
where, I would teach thee to cog.
Nay, if thou shake thy hands, I warrant thou
can not teach any to cog. But neighbour, let not
two old fools fall out for two young wantons.
Indeed it becōmeth men of our experience
to reason, not rail: to debate the matter, not to
combat it.
Well, then this Isle tel thee friendly, I have al∣most
these two years cast in my head, how I might
match my princockes with Stellios daughter, whom
I have heard to be very fair, and know shall be ve∣rye
rich, she is his heir, he dotes, he is stooping old,
and shortly must die, yet by no means, either by
blessing or cursing can I win my son to be a wo∣er,
which I know proceeds not of bashfulness but
stubbornness, for hee knows his good though I
say it, he hath wit at will: as for his personage, I care
not who sees him, I can tell you he is able to make
a Ladies mouth water if she wink not.
Stay Sperantus, this is like my case, for I have
been tampering as long to have a marriage cōmit∣ted
between my wench and Memphios only son,
they say he is as goodly a youth as one shall see in a
Summers day, and as neat a stripling as ever went
on nets leather, his father will not let him be forth
of his sight, he is so tender over him, he yet lies with
his mother for catching cold. Now my pretty else,
as proud as the day is long, she will none of him, she
forsooth will choose her own husband, made mar∣riages
prove mad marriages, she will choose with
her eye and like with her heart before she consent
with her tong, neither father nor mother, kith nor
kin shall be her carver in a husband, she will fall too
where she likes best, and thus the chic scarce out
of the shell cackles as though she had been trodden
with an hundredth cocks, and mother of a thou∣sand
eggs.
Well then this is our best, seeing we know
each others mind, to devise to govern our own
children, for my boy, Isle keep him to his books, &amp;
study shall make him leave to love, Isle break him
of his will or his bones with a cudgel.
And Isle no more dandle my daughter, she
shall prick on a clout till her fingers ache, or Isle cause
her leave to make my heart ache. But in good time,
though with ill luck, behold if they be not both
together, let vs stand close and hear all, so shall we
prevent all.
This happens pat, take heed you cough not
Prisius.
Tush spit not you, &amp; Isle warrant I my beard
is as good as a handkerchief.
Sweet Candius, if thy father should see vs
alone, would be not fret? The old man me thinks
should be full of 〈◊〉.
Tush, let him fone heart string against
another, he shall never trouble the least vain of my
little finger, the old churl thinks none wise, unless
he have a beard hang dāgling to his wast, when my
face is bedaubed with hair as his, then perchance
my conceit may stumble on his staidness.
I, in what book read you that lesson.
I know not in what book hee read it, but I
am sure he was a knave to learn it.
I believe fair Levy, if your sour fire should
see you with your sweet heart, he would not be ve∣rye
patient.
The care is taken, Isle ask him blessing as a
father, but never take counsel for an husband, there
is as much odds between my golden thoughts, &amp;
his leaden advice, as between his silver hairs and
my amber lockes, I know hee will cough for anger
that I yield not, but he shall cough me a fool for
his labour.
Where picked your daughter that work, out
of broad-stitch?
Out of a flirts sampler, but let vs stay the end,
this is but the beginning, you shall hear two i will∣drone
well brought up.
Parents in these days are grown peevish,
they rock their children in their cradles till they
sleep, and cross them about their bridals till their
hearts ache. Marriage among them is become a mar∣ket,
what will you give with your daughter? What
Jointer will you make for your son? And many
a match is broken off for a penny more or less, as
though they could not afford their children at such
a price, when none should cheapen such ware, but
affection, and none buy it but love.
Learnedly and scholerlike.
In deed our parents take great care to make
vs ask blessing and say grace when as we are little
ones, and growing to years of judgment they de∣privy
vs of the greatest blessing, and the most graci∣us
things to our minds, the liberty of our minds:
they give vs pap with a spoon before we can speak,
and when wee speak for that wee love, pap with a
hatchet: because their fancies being grown mu∣sty
with hoary age, therefore nothing can relish in
their thoughts that savours of sweet youth: they
study twenty years together to make vs grow as
straight as a wand, and in the end by bowing vs
make vs as crooked as a cammocke. For mine own
part (sweet Candius) they shall pardon me, for I will
measure my love by min own judgment, not my
fathers purse or peevishness. Nature hath made me
his child, not his slave, I hare Memphio and his son
deadly, if I wist he would place his affection by his
fathers appointment.
Wittily but vnciuily.
Be of that mind still my fair Levy, let our
fathers lay their purses together, we our harts, I will
never woo where I cannot love, let Stellio enjoy his
daughter. But what have you wrought here?
Flowers, fowls, beasts, fishes, trees, plants,
stones, and what not. Among flowers, cowslops &amp;
lilies for our names Candius and Levy. Among
fowls, Turtles and Sparrows, for our truth and
desires. Among beasts, the fox and the Ermine for
beauty and policy, and among fishes the cockle &amp;
the Tortuse, because of Venus among trees, the
vine wreathing about the elm for our embra∣cings.
Among stones Abestor, which being hot will
never be cold, for our constancies. Among plants,
Time and harts-ease, to note that if we take time we
shall ease our hearts.
Theres a girl that knows her lerripoope.
Listen &amp; you shall hear my sons learning.
What book is that?
A fine pleasant poet, who entreats of the
art of Love, and of the remedy.
Is there art in love?
A short art &amp; a certain, three rules in 3. lines.
I pray thee repeat them.
Principio quote amare velis reperire labora,
Proximus hues labour est placidam euor are puellam,
Tertius vt longo tempore ducat amor.
I am no Latinist Cand. you must construe it.
So I will and pace it too: thou shalt be ac∣quainted
with case, gender, and number. First one
must find out a mistress, whom before all others he
vows to serve. Secondly, that he use al the means
that he may to obtain her. And the last with de∣serts,
faith and secrecy to study to keep her.
Whats the remedy?
Death.
What of all the book is the conclusion?
This one verse, Non caret essertu quote volu∣ere
duo.
Whats that?
Where two are agreed, it is impossible but
they must speed.
Then cannot we miss, therefore give me
thy hand Candius.
Soft Levy, take me with you, it is not good
in law without witness.
And as I remember there must be two wit∣noses,
God give you joy Candius, I was worth the
bidding to dinner, though not worthy to be of the
counsel.
I think this hot love hath provided but cold
cheer.
Tush, in love is no lack, but blush not Can∣dius,
you need not bee ashamed of your cunning,
you have made love a book case, and spent your
time well at school, learning to love by art, and
hate against nature, but I perceive, the worser child
the better lover.
And my minion hath wrought well, where
every stitch in her sampler is a pricking stitch at my
heart: you take your pleasure on parents, they are
peevish, fools, churls, ouergrowen with igno∣rance,
because overworn with age, little shalt thou
know the case of a father before thy self be a mo∣there,
when thou shalt breed thy child with conti∣nuall
pains, and bringing it forth with deadly
pangs, nurse it with thine own paps, and nourish it
up with motherly tenderness, and then find them
to curse thee with their hearts, when they should
ask blessing on their knees, and the collop of thine
own bowels to be the torture of thine own soul,
with tears trickling down thy checks, and drops
of blood falling from thy heart, thou wilt in vtte∣ring
of thy mind wish them rather unborn than
unnatural, &amp; to have had their cradles their graves
rather than thy death their bridals. But I will not
dispute what thou should have done, but correct
what thou hast done, I perceive sowing is an idle
exercise, and that every day there come more
thoughts into thine head, than stitches into thy
work, Isle see whether you can spin a better mind
than you have stitched, and if I coop you not up,
then let me be the capon.
As for you sir boy, in stead of poaring on a
book, you shall hold the plough, Isle make ripen∣tance
reap what wantonness hath sown, but we
are both well served, the sons must bee masters,
the fathers gaffers, what wee get together with a
rake, they cast abroad with a fork, and wee must
weary our legs to purchase our children arms.
Well, seeing that booking is but idleness, Isle see
whether threshing be any occupation, thy mind
shall stoop to my fortune, or mine shall break the
laws of nature. How like a micher he stands, as
though he had trewanted from honesty, get thee
in, and for the rest let me alone. In villain.
And you pretty minx, that must be fed with
love upon sops▪ Isle take an order to cram you with
sorrows, get you in without look or reply.
Let vs follow, and deal as rigorously with
yours as I will with mine, and you shall see that hot
love will wax soon cold, Isle tame the proud boy,
and send him as far from his love as hee is from his
duty.
Let vs about it, and also go on with match∣ing
them to our minds, it was happy that we pre∣uented
that by chance, which we could never yet
suspect by circumstance.
Now if I could meet with Risio, it were a
world of waggery.
Oh that it were my chance Obuiam dare Dro∣mio,
to stumble upon Dromio, on whom I doo no∣thing
but dream.
His knavery and my wit should make our
masters that are wise fools, their children that are
fools beggars, and vs two that are bond free.
He to cousin, &amp; I to conjure, would make such
alterations, that our masters should serve themselves,
the idiots their children serve vs, and we to wake
our wits between them all.
Hem quàm opportune, look if he drop not full
in my dish.
Lupus in fabula, Dromio embrace me, hug
me, kiss my hand, I must make thee fortunate.
Risio, honour me, kneel down to me, kiss
my feet, I must make thee blessed.
My master old Stellio hath a fool to his
daughter.
Nay my master old Memphio hath a fool
to his son.
I must convey a controct.
And I must convey a contract.
Between her and Memphios son, with∣out
speaking one to another.
Between him and Stellios daughter with∣out
one speaking to the other.
Doest thou mock me Dromio?
Thou doest me else.
Not I for all this is true.
And all this.
Then are we both driven to our wits ends,
for if either of them had bin wise, wee might have
tempered, if no marriage, yet a close marriage.
Well, let vs sharpen our accounts, ther's no
better grindstone for a young mans head; than to
have it whet upon an old mans purse. Oh thou
shalt see my knavery shave like a razor!
Thou for the edge, and I the point will make
the fool bestride our mistress backs, and then have
at the bag with the dudgeon haft, that i•, at the
dudgeon dagger, by which hanges his tantonie
pouch.
These old buddles have such strong pur∣ses
with locks, when they shut them they go off like
a snaphance.
The old fashion is best, a purse with a ring
round about it, as a circle to course a knaves hand
from it: but Dromio, two they say may keep coun∣sell
is one be away: but to convey knavery, two
are too few, and four too many.
And in good time, look where Halfepenie
Sperantus boy comes, though bound up in deci∣mo
sexto for carriage, yet a wit in folio for coosnage:
Single Halfepenie, what news are now currant?
Nothing but that such double coy∣strels
as you be are counterfeit?
Are you so dapper, weal send you for an
Halfepenie loaf.
I shall go for silver though, when you
you shall be nailed up for slips.
Thou art a slipstring Isle warrant.
I hope you shall never slip string, but hang
steady.
Dromio look here, now is my hand on my
halfepenie.
Thou lie, thou hast not a farthing to lay
thy hands on, I am none of thine: but let me bee
wagging, my head is full of hammers, &amp; they have
so maletted my wit, that I am almost a malcon∣tent.
Why, whats the matter?
My master hath a fine scholar to his son,
Prisius a fair lass to his daughter.
Well.
They two love one another deadly.
In good time.
The feathers have put them up, utterly disli∣king
the match, and have appointed the one shall
have Memphios son, the other Stellios daughter,
this works like wax, but how it will fadge in the
end, the hen that sits next the cock cannot tell.
If thou have but any spice of knavery wele
make thee happy.
Tush, doubt not of mine, I am as full for
my pitch as you are for yours, a wrens egg is as full
of meat as a goose eg, though there be not so much
in it: you shall find this head well stuffed, though there
went little stuff to it.
Laudo ingenium, I like thy sconce, then har∣ken:
Memphio made me of his counsel about mar∣riage
of his son to Stellios daughter, Stellio made
Riscio acquainted to plot a match with Memphios
son. To be short, they be both fools.
But they are not fools that bee short, if I
thought thou meantst so, Senties queen fire simon, Thou
should have a crow to pull.
Be not angry Halfepenie, for fellowship we
will be all fools, and for gain all knaves. But why
doest thou laugh?
At mine own conceit and quick censure.
Whats the matter?
Suddenly me thought you two were asses,
and that the least ass was the more ass.
Thou art a fool, that cannot be.
Yea, my young master taught me to prove it
by learning, and so I can out of Ouid by a verse.
Prithee how?
You must first for fashion sake confess your
selves to be asses.
Well.
Then stand you here and you there.
Go to.
Then this is the verse as I point it, Cum ma∣la
per lunges inualuêre moras. So you see the least ass
is the more ass.
Weal bite thee for an ape if thou bob vs
like asses. But to end all, if thou wilt join with vs,
we will make a match between the two fools, for
that must be our tasks, and thou shalt devise to cou∣ple
Candius &amp; Levy, by ouer-reaching their fathers.
Let me alone, Non enim mea pigra iuuentus,
there's matter in this noddle.
But look where Prisius boy comes, as fit as a put∣ding
for a dogs mouth.
Pop three knaves in a sheath, Isle make it a
right Tunbridge case, and be the bodkin.
Nay the bodkin is here already, you must
be the knife.
I am the bodkin, look well to your ears, I
must boar them.
Mew thy tongue or weal cut it out, this I
speak representing the person of a knife, as thou
did that in shadow of a bodkin.
I must begone, Taedet, it irked, Oportet, it be∣houeth
my wits work like barm, alias yest, alias
sizing, alias rising, alias Gods good.
The new wine is in thine head, yet was hee
fine to take this metaphor from ale, and now you
talk of ale, let vs all to the wine.
Four makes a mess, and we have a mess
of masters that must be cosned, let vs lay our heads
together, they are married and cannot.
Let vs consult at the Tavern, where after
to the health of Memphio, drink we to the life of
Stellio, I carouse to Prisius, &amp; brinch you mas Spe∣rantus,
we shall cast vs our accounts and discharge
our stomachs, like men that can digest any thing.
I see not yet what you go about.
Lucio that can pearce a mud wall of twenty
foot thick, would make vs believe he cannot see
a candle through a paper lantern, his knavery is
beyond Ela, &amp; yet he says he knows not Gam vt.
I am ready, if any cosnage be ripe, Isle shake
the tree.
Nay, I hope to see thee so strong, to shake
three trees at once.
We burn time, for I must give a reckoning
of my days work, let vs close to the bush ad deli∣berandum.
In deed Inter pocula philosophundum, it is
good to plea among pots.
Thine will be the worst, I fear we shall leave
a halfepenie in hand.
Why, say thou that thou hast left a print
deeper in thy hand already than a halfpenie canne
leave, unless it should sing worse than an hot iron.
All friends, and so let vs sing tic a pleasant
thing to go into the tavern, clearing the throat.
IO Bacchus! To thy Table.
Thou call every drunken
Rabble,
We already are stiff Drinkers,
Then seal vs for thy jolly Skinckers.
Wine, O Wine!
O Juice Divine!
How dost thou the Nowle refine!
Plump thou make men's Ruby
faces,
And from Girls can fetch embraces;
By thee our Noses swell,
With sparkling Carbuncle.
O the dear blood of Grapes,
Turns vs to Antique shapes,
Now to show tricks like Apes.
Now Lion-like to roar,
Now Goatishly to whore,
Now Hoggishly in the mire,
Now flinging Hats in the fire,
Iô Bacchus! at thy Table,
Make vs of thy Reeling Rabble.
I marvel I hear no news of Dromio, ei∣there
he slackes the matter, or betrays his master, I
dare not motion any thing to Stellio till I know
what my boy hath don; Isle hunt him out; if the lo∣tersacke
be gone springing into a tavern, Isle fetch
him reeling out.
Without doubt Risio hath gone beyond him∣self,
in casting beyond the Moon, I fear the boy
be run mad with studying, for I know hee loved
me so well, that for my favour hee will venture to
run out of his wits, and it may be, to quicken his
invention, hee is gone into this Iuy-bush, a notable
nest for a grape owl, Isle ferret him out, yet in the
end use him friendly, I cannot be merry till I hear
whats done in the marriages.
I think Lucio be gone a squirrelling, but Isle
squirrel him for it, I sent him on my arrande, but I
must go for an answer myself, I have tied up the
loving worm my daughter, and will see whether
fancy can worm fancy out of her head, this green
nosegay I fear my boy hath smelt to, for if he get
but a penny in his purse, he turns it suddenly into
Argentum potabile, I must search every place for
him, for I stand on thorns till I hear what he hath
done.
Well, be as bee may is no banning, I think I
have charmed my young master, a hungry meal, a
ragged coat, &amp; a dry cudgel, have put him quite
beside his love and his logic to, besides his pigsny
is put up, &amp; therefore now Isle let him take the air,
and follow Stellios daughter with all his learning, if
he mean to be my heir, the boy hath wit sance
measure, more than needs, cats meat &amp; dogs meat
enough for the vantage. Well, without Halfepenie
all my wit is not worth a dodkin, that mite
is meshing in this grove, for as long as his name is
Halfepenie, he will bee banqueting, for thither
Halfepenie.
He must needs go that the devil drives,
a father, a fiend, that seeks to place affection by ap∣pointment,
&amp; to force love by compulsion, I have
sworn to woo Sylena, but it shall be so coldly, that
she shall take as small delight in my words, as I do
contentment in his commandment, Isle teach him
one school trick in love. But behold who is that
that comes out of Stellios house, it should seem
to be Silena by her attire,
by her face I am sure it is she, oh fair face, oh love∣lie
countenance! How now Candius, if thou begin
to slip at beauty on a sudden, thou wilt surfeit with
carousing it at the last. Remēber that Levy is faith∣full,
I, and let thine eyes witness Silena is amiable,
here shall I please my father and my self, I will
learn to be obedient, &amp; come what will, Isle make
away, if she seem coy, Isle practise all the art of
love; if I her cunning, all the pleasures of love.
My name is Silena I care not who know it,
so I doo not: my father keeps me close, so he does,
and now I have stolen out, so I have, to go to old
Mother Bombie to know my fortune, so I will, for I
have as fair a face as ever trod on shoo sole, and
as free a foot as ever looked with two eyes.
What, I think she is lunatike or foolish?
Thou art a fool Candius, so fair a face cannot bee
the scabbard of a foolish mind, mad she may bee,
for commonly in beauty so rare, there false passions
extreme, Love and beauty disdain a mean, not
therefore because beauty is no virtue, but because
it is happiness, and we scholars know that virtue is
not to be praised, but honoured. I will put on my best
grace, sweet wench thy face is lovely, thy body
comely, &amp; all that the eyes can see enchanting, you
see how unacquainted I am bold to board you.
My father boards me already, therefore I
care not if your name were Geoffrey.
She raves or ouer-reaches. I am one sweet
soul that loves you, brought hither by report of
your beauty, and here languishes with your rare∣ness.
I thank you that you would call.
I will always call on such a saint, that hath
power to release my sorrows, yield fair creature
to love.
I am none of that sect.
The loving sect is an ancient sect and an
honourable, and therefore should bee in a person so
perfect.
Much.
I love thee much, give me one word of
comfort.
I faith sir no, and so tell your master.
I have no master, but come to make choice
of a mistress.
Aha, are you there with your bears.
Doubtless she is an idiot of the newest cut,
Isle once more try his. I have loved thee long Si∣lena.
In your to there hose.
Too simple to be natural: too senseless
to be artificial. You said you went to know your
fortune, I am a scholar and am cunning in pal∣mistry.
The better for you sir, here is my hand, whats
a clock.
The line of life is good, Venus mount very
perfect, you shall have a scholar to your first hus∣band.
you are well seen in carnes dirt, your father
was a poulter, ha, ha, ha.
Why laugh you?
Because you should see my teeth.
Alas poor wench, I see now also thy foal∣lie,
a fair fool is like a fresh weed, pleasing leaves
and sour juice. I will not yet leave her, she may
dissemble. I cannot choose but love thee.
I had thought to ask you.
Nay then farewell, either to proud to ac∣cept,
or too simple to understand.
You need not bee so crusty, you are not so
hard backed.
Now I perceive thy folly, who hath raked
together all the odd blind phrases, that help
them that know not howe to discourse, but when
they cannot answer wisely, either with gybing
cover their rudeness, or by some new coined
buy word bewraie their peevishness, I am glad
of this, now shall I have colour to refuse the
match, and my father reason to accept of Levy,
I will home, and repeat to my father our wise in∣counter,
and hee shall perceive there is nothing so
fulsome as a she fool.
Good God, I think Gentlemen had never
less wit in a year. Wee maids are mad wen∣ches,
we gird them and flout them out of all scotch
and notch, and they cannot see it, I will know of
the old woman whether I bee a maid or no, and
then if I bee not, I must needs be a man, God be
here.
Whose there.
One that would be a maid.
If thou be not, it is impossible thou shuldst
be, and a shame thou art not.
They say you are a witch.
They lie, I am a cunning woman.
Then tell me some thing.
Hold up thy hand, not so high, thy fa∣there
knows thee not, thy mother bare thee not,
falsely bred, truly begot, choice of two husbands,
but never tyedin bands, because of love and na∣turall
bonds.
I thank you for nothing, because I un∣derstand
nothing: though you bee as old as you
are, yet am I as young as I am, and because
that I am so fair, therefore are you so foul,
&amp; so farewell frost, my fortune nought me cost.
Farewell fair fool, little doest thou know
thy hard fortune, but in the end thou shalt, &amp; that
must bewraie what none can discover, in the mean
season I will profess cunning for all comers.
We were all taken tardy.
Our masters will be overtaken if they tarry.
Now must every one by wit make an ex∣cuse,
and every excuse must be coosnage.
Let vs remember our complot.
We will all plod on that, oh the wine hath
turned my wit to vinegar.
You mean tic sharpe.
Sharpe? Isle warrant twill serve for as good
sauce to knavery as
As what?
As thy knavery meat for his wit.
We must all give a reckoning for our days
travel.
Tush, I am glad we escaped the reckoning for our
liquor. If you be examined how we met, swear by
chance, for so they met, and therefore will believe
it: if how much we drunk, let them answer them
selves, they know best because they paid it.
We must not tarry, abeundum est mihi, I must
go and cast this matter in a corner.
I presequar a bowl, and Isle come after with a
broom, every one remember his que.
I and his k. or else we shall thrive ill.
When shall we meet.
To morrow fresh and fasting.
Fast eating our meat, for we have drunk
for to morrow, &amp; to morrow we must eat for to day.
Away, away, if our masters take vs here the
matter is mart.
Let vs every one to his task.
How luckily we met on a sudden in a ta∣uerne,
that drunk not together almost these their∣tie
years.
A tavern is the Rendezvous, the Exchange,
the staple for good fellows, I have heard my great
grandfather tell how his great grandfather should
say, that it was an old proverb when his great
grandfather was a child, that it was a good wind
that blew a man to the wine.
The old time was a good time, Ale was an
ancient drink, and accounted of our ancestors au∣tentical,
Gascone wine was liquor for a Lord, Sack
a medicine for the sick, and I may tell you, he that
had a cup of red wine to his oysters, was hoisted in
the Queens subsidy book.
I but now you see to what looseness this age
is grown▪ our boys carouse sack like double beer,
and saith that which doth an old man good, can do
a young man no harm: old men (say they) eat pap,
why should not children drink sack, their white
heads have cosned time out of mind our yōg years
Well, the world is wanton since I knew
it first, our boys put as much now in their bellies
in an hour, as would cloth their whole bodies in
a year, wee have paid sor their tippling eight shil∣lingoes,
and as I have heard, it was as much as
bought Rufus, sometime king of this land, a pair
of hose.
First possible.
Nay tic true; they say, Ale is out of request,
tic hogs porridge, broth for beggars, a caudle for
cunstables, watchmens mouth glow; the better it is
the more like bird lime it is; and never makes one
staid but in the stocks.
Isle teach my wag-halter to know grapes
from barley.
And I mine to discern a spigot from a fau∣cet.
And I mine, to judge the difference between
a black boule and a filuer goblet.
And mine shall learn the odds between
a stand and a hogs-head, yet I cannot choose but
laugh to see how my wag answered me, when I
stroke him for drinking sack.
Why what said he?
Master, it is the soueraigntest drink in the
world, and the safest for all times and weathers, if
it thunder, though all the Ale and Beer in the
town turn, it will be constant; if it lighten, and
that any fire come to it, it is the aptest wine to burn
and the most wholesomest when it is burnt. So
much for Summer. If it freeze, why it is so hot in
operation, that no Ise can congeal it, if it rain,
why then he that cannot abide the heate of it, may
put in water. So much for winter. And so ran his
way, but Isle overtake him.
Who would think that my hop on my
thumb, Halfpenie, scarce so high as a pint pot, wold
reason the matter; but hee learned his leer of my
son, his young master, whom I have brought up
at Oxford, and I think must learn here in Kent
at Ashford.
Why what said he▪
Hee boldly rapt it out, Sine Cere &amp; Baccho
frigate Venus, without wine and sugar his veins wold
wax cold.
They were all in a pleasant vain, but I
must be gone, and take account of my boys busi∣ness,
farewell neighbours, God knows when we
shall meet again, yet I have discovered nothing,
my wine hath been my wits friend, I lunge to
hear what Dromio hath done.
I cannot stay, but this good fellowship
shall cost me the setting on at our next meeting, I
am glad I blabbed nothing of the marriage, now I
hope to compass it, I know my boy hath bin bung∣ling
about it.
Let vs all go, for I must to my clothes that
hang on the tenters, my boy shall hang with them,
if hee answer me not his days work.
If all bee gone Isle not stay, Halfepenie I am
sure hath done me a penny worth of good,
else Isle spend his body in buying a rod.
Sweet sister, I know not how it comes
to pass, but I find in my self passions more than
brotherly.
And I dear brother find my thoughts in∣tangled
with affections beyond nature, which so
flame into my distempered head, that I can neither
without danger smother the fire, nor without mo∣destie
disclose my fury.
Our parents are pore, our love unnatural,
what can then happen to make vs happy?
Only to be content with our fathers mean
estate, to comhat against our own intemperate de∣sires,
and yield to the success of fortune, who though
she hath framed vs miserable, cannot make vs mon∣strous.
It is good counsel fair sister, if the noses∣sitie
of love could be relieved by counsel, yet this
is our comfort, that these unnatural heats have
stretched themselves no further than thoughts, un∣happy
me that they should stretch so.
That which nature warranted laws forbid,
strange it seems in sense, that because thou art
mine, therefore thou must not be mine.
So it is Serena, the nearer we are in blood, the
further wee must be from love, and the greater the
kindred is, the less the kindness must be, so that be∣tween
brothers &amp; sisters superstition hath made af∣fection
cold, between strangers custom hath bred
love exquisite.
They say there is hard by an old cunning woman,
who can tell fortunes, expound dreams, tell of things
that be lost, and divine of accidents to come, she is cal∣led
the good woman, who yet never did hurt.
Nor any good I think Serena, yet to satisfy
thy mind we will see what she can say.
Good brother let vs.
who is within?
The dame of the house?
She might have said the beldam, for her face
and years, and attire.
Good mother tell vs, if by your cunning you
can, what shall become of my brother and me.
Let me see your hands, and look on me sted∣fastly
with your eyes. You shall be married to morrow
hand in hand, by the laws of good nature &amp; the land,
your parents shall be glad, &amp; give you their land, you
shall each of you displace a fool, &amp; both together must
relieve a fool. If this be not true call me old fool.
This is my sister, marry we cannot: our pa∣rents
are poor and have no land to give vs, each of vs
is a fool to come for counsel to such an old fool.
These doggerel rimes and obscure words, com∣ming
out of the mouth of such a weather-beatē witch,
are thought divinations of some holy spirit, being but
dreams of decayed brains▪ for mine own part, I
would thou might sit on that stool till he &amp; I mar∣tie
by law.
I say Mother Bombie never speaks but once,
and yet never spake untruth once.
Come brother, let vs to our poor home, this is
our comfort, to bewraie our passions, since we cannot
enjoy our love.
Content sweet sister, and learn of me hereof∣la,
that these old saws of such old hags, are but false
fires to lead one out of a plain path into a deep pit.
Ingenium quondam fuerat pretiotius euro, the time
was wherein wit would work like wax, and crock up
gold like honey.
At nuns barbary est grandis habere nihil, but now
wit and honesty buy nothing in the market.
What Risio, how spedst thou after thy potting?
Nay, my master rong all in the tavern, &amp; thrust
all out in the house. But how spedst thou?
I, it were a days work to discourse it, he spake
nothing but sentences, but they were vengible long
ones, for when one word was out, hee made pause of a
quarter long till he spake another.
Why what did he in all that time?
Break interiections like wind, as eho, ho, to.
And what thou?
Answer him in his own language, as euax,
vah, hue.
These were coniunctions rather than interiecti∣once.
But what of the plot?
As we concluded I told him that I understood
that Silena was very wise, and could sing exceedingly,
that my devise was, seeing Accius his son a proper
youth, &amp; could also sing sweetly, that he should come
in the nick when she was singing and answer her.
Excellent.
Then hee asked how it should be devised that
she might come abroad, I told that was cast already
by my means, then the song being ended, and they
seeing one another, noting the apparel, and marking
the personages, he should call in his son for fear he
should ouer-reach his speech.
Very good.
Then that I had gotten a young Gentleman
that resembled his son in years and favour, that ha∣uing
Accius apparel should court Silena, whom she
finding wise, would after that by small entreaty be won
without mo words, &amp; so the marriage clapped up by this
cosnage, and his son never speak word for himself.
Thou boy, so have I done in every point, for the
song, the calling her in, &amp; the hoping that another shall
woo Accius, and his daughter wed him, I told him this
wooing should be to night, and they early married in
the morning, without any words saving to say after
the Priest.
All this fodges well; now if Halfpenie and Lu∣ceo
have played their parts, wee shall have exccellent
sport, and here they come. Howe wrought the wine
my lads?
How? like wine, for my body being the runt∣let,
and my mouth the vent, it wrought two days over,
till I had thought the hoops of my head would have
flown asunder.
The best was, our masters were as well whittled
as we, for yet they lie by it.
The better for vs, we did but a little parboil our
livers, they have sod theirs in sack these forty years.
That makes them spit white broth as they doo.
But to the purpose. Candius and Levy will send their
attires, you must send the apparel of Accius and Sile∣na,
they wonder wherefore, but commit the matter to
our quadrapertit wit.
If you keep promise to marry them by your
device, and their parents consent, you shall have ten
pounds a piece for your pains.
If wee doo it not wee are undone, for we have
broached a cosnage already, and my master hath the tap
in his hand, that it must needs run out, let thē he ruled
and bring hither their apparel, and we will determine,
the rest commit to our intricate considerations, depart.
Here comes Accius tuning his pipes, I perceive
my master keeps touch.
And here comes Silena with her wit of proof▪
marie it will scarce hold out question shot, let vs in to
instruct our masters in the que.
Come let vs be jogging, but were not a world
to hear them woe one another.
That shall be hereafter to make vs sport, but our
masters shall never know it.
O Cupped! Monarch over
Kings,
Wherefore hast thou feet and wings?
It is to show how swift thou art,
When thou wound a tender heart,
Thy wings being clip'd, and freete hel'd
still,
Thy Bow so many could not kill.
It is all one in Venus wanton
school,
Who highest sits, the wiseman or the
fool:
Fools in loves college
Hane far more knowledge,
To Read a woman over,
Than a neat prating lover.
Nay, tic confessed,
That fools please women best.
Accius come in and that quickly▪ what walking
without leave?
Silena, I pray you look homeward, it is a cold
air, and you want your mufler.
This is pat, if the rest proceed Stellio is like to
marry his daughter to a fool, but a bargen is a bargen.
This frames to my wish; Memphio is like to mar∣rye
a fool to his son; Accius tongue shall tie all Mem∣phios
land to Silenas dowry, let his fathers teeth undo
them if hee can; but here I see Memphio, I must seem
kind, for in kindness lies cosnage.
Well, here is Stellio, Isle talk of other matters, &amp; fly
from the mark I shoot at, lapwing-like flying far from
the place where I nestle. Stellio what make you abroad,
I heard you were sick since our last drinking.
You see reports are no truths, I heard the like of
you, &amp; we are both well. I perceive sober men tel most
lies, for in vino veritas, If they had drunk wine, they
would have told the truth.
Our boys will be sure then never to lie, for they
are ever swilling of wine▪ but Stellio I must strain cur∣sie
with you, I have business▪ I cannot stay.
In good time Memphio, for I was about to crave
your patience to depart, it stands me upon. Perhaps
move his patience ere it be long.
Good silly Stel. we must buckle shortly,
Come Rixula wee have made thee privy to the
whole pack, there lay down the pack.
I believe unless it be better handled, wee shall
out of doors.
I care not, Omnem solum forti patria, I can live in
christendom as well as in Kent.
And Isle sing Patria vbicunque been, every house
is my home▪ where I may stanch hunger.
Nay, if you set all on hazard, though I be a pore
wench I am as hardy as you both▪ I cannot speak La∣tine,
but in plain English if any thing fall out cross Isle
run away,
He loves thee well that would run after.
Why Halfpenie, there's no goose so gray in the
lake, that cannot find a gander for her make.
I love a nutbrowne lass, tic good to recreate.
Thou meanest, a browne nut is good to crack.
Why wold it not do thee good to crack such a nut?
I fear she is worm-eaten within, she is so moth-eaten
without.
If you take your pleasure of me, Isle in and tell
your practises against your masters.
In faith sour heart, hee that takes his pleasure
on thee is very pleasurable.
You mean knavishly, and yet I hope foul wa¦la
will quench hot fire as soon as fair.
Well then let fair words cool that choler,
which foul speeches hath kindled, and because we are
all in this case, and hope all to have good fortune, sing
a roundelay, and weal help, such as thou wast wont
when thou beatest hemp.
It was crabs she stamped, and stole away one to
make her a face.
I agree in hope that the hemp shall come to
your wearing, a halfepenie halter may hang you both,
that is, Halfepeny and you may hang in a halter.
Well brought about.
Twill when tic about your neck.
Nay▪ now shees in▪ she will never out.
Nor when your heads are in, as it is likely, they
should not come out. But harken to my song, Cantant.
FVll hard I did sweat,
When hemp I did beat.
Then thought I of nothing but hanging,
The hemp being spun,
My beating was done,
Then I wished for a noise
Of crack-halter Boys,
On Those hempen strings to be twanging.
Long looked I about.
The City throughout,
And fownd no such fiddling
varlets.
Yes, at last coming hither,
I saw four together.
May thy hemp choke such
singing harlots.
To whit to whoo, the Owl does
cry,
Phip, phip, the sparrows as they fly,
The goose does hiss, the duck cries quack.
A Rope the Parrot, that holds tack.
The parrot and the rope be thine.
The hanging yours, but the hemp
mine.
Yonder stands the wags, I am come in good time.
All here before me, you make hast.
I believe to hanging, for I think you have all
robbed your masters, here is every man his baggage.
That is, we are all with thee, for thou art a very
baggage.
Hold thy peace, or of mine honesty Isle buy an
halfpenie purse with thee.
In deed thats big enough to put thy honesty in,
but come shall we go about the matter?
Now it is come to the pinch my heart pants.
I for my part am resolute, in vtran{que} paratus, re∣die
to die or to run away.
But hear me, I was troubled with a vile dream,
and therefore it is little time spent to let Mother Bom∣by
expound it, she is cunning in all things.
Then will I know my fortune.
And Isle ask for a silver spoon which was lost
last day, which I must pay for.
And Isle know what will become of our devices.
And I.
Then let vs all go quickly, we must not sleep in
this business, our masters are so watchful about it.
Why do you rap so hard at the door?
B•cause we would come in.
Nay my house is no Inn.
Cross your selves, look how she looks.
Mark her not, sheele turn vs all to Apes.
What would you with me?
They say you are cunning, &amp; are called the good
woman of Rochester.
If never to doo harm be to doo good, I dare
say I am not ill. But whats the matter?
I had a ill dream, &amp; desire to know the significatiō.
Dreams my son have their weight, though
they be of a troubled mind, yet are they signs of for∣tune.
Say on.
In the dawning of the day, for about that time
by my starting out of my sleep I found it to bee, me
thought I saw a stately piece of beef, with a cape
cloak of cabbage, embroidered with pepper, having two
honourable pages with hats of mustard on their heads,
himself in great pomp sitting upon a cushion
of white Brewish, lined with browne Bread,
me thought being poudred he was much troubled with
the salt rum, &amp; therefore there stood by him two great
flagons of sack and beer, the one to dry up his rum,
the other to quench his choler, I as one envying his
ambition, hungring and thirsting after his honour, began
to pull his cushiō frō under him, hoping by that means
to give him a fall, &amp; with putting out my hand awaked, &amp;
found nothing in all this dream about me but the salt
rum.
A dream for a butcher.
Soft let me end it, then I slumbered again, &amp; me
thought there came in a leg of mutton.
What all gross meat, a rack had been dainty.
Thou fool how could it come in, unless it had
bin a leg, me thought his hose were cut &amp; drawn out
with parsley, I thrust my hand into my pocket for a knife
thinking to hoxe him, and so awaked.
Belike thou went supperless to bed.
So I doo every night but sundays, Prisius hath
a weak stomach, and therefore we must starve.
Well, take this for answer, though the dream
be fantastical, they that in the morning sleep dream of
eating, are in danger of sickness, or of beating, or shall
hear of a wedding fresh a beating.
This may be true.
Nay then let me come in with a dream, short
but sweet, that my mouth waters ever since I waked: Me
thought there sate upon a shelf three damask prunes
in velvet caps and pressed satin gowns like indges, and
that there were a whole handful of curants to be araig∣ned
of a riot, because they clūged together in such clu∣sters,
twelve raisons of the sun were impannelled in
a Iewry, and as a leaf of whole maze which was bailief
was carrying the quest to consult, me thought there came
an angry cooke, and gelded the Iewry of their stones,
and swept both judges, jurors, rebels and bailiefe into
a porridge pot, whereat I being melancholy, fetched a
deep sigh, that waked my self and my bed fellow.
This was devised not dreamt, and the more foo∣lish
being no dream, for that dreams excuse the fan∣tasticalnesse.
Then ask my bed-felow, you know him, who
dreamt that night that the king of diamonds was sick.
But thy years and humours pretty child, are
subject to such fancies, which the more unsensible they
seem, the more fantastical they are, therefore this
dream is easy. To children this is given from the Gods
to dream of milk, fruit, babies and rods, they betoken
nothing but that wantons must have rods.
Ten to one thy dream is true, thou wilt bee
swinged.
Nay gimmal, I pray you tell me who stole my
spoon out of the buttrie.
Thy spoon is not stolen but mislaid, thou art
an ill huswife though a good maid, look for thy spoon
where thou had like to be no maid.
Body of me let me fetch the spoon, I remem∣ber
the place.
Soft swift, the place if it be there now, it will bee
there to morrow.
I but perchance the spoon will not.
Were thou once put to it?
No sir boy, it was put to me.
How was it must?
Isle warrant for want of a mist. But whats my
fortune▪ mother?
Thy father doth live because he doth die, thou
hast spent all thy thrist with a die, and so like a beggar
thou shalt die.
I would have like•e well if all the gerunds had
been there, di, do, and dum, but all in die, thats too
deadly.
My father in deed is a diar, but I have ben a di∣cer,
but to die a beggar, give me leave not to believe
Mother Bombie, and yet it may bee, I have nothing to
live by but knavery, and if the world grow honest well∣come
beggary. But what hast thou to say Risio?
Nothing till I see whether all this bee true that
she hath said.
I Risio would fine see thee beg.
Nay mother tell vs this, What is all our fortunes,
we are about a matter of legerdemain, howe will it
fodge?
You shall all thrive like coosners, that is, to bee
coosned by coosners: all shall end well, and you bee
found coosners.
Gramercy Mother Bombie, we are all pleased, if
you were for your pains.
I take no money, but good words, rail not if
I tell true, if I doe not revenge. Farewell. 
Now have we nothing to doe but to go about
this business, Accius apparel let Candius put on, and I
will array Accius with Candius clothes.
Here is Silenas attire, Linceo put it upon Levy,
and give me Liuias for Silena, this done, ler Candius &amp;
Levy come forth, and let Dromio and me alone for
the rest.
What shall become of Accius and Silena?
Tush, their turn shall bee next, all must bee
done orderly, lets to it, for now it works.
This attire is very fit. But how if this make me
a fool and Silena wise, you will then woo me and
wed her.
Thou know that Accius is also a fool, and
his rament fits me, so that if apparel be infectious, I am
also like to be a fool, and hee wist what would be the
conclusion, I marvel
Here comes our counsellors.
Well said, I perceive turtles fly in couples.
Else how should they couple?
So do knaves go double; else how should they
be so cunning in doubling.
Bone verb Levy.
I understand Latin, that is, Levy is a good
word.
No, I bid her use good words.
And what deeds?
None but a deed of gift.
What gift?
Her heart.
Give me leave to pose you though you bee a
graduate, for I tell you we in Rochester spur so many
hackneys, that we must needs spuire scholars, for wee
take them for hackneys.
Why so sir boy?
Because I knew two hired for ten grotes a piece
to say service on sunday, and thats no more than a post
horse from hence to Canterbury.
Hee knows what hee says, for hee once served
the post-master.
In deed I think hee served some post to his
master, but come Dromio post me.
You say you would have her heart for a deed.
Well.
If you take her hart for cor, that heart in her by∣die,
then know this, Molle eiusleuibus, Cor enim inuiola∣bile
telis, A women's heart is thrust through with a fea∣there:
if you mean she should give a heart named Cer∣uus,
then are you worse, for cornua ceruus habit, that is,
to have ones heart grow out at his head, which will
make one ache at the heart in their body.
I beshrew your hearts, I hear one coming, I
know it is my father by his coming.
What must we doo?
Why as I told you, and let me alone with the
old men, fall you to your bridal.
Come neighbor, I perceive the love of our i will∣drone
waxes key cold.
I think it was never but luke warm.
Bauins will have their flashes, and youth their
fancies, the one as soon quenched as the other burnt,
but who be these?
Here I do plight my faith, taking thee for the
staff of my age, and of my youth my solace.
And I vow to thee affection which nothing can
dissolve, neither the length of time, nor malice of for∣tune,
not distance of place.
But when shall we be married?
A good question, for that one delay in wedding
brings an hundred dangers in the Church, we will not
be asked, and a lisence is to chargeable, and to tarry till to
morrow too tedious.
Theres a girl stands on pricks till she be married.
To avoid danger, charge, and tediousness, let
vs now conclude it in the next Church.
Agreed.
What be these that hasten so to marry?
Marry sir, Accius son to Memphio, and Si∣lena
Stellios daughter.
I am sorry neighbour, for our purposes are dis∣appointed.
You see marriage is destiny, made in heaven,
though consummated on earth.
How like you them, be they not a pretty couple?
Yes God give them joy, seeing in spite of our
hearts they must join.
I am sure you are not angry, seeing things past
cannot be resold, and being witnesses to their contract,
will be also welwillers to the match.
For my part I wish them well.
And I, and since there is no remedy, that I am
glad of it.
But will you never hereafter take it in dugeon,
but use them as well as though your selves had made
the marriage.
Not, I.
Nor I.
Sir, here is two old men are glad that your loves
so long continued, is so happily concluded.
Wee thank them, and if they will come to
Memphios house they shall take part of a bad dinner.
This cottons, and works like wax in a sows ear.
Well, seeing our purposes are prevented, wee
must lay other plots, for Levy shall not have Canaius.
Fear not, for I have sworn that Canaius shall
not have Levy. But let not vs fall out because our i will∣drone
fall in.
Wilt thou go soon to Memphios house?
I and if you will let vs, that we may see how the
young couple bride it, and so we may teach our own.
By this time I am sure, the wags have played
their parts, there rests nothing now for vs but to match
Accius and Silena
It was too good to be true, for we should laugh
heartily, and without laughing my spleen would split,
but whist here comes the man,
and yonder the maid, let vs stand aside.
What means my father to thrust me forth in
another boys coat? Isle warrant tic to as much pur∣pose
as a hem in the forehead.
There was an ancient proverb knocked in the
head.
I am almost come into mine nonage, and yet I
never was so far as the proverbs of this city.
Theres a quip for the suburbs of Rochester.
Excellently applied.
Well, though this furniture make me a sullen
dame, yet I hope in mine own I am no saint.
A brave fight is like to bee between a cock
with a long comb, and a hen with a long leg.
Nay her wits are shorter than her legs.
And his comb longer than his wit.
I have yonder uncovered a fair girl, Isle be so
bold as spur her, what might a body call her name?
I cannot help you at this time, I pray you come
again to morrow.
I marie sir.
You need not bee so lusty, you are not so ho∣nest.
I cry you mercy I took you for a joined
stool.
Hears courting for a conduit or a bake∣house.
But what are you for a man? me thinks you loke
as pleases God.
What doo you give me the boots?
Whether will they, here be right cobblers cuts.
I am taken with a fit of love: Have you any
mind of marriage?
I had thought to have asked you.
Upon what acquaintance?
Who would have thought it?
Much in my gascoins, more in my round hose,
all my fathers are as white as daisies, as an egg full of
meat.
And all my fathers plate is made of Crimosin
velvet.
That brave with bread.
These three had wise men to their Fa∣theirs.
Why?
Because when their bodies were at work a∣bout
household stuff, their minds were busied about
commonwealth matters.
This is pure lawn: What call you this, a pre∣face
to your hair?
Wisely you have picked a raison out of a frail of
figs.
Take it as you list, you are in your own clothes.
Saving a reverence thats a lie, my clothes are
better, my father borrowed these.
Long may hee so doe. I could tell that these are
not mine if I would blab it like a woman.
I had as lief you should tell them it snout.
Come let vs take them off, for we have had the
cream of them.
Isle warrant if this bee the cream, the milk is
very flat, let vs join issue with them.
To have such issues of our bodies, is worse than
have an issue in the body. God save you pretty mouse.
You may command and go without.
Theres a gleek for you, let me have my gird,
on thy conscience tell me what tic a clock?
I cry you mercy I have kilt your cushion.
I am paid stroke dead in the nest, I am sure
this soft youth who is not half so wise as you are fair,
nor you altogether so fair as he is foolish, will not be
so captious.
Your eloquence pass my recognoscence.
I never heard that before, but shall we two make
a match between you?
Isle know first who was his father.
My father, what need you to care, I hope he was
none of yours.
A hard question, for it is odds but one begat
them both, hee that cut out the upper leather, cut out
the inner, &amp; so with one awl stitched two soles together.
What is she?
Tic Prisius daughter.
In good time it fodges.
What is he?
Sperantus son.
So twill cotton.
Damsel, I pray you how old are you?
My son would scarce have asked such a foo∣lish
question.
I shall be eighteen next bear-baiting.
My daughter would have made a wiser aun∣swear.
O how fitly this comes of!
My father is a scold, whats yours?
My heart throbs, I look him in the face, and
yonder I espi Stellio.
My mind misgives me, but whist, yonder is
Memphio.
In faith I perceive an old saw and a rusty, no
fool to the old fool. I pray you wherefore was I
thrust out like a scar crow in this similitude.
My son and I ashamed, Dromio shall die.
Father are you sneaking behind, I pray you what
must I doe next?
My daughter, Risio thou hast cosned me.
Now begins the game.
How came you hither?
Marie by the way from your house hither▪
How chance in this attire?
How chance Dromio bid me?
Ah thy son will bee begged for a concealed
fool.
Will I, I faith sir no.
Wherefore came you hither Silena without
leave?
Because I did, and I am here because I am.
Poor wench, thy wit is improued to the utter∣most.
I, tic an hard matter to have a wit of the old
rent, every one rackes his commons so high.
Dromio told me that one should meet
Stellios daughter, and court her in person of my
son.
Risio told me one should meet Memphios
son, and plead in place of my daughter.
But alas I see that my son hath met with
Silena himself, and bewraid his folly.
But I see my daughter hath prattled with Ass∣us,
and discovered her simplicity.
A brave cry to hear the two old mules weep
over the young fools.
Accius how likest thou Silena.
I take her to be pregnant.
Truly his talk is very personable.
Come in girl, this gear must be fetched about.
Come Accius, let vs go in.
Nay sir there is no harm done, they have nei∣there
bought nor sold, they may be twins for their
wits and years.
But why did thou tell me it was Prisius
son?
Because I thought thee a fool, to ask who thine
own son was.
And so sir for your daughter, education hath
done much, otherwise they are by nature soft wytted
enough.
Alas their joints are not yet tied, they are
not yet come to years and discretion.
Father, if my hands bee tied shall I grow
wise?
I and Silena to, if you tie them fast to your
tongues.
You may take your pleasure of my tongue, for
it is no mans wife.
Come in Accius.
Come in Silena, I will talk with Memphios
son, but as for Risio.
As for Dromio.
Ass for you all four,
How goes the world, now we have made all
sure, Candius and Levy are married, their fathers con∣scenting,
yet not knowing.
We have flat mart all, Accius and Silena cour∣ted
one another, their fathers toke them napping, both
are ashamed, and you both shall be swingd.
Tush, let vs alone, we will persuade them that all
false out for the best, for if underhand this match had
been concluded, they both had ben coosned, and now
seeing they find both to bee fools, they may be both
better advised. But why is Halfepenle so sad?
Because I am sure I shall never bee a
penny.
Rather pray there be no fall of money, for thou
wilt then go for a que.
But did not the two fools currently court one
another.
Very good words fitly applied, brought in
in the nick.
I arest you.
Me sir, why then did not bring a stool with
thee, that I might sit down?
He arests you at my suite for a horse.
The more Ass hee, if hee had arrested a mare in
stead of an horse, it had bin but a slight oversight, but
to arest a man that hath no likeness of a horse, is flat
lunacy or alecie.
Tush, I hired him a horse.
I swear then he was well ridden.
I think in two days he was never baited.
Why was it a bear thou ridst on?
I mean he never gave him bait.
Why he took him for no fish.
I mistake none of you when I take you for
fools, I say thou never gave my horse meat.
Yes, in four and forty hours I am sure he had
a bottle of hay as big as his belly.
Nothing else, thou shouldest have given him
provender.
Why he never asked for any.
Why, doest thou think an horse can speak?
No, for I spurt him till my heals akt, and hee
said never a word.
Well, thou shalt pay sweetly for spoiling him,
it was as lusty a nag as any in Rochester, and one that
would stand upon no ground.
Then is he as good as ever he was, Isle warrant,
heel do nothing but lie down.
I lent him thee gently.
And I restored him so gently, that hee neither
would cry wyhie nor wag the tail.
But why did thou boar him thorough the
ears?
It may be he was set on the pillory, because hee
had not a true pace.
No, it was for tyring.
He would never tire, it may be he would be so
weary he would go no further, or so.
Yes he was a notable horse for service, he wold
tyre and retire.
Doe you think Isle be jested out of my horse,
Sergeant wreak thy office on him.
Nay stay, let him be baild.
So he shall when I make him a bargen.
It was a very good horse I must needs confess,
and now hearken to his qualities, and have patience to
hear them since I must pay for him: He would stum∣ble
three hours in one mile, I had thought I had rode
upon addeces between this and Canterbury: if one
gave him water, why he would lie down &amp; bath him∣self
like a hake: if one ran him, he would simper
and mump, as though he had gone a wooing to a malt
mare at Rochester: hee trotted before and ambled be∣hind,
and was so obedient, that he would doo duty e∣very
minute on his knees, as though every stone had
bin his father.
I am sure he had no diseases.
A little rum or pose, hee lacked nothing but an
handkercher.
Come, what a tale of a horse have we here, I can
not stay, thou must with me to prison.
If thou be a good fellow Hacknyman, take all our
four bonds for the payment, thou know wee are
town borne children, and will not shrink the city for
a pelting jade.
Isle enter into a statute Merchant to see it aun∣answered.
But if thou wilt have bonds, thou shalt have a
bushel full.
Alas poort Ant, thou bound in a statute mar∣chant:
a browne thread will bind thee fast enough: but
if you will be content all four jointly to enter into a
bond, I will withdraw the action.
Yes Isle warrant they will, How say you?
I yield.
And I.
And I.
Well call the Scrivener.
Hears one hard by, Isle call him.
A scriveners shop hangs to Sergeants maze, like
a bur to a freeze coat.
Whats the matter?
You must take a note of a bond.
Nay a pint of courtesy pulls on a pot of wine, in
this Tavern weal dispatch.
Agreed.
Now if our wits be not in the wane, our knave∣rye
shall bee at the full, they will ride them worse than
Dromio rid his horse, for if the wine master their wits,
you shall see them bleed their follies.
Every fox to his hole, the hounds are, at
hand.
The Sergeants maze lies at pawn for the reck∣ning,
and he under the board to cast it up.
The Scrivener cannot keep his pen out of the
pot, every goblet is an inkhorn.
The hackneyman hee whisks with his wand,
as if the Tavern were his stable, and all the servants
his horses, Iost there up bay Richard, and white loaves
are horsebread in his eyes.
It is well I have my acquitance, and hee such a
bond as shall doo him no more good than the bond of
a faggot, our knaveries are now come to the push, and
wee must cunningly dispatch all, wee two will go see
howe wee may appease our masters, you two howe
you may conceal the late marriage, if all fall out a∣miss,
the worst is beating, if to the best, the worst is lie∣bertie.
Then lets about it speedily, for so many y∣rons
in the together require a diligent Plummer.
My heart throbs, my ears tingle, my mind
misgives me, since I hear such muttering of marry-ages
in Rochester, my conscience which these eigh∣teene
years hath been frozen with coniealed guile∣tynes,
begins now to thaw in open grief, but
I will not accuse my self till I see more danger, the good
old woman Mother Bombie shall try her cunning
upon me, and if I perceive my case is desperate by her
then will I rather prevent, although with shame, then
report too late, and be inexcusable. God speed good
mother.
Welcome sister.
I am troubled in the night with dreams,
and in the day with fears, mine estate bare, which I
cannot well bear, but my practises devilish, which I
cannot recall, if therefore in these same years there be
any deep skill, tell what my fortune shall be, and what
my fault is.
In studying to be ouernaturall thou art like to
be unnatural, and all about a natural: thou shalt bee
eased of a charge if thou thy conscience discharge, and
this I commit to thy charge.
Thou hast touched me to the quick mother, I
understand thy meaning, and thou w•ll know my
practise, I will follow thy counsel. But what will bee
the end?
Thou shalt know before this day end, farewell.
Now I perceive I must either bewraie a mis∣chief,
or suffer a continual inconvenience, I must hast
homewards, and resolve to make all whole, better a
little shame than an infinite grief, the strangeness will a∣bate
the fault, and the betraying wipe it clean a∣way.
Come fellows, tic almost day, let vs have a fit
of mirth at Sperantus door, and give a song to the
bride.
I believe they are asleep, it were pity to a∣wake
them.
It were a shame they should sleep the first
night.
But who can tell at which house they lie, at Pri∣sius
it may be, weal try both.
Come lets draw like men.
Now, tune, tune I say, that boy I think will no∣for
profit in his faculty, he looses his rosin, that his fid∣dl
goes cush, cush, like as one should go wetshod, and
his mouth so dry, that he hath not spittle for his pin
as I have.
Mary sir you see I go wetshod and dry mouthed,
for yet could I never get new shoes or good drink,
rather than Isle lead this life, I throw my fiddle into the
leads for a •obler.
Boy, no more words, theres a time for al things
though I say it that should not, I have been a minstrel
these thirty years, and tickled more strings than thou
hast hairs, but yet was never so misused.
Let vs not brabble but play, to morrow is a new
day.
I am sorry I speak in your cast, what shall wee
sing?
The love knot, for thats best for a bridal. Sing.
God morrow fair bride, and send you joy of your bri∣dall.
What a mischief make the twanglers here? we
have no trenchers to scrape, it makes my teeth on edge
to hear such grating. Get you packing, or Isle make you
wear double stocks, and yet you shall bee never the
warmer.
We come for good will, to bid the bride and
bride groom, God give them joy.
Hers no wedding.
Yes your son and Prisius daughter were ma∣riot,
though you seem strange, yet they repent it not
I am sure.
My son villain, I had rather hee were fairly
hanged.
So he is sir, you have your wish.
Here fiddlers take this and not a word, here is
no wedding, it was at Memphios house, yet gramercy,
your music though it mist the house hit the mind,
we were a preparing our wedding gear.
I cry you mercy sir, I think it was Memphios
son that was married.
O ho the case is altered, go thither then and be
haltered for me.
Whats the alms?
An Angel.
Isle warrant theirs some work towards, ten shil∣lings
is money in master Majors purse.
Let vs to Memphios and share equally, when
we have done all thou shalt have new shoes.
I such as they cry at the Sizes, a mark in issues,
and mark in issues, and yet I never saw so much lea∣there
as would piece ones shoes.
No more, theirs the money.
A good handfell, and I think the maidenhead
of your liberality.
Come here is the house, what shall we sing?
You know Memphio is very rich and wise, and
therefore let vs strike the gentle stroke, and sing a catch.
THe Bride this Night can
catch no cold,
No cold, the Bridegroome's young, not old,
Like Ivy he her fast does hold,
And clips her.
And lips her.
And flips her too.
Then let them alone, They
know what they doe.
At laugh and lie down, if they
play,
What Ass against the sport can
bray?
Such Tick-tacke has held many a
day,
And longer.
And stronger.
It still holds too.
Then let them alone, They know
what they doe,
This Night,
In delight
Does thump away sorrow.
Of billing
Take your filling,
So good morrow, good morrow.
God morrow mistress bride and send you a
huddle.
What crowding knaves have we there, case
up your fiddles, or the cunstable shall cage you up.
What bride talk you of?
Here is a wedding in Rochester, and it was told
me first that Sperantus son had married Prisius daugh∣la,
we were there, and they sent vs to your worship,
saying your son was matched with Stellios daughter.
Hath Sperantus that churl nothing to doe
but mock his neighbours, Isle bee even with him, and
get you gone, or I swear by the roods body Isle lay
you by the heals.
Sing a catch, here is a fair catch in deed, sing till
we catch cold on our feet, and bee called knave till our
ears glow on our heads, your worship is wise
sir.
Dromio shake off a whole kennel of officers,
to punish these earring rogues, Isle teach them to stretch
their dried sheep guts at my door, and to mock one
that stands to be mayor.
I had thought they had been sticking of pigs,
I heard such a squeaking, I go sir.
Let vs be packing.
Where is my scabbard, every one sheath his
science.
A bots on the shoemaker that made this boot
for my •iddle, tic too straight.
No more words, twill bee thought they were
the four wai•es, and let them wring, as or the wags
that set vs on work, wele talk with them.
They be gone sir.
If they had stayed, the stocks should have
stayed them. But sir, what shall we now doo?
As I advised you make a match, for better one
house be encumbered with two fools than two.
Tic true, for it being bruited that each of vs
have a fool, who will tender marriage to any of them
that is wise, besides fools are fortunate, fools are fair,
fools are honest.
I sir, and more than that, fools are not wise: a
wise man is melancholy for moone-shine in the water,
careful building castles in the ayre, &amp; commonly hath
a fool to his heir.
But what say thou to thy dames chasing?
Nothing but all her dishes are chasing dishes.
I would her tongue were in thy belly.
I had as lief have a raw neates tongue in my
stomach.
Why?
Marie if the clapper hang within an inch of my
heart, that makes mine ears burn a quarter of a mile
off. Do you not think it would beat my heart black
and blew?
Well patience is a virtue, but pinching is
worse than any vice, I will break this matter to Stellio,
and if he be willing, this day shall be their wedding.
Then this day shall be my liberty.
I if Stellios daughter had been wise, and by
my means cosned of a fool.
Then sir Isle revolt, and dash out the brains of
your devises.
Rather thou shalt be free.
Boy, this smoke is a token of some fire, I like
not the luck of it. Wherefore should these minstrels
dream of a marriage?
Alas sir they rustle into every place, give credit
to no such words.
I will to Prisius, I cannot be quiet, and in good
time I meet him, God morrow neighbor.
I cast the morrow in thy fate, &amp; bid good night
to all neighbourhood.
This is your old trick, to pick ones purse &amp; then
to pick quarrels, I tell thee, I had rather thou shouldest
rob my chest than imbesell my son.
Thy son, my daughter is seduced, for I hear
say she is married, and our boys can tell. How say
thou, tell the truth or Isle grind thee to powder in my
mill, Be they married?
True it is they were both in a church.
That no fault, the place is holy.
And there was with them a priest.
Why what place fitter for a priest than a church?
And they took one another by the hand.
Trush, thats but common courtesy.
And the priest spake many kind words.
That showed hee was no dumb minister. But
what said they, did thou hear any words be∣tweene
them?
Faith there was a bargain during life, and the
clock cried, God give them joy.
Villain they be married.
Nay I think not so.
Yes, yes, God give you joy is a binder, Isle queen••lie
be resolved, Candius come forth.
And Isle be put out of doubt. Levy come forth.
The micher hangs down his head.
The baggage begins to blush.
Now begins the game.
I believe it will be no game for vs.
Are you married young master?
I cannot deny it, it was done so lately.
But thou shalt repent, it was done so soon.
Then tic bootless to ask you Levy.
I, and needless to be angry.
It shall pass anger, thou shalt find it rage.
You gave your consent.
Impudent giglot, was it not enough to abuse me
but also to belie me?
You sir agreed to this match.
Thou brazen face boy, think thou by learning
to persuade me to that which thou speak. Where did
I consent, when, what witness?
In this place yesterday before Dromio &amp; Risio.
I remember we heard a contract between Mem∣phios
son and Stellios daughter, and that our good wills
being asked which needed not, wee gave them, which
booted not.
It was but the apparel of Accius and Silena, we
were the persons.
O villainy not to be borne, Wast thou privy to
this practise?
In a manner.
Isle pay thee after a manner.
And you oatemeale groat, you were acquain∣ted
with this plot.
Accessory as it were.
Thou shalt be punished as principal: here comes
Memphio and Stellio, they belike were privy, and all
their heads were laid together to grieve our hearts.
Come Stellio, the assurance may be made to
morrow, and our children assured to day.
Let the conveyance run as we agreed.
You convey cleanly in deed, if coosnage bee
clean dealing, for in the apparel of your children you
have conveyed a match between ours, which grieves
vs not a little.
Nay in the apparel of your children you have
discovered the folly of ours, which shames vs overmuch
But tic no matter, though they bee fools they
are no beggars.
And though ours be disobedient, they be no fools.
So now they tune their pipes.
You shall hear sweet music between a hoarse
raven and a schritch owl.
Neighbours, let vs not vary, our boys have
played their cheating parts, I suspected no less at the
Tavern, where four four knaves met together.
If it were knavery for four to meet in a Tavern,
your worcester. wot well there were other four.
This villain calls vs knaves by craft.
Nay truly I dare swear hee used no craft, but
means plainly.
This is worse, come Half. tel truth &amp; scope the rod.
As good honfesse here being trust, as at home
with my hose about my heals.
Nay Isle tell thee, for twill never become the
to utter it.
Well out with it.
Memphio had a fool to his son which Stel∣leo
knew not, Stellio a fool to his daughter unknow∣en
to Memphio; to cousin each other they dealt
with their boys for a match; we met with Lincio and
Halfepenie, who told the love between their masters
children, the youth deeply In love, the fathers vnwit∣ting
to consent.
Isle take the tale by the end; then wee four met,
which argued we were no mountains, and in a tavern
we met, which argued we were mortal, and every one
in his wine told his days work, which was a sign we
forgot not our business, and seeing all our masters trow∣bled
with devises, we determined a little to trouble the
water before they drunk, so that in the attire of your
children our masters wise children betrayed their
good natures, and in the garments of our masters i will∣drone
yours made a marriage; this all stood upon vs
poor children and your young children, to show that
old folks may be overtaken by children.
Here is a children in deed, Isle never forget it.
I will, Accius come forth.
I forgive all, Silena come forth.
Neighbor, these things cannot be resold, there∣fore
as good consent, seeing in all our purposes also we
mist the mark, for they two will match their children.
Well of that more anon, not so suddenly least
our ungracious youths think we dare do no other, but
in truth their loves stirs up nature in me.
Come Accius thou must be married to Sile∣nena.
How art thou minded?
What for ever &amp; Mem. • Accius, what else?
I shall never be able to abide it, it will be so te∣dious.
Silena thou must be betrothed to Accius, &amp; love
him for thy husband.
I had as lief have one of clouts.
Why Silena?
Why look how he looks.
If you will not another will.
I thank you for mine old cap.
And if you be so lusty lend me two shillings.
We are happy, we mist the foolish match.
Come you shall presently be contracted.
Contract their wits no more, they bee shronke
close already.
Well father hears my hand, strike the bar∣gain.
Must he lie with me?
No Silena, lie by thee.
I shall give her the humble bees kiss.
I forbid the banes.
What doest thou think them rats, and fairest
they shall be poisoned?
You Vicinia, wherefore?
Hearken, about eighteen years ago I must
thee a son Memphio, and thee a daughter Stellio.
True.
True.
I had at that time two children of mine own,
and being poor, thought it better to change them than
kill them, I imagined if by device I could thrust my
children into your houses, they should be well brought
up in their youth, and wisely provided for in their age,
nature wrought with me, and when they were weaned
I sent home mine in sted of yours, which hitherto you
have kept tenderly as yours: growing in years I found
the children I kept at home to love dearly, at first like
brother and sister, which I rejoiced at, but at length too
forward in affection, which although inwardly I could
not mislike, yet openly I seemed to disallow: they in∣creased
in their loving humours, I ceased not to cha∣stise
them for their loose demeanours, at last it came to
my ears, that my son that was out with Memphio
was a fool, that my daughter with Stellio was also un∣wise,
and yet being brother and sister, there was a
match in hammering betwixt them.
What monstrous tale is this?
And I am sure incredible.
Let her end her discourse.
Isle never believe it.
Hold thy peace.
My very bowels earned within me, that I should
be author of such wild incest, an hinderance to lawful
love, I went to the good old woman Mother Bombie to
know the event of this practise, who told me this
day I might prevent the danger, and upon submission
escape the punishment, hither I am come to claim my
children, though both sooles, and to deliver you• both
loving.
Is this possible, how shall we believe it?
I cannot sink into my head.
This trial cannot fail, your son Memphio
had a moil under his care, I framed one under my
childes care by art, you shall see it taken away with the
juice of mandrage, behold now for your sons, no
herb can undo that nature hath done. Your daughter
Stellio hath on her wrist a moil, which I counterfeited
on my daughters arm, &amp; that shall you see taken away
as the other. Thus you see I doe not dissemble, hoping
you will pardon me, as I have pitied them.
This is my son, O fortunate Memphio!
This is my daughter, more than thrice happy
Stellio?
How happy is Maestius thou blessed Serena,
that being neither children to poor parents, nor bro∣there
and sister by nature, may enjoy their love by con∣sent
of parents and nature.
Solt, Isle not swap my father for all this.
What do you think Isle be cosned of my father,
me thinks I should not, Mother Bombie told me my
father knew me not, my mother bore me not, falsely
bred, truly begot, a bots on Mother Bomby.
Mother Bombie told vs we should be found
coosners, and in the end be cosned by cosners, welfare
Mother Bomby.
I heard Mother Bomby say that thou shalt die a
beggar, beware of Mother Bomby.
Why have you all been with Mother Bomby?
All, and as far as I can see foretold all.
In deed she is cunning and wise, never doing
harm, but still practising good, seeing these things fall
out thus, are you content Stellio the match go for∣ward.
I, with double joy, having found for a fool a
wise maid, and finding between them both excee∣ding
love.
Then to end alliars, our childrens matches shall
stand with our good liking, Levy enjoy Candius.
Candius enjoy Levy.
How shall we recompense fortune, that to our
loves hath added our parents good wills?
How shall wee requite fortune, that to our
loves hath added lawfulness, and to our poor estate
competent living?
Vicinia thy fact is pardoned, though the law
would see it punished, wee be content to keep Silena in
the house with the new married couple.
And I doo maintain Accius in our house.
Come my children, though fortune hath not
provided you lands, yet you see you are not destitute
of friends, I shall be eased of a charge both in purse and
conscience, in conscience, have revealed my lewd prac∣tise,
in purse, having you kept of alms.
Come if you bee my sister its the better for
you.
Come brother, me thinks its better than it was,
I should have been but a bald bride, Isle eat as much
pie as if I had been married.
Lets also forgive the knavery of our boys
since all turns to our good haps.
Agreed, all are pleased now the boys are un∣punished▪
Nay soft, take vs with you, and seek redress
for our wrongs, or weal complain to the Mayor.
Whats the matter?
I arrested Memphios boy for an horse after
much mocking, at the request of his fellow wags, I
was content to take a bond jointly of them all, they
had me into a tavern, there they made me, the Scriue∣ner,
and the Sergeant drunk, paunde his maze for the
wine, and sealed me an obligation nothing to the pur∣pose,
I pray you read it.
What wags be these? Why by this bond you
can demand nothing, and things done in drink, may
be repented in soberness, but not remedied.
Sir, I have his acquittance, let him sue his
bond.
Isle cry quittance with thee.
And I, or it shall cost me the laying on freely of
my maze.
And Isle give thee such a dash with a pen as shall
cost thee many a pound, wi•h such a Nouerimt as cheap
side can show none such.
Doe your worst, our knaveries will renenge it
upon your childrens children.
Thou boy, we will pay the hire of the horse,
be not angry, the boys have been in a merry cosning
vain, for they have served their masters of the same
sort, but all must be forgotten, now all are content but
the poor fiddlers, they shall be sent for to the marriage &amp;
have double fees.
You need no more send for a fiddler to a feast,
than a beggar to a fair.
This day we will feast at my house.
To morrow at mine.
The next day at mine.
Then at mine the last day, &amp; even so spend this
week in good cheer.
Then we were best be going whilst every one
is pleased, and yet these couples are not fully pleased, till
the priest have done his worst.
Come Sergeant weal toss it this week, and
make thy maze arest a boiled capon.
No more words at the wedding, if the mayor should
know it, I were in danger of mine office.
Then take heed how on such as we are, you show
a cast of your office.
If you mace vs, weal pepper you.
Come sister, the best is, we shall have good che••
these four days.
And be fools for ever.
Thats none of our vpseckings.

SEE lovely Lords, and you my Lord behold
How Time hath turned his restless wheel about
And made the silver moon: &amp; heavens bright eye
Gallop the Zodiac and end the year
Whose revolution now begets a new
The days that have created and confirmed
A worthy Governor for Londons good,
To vnderbeare under his Sovereigns sway
Unpartial Justice beam, and weaved a Web
For your content, and her command in all,
You Citizens of this Metapolis
Whose honour and whose oath to gratulate
Lordings behold what Emblem I present.
Astray daughter of the immortal Jove,
Great Jove defender of this ancient town,
Descended of the Trojan Brutus line:
Offspring of that courageous conquering king.
Whose pure renown, hath pierced the worlds large ears,
In golden scrolls, rolling about the heavens
Celestial sacred Nymph, that tends her flock
With watchful eyes, and keep this fount in peace:
Guarded with Graces, and with gracious trains,
Virtues divine, and gifts incomparable.
Nor lets blind superstitious ignorance,
Corrupt so pure a spring: O happy times
That do beget such calm and quiet days,
Where sheep &amp; shepherd breath in such content.
Honour attends his throne, in his bright eyes
Sits Majesty: Virtue, and Steadfastness
Possess his hart, sweet mercy sways his sword.
Her champion armed with resolution,
Sits at her feet to chastise Malcontents,
That threat his honours wrack. And Time &amp; Kind
Produce his years to make them numberless
While Fortune for his service and his sake,
With golden hands doth strengthen and enrich
The Web that they for fair Astray weave.
Long may she live, long may she govern vs
In peace triumphant, fortunate in wars
Our fair Astray, our Pandora fair,
Our fair Eliza, or Zabeta fair.
Sweet Cynthias darling, beauteous Cyprias peer
As dear to England and true English hearts,
As Pompey to the Citizens of Rome:
As merciful as Caesar in his might.
As mighty as the Macedonian king,
Or Trojan Hector, terror to the Gre•es.
Goddess live long, whose honours we advance,
Srengthen thy neighbours, propagate thine own:
Guide well thy helm, lay thine anointed hand
To build the temple of triumphant Truth,
That while thy subjects draw their peace frō thee,
Thy friends with aid of arms may succor'd be.
Feed on my flock among the gladsome greene
Where heavenly Nectar flows aboue the banks.
Such pastures are not common to be seen,
Pay to immortal Jove immortal thanks:
For what is good fro heavens hie throne doth fall.
And heavens great Architect be praised for all.
Stir Priest, and with thy beads poison this spring,
I tell thee all is baneful that I bring.
It is in vain his eye keeps me in awe,
Whose heart is purely fixed on the law:
The holy law, and bootless we contend,
While this chaste nymph, this fountain doth defend,
Meanwhile when Saturnes golden reign did cease,
and iron age had kindled cruel wars:
Envy in wrath, perturbing common peace,
engendering cankered hate and bloody jars:
Lo then Olympus king, the thundering Jove,
roughed hence this gracious nymph Astray fair,
Now once again he sends his from aboue,
descended through the sweet transparent air:
And here she sits in beauty fresh and sheen,
Shadowing the person of a peerless Queen.
A peerless Queen, a Royal princely dame,
Enroled in register of eternal fame.
The Graces through their balm about his sacred head,
Whose government his realms true happiness hath bred.
That happiness continue in her land,
Great Israels God, spiing of all heavenly peace:
And let thine angels in her reskew stand,
With his lives wane done Englands joys decrease
O let his princely days never have fine,
Whose virtues are immortal and divine.
Such virtues as her throne do beautify,
And make his honours mount and scale the sky.
Where hope of his eternal bliss doth rest,
Conceived in his sweet &amp; sacred breast.
With radiant beams, reflecting on the earth,
Even from the snowy brows of Albion,
Beyond the utmost verge of Christendom,
As bright as is the burning lamp of heaven,
Shines my mistress honour, in whose fame
The heathen carols sing and all admire,
From Icy Tanais to the seuenfold Nyle,
Her glory that commands this Western Isle.
In whose defence my colours I advance,
And girt me with my sword, and shake my lance:
These British Lions rampant in this field,
That never learned in battles rage to yield:
Breath terror to the proud aspiring foe,
Ranging the world commanding where they go.
Therefore in vain this misproud Malecontent,
Threatens his state whose harms the heauēs preuēt
Sit safe sweet Nymph among thy harmless sheep,
Thy sacred person angels have in keep.
What means this, I strive and cannot strike,
She is preserved by miracle belike:
If so then, wherefore threaten we in vain,
That Queen, whose cause the gracious heavens maintain.
No marvel then although we faint and quail,
For mighty is the truth and will prevail.
Thus while my wheel with ever turning gyros,
At heavens hie heast serves earthly men's desires,
I wind the Web that kind so well begins:
While Fortune doth enrich what Nature spinnes.
List gentle Lords, and bubbling stream be still
And whistling winds your angry murmur cease
Let Thetis Nymph unfold the goddess hest:
Behold imbarckt thus bravely as you see,
Laden with treasure and with precious ore
From where in Tellus veins the parching sun,
Doth gold and glittering munerals create,
Are come these strangers lovingly inflamed
To gratulate to you my lovely Lord.
This gladsome day wherein your honours spring.
And by the bar that thwarts this silver stream,
Even to the beauteous verge of Troynouant
That decks this Thamesis on either side,
Thus far these friends have pierced, &amp; all by me;
Salute your honour and your company.
Thrice worthy Praetor of this ancient town.
The mortar of these walls tempered in peace,
Yet holds the building sure, as are the sprigs
Woven from the spreading root in knotty box.
Labour fair Lord as other Majors of yore
To beautify this city with deserts.
So wish these friendly strangers, man by man
Pass with advisement to receive thy oath:
Keep it inviolate for thy sovereigns hope,
Virtues pure mirror, Londons great mistress,
Unsheathe the sword committed to thy sway,
With merciful regard of every cause.
So go in peace happy by sea and land,
Guided by grace, and heavens immortal hand.

MY L. lieutenant of Gloucester, and L. Mortim•…r,
To do you honour in your Sovereigns eyes,
That as we hear is newly come aland,
From Palestine, with all his men of war•…
The poor remainer of the royal Fleet,
Preserved by miracle in Sicill Road.
Go mount your Coursers, meet him on the way,
Pray him to spur his Steed, minutes and hours,
Until his mother see his princely son,
Shining in glory of his safe return.
Illustrious England, ancient feat of kings,
Whose chivalry hath roiallizd thy fame:
That sounding bravely through terrestrial veil,
Proclaiming conquests, spoils, and victories,
Rings glorious Echoes through the farthelt world.
What warlike nation trained in feats of arms,
What barbarous people, stubborn or vntaimd,
What climate under the Meridian signs,
Or frozen Zone under his brumall stage,
Erst have not quaked and trembled at the name
Of Britain, and his mighty Conqueror,?
Her neighbor realms as Scotland, Denmark, France,
Aude with their deeds, and jealous of her arms,
Have begged defensive and offensive leagues.
Thus Europe rich and mighty in her kings,
Hath feared brave England dreadful in her kings:
And now to eternize Albions Champions,
Equivalent with Trotans ancient fame,
Comes lovely Edward from Jerusalem,
Veering before the wind, plowing the sea,
His stretched sails filled with the breath of men,
That through the world admires his manliness.
And Joy at last, arrived in Dover road,
Long shank your king, your glory and our son,
With troops of conquering Lords and warlike knights,
Like bloody crested Mars orelookes his hosle,
Higher then all his army by the head,
Marching along as bright as Phoebus eyes,
And we his mother shall behold our son,
And Englands Peers shall see their Sovereign.
Gloucester, Edward, O my sweet sons.
Help Ladies: O ungrateful destiny,
To welcome Edward with this tragedy.
Patient your highness, tic but mothers love,
Received with sight of her thrice valiant sons:
Madam amaze not, see his Majesty
Returned with glory from the holy land.
Brave sons the worthy Champions of our God,
The honourable soldiers of the highest,
Bear with your mother whose abundant love,
With tears of joys salutes your sweet return,
From famous journeys hard and fortunate.
But lords alas how heavy is our loss,
Since your departure to these Christian wars,
The king your Father, and the prince your son,
And your brave Uncle Almaines Emperor,
Aye me are dead.
Take comfort madam, leave these sad laments,
Dear was my uncle, dearer was my son:
And ten times dearer was my noble father,
Yet were their lives valewd at thousand worlds,
They cannot scope the arrest of dreadful death:
Death that doth seize and summon all alike.
Then leaving them to heavenly blessedness,
To join in thrones of glory with the just,
I doo salute your royal Majesty.
My gracious mother Queen, and you my lords,
Gilbert de Clare, Sussex, and Mortimer,
And all the princely states of Englands peers,
With health and honour to your harts content,
And welcome wished England on whose ground,
These feet so often have desired to tread,
Welcome sweet Queen my fellow Traveller,
Welcome sweet Nil my fellow mate in arms,
Whose eyes have seen the slaughtered Saracens,
Piled in the ditches of Jerusalem,
And lastly welcome manly followers,
That bears the scars of honour and of arms,
And on your war drums carry crowns as kings,
Crown Mural, Nauall, and triumphant all,
At view of whom the Turks have trembling fled,
And Saracens like sheep before the walls,
Have made their cottages in walled towns,
But Bulwarks had no •…ence to beat you back,
Lords, these and they will enter brazen gates,
And tear down lime and Mortar with their nails.
I•…brace them Barons these have got the name,
Of English Gentlemen and knights at arms:
Not one of these but in the Champain sealed,
Hath won his crown, his collar and his spurs,
Not Caesar •…adding through the streets of Rome,
The cap•… kings of conque•…ed nations,
Was in his princely triumphs •…onoured more,
Then English Edward in this martial •…ight.
〈◊〉 your li•…s are •…oct in service of the Lord,
Which is your glory and your Countries fame,
For li•…s, you 〈◊〉 have •…ing, lordships, l•…ds,
And be m•… counsel•…rs in wars affairs:
Soldiers sit down, Nil sit thee by my side,
These be pr•…ce Edwards pompious treasury.
O glorious Capitol, beauteous Senate house,
Triumphant Edward, how like sturdy Oaks,
Do these thy Soldiers circle thee about,
To shield and shelter thee from winters storms?
Display thy cross, old Aims of the Vies,
Dub on your Drums tand with Indies sun,
My lusty •…esterne lads, Matreueirs thou,
Sound proudly here a perfect point of war,
In honour of thy Sovereigns safe return.
Thus Long shanks bids his Soldiers Bien vene•….
O God my God, the brightness of my day,
How oft hast thou preserved thy servant safe,
By sea and land, yea in the gates of death,
O God to thee how highly am I bound,
For setting me with these on English ground:
One of my mansion houses will I give,
To be a college for my maimed men,
Where every one shall have an hundred marks
Of yearly pension to his maintenance,
A Soldier that for Christ and country sights,
Shall want no living whilst king Edward lives,
Lords you that love me now be liberal,
And give your larges to these maimed men.
Towards this erection doth thy mother give,
Out of her dowry, five thousand pounds of gold,
To find them Surgeons to recur their wounds,
And whilst this ancient Standard bearer lives,
He shall have forty pound of yearly fee,
And be my Beadsman father if you please.
Madam I tell you England never bred,
A better soldier then your Beadsman is,
And that the Sultan and his Army felt.
Out of the duchy of rich Lancaster,
To find soft bedding for their bruised bones,
Duke Edmund gives three thousand pounds.
Gramercies brother Edmund,
H•…ppie is England under Edwards reign,
When men are had so highly in regard,
That Nobles strive who shall remunerate,
The soldiers resolution with regard.
My Lord of Gloucester what is your benevolence?
A thousand marks and please your Majesty.
And yours my lord of Sussex?
Five hundred pound, and please your majesty.
What say you sir Dauid of Brecknock.
To a soldier sir Dauid cannot be too liberal,
Yet that I may give no more then a poor knight is able
And not presume as a mighty Earl,
I give my Lord four hundred, four score,
And nineteen pounds:
And so my lord of Sussex I am behind you an ace.
And yet sir Dauid ye amble after apace.
Well said Da. thou could not be a Camber Britain
If thou did not love a soldier with thy hart,
Let me see how is my Arithmetic wilserue,
To total the par•…ars.
Why my lord I hope you mean,
I shall be a benefactor to my fellow soldiers.
And well said Nil.
What wilt thou I set down for thee?
Nay, my lord I am of age to set it down for my self.
You will allow what I do, will you not?
That I will Madam,
Were it to the value of my kingdom.
What is the sum my lord?
10000 pounds my Nil.
Then Elinor bethink thee of a gift worthy the king of Englandes wife, and the king of Spaines daughter, and give such a largis, that the Chronicles of this land may croak with record of thy liberality.
There my lord, neither one, two, nor three,
But a poor Cipher in Agrum, to enrich good fellows,
And compound their figure in their kind.
Madam I commend your composition,
An argument of your honourable disposition:
Sweet Nil thou should not be thy self,
Did not with thy mounting mind,
Thy gift surmount the rest.
Cal you this Ridiculus mus? mary sir this mouse
Would make a foul hole in a fair Cheese,
Tic but a Cipher in Agrum,
And it hath made of 10000 pounds, 100000 pounds:
A princely gift and worthy memory.
My gracious Lord, as erst I was assigned,
Lieutenant to his Majesty,
Hererender I up the crown left in charge with me,
By your princely father king Menrie,
Who on his death bed still did call for you,
And dying, wild to you the Diadem.
Thanks worthy Lords,
And seeing by doom of heavens it is decreed,
And lawful line of our succession,
Unworthy Edward is become your king,
We take it as a blessing from on hie,
And will our Coronation be solemnised,
Upon the 14. of December next.
Upon the 14. of December next?
Alas my Lord, the time is all too short
And sudden, for so great solemnity:
A year were scarce enough to set a work,
Tailers Imb•…oderes, and men of rare device,
For preparation of so great estate.
Trust me sweet Ned, hardly shall I bethink me,
In twenty weeks what fashion robes to wear,
I pray thee then defer it till the spring,
That we may have our garments point device.
I mean to send for Tailers into Spain,
That shall confer of some fantastickt suits,
With those that be our conningst Englishmen,
What? let me brave it now or never Ned.
Madam content ye, would that were greatest car•…
You shall have garments to your harts desire,
I never red but Englishmen exceld,
For change of rare devises every way.
Yet pray thee Ned, my love, my lord, and king,
My fellow soldier, and compeere in arms,
Do so much honour to thy Elinor,
To wear a suit that thee shall give thy grace,
Of he on•… cost and workmanship perhaps.
Twi•… come by leasurs daughter then I fear,
You are too fine •…guard to be quick at work.
Twixt v•…a greater matter breaks no square,
So it be such my Nil as may be 〈◊〉,
The ma•…sty and greatness of a king.
A•…d now my Lords and loving friends,
Follow your General to the court,
After his travels to repose him then,
There to recount with pleasure what is past,
Of wars alarms, showers and sharpest storms.
Now Elinor, now Englands lovely Queen,
Bethink thee of the greatness of thy state:
And how to bear thy self with to•…ltie,
Aboue the other Q•…eons of Christendom,
That Spain reaping renown by Elinor,
And Elinor adding renown to Spain,
Britain may her magnificence admire,
Ttell thee Ione, what time our •…ighnes sits,
Under our royal Canopy of state,
Glistening with pendants of the purest gold,
Like as our seat were spangled all with stars
The world shall wonder at our majesty,
As if the daughter of eternal Ops,
Turned to the likeness of Vermilion fumes,
Where from her cloudy womb the Centaurs lap•….
Were in her royal seat inthronized.
Madam, if Ione thy daughter may advise,
Let not your honour make your manners change•…
The people of this land are men of war,
The women courteous, mild, and debonair,
Laying the•… 〈◊〉 at princes feet,
That governs w•…h familiar majesty,
But if their sovereigns •…ce gin swell with pride,
Disdaning commons love which is the strength,
And sureness of the richest common wealth:
That Prince were better live a private life,
Then rule with tyranny and discontent.
Indeed we count them headstrong Englishmen
But we shall hold them in a Spanish yoke:
And make them know their Lord and sovereign.
Come daughter let vs home for to provide:
For all the cunning work-men of this Isle,
In our great chamber shall bee set a work,
And in my hall shall bountifully feed.
My King like Phoebus bridegroom like shall marche
With lovely Xheeis to her g•…assie bed,
And all the lookers on shall stand amazed,
To see King Edward and his lovely Queen,
Sit lovely in Englands stately throne.
Come Rice and rouse thee for thy countries good,
Follow the man that means to make you great:
Follow Lluellen rightful prince of VVales.
Sprung from the •…oines of great Cadwallader,
Descend from the •…oines of Trojan Brute,
And though the tari•…os Saxons, Normans, Danes,
Have sp•…t the true Romans of glorious Troy,
Within the western mountains of this Isle,
Yet have we hope to clime these stony pales,
When Londoners as Romains earstamazde,
Shall tree•…bling 〈◊〉 Lluellens at the gate.
T'accomplish this, thus have I brought you forth,
Disguised to Milford haven, here attend,
The landing of the lady Aeliner.
Her stay doth make me muse, the wind stands fair•…
And ten days hence we did expect them here,
Neptune be favourable to my love,
And steer his keel with thy three forked mace,
That from this shore I may behold her sails,
And in mine arms embrace my dearest dear.
Brave prince of Wales, this honourable match,
Cannot but turn to Cambrias common good.
Simon de Momfort, her thrice valiant son,
That in the Barons wars was General,
Was loved and honoured of the Englishmen.
When they shall hear, shees your espoused wife.
Assure your grace we shall have great supply,
To make our roads in England mightily.
What we resolved, must strongly be performed,
Before the king return from Palestine,
Whilst he wins glory at Jerusalem,
Let vs win ground upon the Englishmen.
Owen ap Rice, tic that Lluellen fears,
I fear me Edward will be come a shore,
Ere we can make provision for the war.
But be it as it will, within his court
My brother Dauid is, that bears a face,
As if he were my greatest enemy,
He by this craft shall creep into her heart,
And give intelligence from time to time,
Of her intentions, drifts and stratagems.
Here let vs rest upon the salt sea shore,
And while our eyes long for our hearts desires,
Let vs like friends pastime vs on the sands,
Our frolic minds are ominous for good.
Guenthian as I am true man,
So will I doo the best I can:
Guenthian as I am true Priest,
So will I bee at thy behest:
Guenthian as I am true Friar,
So will I be at thy desire.
My moister stands too near the fire,
Trust him not wench, he will prove a liar.
True man, true Friar, true priest, &amp; true knave,
These four in one this trull shall have,
Here swear I by my shaven crown,
Wench if I give thee a gay greene gown,
Isle take thee up as I laid thee down,
And never bruise nor batter thee.
O swear not moister, flesh is frail,
Wench when the sign is in the tail,
Mighty is love and will prevail,
This Churchman doth but flatter thee.
A pretty worm, and a lusty friar,
Made for the field, not for the quire.
Mas Friar as I am true maid,
So do I hold me well a paid:
Tic Churchmans lay and verity,
To live in love and charity,
And therefore wean I as my creed,
Your words shall company my deed,
Day my dear, I yield in all,
Thine own to go and come at call.
And so far forth begins our brawl.
Then my Guenthian to begin,
Sith idleness in love is sin,
Boy to the town I will thee hie,
And so return even by and by,
When thou with cakes and muskadine,
And other •…unkets good and fine,
Hast filled thy bottle and thy bag.
Now moister as I am true wag,
I will be neither late nor lag,
But go and come with gossips cheer,
Ere Gibe our Cat can lick her care.
For long ago I learned in school,
That lovers desire, and pleasures cool:
Sanct Ceres sweets and Bacchus vine,
Now moister for the Cakes and Wine.
Wench to pass away the time in glee,
Guenthian set thee down by me,
And let our lips and voices meet,
In a merry country songe.
Friar, I am at beek and bay,
And a•… thy commandment to sing and say,
And other sports among.
I marry my lord, this is somewhat like a mans'mony,
Hears a wholesome Welsh wench,
Lapped in her Flannel as warm as wool,
And as fit as a pudding for a Friars mouth.
Pox vobis, pox vobis, good fellows fair fall ye.
E•… cum spiritu tuo.
Friends have you any thing else to say to the Friar?
Much good doo you, much good you,
My masters heart elie.
And you sir when ye eat:
Ha•…y •…ny thing else to say to the Friar?
Nothing, but I wo•…d gladly know,
If 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 be your first dish, what shall be your last service.
〈◊〉 •…y bee s•… I count it physic,
To feed but on one dish at a sitting:
Sir would you any thing else with the Friar?
O nothing sir, but if you had any manners,
You might bid vs fall too.
Nay and that be the matter good enough,
Is this all ye have to say to the Friar?
All we have to say to you sir, it may be sir,
We would walk aside with your wench a little.
My masters and friends, I am a poor Friar, a man of Gods making, and a good fellow as you are, legs, feet, face and hands, &amp; hart from top to toe, of my word, •…light shape and Christendom: and I love a wench as a wench should be loved, and if you love your self walk good friends I pray you, &amp; let the Friar alone with his flesh.
O Friar, your holy mother the church teaches you to abstain from these morsels, therefore my masters tic a deed of charity to remove this stumbling block, a fair wench, a shrewd temptation to a Friars conscience.
Friend if you knew the Friar half so well as the bailey of Brecknock, you would think you might as so one move mun•…k Day into the sea, as Guenth. from his side.
Mas by your leave, weal prove.
At your peril if you move his patience.
Brother, brother, and my good Countrymen.
Countrymen? nay I cannot think that an English friar, will come so far into Wales barefooted.
Thats more then you know, and yet my lord he might ride, having a filly so n•…re. (warnings:
Hands off good countryman, at few words &amp; fair
Countrymen, not so sir, wee renounce thee Friar, and refuse your country.
Then brother and my good friends,
Hands off and if you love your ease.
Ease me no easings, weal ease you of this carriage.
Fellow be gone quickly, or my pike staff and I will set thee away with a vengeance.
I am sorry trust me to see the church so vnpatient.
Ye Dogs ones, do me a shroud turn and mock me too, flesh and blood will not bear this: then rise up Rob•… and say to Richard, Red rationem villicationistuae. sir Countryman, kinsman, Englishman, Welshman, you with the Wench, return your Habeas corpus, here is a Circiorari for your Procedendo.
Hold friar we are thy countrymen.
Rice. Paid, paid, Digone, we are thy countrimē, Mundue.
My Countrymen? nay marry sir shall you not be my countrymen, you sir, you, specially you sir that refuse the Friar, and renounce his country.
Friar, hold thy hands, I swear as I am a Gen∣tleman, I am a Welshman, and so are the rest of honesty.
Of honesty says thou?
They are neither Gentlemen nor Welshman,
That will deny their country: Come hither wench,
Isle have about with them once more,
For denying of their Country.
Friar thou wottest not what thou say est,
This is the prince, and we are all his train:
Disposed to be pleasant with thee a little,
But I perceive Friar, thy nose will bide no •…est.
As much as you will with me sir,
But not at any hand with my wench,
I and Richard my man here.
For here, Country omnes gents.
But is this Lluellen the great Camber Britain?
It is he Friar, give me thy hand,
And gramercies twenty times,
I promise thee thou hast cudgeld
Two as good lessons into my jacket,
As ever Churchman did at so short warning.
The one is, not to be too busy with another mans cattle,
The other, not in hast to deny my country.
Tic pity my Lord,
But you should have more of this learning
You profit so well by it.
Tic pity Friar but thou should be Lluellens Chaplain, thou edifiest so well, and so shalt thou be, of mine honour, here I entertain thee, thy boy, and thy trull, to follow my fortune, in Secula seculorum.
And Richard my man sir and you love me,
He that stands by me, and shrunk not at all weathers,
And then you have me in my colours.
Friars agreed: Rice welcome the Ruffians.
Go too, go too, you Britains all,
And play the men both great and small,
A wondrous matter hath be fall,
That makes the Prophets cry and call,
Tum da et di te de te dum,
That you must marche both all and some,
Against your foes with trump and Drum:
I speak to you from God that you shall overcome.
What now, who have we here?
Tum date dite dote dum.
What have we a fellow dropped out of the element,
Whats hee for a man?
Know thou this Goscup?
What? not Morgain Pigot, our good welsh prophet,
O tic a holy Harper.
A Prophet with a moraine,
Good my Lord, lets hear a few of his lines I pray you.
My lords, tic an od fellow I can tell you,
As any is in all Wales:
He can sing rime with reason, and rime without reason,
And without reason or rime.
The devil hee can,
Rime with reason, and rime without reason,
And reason without rime:
Then good Morgan Pigot, pluck out thy spigot,
And draw vs a fresh pot,
From the kinder kind of thy knowledge.
Knowledge my son, knowledge I warranty,
How say thou Morgaine, art thou not a very prophet?
Friar, friar, a Prophet verily,
For great Lluellens love,
Sent from aboue, to bring him victory.
Come then gentle prophet, lets see how thou can salute thy prince, say, shall we have good success in our enterprise or no?
When the weathercock of Carmarthen steeple
Shall engender young ones in the belferie,
And a heard of Goats leave their pasture,
To be clothed in silver:
Then shall Brute be borne a new,
And VVa•…es record their ancient hew,
Ask Friar Dauid if this be not true.
This my Lord a means by you,
O he is a prophet, a prophet.
Soft you now good Morgan Pigot,
And take vs with ye a little I pray,
What means your wisdom by all this.
The VVeathercock (my lord) was your fa∣there, who by foul weather of weir, was driven to take Sanctuary in Saint Maries at Carnaruon, where he begat young ones on your mother in t•…e belfry, viz. your worcester∣ship, and your brother Dauid
But what did thou mean by the Goats?
The Goats that leave the pasture to be cloa∣thed in silver, are the silver Goats your men wore on their sleeves.
O how I love thee Morgain Pigot our sweet prophet.
Hence rogue with your prophesies, out of my sight.
Nay good my lord, lets have a few more of these meeters, he hath great •…lore in his head.
Yea, and of the best in the market,
And your Lordship would vouchsafe to hear them.
Villain away, isle here no more of your prophesies.
When legs shall lose their length,
Returning weary home. from out the holy land:
A Well•…man shall be king,
And govern merry England.
Did I not tell your Lordship hee would hit it home anon?
My Lord he comes to your time thats flat.
I moister and you mark him, he hit the mark pat.
As how Jack?
Why thus: when legs shall lose their length,
And thanks yield up their strength:
Returning weary home from out the holy land,
A Well•…man shall bee king,
And govern merr•…e England.
Why my Lord. in this prophecy, is your advancement as plainly seen, as a three halfepence through a dish of butter in a sunny date.
I think so lack for hee that sees three halfepence, must tarry till the butter be melted in the suune, and so forth apply boy
Nonego moister, do you and you dare.
And •…o boy thou meanest, hee that tarries this prophecy, may see Long shanks shorter by the head, and Lluellan wear the crown in the field.
By lady my Lord you go near the matter,
But what saith Morgaine Pigote more?
In the year of our lord God 1272, shall spring from the loins of Brute. o•…e whose wives name being the perfect end of his ground, •…al cōsummate the peace betwixt England and VVales, and bee advanced to ride through Cheapside with a crown on his head, and thats meant by your lordship, for your wives name being Ellen, and your own Lluellan, bears the perfect end of your own name: so must it needs bee, that for a time Ellen flee from Lluellen, ye being betrothed in heart each to others, must needs bee advanced to bee highest of your kin.
Jack, I make him thy prisoner,
Look what way my fortune inclines,
That way goes hee,
Sir, see you run swiftest.
Farewell, be far from the Spigot,
Now sir, if our country Ale, were as good as your Metheglen, I would teach you to play the knave. or you should teach me to play the Harper.
Ambo, boy, you are too light wetted,
As I am light minded.
It seemed to me thou art fittest, and passing well.
What tidings brings Guenther with his haste?
Say man, what bodes thy message good or bad.
Bad my lord, and all in vain I wot,
Thou dare thine eyes upon the wallowing maine,
As erst did Aegean to behold his son,
To welcome and receive thy welcome love,
And sable sails he saw, and so moist thou,
For whose mishap the Brackish seas lament,
Edward, ô Edward.
And what of him?
Landed he is at Dover with his men,
From Palestine safe by his English Lords,
Received in triumphs like an earthly God,
He lives to wear his fathers Diadem,
And sway the sword of british Albion.
But Elinor, thy Elinor.
And what of her?
Hath amorous Neptune gazed upon my love,
And stopped her passage with his forked mace:
Or that I rather fear, O deadly fear,
Enamoured Nereus doth he withhold my Elinor?
Nor Neptune, Nereus nor other God,
Withholds from my gracious lord his love,
But cruel Edward that injurious king,
Withholds thy liefest lovely Elmor,
Taking in a Pinnasse on the narrow seas,
By four tall ships of Bristowe, and with her,
Lord Emerick her unhappy noble brother,
As from Mont argis hetherward they sailed:
This say in brief these letters tell at large.
Is Longshankes then, so lusty now become,
Is my fair love my beautions Elinor tan?
Villain damned villains not to guard her safe,
Or fence her sacred person from her foes,
Sun could thou shine and see my love beset,
And did not clothe thy clouds in fiery coats,
Ore all the heavens with winged sulphur flames,
As when the beams like mounted combatants,
Battaild with Pyetion in the fallowed lays,
But if kind Cambria deign me good aspect,
To make me chiefest brute of western Wales,
Isle short that gainlegd Longshanke by the top,
And make his flesh my murdering fawchions food:
To arms true Britains sprung of Troians seed.
And with your swords write in the book of Time,
Your British names in Characters of blood.
Owen ap Rice, while we stay for further force,
Prepare away in post, and take with thee,
A hundred chosen of thy countrymen,
And scour the marches with your Welshmens hooks,
That Englishmen may think the devils come.
Rice shall remain with me, make thou thy boade,
In resolution to revenge these wrongs,
With blood of thousands guiltless of this rage,
Fly thou on them amain: Edward, my love
Be thy lives bane. Follow me countrymen,
Words make no way, my Elinor is surprised,
Robbed am I of the comfort of my life,
And know I this and am not veng'd on him?
Come boy we must buckle I see,
The prince is of my profession right:
Rather than he will lose his wench,
He will fight Ab ouo vsque ad mala.
O moister doubt you not but your Novice will prove a what shot, with a bottle of Methegl•….
Nobles of Scotland, we thank you all,
For this days gentle princely service done,
To Edward Englands king and Scotlands lord:
Our Coronations due sollen night,
Is ended with applause of all estates.
Now then let vs oppose and rest vs here,
But specially we thank you gentle lords,
That you so well have governed your g•…eefes,
As being grown unto a ag•… all •…are,
You choose king Edward by your Messengers,
To calm, to qualify, and to compound:
Thank Britains strife of Scotlands climbing peers.
I have no doubt fair lords but you well wot,
How factions waste the ritchest Commonwealth,
And discord spoils the seats of mighty kings.
The Barons wars, a tragic wicked war,
Nobles how hath i•… shaken Englands strength?
Industriously it seems to me you have,
Loiallie ventured to prevent this shock,
For which sith you have chosen me your judge,
My lord, will you stand to what I shall awe•…rd?
Victorious Edward, to whom the Scottish kings
Owe ho •…age as their lord and sovereign,
Amongst vs nine, is but one lawful king:
But might we all be judges in the case,
Then should in Scotland be nine kings at once,
And this contention never set or limited,
To stay these jars we jointly make appeal,
To thy imperial throne, who knows our claims,
We stand not on our titles before your grace,
But do submit our selves to your award,
And whom your Majesty shall name to be our king,
To him weal yield obedience as a king,
Thus willingly, and of their own accord,
Doth Scotland make great Englands king their judge.
Then nobles since you all agree in one,
That for a crown so disagree in all,
Since what I do shall rest inreuocable,
And lovely England to thy lovely Queen,
Lovely Queen Elinor, unto her turn thy eye,
Whose honour cannot but love thee well,
Hold up your hands in sight, with general voice,
That are content to stand to our award.
Deliver me the golden Diadem.
Lo here I hold the goal for which ye strived,
And here behold my worthy men at arms,
For chivalry and worthy wisdoms praise,
Worthy each one to wear a Diadem,
Expect my doom, as erst at I da hills,
The Goddesses divine waited the award,
Of Danes son: Balioll stand farthest forth,
Baliol behold I give thee the Scottish crown,
Wear it with heart and with thankfulness:
Sound Trumpets, and say all after me,
God save king Baliol the Scottish king.
Thus lords though you require no reason why,
According to the consci•…nce in the cause,
I make Iohn Balioll your anointed king:
Honour and love him as behooves him best,
That is in peace of Scotlands crown possessed.
Thanks royal England for thy honour done,
This justice that hath calmed our civil strife:
Shall now be ceased with honourable love,
So moved of remorse and pity,
We will erect a college of my name,
In Oxford will I build for memory,
Of Baliols bounty and his gratitude:
And let me happy days no longer see,
Then here to England loyal I shall bee.
Now brave Iohn Balioll Lord of Gallaway,
And king of Scots shine with thy golden head,
Shake thy spears in honour of his name,
Under whose royalty thou worst the same.
The welkin spangled through with golden spots,
Reflects no finer in a frosty night,
Then lovely Longshankes in his Elinors eye:
So Ned thy Nil in every part of thee,
Thy person's guarded with a troop of Queens,
And every Queen as brave as Elinor,
Give glory to these glorious ch•…stall quarries,
Where every robe an object entertains,
Of rich device and princely majesty.
Thus like Narcissus diving in the deep,
I die in honour and in Englands arms:
And if I drown, it is in my delight.
Whose company is chiefest life in death,
From forth whose currall lips I suck the sweet,
VVherewith are dainty Cupids candles made,
Then live or die brave Ned, or sink or swim,
An earthly bliss it is to look on him,
On thee sweet Ned, it shall become thy Nil,
By unteous to be unto the beauteous,
Ore pry the palms sweet fountains of my bliss;
And I will stand on tiptoe for a kiss.
He had no thought of any gentle heart,
That would not seize desire for such desert,
If any heavenly joy in women be,
Sweet of •…ll sweets, sweet Nil it is in thee.
Now lords along by this the Earl of Marche,
Lord Mortimor ore Cambriaes mountain tops,
Hath ranged his men, and feels Lluellens mind,
To which con•…es that we•… in wasting be,
Our solle•…no service of coronation past,
We 〈◊〉 amain to back our friends at need,
And 〈◊〉 to Wales our men at arms shall march,
And we with them in person foot by foot.
Brother of Scotland, you shall to your home,
And live in honour there fair England friend.
And thou sweet Nil Queen of king Edwards heart.
Shall now come 〈◊〉 at thy dainty love,
And at coron•…tion meet thy loving peers,
When storms are past, and we have cooled the rage
Of these rebellious Welshman that contend,
Against Englands majesty, and Edwards crown.
Sound Trumpets Harolds lead the train along,
This be king Edwards feast and holly day.
Gloucester, who may this be, a bride or what?
I pray ye 〈◊〉 go see,
And know the reason of the harmony.
Good woman let it not ostend you any whit,
For to deliver unto me the cause,
That in this unusual kind of sort,
You pass the streets with 〈◊〉 so.
Mistress or Madam what ere you be,
Wot you I am the Mayor of Londons wife,
Who for I have been delivered of a son,
Having not these dozen years had any before,
Now in my husbands year of Ma•…oltie,
Bringing him a goodly boy,
I pass unto my house a maiden bride,
Which private pleasure touching godliness,
Shall here no way I hope offend the good.
You hope so gentle mistress, do you indeed!
But doe not make it parcel of your creed.
Alas I am undone, it is the Queen,
The proudest Queen that ever England knew.
Come Gloster, lets to the court and revel there.
Soft is it not Merits I behold?
All good, all friends: Merits see the man,
Must make vs great, and raise Lluellens •…ead:
Fight thou Lluellen for thy friend and thee.
Fight maugre fortune strong our battles strong,
And bear thy foes before thy pointed lance
Not too much prowess good my lord at once.
Some talk of policy another w•…isle.
How comes my li•…s hurt at this assault?
Hurt for our good, Merits make account,
Sir Dauids wit is full of good devise,
And kindly will perform what he pretends.
Enough of t•…is my Lord at once,
What will you that I hold the king in hand,
Or what shall I especially advise,
Sitting in counsel with the English lords,
That so my counsel may avail my friends?
Dauid if thou wilt best for me devise,
Advise my love be rendered to my hand:
Tell th•…m the Chains that Mule•…ber erst made,
To tie Prometheus limbs to Caucasus,
Nor furies phanges shall hold me •…ong from her,
But I will have her from the usurpers tent,
My beauteous Elinor: if ought in this,
〈◊〉 in this case thy wit may boot thy friends,
Express it then in this, in nothing else.
I theres a Card that puts vs to our trump,
For might I see the star of Leisters loins,
It were enough to darken and obscure,
This Edwards glory, fortune, and his pride:
First hereof can I put you out of doubt,
Lord Mortimor of the king hath her in charge,
And honourably entreats your Elinor,
Some thinks he prays Lluellen were in heaven,
And thereby hopes to coach his love on earth.
No, where Lluellen mounts, there Ellen flies
Insp•…keable are my thoughts for her,
She is not from me in death to be divorced.
Go to, it shall be so, so shall it be,
Edward is full resolved of thy faith,
So are the English lords and Barons all:
Then what may let thee to intrude on them,
Some new found stratagem to feel their wit,
It is enough: Merits take my weapons,
I am your prisoner, say so at the least,
Go hence, and when you parley on the walls,
Make show of monstrous tyranny you intend,
To execute on me, as on the man,
That shamefully rebels against kin and kind:
And lea•… thou have thy love, and make thy kind:
With such conditions as shall best concern,
Dauid must die say thou a shameful death,
Edward perhaps with ruth and pity moved,
Will in exchange yield Elinor to thee,
And thou by me shalt gain thy hearts desire.
Sweetly advised Dauid, thou blessest me,
My brother Dauid lengthener of my life,
Friends gratulate to me my joyful hopes.
Why Barons, suffer ye our foes to breathe?
Assault, assault, and charge them all amain,
They fear, they fly, they faint, they fight in vain,
But where is gentle Dauid in his De•…?
Loath were lo•…light but good should him betide.
Where is the proud disturber of our state?
Traitor to Wails, and to his Sovereign.
Usurper here I am, what dost thou cra•…e.
Welshman alleagance which thou owe thy king.
Traitor, no king, that seeks thy countries sack,
The famous runagate of Christendom.
Ambitious rebel, know thou what I am,
How great. how famous, and how fortunate,
And dare thou carry arms against me here,
Even when thou should do reverence at my feet?
Yea feared and honoured in the farthest parts,
Hath Edward been, thy noble Henries son,
Traitor, this sword vnsheathd hath shined oft,
With reeking in the blood of Saracens,
When like to Perseus on his winged steed,
Brandishing bright the blood of Ad•…t,
That aged Saturn gave s•…ire Maias son,
Conflicting tho with Gorgon in the vale,
Setting before the gates of Nazareth,
My horses hooves I stained in Pagaus gore,
Sending whole countries of heathen souls,
To Plutoes house: this sword, this thirllie sword,
Aims at thy head, and shall I hope ere long,
Gage and divide thy bowels and thy bulk,
Disloi•…ll villain thou, and what is more.
Why Longshankes, think thou I will bee scared with words?
No, did thou speak in thunder like to Io•…e,
Or should as Br•…arouse shake at once,
A hundred bloody swords, with bloody hands,
I tell thee Longshankes here he faces thee,
Whom nought can daunt, no not the stroke of death:
Resolved ye see: but see the chance of war,
Know thou a traitor and thou see his head,
Then Longshankes look this villain in the face:
This Rebel he hath wrought his countries wrack,
Base. rascal, had and hated in his kind,
Object of wrath, and subject of revenge.
Lluellen, call thou this the chance of war?
Bad for vs all pardie, but worse for him,
Courage sir Dauid, kings thou know must die,
And noble minds all dastard fear defies.
Renowned England, star of Edwards Globe,
My liefest lord and sweetest Sovereign,
Glorious and happy is this champion•…e to me,
To reap this fame and honour in my death,
That I was hewed with soul defiled hands,
For my beloved king and countries good,
And died in grace and favour with my prince:
Seize on me bloody butchers with your paws,
It is but temporal that you can inflict.
Bravely resolved brave soldier by my life.
Hark you sir, I am afraid you will not be so re∣solved, by that time you know so much as I can show you, here be hot Dogs I can tell you, means to have the baiting of you.
Lluellen in the midst of all thy braves,
How wilt thou use thy brother, thou hast tan,
Wilt thou let his moister ransom him?
No nor his mistress gallant Mortimor,
With all the gold and silver of the land.
Ransom this Iudas to his fathers line,
Ransom this traitor to his brothers life,
No take that earnest penny of thy death,
This touche my lord comes nothing near the mark.
O damned villain hold thy hands,
Ask and have.
We will nor ask nor have, see thou these tools?
These be the Dogs shall bait him to the death,
And shall by peecemeales tear his cursed flesh,
And in thy sight here shall he hang and pine.
O villains, traitors, how will I be vengd?
What threats thou Edward,
Desperate minds contemn,
That fury menaces, see thy words effects.
O gracious heavens, dissolve me into clay,
This tyranny is more then flesh can bear.
Bear it brave mind, sith nothing but thy blood,
May satisfy in this extreme estate.
My lord it is in vain to threaten them,
They are resolved ye see upon his death.
Sussex, his death, they all shall buy it dear,
Offer them any favour for his life,
Pardon, or peace, or ought what is beside:
So love me God, as I regard my friends.
Lluellen let me have thy brothers life,
Even at what rate and ransom thou wilt name.
Edward, king Edward, as thou list be termed,
Thou know thou hast my beauteous Elinor,
Produce her forth, to plead for Dauids life,
She may obtain more then an host•… of men.
Wilt thou exchange thy prisoner for thy love?
Talk no more to me, let me see her face.
Why, will your majesty be all so base,
To stoop to his demands in every thing?
Fetch her at once, good Mortimor be gone.
I go, but how unwilling heavens doth know,
A pace Mortimor if thou love thy friend.
I go for dearer then I leave behind.
See Sussex how he bleeds in my eye,
That bears fortunes shock triumphantly.
Saw haw, my•…er; I have found, I have found.
What hast thou found Friar, ha?
News my lord, a Star from out the Sea,
The same is risen, and made a summers day.
What Nil, sweet Nil, doe I behold thy face?
Fall heavens, fleet stars, shine Phoebus lamp no more,
This is the Planet lends this world her light,
Starr•… of my fortune, this that shines bright,
Queen of my heart, load star of my delight,
Fair mould of beauty, miracle of fame,
O let me die with Elinor in mine arms:
What honour shall I lend thy loyalty,
Or praise unto thy sacred deity.
Marry this my lord, if I may give you counsel, sacrifice this Tike in her sight, her friend, which being done, one of your soldiers may dip his foul shirt in his blood, so shall you bee waited with as many crosses as king Edward.
Good cheer sir Dauid, we shall up anon.
Die Mortimor, thy life is almost gone.
Sweet prince of Wales, were I within thine arms,
Then should I in peace possess my love,
And heavens open fair their crystal gates,
That I may see the palace or my intent.
Lluellen set try brother free,
Let me have him, thou thalt have Elinor.
Sooth Edward I do prize my Elinor,
Dearer then life, but there belonged more
To these affairs, than my content in love:
And to be short, if thou wilt have thy man,
Of whom I swear thou think over well,
The safety of Lluellen and his men,
Must be regarded highly in this match,
Say therefore and be short, wilt thou give peace
And pardon to Lluellen and his men.
I will 〈◊〉 have time to be advised.
King Edward no, we will admit no pause,
For goes this wretch, this wret•…h to the pot,
And 〈◊〉 Lluellen be pursued so near,
May chance to show thee such a tumbling cast,
As er•… our father, when he thought to scope,
And broke his neck from Iulius Casars town.
My lord these rebels all are desperate.
And Mortimor of all most misetable.
How say you Welshman, will you leave your arms,
And be true liegemen unto Edwards crown?
If Edward pardon surely what is past,
Upon conditions we are all content.
B•… like you will condition with vs then.
Special conditions for our safety first,
And for our country Cambrias common good,
T'auoide the fusion of our guilty blood.
Go to, say on.
First for our foe•…lowers and our selves and all,
We ask a pardon in the Princes word,
Then for this Lords possession in his love:
But for our Country 〈◊〉 these boons we beg,
And Englands promise princely to thy Wails,
That none be Cambrias prince to govern vs,
B•…t he that is a Welshman borne in Wales.
Grant this and swear it on thy knightly sword,
And have thy man, and vs, and all in peace.
Why Cambria Britains are you so incensed,
Will you deliver me to Edwards hands?
No lord Lluellen we will back for thee,
Thy life, thy love, and golden liberty.
A tiuce with honourable conditions tan,
VVales happiness, Englands glo•…, and my bane.
Command retreat be sounded in our camp,
Soldiers I grant at full what you request,
Dauid good cheer, Lluellen open the gates.
The gates are opened, enter thee and thine.
The sweetest sun that ere I saw to shine.
Madam, a brabble well begun for thee,
Be thou my guest, and sir Lluellens love.
Mortimor, a brable ill began for thee,
A truce with capital conditions tan:
A prisoner saved and raunsomd with thy life,
Edward my king, my Lord and lover dear,
Full little dost thou wot, how this retreat.
As with a sword, hath slain poor Mortimor.
Farewell the flower the gem of beauties blaze,
Sweet Ellen, mir•…cle of natures •…and,
Fuellen in thy name, but heaven is in thy looks,
Sweet Venus let me s•…ct or devil be,
In that sweet heaven or hell that is in thee,
Give me my pantables.
Fie this hot whether how it makes me sweat,
Hey ho my heart, ah I am passing faint.
Give me my fan that I may cool my face,
Hold, take my mask but see you romple n•…t,
This wind and dust see how it smolders me,
Some drink good Gloster or I die for drink,
Ah Ned thou hast forgot thy Nil I see,
That she is thus enforced to follow thee. (majesty
This aires distemperature and please your
Noisome through mountains vapors send thick mist,
Unpleasant needs must be to you and your company,
That never was wont to take the air,
Till Flora have perfumde the earth with sweets,
With lilies, roses, mints and Eglantine,
I tel thee the ground is al to base,
For Elinor to honour with her steps:
Whose footepace when she progressed in the street,
Of Aecon and the fair Jerusalem,
Was nought but costly Arras points:
Fair I land tapestry and Azured silk,
My milk white steed treading on cloth of ray,
And trampling proudly under neath the feet,
Choice of our English woollen drapery.
This climate or clowring with black congealed clouds,
That takes their swelling from the marrish soil,
Fraught with infectious f•…ogges and ruistie dampes,
Is far unworthy to be once embalmd:
With redolence of this refreshing breath:
That sweetens where it lights as doe the flames,
And holy fires of Vistas sacrifice. spring,
Whose pleasant fields new planted with the
Make Thamesis to mount aboue the banks,
And like a wanton walloing up and down:
On Floras beds and Napees silver down.
And wales for me Madame while you are here,
No Climate good unless your grace be ne'er,
Would wales had ought could please you half so well,
Or any precious thing in Glosters gift,
Whereof your ladyship would challenge me.
Well said my lord tic as my mother says,
You men have learned to woe a thousand ways.
O madame had I learned against my need,
Of all those ways to woo one way to speed,
My cunning then had been my fortunes guide.
Faith Ione I think thou must be Glosters bride,
Good Earl how near he steps unto her side,
So soon this eye these younglings had espied,
Isle tel thee girl when I was fair and young:
I found such honey in sweet Edwards tongue,
As I could never spend one idle walk,
But Ned and I would piece it out with talk.
So you my Lord when you have got your Ione,
No matter let Queen mother be alone.
Old Nil is mother now and grandmother may,
The greenest grass doth droop and turn to hay,
Woo one kind Clarke, good Gloster love thy Ione,
Her heart is thine, her eyes is not her own.
This comfort Madam that your grace doth give
Binds me in double duty whilst I live,
Would God King Edward see and say no less.
Gloster I warrant thee upon my life,
My King vouchsafs his daughter for thy wife,
Sweet Ned hath not forgot since he did woo,
The gal of love and al that longs thereto.
Why was your grace so coy to one so kind?
Kind Gloster so me thinks in deed,
It seems he loves his wife no more then needs,
That sends for vs in al the speedy hast,
Knowing his Queen to be so great with child,
And make me leave my princely pleasant seats,
To come into his ruder part of wales.
His highness hath some secrete reason why,
He wishes you to move frō Englands pleasant courts
The VVelshmen have of long time suitors been,
That when the war of rebels sorts an end:
None might be prince and ruler over them,
But such a one as was their countryman,
Which sure I think his grace hath granted them.
So then it is king Edwards Policy,
To have his son, for sooth son i•… be,
A VVelshman, well welshman it likes me,
And •…re he comes.
Nil, welcome into VVales,
How fares my Elinor?
Near worse, beshrow their harts tic long on.
Harts sweet Nil, shrove no harts,
Where such sweet saints doe dwell
Nay then I see I have my dream, I pray let go,
You will not will you whether I will or no?
You are disposed to move me.
Say any thing but so:
Once Nil thou gau•…st me this.
I pray let go, ye are disposed I think.
I madame very well
Let go and be nought I say.
What ails my Nil?
Ay me, what sudden fits is this I prove;
What grief, what pine lung pain, like youngmens love,
That makes me matting tun thus too and fro•…?
What, mallencollie Nil?
My lord pray let me go.
Give me sweetwater, why how what it is?
These be the fits, trouble men's wits.
Ione ask thy beauteous Mistress how she doth.
How fares your majesty?
Ione aggrieved at the hart and angered worse,
Because I came not right in,
I think the King comes purposely to spite me,
My finger itch till I have had my will,
Proud Edward call in thy Elinor be still,
It will not be, nor rest I any where:
Till I have set it soundly on his ear.
Is that the matter then let me alone.
Fie how I fret with grief.
Come hither Ione, know thou what ails my Queen?
Not I my lord, she longs I think to give your gracea box on theare.
Nay wench if that be as weal ear it well,
What all a mort how doth my dainty Nil?
Look up sweet love, unkind, not kiss me once?
That may not be.
My lord I think you doe it for the nonce.
Sweet heart one kiss.
For Gods sake let me go.
Sweet heart a kiss.
What, whether I will or no? you will not leave? let be I say?
I must be better chidde.
No will? take that then lusty lord, Sir leave when you are bid.
Why so this chare is charde.
A good one by the rood,
No force no harm.
No harm that doth my Elinor any good.
Learn lords against you be married men to bow to wo∣men's yoke:
And sturdy though you be you may not stir for every stroke:
Now my sweet Nil how doth my Queen?
She vaunts that mighty England hath felt her fist:
Taken a blow basely at Elinors hand,
And vaunt she may good leave being cursed and coy,
Lack nothing Nil whilst thou hast brought thy lord a lovely boy.
I am sick good Katherine I pray thee beat hand.
This sickness I hope will bring King Ed∣ward a jolly boy.
And Katherine who brings me that news shall not go empty handed.
Farewell Lluellen with thy loving Nil.
Godamercy Mortimor and so farewell.
Farewell and behangde half Sinons sapons brood
Good words Sir Rice wrongs have best remedy,
So taken with time patience and policy.
But where is the Friar who can tel?
That can I moister very well,
And say I faith what hath befell:
Must we at once to heaven or hell?
To heaven Friar, Friar no fie,
Such heavy souls mount not so hie.
Then Friar lie thee down and die.
And if any ask the reason why,
Answer and say thou can not tel,
Unless because thou must to hell.
No Friar because thou did rebel,
Gentle Sir Rice ring out thy kneel.
And Mattock towel thy passing bell. So there lies a straw, and now to the law masters and friends, naked came we in to the world naked are wee
turned out of the good towns into the wilderness, let me say Mass, me thinks we are a handsome Com∣mon-wealth, a hand•… of goodfellowes, set a sunning to dog on our own dis•…tion, what say you Sir? we are enough to keep 〈◊〉 passage, will you be ruled by me? weal get the next day from Brecknocke the book of Robin Hood, the Friar he shall instruct vs in his cause and weal even here 〈◊〉 and well since the king hath put vs amongst the discarding cards, and as it were turned vs with deuces and traies out of the deck, every man take his standing on Ma•…neck deny and wander like ir∣regulars up and down the wilderness, isle be moister of •…rule, isle be Robin Hood that once, cousin Rice thou shalt be little Iohn, and hers Friar Dauid as fit as a die for Friar Tucke, now my sweet Nel if you will make up the mess with a good heart for Maid marian and doe well with Lluellen under the greene wood trees, with as good a will as in the good towns, why plane est curia.
My sweetest love and this my infracte for∣tune could never vaunt har sovereignty, and shouldest thou pass the ford of Phlegeton, or with Lender win the Hellispont in deserts, Oenophrius ever dwell, or build thy bower on Aetuas fiery tops, thy Nel would follow thee and keep with thee, thy Nel would feed with thee and sleep with thee.
O Cupido quantus quantus.
Bravely resolude Madam and t•…n what rests my Lord Robin but we will live and die together like Chamber Britains, Robin Hood, little Iohn, Friar Tucke, and Maid marrian.
There rests nothing now cousin but that I sell my chain to set vs all in greene and weal al play the Pioners to make vs a cave and Cabin for al weathers.
My sweet Lluellen though this sweet bee gal, Patience doth conquer me by out suffering al.
Now Manmocke deny I hold thee a penny,
Thou shalt have neither sheep nor goat:
But Friar Dauid, Will fleeces his coat,
Where ever lack my Novice jet.
Al is fish with 〈◊〉 that comes to net,
Dauid this year thou paiest no de•…te.
Why F•…er is it so plain in deed,
Lluellen art thou flatly so resolude.
To to•…st it out and roust so near the king:
What shall we have a passage kept in wales:
For men at arms and knights aduenturou•…?
By cock Sir Rice I see no reason why,
Young Mortimor should make one among:
And play hi, parton 〈◊〉 dying here,
For love of his beloved Elinor:
His Elinor where 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 I wott,
The bitter Northern wind upon the plains:
The dampes that rise from out the quec•…y plots:
Nor influence of contagious air should touch,
But she should court yet with the prondest d•…mes,
Rich in attire and sumptuous in her fare.
And take her ease in beds of safest Down,
Why Mort•… may not thy offers move,
And win sweet E•… 〈◊〉 Lluellens love,
Why pleasant gold and gentle eloquence,
Have •…yset the 〈◊〉 Nymphs the fairest dames,
And vents of words, delights of wealth and ease,
Have made a Nun 10 yield Lluellens,
Being set to see the last of desp•…ate chance,
Why should so fair a slarre stand in a vale?
And not be seen to sparkle in the sky,
It is enough Jove change his glittering robes:
To see Mennosyne and the flies
Masters have alter gentle Robinhood,
You are not so well accompanied I hope:
But if a potter come to p•…ic his part,
You'll give him stripes or welcome good or worse:
Go Mortimor and make their love holidays,
The king will take a common scuse of thee,
And who hath more men to attend then Mortimor.
Why so, I see my mates of old,
All were not lies that Bedlams told:
Of Robin Hood and little Iohn,
Friar Tucke and Maid marian.
I for sooth moister.
How well they couched in forest green,
Frolic and lively with oaten teene:
And spent their day in game and glee,
Lluellen doe seek if ought please thee,
Nor though thy foot be out of town,
Let thine look black on Edwards Crown.
Nor think this greene is not so gay,
A•… was the golden rich array:
And if sweet Nel my Marrian,
Trust me as I am Gentle man:
Thou art as fine in this at tire:
As fine and fit to my desire,
As when of Leisters Hal and bower,
Thou were the rose and sweetest flowers
How say thou Friar say I well?
For any thing becomes my Nil.
Never made man of a woman borne,
A Bullocks tail a blowing horn,
Nor can an Isles hide disguise,
A Lion if he ramp and rise.
My Lord, the Friar is wondrous wise.
Believe him for he tells no lies,
But what doth little Iohn devise?
That Robin Hood beware of spies,
An aged saying and a true,
Black will take no other hue.
He that of old hath been thy toe:
Will die but will continue so.
O masters, whither shall we, doth any living creature know?
Rice and I will walk the round,
Friar see about the ground.
And spoil what pray is to be found,
My love I leave within in trust,
Because I know thy dealing lust:
Come Potter come and welcome to,
Fare as we fare and doe as we doe.
Nil adieu we go for news,
A little serves the Friar's lust,
When nolens volens fast I must,
Moister at al that you refuse.
Such a porter would I choose,
When I mean to blind a skule.
While Robin walk with little Io•…,
The Friar will like his marrian.
So will the Porter if he can.
Now Friar sith your lord is gone,
And you and I are left alone,
What can the Friar doe or say,
To pass the weary time away?
Weary God wot poor wench to thee,
That never thought these days to see.
Bre•…ke 〈◊〉 and split mine eyes in 〈◊〉.
Never let me hear those words again.
What can the Friar doe or sal•…
To pass the weary time away:
More dare I doe then he dare say,
Because he doubts to have away.
Doe somewhat Friar say or sing,
That may to sorrows so lace bring,
And I mean while will Garlands make,
O Mortimor were it for thy sake,
A Garland were the happiest stake:
That ever this hand unhappy drew.
Mistress shall I tel you true,
I have a soug I learned it long ago,
I wot not whether yole like it well or ill,
Tic short and sweet but somewhat brolde before.
Once let me sing it and I ask no more.
What Friar will you so indeed,
Agrees it somewhat with your need?
Why mistress shall I sing my creed,
Thats fitter of the two at need.
O wench how moist thou hope to speed?
O mistress out it goes.
Look what comes next the Friar throes.
Such a sitting who ever saw,
An Eagles bird of a Jack dawe.
So Sir is this all?
Sweet heart here is no more.
How now good fellow more indeed,
By one then was before.
How now the devil in steed of a ditty.
Friar a ditty come late from the city.
To ask some pity of this lass so pretty:
Some pity sweet mistress I pray you.
How now Friar where are we now and you play not the man?
Friend Copes mate, you that come late from the City,
To ask some pity of this lass so pretty,
In likeness of a doleful ditty,
Hang me if I doe not pay ye.
O Friar you grow choleric, well yole
Have no man to Court your mislers but your self,
On my word isle take you down a botton hole,
Ye talk, ye talk child.
Tic well potter you fight in a good quarrel,
Mas this blade will hold le•… •…ee then Friar.
Mines for mine own turn 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 his Tools, rise and lets to it, b•… 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 you love me, I scorn the odds I can tel you, •…ee fair play and you be Gentlemen.
Mary shall we Friar, let vs see, be their staves of a length good, so now let vs deem of the matter Fri∣er and Potter 〈◊〉 more clatter I have cast your water, and see as deep into your desire, as he that had dined every day into your bosom, O Friar will nothing serve your turn but Larks.
Are such five birds for such course Clarks,
None but my Marian can serve your turn.
Cast water, for the house will burn.
O mistress mistress flesh is frail,
Ware when the sign is in the tail,
Meg•… is love and doth prevail:
Therefore Friar shalt thou not fail,
But mightily your foe assail:
And thrash this Potter with thy slaile,
And Potter never rave nor rail,
Not ask questions what I ail:
But take this tool and doe not quail,
But t•…rash this Friars russet cote:
And make him sing a dastards note,
And cry Pecca•… miserere Dauid,
In am•… ama•…: Gos to.
Strike, strike.
Strike Potter be thou lief or loath,
And if you'll not strike isle strike for both.
He must needs go that the devil drives
Then Friar beware of other men's wives.
I wish moister proud Potter the Devil have my soul:
But isle. make my slaile circumscribe your noule.
Why so, now it co•…tens, now the game be∣gins.
One knave currieth another for his sins.
O moister short en my offences in mine eyes.
If this Crucifige doe not suffice,
Send me to Heaven in a hempen sacrifice.
O masters masters let this bee warning:
The Friar hath infected me with his learning.
Villains do not touch the forbidden hair now to delude, or to dishonour me.
O moister, quae negate sunt grant•… sunt.
Rice every day thus shall it be, weal have a thrashing set among the Friars, and he that of these cha∣lingers lays on slowest load, be thou at hand Rice to gore him with thy god.
A Potter Potter the Friar may rue,
That ever this day this our quarrel he knew:
My pate adle, mine arms black and blue.
Ah Friar who may his fates force eschew,
I think Friar you are prettily scholde,
And I think the Potter is handsomely cooled,
No Martimor here that Eternal 〈◊〉,
That burns and Ha•…s with brands of hot desire•…
Why Martimor, why do est thou not discover,
Thy self her knight her liegeman and her lover?
Lords of Albany, and my peers in France.
Since Balioll is invested in his rights,
And wears the 〈◊〉 Scottish Diadem,
Time is to rouse •…im that the world may wot,
Scotland disdains to carry Englands yoke.
Therefore my fry•…d thus put in readiness,
Why slack we time to greet the English king?
Wi•… 〈◊〉 message to •…et him know our minds,
Lord Verses though thy •…aith and o•…th be tan,
To follow Baliols arms for Scotlands right,
Yet is thy heart to Englands honour knit,
Therefore in spite of England and thy self,
Bear thou defiance proudly to thy king,
Tel him 〈◊〉 finds heart and hope,
To shake o•… Englands tyranny be time,
To reskue Scotlands honour with his sword,
Lord Bru•… see cast about Verses neck,
A strangling halter that he mind his ha•…t.
How sa•…est thou Verses wilt thou doe this message?
Although no common post, yet for my king
I will to England maugre Englands might,
And doe mine arrand boldly as becomes,
Albeit I honour English Edwards name,
And hold this s•…uish contemnment to scorn.
Then h•…e away as swift as swallow •…lies,
And meet •…e on our rodes on Englands ground,
We there •…think of thy message and thy 〈◊〉.
Now have I leisure Lords to bid you well∣come into Wales.
Welcome sweet Edmund to christen thy young nephew
And welcome Cressing•…, give me thy hand,
But Sussex what became of Mortimor?
We have not seen the man this many a day.
Besore your highness rid frō hence to Northam.
Sir Roger was a suitor to your Grace,
Touching fair Elinor Lluellens love,
And so •…like denied with discontent,
A discontinues from your Royal presence.
Why Sussex said we not •…or Elinor,
So she would leave whom she had loved too long,
She might have f•…uour with my Queen and me,
But man, her 〈◊〉 above•… her fortune mounts,
And thats a cause she •…ails in her accounts.
But go with me my lord of Lancaster,
We will go see my bea•…os lovely Queen,
That hath enriched me with a goodly by•…e.
Longsh Ladies by your leave, how doth my Nil, mine own •…ny love, my life, my heart, my dear, my dove, my Queen, my wife.
〈◊〉 N•… 〈◊〉 thou come, sweet Ned welcome my joy.
Thy Nil presents thee with a lovely boy.
Kiss him, and christen him after thine own name.
Hey ho whom doe I see, my lord of Lancaster, welcome heartily.
I thank your grace, sweet Nil well met withal.
Brother Emund hers a kinsman of yours you must need, be acquainted.
A goodly boy God bless him, give me your hand Sir, you are welcome into Wales.
Brother theirs a fist I warrant you will hold•…
Mace as f•…t as ever did father or grandfather be∣fore him.
But •…el in now lapped in Lilly bands,
How with my Queen, my lovely by•…e it stands:
After thy journey and these child bed pains.
Sick mine own Ned thy Nil for thy com∣panie:
That lured her with thy lies all so far,
To follow thee vnweldie in thy war,
But I forgive thee Ned my •…ms delight:
So thy young son thou see be bravely dight,
And in Carnaruan christened royally.
Sweet love let him be lapped most curiously,
He is thine own, as true as he is thine,
Take order then that he be passing fine.
My lovely Lady let that care be less,
For my young son the country will I feast:
And have him borne as bravely to the sunt;
As ever yet Kings son to Christening went.
Lack thou no precious thing to comfort thee,
De rear then Englands Diadem unto me.
Thanks gentle Lord, nurse rock the Cr•…∣dl, fie:
The King so near, and here the boy to cri•…?
Ione take him up and sing a Lullaby.
Ti•… well believe me wench godamercie I•…,
Sl•…e learns my Lord to •…ull a young one of her own.
Give me some drink.
Drink Nectar my sweet Nil,
Worthy for seat in heaven with Jove to dwell.
Gramercis Ned, now well remembered yet,
I have a suite sweet lord, but you must not deny it,
Whereas my Lord of Gloster, good Cla•…e mine host, my guide,
Good Ned let Ione of Icon be his bride,
Assure your self that they are thoroughly wooed.
God send the King be taken in the mood,
Then Niece tic like that you shall have a husband,
Come hither Gloster hold give her thy hand,
Take her, sole daughter to the Queen of England.
For news hee brought Nil of my young son,
I promised him as much as I have done.
We humbly thank your majesty.
Much joy may them betide,
A gallant bridegroom and a princely bride.
Now say sweet Queen what doth my Lady crave?
Tell me what name shall this young Welshman have,
Borne Prince of wales by Cambrias full consent.
Edward the name, that doth me well content,
Then Edward of Carnaruan shall he be,
And Prince of Wales christened in royalty.
My Lord I think the Queen would•… take a nap,
Nurse take the child and hold in your lap,
Farewell good Ione be careful of my Queen.
Sleep•… Nil, the fairest Swan mine eyes have seen.
I had forgot-to ask your Majesty.
How doe you with the Abbeys here in Wales,
As kings with rebels Mun, our right prevails,
We have good Robin Hood and little Iohn,
The Friar and the good Maid; marrian.
Why our Lluellen is a mighty man.
Trust me my Lord, me thinks it were very good
That some good fellows went and scored the wood,
And take in hand to cudgel Robin Hood.
I think the Friar for all his lusty looks,
Nor Robin rule with their gleams and hooks,
But would be quickly driven to the nookes.
I can assure your highness what I know,
The false Lluellen will not run nor go
Or give an inch of ground come man for man,
Nor that proud rebel called little Iohn,
To him that welds the massiest sword of England,
Welshman, how wilt thou that we understand,
But for Lluellen, Dauid I deny,
England hathmen will make Lluellen fly,
Maugre his beard and hide him in a hole,
Weary of Englands dints and manly dole.
Gloster, grow not so hot in Englands right,
That paints his honour out in every sight.
By Gis fair Lords ere many days be past,
England shall give this Robin Hood his breakefall.
Dauid, be secrete friend to that I say,
And if I use thy skill thou know the way.
Where this proud Robin and his yeomen rome.
I do my Lord and blindfold thither can I run.
Dauid enough, as I am a Gentleman,
Isle have one merry flirt with little Iohn,
And Robin Hood, and his Maid marrian,
Be thou my counsel and my company,
And thou moist Enlands resolution see.
May it please your majesty, here are 4. good Squires of the Cantréds where they do dwell, come in the name of the whole country to gratulate unto your
highness all your good fortunes, and by me offer their most humble service to your young son their Prince, whom they most heartily beseech God to bless with long life and honour.
Well said Sussex I pray bid them come tear,
Sir Dan trust me, this is kindly don of your country me.
Villains, Traitors to the ancient glory and re∣noun of Cambria, Morris Vaghan art thou there, and thou proud Lord of Anglesee.
The poor country of Cambria by vs unworthy messengers, gratulats to your majesty the birth of your young son Prince of Wales, and in this poor pressed express their most zealous duty and affe∣ction, which with all humbleness we present to your highness sweet and sacred hands.
Gramercis Barons for your gifts and good wills, by this means my boy shall wear a Mantle of cun∣tries weaving to keep him warm, and live for Englands honour and Cambrias good, I shall not need I trust cur∣teously to inuit you, I doubt not Lords but you will be all in readiness to waite on your young Prince and doe him honour at his christening.
The whole country of Cambriaround about all well horsed, and attended on both men and women in their best array, are come down to doe service of love and honour to our late born Prince, your Majesties son and honey, the men and women of Sowdone especially have sent in great abundance of cattle &amp; corn enough by computacion for your highness household a whole month and more.
We thank them all, and will present our Q with these courtesies and presents bestowed on her young Son, and greatly account you for our friends.
Who talks there?
A friend Madam.
Madam it is the King.
Welcome my Lord hey ho what have wee there?
Madam the country in all kindness and duty recommend their service and good will to your son and in token of their pure good will, presents him by vs with a mantle of frizz richly lined to keep him warm,
A mantle of frizz, fie fie for Gods sake let me here no more of it and if you love me, fie my lord is this the wisdom and kindness of the country? now I commend me to them all, and if VVales have no more wit or manners, then to cloth a Kings son in frizz I have a mantle in store for my boy, that shall I trow make him shine like the son, and presume the streets where he comes.
In good time Madam, he is your own, lap him as you list, but I promise thee Nil I would not for ten thousand pounds the country should take un∣kindness at thy words.
Tic no marvel sure, you have been royal∣lie received at their hands, no Ned, but that thy Nil doth want of her will, her boy should glister like the Summers Sun in robes as rich as Jove when hee tri∣umphes.
His pap should be of precious Nectar made,
His food Ambrosia no earthly women's milk,
Sweet fires of Sinamon to open him by,
The Graces on hi•… cradle should attend,
Venus should make his bed and waite on him,
And Phebus daughter sing him still a sleep.
Thus would I have my boy used as divine,
Because he is king Edwards son and mine.
And doe you mean to make him up in frizz,
For God sake lay it up charily, and perfume it against winter, it will make him a goodly warm Christemas coat.
Ah Mun my brother, dearer then my life,
How this proud honour slaies my heart with grief.
Sweet Queen how much I pity the effects,
This Spanish pride grees not with Englands prince,
Mild is the mind where honour builds his bower,
And yet is earthly honour but a flower.
Fast to those looks are all my fancies tide,
Pleased with thy sweetness, angry with thy pride.
Fie fie me thinks I am not where I should bee,
Or at the least I am not where I would be.
What wants my Queen to perfect her content,
But ask and have the King will not repent.
Thanks gentle Edward, lords have at you then,
Have at you all long bearded Englishmen,
Have at you lords and ladies when I crave,
To give your English pride a Spanish brave.
What means my Queen Gloster, this is a Spanish fit.
Ned thou hast granted and can not re∣uoke it.
Sweet Queen say on my word shall bee my deed.
Then shall my words make many a bosom bleed.
Reed Ned thy Queens request lapped up in rime,
And say thy Nil had skill to choose her time.
The pride of Englishman's long hair,
Is more then Englands Queen can bear:
Women's right breast cut them off al,
And let the great tree pensh with the small.
What means my lovely Elinor by this?
Not be denied for my request it is.
The rime is, that men's beards and women's breasts bee cut off &amp;c.
Gloster, an old said saying, he that grants all is asked,
Is much •…arder then Hercules task.
Were the King so mad as the Queen is wood,
Here were an end of Englands good.
My word is pall I am well agreed,
Let men's beards melt and women's bosoms bleed.
Call forth my Barbers, Lords weal first begin.
Come si•…ra cut me close unto the chin,
And •…not me even see thou by a dish,
〈◊〉 not a lo•…ke •…y Qu•…en shall have her wish.
What Ned. those locks that ever pleased thy
Were her desire, where her de•…ight doth dwell, (Nel?
Wilt thou deface that silver labyrinth?
More orient then pimpilde Hyancinth,
Sweet Ned, thy sacred person ought not droop,
Though my command m•…ke other gallants stoup.
Madam, pardon me and pardon all,
No justice but the great runs with the small.
Tell me good Gloster art thou not afraid?
No my Lord but resolude to lose my beard.
Now Madam if you purpose to proceed,
To make so many guiltless Ladies bleed.
Here must the law begin, sweet Elinor at thy breast,
And strech it self with violence to the rest.
Flse Princes ought no other doe,
Fair lady, then they would be done unto.
What logic cal you this, doth Edward mock his love?
No Nil he doth as best in honour doth behove,
And prays thee gentle Queen, and let my prays move,
Leave these ungentle thoughts, put on a milder mind,
Sweet looks, not lofty, civil mood becomes a women's kind:
And live as being dead, and buried in the ground,
Thou moist for affability and honour be renownde.
Nay and you preach, I pray my lord begone,
The child will cry and trouble you anon.
Proud incest in the cradle of disdain,
Bred up in court of pride, brought up in Spain,
Doest thou command him coily from thy sight?
That is the star, the glory of thy sight.
O could I with the riches of my crown,
Buy better thoughts for my renowned Nel,
Thy mind sweet Queen should be as beautiful,
As is thy face, as is thy features all.
Fraught with pure honour, treasure, and enriched,
With virtues and glory incomparable.
Ladies about her Majesty, se that the Queen your mo∣there know not so much, but at any hand our pleasure is, that our young son be in this Mantle borne to his Christening, for special reasons is thereto moving, from the Church as best it please your women's wits to de∣uise, yet sweet Ione see this faithfully performed, and hear you daughter, look you be not last up when this day coms, least Gloster find another Bride in your steed, Dauid go with me. .
She rises early Ione, that beguiles thee of a Gloster.
believe him not sweet Niece, women can speak smooth for advantage.
We men doe you mean my good uncle?
Well be the accent where it will women are women, I will believe you for as great a matter as this comes to my lord.
Gramercies sweet lady, &amp; habebis fidei mercedem contrà.
Come fellows, cast your selves even round in a string, a ring I would say, come merely on my word for the Queen is most liberal, and if you will please her well she will pay you royally, so lawful to brave well thy British lustily, to solace our good Queen God save her Grace, and give our young Prince a carpell in their kind, come on come on set your crowds and beat your heads together and behave you handsomely.
I have a budget in my nose this gay morning, and now will I try how clarkly the Friar can behave him self, tic a common fashion to get gold which stand, de∣liver your purses, Friar Dauies will once in his days get money by wit, there is a rich Farmer should pass this ways to receive a round sum of money, if hee come to me the money is mine, and the law shall take no van∣tage, I will cut off the law as the hangman would cut a man down when he hath shaken his heals half an hour under the gallows, well I must take some pains for this gold, and have at it.
Tic an old said saying I remember I red it in Catoes Pueriles, that Cantabit va•…nus coram la•…ron viator. A mans purse penniless may sing before a thief, true as I have not one penny, which makes me so peart∣lie pass through these thickets, but indeed I receive a hundred marks, and al the care is how I shall pass again,
well. I resolved either to ride twenty miles about, or else to be so well accompanied that I will not care for these ruffelers.
Did ever man play with such vncircumcised hands, sic ace to eleven and lose the chance.
God speed good fellow, why chafest thou so fast, theirs no body will win thy money from thee.
Sounds you offer me injury Sir to speak in my cast.
The Friar undoubtedly is lunatic, I pray thee good fellow leave chasting, and get some warm drink to comfort thy brains.
A las Sir I am not lunatic, tic not so well, for I have lost my money which is far worse, I have lost five gold Nobles to S Francis, and if I knew where to meet with his receiver I would pay him presently.
Would thou speak with S. Francis re∣ceauer?
O Lord, I Sir full gladly.
Why man I am S. Francis receiver, if you would have any thing with him.
Are you S. Francis receiver, Iesus, Iesus, are you S. Francis receiver, and how does all?
I am his receiver, and am now going to him, abids S. Thomas a Waterings to breakfast this morning to a calf•…s head and bacon.
Good Lord Sir I beseech you carry him these five Noble, and tell him I deal honestly with him as if he were here present.
I will of my word and honesty Friar, and so farewell.
Farewell S. Francis receiver even heartily, well now the Friar is out or cash sieve Nobles, God knows how he shall come into cash again, but I must to it a∣gain, theres nine for your holiness and six for me.
Come on my hearts, bring forth your pri∣sonars and let vs see what slore of 〈◊〉 is there in their pursenets, Friar why ch•…fest t•…ou man no body will offer thee any foe•…e ply•…e I w•…ned thee.
O good moister give me leave, my hand is in a little, I trust I 〈◊〉 recover my los•…es.
The Friar is •…d, but let him alone with •…s devise, and now to you my masters, Peddler, Priest and Piper, throw down your budgets in the mean while, and when the Friar is at leisure he •…hal tel you wh•…t you shall trust to. (•…o,
Alas sir I have but 3. pence in the corner of my
Never a •…older of Mutton Piper in your Taber, but soft here comes •…ompanie.
Alas gentlemen if you love your selves doe not venture through this mountain, here is such a coil with Robin Hood and his •…bell that every cross in my purse trembles for fear.
Honest man as I said to thee before, conduct vs through this wood, and if thou be robbed, or have any violence offered thee, as I am a Gentleman I will repay it thee again.
How much money hast thou about thee?
Faith Sir a hundred marks, I received it even now at 〈◊〉, but out alas we are undone, yonder is Robin Hood and al the strong thieves in the mountain I have no hope left but your honours assurance
Fear not I will be my words moister.
Good moister and if you love the Friar, give aim a while I you desire: and as you like of my devise, so love him that hole•…es the dise.
What Friar art thou still laboring so hard, will you have any thing more to S. Francis?
Go•…d lord are you here sweet S. Francis recea∣for, how doth his holiness and al his good family?
In good health faith Friar, hast thou any Nobles for •…im?
You know the dice are not partial and Saint Francis were ten S. they will favour him no more thē they would favour the Devil if he play at dice, in very truth my friend they have favoured the Friar, and I have won a C. marks of S. Francis, come Sir I pray. 〈◊〉 draw it over I know sir •…e is a good man and n•…for deceives none.
Draw it over, what meanest thou by that?
Why in number•…atis pecuniis legem pone, pay me my winnings.
What ass is this, should I pay thee thy winnings?
Why art not thou sir Saint Francis receive•…?
Indeed I doe receive for Saint Francis.
Then •…e make you pay for S. Francis thats flat.
Help help I am robbed I am robbed.
Will•…e you wrong the man, hands off.
Masters I bese•… you leave this braw•…ing and give me leave to speak, so it is I went to dice with S. Francis &amp; lost five Nobles, by good fortune his Cashier came by received it of me in ready cash. I being ver•… des•…os to try my fortune f•…er, plaide sty•…l, and as the dice not being bound 〈◊〉 to him or any •…an, favoured me, I drew a hand and won a hundred marks, now I reser it to your judgements whither the Friar is to seek •…is winnings.
M•…rye Friar the Farmer must and shall pay thee honestly ere he pass.
Shall I sir, why will you be content to pay half a you promise me.
I Farmer if you had been robbed of it, but if you bee agamester isle take no charge of you I.
Alas I am undone.
So sir Friar, now you have gathered up your winnings I pray you stand up and give the messeugers their charge that Robin Hood may receive his Toule.
And shall my Lord. Our thrice renowned Llu∣ellen Prince of Wales and Robin Hood of the great moun∣taine, doth will and command all passengers at the sight of Richard servant unto me Friar 〈◊〉 Tucke to lay down their weapons, and quietly to yield for cu•…m towards the maintenance of his highness wars, the •…se of al such gold, silver, money, and money worth, a the said messenger hath then about him, but if he conc•…al any part or parcel of the same, then shall he forfai•…e all that he possesses at that present, and this sentence is ir∣reuocable confirmed by our Lord Lluellen Prince of Wales, and Robin Hood of the great mo•…ntaines.
So va•…e your budgets to Robin of the mountain, but what art thou that disd•…nest to pay thy•… custōe, as if thou scornest the greatness of the prince of Wales?
Faith Robin thou seem to be a good fellow theres my bag, half is mine and half is thine, but lets to it if thou dare man for man, to try who •…al have the whole.
Why thou speak as thou should speak. My masters on pain of my displeasure depart the place and leave vs two to our selves, I must lope his Long∣shanks. for isle ear to a pair of Longshankes.
They are fair marks sir, and I must defend as I may, Dau•… be gone, hold here my hearts, long legs give•… you this among•… you to spend blows one with an other, Day now Day days are almost come at end.
But Mortimor this sight is strange, staye thou in some corner to see what will befall in this battle.
Now Robin of the wood, alias Robin Hood, be it known to your worship by these presents, that the Longshankes which you aim at, have brought the king
of England into these mountains, to use Lluellen, and to crack a 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 his man that supposes him∣self Prince of •…ales.
What •…r K•…g, well•…ome to Cambrias, what foolish Edward dare •…ou endanger 〈◊〉 to tree•…l these mountains, 〈◊〉 thou 〈◊◊◊〉 as to com∣bate with the Prince of •…ales?
What I dare thou see, what I can perform thou shalt shortly know, I think thee a Gentleman, and therefore hold no scorn to fight with thee.
No Edward I am as good a man as thy self.
That shall I try.
Halloe Edward how are thy senses confoun∣ded, what Day is it possible thou shouldest be false to England?
I am true to Wales, and so have been friends since my birth, and that shall the King of England know to his cost.
What Potter, did not I charge you to begone with your fellows?
No Traitor no Potter I, but Mortimor the Earl of March, whose coming to these woods, is to deceive thee of thy love, and reserved to save my so∣ueraignes life.
Upon them brother let them not breath.
Villain thou die, God and my right hath prevailed.
Base Earl now doth Dauid triumph in thine over throw, ay is me Lluellen at the fe•… of Longshanks.
What Mortimor under the sword of such a Tree•…or?
Brave King run thy sword up to the hilts into the blood of the rebel.
O Mortimor thy life is dearer to me then mil∣lions of rebels.
Edward relieve my brother and Mortimor lives.
I villain thou know too well how dear I hold my Mortimor, r•…e man and assure thee, and the •…ate I bear to 〈◊〉 long in respect of the deadly ha∣tred I bear to that noto•…os rebel.
Away, his sight to me is like the sight of a 〈◊〉, villain I go to revenge me on thy trea∣son, and to make thee pattern to the world, of moun∣tains treason, fall•…ood and ingratitude.
Br•…er a chafes, but hard was your hap to be overmastered by the coward.
No cow•…d Dau•…d, hi•… courage is like to the Lion, and were it not that rule and souerai•…tie sets vs at 〈◊〉, I could love and honour the man for his valour.
But t•…e Potter, oh the vi•…lain will never out of my mind whilst I live, and I w•… late to be revenged on hi•… will•…e.
Well Dauid what will be shall be, therefore ca∣sting these matters out of our heads, Dauid thou art welcome to Cambria, let vs in and bee merry after this cold cooling, and to prep•…re to strengthen our selves a∣against the last threatenings.
Welcome Ione Countess of Gloster, to Gilb•…rt de Clare for ever, God give them io•…e, cousin Gloster, let
vs now go visit the King and Queen, and present t•… Majesties with their young son, Edward Prince of Wall•…s.
Wee represent your highness most humbly, with your young son Edward of Carnaruan Prince of Wales.
God save Edward of Carnaruan prince of Wales.
 Prince of Wales God bless thee with long life and honour, welcome Ione coun∣tesse of Gloster, God bless thee and thine for ever. lords let vs visit my Queen and wife, whom we will at once present with a Son and daughter honoured to her desire.
Wee humbly present your Majesty with your young son Edward of Carnaruan Prince of VVales.
God save Edward of Carnaruan prince of wales:
Gramercis Bishop, hold take•… that to b•…ie thee a To∣chell, welcome VVelshman. here Nurse open him and have him to the fire for God sake, they have touzed him, and wash th•…m throug•…e and that bee good, and welcome Ione Countess of Gloster, God bless thee with long life, honour, and hearts ease.
I am now as good as my word Gloster, she is thine make much of her gentle Earl.
Now my sweet Nil what more commands my Queen that nothing may want to periect her con∣tentment.
Nothing sweet Ned, but pray my king to feast the Lords and ladies royal•…ie, and thanks a thousand
times good men and women, to you all, for this duty and honour done to your Prince.
Moister Bridegroom by old custom this is your waiting day, Sir Dauid you may command alam∣ple welcome in our court, for your cuntreymen: brother Edmund revel it now or never for honour of your Eng∣lands son, Gloster now like a brave Bridegroom mar∣shall this many, and set these Lords and Ladies to dan∣cing, so shall you fulfil the old English proverb, us 〈◊〉 in Hall when beards wag all.
What tidings brings Verses to our court?
Tidings to make thee tremble English king.
Me tremble b•…? must not bee news from Scotland, can once make English Edward s•…and a∣gaste.
Baliell hath chosen at this time to stu•…e,
To rouse him Lion like and cast the yoke:
That Scots ingloriouslie have borne from thee,
And all the predecessors of thy line:
And make his rods to reobtaine his rights,
And for his homage sends thee al this despite.
Why how now p•…cocks prate thou to a king?
I doe my message truly from my king,
This sword and targ•…t chide in louder terms,
I bring defiance from king Iohn Balioll,
To English Edward and his Barons all.
M•…ie so me thinks thou defiest me with a witness.
Balioll my king in Berwick makes his Court,
His •…pe he spreads upon the sand•…e plain,
And d•…res thee to the battle in his right.
What Court and Camp in Englishman's despite?
Hold messenger, commend me to thy King,
Wear thou my chain and car•…ie this to him,
Greet all his route of Rebels more or less,
Tel them such shameful end will hit them all,
And wend with this as resolutely back,
As thou to England broughst thy Scottish braves,
Tel then disdainfully Balioll from vs,
VVeele rouse him from his hold, and make him soon•…
Disloge his Camp, and take his walled town.
Say what I bid thee Verses to his teeth.
And earn this favour and a better thing.
Yes King of England whom my heart beloues,
Think as I promised him to brave thee hear,
So shall I bid Iohn Balioll base from thee.
So shalt thou earn my chain and favour Verses,
And carry him this token that thou sendst:
Why now is Englands harvest ripe,
Barons now may you reap the rich renown,
That under warlike colours springs in field,
And grows where ensigns wan upon the plains.
False Balioll •…arwicke arwicke is no hold of proofs,
To shroud thee from the strength of Edwards arm,
No Scot thy Treasons fear shall make th•… breach,
For Englands pure renown to enter one.
Amain amain upon these treacherous Scots.
Amain say all, upon these treacherous Scots,
While wee with Edmund, •…loster, and the rest,
With speedy journey is gather up our forces,
And beat these braving Scots from Englands bounds,
Mortimor thou shalt take the route in task,
That revel here and spoil fair Cambria,
My Queen when she is strong and well a foot,
Shall post to London and repast her there,
Then God shall send vs happily all to meet,
And joy the honours of our victories,
Take vantage of our foes and see the time,
Keep still our hold, our fight yet on the plain,
Balioll I come proud Balioll and ingrate,
Persuaded to chase thy men from Englands gate.
Princes of Scotland and my loving friends.
Whose necks are ouer-wearied with the yoke.
And servile bondage of these Englishmen,
List up your horns, and with your brazen hooves,
Spur at the honour of your Enemies.
Tic not ambitious thoughts of private rule,
Hath foe•…st your king to take on him these Arms,
Tic countries cause, it is the commons good,
Of vs and of our brave posterity, to arms, to arms.
Verses by this hath told the King our minds,
And he hath braved proud England to the proof,
We will renumerate his resolution,
With gold, with glory, and with kingly gifts.
By sweet Saint Ierem Verses will not spare,
To tell his message to the English King:
And beard the jolly Longshankes to his face,
Were he the greatest Monarch in the world,
And here he comes his halter makes him hast.
Long live my lord the rightful King of Scots.
Welcome Verses, what news from England?
Like to the measure of Scotlands King?
Verses my Lord in terms like to himself,
Like to the messenger of Scottish King,
D•…ed the Pears of England and their lords,
That all his Barons trembles at my threats,
And Longsharkes himself as dainted and amassed,
Gazed on my face not witting what to say:
Till rousing up he shook his threating hair,
Verses quoth he take thou King Edwards chain,
Upon condition, thou a message doe,
To Balioll false, periurde Balioll.
For in these terms he bad me greet your Grace,
And gave this halter to your excellences,
I took the chain and gave your Grace the rope.
You took the chain and give my Grace the rope,
Lay hold on him, why miscreāt recreant,
And dare thou bring a halter to thy King?
But I will quite thy pain, and in that chain,
Upon a silver Gallows shalt thou hang,
That honoured with a golden rope of England,
And a silver Gibbet of Scotland,
Thou moist hang in the air for fowls to feed upon,
And men to wonder at, away with him away.
Strike up th•… drum, follow, pursue and chase,
Follow, pursue, spare not the proudest he,
That hauocks Englands sacred royalty.
Now fits the time to purge our melancholy, and bee re•…enged upon this London Dame.
Katherine.
At hand Madam.
Bring forth our London Maris here.
I will Madam.
Now Nil be think thee of some tortures for the Dame:
And purge thy choler to the uttermost,
Now mistress Maris you have attendance urged,
And therefore to requite your courtesy,
Our mind is to bestow an office on you straight.
My self, my life, and service mighty Queen, are humbly at your Majesties command.
Then mistress Maris say whether will you be our Nurse or Lenders.
Then may it please your Majesty, to enter∣taine your handmaid for your Nurse, she will attend the cradle carefully.
O no Nurse, the Babe needs no great rock∣ing, it can lull it self, Katherine bind her in the chair, and let me see how sheele become a Nurse, so now Call∣therein draw forth her breast and let the Serpent suck his fill, why so now she is a Nurse, suck on sweet Babe.
Ah Queen sweet Queen, seek not my blood to spill:
For I shall die before this Adder have his fill.
Die or die not, my mind is fully pleased,
Come Katherine to London now will we,
And leave our Maris with her nursery.
Farewell sweet Maris look unto the Babe.
Farewell proud Queen the Author of my death,
The scourge of England and to English dames:
Ah husband sweet Iohn Bearmber Mayor of London,
Ah did thou know how Mary is perplexed,
Soon would thou come to Wales and rid me of this pain.
But oh I die, my wish is al in vain.
The angry Heavens frowned on Brittains face•…
To Eclipse the glory of fair Cambria,
With sor or aspects the dreadful Planets lower,
Lluellen basely turn thy back and fly,
No Welshman fight it to the last and die.
For if my men safely have got the Bride,
Careless of chance, isle reck no sour event,
Englands broad womb hath not that armed band,
That can expel Lluellen from his land.
Fly Lord of Cambria, fly Prince of VVales,
Sweet brother fly the field is won and lost,
Thou art beset with Englands furious troupes,
And cursed Mortimor like a Lion leads,
Our men have got the Bridge but al in vain:
The English men are come upon our backs,
Either flee or die for Edward hath the day:
For me I have my rescue in my hand,
England on me no torments shall inflict,
Farewell Lluellen while wee meet in Heaven.
Follow pursue: lie there what ere thou be,
Yet soft my hearts let vs his countenance see,
This is the Prince I know him by his face,
O gracious fortune that me happy made,
To spoil the weed that chokes fair Cambria,
Hale him from hence and in this buskie wood,
Bury his corps, but for his head I vowed,
I will present our governor with the same.
Come my gentle Richard my true master servant that in some storms have stood my moister, hang thee I pray thee least I hang for thee, and down on thy ma∣rye bones like a foolish fellow, that have gone far astray and ask forgiveness of God and king Edward for play∣ing the rachel and the Rebel here in Wales, ah gentle Richard many a what breakfast have wee been at to∣gether, &amp; now since, like one of Mars his frozen knights I must hang up my weapon upon this tree and come per misericordiam to the mad Potter Mortimor, wring thy hands Friar and sing a pitiful farewell to thy pike∣staff at parting.
Bind fast the Traitor and bring him a∣way, that the law may justly pass upon him and re∣ceaue the reward of monstrous treasons and villainy, stain to the name and honour of his noble country for you that slew Lluellen and presented vs with his head, the King shall reward your fortune and chivalry. Sweet Lady abate not thy looks so heavenly to the earth, God and the King of England hath honour for thee in store, and Mortimors heart at service and at thy com∣maundement.
Thanks gentle Lord, but alas who can blame Elinor to accuse her stars, that in one hour hath lost honour and contentment.
And in one hour may your Ladyship reconer both if you vouchsafero be advised by your friends, but what makes the Friar here upon his mary bones?
O •…tter Potter the Friar doth sue,
Now his 〈◊〉 moister is slain and gone to have anew.
Ah sweet Lluellen how thy death I rue.
Well said Friar better once then never, give me thy hand, my cunning shall fail me but we will be fellows yet, and now Robin Hood is gone, it shall cost me what water but thou shalt be King Edwards man, on∣lie I enjoin thee this, come not too near the Friar but good Friar be at my hand.
O sir no sir not so sir, a was warned too late∣lie none of that flesh I love.
Come on, and for those that have made their submission, and given their names in the Kings name, I pronounce their pardons, and so God save K. Edward.
Why Ione, is this the welcome that the clouds affords, how dare these disturb our thoughts, knowing that I am Edwards wife and Englands Queen here thus on Charing greene to threaten me?
Ah mother blaspheme not so, your blaspheming and other wicked deeds hath caused our God to terrify your thoughts, and call to mind your sinful fact com∣meted against the Maris here of lovely London, and better Maris London never bread, so full of ruth and pity to the poor, her have you made away, that Lone∣don cries for vengeance on your head.
I rid her not, I made her not away, by heaven
I swear, Traitors they are to Edward and to Englandes
Queen that say I made away the Maris.
Take heed sweet Lady mother swear not so, a field of prise corn will not stop their mouths, that said you have made a way that virtuous woman.
Gape earth and swallow me, and 〈◊〉 my soul sink down to Hell if I were Author of 〈◊〉 women's Tragedy, Oh Ione, help Ione thy mother •…kes.
Oh mother my help is nothing, oh she is sunk, and here the earths new closed up again, ah Charinge greene for ever change thy hew, and never may th•… •…ras grow greene again but wither and return to stones, because that beauteous Elinor sink on thee, well I will send unto the king my fathers Grace, and satisfy him of this strange mishap.
Now trothles King what fruits have bra∣uing boastes,
What end hath Treason but a sudden fall?
Such as have known thy life and bringing up,
Have praised thee for thy learning and thy art,
How comes it then that thou forgetst thy books,
That schooled thee to forgetingratitude,
Unkind, this hand hath no•…ted thee a king,
This tongue pronounced the sentence of thy ruth,
If thou in •…ue of mine unfeigned love,
Hast levied arms for to attempt my crown,
Now see thy fruits, thy glories are dispea•…st,
And his, for like sith thou hast past thy bounds,
Thy slurdie neck must stoop to bear this yoke.
I took this lesson Edward from my book,
To keep a just equality of mind,
Content with every fortune as it comes,
So can•… thou threat no more then I expect.
So sir your moderation is enfor•…t,
Your goodly glosses cannot make it good,
Then will I keep insilence what I mean,
Since Edward thinks my meaning is not good.
Nay Balioll speak forth, if there yet remain,
A little remnant of persuading Art.
If cunning have power to win the king,
Let those employ it that can flatter him.
If honoured deed may reconcile the King,
It lies in me to give and him to take.
Why what remains for Balioll now to give?
A•…geance as becomes a royal king.
What league of fa•… where league is broken once?
The greater hope in them that once have fallen.
But foolish are those Monarchs that doe yield
A conquered Realm upon submissive vows.
There take my crown and so redeem my life.
I sit that was the choicest plea of both,
For who so quills the pomp of haughty winds.
And breaks their s•…fe, whereon they build their trust,
〈◊◊〉 wanting power they carry not harm.
〈◊〉 shall live, but yet within su•… bounds,
That if his wings grow •…eg, they may be clipped:
Iohn come away, you go as though you slept, a great knave and be afraid of a little thundering and lightning.
Call you this a little thundering, I am sure my breeches finds it a great deal, for I am sure they are stu•…te with thunder.
They are stuffed with a fool, are they not, will it please you to carry the lantern a little handsome∣mer, and not to carry it with your hands in your slop•….
Slops quoth you would I had ta•…d at •…ome
by the fire, and then I should not have need to put my 〈◊〉 in my pockets, but 〈◊〉 l•…e my life I know the rea∣son of this towel we•…there.
Doe you know the reason.' I pray thee Ioh•… tel me and let me hear this reason.
I l•…e my life son•…e of your Gossips becros leg•… that we came •…rome, b•…t you are wise mistress for you •…om now awe•… and will•… no. 〈◊〉 a go•…ping in a dr•…e house all night.
Would it ple•…se you to walk and leave of your 〈◊〉, but st•… 〈◊〉, whats that rises out of the ground, Iesus bless vs Iohn, look how it rises hig•…∣er and higher.
Be my troth mistress tic a woman, good Lord do women gr•…, I never saw none grow before.
Hold thy tongue t•…ou foolish kn•…ue, it is the spirit of some woman
Ha let me see where am I, on C•…ring green, I o•… 〈◊〉 greene here h•…rd by Westminster where I was crowned and Edward there made King, I tic true 〈◊◊◊〉, and therefore Edward •…isse not me unless you will •…raight perfume your •…ps Edward.
Orapr•… nobis Iohn, I pr•…e •…ll to your pray∣ers for my life it is the Queen that chases thus, who s•…cke this da•…e on Charing gre•…no, a•… •…ow 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 up on Potters Hive, and there•…ore true•…e 〈◊〉 isle g•… to her.
Welcome good woman, what place is this, sea o•…and I pray show to me.
Your Grace need not to fear you are on fi•…e gr•…not, it is the Potters Hive, and therfoere cheer your Majesty for I will see you safe conducted to the Court, if case your highness be therewithal pleased.
I good woman conduct me to the court, that there I may bew•…isle my sin•…ull life, and call to God to save my wretched soul, won ā what noise is this I hear?
And like your Grace it is the Watermen that calls for passengers to go Westward now.
That fits my turn, for I will straight with them to Kings town to the Court, and there repose me till the king come home: and therefore sweet wo∣man conceal what thou hast seen, and lead me to those Watermen, for here doth Elinor droop.
Come come here is a goodly leading of you is there not, first you must •…ache vs afraid, and now I must bee troubled in carrying of you, I would you were honestly l•…id in your bed so that I were not troubled with you.
Honour and Fortune waite upon the Crown
Of Prince•…e Edward Englands valiant king.
Thanks Messenger, and if my God vouchsafe•…
That winged Honour waite upon my throne,
Isle •…ache her 〈◊〉 her plu•…bes upon their heads,
Whose true al•…egeance doth confirm the Crown,
What news in Wales how wends our business there?
The false disturber of that was•…ed soil,
With hi•… adherents is surprised my King:
And in assuran•…ce he shall start no more,
Breathless he lies and headles to my Lords,
The circumstance these lines shall here unfold.
A harmful w•…ede by wisdom rooted out,
C•…n never hurt the true ingratted plant,
But whats the news Sir Thomas Spencer brings?
Wonders my Lord, wrapped up in homely words,
And Letters to info•…rme your Majesty.
O Heavens, what m•…e these miracles portend?
Nobles my Queen is 〈◊〉 but what is more,
Reed brother Edmund reed a w•…dross chance•…
And •…not heard •…or red s•… strange a thing.
Sweet Queen 〈◊〉 sinking is a 〈◊〉 tan
Of pride, wherewith thy 〈◊〉 mans 〈◊〉 did swell,
A dangerous mal•…die in the heart to dwe•…l.
Lords march we toward•… London now in •…ast,
I will go see my lou•… lie Elinor,
And co•…fort her after this strange •…ffright,
And where she is importune to have talk,
And secret conference with some Friars of France,
Mun thou with me and I with thee will go,
And take the sweet confession of my Nil,
We will h•…ue French enough to p•…rlee with the Queen•…
Might I advise your royal majesty,
I would not go for millions of gold:
What •…nowes your grace disguised if you wend,
What you may hear in secrecy reveled?
That may appeal and discontent your highness,
A goodly creature is your Elinor,
Brought up in niceness and in delicacy,
Then li•…en not to her confession Lord,
To wound t•…y heart with some unkind cons•…te,
But as for Lancaster he may not go•….
brother I am resolude and go I will•…
If God •…iue life, and cheer my dying Queen,
Why Mun, why man, what ere King Edward heats,
It lies in God and him to pardon all.
Isle have no ghos•…lie Fathers out of France,
England hath learned Clarks and Confessors,
To comfort and absolve as m•…n may doe,
And isle be ghos•…lie Father for this once.
Edmund thou m•…first not go although tho•… di•….
And yet how moist thou here thy King deny•…
Ed•…art is gr•…ious, merciful, meek and mild,
But 〈◊〉 when •…e finds he is beguiled,
Messenger hie thee back to Shrewsbury.
Bid Mortimor thy moister speed him fast,
And with his fortune welcome vs to London,
I long to see my beauteous lovely Queen.
On before, on before.
Hold up your torches for dropping.
A fair procession, Sir Dauid be of good chea•… you cannot go out of the way having so many guides at hand.
Be sure of that, for we go all the high way to the Gallows I warrant you.
I go where my star leads me, and die in my countries just cause and quarrel.
The Star that twinkled at thy birth,
Good brother mine hath mart thy mirth,
An o'de said •…awe Oared•… must to earth,
Next year will be a piteous de•…th,
Of Hemp I dare lay a penny:
T•…is year is •…angde so many.
Well said Morgan Pigot Harper, and Prophet for the Kings one mouth.
•…unda ted•… tedo dote dum, this is the day th•… time is come Morgan Pigots prophecy and Lord Lluel∣lens Tragedy.
Who saith the Prophet is an Ass, whose pro∣phecies come so to pails:
Said he not oft a•…d sung it to, Lluellen after much ado,
Should i•… spite heave up his •…hen, and be the highest of
his kin:
And see aloft Lluellens head,
Empalled with a crown of lead:
My Lord let not this South•…air lack,
That hath such cunning in his jack.
Dauid hold still your clack.
Least your heals make your no•… crack.
Gentle Prophet and ye love me for spe•… me' not, 〈◊〉 the worst •…ke in the world to stir a wirche or anger a wise man, moister •…ffe have wee any nast, best give my horses some more •…ay.
Cal forth those renowned Friars come from France,
And raise me gentle Ladies in my bed,
That while this faltering engine of my speech,
I lean to utter my concealed guilt,
I may respect and so repent my sins
What plague a•…cts your to•…ll Majesty?
Ah Ione I perish through a double wars,
First in this painful prison of my soul,
A world of dreadful sins help thee to sight,
And Nature h•…uing lost her workin•… power,
Yields up her earthly Fortunes unto death.
Next over War my soul is over preast,
In thee my Conscience laden with misdeeds,
Sits seeing my Cons ience to ensue,
Without especial favour from aboue.
Your Grace must account it a warriors cross,
To make resist where danger there is none,
Superdewe your Fever by precious Art,
And help you still through hope of heavenly aid•…
The c•…release sleep rule on the mountains tops,
That see the Sea-man floating on the swerge,
The threatening winds comes springing with the floods
To overwhelm and drown his craised keel,
His tackestorne, his sails borne over board.
How pale like Fellow flowers the mountain stands•…
Upon his hatches waiting for his jerk,
Wringing his hands that ought to play the pomp,
May bla•…e his fear that laboured not for life.
So thou poor soul may tell a servile tale,
May council me, but I that prove thy pain.
May he•…re thee talk: but not redress my harm,
But ghastly death already is addressed,
To glean the latest blossom of my life,
My spirit fails me, are these Friars come?
Dominus vobiscum.
Et cum spiritu tuo.
Draw near grave Fathers, and approach my bed:
Forbear our presence Ladies for a while,
And leave vs to our secret conference.
What cause hath moved your royal Majesty,
To call your servant from their countries bounds?
For to attend your pleasure here in Englands court?
See you not holy Friars mine estate,
My body weak inclining to my grave.
We see and sorrow for thy pain fair Queen.
By this eternal signs of my defects,
Friars consecrate mine ineternall grief,
My soul, ah wretched soul within this breast,
F•…ned for to mount the Heavens with wings of grace,
A hundred by flocking troupes of sin,
That stop my passage to my wished hours.
The nearer Elinor, so the greatest hope of health,
And deign to vs for to impart your quiet.
Who by our prayers and counsel ought to arm,
Aspiring souls to scale the heavenly grace.
Shame and remorse doth stop my course of spec•….
Madam you need not dread our conference,
Who by the order of the holy Church,
Are all anointed to sacred secrecy.
Did I not think•… nay were I not assured,
Your wisdoms would be silent in that cause,
No fear could make me to be wraie my self,
•…ue gentle fathers I have thought it good,
Not to rely upon these Englishmen,
But on your trothes, you holy men of France,
Then as you love your life and Englands weal,
Keep secret my Confession from the king,
For why my story nearly touches him.
Whose love compared with my loss delights.
With many sorrows that my heart affrights.
My heart misgives.
Be silent, follow Friar.
In pride of youth when I was young and fair.
And gracious in the king of Englands sight,
The day before that night his Highness should,
Possess the pleasure of my wedlockes bed,
Caitiff accursed monster as I was,
His brother Edmund beautiful and young,
Upon my bridal couch by my consent,
Enioies the flower and favour of my love.
And I became a Traitress to my Lord.
Madam, through sickness, weakness, and your wits, it were very good to bethink y•… •…fe before you speak.
Good father not so weak but that I woe,
My heat dothrent to think upon the time,
But why exclaims this holy Friar so•…
Oh •…ay then for my faults religious man.
Tic charity in men of my degree,
To sorrow for our neighbours heinous sins:
And Madam, though some promise love to you,
And zeal to Edmund brother to the King,
I pray the Heavens you both may soon repent.
But might it please your Highness to proce•…de,
Unto this sin a worser doth succeed.
For Ione of Icon the supposed child,
And daughter of my Lord the English King:
Is basely borne begotten of a Friar.
Such time as I was their ai•…ed in France,
His one lie true and lawful son my friends,
He is my hope, his son that should succeed.
Is Edward of Carnaruan lately borne,
Now all the scruples of my troubled mind,
I sighing sound within your reverent ears,
Oh pra•…e for pity, pray for I must die.
Remit my God the folly of my youth,
My groaned spirits attends thy mercies seat,
Fathers farewell, commend me to my King,
Commend me to my children and my friends,
And close mine eyes for death will have hi•… due.
Blushing I shut theie thine inti•…ing lamps,
The wanton baits that make me suck my bane,
〈◊〉 hardened slames did never rifle•…ct,
More hideous slames then from my breast arise,
What fault more wild unto thy dearest Lord?
Our daughter base begotten of a Priest,
And Ned my brother partner of my love,
Oh that those eyes that lightened Cesars brain,
Oh that those looks that mastered Phucebus brand,
Or else those looks that stain Melisaes far,
Should shrine discreet desire and lawless lust,
Unhappy King dishonoured in thy stock,
Hence feigned weeds, unfeigned is my grief.
Dread Prince my brother if my vows avail,
I call to wit•…es Heaven in my behalf,
If zealous prayer might drive you from suspect,
I bend my knees and humbly crave this boon,
That you will drive misdeeds out of your mind,
May never good betide my life my Lord,
If once I dreamde upon this damned deed,
But my deceased sister and your Queen,
Afflicted with recurelesse maladies,
Impatient of her pain grew lunatic,
Discovering errors never dreamde upon,
To prove this true the greatest men of all,
Within their learned volumes doe discord,
That all extremes, and aland in nought but extremes,
Then think oh King her ago•…e in death,
Bereaves her sense and memory at once,
So that she spoke she knew nor how nor what.
Sir fir, fain would your highness hide your faults,
By cunning vows and glossing terms of Art,
And well thou moist delude these listening ears,
Yet never allwage by proof this jealous heart,
Traitor thy head shall ransom my disgrace,
Daughter of darkness, whose accursed bower,
The Poet fained to live upon Auernus,
Whereas Cimerians darkness checks the Sun,
Dauids jealousy afflict me not so sore,
Fair Queen Elinor could never be so false,
I but she vowed these treasons at her death,
A time not fit to fashion monstrous lies,
Ah my ungrateful brother as thou art,
Could not my love, nay more could not the law,
Nay further, could not nature thee allure,
For to refrain from this incestuous sin,
Hast from my sight, call Ione of Icon here,
The luke-warme spring distilling from his eyes,
His oaths, his vows, his reasons rested with remorse,
From forth his breast empoisoned with suspect.
Fine would I deem that false I find too true.
I come to know what Englands King commands,
I wonder why your Highness greetes me thus.
With strange regard and unacquainted terms.
Ah Ione this wonder needs must wound thy breast,
For it hath well nigh slain my wretched heart.
What is the Queen my sovereign mother dead
Woes in unhappy Lady we begone?
The Queen is dead, yet Ione lament not thou,
Poor soul guiltless art thou of this deceit,
That •…ath more cause to curse then to complain.
My dreadful soul assailed with doleful speech,
Joins me to bow my knees unto the ground,
Beseeding your most royal Majesty,
To rid your woeful daughter of suspect.
I daughter Ione, poor soul thou art deceived,
The King of England is no scorned Priest.
Was not the Lady Elinor your spouse,
And am not I the offspring of your Ioins?
I but when Ladies list to run as•…raie,
The poor supposed father wears the horn,
And pl•…ating leave their Liege in Princes laps,
Jon thou art daughter to a lecherous Friar,
A Friar was thy father haplesse Ione,
Thy mother in profession vows no less,
And I wild wretch which sorrowed hard no less,
What am I then a Friars base borne brat?
Presumptuous wretch why press I fore my king,
How can I look my husband in the face?
Why should I live since my renown is lost?
Away thou want on weed, hence worlds delight.
O some•…o Dio come i go•…dneo humans,
Specs offuscan son danu mambo oscunro,
Haplesse and wretched, lift up thy heavy 〈◊〉
Nurse not so much as thy•… unhappy chance,
Inconstant Fortune still will have her course.
My King, my King, let Fortune have her course
Fly thou my soul and take a better corse,
Eyes me from royal state I now am fine.
You purple springs that wander in my veins,
And meanwhile wants to feed•… my heavy heart,
Now all at once make hast and pity me,
And stop your powers and change your native course,
Disolue to air your luke-warme blouddie streams,
And cease to be that I may be no more,
Your curled lockes draw from this cursed head,
A base her pomp for Ione is basely borne,
Ah Gloster thou poor Gloster hast the wrong
Die wretch, hate death, for Ione hath lived •…oo long.
Revive thee hapless Lady grieve not thus,
In vain speak I for she revives no more,
Poor haplesse soul thy own espected mons,
Hath wrought her sudden and untimely death.
Lords, Ladies hast, ah Gloster a•…t thou come,
Then must I now present a Tragedy,
Thy Ione is dead, yet grieve thou not her fall,
She was too base a spouse for such a Prince.
Conspire you then with Heavens to work my harms?
O sweet aflwagers of our martial miss,
Desired death deprive me of my life,
That I in death may end my life and love.
Gloster thy King is partner of thy heaviness,
Although nor tongue nor eyes bewraie his mean,
For I have lost a flower as fair as thine,
A love more dear, For Elinor is dead,
But since the heaven lie ordinance decrees,
That all things change in their prefixed time,
Be thou content and bear it in thy breast,
Thy swelling grief as needs I must mine,
Thy Ione of Icon and my Queen deceased,
Shall have that Honour as beseems their state.
You peers of England, see in to•…all pomp,
These 〈◊〉 bodies be entombed straight
With tried colours covered all with black,
Let Spanish steeds as swift as sleeting wind,
Convey these Princes to their sunerall,
Before them let a hundred mourners ride,
In every time of their enforced abode,
Rear up a cross in token of their work,
Whereon fair Elinors picture shall be placed,
Arrived at London near our Pallas bounds,
Inter my lovely Elinor late deceased,
And in remembrance of her royalty,
Erect a rich and stately carved Cross,
Whereon her stature shall with glory shine,
And hence forth see you call it Charing cross,
For why the chancest and the choicest Queen,
That ever did delight my royal eyes,
Their dwell in darkness whilst I die in grief,
But soft, what tidings with these Purciuants?
Sir Roger Mortimor with all Sussex as erst your Grace by message did command, is here at hand in purpose to present your Highness with his signs of vi∣ctorie, and trothles Balioll their accursed King, with fire and sword doth threat Northumberland.
How one at fliction calls another over,
First death torments me, then I feel disgrace,
Again Lluellen he rebels in VVales,
And false Balioll means to brave me to,
But I will find provision for them all,
My co•… shall conquer death and shame,
And Mortimor tic thou must hast to wales,
And rous•… that Rebel from his starting holes,
And rid thy King of his contentions foe.
Whilst I with Elinor, Gloster, and the rest,
With speedy journey gather up our force,
And beat these braving Scots from out our bounds,
Courage brave Soldiers fates hath done their worst,
Now Virtue let me triumph in 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
Now 〈◊〉 of Icon let me morn thy fall,
Sole here alone now set thee down and sigh,
Sig•…apples Gloster for thy so deign less,
T•…ale death alas hath ba•…nished all thy pride,
Thy wedlock vows how ought have I beheld?
Thy eyes thy looks thy lips and every part,
How nature store in them to show their Art,
In shine, in shape, in colour and compare,
But now hath death the enemy of love,
Stained and deformed, the shine, the shape, the reed,
With pale and dimness, and my love is dead.
Ah dead my love, vile wretch whicam I living?
So wills fates, and I must be contented,
All pomp in time must fade and grow to nothing,
VVept I like Nobe, yet it profits nothing,
Then cease my sighs since I may not regain her,
And woe to wretched death that th•…s hath slain her.

IF you shall chance (Camillo) to visit Bohemia, on the like occasion whereon my services are now on-foot, you shall see (as I have said) great dif∣ference betwixt our Bohemia, and your Sicilia.
I think, this coming Summer, the King of Sicilia means to pay Bohemia the Visitation, which hee justly owes him.
Wherein our Entertainment shall shame vs: we will be justified in our Loves: for indeed—
Beseech you—
Verily I speak it in the freedom of my know∣ledge: we cannot with such magnificence— in so rare— I know not what to say— Wee will give you sleepy Drinks, that your Senses (vn-intelligent of our insuffi∣cience) may, though they cannot praise vs, as little ac∣cuse vs.
You pay a great deal to dear, for what's given freely.
Believe me, I speak as my understanding in∣structs me, and as mine honesty puts it to utterance.
Sicilia cannot show himself ouer-kind to Bohe∣mia: They were trained together in their Child-hoods; and there rooted betwixt them then such an affection, which cannot choose but branch now. Since their more mature Dignities, and Royal Necessities, made separate∣on of their Society, their Encounters (though not Person∣nil) hath been Royally attornied with enter-change of Gifts, Letters, loving Embassies, that they have seemed to be together, though absent: shook hands, as over a Vast; and embraced as it were from the ends of opposed Winds. The Heavens continue their Loves.
I think there is not in the World, either Malice or Matter, to alter it. You have an unspeakable comfort of your young Prince Mamillius: it is a Gentleman of the greatest Promise, that ever came into my Note.
I very well agree with you, in the hopes of him: it is a gallant Child; one, that (indeed) Physics the Sub∣jest, makes old hearts fresh: they that went on Crutches ere he was borne, desire yet their life, to see him a Man.
Would they else be content to die?
Yes; if there were no other excuse, why they should desire to live.
If the King had no Son, they would desire to live on Crutches till he had one.
Nine Changes of the Watry-Starre hath been
The Shepherds Note, since we have left our Throne
Without a Burden: Time as long again
Would be filled up (my Brother) with our Thanks,
And yet we should, for perpetuity,
Go hence in debt: And therefore, like a Cipher
(Yet standing in rich place) I multiply
With one we thank you, many thousands more,
That go before it.
Stay your Thanks a while,
And pay them when you part.
Sir, that's to morrow:
I am questioned by my fears, of what may chance,
Or breed upon our absence, that may blow
No snooping Winds at home, to make vs say,
This is put forth too truly: besides, I have stayed
To tyre your Royalty.
We are tougher (Brother)
Then you can put vs to it.
No longer stay.
One Seue'night longer.
Very sooth, to morrow.
We'll part the time betweene's then: and in that Isle no gaine-saying.
Press me not (beseech you) so:
There is no Tongue that moves; none, none in the World
So soon as yours, could win me: so it should now,
Were there necessity in your request, although
It were needful I denied it. My Affairs
Doe even drag me home-ward: which to hinder,
Were (in your Love) a Whip to me; my stay,
To you a Charge, and Trouble: to save both,
Farewell (our Brother.)
Tongue-tied our Queen? speak you.
I had thought (Sir) to have held my peace, until
You had drawn Oaths from him, not to stay: you (Sir)
Charge him too coldly. Tell him, you are sure
All in Bohemia's well: this satisfaction,
The by-gone-day proclaimed, say this to him,
He's beat from his best ward.
Well said, Hermione.
To tell, he longs to see his Son, were strong:
But let him say so then, and let him go;
But let him swear so, and he shall not stay,
We'll thwack him hence with Distaffs.
Yet of your Royal presence, Isle adventure
The borrow of a Week. When at Bohemia
You take my Lord, Isle give him my Commission,
To let him there a Month, behind the Gest
Prefixed for's parting: yet (good-deed) Leontes,
I love thee not a Jar of the Clock, behind
What Lady she her Lord. You'll stay?
No, Madame.
Nay, but you will?
I may not verily.
Verily?
You put me off with limber Vows: but I,
Though you would seek to vnsphere the Stars with Oaths,
Should yet say, Sir, no going: Verily
You shall not go; a Ladies Verily 'is
As potent as a Lords. Will you go yet?
Force me to keep you as a Prisoner,
Not like a Guest: so you shall pay your Fees
When you depart, and save your Thanks. How say you?
My Prisoner? or my Guest? by your dread Verily,
One of them you shall be.
Your Guest then, Madame:
To be your Prisoner, should import offending;
Which is for me, less easy to commit,
Then you to punish.
Not your Jailer then,
But your kind Hostess. Come, Isle question you
Of my Lords Tricks, and yours, when you were Boys:
You were pretty Lordings then?
We were (fair Queen)
Two Lads, that thought there was no more behind,
But such a day to morrow, as to day,
And to be Boy eternal.
Was not my Lord
The verver Wag of the two?
We were as twined Lambs, that did frisk in the Sun,
And bleat the one at the other: what we changed,
Was Innocence, for Innocence: we knew not
The Doctrine of ill-doing, nor dreamed
That any did: Had we pursued that life,
And our weak Spirits ne'er been higher reared
With stronger blood, we should have answered Heaven
Boldly, not guilty; the Imposition cleared,
Hereditary ours.
By this we gather
You have tripped since.
O my most sacred Lady,
Temptations have since then been borne to's: for
In those vnfledg'd days, was my Wife a Girl;
Your precious self had then not crossed the eyes
Of my young Play fellow.
Grace to boot:
Of this make no conclusion, least you say
Your Queen and I are Devils: yet go on,
The offences we have made you doe, we'll answer,
If you first sinned with vs: and that with vs
You did continue fault; and that you slipped not
With any, but with vs.
Is he won yet?
He will stay (my Lord.)
At my request he would not:
Hermione (my dearest) thou never spoak'st
To better purpose.
Never?
Never, but once.
What? have I twice said well? when was it before?
I prithee tell me: cram's with praise, and mike's
As fat as tame things: One good deed, dying tongueless,
Slaughters a thousand▪ waiting upon that.
Our praises are our Wages. You may rite's
With one soft Kiss a thousand Furlongs, ere
With Spur we heat an Acre. But to the Goal:
My last good deed, was to entreat his stay.
What was my first? it he's an elder Sister,
Or I mistake you: O, would her Name were Grace.
But once before I spoke to the purpose? when?
Nay, let me have it: I long.
Why, that was when
Three crabbed Months had soured themselves to death,
Ere I could make thee open thy white Hand:
A clap thy self, my Love; then did thou utter,
I am yours for ever.
It is Grace indeed.
Why lo-you now; I have spoke to the purpose twice:
The one, for ever earned a Royal Husband;
The other, for some while a Friend.
Too hot, too hot:
To mingle friendship far, is mingling bloods.
I have Tremor Cords on me: my heart dances,
But not for joy; not joy. This Entertainment
May a free face put on: derive a Liberty
From Heartiness, from Bounty, fertile Bosom,
And well become the Agent: 't may; I grant:
But to be padling Palms, and pinching Fingers,
As now they are, and making practised Smiles
As in a Looking-Glasse; and then to sigh, as it were
The Mort of the Dear: oh, that is entertainment
My Bosom likes not, nor my Brows. Mamillius,
Art thou my Boy?
I, my good Lord.
In fecks:
Why that's my Bawcock: what? has't smutch'd thy Nose?
They say it is a Copy out of mine. Come Captain,
We must be neat; not neat, but cleanly, Captain:
And yet the Steer, the Heycfer, and the Calfe,
Are all called Neat. Still Virginalling
Upon his Palm? How now (you wanton Calfe)
Art thou my Calfe?
Yes, if you will (my Lord.)
Thou want a rough posh, &amp; the shoots that I have
To be full, like me: yet they say we are
Almost as like as Eggs; Women say so,
(That will say any thing.) But were they false
As o're-dy'd Blacks, as Wind, as Waters; false
As Dice are to be wished, by one that fixes
No borne twixt his and mine; yet were it true,
To say this Boy were like me. Come (Sir Page)
Look on me with your Welkin eye: sweet Villain,
Most dearest, my Collop: Can thy Dam, may it be
Affection? thy Intention stabs the Center.
Thou dost make possible things not so held,
Communicate with Dreams (how can this be?)
With what's vnreall: thou coactive art,
And fellow nothing. Then it is very credent,
Thou may co-join with something, and thou dost,
(And that beyond Commission) and I find it,
(And that to the infection of my Brains,
And hardening of my Brows.)
What means Sicilia?
He something seems unsettled.
How? my Lord?
What cheer? how is it with you, best Brother?
You look as if you held a Brow of much distraction:
Are you moved (my Lord?)
No, in good earnest.
How sometimes Nature will betray it's folly?
It's tenderness? and make it self a Pastime
To harder bosoms? Looking on the Lines
Of my Boys face, me thoughts I did requoyle
Twenty three years, and saw my self vn-breech'd,
In my greene Velvet Coat; my Dagger mussel•d,
Least it should bite it's Master, and so prove
(As Ornaments oft do's) too dangerous:
How like (me thought) I then was to this Kernel,
This Squash, this Gentleman. Mine honest Friend,
Will you take Eggs for Money?
No (my Lord) Isle fight.
You will: why happy man be's dole. My Brother
Are you so fond of your young Prince, as we
Doe seem to be of ours?
If at home (Sir)
He's all my Exercise, my Mirth, my Matter;
Now my sworn Friend, and then mine Enemy;
My Parasite my Soldier: States-man; all:
He makes a Iulyes day, short as December,
And with his varying child-nesse, cures in me
Thoughts, that would thick my blood.
So stands this Squire
Offic'd with me: We two will walk (my Lord)
And leave you to your graver steps. Hermione,
How thou love vs, show in our Brothers welcome;
Let what is dear in Sicily, be cheap:
Next to thy self, and my young Rover, he's
Apparent to my heart.
If you would seek vs,
We are yours in the Garden: shall's attend you there?
To your own bents dispose you: you'll be found,
Be you beneath the Sky: I am angling now,
(Though you perceive me not how I give Lyne)
Go too, go too.
How she holds up the Neb? the Bill to him?
And arms her with the boldness of a Wife
To her allowing Husband. Gone already,
Inch-thick knee-deepe; ore head and ears a forked one.
Go play (Boy) play: thy Mother plays, and I
Play too; but so disgraced a part, whose issue
Will hiss me to my Grave: Contempt and Clamour
Will be my Knell. Go play (Boy) play, there have been
(Or I am much deceived) Cuckolds ere now,
And many a man there is (even at this present,
Now, while I speak this) holds his Wife by the Arm,
That little thinks she he's been sluiced in's absence,
And his Pond fished by his next Neighbor (by
Sir Smile, his Neighbor:) nay, there's comfort in it,
Whiles other men have Gates, and those Gates opened
(As mine) against their will. Should all despair
That have revolted Wives, the tenth of Mankind
Would hang themselves. Physic for it, there's none:
It is a bawdy Planet, that will strike
Where it is predominant; and it is powerful: think it:
From East, West, North, and South, be it concluded,
No Barricade for a Belly. Know it,
It will let in and out the Enemy,
With bag and baggage: many thousand on's
Have the Disease, and feele't not. How now Boy?
I am like you say.
Why, that's some comfort.
What? Camillo there?
I, my good Lord.
Go play (Mamillius) you're an honest man:
Camillo, this great Sir will yet stay longer.
You had much ado to make his Anchor hold,
When you cast out, it still came home.
Did note it?
He would not stay at your Petitions, made
His Business more material.
Did perceive it?
They're here with me already; whispering, rounding:
Sicilia is a so-forth: it is far gone,
When I shall gust it last. How cam't (Camillo)
That he did stay?
At the good Queens entreaty.
At the Queens be it: Good should be pertinent,
But so it is, it is not. Was this taken
By any understanding Pate but thine?
For thy Conceit is soaking, will draw in
More then the common Blocks. Not noted, is it,
But of the finer Natures? by some Severals
Of Head-peece extraordinary? Lower Messes
Perchance are to this Business purblind? say.
Business, my Lord? I think most understand Bohemia stays here longer.
Ha?
Stays here longer.
I, but why?
To satisfy your Highness, and the Entreaties
Of our most gracious Mistress.
Satisfy?
The entreaties of your Mistress? Satisfy?
Let that suffice. I have trusted thee (Camillo)
With all the nearest things to my heart, as well
My Chamber-Councels, wherein (Priest-like) thou
Hast cleansed my Bosom: I, from thee departed
Thy Penitent reformed: but we have been
Deceived in thy Integrity, deceived
In that which seems so.
Be it forbid (my Lord.)
To bide upon it: thou art not honest: or
If thou inclin'st that way, thou art a Coward,
Which hoxes honesty behind, restraining
From Course required: or else thou must be counted
A Servant, grafted in my serious Trust,
And therein negligent: or else a Fool,
That see a Game played home, the rich Stake drawn,
And take it all for jest.
My gracious Lord,
I may be negligent, foolish, and fearful,
In every one of these, no man is free,
But that his negligence, his folly, fear,
Among the infinite doings of the World,
Sometime puts forth in your affairs (my Lord.)
If ever I were wilfull-negligent,
It was my folly: if industriously
I played the Fool, it was my negligence,
Not weighing well the end: if ever fearful
To doe a thing, where I the issue doubted,
Whereof the execution did cry out
Against the non-performance, it was a fear
Which oft infects the wisest: these (my Lord)
Are such allowed Infirmities, that honesty
Is never free of. But beseech your Grace
Be plainer with me, let me know my Trespass
By it's own visage; if I then deny it,
It is none of mine.
Have not you seen Camillo?
(But that's past doubt: you have, or your eye-glasse
Is thicker then a Cuckolds Horn) or heard?
(For to a Vision so apparent, Rumour
Cannot be mute) or thought? (for Cogitation
Resides not in that man, that do's not think)
My Wife is slippery? If thou wilt confess,
Or else be impudently negative,
To have nor Eyes, nor Ears, nor Thought, then say
My Wife's a Holy-Horse, deserves a Name
As rank as any Flax-Wench, that puts to
Before her troth-plight: say it, and iustify't.
I would not be a stander-by, to hear
My Sovereign Mistress clouded so, without
My present vengeance taken: shrew my heart,
You never spoke what did become you less
Then this; which to reiterate, were sin
As deep as that, though true.
Is whispering nothing?
Is leaning Cheek to Cheek? is meeting Noses?
Kissing with in-side Lip? stopping the Ca•iere
Of Laughter, with a sigh? (a Note infallible
Of breaking Honesty) horsing foot on foot?
Skulking in corners? wishing Clocks more swift?
Hours, Minutes? Noon, Mid-night? and all Eyes
Blind with the Pin and Web, but theirs; theirs only,
That would unseen be wicked? Is this nothing?
Why then the World, and all that's in it, is nothing,
The covering Sky is nothing, Bohemia nothing,
My Wife is nothing, nor Nothing have these Nothings,
If this be nothing.
Good my Lord, be cured
Of this diseased Opinion, and betimes,
For it is most dangerous.
Say it be, it is true.
No, no, my Lord.
It is: you lye, you lye:
I say thou lie Camillo, and I hate thee,
Pronounce thee a gross Lowt, a mindless Slave,
Or else a hovering Temporizer, that
Can with thine eyes at once see good and evil,
Inclining to them both: were my Wives Liver
Infected (as her life) she would not live
The running of one Glass.
Who do's infect her?
Why he that wears her like her Medull, hanging
About his neck (Bohemia) who, if I
Had Servants true about me, that bare eyes
To see alike mine Honour, as their Profits.
(Their own particular Thrifts) they would doe that
Which should undo more doing: I, and thou
His Cup-bearer, whom I from meaner form
Have Benched, and reared to Worship, who may see
Plainly, as Heaven sees Earth▪ and Earth sees Heaven,
How I am galled, might be-spice a Cup,
To give mine Enemy a lasting Wink:
Which Draught to me, were cordial.
Sir (my Lord)
I could doe this, and that with no rash Potion,
But with a lingering Dram, that should not work
Maliciously, like Poison: But I cannot
Believe this Crack to be in my dread Mistress
(So sovereignly being Honourable.)
I have loved thee.
Make that thy question, and go rot:
Dost think I am so muddy, so unsettled,
To appoint my self in this vexation?
Su•lie the purity and whiteness of my Sheets
(Which to preserve, is Sleep; which being spotted,
Is Go•es, Thorns Nettles, Tails of Wasps)
Give scandal to the blood of the Prince, my Son,
(Who I doe think is mine, and Jove as mine)
Without ripe moving to it? Would I doe this?
Could man so blench?
I must believe you (Sir)
I doe, and will fetch off Bohemia for it:
Provided, that when hoe's removed, your Highness
Will take again your Queen, as yours at first,
Even for your Sons sake, and thereby for sealing
The Injury of Tongues, in Courts and Kingdoms
Known, and allied to yours.
Thou dost advise me,
Even so as I mine own course have set down:
Isle give no blemish to her Honour, none.
My Lord,
Go then; and with a countenance as clear
As Friendship wears at Feasts, keep with Bohemia,
And with your Queen: I am his Cup-bearer,
If from me he have wholesome Beverage,
Account me not your Servant.
This is all:
Do it, and thou hast the one half of my heart;
Do it not, thou split thine own.
Isle do it, my Lord.
I will seem friendly, as thou hast advised me.
O miserable Lady. But for me,
What case stand I in? I must be the poisoner
Of good Polixenes, and my ground to do it,
Is the obedience to a Master; one,
Who in Rebellion with himself, will have
All that are his, so too. To doe this deed,
Promotion follows: If I could find example
Of thousand's that had struck anointed Kings,
And flourished after, Il'd not do it: But since
Nor Brass, nor Stone, nor Parchment bears not one,
Let Villainy it self forswear it. I must
Forsake the Court: to do it, or no, is certain
To me a break-neck. Happy Star reign now,
Here comes Bohemia.
This is strange: Me thinks
My favour here begins to warp. Not speak?
Good day Camillo.
Hail most Royal Sir.
What is the News in the Court?
None rare (my Lord.)
The King hath on him such a countenance,
As he had lost some Province, and a Region
Loved, as he loves himself: even now I met him
With customary complement, when hee
Wafting his eyes to the contrary, and falling
A Lip of much contempt, speeds from me, and
So leaves me, to consider what is breeding,
That changes thus his Manners.
I dare not know (my Lord.)
How, dare not? doe not? doe you know, and dare not?
Be intelligent to me, it is thereabouts:
For to your self, what you doe know, you must,
And cannot say, you dare not. Good Camillo,
Your changed complexions are to me a Mirror,
Which shows me mine changed too: for I must be
A party in this alteration, finding
My self thus altered with it.
There is a sickness
Which puts some of vs in distemper, but
I cannot name the Disease, and it is caught
Of you, that yet are well.
How caught of me?
Make me not sighted like the Basilisk.
I have looked on thousands, who have sped the better
By my regard, but killed none so: Camillo,
As you are certainly a Gentleman, thereto
Clerk-like experienced, which no less adorns
Our Gentry, then our Parents Noble Names,
In whose success we are gentle: I beseech you,
If you know ought which do's behove my knowledge,
Thereof to be informed, imprison't not
In ignorant concealment.
I may not answer.
A Sickness caught of me, and yet I well?
I must be answered. Dost thou hear Camillo,
I conjure thee, by all the parts of man,
Which Honour do's acknowledge, whereof the least
Is not this Suit of mine, that thou declare
What incidence thou dost guess of harm
Is creeping toward me; how far off, how near,
Which way to be prevented, if to be:
If not, how best to bear it.
Sir, I will tell you,
Since I am charged in Honour, and by him
That I think Honourable: therefore mark my counsel,
Which must be even as swiftly followed, as
I mean to utter it; or both your self, and me,
Cry lost, and so good night.
On, good Camillo.
I am appointed him to murder you.
By whom, Camillo?
By the King.
For what?
He thinks, nay with all confidence he swears,
As he had seen't, or been an Instrument
To vice you to it, that you have touched his Queen
Forbiddenly.
Oh then, my best blood turn
To an infected Gelly, and my Name
Be yoked with his, that did betray the Best:
Turn then my freshest Reputation to
A savour, that may strike the dullest Nosthrill
Where I arrive, and my approach be shunned,
Nay hated too, worse then the greatest Infection
That ere was heard, or read.
Swear his thought over
By each particular Star in Heaven, and
By all their Influences; you may as well
Forbid the Sea for to obey the Moon,
As (or by Oath) remove, or (Counsel) shake
The Fabric of his Folly, whose foundation
Is piled upon his Faith, and will continue
The standing of his Body.
How should this grow?
I know not: but I am sure it is safer to
Avoid what's grown, then question how it is borne.
If therefore you dare trust my honesty,
That lies enclosed in this Trunk, which you
Shall bear along impound, away to Night,
Your Followers I will whisper to the Business,
And will by twos, and threes, at several Posternes,
Clear them of the City: For my self, Isle put
My fortunes to your service (which are here
By this discovery lost.) Be not uncertain,
For by the honour of my Parents, I
Have uttered Truth: which if you seek to prove,
I dare not stand by; nor shall you be safer,
Then one condemned by the Kings own mouth:
Thereon his Execution sworn.
I doe believe thee:
I saw his heart in's face. Give me thy hand,
Be Pilot to me, and thy places shall
Still neighbour mine. My Ships are ready, and
My people did expect my hence departure
Two days ago. This Jealousy
Is for a precious Creature: as shoe's rare,
Must it be great; and, as his Person's mighty,
Must it be violent: and, as he do's conceive,
He is dishonoured by a man, which ever
Professed to him: why his Revenges must
In that be made more bitter. Fear ore-shades me:
Good Expedition be my friend, and comfort
The gracious Queen, part of his Theme; but nothing
Of his ill-ta'ne suspicion. Come Camillo,
I will respect thee as a Father, if
Thou bear my life off, hence: Let vs avoid.
It is in mine authority to command
The Keys of all the Posternes: Please your Highness
To take the urgent hour. Come Sir, away.
Take the Boy to you: he so troubles me,
It is past enduring.
Come (my gracious Lord)
Shall I be your play-fellow?
No, Isle none of you.
Why (my sweet Lord?)
You'll kiss me hard, and speak to me, as if
I were a Baby still. I love you better.
And why so (my Lord?)
Not for because
Your Brows are blacker (yet black-browes they say
Become some Women best, so that there be not
Too much hair there, but in a Semi-circle,
Or a halfe-Moone, made with a Pen.)
Who taught 'this?
I learned it out of Women's faces: pray now,
What colour are your eye-browes?
Blew (my Lord.)
Nay, that's a mock: I have seen a Ladies Nose
That he's been blew, but not her eye-browes.
Hark ye,
The Queen (your Mother) rounds apace: we shall
Present our services to a fine new Prince
One of these days, and then youl'd wanton with vs,
If we would have you.
She is spread of late
Into a goodly Bulk (good time encounter her.)
What wisdom stirs amongst you? Come Sir, now
I am for you again: 'Pray you sit by vs,
And tell's a Tale.
Merry, or sad, shall it be?
As merry as you will.
A sad Tale's best for Winter:
I have one of Sprights, and Goblins.
Let's have that (good Sir.)
Come-on, sit down, come-on, and doe your best,
To fright me with your Sprights: you're powerful at it.
There was a man.
Nay, come sit down: then on.
Dwelt by a Church-yard: I will tell it softly,
Yond Crickets shall not hear it.
Come on then, and gived me in mine care.
Was hee met there? his Train? Camillo with him?
Behind the tuft of Pines I met them, never
Saw I men scour so on their way: I eyed them
Even to their Ships.
How blessed am I
In my just Censure? in my true Opinion?
Alack, for lesser knowledge, how accursed,
In being so blessed? There may be in the Cup
A Spider steeped, and one may drink; depart,
And yet partake no venom: (for his knowledge
Is not infected) but if one present
The abhorred Ingredient to his eye, make known
How he hath drunk, he cracks his gorge, his sides
With violent Hefts: I have drunk, and seen the Spider.
Camillo was his help in this, his Pander:
There is a Plot against my Life, my Crown;
Ell's true that is mistrusted: that false Villain,
Whom I employed, was pre-employ'd by him:
He he's discovered my Design, and I
Remain a pinched Thing; yea, a very Trick
For them to play at will: how came the Posternes
So easily open?
By his great authority,
Which often hath no less prevailed, then so,
On your command.
I know it too well.
Give me the Boy, I am glad you did not nurse him:
Though he do's bear some signs of me, yet you
Have too much blood in him.
What is this? Sport?
Bear the Boy hence, he shall not come about her,
Away with him, and let her sport her self
With that shoe's big-with, for it is Polixenes
He's made thee swell thus.
But Il'd say he had not;
And Isle be sworn you would believe my saying,
How ever you leave to the Nay-ward.
You (my Lords)
Look on her, mark her well: be but about
To say she is a goodly Lady, and
The justice of your hearts will thereto add
It is pity shoe's not honest: Honourable;
Praise her but for this her without-dore-Forme,
(Which on my faith deserves high speech) and straight
The Shrug, the Hum, or Ha, (these Petty-brands
That Calumny doth use; Oh, I am out,
That Mercy do's, for Calumny will fear
Virtue it self) these Shrugs, these Hum's, and He's,
When you have said shoe's goodly, come between,
Ere you can say shoe's honest: But be it known
(From him that he's most cause to grieve it should be)
Shoe's an Adulteress.
Should a Villain say so,
(The most replenished Villain in the World)
He were as much more Villain: you (my Lord)
Doe but mistake.
You have mistook (my Lady)
Polixenes for Leontes: O thou Thing,
(Which Isle not call a Creature of thy place,
Least Barbarism (making me the precedent)
Should a like Language use to all degrees,
And mannerly distinguishment leave out,
Betwixt the Prince and Beggar:) I have said
Shoe's an Adulteress, I have said with whom:
More; shoe's a Traitor, and Camillo is
A Federarie with her, and one that knows
What she should shame to know her self,
But with her most wild Principal: that shoe's
A Bed-swaruer, even as bad as those
That Vulgars give boldest Titles; I, and privy
To this their late escape.
No (by my life)
Privy to none of this: how will this grieve you,
When you shall come to clearer knowledge, that
You thus have published me? Gentle my Lord.
You scarce can right me thoroughly, then, to say
You did mistake.
No: if I mistake
In those Foundations which I build upon,
The Centre is not big enough to bear
A Schoole-Boyes Top. Away with her, to Prison:
He who shall speak for her, is a farre-off guilty,
But that he speaks.
There's some ill Planet reigns:
I must be patient, till the Heavens look
With an aspect more favourable. Good my Lords,
I am not prone to weeping (as our Sex
Commonly are) the want of which vain dew
Perchance shall dry your pities: but I have
That honourable Grief lodged here, which burns
Worse then Tears drown: beseech you all (my Lords)
With thoughts so qualified, as your Charities
Shall best instruct you, measure me; and so
The Kings will be performed.
Shall I be heard?
Who is it that goes with me? beseech your Highness
My Women may be with me, for you see
My plight requires it. Doe not weep (good Fools)
There is no cause: When you shall know your Mistress
He's deserved Prison, then abound in Tears,
As I come out; this Action I now go on,
Is for my better grace. Adieu (my Lord)
I never wished to see you sorry, now
I trust I shall: my Women come, you have leave.
Go, doe our bidding: hence.
Beseech your Highness call the Queen again.
Be certain what you do (Sir) least your Justice
Prove violence, in the which three great ones suffer,
Your Self, your Queen, your Son.
For her (my Lord)
I dare my life lay down, and will do it (Sir)
Please you to accept it, that the Queen is spotless
In the eyes of Heaven, and to you (I mean
In this, which you accuse her.)
If it prove
Shoe's otherwise, Isle keep my Stables where
I lodge my Wife, Isle go in couples with her:
Then when I feel, and see her, no farther trust her:
For every inch of Woman in the World,
I, every dram of Women's flesh is false,
If she be.
Hold your peaces.
Good my Lord.
It is for you we speak, not for our selves:
You are abused, and by some putter on,
That will be damned for it: would I knew the Villain,
I would Land-damne him: be she honor-flaw'd,
I have three daughters: the eldest is eleven;
The second, and the third, nine: and some five:
If this prove true, they'll pay for it. By mine Honour
Isle gell'd em all: fourteen they shall not see
To bring false generations: they are co-heirs,
And I had rather glib my self, then they
Should not produce fair issue.
Cease, no more:
You smell this business with a sense as cold
As is a dead-mans nose: but I do see it, and feel it,
As you feel doing thus: and see withal
The Instruments that feel.
If it be so,
We need no grave to bury honesty,
There's not a grain of it, the face to sweeten
Of the whole dungy-earth.
What? lack I credit?
I had rather you did lack then I (my Lord)
Upon this ground: and more it would content me
To have her Honour true, then your suspicion
Be blamed for it how you might.
Why what need we
Commune with you of this? but rather follow
Our forceful instigation? Our prerogative
Calls not your Counsels, but our natural goodness
Imparts this: which, if you, or stupefied,
Or seeming so, in skill, cannot, or will not
Relish a truth, like vs: inform your selves,
We need no more of your advice: the matter,
The loss, the gain, the ord'ring on it,
Is all properly ours▪
And I wish (my Liege)
You had only in your silent judgment tried it,
Without more overture.
How could that be?
Either thou art most ignorant by age,
Or thou were it borne a fool: Camillo's flight
Added to their Familiarity
(Which was as gross, as ever touched conjecture,
That lacked sight only, nought for approbation
But only seeing, all other circumstances
Made up to 'th deed) doth push-on this proceeding.
Yet, for a greater confirmation
(For in an Act of this importance, it were
Most piteous to be wilde) I have dispatched in post,
To sacred Delphos, to Appollo's Temple,
Cleomines and Dion, whom you know
Of stuff'd-sufficiency: Now, from the Oracle
They will bring all, whose spiritual counsel had
Shall stop, or spur me. Have I done well?
Well done (my Lord.)
Though I am satisfied, and need no more
Then what I know, yet shall the Oracle
Give rest to the minds of others; such as he
Whose ignorant credulity, will not
Come up to the truth. So have we thought it good
From our free person, she should be confined,
Least that the treachery of the two, fled hence,
Be left her to perform. Come follow vs,
We are to speak in public: for this business
Will raise vs all.
To laughter, as I take it,
If the good truth, were known.
The Keeper of the prison, call to him:
Let him have knowledge who I am. Good Lady,
No Court in Europe is too good for thee,
What dost thou then in prison? Now good Sir,
You know me, do you not?
For a worthy Lady,
And one, who much I honour.
Pray you then,
Conduct me to the Queen.
I may not (Madam)
To the contrary I have express commandment.
Here's ado, to locke up honesty &amp; honour from
The access of gentle visitors. Is it lawful pray you
To see her Women? Any of them? Emilia?
So please you (Madam)
To put apart these your attendants, I
Shall bring Emilia forth.
I pray now call her:
With-draw your selves.
And Madam,
I must be present at your Conference.
Well: be it so: prithee.
Heere's such ado, to make no stain, a stain,
As passes colouring. Dear Gentlewoman,
How fares our gracious Lady?
As well as one so great, and so forlorn
May hold together: On her frights, and griefs
(Which never tender Lady hath borne greater)
She is, something before her time, delivered.
A boy?
A daughter, and a goodly babe,
Lusty, and like to live: the Queen receives
Much comfort in it: Says, my poor prisoner,
I am innocent as you,
I dare be sworn:
These dangerous, unsafe Lunes in the King, beshrew them:
He must be told on it, and he shall: the office
Becomes a woman best. Isle take it upon me,
If I prove hony-mouth'd, let my tongue blister.
And never to my red-look'd Anger bee
The Trumpet any more: pray you (Emilia)
Commend my best obedience to the Queen,
If she dares trust me with her little babe,
I'll show it the King, and undertake to bee
Her Advocate to the loudest. We do not know
How he may soften at the sight of the Child:
The silence often of pure innocence
Persuades, when speaking fails.
Most worthy Madam,
your honour, and your goodness is so evident,
That your free undertaking cannot miss
A thriving issue: there is no Lady living
So meet for this great errand; please your Ladyship
To visit the next room, Isle presently
Acquaint the Queen of your most noble offer,
Who, but to day hammered of this design,
But durst not tempt a minister of honour
Least she should be denied.
Tell her (Emilia)
Isle use that tongue I have: If wit flow from it
As boldness from my bosom, le't not be doubted
I shall do good.
Now be you blessed for it.
Isle to the Queen: please you come something nearer.
Madam, if it please the Queen to send the babe,
I know not what I shall incur, to pass it,
Having no warrant.
You need not fear it (sir)
This Child was prisoner to the womb, and is
By Law and process of great Nature, thence
Freed, and enfranchised, not a party to
The anger of the King, nor guilty of
(If any be) the trespass of the Queen.
I do believe it.
Do not you fear: upon mine honour, I•
Will stand betwixt you, and danger.
Nor night, nor day, no rest: It is but weakness
To bear the matter thus: mere weakness, if
The cause were not in being: part of the cause,
She, the Adulteress: for the harlot-King
Is quite beyond mine Arm, out of the blank
And level of my brain: plot-proofe: but she,
I can hook to me: say that she were gone,
Given to the fire, a moity of my rest
Might come to me again. Whose there?
My Lord.
How do's the boy?
He took good rest to night: it is hoped
His sickness is discharged.
To see his Nobleness,
Conceiving the dishonour of his Mother.
He straight declined, drooped, took it deeply,
Fastened, and fixed the shame on it in himself:
Threw-off his Spirit, his Appetite, his Sleep,
And down-right languished. Leave me solely: go,
See how he fares: Fie, fie, no thought of him,
The very thought of my Revenges that way
Recoil upon me: in himself too mighty,
And in his parties, his Alliance; Let him be,
Until a time may serve. For present vengeance
Take it on her: Camillo, and Polixenes
Laugh at me: make their pastime at my sorrow:
They should not laugh, if I could reach them, nor
Shall she, within my power.
You must not enter.
Nay rather (good my Lords) be second to me:
Fear you his tyrannous passion more (alas)
Then the Queens life? A gracious innocent soul,
More free, then he is jealous.
That's enough.
Madam; he hath not slept to night, commanded
None should come at him.
Not so hot (good Sir)
I come to bring him sleep. It is such as you
That creep like shadows by him, and do sigh
At each his needless heauings: such as you
Nourish the cause of his awaking. I
Do come with words, as medicinal, as true;
(Honest, as either;) to purge him of that humour,
That presses him from sleep.
Who noise there, hoe?
No noise (my Lord) but needful conference,
About some Gossips for your Highness.
How?
Away with that audacious Lady. Antigonus,
I charged thee that she should not come about me,
I knew she would.
I told her so (my Lord)
On your displeasures peril, and on mine,
She should not visit you.
What? can not rule her?
From all dishonesty he can: in this
(Unless he take the course that you have done)
Commit me, for committing honour, trust it,
He shall not rule me:
La-you now, you hear,
When she will take the rain, I let her run,
But she'll not stumble.
Good my Liege, I come:
And I beseech you hear me, who professes
My self your loyal Servant, your Physician,
Your most obedient Counsailor: yet that dares
Less appear so, in comforting your Evils,
Then such as most seem yours. I say, I come
From your good Queen.
Good Queen?
Good Queen (my Lord) good Queen,
I say good Queen,
And would by combat, make her good so, were I
A man, the worst about you.
Force her hence.
Let him that makes but trifles of his eyes
First hand me: on mine own accord, Isle off,
But first, Isle do my errand. The good Queen
(For she is good) hath brought you forth a daughter,
Here it is: Commends it to your blessing.
Out:
A mankind Witch? Hence with her, out o'dore:
A most intelligencing bawd.
Not so:
I am as ignorant in that, as you,
In so entit'ling me: and no less honest
Then you are mad: which is enough, Isle warrant
(As this world goes) to pass for honest:
Traitors;
Will you not push her out? Give her the Bastard,
Thou dotard, thou art woman-tyr'd: vnroosted
By thy dame Partlet here. Take up the Bastard,
Take it up, I say: giue't to thy Croon.
For ever
Vnvenerable be thy hands, if thou
Take up the Princess, by that forced baseness
Which he he's put upon it.
He dreads his Wife.
So I would you did: then it were past all doubt
Youl'd call your children, yours.
A nest of Traitors.
I am none, by this good light.
Nor I: nor any
But one that's here: and that's himself: for he,
The sacred Honour of himself, his Queens,
His hopeful Sons, his Babes, betrays to Slander,
Whose sting is sharper then the Swords; and will not
(For as the case now stands, it is a Curse
He cannot be compelled too't) once remove
The Root of his Opinion, which is rotten,
As ever Oak, or Stone was sound.
A Collate
Of boundless tongue, who late hath beat her Husband,
And now baits me: This Brat is none of mine,
It is the Issue of Polixenes,
Hence with it, and together with the Dam,
Commit them to the fire.
It is yours:
And might we l•y the old Proverb to your charge,
So like you, it is the worse. Behold (my Lords)
Although the Print be little, the whole Matter
And Copy of the Father: (Eye, Nose, Lip,
The trick of's Frown, his Fore-head, nay, the Valley,
The pretty dimples of his Chin, and Cheek; his Smiles:
The very Mold, and frame of Hand, Nail, Finger.)
And thou good Goddess Nature, which hast made it
So like to him that got it, if thou hast
The ordering of the Mind too, amongst all Colours
No Yellow in it, least she suspect, as he do's,
Her Children, not her Husbands.
A gross Hag:
And Losel, thou art worthy to be hanged,
That wilt not stay her Tongue.
Hang all the Husbands
That cannot doe that Feat, you'll leave your self
Hardly one Subject.
Once more take her hence.
A most unworthy, and unnatural Lord
Can doe no more.
Isle h•' thee burnt.
I care not:
It is an Heretic that makes the fire,
Not she which burns in it. Isle not call you Tyrant:
But this most cruel usage of your Queen
(Not able to produce more accusation
Then your own weake-hindg'd Fancy) something savours
Of Tyranny, and will ignoble make you,
Yea, scandalous to the World.
On your Allegiance,
Out of the Chamber with her. Were I a Tyrant,
Where were her life? she durst not call me so,
If she did know me one, Away with her.
I pray you doe not push me, Isle be gone.
Look to your Babe (my Lord) it is yours: Jove send her
A better guiding Spirit. What needs these hands?
You that are thus so tender o'er his Follies,
Will never doe him good, not one of you.
So, so: Farewell, we are gone.
Thou (Traitor) hast set on thy Wife to this.
My Child? away with it? even thou, that hast
A heart so tender o'er it, take it hence,
And see it instantly consumed with fire.
Even thou, and none but thou. Take it up straight:
Within this hour bring me word it is done,
(And by good testimony) or Isle seize thy life,
With what thou else call thine: if thou refuse,
And wilt encounter with my Wrath, say so;
The Bastard brains with these my proper hands
Shall I dash out. Go, take it to the fire,
For thou set on thy Wife.
I did not, Sir:
These Lords, my Noble Fellows, if they please,
Can clear me in it.
We can: my Royal Liege,
He is not guilty of her coming hither.
You're liars all.
Beseech your Highness, give vs better credit:
We have always truly served you, and beseech'
So to esteem of vs: and on our knees we beg,
(As recompense of our dear services
Past, and to come) that you doe change this purpose,
Which being so horrible, so bloody, must
Lead on to some foul Issue. We all kneel.
I am a Feather for each Wind that blows:
Shall I live on, to see this Bastard kneel,
And call me Father? better burn it now,
Then curse it then. But be it: let it live.
It shall not neither. You Sir, come you hither:
You that have been so tenderly officious
With Lady Margerie, your Mid-wife there,
To save this Bastards life; for it is a Bastard,
So sure as this Beard's gray. What will you adventure,
To save this Brats life?
Any thing (my Lord)
That my ability may undergo,
And Nobleness impose: at least thus much;
Isle pawn the little blood which I have left,
To save the Innocent: any thing possible.
It shall be possible: Swear by this Sword
Thou wilt perform my bidding.
I will (my Lord.)
Mark, and perform it: see thou? for the fail
Of any point in it, shall not only be
Death to thy self, but to thy lewd-tongu'd Wife,
(Whom for this time we pardon) We enjoin thee,
As thou art Liege-man to vs, that thou carry
This female Bastard hence, and that thou bear it
To some remote and desert place, quite out
Of our Dominions; and that there thou leave it
(Without more mercy) to it own protection,
And favour of the Climate: as by strange fortune
It came to vs, I doe in Justice charge thee,
On thy Souls peril, and thy Bodies torture,
That thou commend it strangely to some place,
Where Chance may nurse, or end it: take it up.
I swear to doe this: though a present death
Had been more merciful. Come on (poor Babe)
Some powerful Spirit instruct the Kites and Ravens
To be thy Nurses. Wolves and Bears, they say,
(Casting their savageness aside) have done
Like offices of Pity. Sir, be prosperous
In more then this deed do's require; and Blessing
Against this Cruelty, fight on thy side
(Poor Thing, condemned to loss.)
No: Isle not rear
Another Issue.
Please' your Highness, Posts
From those you sent to the Oracle, are come
An hour since: Cleomines and Dion,
Being well arrived from Delphos, are both landed,
Hasting to the Court.
So please you (Sir) their speed
Hath been beyond account.
Twenty three days
They have been absent: it is good speed: fore-tells
The great Apollo suddenly will have
The truth of this appear: Prepare you Lords,
Summon a Session, that we may arraign
Our most •sloyall Lady▪ for as she hath
Been publicly accused, so shall she have
A just and open Trial. While she lives,
My heart will be a burden to me. Leave me,
And think upon my bidding.
The Clymat's delicate, the Ayre most sweet,
Fertile the Isle, the Temple much surpassing
The common praise it bears.
I shall report,
For most it caught me, the Celestial Habits,
(Me thinks I so should term them) and the reverence
Of the grave Wearers. O, the Sacrifice,
How ceremonious, solemn, and vn-earthly
It was in the Offering?
But of all, the burst
And the eare-deaff•ning Voice of the Oracle,
Kin to Ioues Thunder, so surprised my Sense,
That I was nothing.
It the event of the Journey
Prove as successful to the Queen (O be it so)
As it hath been to vs, rare, pleasant, speedy,
The time is worth the use on it.
Great Apollo
Turn all to the best: these Proclamations,
So forcing faults upon Hermione,
I little like.
The violent carriage of it
Will clear, or end the Business, when the Oracle
(Thus by Apollo's great Divine sealed up)
Shall the Contents discover: something rare
Even then will rush to knowledge. Go: fresh Horses,
And gracious be the issue.
This Sessions (to our great grief we pronounce)
Even pushes against our heart. The party tried,
The Daughter of a King, our Wife, and one
Of vs too much beloved. Let vs be cleared
Of being tyrannous, since we so openly
Proceed in Justice, which shall have due course,
Even to the Guilt, or the Purgation:
Produce the Prisoner.
It is his Highness pleasure, that the Queen
Appear in person, here in Court.
Read the Indictment.
Hermione, Queen to the worthy Leontes, King of Sicilia, thou art here accused and arraigned of High Trea∣son, in committing Adultery with Polixenes King of Bohemia, and conspiring with Camillo to take away the Life of our Some∣reign Lord the King, thy Royal Husband: the pretence whereof being by circumstances partly laid open, thou (Hermione) con∣trary to the Faith and Allegiance of a true Subject▪ did coun∣sail and aid them, for their better safety, to fly away by Night.
Since what I am to say, must be but that
Which contradicts my Accusation, and
The testimony on my part, no other
But what comes from my self, it shall scarce boot me
To say, Not guilty▪ mine Integrity
Being counted Falsehood, shall (as I express it)
Be so received. But thus, if Powers Divine
Behold our humane Actions (as they doe)
I doubt not then, but Innocence shall make
False Accusation blush, and Tyranny
Tremble at Patience. You (my Lord) best know
(Whom least will seem to doe so) my past life
Hath been as continent, as chaste, as true,
As I am now unhappy; which is more
Then History can pattern, though deuis'd,
And played, to take Spectators. For behold me,
A Fellow of the Royal Bed, which owe
A Moitie of the Throne: a great Kings Daughter,
The Mother to a hopeful Prince, here standing
To prate and talk for Life, and Honour, fore
Who please to come, and hear. For Life, I prize it
As I weigh Grief (which I would spare:) For Honour,
It is a derivative from me to mine,
And only that I stand for. I appeal
To your own Conscience (Sir) before Polixenes
Came to your Court, how I was in your grace,
How merited to be so: Since he came,
With what encounter so vncurrant, I
Have strained to appear thus; if one jot beyond
The bound of Honour, or in act, or will
That way inclining, hardened be the hearts
Of all that hear me, and my nearest of Kin
Cry fie upon my Grave.
I ne'er heard yet,
That any of these bolder Vices wanted
Less Impudence to gainsay what they did,
Then to perform it first.
That's true enough,
Though it is a saying (Sir) not due to me.
You will not own it.
More then Mistress of,
Which comes to me in name of Fault, I must not
At all acknowledge. For Polixenes
(With whom I am accused) I doe confess
I loved him, as in Honour he required:
With such a kind of Love, as might become
A Lady like me; with a Love, even such,
So, and no other, as your self commanded:
Which, not to have done, I think had been in me
Both Disobedience, and Ingratitude
To you, and toward your Friend, whose Love had spoke,
Even since it could speak, from an Infant, freely,
That it was yours. Now for Conspiracy,
I know not how it tastes, though it be dished
For me to try how: All I know of it,
Is, that Camillo was an honest man;
And why he left your Court, the Gods themselves
(Wotting no more then I) are ignorant.
You knew of his departure, as you know
What you have vnderta'ne to doe in's absence.
Sir,
You speak a Language that I understand not:
My Life stands in the level of your Dreams,
Which Isle lay down.
Your Actions are my Dreams.
You had a Bastard by Polixenes,
And I but dreamed it: As you were past all shame,
(Those of your Fact are so) so past all truth;
Which to deny, concerns more then avails: for as
Thy Brat hath been cast out, like to it self,
No Father owning it (which is indeed
More criminal in thee, then it) so thou
Shalt feel out Justice; in whose easiest passage,
Look for no less then death.
Sir, spare your Threats:
The Bug which you would fright me with, I seek:
To me can Life be no commodity;
The crown and comfort of my Life (your Favour)
I doe give lost, for I doe feel it gone,
But know not how it went. My second Joy,
And first Fruits of my body, from his presence
I am bared, like one infectious. My third comfort
(Stared most unluckily) is from my breast
(The innocent milk in it most innocent mouth)
Hauled out to murder. My self on every Post
Proclaimed a Strumpet: With immodest hatred
The Child-bed privilege denied, which longs
To Women of all fashion. Lastly, horried
Here, to this place, in the open ayre, before
I have got strength of limit. Now (my Liege)
Tell me what blessings I have here alive,
That I should fear to die? Therefore proceed:
But yet hear this: mistake me not: no Life,
(I prize it not a straw) but for mine Honour,
Which I would free: if I shall be condemned
Upon surmises (all proofs sleeping else,
But what your Jealousies awake) I tell you
It is Rigour, and not Law Your Honours all,
I doe refer me to the Oracle:
Apollo be my Judge.
This your request
Is altogether just: therefore bring forth
(And in Apollo's Name) his Oracle.
The Emperor of Russia was my Father.
Oh that he were alive, and here beholding
His Daughters Trial: that he did but see
The flatness of my misery; yet with eyes
Of Pity, not Revenge.
You here shall swear upon this Sword of Justice,
That you (Cleomines and Dion) have
Been both at Delphos, and from thence have brought
This seal'd-vp Oracle, by the Hand delivered
Of great Apollo's Priest; and that since then,
You have not dared to break the holy Seal,
Nor read the Secrets in it.
All this we swear.
Break up the Seals, and read.
Hermione is chaste, Polixenes blameless, Camillo a true Subject, Leontes a jealous Tyrant, his innocent Babe truly begotten, and the King shall live without an Heir, if that which is lost, be not found.
Now blessed be the great Apollo.
Praised.
Hast thou read truth?
I (my Lord) even so as it is here set down.
There is no truth at all in the Oracle:
The Sessions shall proceed: this is mere falsehood.
My Lord the King: the King?
What is the business?
O Sir, I shall be hated to report it.
The Prince your Son, with mere conceit, and fear
Of the Queens speed, is gone.
How? gone?
Is dead.
Apollo's angry, and the Heavens themselves
Doe strike at my Injustice. How now there?
This news is mortal to the Queen: Look down
And see what Death is doing.
Take her hence:
Her heart is but o're-charg'd: she will recover.
I have too much believed mine own suspicion:
Beseech you tenderly apply to her
Some remedies for life. Apollo pardon
My great profaneness against thine Oracle.
Isle reconcile me to Polixenes,
New woe my Queen, recall the good Camillo
(Whom I proclaim a man of Truth, of Mercy:)
For being transported by my Jealousies
To bloody thoughts, and to revenge, I chose
Camillo for the minister, to poison
My friend Polixenes: which had been done,
But that the good mind of Camillo tardied
My swift command: though I with Death, and with
Reward, did threaten and encourage him,
Not doing it, and being done: he (most humane,
And filled with Honour) to my Kingly Guest
Unclasped my practise, quit his fortunes here
(Which you knew great) and to the hazard
Of all Uncertainties, himself commended,
No richer then his Honour: How he glisters
Through my Rust? and how his Piety
Do's my deeds make the blacker?
Woe the while:
O cut my Lace, least my heart (cracking it)
Break too.
What fit is this? good Lady?
What studied torments (Tyrant) hast for me?
What Wheels? Racks? Fires? What flaying? boiling?
In Leads, or Oils? What old, or newer Torture
Must I receive? whose every word deserves
To taste of thy most worst. Thy Tyranny
(Together working with thy Jealousies,
Fancies too weak for Boys, too greene and idle
For Girls of Nine) O think what they have done,
And then run mad indeed: starke-mad: for all
Thy by-gone fooleries were but spices of it.
That thou betrayed Polixenes, it was nothing,
(That did but show thee, of a Fool, inconstant,
And damnable ungrateful:) Nor was it much,
Thou would have poisoned good Camillo's Honour,
To have him kill a King: poor Trespasses,
More monstrous standing by: whereof I reckon
The casting forth to Crows, thy Baby-daughter,
To be or none, or little; though a Devil
Would have shed water out of fire, ere don't:
Nor is it directly laid to thee the death
Of the young Prince, whose honourable thoughts
(Thoughts high for one so tender) cleft the heart
That could conceive a gross and foolish Sire
Blemished his gracious Dam: this is not, no,
Laid to thy answer: but the last: O Lords,
When I have said, cry woe: the Queen, the Oueene,
The sweetest, dearest creature's dead: &amp; vengeance for it
Not dropped down yet.
The higher powers forbid.
I say she's dead: Isle swear it. If word, nor oath
Prevail not, go and see: if you can bring
Tincture, or lustre in her lip, her eye
Heate outwardly, or breath within, Isle serve you
As I would do the Gods. But, O thou Tyrant,
Do not repent these things, for they are heavier
Then all thy woes can stir: therefore betake thee
To nothing but despair. A thousand knees,
Ten thousand years together, naked, fasting,
Upon a barren Mountain, and still Winter
In storm perpetual, could not move the Gods
To look that way thou were it.
Go on, go on:
Thou can not speak too much, I have deserved
All tongues to talk their bitterest.
Say no more;
How ere the business goes, you have made fault
I 'th boldness of your speech.
I am sorry for it;
All faults I make, when I shall come to know them,
I do repent: Alas, I have showed too much
The rashness of a woman: he is touched
To the Noble heart. What's gone, and what's past help
Should be past grief: Do not receive affliction
At my petition; I beseech you, rather
Let me be punished, that have minded you
Of what you should forget. Now (good my Liege)
Sir, Royal Sir forgive a foolish woman:
The love I bore your Queen (Lo, fool again)
Isle speak of her no more, nor of your Children:
Isle not remember you of my own Lord,
(Who is lost too:) take your patience to you,
And Isle say nothing.
Thou did speak but well,
When most the truth: which I receive much better,
Then to be pitied of thee. Prithee bring me
To the dead bodies of my Queen, and Son,
One grave shall be for both: Upon them shall
The causes of their death appear (unto
Our shame perpetual) once a day, Isle visit
The Chapel where they lye, and tears shed there
Shall be my recreation. So long as Nature
Will bear up with this exercise, so long
I daily vow to use it. Come, and lead me
To these sorrows.
Thou art perfect then, our ship hath touched upon
The Deserts of Bohemia.
I (my Lord) and fear
We have Landed in ill time: the skies look grimly,
And threaten present blusters. In my conscience
The heavens with that we have in hand, are angry,
And frown vpon's.
Their sacred wil's be done: go get aboard,
Look to thy bark, Isle not be long before
I call upon thee.
Make your best haste, and go not
Too-farre in th Land: it is like to be loud weather,
Besides this place is famous for the Creatures
Of prey, that keep upon it.
Go thou away,
Isle follow instantly.
I am glad at heart
To be so rid of th business.
Come, poor babe;
I have heard (but not believed) the Spirits of the dead
May walk again: if such thing be, thy Mother
Appeared to me last night: for ne'er was dream
So like a waking. To me comes a creature,
Sometimes her head on one side, some another,
I never saw a vessel of like sorrow
So filled, and so becoming: in pure white Robes
Like very sanctity she did approach
My Cabin where I lay: thrice bowed before me,
And (gasping to begin some speech) her eyes
Became two spouts; the fury spent, anon
Did this break from her. Good Antigonus,
Since Fate (against thy better disposition)
Hath made thy person for the Thower-out
Of my poor babe, according to thine oath,
Places remote enough are in Bohemia,
There weep, and leave it crying: and for the babe
Is counted lost for ever, Perdita
I prithee call it: For this ungentle business
Put on thee, by my Lord, thou ne'er shalt see
Thy Wife Pauline more: and so, with shrickes
She melted into Ayre. Affrighted much,
I did in time collect my self, and thought
This was so, and no slumber: Dreams, are toys,
Yet for this once, yea superstitiously,
I will be squared by this. I do believe
Hermione hath suffered death, and that
Apollo would (this being indeed the issue
Of King Polixenes) it should here be laid
(Either for life, or death) upon the earth
Of it's right Father. Blossom, speed thee well,
There lye, and there thy character: there these,
Which may if Fortune please, both breed thee (pretty)
And still rest thine. The storm begins, poor wretch,
That for thy mothers fault, art thus exposed
To loss, and what may follow. Weep I cannot,
But my heart bleeds: and most accursed am I
To be by oath enjoined to this. Farewell,
The day frowns more and more: you're like to have
A lullaby too rough: I never saw
The heavens so dim, by day. A savage clamour?
Well may I get aboard: This is the Chase,
I am gone for ever.
I would there were no age between ten and three and twenty, or that youth would sleep out the rest: for there is nothing (in the between) but getting wen∣ches with child, wronging the Ancientry, stealing, fighting, hark you now: would any but these boylde-braines of nineteen, and two and twenty hunt this wea∣there? They have scarred away two of my best Sheep, which I fear the Wolf will sooner find then the My∣ster; if any where I have them, it is by the sea-side, brou∣zing of Ivy▪ Good-lucke (and't be thy will) what have we here? Mercy on's, a Barn? A very pretty barn; A boy, or a Child I wonder? (A pretty one, a very pretty one) sure some Scope; Though I am not bookish▪ yet I
can read Waiting-Gentlewoman in the scope: this has been some staire-worke, some Trunke-worke, some be∣hinde-doore work: they were warmer that got this, then the poor Thing is here. Isle take it up for pity, yet Isle tarry till my son come: he hallowed but even now. Whoa-ho-hoa.
Hilloa, loa.
What? art so near? If thou'lt see a thing to talk on, when thou art dead and rotten, come hither: what ail thou, man?
I have seen two such sights, by Sea &amp; by Land: but I am not to say it is a Sea, for it is now the sky, be∣twixt the Firmament and it, you cannot thrust a bodkins point.
Why boy, how is it?
I would you did but see how it chases, how it ra∣ges, how it takes up the shore, but that's not to the point: Oh, the most piteous cry of the poor souls, sometimes to see 'em, and not to see 'em: Now the Ship boaring the Moon with her maine Mast, and anon swallowed with yest and froth, as you'd thrust a Cork into a hogs∣head. And then for the Land-seruice, to see how the Bear tore out his shoulder-bone, how he cried to me for help, and said his name was Antigonus, a Nobleman: But to make an end of the Ship, to see how the Sea flap∣dragon'd it: but first, how the poor souls roared, and the sea mocked them: and how the poor Gentleman roa∣red, and the Bear mocked him, both roaring louder then the sea, or weather.
Name of mercy, when was this boy?
Now, now: I have not winked since I saw these sights: the men are not yet cold under water, nor the Bear half dined on the Gentleman: he's at it now.
Would I had bin by, to have helped the old man.
I would you had been by the ship side, to have helped her; there your charity would have lacked footing.
Heavy matters, heavy matters: but look thee here boy. Now bless thy self: thou met with things dying, I with things new borne Here's a sight for thee: Look thee, a bearing-cloth for a Squires child: look thee here, take up, take up (Boy:) open it: so, let's see, it was told me I should be rich by the Fairies. This is some Changeling: open it: what's within, boy?
You're a mad old man: If the sins of your youth are forgiven you, you're well to live. Gold, all Gold.
This is Faiery Gold boy, and twill prove so: up with it, keep it close: home, home, the next way. We are lucky (boy) and to bee so still requires nothing but secrecy. Let my sheep go: Come (good boy) the next way home.
Go you the next way with your Findings, Isle go see if the Bear bee gone from the Gentleman, and how much he hath eaten: they are never cursed but when they are hungry: if there be any of him left, Isle bury it.
That's a good deed: if thou may discern by that which is left of him, what he is, fetch me to the sight of him.
'Marry will I: and you shall help to put him in the ground.
It is a lucky day, boy, and we'll do good deeds on it
I that please some, try all: both joy and terror
Of good, and bad: that makes, and unfolds error,
Now take upon me (in the name of Time)
To use my wings: Impute it not a crime
To me, or my swift passage, that I slide
Ore sixteen years, and leave the growth vntride
Of that wide gap, since it is in my power
To orethrow Law, and in one selfe-borne hour
To plant, and ore-whelme Custom. Let me pass
The same I am, ere ancient'st Order was,
Or what is now received. I witness to
The times that brought them in, so shall I do
To the freshest things now reigning, and make stale
The glistening of this present, as my Tale
Now seems to it: your patience this allowing,
I turn my glass, and give my Scene such growing
As you had slept between: Leontes leaving
The effects of his fond jealousies, so grieving
That he shuts up himself. Imagine me
(Gentle Spectators) that I now may be
In fair Bohemia, and remember well,
I mentioned a son of the Kings, which Florizell
I now name to you: and with speed so pace
To speak of Perdita, now grown in grace
Equal with wondering. What of her ensues
I list not prophecy: but let Times news
Be known when it is brought forth. A shepherds daugh∣la
And what to her adheres, which follows after,
Is the argument of Time: of this allow,
If ever you have spent time worse, ere now:
If never, yet that Time himself doth say,
He wishes earnestly, you never may.
I pray thee (good Camillo) be no more importu∣nate: it is a sickness denying thee any thing: a death to grant this.
It is fifteen years since I saw my Country: though I have (for the most part) bin aired abroad, I de∣sire to lay my bones there. Besides, the penitent King (my Master) hath sent for me, to whose feeling sorrows I might be some allay, or I oreweene to think so) which is another spur to my departure.
As thou love me (Camillo) wipe not out the rest of thy services, by leaving me now: the need I have of thee, thine own• goodness hath made: better not to have had thee, then thus to want thee, thou having made me Businesses, (which none (without thee) can suffice∣ently manage) must either stay to execute them thy self, or take away with thee the very services thou hast done: which if I have not enough considered (as too much I cannot) to bee more thankful to thee, shall bee my stu∣die, and my profit therein, the heaping friendshippes. Of that fatal Country Sicillia, prithee speak no more, whose very naming, punishes me with the remembrance
of that penitent (as thou call him) and reconciled King my brother, whose loss of his most precious Queen &amp; Children, are even now to be afresh lamented. Say to me, when saw thou the Prince Florizell my son? Kings are no less unhappy, their issue, not being gracious, then they are in loosing them, when they have approved their Virtues.
Sir, it is three days since I saw the Prince: what his happier affairs may be, are to me unknown: but I have (missingly) noted, he is of late much retired from Court, and is less frequent to his Princely exercises then formerly he hath appeared.
I have considered so much (Camillo) and with some care, so far, that I have eyes under my service, which look upon his remouednesse: from whom I have this Intelligence, that he is seldom from the house of a most homely shepherd: a man (they say) that from very nothing, and beyond the imagination of his neighbours, is grown into an unspeakable estate.
I have heard (sir) of such a man, who hath a daughter of most rare note: the report of her is extended more, then can be thought to begin from such a cottage
That's likewise part of my Intelligence: but (I fear) the Angle that plucks our son thither. Thou shalt accompany vs to the place, where we will (not ap∣pearing what we are) have some question with the shep∣heard; from whose simplicity, I think it not uneasy to get the cause of my sons resort thither. Prithee be my present partner in this business, and lay aside the thoughts of Sicillia.
I willingly obey your command.
My best Camillo, we must disguise our selves.
When Daffodils begin to peer,
With heigh the Doxy over the dale.
Why then comes in the sweet of the year,
For the red blood reigns in ye winters pale.
The white sheet bleaching on the hedge,
With boy the sweet birds, O how they sing:
Doth set my pugging tooth an edge,
For a quart of Ale is a dish for a King.
The Lark that tire Lyra chants,
With heigh, the Thrush and the Iay:
Are Summer songs for me and my Aunts
While we lye tumbling in the hay.
I have served Prince Florizell, and in my time wore three pile, but now I am out of service.
But shall I go morn for that (my dear)
the pale Moon shines by night:
And when I wander here, and there
I then do most go right.
If Tinkers may have leave to live,
and bear the Sow-skin Budget,
Then my account I well may give,
and in the Stocks avouch it.
My Traffic is sheets: when the Kite builds, look to lesser Linne•. My Father named me Autolicus, who be∣ing (as I am) littered under Mercury, was likewise a snapper-vp of vnconsidered trifles: With Dye and drab, I purchased this Caparison, and my Revenue is the silly Cheat. Gallows, and Knock, are too powerful on the Highway. Beating and hanging are terrors to me: For the life to come, I sleep out the thought of it. A prize, a prize.
Let me see, every Leauen-weather toddes, every tod yields pound and odd shilling: fifteen hundred shorn, what comes the wool too?
If the sprindge hold, the Cocke's mine.
I cannot do it without Counters. Let me see, what am I to buy for our Sheepe-shearing-Feast? Three pound of Sugar, five pound of Currence, Rice: What will this sister of mine do with Rice? But my father hath made her Mistress of the Feast, and she lays it on. She hath made-me four and twenty Nose-gayes for the shea∣rears (three-man song-men, all, and very good ones) but they are most of them Means and Bases; but one Pur∣itan amongst them, and he sings Psalms to horne-pipes. I must have Saffron to colour the Warden Pies, Mace: Dates, none: that's out of my note: Nutmegs, seven; a Race or two of Ginger, but that I may beg: Four pound of Prewyns, and as many of Reysons of th Sun.
Oh, that ever I was borne.
In the name of me.
Oh help me, help me: pluck but off these rags: and then, death, death.
Alack poor soul, thou hast need of more rags to lay on thee, rather then have these off.
Oh sir, the loathsomeness of them offend me, more then the stripes I have received, which are mighty ones and millions.
Alas poor man, a million of beating may come to a great matter.
I am robed sir, and beaten: my money, and ap∣parrell tan from me, and these derestable things put up∣on me.
What, by a horse-man, or a foot-man?
A footman (sweet sir) a footman.
Indeed, he should be a footman, by the garments he has left with thee: If this bee a horseman's Coat, it hath seen very hot service. Lend me thy hand, Isle help thee. Come, lend me thy hand.
Oh good sir, tenderly, oh.
Alas poor soul.
Oh good sir, softly, good sir: I fear (sir) my shoulder-blade is out.
How now? Can stand?
Softly, dear sir: good sir, softly: you ha done me a charitable office.
Doest lack any money? I have a little money for thee.
No, good sweet sir: no, I beseech you sir: I have a Kinsman not past three quarters of a mile hence, unto whom I was going: I shall there have money, or any thing I want: Offer me no money I pray you, that kills my heart.
What manner of Fellow was hee that robbed you?
A fellow (sir) that I have known to go about with Troll-my-dames: I knew him once a servant of the Prince: I cannot tell good sir, for which of his Ver∣tues it was, but hee was certainly Whipped out of the Court.
His vices you would say: there's no virtue whipped out of the Court: they cherish it to make it stay there; and yet it will no more but abide.
Vices I would say (Sir.) I know this man well, he hath been since an Ape-bearer, then a Processe-seruer (a Bailiff) then hee compassed a Motion of the Prodigal son, and married a Tinkers wife, within a Mile where my Land and Living lies; and (having flown over ma∣ny knavish professions) he settled only in Rogue: some call him Autolicus.
Out upon him: Prig, for my life Prig: he haunts Wakes, Fairs, and Bear-baitings.
Very true sir: he sir hee: that's the Rogue that put me into this apparel.
Not a more cowardly Rogue in all Bohemia; If you had but looked big, and spit at him, hee'ld have run.
I must confess to you (sir) I am no fighter: I am false of heart that way, &amp; that he knew I warrant him.
How do you now?
Sweet sir, much better then I was: I can stand, and walk: I will even take my leave of you, &amp; pace soft∣lie towards my Kinsmans.
Shall I bring thee on the way?
No, good faced sir, no sweet sir.
Then fartheewell, I must go buy Spices for our sheepe-shearing.
Prosper you sweet sir. Your purse is not hot e∣nough to purchase your Spice: Isle be with you at your sheepe-shearing too: If I make not this Cheat bring out another, and the shearers prove sheep, let me be vnrold, and my name put in the book of Virtue.
Iog-on, Iog-on, the foot-path way,
And merrily hent the Stile-a:
A merry heart goes all the day,
Your sad tyres in a Mile-a.
These your unusual weeds, to each part of you
Do's give a life: no Shepherdess, but Flora
Peering in Aprils front. This your sheepe-shearing,
Is as a meeting of the petty Gods,
And you the Queen on it.
Sir: my gracious Lord,
To chide at your extremes, it not becomes me:
(Oh pardon, that I name them:) your high self
The gracious mark of the Land, you have obscured
With a Swains wearing: and me (poor lowly Maid)
Most Goddese-like pranked up: But that our Feasts
In every Mess, have folly; and the Feeders
Digest with a Custom, I should blush
To see you so attired: sworn I think,
To show my self a glass.
I bless the time,
When my good Falcon, made her flight across
Thy Fathers ground
Now Jove afford you cause:
To me the difference forges dread (your Greatness
Hath not been used to fear:) even now I tremble
To think your Father, by some accident
Should pass this way, as you did: Oh the Pates,
How would he look, to see his work, so noble,
Vildely bound up? What would he say? Or how
Should I (in these my borrowed Flaunts) behold
The sternness of his presence?
Apprehend
Nothing but jollity: the Gods themselves
(Humbling their Deities to love) have taken
The shapes of Beasts upon them. Iupiter,
Became a Bull, and bellowed: the greene Neptune
A Ram, and bleated: and the Fire-roab'd-God
Golden Apollo, a poor humble Swain,
As I seem now. Their transformations,
Were never for a piece of beauty, rarer,
Not in a way so chaste: since my desires
Run not before mine honour: nor my Lusts
Burn hotter then my Faith.
O but Sir,
Your resolution cannot hold, when it is
Opposed (as it must be) by the power of the King:
One of these two must be necessities,
Which then will speak, that you must change this pur∣pose,
Or I my life.
Thou dearest Perdita,
With these forced thoughts, I prithee darken not
The Mirth of the Feast: Or Isle be thine (my Fair)
Or not my Fathers. For I cannot be
Mine own, nor any thing to any, if
I be not thine. To this I am most constant,
Though destiny say no. Be merry (Gentle)
Strangle such thoughts as these, with any thing
That you behold the while. Your guests are coming:
Lift up your countenance, as it were the day
Of celebration of that nuptial, which
We two have sworn shall come.
O Lady Fortune,
Stand you auspicious.
See, your Guests approach,
Address your self to entertain them sprightly,
And let's be red with mirth.
Fie (daughter) when my old wife lived: upon
This day, she was both Pantler, Butler, Cooke,
Both Dame and Servant: Welcomed all: served all,
Would sing her song, and dance her turn: now here
At upper end of th Table; now, in th middle:
On his shoulder, and his: her face of fire
With labour, and the thing she took to quench it
She would to each one sip. You are retired,
As if you were a feasted one: and not
The Hostess of the meeting: Pray you bid
These unknown friends to's welcome, for it is
A way to make vs better Friends, more known.
Come, quench your blushes, and present your self
That which you are, Mistress of the Feast. Come on,
And bid vs welcome to your sheepe-shearing,
As your good flock shall prosper.
Sir, welcome:
It is my Fathers will, I should take on me
The Hostesseship of the day: you're welcome sir.
Give me those Flowers there (Dorcas.) Reverend Sirs,
For you, there's Rosemary, and Rue, these keep
Seeming, and savour all the Winter long:
Grace, and Remembrance be to you both,
And welcome to our Shearing.
Shepherdess,
(A fair one are you:) well you fit our ages
With flowers of Winter.
Sir, the year growing ancient,
Not yet on summers death, nor on the birth
Of trembling winter, the fairest flowers of th season
Are our Carnations, and streaked Gilly-vors,
(Which some call Natures bastards) of that kind
Our rustic Gardens barren, and I care not
To get slips of them.
Wherefore (gentle Maiden)
Do you neglect them.
For I have heard it said,
There is an Art, which in their pidenesse shares
With great creating-Nature.
Say there be:
Yet Nature is made better by no mean,
But Nature makes that Mean: so over that Art,
(Which you say adds to Nature) is an Art
That Nature makes: you see (sweet Maid) we marry
A gentler Sign, to the wildest Stock,
And make conceive a bark of baser kind
By bud of Nobler race. This is an Art
Which do's mend Nature: change it rather, but
The Art it self, is Nature.
So it is.
Then make you Garden rich in Gilly'vors,
And do not call them bastards.
Isle not put
The Dible in earth, to set one slip of them:
No more then were I painted, I would wish
This youth should say it were well: and only therefore
Desire to breed by me. Here's flowers for you:
Hot Lavender, Mints, Savoury, Mariorum,
The Mary-gold, that goes to bed with Sun,
And with him rises, weeping: These are flowers
Of middle summer, and I think they are given
To men of middle age. Y' are very welcome.
I should leave grazing, were I of your flock,
And only live by gazing.
Out alas:
You'd be so lean, that blasts of January
Would blow you through and through. Now my fa•st Friend,
I would I had some Flowers of th Spring, that might
Become your time of day: and yours, and yours,
That wear upon your Virgin-branches yet
Your Maiden-heads growing: O Proserpina,
For the Flowers now, that (frighted) thou let fall
From Disses Waggon: Daffodils,
That come before the Swallow dares▪ and take
The winds of March with beauty: Violets (dim,
But sweeter then the lids of Iuno's eyes,
Or Cytherea's breath) pale Prime-roses,
That dye unmarried, ere they can behold
Bright Phoebus in his strength (a Malady
Most incident to Maids:) bold Oxlips, and
The Crown Imperial: Lilies of all kinds,
(The Flowre-de-Luce being one.) O, these I lack,
To make you Garlands of) and my sweet friend,
To strew him o'er, and ore.
What? like a Coarse?
No, like a bank, for Love to lye, and play on:
Not like a Coarse: or if: not to be buried,
But quick, and in mine arms. Come, take your flours,
Me thinks I play as I have seen them do
In Whitso•pastorals: Sure this Robe of mine
Do's change my disposition:
What you do,
Still betters what is done. When you speak (Sweet)
I'd have you do it ever: When you sing,
I'd have you buy, and sell so: so give Alms,
Pray so: and for the ord'ring your Affairs,
To sing them too. When you do dance, I wish you
A wave of th Sea, that you might ever do
Nothing but that: move still, still so:
And own no other Function. Each your doing,
(So singular, in each particular)
Crowns what you are doing, in the present deeds,
That all your Acts, are Queens.
O Doricles,
Your praises are too large: but that your youth
And the true blood which peepes fairly throughout,
Do plainly give you out an unstained Shepherd
With wisdom, I might fear (my Doricles)
You wooed me the false way.
I think you have
As little skill to fear, as I have purpose
To put you to it. But come, our dance I pray,
Your hand (my Perdita:) so Turtles pair
That never mean to part.
Isle swear for 'em.
This is the prettiest Low-borne Lass, that ever
Ran on the greene-sord: Nothing she do's, or seems
But smacks of something greater then her self,
Too Noble for this place.
He tells her something
That makes her blood look on it: Good sooth she is
The Queen of Curds and Cream.
Come on: strike up.
Mopsa must be your Mistress: marry Garlic to mend her kissing with.
Now in good time.
Not a word, a word, we stand upon our manners,
Come, strike up.
Pray good Shepherd, what fair Swain is this,
Which dances with your daughter?
They call him Doricles, and boasts himself
To have a worthy Feeding; but I have it
Upon his own report, and I believe it:
He looks like sooth: he says he loves my daughter,
I think so too; for never gazed the Moon
Upon the water, as he will stand and read
As it were my daughters eyes: and to be plain,
I think there is not half a kiss to choose
Who loves another best.
She dances fairly.
So she do's any thing, though I report it
That should be silent: If young Doricles
Do light upon her, she shall bring him that
Which he not dreams of.
O Master: if you did but hear the Peddler at the door, you would never dance again after a Tabor and Pipe: no, the Bag-pipe could not move you: hee singes several Tunes, faster then you'll tell money: hee utters them as he had eaten ballads, and all men's ears grew to his Tunes.
He could never come better: hee shall come in: I love a ballad but even too well, if it be doleful matter merrily set down: or a very pleasant thing indeed, and sung lamentably.
He hath songs for man, or woman, of all sizes: No Milliner can so fit his customers with Gloves: he has the prettiest Loue-songs for Maids, so without bawdry (which is strange,) with such delicate burdens of Dil∣do's and Fadings: Iump-her, and thump-her; and where some stretch-mouth'd Rascal, would (as it were) mean mischief, and break a foul gap into the Matter, hee makes the maid to answer, Whoop, doe me no harm good man: putt's him off, slights him, with Whoop, doe me no harm good man.
This is a brave fellow.
Beleeee me, thou talk of an admirable con∣ceited fellow, has he any vnbraided Wares?
Hee hath Ribbons of all the colours in th Rain∣bow; Points, more then all the Lawyers in Bohemia, can learnedly handle, though they come to him by the gross: Inckles, Caddysses, Cambrickes, Lawns: why he sings em over, as they were Gods, or Goddesses: you would think a Smock were a shee-Angell, he so chants to the sleeue-hand, and the work about the square on it:
Prithee bring him in, and let him approach sin∣ging.
Forewarn him, that he use no scurrilous words in's tunes.
You have of these Peddlers, that have more in them, then youl'd think (Sister.)
I, good brother, or go about to think.
Lawn as white as driven Snow,
Cypress black as ere was Crow,
Gloves as sweet as Damask Roses,
Masks for faces, and for noses:
Bugle-bracelet, Necke-lace Amber,
Perfume for a Ladies Chamber:
Golden Quoises, and Stomachers
For my Lads, to give their deers:
Pins, and poaking-stickes of steel.
What Maids lack from head to heel:
Come buy of me, come: come buy, come buy,
Buy Lads, or else your Lasses cry: Come buy.
If I were not in love with Mopsa, thou should take no money of me, but being enthralled as I am, it will also be the bondage of certain Ribbons and Gloves.
I was promised them against the Feast, but they come not too late now.
He hath promised you more then that, or there be liars.
He hath paid you all he promised you: May be he has paid you more, which will shame you to give him again.
Is there no manners left among maids? Will they wear their plackets, where they should bear their faces? Is there not milking-time? When you are going to bed? Or kill-hole? To whistle of these secrets, but you must be tittle-tatling before all our guests? It is well they are whispring: clamour your tongues, and not a word more.
I have done; Come you promised me a tawdry-lace, and a pair of sweet Gloves.
Have I not told thee how I was cozened by the way, and lost all my money.
And indeed Sir, there are Cozeners abroad, there∣fore it behooves men to be wary.
Fear not thou man, thou shalt lose nothing here
I hope so sir, for I have about me many parcels of charge.
What hast here? Ballads?
Pray now buy some: I love a ballet in print, a life, for then we are sure they are true.
Here's one, to a very doleful tune, how a Vsu∣rears wife was brought to bed of twenty money bags at a burden, and how she longed to eat Adders heads, and Toads carbonado'd.
Is it true, think you?
Very true, and but a month old.
Bless me from marrying a Usurer.
Here's the Midwives name to it: one Mist. Tale-Porter, and five or six honest Wives, that were present. Why should I carry lies abroad?
'Pray you now buy it.
Come-on, lay it by: and let's first see more Bal∣lads: We'll buy the other things anon.
Here's another ballad of a Fish, that appeared upon the coast, on wensday the fourscore of April, forty thousand fathom aboue water, &amp; sung this ballad against the hard hearts of maids: it was thought she was a Wo∣man, and was turned into a cold fish, for she wold not ex∣change flesh with one that loved her: The Ballad is very pitiful, and as true.
Is it true too, think you.
Five Justices hands at it, and witnesses more then my pack will hold.
Lay it by too; another.
This is a merry ballad, but a very pretty one.
Let's have some merry ones.
Why this is a passing merry one, and goes to the tune of two maids wooing a man: there's scarce a Maid westward but she sings it: it is in request, I can tell you.
We can both sing it: if thou'lt bear a part, thou shalt hear, it is in three parts.
We had the tune on it, a month ago.
I can bear my part, you must know it is my oc∣cupation: Have at it with you.
Get you hence, for I must go
Where it fits not you to know.
Whether?
O Whether?
Whether?
It becomes thy oath full well,
Thou to me thy secrets tell.
Me too: Le me go thither:
Or thou goosed to the Grange, or Mill,
If to either thou dost ill,
Neither.
What neither?
Neither:
Thou hast sworn my Love to be,
Thou hast sworn it more to me.
Then whether goosed? Say whether?
We'll have this song out anon by our selves: My Father, and the Gent▪ are in sad talk, &amp; we'll not trouble them: Come bring away thy pack after me, Wenches Isle buy for you both: Peddler let's have the first choice; follow me girls.
And you shall pay well for 'em.
Will you buy any Tape, or Lace for your •rpe?
My dainty Duck, my deere-a?
Any Silk, any Thread, any Toys for your head
Of the news't, and fins't, fins't weare-a.
Come to the Peddler, Money's a meddler,
That doth utter all men's ware-a.
Master, there is three Carters, three Shep∣herds, three Neat-herds, three Swine-herds yt have made
themselves all men of hair, they cal themselves Saltiers, and they have a Dance, which the Wenches say is a gal∣ly-maufrey of Gambols, because they are not in it: but they themselves are of the mind (if it bee not too rough for some, that know little but bowling) it will please plentifully.
Away: We'll none on it; here has been too much homely foolery already. I know (Sir) wee wea∣rye you.
You weary those that refresh vs: pray let's see these foure-threes of Heardsmen.
One three of them, by their own report (Sir,) hath danced before the King: and not the worst of the three, but iumpes twelve foot and a half by the squire.
Leave your prating, since these good men are pleased, let them come in: but quickly now.
Why, they stay at door Sir.
O Father, you'll know more of that hereafter:
Is it not too far gone? It is time to part them,
He's simple, and tells much. How now (fair shepherd)
Your heart is full of something, that do's take
Your mind from feasting. Sooth, when I was young,
And handed love, as you do; I was wont
To load my She with knackes: I would have ransacked
The Peddlers silken Treasury, and have powered it
To her acceptance: you have let him go,
And nothing matted with him. If your Lass
Interpretation should abuse, and call this
Your lack of love, or bounty, you were straited
For a reply at least, if you make a care
Of happy holding her.
Old Sir, I know
She prizes not such trifles as these are:
The gifts she looks from me, are packed and locked
Up in my heart, which I have given already,
But not delivered. O hear me breath my life
Before this ancient Sir, whom (it should seem)
Hath sometime loved: I take thy hand, this hand,
As soft as Doves down, and as white as it,
Or Ethyopians tooth, or the san'd snow, that's bolted
By the Northern blasts, twice ore.
What follows this?
How prettily the young Swain seems to wash
The hand, was fair before? I have put you out,
But to your protestation: Let me hear
What you profess.
Do, and be witness too't.
And this my neighbour too?
And he, and more
Then he, and men: the earth, the heavens, and all;
That were I crowned the most Imperial Monarch
Thereof most worthy: were I the fairest youth
That ever made eye swerve, had force and knowledge
More then was ever mans, I would not prize them
Without her Love; for her, employ them all,
Commend them, and condemn them to her service,
Or to their own perdition.
Fairly offered.
This shows a sound affection.
But my daughter,
Say you the like to him.
I cannot speak
So well, (nothing so well) no, nor mean better
By the par•erne of mine own thoughts, I cut out
The purity of his.
Take hands, a bargain;
And friends unknown, you shall bear witness to it:
I give my daughter to him, and will make
Her Portion, equal his.
O, that must bee
In th Virtue of your daughter: One being dead,
I shall have more then you can dream of yet,
Enough then for your wonder: but come-on,
Contract vs fore these Witnesses.
Come, your hand:
And daughter, yours.
Soft Swain awhile, beseech you,
Have you a Father?
I have: but what of him?
Knows he of this?
He neither do's, nor shall.
Me-thinkes a Father,
Is at the Nuptial of his son, a guest
That best becomes the Table: Pray you once more
Is not your Father grown incapeable
Of reasonable affairs? Is he not stupid
With Age, and altering Rheumes? Can he speak? hear?
Know man, from man? Dispute his own estate?
Lies he not bed-rid? And again, do's nothing
But what he did, being childish?
No good Sir:
He has his health, and ampler strength indeed
Then most have of his age.
By my white beard,
You offer him (if this be so) a wrong
Something vnfilliall: Reason my son
Should choose himself a wife, but as good reason
The Father (all whose joy is nothing else
But fair posterity) should hold some counsel
In such a business.
I yield all this;
But for some other reasons (my grave Sir)
Which it is not sit you know, I not acquaint
My Father of this business.
Let him know it.
He shall not.
Prithee let him.
No, he must not.
Let him (my son) he shall not need to grieve
At knowing of thy choice.
Come, come, he must not:
Mark our Contract.
Mark your divorce (young sir)
Whom son I dare not call: Thou art too base
To be acknowledge. Thou a Scepters heir,
That thus affects a sheepe-hooke? Thou, old Traitor,
I am sorry, that by hanging thee, I can
but shorten thy life one week. And thou, fresh piece
Of excellent Witchcraft, whom of force must know
The royal Fool thou cope with.
Oh my heart.
Isle have thy beauty scratched with briers &amp; made
More homely then thy state. For thee (fond boy)
If I may ever know thou dost but sigh,
That thou no more shalt never see this knack (as never
I mean thou shalt) we'll bar thee from succession,
Not hold thee of our blood, no not our Kin,
Far then Deucalion off: (mark thou my words)
Follow vs to the Court. Thou Churl, for this time
(Though full of our displeasure) yet we free thee
From the dead blow of it. And you Enchantment,
Worthy enough a Herdsman: yea him too,
That makes himself (but for our Honour therein)
Unworthy thee. If ever henceforth, thou
These rural Latches, to his entrance open,
Or hope his body more, with thy embraces,
I will devise a death, as cruel for thee
As thou art tender to it.
Even here undone:
I was not much afeared: for once, or twice
I was about to speak, and tell him plainly,
The selfsame Sun, that shines upon his Court,
Hides not his visage from our Cottage, but
Looks on alike. Wilt please you (Sir) be gone?
I told you what would come of this: Beseech you
Of your own state take care: This dream of mine
Being now awake, Isle Queen it no inch farther,
But milk my Ewes, and weep.
Why how now Father,
Speak ere thou die.
I cannot speak, nor think,
Nor dare to know, that which I know: O Sir,
You have undone a man of fourscore three,
That thought to fill his grave in quiet: yea,
To dye upon the bed my father dyed,
To lye close by his honest bones; but now
Some Hangman must put on my shroud, and lay me
Where no Priest shouels-in dust. Oh cursed wretch,
That knew this was the Prince, and would adventure
To mingle faith with him. Undone, undone:
If I might dye within this hour, I have lived
To die when I desire.
Why look you so upon me?
I am but sorry, not afeared: delayed,
But nothing altered: What I was, I am:
More straining on, for plucking back; not following
My leash unwillingly.
Gracious my Lord,
You know my Fathers temper: at this time
He will allow no speech: (which I do guess
You do not purpose to him:) and as hardly
Will he endure your sight, as yet I fear;
Then till the fury of his Highness settle
Come not before him.
I not purpose it:
I think Camillo.
Even he, my Lord.
How often have I told you it would be thus?
How often said my dignity would last
But till it were known?
It cannot fail, but by
The violation of my faith, and then
Let Nature crush the sides of th earth together,
And mar the feeds within. Lift up thy looks:
From my succession wipe me (Father) I
Am heir to my affection.
Be advised.
I am: and by my fancy, if my Reason
Will thereto be obedient: I have reason:
If not, my senses better pleased with madness,
Do bid it welcome.
This is desperate (sir.)
So call it: but it do's fulfil my vow:
I needs must think it honesty. Camillo,
Not for Bohemia, nor the pomp that may
Be there at gleaned: for all the Sun sees, or
The close earth wombs, or the profound seas, hides
In unknown fadomes, will I break my oath
To this my fair beloved: Therefore, I pray you,
As you have ever bin my Fathers honoured friend,
When he shall miss me, as (in faith I mean not
To see him any more) cast your good counsels
Upon his passion: Let my self, and Fortune
Tug for the time to come. This you may know,
And so deliver, I am put to Sea
With her, who here I cannot hold on shore:
And most opportune to her need, I have
A Vessel rides fast by, but not prepared
For this design. What course I mean to hold
Shall nothing benefit your knowledge, nor
Concern me the reporting.
O my Lord,
I would your spirit were easier for advice,
Or stronger for your need.
Hark Perdita,
Isle hear you by and by.
Hoe's irremoveable,
Resolved for flight: Now were I happy if
His going, I could frame to serve my turn,
Save him from danger, do him love and honour,
Purchase the sight again of dear Sicillia,
And that unhappy King, my Master, whom
I so much thirst to see.
Now good Camillo,
I am so fraught with curious business, that
I leave out ceremony.
Sir, I think
You have heard of my poor services, in th love
That I have borne your Father?
Very nobly
Have you deserved: It is my Fathers Music
To speak your deeds: not little of his care
To have them recompensed, as thought on.
Well (my Lord)
If you may please to think I love the King,
And through him, what's nearest to him, which is
Your gracious self; embrace but my direction,
If your more ponderous and settled project
May suffer alteration. On mine honour,
Isle point you where you shall have such receiving
As shall become your Highness, where you may
Enjoy your Mistress; from the whom, I see
There's no disiunction to be made, but by
(As heavens forefend) your ruin: Marry her,
And with my best endeavours, in your absence,
Your discontenting Father, strive to qualify
And bring him up to liking.
How Camillo
May this (almost a miracle) be done?
That I may call thee something more then man,
And after that trust to thee.
Have you thought on
A place whereto you'll go?
Not any yet:
But as the vnthought-on accident is guilty
To what we wildely do, so we profess
Our selves to be the slaves of chance, and flies
Of every wind that blows.
Then lift to me:
This follows, if you will not change your purpose
But undergo this flight; make for Sicillia,
And there present your self, and your fair Princess,
(For so I see she must be) before Leontes;
She shall be habitat, as it becomes
The partner of your Bed. Me thinks I see
Leontes opening his free Arms, and weeping
His Welcomes forth: asks thee there Son forgiveness,
As it were in the Fathers person: kisses the hands
Of your fresh Princess; ore and ore divides him,
Twixt his unkindness, and his Kindness: the one
He chides to Hell, and bids the other grow
Faster then Thought, or Time.
Worthy Camillo,
What colour for my Visitation, shall I
Hold up before him?
Sent by the King your Father
To greet him, and to give him comforts. Sir,
The manner of your bearing towards him, with
What you (as from your Father) shall deliver,
Things known betwixt vs three, Isle write you down,
The which shall point you forth at every sitting
What you must say: that he shall not perceive,
But that you have your Fathers Bosom there,
And speak his very Heart.
I am bound to you:
There is some sap in this.
A Course more promising,
Then a wild dedication of your selves
To vnpath'd Waters, undreamed Shores; most certain,
To Miseries enough: no hope to help you,
But as you shake off one, to take another.
Nothing so certain, as your Anchors, who
Doe their best office, if they can but stay you,
Where you'll be loath to be: besides you know,
Prosperitie's the very bond of Love,
Whose fresh complexion, and whose heart together,
Affliction alters.
One of these is true:
I think Affliction may subdue the Cheek,
But not take-in the Mind.
Yea? say you so?
There shall not, at your Fathers House, these seven years
Be borne another such.
My good Camillo,
She's as forward, of her Breeding, as
She is in the reare' our Birth.
I cannot say, it is pity
She lacks Instructions, for she seems a Mistress
To most that teach.
Your pardon Sir, for this,
Isle blush you Thanks.
My prettiest Perdita.
But O, the Thorns we stand upon: (Camillo)
Preserver of my Father, now of me,
The Medicine of our House: how shall we doe?
We are not furnished like Bohemia's Son,
Nor shall appear in Sicilia.
My Lord,
Fear none of this: I think you know my fortunes
Doe all lye there: it shall be so my care,
To have you royally appointed, as if
The Scene you play, were mine. For instance Sir,
That you may know you shall not want: one word.
Ha, ha, what a Fool Honesty is? and Trust (his sworn brother) a very simple Gentleman. I have sold all my Tromperie: not a counterfeit Stone, not a Ribbon, Glass, Pomander, Browch, Table-booke, Ballad, Knife, Tape, Glove, Shooe-tye, Bracelet, Horne-Ring, to keep my Pack from fasting: they throng who should buy first, as if my Trinkets had been hallowed, and brought a be∣nediction to the buyer: by which means, I saw whose Purse was best in Picture; and what I saw, to my good use, I remembered. My Clown (who wants but some∣thing to be a reasonable man) grew so in love with the Wenches Song, that hee would not stir his Petty-toes, till he had both Tune and Words, which so drew the rest of the Heard to me, that all their other Senses stuck in Ears: you might have pinched a Placket, it was sense∣less; it was nothing to gueld a Codpiece of a Purse: I would have filled Keys of that hung in Chains: no hearing, no feeling, but my Sirs Song, and admiring the Nothing of it. So that in this time of Lethargy, I pickd and cut most of their Festival Purses: And had not the old-man come in with a Whoo-bub against his Daugh∣la, and the Kings Son, and scared my Choughs from the Chafe, I had not left a Purse alive in the whole Army.
Nay, but my Letters by this means being there
So soon as you arrive, shall clear that doubt.
And those that you'll procure from King Leontes?
Shall satisfy your Father.
Happy be you:
All that you speak, shows fair.
Who have we here?
We'll make an Instrument of this: omit
Nothing may give vs aide.
If they have ouer-heard me now: why hanging.
How now (good Fellow)
Why shake thou so? Fear not (man)
Here's no harm intended to thee.
I am a poor Fellow, Sir.
Why, be so still: here's no body will steal that from thee: yet for the out-side of thy poverty, we must make an exchange; therefore dis-case thee instantly (thou must think there's a necessity in it) and change Garments with this Gentleman: Though the penny-worth (on his side) be the worst, yet hold thee, there's some boot.
I am a poor Fellow, Sir: (I know ye well enough.)
Nay prithee dispatch: the Gentleman is half fled already.
Are you in earnest, Sir? (I smell the trick on it.)
Dispatch, I prithee.
Indeed I have had Earnest, but I cannot with conscience take it.
Unbuckle, unbuckle.
Fortunate Mistress (let my prophecy
Come home to ye:) you must retire your self
Into some Covert; take your sweet-hearts Hat
And pluck it ore your Brows, muffle your face,
Dis-mantle you, and (as you can) disliken
The truth of your own seeming, that you may
(For I doe fear eyes over) to Ship-boord
Get undescried.
I see the Play so lies,
That I must bear a part.
No remedy:
Have you done there?
Should I now meet my Father,
He would not call me Son.
Nay, you shall have no Hat:
Come Lady, come: Farewell (my friend.)
Adieu, Sir.
O Perdita: what have we twain forgot?
'Pray you a word.
What I doe next, shall be to tell the King
Of this escape, and whither they are bound;
Wherein, my hope is, I shall so prevail
To force him after: in whose company
I shall re-view Sicilia; for whose sight,
I have a Women's Longing.
Fortune speed vs:
Thus we set on (Camillo) to the Sea-side.
The swifter speed, the better.
I understand the business, I hear it: to have an open ear, a quick eye, and a nimble hand, is necessary for a Cut-purse; a good Nose is requisite also, to smell out work for the other Senses. I see this is the time that the unjust man doth thrive. What an exchange had this been, without boot? What a boot is here, with this exchange? Sure the Gods doe this year connive at vs, and we may doe any thing extempore. The Prince himself is about a piece of Iniquity (stealing away from his Father, with his Clog at his heals:) if I thought it were a piece of ho∣nestie to acquaint the King withal, I would not do it: I hold it the more knavery to conceal it; and therein am I constant to my Profession.
Aside, aside, here is more matter for a hot brain: Every Lanes end, every Shop, Church, Session, Hanging, yields a careful man work.
See, see: what a man you are now? there is no other way, but to tell the King she's a Changeling, and none of your flesh and blood.
Nay, but hear me.
Nay; but hear me.
Go too then.
She being none of your flesh and blood, your flesh and blood he's not offended the King, and so your flesh and blood is not to be punished by him. Show those things you found about her (those secret things, all but what she he's with her:) This being done, let the Law go whistle: I warrant you.
I will tell the King all, every word, yea, and his Sons pranks too; who, I may say, is no honest man, neither to his Father, nor to me, to go about to make me the Kings Brother in Law.
Indeed Brother in Law was the farthest off you could have been to him, and then your Blood had been the dearer, by I know how much an ounce.
Very wisely (Puppies.)
Well: let vs to the King: there is that in this Farthel, will make him scratch his Beard.
I know not what impediment this Complaint may be to the flight of my Master.
'Pray heartily he be it Palace.
Though I am not naturally honest, I am so some∣times by chance: Let me pocket up my Peddlers excre∣meant. How now (Rustiques) whither are you bound?
To the Palace (and it like your Worship.)
Your Affairs there? what? with whom? the Condition of that Farthel? the place of your dwelling? your names? your ages? of what having? breeding, and any thing that is fitting to be known, discover?
We are but plain fellows, Sir.
A Lye; you are rough, and hayrie: Let me have no lying; it becomes none but Trades-men, and they of∣ten give vs (Soldiers) the Lye, but wee pay them for it with stamped Coin, not stabbing Steel, therefore they doe not give vs the Lye.
Your Worship had like to have given vs one, if you had not taken your self with the manner.
Are you a Courtier, and't like you Sir?
Whether it lke me, or no, I am a Courtier. See thou not the ayre of the Court, in these enfoldings? Hath not my gate in it, the measure of the Court? Receives not thy Nose Court-Odour from me? Reflect I not on thy Baseness, Court-Contempt? Think thou, for that I insinuate, at tease from thee thy Business, I am there∣fore no Courtier? I am Courtier Cap-a-pe; and one that will either push-on, or pluck-back, thy Business there: whereupon I command thee to open thy Affair.
My Business, Sir, is to the King.
What Advocate hast thou to him?
I know not (and't like you.)
Aduocate's the Court-word for a Pheasant: say you have none.
None, Sir: I have no Pheasant Cock, nor Hen.
How blessed are we, that are not simple men?
Yet Nature might have made me as these are,
Therefore I will not disdain.
This cannot be but a great Courtier.
His Garments are rich, but he wears them not handsomely.
He seems to be the more Noble, in being fanta∣sticall: A great man, Isle warrant; I know by the picking on's Teeth.
The Farthel there? What's in the Farthel? Wherefore that Box?
Sir, there lies such Secrets in this Farthel and Box, which none must know but the King, and which hee shall know within this hour, if I may come to the speech of him.
Age, thou hast lost thy labour.
Why Sir?
The King is not at the Palace, he is gone aboard a new Ship, to purge Melancholy, and ayre himself: for if thou be capable of things serious, thou must know the King is full of grief.
So it is said (Sir:) about his Son, that should have married a Shepherds Daughter.
If that Shepherd be not in hand-fast, let him fly; the Curses he shall have, the Tortures he shall feel, will break the back of Man, the heart of Monster.
Think you so, Sir?
Not hee alone shall suffer what Wit can make heavy, and Vengeance bitter; but those that are Iermaine to him (though removed fifty times) shall all come under the Hang-man: which, though it be great pity, yet it is necessary. An old Sheepe-whistiing Rogue, a Ram-ten∣der, to offer to have his Daughter come into grace? Some say hee shall be stoned: but that death is too soft for him (say I:) Draw our Throne into a Sheep-Coat? all deaths are too few, the sharpest too easy.
He's the old-man ere a Son Sir (doe you hear) and't like you, Sir?
Hee he's a Son: who shall be flayd alive, then anointed over with Honey, set on the head of a Wasps Nest, then stand till he be three quarters and a dram dead: then recovered again with Aquavit, or some other hot Infusion: then, raw as he is (and in the hottest day Progno∣stication proclaims) shall he be set against a Brick-wall, (the Sun looking with a South-ward eye upon him; where hee is to behold him, with Flies blown to death.) But what talk we of these Traitorly-Rascals, whose mi∣series are to be smiled at, their offences being so capital?
Tell me (for you seem to be honest plain men) what you have to the King: being something gently considered, Isle bring you where he is aboard, tender your persons to his presence, whisper him in your behalfes; and if it be in man, besides the King, to effect your Suites, here is man shall doe it.
He seems to be of great authority: close with him, give him Gold; and though Authority be a stub∣borne Be•re, yet hee is oft led by the Nose with Gold: show the in-side of your Purse to the out-side of his hand, and no more ado. Remember •on it, and stayed alive.
And't please you (Sir) to undertake the Business for vs, here is that Gold I have: Isle make it as much more, and leave this young man in pawn, till I bring it you.
After I hate done what I promised?
I Sir.
Well, give me the Mo•: Are you a party in this Business?
In so•e s•rt, Sir: but though my case be a pit∣tifull one, I hope I shall not •s •d out o• it.
Oh, that's the case 〈◊〉 the Shepherds Son: hang him, he will be ma• a• ex•le.
Comfort •ood co•. We must to the King, and she •our strange sights: • •st know it is none of your Daugh• • my 〈…〉 are gone else. Sir, I will give you as much as this old man do's when the Bu∣sinesse i• pe•s•ed, and remain (as he says) your pawn till it be brough• you.
I will trust you. Walk before toward the Sea∣side, go on the right hand, I will but look upon the Hedge, and follow you.
We are blessed, in this man: as I may say, even blessed.
Let's before, as he bids vs: he was provided to doe vs good.
If I had a mind to be honest, I see Fortune would not suffer m• •sh• d•s 〈◊〉 in my mouth. I am courted now with a double •zion: (Gold, and a means to doe the Prince my Master •od▪ which, who knows how that may turn back to 〈◊〉 •ncement?) I will bring these •wo M•ay•, t•e •d-ones, aboard him▪ if he think it •it to shore th• again, and that the Com∣plaint they have •o 〈◊〉 King▪ concerns him nothing, let him call me Rog•e, •o• being 〈◊〉 far officious, for I am proof against that side, and what shame else belongs to it: To him will I present them, there may be matter in it.
Sir, you have done enough, and have performed
A Saint-like Sorrow: No fault could you make,
Which you have not redeemed; indeed paid down
More penitence▪ then done trespass: At the last
Doe as the Heavens have done; forget your evil,
With them, forgive your self.
Whilst I remember
Her, and her Virtues, I cannot forget
My blemishes in them, and so still think of
The wrong I did my self: which was so much,
That Heire-lesse it hath made my Kingdom, and
Destroyed the sweetest Companion, that ere man
Bred his hopes out of true.
Too true (my Lord:)
If one by one, you wedded all the World,
Or from the All that are, took something good,
To make a perfect Woman; she you killed,
Would be unparalleled.
I think so. Killed?
She I killed? I did so: but thou strik'st me
Sorely, to say I did: it is as bitter
Upon thy Tongue, as in my Thought. Now, good now,
Say so but seldom.
Not at all, good Lady:
You might have spoken a thousand things, that would
Have done the time more benefit, and graced
Your kindness better.
You are one of those
Would have him wed again.
If you would not so,
You pity not the State, nor the Remembrance
Of his most Sovereign Name: Consider little,
What Dangers, by his Highness fail of Issue,
May drop upon his Kingdom, and deuou•e
Uncertain lookers on. What were more holy,
Then to rejoice the former Queen is well?
What holier, then for Royalties repair,
For present comfort, and for future good,
To bless the Bed of Majesty again
With a sweet Fellow to it?
There is none worthy,
(Respecting her that's gone:) besides the Gods
Will have fulfilled their secret purposes:
For he's not the Divine Apollo said?
Is it not the tenor of his Oracle,
That King Leontes shall not have an Heir,
Till his lost Child be found? Which, that it shall,
I• all as monstrous to our humane reason,
As my Antigonus to break his Grave,
And come again to me: who, on my life,
Did perish with the Infant. It is your council,
My Lord should to the Heavens be contrary,
Oppose against their wills. Care not for Issue,
The Crown will find an Heir. Great Alexander
Left his to the Worthiest: so his Successor
Was like to be the best.
Good Pauline,
Who hast the memory of Hermione
I know in honour: O, that ever I
Had squared me to thy council: then, even now,
I might have looked upon my Queens full eyes,
Have taken Treasure from her Lips.
And left them
More rich, for what they yielded.
Thou speak truth:
No more such Wives, therefore no Wife: one worse,
And better used▪ would make her Sainted Spirit
Again possess her Corps, and on this Stage
(Where we Offenders now appear) Soule-vext,
And begin, why to me?
Had she such power,
She had just such cause.
She had, and would incense me
To murder her I married.
I should so:
Were I the Ghost that walked, Il'd bid you mark
Her eye, and tell me for what dull part in it
You chose her: then Il'd shriek, that even your ears
Should rift to hear me, and the words that followed,
Should be, Remember mine.
Stars, Stars,
And all eyes else, dead coals: fear thou no Wife;
Isle have no Wife, Pauline.
Will you swear
Never to marry, but by my free leave?
Never (Pauline) so be blessed my Spirit.
Then good my Lords, bear witness to his Oath.
You tempt him ouer-much.
Unless another,
As like Hermione, as is her Picture,
Affront his eye.
Good Madame, I have done.
Yet if my Lord will marry: if you will, Sir;
No remedy but you will: Give me the Office
To choose you a Queen: she shall not be so young
As was your former, but she shall be such
As (walked your first Queens Ghost) it should take joy
To see her in your arms.
My true Pauline,
We shall not marry, till thou bid vs.
That
Shall be when your first Queene's again in breath:
Never till then.
One that gives out himself Prince Florizell,
Son of Polixenes, with his Princess (she
The fairest I have yet beheld) desires access
To your high presence.
What with him? he comes not
Like to his Fathers Greatness: his approach
(So out of circumstance, and sudden) tells vs,
It is not a Visitation framed, but forced
By need, and accident. What Train?
But few,
And those but mean.
His Princess (say you) with him?
I: the most peerless piece of Earth, I think,
That ere the Sun shone bright on.
Oh Hermione,
As every present Time doth boast it self
Aboue a better, gone; so must thy Grave
Give way to what's seen now. Sir, you your self
Have said, and writ so; but your writing now
Is colder then that Theme: she had not been,
Nor was not to be equalled, thus your Verse
Flowed with her Beauty once; it is shrewdly ebbed,
To say you have seen a better.
Pardon, Madame:
The one, I have almost forgot (your pardon:)
The other, when she he's obtained your Eye,
Will have your Tongue too. This is a Creature,
Would she begin a Sect, might quench the zeal•
Of all Professors else; make Proselytes
Of who she but bid follow.
How? not women?
Women will love her, that she is a Woman
More worth then any Man: Men, that she is
The rarest of all Women.
Go Cleomines,
Your self (assisted with your honoured Friends)
Bring them to our embrace. Still it is strange,
He thus should steal upon vs.
Had our Prince
(Jewel of Children) seen this hour, he had paired
Well with this Lord; there was not full a month
Between their births.
Prithee no more; cease: thou know
He dyes to me again, when talk'd-of: sure
When I shall see this Gentleman, thy speeches
Will bring me to consider that, which may
Unfurnish me of Reason. They are come.
Your Mother was most true to Wedlock, Prince,
For she did print your Royal Father off,
Conceiving you. Were I but twenty one,
Your Fathers Image is so hit in you,
(His very ayre) that I should call you Brother,
As I did him, and speak of something wildly
By vs performed before. Most dearly welcome,
And your fair Princess (Goddess) oh: alas,
I lost a couple, that twixt Heaven and Earth
Might thus have stood, begetting wonder, as
You (gracious Couple) doe: and then I lost
(All mine own Folly) the Society,
Amity too of your brave Father, whom
(Though bearing Misery) I desire my life
Once more to look on him.
By his command
Have I here touched Sicilia, and from him
Give you all greetings, that a King (at friend)
Can send his Brother: and but Infirmity
(Which waits upon worn times) hath something seized
His wished Ability, he had himself
The Lands and Waters, twixt your Throne and his,
Measured, to look upon you; whom he loves
(He bad me say so) more then all the Scepters,
And those that bear them, living.
Oh my Brother,
(Good Gentleman) the wrongs I have done thee, stir
Afresh within me: and these thy offices
(So rarely kind) are as Interpreters
Of my behind-hand slackness. Welcome hither,
As is the Spring to the Earth. And hath he too
Exposed this Paragon to the fearful usage
(At least ungentle) of the dreadful Neptune,
To greet a man, not worth her pains; much less,
The adventure of her person?
Good my Lord,
She came from Libia.
Where the Warlike Smalus,
That Noble honoured Lord, is feared, and loved?
Most Royal Sir,
From thence: from him, whose Daughter
His Tears proclaimed his parting with her: thence
(A prosperous South-wind friendly) we have crossed,
To execute the Charge my Father gave me,
For visiting your Highness: My best Train
I have from your Sicilian Shores dismissed;
Who for Bohemia bend, to signify
Not only my success in Libia (Sir)
But my arrival, and my Wives, in safety
Here, where we are.
The blessed Gods
Purge all Infection from our Ayre, whilst you
Doe Climate here: you have a holy Father,
A graceful Gentleman, against whose person
(So sacred as it is) I have done sin,
For which, the Heavens (taking angry note)
Have left me Issue-lesse: and your Father's blessed
(As he from Heaven merits it) with you,
Worthy his goodness. What might I have been,
Might I a Son and Daughter now have looked on,
Such goodly things as you?
Most Noble Sir,
That which I shall report, will bear no credit,
Were not the proof so nigh. Please you (great Sir)
Bohemia greets you from himself, by me:
Desires you to attach his Son, who he's
(His Dignity, and Duty both cast off)
Fled from his Father, from his Hopes, and with
A Shepherds Daughter.
Whore's Bohemia? speak:
Here, in your City: I now came from him.
I speak amazedly, and it becomes
My marvel, and my Message. To your Court
Whiles he was hastening (in the Chase, it seems,
Of this fair Couple) meets he on the way
The Father of this seeming Lady, and
Her Brother, having both their Country quited,
With this young Prince.
Camillo he's betrayed me;
Whose honour, and whose honesty till now,
Endured all Weathers.
Lay it so to his charge:
He's with the King your Father.
Who? Camillo?
Camillo (Sir:) I spake with him: who now
He's these poor men in question. Never saw I
Wretches so quake: they kneel, they kiss the Earth;
Forswear themselves as often as they speak:
Bohemia stops his ears, and threatens them
With divers deaths, in death.
Oh my poor Father:
The Heaven sets Spies upon vs, will not have
Our Contract celebrated.
You are married?
We are not (Sir) nor are we like to be:
The Stars (I see) will kiss the Valleys first:
The odds for high and low's alike.
My Lord,
Is this the Daughter of a King?
She is,
When once she is my Wife.
That once (I see) by your good Fathers speed,
Will come-on very slowly. I am sorry
(Most sorry) you have broken from his liking,
Where you were tied in duty: and as sorry,
Your Choice is not so rich in Worth, as Beauty,
That you might well enjoy her.
Dear, look up:
Though Fortune, visible an Enemy,
Should chase vs, with my Father; power no jot
Hath she to change our Loves. Beseech you (Sir)
Remember, since you owed no more to Time
Then I doe now: with thought of such Affections,
Stop forth mine Advocate: at your request,
My Father will grant precious things, as Trifles.
Would he doe so. I'd beg your precious Mistress,
Which he counts but a Trifle.
Sir (my Liege)
Your eye hath too much youth in it: not a month
Before your Queen died, she was more worth such gazes,
Then what you look on now.
I thought of her,
Even in these Looks I made. But your Petition
Is yet unanswered: I will to your Father:
Your Honour not o're-throwne by your desires,
I am friend to them, and you: Upon which Errand
I now go toward him: therefore follow me,
And mark what way I make: Come good my Lord.
Beseech you (Sir) were you present at this Re∣lotion?
I was by at the opening of the Farthel, heard the old Shepherd deliver the manner how he found it: Whereupon (after a little amazedness) we were all com∣manded out of the Chamber: only this (me thought) I heard the Shepherd say, he found the Child.
I would most gladly know the issue of it.
I make a broken delivery of the Business; but the changes I perceived in the King, and Camillo, were very Notes of admiration: they seemed almost, with sty∣ring on one another, to tear the Cases of their Eyes. There was speech in their dumbness, Language in their very gesture: they looked as they had heard of a World •ansom'd, or one destroyed: a notable passion of Won∣der appeared in them: but the wisest beholder, that knew no more but seeing, could not say, if the importance were I•y, or Sorrow; but in the extremity of the one, it must needs be.
Here comes a Gentleman, that happily knows more: The News, Rogero.
Nothing but Bon-fires: the Oracle is fulfilled: the Kings Daughter is found: such a deal of wonder is broken out within this hour, that Ballad-makers cannot be able to express it.
Here comes the Lady Paulina's Steward, hee can deliver you more. How goes it now (Sir.) This News (which is called true) is so like an old Tale, that the verity of it is in strong suspicion: He's the King found his Heir?
Most true, if ever Truth were pregnant by Circumstance: That which you hear, you'll swear you see, there is such unity in the proofs. The Mantle of Queen Hermiones: her Jewel about the Neck of it: the Letters of Antigonus found with it, which they know to be his Character: the Majesty of the Creature, in re∣semblance of the Mother: the Affection of Nobleness, which Nature shows aboue her Breeding, and many o∣there Evidences, proclaim her, with all certainty, to be the Kings Daughter. Did you see the meeting of the two Kings?
No.
Then have you lost a Sight which was to bee seen, cannot bee spoken of. There might you have be∣held one Joy crown another, so and in such manner, that it seemed Sorrow wept to take leave of them: for their Joy waded in tears. There was casting up of Eyes, hole∣ding up of Hands, with Countenance of such distraction, that they were to be known by Garment, not by Favour.
Our King being ready to leap out of himself, for joy of his found Daughter; as if that Joy were now become a Loss, cries, Oh, thy Mother, thy Mother: then asks Bohemia forgiveness, then embraces his son-in-law: then again worries he his Daughter, with clipping her. Now he thanks the old Shepherd (which stands by, like a Weather-bitten Conduit, of many Kings Reigns.) I never heard of such another Encounter; which lames Re∣port to follow it, and vndo's description to doe it.
What, 'pray you, became of Antigonus, that carried hence the Child?
Like an old Tale still, which will have matter to rehearse, though Credit be asleep, and not an ear o∣pen; he was torn to pieces with a Bear: This avouches the Shepherds Son; who he's not only his Innocence (which seems much) to justify him, but a Hand-kerchief and Rings of his▪ that Pauline knows.
What became of his Bark, and his Foal∣lowers?
Wrecked the same instant of their Masters death, and in the view of the Shepherd: so that all the Instruments which aided to expose the Child, were even then loft, when it was found. But oh the Noble Combat, that twixt Joy and Sorrow was fought in Pauline. She had one Eye declined for the loss of her Husband, ano∣there elevated, that the Oracle was fulfilled: She lifted the Princess from the Earth, and so locks her in embracing, as if she would pin her to her heart, that she might no more be in danger of loosing.
The Dignity of this Act was worth the au∣audience of Kings and Princes, for by such was it acted.
One of the prettiest touches of all, and that which angled for mine Eyes (caught the Water, though not the Fish) was, when at the Relation of the Queens death (with the manner how she came to it bravely con∣fess'd, and lamented by the King) how attentiveness wounded his Daughter, till (from one sign of dolor to another) she did (with an Alas) I would fine say, bleed Tears; for I am sure, my heart wept blood. Who was most Marble, there changed colour: some sounded, all sorrowed: if all the World could have seen't, the Woe had been universal.
Are they returned to the Court?
No: The Princess hearing of her Mothers Statue (which is in the keeping of Pauline) a Piece many years in doing, and now newly performed, by that rare Italian Master, Iulio Romaeno, who (had he himself Eter∣night, and could put Breath into his Work) would be∣guile Nature of her Custom, so perfectly he is her Ape: He so near to Hermione, hath done Hermione, that they say one would speak to her, and stand in hope of answer. Thither (with all greediness of affection) are they gone, and there they intend to Sup.
I thought she had some great matter there in hand, for she hath privately, twice or thrice a day, ever since the death of Hermione, visited that removed House. Shall wee thither, and with our company piece the Re∣ioycing?
Who would be thence, that he's the benefit of Access? every wink of an Eye, some new Grace will be borne: our Absence makes vs unthrifty to our Knowledge. Let's along.
Now (had I not the dash of my former life in me) would Preferment drop on my head. I brought the old man and his Son aboard the Prince; told him, I heard them talk of a Farthel, and I know not what: but he at that time ouer-fond of the Shepherds Daughter (so he then took her to be) who began to be much Sea-sick, and himself little better, extremity of Weather conti∣nuing, this Mystery remained undiscovered. But it is all one to me: for had I been the finder-out of this Secret, it would not have relished among my other discredits.
Here come those I have done good to against my will, and already appearing in the blossoms of their For∣tune.
Come Boy, I am past more Children: but thy Sons and Daughters will be all Gentlemen borne.
You are well met (Sir.) you denied to fight with me this other day, because I was no Gentleman borne. See you these Clothes? say you see them not, and think me still no Gentleman borne: You were best say these Robes are not Gentlemen borne. Give me the Lye: doe: and try whether I am not now a Gentleman borne.
I know you are now (Sir) a Gentleman borne.
I, and have been so any time these four hours.
And so have I, Boy.
So you have: but I was a Gentleman borne be∣fore my Father: for the Kings Son took me by the hand, and called me Brother: and then the two Kings called my Father Brother: and then the Prince (my Bro∣there) and the Princess (my Sister) called mv Father, Father; and so wee wept: and there was the first Gentleman-like tears that ever we shed.
We may live (Son) to shed many more.
I: or else it were hard luck, being in so p•eposte∣rous estate as we are.
I humbly beseech you (Sir) to pardon me all the faults I have committed to your Worship, and to give me your good report to the Prince my Master.
Prithee Son doe: for we must be gentle, now we are Gentlemen.
Thou wilt amend thy life?
I, and it like your good Worship.
Give me thy hand: I will swear to the Prince, thou art as honest a true Fellow as any is in Bohemia.
You may say it, but not swear it.
Not swear it, now I am a Gentleman? Let Boors and Francklins say it, Isle swear it.
How if it be false (Son?)
If it be ne'er so false, a true Gentleman may swear it, in the behalf of his Friend: And Isle swear to the Prince▪ thou art a tall Fellow of thy hands, and that thou wilt not be drunk: but I know thou art no tall Fell∣low of thy hands, and that thou wilt be drunk: but Isle swear it, and I would thou would be a tall Fellow of thy hands.
I will prove so (Sir) to my power.
I, by any means prove a tall Fellow: if I do not wonder, how thou dare venture to be drunk, not being a tall Fellow, trust me not. Hark, the Kings and the Prin∣ces (our Kindred) are going to see the Queens Picture. Come, follow vs: we'll be thy good Masters.
O grave and good Pauline, the great comfort
That I have had of thee?
What (Sovereign Sir)
I did not well, I meant well: all my Services
You have paid home. But that you have vouchsafed
(With your Crowned Brother, and these your contracted
Heirs of your Kingdoms) my poor House to visit;
It is a surplus of your Grace, which never
My life may last to answer.
O Pauline,
We honour you with trouble: but we came
To see the Statue of our Queen. Your Gallery
Have we passed through, not without much content
In many singularities; but we saw not
That which my Daughter came to look upon,
The Statue of her Mother.
As she lived peerless,
So her dead likeness I doe well believe
Excels what ever yet you looked upon,
Or hand of Man hath done: therefore I keep it
Lovely, apart. But here it is: prepare
To see the Life as lively mocked, as ever
Still Sleep mocked Death: behold, and say it is well.
I like your silence, it the more shewes-off
Your wonder: but yet speak, first you (my Liege)
Comes it not something near?
Her natural Posture.
Chide me (dear Stone) that I may say indeed
Thou art Hermione; or rather, thou art she,
In thy not chiding: for she was as tender
As Infancy, and Grace. But yet (Pauline)
Hermione was not so much wrinkled, nothing
So aged as this seems.
Oh, not by much.
So much the more our Carvers excellence.
Which lets goe-by some sixteen years, and makes her
As she lived now.
As now she might have done,
So much to my good comfort, as it is
Now piercing to my Soul. Oh, thus she stood,
Even with such Life of Majesty (warm Life,
As now it coldly stands) when first I wooed her.
I am ashamed: Do's not the Stone rebuke me,
For being more Stone then it? Oh Royal Piece:
There's Magic in thy Majesty, which he's
My Evils conjured to remembrance; and
From thy admiring Daughter took the Spirits,
Standing like Stone with thee.
And give me leave,
And doe not say it is Superstition, that
I kneel, and then implore her Blessing. Lady,
Dear Queen, that ended when I but began,
Give me that hand of yours, to kiss.
O, patience:
The Statue is but newly fixed; the Colour's
Not dry.
My Lord, your Sorrow was too sore lay'd-on,
Which sixteen Winters cannot blow away,
So many Summers dry: scarce any Joy
Did ever so long live; no Sorrow,
But killed it self much sooner.
Dear my Brother,
Let him, that was the cause of this, have power
To take-off so much grief from you, as he
Will piece up in himself.
Indeed my Lord,
If I had thought the sight of my poor Image
Would thus have wrought you (for the Stone is mine)
Il'd not have showed it.
Doe not draw the Curtain.
No longer shall you gaze on it, least your Fancy
May think anon, it moves.
Let be, let be:
Would I were dead, but that me thinks already.
(What was he that did make it?) See (my Lord)
Would you not deem it breathed? and that those veins
Did verily bear blood?
Masterly done:
The very Life seems warm upon her Lip.
The fixture of her Eye he's motion in it,
As we are mocked with Art.
Isle draw the Curtain:
My Lord's almost so far transported, that
He will think anon it lives.
Oh sweet Pauline,
Make me to think so twenty years together:
No settled Senses of the World can match
The pleasure of that madness. Let it alone.
I am sorry (Sir) I have thus far stirred you: but
I could afflict you farther.
Doe Pauline:
For this Affliction he's a taste as sweet
As any Cordial comfort. Still me thinks
There is an ayre comes from her. What fine Chisel
Could ever yet cut breath? Let no man mock me,
For I will kiss her.
Good my Lord, forbear:
The ruddiness upon her Lip, is wet:
You'll mar it, if you kiss it; stain your own
With Oily Painting: shall I draw the Curtain.
No: not these twenty years.
So long could I
Stand-by, a looker-on.
Either forbear,
Quit presently the Chapel, or resolve you
For more amazement: if you can behold it,
Isle make the Statue move indeed; descend,
And take you by the hand: but then you'll think
(Which I protest against) I am assisted
By wicked Powers.
What you can make her doe,
I am content to look on: what to speak,
I am content to hear: for it is as easy
To make her speak, as move.
It is required
You doe awake your Faith: then, all stand still:
On: those that think it is unlawful Business
I am about, let them depart.
Proceed:
No foot shall stir.
Music; awake her: Strike:
It is time: descend: be Stone no more: approach:
Strike all that look upon with marvel: Come:
Isle fill your Grave up: stir: nay, come away:
Bequeath to Death your numnesse: (for from him,
Dear Life redeems you) you perceive she stirs:
Start not: her Actions shall be holy, as
You hear my Spell is lawful: doe not shun her,
Until you see her dye again; for then
You kill her double: Nay, present your Hand:
When she was young, you wooed her: now, in age,
Is she become the Suitor?
Oh, she's warm:
If this be Magic, let it be an Art
Lawful as Eating.
She embraces him.
She hangs about his neck,
If she pertain to life, let her speak too.
I, and make it manifest where she he's lived,
Or how stolen from the dead?
That she is living,
Were it but told you, should be hooted at
Like an old Tale: but it appears she lives,
Though yet she speak not. Mark a little while:
Please you to interpose (fair Madam) kneel,
And pray your Mothers blessing: turn good Lady,
Our Perdita is found.
You Gods look down,
And from your sacred Viols pour your graces
Upon my daughters head: Tell me (mine own)
Where hast thou bin preserved? Where lived? How found
Thy Fathers Court? For thou shalt hear that I
Knowing by Pauline, that the Oracle
Gave hope thou wast in being, have preserved
My self, to see the issue.
There's ttme enough for that,
Least they desire (upon this push) to trouble
Your joys, with like Relation. Go together
You precious winners all: your exultation
Partake to every one: I (an old Turtle)
Will wing me to some withered bough, and there
My Mate (that's never to be found again)
Lament, till I am lost.
O peace Pauline:
Thou should a husband take by my consent,
As I by thine a Wife. This is a Match,
And made betweene's by Vows. Thou hast found mine,
But how, is to be questioned: for I saw her
(As I thought) dead: and have (in vain) said many
A prayer upon her grave. Isle not seek fair
(For him, I partly know his mind) to find thee
An honourable husband. Come Camillo,
And take her by the hand: whose worth, and honesty
Is richly noted: and here justified
By Vs, a pair of Kings. Let's from this place.
What? look upon my Brother: both your pardons,
That ere I put between your holy looks
My ill suspicion: This your Son-in-law,
And Son unto the King, whom heavens directing
Is troth-plight to your daughter. Good Pauline,
Lead vs from hence, where we may leisurely
Each one demand, and answer to his part
Performed in this wide gap of Time, since first
We were disseuer'd: Hastily lead away.

NOw say Chatillion, what would France with vs?
Thus (after greeting) speaks the King of France,
In my behaviour to the Majesty▪
The borrowed Majesty of England here.
A strange beginning: borrowed Majesty?
Silence (good mother) hear the Embassy.
Philip of France, in right and true behalf
Of thy deceased brother, Geffreyes son,
Arthur Plantagines, lays most lawful claim
To this fair Island, and the Territories:
To Ireland, Poyctiers, Aniowe, Torayne, Maine,
Desiring thee to lay aside the sword
Which sways vsurpingly these several titles,
And put the same into young Arthurs hand,
Thy Nephew, and right royal Sovereign▪
What follows if we disallow of this?
The proud control of fierce and bloody war,
To enforce these rights, so forcibly with-held,
Here have we wat for war, &amp; blood for blood,
Controlment for controlment▪ so answer France.
Then take my Kings defiance from my mouth,
The farthest limit of my Embassy.
Bear mine to him, and so depart in peace,
Be thou as lightning in the eyes of France:
For ere thou can report, I will be there:
The thunder of my Cannon shall be heard,
So hence: be thou the trumpet of our wraths
And sullen presage of your own decay;
An honourable conduct let him have,
Pembroke look too't farewell Chattillion.
What now my son, have I not ever said
How that ambitious Constance would not coast
Till she had kindled France and all the world,
Upon the right and party of her son.
This might have been preue•ed, and made whole
With very easy arguments of love,
Which now the ma•nag of two kingdoms must
With fearful bloody issue arbitrate,
Out strong possession, and our right for vs,
Your strong possessiō much more then your right,
Or else it must go wrong with you and me,
So much my conscience whispers in your ear,
Which none but heaven, and you, and I, shall hear.
My Liege, here is the strangest controversy
Come from the Country to be judged by you
That ere I heard: shall I produce the men?
Let them approach:
Our Abbeys and our Priories shall pay
This expeditious charge what men are you?
Your faithful subject, I a gentleman,
Borne in Northamptonshire, and eldest son
As I suppose, to Robert Faulconbridge,
A Soldier by the Honor-giuing-hand
Of Cordelion, Knighted in the field.
What art thou?
The son and heir to that same Faulconbridge.
Is that the elder, and art thou the heir?
You came not of one mother then it seems.
Most certain of one mother, mighty King.
That is well known, and as I think one father:
But for the certain knowledge of that truth,
I put you o'er to heaven, and to my mother;
Of that I doubt, as all men's children may.
Out on thee rude man, you dost shame thy mother,
And wound her honour with this diffidence.
I Madame? No, I have no reason for it.
That is my brothers plea, and none of mine,
The which if he can prove, a pops me out,
At least from fair five hundred pound a year:
Heaven guard my mothers honour, and my Land.
A good blunt fellow: why being younger born
Doth he lay claim to thine inheritance?
I know not why, except to get the land:
But once he slandered me with bastardy:
But where I be as true begot or no,
That still I lay upon my mothers head,
But that I am as well begot my Liege
(Fair fall the bones that took the pains for me)
Compare our faces, and be Judge your self
If old Sir Robert did beget vs both,
And were our father, and this son like him:
O old sir Robert Father, on my knee
I give heaven thanks I was not like to thee.
Why what a mad-cap hath heaven lent vs here?
He hath a trick of Cordelions face,
The accent of his tongue affects him:
Doe you not read some tokens of my son
In the large composition of this man?
Mine eye hath well examined his parts,
And finds them perfect Richard: sir speak,
What doth move you to claim your brother• l•d.
Because he hath a half〈◊〉 like my 〈◊〉
With half that face would he have all my •and
A halfe-fac'd groa• five hundred pound a year.
My gracious Liege; when that my father lived,
Your brother did employ my father much.
Well sir, by this you cannot get my land,
Your tale must be how he employed my mother▪
And once dispatched him in an Embassy
To Germany, there with the Emperor
To treat of high affairs touching that time:
The advantage of his absence took the King,
And in the mean time sojourned at my fathers;
Where how he did prevail, I shame to speak:
But truth is truth, large lengths of seas and shores
Between my father, and my mother lay,
As I have heard my father speak himself
When this same lusty gentleman was got:
Upon his death-bed he by will bequeathed
His lands to me, and took it on his death
That this my mothers son was none of his;
And if he were, he came into the world
Full fourteen weeks before the course of time:
Then good my Liedge let me have what is mine,
My fathers land, as was my fathers will.
Sir, your brother is Legitimate,
Your fathers wife did after wedlock bear him:
And if she did play false, the fault was hers;
Which fault lies on the hazards of all husbands
That marry wives: tell me, how if my brother
Who as you say, took pains to get this son,
Had of your father claimed this son for his,
Insooth, good friend, your father might have kept
This Calfe, bred from his Cow from all the world:
Insooth he might: then if he were my brothers,
My brother might not claim him, nor your father
Being none of his, refuse him: this concludes,
My mothers son did get your fathers heir,
Your fathers heir must have your fathers land.
Shall then my fathers Will be of no force,
To dispossess that child which is not his.
Of no more force to dispossess me sir,
Then was his will to get me, as I think.
Whether had thou rather be a Faulconbridge,
And like thy brother to enjoy thy land:
Or the reputed son of Cordelion,
Lord of thy presence, and no land beside.
Madam, and if my brother had my shape
And I had his, sir Roberts his like him,
And if my legs were two such riding rods,
My arms, such eel skins stuffed, my face so thin,
That in mine ear I du•st not stick a rose.
Lest men should say, look where three farthings goes,
And to his shape were heir to all this land,
Would I might never stir from off this place,
I would give it every foot to have this face:
It would not be sir nobbe in any case.
I like thee well: wilt thou forsake thy fortune,
Bequeath thy land to him, and follow me?
I am a Soldier, and now bound to France.
Brother, take you my land, Isle take my chance;
Your face hath got five hundred pound a y•ere,
Yet sell your face for five pence and it is dear:
Madam, Isle follow you unto the death.
Nay, I would have you go before me thither.
Our Country manners give our betters way.
What i• thy name?
Philip •y Liege, so is my name begun, Philip, good old Sir Roberts wives eldest son.
From henceforth bear his name
Whose for me thou bear:
Kneel thou down Philip, but rise more great,
Arise Sir Richard, and Plantagenet.
Brother by the mothers side, give me your hand,
My father gave me honour, yours gave land:
Now blessed be the hour by night or day
When I was got, Sir Robert was away.
The very spirit of Plantaginet:
I am thy grandam Richard, call me so.
Madam by chance, but not by truth, what tho;
Something about a little from the right,
In at the window, or else ore the hatch:
Who dares not stir by day, must walk by night,
And have is have, how ever men doe catch:
Near or far off well won is still well shot,
And I am I, how ere I was begot.
Go, Faulconbridge, now hast thou thy desire,
A landless Knight, makes thee a landed Squire:
Come Madam, and come Richard, we must speed
For France, for France, for it is more then need.
Brother adieu, good fortune come to thee,
For thou wast got in th way of honesty.
A foot of Honour better then I was,
But many a many foot of Land the worse.
Well, now can I make any Join a Lady,
Good den Sir Richard, God a mercy fellow,
And if his name be George, Isle call him Peter;
For new made honour doth forget men's names:
It is two respective, and too sociable
For your conversion, now your traveller,
Hee and his tooth-picke at my worships mess,
And when my knightly stomach is sufficed,
Why then I suck my teeth, and catechise
My picked man of Countries: my dear sir,
Thus leaning on mine elbow I begin,
I shall beseech you; that is question now,
And then comes answer like an Absey book:
O sir, says answer, at your best command,
At your employment, at your service sir:
No sir, says question, I sweet sir at yours,
And so ere answer knows what question would,
Saving in Dialogue of Complement,
And talking of the Alps and Appenines,
The Perennean and the river Poe,
It draws toward fupper in conclusion so.
But this is worshipful society,
And fits the mounting spirit like my self;
For he is but a bastard to the time
That doth not smoke of observation,
And so am I whether I smack or no:
And not alone in habit and device,
Exterior form, outward accoutrement;
But from the inward motion to deliver
Sweet, sweet, sweet poison for the ages tooth,
Which though I will not practice to deceive,
Yet to avoid deceit I mean to learn;
For it shall strew the footsteps of my rising:
But who comes in such haste in riding robes?
What woman post is this? hath she no husband
That will take pains to blow a horn before her?
O me, it is my mother: how now good Lady,
What brings you here to Court so hastily?
Where is that slave thy brother? where is he?
That holds in chase mine honour up and down.
My brother Robert, old Sir Roberts son:
Colbrand the Giant, that same mighty man,
Is it Sir Roberts son that you seek so?
Sir Roberts son, I thou unreverend boy,
Sir Roberts son? why scorn thou at sir Robert?
He is Sir Roberts son, and so art thou.
Iames Gournie, wilt thou give vs leave a while?
Good leave good Philip.
Philip, sparrow, Iames,
There's toys abroad, anon Isle tell thee more.
Madam, I was not old Sir Roberts son,
Sir Robert might have eat his part in me
Upon good Friday, and ne'er broke his fast:
Sir Robert could doe well, marry to confess
Could get me sir Robert could not doe it;
We know his handy-worke, therefore good mother
To whom am I beholding for these limbs?
Sir Robert never help to make this leg.
Hast thou conspired with thy brother too,
That for thine own gain should defend mine honour?
What means this scorn, thou most untoward knave?
Knight, knight good mother, Basilisco-like:
What, I am dubbed, I have it on my shoulder:
But mother, I am not Sir Roberts son,
I have disclaimed Sir Robert and my land,
Legitimation, name, and all is gone;
Then good my mother, let me know my father,
Some proper man I hope, who was it mother?
Hast thou denied thy self a Faulconbridge?
As faithfully as I deny the devil.
King Richard Cordelion was thy father,
By long and vehement suit I was seduced
To make room for him in my husbands bed:
Heaven lay not my transgression to my charge,
That art the issue of my dear offence
Which was so strongly urged past my defence.
Now by this light were I •o get again,
Madam I would not wish a better father:
Some sins doe bear their privilege on earth,
And so doth yours: your fault, was not your folly,
Needs must you lay your heart at his dispose,
Subjected tribute to commanding love,
Against whose fury and unmatched force,
The aweless Lion could not wage the fight,
Nor keep his Princely heart from Richards hand
He that perforce robs Lions of their hearts,
May easily win a women's: aye my mother,
With all my heart I thank thee for my father:
Who lives and dares but say, thou did not well
When I was got, Isle send his soul to hell.
Come Lady I will show thee to my kin,
And they shall say, when Richard me begot,
If thou had said him nay, it had been sin;
Who says it was, he lies, I say it was not.
Before Angiers well met brave Austria,
Arthur that great fore-runner of thy blood,
Richard that robed the Lion of his heart,
And fought the holy Wars in Palestine,
By this brave Duke came early to his grave:
And for amends to his posterity,
At our importance hither is he come,
To spread his colours boy, in thy behalf,
And to rebuke the usurpation
Of thy unnatural Uncle, English Iohn,
Embrace him, love him, give him welcome hither.
God shall forgive you Cordelions death
The rather, that you give his off-spring life,
Shadowing their right under your wings of war:
I give you welcome with a powerless hand,
But with a heart full of unstained love,
Welcome before the gates of Angiers Duke.
A noble boy, who would not doe thee right?
Upon thy cheek lay I this zealous kiss,
As seal to this indenture of my love:
That to my home I will no more return
Till Angiers, and the right thou hast in France,
Together with that pale, that white-fac'd shore,
Whose foot spurns back the Oceans roaring tides,
And coops from other lands her Ilanders,
Even till that England hedged in with the maine,
That Water-walled Bulwark, still secure
And confident from foreign purposes,
Even till that utmost corner of the West
Salute thee for her King, till then fair boy
Will I not think of home, but follow Arms.
O take his mothers thanks, a widows thanks,
Till your strong hand shall help to give him strength,
To make a more requital to your love.
The peace of heaven is theirs yt lift their swords
In such a just and charitable war.
Well, then to work our Cannon shall be bent
Against the brows of this resisting town,
Call for our chiefest men of discipline,
To cull the plots of best advantages:
We'll lay before this town our Royal bones,
Wade to the market-place in French-mens blood,
But we will make it subject to this boy.
Stay for an answer to your Embassy,
Lest unadvised you stain your swords with blood,
My Lord Chattilion may from England bring
That right in peace which here we urge in war,
And then we shall repent each drop of blood,
That hot rash haste so indirectly shed.
A wonder Lady: lo upon thy wish
Our Messenger Chattilion is arrived,
What England says, say briefly gentle Lord,
We coldly pause for thee, Chatilion speak,
Then turn your forces from this paltry siege,
And stir them up against a mightier task:
England impatient of your just demands,
Hath put himself in Arms, the adverse winds
Whose leisure I have staid, have given him time
To land his Legions all as soon as I:
His marches are expedient to this town,
His forces strong, his Soldiers confident:
With him along is come the Mother Queen,
An Ace stirring him to blood and strife,
With her her Niece, the Lady Blanch of Spain,
With them a Bastard of the Kings deceased,
And all the unsettled humours of the Land,
Rash, inconsiderate, fiery voluntaries,
With Ladies faces, and fierce Dragons spleens,
Have sold their fortunes at their native homes,
Bearing their birth-rights proudly on their backs,
To make a hazard of new fortunes here:
In brief, a braver choice of dauntless spirits
Then now the English bottoms have waft o'er,
Did never flote upon the swelling tide,
To doe offence and scathe in Christendom:
The interruption of their churlish drums
Cuts off more circumstance, they are at hand,
To parley or to fight, therefore prepare.
How much unlooked for, is this expedition.
By how much unexpected, by so much
We must awake endeavour for defence,
For courage mounts with occasion,
Let them be welcome then, we are prepared.
Peace be to France: If France in peace permit
Our just and lineal entrance to our own;
If not, bleed France, and peace ascend to heaven.
Whiles we Gods wrathful agent doe correct
Their proud contempt that beats his peace to heaven.
Peace be to England, if that war return
From France to England, there to live in peace:
England we love, and for that Englands sake,
With burden of our armour here we sweat:
This toil of ours should be a work of thine;
But thou from loving England art so far,
That thou hast vnder-wrought his lawful King,
Cut off the sequence of posterity,
Out-faced Infant State, and done a rape
Upon the maiden virtue of the Crown:
Look here upon thy brother Geffreyes face,
These eyes, these brows, were moulded out of his;
This little abstract doth contain that large,
Which died in G•ffrey: and the hand of time,
Shall draw this brief into as huge a volume:
That Geffrey was thy elder brother borne,
And this his son, England was Geffreys right,
And this is Geffreyes in the name of God:
How comes it then that thou art called a King,
When living blood doth in these temples beat
Which owe the crown, that thou ore-masterest?
From whom hast thou this great commission
To draw my answer from thy Articles?
Frō that supernal Judge that stirs good thoughts France,
In any beast of strong authority,
To look into the blots and staines of right.
That Judge hath made me guardian to this boy,
Under whose warrant I impeach thy wrong,
And by whose help I mean to chastise it.
Alack thou dost usurp authority.
Excuse it is to beat usurping down.
Who is it thou dost call usurper France?
Let me make answer: thy usurping son.
Out insolent, thy bastard shall be King,
That thou moist be a Queen, and check the world.
My bed was ever to thy son as true
As thine was to thy husband, and this boy
Liker in feature to his father Geffrey
Then thou and Iohn, in manners being as like,
As rain to water, or devil to his damme;
My boy a bastard? by my soul I think
His father never was so true begot,
It cannot be, and if thou were his mother.
Theres a good mother boy, that blots thy fa∣there
There's a good grandam boy
That would blot thee.
Peace.
Hear the Crier.
What the devil art thou?
One that will play the devil sir with you,
And a may catch your hide and you alone:
You are the Hare of whom the Proverb goes
Whose valour plucks dead Lyons by the beard;
Isle smoke your skin-coat and I catch you right,
Sir look too't, in faith I will, in faith.
O well did he become that Lyons robe,
That did disrobe the Lion of that robe.
It lies as sightly on the back of him
As great Alcides shoes upon an Ass:
But Ass, Isle take that burden from your back,
Or lay on that shall make your shoulders crack.
What cracker is this same that deafes our ears
With this abundance of superfluous breath?
King Lewis, determine what we shall doe strait.
Women &amp; fools, break off your conference.
King Iohn, this is the very sum of all:
England and Ireland, Angiers, Toraine, Maine,
In right of Arthur doe I claim of thee:
Wilt thou resign them, and lay down thy Arms?
My life as soon: I doe defy thee France,
Arthur of Britain, yield thee to my hand,
And out of my dear love Isle give thee more,
Then ere the coward hand of France can win;
Submit thee boy.
Come to thy grandam child.
Doe child, go to yt grandam child,
Give grandam kingdom, and it grandam will
Give yt a plum, a cherry, and a fig,
There's a good grandam.
Good my mother peace,
I would that I were low laid in my grave,
I am not worth this coil that's made for me.
His mother shames him so, poor boy hee weeps.
Now shame upon you where she does or no,
His gran•ames wrongs, and not his mothers shames
Draws those heauen-mouing pearls frō his poor eyes,
Which heaven shall take in nature of a fee:
I, with these Crystal beads heaven shall be bribed
To doe him Justice, and revenge on you.
Thou monstrous slanderer of heaven and earth.
Thou monstrous of Iniurer of heaven and earth,
Call not me slanderer, thou and thine usurp
The Dominations, Royalties, and rights
Of this oppressed boy; this is thy eldest sons son,
Unfortunate in nothing but in thee:
Thy sins are visited in this poor child,
The Canon of the Law is laid on him,
Being but the second generation
Removed from thy sinne-conceiuing womb.
Bedl• have done.
I have but this to say,
That he is not only plagued for her sin,
But God hath made her sin and her, the plague
On this removed issue, plagued for her,
And with her plague her sin: his injury
Her injury the Beadle to her sin,
All punished 〈◊〉 the person of this child,
And all for her, a plague upon her.
Thou unadvised scold, I can produce
A Will, that bars the title of thy son.
I who doubts that, a Will: a wicked will,
A women's will, a cankered Grandams will.
Peace Lady, pause, or be more temperate,
It ill beseems this presence to cry aim
To these ill-tuned repetitions:
Some Trumpet summon hither to the walls
These men of Angiers, let vs hear them speak,
Whose title they admit, Arthurs or Iohns.
Who is it that hath warned vs to the walls?
It is France, for England.
England for it self:
You men of Angiers, and my loving subjects.
You loving men of Angiers, Arthurs subjects,
Our Trumpet called you to this gentle parley.
For our advantage, therefore hear vs first:
These flags of France that are advanced here
Before the eye and prospect of your Town,
Have hither marched to your endamagement.
The Canons have their bowels full of wrath,
And ready mounted are they to spit forth
Their Iron indignation against your walls:
All preparation for a bloody siege
And merciless proceeding, by these French.
Comfort yours Cities eyes, your winking gates:
And but for our approach, those sleeping stones,
That as a waste doth girdle you about
By the compulsion of their Ordinance,
By this time from their fixed beds of lime
Had bin dishabited, and wide havoc made
For bloody power to rush upon your peace.
But on the sight of vs your lawful King,
Who painefully with much expedient march
Have brought a counter-cheeke before your gates,
To save vnscratch'd your Cities threatened cheeks:
Behold the French amazed vouchsafe a parley,
And now instead of bullets wrapped in fire
To make a shaking fever in your walls,
They shoot but calm words, folded up in smoke,
To make a faithless error in your ears,
Which trust accordingly kind Citizens,
And let vs in. Your King, whose laboured spirits
Fore-wearied in this action of swift speed,
Craves harbourage within your City walls.
When I have said, make answer to vs both.
Lo in this right hand, whose protection
Is most divinely vowed upon the right
Of him it holds, stands young Pl•tagen•s,
Son to the elder brother of this man,
And King ore him, and all that he enjoys:
For this downtrodden equity, we tread
In warlike march, these greenes before your Town,
Being no further enemy to you
Then the constraint of hospitable zeal,
In the relief of this oppressed child,
Religiously provokes. Be pleased then
To pay that duty which you truly owe,
To him that owes it, namely, this young Prince,
And then our Arms, like to a muzzled Bear,
Save in aspect, hath all offence sealed up:
Our Cannons malice vainly shall be spent
Against the involuerable clouds of heaven,
And with a blessed and vn-vext retire,
With vnhack'd swords, and Helmets all unbruised,
We will bear home that Just blood again,
Which here we came to spout against your Town,
And leave your children, wives, and you in peace.
But if you fondly pass our proffered offer,
It is not the rounder of your old-fac'd walls,
Can hide you from our messengers of War,
Though all these English, and their discipline
Were harboured in their rude circumference:
Then tell vs, Shall your City call vs Lord,
In that behalf which we have challenged it?
Or shall we give the signal to our rage,
And stalk in blood to our possession?
In brief, we are the King of Englands subjects
For him, and in his right, we hold this Town.
Acknowledge then the King, and let me in.
That can we not: but he that proves the King
To him will we prove loyal, till that time
Have we rammed up our gates against the world.
Doth not the Crown of England, prove the King?
And if not that, I bring you Witnesses
Twice fifteen thousand hearts of Englands breed.
Bastards and else.
To verify our title with their lives.
As many and as well-borne bloods as those.
Some Bastards too.
Stand in his face to contradict his claim.
Till you compound whose right is worthiest,
We for the worthiest hold the right from both.
Then God forgive the sin of all those souls,
That to their everlasting residence,
Before the dew of evening fall, shall fleet
In dreadful trial of our kingdoms King.
Amen, Amen, mount Cheualiers to Arms.
Saint George that swindg'd the Dragon,
And ere since sit's on's horseback at mine Hostess door
Teach vs some fence. Sirrah, were I at home
At your den sirrah, with your Lioness,
I would set an Oxe-head to your Lyons hide:
And make a monster of you.
Peace, no more.
O tremble: for you hear the Lyon roar.
Up higher to the plain, where we will set forth
In best appointment all our Regiments.
Speed then to take advantage of the field.
It shall be so, and at the other hill▪
Command the rest to stand▪ God and our right.
You men of Angiers open wide your gates,
And let young Arthur Duke of Britain in,
Who by the hand of France, this day hath made
Much work for tears in many an English mother,
Whose sons lye scattered on the bleeding ground▪
Many a widows husband grovelling lies,
Coldly embracing the discoloured earth,
And victory with little loss doth play
Upon the dancing banners of the French,
Who are at hand triumphantly displayed
To enter Conquerors, and to proclaim
Arthur of Britain, Englands King, and yours.
Rejoice you men of Angiers, ring your bells,
King Iohn, your king and Englands, doth approach,
Commander of this hot malicious day,
Their Armours that marched hence so silver bright,
Hither return all gilt with Frenchmens blood:
There stuck no plume in any English Crest,
That is removed by a staff of France.
Our colours do return in those same hands
That did display them when we first marched forth:
And like a jolly troop of Huntsmen come
Our lusty English, all with purpled hands,
Did in the dying slaughter of their foes,
Open your gates, and give the Victors way.
Heralds, from off our towers we might behold
From first to last, the on-set and retire▪
Of both your Armies, whose equality
By our best eyes cannot be censured:
Blood hath bought blood, and blows have answered blows:
Strength matched with strength, and power confronted power,
Both are alike, and both alike we like:
One must prove greatest. While they weigh so even,
We hold our Town for neither: yet for both.
France, hast thou yet more blood to cast away?
Say, shall the currant of our right rome on,
Whose passage vexed with thy impediment,
Shall leave his native channel, and ore-swell
with course disturbed even thy confining shores,
Unless thou let his silver Water, keep
A peaceful progress to the Ocean.
England thou hast not saved one drop of blood
In this hot trial more then we of France,
Rather lost more. And by this hand I swear
That sways the earth this Climate ouer-lookes,
Before we will lay down our iust-borne Arms,
We'll put thee down, against whom these Arms wee bear,
Or add a royal number to the dead:
Gracing the scroll that tells of this wars loss,
With slaughter coupled to the name of kings.
Ha Majesty: how high thy glory towers,
When the rich blood of kings is set on fire:
Oh now doth death line his dead chaps with steel,
The swords of soldiers are his teeth, his fangs,
And now he feasts, mousing the flesh of men
In vndetermin'd differences of kings.
Why stand these royal fronts amazed thus:
Cry havoc kings, back to the stained field
You equal Potents, fiery kindled spirits,
Then let confusion of one part confirm
The others peace: till then, blows, blood, and death.
Whose party do the Townsmen yet admit?
Speak Citizens for England, whose your king.
The king of England, when we know the king.
Know him in vs, that here hold up his right.
In Vs, that are our own great Deputy,
And bear possession of our Person here▪
Lord of our presence Angiers, and of you.
A greater power then▪ We denies all this,
And till it be undoubted, we do locke
Our former scruple in our strong barred gates:
Kings of our fear, until our fears resolved
Be by some certain king, purged and deposed.
By heaven, these scroyles of Angiers flout you kings,
And stand securely on their battlements,
As in a Theater, whence they gape and point
At your industrious Scenes and acts of death.
Your Royal presences be ruled by me,
Do like the Muteness of Jerusalem,
Be friends awhile, and both conjointly bend
Your sharpest Deeds of malice on this Town.
By East and West let France and England mount.
Their battering Canon charged to the mouths,
Till their soule-fearing clamours have brawled down
The flinty ribs of this contemptuous City,
I'd play incessantly upon these Jade,
Even till vnfenced desolation
Leave them as naked as the vulgar ayre:
That done, dissever your united strengths,
And part your mingled colours once again,
Turn face to face, and bloody point to point:
Then in a moment Fortune shall cull forth
Out of one side her happy Minion,
To whom in favour she shall give the day,
And kiss him with a glorious victory:
How like you this wilde counsel mighty States,
Smacks it not something of the policy.
Now by the sky that hangs aboue our heads,
I like it well. France, shall we knit our powers,
And lay this Angiers even with the ground,
Then after fight who shall be king of it?
And if thou hast the mettle of a king,
Being wronged as we are by this peevish Town:
Turn thou the mouth of thy Artillery,
As we will ours, against these saucy walls,
And when that we have dashed them to the ground,
Why then defy each other, and pell-mell,
Make work upon our selves, for heaven or hell.
Let it be so: say, where will you assault?
We from the West will send destruction
Into this Cities bosom.
I from the North.
Our Thunder from the South,
Shall rain their drift of bullets on this Town.
O prudent discipline! From North to South:
Austria and France shoot in each others mouth.
Isle stir them to it: Come, away, away.
Hear vs great kings, vouchsafe awhile to stay
And I shall show you peace, and faire-fac'd league:
Win you this City without stroke, or wound,
Rescue those breathing lives to dye in beds,
That here come sacrifices for the field.
Persevere not, but hear me mighty kings.
Speak on with favour, we are bent to hear.
That daughter there of Spain, the Lady Blanch
Is near to England, look upon the years
Of Lewes the Dolphin, and that lovely maid.
If lusty love should go in quest of beauty,
Where should he find it fairer, the• in Blanch:
If zealous love should go in search of virtue,
Where should he find i• purer then in Blanch?
If love ambitious, sought a match of birth,
Whose veins bound richer blood then Lady Blanch?
Such as she is, in beauty, virtue, birth,
Is the young Dolphin every way complete,
If not complete of, say he is not she,
And she again wants nothing, to name want,
If want it be not, that she is not hee:
He is the halfe-part o• a blessed man,
Left to be finished by such as she,
And she a fair divided excellence,
Whose fullness of perfection lies in him.
O two such silver currents when they join
Do glorify the banks that bound them in:
And two such shores, to two such streams made one,
Two such controlling bounds shall you be, kings,
To these two Princes, if you marry them:
This Union shall do more then battery can
To our fast closed gates: for at this match,
With swifter spleen then powder can enforce
The mouth of passage shall we sling wide op,
And give you entrance: but without this match,
The sea enraged is not half so deaf,
Lyons more confident, Mountains and rocks
More free from motion, no not death himself
In mortal fury half so peremptory,
As we to keep this City.
Hears a stay,
That shakes the rotten carcass of old death
Out of his rags. Here's a large mouth indeed,
That spits forth death, and mountains, rocks, and seas,
Talks as familiarly of roaring Lyons,
As maids of thirteen do of puppi-dogges.
What Cannoneere begot this Just blood,
He speaks plain Cannon fire, and smoke, and bounce,
He gives the bastinado with his tongue:
Our ears are cudgeled, not a word of his
But buffets better then a fist of France:
Zounds, I was never so bethump with words,
Since I first called my brothers father Dad.
Son, list to this conjunction, make this match
Give with our Niece a dowry large enough,
For by this knot, thou shalt so surely tie
Thy now uncured assurance to the Crown,
That you greene boy shall have no Sun to ripe
The bloom that promises a mighty fruit.
I see a yielding in the looks of France:
Mark how they whisper, urge them while their souls
Are capable of this ambition,
Least zeal now melted by the windy breath
Of soft petitions, pity and remorse,
Cool and congeal again to what it was.
Why answer not the double Majesties,
This friendly treaty of our threatened Town.
Speak England first, that hath bin forward first
To speak unto this City: what say you?
If that the Dolphin there thy Princely son,
Can in this book of beauty r•ad, I love:
Her Dowry shall weigh equal with a Queen:
For Angiers, and fair Toraine Maine, Poyctiers,
And all that we upon this side the Sea,
(Except this City now by vs besieged)
Find liable to our Crown and Dignity,
Shall gild her bridal bed and make her rich
In titles, honours, and promotions,
As she in beauty, education, blood,
Holds hand with any Princess of the world.
What sai'st thou boy? look in the Ladies face.
I do my Lord, and in her eye I find
A wonder, or a wondrous miracle,
The shadow of my self formed in her eye,
Which being but the shadow of your son,
Becomes a son and makes your son a shadow:
I do protest I never loved my self
Till now, infixed I beheld my self,
Drawn in the flattering table of her eye.
Drawn in the flattering table of her eye,
Hanged in the frowning wrinkle of her brow,
And quartered in her heart, hee doth espy
Himself loves traitor, this is pity now;
That hanged, and drawn, and quartered there should be
In such a love, so vile a Lout as he.
My uncles will in this respect is mine,
If he see ought in you that makes him like,
That any thing he see's which moves his liking,
I can with ease translate it to my will:
Or if you will, to speak more properly,
I will enforce it easlie to my love.
Further I will not flatter you, my Lord,
That all I see in you is worthy love,
Then this, that nothing do I see in you,
Though churlish thoughts themselves should bee your Judge,
That I can find, should merit any hate.
What say these young ones? What say you my Niece?
That she is bound in honour still to do
What you in wisdom still vouchsafe to say.
Speak then Prince Dolphin, can you love this Lady?
Nay ask me if I can refrain from love,
For I doe love her most unfeignedly.
Then do I give Ʋolquessen, Toraine, Maine,
Poyctiers, and Aniow, these five Provinces
With her to thee, and this addition more,
Full thirty thousand Marks of English coin:
Phillip of France, if thou be pleased withal,
Command thy son and daughtet to join hands.
It likes vs well young Princes: close your hands
And your lips too, for I am well assured,
That I did so when I was first assured.
Now Citizens of Angers op your gates,
Let in that amity which you have made,
For at Saint Maries Chapel presently,
The rights of marriage shall be solemnised.
Is not the Lady Constance in this troop▪
I know she is not for this match made up,
Her presence would have interrupted much.
Where is she and her son, tell me, who knows?
She is sad and passionate at your highness Tent.
And by my faith, this league that we have made
Will give her sadness very little cure:
Brother of England, how may we content
This widow Lady? In her right we came,
Which we God knows, have turn•d another way,
To our own vantage.
We will heal up all,
For we'll create young Arthur Duke of Britain
And Earl of Richmond; and this rich fair Town
We make him Lord of. Call the Lady Constance,
Some speedy Messenger bid her repair
To our solemnity: I trust we shall,
(If not fill up the measure of her will)
Yet in some measure satisfy her so,
That we shall stop her exclamation,
Go we as well as hast will suffer vs,
To this unlooked for unprepared pomp.
Mad world, mad kings, mad composition:
Iohn to stop Arthurs Title in the whole,
Hath willingly departed with a part,
And France, whose armour Conscience buckled on,
Whom zeal and charity brought to the field,
As Gods own soldier, rounded in the ear,
With that same purpose-changer, that sly devil,
That Broker, that still breaks the pate of faith,
That daily breake-vow, he that wins of all,
Of kings, of beggars, old men, young men, maids,
Who having no external thing to loose,
But the word Maid, cheats the poor Maid of that.
That smooth-fac'd Gentleman, tickling commodity.
Commodity, the bias of the world,
The world, who of it self is poised well.
Made to run even, upon even ground:
Till this advantage, this vile drawing bias,
This sway of motion, this commodity,
Makes it take head from all indifference,
From all direction, purpose, course, intent.
And this same bias, this Commodity,
This Bawd, this Broker, this all-changing-word,
Clapped on the outward eye of fickle France,
Hath drawn him from his own determined aid,
From a resolved and honourable war,
To a most base and vile-concluded peace.
And why rail I on this Commodity?
But for because he hath not wooed me yet:
Not that I have the power to clutch my hand,
When his fair Angels would salute my palm,
But for my hand, as unattempted yet,
Like a poor beggar, rails on the rich.
Well, whiles I am a beggar, I will rail,
And say there is no sin but to be rich:
And being rich, my virtue then shall be,
To say there is no vice, but beggary:
Since Kings break faith upon commodity,
Gain be my Lord, for I will worship thee.
Gone to be married? Gone to swear a peace?
False blood to false blood joined. Gone to be friends?
Shall Lewis have Blanch, and Blanch those Provinces?
It is not so, thou hast mispoke, misheard,
Be well advised, tell ore thy tale again.
It cannot be, thou dost but say it is so.
I trust I may not trust thee, for thy word
Is but the vain breath of a common man:
Believe me, I doe not believe thee man,
I have a Kings oath to the contrary.
Thou shalt be punished for thus frighting me,
For I am sick, and capable of fears,
Oppressed with wrongs, and therefore full of fears,
A widow, husbandless, subject to fears,
A woman naturally borne to fears;
And though thou now confess thou did but jest
With my vexed spirits, I cannot take a Truce,
But they will quake and tremble all this day.
What dost thou mean by shaking of thy head?
Why dost thou look so sadly on my son?
What means that hand upon that breast of thine?
Why holds thine eye that lamentable rheum,
Like a proud river peering ore his bounds?
Be these sad signs confirmers of thy words?
Then speak again, not all thy former tale,
But this one word, whether thy tale be true.
As true as I believe you think them false,
That give you cause to prove my saying true.
Oh if thou teach me to believe this sorrow,
Teach thou this sorrow, how to make me dye,
And let belief, and life encounter so,
As doth the fury of two desperate men,
Which in the very meeting fall, and dye.
Lewes marry Blanch? O boy, then where art thou?
France friend with England, what becomes of me?
Fellow be gone: I cannot brooke thy sight,
This news hath made thee a most ugly man.
What other harm have I good Lady done.
But spoke the harm, that is by others done?
Which harm within it self so heinous is,
As it makes harmful all that speak of it.
I do beseech you Madam be content.
If thou that bid me be content, were grim
Ugly, and slanderous to thy Mothers womb,
Full of unpleasing blots, and sightless staines,
Lame, foolish, crooked, answered, prodigious,
Patched with foul Moles, and eye-offending marks,
I would not care, I then would be content,
For then I should not love thee: no, nor thou
Become thy great birth, nor deserve a Crown.
But thou art fair, and at thy birth (dear boy)
Nature and Fortune joined to make thee great.
Of Natures gifts, thou may with Lilies boast,
And with the halfe-blowne Rose. But Fortune, oh,
She is corrupted, changed, and won from thee▪
She adulterates hourly with thine Uncle Iohn,
And with her golden hand hath plucked on France
To tread down fair respect of Sovereignty,
And made his Majesty the bawd to theirs.
France is a Bawd to Fortune, and king Iohn,
That strumpet Fortune, that usurping Iohn:
Tell me thou fellow, is not France forsworn?
Euvenom him with words, or get thee gone,
And leave those woes alone, which I alone
Am bound to vnder-beare.
Pardon me Madam,
I may not go without you to the kings.
Thou moist, thou shalt, I will not go with thee,
I will instruct my sorrows to bee proud,
For grief is proud, and makes his owner stoop,
To me and to the state of my great grief,
Let kings assemble: for my greefe's so great,
That no supporter but the huge firm earth
Can hold it up: here I and sorrows sit,
Here is my Throne, bid kings come bow to it.
It is true (fair daughter) and this blessed day,
Ever in France shall be kept festival:
To solemnise this day the glorious sun
Stays in his course, and plays the Alchemist,
Turning with splendour of his precious eye
The meager cloddy earth to glittering gold:
The yearly course• that brings this day about,
Shall never see it, but a holy day.
A wicked day, and not a holy day.
What hath this day deserved? what hath it done,
That it in golden letters should be set
Among the high tides in the Calendar?
Nay, rather turn this day out of the week,
This day of shame, oppression, perjury.
Or if it must stand still, let wives with child
Pray that their burdens may not fall this day,
Lest that their hopes prodigiously be crossed:
But (on this day) let Sea-men fear no wrack,
No bargains break that are not this day made;
This day all things begun, come to ill end,
Yea, faith it self to hollow falsehood change.
By heaven Lady, you shall have no cause
To curse the fair proceedings of this day:
Have I not pawned to you my Majesty?
You have beguiled me with a counterfeit
Resembling Majesty, which being touched and tried,
Proves valueless: you are forsworn, forsworn,
You came in Arms to spill mine enemies blood,
But now in Arms, you strengthen it with yours.
The grappling vigour, and rough frown of War
Is cold in amity, and painted peace,
And our oppression hath made up this league:
Arm, arm, you heavens, against these perjured Kings,
A widow cries, be husband to me (heavens)
Let not the hours of this ungodly day
Wear out the days in Peace; but ere Sun-set,
Set armed discord twixt these perjured Kings,
Hear me, Oh, hear me.
Lady Constance, peace.
War, war, no peace, peace is to me a war:
O Lymoges, O Austria, thou dost shame
That bloody spoil: thou slave, thou wretch, you coward,
Thou little valiant, great in villainy,
Thou ever strong upon the stronger side;
Thou Fortunes Champion, that dost never fight
But when her humorous Ladyship is by
To teach thee safety: thou art perjured too,
And sooth'st up greatness. What a fool art thou,
A romping fool, to brag, and stamp, and swear,
Upon my party: thou cold blooded slave,
Hast thou not spoke like thunder on my side?
Been sworn my Soldier, bidding me depend
Upon thy stars, thy fortune, and thy strength,
And dost thou now fall over to my foes?
Thou wear a Lyons hide, doff it for shame,
And hang a Calves skin on those recreant limbs.
O that a man should speak those words to me.
And hang a Calf-skin on those recreant limbs
Thou dare not say so villain for thy life.
And hang a Calf-skin on those recreant limbs.
We like not this, thou dost forget thy self.
Here comes the holy Legate of the Pope.
Hail you anointed deputies of heaven;
To thee King Iohn my holy errand is:
I Pandulph, of fair Millane Cardinal,
And from Pope Innocent the Legate here,
Doe in his name religiously demand
Why thou against the Church, our holy Mother,
So wilfully dost spurn; and force perforce
Keep Stephen Langton chosen Archbishop
Of Canterbury from that holy Sea:
This in our foresaid holy Fathers name
Pope Innocent, I doe demand of thee.
What earthy name to Interrogatories
Can taste the free breath of a sacred King?
Thou can not (Cardinal) devise a name
So slight, unworthy, and ridiculous
To charge me to an answer, as the Pope:
Tell him this tale, and from the mouth of England,
Add thus much more, that no Italian Priest
Shall tithe or toll in our dominions:
But as we, under heaven, are supreme head,
So under him that great supremacy
Where we doe reign, we will alone uphold
Without the assistance of a mortal hand:
So tell the Pope, all reverence set apart
To him and his usurped authority.
Brother of England, you blaspheme in this.
Though you, and all the Kings of Christendom
Are led so grossly by this meddling Priest,
Dreading the curse that money may buy out,
And by the merit of wild gold, dross, dust,
Purchase corrupted pardon of a man,
Who in that sale sells pardon from himself:
Though you, and al the rest so grossly led,
This juggling witchcraft with revenue cherish,
Yet I alone, alone doe me oppose
Against the Pope, and count his friends my foes.
Then by the lawful power that I have,
Thou shalt stand cursed and excommunicate,
And blessed shall he be that doth revolt
From his Allegiance to an heretic,
And meritorious shall that hand be called,
Canonised and worshipped as a Saint,
That takes away by any secret course
Thy hateful life.
O lawful let it be
That I have room with Rome to curse a while,
Good Father Cardinal, cry thou Amen
To my keen curses; for without my wrong
There is no tongue hath power to curse him right.
There's Law and Warrant (Lady) for my curse.
And for mine too, when Law can do no right.
Let it be lawful, that Law bar no wrong:
Law cannot give my child his kingdom here;
For he that holds his Kingdom, holds the Law:
Therefore since Law it self is perfect wrong,
How can the Law forbid my tongue to curse?
Philip of France, on peril of a curse,
Let go the hand of that Arch-heretic,
And raise the power of France upon his head,
Unless he doe submit himself to Rome.
Look thou pale France? do not let go thy hand.
Look to that Devil, lest that France repent,
And by disioyning hands hell lose a soul.
King Philip, listen to the Cardinal.
And hang a Calf-skin on his recreant limbs.
Well ruffian, I must pocket up these wrongs, Because,
Your breeches best may carry them.
Philip, what say thou to the Cardinal?
What should he say, but as the Cardinal?
Bethink you father, for the difference
Is purchase of a heavy curse from Rome,
Or the light loss of England, for a friend:
Forgo the easier.
That•s the curse of Rome.
O Lewis, stand fast, the devil tempts thee here
In likeness of a new untrimmed Bride.
The Lady Constance speaks not from her faith,
But from her need.
Oh, if thou grant my need,
Which only lives but by the death of faith,
That need, must needs infer this principle,
That faith would live again by death of need:
O then tread down my need, and faith mounts up,
Keep my need up, and faith is trodden down.
The king is moud, and answers not to this.
O be removed from him, and answer well.
Doe so king Philip, hang no more in doubt.
Hang nothing but a Calves skin most sweet lout.
I am perplexed, and know not what to say.
What can thou say, but will perplex thee more?
If thou stand excommunicate, and cursed?
Good reverend father, make my person yours,
And tell me how you would bestow your self?
This royal hand and mine are newly knit,
And the conjunction of our inward souls
Married in league, coupled, and linked together
With all religious strength of sacred vows,
The latest breath that gave the sound of words
Was deepe-sworne faith, peace, amity, true love
Between our kingdoms and our royal selves,
And even before this truce, but new before,
No longer then we well could wash our hands,
To clap this royal bargain up of peace,
Heaven knows they were besmeared and ouer-staind
With slaughters pencil; where revenge did paint
The fearful difference of incensed kings:
And shall these hands so lately purged of blood?
So newly joined in love? so strong in both,
Vnyoke this seizure, and this kind regreete?
Play fast and loose with faith? so jest with heaven,
Make such inconstant children of our selves
As now again to snatch our palm from palm:
Vn-sweare faith sworn, and on the marriage bed
Of smiling peace to march a bloody host,
And make a riot on the gentle brow
Of true sincerity? O holy Sir
My reverend father, let it not be so;
Out of your grace, devise, ordain, impose
Some gentle order, and then we shall be blessed
To doe your pleasure, and continue friends.
All form is formelesse, Order orderlesse,
Save what is opposite to Englands love.
Therefore to Arms, be Champion of our Church,
Or let the Church our mother breathe her curse,
A mothers curse, on her revolting son:
France, thou moist hold a serpent by the tongue,
A cased Lion by the mortal paw,
A fasting Tiger safer by the tooth,
Then keep in peace that hand which thou dost hold.
I may dis-ioyne my hand, but not my faith.
So make thou faith an enemy to faith,
And like a civil war set oath to oath,
Thy tongue against thy tongue. O let thy vow
First made to heaven, first be to heaven performed,
That is, to be the Champion of our Church,
What since thou sworst, is sworn against thy self,
And may not be performed by thy self,
For that which thou hast sworn to doe amiss,
Is not amiss when it is truly done:
And being not done, where doing tends to ill,
The truth is then most done not doing it:
The better Act of purposes mistook,
Is to mistake again, though indirect,
Yet indirection thereby grows direct,
And falsehood, falsehood cures, as fire cools fire
Within the scorched veins of one new burned:
It is religion that doth make vows kept,
But thou hast sworn against religion:
By what thou swear against the thing thou swear,
And make an oath the surety for thy truth,
Against an oath the truth, thou art unsure
To swear, swears only not to be forsworn,
Else what a mockery should it be to swear?
But thou dost swear, only to be forsworn,
And most forsworn, to keep what thou dost swear,
Therefore thy later vows, against thy first,
Is in thy self rebellion to thy self:
And better conquest never can thou make,
Then arm thy constant and thy nobler parts
Against these giddy loose suggestions:
Upon which better part, our prayers come in,
If thou vouchsafe them. But if not, then know
The peril of our curses light on thee
So heavy, as thou shalt not shake them off
But in despair, dye under their black weight.
Rebellion, flat rebellion.
Will it not be?
Will not a Calf-skin stop that mouth of thine?
Father, to Arms.
Upon thy wedding day?
Against the blood that thou hast married?
What, shall our feast be kept with slaughtered men?
Shall braying trumpets, and loud churlish drums
Clamours of hell, be measures to our pomp?
O husband hear me: aye, alack, how new
Is husband in my mouth? even for that name
Which till this time my tongue did ne'er pronounce;
Upon my knee I beg, go not to Arms
Against mine Uncle.
O, upon my knee made hard with kneeling,
I doe pray to thee, thou virtuous Daulphin,
Alter not the doom fore-thought by heaven.
Now shall I see thy love, what motive may
Be stronger with thee, then the name of wife?
That which vpholdeth him, that thee upholds,
His Honour, Oh thine Honour, Lewis thine Honour.
I muse your Majesty doth seem so cold,
When such profound respects doe pull you on?
I will denounce a curse upon his head.
Thou shalt not need. England, I will fall frō thee.
O fair return of banished Majesty.
O foul revolt of French inconstancy.
France, you shalt rue this hour within this hour.
Old Time the clock setter, yt bald sexton Time:
Is it as he will? well then, France shall rue.
The Sun's orecast with blood: fair day adieu,
Which is the side that I must go withal?
I am with both, each Army h• a hand,
And in their rage, I having hold of both,
They whurle a•under, and dismember me,
Husband, I cannot pray that thou moist win:
Uncle, I needs must pray that thou moist lose:
Father, I may not wish the fortune thine:
Grandam, I will not wish thy wishes thrive:
Who-euer wins, on that side shall I lose:
Assured loss, before the match be plaid.
Lady, with me, with me thy fortune lies.
There where my fortune lives, there my life dies.
Cousin; go draw our puisance together,
France, I am burned up with inflaming wrath,
A rage, whose heat hath this condition;
That nothing can allay, nothing but blood,
The blood and dearest valued blood of France.
Thy rage shall burn thee up, &amp; thou shalt turn
To ashes, ere our blood shall quench that fire:
Look to thy self, thou art in jeopardy.
No more then he that threats. To Arms le'ts hie.
Now by my life, this day grows wondrous hot,
Some aerie Devil hovers in the sky,
And pour's down mischief. Austrias head lye there,
While Philip breathes.
Hubert, keep this boy: Philip make up,
My Mother is assailed in our Tent,
And tan I fear.
My Lord I rescued her,
Her Highness is in safety, fear you not:
But on my Liege, for very little pains
Will bring this labour to an happy end.
So shall it be: your Grace shall stay behind
So strongly guarded: Cousin, look not sad,
Thy Grandam loves thee, and thy Uncle will
As dear be to thee, as thy father was.
O this will make my mother die with grief.
Cousin away for England, haste before,
And ere our coming see thou shake the bags
Of hoording Abbots, imprisoned angels
Set at liberty: the fat ribs of peace
Must by the hungry now be fed upon:
Use our Commission in his utmost force.
Bell, Book, &amp; Candle, shall not drive me back,
When gold and silver becks me to come on▪
I leave your highness: Grandam, I will pray
(If ever I remember to be holy)
For your fair safety: so I kiss your hand.
Farewell gentle Cousin.
Cos, farewell.
Come hither little kinsman, hark, a word.
Come hither Hubert. O my gentle Hubert,
We owe thee much: within this wall of flesh
There is a soul counts thee her Creditor,
And with advantage means to pay thy love:
And my good friend, thy voluntary oath
Lives in this bosom, dearly cherished.
Give me thy hand, I had a thing to say,
But I will fit it with some better tune.
By heaven Hubert, I am almost ashamed
To say what good respect I have of thee.
I am much bounden to your Majesty.
Good friend, thou hast no cause to say so yet,
But thou shalt have: and creep time ne'er so slow,
Yet it shall come, for me to doe thee good.
I had a thing to say, but let it go:
The Sun is in the heaven, and the proud day,
Attended with the pleasures of the world,
Is all too wanton, and too full of gauds
To give me audience: If the mid-night bell
Did with his iron tongue, and brazen mouth
Sound on into the drowsy race of night:
If this same were a Church-yard where we stand,
And thou possessed with a thousand wrongs:
Or if that surly spirit melancholy
Had baked thy blood, and made it heavy, thick,
Which else runs tickling up and down the veins,
Making that idiot laughter keep men's eyes,
And strain their cheeks to idle merriment,
A passion hateful to my purposes:
Or if that thou could see me without eyes,
Hear me without thine ears, and make reply
Without a tongue, using conceit alone,
Without eyes, ears, and harmful sound of words:
Then, in despite of brooded watchful day,
I would into thy bosom pour my thoughts:
But (ah) I will not, yet I love thee well,
And by my troth I think thou love me well.
So well, that what you bid me undertake,
Though that my death were adjunct to my Act,
By heaven I would doe it.
Doe not I know thou would?
Good Hubert, Hubert, Hubert throw thine eye
On you young boy: Isle tell thee what my friend,
He is a very serpent in my way,
And wheresoever this foot of mine doth tread,
He lies before me: dost thou understand me?
Thou art his keeper.
And Isle keep him so,
That he shall not offend your Majesty.
Death.
My Lord.
A Grave.
He shall not live.
Enough.
I could be merry now, Hubert, I love thee.
Well, Isle not say what I intend for thee:
Remember: Madam, Fare you well,
Isle send those powers o'er to your Majesty.
My blessing go with thee.
For England Cousin, go.
Hubert shall be your man, attend on you
Withal true duty: On toward Callice, hoe.
So by a roaring Tempest on the flood,
A whole Armado of convicted sail
Is scattered and disjoined from fellowship.
Courage and comfort, all shall yet go well.
What can go well, when we have run so ill?
Are we not beaten? Is not Angiers lost?
Arthur tan prisoner? divers dear friends slain?
And bloody England into England gone,
Ore-bearing interruption spite of France?
What he hath won, that hath he fortified:
So hot a speed, with such advice disposed,
Such temperate order in so fierce a cause,
Doth want example: who hath read, or heard
Of any kindred-action like to this?
Well could I bear that England had this praise,
So we could find some pattern of our shame:
Look who comes here? a grave unto a soul,
Holding the eternal spirit against her will,
In the wild prison of afflicted breath:
I prithee Lady go away with me.
Lo; now: now see the issue of your peace.
Patience good Lady, comfort gentle Constance.
No, I defy all Counsel, all redress,
But that which ends all counsel, true Redress:
Death, death, O amiable, lovely death,
Thou odoriferous stench: sound rottenness,
Arise forth from the couch of lasting night,
Thou hate and terror to prosperity,
And I will kiss thy detestable bones,
And put my eye-balls in thy vaulty brows,
And ring these fingers with thy household worms,
And stop this gap of breath with fulsome dust,
And be a Carrion Monster like thy self;
Come, grin on me, and I will think thou smile,
And bus thee as thy wife: Miseries Love,
O come to me.
O fair affliction, peace.
No, no, I will not, having breath to cry:
O that my tongue were in the thunders mouth,
Then with a passion would I shake the world,
And rowze from sleep that fell Anatomy
Which cannot hear a Ladies feeble voice,
Which scorns a modern Invocation.
Lady, you utter madness, and not sorrow.
Thou art holy to belie me so,
I am not mad: this hair I tear is mine,
My name is Constance, I was G•ffreyes wife,
Young Arthur is my son, and he is lost:
I am not mad, I would to heaven I were,
For then it is like I should forget my self:
O, if I could, what grief should I forget?
Preach some Philosophy to make me mad,
And thou shalt be Canonised (Cardinal.)
For, being not mad, but sensible of grief,
My reasonable part produces reason
How I may be delivered of these woes,
And teaches me to kill or hang my self:
If I were mad, I should forget my son,
Or madly think a babe of clowes were he:
I am not mad: too well, too well I feel
The different plague of each calamity.
Bind up those tresses: O what love I note
In the fair multitude of •hose her hairs;
Where but by chance a silver drop hath fallen,
Even to that drop ten thousand weary fiends
Doe glow themselves in sociable grief,
Like true, inseparable, faithful loves,
Sticking together in calamity.
To England, if you will.
Bind up your hairs.
Yes that I will: and wherefore will I do it?
I tore them from their bonds, and cried aloud,
O, that these hands could so redeem my son,
As they have given these hairs their liberty:
But now I envy at their liberty,
And will again commit them to their bonds,
Because my poor child is a prisoner.
And Father Cardinal, I have heard you say
That we shall see and know our friends in heaven:
If that be true, I shall see my boy again;
For since the birth of Caine, the first male-childe
To him that did but yesterday suspire,
There was not such a gracious creature borne:
But now will Canker-sorrow eat my bud,
And chase the native beauty from his cheek,
And he will look as hollow as a Ghost,
As dim and meager as an Agues fit,
And so he will dye: and rising so again,
When I shall meet him in the Court of heaven
I shall not know him: therefore never, never
Must I behold my pretty Arthur more.
You hold too heinous a respect of grief.
He talks to me, that never had a son.
You are as fond of grief, as of your child.
Grief fills the room up of my absent child:
Lies in his bed, walks up and down with me,
Puts on his pretty looks, repeats his words,
Remembets me of all his gracious parts,
Stuffs out his vacant garments with his form;
Then, have I reason to be fond of grief?
Fareyouwell: had you such a loss as I,
I could give better comfort then you doe.
I will not keep this form upon my head,
When there is such disorder in my wit:
O Lord, my boy, my Arthur, my fair son,
My life, my joy, my food, my all the world:
My widow-comfort, and my sorrows cure.
I fear some out-rage, and Isle follow her.
There's nothing in this world can make me joy,
Life is as tedious as a twice-told tale,
Vexing the dull ear of a drowsy man;
And bitter shame hath spoiled the sweet words taste,
That it yields nought but shame and bitterness.
Before the curing of a strong disease,
Even in the instant of repair and health,
The fit is strongest: Evils that take leave.
On their departure, most of all show evil▪
What have you lost by losing of this day?
All days of glory, joy and happiness.
If you had won it, certainly you had.
No, no: when Fortune means to men most good,
She looks upon them with a threatening eye:
It is strange to think how much King Iohn hath lost
In this which he accounts so clearly won:
Are not you grieved that Arthur is his prisoner?
As heartily as he is glad he hath him.
Your mind is all as youthful as your blood.
Now hear me speak with a prophetic spirit:
For even the breath of what I mean to speak,
Shall blow each dust, each straw, each little rub
Out of the path which shall directly lead
Thy foot to Englands Throne. And therefore mark:
Iohn hath seized Arthur, and it cannot be,
That whiles warm life plays in that infants veins,
The mis-plac'd-Iohn should entertain an hour,
One minute, nay one quiet breath of rest.
A Sceptre snatched with an unruly hand,
Must be as boisterously maintained as gained.
And he that stands upon a slippery place,
Makes nice of no wild hold to stay him up:
That Iohn may stand, then Arthur needs must fall;
So be it, for it cannot be but so.
But what shall I gain by young Arthurs fall?
You, in the right of Lady Blanch your wife,
May then make all the claim that Arthur did.
And loose it, life and all, as Arthur did.
How green you are and fresh in this old world?
Iohn lays you plots: the times conspire with you,
For he that steepes his safety in true blood,
Shall find but bloody safety, and untrue.
This Act so evilly borne shall cool the hearts
Of all his people, and freeze up their zeal,
That none so small advantage shall step forth
To check his reign, but they will cherish it.
No natural exhalation in the sky,
No scope of Nature, no distempered day,
No common wind, no customed event,
But they will pluck away his natural cause,
And call them Meteors, prodigies, and signs,
Abbortiues, presages, and tongues of heaven,
Plainly denouncing vengeance upon Iohn.
May be he will not touch young Arthurs life,
But hold himself safe in his prisonment.
O Sir, when he shall hear of your approach,
If that young Arthur be not gone already,
Even at that news he dies: and then the hearts
Of all his people shall revolt from him,
And kiss the lips of unacquainted change,
And pick strong matter of revolt, and wrath
Out of the bloody fingers ends of Iohn.
Me thinks I see this hurly all on foot;
And O, what better matter breeds for you,
Then I have named. The Bastard Falconbridge
Is now in England ransacking the Church,
Offending Charity: If but a dozen French
Were there in Arms, they would be as a Call
To train ten thousand English to their side;
Or, as a little snow, tumbled about,
Anon becomes a Mountain. O noble Dolphin,
Go with me to the King, it is wonderful,
What may be wrought out of their discontent,
Now that their souls are topfull of offence,
For England go; I will whet on the King.
Strong reasons makes strange actions: let vs go,
If you say I, the King will not say no.
Heate me these Irons hot, and look thou stand
Within the Arras: when I strike my foot
Upon the bosom of the ground, rush forth
And bind the boy, which you shall find with me
Fast to the chair: be heedful: hence, and watch.
I hope your warrant will bear out the deed.
Vncleanly scruples fear not you: look too't.
Young Lad come forth; I have to say with you.
Good morrow Hubert.
Good morrow; little Prince.
As little Prince, having so great a Title
To be more Prince, as may be: you are sad.
Indeed I have been merrier.
Mercy on me:
Me thinks no body should be sad but I:
Yet I remember, when I was in France,
Young Gentlemen would be as sad as night
Only for wantonness: by my Christendom,
So I were out of prison, and kept Sheep
I should be as merry as the day is long:
And so I would be here, but that I doubt
My Uncle practises more harm to me:
He is afraid of me, and I of him:
Is it my fault, that I was Geffreyes son?
No in deed is it not: and I would to heaven
I were your son, so you would love me, Hubert:
If I talk to him, with his innocent prate
He will awake my mercy, which lies dead:
Therefore I will be sudden, and dispatch.
Are you sick Hubert? you look pale to day,
Insooth I would you were a little sick,
That I might sit all night, and watch with you.
I warrant I love you more then you do me.
His words do take possession of my bosom.
Read here young Arthur. How now foolish rheum?
Turning dispitious torture out of door?
I must be brief, least resolution drop
Out at mine eyes, in tender womanish tears.
Can you not read it? Is it not fair writ?
Too fairly Hubert, for so foul effect,
Must you with hot Irons, burn out both mine eyes?
Young Boy, I must.
And will you?
And I will.
Have you the heart? When your head did but ache,
I knit my •and-kercher about your brows
(The best I had, a Princess wrought it me)
And I did never ask it you again:
And with my hand, at midnight held your head;
And like the watchful minutes, to the hour,
Still and anon cheered up the heavy time;
Saying, what lack you? and where lies your grief?
Or what good love may I perform for you?
Many a poor mans son would have lain still,
And ne'er have spoke a loving word to you:
But you, at your sick service had a Prince:
Nay, you may think my love was crafty love,
And call it cunning. Do, and if you will,
If heaven be pleased that you must use me ill,
Why then you must. Will you put out mine eyes?
These eyes, that never did, nor never shall
So much as frown on you.
I have sworn to do it:
And with hot Irons must I burn them out.
Ah, none but in this Iron Age, would do it:
The Iron of it self, though heate red hot,
Approaching near these eyes, would drink my tears,
And quench this fiery indignation,
Even in the matter of mine innocence:
Nay, after that, consume away in rust,
But for containing fire to harm mine eye:
Are you more stubborn hard, then hammered Iron?
And if an Angel should have come to me,
And told me Hubert should put out mine eyes,
I would not have believed him: no tongue but Huberts.
Come forth: Do as I bid you do.
O save me Hubert, save me: my eyes are out
Even with the fierce looks of these bloody men.
Give me the Iron I say, and bind him here.
Alas, what need you be so boisterous rough?
I will not struggle, I will stand stone still:
For heaven sake Hubert let me not be bound:
Nay hear me Hubert, drive these men away,
And I will sit as quiet as a Lamb.
I will not stir, nor winch, nor speak a word,
Nor look upon the Iron angrily:
Thrust but these men away, and Isle forgive you,
What ever torment you do put me too.
Go stand within: let me alone with him.
I am best pleased to be from such a deed.
Alas, I then have chid away my friend,
He hath a sterne look, but a gentle heart:
Let him come back, that his compassion may
Give life to yours.
Come (Boy) prepare your self.
Is there no remedy?
None, but to lose your eyes.
O heaven: that there were but a moth in yours,
A grain, a dust, a gnat, a wandering hair,
Any annoyance in that precious sense:
Then feeling what small things are boisterous there,
Your wild intent must needs seem horrible.
Is this your promise? Go too, hold your tongue
Hubert, the utterance of a brace of tongues,
Must needs want pleading for a pair of eyes:
Let me not hold my tongue: let me not Hubert,
Or Hubert, if you will cut out my tongue,
So I may keep mine eyes. O spare mine eyes,
Though to no use, but still to look on you.
Lo, by my troth, the Instrument is cold,
And would not harm me.
I can heate it, Boy.
No, in good sooth: the fire is dead with grief,
Being create for comfort, to be used
In undeserved extremes: See else your self,
There is no malice in this burning cole,
The breath of heaven, hath blown his spirit out,
And strewed repentant ashes on his head.
But with my breath I can revive it Boy.
And if you do, you will but make it blush,
And glow with shame of your proceedings, Hubert:
Nay, it perchance will sparkle in your eyes:
And, like a dog that is compelled to fight,
Snatch at his Master that doth carre him on.
All things that you should use to do me wrong
Deny their office: only you do lack
That mercy, which fierce fire, and Iron extends,
Creatures of note for mercy, lacking uses.
Well, see to live: I will not touch thine eye,
For all the Treasure that thine Uncle owes,
Yet am I sworn, and I did purpose, Boy,
With this same very Iron, to burn them out.
O now you look like Hubert. All this while
You were disguised.
Peace: no more. Adieu,
Your Uncle must not know but you are dead.
Isle fill these dogged Spies with false reports:
And, pretty child, sleep doubtless, and secure,
That Hubert for the wealth of all the world,
Will not offend thee.
O heaven! I thank you Hubert.
Silence, no more; go closely in with me,
Much danger do I undergo for thee.
Here once again we sit: once against crowned
And looked upon, I hope, with cheerful eyes.
This once again (but that your Highness pleased)
Was once superfluous: you were Crowned before,
And that high Royalty was ne'er plucked off:
The faiths of men, ne'er stained with revolt:
Fresh expectation troubled not the Land
With any long'd-for-change, or better State.
Therefore, to be possessed with double pomp,
To guard a Title, that was rich before;
To gilde refined Gold, to paint the Lily;
To throw a perfume on the Violet,
To smooth the ye, or add another hew
Unto the Rainbow; or with Taper-Light
To seek the beauteous eye of heaven to garnish,
Is wasteful, and ridiculous excess.
But that your Royal pleasure must be done,
This act, is as an ancient tale new told,
And, in the last repeating, troublesome,
Being urged at a time unseasonable.
In this the Antique, and well noted face
Of plain old form, is much disfigured,
And like a shifted wind unto a sail,
It makes the course of thoughts to fetch about,
Startles, and frights consideration:
Makes sound opinion sick, and truth suspected,
For putting on so new a fashioned robe.
When Workmen strive to do better then well,
They do confound their skill in covetousness,
And oftentimes excusing of a fault,
Doth make the fault the worse by the excuse:
As patches set upon a little breach,
Discredit more in hiding of the fault,
Then did the fault before it was so patched.
To this effect, before you were new crowned
We breathed our Council: but it pleased your Highness
To ouer-beare it, and we are all well pleased,
Since all, and every part of what we would
Doth make a stand, at what your Highness will.
Some reasons of this double Coronation
I have possessed you with, and think them strong.
And more, more strong, then lesser is my fear
I shall endue you with: Mean time, but ask
What you would have reformed▪ that is not well,
And well shall you perceive, how willingly
I will both hear, and grant you your requests.
Then I, as one that am the tongue of these
To sound the purposes of all their hearts,
Both for my self, and them: but chief of all
Your safety: for the which, my self and them
Bend their best studies, heartily request
The enfranchisement of Arthur, whose restraint
Doth move the murmuring lips of discontent
To break into this dangerous argument.
If what in rest you have, in right you hold,
Why then your fears, which (as they say) attend
The steppes of wrong, should move you to mew up
Your tender kinsman, and to choke his days
With barbarous ignorance, and deny his youth
The rich advantage of good exercise,
That the times enemies may not have this
To grace occasions: let it be our suite,
That you have bid vs ask his liberty,
Which for our goods, we do no further ask,
Then, whereupon our weal on you depending,
Counts it your weal: he have his liberty.
Let it be so: I do commit his youth
To your direction: Hubert, what news with you?
This is the man should do the bloody deed:
He showed his warrant to a friend of mine,
The image of a wicked heinous fault
Lives in his eye: that close aspect of his,
Do show the mood of a much troubled breast,
And I do fearfully believe it is done,
What we so feared he had a charge to do.
The colour of the King doth come, and go
Between his purpose and his conscience,
Like Heralds twixt two dreadful battles set:
His passion is so ripe, it needs must break.
And when it breaks, I fear will issue thence
The foul corruption of a sweet childes death.
We cannot hold mortalities strong hand.
Good Lords, although my will to give, is living,
The suite which you demand is gone, and dead.
He tells vs Arthur is deceased to night.
Indeed we feared his sickness was past cure.
Indeed we heard how near his death he was,
Before the child himself felt he was sick:
This must be answered either here, or hence.
Why do you bend such solemn brows on me?
Think you I bear the Shears of destiny?
Have I commandment on the pulse of life?
It is apparent foule-play, and it is shame
That Greatness should so grossly offer it;
So thrive it in your game, and so farewell.
Stay yet (Lord Salisbury) Isle go with thee,
And find the inheritance of this poor child,
His little kingdom of a forced grave.
That blood which owed the breadth of all this Isle,
Three foot of it doth hold; bad world the while:
This must not be thus borne, this will break out
To all our sorrows, and ere long I doubt.
They burn in indignation: I repent:
There is no sure foundation set on blood:
No certain life achieved by others death:
A fearful eye thou hast. Where is that blood,
That I have seen inhabit in those cheeks?
So foul a sky, clears not without a storm,
Pour down thy weather: how goes all in France?
From France to England, never such a power
For any foreign preparation,
Was levied in the body of a land.
The Copy of your speed is learned by them:
For when you should be told they do prepare,
The tidings comes, that they are all arrived.
Oh where hath our Intelligence bin drunk?
Where hath it slept? Where is my Mothers care?
That such an Army could be drawn in France,
And she not hear of it?
My Liege, her ear
Is stopped with dust: the first of April died
Your noble mother; and as I hear, my Lord,
The Lady Constance in a frenzy died
Three days before: but this from Rumours tongue
I idly heard: if true, or false I know not.
With-hold thy speed, dreadful Occasion:
O make a league with me, 'till I have pleased
My discontented Peers. What? Mother dead?
How wildely then walks my Estate in France?
Under whose conduct came those powers of France,
That thou for truth giu'st out are landed here?
Under the Dolphin.
Thou hast made me giddy
With these ill tidings: Now? What says the world
To your proceedings? Do not seek to stuff
My head with more ill news: for it is full.
But if you be afraid to hear the worst,
Then let the worst vn-heard, fall on your head.
Bear with me Cousin, for I was amazed
Under the tide; but now I breath again
Aloft the flood, and can give audience
To any tongue, speak it of what it will.
How I have sped among the Clergy men,
The sums I have collected shall express:
But as I travailed hither through the land,
I find the people strangely fantasied,
Possessed with rumours, full of idle dreams,
Not knowing what they fear, but full of fear.
And here's a Prophet that I brought with me
From forth the streets of Pomfret, whom I found
With many hundreds treading on his heals:
To whom he sung in rude harsh sounding rimes,
That ere the next Ascension day at noon,
Your Highness should deliver up your Crown.
Thou idle Dreamer, wherefore did thou so?
Fore-knowing that the truth will fall out so.
Hubert, away with him: imprison him,
And on that day at noon, whereon he says
I shall yield up my Crown, let him be hanged.
Deliver him to safety, and return,
For I must use thee. O my gentle Cousin,
Hear thou the news abroad, who are arrived?
The French (my Lord) men's mouths are full of it:
Besides I met Lord Bigot, and Lord Salisbury
With eyes as red as new kindled fire,
And others more, going to seek the grave
Of Arthur, whom they say is killed to night, on your suggestion.
Gentle kinsman, go
And thrust thy self into their Companies,
I have a way to win their loves again:
Bring them before me.
I will seek them out.
Nay, but make haste: the better foot before.
O, let me have no subject enemies,
When adverse Foreigners affright my Towns
With dreadful pomp of stout invasion.
Be Mercury, set feathers to thy heals,
And fly (like thought) from them, to me again.
The spirit of the time shall teach me speed.
Spoke like a sprightful Noble Gentleman.
Go after him: for he perhaps shall need
Some Messenger betwixt me, and the Peers,
And be thou hee.
With all my heart, my Liege.
My mother dead?
My Lord, they say five Moons were seen to night:
Four fixed, and the fifth did whirl about
The other four, in wondrous motion.
Five Moons?
Old men, and Beldams, in the streets
Do prophecy upon it dangerously:
Young Arthurs death is common in their mouths,
And when they talk of him, they shake their heads,
And whisper one another in the ear.
And he that speaks, doth gripe the hearers wrist,
Whilst he that hears, makes fearful action
With wrinkled brows, with nods, with rolling eyes.
I saw a Smith stand with his hammer (thus)
The whilst his Iron did on the Anvil cool,
With open mouth swallowing a Taylors news,
Who with his Shears, and Measure in his hand,
Standing on slippers, which his nimble haste
Had falsely thrust upon contrary feet,
Told of a many thousand warlike French,
That were embattailed, and ranked in Kent.
Another lean, vnwash'd Artificer,
Cuts off his tale, and talks of Arthurs death.
Why seek thou to possess me with these fears?
Why vrgest thou so oft young Arthurs death?
Thy hand hath murdered him: I had a mighty cause
To wish him dead, but thou had none to kill him.
No had (my Lord?) why, did you not provoke me?
It is the curse of Kings, to be attended
By slaves, that take their humours for a warrant,
To break within the bloody house of life,
And on the winking of Authority
To understand a Law; to know the meaning
Of dangerous Majesty, when perchance it frowns
More upon humour, then advised respect.
Here is your hand and Seal for what I did.
Oh, when the last account twixt heaven &amp; earth
Is to be made, then shall this hand and Seal
Witness against vs to damnation.
How oft the sight of means to do ill deeds,
Make deeds ill done? Had not thou been by,
A fellow by the hand of Nature marked,
Quoted, and signed to do a deed of shame,
This murder had not come into my mind.
But taking note of thy abhorred Aspect,
Finding thee fit for bloody villainy:
Apt, liable to be employed in danger,
I faintly broke with thee of Arthurs death:
And thou, to be endeared to a King,
Made it no conscience to destroy a Prince.
My Lord.
Had thou but shook thy head, or made a pause
When I spake darkly, what I purposed:
Or turned an eye of doubt upon my face;
As bid me tell my tale in express words:
Deep shame had struck me dumb, made me break off,
And those thy fears, might have wrought fears in me.
But, thou did understand me by my signs,
And did in signs again parley with sin,
Yea, without stop, did let thy heart consent,
And consequently, thy rude hand to act
The deed, which both our tongues held wild to name.
Out of my sight, and never see me more:
My Nobles leave me, and my State is braved,
Even at my gates, with ranks of foreign powers;
Nay, in the body of this fleshly Land,
This kingdom, this Confine of blood, and breathe
Hostility, and civil tumult reigns
Between my conscience, and my Cousins death.
Arm you against your other enemies:
Isle make a peace between your soul, and you.
Young Arthur is alive: This hand of mine
Is yet a maiden, and an innocent hand.
Not painted with the Crimson spots of blood,
Within this bosom, never entered yet
The dreadful motion of a murderous thought,
And you have slandered Nature in my form,
Which howsoever rude exteriorly,
Is yet the cover of a fairer mind,
Then to be butcher of an innocent child.
Doth Arthur live? O hast thee to the Peers,
Throw this report on their incensed rage,
And make them tame to their obedience.
Forgive the Comment that my passion made
Upon thy feature, for my rage was blind,
And foul imaginary eyes of blood
Presented thee more hideous then thou art.
Oh, answer not; but to my Closet bring▪
The angry Lords, with all expedient hast,
I conjure thee but slowly: run more fast.
The Wall is high, and yet will I leap down.
Good ground be pitiful, and hurt me not:
There's few or none do know me, if they did,
This Ship-boyes semblance hath disguised me quite.
I am afraid, and yet Isle venture it.
If I get down, and do not break my limbs,
Isle find a thousand shifts to get away;
As good to dye, and go; as dye, and stay.
Oh me, my Uncles spirit is in these stones,
Heaven take my soul, and England keep my bones.
Lords, I will meet him at S. Edmondsbury,
It is our safety, and we must embrace
This gentle offer of the perilous time.
Who brought that Letter from the Cardinal?
The Count Meloone, a Noble Lord of France,
Whose private with me of the Dolphins love,
Is much more general, then these lines import.
To morrow morning let vs meet him then.
Or rather then set forward, for twill be
Two long days journey (Lords) or ere we meet.
Once more to day well met, distempered Lords,
The King by me requests your presence straight.
The king hath dispossessed himself of vs,
We will not lyne his thin-bestained cloak▪
With our pure Honours: nor attend the foot.
That leaves the print of blood where ere it walks.
Return, and tell him so: we know the worst.
What ere you think, good words I think were best.
Our griefs, and not our manners reason now.
But there is little reason in your grief.
Therefore it were reason you had manners now.
Sir, sir, impatience hath his privilege.
It is t•ue, to hurt his master, no mans else.
This is the prison: What is he lies here?
Oh death, made proud with pure &amp; princely beauty,
The earth had not a hole to hide this deed.
Murder, as hating what himself hath done,
Doth lay it open to urge on revenge.
Or when he doomed this Beauty to a grave,
Found it too precious Princely, for a grave.
Sir Richard, what think you? you have beheld,
Or have you read, or heard, or could you think?
Or do you almost think, although you see,
That you do see? Could thought, without this object
Form such another? This is the very top,
The height, the Crest: or Crest unto the Crest
Of murders Arms: This is the bloodiest shame,
The wildest Sa•agery, the vildest stroke
That ever wall-ey'd wrath, or staring rage
Presented to the tears of soft remorse.
All murders past, do stand excused in this:
And this so sole, and so vnmatcheable,
Shall give a holiness, a purity,
To the yet unbegotten sin of times;
And prove a deadly blood-shed, but a jest,
Exampled by this heinous spectacle.
It is a damned, and a bloody work,
The graceless action of a heavy hand,
If that it be the work of any hand.
If that it be the work of any hand?
We had a kind of light, what would ensue:
It is the shameful work of Huberts hand,
The practice, and the purpose of the king:
From whose obedience I forbid my soul,
Kneeling before this ruin of sweet life,
And breathing to his breathless Excellence
The Incense of a Vow, a holy Vow:
Never to taste the pleasures of the world,
Never to be infected with delight,
Nor conversant with Ease, and Idleness,
Till I have set a glory to this hand,
By giving it the worship of Revenge.
Our souls religiously confirm thy words.
Lords, I am hot with haste, in seeking you,
Arthur doth live, the king hath sent for you.
Oh he is bold, and blushes not at death,
Avaunt thou hateful villain, get thee gone.
I am no villain.
Must I rob the Law?
Your sword is bright sir, put it up again.
Not till I sheath it in a murderers skin.
Stand back Lord Salsbury, stand back I say.
By heaven, I think my sword's as sharpe as yours.
I would not have you (Lord) forget your self,
Nor tempt the danger of my true defence;
Least I, by marking of your rage, forget your Worth, your Greatness, and Nobility.
Out dunghill: dare thou brave a Nobleman?
Not for my life: But yet I dare defend
My innocent life against an Emperor.
Thou art a Murderer.
Do not prove me so:
Yet I am none. Whose tongue so ere speaks false,
Not truly speaks: who speaks not truly, Lies.
Cut him to pieces.
Keep the peace, I say.
Stand by, or I shall gaul you Faulconbridge.
Thou were it better gaul the devil Salsbury.
If thou but frown on me, or stir thy foot,
Or teach thy hasty spleen to do me shame,
Isle strike thee dead. Put up thy sword betime,
Or Isle so maule you, and your tosting-Iron,
That you shall think the devil is come from hell.
What wilt thou do, renowned Faulconbridge?
Second a Villain, and a Murderer?
Lord Bigot, I am none.
Who killed this Prince?
It is not an hour since I left him well:
I honoured him, I loved him, and will weep
My date of life out, for his sweet lives loss.
Trust not those cunning waters of his eyes,
For villainy is not without such rheum,
And he, long traded in it, makes it seem
Like Rivers of remorse and innocence.
Away with me, all you whose souls abhor
The vncleanly savours of a Slaughter-house,
For I am stifled with this smell of sin.
Away, toward Bury, to the Dolphin there.
There tel the king, he may inquire vs out.
Here's a good world: knew you of this fair work?
Beyond the infinite and boundless reach of mercy,
(If thou did this deed of death) art you damned Hubert.
Do but hear me sir.
Ha? Isle tell thee what.
You're damned as black, nay nothing is so black,
Thou art more deep damned then Prince Lucifer:
There is not yet so ugly a fiend of hell
As thou shalt be, if thou did kill this child.
Upon my soul.
If thou did but consent
To this most cruel Act: do but despair,
And if thou want a Cord, the smallest thread
That ever Spider twisted from her womb
Will serve to strangle thee: A rush will be a beam
To hang thee on. Or would thou drown thy self,
Put but a little water in a spoon,
And it shall be as all the Ocean,
Enough to stifle such a villain up.
I do suspect thee very grievously.
If I in act, consent, or sin of thought,
Be guilty of the stealing that sweet breath
Which was embounded in this beauteous clay,
Let hell want pains enough to torture me:
I left him well.
Go, bear him in thine arms: am amazed me thinks, and loose my way
Among the thorns, and dangers of this world▪
How easy dost thou take all England up,
From forth this morsel of dead Royalty?
The life, the right, and truth of all this Realm
Is fled to heaven: and England now is left
To tug and scamble, and to part by the teeth
The vn-owed interest of proud swelling State:
Now for the bare-pickt bone of Majesty,
Doth dogged war bristle his angry crest,
And snarled in the gentle eyes of peace:
Now▪ Powers from home, and discontents at home
Meet in one line: and vast confusion waits
As doth a Raven on a sicke-falne beast,
The imminent decay of wrested pomp.
Now happy he, whose cloak and center can
Hold out this tempest. Bear away that child,
And follow me with speed: Isle to the King:
A thousand businesses are brief in hand,
And heaven it self doth frown upon the Land.
Thus have I yielded up into your hand
The Circle of my glory.
Take again
From this my hand, as holding of the Pope
Your Sovereign greatness and authority.
Now keep your holy word, go meet the French,
And from his holiness use all your power
To stop their marches before we are inflamed:
Our discontented Counties doe revolt:
Our people quarrel with obedience,
Swearing Allegiance, and the love of soul
To stranger-bloud, to for•en Royalty;
This inundation of mistempred humour,
Rests by you only to be qualified.
Then pause not: for the present time's so sick,
That present medcine must be ministered,
Or overthrow incurable ensues.
It was my breath that blew this Tempest up,
Upon your stubborn usage of the Pope:
But since you are a gentle convertite,
My tongue shall hush again this storm of war,
And make fair weather in your blustering land:
On this Ascention day, remember well,
Upon your oath of service to the Pope,
Go I to make the French lay down their Arms.
Is this Ascension day: did not the Prophet
Say, that before Ascension day at noon,
My Crown I should give off? even so I have:
I did suppose it should be on constraint,
But (heaven be thanked) it is but voluntary.
All Kent hath yielded: nothing there holds out
But Dover Castle: London hath received
Like a kind Host, the Dolphin and his powers.
Your Nobles will not hear you, but are gone
To offer service to your enemy:
And wilde amazement hurries up and down
The little number of your doubtful friends.
Would not my Lords return to me again
After they heard young Arthur was alive?
They found him dead, and cast into the streets,
An empty Casket, where the Jewel of life
By some damned hand was robed, and tan away.
That villain Hubert told me he did live.
So on my soul he did, for ought he knew:
But wherefore doe you droop? why look you sad?
Be great in act, as you have been in thought:
Let not the world see fear and sad distrust
Govern the motion of a kingly eye:
Be stirring as the time, be fire with fire,
Threaten the threatener, and out-face the brow
Of bragging horror: So shall inferior eyes
That borrow their behaviours from the great,
Grow great by your example, and put on
The dauntless spirit of resolution.
Away, and glister like the god of war
When he intends to become the field:
Show boldness and aspiring confidence:
What, shall they seek the Lion in his den,
And fright him there? and make him tremble there?
Oh let it not be said: forage, and run
To meet displeasure farther from the doors,
And grapple with him ere he come so ny.
The Legate of the Pope hath been with me,
And I have made a happy peace with him,
And he hath promised to dismiss the Powers
Led by the Dolphin.
Oh inglorious league:
Shall we upon the footing of our land,
Send fayre-play-orders, and make compromise,
Insinuation, parley, and base truce
To Arms Inuasiue? Shall a beardless boy,
A cockred-silken wanton brave our fields,
And flesh his spirit in a warre-like soil,
Mocking the ayre with colours idly spread,
And find no check? Let vs my Liege to Arms:
Perchance the Cardinal cannot make your peace;
Or if he doe, let it at least be said
They saw we had a purpose of defence.
Have thou the ordering of this present time.
Away then with good courage: yet I know
Our Party may well meet a prouder foe.
My Lord Melloone, let this be copied out,
And keep it safe for our remembrance:
Return the president to these Lords again,
That having our fair order written down,
Both they and we, perusing ore these notes
May know wherefore we took the Sacrament,
And keep our faiths firm and inviolable.
Upon our sides it never shall be broken.
And Noble Dolphin, albeit we swear
A voluntary zeal, and an vn-urg'd Faith
To your proceedings: yet believe me Prince,
I am not glad that such a sore of Time
Should seek a plaster by contemned revolt,
And heal the inveterate Canker of one wound,
By making many: Oh it grieves my soul,
That I must draw this mettle from my side
To be a widdow-maker: oh, and there
Where honourable rescue, and defence
Cries out upon the name of Salisbury.
But such is the infection of the time,
That for the health and Physic of our right,
We cannot deal but with the very hand
Of sterne Injustice, and confused wrong:
And is it not pity, (oh my grieved friends)
That we, the sons and children of this Isle,
Was borne to see so sad an hour as this,
Wherein we step after a stranger, march
Upon her gentle bosom, and fill up
Her Enemies ranks? I must withdraw, and weep
Upon the spot of this enforced cause,
To grace the Gentry of a Land remote,
And follow unacquainted colours here:
What here? O Nation that thou could remove,
That Neptunes Arms who clip thee about,
Would bear thee from the knowledge of thy self,
And cripple thee unto a Pagan shore,
Where these two Christian Armies might combine
The blood of malice, in a vain of league,
And not to spend it so unneighbourly.
A noble temper dost thou show in this,
And great affections wrestling in thy bosom
Doth make an earth-quake of Nobility:
Oh, what a noble combat hast fought
Between compulsion, and a brave respect:
Let me wipe off this honourable dew,
That siluerly doth progress on thy cheeks:
My heart hath melted at a Ladies tears,
Being an ordinary Inundation:
But this effusion of such manly drops,
This shower, blown up by tempest of the soul,
Startles mine eyes, and makes me more amazed
Then had I seen the vaulty top of heaven
Figured quite ore with burning Meteors.
Lift up thy brow (renowned Salisbury)
And with a great heart heave away this storm:
Commend these waters to those baby-eyes
That never saw the giant-world enraged,
Nor met with Fortune, other then at feasts,
Full warm of blood, of mirth, of gossipping:
Come, come; for thou shalt thrust thy hand as deep
Into the purse of rich prosperity
As Lewis himself: so (Nobles) shall you all,
That knit your sinews to the strength of mine.
And even there, methinkes an Angel spake,
Look where the holy Legate comes apace,
To give vs warrant from the hand of heaven,
And on our actions set the name of right
With holy breath.
Hail noble Prince of France:
The next is this: King Iohn hath reconciled
Himself to Rome, his spirit is come in,
That so stood out against the holy Church,
The great Metropolis and Sea of Rome:
Therefore thy threatening Colours now wind up,
And tame the savage spirit of wilde war,
That like a Lion fostered up at hand,
It may lie gently at the foot of peace.
And be no further harmful then in show.
Your Grace shall pardon me, I will not back:
I am too high-borne to be proportied
To be a secondary at control,
Or useful serving-man, and Instrument
To any Sovereign State throughout the world.
Your breath first kindled the dead coal of wars,
Between this chastised kingdom and my self,
And brought in matter that should feed this fire;
And now it is far too huge to be blown out
With that same weak wind, which kindled it:
You taught me how to know the face of right,
Acquainted me with interest to this Land,
Yea, thrust this enterprise into my heart,
And come ye now to tell me Iohn hath made
His peace with Rome? what is that peace to me?
I (by the honour of my marriage bed)
After young Arthur, claim this Land for mine,
And now it is half conquered, must I back,
Because that Iohn hath made his peace with Rome?
Am I Romes slave? What penny hath Rome borne?
What men provided? What munition sent
To vnder-prop this Action? Is it not I
That vnder-goe this charge? Who else but I,
And such as to my claim are liable,
Sweat in this business, and maintain this war?
Have I not heard these Islanders shout out
Ʋiue le Roy; as I have banked their Towns?
Have I not here the best Cards for the game
To win this easy match, plaid for a Crown?
And shall I now give ore the yielded Set?
No, no, on my soul it never shall be said.
You look but on the out-side of this work.
Out-side or in-side, I will not return
Till my attempt so much be glorified,
As to my ample hope was promised,
Before I drew this gallant head of war,
And culled these fiery spirits from the world
To out-looke Conquest, and to win renown
Even in the jaws of danger, and of death:
What lusty Trumpet thus doth summon vs?
According to the faire-play of the world,
Let me have audience: I am sent to speak:
My holy Lord of Millane, from the King
I come to learn how you have dealt for him:
And, as you answer, I doe know the scope
And warrant limited unto my tongue.
The Dolphin is too wilful opposite
And will not temporise with my entreaties:
He flatly says, hee•ll not lay down his Arms.
By all the blood that ever fury breathed,
The youth says well. Now hear our English King,
For thus his Royalty doth speak in me:
He is prepared, and reason to he should,
This apish and unmannerly approach,
This harnessed Mask, and unadvised Revel,
This vn-heard sauciness and boyish Troops,
The King doth smile at, and is well prepared
To whip this dwarfish war, this Pygmy Arms
From out the circle of his Territories.
That hand which had the strength, even at your door,
To cudgel you, and make you take the hatch,
To dive like Buckets in concealed Wells,
To crouch in litter of your stable planks,
To lye like pawns, locked up in chests and trunks,
To hug with swine, to seek sweet safety out
In vaults and prisons, and to thrill and shake,
Even at the crying of your Nations crow,
Thinking this voice an armed Englishman.
Shall that victorious hand be feebled here,
That in your Chambers gave you chastisement?
No: know the gallant Monarch is in Arms,
And like an Eagle, o'er his aerie towers,
To sowsse annoyance that comes near his Nest;
And you degenerate, you ingrate Revolts, you bloody Nero's, ripping up the womb
Of your dear Mother-England: blush for shame:
For your own Ladies, and pale-visag'd Maids,
Like Amazons, come tripping after drums:
Their thimbles into armed Gantlets change,
Their Needl's to Lances, and their gentle hearts
To fierce and bloody inclination.
There end thy brave, and turn thy face in peace,
We grant thou can out-scold vs: Far thee well,
We hold our time too precious to be spent
With such a brabler.
Give me leave to speak.
No, I will speak.
We will attend to neither:
Strike up the drums, and let the tongue of war
Plead for our interest, and our being here.
Indeed your drums being beaten, will cry out;
And so shall you, being beaten: Do but start
An echo with the clamour of thy drum,
And even at hand, a drum is ready braced,
That shall reuerberate all, as loud as thine.
Sound but a 〈◊〉, and another shall
(As loud as thine) rattle the Welkins ear,
And mock the deep mouthed Thunder: for at hand
(Not trusting to this halting Legate here,
Whom he hath used rather for sport, then need)
Is warlike Iohn: and in his fore-head sits
A bare-rib'd death, whose office is this day
To feast upon whole thousands of the French.
Strike up our drums, to find this danger out.
And thou shalt find it (Dolphin) do not doubt
How goes the day with vs? oh tell me Hubert.
Badly I fear; how fares your Majesty?
This Fever that hath troubled me so long,
Lies heavy on me: oh, my heart is sick.
My Lord: your valiant kinsman Falconbridge,
Desires your Majesty to leave the field,
And send him word by me, which way you go.
Tell him toward Swinsted, to the Abbey there.
Be of good comfort: for the great supply,
That was expected by the Dolphin here,
Are wracked three nights ago on Goodwin sands.
This news was brought to Richard but even now,
The French fight coldly, and retire themselves.
Aye me, this tyrant Fever burns me up,
And will not let me welcome this good news.
Set on toward Swinsted: to my Litter straight,
Weakness possesses me, and I am faint.
I did not think the King so stored with friends.
Up once again: put spirit in the French,
If they miscarry: we miscarry too.
That misbegotten devil Falconbridge,
In spite of spite, alone upholds the day.
They say King Iohn sore sick, hath left the field.
Lead me to the Revolts of England here.
When we were happy, we had other names.
It is the Count Meloone.
Wounded to death.
Fly Noble English, you are bought and sold,
Vnthred the rude eye of Rebellion,
And welcome home again discarded faith,
Seek out King Iohn, and fall before his feet:
For if the French be Lords of this loud day,
He means to recompense the pains you take,
By cutting off your heads: Thus hath he sworn,
And I with him, and many more with me,
Upon the Altar at S. Edmondsbury,
Even on that Altar, where we swore to you
Dear Amity, and everlasting love.
May this be possible? May this be true?
Have I not hideous death within my view,
Retaining but a quantity of life,
Which bleeds away, even as a form of wax
Resolves from his figure against the fire?
What in the world should make me now deceive,
Since I must loose the use of all deceit?
Why should I then be false, since it is true
That I must dye here, and live hence, by Truth?
I say again, if Lewis do win the day,
He is forsworn, if ere those eyes of yours
Behold another day break in the East:
But even this night, whose black contagious breath
Already smokes about the burning Crest
Of the old, feeble, and day-wearied Sun,
Even this ill night, your breathing shall expire,
Paying the fine of rated Treachery,
Even with a treacherous fine of all your lives:
If Lewis, by your assistance win the day.
Commend me to one Hubert, with your King;
The love of him, and this respect besides
(For that my Grandsite was an Englishman)
Awakes my Conscience to confess all this.
In lieu whereof, I pray you bear me hence
From forth the noise and rumour of the Field;
Where I may think the remnant of my thoughts
In peace: and part this body and my soul
With contemplation, and devout desires.
We do believe thee, and beshrew my soul,
But I do love the favour, and the form
Of this most fair occasion, by the which
We will untried the steps of damned flight,
And like a bated and retired Flood,
Leaving our rankness and irregular course,
Stoop lowe within those bounds we have ore-look'd,
And calmly run on in obedience
Even to our Ocean, to our great King Iohn.
My arm shall give thee help to bear thee hence,
For I do see the cruel pangs of death
Right in thine eye. Away, my friends, new flight,
And happy newness, that intends old right.
The Sun of heaven (me thought) was loath to set;
But staid, and made the Western Welkin blush,
When English measure backward their own ground
In faint Retire: Oh bravely came we off,
When with a volley of our needless shot,
After such bloody toil, we bid good night,
And woon'd our tottering colours clearly up,
Last in the field, and almost Lords of it.
Where is my Prince, the Dolphin?
Here: what news?
The Count Meloone is slain: The English Lords
By his persuasion, are again fallen off,
And your supply, which you have wished so long,
Are cast away, and sunk on Goodwin sands.
Ah foul, shrewed news. Beshrew thy very hart:
I did not think to be so sad to night
As this hath made me. Who was he that said
King Iohn did fly an hour or two before
The stumbling night did part our weary powers?
Who ever spoke it, it is true my Lord.
Well: keep good quarter, &amp; good care to night,
The day shall not be up so soon as I,
To try the fair adventure of to morrow.
Whose there? Speak hoe, speak quickly, or I shoot.
A Friend. What art thou?
Of the part of England.
Whether doest thou go?
What's that to thee?
Why may not I demand of thine affairs,
As well as thou of mine?
Hubert, I think.
Thou hast a perfect thought:
I will upon all hazards well believe
Thou art my friend, that know my tongue so well:
Who art thou?
Who thou wilt: and if thou please
Thou moist be-friend me so much, as to think
I come one way of the Plantagenets.
Unkind remembrance: thou, &amp; endless night,
Have done me shame: Brave Soldier, pardon me,
That any accent breaking from thy tongue,
Should scope the true acquaintance of mine ear.
Come, come: sans complement, What news abroad?
Why here walk I, in the black brow of night
To find you out.
Brcefe then: and what's the news?
O my sweet sir, news fitting to the night,
Black, fearful, comfortless, and horrible.
Show me the very wound of this ill news,
I am no woman, Isle not swooned at it.
The King I fear is poisoned by a Monk,
I left him almost speechless, and broke out
To acquaint you with this evil, that you might
The better arm you to the sudden time,
Then if you had at leisure known of this.
How did he take it? Who did taste to him?
A Monk I tell you, a resolved villain
Whose Bowels suddenly burst out: The King
Yet speaks, and peradventure may recover.
Who did thou leave to tend his Majesty?
Why know you not? The Lords are all come back,
And brought Prince Henry in their company,
At whose request the king hath pardoned them,
And they are all about his Majesty.
With-hold thine indignation, mighty heaven,
And tempt vs not to bear aboue our power:
Isle tell thee Hubert, half my power this night
Passing these Flats, are taken by the Tide,
These Lincolne-Washes have devoured them,
My self, well mounted, hardly have escaped.
Away before: Conduct me to the king,
I doubt he will be dead, or ere I come.
It is too late, the life of all his blood
Is touched, corruptibly: and his pure brain
(Which some suppose the souls frail dwelling house)
Doth by the idle Comments that it makes,
Fore-tell the ending of mortality.
His Highness yet doth speak, &amp; holds belief,
That being brought into the open ayre,
It would allay the burning quality
Of that fell poison which assails him.
Let him be brought into the Orchard here:
Doth he still rage?
He is more patient
Then when you left him; even now he sung.
Oh vanity of sickness: fierce extremes
In their continuance, will not feel themselves.
Death having praide upon the outward parts
Leaves them invisible, and his siege is now
Against the wind, the which he pricks and wounds
With many legions of strange fantasies,
Which in their throng, and press to that last hold,
Confound themselves. It is strange yt death should sing:
I am the Symer to this pale faint Swan,
Who chants a doleful hymn to his own death,
And from the organ-pipe of frailety sings
His soul and body to their lasting rest.
Be of good comfort (Prince) for you are borne
To set a form upon that indigest
Which he hath left so shapeless, and so rude.
I marry, now my soul hath elbow room,
It would not out at windows, nor at doors,
There is so hot a summer in my bosom,
That all my bowels crumble up to dust:
I am a scribbled form drawn with a pen
Upon a Parchment, and against this fire
Do I shrink up.
How fares your Majesty?
Poisoned, ill fare: dead, forsook, cast off,
And none of you will bid the winter come
To thrust his icy fingers in my maw;
Nor let my kingdoms Rivers take their course
Through my burned bosom: nor entreat the North
To make his bleak winds kiss my parched lips,
And comfort me with cold. I do not ask you much,
I beg cold comfort: and you are so straight
And so ungrateful, you deny me that.
Oh that there were some virtue in my tears,
That might relieve you.
The salt in them is hot.
Within me is a hell, and there the poison
Is, as a fiend, confined to tyrannise,
On vnrepreeuable condemned blood.
Oh, I am scalded with my violent motion
And spleen of speed, to see your Majesty.
Oh Cozen, thou art come to set mine eye:
The tackle of my heart, is cracked and burnt,
And all the shrouds wherewith my life should sail,
Are turned to one thread, one little hair:
My heart hath one poor string to stay it by,
Which holds but till thy news be uttered,
And then all this thou see, is but a clod,
And module of confounded royalty.
The Dolphin is preparing hither-ward,
Where heaven he knows how we shall answer him.
For in a night the best part of my power,
As I upon advantage did remove,
Were in the Washes all vnwarily,
Devoured by the unexpected flood.
You breath these dead news in as dead an ear
My Liege, my Lord: but now a King, now thus.
Even so must I run on, and even so stop.
What surety of the world, what hope, what stay,
When this was now a King, and now is clay?
Art thou gone so? I do but stay behind,
To do the office for thee, of revenge,
And then my soul shall waite on thee to heaven,
As it on earth hath been thy servant still.
Now, now you Stars, that move in your right spheres,
Where be your powers? Show now your mended faiths,
And instantly return with me again.
To push destruction, and perpetual shame
Out of the weak door of our fainting Land:
Straight let vs seek, or straight we shall be sought,
The Dolphin rages at our very heals.
It seems you know not then so much as we,
The Cardinal Pandulph is within at rest,
Who half an hour since came from the Dolphin,
And brings from him such offers of our peace,
As we with honour and respect may take,
With purpose presently to leave this war.
He will the rather do it, when he sees
Our selves well sinewed to our defence.
Nay, it is in a manner done already,
For many carriages hee hath dispatched
To the sea side, and put his cause and quarrel
To the disposing of the Cardinal,
With whom your self, my self, and other Lords,
If you think meet, this afternoon will post
To consummate this business happily.
Let it be so, and you my noble Prince,
With other Princes that may best be spared,
Shall waite upon your Fathers Funeral.
At Worster must his body be interred,
For so he willed it.
Thither shall it then,
And happily may your sweet self put on
The lineal state, and glory of the Land,
To whom with all submission on my knee,
I do bequeath my faithful services
And true subjection everlastingly.
And the like tender of our love wee make
To rest without a spot for evermore.
I have a kind soul, that would give thanks,
And knows not how to do it, but with tears.
Oh let vs pay the time: but needful woe,
Since it hath been before hand with our griefs.
This England never did, nor never shall
Lye at the proud foot of a Conqueror,
But when it first did help to wound it self.
Now, these her Princes are come home again,
Come the three corners of the world in Arms,
And we shall shock them: Nought shall make vs rue,
If England to it self, do rest but true.

TAncred the Prince of Salerne, ouerloues
His only daughter (wonder of that age)
Gismund, who loves the County Palurin,
Guishard, who quites her likings with his love:
A Letter in a cane, describes the means
Of their two meetings, in a secret cave.
Inconstant fortune leads forth the king
To this unhappy sight, wherewith in rage,
The gentle Earl he doometh to his death,
And greets his daughter with her lovers hart.
Gismunda fills the goblet with her tears,
And drinks a poison which she had distild,
Whereof she dies, whose deadly countenance
So grieves her Father, that he slew himself.
TANCRED king of Naples and Prince of Salerne, gave his only daughter Gismund (whom he most dearly loved) in marriage to a foreign Prince, after whose death she retur∣ned home to her Father, who having felt great grief of his absence whilst her husband lived, emma∣surably esteeming her, determined never to suffer any second marriage to bereave him of his She on the other side waxing weary of that her fathers purpose, bent his mind to the se∣cret love of the County Palurin: to whom (he being likewise inflamed with love of her) by a Letter subtly enclosed in a cloven cane, she gave to understand a convenient way for their desired meetings, through an old ruinous vaut, whose mouth opened directly under her chamber floor. Into this vaut when she was one day descended (for the conveyance of his lover) his father in the mean season (whose only joy was in his daughter) came to his chamber, and not finding her there, supposing her to have bin walked abroad for his di∣sport, he threw him down on his bed, and covered his head with a curtain, minding to abide and rest there till his re∣turn. She nothing suspecting this his fathers vnseasona∣ble coming, brought up his lover out of the cane into his chamber, where his father espied their secret love: and hee (not espied of them) was upon this sight stricken with mer∣uailous grief; but either for that the sudden despite had amazed him, &amp; taken from him all use of speech, or for that he resolved himself to a more cōueniēt revenge, he then spake nothing, but noted their return into the vant, and secretly
departed. Afterword bewailing his mishap, be commanded the Earl to be attached, imprisoned, strangled, vnbowelled, and his heart in a cup of gold to be presented to his daugh∣la: she thankfully receives the present, filling the cup (wherein the heart was) with her tears, with a vonimcus potion (by her distilled for that purpose) she drank to her Earl. Which her father hearing of, came too late to comfort his dying daughter, who for her last request besought him, that her lover and her self, might in one tomb be together buried, for a perpetual memory of their faithful loves, which request he granted, adding to the burial, himself slain with his own hands, to his own reproach, and the la∣roar of all other hard hearted fathers.
There rest my chariot on the mountain tops,
I that in shape appear unto your sight
A naked boy, not cloathde but with my wings,
Am that great God of Love, who with his might
Rules the wast wide world, and living things.
This left hand bears vain hope, short joyful state,
With fair Resemblance, lovers to allure,
This right hand holds Repentance all too late,
War, fire, blood, and pains without recur.
On sweet Ambrosia, is not my food,
Nectar is not my drink, as to the rest
"Of all the Gods: I drink the lovers blood,
"And feed upon the heart within his breast.
Well hath my power in heaven and earth bin tried,
And deepest hell, my piercing force hath known.
The marble seas, my wonders have descried,
Which elder age throghout the world hath blown.
To me, the king of Gods and men doth yield,
As witness can the Greekish maid, whom I
Made like a cow go lowing through the field,
Least jealous Iuno should the scope espy:
The doubled night, the Suns restrained course,
His secret stealths, the slander to eschew,
In shape transformed, we list not to discourse.
All that and more we forced him to do.
The warlike Mars hath not subdued our might,
We feared him not, his fury nor disdain,
That can the Gods record: before whose sight
He lay fast wrapped in Vulcans subtle chain.
He that on earth yet hath not felt our power,
Let him behold the fall and cruel spoil
Of thee fair Troy, of Asia the flower,
So foul defast, and leveled with the soil.
Who forced Lender with his naked breast
So many nights to cut the frothie waives,
But Heroes love, that lay enclosed in Sest?
The stoutest hearts to me shall yield them slaves.
Who could have matched the huge Alcides strength,
Great Macedon, what force might have subdued?
Wise Scipio who overcame at length,
But we, that are with greater force endued?
Who could have conquered the golden fleece
But Iason, aided by Medeas art?
Who durst have stolen fair Helen out of Greece
But I, with love that boldened Paris heart?
What bond of nature, what restraint avails
Against our power? I vouch to witness truth.
The Myrrh tree that with shamefaced tears bewails
Her fathers love, still weeps yet for ruth.
But now, this world not seeing in these days,
Such present proofs of our al-daring power,
Disdains our name, and seeks sundry ways,
To scorn and scoff, and shame vs every hour,
A brat, a bastard, and an idle boy,
A rod, a staff, a whip to beat him out,
And to be sick of love, a childish toy,
These are mine honours now the world about,
My name disgraced, to raise again therefore,
And in this age, mine ancient renown
By mighty acts, intending to restore,
Down to the earth, in wrath now am I come.
And in this place, such wonders shall ye hear,
As these your stubborn, and disdainful hearts,
In melting tears, and humble yielding fear,
Shall soon relent by sight of others smarts.
This princely palace, will I enter in,
And there inflame, the fair Gismunda, so
Enraging all her secret veins within,
Through fiery love, that she shall feel much wo.
Too late repentance, thou shalt bend my bow.
Vain hope, take out my pale dead heavy shaft,
Thou fair Resemblance, foremost forth shalt go,
With Brittle joy: my self will not be least,
But after me, comes death, and deadly pain.
Thus shall ye march, till we return again,
Mean while, sit still, and here I shall you show
Such wonders, that at last with one accord,
Ye shall relent, and say that now ye know,
Love rules the world, Love is a mighty Lord,
"OVaine, vnsteadfast state of mortal things,
"Who trusts this world, leans to a brittle stay,
"Such fickle fruit, his flattering bloom forth brings
"Ere it be ripe, it falls to decay,
The joy and bliss that late I did possess,
In weal at will, with one I loved best,
Is turned now into so deep distress,
As teaches me to know the worlds unrest.
For neither wit nor princely stomachs serve
Against his force that slaies without respect,
The noble and the wretch: no doth reserve,
So much as one, for worthiness elect.
Ah me dear Lord, what well of tears may serve
To feed the streams of my foredulled eyes,
To weep thy death, as thy death doth deserve,
And wail thy want in full sufficing wise.
Ye lamps of heaven, and all ye heavenly powers,
Wherein did he procure your high disdain,
He never sought with vast huge mounting towers
To reach aloft, and ouer-view your reign,
Or what offence of mine was it unawares,
That thus your fury should on me be thrown,
To plague a woman with such endless cares,
I fear that envy hath the heavens this shown.
The Sun his glorious virtues did disdain,
Mars at his manhood mightily repent,
Yea all the Gods no longer could sustain,
Each one to be excelled in his kind.
For he my Lord surpassed them every one,
Such was his honour all the world throughout,
But now my love, oh whither art thou gone?
I know thy ghost doth hover here about,
Expecting me (thy heart) to follow thee:
And I (dear love) would fine dissolve this •…rife,
But stay a while, I may perhaps foresee
Some means to be disburdend of this life,
And to discharge the duty of a wife,
Which is, not only in this life to love,
But after death her fancy not remove.
Mean while accept of these our daily rites,
Which with my maidens I shall do to thee,
Which is, in songs to cheer our dying spirits
With hymns of praises of thy memory.
Fair daughter, I have sought thee out with g•…iefe,
To ease the sorrows of thy vexed heart.
How long wilt thou torment thy father thus?
Who daily dies to see thy needles tears,
•…uch bootless plaints that know nor mean nor end
〈◊〉 but increase the floods of thy lament,
And since the world knows well there e was no want
In thee, of ought that did to him belong
Yet all thou see could not his life prolong.
Why thē doest thou provoke the heavens to wrath?
His doom of death was dated by his stars,
"And who is he that may withstand his fate?
By these complaints small good to him thou doest,
Much grief to me, most hurtvnto thy self,
And unto Nature greatest wrong of all.
Tell me not of the date of natures days,
Then in the April of her springing age:
No, no, it was my cruel destiny,
That spited at the pleasance of my life.
My daughter knows the proof of natures course
"For as the heavens do guide the lamp of life
"So can they search no further forth the flame,
"Then whilst with oil they do maintain the same.
Cursed be the stars, and vanish may they cursed,
Or fall from heaven, that in the dire aspect,
Abridgde the health and welfare of my love.
Gismund my joy, set all these griefs apart,
"The more thou art with hard mishap beset,
"The more thy patience should procure thine ease.
What hope of hap may cheer my hapless chance
What sighs, what tears may countervail my cares?
What should I do, but still his death bewail,
That was the solace of my life and soul?
Now, now I want the wonted guide and stay
Of my desires, and of my wreaklesse thoughts,
My Lord, my love, my life, my liking gone,
In whom was all the fulness of my joy,
To whom I gave the first fruits of my love,
Who with the comfort of his only sight,
All cares and sorrows could from me rem•…ue.
But father, now my joys forepast to tel,
Doe but revive the horrors of my hell.
As she that seems in darkness to behold
The gladsome pleasures of the cheerful light.
What then avails thee fruitless thus to rue
His absence whom the heavens cannot return:
Impartial death thy husband did subdue,
Yet hath he spared thy kingly fathers life:
Who during life, to thee a double stay,
As father, and as husband will remain,
With doubled love to ease thy widows want.
Ofhim whose want is cause ofthy complaint,
Forbear thou 〈◊〉 al these needless tears,
That nip the blossoms of thy beauties pride.
Father, these tears love challenged of due.
But reason saith thou should the same subdue.
His funerals are yet before my sight.
In endless mons Princes should n•…t delight.
The turtle pines in loss of her true mate.
And so continues poor and desolate.
Who ca•… forget a •…well of such price?
She that hath learned to master her desires.
"Let reason work that time doth easily srame
"In meanest wits: to bear the greatest ills.
So plenteous are the springs
Of sorrows that increase my passions,
As neither reason can recur my smart,
Nor can your care, nor fatherly comfort
Appease the stormy combats of my thoughts,
Such is the sweet remembrance of his life.
Then give me leave, of pity pity me,
And as I can I shall allay these griefs.
These solitary walks thou do•…st frequent,
Yield fresh occasions to thy secrete mons:
We will therefore thou keep vs company,
Leaving thy maidens with their harmony.
Wend thou with vs, virgins withdraw your selves.
The divers haps which always work our care,
Our joys so far, our woes so near at hand,
Have long ere this, and daily doe declare
The fickle foot on which our state doth stand.
"Who plants his pleasures here to gather root,
"And hopes his happy life will still endure,
"Let him behold how death with stealing foot
"Steps in, when he shall think his joys most sir•….
"No ransom serves to redeem our days.
If prowes could preserve, or worthy deeds,
He had yet lived whose twelve labours displays
His enddlesse fame, and yet his honour spreads.
And that gre•…t king that with so small a power
Bereft the might ie Persian his crown:
Doth witness well our life is but a flower,
Though it be decked with honour and renown.
"What grows to day in favour of the heaven,
"Nursed with the sun, and with the showers sweet,
"Pluekt with the hand it withers ere even.
"So pass our days even as the rivers fleet.
The valiant Greeks that unto Troya gave
The ten years siege, left but their names behind.
And he that did so long and only save
His fathers walls, found there at last his end.
Proud Rome herself, that meanwhile laid her yoke
On the wide world, and vanquished all with war,
Yet could she not remove the fatal stroke
Of death, from them that stretched her power so far.
Look what the cruel sisters once decreed
The thunderer himself cannot remove:
They are the Ladies of our destiny,
To work beneath, what is conspired aboue,
But happy he that ends this mortal life,
By speedy death, who is not forced to see,
The many cares, nor feel the sundry griefs
Which we sustain, in wo and misery.
Here Fortune rules, who when she list to play,
Whirleth her wheel, and brings the high full low,
To morrow takes, what she hath given to day,
To show she can advance, and over throw.
Not Euripus unquiet flood so oft
Abc in a day, and flows too and fro,
As Fortunes change, plucks down that was aloe•…t,
And mingles joy, with interchange of w•….
Who lives below, and feels not the strokes,
Which often times on highest towers do fall,
Nor blustering winds, wherewith the strongest oaks
Are rent and torn, his life is surste of all:
For he may sco•…e Fortune, that hath no power
On him, that is well pleased with his estate:
He seeks not her sweets, nor fears her sower,
But lives contented in his quiet rate,
And marking how these worldly things do wade,
Rejoices to himself, and laughs to see
The folly of men, that in their wits have made,
Fortune a goddess, placed in the sky.
Dear Aunt, my sole companion in distress,
And true copartner of my thoughtful cares:
When with my self, I way my present state,
Comparing it with my forepassed days,
New heaps of cares, afresh beginnet' assay
My pensive heart: as when the glittering rays,
Of bright Phoebus, are suddenly ore-spred,
With dusky clouds, that dim his golden light,
Namely, when I, laid in my widows bed,
Amid the silence, of the quiet night,
With curious thought, the fleeting course observe,
Of gladsome youth: how soon his flower decays.
How time once past, may never have recourse,
No more then may the running streams revert,
To climb the hills, when they bin rolled down
The hollow vales, there is no curious art,
Norworldlie power, no not the gods can hold
The sway of flying time, nor him return
When he is past: all things unto his might
Must bend, and yield, unto the Iron teeth
Of eating time: this in the shedy night,
When I record, how soon my youth withdraws
It self away, how swift my pleasant spring
Runs out his race, this this (Aunt) is the cause.
When I advise me sadly on this thing,
That makes my heart, in pensive dumps dismayed.
For if I should, my springing years neglect.
And suffer youth, fruitless to fade away:
Whereto live I? or whereto was I borne?
Wherefore hath nature decked me with her grace?
Why have I tasted the delights of love?
And felt the sweets of Hymeneus bed?
But to say sooth (dear Aunt) it is not I
Sole and alone, can thus content to spend
My cheerful years: my father will not still
Prolong my mornings, which have grieved him,
And pleased me too long. Then this I crave,
To be resolved of his princely mind.
For, stood it with the pleasure of his will
To marry me, my fortune is not such,
So hard, that I so long should still persist
Makelesse alone in woeful widowhood,
And shall I tell mine Aunt? come hither then,
Give me that hand, by thine own right hand,
I charge thy heart my councels to conceal.
Late have I seen, and seeing, took delight,
And with delight, I will not say, I love,
A Prince, an Earl, a County in the Court.
But love and duty force me to refrain,
And drive away these fond affections,
Submitting them unto my fathers hest.
But this (good Aunt) this is my chiefest pain,
Because I stand at such uncertain stay.
For if my kingly father would decree
His final doom, that I must lead my life
Such as I doe, I would content me then
To frame my fancies to his princely heast,
And as I might, endure the grief thereof.
But now his silence doubles all my doubts,
Whilst my suspicious thoughts twixt hope &amp; fear,
Distract me into sundry passions.
Therefore (good Aunt) this labour must be yours,
To understand my fathers will herein:
For well I know your wisdom knows the means,
So shall you both allay my stormy thoughts,
And bring to quiet my unquiet mind.
Suffices this (good Niece) that you have said,
For I perceive what sundry passions
Strive in your breast, which oftentimes ere this
Your countenance confused did bewray,
The ground whereof since I perceive to grow
On just respect of this your sole estate,
And skilful care of fleeting youths decay,
Your wise foresight such sorrowing to eschew
I much commend, and promise as I may
To break this matter, and impart your mind,
Unto your father, and to work it so,
As both your honour shall not be impeached,
Nor he unsatisfied of your desire.
Be you no farther grieved, but return
Into your chamber. I shall take this charge,
And you shall shortly truly understand
What I have wrought, and what the king affirms.
I leave you to the fortune of my stars.
The heavens I hope will fauoury our request.
My Niece shall not impute the cause to be
In my default, her will should want effect:
But in the king is all my doubt, least he
My suite for her new marriage should reject.
Yet shall I prove him: and I heard it said,
He means this evening in the park to hunt,
Here will I wait attending his approach.
VNcouple all our hounds: Lords to the chase:
Fair sister Lucre, what's the news with you?
Si•… as I always have employed my power,
And faithful service, such as lay in me,
In my best wise, to honour you and yours:
So now, my bounden duty moves me,
Your majesty most humbly to entreat,
With patient ears, to understand the state,
Of my poreneece, your daughter.
what of her?
Is she notwell? Enjoys she not her health?
Say sister, ease me of this jealous fear?
She lives my Lord, &amp; hath her outward health,
But all the danger of her sickness lies
In the disquiet of her princely mind:
Resolve me? what afflicts my daughter so,
Since whenthe Princes hath entombed her Lord
Her late disseased husband of renown:
Brother, I see, and very well perceive,
She hath not closed together in his grave,
All sparks of nature, kindness, nor of love:
But as she lives, so living may she feel,
Such passions as our tender hearts oppress,
Subject unto th impressions of desire:
Forwell I wot, my niece was never wrought,
Of steel, nor carved from the stony rock,
Such stern hardness, we ought not to expect,
In her, whose princely heart, and springing years,
Yet flowering in the chiefest heat of youth,
Is lead offorce, to feed on such conceits,
As easily befalls that age, which asks ruth
Of them, whom nature binds by foresight
Of their grave years, and careful love to reach,
The things that are aboue their feeble force:
And for that cause, dread Lord although.
Sister I say.
If you esteem, or ought respect my life,
Her honour, and the welfare of our house,
Forbear, and wade no further in this speech.
Your words, are wounds, I very well perceive,
The purpose of this smooth oration:
This I suspected, when you first began,
This fair discourse with vs: Is this the end
Of all our hopes, that we have promised
Unto ourselfe, by this her widowhood?
Would our dear daughter, would our only joy,
Would she f•…sake vs? would she leave vs now?
Before she hath closed up, our dying eyes,
And with her tears, bewaild our funeral?
No other solace, doth her father crave,
But whilst the fates, maintain his dying life,
Her healthful presence, gladsome to his soul,
Which rather then he willing would for-goe,
His heart desires, the bitter taste of death:
Her late marriage, hath taught vs to our grief,
That in the fruits, of her perpetual sight
Consists the only comfort and relief,
Of our unwieldy age: for what delight
What joy? what comfort? have we in this world,
Now grown in years, and overworn with cares,
Subject unto the sudden stroke of death,
Already falling like the mellowed fruit,
And dropping by degrees into our grave.
But what revives vs? what maintains oursoule
Within the prison of our withered breast?
But our Gismunda and her cheerful sight.
O daughter, daughter, what desert of mine,
Wherein have I been so unkind to thee?
Thou should desire to make my naked house
Yet once again stand desolate by thee?
O let such fancies vanish with their thoughts,
Tell her I am her father, whose estate,
Wealth, honour, life, and all that we possess,
Wholly relies upon her presence here.
Tell her I must account her all my joy,
Work as she will: But yet the were unjust,
To haste his death that lives by her fight
Her gentle hart abhors such ruthless thoughts.
Then let her not give place to these desires.
She craves the right that nature challenged.
Tell her the king commands otherwise.
The kings cōmandment always should be just.
What ere it be the kings command is just.
Just to command: but justly must he charge.
He charge justly that commands as king.
The kings command concerns the body best.
The king commands obedience of the mind.
That is exempted by the law of kind,
That law of kind to children doth belong.
In due obedience to their open wrong.
I then, as king and father, will command.
No more then may with right of reason stand.
Thou know our mind, resolve her, depart,
Return the chase, we have been chased •…nough.
He cannot hear, anger hath stopped his ears,
And ouer-loue his judgment hath deceit.
Ah my poor Niece, I shrewdly fear thy cause.
Thy just complaint shall never be relieved.
BY this I hope my aunt hath moved the king.
And knows his mind, &amp; makes return to me
To end at once all this perplexity.
Lo where she stands. Oh how my trembling heart
In doubtful thoughts panted within my breast.
For in her message doth rely my smart,
Or the sweet quiet of my troubled mind.
Niece, on the point you lately willed me
To treat of with the king in your behalf,
I brake even now with him so far, till he
In sudden rage of grief, ere I scarce had
My tale out told, pried me to stint my suite,
As that from which his mind abhorred most.
And well I see his fancy to refute,
Is but displeasure gained, and labour lost.
So firmly fixed stands his kingly will,
That till his body shall be laid in grave,
He will not part from the desired sight
Of your presence, which silder he should have,
If he had once allied you again,
In marriage to any prince or peer.
This is his final resolution.
A resolution that resolves my blood
Into the Ice-sie drops of Lethes flood,
Therefore my counsel is, you shall not stir,
Nor further wade in such a case as this:
But since his will, is grounded on your love,
And that it lies in you, to save or spill,
His old fore-wasted age: you ought t'eschew,
The thing that grieves so much his crazed heart,
And in the state you stand, content your self:
And let this thought, appease your troubled mind,
That in your hands, relies your fathers death,
Or blissful life, and since without your sight,
He cannot live, nor can his thoughts endure,
Your hope of marriage, you must then relent,
And ouer-rule these fond affections:
Least it be said, you wrought your fathers end.
Dear Aunt, I have with patient ears endured,
The hearing of my fathers hard behest:
And since I see, that neither I my self,
Nor your request, can so prevail with him,
Nor any sage advice persuade his mind
To grant me my desire, In willing wise,
I must submit me unto his command,
And frame my heart to serve his majesty.
And (as I may) to drive away the thoughts
That diversely distract my passions,
Which as I can, Isle labour to subdue,
But sore I fear, I shall but toil in vain,
Wherein (good Ant) I must desire your pain.
What lies in me by comfort or advice,
I shall discharge with all humility.
Who marks our former times and present years,
What we are now, and looks what we have bin,
He cannot but lament with bitter tears,
The great decay and change of all women.
For as the world wore on and waxed old,
So virtue quaild, and vice began to grow.
So that, that age, that meanwhile was of gold,
Is worse than brass, more vile than iron now,
The times were such, that if we ought believe
Of elder days) women examples were,
Of rare virtues: Lucre disdained to live
Longer then chaste: and boldly without fear
Took sharpe revenge on her enforced heart,
With her own hands: for that it not withstood
The wanton will, but yielded to the force
Of proud Tarquin, who bought his fame with blood.
Queen Artemissa thought an hepe of stones,
Although they were the wonder of that age)
A worthless grave, wherein to rest the bones
Of her dear Lord, but with bold courage,
She drank his heart, and made her lovely breast
His tomb, and failed not of wifely faith,
Of promised love, and of her bound behest,
Until she ended had her days by death.
Vlysses wife (such was her steadfastness)
Abode his slow return whole twenty years:
And spent her youthful days in pensiveness,
Bathing her widows bed with brinish tears.
The stout daughter of Cato Bratus wife, Portia
When she had heard his death, did not desire•…
Longer to live: and lacking use of knife,
(A most strange thing) ended her life by fire,
And •…at what burning coals: O worthy dame!
O virtues worthy of eternal praise!
The flood of Lethe cannot wash out thy fame,
To others great reproach, shame, and dispraise.
Rare are those virtues now in women's mind,
Where shall we seek such jewels passing strange?
Scarce can you now among a thousand find
One woman steadfast: all delight in change.
Mark but this princess that lamented here,
Of late so sore her noble husbands death,
And thought to live alone without a fear,
Behold how soon she changed hath that breath.
I think those Ladies that have lived to fore,
A mirror and a glass to women kind,
By those their virtues they did set such store,
That unto vs they none bequeathed behind.
Else in so many years we might have seen
As virtuous as e•…er they have been.
Yet let not vs maidens condemn our kind,
Because our virtues are not all so rare:
For we may freshly yet record in mind,
There lives a virgin, one without compare:
Who of all graces hath her heavenly share.
In whose renown, and for whose happy days,
Let vs record this Paean of her praise.
SO, now they feel what lordly love can d
that proudly practise to deface his name
Invaine they wrestle with so fierce a foe,
of little sparks arise a blazing flame.
"By small occasions love can kindle heate,
"and wast the Oken breast to cinder dust:
I have enticed to forget
her widows weeds, and burn in raging lust:
It was I •…nforst her father to deny
her second marriage to any peer:
It was I allured her once again to try
the sower sweets that Lovers buy too dear.
The County Palurin, a man right wise,
a man of exquisite perfections:
I have like wounded with her piercing eyes,
and burnt her heart with his reflections.
These two shall joy in tasting of my sweet,
to make them prove more feelingly the grief
That bitter brings: for when their joys shall fleet,
their dole shall be increased without relief.
Thus love shall make worldlings to know his might,
thus love shall force great princes to obey.
Thus love shall daunt each proud rebelling spirit,
thus love shall wreak his wrath on their decay.
Their ghosts shall doe black hell to understand,
how great and wonderful a God is Love:
And this shall learn the Ladies of this land,
with patient minds his mighty power to prove.
From whence I did descend now will I mount,
to Jove, and all the Gods in their delights:
In throne of triumph there will I recount,
how I by sharpe reu•…nge on mortal wights,
Have taught the earth, and learned hellish spirits
to yield with fear their stubburn hearts to love:
Least their disdain, his plagues and vengeance prove
Pity, that moves every gentle heart,
To rue their griefs, that be distressed in pain,
Enforces me, to wail my nieces smart,
Whose tender breast, no long time may sustain,
The restless toil, that her unquiet mind,
Hath caused her feeble body to endure,
But why it is, (alack) I must not find,
Nor know the man, by whom I might procure
Her remedy, as I of duty ought,
As to the law of kindship, doth belong,
With careful heart, the secret means I sought,
Though small effect, is of my travel sprung:
Full often as I durst, I have assaid,
With humble words, the princes to require,
To name the man, which she hath so denied,
That it abashed me, further to desire,
Or ask from whence, those cloudy thoughts pro∣ceed,
Whose stony force: that smoky sighs forth send.
Is lively witness, how that carefnll dread,
And hot desire, within her doe contend.
Yet she denies, what she confessed of yore,
And then conioynd me, to conceal the same:
She loved once, (she saith) but never more,
Nor ever will, her fancy thereto frame:
Though daily, I observed in my breast,
What sharpe conflicts, disquiet her so sore,
That heavy sleep cannot procure her rest,
But fearful dreams present her evermore
Most hideous sights her quiet to molest.
That starting oft therewith she doth awake,
to muse upon those fancies which torment
Her thoughtful heart with horror, that doth make
Her cold i will sweat break forth incontinent
From her weak limbs: and while the quiet night
Gives others rest, she turning to and fro
Doth wish for day. But when the day brings light,
She keeps her bed, there to record her woe.
As soon as when she rises flowing tears
Stream down her chekes, immixt with deadly groans
Whereby her inward sorrow so appears,
That as salt tears the cruel cause bemones.
In case she be constrained to abide
In press of company, she scarcely may
Her trembling voice restrain it be not spied
From careful plaints her sorrows to bewray.
By which restraint the force doth so increase,
When time and place give liberty to plain.
That as small streams from running never cease,
Till they return into the seas again:
So her laments we fear will not amend,
Before they bring her Princely life to end.
To others talk when as she should attend,
Her heaped cares her senses so oppress,
That what they speak, or where their words tend
She knows not, as her answers do express.
Her chief delight is still to be alone,
Her pensive thoughts within themselves d•…bate,
But whereupon this restless life is grown,
Since I know not nor how the same t'abate.
I can no more but wish it as I may,
That he which knows it would the same allay,
For which the Muses with my song shall pray.
Leave me my friends, this solitary walk
Intiseth me to break your company.
Leave me my friends, I can endure no talk.
Let me entreat this common courtesy.
WHat grecuous pain they dure which neither may
Forget their Loves, no yet enjoy their love.
I know by proof, and daily make assay,
Though Love hath brought my Ladies hart to love
My faithful love with like love to requite:
This doth not quench, but rather cause to flame
The creeping fire, which spreading in my breast
With raging heat, grants me no time of rest.
If they bewail their cruel destiny,
Which spend their love where they no love can find
Well may I plain, since Fortune hales me
To this torment of far more grievous kind.
Wherein I feel as much extremity,
As may be felt in body or in mind.
For by that sight which should recur my pain,
My sorrows are redoubled all in vain.
Now I perceive that only Ialone
Am her beloved, her looks assure me so:
The thought thereof provokes me to bemoan
Her heavy plight that grieves at my woe.
This intercourse of our affections:
I her to serve, she thus to honour me,
Bewrays the truth of our elections,
Delighting in this mutual sympathy.
Thus love for love entreats the Queen of love,
That with her help Loves solace we may prove.
I see my mistress seeks as well as I
To stay the strife of her perplexed mind:
Full fine she would our secrete company,
If she the wished way thereof might find.
Heavens have yeseen, or hath the age ofman
Recorded such a miracle as this?
In equal love two noble harts to frame,
That never spake one with another bliss,
I am assured that she doth assent,
To my relief that I should reap the same,
If she could frame the means of my content,
Keeping her self from danger of defame.
In happy hour right now I did receive
This cane from her: which gift though it be small,
Receiving it what joys I did conceive,
Within my fainting spiri•… therewithal,
Who knows love arightmay well conceive,
By like adventures that to them befall.
"For needs the Lover must esteem that well,
"Which comes from her with whom his hart doth dwell.
Assuredly it is not without cause
She gave me this: something she meant thereby:
For therewithal I might perceive her pause
Awhile, as though some weighty thing did lie
Upon her heart, which he concealed, because
The standers by should not our loves descry.
This cleft bewrays that it hath been disclosed.
Perhaps herein she hath something enclosed.
O thou great th•…nderer! who would not serve,
Where wit with beauty chosen have their place,
Who could devise more wisely to conserve
Things from suspect? O Venus, for this grace
That deigns me, all unworthy, to deserve
So rare a love, in heaven I should thee place.
This sweet letter some joyful news contains.
I hope it brings recur to both our pains.
Mine own, as I am yours, whose hear: (I know)
No less then mine, for lingering help of woe
Doth long too long: Love tendering your case
And mine, hath taught recur of both our pain.
My chamber flower doth hide a cave, where was
An old vats mouth: the other in the plain
Doet•… rise Southward, a furlong from the wall,
Descend you there. This shall suffice. And so
I yield my self, mine honour, life and all,
To you. Use you the same as there may grow
Your bliss and mine (mine Earl) and that the same
Free may abide from danger of defame.
Farewell, and fare so well as that your joy
Which only can, may comfort mine annoy.
Yours more then his own, Gismund.
O blissful chance my sorrows to assuage.
Wonder of nature, marvel of our age,
Comes this from Gismund? did she thus enfold
This letter in the cane? may it be so?
It were too sweet a joy, I am deceived.
Why shall I doubt, did she not give it me?
Therewith she smiled, she joyed, she roughed the cane
And with her own sweet hand she gave it me:
And as we danced, she dallied with the cane,
And sweetly whispered I should be her king,
And with this cane the sceptre of our rule,
Command the sweets of her surprised heart.
Therewith she roughed from her alluring lockes,
This golden tress, the favour of her grace,
And with her own sweet hand she gave it me.
O peerless Queen, my joy, my hearts d•…cry;
And thou fair Letter, how shall I welcome thee:
Both hand and pen wherewith thou written were,
Blessed may ye be, such solace that impart,
And blessed be this cane, and he that taught
Thee to descry the hidden entry thus:
Not only through a dark and dreadful vaut,
But fire and sword, and through what ever be,
Mistress of my desires, I come to thee.
Right mighty is thy power, O cruel Love,
High Jove himself cannot resist thy bow,
Thou sent him down, even frō the heavens aboue,
In sundry shapes here to the earth below,
Then how shall mortal men escape thy dart?
The fervent flame, and burning of thy fire?
Since that thy might is such, and since thou art,
Both of the seas and land the Lord and sire.
But why doth he that sprung from Ioues high head?
And Phoebus sister shene, despise thy power?
No fears thy bow? why have they always led
A maiden life, and kept untouched the flower?
Why doth Aegistus love? and to obtain
His wicked will, conspires his uncles death,
Or why doth Phaedra burn? for whom is slain
Theseus chaste son? or Helen false of faith?
"For Love assauts not but the idle heart,
"And such as live in pleasure and delight,
"He turns oft their gladsome joys to smart,
"Their play to plaint, their sport into despite,
Tic true that Dian chase with her bow,
The flying Hart, the Goat and some Bore,
By hill, by dale, in heat, in frost, in snow,
She recks not, but labours evermore.
Love seeks not her, no knows where her to find,
Whilst Paris kept his heard on Ida down
Cupped ne'er sought him out, for he is blind.
But when he left the field to live in town,
He fell into his snare, and brought that brand
From Greece to Troy, which after set on fire
Strong Ilium, and al the Phryges land:
"Such are the fruits of love, such is his hire.
Who yields unto him his captive heart,
Ere he resist, and holds his open breast
Withouten war to take his bloody dart,
Let him not think to shake off when him list
His heavy yoke. "Resist his first assault,
"Weak is his bow, his quenched brand is cold,
"Cupped is but a child, and cannot daunt
"The mind that bears him, or his virtues bold.
But he gives poison so to drink in gold.
And hides under pleasant baits his hook,
But ye beware, it will be hard to hold
Your greedy minds, but if ye wisely look
What sly snake lurks under those flowers gay,
But ye mistrust some cloudy smokes, and fear
A stormy shower after so fair a day.
Ye may repent, and buy your pleasure dear,
For seldom times is Cupped wont to send
"Unto anidle love a joyful end.
SIsters be gone, bequeath the rest to me,
That yet belongs unto this Tragaedie.
Vengeance and death from forth the deepest hell
I bring the cursed house where Gismund dwells.
Sent from the grisly god that holds his reign
In Tartars ugly Realm, where Pelops sire
(Who with his own sons flesh whom he had slain
Did feast the Gods) with famine hath his hire.
To gape and catch at flying fruits in vain,
And yielding waters to his gasping throat,
Where stormy Aeoles son with endless pain
Rolls up the rock: where Titius hath his lot
To feed the Gripe that gnaws his growing heart.
Where proud Ixion wherled on the wheel,
Pursues himself: where due deserved smart
The damned Ghosts in burning flame do feel,
From thence I mount: thither the winged God,
Nephew to Atlas, that upholds the sky,
Of late down from the earth, with golden rod,
To Stigian Firrie, Salerne souls did guide,
And made report, how Love that lordly boy,
Highly disdaining his renowns decay,
Slipped down from heaven, have filled with fickle joy,
Gismunds heart, and made her throw away
Chastnes of life, to her immortal shame,
Minding to show by proof of her foul end,
Some terror unto those that scorn his name,
Black Pluto (that once found Cupped his friend
In winning Ceres daughter Queen of hells)
And Parthie moved by the grieved Ghost
Of her late husband, that in Tartar dwells,
Who pried due pains for her, that thus hath lost
All care of him, and of her chastity,
The Senate then of hell by grave advice
Of Minos, Eec, and of Radamant,
Commands me draw this hateful air, and rise
Aboue the earth, with dole and death to dant
The pride and present joys, wherewith these two
Feed their disdained hearts, which now to do
Behold I come, with instruments of death.
This stinging snake which is of hate and wrath,
Isle fix upon her fathers heart full fast,
And into hers, this other will I cast,
Whose rankling venom shall infect them so
With •…nuious wrath, and with recurelesse wo
Each shall be others plague and overthrow.
Furies must aide when men surcease to know
Their gods: and hell sends forth revenging pain
On those whom shame from sin cannot restrain.
GOds are ye guyds of justice and revenge?
O thou great Thunderer, doest thou be∣hold
With watchful eyes the subtle scopes of men
Hardened in shame, seared up in the desire
Of their own lusts: why then dost thou withhold
The blast of thy revenge? why doest thou grant
Such lively breath, such lewd occasion
To execute their shameless villainy?
Thou, thou art cause of al this open wrong,
Thou that forbear'st thy vengeance all too long,
If thou spare them rain then upon my head
The fullness of thy plagues with deadly ire,
To reeve this ruthful soul, who all too sore
Burns in the wrathful torments of revenge.
O earth the mother of each living wight,
Open thy womb, devour this withered corps,
And thou O hell, (if other hell there be
Then that I feel) receive my soul to thee.
O daughter, daughter, wherefore do I grace
Her with so kind a name? O thou fond girl,
The shameful ruin of thy fathers house,
Is this my hoped joy? is this the stay
Must glad my griefe-ful years that wast away?
For life which first thou did receive from me,
Ten thousand deaths shall I receive by thee?
For al the joys I did repose in thee,
Which I (fond man) did settle in thy sight,
Is this my recompense? that I must see
The thing so shameful, and so villainous,
That would to God this earth had swalowed
This worthless burden into lowest deeps,
Rather then I (accursed) had beheld
The sight that hourly massacars my life.
O whether, whether fliest thou forth my soul?
O whether wanders my tormented mind?
Those pains that make the miser glad of death
Have c•…asked on me, and yet I cannot have
What villains may command, a speedy death.
Whom shall I first accuse for this outrage?
That God that guides all, and guides so
This damned deed. Shall I blaspheme their names?
The gods the authors of this spectacle:
Or shall I justly curse that cruel star
Whose influence assigned this destiny?
But nay, that traitor, shall that vile wretch live
By whom I have received this injury?
Or shall I longer make account of her
That fondly prostitutes her widows shame?
I have bethought me what I shall request.
On bended knees, with hands heaved up to heaven
This (sacred senate of the Gods) I crave,
First on the traitor your counsming ire:
Next, on the cursed strumpet dire revenge:
Last, on my self, the wretched father, shame.
Oh could I stamp, and therewithal command
Armies of Furies to assist my heart,
To prosecute due vengeance on their souls.
Hear me my friends, but as ye love your lives,
Reply not to me, hearken and stand amazed,
When I (as is my wont) oh fond delight,
Went forth to seek my daughter, now my death,
Within her chamber (as I thought) she was,
But there I found her not, I deemed then
For her disport she and her maidens were
Down to the garden walked to comfort them,
And thinking thus, it came into my mind
There all alone to tarry her return:
And thereupon I (weary) threw my self
Upon her widows bed (for so I thought)
And in the curten wrapped my cursed head.
Thus as I lay anon I might behold
Out of the vaut up through her chamber floor
My daughter Gismund bringing hand in hand
The County Palurin, alas it is too true,
At her beds feet this traitor made me see
Her shame, his treason, and my deadly grief.
Her Princely body yielded to this thief.
The high despite whereof so wounded me
That traunce-like, as a senseless stone I lay,
For neither wit, nor tongue could use the mean
To express the passions of my pained heart.
Forceless, perforce, I sunk down to this pain,
As greedy famine doth constrain the hake,
Piecemeal to rent and tear the yielding pray:
So fared it with me in that heavy stoned,
But now what shall I doe? how may I seek
To ease my mind that burns with desire
Of dire revenge? For never shall my thoughts
Grant ease unto my heart, till I have found
A mean of vengeance to requite his pains,
That first conveyed this sight unto my soul.
Renuchio.
What is your Highness will?
Call my daughter: my heart boils till I see
Her in my sight, to whom I may discharge
All the unrest that thus distempers me.
Should I destroy them both? O gods ye know
How near and dear our daughter is to vs.
And yet my rage persuades me to imbrue
My thirsty hands in both their trembling bloods,
Therewith to cool my wrathful furies heate.
But Nature, why repin'st thou at this thought?
Why should I think upon a fathers debt
To her that thought not on a daughters due?
But still me thinks if I should see her die,
And therewithal reflex her dying eyes
Upon mine eyes, that sight would slit my heart.
Not much unlike the Cocatrice, that slaies
The object of his foul infections.
Oh what a conflict doth my mind endure?
Now fight my thoughts against my passions:
Now strive my passions against my thoughts.
Now sweates my heart, now i will cold falls it dead.
Help heavens, and succour ye Celestial powers,
Infuse your secrete virtue on my soul.
Shall nature win? shall justice not prevail?
Shall I (a king) be proved partial?
"How shall our Subjects then insult on vs,
"When our examples (that are light to them)
"Shall be eclipsed with our proper deeds?
And may the arms be rented from the tree?
The members from the body be disseuer'd?
And can the heart endure no violence?
My daughter is to me mine only heart,
My life, my comfort, my continuance,
Shall I be then not only so unkind
To pass all natures strength, and cut her off.
But therewithal so cruel to my self,
Against all law of kind to shred in twain
The golden thread that doth vs both maintain.
But were it that my rage should so command,
And I consent to her untimely death,
Were this an end to all our miseries?
No, no, her ghost will still pursue our life.
And from the deep her bloodless gastfull spirit
Will as my shadow in the shining day,
Follow my footsteps till she take revenge.
I will doe thus therefore: the traitor dies,
Because he scorned the favour of his king,
And our displeasure wilfully incurde:
His slaughter, with her sorrow for his blood,
Shall to our rage supply delightful food.
What first your Majesty commands?
Iulio, if we have not our hope in vain,
Nor all the trust we doe repose in thee:
Now must we try if thou approve the same.
Herein thy force and wisdom we must see,
For our command requires them both of thee.
How by your Graces bounty I am bound,
Beyond the common bond wherein each man
Stands bound unto his king, how I have found
Honour and wealth by favour in your sight,
I doe acknowledge with most thankful mind.
My truth (with other means to serve your Grace,
What ever you in honour shall assign)
Hath sworn her power true vassal to your hest,
For proof let but your Majesty command
I shall unlock the prison of my soul,
(Although unkindly horror would gainsay)
Yet in obedience to your Highness will,
By whom I hold the tenor of this life,
This hand and blade will be the instruments,
To make pale death to grapple with my heart.
Well, to be short (for I am grieved too long
By wrath without revenge) I think you know
Meanwhile a Palace builded strong
For war, within our Court, where dreadlesse peace
Hath planted now a weaker entrance.
But of that palace yet one vaut remains,
Within our Court, the secret way whereof
Is to our daughter Gismunds chamber laid:
There is also another mouth hereof,
Without our wall: which now is ouergrowen,
But you may find it out, for yet it lies
Directly South a furlong from our place:
It may be known, hard by an ancient stoop,
Where grew an Ok in elder days deceit,
There will we that you watch, there shall you see
A villain traitor mount out of a vaut:
Bring him to vs, it is th'Earle Palurin,
What is his fault neither shall you enquire,
Nor list we to disclose, these cursed eyes
Have seen the flame, this heart hath felt the fire
That cannot else be quenched but with his blood.
This must be done: this will we have you do.
Both this, and else what ever you think good.
REnugio depart, leave vs alone.
Gismund, if either I could cast aside
All care of thee: or if thou would have had
Some care of me, it would not now betide
That either thorough thy fault my joy should fade,
Or by thy folly I should bear the pain
Thou hast procured: but now tic neither I
Can shun the grief: whom thou hast more thē slain
Nor moist thou heal, or ease the grievous wound,
Which thou hast given me. That unstained life
Wherein I joyed, and thought it thy delight,
Why hast thou lost it? Can it be restored?
Where is thy widowhood, there is thy shame.
Gismund, it is no mans, nor men's report,
That have by likely proofs enformd me thus.
Thou know how hardly I could be induced
To vex my self, •…nd be displeased with thee,
With flying tales of flattering Sycophants.
No, no, there was in vs such settled trust
Of thy chaste life, and uncorrupted mind:
That if these eyes had not beheld thy shame,
Invaine ten thousand censures could have told,
That thou did once vnprincelike make agree
With that vile traitor County Palurin.
Without regard had to thy self or me,
Vnshamefastly to stain thy state and mine.
But I unhappiest have beheld the same,
And seeing it, yet feeleth' exceeding grief
That slaies my heart with horror of that thought.
Which grief commands me to obey my rage,
And Justice urges some extreme revenge,
To wreak the wrongs that have been offred vs.
But Nature that hath locked within thy breast
Two lives: the same inclines me to spare
Thy blood, and so to keep mine own vnspilt.
This is that ouerweening-loue I bear•…
To thee vnduetifull, and undeserved.
But for that traitor, he shall surely die,
For neither right nor nature doth entreat
For him, that wilfully without all awe
Of gods, or men, or of our deadly hate,
Incurde the just displeasure of his king.
And to be brief, I am content to know
What for thy self thou can object to vs,
Why thou should not together with him die,
So to assuage the griefs that overthrow
Thy fathers heart.
O king, and father, humbly give her leave
To plead for grace, that stands in your disgrace.
Not that she recks this life: for I confess
I have deserved, when so it pleases you,
To die the death. Mine honour and my name
(As you suppose) distained with reproach,
And well contented shall I meet the stroke
That must dissever this detested head
Frō these lewd limbs. But this I wish were known
That now I live not for my self alone.
For when I saw that neither my request,
Nor the entreaty of my careful Aunt,
Could win your Highness pleasure to our will:
"Then Love, heate of the heart, life of the soul,
"Fed by desire, increasing by restraint,
Would not endure controlment any more:
But violently enforced my feebled heart.
For who am I alas, still to resist
Such endless conflicts? To relent and yield
Therewith I chose him for my Lord and fear.
Guiszard mine Earl that holds my love full dear,
Then if it be so settled in your mind,
He shall not live because he dared to love
Your daughter. Thus I give your Grace to know
Within his heart there is enclosed my life.
Therefore O father, if that name may be
Sweet to your ears, and that we may prevail
By name of father, that you favour vs.
But otherwise, if now we cannot find
That which our falsed hope did promise vs.
Why then proceed, and rid our trembling hearts
Of these suspicions: since neither in this case
His good deserts in service to your Grace,
Which always have bin just, nor in desires
May mitigate the cruel rage of grief.
That strains your heart, but that mine Earl must die
Then all in vain you ask what I can say
Why I should live, suffices for my part
To say I will not live, and so resolve.
Dare thou so desperate decree thy death.
A dreadles heart deletes in such decrees.
Thy kind abhors such unkindly thoughts.
Unkindly thoughts they are to them that live
In kindly love.
As I doe unto thee.
To take his life who is my love to me.
Have I then lost thy love?
If he shall lose
His life, that is my love.
Thy love. Be gone.
Return unto thy chamber.
I will go.
IF it please your highness hither have we brought
This captive Earl as you commanded vs.
Whō (as we were foretold) even there we found
Where by your majesty we were inioin'd
To watch for him. What more your highness wills,
This heart and hand shall execute your hest.
Iulio we thank your pains. Ah Palurin,
Have we deserved in such traitorous sort
Thou should abuse our kingly courtesies,
Which we too long in favour have bestowed
Upon thy false-dissembling hart with vs.
What grief thou therewithal hast thrown on vs
What shame upon a house, what dire distress,
Our soul endures, cannot be uttered.
And durst thou villen dare to undermine
Our daughters chamber, durst thy shameless face
Be bold to kiss her: th'rest we will conceal.
Suffices that thou know I too well know
All thy proceedings in thy private shames.
Herin what hast thou won? thine own content,
With the displeasure of thy Lord and king.
The thought whereof if thou had had in mind
The least remorse of love and loyalty
Might have restraind thee from so foul a fact.
But Palurin, what may I deem of thee,
Whom neither fear of gods, nor love of him
(Whose Princely favour hath been thine uproar)
Could quench the fuel of thy lewd desires.
Wherefore content thee that we are resolved
(And therefore laid to snare thee with this bait)
That thy just death, with thine effused blood,
Shall cool the heate and choler of our mood.
My Lord the •…ing, neither do I mislike
Your sentence, nor do your smoking sighs
Reached from the entrails of your boiling heart,
Disturb the quiet of my calmed thoughts:
For this I feel, and by experience prove,
Such is the force and endless might of love,
As never shall the dread of carren death
That hath enuide our joys, invade my breast,
For if it may be found a fault in me
(That evermore have loved your Majesty)
Likewise to honour and to love your child,
If love unto you both may be a fault,
〈◊〉 unto her my love exceeds compare,
Then this hath been my fault, for which I joy
That in the greatest lust of all my life,
I shall submit for her sake to endure
The pangs of death. Oh mighty Lord of love
Strengthen thy vassal, boldly to receive
Large wounds into this body for her sake.
Then use my life or death, my Lord and king,
For your relief to ease your grieved soul:
For whether I live, or else that I must die,
To end your pains I am content to bear:
Knowing by death I shall bewray the truth
Of that sound heart which living was her own,
And did alive for her that lived mine,
Thine Palurin, what, lives my daughter thine?
Traitor thou wrongst me, for she lives mine.
Rather I wish ten thousand sundry deaths,
Then I to live and see my daughter thine.
Thine, that is dearer then my life to me?
Thine, whom I hope to see an Empress?
Thine, whom I cannot pardon from my sight?
Thine, unto whom we have bequeathed our crown?
Iulio, we will that thou inform from vs
Renuchio the Captain of our Guard,
That we command this traitor be conveyed
Into the dungeon underneath our Tower,
There let him rest until he be resolved
What further we intend, which to understand,
We will Renuchio repair to vs.
O that I might your Majesty entreat
With clemency to beautify your seat,
Toward this Prince distressed by his desires,
Too many, all too strong to captivate
"This is the soundest safety for a king
"To cut them off that vex or hinder him.
"This have I found the safety of a king,
"To spare the Subjects that do honour him.
Have we been honoured by this lechers lust?
No, but by this devout submission.
Our fortune says we must do what we may.
"This is praise-worth, not to do what you may.
And may the Subject countermand the king?
No, but entreat him.
What he shall decree.
What wisdom shall discern.
Nay what our word
Shall best determine. We will not reply.
Thou know our mind, our heart cannot be easd,
But with the slaughter of this Palurin.
O thou great God, who from thy heist throne
Hast stooped down, and felt the force of love,
Bend gentle ears unto the woeful moan,
Of me poor wretch, to grant that I require:
Help to persuade the same great God, that he
So far remit his might, and slack his fire
From my dear Ladies kindled heart, that she
May hear my death without her hurt,
Herface, wherein there is as clear a light
As in the rising moon: let not her cheeks
As red as is the partie-coloured rose.
Be paled with the news hereof and so
I yield my self, my silly soul, and all,
To him, for her, for whom my death shall show
I lived, and as I lived, I did her thrall.
Grant this thou Thunderer: this shall suffice,
My breath to vanish in the liquid skies.
Who doth not know the fruits of Paris love,
Nor understand the end of Helens •…oy,
He may behold the fatal overthrow
OfPriams house, and of the town of Troy.
His death at last, and her eternal shame,
For whom so many a noble knight was slain.
So many a Duke, so many a Prince of fame
Bereft his life, and left there in the plain.
Medeas armed hand, Elizas sword,
Wretched Lender drenched in the flood.
Phillis so long that waited for her Lord
All these too dearly bought their loves with blood.
But he in virtue that his Lady serves
Newels but what unto her Honour longs,
Heneuer from the rule of reason swarues,
He feels not the pangs, no raging throngs
Of blind Cupped: he lives not in despair
As done his servants: neither spends his days
In joy, and care, vain hope, and throbbing fear.
But seeks always what may his sovereign please
In honour: he that thus serves, reapes the fruit
Of his sweet service: and no jealous dread
Nor base suspect of ought to let his suit
(Which causes oft the lovers hart to bleed)
Doth fret his mind, or burns in his breast:
He wayleth not by day, nor wakes by night,
When every other living thing doth rest.
Nor finds his life or death within her sight.
Remember thou in virtue serve therefore
Thy chaste Lady: beware thou do not love
As meanwhile Venus did the fair Atone,
But as Diana loved the Amazons son.
Through whose request the gods to him alone
Restored new life: the twine that was undone
Was by the sisters twisted up again.
The love of virtue in thy Ladies looks,
The love of virtue in her learned talk,
This love yields matter for eternal books.
This love intiseth him abroad to walk,
There to invent and write new rondelaies
Of learned conceit, her fancies to allure
To vain delights, such humours he allaies,
And sings of virtue and her garments pure.
Desire not of thy Sovereign the thing
Whereof shame may ensue by any mean:
Nor wish thou ought that may dishonour bring.
So meanwhile did the learned Tuscan serve
His fair Lady: and glory was their end.
Such are the praises Lovers done deserve,
Whose service doth to virtue and honour tend.
OH cruel fate, oh miserable chance
Oh dire aspect of hateful destinies,
Oh wo may not be told: sufficed it not
That I should see and with these eyes behold
So foul, so bloody, and so base deed:
But more to aggravate the heavy cares
Of my perplexed mind, must only I
Must I alone be made the messenger,
That must deliver to her Princely ears
Such dismal news? as when I shall disclose
I know it cannot but abridge her days.
As when the thunderer and three forked fire
Rent through the clouds by Ioues almighty power
Breaks up the bosom of our mother earth,
And burns her heart before the heat be felt.
In this distress whom should I most bewail,
My woe, that must be made the messenger
Of these unworthy and unwelcome news?
Or shall I moan thy death, O noble Earl?
Or shall I still lament the heavy hap
That yet, O Queen, attends thy funeral.
What mons be these? Renuchio is this Salerne I see?
Doth here king Tancred hold the awful cronw?
Is this the place where civil people be?
Or do the savage Scythians here abound?
What mean these questiōs? whether tend these words?
Resolve vs maidens, &amp; release our fears.
What ever news thou bring, discover them,
Detain vs not in this suspicious dread,
''The thought whereof is greater then the woe.
O whither may I cast my looks? to heaven?
Blackpitchy clouds from thence rain down r•…avenge
The earth shall I behold? stained with the gore
Of his heart blood that did most innocent.
Which way so ere I turn mine eyes, me thinks
His butchered corps stands staring in my face.
We humbly pray thee to forbear these words
So full of terror to our maiden hearts:
''The dread of things unknown breeds the suspect
''Of greater dread, until the worst be known.
Tel therefore what hath chanced, and whereunto
This bloody cup thou hold in thy hand.
Since so is your request that I shall doe,
Although my mind so sorrowful a thing
Ripens to tell, and though my voice eschews
To say what I have seen: yet since your will
So fixed stands to hear for what I rue,
Your great desires I shall herein fulfil.
First by Salerne City, amids the plain,
There stands a hill, whose bottom huge and round,
Thrown out in breadth, a large space doth contain
And gathering up in height small from the ground
Still less and less it mounts: there sometime was
A goodly tower vpreard, that flowrde in fame
While fate and fortune served, but time doth pass,
And with his sway suppresses all the same:
For now the walls be euened with the plain.
And all the rest so foully lies defast:
As but the only shade doth there remain
Of that which there was built in time forepast:
And yet that shows what worthy work tofore
Hath there been reared: one parcel of that tower
Yet stands, which eating time could not devour:
A str ong turret compact of stone and rock:
Huge without, but horrible within:
To pass to which by force of handy stroke
A crooked strait is made, that enters in
And leads into this ugly loathsome place.
Within the which carved into the ground
A deep dungeon there runs of narrow space
Dreadful and dark, where never•… light is found:
Into this hollow cave, by cruel hest
Of king Tancred, were divers servants sent
To work the horror of his furious breast,
Erst nourished in his rage, and now sterne bent,
To have the same performed: I woeful man
Amongst the rest, was one to do the thing
That to our charge so straightly did belong,
In sort as was commanded by the king.
Within which dreadful prison when we came,
The noble County Palurin that there
Lay chained in gives, fast fettered in his bolts,
Out of the dark dungeon we did uproar
And hauled him thence into a brighter place,
That gave vs light to work our tyranny.
But when I once beheld his manly face,
And saw his cheer, no more appauld with fear,
Of present death, then he whom never dread
Did once amate: my heart abhorred then
To give consent unto so foul a deed,
That wretched death should reeve so worthy a man
On false fortune I cried with loud complaint,
That in such sort ouerwhelmes nobility.
But he whom never grief no fear could taint,
With smiling cheer himself oft wills me,
To leave to plain his case, or sorrow make,
For him, for he was far more glad apaid
Death to embrace thus for his Ladies sake,
Then life, or all the joys of life he said.
For loss of life (quoth he) grieves me no more,
Then ioss•… of that which I 〈◊〉 least,
My Ladies grief, least she should rue therefore,
Is all the cause of grief within my breast.
He pried therefore that we would make report
To her of those his last words he would say:
That though he never could in any sort
Her gentleness requite, nor never lay
Within his power to serve her as he would,
Yet she possessed his heart with hand and might,
To doe her all the honour that he could.
This was to him of all the joys that might
Revive his heart, the chiefest joy of al,
That, to declare the faithful heart which he
Did bear to her, fortune so well did fall,
That in her love he should both live and die.
After these words he staid, and spake no more,
But joyfully beholding vs eachone,
His words and cheer amazed vs so sore
That still we stood: when forthwith thereupon
But why slack you (quoth he) to do the thing
For which you come? make speed and stay no more
Perform your masters will: now tel the king
He hath his life for which he longed so sore:
And with those words himself with his own hand
Fastened the bands about his neck. The rest
Wondering at his stout heart, astonished stand
To see him offer thus himself to death.
What stony breast, or what hard heart of flint
Would not relent to see this dreary sight?
So goodly a man, whom death nor fortunes dint
Could once disarm, murdered with such despite.
And in such sort bereft amidst the flowers
Of his fresh years, that ruthful was to seen:
"For violent is death, when he devours
"Young men, or virgins, while their years be green.
Lo now our servants seeing him take the bands
And on his neck himself to make them fast:
Without delay set to their cruel hands,
And sought to work their fierce intent with hast,
They stretch the bloody bands, and when the breath
Began to fail his breast, they slackt again.
Thrice did they pull, and thrice they lost him,
So did their hands rapine against their hearts:
And oft times lost to his greater pain.
"But date of death that fixed is so fast,
"Beyond his course there may no wight extend,
For strangled is this noble Earl at last,
Bereft of life, unworthy such an end.
O dāned deed.
What deem you this to be
Al the said news that I have to unfold?
Is here (think you) end of the cruelty
That I have seen?
Could any heavier woe
Be wrought to him, then to destroy him so?
What, think you this outrage did end so well?
The horror of the fact, the greatest 〈◊〉,
The massaker, the terror is to tell.
Alack what could be more? they threw percase
The dead body to be deuourd and torn
Of the wild beasts.
Would God it had been cast a savage pray
To beasts and birds: but lo, that dreadful thing
Which even the tiger would not work, but to
Suffice his hunger: that hath the tyrant king
Withouten ruth commanded vs to doe,
Only to please his wrathful heart withal.
Happy had been his chance, too happy alas,
If birds, or beasts had eaten up his corps,
Yea heart and all: within this cup I bring,
And am constrained now unto the face
Of his dear Lady to present the same.
What kind of cruelty is this you name?
Declare foo•…hwith, and whereunto doth tend
This farther plaint.
After his breath was gone,
Forced perforce thus from his panting breast
Straight they despoiled him, and not alone
Contented with his death, on the dead corps
Which ravenous beasts forbear to lacerate,
Even upon this our villens fresh begun
To show new cruelty: forthwith they pearce
His naked belly, and unripped it so,
That out the bowels gushed: who can rehearse
Their tyranny, wherewith my heart yet bleeds.
The warm entrails were torn out of his breast.
Within their hands trembling not fully dead,
His veins smoked, his bowels all to 〈◊〉
Ruthless were rent, and thrown about the place:
All clottered lay the blood in lumps of gore,
Sprint on his corps, and on his paled face,
His trembling heart, yet leaping, out they tore,
And cruelly upon a rapier
They fixed the same, and in this hateful wise
Unto the king this heart they do present:
A sight longed for to feed his ireful eyes.
The king perceiving each thing to be wrought
As he had wilde, 〈◊〉 to behold
Upon the bloody sword the pierced heart,
He calls then for this massy cup of gold,
Into the which the woeful heart he cast,
And reaching me the same, now go, quoth 〈◊〉,
Unto my daughter, and with speedy hast
Present her this, and say to her from me,
Thy father 〈◊〉 here in this cup thee sent
That thing to joy and comfort thee withal,
Which thou loved best, even as thou were content
To comfort him with his chief joy of all.
O hateful fact! O passing cruelty!
O murder wrought with too much hard despite•…e
O heinous deed, which no posterity
Will once believe!
Thus was Earl Palurin
Strangled unto the death, yea after death
His heart and blood disboweled from his breast:
But what avails 〈◊〉? it is but breath
Forewasted all in vain: why do I rest
Here in this place? why go I not and doe
The hateful message to my charge committed?
Oh were it not that I am forced thereto,
By a kings will, here would I stay my feet,
No one whit farther wade in this intent:
But I must yield me to my Princes hest,
Yet doth this somewhat comfort mine unrest,
I am resolved her grief not to behold,
But get me gone my message being told.
Where is the Princess chamber?
Lo where she comes
THy father, O Queen, here in this cup hath sent
The thing to joy and comsort thee withal
Which thoulouedst best, even as thou wast content
To comfort him with his chief joy of all.
I thank my father, and thee gentle squire,
For this thy travel take thou for thy pains
This bracelet, and commend me to the king.
So now is come the long expected hour,
The fatal hour I have so looked for,
Now hath my father satisfied his thirst
With guiltless blood which he so coveted
What brings this cup? (ay me) I thought no less,
It is mine Earls, my Counties pierced heart,
Dear heart, too dearly hast thou bought my 〈◊〉
Extremely rated at too high a price.
Ah my sweet heart, sweet wast thou in thy life,
But in thy death thou proves passing sweet.
A fitter hearce then this of beaten gold,
Could not be lotted to so good an heart:
My father therefore well provided thus
To close and wrap thee up in massy gold,
And there withal to send thee unto me,
To whom of duty thou doest best belong.
My father hath in all his life bewraid
A princely care and tender love to me:
But this surpasses, in his later days
To send me this, mine own dear heart to me.
Were thou not mine, dear hart, whilst that my love
Danced and plaid upon thy golden strings?
Art thou not mine (dear heart) now that my love
Is fled to heaven, and got him golden wings?
Thou art mine own, and still mine own shalt be
Therefore my father sends thee to me.
Ah pleasant harborough of my hearts thought!
Ah sweet delight, the quickner of my soul
Seven times accursed be the hand that wrought
Thee this despite, to mangle thee so foul:
Yet in this wound I see mine own true love,
And in this wound thy magnanimity,
And in this wound I see thy constancy.
Go gentle heart, go rest thee in thy tomb,
Receive this token at thy last farewell:
Thine own true heart anon will follow thee,
Which panting hastes for thy company.
Thus hast thou run (poor heart) thy mortal race,
And rid thy life from fickle fortunes snares,
Thus hast thou lost this world, and worldly cares,
And of thy foe, to honour thee withal,
Received a golden grave, to thy desert,
Nothing doth want to thy just funeral,
But my salt tears to wash thy bloody wound.
Which to the end thou might receive, behold
My father sends thee in this cup of gold,
And thou shalt have them, though I was resolved
To shed no tears, but with a cheerful face
Once did I think to wet thy funeral
Only with blood, and with no weeping eye.
This done, forthwith my soul shall fly to thee,
For therefore did my father send thee me.
Ah my pure heart, with sweeter company,
Or more content, how safer may I prove
To pass to places all unknown with thee.
Why die I not therefore? why doe I stay?
Why doe I not this woeful life forgo,
And with these hands enforce this breath away?
What means this gorgeous glittering head attire
How ill 〈◊〉 these billam•…nts of gold
Thy mournful widowhood? away with them,
So let thy tresses flaring in the wind 
Untrimmed hang about thy bared neck:
Now hellish furies set my heart on fire,
Bolton my courage, strengthen ye my hands
Against their kind, to do a kindly deed:
But shall I then vnwreaken down descen d?
Shall I not work some just revenge on him
That thus hath slain my love? shall not these hands
Fire his gates, and make the flame to climb•…
Up to the pinnacles, with burning brands,
And on his cinders wreak my cruel teene.
Be still (fond girl) content thee first to die,
This venomed water shall abridge thy life, 
This for the same intent provided I,
Which can both ease and end this raging strife.
Thy father by thy death shall have more woe,
Then fire or flames within his gates can bring:
Content thee then in patience hence to go,
Thy death his blood shall wreak upon the king.
Now not alone (a grief to die alone)
"The only mirror of extreme annoy,
But not alone, thou die my love, for I
Will be copartner o•… thy destiny.
Be merry then my soul, can thou refuse
To die with him, that death for thee did choose?
What damned fury hath possessed our Queen
Why sit we still beholding her distress?
Madame forbear, suppress this headstrong rage.
Maidens forbear your comfortable words.
O worthy Qu•…, rashn•…s doth overthrow
The author of his resolution.
Where hope of help is lost what boots fear?
Fear wilauoyd the sting of infamy.
May good or bad reports d•…light the dead?
If of the living yet the dead have care.
An easy grief by council may be cured.
But headstrong mischiefs princes should avoid
In headlong griefs and cases desperate?
Cal to your mind (Gis.) you are the Queen.
Unhappy widow, wife, and paramour.
Think on the king.
The king? the tyrant king
Your father.
Yea, the murthrer of my love
His force.
the dead fear not the force of mē
His care &amp; grief.
That neither cared for me
Nor grieved at the murder of my love,
My mind is settled, you with these vain words,
Withhold me but too long from my desire.
Depart ye to my chamber.
We will hast
To tel the king hereof.
I will prevent
Both you and him. Lo here, this hearty draught
The last that in this world I mean to taste,
Dreadlesse of death (mine Earl) I drink to thee.
So now work on, now doth my soul begin
To hate this light, where•…in there is no love,
No love of parents to their children,
No love of Princes to their Subjects true,
No love of Ladies to their dearest loves.
Now pass I to the pleasant land of love,
Where heavenly love immortal flourishes:
The Gods abhor the company of men,
Hell is on earth, yea hell it self is heaven
Compared with earth. I cal to wit•… h•…n,
Heaven, said I? no, but hell record I call,
And thou sterne Goddess of revenging wrongs
Witness with me I die for his pure love
That lived mine. 
WHere is my daughter?
Behold, here, woeful king.
Aim, break hart, &amp; thou fly forth my soul
What, doth my daughter Gis. take it so?
What hast thou done? oh let me see thine eyes,
Oh let me dress up those untrimmed locks,
Look up, sweet child, look up mine only joy,
Tic I thy father that beseeches thee:
Rear up thy body, strain thy dying voice
To speak to him, sweet Gismund speak to me.
Who stays my soul? who thus disquiets me?
Tic I thy father, ah behold my tears
Like pearled dew that trickle down my cheeks,
To wash my silver hairs.
Oh father king
Forbear your tears, your plaint will not avail.
Oh my sweetheart, hast thou received thy life
From me, and wilt thou to requite the same,
Yield me my death? yea death and greater grief
To see thee die for him that did defame
Thine honour thus, my kingdom, and thy name.
Yea therefore father gave ye life to me,
That I should die, and now my date is done.
As for your kingdom, and mine own renown,
Which you affirm dishonoured to be
That fault impute•… it where it is, for he
That slew mine •…earl, and sent his heart to me,
His hands have brought this shame and grief on vs
But father, yet if any spark remain
Of your dear love, if ever yet I could
So much deserve, or at your hands desire,
Grant that I may obtain this last request,
Sa•…e lovely child, say on, what ere it be,
Thy father grants it willingly to thee.
My life I crave not, for it is not now
In you to give, nor in my self to save,
Nor crave I mercy for mine Earl and me,
Who hath bin slain with too much cruelty.
With patience I must awhile abide
Within this life, which now will not be long.
But this is my request, Father I pray,
That since it pleased so your majesty,
I should enjoy my love alive no more,
Yet neretheles let vs not parted be,
Whom cruel death could never separate:
But as we lived and did together here,
So let our bodies be together tombde,
Let him with me, and I with him be laid
Within one shrine, where ever you appoint,
This if you grant me, as I trust you will,
Although I live not to requite this grace,
Th'immortall Gods due recompense shall give
To you for this, and so vain world farewell,
My speech is painful, and mine eie-sight fails.
My daughter dies, see how the bitter pangs
Of tyrannous death, torments her princely heart,
She looks on me, at me she shakes her head,
For me she groans, by me my daughter dies,
I, I, the author of this Tragedy.
On me, on me, ye 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 down your 〈◊〉
Now 〈◊〉 my daughter, 〈◊〉 with 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
Oh fair in life, thrice fairer in 〈◊〉 death,
Dear to thy father in thy life thou were,
But in thy death, dearest unto his heart,
I kiss thy paled cheeks, and close thine eyes,
This duty once I promised to my self,
Thou should perform to me, but ah false hope
Now ruthful wretched king what rests thee?
Wilt thou now live wasted with misery?
Wilt thou now live that with these eyes did see
Thy daughter dead? wilt thou now live to see
Her funerals, that of thy life was stay?
Wilt thou now live that wast her lives decay?
Shall not this hand reach to this heart the stroke
Mine arms are not so weak, nor are my limbs
So feebled with mine age, nor is my heart
So daunted with the dread of cowardice,
But I can wreak due vengeance on that head
That wrought the means these lovers now be dead
Iulio come near, and lay thine own right hand
Upon my thigh, now take thine oath of me.
I swear to thee, my liege Lord, to discharge
What ever thou enioynest Iulio.
First then I charge thee that my daughter have
Her last request, thou shalt within one tomb
Inter her Earl and her: and thereupon
Engrave some Royal Epitaph ofloue.
That done, I swear thee thou shalt take my corps
Which thou shalt find by that time done to death,
And lay my body by my daughters side.
Swear this, swear this I say.
I swear.
But will the king do so unkingly now.
A kingly deed the king resolves to doe.
To kill himself.
To send his soul to ease.
Doth Jove command it?
Our stars cōpell it.
The wiseman overrules his stars.
So we
Undaunted should the minds of kings endure.
So shall it in this resolution.
•…ulio sorbeare, and as thou love the king,
When thou shalt sec him weltering in his gore,
Stretching his limbs, and gasping in his groans
Then Iulio set to thy helping hand,
Redouble stroke on stroke, and drive the stab
Down deeper to his heart, to rid his soul.
Now stand aside, stir not a foot, least thou
Make up the fourth to fill this Tragedy.
These eyes that first beheld my daughters shame,
These eyes that longed for the ruthful sight
Of her Earls heart, these eyes that now have seen
His death, her woe, and her avenging teene:
Upon these eyes we must be first avenged.
Unworthy lamps of this accursed lump,
Out of your dwellings: so, it fits vs thus
In blood and blindness to go seek the path
That leads down to everlasting night.
Why frighst thou dastard? be thou desperate,
One mischief brings another on his neck,
As mighty billows tumble in the seas.
Now daughter, see thou not how I amerce
My wrath that thus bereft thee of thy love,
Upon my head? now fathers learn by me,
Be wise, be warned to use more tenderly
The jewels of your joys. Daughter, I come.
LO here the sweets of, grisly-pale despair,
These are the blossoms of this cursed tree
Such are the fruits of too much love and care
Orewhelmed in the sense of misery.
With violent hands he that his life doth end,
His damned soul to endless night doth wend.
Now rests it that I discharge mine oath,
To see th'unhappy lovers and the king,
Laid in one tomb: I would be very loath:
You should wait here to see this mournful thing.
For I am sure, and do ye all to wit,
Through grief wherein the Lords of Salerne be,
These funerals are not prepared yet:
Nor do they think on that solemnity.
As for the fury, ye must understand,
Now she hath seen the'ffect of her desire,
She is departed, and hath left our land,
Granting this end unto her hellish ire.
Now humbly pray we that our English dames
May never lead their loves into mistrust:
But that their honours may avoid the shames
That follow such as live in wanton lust.
We know they bear them on their virtues bold
With blissful chastity so well content,
That when their lives, and loves abroad are told,
All men admire their virtuous government.
Worthy to live where Furieneuer came,
Worthy to live where love doth always see,
Worthy to live in golden trump of Fame,
Worthy to live, and honoured still to be.
Thus end our sorrows with the setting Sun:
Now draw the curtains for our Scene is done.

ARden chéere up thy spirits and droup no more
My gracious Lord ye Duke of Sommerset;
Hath frely given to thee and to thy heirs,
By letters patents from his Majesty:
All the lands of the Abbey of Feuershame.
Heer are the deeds sealed &amp; subscribed with his name and the kings,
Read them, and leave this melancholy mood
Franklin thy love prolongs my weary life,
And but for thee, how odious were this life:
That shows me nothing but torments my soul,
And those foul objects that offend mine eyes,
Which makes me wish that for this vale of Heaven,
The earth hung over my heed and covered me.
Love letters past twixt Mosbie and my Wife,
And they have privy méetings in the Town:
Nay on his finger did I spy the Ring,
Which at our Marriage day the Priest put on,
Can any grief be half so great as this?
Comfort thy self sweet friend it is not strange,
That women will be false and wavering.
I but to dote on such a one as hée
Is monstrous Franklin, and intolerable.
Why, what is he?
A Botcher and no better at the first,
Who by base brocage, getting some small stock:
Crept into service of a noble man:
And by his servile flattery and fawning,
Is now become the steward of his house,
And bravely sets it in his silken gown.
No noble man will countnaunce such a peasant,
Yes, the Lord Clifford, he that loves not me,
But through his favour let not him grow proud,
For were he by the Lord Protector backed,
He should not make me to be pointed at,
I am by birth a gentle man of blood,
And that injurious rebel that attempts,
To violate my dear wives chastity,
(For dear I hold his love, as dear as heaven)
Shall on the bed which he thinks to defile,
See his dissevered joints and sinews torn,
Whilst on the planchers, pants his weary body,
Smeard in the channels of his lustful blood.
Be patient gentle friend and learn of me,
To ease thy grief, and save her chastity:
Entreat her fair sweet words are fittest engines
To race the flint walls of a women's breast:
In any case be not too Ielyouse,
Nor make no question of her love to thee,
But as securely, presently take horse,
And lie with me at London all this term
For women when they may, will not,
But being kept back, straight grow outrageous.
Though this abhors from reason yet isle try it
And call her forth, and presently take leave: How Ales,
Husband what mean you to get up so early.
Summer nights are short, and yet yo rise ere day,
Had I been wake you had not rise so soon,
Sweet love thou know that we two Ouid like
Have often chid the morning, when it began to peep,
And often wished that dark nights purblind steeds,
Would pull her by the purple mantle back:
And cast her in the Ocean to her love.
But this night sweet Ales thou hast kilt my hart,
I heard thee cal on Mosbie in thy sleep.
Tic like I was a sleep when I named him,
For being awake he comes not in my thoughts:
I but you started up, and suddenly
In steed of him: caught me about the neck.
In steed of him? why, who was there but you,
And where but one is, how can I mistake.
Arden leave to vrdge her over far.
Nay love there is no credit in a dream,
Let it suffice I know thou love me well.
Now I remember where upon it came,
Had we no talk of Mosbie yesternight.
Mistress Ales I hard you name him once or twice,
And thereof came it, and therefore blame not me
I know it did, and therefore let it pass,
I must to London sweet Ales presently.
But tell me do you mean to stay there long?
No longer there till my affairs be done,
He will not stay above a month at most.
A month aye me, sweet Arden come again
Within a day or two, or else I die.
I cannot long be from thee gentle Ales,
Whilst, Michel fetch our horses from the field,
Franklin and I will down unto the key:
For I have certain goods there to unload,
Meanewhile prepare our breakfast gentle Ales,
For yet ere noon wele take horse and away,
Ere noon he means to take horse and away:
Sweet news is this, Oh that some airy spirit,
Would in the shape and liknes of a horse
Gallop with Arden cross the Ocean,
And throw him from his back into the waives.
Sweet Mosbie is the man that hath my hart:
And he usurps it, having nought but this,
That I am tied to him by marriage.
Love is a God and marriage is but words,
And therefore Mosbies title is the best,
Tush whether it be or no, he shall be mine,
In spite of him, of Hymen and of rytes.
And here comes Adam of the flourdeluce,
I hope he brings me tidings of my love.
Now now Adam, what is the news with you?
Be not afraid my husband is now from home.
He whom you wot of Mosbie Mistress Ales,
Is come to town, and sends you word by me,
In any case you may not visit him.
Not visit him?
No nor take no knowledge of his béeing haere
But tell me is he angree or displeased.
Should seem so for he is wondrous sad.
Were he as mad as raving Hercules,
Isle see him, I and were thy house of force.
These hands of mine should race it to the ground:
••isles that thou would it bring me to my love.
Nay and you be so impatient Isle be gone
Stay Adam, stay, thou were wont to be my fr̄d
Ask Mosbie how I have incurred his wrath,
Bear him from me these pair of silver dice:
With which we plaid for kisses manya t•me,
And when I lost, I wan, and so did hée:
Such winning and such losing, Jove send me,
And bid him if his love doo not decline,
Come this morning but along my door:
And as a stranger, but salute me there,
This may he doo without suspect or fear.
Isle tell him what you say, and so farewell.
Doo, and one day Isle make amends for all:
I know he loves me well, but dares not come,
Because my husband is so Jealous:
And these my marrow prying neighbours blab,
Hinder our meetings when we would confer.
But if I live that block shall be removed,
And Mosbie, thou that comes to me by stelth
shalt neither fear the biting speech of men,
Nor Ardens looks, as surely shall he die,
as I abhor him, and love only thée.
Now now Michael, whether are you going?
To fetch my masters nag,
I hope you'll think on me.
I But Michael sée you keep your oath,
And be as secret, as you are resolute.
Isle see he shall not live aboue a week.
On that condition Michael here is my hand
None shall have Mosbies sister but thy self.
I understand the Painter here hard by,
Hath made report that he and Sue is sure.
There's no such matter Michael believe it not,
But he hath sent a dagger sticking in a hart,
With a verse or two stolen from a painted cloth:
The which I here the wench kéepes in her chest,
Well let her keep it, I shall find a fellow
That can both write and read, and make rime too,
And if I doo, well, I say no more:
Isle send from London such a taunting letter,
As shall eat the hart he sent with salt,
And sling the dagger at the Painters head.
What needs all this, I say that Susan's thine
Why then I say that I will kill my master
Or any thing that you will have me doo.
But Michael see you doo it cunningly.
Why, say I should be took, isle ne'er confess,
That you know any thing, and Susan being a Maid,
May beg me from the gallous of the Shriefe.
Trust not to that Michael.
You can not tell me, I have seen it I,
But mistress tell her whether I live or die.
Isle make her more worth then twenty Painters can,
For I will rid mine elder brother away:
And then the farm of Bolton is mine own.
Who would not venture upon house and land?
When he may have it for a right down blow.
Yonder comes Mosbie, Michael get thee gone,
And let not him nor any know thy drifts.
Mosbie my love,
Away I say, and talk not to me now.
A word or two sweet hart, and then I will,
Tic yet but early days, thou neatest not fear.
Where is your husband?
Tic now high water, and he is at the key.
There let him be, hence forward know me not.
Is this the end of all thy solemn oaths?
Is this the fruit thy reconcilement buds?
Have I for this given thée so many favours.
Incurd my husbands hate, and out alas,
Made shipwreck of mine honour for thy sake,
And doest thou say hence forward know me not?
Remember when I locked the in my closet,
What were thy words and mine, did we not both
Decree, to murder Arden in the night.
The heavens can witness, and the world can tell,
Before I saw that falsehood look of thine,
Fore I was tangled with thy teasing speech.
Arden to me was dearer then my soul,
And shall be still, base peasant get thée gone.
And boast not of thy conquest over me,
Gotten by witch-craft, and méere sorcery.
For what hast thou to countenance my love,
béeing descend of a noble house,
And matched already with a gentleman,
Whose servant thou moist be, and so farewell.
Ungentle and unkind Ales, now I sée
That which I ever feared, and find too true:
A women's love is as the lightning flame,
Which even in bursting forth consumes it self,
To try thy constancy have I béene strange,
Would I had never tried, but lived in hope.
What needs thou try me, whom thou never found false
Yet pardon me for love is Jealous,
So list the Sailor to the Mermaids song,
So looks the trauellour to the Baūliske,
I am content for to be reconcilde,
And that I know will be mine overthrow.
Thine overthrow? first let the world dissolve,
Nay Mosbie let me still enjoy thy love,
And happen what will, I am resolute,
My saving husband hoards up bags of gould,
To make our children rich, and now is hee
Gone to unload the goods that shall be thine,
And he and Franklin will to London straight.
To London Ales, if thoult be ruled by mée,
Weal make him sure enough for coming there.
Ah, would we could.
I happened on a Painter yesternight,
The only cunning man of Christendoome:
For he can temper poison with his oil,
That who so looks upon the work he draws,
Shall with the beams that issue from his sight,
Suck venomme to his breast and slay him self,
Sweet Ales he shall draw thy counterfeit,
That Arden may by gaizing on it perish
I but Mosbie that is dangerous,
For thou or I, or any other else,
Coming into the Chamber where it hangs, may die.
I but weal have it covered with a cloth,
And hung up in the study for himself.
It may not be, for when the pictur's drawn,
Arden I know will come and show it me.
Fear not weal have that shall serve the turn,
This is the painters house Isle call him forth,
But Mosbie Isle have no such picture I:
I pray thoe leave it to my discretion. Now, Clarke
O you are an honest man of your word, you served me well,
Why sir isle do it for you at any time,
Provided as you have given your word,
I may have Susan Mosbie to my wife:
For as sharpe wetted Poets, whose sweet verse
Make heavenly gods break of their Nector draughts,
And lay their ears down to the lowly earth:
Use humble promise to their sacred Muse,
So we that are the Poets favourite,
Must have a love, I, Love is the Painters Muse.
That makes him frame a speaking countenance.
A weeping eye that witnesses hearts grief,
Then tell me Master Mosbie shall I have his?
Tic pity but he should, heel use her well.
Clarke héers my hand my sister shall be thine,
Then brother to requite this courtesy,
You shall command my life my skill and all.
Ah that thou could be secret,
Fear him not, leave, I have talked sufficient,
You know not me, that ask such questions:
Let it suffice, I know you love him well,
And fine would have your husband made away:
Wherein trust me you show a noble mind,
That rather then you'll live with him you hate,
You'll venture life, and die with him you love,
The like will I do for my Susans sake.
Yet nothing could enforce me to the deed,
But Mosbies love, might I without control,
Enjoy thee still, then Arden should not die:
But seeing I cannot, therefore let him die.
Enough sweet Ales, thy kind words makes me melt,
Your trick of poisoned pictures we dislike,
Some other poison would do better far.
I such as might be put into his broth,
And, yet in taste not to be found at all,
I know your mind, and here I have it for you,
Put but a dram of this into his drink,
Or any kind of broth that he shall eat:
And he shall die within an hour after.
As I am a gentle woman Clarke, next day
Thou and Susan shall be married.
And isle make her dowry more thē isle talk of Clark,
Yonder's your husband, Mosbie isle be gone.
In good time, sée where my husband comes,
Moister Mosbie ask him the question your self.
Moister Arden, being at London yester night,
The Abbey lands whereof you are now possessed,
Were offred me on some occasion,
By Greene one of sir Antony Agers men:
I pray you sir tell me, are not the lands yours?
Hath any other in••rest herein?
Mosby ••at question wele decide anon,
Ales make ready my ••ekfast, I must hence.
As for the lands mosbie they are mine,
By letters patents from his Majesty:
But I must have a Mandate for my wife,
They say you seek to rob me of her love,
Villain what makes thou in her company,
Shées no companion for so base a groom.
Arden I thought not on her, I came to thée,
But rather then I pocket up this wrong.
What will you doo sir?
Revenge it on the proudest of you both:
So sirha, you may not wear a sword,
The statute makes against artificers,
I warrant that I doo, now use your bodkin,
Your spanish needle, and your pressing Iron,
For this shall go with me, and mark my words,
You goodman botcher, tic to you I speak,
The next time that I take thee near my house,
In steed of Legs Isle make thee crall on stumps.
Ah moister Arden you have inturde mée,
I doo appeal to God, and to the world.
Why can thou deny, thou were a botcher once,
Measure me what I am, not what I was.
Why what art thou now, but a Velvet drudge,
A cheating steward, and base minded peasant.
Arden now thou hast belched and vomited,
The rancorous venom of thy mis-swolne hart,
Hear me but speak, as I intend to live
With God, and his elected saints in heaven,
I never meant more to solicit her,
And that she knows, and all the world shall sée,
I loved her once, sweet Arden pardon me.
I could not choose, her beauty fired my heart,
But time hath quenched these ouerraging coals,
And Arden though I now frequent thy house,
Tic for my sisters sake, her waiting maid
And not for hers, majesty thou enjoy her long:
Hell fyze and wrathful vengeance light on me,
If I dishonour her or injure thée.
Mosbie with these thy protestations,
The deadly hatred of my hart is appealed,
And thou and Isle be friends, if this prove true.
As for the base terms I gave thee late,
Forget them Mosbie, I had cause to speak:
When all the Knights and gentlemen of Kent,
Make common table talk of her and thée.
Who lives that is not touched with staunderous tongues,
Then Mosbie, to eschew the speech of men,
Upon whose general brute all honour hangs,
Forbear his house.
Forbear it, nay rather frequent it more.
The world shall see that I distrust her not,
To warn him on the sudden from my house,
Were too confirm the rumour that is grown.
By faith my sir you say true,
And therefore will I sojourn here a while,
Until our enemies have talked their fill.
And then I hope theile cease, and at last confess,
How causeles they have inturde her and me.
And I will lie at London all this term,
To let them see how light I way their words.
Husband sit down, your breakfast will be could,
Come M. Mosbie will you sit with vs,
I can not eat, but isle sit for company.
Sir Michael see our horse be ready.
Husband why pause ye, why eat you not,
I am not well, theirs something in this broth
That is not wholesome, did thou make it Ales?
I did, and thats the cause it likes not you,
Theirs nothing that I do can please your taste.
You were best to say I would have poisoned you,
I cannot speak or cast aside my eye:
But he Imagines, I have stepped awry.
Here is he that you cast in my teeth so oft,
Now will I be convinced, or purge my self,
I charge thee speak to this mistrustful man,
Thou that would see me hang, thou M of bye thou,
What favour hast thou had more then a kiss
At coming or departing from the Town?
You wrong your self and me, to cast these douts
Your loving husband is not Jealous.
Why gentle mistress Ales, cannot I be ill,
But you'll accuse your self.
Franklin thou haste a box of Methridate,
Isle take a little to prevent the worst.
Do so, and let vs presently take horse,
My life for yours ye shall do well enough.
Give me a spoon, I le eat of it my self,
Would it were full of poison to the brim.
Then should my cares and troubles have an end,
Was ever silly woman so tormented?
Be patient sweet love, I mistrust not thée,
God will revenge it Arden if thou doest.
For never woman loved her husband better, thē I do thee,
I know it sweet Ales, cease to complain:
Least that in fears I answer thee again.
Come leave this dallying, and let vs away.
Forbear to wound me with that bitter word,
Arden shall go to London in my arms.
Loath am I to depart, yet I must go,
Wilt thou to London then, and leave me here,
Ah if thou love me gentle Arden stay,
Yet if thy business be of great Import
Go if thou wilt Isle bear it as I may.
But write from London to me every week,
Nay every day, and stay no longer there
Then thou must needs, least that I die for sorrow.
Isle write unto thee every other side,
And so farewell sweet Ales till we meet next.
Farewell Husband seeing you'll have it so.
And M, Franklin, seeing you take him hence,
In hope you'll hasten him home Isle give you this
And if he stay the fault shall not be mine,
Mosbie farewell and see you kéepe your oath.
I hope he is not Jealous of me now.
No Mosbie no, hereafter think of me,
As of your dearest friend, and so farewell.
I am glad he is gone, he was about to stay.
But did you mark me then how I brake of?
I Ales, and it was cunningly performed,
But what a villain is this painter Clarke?
Was it not a goodly poison that he gave?
Why he's as well now, as he was before.
It should have been some fine confection,
That might have given the broth some dainty tasty,
This powder was to gross and populos.
But had he eaten but thrée spoonefulles more,
Then had he died, and our love continued.
Why so it shall Mosbie, albeit he live,
It is unpossible, for I have sworn,
Never hereafter to solicit thee,
Or whilst he lives, once more importune thée.
Thou shalt not need I will importune thée.
What shall an oath make thee forsake my love?
As if I have not sworn as much my self,
And given my hand unto him in the church,
Tush Mosbie oaths are words, and words is wind,
And wind is mutable: then I conclude,
Tic childishness to stand upon an oath,
Well proved Mistress Ales, yet by your leave,
Isle keep mine vnbroken, whilst he lives.
I doo, and spare not his time is but short,
For if thou be as resolute as I,
Weal have him murdered, as he walks the stréets:
In London many alehouse Ruffians kéepe,
Which as I hear will murder men for gould,
They shall be soundly fed, to pay him home:
Ales whats he that comes yonder, know thou him
Mosbie be gone, I hope tic one that comes
To put in practise our intended drifts,
Mistress Arden you are well met,
I am sorry that your husband is from home,
When as my purposed journey was to him,
Yet all my labour is not spent in vain:
For I suppose that you can full discourse,
And flat resolve me of the thing I seek.
What is it moister Greene? If that I may
Or can, with safety, I will answer you.
I heard your husband hath the grant of late,
Confirmed by letters patents from the king,
Of all the lands of the Abbey of Feuershame,
Generally entitled, so that all former grants,
Are cut of, whereof I my self had one,
But now my interest by that is void,
This is all mistress Arden, is it true nor no?
True moister Gréene, the lands are his in state,
And whatsoever leases were before,
Are void for term of Moister Ardens life:
He hath the grant under the Chancery seal.
Pardon me mistress Arden, I must speak,
For I am touched, your husband doth me wrong:
To wring me from the little land I have.
My living is my life, only that
Rests remainder of my portion.
Desire of wealth is endless in his mind,
And he is greedy gaping still for gain,
Nor cares he though young gentlemen do beg,
So he may scrape and hoard up in his poutche,
But seeing he hath taken my lands, Isle value life:
As careless, as he is careful for to get,
And tell him this from me, Isle be revenged,
And so, as he shall wish the Abbey lands
Had rested still, within their former state.
Alas poor gentleman, I pity you,
And wo is me that any man should want,
God knows tic not my fault, but wonder not
Though he be harde to others, when to me,
Ah moister Greene, God knows how I am used,
Why mistress Arden can the crabbed churl,
Use you unkindly, respects he not your birth?
Your honourable fréends, nor what you brought:
Why? all Kent knows your parentage, and what you are
Ah M. Gréene be it spoken in secret here,
I never live good day with him alone:
When hee is at home, then have I froward looks,
Hard words and blows, to mend the match withal;
And though I might content as good a man,
Yet doth he kéepe in every corner trulls,
And weary with his trugges at home,
Then rides he straight to London, there forsooth
He revels it among such filthy ones,
As counsels him to make a way his wife:
Thus live I daily in continual fear:
In sorrow, so despairing of redress
As every day I wish with hearty prayer,
That he or I were taken forth the world.
Now trust me mistress Ales, it gréeueth me,
So fair a creature should be so abused.
Why who would have thought the civil sir, so sollen,
He looks so smoothly now fie upon him Churl,
And if he live a day he lives too long,
But frolic woman, I shall be the man,
Shall set you free from all this discontent:
And if the Churl deny my intereste,
And will not yield my lease into my hand,
Isle paye him home, what ever hap to me,
But speak you as you think?
I Gods my witness, I mean plain dealing,
For I had rather die then lose my land.
Then moister Greene be counselled by me
Endanger not your self, for such a Churl,
But hire some Cutter for to cut him short,
And héer's ten pound, to wager them with all,
When he is dead you shall have twenty more.
And the lands whereof my husband is possessed,
Shall be entitled as they were before.
Will you kéepe promise with me?
Or count me false and periurde, whilst I live,
Then hears my hand Isle have him so dispatcht,
Isle up to London straight, Isle thither post,
And never rest, till I have compassed it,
Till then farewell.
Good Fortune follow all your forward thoughts
And whosoever doth attempt the déede,
A happy hand I wish and so farewell.
All this goes well, Mosbie I long for thée
To let thee know all that I have contrived,
Now now Ales whats the news,
Such as will content thee well sweet hart,
Well let them pass a while, and tell me Ales,
Now have you dealt, and tempered with my sister,
What will she have my neighbour Clarke, or no?
What M. Mosbie let him woo him self,
Think you that maids look not for fair words,
Go to her Clarke shées all alone within,
Michael my man is clean out of her books.
I thank you mistress Arden, I will in,
And if fair Susan, and I can make a gre,
You shall command me to the uttermost,
As far as either goods or life may stretch.
Now Ales lets bear thy news?
They be so good, that I must laugh for joy,
Before I can begin to tell my tale,
Lets hear them, that I may laugh for company
This morning M. Greene, dick gréene I mean,
From whom my husband had the Abbey land,
Came hither rattling for to know the truth,
Whether my husband had the la nds by grant,
I told him all, where at he stormd a maine,
And s••ore he would cry quittance with the Churl,
And if he did deny his interest
Stab him, whatsoever did befall him self,
When as I saw his choler thus to rise,
I whetted on the gentleman with words
And to conclude, Mosbie, at last we grew
To composition for my husbands death,
I gave him ten pound to hire knaves,
By some devise to make away the Churl:
When he is dead, he should have twenty more,
And repossess his former lands again,
On this we greed, and he is ridden straight
To London, to bring his death about.
But call you this good news?
I sweet hart, be they not?
I were cheerful news, to hear the churl were dead,
But trust me Ales, I take it passing ill,
You would be so forgetful of our state,
To make recount of it to every groom,
What? to acquaint each stranger with our drifts,
Cheesely in case of murder, why tic the way,
To make it open unto Ardens self.
And bring thy self and me to ruin both,
Forewarnde, forearmde, who threats his enemy
Lends him a sword to guard himself with all.
I did it for the best.
Well, seeing tic don, cheerly let it pas.
You know this Greene, is he not religious?
A man I guess of great devotion.
He is.
Then sweet Ales let it pas, I have a drift
Will quiet all, what ever is amiss.
Now now Clarke, have you found me false?
Did I not plead the matter hard for you?
You did.
And what, Wilt be a match,
A match, I faith sir I the day is mine,
The Painter, lays his colours to the life,
His pencil draws no shadows in his love.
Susan is mine.
You make her blush.
What sister is it Clarke must be the man?
Stresteth in your grant, some words are past,
And happily we be grown unto a match,
If you be willing that it shall be so?
Ah moister Clarke, it rests at my grant,
You see my sister's yet at my dispose,
But so you'll grant me one thing I shall ask,
I am content my sister shall be yours.
What is it M. Mosbie?
I doo remember once in secret talk,
You told me how you could compound by Art.
A crucifix empoisoned:
That who so look upon it should wax blind,
And with the sent be stifeled, that ere long,
He should dye poisoned, that did view it well.
I would have you make me such a crucifix,
And then Isle grant my sister shall be yours.
Though I am loath, because it touches life,
Yet rather or Isle leave sweet Susans love,
Isle do it, and with all the haste I may.
But for whom is it?
Leave that to vs, why Clarke, is it possible▪
That you should paint and draw it out your self,
The colours being baleful and empoisoned,
And no ways prejudice your self with all?
Well questioned Ales,
Clarke how answer you that?
Very easily, Isle tell you straight,
How I doo work of these Empoisoned drugs,
I fasten on my spectacles so close,
As nothing can any way offend my sight,
Then as I put a lease within my nose,
So put I rubarbe to avoid the smell,
And softly as another work I paint,
Tic very well, but against when shall I have it,
Within this ten days,
I will serve the turn.
Now Ales lets in, and see what chéere you kéepe,
I hope now M. Arden is from home,
You'll give me leave to play your husbands part.
Mosbie you know whose moister of my hart,
He well may be the master of the house.
See you them that coms yonder M. Gréene?
I very well, doo you know them?
The one I know not, but he seems a knave,
Choesly for bearing the other company:
For such a slave, so vile a rog as he,
Lives not again upon the earth,
Black-will is his name I tell you M. Gréene,
At Bulloine he and I were fellow soldiers,
Where he plaid such pranks,
As all the Camp feared him for his villainy:
I warrant you he bears so bad a mind,
That for a crone heel murder any man.
The fitter is he for my purpose mary.
Now now fellow Bradshaw,
Whether away so early?
O Will times are changed, no fellows now,
Though we were once together in the field,
Yet thy friend to doo thee any good I can.
Why Bradshaw was not thou and I,
Fellow soldiers at Bulloine:
Where I was a corporal, and thou but a base mercenary groom?
No fellows now, because you are a goldsmith,
And have a little plate in your shop,
You were glad to call me fellow Will,
And with a curtsy to the earth,
One snatch good corporal.
When I stole the half Ore from Iohn the vitler.
And domineered with it, amongst good fellows,
In one night.
I Will, those days are past with me.
I but they be not past with me.
For I keep that same honourable mind still,
Good neighbour Bradshaw you are too proud to be my fell∣low,
But were it not, that I sée more company coming down
The hill, I would be fellows with you once more,
And share Crowns with you to.
But let that pas, and tell me whether you go.
To London Will, about a piece of service,
Wherein happily thou moist pleasure me.
What is it?
Of late Lord Cheiny lost some plate,
Which one did bring, and sold it at my shop,
Saying he served sir Antony Cooke,
A search was made, the plate was found with me,
And I am bound to answer at the syse,
Now Lord Cheiny solemnly bowen,
If law will serve him, heal hang me for his plate,
Now I am going to London upon hope,
To find the fellow, now Will I know
Thou art acpuainted with such companions,
What manner of man was he?
A lean faced writhen knave,
Hake nosed, and very hollow eyed,
With mighty furrows in his stormy brows,
Long hair down his shoulders curled,
His Chin was bare, but on his upper lip,
A mutchado, which he wound about his ear,
What apparel had he,
A watchet satin doublet all to torn,
The inner side did bear the greater show,
A pair of thread bare Velvet hose seam rent,
A wosted stocking rent aboue the shoe,
A livery cloak, but all the lace was of,
It was bad, but yet it served to hide the plate,
Sir Shakebagge, can thou remember
Since we trould the boule at Sittingburgh,
Where I broke the Lapsters head of the Lyon
With a Cudgel stick?
I very well Will.
Why it was with the money that the plate was sold for
Sir Bradshaw what wilt thou give him
That can tell thee who sold thy plate?
Who I pray thee good Will,
Why it was one Jack Fitten,
He's now in Newgate, for stealing a horse,
And shall be arrainde the next life.
Why then let Lord Cheiny séek Jack Fittē forth
For Isle back and tell him, who robbed him of his plate,
This cheers my hart M. Greene, Isle leave you,
For I must to the Isle of Sheppy with spéede,
Before you go let me entreat you
To carry this letter to mistress Arden of Feuershame,
And humbly recommend me to her self.
That will I M. Greene, and so farewell.
Here Will, theres a Crown for thy good news.
Farewell Bradshaw,
Isle drink no water for thy sake, whilst this lasts:
Now gentlemen, shall we have your company to London.
Nay stay sirs, a little more I needs must use your help,
And in a matter of great consequence,
Wherein if you'll be secret and profound,
Isle give you twenty Angels for your pains.
Now? twenty Angels? give my fellow
George shakbag and me, twenty Angels,
And if thoult have thy own father slain,
That thou may inherit his land, weal kill him,
I thy Mother, thy sister, thy brother, or all thy kin
Well this it is, Arden of Feuershame,
Hath highly wronged me about the Abbey land,
That no reuendge but death will serve the turn:
Will you two kill him, hoeres the Angels down,
And I will lay the platform of his death:
Plat me no platforms give me the money,
And isle stab him as he stands pissing against a wall,
but Isle kill him.
Where is he?
He is now at London, in Aldersgate stréete,
He's dead, as if he had been condemned
By an act of parliament, if once Black Will and I
Swear his death,
Here is ten pound, and when he is dead,
Ye shall have twenty more:
My fingers itches to be at the peasant,
Ah that I might be set a work thus through the yéere,
And that murder would grow to an occupation:
That a man might without danger of law,
Zounds I warrant, I should be warden of the company,
Come let vs be going, and wele bate at Rochester,
Where Isle give thee a gallon of Sack,
To hansell the match with all.
I have gotten such a letter,
As will touche the Painter, And thus it is.
My duty remembered Mistress Susan, hoping in God you be in good health, as I Michael was at the making hereof. This is to certify you, that as the Turtle true, when she hath lost her mate,
sits alone, so I mourning for your absence, do walk up and down. Poules, till one day I fell a sleep and lost my masters Pantophelles. Ah mistress Susan abolish that paltry Painter, cut him off by the shins, with a frowning look of your cravat countenance, &amp; think upon Michael, who drunk with the dregs of your favour, well cleave as fast to your love, as a plaster of Pitch to a gald horse back Thus hoping you will let my passions penetrate, or rather impetrate mercy of your meek hands, I end.
Why you paltry knave,
Stand you here loitering, knowing my affairs,
What haste my business craves to send to Kent?
Faith friend Michael, this is very ill,
Knowing your moister hath no more but you,
And do ye slache-his business for your own?
Where is the letter sir, let me sée it,
Sée moister Franklin, here is proper stuff,
Susan my maid, the Painter, and my man,
A crew of harlots all in love forsooth,
Sir let me hear no more of this.
Now for thy life, once write to her a word,
Wilt thou be married to so base a trull.
Tic Mosbies sister, come I once at home,
Isle rouse her from remaining in my house:
Now M. Franklin let vs go walk in Paules,
Come, but a turn or two and then away,
The first is Arden, and thats his man,
The other is Franklin Ardens dearest fréend,
Zounds Isle kill them all three,
Nay sirs, touch not his man in any case,
But stand close, and take you sit standing,
And at his coming forth spéede him:
To the Nages head, ther'is this cowards haunt,
But now Isle leave you till the deed be don:
If he be not paid his own ne'er trust shakebagge,
Sir Shakbag, at his coming forth
Isle run him through, and then to the blackfreers,
And there take water and a way.
Why thats the best, but see thou miss him not.
How can I miss him, when I think on the forty
Angels I must have more.
Tic very late, I were best shute up my stall,
For here will be old filching when the press comes forth of Paules.
Zounds draw Shakbag draw, I am almost kilt.
Wele tame you I warrant.
Zounds I am tame enough already,
What trublesome fray or mutiny is this?
Tic nothing but some brabbling paltry fray.
Devised to pick men's pockets in the throng.
If nothing else? come Franklin let vs away.
What mends shall I have for my broken head?
Mary this mends, that if you get you not away
All the sooner, you shall be well beaten and sent to the coun∣la.
Well Isle be gone, but look to your signs,
For Isle pull them down all.
Shakbag my broken head gréeues me not so much,
As by this means Arden hath escaped.
I had a glimpse of him and his companion.
Why sirs, Arden's as well as I,
I met him and Franklin going merrily to the ordinary,
What dare you not do it?
Yes sir we dare do it, but were my consent to give again,
We would not do it under ten pound more.
I value every drop of my blood at a french Crown.
I have had ten pound to steal a dog,
And we have no more here to kill a man,
But that a bargane is a bargane, and so forth,
You should do it your self.
I pray thee how came thy head broke,
Why thou séest it is broke, dost thou not.
Stāding against a staule, watching Ardens cōming,
A boy let down his shop window, and broke his head.
Whereupon arose a brawl, and in the tumult
Arden escaped vs, and past by unthought on.
But forbearance is no acquittance,
Another time wele do it I warrant thée.
I pray thée will make clean thy bloody brow,
And let vs bethink vs on some other place,
Where Arden may be met with handsomely.
Remember how devoutly thou hast sworn,
To kill the villain think upon thine oath.
Tush, I have broken five hundred oaths,
But would thou charm me to effect this dede?
Tell me of gould my resolutions fee,
Say thou see Mosbie kneeling at my knées,
Offering me service for my high attempt:
And swéete Ales Arden with a lap of crowns.
Comes with a lowly curtsy to the earth,
Saying take this, but for thy quarterige,
Such yéerely tribute will I answer thée.
Why this would steal soft mottled cowardice,
With which black Will was never tainted with.
I tell thee Greene the forlorn travailer,
Whose lips are glowed with summers parching heat,
Ne'er longed so much to sée a running brooke,
As I to finish Ardens Tragedy.
Séest thou this gore that cleaves to my face?
From hence ne'er will I wash this bloody stain,
Till Ardens hart be panting in my hand.
Why thats well said, but what saith shakbag?
I cannot paint my valour out with words,
But give me place and opportunity,
Such mercy as the staruen Lyones
When she is dry sucked of her eager young:
Shows to the pray that next encounters her,
On Arden so much pity would I take.
So should it fair with men of firm resolve,
And now sirs seeing this accident,
Of meeting him in Paules hath no success:
Let vs bethink vs on some other place,
Whose earth may swallow up this Ardens blood.
Se yonder comes his man, and wat you what,
The foolish knave is in love with Mosbies sister,
And for her sake whose love he cannot get,
Unless Mosbie solicit his suit.
The villain hath sworn the slaughter of his moister,
Weal question him, for he may stead vs much:
Now now Michael whether are you going?
My moister hath new supped,
And I am going to prepare his chamber.
Where supped M. Arden?
At the Nages head, at the 18 pence ordinary,
Now now M. Shakbag, what Black Will,
Gods déere lady, how chance your face is so bloody?
Go too sir, there is a chance in it.
This sauciness in you will make you be knocked.
Nay and you be offended isle be gone.
Stay michael you may not scope vs so.
Michael I know you love your M. well.
Why so I do, but wherefore vrdge you that?
Because I think you love your mistress better,
So think not I, but say, in faith what if I should?
Come to the purpose Michael, we hear
You have a pretty love in Feuershame,
Why have I two or three, whats that to thée?
You deal to mildly, with the peasant, thus it is,
Tic kowne to vs you love mosbies sister.
We know besides that you have tan your oath,
To further Mosbie to your mistress bed.
And kill your M. for his sisters sake.
Now sir, a poorer coward then your self,
Was never fostered in the coast of Kent.
Now comes it then, that such aknaue as you
Dare swear a matter of such consequence?
Ah will.
Tush give me leave, theirs no more but this,
Sith thou hast sworn, we dare discover all,
And had thou or should thou utter it,
We have devised a complat under band
What ever shall beside to any of vs:
To send thee roundly to the devil of hell.
And therefore thus, I am the very man,
Marked in my birth hour by the destinies,
To give an end to Ardens life on earth,
Thou but a member, but to whet the knife,
Whose edge must search the closet of his breast,
Thy office is but to appoint the place,
And train thy M. to his tragedy.
Mine to perform it, when occasion serves.
Then be not nice, but here devise with vs,
Now and what way, we may conclude his death.
So shalt thou purchase, Mosbie for thy friend
And by his friendship gain his sisters love.
So shall thy mistress be thy fauorer,
And thou disburdned of the oath thou made.
Well gentlemen I cannot but confess,
Sith you have brdged me so apparently,
That I have vowed my M. Ardens death,
And he whose kindly love and liberal hand,
Doth challenge nought but good deserts of me,
I will deliver over to your hands.
This night come to his house at Aldersgate,
The doors Isle leave unlocked against you come.
No sooner shall ye enter through the latch,
Over the threshold to the inner court.
But on your left hand shall you sée the stairs.
That leads directly to my M. chamber.
There take him and dispose him as ye please,
Now it were good we parted company,
What I have promised, I will perform.
Should you deceive vs, twould go wrong with you,
I will accomplish al I have reveled,
Come let's go drink, choler makes me as dry as a dog
Thus féedes the Lamb securely on the down,
Whilst through the thicket of an arbor brake,
The hunger bitten Wolf orepryes his hant,
And takes advantage to eat him up.
Ah harmless Arden how, how hast thou misdone,
That thus thy gentle life is leveled at,
The many good turns that thou hast don to me,
Now must I quitance with betraying thee.
I that should take the weapon in my hand,
And buckler thée from ill intending foes.
Do lead thée with a wicked fraudful smile,
As unsuspected, to the slaughterhouse:
So have I sworn to Mosby and my mistress.
So have I promised to the slaughtermen.
And should I not deal currently with them,
Their lawless rage would take revenge on me,
Tush I will spurn at mercy for this once.
Let pity lodge where féeble womanly,
I am resolved, and Arden néeds must die.
No Franklin no, if fear or stormy threats,
If love of me, or care of womanhood,
If fear of God, or common speech of men,
Who mangle credit with their wounding words,
And cooch dishonour, as dishonour buds.
Might soyne repentance in her wanton thoughts,
No question then but she would turn the lease,
And sorrow for her dissolution.
But she is rooted in her wickedness
Perverse and stobburne, not to be reclaimde,
Good counsel is to her as rain to weeds
And reprehension makes her vice to grow,
As Hydras head that perished by decay.
Her faults me think are painted in my face.
For every searching eye to over réede.
And Mosbies name, a scandal unto mine.
Is deeply trenched in my blushing brow.
Ah Franklin Franklin, when I think on this,
My harts greese rends my other powers,
Worse then the conflict at the hour of death.
Gentle Arden leave this sad lament,
She will amend, and so your gréefes will cease
Or else shele die, and so your sorrows end.
If neither of these two do happily fall,
Yet let your comfort be, that others bear
Your woes twice doubled all with patience.
My house is irksome, there I cannot rest.
Then stay with me in London, go not home.
Then that base Mosbie doth usurp my room,
And makes his triumph of my béeing thence.
At home, or not at home, where ere I be.
Here here it lies, ah Franklin here it lies,
That will not out till wretched Arden dies.
Forget your gréefes a while, héer coms your man,
What a Clock first sir?
Almost ten.
Sée sée how runs away the weary time,
Come M. Franklin, shall we go to bed.
I pray you go before, Isle follow you,
Ah what ahell is fretful Jealousy?
What pity moaning words? what déepe fetched sighs?
What gréeuous groans? and ouerlading woes,
Accompanies this gentle gentleman.
Now will he shake his care oppressed head,
Then sir his sad eec on the sollen earth,
Ashamed to gaze upon the open world.
Now will he cast his eyes up towards the heavens,
Looking that ways for redress of wrong,
Some times he séeketh to beguile his grief,
And tells a story with his careful tongue.
Then comes his wives dishonour in his thoughts,
And in the middle cutteth of his tale.
Dowring fresh sorrow on his weary limbs.
So woe begone, so inly charged with woe,
Was never any lived and bare it so.
My M. would desire you come to bed.
Is he himself already in his bed?
He is and fine would have the light away,
Conflicting thoughts encamped in my breast
Awake me with the Echo of their strokes:
And I a judge to censure either side,
Can give to neither wished victory.
My masters kindness pleads to me for life,
With just demand, and I must grant it him.
My mistress she hath forced me with an oath,
For Susans sake the which I may not break,
For that is nearer thē a masters love,
That grim faced fellow, pitiless black Will,
And Shakebag stern in bloody stratagem,
Two Ruffer Ruffians never lived in Kent,
Have sworn my death if I infringe my vow,
A dreadful thing to be considred of,
Me thinks I see them with their bolstred hair,
Staring and grinning in thy gentle face,
And in their ruthless hands, their dagers drawn,
Insulting ore there with a peck of oaths.
Whilst thou submissive pleading for reléefe,
Art mangled by their ireful instruments.
Me thinks I hear them ask where Michael is
And pitiless black Will, cries stab the slave.
The Peasant will detect the Tragedy.
The wrinkles in his foul death threatening face,
Gapes open wide, like graves to swallow men.
My death to him is but a merriment,
And he will murder me to make him sport.
He comes he comes, ah M. Franklin help,
Call up the neighbours or we are but dead
What dismal outcry calls me from my rest?
What hath occasiond such a fearful cry?
Speak Michael, hath any iniurde thée?
Nothing sir, but as I fell a sleep,
Upon the threshold leaning to the stairs.
I had a fearful dream that troubled me,
And in my slumber thought I was beset,
With murderer thieves that came to rifle me.
My trembling joints witness my inward fear.
I crave your pardons for disturbing you.
So great a cry for nothing, I ne'er heard.
What, are the doors fast locked? and al things safe?
I cannot tel, I think I locked the doors.
I like not this, but Isle go sée my self,
Ne'er trust me, but the doors were all unlocked.
This negligence not halse contents me.
Get you to bed, and if you love my favour,
Let me have no more such pranks as these
Come M. Franklin, let vs go to bed.
I be my Faith, the air is very cold,
Michael farewell, I pray thee dream no more.
Black night hath hid the pleasurs of yt day.
And sheting darkness ouerhangs the earth,
And with the black fold of her cloudy robe,
Obscure vs from the eiesight of the world,
In which sweet silence such as we triumph.
The laysie minutes linger on their time,
Loath to give due audit to the hour:
Till in the watch our purpose be complete,
And Arden sent to everlasting night.
Greene get you gone, and linger here about,
And at some hour hence, come to vs again,
Where we will give you instance of his death.
Speed to my wish whose will so ere says no,
And so isle leave you for an hour or two.
I tel thoe Shakebag, would this thing were don,
I am so heavy that I can scarce go:
This drowsiness in me bods little good.
Now now Will, become a precision.
Nay then lets go sleep, when huges and fears,
Shall kill our courages with their fancies work,
Why Shakbagge thou mistakes me much,
And wrongs me to in telling me of fear,
Were not a serious thing we go about,
It should be slipped, till I had sought with thée:
To let thée know I am no coward I,
I tel thee Shakbag thou abuse me.
Why thy speech betrayed an inly kind offer.
And favoured of a weak relenting spirit.
Go forward now in that we have begone.
And afterwards attempt me when thou dare.
And if I do not heaven cut me of,
But let that pass, and show me to this house.
Where thou shalt sée Isle do as much as Shakbag.
This is the door, but soft, me thinks tic shut.
The villain Michael hath deceived vs,
Soft let me sée, shakbag tic shut indéed.
Knock with thy sword, perhaps the slave will hear,
It will not be, the white liuerd peasant is gon to bed
And laughs vs both to scorn.
And he shall by his merriment as dear,
As ever coistrell bought so little sport,
Here let this sword assist me when I need,
But rust and canker after I have sworn:
If I the next time that I mete the hind,
Lop not away his leg, his arm or both,
And let me never draw a sword again,
Nor prosper in the twilight, cockshut light,
When I would sleece the wealthy passenger,
But lie and languish in a loathsome den:
Hated and spit at by the goers by.
And in that death may die, unpitied.
If I the next time that I meet the slave,
Cut not the nose from of the cowards face,
And trample on it, for this villainy.
Come lets go seek out Gréen I know heal swear
He were a villainy and he would not swear,
I would make a peasant swear amongst his boys.
That ne'er durst say before but yea and no.
To be thus slouted of a coysterel.
Shakbag lets seek out gréen, &amp; in the morning
At the Alehouse butting Ardens house,
Watch thee out coming of that prick eard cur,
And then letme alone to handle him.
Sir get you back to billensgate,
And learn what time the tide will serve our turn,
Come to vs in Paules, first go make the bed,
And afterwards go harken for the floude.
Come M. Franklin, you shall go with me.
This night I dreamed that béeing in a park,
A toil was picht to overthrow the dear,
And I upon a little rising hill,
Stood whistely watching for the herds approach,
Even there me thoughts a gentle slumber took me,
And sommond all my parts to swéete repose.
But in the pleasure of this golden rest,
An ill thewd foster had removed the toil,
And rounded me with that beguiling home,
Which late me thought was pitched to cast the dear,
With that he blew an evil sounding horn,
And at the noise an other heard man came:
With Fashion drawn, and bent it at my breast.
Crying aloud thou art the game we séeke,
With this I waked, and trembled every joint,
Like one occurred in a little bush,
That sees a lyon foraging about,
And when the dreadful forest King is gone,
He pries about, with timorous suspects
Throughout the thorny casements of the brake,
And will not think his person daungerles.
But quakes and showers though the cause be gone.
So trust me Franklin when I did awake,
I stood in doubt whether I waked or no:
Such great impression took this sond surprise:
God grant this vision bedeeme me any good.
This fantasy doth rise from Michaels fear,
Who being awaked with the noise he made,
His troubled senses, yet could take no rest.
And this I warrant you procured your dream.
It may be so God frame it to the best,
But often times my dreams presage to true.
To such as note their nightly fantasies,
Some one in twenty may incur belief,
But use it not, tic but a mockery,
Come M. Franklin wele now walk in Pa's
And dine together at the ordinary,
And by my mans direction draw to the key,
And with the tide go down to Feuershame,
Say, M. Franklin shall it not be so?
At your good pleasure sir,
Isle bear you company.
Draw Shakbag for heers that villain Michael,
First Will lets hear what he can say,
Speak milksop slave, &amp; never after speak.
For Gods sake sirs let me excuse my self.
For hear I swear by heaven and earth and all,
I did perform the outmost of my talk,
And left the doors unbolted and unlocked,
But see the chance Franklin and my master,
Were very late conferring in the porch,
And Franklin left his napkin where he sat,
With certain gourlo knit mit, as he said
Being in bed, he did bethink himself,
And coming down, he found the doors unshut,
He locked the gates, and brought away the keys
For which offence my master rated me,
But now I am going to see what flood it is,
For with the tide my M. will away.
Where you may frons him well on Kaynum down,
A place well sitting such a stratagem.
Your excuse hath some what molysted my choler,
Why now Gréene tic better now nor ere it was,
But Michael is this true?
As true as I report it to be true.
Then Michael this shall be your penance,
To feast vs all at the Salutation,
Where we will plat our purpose thoroughly.
And Michael, you shall bear no news of this tide
Because they two may be in Kaynū down before your M.
Why Isle agree to any thing you'll have me.
So you will except of my company.
Disturbed thoughts drives me from company,
And dries my marrow with their watchfulness,
Continual trouble of my moody brain,
Féebles my body by excess of drink,
And nippes me, as the bitter Northeast wind,
Doth check the tender blossoms in the spring.
Well fares the man how ere his cates do taste
That tables not with foul suspicion:
And he but pines amongst his delicats,
Whose troubled mind is stuffed with discontent.
My golden time was when I had no gould,
Thought then I wanted, yet I slept secure,
My daily toil, begat me nights repose:
My nights repose made daylight fresh to me.
But since I climbed the top bough of the tree,
And sought to build my nest among the clouds.
Each gentle stary gail doth shake my bed:
And makes me dread my downfall to the earth,
But whether doth contemplation carry me.
The way I seek to find where pleasure dwells,
Is hedged behind me that I cannot back,
But needs must on, although to dangers gate:
Then Arden perish thou by that decree.
For Greene doth err the land and weed thée up,
To make my harvest nothing but pure corn.
And for his pains Isle heave him up a while,
And aftersmother him to have his wax.
Such bees as Greene, must never live to sting.
Then is there Michael and the Painter to,
Chrefe actors to Ardens overthrow:
Who when they shall see me sit in Ardens seat,
They will insult upon me for my mede,
Or fright me by detecting of his end.
He none of that, for I can cast a bone,
To make these cures pluck out each others throat,
And then am I sole ruler of mine own:
Yet mistress Arden lives, but she's my self,
And holy Churchrites makes vs two, but one,
But what for that I may not trust you Ales,
You have supplanted Arden for my sake,
And will extirpen me to plant another:
Tic fearful sleeping in a serpents bed.
And I will cleanly rid my hands of her.
But here she comes and I must flatter her.
How now Ales? what sad, and passionate?
Make me partaker of thy pensiveness:
Fire divided burns with lesser force.
But I will damn that fire in my breast.
Till by the force thereof, my part consume, ah Mosbie.
Such deep pathaires like to a cannons burst,
Discharged against a ruinated wall,
Breaks my relenting hart in thousand pieces,
Ungentle Ales thy sorrow is my sore,
Thou know it well, and tic thy policy,
To forge distressful looks, to wound a breast,
Where lies a hart, that dies where thou art sad,
It is not love, that loves to anger love.
It is not love, that loves to murder love.
How mean you that?
Thou know how dearly Arden loved me.
And then.
And then conceal the rest, for tic too bad,
Least that my words be carried with the wind.
And published in the world to both our shames,
I pray thée Mosbye let our springtime wither,
Our harvest else will yield but loathsome weeds.
Forget I pray thée what hath past betwixt vs,
For now I blush and tremble at the thoughts,
What are you changed?
I to my former happy life again.
From title of an odious strumpets name,
To honest Ardens wife, not Ardens honest wife,
Ha Mosbye tic thou hast rifled me of that,
And made me slanderous to all my kin:
Even in my forehead is thy name ingraueu,
Ameane Artifiecer, that lowe borne name,
I was bewitched, woe worth the hapless hour,
And all the causes that enchanted me:
Nay if thou ban, let me breath curses forth,
And if you stand so nicely at your fame:
Let me repent the credit I have lost,
I have neglected matters of import,
That would have stated me aboue thy state:
Forslowde advantages, and spurnd at time.
I Fortunes right hand▪ Mosbie hath forsoohe,
To take a wanton go•lote by the lest.
I left the Marriage of •n honest maid,
Whose dowry would have weighed down all thy wealth,
Whose beauty and demeanour far exceeded thee.
This certain good I lost for changing bad,
And wrapped my credit in thy company.
I was bewitched, that is no theme of thine,
And thou unhallowed hast enchanted me:
But I will break thyspels, and excirsimes,
And put another sight upon these eyes,
That showed my hart, a raven for a dow.
Thou art not fair, I vieud thee not till now,
Thou art not kind, till now I knew the not.
And now the rain hath beaten of thy gilt,
Thy worthless copper shows thee conterset.
It grieves me not to see how foul thou art,
But maddes me that ever I thought thee fair,
Go get thée gone, a copesmate for thy hyndes.
I am too good to be thy favourite.
I now I see, and too soon find it true,
Which often hath béene told me by my fréends:
That Mosbie loves me not but for my wealth,
Which too incredulus I ne'er believed.
Nay hear me speak Mosbie a word or two,
Isle byte my tongue, if it speak bitterly:
Look on me Mosby, or Isle kill my self,
Nothing shall hide me from thy stormy look:
If thou cry war, there is no peace for me
I will do penance for offending thee,
And burn this prayer book, where I here use,
The holy word that had converted me,
See Mosbie I will tear away the leaves.
And al the leaves, and in this golden cover,
Shall thy sweet phrases, and thy letters dwell,
And thereon will I chiefly meditate,
And hold no other sect, but such devotion,
Wilt thou not look? is all thy love ouerwhelmde?
Wilt thou not hear? what malice stopes thine ears?
Why speaks thou not? what silence ties thy tongue?
Thou hast been sighted, as the eagle is,
And heard as quickly as the fearful hare:
And spoke as smoothly as an orator.
When I have bid thee hear, or sée, or speak.
And art thou sensible in none of these?
Weigh all thy good turns, with this little fault,
And I deserve not Mosbies muddy looks.
A fence of trouble is not thickened still,
Be clear again, Isle ne'er more trouble thée,
O no, I am a base artificer,
My wings are feathred for a lowly sight,
Mosby fie no, not for a thousand pound,
Make love to you, why tic unpardonable,
We beggars must not breath where gentiles are.
Sweet Mosbie is as gentle as a King,
And I too blind, to judge him otherwise,
Flowers do some times spring in fallow lands,
Weeds in gardens, Roses grow on thorns.
So what so ere my Mosbies father was,
Himself valued gentle by his worth.
Ah how you women can insinuate,
And clear a trespass with your sweet set tongue,
I will forget this quarrel gentle Ales,
Provided Isle be tempted so no more:
Then with thy lips seal up this new made match
Soft Ales for here comes some body.
How now Bradshaw, whats the news with you
I have little news but here is a letter.
That M. Gréene importuned me to give you:
Go in Bradshaw call for a cuppe-of bear.
Tic almost suppertime, thou shalt stay with vs.
We have mist of our purpose at London, but shall perform it by the way, We thank our neighbour Bradshaw.
Yours Richard Greene.
How likes my love the tennor of this letter?
Well, were his date complete and expired.
Ah would it were,
Then comes my happy hour.
Till then my bliss is mixed with bitter gall.
Come let vs in to shun suspicion.
I to the gates of death to follow thee.
Come Will, sée thy tools be in a readiness?
Is not thy Powder dank,
Or will thy flint strike fire
Then ask me if my nose be on my face,
Or whether my tongue be frozen in my mouth.
Zounds here is a coil, you were best swear me on the intergatories, how many Pistols I have took in hand,
Or whether I love the smell of gun powder,
Or dare abide the noise the dagge will make,
Or will not wink at flashing of the fire.
I pray thée shackbag let this answer thée.
That I have took more purses in this down,
Then ere thou handledst pistols in thy life.
I happily thou hast picked more in a throng.
But should I brag what booties I have took,
I think the overplus thats more then thine,
Would mount to a greater sum of money,
Then either thou, or all thy kin are worth.
Zounds I hate them as I hate a toad,
That cary a muscado in their tongue.
And scarce a hurting weapon in their hand.
O Gróene, intolerable,
It is not for mine honour to bear this.
Why shakbag I did serve the King at Bulloyne,
And thou can brag of nothing that thou hast done.
Why so can Jack of Feuershame,
That sounded for a phillope on the nose:
When he that gave it him hollowed in his ear.
And he supposed a Cannon bullet hit him.
I pray you sirs list to Esops talk,
Whilst two stout dogs were striving for a bone,
There comes a cur, and stole it from them both,
So while you stand striving on these terms of manhood,
Arden escapes vs and deceive vs al.
Why he begun.
And thou shalt find Isle end.
I doo but slip it until better time.
But if I do forget.
Well take your fittest standings, &amp; once more
Lime your twigs to catch this weary bird,
Isle leave you, and at your dags discharge
Make towards like the longing water dog,
That couches till the fowling piece be of:
Then ceases on the pray with eager mood,
Ah might I sée him stretching forth his limbs,
As I have seen them beat their wings ere now,
Why that thou shalt see if he come this way,
Yes that he doth shakbag I warrant thée:
But brawl not when I am gone in any case,
But sirs be sure to speed him, when he comes,
And in that hope Isle leave you for an hour.
It were best that I went back to Rochester,
The horse halts down right, it were not good
He travailed in such pain to feuershàme:
Removing of a shoe may happily help it.
Well get you back to Rochester, but sierra sée ye overtake vs ere we come to Raynum down,
For it will be very late ere we get home:
I God he knows, &amp; so doth Will and shakebagge,
That thou shalt never go further then that down,
And therefore have I pricked the horse on purpose,
Because I would not view the massacar.
Come M. Franklin onwards with your tale,
I assure you sir, you task me much,
A heavy blood is gathered at my hart,
And on the sudden is my wind so short:
As hindered the passage of my speech.
So ferse a qualm yet near assailed me:
Come M. Franklin let vs go on softly,
The annoyance of the dust, or else some meat,
you eat at dinner, cannot brooke you:
I have been often so, and soon amended.
Do you remember where my tale did leave?
I, where the gentleman did chek his wife.
She being reprehended for the fact.
Witness produced that took her with the deed,
Her glove brought in, which there she left behind,
And many other assured Arguments:
He husband asked her whether it were not so.
her answer then, I wonder how she looked,
Having forsworn it with such vehement oaths,
And at the instant so approved upon her,
First did she cast her eyes down to the earth,
Watching the drops that fell amain from thence,
Then softly draws she forth her hand kercher,
And modestly she wipes her tear stained face:
Then hemd she out to clear her voice should séeme,
And with a majesty addressed her self,
To encounter all their accusations.
Pardon me M. Arden I can no more:
This fighting at my hart, makes short my wind.
Come we are almost now at Raynum down,
Your pretty tale beguiles the weary way:
I would you were in state to tell it out.
Stand close Will I hear them cumming.
Stand to it Shakbag, and be resolute,
Is it so néere night as it séemes,
Or will this black faced evening have a shower?
What M. Arden, you are well met,
I have longed this fortnights day to speak with you,
You are a stranger man in the isle of Shepny,
Your honours always bound to do you service,
Come you from London &amp; ne'er a man with you?
My man's coming after,
But her's my honest fréend that came along with me.
My Lord protectors man I take you to bée
I my good Lord, and highly bound to you,
You &amp; your friend come home &amp; sup with me.
I beséech your honour pardon me.
I have made a promise to a gentle man,
My honest fréend to méete him at my house,
The occasion is great, or else would I wait on you.
Will you come tomorrow &amp; dine with me
And bring your honest friend along with you:
I have divers matters to talk with you about.
Tomorrow wele waite upon your honour,
One of you staye my horse at the top of the hill
What black Will, for whose purse wait you?
Thou wilt be hanged in Kent, when all is done.
Not hanged, God save your honour.
I am your bedesman, bound to pray for you,
I think thou ne'er saidest prayer in all thy life,
One of you give him a crown,
And sir leave this kind of life.
If thou be tainted for a penny matter,
And come in question surely thou wilt truss,
Come M. Arden let vs be going,
Your way and mine lies four mile together.
The Devil break all your necks, at 4 miles end,
Zounds I could kill my self for very anger.
His Lordship chops me in, even when
My dagge was leveled at his hart.
I would his crown were molten down his throat,
Arden thou hast wondrous holy luck,
Did ever man escape as thou hast done.
Well Isle discharge my pistol at the sky,
For by this bullet Arden might not die.
What is he down, is he dispatcht?
I in health towards Feuershame, to shame vs all
The Devil he is, why sirs how escaped he?
When we were ready to shoot,
Comes my Lord Cheiny to prevent his death.
The Lord of heaven hath preserved him.
Preserved, a fig, the L. Cheiny hath preserved him
And bids him to a feast, to his house at shorlow:
But by the way, once more Isle méete with him,
And if all the Cheinies in the world say no,
Isle have a bullet in his breast to morrow,
Therefore come Gréene and let vs to Feuershame.
I and excuse our selves to mistress Arden,
O how shele chafe when she hears of this.
Why isle warrant you shell think we dare not do it
Why then let vs go, &amp; tell her all the matter.
And plat the news to cut him of to morrow.
Sée how the hours the gardened of heavens gate
Have by their toil removed the darksome clouds.
That Soll may well deserve the trampled pace,
Wherein he wont to guide his golden car,
The season fits, come Franklin, let's a way.
I thought you did pretend some special hunt,
That made you thus cut short the time of rest.
It was no chase that made me rise so early,
But as I told thée yesternight to go to the Isle of Sheppy:
There to dine with my Lord Cheiny.
For so his honour late commanded me.
I such kind husbands seldom want excuses,
Home is a wilde Cat, to a wandering wit,
The time hath been, would God it were not past,
That honours title nor a Lords command,
Could once have drawn you from these arms of mine,
But my deserts, or your deserves decay,
Or both, yet if true love may séeme desert,
I merit still to have thy company.
Why I pray you sir, let her go along with vs,
I am sure his honour will welcome her,
And vs the more, for bringing her along.
Content, sir saddle your mistress nag.
No, begged favour merits little thanks,
If I should go, our house would run away,
Or else be stolen, therefore Isle stay behind.
Nay see how mistaking you are,
I pray thee go.
No no, not now.
Then let me leave thée satisfied in this,
That time nor place, nor persons alter me,
But that I hold thée de rer then my life.
That will be séene by your quick return.
And that shall be ere night and if I live.
Farewell swéete Ales, we mind to sup with thee.
Come Michael are our horses ready?
I your horse are ready, but I am not ready,
For I have lost my purse,
With six and thirty shillings in it,
With taking up of my M. Nag.
Why I pray you let vs go before,
Whilst he stays behind to séeke his purse.
Go too sir, sée you follow vs to the isle of sheppye,
To my Lord Cheynyes where we mean to dine.
So fair whether after you,
For before you lies, black Will and shakebag,
In the broom close, to close for you,
Theyle be your ferrymen to long home,
But who is this the Painter, my corrival,
That would needs win M. Susan.
How now Michael how doth my Mistress,
And all at home?
Who susan Mosbye? sheis your Mistress too
I How doth she, and all the rest?
Al's well but susan she is sick,
Sick, of what disease?
Of a great fear.
A fear, of what?
A great fever.
A fever God forbid.
Yes faith, and of a lordaine too,
As big as your self.
M. Michael the spleen prickles you.
Go too, you carry an eye over mistress susan.
I faith, to keep her from the Painter.
Why more from a Painter, then from a serving creature like your self.
Because you Painters make but a painting fa∣ble of a pretty wench, and spotle her beauty with blotting.
What mean you by that?
Why that you Painters, paint lambs, in the lining of wenches peticots
And we serving men put horns to them, to make them be∣come sheep.
Such another word wilcost you a cuff or a knock
What with a dagger made of a pencil?
Faith tic too weak,
And therefore thou to weak to win susan.
Would susans love lay upon this stroke,
Isle lay my life, this is for susans love,
Stayed you behind your M. to this end?
Have you no other time to brable in
But now when serious matters are in hand?
Say Clarke, hast thou done the thing thou promised?
I hear it is, the very touch is death.
Then this I hope, if all the rest do fail,
Will catch M. Arden,
And make him wise in death, that lived a fool.
Why should he thrust his sickle in our corn,
Or what hath he to do with thee my love?
Or govern me that am to rule my self,
Forsooth for credit sake I must leave thee.
Nay he must leave to live, to live, that we may love,
May live may love for what is life but love?
And love shall last as long as life remains,
And life shall end, before my love depart.
Why whats love, without true constancy?
Like to a pillar built of many stones.
Yet neither with good mortar, well compact,
Nor semell, to fasten it in the joints.
But that it shakes with every blast of wind,
And being touched, straight falls unto the earth,
And buries all his haughty pride in dust.
No let our love be rose•es of Addamant,
Which time nor place, nor tempest can a sunder.
Mosbie leave protestations now,
And let vs bethink vs what we have to doo:
Black Will and shakebag I have placed,
In the broom close watching Ardens coming,
Lets to them, and see what they have done.
Of ferry man, where art thou?
Here here, go before to the boat.
And I will follow you.
We have great haste, I pray thée come away.
Fie what a mist is here.
This mist my friend, is mystical,
Like to a good companions smoky brain,
That was half dround with new ale over night.
I were pity but his stull were opened,
To make more Chimney room.
Fréend whats thy opinion of this mist.
I think tic like to a cursed wise in a lytlehouse,
That never leaves her husband till she have driven him out at doors, with a wet pair of eyes,
Then looks he as if his house were a fire,
Or some of his fréends dead.
Speaks thou this of thine own experience,
Perhaps I, perhaps no: For my wife is as other women are, that is to say, governed by the Moon.
By the Moon, how I pray thée?
Na thereby lies a bargane.
And you shall not have it fresh and fasting.
Yes I pray thee good ferryman.
Then for this once, let it be midsommer Moon,
But yet my wife as another moon.
Another Moon.
I, and it hath influences and Celipses.
Why then by this reasoning, you sometimes
Play the man in the Moon.
I but you had not best to meddle with that moon
Least I scratch you by the face, with my bramble bush,
I am almost stifled with this fog, come lets away
And sir as we go, lets vs have some more of your bold yeomandry.
Nay by my troth sir, but flat knavery.
Oh Will where art thou?
Here shakbag, almost in hells mouth,
Where I can not see my way for smoke.
I pray thee speak still, that we may mete by the sound, for I shall fall into some ditch or other, unless my seete see better then my eyes.
Did thou ever sée better weather to run a∣way with another mans wife, or play with a wench at potfinger.
No this were a sine world for chandlers,
If this weather would last, for then a man
Should never dine nor sup without candle light,
But sir Will what horses are those that past?
Why, did thou hear any?
I that I did.
My life for thine, it was Arden and his companiō
And then all our labour's lost,
Nay say not so for, if it be they, they may happily loose their way as we have done
And then we may chance meet with them.
Come let vs go on like a couple of blind pilgrims
Help Will help, I am almost drowned.
Whose that, that calls for help?
I was none here, it was thou thy self.
I came to help him that called for help,
Why how now? who is this thats in the ditch?
You are well enough served, to go without a guide such weather as this.
Sir what companies hath past your ferry this morning
None but a couple of gentlemen, that went to dine at my Lord cheyneis.
Shakbag did not I tell thée as much?
Why sir, will you have any letters carried to them
No sir, get you gone.
Did you ever see such a mist as this?
No, nor such a fool as will rather be bought then get his way.
Why sir, this is no hough monday, you are deceiud
Whats his name I pray you sir?
His name is black will.
I hope to see him one day hanged upon a hill.
Sée how the Sun hath cleared the foggy mist,
Now we have mist the mark of our intent.
Black Will and Shakbag, what make you héer
What is the deed don? is Arden dead.
What could a blinded man perform in arms?
Saw you not how till now, the sky was dark,
That neither horse nor man could be decerned,
Yet did we hear their horses as they past.
Have they escaped you then, and past the ferry?
I for a while, but here we two will stay.
And at their coming back meet with them once more,
Zounds I was ne'er so toylde in all my life,
In following so slight a task as this.
Now came thou so beraide?
With making false footing in the dark,
He needs would follow them without a guide.
Here's to pay for a fire and good chéere
Get you to Feuershame to the flower deluce,
Interest your selves until some other time.
Let me alone, it most concerns my state.
I mistress Arden this will serve the turn,
In case we fall into a second fog.
These knaves will never do it, let vs give it over
First tell me how you like my new device?
Soon when my husband is returning back,
You and I both marching arm in arm,
Like loving friends wele meet him on the way.
And boldly beard and brave him to his teeth:
When words grow hot, and blows begin to rise,
Isle call those cutters forth your tenement,
Who in a manner to take up the fray,
Shall wound my husband hornesbie to the death.
Ah fine devise, why this deserves a kiss.
Faith Dick Rede it is to little end.
His conscience is too liberal, and he too nigardly.
To part from any thing may doo thée good.
He is coming from Shorlow as I understand,
Here isle intercept him, for at his house
He never will vouchafe to speak with me:
If prayers and fair entreaties will not serve,
Or make no battery in his flinty breast.
Isle curse the carl and sée what that will do.
Se where he comes, to further my intent,
M. Arden I am now bound to the sea,
My coming to you was about the plat of ground,
Which wrongfully you detain from me.
Although the rent of it be very small,
Yet will it help my wife and children:
Which here I leave in Feuershame God knows,
Needy and bare, for Christ sake let them have it,
Franklin hear thou this fellow speak?
That which he craves I dearly bought of him,
Although the rent of it was ever mine.
Sir you, that ask these questions,
If with thy clamorous impeaching tongue
Thou rail on me, as I have heard thou dost,
He lay thée up so close a twelve months day,
As thou shalt neither sée the Son nor Moon,
Look to it, for as surely as I live,
Isle banish pity if thou use me thus.
What wist thou do me wrong, &amp; threat me too?
Nay then Isle tempt thee, Arden doo thy worst,
God I beseech thee show some miracle,
On thée or thine, in plauging thée for this.
That plot of ground, which thou detains from me,
I speak it in an agony of spirit,
Be ruinous and fatal unto thée:
Either there be butcherd by thy dearest fréends,
Or else be brought for men to wonder at.
Or thou or thine miscarry in that place.
Or there run mad, and end thy cursed days,
Fie bitter knave bridle thine envious tongue,
For curses are like arrows shot upright,
Which falling down light on the suitors head.
Light where they will, were I upon the sea,
As oft I have in many a bitter storm,
And said a dreadful suthern flaw at hand,
The Pilot quaking at the doubtful storm,
And all the sailors praying on their knees,
Even in that fearful time would I fall down,
And ask of God, what ere betide of me,
Vengeance on Arden, or some misevent,
To show the world, what wrong the carl hath done,
This charge Isle leave with wy distressful wife.
My children shall be taught such prayers as these,
And thus I go but leave my curse with thee.
It is the raylingest knave in christendom,
And oftentimes the villain will be mad,
It greatly matters not what he says,
But I assure you, I ne'er did him wrong.
I think so M. Arden.
Now that our horses are gone home before,
My wife may happily mete me on the way,
For God knows she is grown passing kind of late,
And greatly changed from the old humour
Of her wonted frowardness.
And seeks by fair means to redeem old faults.
Happy the change, that alters for the best,
But see in any case you make no speech,
Of the cheer we had at my Lord Cheineis,
Although most bounteous and liberal,
For that will make her think her self more wronged,
In that we did carry her a long,
For sure she grieved that she was left behind,
Come Franklin, let vs strain to mend our pace,
And take her unawares playing the cooke.
For I beléeue sheele strive to mend our chéere.
Why theirs no better creaturs in the world
Then women are, when they are in good humours.
Who is that? Mosbie, what so familiar?
Injurious strumpet, and thou ribald knave,
Not wine those arms.
I with a sugared kiss, let them untwine.
Ah Mosbie, perturde beast, bear this and all.
And yet no horned beast,
The horns are thine.
O monstrous, Nay then tic time to draw.
Help help, they murder my husband.
Zounds who iniures M. Mosbie.
Help Will I am hurt.
I may thank you Mistress arden for this wound,
Ah Arden what folly blinded thee?
Ah Jealous harebraine man what hast thou don,
When we to welcome thy intended sport.
Came lovingly to mete thee on thy way.
Thou drowsed thy sword enraged with Jealousy,
And her•e thy friend,
Whose thoughts were frée from harm.
All for a woorthles kiss, and joining arms.
Both don but mir•ely to try thy patience.
And me unhappy that devised the Jest,
Which though begone in sport, yet ends in blood.
Mary God defend me from such a Jest.
Could thou not see vs friendly smile on thée.
When we joined arms and when I kissed his cheek.
Hast thou not lately found me over kind?
Did thou not hear me cry they murder thee.
Called I not help to set my husband frée:
No, ears and all were witched, ah me accursed,
To lincke in liking with a frantic man,
Hence forth Isle be thy slave, no more thy wife:
For with that name I never shall content thee.
If He merry thou straight ways thinks me light.
If sad thou satest the sullens trouble me.
If well attired thou thinks I will be gadding,
If homely, I seem sluttish in thine eye.
Thus am I still, and shall be while I die,
Poor wench abused by thy misgovernment,
But is it for truth, that neither thou nor he,
Entendedst malice in your misdemeanor.
The heavens can witness of our harmless thoughts
Then pardon me sweet Ales,
And forgive this fault:
Forget but this, and never sée the like.
Impose me penance, and I will perform it:
For in thy discontent I find a death,
A death tormenting more then death it self,
Nay had thou loved me as thou doest pretend,
Thou would have marked the speeches of thy friend,
Who going wounded from the pals, he said
His skin was pierced only through my devise,
And if sad so row taint thee for this fault,
Thou would have followed him, and scene him dressed,
And cried him mercy whom thou hast misdone,
Ne'er shall my hart be cased till this be done.
Content thee sweet Ales thou shalt have thy will
What ere it be, For that I iniurde thee
And wronged my friend, shame scourges my offence,
Come thou thy self and go along with me,
And be a mediator twixt vs two.
Why M. Arden, know you what you do,
Will you follow him that hath dishonourd you,
Why can thou prove I have been disloyal.
Why Mosbie traunt you husband with the horn,
I after he had reviled him,
By the injurious name of periurde beast,
He knew no wrong could spyte an Jealous man,
More then the hateful naming of the horn.
Suppose tic true, yet is it dangerous.
To follow him whom he hath lately hurt,
A fault confessed is more then half a mends,
But men of such ill spirit as your self.
Work crosses and debates twixt man and wife.
I pray the gentle Franklin hold thy peace,
I know my wife conceals me for the best,
Isle seek out mosby, where his would is dressed,
And salve his hapless quarrel if I may.
He whom the devil drives must go perforce,
Poor gentleman how soon he is bewitched,
And yet because his wife is the instrument,
His friends must not be lash in their speech,
Sir Greene when was I so long in killing a man.
I think we shall never do it.
Let us give it over.
Nay Zounds wele kill him.
Though we be hanged at his door for our labour.
Thou know Greene that I have lived in
London this twelve years.
Where I have made some go upon wooden legs,
For taking the wall on me,
Divers with silver noses, for saying,
There goes blackwill.
I have cracked as many blades,
As thou hast done Nuts,
O monstrous lye.
Faith in a manner I have.
The bawdy houses have paid me tribute,
There durst not a whore set up, unless she have aggreed
with me first, for-opning her shop windows.
For a cross word of a Tipster,
I have pierced one barrel after another, with my dagger,
And held him be the ears till all his bear hath run out,
In Temes street a brewers carte was like to have run
over me, I made no more ado, but went to the clark
and cut all the notches of his tales,
and beat them about his head.
I and my company have taken the Constable from his watch,
And carried him about the fields on a coltstaffe.
I have broken a Sariants head with his own mace,
And build whom I list with my sword and buckler.
All the tenpenny alehouse would stand every morning,
With a quart pot in his ha•d,
Saying will it please your worship drink:
He that had not done so had been sure to have had tic
Singne pulled down, &amp; his lattice borne away the next right
To conclude, what have I not done it cannot do this,
Doubtless he is preserved by Miracle.
Hence Will, here comes M. Arden.
Ah gentle michael art thou sure their friends
Why I saw them when they both shoke hands,
When Mosbie bled, he even wept for sorrow:
And raild on Franklin that was cause of all.
No sooner came the Surgen in at doors,
But my M. took to his purse, and gave him money.
And to conclude, sent me to bring you word,
That Mosbie, Franklin, Bradshaw, Adam fewle,
With divers of his neighbours, and his friends,
Will come and sup with you at our house this night.
Ah gentle Michael, run thou back again,
And when my husband walks into the fair,
Bid Mosbie steal from him, and come to me.
And this night shall thou and Susan be made sure,
Isle go tell him.
And as thou goosed, tell Iohn cooke of our guests,
And bid him lay it on, spare for no coast.
Nay and there be such cheer, we will bid our selves
Mistress Arden, Dick Greene &amp; I do mean to sup with you,
And welcome shall you be, ah gentlemen,
Now must you of your purpose yesternight?
It was long of shake•bag that unlucky villain.
Thou doest me wrong, I did as much as any.
Nay, then M. Ales, Isle tell you how it was,
When he should have locked with both his huts,
He to a bravery flourished over his head
With that comes Franklin at him lustily
And hurts the slave, with that he slinks away,
Now his way had been to have come hand and féete,
one and two round at his costerd.
He like a loose bears his sword point half a yard out
of danger, I lye here for m• life.
If the deui•l come, and he have no more strength then sense
He shall never beat me from this ward,
He stand to it, a buckler in a skilful hand,
Is as good as a castle.
Nay tic better then a sconce, for I have tried it.
Mosbie perceiving this, began to faint.
With that comes Arden with his arming sword,
And thrust him through the shoulder in a tryce.
I but I wonder why you both stood still.
Faith I was so amazed I could not strike.
Ah sirs had he yesternight been slain,
For every drop of his detested blood,
I would cranime in Angels in thy fist.
And kissed thee too, and hugd thee in my arms.
Patient your self, we can not help it now,
Greene and we two, will dog him through the fair,
And stab him in the crowd, and steal away,
It is unpossible, but here comes he,
That will I hope invent some surer means.
Sweet Mosbie hide thy arm, it kills my hart.
I mistress Arden, this is your favour,
Ah say not so for when I saw thee hurt,
I could have toke the weapon thou letst fall,
And cunne at Arden, for I have sworn,
That these mine eyes offended with his sight,
Shall never close, till Ardens be shut up,
This night I rose and walked about the chamber.
And twice or thrice, I thought to have murdered him,
What in the night, then had we been undone,
Why, how long shall he live?
Afraid Ales no longer then this night.
Black Will and shakbag, will you two
Perform the complot that I have laid.
I or else think me as a villain.
And rather then you shall want,
He help my self.
You M. Greene shall single Franklin forth,
And hold him with a long tale of strange news:
That he may not come home till suppertime.
Isle fetch M. Arden home, &amp; we like friends.
Will play a game or two at tables here,
But what of all this?
Now shall he be stain?
Why black Will and shakebag locked within the countinghouse,
Shall at a certain watchword given, rush forth,
What shall the watch word be?
(Now I take you) that shall be the word.
But come not forth before in any case.
I warrant you, but who shall lock me in?
That will I do, thou'st keep the key thy self.
Come M. Gréene, go you along with me.
Sée all things ready Ales against we come.
Take no care for that, send you him home.
And if he ere go forth again, blame me,
Come black Will that in mine eyes art fair,
Next unto Mosbie doe I honour thée,
Instead of fair words and large promises,
My hands shall play you golden harmony,
Now like you this? say, will you doe it sirs?
I and that bravely too, mark my device.
Place Mosbie being a stranger in a chair,
And let your husband sit upon a stool,
That I may come behind him cunningly,
And with a to well pull him to the ground,
Then stab him till his flesh be as a sine,
That done bear him behind the Abbey,
That those that find him murdered, may suppose
Some slave or other kilt him for his gold.
A fine device, you shall have twenty pound,
And when he is dead, you shall have forty more.
And least you might be suspected staying here,
Michael shall saddle you two lusty geldings.
Ride whether you will to Scotland or to Wales.
He see you shall not lack, where ere you be.
Such words would make one kill 1000. men.
Give me the key, which is the counting house?
Here would I stay, and still encourage you,
But that I know how resolute you are.
Lush you are too faint hearted, we must do it.
But Mosbie will be there, whose very looks,
Will ad unwonted courage to my thought,
And make me the first that shall adventure on him,
Lush get you gone, tic we must do the deed.
When this door oppens next look for his death
Ah, would be now were here, that it might oppen
I shaling more be closed in Ardens arms,
That like the snakes of black Tisiphone,
Sting me with their enbraceings, mosbies arms
Shall compass me, and were I made a star,
I would have none other spheres but those.
There is no nedor, but in Mosbies lips,
Had chaste Diana kissed him, she like me
Would grow love sick, and from her watery bower,
Fling down Endimion and snath him up:
Then blame not me, that stay a silly man,
Not half so lovely as Endimion.
Mistress my moister is coming hard by,
Who comes with him.
No body but mosbye.
Thats will michael, fetch in the tables,
And when thou hast done, stand before the countinghouse door.
Why so?
Black will is locked within, to do the déede.
What shull he die to night?
I michael▪
But shall not susan know it?
Yes for shele be as seereete as our selves.
Thats brave, Isle go fetch the tables.
But michael hark to me a word or two,
When my husband is come in lock the street door:
He shall be murdered or the guests come in.
Husband what mean you to bring mosby home?
Although I wished you to be reconciled,
It was more for fear of you, then love of him,
Black Will and Greene, are his companions,
And they are cutters, and may cut you short,
Therefore I thought it good to make you friends.
But wherefore do you bring him hither now,
You have given me my supper with his sight,
M. Arden me thinks your wife would have me gone.
No good M. Mosbie, women will be prating,
Ales bid him welcome, he and I are friends.
You may enforce me to it, if you will.
But I had rather die then bid him welcome,
Die company hath purchased me ill friends.
And therefore will I ne'er frequent it more.
Oh how cunningly she can dissemble.
Now he is here you will not serve me so.
I pray you be not angree or displeased
Isle bid him welcome seeing you'll have it so,
You are welcome M. Mosbie will you sit down.
I know I am welcome to your loving husband,
But for your self, you speak not from your hart.
And if I do not, sir think I have cause.
Pardon me M. Arden, Isle away.
No good M. Mosbie.
We shall have guests enough, though you go hence
I pray you M. Arden let me go
I pray thee Mosbie let her prate her fill,
The doors are open sir, you may be gone.
Nay thats a lye, for I have locked the doors.
Sir fetch me a cup of Wine.
Isle make them friends.
And gentle M. Ales, seeing you are so stout,
You shall begin, frown not, Isle have it so.
I pray you meddle with that you have to do.
Why Ales? how can I do too much for him,
Whose life I have endangered without cause.
Tic true, &amp; seeing it was partly through my means
I am content to drink to him for this once.
Here M. Mosbie, and I pray you hence forth,
Be you as strange to me, as I to you
Your company hath purchased me ill friends.
And I for you God knows, have undeserved
Been ill spoken of in every place.
Therefore henceforth frequent my house no more.
Isle see your husband in despite of you,
Yet Arden I protest to thee by heaven,
Thou ne'er shalt see me more, after this night.
Isle go to Room rather then be forsworn.
Tush Isle have no such vows made in my house.
Yes I pray you husband let him swear,
And on that condition Mosbie pledge me here.
I as willingly as I mean to live.
Come Ales, is our supper ready yet?
It will by then you have plaid a game at tables,
Come M. Mosbie, what shall we play for?
Thrée games for a french crown sir,
And please you.
Content.
Can he not take him yet? what a spite is that?
Not yet Will, take heed he see thee not?
I fear he will spy me, as I am coming,
To prevent that, creep betwixt my legs
One ace, or else I lose the game.
Mary sir theres two for failing.
Ah M. Arden (now I can take you)
Mosbie, Michael, Ales, what will you do?
Nothing but take you up sir, nothing else.
Theirs for the pressing Iron you told me of.
And ther's for the ten pound in my sleeve,
What, groans thou? nay then give me y• weapō,
Take this for hindering Mosbies love and mine.
D Mistress.
Ah that villain will betray vs all,
Tush fear him not, he will be secrete,
Why dost thou think I will betray my self?
In South work dwells a bonnie northern lass,
The widow Chambley, isle to her house now,
End if she will not give me harborough,
He make booty of the queen even to her smock.
Shift for your selves we two will leave you now
First lay the body in the countinghouse.
We have our gould mistress Ales, adieu,
Mosbie farewell, and Michael farewell too.
Mistress, the guests are at the doors.
Hearken they knock, what shall I let them in?
Mosbie go thou &amp; bear them company.
And susan fetch water and wash away this blood,
The blood cleaves to the ground &amp; will not out
But with my nails isle scrape away the blood,
The more I strive the more the blood appears:
Whats the reason M. can you tell?
Because I blush not at my husbands death.
Now now, whats the matter? is all well?
I well, if Arden were alive again.
In vain we strive, for here his blood remains,
Why strew rushes on it, can you not,
This wench doth nothing fall unto the work.
It was thou that made me murder him,
What of that?
Nay nothing Mosbie so it be not known.
Kéepe thou it close, and tic unpossible,
Ah but I can not, was he not stain by me,
My husbands death torments me at the hart.
It shall not long torment thee gentle Ales,
I am thy husband, think no more of him.
Now now M. Arden? what aisle you wéepe?
Because her husband is abroad so late.
A couple of Ruffians threatened him yesternight,
And she poor soul is afraid he should be hurt.
It nothing else? tush heal be here anon.
Now M. Arden lack you any guests.
Ah M. Greene, did you se my husband lately,
I saw him walking behind the Abbey even now,
I do not like this being out so late,
M. Franklin where did you leave my husband.
Believe me I saw him not since Morning,
Fear you not heal come anon, mean time
You may do well to bid his guests sit down.
I so they shall, M. Bradshaw sit you there,
I pray you be content, Isle have my will.
M. Mosbie sit you in my husbands seat.
Susan shall thou and I wait on them,
Or and thou saith the word let vs sit down too.
Peace we have other matters now in hand.
I fear me Michael al will be betrayed.
Tush so it be known that I shall marry thée in the
Morning, I care not though I be hanged ere night.
But to prevent the worst, Isle by some rats bane.
Why Michael wilt thou poison thy self?
No, but my mistress, for I fear shele tell.
Tush Michel fear not her, she's wise enough.
Sir Michell gives a cup of bear.
M. Arden, heers to your husband.
My husband?
What ails you woman, to cry so suddenly.
Ah neighbours a sudden qualm came over my hart
My husbands being forth torments my mind.
I know some thing's amiss, he is not well.
Or else I should have heard of him ere now.
She will undo vs, through her foolishness.
Fear not M. Arden, he's well enough.
Tell not me, I know he is not well,
He was not wont for to stay thus late.
Good M. Franklin go and seek him forth,
And if you find him send him home to me.
And tell him what a fear he hath put me in.
Ilyke not this, I pray God all be well
Isle seek him out, and find him if I can.
Michael how shall I doo to rid the rest away?
Leave that to my charge, let me alone,
Tic very late M. Bradshaw,
And there are many false knaves abroad,
And you have many narrow lanes to pas.
Faith friend Michael and thou says true,
Therefore I pray thee lights forth, and lends a link
Michael bring them to the doors, but doo not stay,
You know I do not love to be alone.
Go Susan and bid thy brother come,
But wherefore should he come? Here is nought but fear.
Stay Susan stay, and help to counsel me.
Alas I counsel, fear frights away my wits,
Sée Susan where thy quondam Moister lies,
Sweet Arden smeard in blood and filthy gore.
My brother, you, and I, shall rue this déede.
Come susan help to lift his body forth,
And let our salt tears be his obsequies.
Now now Ales whether will you bear him
Sweet Mosbie art thou come?
Then weep that will.
I have my wish in that I joy thy sight.
Well it houes vs to be circumspect.
I for Franklin thinks that we have murdered him.
I but he can not prove it for his life,
Wele spend this night in dalliance and in sport.
O mistress the Mayor and all the watch,
Are coming towards our house with glaues &amp; bills.
Make the door fast, let them not come in,
Tell me sweet Ales how shall I escape?
Out at the back door, over the pile of wood.
And for one night lie at the flower deluce,
That is the next way to betray my self.
Alas M. Arden the watch will take me here,
And cause suspicion, where else would be none.
Why take that way that M. Mosbie doth,
But first convey the body to the fields.
Until to morrow, swéete Ales now farewell,
And see you confess nothing in any case.
Be resolute M. Ales, betray vs not,
But cleave to vs as we will stick to you,
Now let the indge and juries do their worst,
My house is clear, and now I sear them not.
As we went it snowed al the way,
Which makes me fear, our footsteps will be spied.
Peace fool, the snow will cover them again.
But it had done before we came back again.
Hark hark, they knock,
go Michael let them in.
Now now M. Mayor, have you brought my husband home
I saw him come into your house an hour ago
You are deceived, it was a Londoner,
Mistress Arden know you not one that is called black Will.
I know none such, what mean these questions
I have the counsels warrant to apprehend him
I am glad it is no worse.
Why M. mayor think you I harbour any such?
We are informd that here he is.
And therefore pardon vs, for we must search.
I search and spare you not, through every room,
Were my husband at home, you would not offer this,
M. Franklin what mean you come so sad.
Arden thy husband, and my fréend, is slain,
Ah, by whom? M. Franklin can you tell?
I know not, but behind the abbey,
There holes murdered in most piteous case,
But M. Franklin are you sure tic he,
I am too sure, would God I were deceived.
Find out the Murthrers let them be known,
I so they shall, come you along with vs.
Wherefore?
know you this handtowel and this knife?
Ah michael through this thy negligence.
Thou hast betrayed and undone vs all.
I was so afraid, I knew not what I did,
I thought I had thrown them both into the well.
It is the pigs blood we had to supper.
But wherefore stay you? find out the murthrers.
I fear me you'll prove one of them your self.
I one of them, what mean such questions.
I fear me he was murdered in this house.
And carried to the fields, for from that place,
Backwards and forwards may you see,
The print of many feet within the snow,
And look about this chamber where we are,
And you shall find part of his guiltless blood,
For in his slipshoe did I find some rushes.
Which argues he was murdered in this room.
Look in the place where he was wont to sit.
Sèe see his blood it is too manifest,
It is a cup of Wine that michael shed.
I truly.
It is his blood, which strumpet thou hast shed,
But if I live thou and thy accomplices,
Which have conspired and wrought his death,
Shall rue it.
Ah M. Franklin God and heaven can tell,
I loved him more then all the world beside.
But bring me to him let me sée his body.
Bring that villain and mosbies sister too,
And one of you go to the flower deluce.
And séeke for mosbie, and apprehend him to.
The widow chambly in her husbands days I kept
And now he's dead, she is grown so stout
She will not know her old companions,
I came thither thinking to have had
Harbour as I was wont
And she was ready to thrust me out at doors,
But whether she would or no, I got me up,
And as she followed me I spurnd her down the stairs,
And broke her neck, and cut her tipsters throat,
And now I am going to sting them in the Temes,
I have the gould, what care I though it be known?
Isle cross the water and take sanctuary.
Sée M. Arden where your husband lies.
Confess this foul fault and be penitent.
Arden sweet husband, what shall I say?
The more I found his name, the more he bleeds.
This blood condemns me, and in gushing forth
Speaks as it falls, and asks me why I did it,
Forgive me Arden, I repent me now,
And would my death save thine, thou should not dye,
Rise up sweet Arden and enjoy thy love.
And frown not on me when we mete in heaven,
In heaven I love thee, though on earth I did not,
Say Mosby what made thée murder him,
Study not for an asnwer, look not down
His purse and girdle found at thy beds head,
Witness sufficiently thou did the deed.
It bootless is to swear thou did it not,
I hired black Will and Shakebagge, Ruffians both,
And they and I have done this murthrous deed,
But wherefore stay we?
Come and bear me hence.
Those Ruffians shall not escape,
I will up to London, and get the counsels warrant to apprehend them.
Shakebag I hear hath taken sanctuary,
But I am so pursued with hues and cries,
For petty robberies that I have done,
That I can come unto no Sanctuary.
Therefore must I in some Oyster boat,
At last, be fine to go a board some Hoye.
And so to Flushing there is no staying here,
At Sittinburgh the watch was like to take me.
And had I not with my buckler covered my head,
And run full blank, at all adventures,
I am sure I had ne'er gone further then that place,
For the Constable had 20 warrants to apprehend me,
Besides that, I robbed him and his Man once at Gades hill,
Farewell England, Isle to Flushing now.
Come make haste &amp; bring away the prisoners.
M. Arden you are now going to God,
And I am by the law condemned to die.
About a letter I brought from M. Grèene,
I pray you M. Arden speak the truth,
Was I ever privy to your intent or no?
What should I say?
You brought me such a letter.
But I dare swear thou knew not the contents.
Leave now to trouble me with wordly things.
And let me meditate upon my saviour Christ,
Whose blood must save me for the blood I shed,
How long shall I live in this hell of grief?
Convey me from the presence of that strumpet.
Ah but for thee I had never been strumpet
What can not oaths and prote stations doe?
When men have opportunity to woe.
I was too young to sound thy villainies.
But now I find it, and repent too late.
Ah gentle brother, wherefore should I die.
I knew not of it, till the deed was don.
For thée I morn more then for my self,
But let it suffice, I can not save thee now,
And if your brother and my Mistress.
Had not promised me you in marriage,
I had ne'er given consent, to this foul deed.
Leave to accuse each other now,
And listen to the sentence I shall give.
Bear Mosbie and his sister to London straight,
Where they in smithfield must be executed.
Bear M. Arden unto Canterbury,
Where her sentence is she must be burnt.
Michael and Bradshaw in Feuershame
must suffer death.
Let my death make a mends for all my sins,
Fie upon women, this shall be my song,
But bear me hence, for I have lived to long.
Seeing no hope on earth, in heaven is my hope.
Faith I care not seeing I die with Susan.
My blood be on his head that gave the sentence,
To speedy execution with them all.
Thus have you seen the truth of Ardens death
As for the Ruffians, Shakbag and black Will,
The one took Sanctuary, and being sent for out.
Was murdered in Southwark, as he past
To Greenewitch, where the Lord Protector lay.
Black Will was burnt in flushing on a stage.
Grèene was hanged at Osbridge in Rent.
The Painter fled, &amp; how he dyed we know not.
But this aboue the rest is to be noted,
Arden lay murdered in that plot of ground,
Which he by force and violence held from Rede.
And in the grass his bodies print was seen,
Two yéeres and more after the deed was done
Gentlemen we hope you'll pardon this naked Tragedy,
Wherein no filed points are foilted in,
To make it gracious to the ear or eye.
For simple trusth is gracious enough:
And needs no other points of glossing stuff.

