DVnston, how •ighlie are we bound to praise
The Eternal God that still provides for vs,
And gives vs leave to rule in this our land,
Like wise Vaspasian, Romes rich Emperor:
Suppressing sinue, that daily reigns in vs?
First, murder we reward with present death,
And those that doe commit felonious crimes,
Our laws of England doe award them death:
And he• that doth despoil a Virgins chastity,
Must likewise suffer death by laws decree,
And that decree is trreuocable.
Then as I am Gods Vicegerent here on earth,
By Gods appointment here to reign and rule,
So must I seek to cut abuses down,
That like to Hydras heads, daily grows up one in ano∣theirs place,
And therein makes the land infectious,
Which if with good regard we look not to,
We shall, like Sodom, feel that fiery doom,
That God in Justice did inflict on them.
Your Graces care herein I much cummend,
And England hath just cause to praise the Lord,
That sent so good a King to govern them,
Your life may be a Lantern to the state,
By perfect sign of humility.
Howe blessed had Sodomy been in sight of God,
If they had had so kind a Governor,
They had then undoubtedly e•capt that doom,
That God in justice did inflict on them:
Then England kneel upon thy hearty knee,
And praise that God, that so provides for thee.
And virtuous Prince, thou Solomon of our age,
Whose years I hope shall double Nestors reign,
And bring a thousand profits to the land:
My self (dread Prince) in token of my love,
And dutiful obedience to your Grace,
Will study daily, as my duty wills,
To root sins from the flourishing common wealth.
That Fame in every angle of the world,
May sound due praise of Englands vetuous King.
Dunston. live thou, and counsel still the king,
To maintain Justice, were it on himself,
Rather than soothing him in his abuse,
To see subversion of his common wealth.
I tell thee Dunston, thou hast pleased the King,
And proved thy self a virtuous counsellour:
Thy counsel is to me as North stars light,
That guides the Sailor to his wished port:
For by that star he is so comforted,
That he sails daungerlesse on dangerous seas,
And in his deepest sadness comforts him:
So Dunstons knowledge is that star of joy,
That will with help conduct me to my happiness.
And yet thou art not happy Edgar,
Because that sins, like swarms, remain in thee.
Why, tic impossible, for I have studied still,
To root abuses from the common wealth,
That may infect the king or communaltie.
Therefore, base Peasant, wilful as thou art,
I tell thee troth, thou hast displeased the King.
Nay, the King hath displeased himself,
In trusting every one that speaks him fair:
For through fair words, Kings many times are fine
To countenance Knaves by their authority:
I will not say your Grace doth so.
No sir, you were not best.
Why, if I should, I might make good my worcester•,
And find a Knave, I fear, before I part.
Why, what art thou?
Mary I go plain, and my name is Honesty,
A friend to your Grace, but a foe to Flatterers,
And one that hath a Knack to know a Knave.
As how sir, by art, or by some foolish gift God hath given you,
You are some Uissitian, or skilled in Uisognomy, or in palms•rye
For I am sure, you can never do it by Astronomy,
Because there are no stars to know a knave.
True, but many an honest man knows a knave to his cost,
And is neither Uisitiā, Uisognomer, palmester, nor astronomer
But a plain man of the country, like me.
That knows a knave, if he doe but see his cap.
That were pretty I faith, to see Honesty know a knave by his cap,
Tic more than I can do with al the skill I have:
But tel me I pray thee, how I should know a knave.
I believe you well, for offenders never bewray their offences
Till the Law find them, and punish them:
But you would fine tell how to know a knave,
Then thus, the first man you meet in the morning,
If he salute you, draw near him,
And smell to his hat, and after smell to your own,
And my cap to a noble, if his smell like yours, he is a knave,
I think I spoke with you now.
Base Villain, were it not •hat the Kings presence
doth privilege thy presūptiō, I wold teach you to jest with your fellows▪
Forbear, honesty, thou art a good plain fellow,
And I cōmend thy wit, that hast such ways to know a knave.
Honesty is plain my Lord, but no good fellow,
For good fellows be purse-takers now a days:
And there be so many of such good f•ll•was,
That Honesty may walk the stre•tes without company,
Not that there wants company, but honest company I mean,
And yet Honesty▪ can clap a knave on the shoulder for al his
bravery.
Why (base companion) mean you me?
Not base (sir) because I was truly begotten,
For Honesty may be suspected, but never detected:
But you think I had a bayliefe to my father as you had,
And that my mother could return a writ of error,
As yours did, when such a Gallant as you were gotten.
Believe me, Perin, he hath touched you now,
And I perceive, though Honesty be simple,
Yet many times he speaks truth.
True, if it please your Grace, for honest men will not lie:
But if your Grace vouchsafe to give me leave,
You shall see me find more knaves than one.
If my cunning fail me not, or else say Honesty had no honesty
But tel me, Dunston, how think thou of this motion?
Were it not good think thou we gave him leave
To stifle such Caterpillars as corrupt the common wealth:
For many times such simple men as he,
Bewray much matter in simplicity:
Then tell me Dunston, what think thou of his motion?
If it please your Grace to think it good,
Dunston will say as once Hefestion did,
When Alexander wan rich Macedone,
That what so ere the King himself thought meet,
He would in dutiful obedience yield unto:
And so saith Dunston to your Majesty.
For many times such simple men bring that to pass▪
That wiser heads cannot attain unto,
For doubtless he hath some device in hand,
Whereby to find such subtle knavery.
Well, Dunston, then as thou hast counseld me,
I will for once make proof of Honesty: sir, come hither,
In hope you will, as your profession is,
In honest sort to find deceivers out:
And finding them, to give vs notice straight,
That we may punish them for their amiss:
We give thee lean to work what means thou moist,
So it be not prejudice to the state nor vs.
My gracious Lord, if Honesty offend,
In any thing that he hath promised,
And doe not as your Grace hath given in charge,
Stifle such Caterpillars as corrupt the state.
Let Honesty receive such punishment,
As he deserves that leases to the king.
Honesty it is enough, but tel me now what moved thee first,
To undertake this task to visit vs, speak truth, dissemble not:
If I should tel your Grace twold make you laugh
To hear how Honesty was entertained,
Poor, lame and blind when I came once ashore,
Lord, how they came in flocks to visit me,
The shepherd with his hook, and Thrasher with his flail,
The very peddler with his dog, and the tinker with his male.
Then comes a soldier counterfeit, &amp; with him was his Jug,
And Will the whipper of the dogs had got a bouncing trug:
And coging Dick was in the crew, that swore he cam srō Frāce
He swore that in the Kings defence, he lost his arm by chance,
And yet in conscience, if I were put to swear,
I would be bound to lay a pout, the knave was never there,
And happening amongst this company by chance one day,
I had no sooner named my name, but they ran all away,
But now I will to my task, and leave your Grace,
And so I take my conge of your Majesty.
Honesty, farewell, and look unto your charge.
My gracious Lord, if I might not offend,
I would entreat a favour at your hand,
Tic so, I heard of late, my gracious Lord,
That my kind father lay at point of death,
And if (my Lord) I should not visit him,
The world (I fear) would find great fault with me.
Nay, Perin, if your business bee of weight,
We are content to give you leave to go:
Provided this, that you return again,
When you have seen your Father and your friends.
My gracious Lord, I will not stay there long.
Only but see my father and return again.
Till when my grations Lord, I take my leave.
Perin farewell, and tel me Dunston, now we are alone,
What doest thou think of beauteous Alfrida,
For she is reported to be be passing fair:
They say she hath a white pit in his chin,
That makes her look like to the Queen of love,
When she was dalying with Endymion:
Believe me Dunston, if she be so fair,
She will serve our turn to make a Concubine,
Me thinks tic good some time to have a love
To sport withal, and pass away the time.
I, my good Lord, Dunston could well allow of it,
If so your Grace would marry Alfrida.
What, would thou have me marie her I never sa•
Then men would say I doted on a wench:
But Dunston, I have found a policy,
Which must indeed be followed to the full:
Earl Ethenwald, welcome, I thought to send for you,
You must go doe a message for vs now,
Tic nothing but to 〈◊〉 a Wench, which you can doe:
You must not woo her for your self but me.
Tell her, I sit and pine like Tantalus:
An• if you can, strain forth a tear for me,
Tell her, she shall be honoured in my Love,
And bear a child that one day may be King:
Bid her not stand on terms, but send me word.
Whether she be resolved to love me, yea or no.
If she say no, tell her I can enforce her Love:
Or tic no matter though you leave that out,
And tell her this, we hear she is as wise,
As eloquent and full of Oratory, as Thaly was, daughter of Iupiter
Whose speeches were so pleasing mong the Greeks
That she was termed a second Socrates.
For some report, women love to be praised,
Then in my cause I pray thee love thou Alfrida.
My gracious Lord, and Ethenwald shall not fail
To show his humble duty to your Majesty:
I will, my Lord, woe her in your behalf,
Plead love for you, and strain a sigh to show your passions,
I will say she is fairer than the Dolphins eye,
At whom amazed, the night stars stand and gaze,
Then will I praise her chin, and cheek, and pretty hand,
Long made like Venus, when she used the harp,
When Mars was revelling in loves high house.
Besides, my Lord, I will say she hath a pace,
Much like to Iuno in Idea vale,
When Argus watched the Heifer on the mount:
These words, my Lord, will make her love, I am sure,
If these will not my Lord, I have better far.
Nay, this is well, now Ethenwald be gone,
For I shall long to hear of thy return.
My gracious Lord, I humbly take my leave.
Ethenwald farewell: Dunston, how likest thou this?
What, have I done well in sending Ethenwald:
But in good time, how if he like the maid,
Believe me Dunston, then my game is mart.
I doe not think, my gracious Lord,
My Nephew Ethenwald bears that bad mind,
For hither•od he hath been termed just,
And kept your Grace his gracious favourer.
True Dunston, yet have I read that Love
Hath made the son •eceiue the father oft:
But Dunston, leaving this, come lets to court.
I will attend upon your Majesty,
MY sons you see how age decays my state,
And that my life like snow before the sun:
Gins to dissolve into that snbstance now,
From whose enclosure grew my sire of life,
The earth I mean, sweet mother of vs all,
Whom death authorised by heavens high power,
Shall bring at last, from whence at first I came,
Yet ere I yield my self to death, my sons,
Give ear, and hear what rules I set you down,
And first to thee my son, that lives by wit,
I know thou hast so many honest sleights,
To shift and cousin smoothly on thy wit,
To cog and lie, and brave it with the best,
That it were but labour lost to counsel thee,
And therefore to the next, Walter, that seems in show a husband∣man:
My son, when that thy master trusts thee most,
And thinks thou dialect as truly as himself,
Be thou the first to work deceit to him:
So by that means thou moist enrich thy self,
And live at pleasure when thy maister's dead:
And when to market thou art sent with woll,
Put sand amongst it, and twill make it weigh,
The weight twice double that it did before,
The overplus is thine into thy purse.
But now my son, that keeps the Court,
Be thou a means to set the Peers at strife,
And currifauour for the commons love.
If any but in conference name the King.
Inform his Majesty they ••uie him.
And if the king but move or speak to thee,
Kneel on both knees, and say, God save your Majesty.
If any man be favoured by the King,
Speak thou him fair, although in heart thou envy him.
But who is next?
That am I father, that use the word of God,
And live only by the heavenly Manna.
Who? the Priest, Give ear my son,
I have a lesson yet in store for thee:
Thou must (my son) make show of holiness,
And blind the world with thy hypocrisy▪
And sometime give a penny to the poor,
But let it be in the Church or market place,
That men may praise thy liberality.
Speak against usury, yet forsake no pawns,
So thou moist gain three shillings in the pound:
Warn thou the world from sin and v•le excess,
And now and then speak against drunkenness,
So by this means thou shall be termed wise,
And with thy pureness blind the peoples eyes.
But now (my sons) discourse to me in brief,
How you have lived, and how you mean to die.
Then (father) thus live I that use me wit,
Unto my self I love still to be wise,
For when I am driven to shift for meat or coin,
Or gay apparel to maintain me brave,
Then doe I flaunt it out about the change,
As if I were some landed Gentleman,
And falling in with some rich merchant there,
I take commodities for six months day,
The bill being made, I must set to my hand,
Then if I pay not, they may burn the band.
Then father, hark how I have profited,
Walter your son that keeps the country,
I have raised the markets, and oppressed the poor,
And made a thousand go from door to door:
And why did I (think you) use this extremity,
Because I would have corn y•ough to feed the enemy,
Father, you know we have but a while to live,
Then while we live, let each man shift for one:
For he that can not make shift in the world,
They say hes unworthy to live in it.
And he that lives must still increase his store,
For he that hath most wealth of all 〈◊〉 more.
Brethren you have spoken well, I must needs say,
But now give ear to me, to me that keeps the court.
Father, I live as Aristipus did, &amp; use my wits to flatter with the king.
If any in private conference name the king,
I straight inform his Grace they envy him:
Did Sinon live with all his subtlety?
He could not tell a flattering tale more cunningly:
Some time I move the King to be effeminate,
And spend his time with some coy Courtesan:
Thus with the King I currie fa•our still,
Though with my heart I wish him any ill:
And sometime I can counterfeit his hand and seal,
And borrow money of the communalty:
And thus I live and flaunt it with the best,
And dice and card inferior unto none:
And none dares speak against me in the court,
Because they know the King doth favour me.
And I among my brethren and my friends
Doe still instruct them with my doctrine,
And Yea and nay goes through the world with vs▪
Fie, not an oath we swear for twenty pound,
Brethren (say we) take heed by Adams fall,
For by his sins we are condemned all.
Thus preach we still unto out brethren,
Though in our heart we never mean the thing:
Thus doe we blind the world with holiness,
And so by that are termed pure Precisians.
Full well and wisely have you said my sons,
And I commend you for your forward minds:
That in your lives bewray whose sons ye are:
Here have I hene a Bayliefe three score years,
And used exaction on the dwellers by,
For if a man were brought before my face,
For cosenage, theft, or living on his wit,
For counterfeiting any hand or seal,
The matter heard, the witness brought to me,
I took a bribe, and set the prisoners free:
So by such dealings I have got the wealth,
Which I would have disbursed among you al,
With this proviso, that you all shall live,
And lead such lives as I have set you down,
Carve to your selves, and care not what they say,
That bid you fear the fearful Judgment day.
Live to your selves while you have time to live,
Get what you can, but see ye nothing give:
But hark my sons, me thinks I hear a noise,
And gastlie visions makes me timorous,
Ah see my sons, where death, pall Death appears,
To summon me before a fearful Judge:
Me thiuks revenge stands with an iron whip,
And cries repent, or I will punish thee:
My heart is hardened, I cannot repent.
Ah hark, me thinks the Judge doth give my doom,
And I am damn•d to ever burning fire:
Soul, be thou safe, and body fly to hell.
Br•there, why do you not read to my father?
Truly my book of exhortation is at my place of
Exercise, and without it I can doe nothing: Gods peace bee
with him.
FAther say on, for now my leisure serves,
And Edgar gives thee leave to tell thy mind,
For I perceive thine eyes are full of •ears,
Which shows that many inward passions troubles thee.
If any here have wronged thine aged years,
In keeping that from thee that is thy •ue,
Name but the man, and as I am Englands King,
Thou shalt have all the favour I can show.
Then virtuous Prince, mirror of courtesy,
Whose Judgements, and whose laws for government,
And punishing of every foul abuse,
Is like the judgment of great Alexander,
Third of that name, whom some termed the Severe,
Or like Vaspasian, Romes virtuous governor,
Who for a blow his son did give a Swain,
Did straight command that he should loose his hand.
T•en virtuous Edgar, be Vaspasian once,
In giving sentence on a graceless child,
Know (virtuous Prince) that in my pride of years,
When lustful pleasure pricked my wanton mind:
Even in the April of my flourishing time,
I was better•th'd, and wedded to a wife,
By whom, too soon, I had that unkind boy,
Whose disobedience to his aged Sire,
The Lord will plague with torments worse than death,
This disobedient child, nay base Abstranogant,
Whom I with care did nourish to this state,
Puffed with a pride, that upstart Courtiers use,
And seeing that I was brought to poverty,
He did refuse to know me for his Sire.
And when I challenged him by Natures laws,
To yield obedience to his Fathers age,
He told me straight, he took it in great scorn,
To be begot by one so base as I.
My age that ill could brook his sharpe reply,
Did with this wand (my Lord) reach him a blow:
But he contrary laws of God and •en,
Did 〈◊〉 me such a blow in wild dis•aine,
That with the stroke I fell to earth again.
Unkind Philarchns, how hast thou misdone
In wilful disobedience to thy Sire:
Art thou grown proud because I favoured thee?
Why, I can quickly make thee bare again,
And then, I think, being in thy former state,
Thou 〈◊〉 remember who thy father was:
And gentle Sophocles, in good time I recount▪
Thy ancient saying, not so old as true,
For saith, he that hath many children.
Shall never be without some mirth,
Nor die without some sorrow, for if they
Be virtuous, he shall have cause to rejoice,
But if vicious, stubburne, or disobedient,
Ever to live in continual sadness.
I am sorry (Philarchus) that my favours have made thee in∣solent,
Well, I will see now if my frowns will make thee penitent.
Now Father, see how Nature gins to work,
And how salt tears, like drops of peely dew
False from his eyes, as sorrowing his amiss.
Most gracious Prince, vouchsafe to hear me speak,
I cannot but confess (most gracious Sovereign)
That I have erd in being obstinate in wilful disobedience to my sire
Wherein I have wronged nature and your Mays•y
But I am not the first whom oversight
Hath made forgetful of a Fathers love:
But Fathers love shall never be forgot,
If he but deign to pardon my amiss:
But if your wrath will no ways be appeased,
Rip up this breast where is incl•sde that heart,
That bleeds with grief to think on my amiss.
Ah Father pardon, sweet Father pardon me.
No (graceless Imp, degenerate and unkind)
Thou art no son of mine, but Tigers whelp,
That hast been fostered by some Lyons pap,
But as the tallest Ash is cut down, because it yields no fruit,
And an unprofitable cow, yielding no milk, is slaughtered,
And the idle •ron, gathering no honey, is contemned,
So ungrateful children, that will yield no natural obedience,
Must be cut off, as unfit to bear the name Christians.
Whose lives digress both from reason and humanity,
But as thou hast dealt unnatural•• with me,
So I resolve to pull my heart from thee,
Therefore dread Prince, vouchsafe to pity me,
An grant I may have Justice on my son.
Dunston, how counsailest thou the King in this?
I promise thee I am sorry for the Youth,
Because in heart I ever wished him well.
My gracious Lord, if I might counsel you,
I would counsel you to judge as be deserves,
He that disdains his Father in his want,
And wilfully will disobey his Sire,
Deserves (my Lord) by Gods and Natures laws,
To be rewarded with extremest ills:
Then as your Grace hath stablisht laws for government,
So let Offenders feel the penalties,
I Dunston, now thou speak as fits a counsellor,
But not as friend to him whom Edgar loves:
Father, what would thou have me doe in this?
Thou see thy son is sorry for his fault,
And I am sure thou would not wish his death,
Because a fathers care commands the contrary,
Then (gentle Father) let me plead for him,
And be his pledge for shunning wilful ills.
Will Edgar now be found a partial Judge,
In pleading pardon for a graceless child?
Is it not true, that one cole of fire will burn many houses?
And one small brack in finest cloth that is,
Will both disgrace and blemish the whole piece:
So wilful children, spotted with one ill,
Are apt to fall to twenty thousand more.
And therefore (mighty Sovereign) leave to speak,
And pass just sentence on Philarchus life.
My life (dear father) that sentence were too hard,
Let me be banished from my countries bounds,
And live as exiled in some wilderness,
Bard from society and sight of men,
Or let me hazard fortune on the seas,
In setting me aboard some helmlesse ship,
That either I may split upon so me rock,
Or else be swallowed in the purple Maine,
Rather than die in presence of my King,
Or bring that sorrow to your aged years:
If this suffice not, then let me be armed,
And left alone 〈…〉 ••ousand foes,
And if my weapon cannot set me free,
Let them be means to take my life from me.
Father, what say you to Philarchus now?
Are you content to pardon his amiss:
Dunston, I promise thee, it grieves me much,
To hear what piteous moan Philarchus makes:
〈…〉
And his humility argues him penitent.
But Father, for I will not be the Judge,
To doom Philarchus either life or death,
Here take my robes, and judge him as thou wilt,
Then virtue•us Prince, seeing you will have it so,
Although the place be far unfit for me,
I am content your Grace shall have your mind,
Thus like an Ass attired in costly robes,
Or like a ring thrust in a foul Sows snout,
So doe these robes and sceptre fit mine age:
But for I am Judge, Philarchus, stand thou forth,
And know, as there is nothing so good, but it hath some inconueni∣ence,
So there is no man whatsoever without some fault:
Yet this is no argument to maintain thy wilful disobedience,
As the Rose hath his prickle, the finest Velvet his brack,
The fairest flower his bran, so the best wit his wanton will:
But (Philarchus) thou hast been more than wanton,
Because thou hast disobeyed the laws both of God and nature,
The tears that thou hast shed, might warrant me
That thou art penitent for thy amiss:
Besides (my son) a fathers natural care,
Doth challenge pardon for thy first amiss.
Father, well said, I see thou pettiest him.
Nay, stay my Lord, this did I speak as father to Phi∣larchus
But now my (Lord) I must speak as a Judge.
And now Philarchus, mark what I set down,
Because thou hast been disobedient,
And wronged thy aged father wilsullie,
And given a blow to him that nourished thee.
And thereby hast incurd thy mothers 〈◊〉
And in that curse to 〈◊〉 the wrath of God,
And so be hated on the earth amongst men.
And for I will be found no partial Judge,
Because I sit as Gods Utzegerent now:
Here I doe banish thee from Englands bounds,
And never to
There stay, now let me speak the rest:
〈◊〉, thou hast heard thy fathers doom,
And what thy disobedience moved him to,
Ye• for thou wast once bedfellow to the king,
And that I loved thee as my second self,
Thou shalt go live in France, in Flanders, Scotland, or else where,
And have annual pension sent to thee,
There moist thou live in good and honest sort,
U•till thou be r•called by the King.
Thanks, gracious King, for this great favour shown,
And may I never live, if I forget,
Your Graces kind and unexpected love,
In favouring him, whom all the world forsook:
For which my Orisons s•all still he spent:
Heavens may protect your princely Majesty.
And loving Father, here upon my knee,
Sorry for my amiss, I take my leave,
Both of your self, my King, and countrymen▪
England, farewell, more dearer unto me,
Than pen can write, or hart can think of thee.
Farewell Philarchus, and father come to court,
〈◊〉 for Philarchus sake thou shalt not want.
Thanks (virtuous king) I humbly take my leave.
Dunston, I promise thee I was like to weep,
To hear• what piteous moan Philarchus made.
Here your Grace hath showed your se•fe to be
Edgar so famed for love and virtuous government.
And I pray God your Grace may live to be
Long Englands king to reign with verity.
Tic strange to see how men of honesty,
Are troubled many times with subtle knavery:
For they have so many cloaks to colour their abuses,
That Honesty may well susye•t them, but dares not detect thē
For if he should, they have by their knavery
G•t so many friends, that though never so bad,
They will stand in defence with the best.
I was at the water side, where I saw such deceit,
I dare not say k•auerie, in paying and receiving
Custom for out•andish ware, that I wondered to see,
Yet durst not complain of, the reason was,
They were countenanced with men of great wealth,
Richer than I a great deal, but not h•nectar:
Thou I went i•to che markers, where I saw petie knavery:
In false measuring corn, and in scales,
That wanted no less than two ounces in the pound.
But all this was nothing, scant worth the talking of:
But when I came to the Exchange, I espied in a corner of an Isle,
An Arch-cosoner, a Conicatcher I mean.
Which used such gross cosoning, as you would wonder to hear:
But here he comes fine and brave,
Honesty marks him down• for a kuaue.
Why so, tic an il wind blues no man to profit
And he is but a fool that when al fails cannot live upon his wit,
I have attired my self like a very civil citizen,
To draw four score pound from a couple of fools,
A Gentleman having made over his land by deed of gift,
Means to cousin a broker with a false conveyance:
Al's one to me, I shall loose nothing by the bargain,
But here comes the Broker, I will walk as I regarded him not
God save you sir, I see you keep your hour,
But hear you sir, hath the Gentleman that conveyance you told
me of ready, I hope sir, I shall need misdoubt no deceit in the mat∣la,
for I mean plainly, and so I hope do you.
Sir, as concerning the conveyance, I assure you tic so good
And he hath such good interest in it,
That were I furnished with so much money presently,
No man in the world should have it but my self,
An• for my own part, yuu need not suspect me,
For I would not discredit my self for a thousand pound,
For the Gentlemen•n is my very friend,
And being in some want, is enforced to pawn land.
For the supplying of a present necessity.
Tush, the interest is good, I warrant you.
And thats much worth, some will say,
A crafty knave needs no broker,
But here is a crafeie knave and a broker to:
Then imagine there wants not a knave.
But tell me sir, when did he promise to be here,
What, will it be long ere be come?
Nay, it will not be long ere he come,
For the conveyance was made ere I came from the scriveners,
And in good time, here he comes, God save you sir,
Here is the man I told you of, that wold lend you the money,
He is a very honest man, and but for my sake I know
He would not do it, but is the land dispatcht another way:
If you be ready to seal, he is ready with the money,
H•are you (sir) you have a good bargain, dispatch it quickly.
Being advertised by my friend, this honest merchant,
That you have certain land to pawn for present money,
Now I had not so much money of mine own at this time,
But I made mea•es to borrow so much of a friend of mine,
Because I would not have you fall into bad men's handling
I thank you sir for this unspeakable favour,
If you deal amiss with me, I am undone for ever.
I would not deal amiss with any man for a thousand pound,
And yet he will cut a mans throat for twelve pence,
Here is a cluster of 〈◊〉 here lacks but the daily of Hexham
Well sir, here is the money, will it please you seal the as∣surance
With all my heart.
God save her sirs, and her good friends, is a poor
Welshman, come as far as Carnaiuan in Wales to receive a li∣tle
money, and here a has paid her I cannot tell what.
Here you master, wat is it not brass money?
No, honest fellow, tic a good Angel in gold.
Wh• told him my name? hear you moister, a has a
great deal more in her bosom, but a will take her leave.
Nay, stay and dine with me: I must fetch him o∣for
for all his gold.
Mary I thank her good Moister, I will weight upon
her I warrant you.
Now sir, have you sealed and subscribed?
I have sir.
And you deliver this as your deed to my use?
With all my heart Sir, and hope you will use me well.
We will talk of that another time, here is your money.
I thank you sir, Isle be gone.
Hear you sir, was not this bravely done?
Excellent: hold, here is forty pound, as I promised thee.
I thank you sir: do you hear Sir, you have got a
thousand pound by the bargain: but much good may it doe you.
God a mercy, and here's •ourty pound for thy pains,
Such another match, and Isle give thee a hundred pound.
I thank you sir, God buy: n•w to my welshman:
Sir, let me see thy piece of gold,
Isle tell thee whether it be weight or no?
Hast thou any more, Isle give thee white many for it.
Yes, a has a great deal more in her bosom,
But a will have no wit money: O a loves led money.
Well, Isle keep thē for thee till thou come to my house.
Why Cutbert, wilt thou never leave thy old knauery'•
Why, we should gre together like belles,
If thou were but hanged first,
Why we are as near kin together,
As the Cats of Banbery be to the hells of Lincoln.
Why man, we are all birds of a feather,
And whosoever says nay, we will hold together.
C•me you mad slave, thou doest not know me,
Tush, I have done many better tricks than this.
Why (you base slave) take you me for your fellow?
Why, I am of good reputation in the city,
And held in account with the best.
And yet thou art Cutbert the Conicatcher,
The Bailiefs son of Hexham, whose father being dead,
The devil carried to hell for his knavery:
How say thou, art not thou his son?
This grave black cloak makes you so proud,
You have forgotten who was your father.
Nay, I have not forgotten that my father was a Bai∣lief,
A man that would live to himself.
And yet in faith, he gave me nothing at his death,
But good counsel, how to live in the world.
But sir, as thou know me, I pray thee bewray me not,
And in any thing I can, command me.
Tush, fear not me, I will be as secrete as thy self:
•ut sir, tic thus, if thou wilt doe one thing,
I shall tell thee, I will give thee an hundred pound,
Tic nothing with thee I am sure.
Tush, tel me what it is: Isle doe it, I warrant thee.
Nothing but this, to swear upon a book
That thou saw a Gentleman pay a Farmer
Four hundred pound, as the last payment of a Farm,
That the said Gentleman bought of him.
Tush, if this be all, let me alone. I will doe it.
Why, tic nothing for me to swear,
For I am forsworn already, but when is the day?
Why to morrow.
But where shall I meet you?
Why upon the exchange at eight a clock.
I will not miss, till that time fare well.
Farewell, nay, you will scant farewell
By that time I have done, but I must about my business,
To find some knack to know this knave at large.
THe night draws on, &amp; Phoebus is declining towards the West.
Now shepherds bear their flocks unto the folds▪
〈…〉
Now leave to feed, and gin to take their rest,
Black dusky clouds environ round the globe,
And heaven is covered with a Sable r•be,
Now am I come to doe the kings command▪
To court a Wench &amp; win her for the King▪
But if I like her well, I say no more,
Tic good to have a hatch before the door:
But first I will move her Father to pre•er
The earnest suit I have in canuasing,
So may I see the Maid, woo, wed, I and bed her to:
Who is here? what ho.
Earl Ethenwald, welcome, how fares our friends at court
What cause constrains your Honour, that thus late
You visit vs, that dream not of your coming?
My Lord, I am come unlooked for, very true,
So is my cum•ing yet concealed from you.
Your Honour shall repose you here to night,
And early as you please, begin your task,
Time serves not now, come Ethenwald,
As welcome as the King himself to me.
Now Ethenwald, if Fortune favour thee,
Thou moist prove happy love to Alfrida.
This is the place, and this the appointed time,
I know heel keep his word, for he thinks me his friend,
But tell me Honesty, am I not well disguised,
Can any man discern me by my looks to be the King,
Take heed of that, for then our game is mart:
And hast thou promised him what reward he shall have.
Tush fear not you, for you never knew honest man dis∣semble with his friend,
Though many friends dissemble with honest men:
But, my Lord, the cards be shuffled, and here comes a knave.
Tic strange to see how men of our knowledge live,
And how we are hated of the baser sort,
Because (forsooth) we live upon our wit:
But let the baser sort think as they will,
For he may best he termed a Gentleman,
That when all fails, can live upon his wit.
And if all fails, then have I got a wench,
That cuts and deals, to maintain my expense,
Now I use her, as men use sweetest flowers,
That while they are sweet and pleasant to the eye,
I doe regard them for their pleasant smell:
But when their colour fades, and sent decays,
I cast them off for men to trample on:
But to the purpose, here is the Gentleman
My honest friend did lately tell me of.
Sir, though I had another business of import,
That might have hindered me for coming here,
Yet in regard I am loath to break my word,
I have set my other business clean apart,
Because you should not judge amiss of me,
I find you kind Sir, and your self shall see
How I will labour to requite your courtesy.
This is the honest man I told you of,
One that will doe you pleasure in the cause,
So be it you will content him for his pains.
Else God forbid, and good sir, thus it is,
I bought a farm of one that dwells here by,
And for an earnest gave an hundred pound,
The rest was to be paid as six weeks past,
Now sir, I would have you as witness,
That at my house you saw me pay three hundred pound,
And for your pains I will give you a hundred pound:
Besides, I will stand your friend in what I may,
You hear the cause, what will your conscience serve you to do it?
How say you sir, my conscience, then you touch me,
I tell you sir, my conscience will serve me to doe more than this:
Why, I have been a post knight in Westminster this xii. year,
And sworn to that which no one else would venture on.
Why, I have sworn against mine own father for money:
I have sworn right or wrong any ways for money,
whē I have rereiued money before witness, I swore to the cōtrary
And do you misdoubt me in so slight a matter as this,
When I have sworn against father, mother and all my kin?
I told you sir how resolute you should find him,
He doth it without fear I warrant you:
I think that in London you could not have found a man so fit for your purpose,
I knew his father (sir) a man of honest reputation,
And one whose life was witness to the life he led,
He was a Bailtefe (sir) though I say it, but no Bay•iefe that used deceit,
He had too good a conscience for that.
Al the better for that, for it should seem by his behaviour
That he hath had good bringing up.
Indeed my father in his life time was a man,
Given to the fear of God, and to use much devotion.
I, but he gave nothing for Gods sake, except it were
hard words or blows, and they had been better kept that given:
But hushed, here comes the Judge.
Hear you sir, if you be in readiness, here is the Judge.
I sir, fear not, I warrant you, is that your adversary?
What an old crust it is?
I think the villain hath a face hardened with steel,
He could never be so impudent else.
It it please your Worship, this is the man,
That wrongfully would have my farm from me,
Facing me down that •he hath paid me that,
Which he never offred, nor I never received:
And this day he hath promised to make proof,
That he hath paid me full four hundred pound.
And so I can, and here is my witness to it,
That saw me when I paid the money.
Why, I am sure he will not say it,
I never saw the man in all my life.
No sir? but I saw you, and was a witness,
When this Gentlemā paid you three hundred pound
As the last payment for the farm he bought.
But where was the money tendered?
At the Gentleman's house.
You see father, this merchant will be witness
That he saw so much money tendered,
And you received it, being full satisfied,
As the last payment for the farm he bought,
And if this merchant take his oath against you,
That seven days past he saw the money tendered,
I must pass sentence then against you needs.
But will you swear on the bible this is true?
I sir, and to that intent I came hither,
For I will never refuse to swear a truth while I live
Yet ere thou speak, vouchsafe to hear me speak,
Full three score Winters Gentle sir I have past,
And age hath brought gray hairs upon my head.
Look but upon my face, and thou shalt see,
The perfect pattern of humility.
Thou man of worth, or citizen, what ere thou be,
Weigh but my charge, and then thou wilt not swear
I have five sons, al pretty tender ba•es,
That live upon the farm that he would have,
Twelve hundred sheep do feed upon the plains,
That year lie bring a great increase to me,
Besides a hundred Oxen fitly fed:
That every Winter feed within my stalls,
And twenty poor men living near my house,
I daily feed, and all upon my Farm:
Go but among my neighbours, where I dwell,
And hear what good report they give of me.
The poor man never yet went from my door,
But to my power I did relieve his want:
I was no Farmer that enriched my self:
By raising markets and oppressing poor,
But I have sold my corn full many times
A• better rate, than I could well afford,
And all to help my needy brethren:
Then ere thou swearst, cal al these things to mind,
And thou wilt weep, and leave to swear vntrueths,
Confusion to thy body and thy soul.
Well, if thou be well advised, take thy oath,
But yet remember before whom thou swearest,
The God of truth and perfect equity,
Which will revenge wrong to the innocent,
with thousand plagues and tortors worse than death.
By the holy contents of this Bible,
And by that just God, before whom I stand, I saw this man,
Peace, shameless villain, execrable wretch,
Monster of nature, degenerate miscreant,
Who ever knew or heard so vile an oath,
Uildly pronounced by such a damned slave,
Have I such monstrous vipers in my land,
That with their very breaths infect the air,
Say Dunston, hast thou ever heard the like.
My Liege, such loathsome weeds must needs infect the corn,
Such Cankers perish both the root and branch,
Unless they be soon spied and weeded out:
Isle be the husbandman• to mow such Tares,
Here Honesty, let him be manacled:
And scar his forehead, that he may be known,
As Cain for murder, he for perjury.
〈…〉 I beseech your Grace be good to me.
〈…〉 I, you sha• have a cold iron 〈◊〉 in your forehead,
〈…〉 I would say, you are a 〈◊〉 end•ede.
•onicatcher. Goo• Honesty.
Good villain, theres no help for you.
My fancies thoughts, like the labouring Spider,
That spreads her nets, to entrap the silly Fly:
Or like the restless billows of the seas,
That ever alter by the fleeting ayre,
Still hovering past their wonted passions,
Makes me amazed in these extremities,
The King commands me on his embassage,
To Osricks daughter, beauteous Alfrrida,
The height and pride of all this bounding ill,
To post amain, plead love in his behalf,
To court for him, and woo, and wed the maid,
But have you never heard that theme,
Deceit in love is but a merriment,
To such as seek a•rival to prevent,
Whether (distraught) romes my unruly thoughts,
It is the King I cousin of his choice,
And he nil brook Earl Ethenwald should prove
False to his Prince, especially in love.
Thē thus it shall be, Isle tel the king the maid is fair,
Of nut browne colour, comely and fair spoken,
Worthy companion to an Earl or so:
But not a Bride for Edgar, Englands King,
This will allay the strong effects in love.
Fame wrought in Edgars mind of Alfrida.
Well, Isle to court, and dalie with the King,
And work some means to draw his mind from love.
NEighbour Walter I cannot but admire to see
How housekeeping is decayed within
this thirty year,
But where the fault is God knows, I know not:
My father in his life time gave hospitality to all strangers, and
Distressed travellers, his table was never empty of bread, beef
And beer, he was wont to keep a hundred tall men in his hall.
He was a fester of all comers in general,
And yet was he never in want of money:
I think God did bless him with increase, for his bountiful mind
Truly sir, I am sorry, you are fallen into decay,
In that you want to maintain household charge,
And whereof comes this want, I will tell you sir,
Tic only throw your great housekeeping:
Be ruled by me, and doe as I advise you:
You must learn to leave so great a tra•e of men,
And keep no more than needs of force you must,
And those you keep, let them be simple men,
For they will be content with simple fare,
Keep but a boy or two within your house,
To run of errants, and to wait on you,
And for your kitchen, keep a woman cooke,
One that will serve for thirty shillings a year:
And by that means you save two liveries,
And if ye will keep retainers towards you,
Let them be Farmers, or rich husbandmen,
For you shall find great profit (sir) in keeping them:
For if you stand in need of corn or hay,
Send but to them, and you may have it strait:
And if you kill a Beef, let it be so lean
The Butcher nor the Grassier will not buy it,
Your drink is too strong, and tastes too much of malt,
Tush, single beer is better far, both for your profit, and your ser∣uants health
And at a Christmas time feast none at al,
But such as yield you some commodity:
I mean such as will send you now and then,
Fat Geese and Capons to keep house withal,
To these and none else would I have you liberal.
Why neighbor, my goods are lent me to no other end
But to relieve my needy brethren, but God I hope hath in store for me.
I, trust you to that, &amp; you may hap die a beggar:
Why sir, if he should not trust in God, in whom should he
trust, for God is the giver of all good whatsoever.
True, and yet tic good for a man to trust to himself now
and then: for if you be down, and bid God help you up, and do not
help your self, you may fortune lie and perish: and therefore, serve
God on Sundays, as you are appointed, and thereby hope to be
saved, for by your alms deeds you cannot, for if you give to the
poor, there be many will say, he thinks to bee saved by his alms
deeds: and thus you shall be ill thought on for your good will, and
therefore learn to provide for your self, let God provide for the pore
I tel you neighbor, my great grandfather, &amp; all my pre∣decessors
have been held in good regard for their good housekee∣ping,
and (God willing) their good names shall never take an exi∣gent
in me, for I will (God willing) keep such hospitality to my
death, as my state can maintain, and I will rather sell my land,
to maintain hous-keeping, then keeping my land make sale of my
good name for housekeeping, but stay, who comes here.
God save you sir, I pray be good to me for cham
a poor man, and I cannot tell what you will doe, for you say my
horse hath broken into your corn, or your corn into my horse,
But indeed my neighbor saw your boy drive my horse into a field
But Isle stand to nothing, now I am warned with a piece of pa∣per,
and a little wax, to prepare or proceed to London,
And there I am invented, I cannot tell for what:
The Bailiefe here hath arrested me ere I was weary against my
will: he said it was upon your suit, &amp; yet he laid his hands on me,
Nay more, on my shoulder.
And sir, and it may please you, I borrowed certain
corn, and I brought you your corn again, and yet you rest me.
True sir, but then was corn sold for four shillings a bu∣shell,
and now tic sold for two.
I sir, but he borrowed corn, and promised to pay you corn
again, and you can have but so much as you lent:
For if he should pay you at the rate you demand,
You wold have for the twenty bushels you lent, forty,
Which were neither right nor conscience.
O sir, I pray let me alone with my conscience,
You would have me give al I have away to the poor, &amp; want as
you do, I pray let me alone to deal for my self: hear you, have
you rested them?
I have sir as you commanded me.
Then to prison with them, till they have paid such dam∣mages
as the law shall award them.
Hear you sir, if you should bid your boy break down
a gap, and drive in my horse, it were little better than plain knave∣rye,
for my horse is as honest a horse, as any is in this town.
Well neighbor, we will have the horse examined be∣fore
an officer, and my boy Jack shall write what the horse speaks
and if the horse say a was driven in against his will,
Then you may have the law of him, neighbor,
For all the horses in the parish will be sworn for his •orse.
But Isle stand to nothing.
Well, to prison with thē till they have paid your due, away with them.
Nay, I pray, be more miserable to me, and I will
give you forty shillings when I have it.
•y the Mas the knave hath a pretty cottage,
Isle see and I can get that: sir, you have an old cottage,
If you will make me that over by deed of gift,
I am content to draw my action.
My house? why tic my goods, my wife, my land,
My horse my ass, or any thing that his his: no you Caterpillar,
I will never make away my house, I will die first.
But tel me sir, howe much wold you have of them for
their trespass?
Mary, for forty shillings, and yet I befriend them,
Why sir, I hope you will not pay it for •hem?
But I will: sir Bailey, I will answer the poor men's
debts, and come home 〈◊〉 for thy fee anon, go old men.
Get you home and praise God.
Mary Iesus bless you: naibor, how many such good
Knights have you now a days?
Too few, neighbor, the more is the pity.
But come lets away.
But who comes her?
God save you gentlemen, the king greets you, and at this time,
Having some occasion, to use money, hath sent to know
What you that be Knights and Squires will lend his Grace,
And you moister Farmer, be brief (sir) for I cannot stay.
Sir, though hous-keeping be some hindrance to my willing
mind by reason it robs me of that, which should bewray my loving
mind both to my prince &amp; country, money I mean which at this
time I stand in some want of, yet of that small store that I have,
am willing to impart the lending of the king xx. pound, and more
I assure you I am not able.
Very well, and what say you moister Squire.
I say that my revenues are but small, yet I will
lend his Majesty ten pound:
Very well, but what saith the Farmer?
What can he spare the King?
Marry sir, I am a poor Farmer, &amp; yet I can afford
To lend the King a hundred or two of pounds,
And hear you sir, if you prefer a suit I have to the King,
I will give you forty Angels for your pains:
Besides, I will give you the keeping of a dozen jade:
And now and then meat for you and your horse.
If you come to my house and lie a whole year.
Why thats well said, and I commend thy honest mind,
Would all men were of thy mind:
I warrant thee, thou art an honest man, &amp; one that loves the king
But tel me, what would thou have me doe?
Nothing but procure me the Kings letter to convey corn
beyond seas, for in England it is so good cheap, that a man can
make no living by selling thereof: therefore if the King will grant
me his letter, I will at any time, lend him five or six hundred
and perhaps never ask it again, and I will not forget your pains.
Sir, fear not, I will do it for you, I warrant you,
For I tel you, I can do much with the King.
I believe you will do more than you will be commended for,
The Courtier resembles the Iay, that decks her self with the
feathers of other birds, to make her self glorious:
So the Courtier must be brave, tho he be hanged at the gallous.
Well sir, will it please you to come and dine with me.
I thank you sir heartily.
But whats he there in your company.
A plain fellow, and his name is Honesty.
O let him go where he will, for he shall not dine with me.
See how the Farmer fears my name,
What wold he doe if he knew my nature?
But hear you (moister Courtier) shall I dine with you?
I promise you sir, I am very hungry,
Truly Honesty, if I were furnished with money,
I would not stick to give thee thy dinner,
But now thou see I am but a guest my self.
Truly honest fellow, if I were certain of my cheer, I
wold bid thee to dinner, but know not my prouisiō I promise thee
Hear you sir, will it please you to take part of a piece of
beef with me, you shall be welcome.
I thank you sir, but I must dine with my honest friend
here, else I would not refuse your gentle offer.
See how he can use my name and not me,
But I perceive I may go dine with Duke Humfrie,
God buy Gentlemen, for none here hath occasion to use Honesty
Yes Honesty, thou shalt be my brothers guest and mine.
Mary and I thank you to, for now the world may say,
That Honesty dines with Hospitality to day,
DAughter, see that you entertain the Earl,
As best beseems his state and thy degree:
He comes to see whether Fame have worthily
Been niggard, in commending thee or no,
So shall thy virtues be admired at the court.
And thou be praised for kind and debonair,
For courtesy contents a Courtier oft:
When nothing else seems pleasant in his eyes.
Father, you shall perceive that Alfrida
Will doe her best in honouring of your age,
To entertain the Earl of Cornwall so,
That he shall think him highly favoured,
Throw loving speech and courteous entertain.
How fares my L. of Cornwall, what displeased
Or troubled with a mood thats male content?
Not male content, and yet I am not well,
For I am troubled with a painful rum,
That when I would be merry, troubles me,
And commonly it holds me in my eyes.
With such extremes, that I can scantly see.
How long have you been troubled with the pain,
Or is it a pain that you have usual?
Or is it some water, that by taking cold,
Is fallen into your eyes, and troubles you?
I cannot tel, but sure it pains me much,
Nor did it ever trouble me till now,
For till I came to lodge within your house,
My eyes were clear, and I never felt the pain.
I am sorry that my house should cause your grief
Daughter, if you have any skill at all,
I pray you use your cunning with the Earl,
And see if you can ease him of his pain.
Father, such skill as I received of late,
By reading many pretty pend receipts,
Both for the ache of head, and pain of eyes.
I will, if so it please the Earl to accept it,
Endeavour what I may to comfort him.
My Lord, I have waters of approved worth,
And such as are not common to be found:
Any of which, if it please your honour, use them,
I am in hope, will help you to your sight,
No (matchless Alfrida) they will doe me no good.
For I am troubled only when I look.
On what (my Lord) or whom?
I cannot tell.
Why let me see your eyes (my Lord) look upon me.
Then twil be worse.
What, if you look on me? then Isle be gone.
Nay stay, sweet love, stay beauteous Alfrida▪
And give the Earl of Cornwall leave to speak:
Know Alfrida, thy beauty hath subdued,
And captivate the Earl of Cornwels heart
Briefly, I love thee, seem I near so bold,
So rude and rashly to prefer my suit,
And if your father give but his consent,
Eased be that pain that troubles Ethenwald.
And this considered, Osricke shall prove,
My father, and his daughter be my love,
Speak Osrick, shall I have her I or no?
My Lord with al my hart, you have my consent
If so my daughter please to condescend.
But what saith Alfrida?
I say (my Lord) that seeing my father grants,
I will not gainsay, what his age thinks meet,
I do appoint my self (my Lord) at your dispose,
Well Osrick, now you see your daughter's mine,
But tel me when shall be the wedding day,
On Monday next, till then you are my guest.
Well Osricke, when our nuptial rites are past,
I must to Court, of business to the King.
Let that be as you please my Lord,
But stay not long, for I shall hardly brooke your absence then.
Fear not Alfrida, I will not stay there long,
But come, let vs in Father, pray lead the way.
TEl me Dunston, what think thou of the favours of Kings
〈…〉 of 〈◊〉 favours as of a Marigold flower,
〈…〉 shines opens her leaves,
And with the least cloud closes again:
Or like the Violets in America, that in summer yield an odiffe∣rous smell,
And in winter a most infectious savour:
For at every full sea they flourish, or at every dead op they vade:
The fish Palerna being perfect white in the calm,
Yet turns black with every storm:
Or like the trees in the deserts of Africa,
That flourish but while the southwest wind blows:
Even so (my Lord) is the favours of kings to them they favour,
For as their favours give life, so their frowns yield death.
Well said, Dunston, but what merits he that dissembles
with his Sovereign?
In my opinion (my Lord) he merits death.
Then assure thy self, if Ethenwald dissemble, he shall
die: but who comes here? Perin, what news, that thou comes
in such hast? and what is he that bears thee company?
It is my gracious Lord and honest man,
And one it seems that loves you Majesty:
For as your Grace gave me in charge,
I went about into the country, to see what sums of money I could make,
Among the chiefest of the communaltie:
And amongst the richest Knights that I could find,
They would lend your Grace at most but twenty ponnd,
And every Squire would lend you Grace but ten:
Then came I amongst the rest to this plain man,
And asked him what he would lend the king,
He answered sir, you see I am but poor,
Not half so wealthy as a Knight or Squire,
And yet in sign of duty to his Grace,
I will lend his Majesty two hundred pound.
Thanks honest fellow, for thy love to vs,
And if I may but pleasure thee in ought,
Command me to the uttermost I may:
England hath too few men of thy good mind.
Honesty, what news? where hast thou been so long?
A my Lord, I have been searching for a privy knave
One (my Lord) that feeds upon the poor commons,
And makes poor Piers ploughman wear a thread bare coat,
It is a farmer (my Lord) which buys up all the corn in the mar∣ket,
and sends it away beyond seas, &amp; thereby feeds the enemy.
Alas, poor piers ploughmen, what ail thou? why doest
thou weep, peace man, if any have offended thee,
Thou shalt be made amends unto the most.
I beseech your Grace to pity my distress,
There is an unknown thief that robs the common wealth,
And makes me and my poor wife and children beg for mainte∣nonce,
The time hath been (my Lord) in diebus illis,
That the Plowmans coat was of good homespun russet cloth,
Whereof neither I nor my servants had no want,
Though now both they and I want,
And all by this unknown Farmer:
For there cannot be an aker of ground to be sold,
But he will find money to buy it: nay my Lord, he hath money
to buy whole Lordships, and yet but a Farmer,
I have kept a poor house where I dwell this four score year,
Yet was I never driven to want till now:
I beseech your Grace, as you have still been just,
To seek redress for this oppression
I beseech your Grace read my humble petition.
Let me see the humble petition, of poor piers ploughmen,
Alas poor piers, I have heard my father say,
That piers ploughmen was one of the best members in a commō wealth,
For his table was never empty of bread, beef, and beer,
As a help to all distressed travellers: but where thou tell me,
I harbour him, and he is daily under my elbow,
I assure thee tic more than I know, for I harbour none but this
which is my honest fry•d.
Is this your honest friend? the devil a is (my Lord)
This is he: if you doubt my word to be true, call in Clarke of the
Assizes, now shall your Grace see,
How Honesty can shake out a knave in this company:
Sir, tell me who hath most poor men in suit at this Syses?
That hath Walter would have more▪
He hath one poor man in suit for certain Barley,
And another for that his horse was taken in his corn.
But what inditemennts are against him, read them
F•rst, he hath conueyed corn out of the land to feed the
Enemy. Next, hee hath turned poor Piers Ploughmen out of
doors by his great raising of rents.
Next, he is known to bee a common disturber of men of their
quiet, by serving Writs on them, and bringing them to London,
to their utter undoing.
Also, he keeps corn in his barn, and suffers his brethren and
neighbours to lie and want, and thereby makes the market so
dear, that the poor can buy no corn.
Enough: now fie upon thee, thou monster of nature,
To seek the utter undoing of many, to enrich thy self:
Honesty, take him, and use him as thou will•.
Come sir, I think I found out your knavery,
Away sir, and bear your fellow company.
Health and good hap befall your Majesty,
Ethenwald welcome, how fares our beauteous love,
Be breeze man, what, will she love or no?
Then as your Grace did give to me in charge,
I have discharged my duty every way,
And communed with the maid you so commend:
For when the Sun, rich Father of the day,
E•e of the world, King of the spangled vale,
Had run the circuit of the Horizon,
And that Artofelex, the nights bright star,
Had brou••• fair L•na from the purpled mayne,
Where 〈◊〉 was 〈◊〉 with her wanton love,
To lend her light to weary travellers.
Then it was my chance to arrive at Osricks house?
But being late I could not then unfold
The message that your Grace had given in charge:
But in the morn Aurora did appear,
At sight of whom the Welkin straight did clear.
Then was the spangled •ale of heaven drawn in,
And phoebus rose like heavens imperial King:
And ere the Sun was mounted five degrees
The maid ca•e down and gave me the good day,
But being come, what said she then?
How likest thou her, what is she fair or no?
My Lord, she is coloured like the Scythia Maid,
That challenged Lucio at the Olympian games,
Well bodied, but) her face was something black,
Like those that follow household business:
Her 〈◊〉 were hollow sunk into her head,
Which makes her have a cloudy countenance,
She hath a pretty tongue, I must confess,
And yet (my Lord) she is nothing eloquent.
Why then (my Lord,) theres nothing good in her.
Yes my Lord, she is fit to serve an Earl or so,
But far unfit for •dgar Englands King.
So then she is fit for Ethenwald our Cornish Earl,
But far unfit for Edgar Englands king:
Well Ethenwald, I found your policy:
But tell me in faith, doest thou love the maid.
Speak truly man, dissemble not.
I doe (my gracious Lord) and therewithal,
Entreat your Majesty to pardon me.
Ethenwald, I am content to pardon thee,
And will be with thee my self ere long,
To doe thee honour in thy marriage,
And therefore Ethenwald thou moist depart,
And leave vs till we visit thee at home.
My gracious Lord I humbly take my leave.
If is please your Grace pardon me, and give me leave
I would gladly bring my Nephew on the way.
With all my heart Dunston, but stay not long.
I humbly take my leave of your Majesty.
Farewell Ethenwald, but Perin tell me now,
What doest thou think of Alfrida,
Is she so foul as Ethenwald reports her,
Believe me then she had been unfit for me.
My gracious Lord, Ethenwald hath dissembled with your Majesty,
For Alfrida is fair and virtuous:
For last night, being in private conference,
He told me he had devised a mean
To colour with the King by forged excuse,
No, no, (quoth he) my Alfrida is fair,
As is the radiant North star Crystalline,
That guides the wet and weary Traveller,
Soust with the surge of Neptunes watery main,
And thus my Lord, he fell to praising her,
And from his pocket straight he drew this counterfeit,
And said it was made by beauteous Alfrida.
A face more fair than is the Suns bright beams,
Or snow white Alps beneath fair Cynthia,
Who would refuse with Hercules to spin,
When such fair faces bears vs company.
Fair Pollyxena never was so fair:
Nor she that was proud love to Troylus.
Great Alexanders love, Queen of Amazons,
Was not so fair as is fair Alfrida.
But perin, be thou secrete to the King,
And I will sound these subtle practises,
And Ethenwald, be sure I will quittance thee,
And teach thee how to dally with thy King,
But perin lets to Court until to morn,
And then weal take horse and away.
Now let vs constult among our selves,
How to misbehaue our selves to the Kings worship,
Iesus bless him: and when he comes, to deliver him this petition
I think the Smith were best to do it, for hes a wise man.
Naighbor, he shall not doe it, as long as Iefferay the
Translator is Mayor of the town.
And why, I pray, because I would have put yo• from the Mace?
No, not for that, but because he is no good fellow,
Nor he will not spend his pot for company.
Why (sir) there was a god of our occupation, and I
charge you by virtue of his godhed, to let me deliver the petitiō.
But soft you, your God was a Cuckold, and his God∣head
was the horn, and thats the Arms of the Godhood you call
upon. Go, your are put down with your occupation, and now I will
not grace you so much as to deliver the petition, for you.
What, dispraise our trade?
Nay, neighbour, be not angry, for Isle stand to nothing
only but this.
But what? bear witness a gives me the But, and I
am not willing to shoot: Cobbler, I will talk with you: nay, my
bellows, my coletrough, and my water shall enter arms with
you for our trade: O neighbour, I can not bear it, nor I will not
bear it.
Hear you, neighbour, I pray co•swade your self and be
not wilful, &amp; let the Cobbler deliver it, you shall see him mar all,
At your request I will commit my self to you,
And lay my self open to you, like an Oyster.
Isle tell him what you say: Hear you naighbor, we have
cons•ulted to let you deliver the petition, doe it wisely for the cre∣dite
of the t•wne.
Let me alone, for the Kings Carminger was here,
He says the King will be here anon.
But hark, by the Mas he comes.
How now Perin, who have we here?
We the towns men of Goteham,
Hearing your Grace would come this way,
Did think it good for you to stay,
But hear you, neighbours, bid somebody ring the bells,
And we are come to you alone to deliver our petition,
What is it Perin, I pray thee read.
Nothing but to have a license to brew strong Ale thrice a
we•k, and he that comes to Goteham, and will not spend a penny
on a pot of Ale, if he be a dry, that he may fast.
Well sirs, we grant your petition.
We humbly thank your royal May••y.
Come Dunston, lets away.
Ethenwald, be advised, the King hath sent to thee,
Nay, more, he means to come and visit thee,
But why, I theres the question?
Why tic for this, to see if he can find,
A front whereon to graft a pair of horns▪
But in plain terms, he comes to Cu•kold me,
And for he means to doe it without suspect,
He sends me word he means to visit me:
The King is amorous, and my wife is kind,
So kind (I fear) that she will quickly yield
To any motion that the king shall make:
Especially if the motion be of love:
For Pliny writes, women are made like wax•,
Apt to receive any impression:
Whose minds are like the Ianamy••,
That eats, yet cries, and never is satisfied:
Well, be as it is, for Isle be sure of this,
It shall be no ways prejudice to me:
For I will set a screen before the fire,
And so prevent what otherwise would ensue:
It were good I q•actioned with my father first,
To hear how he affected towards the King.
What ho.
Ethenwald, my son, what news?
Why ask you? I am sure you have heard the news.
Not yer, I promise you my Lord.
Why then tic thus, the King doth mean to come and visit you.
And welcome shall his Majesty be to me,
That in the wane of my decreasing years,
Uouchsafes this honour to Earl Osricks house.
So then, you mean to entertain him well?
What else my Son?
Nay, as you will, but hear you wife, what do you think
in this, that Edgar means to come and be your guest?
I think my Lord he shall be welcome then,
And I hope that you will entertain him so:
That he may know how Osrick honours him:
And I will be attired in cloth of Bis,
Beset with Orient pearl, fetched from rich Indian
And all my chamber shall be richly,
With Aras hanging, fetched from Alexandria,
Then will I have rich Counterpoints and musk,
Calamon, and Cassia, sweet smelling Amber Greece,
That he may say, Venus is come from heaven.
And left the Gods to marie Ethenwald.
Zwouns, they are both agreed to cuckold me.
But hear you wife, while I am master of the Bark,
I mean to keep the helmster in my hand:
My meaning is, you shall be ruled by me,
In being disguised till the King be gone,
And thus it shall be, for I will have it so.
The King hath never seen thee I am sure,
Nor shall he see thee now, if I can choose:
For thou shalt be attired in some base weeds,
And Kate the kitchen maid shall put on thine:
For being richly tyred, as she shall be,
She will serve the turn to keep him company.
Why, men that bear of this will make a scorn of you.
And he that lies with this will make a horn for me.
It is enough, it must be so.
Me thinks it were better otherways.
I think not so, will you be gone?
Father, let me alone, Isle break her of her will,
We that are married to young wives, you see,
Must have a special care unto their honesty:
For should we suffer them to have their will:
They are apt (you know) to fall to any ill.
But here comes the King.
Earl Osricke, you must needs hold vs excused,
Though boldly thus vnbid we visit you:
But know the cause that moved vs leave our Court,
Was to doe honour to Earl Ethenwald:
And see his lovely Bride, fair Alfrida.
My gracious Lord, as welcome shall you be,
To me, my Daughter, and my son in Law,
As Titus was unto the Roman Senators,
When he had made a conquest on the Gods:
That in requ•tall of his service done,
Did offer him the imperial Diadem:
As they in Titus, we in your Grace still find,
The perfect figure of a Princely mind.
Thanks Osrick, but I think I am not welcome,
Because I cannot see fair Alfrida:
Osricke, I will not stay, nor eat with thee,
Till I have seen the Earl of Cornwels wife.
If it please your Majesty to stay with vs,
My wife shall wait as handmaid on your Majesty:
And in her duty show her husbands love:
And in good time, my Lord, see where she comes:
you must leave your kitchen tricks,
And use no words but princely Majesty.
Now Iesus bless your honourable Grace,
C•me I pray, sit down, you are welcome by my tree•th,
As God save me here is never a napkin, fie, fie,
Come on, I pray eat some plums, they be sugar,
Here is good drink by Lady, why do you not eat?
May, pray thee eat Alfrida, it is enough for me to see thee eat,
I thank you heartily: by my troth here is never a cushen
By my troth Isle k•ok you anon, go to.
My Lord, this is not Alfrida, this is the kitchen maid,
Peace Perin, I have found their subtlety,
Ethenwald, I pray thee let me see thy kitchen Maid,
Me thinks it is a pretty homely Wench:
I promise thee, Ethenwald, I like her well.
My Lord, she is a homely kitchen maid,
And one whose bringing up hath been but rude:
And far unfit for Edgars company:
But if your Grace want merry company,
I will send for Ladies wise and courteous.
To be associates with your Majesty.
Or if you Grace will have Musicians sent for,
I will fetch your Grace the best in all this land.
Etherwald, no, I will have the kitchen maid,
And therefore, if you love me, send for her.
For till she come I cannot be content.
Father, I will not fetch her: zwouns, see where she comes
Successful fortune and his hearts content,
Daily attend the person of the King.
And Edgar know that I am Alfrida, daughter to Osrick,
And lately made the Earl of Cornwals wife.
Why, is not this Alfrida?
No, mygood Lord, it is the kitchen maid,
Whom Ethenwald in too much love to me,
Hath thus attired to dally with the King.
By my troth (my Lord) she lies, go to, Isle course you by and by.
Away (base strumpet) get the from my sight.
Go your ways, you are a cogging knave I warrant you.
Base Ethenwald, dissembler thae thou art,
So to dissemble with thy Sovereign,
〈◊〉 afterword under a show of love,
Thou came to sooth thy leasing to the King,
Meaning by that to make me to conceive,
That thy intent was just and honourable:
But see, at last thou hast deceived thy self,
And Edgar hath found out thy subtle•ie,
Which is requite, think Edgar is thy enemy,
And vows to be revenged for this ill.
Go to thy husband beauteous Alfrida,
For Edgar can subdue affects in love.
Thanks, gracious King, mirror of curtest,
Whose virtuous thoughts bewray thy princely mind
And makes thee famous amongst thy enemies:
For what is he that hears of Edgars name,
And will not yield him praise as he deserves.
Nor hath your Grace ever been praised more,
Or termed more just in any action,
Than you shall be in conquering your desires,
And yielding pardon to Earl Ethenwald.
Will you be gone?
My gracious Lord, I humbly take my leave.
H•w am I wronged, and yet without redress?
Have patience good my Lord, and call to mind
How you have lived praised for virtuous government,
You have subdued lust unto this day,
〈◊〉 been reputed wise in government,
And will you •lemish all your honours got,
〈◊〉 being term• a foul Adulterer.
Dunston, forbear for I will have it so,
It boots thee not to counsel me in this,
For I have sworn the death of Ethenwald.
And he shall •ie, or Edgar will not live.
Dunston, it is enough, I am resolved.
Nay, if it be so, then Ethenwald shall not die,
〈◊〉 since ••reaties can not serve the turn:
I ••ll make make proof for once what Art will doe,
What wilt thou?
Tel me what means the King?
I will not tell thee.
I charge thee by the eternal living God,
That keeps the Prince of darkness bound in chains,
And by that Sun, that thou would gladly see,
By heaven and earth, and every living thing,
Tel me that which I did demand of thee.
Then thus, the king doth mean to murder Ethenwald
But where is the king?
Seeking for Ethenwald.
But Isle prevent him, follow me invisible.
I will.
I have been this morning with a friend of mine,
That would borrow a small sum of money of me,
But I have learned the best assurance a man can have,
In such a matter is a good pawn of twice the value,
Or bonds sufficient for five times the quantity.
He is my near kinsman, I confess, and a Clergy man,
But fifty shillings is money, &amp; though I think I might trust him
simply with it for a twelvemonth, where hee craves it but for a
month, yet simply I will not be so simple:
For I will borrow his gelding to ride to the Term,
And keep away a just fortnight:
If then he pay me my money, I will deliver him his horse,
I wold be loath to lose my money, or crave assurance of my kinsmā,
But this may be done to try me, &amp; I mean likewise to try him.
This is plain, though truly (brethreu) something subtle.
But here comes one would fine take my house of me.
Sir, I am a poor man, and I will give you thirty
shillings a year, if I may have it you shall be sure of your money.
Truly brother in Christ, I cannot afford it of the price.
I must let my house to live, I ask no gains, but who comes •ere?
I beseech you (good moister) for Gods sake, give one pe∣no
to the poor, lame, and blind, good moister give something.
Fie upon thee lazy fellow, art thou not ashamed to beg?
Read the blessed saying of S. Paul, which is, thou shalt get thy li∣uing
with the sweat of thy brows, and he that will not labour is
not worthy to eat.
I, but he remembers not where Christ saith, hee that
gives a cup of cold water in my name shall be blessed.
Alas sir, you see I am old.
But thats no reason you should beg.
Alas sir, age coming on me, and my sight being gone,
I hope sir, you will pardon me though I beg, and therefore for
Gods sake one penny, good master.
Why I cel thee no, for the Spirit doth not move me
thereunto: and in good time, look in the blessed Proverb of Sa∣lomon,
which is, good deeds do not justify a man, therefore I count
it sin to give thee any thing.
See how he can turn and wind the Scripture to his
own use, but he remembers not where Christ saith,
He that gives to the poor lends unto the Lord,
And he shall be repaid seven fold: but the Priest forgets that, or at
least wise he will not remember it.
Now fie upon thee, is this the pureness of your religion▪
God will reward you no doubt for your hard dealing.
Care not thou for that, well neighbor, if thou wilt have
my house, fr•e•d, and brother in Christ, it will cost you forty shil∣lings,
tic well worth it truly, provided this, I may not stay for
my rent, I might have a great deal more, but I am loath to ex∣act
on my brother.
And yet he will sell all a poor man hath to his shirt, for
one quarters rent.
Gods blessing on your heart sir, you made a godly ex∣hortation
an Sunday.
I brother, the Spirit did move me thereunto: Fie
upon usury, when a man will cut his brothers throat for a little
Lucre, fie upon it, fie, we are borne one to live by another, and for
a man to let his own as he may line, tic allowed by the word of
God, but for usury and oppression, fie on it, tic ungodly, but tell
me will you have it?
I will give you, as I have proffered you.
Truly I cannot afford it, I would I could, but I
must go to our exercise of prayer, &amp; after I must go see a Farm
that I should have.
MOst gracious Prince, vouchsafe to hear me speak,
In that the law of kindred pricks me on,
And though I speak contrary to your mind,
Yet doe I build on hope you will pardon me.
Were I as eloquent as Demosthenes,
Or like Isocrates were given to Oratory:
Your Grace no doubt will think the time well spent,
And I should gain me commendations:
But for my note is tuned contrary,
I must entreat your Grace to pardon me, if I do jar in my deli∣very.
Why Dunston, thou hast found vs gracious still,
Nor will we pull our settled love from thee,
Until we find thy dealings contrary:
But if thy parley be for Ethenwald,
That base dissembler with his sovereign.
It were better leave to speak in his excuse,
Than by excusing him game our ill will:
For I am minded like the Salamander stone,
That fired with anger, will not in hast be quenched:
Though wax be soft, &amp; apt to receive any impression.
Yet will hard mettell take no form, except you melt the same.
So mean men's minds may move as they think good,
But Kings just dooms are irrevocable.
Tic not enough, where lust doth move the offence.
Why, Counsellors may not with Kings dispense.
A Counsellor may speak if he see his prince offend.
And for his Counsel rue it in the end.
But Dunston, leave, you urge vs over far,
We pardon what is past, but speak no more
May pardon me, for I will speak my mind,
Your Grace may call to mind proud Marius fall,
That through his wilful mind, lost life and empire,
And Nimrod, that built huge Babylon,
And thought to make a tour to check the clouds,
Was soon dismayed by unknown languages:
For no one knew what any other spake,
Which made him to confess, though it were too late,
Hee had made offence in temp•ing of the Lord.
Remember Dauid, Solomon and the rest,
Nor had proud Holofernes lost his head,
Had he not been a foul Adulterer.
Dunston, forbear, and let this answer thee
Thou art too presumptuous in reproouing me,
For I have sworn as truly as I live,
That I will never pardon Ethenwald.
Did you but see the man, I am assured,
You would not choose but pardon Ethenwald.
Why Dunston, you have seen as well as I,
That Ethenwald hath dissembled with the King,
My gracious Lord, first cut that Traitor down.
And then will others fear the like amiss.
I tell thee perin, were the Earl in place,
Thou would eat these words uttered in his disgrace,
Veni Asmoroth, &amp; in good time see where he comes.
But tel me Dunston, is this Alfrida?
It is my gracious ••rd, &amp; this is Ethēwald
That lays his breast wide open to your Grace,
If so it please your Grace to pardon him.
Yes, Dunston, I am well content to pardon him,
Ethenwald stand up, and rise up Alfrida,
For Edgar now gives pardon to you both.
Asmoroth away, My gracious Lord, Dunston will not for¦get
This unknown favour shown Earl Ethenwald,
For which account my Nephew and my self,
Do yield both lyfes and goods at your dispose.
Thanks Dunston for thy honourable love,
And thou deserve to be a Counsellour,
For he deserves not other to command,
That hath no power to moister his desire,
For Locrin being the eldest son of B•ute,
Did dote so far upon an Almaine maid,
And was so ravished with her pleasing sight,
That full seven years he kept her under earth,
Even in the life time of fair Guendolin:
Which made the Cornish men to rise in Arms,
And never left till Locrin was slain:
And now though late, at last I call to mind,
What wretched ends fell to Adulterers.
And if your Grace cal Abrams tale to mind,
When that Egyptian Pharo craved his wife,
You will no doubt forgive my Nephews guilt,
Who by the merry jest he showed your Grace,
Did save your Honour and her chastity.
We take it so, and for amends
Ethenwald, give me thy hand and we are friends,
And love thy wife and live together long,
For Edgar hath forgot all former wrong.
Thanks gracious King, and here upon my knee,
I rest to be disposed as you please:
Enough Ethenwald, but who comes here.
Why, I think I have taken in hand an endless task,
To smell a Knave, tic more than a Dog can doe:
I have disguised my self of purpose to find
A couple of Knaves, which are yet behind,
The next Knave is a Priest, called Iohn the precise,
That with counterfeit holiness blinds the peoples eyes,
This is one of them that will say it is a shame,
For men to swear and blaspheme Gods holy name:
Yet if a make a good Sermon but once in a year,
A will be forty times in a Tavern making good cheer,
Yet in the Church he will read with such sobriety,
That you would think him very precise, and of great honesty.
What Honesty, hast thou dispatcht and found these pri∣uie
knaves?
I shall doe anon, I have them in sent, but I will be gone.
Good Lord, I praise God I am come from our mornings exercise,
Where I have profited my self, and eified my brethren,
In showing the way to salvation by my doctrine:
And now I am going to the Court to prefer my petition.
I would give a hundred pound it were granted:
Tic a thing of nothing, but here comes one of the Court,
God save you, brother in Christ, are you towards the King.
I mary am I, what then, why doest thou ask?
Nothing sir, but I would desire you to stand my friend
To get me the Kings hand and seal to this letter:
I would not use it (sir) to hinder any man for a thousand pound:
For indeed I am a Clergy man by my profession:
Tic nothing sir, but as you see, to have the Kings seal,
T carry Tin, Lead, Wool and broad Clothes beyond seas,
For you know (sir) every man will make the most he can of his own
And for my part, I use it but for a present necessity▪
If you will undertake to doe it, Isle give you a hundred pound.
I thank you sir, but I am afraid the King will
hardly grant it: why, tic an undoing to the common wealth,
But truly I will move the King to hang you Priest in faith.
May it please you Grace to grant me my petition,
For I offer it your Grace in pure devotion.
O monstrous: Dunston, did thou ever hear the like,
Now fie upon thee base villain▪ lay hands on him.
On me? nay, on him: Priest, I gave your petition to the King,
And I will speak to him you may be but hanged,
For if you should live till the King granted your petition,
The very Ravens would pick out thine cies living:
And therefore it were better you were hanged to save the birds a labour.
Now Honesty, hast thou done, is here all▪
O no, my Lord, for there are so many behind,
That I am afraid my work will never have an end:
But I see by the Priests looks, he lacks company,
Stay a while, my Lord, Isle fetch another presently.
Fie, Graceless man, hast thou no fear of God,
To withhold thee from these lawless motions,
Why, thou should be as Messenger of God,
And hate deceit and wicked avarice:
But thou art one of those whom God doth hate,
And thy wild deeds will witness against thy soul:
And make the most abominable in his sight,
That made thee (wretch) but to a better end,
Then thus to wrong his sacred Deity.
Now fie upon thee monster of a man,
That for to gain thy self a private gain,
Would seek the undoing of a common wealth.
And though thou bid ten thousand torments here
They cannot quit thee where thou shalt appear.
A Prize, though it be long, I have found him at last,
But I could not bring him with me,
And therefore I pind a paper on his shoulder,
Meaning thereby to mark him for the gailous:
But hushed, here he comes.
What Perin? I cannot think that Perin will be false to me
Why no, for he is false to himself, look in his pocket &amp; see,
This is but a false writ that he hath used,
Unknown to your Majesty, and levied great sums of money,
And bribed upon your poor Commons extremely,
How say you my Lord, is this true or no?
Honesty, thou say true, why, impious wretch,
Ungrateful wretch that thou art to injure him that always held thee dear,
Believe me Dunston, I durst well have sworn,
That Perin had not hatched so base a thought,
I, but your Grace sees you are deceived.
But will your Grace grant me one boon?
Whats that Honesty?
That I may have the punishing of them,
Whom I have so laboured to find.
With all my hart Honesty, use them as thou wilt.
I thank your Grace: go fetch the other two:
Now to you Cutbert Cutpurse the Conicatcher,
Thy judgment is to stand at the Market cross,
And have thy cursed tongue pind to thy breast,
And there to staud for men to wonder at:
Till Owls and night-Rauens pick out thy cursed eyes.
Good Honesty be more merciful.
You know my mind: O Walter that wold have more,
And you shall have judgment I mean, which is,
To be carried into a corn field, and th•r have your legs and hands
cut off, because you loved corn so well, and there rest till the crows thereunto,
pick out thine eyes.
But now to you that will do nothing except the spirit move you
You shall for abusing the blessed word of God,
And mocking the divine order of Ministry,
Whereby you have led the ignorant into errors,
You (I say) as you were shameless in your shameful dealing,
Shall to your shame, &amp; the utter shame of al bad minded men,
That live as thou hast done,
Stand in Finsburie fields, near London,
And there (as a dissembling Hypocrite) be shot to death.
Good Honesty, be more favourable than so.
Truly no, the spirit doth not move me thereunto,
But who is next, what Perin, a Courtier, and a Cosoner to,
I have a judgment yet in store for thee,
And for because I will use thee favourably,
In faith thy judgment is to be but hanged,
But where? even at Tyborne in a good two-peny hal•er,
And though you could never abide the seas,
Yet now against your will, you must bear your sail, namely your sheer,
And in a cart be towde up Holburne hill,
Would all men living like these in this land,
Might be judged so at Honesties hand.
Well Honesty come follow vs to Court,
Wheee thou shalt be rewarded for thy pain.
I thank your Grace: you that will damn your selves for lucres sake
And make no conscience to deceive the poor:
You that be enemies of the common wealth:
To send corn over to enrich the enemy:
And you that doe abuse the word of God,
And send over wool and Tin, broad cloth and lead,
And you that counterfeit Kings privy seals,
And thereby rob the willing minded Communaltie,
I warn you all that use such subtle villainy,
Beware least you like these be found by Honesty,
Take heed I say, for if I catch you once,
Your bodies shall be meat for Crows,
And the Devil shall have your bones,
And thus though long at last we make an end,
Desiring you to pardon whats amiss,
And way the work, though it be grossy pend,
Laugh at the faults, and weigh it as it is,
And Honesty will pray upon his knee,
God cut then off that wrong the Prince or Communaltie.
And may her days of bless never have end,
Upon whose life so many lives depend.

NOt marching now in fields of Thracimene,
Where Mars did mate the Carthaginians,
Nor sporting in the dalliance of love,
In courts of Kings where state is ouerturnd,
Nor in the pomp of proud audacious deeds,
Intends our Muse to daunt his heavenly verse:
Only this (Gentlemen) we must perform,
The form of Faustus fortunes good or bad.
To patient Judgements we appeal our plate,
And speak for Faustus in his infancy:
Now is he borne, his parents base of stock,
In Germany, within a town called Rhod•s:
Of riper yéeres to Wertenberg he went,
Whereas his kinsmen chiefly brought him up,
So soon hée profits in Divinity,
The fruitful plot of Scholerisme graced,
That shortly he was graced with Doctors name,
Excelling all, whose swéete delight disputes
In heavenly matters of Theology,
Till sue•lne with cunning of a s•lfe conceit,
His wa•en wings did mount aboue his reach,
And mel•ing heavens conspired his overthrow.
For falling to a devilish exercise,
And glut• more with learnings golden gifts,
He surffets upon cursed Necromancy▪
Nothing so sweet as magic is to him
Which he prefers before his chiefest bliss,
And this the man that in his study sits.
Settle thy studies Faustus, and begin
To sound the depth o• that thou wilt profess:
Having commenced, be a Divine in show,
Yet level at the end of every Art,
And live and die in Aristotles works:
Sweet Anulatikes tic thou hast ravished me,
Been disserere est finis logicis▪
Is, to dispute well, Logickes chiefest end
Affords this Art no greater miracle:
Then read no more, thou hast attained the end:
A greater subject fitteth Faustus wit,
Bid Oncaymaeon farewell, Galen come:
Séeing, vbi desinit philosophus, ibi incipit medicus.
Be a physician Faustus, heap up gold,
And be eternizde for some wondrous cure,
Summum bonum medicine sanitise,
The end of physic is our bodies health:
Why Faustus, hast thou not attained that end?
Is not thy common talk sound Aphorisms?
Are not thy bills hung up as monuments,
whereby whole Cities have escaped the plague,
And thousand desprate maladies béene eased,
Yet art thou still but Faustus, and a man.
would thou make man to live eternally?
Or being dead, raise them to life again?
Then this profession were to be estéemd.
Physic farewell, where is Iustinian?
S• 〈…〉 res legatus duobus,
A•la rem alter v•lorem rei, &amp;c.
A pretty case of paltry legacies:
Ex 〈…〉 nisi:
Such is the subject of the institute
And universal body of the Church:
•is study fits a mercenary drudge,
who aims at nothing but external trash,
The devil and illiberal for me:
when all is done, Divinity is best.
Ieromes Bible, Faustus, view it well.
Stipendium peccati morse est: ha, Stipendium, &amp;c.
The reward of sin is death: tha•s hard.
Si peccasse negamus, fallimur, &amp; nulla est in nobis veritas.
If we say that we have no sin,
We deceive our selves, and theres no truth in vs.
Why then belike we must sin,
And so consequently die.
I, we must die an e•erlasting death:
What doctrine call you this, Che sera, sera,
What will be, shall be? Divinity, adieu,
These Metaphisickes of Magicia•s,
And Negromantike books are heavenly
Lines, circles, scenes, letters and characters:
I, these are those that Faustus most d•sires.
O what a world of profit and delight,
Of power, of honour, of omnipotence
Is promised to the studious Artisan?
All things that move between the quiet poles
Shall be at my commaun. Emperors and Kings,
Are but obeyed in their seu•rall provinces:
Nor can they raise• the wind, or •end the clouds:
But his dominion that excéedes in this,
Stretches as far as doth the mind of man.
A sound Magician is a mighty god:
Héere Fa•stus try thy brains to gain a deity.
Wagner, commend me to my dearest friends,
The Germaine Valde•, and Corneliu•,
Request them earnestly to visit me.
I will sir.
Their conference will be a greater help to me,
Thn all my labours, plodde I ne'er so fast.
O Faustus, lay that damned book aside,
And gaze not on it, lest it tempt thy soul,
And heap Gods heavy wrath upon thy head,
Read, read the scriptures, that is blasphemy.
Go forward Faustus in that famous art,
Wherein all natures treasury is contained:
Be thou on earth as Jove is in the sky,
Lord and commander of these Elements.
How am I glutted with conceit of this?
Shall I make spirits fetch me what I please,
Resolve me of all ambiguities,
Perform what d•sperate enterprise I will?
Isle have them fly to India for gold,
Ransack the Ocean for orient pearl,
And search all corners of the new found world
For pleasant fruits and princely delicates:
Isle have them read mée strange philosophy,
And tell the secrets of all foreign kings,
Isle have them wall all Iermany with brass,
And make swift Rhine circle fair Wertenberge,
Isle have them fill the public schools with skill.
Wherewith the students shall be bravely clad:
Isle levy soldiers with the coin they bring,
And chase the Prince of Parma from our land,
And reign sole king of all our provinces:
Yea stranger engines for the brunt of war,
Then was the fiery kéele at Antwarpes bridge,
Isle make my servile spirits to invent:
Come Germaine Velds and Cornelius,
And make me blessed with your sage conference,
V•ldes, swéete Velds, and Cornelius,
Know that your words have won me at the last,
To practise Magic and concealed arts:
Yet not your words only, but mine own fantasy,
That will receive no object for my head,
But ruminates on Negremantique skill,
Philosophy is odious and obscure,
Both Law and Phis•cke are for petty wit•,
Divinity is basest of the thrée,
Unpleasant, harsh, contemptible and wild,
Tic Magic, Magic that hath ravished mée,
Then gentle friends aid me in this attempt,
And I that have with Consissylogismes
Graueld the Pastors of the Germaine Church,
And made the flowering pride of Wertenberge
Swarm to my Problems as the infernal spirits
On swéet Musaeus when he came to hell,
Will be as cunning as Agrippa was,
Whose shadows made all Europe honour him.
Faustus▪ these books thy wit and our experience
Shall make all nations to cononize vs,
As Indian Moors obey their Spanish Lords,
So shall the subjects of every element
Be always serviceable to vs thrée,
Like Lyons shall they guard vs when we please,
Like Almaine Rutters with their horseman's staves,
Or Lapland Giants trotting by our sides,
Sometimes like women, or unwedded maids,
Shadowing more beauty in their airy brows,
Then in their white breasts of the queen of Love:
For Venice shall they drag huge Argoces,
And from America the golden fléece,
That yearly ••nffes old Philips treasury
If learned Faustus will be resolute.
Velds as resolute am I in this
As thou to live, therefore object it not.
The miracles that Magic will perform,
Will make thée vow to study nothing else,
He that is grounded in Astrology,
Enriched with tongues well séene minerals,
〈◊〉 all the principles Magic doth require,
The• doubt n•t (F••stus) but to be renowmd,
And more frequented for this mystery,
Then heretofore the Dolphian Oracle.
The spirits tell me they can dry the sea,
And fet•h the trea•ur of all foreign wrackes,
I, all the wealth that our fore•others hid
〈◊〉 the ma••ie en•rail•s of the earth.
Th•n tell me Faustus, what shall we three want?
Noth•ng Cornelius, O this cheers my soul,
Come show me some demonstrations magi•all,
That I may conjure in some lusty grove,
And have these joys in full possession.
Then haste thée to some solitary grove,
And bear wise Basins and Albanus works,
The H•brew Psalter, and new Testament,
And whatsoever else is requisite
Wee will inform thée ere our conference cease.
Velds, first let him know the words of art,
And then all other ceremonies learned,
Faustus may try his cunning by himself.
First Isle instruct thee in the rudiments,
And then wilt thou be perfecter then I.
Then come and dine with me, and after meat
Wéele ca•uas every quiddity thereof:
For ere I sleep •le try what I can do,
This night Isle conjure though I die therefore.
I wonder whats become of Faustus, that was
wont to make our schools ring with, sic probo.
That shall we know, for see here comes his boy.
How now sir, wheres thy moister?
God in heaven knows.
Why, dost not thou know?
Yes I know, but that follows not.
Go too sir, leave your jesting, and tell vs where
hée is.
That follows not necessary by force of argument,
that you being licentiate should stand upon it, therefore ac∣knowledge
your error, and be attentive.
Why, did thou not say thou knew?
Have you any witness on it?
Yes sir, I heard you.
Ask my fellow if I be a thief.
Well, you will not tell vs.
Yes sir, I will tell you, yet if you were not dunces
you would never ask me such a question, for is not he cor∣pus
natural, and is not that mobile, then wherefore should
you ask me such a question: but that I am by nature fleg∣maticke,
slow to wrath, and prone to lechery, (to love I
would say) it were not for you to come within forty foot of
the place of execution, although I do not doubt to sée you
both hanged the next Sessions. Thus having triumphed over
you, I will set my countnance like a precision, and begin to
speak thus: truly my dear brethren, my moister is within
at dinner with Velds and Cornelius, as this wine if it could
speak, it would inform your worships, and so the Lord
bless you, preserve you, and kéepe you my dear brethren,
my dear brethren.
Nay then I fear he is fallen into that damned art, for
which they two are infamous through the world.
Were he a stranger, and not allied to me, yet should
I grieve for him: but come let vs go and inform the Rector,
and sée if hée by his grave counsel can reclaim him.
O but I fear me nothing can reclaim him.
Yet let vs try what we can do.
Now that the gloomy shadow of the earth,
Longing to view Orions drisling look,
Leaps f•om •h•antartike world unto the sky,
A•d dimmes the welkin with her pitchy breath:
Faustus, beg•n thine incantations,
And tri• if devils will obey thy hest,
Séeing thou hast prayed and sacri•••d to them.
UUithin this 〈◊〉 is 〈◊〉 name,
Forward a•d backward, and Agramithist,
〈…〉 names of holy Saints,
Figure•s of every adjunct to the heavens,
And characters of signs and erring stars.
By which the spirits are enforced to rise,
Then fear not Faustus, but be resolute.
And try the uttermost Magic can perform.
Sint mihi dei acherontis propitij, valeat numen triplex Iehouae, igne•,
aerij, Aquatani spiritus saluete, Orientis princeps Beelzebub, inferni
ardentis monarcha &amp; demigorgon, propitiamus vos, vt apariat &amp;
surgat Mep•astophilis, quòd tumeraris, per I•home gehennam &amp;
con•ecratam aquam quam nuns spargo, signúmque crucis quodnunc
facio, &amp; per vote nostra ipse nuns surgat nobis dic•tic Mephasto∣philis.
I charge thée to return and cha••ge thy shape,
Thou art too ugly to attend on me,
Go and return an old Franciscan Friar,
That holy shape becomes a devil best.
I see theres virtue in my heavenly words,
Who would not be proficient in this art?
How pliant is this M•phastophilis?
Full of obedience and humility,
Such is the force of Magic and my spells,
No Faustus, thou art Conjurer la•reate
That can command great Mephastophilis,
Queen regis M•phastoph••is fratris imagine.
Now Faustus, what would thou have me do?
I charge thée wait upon me whilst I live,
To do what ever Faustus shall command,
Be it to make the Moo•e drop from her sphere,
Or the Ocean to overwhelm the world.
I am a servant to great Luci•er,
And may not follow thée without his leave,
No more then he commands must we perform.
Did not he charge thée to appear to mée?
No, I came now hither of mine own accord.
Did not my conjuring spéeches raise thee? speak.
That was the cause, but yet per accident,
For when we hear one rack the name of God,
Abjure the scriptures, and his Saviour Christ,
Wée fly, in hope to get his glorious soul,
Nor will we come, unless he use such means
Whereby he is in danger to be damned:
Therefore the shortest cut for conjuring
Is stoutly to abjure the Trinity,
And pray devoutly to the prince of hell.
So Faustus hath already done, &amp; holds this principle
There is no chief but only Beelzebub,
To whom 〈◊〉 doth dedicate himself,
This word damnation terrifies not him,
For he confounds hell in Elizium,
His ghost be with the old Philosophers,
But lea•ing these vain trifles of men's souls,
Tell me what is that Lucif•r thy Lord?
Arch-regent and commander of all spirits.
Was not that Lucifer an Angel once?
Yes Faustus, and most dearly loved of God.
How comes it then that he is prince of devils?
O by aspiring pride and insolence,
For which God threw him from the face of heaven.
and what are you that live with L•cifer?
Unhappy spirits that fell with Lucifer,
Conspired against our God with Lucifer,
And are for euerdamnd with Lucifer.
UUhere are you damned?
In hell.
How comes it then that thou art out of hell?
Why this is hell, nor am I out of it:
Think thou that I who saw the face of God,
And tasted the eternal joys of heaven,
Am not tormented with ten thousand hells,
In being deprived of everlasting bliss:
O Faustus, leave these frivolous demands,
which strike a terror to my fainting soul.
What, is great Mephastophilis so passionate,
For being deprived of the joys of heaven?
Learn thou of Faustus manly fortitude,
And scorn those joys thou never shalt possess.
Go bear those tidings to•great Lucifer,
Séeing Faustus hath incurrd eternal death,
By desprate thoughts against Ioues deity:
Say, he surrenders up to him his soul,
So he will spare him 24. yéeres,
Letting him live in al voluptuousness,
Having thee ever to attend on me,
To give me whatsoever I shall ask,
To tel me whatsoever I demand,
To slay mine enemies, and aid my friends,
And always be obedient to my will:
Go and return to mighty Lucifer,
And méete mée in my study at midnight,
And then resolve me of thy masters mind.
I will Faustus.
Had I •s many souls as there be stars,
Id give them al for Mephastophilis:
By him Isle be great Emperor of the world,
And make a bridge through the mooing ayre,
To pass the Ocean with a band of men,
Isle join the hills that bind the Aff•icke shore,
And make that land continent to Spain,
And both contributory to my crown:
The Emperor shall boat live but by my leave,
Nor any Potentate of Germany:
Now that I have obtained what I desire,
Isle live in speculation of this Art,
Till Mephastophilis return again.
Sir boy, come hither.
How, boy? swowns boy, I hope you have séene ma∣ny
boys with such pickadevaunts as I have. Boy quoth?
Tel me sir, hast thou any comings in?
I, and goings out too, you may sée else.
Alas poor slave, sée how poverty jests in his na∣kednesse,
the vilaine is bare, and out of service, and so hun∣gry,
that I know he would give his soul to the Devil for a
shoulder of mutton, though it were blood raw.
How, my soul to the Devil for a shoulder of mut∣ton
though it were blood raw? not so good friend, burladie I
had néede have it well roasted, and good sauce to it, if I pay so
déere.
well, wilt thou serve me, and Isle make thée go like
Queen mihi discipulus?
How, in verse?
No sir, in beaten silk and staves acre.
how, how, knaves acre? I, I thought that was al
the land his father •left him: Doe ye hear, I would be sorry
to rob you of your living.
Sir, I say in staves acre.
Oho, oho, staves acre, why then belike, if I were
your man, I should be full of vermin.
So thou shalt, whether thou bée•t with me, or no:
but sir, leave your jesting, and bind your self presently
unto me for seven yéeres, or Isle turn al the lice about thée
into familiars, and they shall tear thée in péeces.
Doe you hear sir? you may save that labour, they
are too familiar with me already, swowns they are as bold
with my flesh, as if they had paid for my meat and drink.
well, do you hear sir? hold, take these guilders.
Gridirons, what be they?
Why french crowns.
Mas but for the name of french crowns a man
were as good have as many english counters, and what
should I do with these?
UUhy now sir thou art at an hours warning
whenso•for or wheresoever the devil shall fetch the•.
No, no, here take your gridirons again.
Truly Isle n•no of them.
Truly but you shall.
Bear witness I gave them him.
Bear witness I give them you again.
UUell, I will cause two devils presently to fetch
thée away Baliol and Belcher.
Let your Balio• and your B•lcher come here, and Isle
knock them, they were never so knocked since they were di∣uels,
say I should kill one of them▪ what would folks say? do
ye see yonder tall fellow in the round flop, hee has kilt the di∣uell,
so I should be called 〈◊〉 devil all the parish over.
Baliol• and Belcher, spirits away.
what, are they gone? a vengeance on them, they
have v•lt long nails, there was a hee devil and a shée di∣uell,
Isle t•ll you how you shall know them, all hee devils has
〈◊〉, and all shée devils had clefts and cloven feet.
Well sir follow me.
But do yo• hear? if I should serve you, would you
〈…〉 up Banios and Belcheos?
〈1 paragraph〉
〈◊〉? a Christian fellow to a dog or a cat, a
〈…〉 no, no sir, if you turn me into any thing,
〈…〉 of a little pretty frisking flea, that I
〈…〉 and there and every where, O Isle tickle the 〈…〉
be amongst them •faith.
Well sir, come.
But doe you hear Wagner?
How Ba•ioll a•d Bell•her.
O Lord I pray sir, let Ban•o and Belcher go sléepe.
〈…〉
God forgive me, he speaks Dutch fustian: well,
Isle follow him, Isle serve him, thats flat.
Now Faustus must thou néedes be damned,
And can thou not be saved?
what boots it then to think of God or heaven?
Away with such vain fancies and despair,
Despair in God, and trust in Beelzebub:
Now go not backward: no Faustas, be resolute,
why wauerest thou? O something sounds in mine ears:
Abi•re this Magic, turn to God again,
I and Faustus will turn to God again.
To God? he loves thee not,
The god thou serve is thine own appetite,
wherein is fixed the love of Beelzebub,
To him Isle build an altar and a church,
And offer luke warm blood of new borne babes.
Swéet Faustus, leave that execrable art.
Contrition, prayer, repentance: what of them?
O they are means to bring thée unto hey∣uen.
Rather illusio•s fruits of lunacy,
That makes men foolish that do trust them most.
Swéet Faustus think of heaven, and hey∣uenly
things.
No Faustus, think of honour and wealth.
Of wealth,
Why the signory of Emden shall be mine,
when Mephatophilus shall stand by me,
What God can hurt thée Faustus? thou art safe,
Cast no more doubts, come Mephastophilus,
And bring glad tidings from great Lucifer:
First not midnight? come Mephastophilus,
Veni veni Mephastophile
Now tel, what says Lucifer thy Lord?
That I shall waite on Faustus whilst I live,
So he will buy my service with his soul.
Already Faustus hath hazarded that for thée.
But Faustus, thou must bequeath it solemnly,
And write a déede of gift with thine own blood,
For that security craves great Lucifer:
If thou deny it, I will back to hell.
Stay Mephastophilus, and tel me, what good will
my soul do thy Lord?
Enlarge his kingdom.
Is that the reason he tempts vs thus?
Solomon miseris socios habuisse doloris.
Have you any pain that tortures others?
As great as have the humane souls of men:
But tel me Faustus, shall I have thy soul,
And I will be thy slave, and waite on thée,
And give thée more than thou hast wit to ask.
I Mephastophilus, I give it thée.
Then stab thine arm courageously,
And bind thy soul, that at some certain day
Great Lucifer may claim it as his own,
And then be thou as great as Lucifer.
Lo Mephastophilus, for love of thée,
I cut mine arm, and with my proper blood
Assure my soul to be great Lucifers,
Chief Lord and regent of pe•petual night,
Uiew here the blood that trickles from mine arm,
And let it be propitious for my wish.
But Faustus, thou must write it in manner of a
déede of gift.
I so I will, but Mephastophilis my blood conieales
and I can write no more.
Isle fetch thée fire to dissolve it straight.
What might the staying of my blood portend?
Is it unwilling I should write this bill?
Why streams it not, that I may write afresh?
Faustus gives to thee his soul: ah there it stayde,
Why should thou not? is not thy soul thine own?
Then write again, Faustus gives to thée his soul.
Here is fire, come Faustus, set it on.
So now the blood begins to clear again,
Now will I make an end immediately.
O what will not I do to obtain his soul?
Consummatum est, this Bill is ended,
And Faustus hath bequeathed his soul to Lucifer.
But what is this inscription on mine arm?
Homo fuge, whither should I fly?
If unto God hée'le throw thée down to hell,
My senses are deceived, here's nothing writ,
I sée it plain, here in this place is writ,
Homo fuge, yet shall not Faustus fly.
Isle fetch him somewhat to delight his mind.
Speak Mephastophilis, what means this show?
Nothing Faustus, but to delight thy mind withal,
And to show thee what Magic can perform.
But may I raise up spirits when I please?
I Faustus, and do greater things then these.
Then theres enough for a thousand souls,
Here Mephastophi•is receive this scroll,
A déede of gift of body and of soul:
But yet conditionally, that thou perform
All articles prescribed be•wéene vs both.
Faustus, I swear by hell and Lucifer
To effect all promises between vs made.
Then hear me read them: on these conditions foal∣lowing.
First, that Faustus may be a spirit in •orme and substance.
Secondly, that Mephastophilis shall be his servant, and at
his command.
Thirdly, that Mephastophilis shall do for him, and bring
him whatsoever.
Fourthly, that hee shall be in his chamber or house in∣uisible.
L•stly, that hee •hall appear to the said Iohn Faustus at all
times, in what form or shape soever he please.
I Iohn Faustus of Wertenberge, Doctor, by these presents, do
go•e both body and soul to Lucifer prince of the East, and his
minister Mephastophilis, and furthermore grant unto them,
that 24. years being expired, the articles aboue written in∣uiolate,
full power to fetch or carry the said Iohn Faustus body
and soul, flesh, blood, or goods, into their habitation where∣soever.
Speak Faustus, do you deliver this as your déede?
I, take it, and the devil give thee good on•t.
Now Faustus ask what thou wilt.
First will I question with thée about hell,
Tel me, where is the place that men call hell?
Under the heavens.
I, but where about?
Within the bowels of these elements,
Where we are tortured and remain for ever,
Hell hath no limits, nor is circumscribed
In one self place, for where we are is hell,
And where hell is, must we ever be:
And to conclude, when all the world dissolves,
And every creature shall be purified,
All places shall be hell that is not heaven.
Come, I think hell's a fable.
I, think so still, till experience change thy mind.
Why? think thou then that Faustus shall bée
damned?
I of necessity, for here's the scroll,
Wherein thou hast given thy soul to Lucifer.
I, and body too, but what of that?
Think thou that Faustus is so sond,
To imagine, that after this life there is any pain?
Tush these are trifles and méere old wives tales.
But Faustus I am an instance to prove the contrary
For I am damned, and am now in hell.
How? now in hell? nay and this be hell, Isle will∣lingly
be damned here: what walking, disputing, &amp;c. But
leaving off this, let me have a wife, the fairest maid in Ger∣many,
for I am wanton and lascivious, and can not live
without a wife.
How, a wife? I prithée Faustus talk not of a wife.
Nay sweet Mephastophilis fetch me one, for I will
have one.
UUell thou wilt have one, sit there till I come, Isle
fetch thée a wife in the devils name.
Tel Faustus, how dost thou like thy wife?
A plague on her for a hot whore.
Tut Faustus, marriage is but a ceremonial toy, if
thou love me, think more of it.
Isle cull thée out the fairest courtesans,
And bring them every morning to thy bed,
She whom thine eye shall like, thy heart shall have,
Be she as chaste as was Penelope,
As wise as Saba, or as beautiful
As was bright Lucifer before his fall.
H•lt, take this book, peruse it thoroughly,
The iterating of these lines brings gold,
The framing of this circle on the ground,
Brings whirlewindes, tempests, thunder and lightning.
Pronounce this thrice devoutly to thy self,
And men in armour shall appear to thee,
Ready to execute what thou desirst.
Thanks Mephastophilus, yet fine would I have
a book wherein I might behold al spells and incantations,
that I might raise up spirits when I please.
Here they are in this book.
Now would I have a book where I might sée al
characters and planets of the heavens, that I might know
their motions and dispositions.
Héere they are too. Turn to them
Nay let me have one book more, and then I have
done, wherein I might sée al plants, herbs and trées that
grow upon the earth.
Here they be.
O thou art deceived.
Tut I warrant thée.
When I behold the heavens, then I repent,
And curse thée wicked Mephastophilus,
Because thou hast deprived me of those joys.
why Faustus,
Think thou heaven is such a glorious thing?
I tel thée tic not half so fair as thou,
Or any man that breathes on earth.
How proouest thou that?
It was made for man, therefore is man more excel∣lent.
If it were made for man, it was made for me:
I will renounce this magic, and repent.
Faustus, repent yet, God will pity thée.
Thou art a spirit, God cannot pity thée.
who buzzes in mine ears I am a spirit?
B• I a devil, yet God may pity me,
I God will pity me, if I repent.
I but Faustus never shall repent.
My hearts so hardened I cannot repent,
Scarce can I name salvation, faith, or heaven,
But fearful echoes thunders in mine ears,
Faustus, thou art damned, then swords and knives,
Poison, guns, halters, and invenomd stéele
Are laid before me to dispatch my self,
And long ere this I should have slain my self,
Had not swéete pleasure conquered déepe despair.
Have not I made blind Homer sing to me,
Of Alexanders love, and Anons death,
And hath not he that built the walls of Thebes,
With ravishing sound of his melodious harp
Made music with my Mephastophilis,
Why should I dye then, or basely despair?
I am resolved Faustus shall ne'er repent,
Come Mephastophilis, let vs dispute again,
And argue of divine Astrology,
Tel me, are there many heavens aboue the Moon?
Are all celestial bodies but one globe,
As is the substance of this centricke earth?
As are the elements, such are the spheres,
Mutually folded in each others orb,
And Faustus all jointly move upon one axletrée,
Whose terminine is termed the worlds wide pole,
Nor are the names of Saturn, Mars, or Iupiter
Faind, but are erring stars.
But tell me, have they all one motion? both 〈◊〉 &amp;
tempore.
All jointly move from East to West in 24. hours
upon the poles of the world, but differ in their motion upon
the poles of the Zodiake.
Tush, these slender trifles Wagner can decide,
Hath M•phastophilus no greater skill?
Who knows not the double motion of the planets?
The 〈◊〉 is 〈◊〉 in a natural day,
The sec•nd thus, as 〈◊〉 in 30. years, Iupiter in 12.
Mars in 4. the Sun, Venus, and Mercury in a year: the
Moon in 28. days. Tush these are fresh men's suppositions,
but tell me, hath every sphere a dominion or Intelligentij?
I.
How many heavens or spheres are there?
Nine, the seven planets, the firmament, and the im∣periall
heaven.
UUell, resolve me in this question, why have wée
not coniunctions, oppositions, aspects, eclipses, all at one
time, but in some years we have more, in some less?
Per inaequalem motum respectu totius.
Well, I am answered, tell me who made the world?
I will not.
Sweet Mephastophilus tell me.
Move me not, for I will not tell thée.
Villain, have I not bound thée to tel me any thing?
I, that is not against our kingdom, but this is,
Think thou on hell Faustus, for thou art damned.
Think Faustus upon God that made the world.
Remember this.
I, go accursed spirit to ugly hell,
Tic thou hast damn•d distressed Faustus soul:
First not too late?
Too late.
Never too late, if Faustus can repent.
If thou repent devils shall tear thee in péeces.
Repent, &amp; they shall never race thy skin.
Ah Christ my Saviour, seek to save distressed Fau∣stus
soul.
Chr•st cannot save thy soul, for he is just,
Theres none but I have interest in the same.
O who art thou that look so terrible?
I am Lucifer, and this is my companion Prince in
hell.
O Faustus, they are come to fetch away thy soul.
we come to tell thée thou dost injure vs,
Thou talk of Christ, contrary to thy promise
Thou should not think of God, think of the devil,
A•d of his da•• too.
Nor will • henceforth: pardon me in this,
And Faustus vows never to look so heaven,
Never to name God, or to pray to him,
To burn his Scriptures, slay his Ministers,
And make my spirits pull his churches dow•e.
Do so, and we will highly gratify thee:
Faustus, we are come from hell to show thée some pastime:
ssit down, and thou shalt see al the seven deadly sins ap∣pear
in their proper shapes.
That sight will be as pleasing unto me, as paradise
was to Adam, the first day of his creation.
Talk not of paradise, nor creation, but mark this
show, talk of the devil, and nothing else: come away.
Now Faustus, examine them of their several names and
dispositions.
What art thou? the first.
I am Pride, I disdain to have any parents, I am
like to Ouids fl••, I can créepe into every corner of a w•nch,
sometimes like a per•wig, I sit upon her brow, or like a fan
of feathers, I kiss her lips, indéede I doe, what doe I not?
but fie, what a scent is here? Isle not speak an other word,
except the ground were perfumde and covered with cloth of
arras.
What art thou? the second.
I am Covetousness, begotten of an old churl, in
an old leathern bag: and might I have my wish, I would
desire, that this house, and all the people in it were turned to
go•de, that I might locke you up in my good chest, O my
sweet gold
What art thou? the third.
I am Wrath, I had neither father nor mother, I
leapt out of a lions mouth, when I was scarce half an hour
old, and ever since I have run up and down the world,
with this case of rapiers wounding my self, when I had no
body to fight withal: I was borne in hell, and look to it, for
some of you shall be my father.
what art thou? the fourth.
I am Envy, begotten of a Chimney-swéeper, and
an Oyster wife, I cannot read, and therefore wish al books
were burnt: I am lean with séeing others eat, O that
there would come a famine through all the world, that all
might die, and I live alone, then thou should see how fat I
would be: but must thou sit and I stand? come down with
a vengeance.
Away envious rascal: what art thou? the fifth.
who I sir, I am Gluttony, my parents are al dead,
and the devil a penny they have left me, but a bare pension,
and that is 30. meals a day, and ten beavers, a small
trifle to suffice nature, O I come of a royal parentage, my
grandfather was a gammon of bacon, my grandmother a
hogs head of Claret-wine: My godfathers were these, Pe∣la
Pickle-herring, and Mart• Martlemas beef, O but
my godmother she was a jolly gentlewoman, and welbelo∣ued
in every good town and City, her name was mistress
Margery March-béere: now Faustus, thou hast heard all my
Progeny, wilt thou bid me to supper?
No, Isle sée thée hanged, thou wilt eat up all my
victuals.
Then the devil choke thée.
Choke thy self glutton: what art thou? the sixth.
I am sloth, I was begotten on a sunny bank,
where I have lain ever since, and you have done me great
injury to bring me from thence, let me be carried thith•r a∣gain
by Gluttony and Lechery, Isle not speak an other
word for a Kings ra•nsome.
What are you mistress minkes? the seventh
and last.
Who I sir? I am one that loves an inch of raw
Mutton better then an ell of frid• ••ock-fish, and the first
letter of my name begins with lechery.
Away, to hell, to hell.
Now Faustus, how dost thou like this?
O this feeds my soul.
•ut Faustus, in hell is al manner of delight.
O might I sée hell, and return again, how happy
were I then?
Thou shalt, I will send for thée at midnight, in mean
time take this book, peruse it throwly, and thou shalt turn
thy self into what shape thou wilt.
Great thanks mighty Lucifer, this will I kéepe as
chary as my life.
Farewell Faustus, and think on the devil.
Farewell great Lucifer, come Mephastophilis.
Learned Faustus,
To know the secrets of Astronomy,
Graven in the book of Jove•s hie firmame•t,
Did mount himself to scale Olympus to•,
Being seated in a chariot burning bright,
Drawn b• the strength of yoky dragons necks,
He now is gone to prove Cosmography,
And as I guess, will first arrive at Rome,
To see the Pope, and manner of his court,
And take some part of holy Peters feast,
That to this day is highly solemnised.
Ha•ing now, my good Mephastophilus,
Past with delight the stately town of Trier,
Inuirond round with airy mountain tops,
With walls of flint, and déepe entrenched lakes,
Not to be won by any conquering prince,
From Paris next coasting the Realm of France,
Wée saw the river Maine fall into Rhine,
UUhose banks are set with groves of fruitful vines.
Then up to Naples, rich Companion,
Whose buildings fair and gorgeous to the eye,
The stréetes straight forth, and paved with •inest brick,
Quarters the town in four equiuolence.
There saw we learned Maroes golden tomb,
The way he cut an English 〈◊〉 in length,
Thorough a rock of stone in one nights space.
From the•ce to Venice, Padna▪ and the rest,
In midst of which a sumptuous Temple stands,
That threats the stars with her aspiring top.
Thus hitherto hath Faustus spent his time,
But t•ll me now, what rest•ng place is this?
Hast thou as •rst I did command,
Conducted me within the walls of Rome?
Faustus I have, and because we will not be vnpro∣uided,
I have taken up his holiness privy chamber for
our use.
I hope his holy•esse will bid vs welcome.
Tut, tic no matter man, wéele be bold with his good cheer,
And now my Faustus, that thou moist perceive
What Rome contains to delight thée with,
Know that this City stands upon seven hills
That vnderprops the groundwor•e of the same,
Over the which four sty•ely bridges lean,
That makes safe passage to each part of Rome.
Upon the bridge called Ponto Angelo,
Erected is a Castle passing strong,
Within whose walls such store of ordonance are,
And double Canons, framed of carved brass,
As match the days within one complete year,
Besides the gates and high pyramids,
Which Iulius Caesar brought from Africa.
Now by the kingdoms of infernal rule,
Of Styx, Acheron▪ and the fiery lake
Of eu•r burning P•leg••on I swear,
That I do long to sée the monuments
And situation o• bright splendent Rome,
Come therefore lets away.
Nay Faustus stay, I know yo•d fine sée the Pope,
And take some part of holy Peters feast,
Where thou shalt see a troupe of bald-pate Friars,
Whose summum bonum is in belly-cheare.
Well, I am content, to compass then some sport,
And by their folly make vs merriment,
Then charm me that I may be invisible, to do what I
please unseen of any whilst I stay in Rome.
So Faustus, now do what thou wilt, thou shalt not
be discerned.
My Lord of Lorraine, wilt please you draw near.
Fall too, and the devil choke you and you spare.
H•w now, whose that which spake? Friars look
about.
Héere's no body, if it like your Holiness.
My Lord, here is a dainty dish was sent me from
the Bishop of Mallaine.
I thank you sir.
How now, whose that which snatched the meat
from me? will no man look?
My Lord, this dish was sent me from the Cardinal of Floe∣rinse.
You say true, Isle hate.
What again? my Lord Isle drink to your grace
Isle pledge your grace.
My Lord, it may be some ghost newly crept out of
Purgatory come to beg a pardon of your holiness.
It may be so, Friars prepare a dirge to lay the fury
of this ghost, once again my Lord fall too.
What, are you crossing of your self?
UUell use that trick no more, I would advise you.
UUell, theres the second time, aware the third,
I give you fair warning.
Come on Mephastophilis, what shall we do?
Nay I know not, we shall be cursed with bell, book,
and candle.
How? bell, book, and candle, candle, book, and bell,
Forward and backward, to curse Faustus to hell.
Anon you shall hear a hog grunt, a calfe bleat, and an
ass bray,
because it is S. Peters holy day.
Come brethren, lets about our business with good
devotion.
Cursed be hee that stole away his holiness meat
from the table.
maledicat dominus.
Cursed be hee that struck his holiness a blow on the face.
maledicat dominus.
Cursed be he that took Friar Sandelo a blow on the pate.
male, &amp;c.
Cursed be he that disturbs our holy Dirge.
male, &amp;c.
Cursed be he that took away his holiness wine.
maledicat dominus.
Et omnes sancti. Amen.
UUhen Faustus had with pleasure tan the view
Of rarest things, and royal courts of kings,
Hée stayde his course, and so returned home,
Where such as bear his absence, but with grief,
I mean his friends and nearest companions,
Did gratulate his safety with kind words,
And in their conference of what befell,
Touching his journey through the world and ayre,
They put forth questions of Astrology,
UUhich Faustus answered with such learned skill,
As they admired and 〈◊〉 at his wit.
Now is his fame spread forth in every land,
Amongst the rest the Emperor is 〈◊〉,
Carolus the fifth, at whose palace now
Faustus is feasted amongst his noble men.
UUhat there he did in trial of his art,
I leave untold, your eyes shall see performed.
O this is admirable! here I ha stolen one of doctor
Faustus conjuring books, and •faith I mean to 〈◊〉 some
circles for my own use▪ now will I make al the 〈◊〉 in
our parish dance at my pleasure stark naked before me, and
so by that means I shall see more then ere I 〈◊〉, or •awe yet.
Robin, prithee come away, theres a Gentleman
tarries to have his horse•, and he would have his things rubbed
and made clean: he keeps such a cha•ing with my mistress
about it, and she has sent me to look thée out, prethée come
away.
Keep out, kéep out, or else you are blown up, you
are dismembered Raf, kéepe out, for I am about a roaring
piece of work.
Come, what doest thou with that same book thou
can not read?
Yes, my moister and mistress shall find that I can
read, he for his forehead, she for her private study, shée's
borne to bear with me, or else my Art fails.
Why Robin what book is that?
What book? why the most intolerable book for
conjuring that ere was invented by any brimstone devil.
Can thou conjure with it?
I can do al these things easily with it: first, I can
make thée drunk with •ipocrase at any taberne in Europe
for nothing, thats one of my conjuring works.
Our moister Parson says thats nothing.
True Raf, and more Raf, if thou hast any mind
to Nan Spit our kitchen maid, then turn her and wind his
to thy own use, as often as thou wilt, and at midnight.
O brave Robin; shall I have Nan Spit, and to mine
own use? On that condition Isle feed thy devil with horse∣bread
as long as he lives, of frée cost.
No more swéete Raf, letts go and make clean
our boots which lie foul upon our hands, and then to our
conjuring in the devils name.
Come Raf, did not I tell thee, we were for ever
made by this doctor Faustus book? ass signum, héeres a simon∣ple
purchase for horse-kéepers, our horses shall eat no hay as
long as this lasts.
But Robin, here comes the vintner.
Hush, Isle gul him supernaturally: Drawer, I
hope al is paid, God be with you, come Raf.
Soft sir, a word with you, I must yet have a gob∣let
paid from you ere you go.
I a goblet Raf, I a goblet? I scorn you: and you
are but a &amp;c. I a goblet? search me.
I mean so sir with your favour.
How say you now?
I must say somewhat to your fellow, you sir.
Me sir, me sir, search your fill: now sir, you may be
ashamed to burden hon•st men with a matter of truth.
Well, tone of you hath this goblet about you.
You lie Drawer, tic before me: sir you, Isle teach ye
to impeach honest men• stand by, Isle scour you for a goblet,
stand aside you had best, I charge you in the name of Balsa∣bub:
look to the goblet Raf.
what mean you sir?
Isle tel you what I mean.
Sanctobulorum Periphrasticon: nay Isle tickle you Vintner,
look to the goblet Raf, Polypragmos Bell•eborams framanto pa∣cost•phos
tostu Mephastophilis, &amp;c.
O nominee Domino, what 〈◊〉 thou Robin thou
hast no goblet.
Peccatum peccatorum, hears thy goblet, good Uint∣ner.
Misericordia pro nob••▪ what shall I doe? good devil
forgive me now, and Isle never •obe thy Library more.
Uanish villains, th one like an Ape, an other like
a Bear, the third an Ass, for doing this enterprise.
Monarch of hell, under whose black survey
Great Potentates do kneel with awful fear,
Upon whose altars thousand fowls 〈…〉,
How am I vexed with these villains charms?
From Constantinople am I hither come,
Only for pleasure of these damned slaves.
How, from Constantinople? you have had a great
journey, will you take six pence in your purse to pay for your
supper, and be gone?
well villains, for your presumption, I transform
thée into an Ape, and thée into a Dog, and so be gone.
How, into an Ape? thats brave, Isle have fine sport
with the boys, Isle get nuts and app•es enough.
And I must be a Dog.
I faith thy head will never be out of the pottage pot.
Moister doctor Faustus, I have heard strange re∣port
of thy knowledge in the black Art, how that none in
my Empire, nor in the whole world can compare with thée,
for the rare effects of Magic: they say thou hast a familiar
spirit, by whom thou can accomplish what thou list, this
therefore is my request that thou let me sée some proof of th•
skill, that mine eyes may be witnesses to confirm what mine
ears have heard reported, and here I swear to thée, by the
honour of mine Imperial crown, that what ever thou doest,
thou shalt be no ways preiudiced or indamaged.
I faith he looks much like a c••juror▪.
My gracious Sovereign, though I must confess
my self far inferior to the report men have published, and
nothing answerable to the honour of your Imperial majesty,
yet for that love and duty binds me thereunto, I am con∣tent
to do whatsoever your majesty shall command me.
Then doctor Faustus, mark what I shall say, As
I was sometime solitary set, within my Closet, sundry
thoughts arose, about the honour of mine ancestors, howe
they had won by prowess such exploits, got such riches,
subdued so many kingdoms, as we that do succéede, or they
that shall hereafter possess our throne, shall (I fear me) no∣for
attain to that degrée of high renown and great ado∣rite,
amongst which kings is Alexander the great, chief
spectacle of the worlds pre-eminence,
The bright shining of whose glorious acts
Lightens the world with his reflecting beams,
As when I hear but motion made of him,
It grieves my soul I never saw the man:
If therefore thou, by cunning of thine Art,
Can raise this man from hollow vaults below,
where lies entombed this famous Conqueror,
And bring with him his beauteous Paramour,
Both in their right shapes, gesture, and attire
They vs•e to wear during their time of life,
Thou shalt both satisfy my just desire,
And give me cause to praise thée whilst I live.
My gracious Lord, I am ready to accomplish your
request, so far forth as by art and power of my spirit I am
able to perform.
•aith thats just nothing at all.
But if it like your Grace, it is not in my ability to
present before your eyes, the true substantial bodies of those
two deceased princes which long since are consumed to dust.
I mary master doctor, now theres a sign of grace
in you, when you will confess the truth.
But such spirits as can lively resemble Alexander
and his Paramour, shall appear before your Grace, in that
manner that they best lived in, in their most flourishing estate,
which I doubt not shall sufficiently content your Imperial
majesty.
Go to moister Doctor, let me sée them presently.
Do you hear moister Doctor? you bring Alexander
and his paramour before the emperor?
How then sir?
I faith thats as true as Diana turned me to a •tag.
No sir but when Action died, he left the horns for
you: Mephastophilis be gone.
Nay, and you go to conjure•g, Isle be gone.
Isle méete with you anon for interrupting me so:
héere they are my gracious Lord.
Moister Doctor, I heard this Lady while she lived
had a wart or moil in her neck, how shall I know whether
it be so or no?
Your highness may boldly go and sée.
Sure these are no spirits, but the true substantial
bodies of those two deceased princes.
wilt please your highness now to send for the knight
that was so pleasant with me here of late?
One of you call him forth.
How now sir Knight? why I had thought thou
had been a bachelor, but now I sée thou hast a wife, that
not only gives thee horns, but makes thée wear them, feel
on thy head.
Thou damned wretch, and execrable dog,
Bred in the concave of some monstrous rock:
How dare thou thus abuse a Gentleman?
Uilaine I say, undo what thou hast done.
O not so fast sir, theres no haste but good, are you
remembered how you crossed me in my conference with the
emperor? I think I have met with you for it.
Good Moister Doctor, at my entreaty release him,
he hath done penance sufficient.
My Grations Lord, not so much for the injury hée
offred me héere in your presence, as to delight you with some
mirth, hath Faustus worthily requited this injurious knight,
which being all I desire, I am content to release him of his
horns: and sir knight, hereafter speak well of Scholars:
Mephastophilis, transform him strait. Now my good Lord
having done my duty, I humbly take my leave.
Farewell moister Doctor, yet ere you go, expect
from me a bounteous reward.
Now Mephastophilis, the restless course that time
doth run with calm and silent foot,
Shortening my days and thread of vital life,
Calls for the payment of my latest years,
Therefore swéet Mephastophilis, let vs make haste to Were∣tenberge.
what, will you go on horse back, or on foot?
Nay, till I am past this fair and pleasant gréene, isle
walk on foot.
I have béene al this day séeking one moister Few∣stian:
mass sée where he is, God save you moister doctor.
What horse-courser, you are well met.
Do you hear sir? I have brought you forty dol∣lers
for your horse.
I cannot sell him so: if thou likst him for fifty, take
him.
Alas sir, I have no more, I pray you speak for
me.
I pray you let him have him, he is an honest fellow,
and he has a great charge, neither wife nor child.
Well, come give me your money, my boy will deli∣for
him to you: but I must tel you one thing before you have
him, ride him not into the water at any hand.
why sir, will he not drink of all waters?
O yes, he will drink of al waters, but ride him not
into the water, ride him over hedge or ditch, or where thou
wilt, but not into the water.
Well sir, Now am I made man for ever, Isle not
leave my horse for forty: if he had but the quality of hey
ding, ding, hey, ding, ding, Id make a brave living on him;
hée has a buttock as slick as an Eel: well god buy sir, your
boy will deliver him me: but har• ye sir, if my horse he sick, or
ill at •as, if I bring his water to you y•ule tel me what it is?
Away you villain: what, dost think I am a horse-doctor?
what art thou Faustus but a man condemned to die?
Thy fatal time doth draw to final end•,
Despair doth drive di••rust unto my thoughts,
Confound these passions with a quiet sléepe:
Tush, Christ did call the thie•e upon the Cross,
Then rest thée Faustus quiet in conceit.
Alas, alas, Doctor Fustian quoth a, mas Doctor
Lopus was never such a Doctor, has given me a purgation,
has purged me of forty Dollars, I shall never sée them more:
but yet like an ass as I was, I would not be ruled by him,
for he bade me I should ride him into no water; now, I thin∣king
my horse had had some rare quality that he would not
have had me known of, I like a venturous youth, rid him in∣to
the deep pond at the towns end, I was no sooner in the
middle of the pond, but my horse vanished away, and I sat up∣on
a bottle of hey, never so near drowning in my life: but
Isle séeke out my Doctor, and have my forty dollars again,
or Isle make it the dearest horse: O yonder is his snipper
snapper, do you hear? you, hey, pass, whore's your
moister?
why sir, what would you? you cannot speak
with him.
But I will speak with him.
Why hée's fast asléepe, come some other time.
Isle speak with him now, or Isle break his glass-windows
about his ears.
I tell thee he has not slept this eight nights.
And he have not slept this eight wéekes Isle speak
with him.
Sée where he is fast asléepe.
I, this is he, God save ye moister doctor, moister
doctor, moister doctor Fustian, forty dollars, forty dollars
for a bottle of hey.
Why, thou see he hears thée not.
So, ho, ho: so, ho, ho.
No, will you not wake? Isle make you wake ere I go.
Alas, I am undone, what shall I do:
O my leg, my leg, help Mephastophilis, call the
Officers, my leg, my leg.
Come villain to the Constable.
O Lord sir, let me go, and Isle give you forty dol∣lers
more.
Where be they?
I have none about me, come to my Oastrie and Isle
give them you.
Be gone quickly.
What is he gone? farewell he, Faustus has his leg
again, and the Horse courser I take it, a bottle of hey for his
labour; well, this trick shall cost him forty dollars more.
How now Vagner, what's the news with thée?
Sir, the Duke of Vanholt doth earnestly entreat
your company.
The Duke of Vanholt! an honourable gentleman,
to whom I must be no niggard of my cunning, come Me∣phastophilis,
let's away to him.
Beléeue me moister Doctor, this merriment hath
much pleased me.
My grations Lord, I am glad if contents you so
well: but it may be Madame, you take no delight in this, I
have heard that great bellied women do long for some dain∣ties
or other, what is it Madame? tell me, and you shall have
it.
Tha•kes, good moister doctor,
And for I sée your courteous intent to pleasure me, I will not
hide from you the thing my heart desires, and were it now
summer, as it is January, and the dead time of the winter, I
would desire no better meat then a dish of ripe grapes.
Alas Madame, thats nothing, Mephastophilis, be
gone:  were it a greater thing then this, so
it would content you, you should have it 
here they be madam, wilt please you taste
on them.
Beléeue me master Doctor, this makes me wonder
aboue the rest, that being in the dead time of winter, and in
the month of January, how you should come by these grapes.
If it like your grace, the yéere is divided into two
circles over the whole world, that when it is héere winter
with vs, in the contrary circle it is summer with them, as in
Indi•, Saba, and farther countries in the East, and by means
of a swift spir•t that I have, I had them brought hither, as ye
see, how do you like them Madame, b• they good?
Beléeue me Moister doctor, they be the best grapes
that er• I tasted in my life before.
I am glad they content you so Madam.
Come Madame, let vs in, where you must well re∣ward
this learned man for the great kindness he hath showed
to you.
And so I will my Lord, and whilst I live,
Rest beholding for this courtesy.
I humbly thank your Grace.
Come, moister Doctor follow vs, and receive your
reward.
I think my moister means to die shortly,
For he hath given to me al his goods,
And yet me thinks, if that death were néere,
He would not banquet, and carouse, and swill
Amongst the Students, as even now he doth,
who are at supper with such belly-cheere,
As Wagner ne'er beheld in all his life.
Sée where they come: belike the least is ended.
Moister Doctor Faustus, since our conference a∣bout
fair Ladies, which was the beutifulst in all the world,
we have determined with our selves, that Helen of Greece
was the admirablest Lady that ever lived: therefore master
Doctor, if you will do vs that favour, as to let vs sée that péere∣less
Dame of Greece, whom al the world admires for ma∣iesty,
wée should think our selves much beholding unto
you.
Gentlemen, for that I know your friendship is un∣fained,
and Faustus custom is not to deuie the just requests
of those that wish him well, you shall behold that peerless
dame of Greece, no otherways for pomp and majesty, then
when sir Paris crossed the scas with her, and brought the spoils
to rich Dardama. Be silent then, for danger is in words.
Too simple is my wit to tell her praise,
Whom all the world admires foe• majesty.
No marvel tho the angry Greeks pursued
With ten years war the rape of such a quéene,
Whose heavenly beauty passes all compare.
1. Since we have séene the pride of natures works,
And only Paragon of excellence,
Let vs depart, and for this glorious déed
Happy and blessed be Faustus evermore.
Gentlemen farewell, the same I wish to you.
Ah Doctor Faustus, that I might prevail,
To guide thy steps unto the way of life,
By which swéete path thou moist attain the gole
That shall conduct thée to celestial rest.
Break heart, drop blood, and mingle it with tears,
Tears falling from repentant heaviness
Of thy most wild and loathsome filthiness,
The stench whereof corrupts the inward soul
With such flagitious crimes of heinous sins,
As no commiseration may expel,
But mercy Faustus of thy Saviour swéete,
Whose blood alone must wash away thy guilt.
Where art thou Faustus? wretch what hast thou done?
Damned art thou Faustus, damned, despair and die,
Hell calls for right, and with a roaring voice
Says, Faustus come, thine hour is come,
And Faustus will come to do thée right.
Ah stay good Faustus, stay thy desperate steps,
I sée an Angel hovers ore thy head,
And with a viol full of precious grace,
Offers to power the same into thy soul,
Then call for mercy and avoid despair.
Ah my swéete friend, I féele thy words
To comfort my distressed soul,
Leave me a while to ponder on my sins.
I go swéete Faustus, but with heavy cheer,
fearing the ruin of thy hopeless soul.
Accursed Faustus, where is mercy now?
I do repent, and yet I do despair:
Hell strives with grace for conquest in my breast,
What shall I do to shun the snares of death?
Thou traitor Faustus, I arrest thy soul
For disobedience to my sovereign Lord,
Revolt, or Isle in peece-meale tear thy flesh.
Sweet Mephastophilis, entreat thy Lord
To pardon my unjust presumption,
And with my blood again I will confirm
My former vow I made to Lucifer.
Do it then quickly, with unfeigned heart,
Lest greater danger do attend thy drift.
Torment sweet friend, that base and crooked age,
That durst dissuade me from thy Lucifer,
With greatest torments that our hell affords.
His faith is great, I cannot touch his soul,
But what I may afflict his body with,
I will attempt, which is but little worth.
One thing, good servant, let me crave of thée
To glut the longing of my hearts desire,
That I might have unto my paramour,
That heavenly Helen which I saw of late,
Whose swéete embracings may extinguish clean
These thought s that do dissuade me from my vow,
And kéepe mine oath I made to Lucifer.
Faustus, this, or what else thou shalt desire,
Shall be performed in twinkling of an eye.
Was this the face that launched a thousand ships?
And burnt the topless Towers of Ilium?
Swéete Helen, make me immortal with a kiss:
Her lips sucks forth my soul, see where it flies:
Come Helen, come give mée my soul again.
Here will I dwell, for heaven be in these lips,
And all is dross that is not Helena:
I will be Pacis, and for love of thée,
Instéede of Troy shall Wertenberge be sacked,
And I will combat with weak Menclaus,
And wear thy colours on my plumed Crest:
Yea I will wound Achillis in the héele,
And then return to Helen for a kiss.
O thou art fairer the• the evening air,
Cla• in the beauty of a thousand stars,
Brighter art thou then flaming Iupiter,
•hen he appeared to haplesse Simile,
Mo•e lovely then the monarch of the s•ie
〈…〉,
And none but thou shalt be my param•••.
Accursed Faustus, miserable man,
That from thy soul excludst the grace of heaven,
And 〈◊〉 the throne of his tribunal •eat,
〈◊〉 an begins to •left me with his p•id,
As in this furnace God shall try my faith,
My faith, vile hell, shall triumph over thée,
Am•itio•s 〈◊〉, sée how the heavens smile•
At your repulse, and laughs your state to 〈◊〉,
Hence hell, for hence I fly unto my God.
Ah Gentlemen!
what ails Faustus?
Ah my swéete chamber-fellow! had I lived with
thée, then had I lived still, but now I die eternally: look,
comes he not? comes he not?
what means Faustus?
Belike he is grown into 〈◊〉 sickness, by
being ever solitary.
If it be so, wéele have Physicians to cure him,
tic but a surff•t, never fear man.
A surfeit of deadly sin that hath damned both body
and soul.
Yet Faustus look up to heaven, remember gods
mercies are infinite.
But Faultus offence can ne'er be pardoned,
The Serpent that tempted Eve may be sau•d,
But not Faustus: Ah Gentlemen, he 〈◊〉 with patience,
and tremble not at my spéeches, though my heart pants and
quivers to remember that I have been a student here these
thirty yéeres, O would I had never séene Wertenberge, no∣for
read book: and what 〈◊〉 I have done, al 〈◊〉
can witness, jeaven yea all the world, for which 〈…〉
both Germany, and the wo•lt, yea heaven it self, 〈◊〉 the
seat of God, the throne of the bless•, the kingdom of joy,
and must remain•• hell for •for, hell ah hell for ever, 〈◊〉
friends, what shall become of Faustus, being in hell for 〈◊〉?
Yet Faustus call on God.
〈…〉
Who Faustus?
Lucifer and M•phastophilis.
Ah Gentlemen! I gave them my soul for my cunning.
God forbid.
God forbade it indéede▪ but Faustus hath done it:
for va••e pleasure of 〈◊〉 years, hath Faustus 〈◊〉 eternal
joy and f•licitie, I writ them a bill with ••no own blood,
the date is expired, the time wii• come, and he will fetch me.
why did not Faustus tel vs of this before, that
Divines might have prayed for thee?
Oft have I thought to have done so, but the devil
threatened to tear mée in péeces, if I named God, to fetch
both body and soul, if I once gave ear to divinity: and
now tic too late: Gentlemen away, lest you perish with me.
O what shall we do to Faustus?
Talk not o• me, but save your selves, and de∣part.
God will strengthen me, I will stay with Fau∣stus.
Tempt not God, swéete friend, but let vs into the
next room, and there pray for him.
I pray for me, pray for me, and what noise soever
yée hear, come not unto me, for nothing can rescue me.
Pray thou, and we will pray that God may have
mercy upon thée.
Gentlemen farewell, if I live till morning, Isle visit
you: if not, Faustus is gone to hell.
Faustus, farewell.
Ah Faustus,
Now hast thou but one bare hour to live,
And then thou must be damned perpetually:
Stand still you ever mooing spheres of heaven,
That •ime may cease, and midnight never come:
Fair Natures eye, rise rise, again, and make
Perpetual day, or let this hour be but a year,
A month, a wéeke, a natural day,
That Faustus may repent and save his soul,
O lent lent curite noctis equi:
The stars move still, time runs, the clock will strike,
The devil will come, and Faustus must be damned.
O Isle leap up to my God: who pulls me down?
See see where Christs blood streams in the firmament,
One drop would save my soul, half a drop, ah my Christ,
Ah rend not my heart for naming of my Christ,
Yet will I call on him, oh spare me Lucifer!
Where is it now? tic gone:
And see where God stretches out his arm,
And bends his ireful brows:
Mountains and hills, come come, and fall on me,
And hide me from the heavy wrath of God.
No no, then will I headlong run into the earth:
Earth gape, O no, it will not harbour me:
You stars that raignd at my nativity,
whose influence hath allotted death and hell,
Now draw up Faustus like a foggy mist,
Into the entrails of yon labring cloud,
That when you vomit forth into the ayre,
My limbs may issue from your smoky mouths,
So that my soul may but ascend to heaven:
Ah, half the hour is past:
Twil all be past anon:
Oh God, if thou wilt not have mercy on my soul,
Yet for Christs sake, whose blood hath ransomd me,
Impose some end to my incessant pain,
Let Faustus live in hell a thousand years,
A hundred thousand, and at last be sau•d.
O no end is limited to damned souls,
Why were thou not a creature wanting soul?
Or, why is this immortal that thou hast?
Ah Pythagoras metem su coccis were that true,
This soul should fly from me, and I be changed
Unto some brutish beast: al beasts are happy, for when they die,
Their souls are soon dissolud in elements,
But mine must live still to be plagde in hell:
Cursed be the parents that engendered me:
No Faustus, curse thy self, curse Lucifer,
That hath deprived thée of the joys of heaven:
O it strikes, it strikes, now body turn to ayre,
Or Lucifer will bear thée quick to hell:
Oh soul, be changed into little water drops,
And fall into the Ocean, ne'er be found:
My God, my God, look not so fierce on me:
Adders, and Serpents, let me breathe a while:
Ugly hell gape not, come not Lucifer,
Isle burn my books, ah Mephastophilis.
Cut is the branch that might have grown full straight,
And burned is Apolloes Laurel bough,
That sometime grew within this learned man:
Faustus is gone, regard his hellish fall,
Whose fiendful fortune may exhort the wise,
Only to wonder at unlawful things,
whose deepenesse doth intise such forward wits,
To practise more than heavenly power permits.

MY father is deceased, come Gaueston,
And share the kingdom with thy dearest friend
Ah words that make me surfeit with delight:
What greater bliss can hap to Gaueston,
Then live and be the favourite of a king?
Sweet prince I come, these these thy amorous lines,
Might have enforced me to have swum from France,
And like Lender gasped upon the sand,
So thou would smile and take me in thy arms.
The sight of London to my exiled eyes,
Is as Elizium to a new come soul,
Not that I love the city or the men,
But that it harbors him I hold so dear,
The king, upon whose bosom let me die,
And with the world be still at enmity:
What need the arctic people love star-light,
To whom the sun shines both by day and night.
Farewell base stooping to the lordly peers,
My knee shall bow to none but to the king,
As for the multitude that are but sparks,
Raked up in embers of their poverty,
Tauti: Isle fan first on the wind,
That glances at my lips and flies away;
But how now, what are these?
Such as desire your worships service.
What can thou doe?
I can ride.
But I have no horses. What art thou?
A traveller.
Let me see, thou would do well
To waite at my trencher, &amp; tell me lies at dinner time,
And as I like your discoursing, isle have you.
And what art thou?
A soldier, that hath served against the Scot.
Why there are hospitals for such as you,
I have no war, and therefore sir be gone.
Farewell, and perish by a soldiers hand,
That would reward them with an hospital.
I, I, these words of his move me as much,
As if a Goose should play the Porpintine,
And dart her plumes, thinking to pierce my breast,
But yet it is no pain to speak men fair,
Isle flatter these, and make them live in hope:
You know that I came lately out of France,
And yet I have not viewed my Lord the king,
If I speed well, isle entertain you all.
We thank your worship.
I have some business, leave me to my self.
We will wait here about the court.
Do: these are not men for me,
I must have wanton Poets, pleasant wits,
Musicians, that with touching of a string
May draw the pliant king which way I please:
Music and poetry is his delight,
Therefore isle have Italian masks by night,
Sweet speeches, comedies, and pleasing shows,
And in the day when he shall walk abroad,
Like Siluian Nymphs my pages shall be clad,
My men like Satyrs grazing on the lawns,
Shall with their Goat feet dance an antic hay,
Sometime a lovely boy in Deans shape,
With hair that gilds the water as it glides,
Crownets of pearl about his naked arms,
And in his sportful hands an Olive tree,
To hide those parts which men delight to see,
Shall bathe him in a spring, and there hard by,
One like Actaeon peeping through the grove,
Shall by the angry goddess be transformed,
And running in the likeness of an Hart,
By yelping hounds pulled down, and seem to die,
Such things as these best please his majesty.
My lord, here comes the king and the nobles
From the parliament, isle stand aside.
Lancaster.
My Lord.
That Earl of Lancaster do I abhor.
Will you not grant me this? in spite of them
Isle have my will, and these two Mortimers,
That cross me thus, shall know I am displeased.
If you love vs my lord, hate Gaueston.
That villain Mortimer isle be his death.
Mine uncle here, this Earl, &amp; I my self,
Were sworn to your father at his death,
That he should ne'er return into the realm:
And know my lord, ere I will break my oath,
This sword of mine that should offend your foes,
Shall sleep within the scabbard at thy need,
And underneath thy banners march who will,
For Mortimer will hang his armour up.
Mort. dieu.
Well Mortimer, isle make thee rue these words,
Beseems it thee to contradict thy king?
Frownst thou thereat aspiring Lancaster,
The sword shall plane the furrows of thy brows,
And hew these knees that now are grown so stiff,
I will have Gaueston, and you shall know,
What danger tic to stand against your king.
Well done, Ned.
My lord, why do you thus incense your peers,
That naturally would love and honour you:
But for that base and obscure Gaueston,
Four Earldoms have I besides Lancaster,
Derby, Salsburie, Lincoln, Leicester,
These will I sell to give my soldiers paye,
Ere Gaueston shall stay within the realm,
Therefore if he be come, expel him straight.
Barons &amp; Earls, your pride hath made me mute,
But now isle speak, and to the proof I hope:
I do remember in my fathers days,
Lord Percie of the North being highly moved,
Braved Mowberie in presence of the king,
For which, had not his highness loved him well,
He should have lost his head, but with his look,
The undaunted spirit of Percie was appeasd,
And Mowberie and he were reconcild:
Yet dare you brave the king unto his face,
Brother revenge it, and let these their heads,
Preach upon poles for trespass of their tongues.
O our heads.
I yours, and therefore I would wish you grant.
Bridle thy anger gentle Mortimer.
I cannot, nor I will not, I must speak,
Cousin, our hands I hope shall fence our heads,
And strike off his that makes you threaten vs.
Come uncle, let vs leave the brainsick king,
And henceforth parley with our naked swords.
Wilshire hath men enough to save our heads.
All Warwickshire will love him for my sake.
And Northward Gaueston hath many friends,
Adieu my Lord, and either change your mind,
Or look to see the throne where you should sit,
To float in blood, and at thy wanton head,
The glossing head of thy base minion thrown.
I cannot brooke these haughty menaces:
Am I a king and must be over ruled?
Brother display my ensigns in the field,
Isle bandy with the Barons and the Earls,
And either die, or live with Gaueston.
I can no longer keep me from my lord.
What Gaueston, welcome: kiss not my hand,
Embrace me Gaueston as I do thee:
Why should thou kneel,
Know thou not who I am?
Thy friend, thy self, another Gaueston,
Not Hilas was more mourned of Hercules,
Then thou hast been of me since thy exile.
And since I went from hence, no soul in hell
Hath felt more torment then poor Gaueston.
I know it, brother welcome home my friend,
Now let the treacherous Mortimers conspire,
And that high minded earl of Lancaster,
I have my wish, in that I joy thy sight,
And sooner shall the sea ore whelm my land,
Then bear the ship that shall transport thee hence:
I here create thee Lord high Chamberlain,
Chief Secretary to the state and me,
Earl of Cornwall, king and lord of Man.
My lord, these titles far exceed my worth.
Brother, the least of these may well suffice
For one of greater birth then Gaueston.
Cease brother, for I cannot brooke these words,
Thy worth sweet friend is far aboue my gifts,
Therefore to equal it receive my hart,
If for these dignities thou be envied,
Isle give thee more, for but to honour thee,
Is Edward pleased with kingly regiment.
Fear thou thy person? thou shalt have a guard:
Wants thou gold? go to my treasury,
Would thou be loud and feared? receive my seal,
Save or condemn, and in our name command,
What so thy mind affects or fancy likes.
It shall suffice me to enjoy your love,
Which whiles I have, I think my self as great,
As Caesar riding in the Romaine street,
With captive kings at his triumphant Carre.
Whether goes my Lord of Coventry so fast?
To celebrate your fathers exequies,
But is that wicked Gaueston returned?
I priest, and lives to be revenged on thee,
That were the only cause of his exile.
Tic true, and but for reverence of these robes,
Thou should not plod one foot beyond this place.
I did no more then I was bound to do,
And Gaueston unless thou be reclaimd,
As then I did incense the parliament,
So will I now, and thou shalt back to France.
Saving your reverence, you must pardon me.
Throw of his golden meter, rend his stole,
And in the channel christen him a new.
Ah brother, lay not violent hands on him,
For heel complain unto the sea of Rome.
Let him complain unto the sea of hell,
Isle be revenged on him for my exile.
No, spare his life, but seize upon his goods,
Be thou lord bishop, and receive his rents,
And make him serve thee as thy chaplain,
I give him thee, here use him as thou wilt.
He shall to prison, and there die in bolts.
I to the tower, the fleet, or where thou wilt.
For this offence be thou accursed of God.
Whose there? convey this priest to the tower.
True, true.
But in the mean time Gaueston away,
And take possession of his house and goods,
Come follow me, and thou shalt have my guard,
To see it done, and bring thee safe again.
What should a priest do with so fair a house?
A prison may be seem his holiness.
Tic true, the Bishop is in the tower,
And goods and body given to Gaueston.
What? will they tyrannise upon the Church?
Ah wicked king, accursed Gaueston,
This ground which is corrupted with their steps,
Shall be their timeless sepulchre, or mine.
Well, let that peevish Frenchma?? guard him sure
Unless his breast be sword proof he shall die.
How now, why droops the earl of Lancaster?
Wherefore is Guy of Warwick discontent?
That villain Gaueston is made an Earl.
An Earl!
I, and besides, lord Chamberlain of the realm,
And secretary to, and lord of Man.
We may not, nor we will not suffer this.
Why post we not from hence to levy men?
My lord of Cornwall, now at every word,
And happy is the man, whom he vouchsafes
For veiling of his bonnet one good look,
Thus arm in arm, the king and he doth marche:
Nay more, the guard upon his lordship waits:
And all the court begins to flatter him.
Thus leaning on the shoulder of the king.
He nods, and scorns, and smiles at those that pass.
Doth no man take exceptions at the slave?
All stomach him, but none dare speak a word.
Ah that bewrays their baseness Lancaster,
Were all the Earls and Barons of my mind,
Weal hale him from the bosom of the king,
And at the court gate hang the peasant up,
Who swollen with venom of ambitious pride,
Will be the ruin of the realm and vs.
Here comes my lord of Canterburies grace.
His countenance bewrays he is displeased.
First were his sacred garments rent and torn,
Then laid they violent hands upon him next,
Himself imprisoned, and his goods asceasd,
This certify the Pope, away take horse.
My lord, will you take arms against the king?
What need I, God himself is up in arms,
When violence is offered to the church.
Then will you join with vs that be his peers
To banish or behead that Gaueston?
What else my lords, for it concerns me near,
The Bishopric of Coventry is his.
Madam, whether walks your majesty so fast?
Unto the forest gentle Mortimer,
To live in grief and baleful discontent,
For now my lord the king regards me not,
But dotes upon the love of Gaueston,
He claps his cheeks, and hanges about his neck,
Smiles in his face, and whispers in his ears,
And when I come, he frowns, as who should say,
Go whether thou wilt seeing I have Gaueston.
Is it not strange, that he is thus bewitched?
Madam, return unto the court again:
That sly inueigling Frenchman weal exile,
Or lose our lives: and yet ere that day come,
The king shall lose his crown, for we have power,
And courage to, to be revenged at full.
But yet lift not your swords against the king.
No, but weal lift Gaueston from hence.
And war must be the means, or heel stay still.
Then let him stay, for rather then my lord
Shall be oppressed by civil mutinies,
I will endure a melancholy life,
And let him stollick with his minion.
My lords, to eaze all this, but hear me speak,
We and the rest that are his counsellors,
Will meet, and with a general consent,
Confirm his banishment with our hands and seals.
What we confirm the king will frustrate.
Then may we lawfully revolt from him.
But say my lord, where shall this meeting bee?
At the new temple.
Content:
And in the mean time isle entreat you all,
To cross to Lambeth, and there stay with me.
Come then lets away.
Madam farewell.
Farewell sweet Mortimer, and for my sake,
Forbear to levy arms against the king.
I, if words will serve, if not, I must.
Edmund the mighty prince of Lancaster,
That hath more earldoms then an ass can bear,
And both the Mortimers two goodly men,
With Guy of VVarwick that redoubted knight,
Are gone towards Lambeth, there let them remain.
Here is the form of Gauestons exile:
May it please your lordship to subscribe your name.
Give me the paper.
Quick quick my lord,
I long to write my name.
But I long more to see him banished hence.
The name of Mortimer shall fright the king,
Unless he be declined from that base peasant.
What? are you moved that Gaueston sits here?
It is our pleasure, we will have it so.
Your grace doth well to place him by your side,
For no where else the new earl is so safe.
What man of noble birth can brooke this sight?
Quam male conueniunt:
See what a scornful look the peasant casts.
Can kingly Lions fawn on creeping Ants?
Ignoble vassal that like Phaeton,
Aspir'st unto the guidance of the sun.
Their downfall is at hand, their forces down,
We will not thus be facst and ouerpeerd.
Lay hands on that traitor Mortimer.
Lay hands on that traitor Gaueston.
Is this the duty that you owe your king?
We know our duties, let him know his peers.
Whether will you bear him, stay or ye shall die,
We are no traitors, therefore threaten not.
No, threaten not my lord, but pay them home.
Were I a king.
Thou villain, wherefore talks thou of a king,
That hardly art a gentleman by birth?
Were he a peasant being my minion,
Isle make the proudest of you stoop to him.
My lord, you may not thus disparage vs,
Away I say with hateful Gaueston.
And with the earl of Kent that favours him.
Nay, then lay violent hands upon your king,
Here Mortimer, sit thou in Edwards throne,
Warwick and Lancaster, wear you my crown,
Was ever king thus over ruled as I?
Learn then to rule vs better and the realm.
What we have done,
our hart blood shall maintain.
Think you that we can brooke this upstart pride?
Anger and wrathful fury stops my speech.
Why are you moved, be patient my lord,
And see what we your counsellors have done.
My lords, now let vs all be resolute,
And either have our wills, or lose our lives.
Meet you for this, proud overdaring peers,
Ere my sweet Gaueston shall part from me,
This Isle shall fleet upon the Ocean,
And wander to the unfrequented Inde.
You know that I am legate to the Pope,
On your allegiance to the sea of Rome,
Subscribe as we have done to his exile.
Curse him, if he refuse, and then may we
Depose him and elect an other king.
I there it goes, but yet I will not yield,
Curse me, depose me, doe the worst you can.
Then linger not my lord but do it straight.
Remember how the Bishop was abused,
Either banish him that was the cause thereof.
Or I will presently discharge these lords,
Of duty and allegiance due to thee.
It boots me not to threat, I must speak fair,
The Legate of the Pope will be obeyed:
My lord, you shall be Chancellor of the realm,
Thou Lancaster, high admiral of our fleet,
Young Mortimer and his uncle shall be earls,
And you lord VVarwick, president of the North,
And thou of VVales, if this content you not,
Make several kingdoms of this monarchy,
And share it equally amongst you all,
So I may have some nook or corner left,
To frolic with my dearest Gaueston.
Nothing shall alter vs, wee are resolved.
Come, come, subscribe.
Why should you love him,
whom the world hates so?
Because he loves me more then all the world:
Ah none but rude and savage minded men,
Would seek the ruin of my Gaueston,
You that be noble borne should pity him.
You that are princely borne should shake him off,
For shame subscribe, and let the lowne depart.
Urge him my lord.
Are you content to banish him the realm?
I see I must, and therefore am content,
In steed of ink, isle write it with my tears.
The king is loue-sick for his minion.
Tic done, and now accursed hand fall off.
Give it me, isle have it published in the streets.
Isle see him presently dispatched away.
Now is my heart at ease.
And so is mine.
This will be good news to the common sort.
Be it or no, he shall not linger here.
How fast they run to banish him I love,
They would not stir, were it to do me good:
Why should a king be subject to a priest?
Proud Rome, that hatchest such imperial grooms,
For these thy superstitious taperlights,
Wherewith thy antichristian churches blaze,
Isle fire thy crazed buildings, and enforce
The papal towers, to kiss the lowly ground,
With slaughtered priests may Tibers channel swell
And banks raised higher with their sepulchers:
As for the peers that back the clergy thus,
If I be king, not one of them shall live.
My lord I hear it whispered every where,
That I am banished, and must fly the land.
Tic true sweet Gaueston, oh were it false,
The Legate of the Pope will have it so,
And thou must hence, or I shall be deposd,
But I will reign to be revenged of them,
And therefore sweet friend, take it patiently,
Live where thou wilt, isle send thee gould enough,
And long thou shalt not stay, or if thou dost,
Isle come to thee, my love shall near decline.
Is all my hope turned to this hell of grief.
Rend not my hart with thy too piercing words
Thou from this land, I from my self am banished.
To go from hence, grieves not poor Gaueston,
But to forsake you, in whose gracious looks
The blessedness of Gaueston remains,
For no where else seeks he felicity.
And only this torments my wretched soul,
That whether I will or no thou must depart:
Be governor of Ireland in my stead,
And there abide till fortune call thee home.
Here take my picture, and let me wear thine,
O might I keep thee here, as I doe this,
Happy were I, but now most miserable.
Tic something to be pitied of a king.
Thou shalt not hence, isle hide thee Gaueston.
I shall be found, and then twil grieve me more.
Kind words, and mutual talk, makes our grief greater.
Therefore with dum embrace let vs part,
Stay Gaueston I cannot leave thee thus.
For every look, my lord drops down a tear,
Seeing I must go, do not renew my sorrow.
The time is little that thou hast to stay,
And therefore give me leave to look my fill,
But come sweet friend, isle bear thee on thy way.
The peers will frown.
I pass not for their anger, come lets go,
O that we might as well return as go.
Whether goes my lord?
Fawn not on me French strumpet, get thee gone.
On whom but on my husband should I fawn?
On Mortimer, with whom ungentle Queen,
I say no more, judge you the rest my lord.
In saying this, thou wrongst me Gaueston,
First not enough, that thou corrupts my lord,
And art a bawd to his affections,
But thou must call mine honour thus in question?
I mean not so, your grace must pardon me.
Thou art too familiar with that Mortimer,
And by thy means is Gaueston exiled,
But I would wish thee reconcile the lords,
Or thou shalt ne'er be reconcild to me.
Your highness knows, it lies not in my power.
Away then, touch me not, come Gaueston.
Villain, tic thou that robst me of my lord.
Madam, tic you that rob me of my lord.
Speak not unto her, let her droop and pine.
Wherein my lord, have I deserved these words?
Witness the tears that Isabella sheds,
Witness this hart, that sighing for thee breaks,
How dear my lord is to poor Isabel.
And witness heaven how dear thou art to me.
There weep, for till my Gaueston be repeald,
Assure thy self thou come not in my sight.
O miserable and distressed Queen!
Would when I left sweet France and was embarked,
That charming Circes walking on the waives,
Had changed my shape, or at the marriage day
The cup of Hymen had been full of poison,
Or with those arms that twinned about my neck,
I had been stifled, and not lived to see,
The king my lord thus to abandon me:
Like frantic Iuno will I fill the earth,
With gastlie murmur of my sighs and cries,
For never doted Jove on Ganimed,
So much as he on cursed Gaueston,
But that will more exasperate his wrath,
I must entreat him, I must speak him fair,
And be a means to call home Gaueston:
And yet heel ever dote on Gaueston,
And so am I for ever miserable.
Look where the sister of the king of France,
Sits wringing of her hands, and beats her breast.
The king I fear hath ill entreated her.
Hard is the hart, that iniures such a saint.
I know tic long of Gaueston she weeps.
Why? he is gone.
Madam, how fares your grace?
Ah Mortimer! now breaks the kings hate forth,
And he confesses that he loves me not.
Cry quittance Madam then, &amp; love not him.
No, rather will I die a thousand deaths,
And yet I love in vain, heel ne'er love me.
Fear ye not Madam, now his minions gone,
His wanton humour will be quickly left.
O never Lancaster! I am inioynde,
To sue unto you all for his repeal:
This wills my lord, and this must I perform,
Or else be banished from his highness presence.
For his repeal, Madam, he comes not back,
Unless the sea cast up his shipwreck body.
And to behold so sweet a sight as that,
Theres none here, but would run his horse to death.
But madam, would you have vs cal him home?
I Mortimer, for till he be restored,
The angry king hath banished me the court:
And therefore as thou love and tendrest me,
Be thou my advocate unto these peers.
What, would ye have me plead for Gaueston?
Plead for him he that will, I am resolude.
And so am I my lord, dissuade the Queen.
O Lancaster, let him dissuade the king,
For tic against my will he should return.
Then speak not for him, let the peasant go.
Tic for my self I speak, and not for him.
No speaking will prevail, and therefore cease.
Fair Queen forbear to angle for the fish,
Which being caught, strikes him that takes it dead,
I mean that vile Torpedo, Gaueston,
That now I hope flotes on the Irish seas.
Sweet Mortimer, sit down by me a while,
And I will tell thee reasons of such waighte,
As thou wilt soon subscribe to his repeal.
It is impossible, but speak your mind.
Then thus, but none shall hear it but our selves.
My Lords albeit the Queen win Mortimer,
will you be resolute and hold with me?
Not I against my nephew.
Fear not, the queens words cannot alter him.
No, doe but mark how earnestly she pleads.
And see how coldly his looks make denial.
She smiles, now for my life his mind is changed.
Isle rather loose his friendship I, then grant.
Well of necessity it must be so,
My Lords, that I abhor base Gaueston,
I hope your honours make no question,
And therefore though I plead for his repeall,
Tic not for his sake, but for our avail:
Nay for the realms behoof and for the kings.
Fie Mortimer, dishonour not thy self,
Can this be true it was good to banish him?
And is this true to call him home again?
Such reasons make white black, and dark night day.
My Lord of Lancaster, mark the respect.
In no respect can contraries be true.
Yet good my lord, hear what he can allege.
All that he speaks, is nothing, we are resolved.
Do you not wish that Gaueston were dead?
I would he were.
Why then my lord, give me but leave to speak.
But nephew, do not play the sophister.
This which I urge, is of a burning zeal,
To mend the king, and do our country good:
Know you not Gaueston hath store of gold,
Which may in Ireland purchase him such friends,
As he will front the mightiest of vs all,
And whereas he shall live and be beloude,
Tic hard for vs to work his overthrow.
Mark you but that my lord of Lancaster.
But were he here, detested as he is,
How easily might some base slave be subbornd,
To greet his lordship with a poniard,
And none so much as blame the murderer,
But rather praise him for that brave attempt,
And in the Chronicle, enrowle his name,
For purging of the realm of such a plague.
He saith true.
I, but how chance this was not done before?
Because my lords, it was not thought upon:
Nay more, when he shall know it lies in vs,
To banish him, and then to call him home,
Twill make him veil the topflag of his pride,
And fear to offend the meanest noble man.
But how if he do not Nephew?
Then may we with some colour rise in arms,
For howsoever we have borne it out,
Tic treason to be up against the king,
So shall we have the people of our side,
Which for his fathers sake lean to the king,
But cannot brooke a night grown mushrump,
Such a one as my Lord of Cornwall is,
Should bear vs down of the nobility,
And when the commons and the nobles join,
Tic not the king can buckler Gaueston.
Weal pull him from the strongest hold he hath,
My lords, if to perform this I be slack,
Think me as base a groom as Gaueston.
On that condition Lancaster will grant.
And so will Penbrooke and I.
And I.
In this I count me highly gratified,
And Mortimer will rest at your command.
And when this favour Isabel forgets,
Then let her live abandond and forlorn,
But see in happy time, my lord the king,
Having brought the Earl of Cornwall on his way,
Is new returned, this news will glad him much,
Yet not so much as me, I love him more
Then he can Gaueston, would he loved me
But half so much, then were I treble blessed.
Hes gone, and for his absence thus I moorne,
Did never sorrow go so near my heart,
As doth the want of my sweet Gaueston,
And could my crowns revenue bring him back,
I would freely give it to his enemies,
And think I gained, having bought so dear a friend.
Hark how he harps upon his minion.
My heart is as an anvil unto sorrow,
Which beats upon it like the Cyclops hammers,
And with the noise turns up my giddy brain,
And makes me frantic for my Gaueston:
Ah had some bloodless fury rose from hell,
And with my kingly sceptre stroke me dead,
When I was forced to leave my Gaueston.
Diablo, what passions call you these
My gracious lord, I come to bring you news.
That you have parled with your Mortimer.
That Gaueston my Lord shall be repeald.
Repeald, the news is too sweet to be true.
But will you love me, if you find it so?
If it be so, what will not Edward do?
For Gaueston, but not for Isabel.
For thee saire Queen, if thou love Gaueston,
Isle hang a golden tongue about thy neck,
Seeing thou hast pleaded with so good success.
No other jewels hang about my neck
Then these my lord, nor let me have more wealth,
Then I may fetch from this rich treasury:
O how a kiss revives poor Isabel.
Once more receive my hand, and let this be,
A second marriage twixt thy self and me.
And may it prove more happy then the first,
My gentle lord, be speak these nobles fair,
That waite attendance for a gracious look,
And on their knees salute your majesty.
Courageous Lancaster, embrace thy king,
And as gross vapours perish by the sun,
Even so let hatred with thy sovereign smile,
Live thou with me as my companion.
This salutation ouerioyes my heart.
Warwick, shall be my chiefest counsellor:
These silver hairs will more adorn my court,
Then gaudie silks, or rich imbrotherie,
Chide me sweet Warwick, if I go astray.
Slay me my lord, when I offend your grace.
In solemn triumphs, and in public shows,
Penbrooke shall bear the sword before the king.
And with this sword, Penbrooke will fight for you.
But wherefore walks young Mortimer aside?
Be thou commander of our royal fleet,
Or if that lofty office like thee not,
I make thee here lord Marshall of the realm.
My lord, isle marshall so your enemies,
As England shall be quiet, and you safe.
And as for you, lord Mortimer of Chirke,
Whose great achievements in our foreign war,
Deserves no common place, nor mean reward:
Be you the general of the levied troops,
That now are ready to assail the Scots.
In this your grace hath highly honoured me,
For with my nature war doth best agree.
Now is the king of England rich and strong.
Having the love of his renowned peers.
I Isabel, ne'er was my heart so light,
Clarke of the crown, direct our warrant forth,
For Gaueston to Ireland: Beamont fly,
As fast as Iris, or Ioues Mercury.
It shall be done my gracious Lord.
Lord Mortimer, we leave you to your charge.
Now let vs in, and feast it royally:
Against our friend the earl of Cornwall comes,
Weal have a general tilt and tournament,
And then his marriage shall be solemnised,
For wot you not that I have made him sure,
Unto our cousin, the earl of Glosters heir.
Such news we hear my lord.
That day, if not for him. yet for my sake,
Who in the triumph will be challenger,
Spare for no cost, we will requite your love.
In this, or ought, your highness shall com???maund vs.
Thanks gentle Warwick, come lets in and revel.
Nephue, I must to Scotland, thou staiest here,
Leave now to oppose thy self against the king,
Thou see by nature he is mild and calm,
And seeing his mind so dotes on Gaueston,
Let him without controlment have his will,
The mightiest kings have had their minions,
Great Alexander loud Ephestion,
The conquering Hector, for Hilas wept,
And for Patroclus sterne Achillis droopt,
And not kings only, but the wisest men,
The Romaine Tulle loved Octaves,
Grave Socrates, wilde Alcibiades:
Then let his grace, whose youth is flexible,
And promises as much as we can wish,
Freely enjoy that vain light-headed earl,
For riper years will wean him from such toys.
Uncle, his wanton humour grieves not me,
But this I scorn, that one so basely borne,
Should by his sovereigns favour grow so pert,
And riot it with the treasure of the realm,
While soldiers mutiny for want of pay,
He wears a lords revenue on his back,
And Midas like he jets it in the court,
With base outlandish cullions at his heals,
Whose proud fantastic liveries make such show,
As if that Proteus god of shapes appeared,
I have not seen a dapper lack so brisk,
He wears a short Italian hooded cloak,
Larded with pearl, and in his tuskan cap
A jewel of more value then the crown,
Whiles other walk below, the king and he
From out a window, laugh at such as we,
And flout our train, and jest at our attire:
Uncle, tic this that makes me impatient.
But nephew, now you see the king is changed.
Then so am I, and live to do him service,
But whiles I have a sword, a hand, a hart,
I will not yield to any such upstart.
You know my mind, come uncle lets away.
Spencer, seeing that our Lord th'earle of Glo???sters dead,
Which of the nobles dost thou mean to serve?
Not Mortimer, nor any of his side,
Because the king and he are enemies,
Baldock: learn this of me, a factious lord
Shall hardly do himself good, much less vs,
But he that hath the favour of a king,
May with one word, advance vs while we live:
The liberal earl of Cornwall is the man,
On whose good fortune Sponsors hope depends.
What, mean you then to be his follower?
No, his companion, for he loves me well,
And would have once preferred me to the king.
But he is banished, theres small hope of him.
I for a while, but Baldock mark the end,
A friend of mine told me in secrecy,
That hes repeald, and sent for back again,
And even now, a post came from the court,
With letters to our lady from the King,
And as she red, she smiled, which makes me think,
It is about her lover Gaueston.
Tic like enough, for since he was exiled,
She neither walks abroad, nor comes in sight:
But I had thought the match had been broke off,
And that his banishment had changed her mind.
Our Ladies first love is not wavering,
My life for thine she will have Gaueston.
Then hope I by her means to be preferred,
Having read unto her since she was a child.
Then Balduck, you must cast the scholar off,
And learn to court it like a Gentleman,
Tic not a black coat and a little band,
A Velvet cap'de cloak, fac'st before with Serge,
And smelling to a Nosegay all the day,
Or holding of a napkin in your hand,
Or saying a long grace at a tables end,
Or making lowe legs to a noble man,
Or looking downward, with your eye lids close,
And saying, truly ant may please your honour,
Can get you any favour with great men,
You must be proud, bold, pleasant, resolute,
And now and then, stab as occasion serves.
Spencer, thou know I hate such formal toys,
And use them but of mere hypocrisy.
Mine old lord whiles he lived, was so precise,
That he would take exceptions at my buttons,
And being like pins heads, blame me for the bigness,
Which made me curate-like in mine attire,
Though inwardly licentious enough,
And apt for any kind of villainy.
I am none of these common pendants I,
That cannot speak without propterea quote.
But one of those that saith quandoquidem,
And hath a special gift to form a verb.
Leave of this jesting, here my lady comes.
The grief for his exile was not so much,
As is the joy of his returning home,
This letter came from my sweet Gaueston,
What need thou love, thus to excuse thy self?
I know thou could not come and visit me,
I will not long be from thee though I die:
This argues the entire love of my Lord,
When I forsake thee, death seize on my heart,
But rest thee here where Gaueston shall sleep.
Now to the letter of my Lord the King,
He wills me to repair unto the court,
And meet my Gaueston: why do I stay,
Seeing that he talks thus of my marriage day?
Whose there, Balduck?
See that my coach be ready, I must hence.
It shall be done madam.
And meet me at the park pale presently:
Spencer, stay you and bear me company,
For I have joyful news to tell thee of,
My lord of Cornwall is a coming over,
And will be at the court as soon as we.
I knew the King would have him home again.
If all things sort out, as I hope they will,
Thy service Spencer shall be thought upon.
I humbly thank your Ladieship.
Come lead the way, I long till I am there.
The wind is good, I wonder why he stays,
I fear me he is wrecked upon the sea.
Look Lancaster how passionate he is,
And still his mind runs on his minion.
My Lord.
How now, what news, is Gaueston arrived?
Nothing but Gaueston, what means your grace?
You have matters of more weight to think upon,
The King of France sets foot in Normandy.
A trifle, weal expel him when we please:
But tell me Mortimer, whats thy devise,
Against the stately triumph we decreed?
A homely one my lord, not worth the telling.
Prithee let me know it.
But seeing you are so desirous, thus it is:
A lofty Cedar tree fair flourishing,
On whose top-branches Kingly Eagles perch,
And by the bark a canker creeps me up,
And gets unto the highest bough of all,
The motto: Aeque tandem.
And what is yours my lord of Lancaster?
My lord, mines more obscure then Mortimers,
Plinie reports, there is a flying Fish,
Which all the other fishes deadly hate,
And therefore being pursued, it takes the air:
No sooner is it up, but theirs a foul,
That seizes it: this fish my lord I bear,
The motto this: Vndique morse est.
Proud Mortimer, ungentle Lancaster,
Is this the love you bear your sovereign?
Is this the fruit your reconcilement bears?
Can you in words make show of amity,
And in your shields display your rancorous minds?
What call you this but private libelling,
Against the Earl of Cornwall and my brother?
Sweet husband be content, they all love you.
They love me not that hate my Gaueston,
I am that Cedar, shake me not too much,
And you the Eagles, sore ye ne'er so high,
I have the gresses that will pull you down,
And Aeque tandem shall that canker cry,
Unto the proudest peer of Brittany:
Though thou comparst him to a flying Fish,
And threaten death whether he rise or fall,
Tic not the hugest monster of the sea,
Nor foulest Harpy that shall swallow him.
If in his absence thus he favours him,
What will he do when as he shall be present?
That shall wee see, look where his lordship comes.
My Gaueston, welcome to Tinmouth, welcome to thy friend,
Thy absence made me droop, and pine away,
For as the lovers of fair Dane,
When she was locked up in a brazen tower,
Desired her more, and waxed outrageous,
So did it sure with me: and now thy sight
Is sweeter far, then was thy parting hence
Bitter and irksome to my sobbing heart.
Sweet Lord and King, your speech prevents mine,
Yet have I words left to express my joy:
The shepherd nipped with biting winters rage,
Frolics not more to see the painted spring,
Then I doe to behold your Majesty.
Will none of you salute my Gaueston?
Salute him? yes welcome Lord Chamberlain.
Welcome is the good Earl of Cornwall
Welcome Lord governor of the Isle of man.
Welcome moister secretary.
Brother doe you hear them?
Still will these Earls and Barons use me thus?
My Lord I cannot brooke these injuries.
Aye me poor soul when these begin to jar.
Return it to their throats, isle be thy warrant.
Base leaden Earls that glory in your birth,
Go sit at home and eat your tenants beef:
And come not here to scoff at Gaueston,
Whose mounting thoughts did never creep so low,
As to bestow a look on such as you.
Yet I disdain not to doe this for you.
Treason, treason: whirs the traitor?
Here here King: convey hence Gaueston, thaile murder him.
The life of thee shall salve this foul disgrace.
Villain thy life, unless I miss mine aim.
Ah surious Mortimer what hast thou done?
No more then I would answer were he slain.
Yes more then thou can answer though he live,
Dear shall you both aby this riotous deed:
Out of my presence, come not near the court.
Isle not be bard the court for Gaueston.
Weal hail him by the ears unto the block.
Look to your own heads, his is sure enough.
Look to your own crown, if you back him thus.
Warwick, these words do ill beseem thy years.
Nay all of them conspire to cross me thus,
But if I live, isle tread upon their heads,
That think with high looks thus to tread me down,
Come Edmund lets away, and levy men,
Tic war that must abate these Barons pride.
Lets to our castles, for the king is mooude.
Moved may he be, and perish in his wrath.
Cousin it is no dealing with him now,
He means to make vs stoop by force of arms,
And therefore let vs jointly here protest,
To prosecute that Gaueston to the death.
By heaven, the abject villain shall not live.
Isle have his blood, or die in seeking it.
The like oath Penbrooke takes.
And so doth Lancaster:
Now send our Heralds to defy the King,
And make the people swear to put him down.
Letters, from whence?
From Scotland my lord.
Why how now cousin, how fares all our friends?
My uncles taken prisoner by the Scots.
Weel have him ransomd man, be of good cheer.
They rate his ransom at five thousand pound,
Who should defray the money, but the King,
Seeing he is taken prisoner in his wars?
Isle to the King.
Do cousin, and isle bear thee company.
Mean time my lord of Penbrooke and my self,
Will to Newcastell here, and gather head.
About it then, and we will follow you.
Be resolute, and full of secrecy.
I warrant you.
Cousin, and if he will not ransom him,
Isle thunder such a peal into his ears,
As never subject did unto his King.
Content, isle bear my part, hole a whose there?
I marry, such a guard as this doth well.
Lead on the way.
Whither will your lordships?
Whither else but to the King.
His highness is disposed to be alone.
Why, so he may, but we will speak to him.
You may not in my lord.
May we not.
How now, what noise is this?
Who have we there, first you?
Nay, stay my lord, I come to bring you news,
Mine uncles taken prisoner by the Scots.
Then ransom him.
It was in your wars, you should ransom him.
And you shall ransom him, or else.
What Mortimer, you will not threaten him?
Quiet your self, you shall have the broad seal,
To gather for him thoroughout the realm.
Your minion Gaueston hath taught you this.
My lord, the family of the Mortimers
Are not so poor, but would they sell their land,
Would levy men enough to anger you,
We never beg, but use such prayers as these.
Shall I still be haunted thus?
Nay, now you are here alone, isle speak my mind.
And so will I, and then my lord farewell.
The idle triumphs, masks, lascivious shows
And prodigal gifts bestowed on Gaueston,
Have drawn thy treasure dry, and made thee weak,
The murmuring commons ouerstretched hath.
Look for rebellion, look to be deposde,
Thy garrisons are beaten out of France,
And lame and poor, lie groaning at the gates,
The wilde Oneyle, with swarms of Irish Kernes,
Lives uncontrolled within the English pale,
Unto the walls of York the Scots made rode,
And unresisted, drove away rich spoils.
The haughty Dane commands the narrow seas,
While in the harbour ride thy ships vnrigd.
What foreign prince sends thee ambassadors?
Who loves thee? but a sort of flatterers.
Thy gentle Queen, sole sister to Valoys,
Complains, that thou hast left her all forlorn.
Thy court is naked, being bereft of those,
That makes a king seem glorious to the world,
I mean the peers, whom thou should dearly love:
Libels are cast again thee in the street,
Ballads and rimes, made of thy overthrow.
The Northern borderers seeing the houses burnt
Their wives and children slain, run up and down,
Cursing the name of thee and Gaueston.
When were thou in the field with banner spread?
But once, and then thy soldiers marched like players,
With garish robes, not armour, and thy self
Bedaubd with gold, rode laughing at the rest,
Nodding and shaking of thy spangled crest,
Where women's favours hung like labels down.
And thereof came it, that the flooring Scots,
To Englands high disgrace, have made this Jig,
Maids of England, sore may you moorne,
For your lemmons you have lost, at Bannocks borne,
With a heave and a ho,
What weeneth the king of England,
So soon to have won Scotland,
With a rombelow.
Wigmore shall fly, to set my uncle free.
And when tic gone, our swords shall purchase more,
If ye be moved, revenge it as you can,
Look next to see vs with our ensigns spread.
My swelling hart for very anger breaks,
How oft have I been baited by these peers?
And dare not be revenged, for their power is great:
Yet, shall the crowing of these cockerels,
Affright a Lion? Edward, unfold thy paws,
And let their lives blood slake thy furies hunger:
If I be cruel, and grow tyrannous,
Now let them thank themselves, and rue too late.
My lord, I see your love to Gaueston,
Will be the ruin of the realm and you,
For now the wrathful nobles threaten wars,
And therefore brother banish him for ever.
Art thou an enemy to my Gaueston?
I, and it grieves me that I favoured him.
Traitor be gone, whine thou with Mortimer.
So will I, rather then with Gaueston.
Out of my sight, and trouble me no more.
No marvel though thou scorn thy noble peers,
When I thy brother am rejected thus.
Away poor Gaueston, that hast no friend but me,
Do what they can, weal live in Tinmoth here,
And so I walk with him about the walls,
What care I though the Earls be girt vs round,
Here comes she thats cause of all these jars.
My lord, tic thought, the Earls are up in arms.
I, and tic likewise thought you favour him.
Thus do you still suspect me without cause.
Sweet uncle speak more kindly to the queen.
My lord, dissemble with her, speak her fair.
Pardon me sweet, I forgot my self.
Your pardon is quickly got of Isabel.
The younger Mortimer is grown so brave,
That to my face he threatens civil wars.
Why do you not commit him to the tower?
I dare not, for the people love him well.
Why then weal have him privily made away.
Would Lancaster and he had both caroused,
A bowl of poison to each others health:
But let them go, and tell me what are these.
Two of my fathers servants whilst he lived,
Meet please your grace to entertain them now.
Tell me, where wast thou borne?
What is thine arms?
My name is Baldock, and my gentry
I fetched from Oxford, not from Heraldry.
The fitter art thou Baldock for my turn,
Wait on me, and isle see thou shalt not want.
I humbly thank your majesty.
Know thou him Gaueston?
I my lord, his name is Spencer, he is well allied,
For my sake let him waite upon your grace,
Scarce shall you find a man of more desert.
Then Spencer waite upon me, for his sake
Isle grace thee with a higher stile ere long.
No greater titles happen unto me,
Then to be favoured of your majesty.
Cousin, this day shall be your marriage feast,
And Gaueston, think that I love thee well,
To wed thee to our niece, the only heir
Unto the Earl of Gloster late deceased.
I know my lord, many will stomach me,
But I respect neither their love nor hate.
The head-strong Barons shall not limit me.
He that I list to favour shall be great:
Come lets away, and when the marriage ends,
Have at the rebels, and their accomplices.
My lords, of love to this our native land,
I come to join with you, and leave the king,
And in your quarrel and the realms behoof,
Will be the first that shall adventure life.
I fear me you are sent of policy,
To undermine vs with a show of love.
He is your brother, therefore have we cause
To cast the worst, and doubt of your revolt.
Mine honour shall be hostage of my truth,
If that will not suffice, farewell my lords.
Stay Edmund, never was Plantagenet
False of his word, and therefore trust we thee.
But whats the reason you should leave him now?
I have enformd the Earl of Lancaster.
And it suffices: now my lords know this,
That Gaueston is secretly arrived,
And here in Tinmoth frolics with the king,
Let vs with these our followers scale the walls,
And suddenly surprise them unawares.
Isle give the onset.
And isle follow thee.
This tottered ensign of my ancestors,
Which swept the desert shore of that dead sea,
Whereof we got the name of Mortimer,
Will I advance upon this castle walls,
Drums strike alarm, raise them from their sport,
And ring aloud the knell of Gaueston.
None be so hardy as to touche the King,
But neither spare you Gaueston, nor his friends.
O tell me Spencer, where is Gaueston?
I fear me he is slain my gracious lord.
No, here he comes, now let them spoil and kill:
Fly, fly, my lords, the earls have got the hold,
Take shipping and away to Scarborough,
Spencer and I will post away by land.
O stay my lord, they will not injure you.
I will not trust them, Gaueston away.
Farewell my Lord.
Lady, farewell.
Farewell sweet uncle till we meet again.
Farewell sweet Gaueston, and farewell Niece.
No farewell, to poor Isabel, thy Queen?
Yes, yes, for Mortimer your lovers sake.
Heavens can witness, I love none but you,
From my embraces thus he breaks away,
O that mine arms could close this Isle about,
That I might pull him to me where I would,
Or that these tears that drissell from mine eyes,
Had power to mollify his stony hart,
That when I had him we might never part.
I wonder how he escaped.
Whose this, the Queen?
I Mortimer, the miserable Queen,
Whose pining heart, her inward sighs have blasted,
And body with continual moorning wasted:
These hands are tired, with haling of my lord
From Gaueston, from wicked Gaueston,
And all in vain, for when I speak him fair,
He turns away, and smiles upon his minion.
Cease to lament, and tell vs wheres the king?
What would you with the king, first him you seek?
No madam, but that cursed Gaueston,
Far be it from the thought of Lancaster,
To offer violence to his sovereign,
We would but rid the realm of Gaueston,
Tell vs where he remains, and he shall die.
Hes gone by water unto Scarborough,
Pursue him quickly, and he cannot scope,
The king hath left him, and his train is small.
Forslowe no time, sweet Lancaster lets march.
How comes it, that the king and he is parted?
That this your army going several ways,
Might be of lesser sorce, and with the power
That he intends presently to raise,
Be easily suppressed: and therefore be gone.
Here in the river rides a Flemish hoe,
Lets all aboard, and follow him amain.
The wind that bears him hence, will fill our sails,
Come, come aboard, tic but an hours sailing.
Madam, stay you within this castle here.
No Mortimer, isle to my lord the king.
Nay, rather sail with vs to Scarborough.
You know the king is so suspicious,
As if he hear I have but talked with you,
Mine honour will be called in question,
And therefore gentle Mortimer be gone.
Madam, I cannot stay to answer you,
But think of Mortimer as he deserves.
So well hast thou deserved sweet Mortimer,
As Isaebell could live with thee for ever,
In vain I look for love at Edwards hand,
Whose eyes are fixed on none but Gaueston:
Yet once more isle importune him with prayers,
If he be strange and not regard my words,
My son and I will over into France,
And to the king my brother there complain,
How Gaueston hath robbed me of his love:
But yet I hope my sorrows will have end,
And Gaueston this blessed day be slain.
Yet lusty lords I have escaped your hands,
Your threats, your larums, and your hot pursutes,
And though divorced from king Edwards eyes,
Yet lives Pierce of Gaueston vnsurprizd,
Breathing, in hope (malgrado all your beards,
That muster rebels thus against your king)
To see his royal sovereign once again.
Upon him soldiers, take away his weapons.
Thou proud disturber of thy countries peace,
Corrupter of thy king, cause of these broils,
Base flatterer, yield, and were it not for shame,
Shame and dishonour to a soldiers name,
Upon my weapons point here should thou fall,
And welter in thy gore.
Monster of men, that like the Greekish strumpet
Trained to arms and bloody wars,
So many valiant knights,
Look for no other fortune wretch then death,
Kind Edward is not here to buckler thee.
Lancaster, why talk thou to the slave?
Go soldiers take him hence,
For by my sword, his head shall off:
Gaueston, short warning shall serve thy turn:
It is our countries cause,
That here severely we will execute,
Upon thy person: hang him at a bough:
My Lord.
Soldiers, have him away:
But for thou were the favourite of a King,
Thou shalt have so much honour at our hands.
I thank you all my lords, then I perceive,
That heading is one, and hanging is the other,
And death is all.
How now my lord of Arundell?
My lords, king Edward greetes you all by me.
Arundell, say your message.
His majesty, hearing that you had take?? Gaueston,
Entreats you by me, yet but he may
See him before he dies, for why he says,
And sends you word, he knows that die he shall,
And if you gratify his grace so far,
He will be mindful of the courtesy.
How now?
Renowned Edward, how thy name
Revives poor Gaueston.
No, it needs not,
Arundell, we will gratify the king
In other matters, he must pardon vs in this,
Soldiers away with him.
Why my Lord of VVarwicke,
Will not these delays beget my hopes?
I know it lords, it is this life you aim at,
Yet grant king Edward this.
Shalt thou appoint what we shall grant?
Soldiers away with him:
Thus weal gratify the king,
Weal send his head by thee, let him bestow
His tears on that, for that is all he gets
Of Gaueston, or else his senseless trunk.
Not so my Lord, least he bestow more cost,
In burying him, then he hath ever earned.
My lords, it is his majesties request,
And in the honour of a king he swears,
He will but talk with him and send him back.
When can you tell? Arundell no, we wot,
He that the care of realm remits,
And drives his nobles to these exigents
For Gaueston, will if he zease him once,
Violate any promise to possess him.
Then if you will not trust his grace in keep,
My lords, I will be pledge for his return.
It is honourable in thee to offer this,
But for we know thou art a noble gentleman,
We will not wrong thee so,
To make away a true man for a thief.
How meanst thou Mortimer? that is over base.
Away base groom, robber of kings renown,
Question with thy companions and thy mates.
My lord Mortimer, and you my lords each one,
To gratify the kings request therein,
Touching the sending of this Gaueston,
Because his majesty so earnestly
Desires to see the man before his death,
I will upon mine honour undertake
To carry him, and bring him back again,
Provided this, that you my lord of Arundell
Will join with me.
Penbrooke, what wilt thou do?
Cause yet more bloodshed: is it not enough
That we have taken him, but must we now
Leave him on had-I wist, and let him go?
My lords, I will not over woo your honours,
But if you dare trust Penbrooke with the prisoner,
Upon mine oath I will return him back.
My lord of Lancaster, what say you in this?
Why I say, let him go on Penbrookes word.
And you lord Mortimer.
How say you my lord of Warwick.
Nay, do your pleasures,
I know how twill prove.
Then give him me.
Sweet sovereign, yet I come
To see thee ere I die.
Yet not perhaps,
If Warwickes wit and policy prevail.
My lord of Penbrooke, we deliver him you,
Return him on your honour, sound away.
My Lord, you shall go with me,
My house is not far hence out of the way,
A little, but our men shall go along,
We that have pretty wenches to our wives,
Sir, must not come so near and balke their lips.
Tic very kindly spoke my lord of Penbrooke,
Your honour hath an adamant of power,
To draw a prince.
So my lord, come hither Iames,
I do commit this Gaueston to thee,
Be thou this night his keeper, in the morning
We will discharge thee of thy charge, be gon.
Unhappy Gaueston, whether goosed thou now.
My lord, weal quickly be at Cobham.
O treacherous Warwick thus to wrong thy friend!
I see it is your life these arms pursue.
Weaponless must I fall and die in bands,
O must this day be period of my life!
Center of all my bliss, and ye be men,
Speed to the king.
My lord of Penbrookes men,
Strive you no longer, I will have that Gaueston.
Your lordship doth dishonour to your self,
And wrong our lord, your honourable friend.
No Iames, it is my countries cause I follow,
Go, take the villain, soldiers come away,
Weel make quick work, co??mend me to your moister
My friend, and tell him that I watched it well,
Come, let thy shadow parley with king Edward.
Treacherous earl, shall I not see the king?
The king of heaven perhaps, no other king, Away.
Come fellows, it booted not for vs to strive,
We will in hast go certify our Lord.
I long to hear an answer from the Barons
Touching my friend, my dearest Gaueston,
Ah Spencer, not the riches of my realm
Can ransom him, ah he is marked to die,
I know the malice of the younger Mortimer,
VVarwick I know is rough, and Lancaster
Inexorable, and I shall never see
My lovely Pierce, my Gaueston again,
The Barons overbear me with their pride.
Were I king Edward Englands sovereign,
Son to the lovely Eleanor of Spain,
Great Edward Longshankes issue: would I bear
These braves, this rage, and suffer vncontrowld
These Barons thus to beard me in my land,
In mine own realm? my lord pardon my speech,
Did you retain your fathers magnanimity?
Did you regard the honour of your name?
You would not suffer thus your majesty
Be counterbuft of your nobility,
Strike off their heads, and let them preach on poles,
No doubt, such lessons they will teach the rest,
As by their preachments they will profit much,
And learn obedience to their lawful king.
Yea gentle Spencer, we have been too mild,
Too kind to them, but now have drawn our sword,
And if they send me not my Gaueston,
Weal steel it on their crest, and powle their tops.
This haught resolve becomes your majesty,
Not to be tied to their affection,
As though your highness were a school boy still,
And must be awde and governed like a child.
Long live my sovereign the noble Edward,
In peace triumphant, fortunate in wars.
Welcome old man, come thou in Edwards aide?
Then tell thy prince, of whence, and what thou art.
Lo, with a band of bowmen and of pikes,
Browne bills, and targetiers, 400 strong,
Sworn to defend king Edwards royal right,
I come in person to your majesty,
Spencer, the father of Hugh Spencer there,
Bound to your highness everlastingly,
For favours done in him, unto vs all.
Thy father Spencer?
True, and it like your grace,
That powers in lieu of all your goodness shown,
His life my lord, before your princely feet.
Welcome ten thousand times, old man again,
Spencer, this love, this kindness to thy King,
Argues thy noble mind and disposition:
Spencer, I here create thee earl of Wilshire,
And daily will enrich thee with our favour,
That as the sun-shine shall reflect ore thee:
Beside, the more to manifest our love,
Because we hear Lord Bruise doth sell his land,
And that the Mortimers are in hand withal,
Thou shalt have crowns of vs, t'out bid the Barons,
And Spenser, spare them not, but lay it on.
Soldiers a largis, and thrice welcome all.
My lord, here comes the Queen.
Madam, what news?
News of dishonour lord, and discontent,
Our friend Lewne, faithful and full of trust,
Informs vs, by letters and by words,
That lord Valoyes our brother, king of France,
Because your highness hath been slack in homage,
Hath seized Normandy into his hands,
These be the letters, this the messenger.
Welcome Lewne, tush Sib, if this be all,
Valoys and I will soon be friends again,
But to my Gaueston: shall I never see,
Never behold thee now? Madam in this matter
We will employ you and your little son,
You shall go parley with the king of France,
Boy, see you bear you bravely to the king,
And do your message with a majesty.
Commit not to my youth things of more weigh
Then fits a prince so young as I to bear,
And fear not lord and father, heavens great beams
On Atlas shoulder, shall not lie more safe,
Then shall your charge committed to my trust.
A boy, this towardness makes thy mother fear
Thou art not marked to many days on earth.
Madam, we will that you with speed be shipped,
And this our son, Lewne shall follow you,
With all the hast we can dispatch him hence,
Choose of our lords to bear you company,
And go in peace, leave vs in wars at home.
Unnatural wars, where subjects brave their king,
God end them once, my lord I take my leave,
To make my preparation for France.
What lord Matre. dost thou come alone?
Yea my good lord, for Gaueston is dead.
Ah traitors, have they put my friend to death,
Tell me Matre. died he ere thou came,
Or did thou see my friend to take his death?
Neither my lord, for as he was surprised,
Begirt with weapons, and with enemies round,
I did your highness message to them all,
Demanding him of them, entreating rather,
And said, upon the honour of my name,
That I would undertake to carry him
Unto your highness, and to bring him back.
And tell me, would the rebels deny me that?
Proud recreants.
Yea Spencer, traitors all.
I found them at the first inexorable,
The earl of Warwick would not bide the hearing,
Mortimer hardly, Penbrooke and Lancaster
Spake least: and when they flatly had denied,
Refusing to receive me pledge for him,
The earl of Penbrooke mildly thus bespoke.
My lords, because our sovereign sends for him,
And promises he shall be safe returned,
I will this undertake, to have him hence,
And see him redelivered to your hands.
Well, and how fortunes that he came not?
Some treason, or some villainy was cause.
The earl of Warwick seazde him on his way,
For being delivered unto Penbrookes men,
Their lord rode home, thinking his prisoner safe,
But ere he came, Warwick in ambush lay,
And bare him to his death, and in a trench
Struck off his head, and marched unto the camp.
A bloody part, flatly against law of arms.
O shall I speak, or shall I sigh and die!
My lord, refer your vengeance to the sword,
Upon these Barons, horton up your men,
Let them not unrevenged murder your friends,
Advance your standard Edward in the field,
And marche to sire them from their starting holes.
By earth, the common mother of vs all,
By heaven, and all the mooing orbs thereof,
By this right hand, and by my fathers sword,
And all the honours longing to my crown,
I will have heads, and lives for him as many,
As I have manors, castles, towns, and towers,
Tretcherous Warwick, traitorous Mortimer:
If I be Englands king, in lakes of gore
Your headles trunks, your bodies will I trail,
That you may drink your fill, and quaff in blood,
And stain my royal standard with the same,
That so my bloody colours may suggest
Remembrance of revenge immortally,
On your accursed traitorous progeny:
You villains that have slain my Gaueston,
And in this place of honour and of trust,
Spencer, sweet Spencer, I adopt thee here,
And merely of our love we do create thee
Earl of Gloster, and lord Chamberlain,
Despite of times, despite of enemies.
My lord, here is is a messenger from the Barons,
Desires access unto your majesty.
Admit him near.
Long live king Edward, Englands lawful lord.
So wish not they I wis that sent thee hither,
Thou come from Mortimer and his accomplices,
A ranker route of rebels never was:
Well, say thy message.
The Barons up in arms, by me salute
Your highness, with long life and happiness,
And bid me say as plainer to your grace,
That if without effusion of blood,
You will this grief have ease and remedy,
That from your princely person you remove
This Spencer, as a putrefying branch,
That dead the royal vine, whose golden leaves
Impale your princely head, your diadem,
Whose brightness such pernicious upstarts dim,
Say they, and lovingly advise your grace,
To cherish virtue and nobility,
And have old servitors in high esteem,
And shake off smooth dissembling flatterers:
This granted, they, their honours, and their lives,
Are to your highness vowed and consecrate.
A traitors, will they still display their pride?
Away, tarry no answer, but be gon,
Rebels, will they appoint their sovereign
His sports, his pleasures, and his company:
Yet ere thou go, see how I do divorce
Spencer from me: now get thee to thy lords,
And tell them I will come to chastise them,
For murdering Gaueston: hie thee, get thee gone,
Edward with fire and sword, follows at thy heals,
My lord, perceive you how these rebels swell:
Soldiers, good harts, defend your sovereigns right,
For now, even now, we marche to make them stoop,
Away.
Why do we sound retreat? upon them lords,
This day I shall power vengeance with my sword
On those proud rebels that are up in arms,
And do confront and countermand their king.
I doubt it not my lord, right will prevail.
Tic not amiss my liege for either part,
To breathe a while, our men with sweat and dust
All chockt well near, begin to faint for heate,
And this retire refreshes horse and man.
Here come the rebels.
Look Lancaster, yonder is Edward among his flatterers.
And there let him bee, till hee pay dearly for their company.
And shall or Warwicks sword shall smite in vain.
What rebels, do you shrink, and sound retreat?
No Edward, no, thy flatterers faint and fly.
Th'ad best betimes forsake thee and their trains,
For theile betray thee, traitors as they are.
Traitor on thy face, rebellious Lancaster.
Away base upstart, brau'st thou nobles thus.
A noble attempt, and honourable deed,
Is it not trow ye, to assemble aide,
And levy arms against your lawful king?
For which ere long, their heads shall satisfy,
T'appeaze the wrath of their offended king.
Then Edward, thou wilt fight it to the last,
And rather bathe thy sword in subjects blood,
Then banish that pernicious company.
I traitors all, rather then thus be braude,
Make Englands civil towns huge heaps of stones,
And plowes to go about our palace gates.
A desperate and unnatural resolution,
Alarm to the fight, saint George for England,
And the Barons right.
S. George for England, and king Edwards right.
Now lusty lords, now not by chance of war,
But justice of the quarrel and the cause
Veiled is your pride, me thinks you hang the head
But weal advance them traitors, now tic time
To be auengd on you for all your braves,
And for the murder of my dearest friend,
To whom right well you knew our soul was knit,
Good Pierce of Gaueston my sweet favourite,
A rebels, recreants, you made him away.
Brother, in regard of thee and of thy land,
Did they remove that flatterer from thy throne.
So sir, you have spoke, away, avoid our presence,
Accursed wretches, wast in regard of vs,
When we had sent our messenger to request
He might be spared to come to speak with vs,
And Penbrooke undertook for his return,
That thou proud Warwick watched the prisoner,
Poor Pierce, and headed him against law of arms,
For which thy head shall over look the rest.
As much as thou in rage out went the rest?
Tyrant, I scorn thy threats and menaces,
Tic but temporal that thou can inflict.
The worst is death, and better die to live,
Then live in infamy under such a king.
Away with them my lord of Winchester,
These lusty leaders Warwick and Lancaster,
I charge you roundly off with both their heads, away.
Farewell vain world.
Sweet Mortimer farewell.
England, unkind to thy nobility,
Groan for this grief, behold how thou art maimed.
Go take that haughty Mortimer to the tower,
There see him safe bestowed, and for the rest,
Do speedy execution on them all, be gon.
What Mortimer? can ragged stony wall
?????????ur thy virtue that aspires to heaven,
????????? Edward, Englands scourge, it may not be,
Mortimers hope surmounts his fortune far.
Sound drums and trumpets, marche with me my friends,
Edward this day hath crowned him king a new.
Lewne, the trust that we repose in thee,
Begets the quiet of king Edwards land,
Therefore be gon in hast, and with advice,
Bestow that treasure on the lords of France,
That therewith all enchanted like the guard,
That suffered Jove to pass in showers of gold
To Dane, all aide may be denied
To Isabel the Queen, that now in France
Makes friends, to cross the seas with her young son,
And step into his fathers regiment.
Thats it these Barons and the subtle Queen,
Long levied at.
Yea, but Lewne thou see,
These Barons lay their heads on blocks together,
What they intend, the hangman frustrates clean.
Have you no doubts my lords, isle claps close,
Among the lords of France with Englands gold,
That Isabel shall make her plaints in vain,
And France shall be obdurate with her tears.
Then make for France, amain Lewne away,
Proclaim king Edwards wars and victories.
Fair blows the wind for France, blow gentle gale,
Till Edmund be arrived for Englands good,
Nature, yield to my countries cause in this,
A brother, no, a butcher of thy friends,
Proud Edward, dost thou banish me thy presence?
But isle to France, and cheer the wronged Queen,
And certify what Edwards looseness is,
Unnatural king, to slaughter noble men
And cherish flatterers: Mortimer I stay
Thy sweet escape, stand gracious gloomy night to his device.
Holla, who walk there, first you my lord?
Mortimer tic I, but hath thy potion wrought so happily?
It hath my lord, the warders all a sleep,
I thank them, gave me leave to pass in peace:
But hath your grace got shipping unto France?
Fear it not.
A boy, our friends do fail vs all in France,
The lords are cruel, and the king unkind,
What shall we doe?
Madam, return to England,
And please my father well, and then a Fig
For all my uncles frienship here in France,
I warrant you, isle win his highness quickly,
A loves me better than a thousand Sponsors.
A boy, thou art deceiude at least in this,
To think that we can yet be tuned together,
No, no, we war too far, unkind Valoys,
Unhappy Isabel, when France reiects,
Whether, O whether dost thou bend thy steps.
Madam, what cheer?
A good sir Iohn of Henolt,
Never so cheereles, nor so far distressed.
I hear sweet lady of the kings unkindness,
But droop not madam, noble minds contemn
Despair: will your grace with me to Henolt?
And there stay times advantage with your son,
How say you my Lord, will you go with your friends,
And shake off all our fortunes equally.
So pleases the Queen my mother, me it likes,
The king of England, nor the court of France,
Shall have me from my gracious mothers side,
Till I be strong enough to break a staff,
And then have at the proudest Sponsors head.
Well said my lord.
Oh my sweet hart, how do I moan thy wrongs?
Yet triumph in the hope of thee my joy,
Ah sweet sir Iohn, even to the utmost verge
Of Europe, or the shore of Tanaise,
Will we with thee to Henolt, so we will,
The Marks is a noble Gentleman,
His grace I dare presume will welcome me,
But who are these?
Madam, long may you live,
Much happier then your friends in England do.
Lord Edmund and lord Mortimer alive,
Welcome to France: the news was here my lord,
That you were dead, or very near your death.
Lady, the last was truest of the twain,
But Mortimer reserved for better hap,
Hath shaken off the thraldom of the tower,
And lives t'aduance your standard good my lord.
How mean you, and the king my father lives?
No my lord Mortimer, not I, I trow.
Not son, why not? I would it were no worse,
But gentle lords, friendless we are in France.
Monsieur le Grand, a noble friend of yours,
Told vs at our arrival all the news,
How hard the nobles, how unkind the king
Hath showed himself: but madam, right makes room,
Where weapons want, and though a many friends
Are made away, as Warwick, Lancaster,
And others of our party and faction,
Yet have we friends, assure your grace in England,
Would cast up caps, and clap their hands for joy,
To see vs there appointed for our foes.
Would all were well, and Edward well reclaimd,
For Englands honour, peace, and quietness.
But by the sword, my lord, it must be deserved.
The king will ne'er forsake his flatterers.
My Lords of England, sith the ungentle king
Of France refuses to give aide of arms,
To this distressed Queen his sister here,
Go you with her to Henolt, doubt ye not,
We will find comfort, money, men, and friends
Ere long, to bid the English king a base,
How say young Prince, what think you of the match?
I think king Edward will out run vs all.
Nay soune, not so, and you must not discourage
Your friends that are so forward in your aide.
Sir Iohn of Henolt, pardon vs I pray,
These comforts that you give our woeful queen,
Bind vs in kindness all at your command.
Yea gentle brother, and the God of heaven,
Prosper your happy motion good sir Iohn.
This noble gentleman forward in arms,
Was borne I see to be our anchor hold,
Sir Iohn of Henolt, be it thy renown,
That Englands Queen, and nobles in distress,
Have been by thee restored and comforted.
Madam along, and you my lord with me,
That Englands peers may Henolts welcome see.
Thus after many threats of wrathful war,
Triumphs Englands Edward with his friends,
And triumph Edward with his friends uncontrolled,
My lord of Gloster, do you hear the news?
What news my lord?
Why man, they say there is great execution
Done through the realm, my lord of Arundell
You have the note, have you not?
From the lieutenant of the tower my lord.
I pray let vs see it, what have we there?
Read it Spencer.
Why so, they barked a pace a month a go,
Now on my life, theile neither bark nor bite.
Now sirs, the news from France, Gloster I trow,
The lords of France love Englands gold so well,
As Isabel gets no aide from thence.
What now remains, have you proclaimed, my lord,
Reward for them can bring in Mortimer?
My lord, we have, and if he be in England,
A will be had ere long I doubt it not.
If; dost thou say? Spencer, as true as death,
He is in Englands ground, our port-maisters
Are not so careless of their kings command.
How now, what news with thee, from whence come these?
Letters my lord, and tidings forth of France,
To you my lord of Gloster from Lewne.
Read.
My duty to your honour promised, &amp;c. I have accor???ding to instructions in that behalf, dealt with the king of France his lords, and effected, that the Queen all discontented and discomforted, is gone, whither if you ask, with sir Iohn of Henolt, brother to the Mar???guess, into Flaunders: with them are gone lord Ed???monday, and the lord Mortimer, having in their company divers of your nation, and others, and as constant re???port goes, they intend to give king Edward battle in England, sooner then he can look for them: this is all the news of import.
A villains, hath that Mortimer escaped?
With him is Edmund gone associate?
And will sir Iohn of Henolt lead the round?
Welcome a Gods name Madam and your son,
England shall welcome you, and all your route,
Gallop a pace bright Phoebus through the sky,
And dusky night, in rusty iron carre,
Between you both, shorten the time I pray,
That I may see that most desired day,
When we may meet these traitors in the field.
Ah nothing grieves me but my little boy,
Is thus misled to countenance their else,
Come friends to Bristow, there to make vs strong,
And winds as equal be to bring them in,
As you injurious were to bear them forth.
Now lords, our loving friends and countrymen,
Welcome to England all with prosperous winds,
Our kindest friends in Belgia have we left,
To cope with friends at home: a heavy case,
When force to force is knit and sword and gleaue,
In civil broils makes kin and country men,
Slaughter themselves in others and their sides
With their own weapons gored, but whats the help?
Misgoverned kings are cause of all this wrack,
And Edward thou art one among them all,
Whose looseness hath betrayed thy land to spoil,
And made the channels overflow with blood,
Of thine own people patro?? should thou be, but thou.
Nay madam, if you be a warriar,
Ye must not grow so passionate in speeches:
Lords, sith that we are by sufferance of heaven,
Arrived and armed in this princes right,
Here for our countries cause swear we to him
All homage, fealty and forwardness,
And for the open wrongs and injuries
Edward hath done to vs, his Queen and land,
We come in arms to wreck it with the swords:
That Englands queen in peace may reposesse
Her dignities and honours, and withal
We may remove these flatterers from the king,
That hauocks Englands wealth and treasury.
Sound true??pets my lord &amp; forward let vs march,
Edward will think we come to flatter him.
I would he never had bin flattered more.
Fly, fly, my Lord, the Queen is ouerstrong.
Her friends doe multiply and yours doe fail,
Shape we our course to Ireland there to breath.
What, was I borne to fly and run away,
And leave the Mortimers conquerors behind?
Give me my horse and lets r'enforce our troupes,
And in this bed of honour die with fame.
O no my lord, this princely resolution
Fits not the time, away, we are pursued.
This way he fled, but I am come too late,
Edward, alas my hart relents for thee,
Proud traitor Mortimer why dost thou chase
Thy lawful king thy sovereign with thy sword?
Wild wretch, and why hast thou of all unkind,
Borne arms against thy brother and thy king?
Reign showers of vengeance on my cursed head
Thou God, to whom in justice it belongs,
To punish this unnatural revolt:
Edward, this Mortimer aims at thy life:
O fly him then, but Edmund calm this rage,
Dissemble or thou die, for Mortimer
And Isabel doe kiss while they conspire,
And yet she bears a face of love forsooth:
Fie on that love that hatches death and hate.
Edmund away, Bristow to Longshankes blood
Is false, be not found single for suspect:
Proud Mortimer pries near into thy walks.
Successful battles gives the God of kings,
To them that fight in right and fear his wrath:
Since then successfully we have prevailed,
Thanks be heavens great architect and you,
Ere farther we proceed my noble lords,
We here create our well-beloved son,
Of love and care unto his royal person,
Lord warden of the realm, and sith the fates
Have made his father so unfortunate,
Deal you my lords in this, my loving lords,
As to your wisdoms fittest seems in all.
Madam, without offence if I may ask,
How will you deal with Edward in his fall?
Tell me good uncle, what Edward doe you mean?
Nephew, your father, I dare not call him king.
My lord of Kent, what needs these questions?
Tic not in her controlment, nor in ours,
But as the realm and parliament shall please,
So shall your brother be disposed of,
I like not this relenting mood in Edmund,
Madam, tic good to look to him betimes.
My lord, the Mayor of Bristow knows our mind.
Yea madam, and they scope not easily,
That fled the field.
Baldock is with the king,
A goodly chancellor, is he not my lord?
So are the Sponsors, the father and the son.
This Edward is the ruin of the realm.
God save Queen Isabel, &amp; her princely son,
Madam, the Mayor and Citizens of Bristow,
In sign of love and duty to this presence,
Present by me this traitor to the state,
Spencer, the father to that wanton Spencer,
That like the lawless Catiline of Rome,
Reveled in Englands wealth and treasury.
We thank you all.
Your loving care in this,
Deserves princely favours and rewards,
But wheres the king and the other Spencer fled?
Spencer the son, created earl of Gloster,
Is with that smooth toongd scholar Baldock gone,
And shipped but late for Ireland with the king.
Some whirl wind fetch them back, or sink them all:
They shall be started thence I doubt it not.
Shall I not see the king my father yet?
Vnhappies Edward, chaste from Englands bounds.
Madam, what rests, why stand ye in a muse?
I rue my lords ill fortune, but alas,
Care of my country called me to this war.
Madam, have done with care &amp; sad complain,
Your king hath wronged your country and himself,
And we must seek to right it as we may,
Mean while, have hence this rebel to the block,
Your lordship cannot privilege your head.
Rebel is he that fights against his prince,
So fought not they that fought in Edwards right.
Take him away, he prates, you Rice ap howell,
Shall do good service to her Majesty,
Being of countenance in your country here,
To follow these rebellious runagates,
We in mean while madam, must take advise,
How Baldocke, Spencer, and their accomplices,
May in their fall be followed to their end.
Have you no doubt my Lord, have you no fear,
As silent and as careful will we be,
To keep your royal person safe with vs,
Free from suspect, and fell invasion
Of such as have your majesty in chase,
Your self, and those your chosen company,
As danger of this stormy time requires.
Father, thy face should harbour no deceit,
O had thou ever been a king, thy hart
Pierced deeply with sense of my distress,
Could not but take compassion of my state,
Stately and proud, in riches and in train,
Meanwhile I was powerful and full of pomp,
But what is he, whom rule and empery
Have not in life or death made miserable?
Come Spencer, come Baldocke, come sit down by me,
Make trial now of that philosophy,
That in our famous nurseries of arts
Thou suckedst from Plato, and from Aristotle.
Father, this life contemplative is heaven,
O that I might this life in quiet lead,
But we alas are chaste, and you my friends,
Your lives and my dishonour they pursue
Yet gentle monks, for treasure, gold nor fee,
Do you betray vs and our company.
Your grace may sit secure, if none but wee doe wot of your abode.
Not one alive, but shrewdly I suspect,
A gloomy fellow in a mead below,
A gave a long look after vs my lord,
And all the land I know is up in arms,
Arms that pursue our lives with deadly hate.
We were embarked for Ireland, wretched we,
With awkward winds, and sore tempests driven
To fall on shore, and here to pine in fear
Of Mortimer and his confederates.
Mortimer, who talks of Mortimer,
Who wounds me with the name of Mortimer
That bloody man? good father on thy lap
Lay I this head, laden with mickle care,
O might I never open these eyes again,
Never again lift up this drooping head,
O never more lift up this dying hart!
Look up my lord. Baldock, this drowsiness
Betides no good, here even we are betrayed.
Upon my life, those be the men ye see
Fellow enough, my lord I pray be short,
A fair commission warrants what we do.
The Queens commission, urged by Mortimer,
What cannot gallant Mortimer with the Queen?
Alas, see where he sits, and hopes unseen,
T'escape their hands that seek to reeve his life:
Too true it is, quem dies vidit veniens superbum,
Hunc dies vidit fugiens iacentem.
But Leister leave to grow so passionate,
Spencer and Baldocke, by no other names,
I arrest you of high treason here,
Stand not on titles, but obey th'arrest,
Tic in the name of Isabel the Queen:
My lord, why droop you thus?
O day! the last of all my bliss on earth;
Center of all misfortune. O my stars!
Why do you lower unkindly on a king?
Comes Leister then in Isabellas name,
To take my life, my company from me?
Here man, rip up this panting breast of mine,
And take my heart, in reskew of my friends.
Away with them.
It may be come thee yet,
To let vs take our farewell of his grace.
My heart with pity earns to see this sight,
A king to bear these words and proud commands.
Spencer, a sweet Spencer, thus then must we part.
We must my lord, so will the angry heavens.
Nay so will hell, and cruel Mortimer,
The gentle heavens have not to do in this.
My lord, it is in vain to grieve or storm,
Here humbly of your grace we take our leaves,
Our lots are cast, I fear me so is thine.
In heaven wee may, in earth never shall wee meet,
And Leister say, what shall become of vs?
Your majesty must go to Killingworth.
Must! tic somewhat hard, when kings must go.
Here is a Litter ready for your grace,
That waits your pleasure, and the day grows old.
As good be gon, as stay and be benighted.
A litter hast thou, lay me in a hearse,
And to the gates of hell convey me hence,
Let Plutos bells ring out my fatal knell,
And hags howl for my death at Charons shore,
For friends hath Edward none, but these, and these,
And these must die under a tyrants sword.
My lord, be going, care not for these,
For we shall see them shorter by the heads.
Well, that shall be, shall be: part we must,
Sweet Spencer, gentle Baldocke, part we must,
Hence fained weeds, unfeigned are my woes,
Father, farewell: Leister, thou staist for me,
And go I must, life farewell with my friends.
O is he gone! is noble Edward gone,
Parted from hence, never to see vs more,
Rent sphere of heaven, and fire forsake thy orb,
Earth melt to ayre, gone is my sovereign,
Gone, gone alas, never to make return.
Spencer, I see our souls are fleeted hence,
We are deprived the sun-shine of our life,
Make for a new life man, throw up thy eyes,
And hart and hand to heavens immortal throne,
Pay natures debt with cheerful countenance,
Reduce we all our lessons unto this,
To die sweet Spencer, therefore live wee all,
Spencer, all live to die, and rise to fall.
Come, come, keep these preachments till you come to the place appointed
You, and such as you are, have made wise work in England.
Will your Lordships away?
Your worship I trust will remember me?
Remember thee fellow? what else,
Follow me to the town.
Be patient good my lord, cease to lament,
Imagine Killingworth castle were your court,
And that you lay for pleasure here a space,
Not of compulsion or neceissitie.
Leister, if gentle words might comfort me,
Thy speeches long ago had eased my sorrows,
For kind and loving hast thou always been:
The griefs of private men are soon allayed,
But not of kings, the forest Dear being struck
Runs to an herb that closes up the wounds,
But when the imperial Lions flesh is gored,
He rends and tears it with his wrathful paw,
Highly scorning, that the lowly earth
Should drink his blood, mounts up into the ayre,
And so it fares with me, whose dauntless mind
The ambitious Mortimer would seek to curb,
And that unnatural Queen false Isabel,
That thus hath pent and mu'd me in a prison,
For such outrageous passions cloy my soul,
As with the wings of rancor and disdain,
Full often am I souring up to heaven,
To plain me to the gods against them both.
But when I call to mind I am a king,
Me thinks I should revenge me of the wrongs,
That Mortimer and Isabel have done.
But what are kings, when regiment is gone,
But perfect shadows in a sun-shine day?
My nobles rule, I bear the name of king,
I wear the crown, but am controlled by them,
By Mortimer, and my inconstant Queen,
Who spots my nuptial bed with infamy,
Whilst I am lodged within this cave of care,
Where sorrow at my elbow still attends,
To company my hart with sad laments,
That bleeds within me for this strange exchange.
But tell me, must I now resign my crown,
To make usurping Mortimer a king?
Your grace mistakes, it is for Englands good,
And princely Edwards right we crave the crown.
No, tic for Mortimer, not Edwards head,
For hes a lamb, encompassed by Wolves,
Which in a moment will abridge his life:
But if proud Mortimer do wear this crown,
Heavens turn it to a blaze of quenchelesse fire,
Or like the snaky wreathe of Tisiphon,
Engirt the temples of his hateful head,
So shall not Englands Vines be perished,
But Edwards name survives, though Edward dies.
My lord, why waste you thus the time away,
They stay your answer, will you yield your crown?
Ah Leister, way, how hardly I can brooke
To loose my crown and kingdom, without cause,
To give ambitious Mortimer my right,
That like a mountain ouerwhelmes my bliss.
In which extreme my mind here murdered is:
But what the heavens appoint, I must obey,
Here, take my crown, the life of Edward too,
Two kings in England cannot reign at once:
But stay a while, let me be king till night,
That I may gaze upon this glittering crown,
So shall my eyes receive their last content,
My head, the latest honour dew to it,
And jointly both yield up their wished right.
Continue ever thou celestial sun,
Let never silent night possess this clime,
Stand still you watches of the element,
All times and seasons rest you at a stay,
That Edward may be still fair Englands king:
But days bright beams doth vanish fast away,
And needs I must resign my wished crown,
In human creatures, nursed with Tigers milk,
Why gape you for your sovereigns overthrow?
My diadem I mean, and guiltless life,
See monsters see, isle wear my crown again,
What, fear you not the fury of your king?
But haplesse Edward, thou art fondly led,
They pass not for thy frowns as late they did,
But seeks to make a new elected king,
Which fills my mind with strange despairing thoughts,
Which thoughts are martyred with endless torments.
And in this torment, comfort find I none,
But that I feel the crown upon my head,
And therefore let me wear it yet a while.
My Lord, the parliament must have present news,
And therefore say, will you resign or no.
Isle not resign, but whilst I live,
Traitors be gon, and join you with Mortimer,
Elect, conspire, install, do what you will,
Their blood and yours shall seal these treacheries.
This answer weal return, and so farewell.
Call them again my lord, and speak them fair,
For if they go, the prince shall lose his right.
Call thou them back, I have no power to speak.
My lord, the king is willing to resign.
If he be not, let him choose.
O would I might, but heavens &amp; earth conspire
To make me miserable: here receive my crown,
Receive it? no, these innocent hands of mine
Shall not be guilty of so foul a crime,
He of you all that most desires my blood,
And will be called the murderer of a king,
Take it: what are you mooude, pity you me?
Then send for unrelenting Mortimer
And Isabel, whose eyes been turned to steel,
Will sooner sparkle fire then shed a tear:
Yet stay, for rather then I will look on them,
Here, here: now sweet God of heaven,
Make me despise this transitory pomp,
And sit for aye inthronized in heaven,
Come death, and with thy fingers close my eyes,
Or if I live, let me forget my self.
My lord.
Call me not lord,
Away, out of my sight, ah pardon me,
Grief makes me lunatic,
Let not that Mortimer protect my son,
More safety is there in a Tigers jaws,
This his embraces, bear this to the queen,
Wet with my tears, and dried again with sighs,
If with the sight thereof she be not moved,
Return it back and dip it in my blood,
Commend me to my son, and bid him rule
Better then I, yet how have I transgressed,
Unless it be with too much clemency?
And thus, most humbly do we take our leave.
Farewell, I know the next news that they bring,
Will be my death, and welcome shall it be,
To wretched men death is felicity.
An other post, what news brings he?
Such news as I expect, come Bartley, come,
And tell thy message to my naked breast.
My lord, think not a thought so villainous
Can harbour in a man of noble birth.
To do your highness service and deuoire,
And save you from your foes, Bartley would die.
My lord, the counsel of the Queen com???maunds,
That I resign my charge.
And who must keep me now, must you my lord?
I, my most gracious lord, so tic decreed.
By Mortimer, whose name is written here,
Well may I rent his name, that rends my hart,
This poor revenge hath something easd my mind,
So may his limbs be torn, as is this paper,
Hear me immortal love, and grant it too.
Your grace must hence with me to Bartley straight.
Whether you will, all places are alike,
And every earth is fit for burial.
Favour him my lord, as much as lies in you.
Even so betide my soul as I use him.
Mine enemy hath pitied my estate,
And thats the cause that I am now remooude.
And thinks your grace that Bartley will bee cruel?
I know not, but of this am I assured,
That death ends all, and I can die but once,
Leicester, farewell.
Not yet my lord, isle bear you on your way.
Fair Isabel, now have we our desire,
The proud corrupters of the light-brainde king,
Have done their homage to the lost gallows,
And he himself lies in captivity,
Be ruled by me, and we will rule the realm,
In any case, take heed of childish fear,
For now we hold an old Wolf by the ears,
That if he flip will seize upon vs both,
And gripe the sorer being gript himself,
Think therefore madam that imports as much,
To erect your son withal the speed we may,
And that I be protector over him,
For our behoof will bear the greater sway
When as a kings name shall be under writ.
Sweet Mortimer, the life of Isabel,
Be thou persuaded, that I love thee well,
And therefore so the prince my son be safe,
Whom I esteem as dear as these mine eyes,
Conclude against his father what thou wilt,
And I my self will willingly subscribe.
First would I hear news that hee were deposde,
And then let me alone to handle him.
Letters, from whence?
From Killing worth my lord.
How fares my lord the king?
In health madam, but full of pensiveness.
Alas poor soul, would I could ease his grief,
Thanks gentle Winchester, sir, be gon.
The king hath willingly resignde his crown.
O happy news, send for the prince my son.
Further, or this letter was sealed, Lord Bartley came,
So that he now is gone from Killingworth,
And we have heard that Edmund laid a plot,
To set his brother free, no more but so,
The lord of Bartley is so pitiful,
As Leicester that had charge of him before.
Then let some other be his guardian.
Let me alone, here is the privy seal,
Whose there, call hither Gurney and Matreuis,
To dash the heavy headed Edmunds drift,
Bartley shall be discharged, the king remooude,
And none but we shall know where he lies.
But Mortimer, as long as he survives
What safety rests for vs, or for my son?
Speak, shall he presently be dispatched and die?
I would hee were, so it were not by my means.
Enough Matreuis, write a letter pre???sently
Unto the Lord of Bartley from our self,
That he resign the king to thee and Gurney,
And when tic done, we will subscribe our name.
It shall be done my lord.
Gurney.
My Lord.
As thou intend to rise by Mortimer,
Who now makes Fortunes wheel turn as he please,
Seek all the means thou can to make him droop,
And neither give him kind word, nor good look.
I warrant you my lord.
And this aboue the rest, because we hear
That Edmund casts to work his liberty,
Remove him still from place to place by night,
And at the last, he come to Killingworth,
And then from thence to Bartley back again:
And by the way to make him fret the more,
Speak curstlie to him, and in any case
Let no man comfort him, if he chance to weep,
But amplify his grief with bitter words.
Fear not my Lord, weal do as you com???maund.
So now away, post thither wards amain.
Whither goes this letter, to my lord the king?
Commend me humbly to his Majesty,
And tell him, that I labour all in vain,
To ease his grief, and work his liberty:
And bear him this, as witness of my love.
I will madam.
Finely dissembled, do so still sweet Queen,
Here comes the young prince, with the Earl of Kent.
Some thing he whispers in his childish ears.
If he have such access unto the prince,
Our plots and stratagems will soon be dashed.
Use Edmund friendly, as if all were well.
How fares my honourable lord of Kent?
In health sweet Mortimer, how fares your grace.
Well, if my Lord your brother were en???largde.
I hear of late he hath deposde himself.
The more my grief.
And mine.
Ah they do dissemble.
Sweet son come hither, I must talk with thee.
Thou being his uncle, and the next of blood,
Doe look to be protector over the prince.
Not I my lord: who should protect the son,
But she that gave him life, I mean the Queen?
Mother, persuade me not to wear the crown,
Let him be king, I am too young to reign.
But bee content, seeing it his highness pleasure.
Let me but see him first, and then I will.
I do sweet Nephew.
Brother, you know it is impossible.
Why, is he dead?
No, God forbid.
I would these words proceeded from your heart.
Inconstant Edmund, dost thou favour him,
That wast a cause of his imprisonment?
The more cause have I now to make amends.
I tell thee tic not meet, that one so false
Should come about the person of a prince,
My lord, he hath betrayed the king his brother,
And therefore trust him not.
But hee repents, and sorrows for it now.
Come son, and go with this gentle Lord and me.
With you I will, but not with Mortimer.
Why yongling, sodainst thou so of Mortimer?
Then I will carry thee by force away.
Help uncle Kent, Mortimer will wrong me.
Brother Edmund, strive not, we are his friends,
Isabel is nearer then the earl of Kent.
Sister, Edward is my charge, redeem him.
Edward is my son, and I will keep him.
Mortimer shall know that he hath wronged me.
Hence will I haste to Killingworth castle,
And rescue aged Edward from his foes,
To be revenged on Mortimer and thee.
My lord, be not pensive, we are your friends,
Men are ordained to live in misery,
Therefore come, dalliance dangered our lives.
Friends, whither must unhappy Edward go,
Will hateful Mortimer appoint no rest?
Must I be vexed like the nightly bird,
Whose sight is loathsome to all winged fowls?
When will the fury of his mind assuage?
When will his hart be satisfied with blood?
If mine will serve, vnbowell straight this breast,
And give my heart to Isabel and him,
It is the chiefest mark they level at.
Not so my liege, the Queen hath given this charge,
To keep your grace in safety,
Your passions make your dolours to increase.
This usage makes my misery increase.
But can my ayre of life continue long,
When all my senses are anoyde with stench?
Within a dungeon Englands king is kept,
Where I am starved for want of sustenance,
My daily diet, is heart breaking sobs,
That almost rents the closet of my heart,
Thus lives old Edward not relieved by any,
And so must die, though pitied by many.
O water gentle friends to cool my thirst,
And clear my body from foul excrements.
Hears channel water, as our charge is given,
Sit down, for weal be Barbers to your grace.
Traitors away, what will you murder me,
Or choke your sovereign with puddle water?
No, but wash your face, and shave away your beard,
Least you be known, and so be rescued.
Why strive you thus, your labour is in vain?
The Wren may strive against the Lions strength.
But all in vain, so vainly do I strive,
To seek for mercy at a tyrants hand.
Immortal powers, that knows the painful cares,
That waits upon my poor distressed soul,
O level all your looks upon these daring men,
That wrongs their liege and sovereign, Englands king,
O Gaueston, it is for thee that I am wronged,
For me, both thou, and both the Sponsors died,
And for your sakes, a thousand wrongs isle take,
The Sponsors ghosts, where ever they remain,
Wish well to mine, then tush for them isle die.
Twixt theirs and yours, shall be no enmity,
Come, come, away, now put the torches out,
Weal enter in by darkness to Killingworth.
How now, who comes there?
Guard the king sure, it is the earl of Kent.
O gentle brother, help to rescue me.
Keep them a sunder, thrust in the king.
Soldiers, let me but talk to him one word.
Lay hands upon the earl for this assault.
Lay down your weapons, traitors yield the king.
Edmund, yield thou thy self, or thou shalt die.
Base villains, wherefore doe you gripe me thus?
Bind him, and so convey him to the court.
Where is the court but here, here is the king,
And I will visit him, why stay you me?
The court is where lord Mortimer remains,
Thither shall your honour go, and so farewell.
O miserable is that commonweal, where lords
Keep courts, and kings are locked in prison!
Wherefore stay we? on sirs to the court.
I, load me whether you will, even to my death,
Seeing that my brother cannot be releast.
The king must die, or Mortimer goes down,
The commons now begin to pity him,
Yet he that is the cause of Edwards death,
Is sure to pay for it when his son is of age,
And therefore will I do it cunningly,
This letter written by a friend of ours,
Contains his death, yet bids them save his life.
Edwardum occidere nolite timer bonum est.
Fear not to kill the king tic good he die.
But read it thus, and thats an other sense:
Edwardum occidere nolite timer bonum est.
Kill not the king tic good to fear the worst.
Unpointed as it is, thus shall it go,
That being dead, if it chance to be found,
Matreuis and the rest may bear the blame,
And we be quit that caused it to be done:
Within this room is locked the messenger,
That shall convey it, and perform the rest,
And by a secret token that he bears,
Shall he be murdered when the deed is done.
Lightborn, come forth, art thou as resolute as thou wast?
What else my lord? and far more resolute.
And hast thou cast how to accomplish it?
I, I, and none shall know which way he died.
But at his looks Lightborne thou wilt relent.
Relent, ha, ha, I use much to relent.
Well, do it bravely, and be secret.
You shall not need to give instructions,
Tic not the first time I have killed a man,
I learned in Naples how to poison flowers,
To strangle with a lawn thrust through the throat,
To pierce the wind-pipe with a needles point,
Or whilst one is a sleep, to take a quill
And blow a little powder in his ears,
Or open his mouth, and power quick silver down,
But yet I have a braver way then these.
Whats that?
Nay, you shall pardon me, none shall know my tricks.
I care not how it is, so it be not spied,
Deliver this to Gurney and Matrons,
At every ten miles end thou hast a horse.
Take this, away, and never see me more.
No.
No, unless thou bring me news of Ed???wards death.
That will I quickly do, farewell my lord.
The prince I rule, the queen do I command,
And with a lowly conge to the ground,
The proudest lords salute me as I pass,
I seal, I cancel, I do what I will,
Feared am I more then loved, let me be feared,
And when I frown, make all the court look pale,
I view the prince with Aristorchus eyes,
Whose looks were as a breaching to a boy,
They thrust upon me the Protectorship,
And sue to me for that that I desire,
While at the council table, grave enough,
And not unlike a bashful paretaine,
First I complain of imbecility,
Saying it is, onus quam grauissimum,
Till being interrupted by my friends,
Suscepi that prouinciam as they term it,
And to conclude, I am Protector now,
Now is all sure, the Queen and Mortimer
Shall rule the realm, the king, and none rule vs,
Mine enemies will I plague, my friends advance,
And what I list command, who dare control,
Mayor sum quam cui posit fortune nocere,
And that this be the coronation day,
It pleases me, and Isabel the Queen,
The trumpets sound, I must go take my place.
Long live king Edward, by the grace of God
King of England, and lord of Ireland.
If any Christian, Heathen, Turk, or Jew,
Dares but affirm, that Edwards not true king.
And will avouch his saying with the sword,
I am the Champion that will combat him.
None comes, sound trumpets.
Champion, hears to thee.
Lord Mortimer, now take him to your charge.
What traitor have wee there with blades and bills?
Edmund the Earl of Kent.
What hath he done?
A would have taken the king away perforce,
As we were bringing him to Killingworth.
Did you attempt his rescue, Edmund speak?
Mortimer, I did, he is our king,
And thou compelst this prince to wear the crown.
Strike off his head, he shall have marshall law.
Strike of my head, base traitor I defy thee.
My lord, he is my uncle, and shall live.
My lord, he is your enemy, and shall die.
Stay villains.
Sweet mother, if I cannot pardon him,
Entreat my lord Protector for his life.
Son, be content, I dare not speak a word.
Nor I, and yet me thinks I should command,
But seeing I cannot, isle entreat for him:
My lord, if you will let my uncle live,
I will requite it when I come to age.
Tic for your highness good, and for the realms,
How often shall I bid you bear him hence?
Art thou king, must I die at thy command?
At our command, once more away with him.
Let me but stay and speak, I will not go,
Either my brother or his son is king,
And none of both, then thirst for Edmunds blood,
And therefore soldiers whether will you hale me?
What safety may I look for at his hands,
If that my Uncle shall be murdered thus?
Fear not sweet boy, isle guard thee from thy foes,
Had Edmund lived, he would have sought thy death,
Come son, weal ride a hunting in the park.
And shall my Uncle Edmund ride with vs?
He is a traitor, think not on him, come.
Gurney, I wonder the king dies not,
Being in a vault up to the knees in water,
To which the channels of the castle run,
From whence a damp continually arises,
That were enough to poison any man,
Much more a king brought up so tenderly.
And so do I, Matreuis: yesternight
I opened but the door to throw him meat,
And I was almost stifeled with the savor.
He hath a body able to endure,
More then we can enflict, and therefore now,
Let vs assail his mind another while.
Send for him out thence, and I will anger him.
But stay, whose this?
My lord protector greetes you.
Whats here? I know not how to construe it.
Gurney, it was left unpointed for the nonce,
Edwardum occidere nolite timer,
Thats his meaning.
Know you this token, I must have the king?
I stay a while, thou shalt have answer straight.
This villain's sent to make away the king.
I thought as much.
And when the murders done,
See how he must be handled for his labour,
Pereat iste: let him have the king,
What else, here is the keys, this is the lake,
Doe as you are commanded by my lord.
I know what I must do, get you away,
Yet be not far off, I shall need your help,
See that in the next room I have a fire,
And get me a spit, and let it be red hot.
Very well.
Need you any thing besides?
What else, a table and a featherbed.
Thats all.
I, I, so when I call you, bring it in.
Fear not you that.
Hears a light to go into the dungeon.
So now must I about this gear, ne'er was there any
So finely handled as this king shall be,
Foh, hears a place in deed with all my hart.
Whose there, what light is that, where???fore comes thou?
To comfort you, and bring you joyful news.
Small comfort finds poor Edward in thy looks,
Villain, I know thou come to murder me.
To murder you my most gracious lord,
Far is it from my hart to do you harm,
The Queen sent me, to see how you were used,
For she relents at this your misery.
And what eyes can refrain from shedding tears,
To see a king in this most piteous state?
VVeepst thou already, list a while to me,
And then thy heart, were it as Gurneys is,
Or as Matreuis, hewn from the Caucasus,
Yet will it melt, ere I have done my tale,
This dungeon where they keep me, is the sink,
Wherein the filth of all the castle falls.
O villains!
And there in mire and puddle have I stood,
This ten days space, and least that I should sleep,
One plays continually upon a Drum,
They give me bread and water being a king,
So that for want of sleep and sustenance,
My minds distempered, and my bodies numde,
And whether I have limbs or no, I know not,
O would my blood dropped out from every vain,
As doth this water from my tattered robes:
Tell Isabel the Queen, I looked not thus,
When for her sake I ran at tilt in France,
And there unhorsed the duke of Cleremont.
O speak no more my lord, this breaks my heart.
Lie on this bed, and rest your self a while,
These looks of thine can harbour nought but death.
I see my tragedy written in thy brows,
Yet stay a while, forbear thy bloody hand,
And let me see the stroke before it comes,
That and even then when I shall lose my life,
My mind may be more steadfast on my God.
What means your highness to mistrust me thus?
What means thou to dissemble with me thus?
These hands were never stained with inno???cent blood,
Nor shall they now be tainted with a kings.
Forgive my thought, for having such a thought,
One jewel have I left, receive thou this,
Still fear I, and I know not whats the cause,
But every joint shakes as I give it thee:
O if thou harborst murder in thy hart,
Let this gift change thy mind, and save thy soul,
Know that I am a king, oh at that name,
I feel a hell of grief, where is my crown?
Gone, gone, and doe I remain alive?
Your over watched my lord, lie down and rest.
But that grief keeps me waking, I should sleep,
For not these ten days have these eye lids closed,
Now as I speak they fall, and yet with fear
Open again, O wherefore sits thou hear?
If you mistrust me, isle be gon my lord.
No, no, for if thou meanst to murder me,
Thou wilt return again, and therefore stay.
He sleeps.
O let me not die, yet stay, O stay a while.
How now my Lord.
Something still busseth in mine ears,
And tells me, if I sleep I never wake,
This fear is that which makes me tremble thus,
And therefore tell me, wherefore art thou come?
To rid thee of thy life, Matreuis come,
I am too weak and feeble to resist,
Assist me sweet God, and receive my soul.
Run for the table.
O spare me, or dispatch me in a trice.
So, lay the table down, and stamp his body.
But not too hard, least that you bruise his body.
I fear me that this cry will raise the town,
And therefore let vs take horse and away.
Tell me sirs, was it not brave lie done?
Excellent well, take this for thy reward,
Come let vs cast the body in the more,
And bear the kings to Mortimer our lord, away.
First done, Matreuis, and the murderer dead?
I my good Lord, I would it were undone.
Matreuis, if thou now growest penitent
Isle be thy ghostly father, therefore choose,
Whether thou wilt be secret in this,
Or else die by the hand of Mortimer.
Gurney my lord is fled, and will I fear,
Betray vs both, therefore let me sly.
Fly to the Savages.
I humbly thank your honour.
As for my self, I stand as Ioues huge tree,
And others are but shrubs compared to me,
All tremble at my name, and I fear none,
Lets see who dare impeach me for his death?
A Mortimer, the king my son hath news,
His fathers dead, and we have murdered him.
What if he have? the king is yet a child.
I, I, but he tears his hair, and wrings his hands,
And vows to be revenged upon vs both,
Into the council chamber he is gone,
To crave the aide and succour of his peers,
Aye me, see where he comes, and they with him,
Now Mortimer begins our tragedy.
Fear not my lord, know that you are a king.
Villain.
How now my lord?
Think not that I am frighted with thy words,
My father's murdered through thy treachery,
And thou shalt die, and on his mournful hearse,
Thy hateful and accursed head shall lie,
To witness to the world, that by thy means,
His kingly body was too soon interrde.
Weep not sweet son.
Forbid not me to weep, he was my father,
And had you loved him half so well as I,
You could not bear his death thus patiently,
But you I fear, conspired with Mortimer.
Why speak you not unto my lord the king?
Because I think scorn to be accused,
Who is the man dare say I murderedd him?
Traitor, in me my loving father speaks,
And plainly saith, it was thou that murdredst him.
But hath your grace no other proof then this?
Yes, if this be the hand of Mortimer.
False Gurney hath betrayed me and him???self.
I feared as much, murder cannot be hid.
Tic my hand, what gather you by this.
That thither thou did send a murderer.
What murderer? bring forth the man I sent.
A Mortimer, thou know that he is slain,
And so shalt thou be too: why stays he here?
Bring him unto a hurdle, drag him forth,
Hang him I say, and set his quarters up,
But bring his head back presently to me.
For my sake sweet son pity Mortimer.
Madam, entreat not, I will rather die,
Then sue for life unto a paltry boy.
Hence with the traitor, with the murderer.
Base fortune, now I see, that in thy wheel
There is a point, to which when men aspire,
They tumble headlong down, that point I touchte,
And seeing there was no place to mount up higher,
Why should I grieve at my declining fall,
Farewell fair Queen, weep not for Mortimer,
That scorns the world, and as a traveller,
Goes to discover countries yet unknown.
What, suffer you the traitor to delay?
As thou received thy life from me,
Spill not the blood of gentle Mortimer.
This argues, that you spilt my fathers blood,
Else would you not entreat for Mortimer.
I spill his blood? no.
I madam you, for so the rumour runs.
That rumour is untrue, for loving thee,
Is this report raised on poor Isabel.
I doe not think her so unnatural.
My lord, I fear me it will prove too true.
Mother, you are suspected for his death,
And therefore we commit you to the Tower,
Till further trial may be made thereof,
If you be guilty, though I be your son,
Think not to find me slack or pitiful.
Nay, to my death, for too long have I lived,
When as my son thinks to abridge my days.
Away with her, her words enforce these tears,
And I shall pity her if she speak again.
Shall I not moorne for my beloved lord?
And with the rest accompany him to his grave.
Thus madam, tic the kings will you shall hence.
He hath forgotten me, stay, I am his mother.
That boots not, therefore gentle madam go.
Then come sweet death, and rid me of this grief.
My lord, here is the head of Mortimer.
Go fetch my fathers hearse, where it shall lie,
And bring my funeral robes: accursed head,
Could I have ruled thee then, as I do now,
Thou had not hatched this monstrous treachery?
Here comes the hearse, help me to moorne my lords,
Sweet father here, unto thy murdered ghost,
I offer up this wicked traitors head,
And let these tears distilling from mine eyes,
Be witness of my grief and innocence.

NOctem peccatis, &amp; fraudibus obiice nubem. There is no such fine time to play the knave in, as the night. I am a Goose or a Ghost at least; for what with turmoil of getting my fools apparel, and care of being perfect, I am sure I have not yet supped to night. Will Sum∣mers Ghost I should be, come to present you with Summers last will, and Testament. Be it so, if my cousin Ned will lend me his Chain and his Fiddle. Other stately paced Prologues use to attire themselves within: I that have a toy in my head, more then ordinary, and use to go without money, without garters, without girdle, without a hat-band, without points to my hose, without a knife to my dinner, and make so much use of this word without, in every thing, will here dress me with∣out. Dick Huntley cries, Begin, begin: and all the whole house, For shame come away; when I had my things but now brought me out of the Laundry. God forgive me, I did not see my Lord before. Isle set a good face on it, as though what I had talked idly all this while, were my part. So it is, bone viri, that one fool presents another; and I a fool by nature, and by art, do speak to you in the person of the Idiot our Play∣maker. He like a Fop &amp; an Ass, must be making himself a public laughing stock, &amp; have no thank for his labour; where other Magisterij, whose invention is far more exquisite, are content to sit still, and doe nothing. Isle show you what a
scurvy Prologue he had made me in an old vain of similitudes: if you bee good fellows, give it the hearing, that you may judge of him thereafter.
The Prologue.
AT a solemn feast of the Triumuiri in Rome, it was seen and observed, that the birds ceased to sing, &amp; sate solita∣rye on the house tops, by reason of the sight of a painted Serpēt set openly to view. So fares it with vs novices, that here betray our imperfections: we, afraid to look on the imaginary serpent of Envy, painted in men's affections, have ceased to tune any music of mirth to your ears this tweluemonth, thinking, that as it is the nature of the serpent to hiss: so childhood and eg∣norance would play the goslings, contemning, and condemn∣ning what they understood not. Their censures we way not, whose senses are not yet vnswadled. The little minutes will be continually striking, though no man regard them. Whelps will bark, before they can see, and strive to byte, before they have teeth. Politianus speaks of a beast, who, while hee is cut on the table, drinks, and represents the motions &amp; voy∣ces of a living creature. Such like foolish beasts are we, who, whilst we are cut, mocked, &amp; flouted at, in every mans com∣mon talk, will notwithstanding proceed to shame our selves, to make sport. No man pleases all, we seek to please one. Didymus wrote four thousand books, or as some say, six thou∣sand, of the art of Grammar. Our Author hopes, it may be as lawful for him to write a thousand lines of as light a sub∣jest. Socrates (whom the Oracle pronounced the wisest man of Greece) sometimes danced. Scipio and Lelius by the sea∣side played at peeble-stone. Semel insaniuimus omnes. Every man cannot, with Archimedes, make a heaven of brass, or dig gold out of the iron mines of the law. Such odd trifles, as Mathematicians experiments be, Artificial flies to hang in the ayre by themselves, dancing balls, an egge-shell that shall climb up to the top of a spear, fiery breathing goares, Poet noster professes not to make. Placeat sibi quis{que} heebit. What's a fool but his babble? Deep reaching wits, here is no deep
stream for you to angle in. Moralizers, you that wrest a no∣for meant meaning, out of every thing, applying all things to the present time, keep your attention for the common Stage: for here are no quips in Characters for you to read. Vain glozers, gather what you will. Spite, spell backwards, what thou can. As the Parthians fight, flying away: so will wee prate and talk, but stand to nothing that we say.
How say you, my masters, doe you not laugh at him for a Coxcomb? Why, he hath made a Prologue longer then his Play: nay, it is no Play neither, but a show. Isle be sworn, the sigge of Rowlands God-sonne, is a Giant in comparison of it. What can be made of Summers last will &amp; Testament? Such another thing, as Cyllian of Braynfords will, where she bequeathed a score of farts amongst her friends. Forsooth, be∣cause the plague reigns in most places in this latter end of sum∣mer, Summer must come in sick: he must call his officers to account, yield his throne to Autumn, make Winter his Exe∣cutour, with tittle tattle Tom boy: God give you good night in Wattling street. I care not what I say now: for I play no more then you hear; &amp; some of that you heard to (by your leave) was extempore. He were as good have let me had the best part: for Isle be revenged on him to the uttermost, in this person of Will Summer, which I have put on to play the Prologue, and mean not to put off, till the play be done. Isle sit as a Chorus, and flout the Actors and him at the end of every Scene: I know they will not interrupt me, for fear of marring of all: but look to your cues, my masters; for I intend to play the knave in cue, and put you besides all your parts, if you take not the better heed. Actors, you Rogues, come away, clear your throats, blow your noses, and wipe your mouths ever you enter, that you may take no occasion to spit or to cough, when you are non plus. And this I bar over and besides, That none of you stroke your beards, to make action, play with your cod-piece points, or stād fumbling on your buttom, when you know not how to bestow your fingers. Serve God, and act cleanly; a fit of mirth, and an old song first, if you will.
Fair Summer droops, droop men and beasts therefore:
So fair a summer look for never more.
All good things vanish, less then in a day,
Peace, plenty, pleasure suddenly decay.
Go not yet away bright soul of the sadyeare.
The earth is hell, when thou lean'st to appear.
What, shall those flowers that decked thy garland erst,
Upon thy grave be wistfully dispersed?
O trees, consume your sap in sorrows source.
Streams, turn to tears your tributary course.
Go not yet hence, bright soul of the sadyeare.
The earth is hell, when thou leave to appear.
A couple of pretty boys, if they would wash their faces, and were well breached an hour or two. The rest of the greene men have reasonable voices, good to sing cat∣ches, or the great Iowben by the fires side, in a winters evening. But let vs hear what Summer can say for himself, why hee should not be hist at.
What pleasure always lasts: no joy endures:
Summer I was, I am not as I was:
Harvest and age have whit'ned my greene head:
On Autumn now and Winter must I lean.
Needs must he fall, whom none but foes uphold.
Thus must the happiest man have his black day.
Omnibus una manes nox, &amp; calcanda semel via laethi.
This month have I lain languishing a bed,
Looking eche hour to yield my life, and throne;
And died I had in deed unto the earth,
But that Eliza Englands beauteous Queen,
On whom all seasons prosperously attend,
Forbad the execution of my fate,
Until her joyful progress was expired.
For her doth Summer live, and linger here,
And wishes long to live to her content:
But wishes are not had when they wish well.
I must depart, my death-day is set down:
To these two must I leave my wheaten crown.
So unto unthrifts rich men leave their lands,
Who in an hour consume long labours gains.
True is it that divinest Sidney sung,
O, he is mart, that is for others made.
Come near, my friends, for I am near my end.
In presence of this Honourable train,
Who love me (for I patronise their sports)
Mean I to make my final Testament:
But first Isle call my officers to count,
And of the wealth I gave them to dispose,
Know what is left. I may know what to give
Vertumnus then, that turnst the year about.
Summon them one by one to answer me,
First Ver, the spring, unto whose custody
I have committed more then to the rest:
The choice of all my fragrant meads and flowers,
And what delights so ever nature affords.
I will, my Lord. Ver, lusty Ver, by the name of lusty Ver, come into the court, lose a mark in issues.
Spring, the sweet spring, is the years pleasant King,
Then blooms eche thing, then maids dance in a ring,
Cold doth not sting, the pretty birds doe sing,
Cuckoo, jug, jug, pu we, to witta woo.
The Palm and May make country houses gay.
Lambs frisk and play, the Shep herds pipe all day,
And we hear aye, birds tune this merry lay,
Cuckoo, jug, jug, pu we, to witta woo.
The fields breathe sweet, the daisies kiss our feet,
Young lovers meet, old wives a sunning sit:
In every street, these tunes our ears doe greet,
Cuckoo, jug, jug, pu we, to witta woo.
Spring the sweet spring.
By my troth, they have voices as clear as Crystal: this is a pretty thing, if it be for nothing but to go a begging with.
Believe me, Ver, but thou art pleasant bent,
This humour should import a harmless mind:
Know thou the reason why I sent for thee?
No faith, nor care not, whether I do or no.
If you will dance a Galliard, so it is: if not, Falangtado, Fa∣langtado, to wear the black and yellow: Falangtado, Falāg∣tado, my mates are gone, Isle follow.
Nay, stay a while, we must confer and talk.
Ver, call to mind I am thy sovereign Lord,
And what thou hast, of me thou hast, and holdst.
Unto no other end I sent for thee.
But to demand a reckoning at thy hands,
How well or ill thou hast employed my wealth.
If that be all, we will not disagree.
A clean trencher and a napkin you shall have presently.
The truth is, this fellow hath bin a tipster in his days.
How now? is this the reckoning we shall have?
My Lord, he doth abuse you: brooke it not.
Sum totalis I fear will prove him but a fool.
About, about, lively, put your horse to it, reyne him harder, jerk him with your wand, sit fast, sit fast, man; focle, hold up your ladle there.
O brave hall! O, well said, butcher. Now for the credit of Wostershire. The finest set of Morris-dauncers that is between this and Stretham: mary, me thinks there is
one of them daūceth like a Clothiers horse, with a wool-pack on his back. You friend with the Hobby-horse, go not too fast, for fear of wearing out my Lords tyle-stones with your hob-nayles.
So, so, so, trot the ring twice over, and away. May it please my Lord, this is the grand capital sum, but there are certain parcels behind, as you shall see.
Nay, nay, no more; for this is all too much.
Content your self, we will have variety.
Trip and go, heave and hoe,
Up and down to and fro,
From the town, to the grove,
Two, and two, let vs rove
A Maying, a playing:
Love hath no gainsaying:
So merrily trip and go.
Beshrew my heart, of a number of ill legs, I never saw worse dancers: how blessed are you, that the wen∣ches of the parish doe not see you!
Presumptuous Ver, uncivil nurturde boy,
Think I will be derided thus of thee?
Is this th'account and reckoning that thou make?
Troth, my Lord, to tell you plain, I can give you no other account: name quae habui, pordidi; what I had, I have spent on good fellows, in these sports you have seen, which are proper to the Spring, and others of like sort, (as giving wenches greene gowns, making garlands for Fencers, and tricking up children gay) have I bestowed all my flowery trea∣sure, and flower of my youth.
A small matter. I know one spent in less then a year, eight and fifty pounds in mustard, and an other that ran in det, in the space of four or sieve year, aboue fourteen thousand pound in lute strings and gray paper.
O monstrous unthrift, who ever heard the like?
The seas vast throat in so short tract of time,
Devours nor consumes half so much.
How well might thou have lived within thy bounds?
What talk you to me, of living within my bounds? I tell you, none but Asses live within their bounds: the silly beasts, if they be put in a pasture, that is eaten bare to the very earth, &amp; where there is nothing to be had but thistles, will ra∣there fall soberly to those thistles, and be hungerstaru'd, then they will offer to break their bounds; whereas the lusty cour∣ser, if he be in a barren plot, and spy better grass in some pasture near adjoining, breaks over hedge and ditch, and to go, ever he will be pent in, and not have his belly full. Per∣adventure, the horses lately sworn to be stolen, carried that youthful mind, who, if they had been Asses, would have been yet extant.
Thus we may see, the longer we live, the more wee shall learn: I ne'er thought honesty an ass, till this day.
This world is transitory, it was made of nothing, and it must to nothing: wherefore, if wee will doe the will of our high Creator, (whose will it is, that it pass to nothing) wee must help to consume it to nothing. Gold is more vile then men: Men dye in thousands, and ten thousands, yea, many times in hundredth thousands in one battle. If then, the best husband bee so liberal of his best handiwork, to what end should we make much of a glittering excrement, or doubt to spend at a banquet as many pounds, as he spends men at a bat∣tail? Me thinks I honour Geta the Roman Emperor, for a brave minded fellow: for he commanded a banquet to bee made him of all meats under the Sun; which were served in after the order of the Alphabet; and the Clarke of the kitchen following the last dish (which was two mile off from the for∣most) brought him an Index of their several names: Neither did he pingle when it was set on the board, but for the space of three days and three nights, never rose from the Table.
O intolerable lying villain, that was never begotten without the consent of a whetstone.
Ungracious man, how fondly he argues!
Tell me, I pray, wherefore was gold laid under our feet in the veins of the earth, but that wee should contemn it, and tread upon it, and so consequently tread thrift under our feet? It was not known, till the Iron age, donec facinus inuasit mortals, as the Poet says; and the Scythians always detested it. I will prove it, that an unthrift, of any, comes no∣rest a happy man, in so much as he comes nearest to beggary. Cicero saith, summum bonum consists in omnium rerum vaca∣tione, that it is the chiefest felicity that may be, to rest from all labours. Now, who doth so much vacare à rebus, who rests so much? who hath so little to doe, as the beggar? Who can sing so merry a note, as he that cannot change a groat? Cui nil est, nil deest: hee that hath nothing, wants nothing. On the other side, it is said of the Carl, Omnia habeo, nec quicquam habeo: I have all things, yet want every thing. Multi mihi vi∣tio vertunt, queen egeo, saith Marcus Cato in Aulus Gellius, at ego illis, queen nequeunt egere: Many upbraid me, saith he, be∣cause I am poor: but I upbraid them, because they cannot live if they were poor. It is a common proverb, Dines{que} miser{que}, a rich man, and a miserable: name nature paucis cōtenta, none so contented as the poor man. Admit that the chiefest happiness were not rest or ease, but knowledge, as Herillus, Al∣cidamas, &amp; many of Socrates followers affirm; why, paupertas omnes perdocot arts, poverty instructs a man in all arts, it makes a man hardy and venturous; and therefore it is called of the Poets, Paupertas audax, valiant poverty. It is not so much subject to inordinate desires, as wealth or prosperity. Non habit vnde suum paupertas pascat amorem: poverty hath not wherewithal to feed lust. All the Poets were beggars: all Alcumists, and all Philosophers are beggars: Omnia mea me∣cum porto, quoth Bias, when he had nothing, but bread and cheese in a leathern bag, and two or three books in his by∣some. Saint Frauncis, a holy Saint, &amp; never had any money. It is madness to dote upon muck. That young man of Athens, (Aelianus makes mention of) may be an example to vs, who
doted so extremely on the image of Fortune, that when hee might not enjoy it, he dyed for sorrow. The earth yields all her fruits together, and why should not we spend them together? I thank heavens on my knees, that have made me an un∣thrift.
O vanity it self; O wit ill spent!
So study thousands not to mend their lives,
But to maintain the sin they most affect,
To be hells advocates against their own souls.
Ver, since thou giu'st such praise to beggary,
And hast defended it so valiantly,
This be thy penance; Thou shalt ne'er appear,
Or come abroad, but Lent shall wait on thee:
His scarcity may counteruayle thy waste.
Riot may flourish, but finds want at last.
Take him away, that knows no good way,
And lead him the next way to woe and want.
Thus in the paths of knowledge many stray,
And from the means of life fetch their decay.
Heigh ho. Here is a coil in deed to bring beggars to stocks. I promise you truly, I was almost asleep; I thought I had been at a Sermon. Well, for this one nights exhortation, I vow (by Gods grace) never to be good husband while I live. But what is this to the purpose? Her come to Powl (as the Welshman says) and her pay an halfepenny for bur seat, and her hear the Preacher talge, and a talge very well by gis, but yet a cannot make her laugh: go a Theater, and hear a Queens Fice, and he make her laugh, and laugh her belly-full. So we come hither to laugh and be merry, and we hear a filthy beggarly Oration, in the praise of beggary. It is a beggarly Poet that writ it: and that makes him so much commend it, because hee knows not how to mend himself. Well, rather then he shall have no employment but like dishes, I will set him a work my self, to write in praise of the art of stouping, and howe there was never any famous Thresher, Porter, Brewer, Pio∣ner, or Carpenter, that had straight back. Repair to my
chamber, poor fellow, when the play is done, and thou shalt see what I will say to thee.
Vertumnus, call Solstitium.
Solstitium, come into the court without: peace there below; make room for master Solstitium.
All hail to Summer my dread sovereign Lord.
Welcome, Solstitium, thou art one of them,
To whose good husbandry we have referred
Part of those small revenues that we have.
What hast thou gained vs? what hast thou brought in?
Alas, my Lord, what gave you me to keep,
But a few days eyes in my prime of youth?
And those I have converted to white hairs:
I never loved ambitiously to climb,
Or thrust my hand too far into the fire.
To be in heaven, sure, is a blessed thing:
But Atlas-like, to prop heaven on ones back,
Cannot but be more labour then delight.
Such is the state of men in honour placed;
They are gold vessels made for servile uses,
High trees that keep the weather from low houses,
But cannot shield the tempest from themselves.
I love to dwell betwixt the hills and dales;
Neither to be so great to be enuide,
Nor yet so poor the world should pity me.
Inter vtrum{que} ten, motion tutissimus ibis.
What doest thou with those balances thou bear?
In them I weigh the day and night alike.
This white glass is the houre-glasse of the day:
This black one the just measure of the night;
One more then other holds not a grain:
Both serve times just proportion to maintain.
I like thy moderation wondrous well:
And this thy balance, weighing the white glass
And black, with equal poyze and steadfast hand,
A pattern is to Princes and great men,
How to weigh all estates indifferently:
The Spirituality and Temporalty alike,
Neither to be too prodigal of smiles,
Nor too severe in frowning without cause.
If you be wise, you Monarchs of the earth,
Have two such glasses still before your eyes;
Think as you have a white glass running on,
Good days, friends favour, and all things at beck,
So this white glass run out (as out it will)
The black comes next, your downfall is at hand,
Take this of me, for somewhat I have tried;
A mighty ebb follows a mighty tide.
But say, Solstitium, had thou nought besides?
Nought but days eyes, and fair looks, gave I thee?
Nothing my Lord, nor ought more did I ask.
But had thou always kept thee in my sight,
Thy good deserts, though silent, would have asked.
Deserts, my Lord, of ancient servitors,
Are like old sores, which may not be ripped up:
Such use these times have got, that none must beg,
But those that have young limbs to lavish fast.
I grieve, no more regard was had of thee:
A little sooner had thou spoke to me,
Thou had been heard, but now the time is past:
Death wayteth at the door for thee and me;
Let vs go measure out our beds in clay:
Nought but good deeds hence shall we bear away.
Be, as thou were, best steward of my hours,
And so return unto thy country bowers.
Fie, fie of honesty, fie: Solstitium is an ass, party, this play is a gally-maufrey: fetch me some drink, some body. What cheer, what cheer, my hearts? are not you thirsty with liftening to this dry sport? What have we to doe with scales, and hower-glasses, except we were Bakers, or Clock-keepers? I cannot tell how other men are addicted, but it is against my profession to use any scales, but such as we play at with a boule, or keep any hours, but dinner or supper. It is a pedantic thing, to respect times and seasons: if a man be drinking with good fellows late, he must come home, for fear the gates be shut; when I am in my warm bed, I must rise to prayers, because the bell rings. I like no such foolish customs. Actors, bring now a black Jack, and a runlet of of Rhenish wine, disputing of the antiquity of red noses; let the prodigal child come out in his doublet and hose all greasy, his shirt hanging forth, and ne'er a penny in his purse, and talk what a fine thing it is to walk summerly, or sit whistling under a hedge and keep hogs. Go forward in grace and virtue to proceed; but let vs have no more of these grave matters.
Vertumnus, will Sol come before vs.
Sol, Sol, vt, re, me, fa, sol, come to church while the bell toll.
I marry, here comes majesty in pomp,
Resplendent Sol, chief planet of the heavens,
He is our servant, looks he ne'er so big.
My liege, what crau'st thou at thy vassals hands?
Hypocrisy, how it can change his shape!
How base is pride from his own dunghill put?
How I have raised thee, Sol, I list not tell,
Out of the Ocean of adversity,
To sit in height of honours glorious heaven,
To be the eye-sore of aspiring eyes,
To give the day her life, from thy bright looks,
And let nought thrive upon the face of earth,
From which thou shalt withdraw thy powerful smiles.
What hast thou done deserving such hie grace?
What industry, or meritorious toil,
Can thou produce, to prove my gift well placed?
Some service, or some profit I expect:
None is promoted but for some respect.
My Lord, what needs these terms betwixt vs two?
Upbraiding, ill beseems your bounteous mind:
I do you honour for advancing me.
Why, it is a credit for your excellence,
To have so great a subject as I am:
This is your glory and magnificence,
That without stouping of your mightiness,
Or taking any whit from your high state,
You can make one as mighty as your self.
O arrogance exceeding all belief!
Summer my Lord, this saucy upstart Jack,
That now doth rule the chariot of the Sun,
And makes all stars derive their light from him,
Is a most base insinuating slave,
The son of parsimony, and disdain,
One that will shine, on friends and foes alike,
That under brightest smiles, hides black showers:
Whose envious breath doth dry up springs and lakes,
And burns the grass, that beasts can get no food.
No dunghill hath so wild an excrement,
But with his beams hee will forth with exhale:
The fens and quagmires tithe to him their filth:
Forth purest mines he sucks a gainful dross:
Greene Iuy-bushes at the Vintners doors
He withers, and devours all their sap.
Lascivious and intemperate he is.
The wrong of Daphne is a well known tale:
Eche evening he descends to Thetis lap,
The while men think he bathes him in the sea.
O, but when he returns whence he came,
Down to the West, then dawnes his deity,
Then doubled is the swelling of his looks;
He over loads his carre with Orient gems,
And reins his fiery horses with rich pearl:
He terms himself the god of Poetry,
And sets wanton songs unto the Lute.
Let him not talk; for he hath words at will,
And wit to make the baddest matter good.
Bad words, bad wit: oh, where dwells faith or truth?
Ill usury my favours reap from thee,
Usurping Sol, the hate of heaven and earth.
If Envy vnconfuted may accuse,
Then Innocence must vncondemned dye.
The name of Martyrdom offence hath gained,
When fury stopped a froward Judges ears.
Much Isle not say (much speech much folly shows)
What I have done, you gave me leave to doe.
The excrements you bred, whereon I feed,
To rid the earth of their contagious fumes;
With such gross carriage did I load my beams,
I burnt no grass, I dried no springs and lakes:
I sucked no mines, I withered no greene boughs.
But when to ripen harvest I was force,
To make my rays more fervent then I wont,
For Daphnes wrongs and scopes in Thetis lap,
All Gods are subject to the like mishap.
Stars daily fall (it is use is all in all)
And men account the fall but natures course:
Vaunting my jewels, hasting to the West,
Or rising early from the gray ei'de morn.
What do I vaunt but your large bountihood
And show how liberal a Lord I serve.
Musique and poetry, my two last crimes,
Are those two exercises of delight,
Wherewithlong labours I doe weary out.
The dying Swan is not forbid to sing.
The waives of Heber played on Orpheus strings,
When he (sweet musiques Trophy) was destroyed.
And as for Poetry, woods eloquence,
(Dead Phaetons three sisters funeral tears
That by the gods were to Electrum turned)
Not flint, or rocks of Icy cinders framed,
Deny the source of siluer-falling streams.
Envy envies not outcries unrest:
In vain I plead, well, is to me a fault,
And these my words seem the flight web of art,
And not to have the taste of sounder truth.
Let none but fools, be cared for of the wise;
Knowledge own children, knowledge most despise.
Thou know too much, to know to keep the mean.
He that sees all things, oft sees not himself. 
The Thames is witness of thy tyranny,
Whose waives thou hast exhaust for winter showers.
The naked channel plains her of thy spite,
That laid'st her entrails unto open sight.
Unprofitably borne to man and beast,
Which like to Nilus yet doth hide his head,
Some few years since thou let o'reflow these walks,
And in the horse-race headlong ran at race,
While in a cloud, thou hid'st thy burning face:
Where was thy care to rid contagious filth,
When some men wetshod, (with his waters) droupt?
Others that ate the Eels his heate cast up,
Sickened and died by them empoisoned.
Sleep thou, or keep thou then Admetus sheep,
Thou drive not back these flowings to the deep?
The winds, not I, have floods &amp; tides in chase:
Diana, whom our fables call the moon,
Only commands o'er the raging may no,
She leads his wallowing offspring up and down,
She waning, all streams ebb in the year:
She was eclipsed, when that the Thames was bare.
A bare conjecture, builded on perhaps;
In laying thus the blame upon the moon,
Thou imitat'st subtle Pithagoras,
Who, what he would the people should believe,
The same he wrote with blood upon a glass,
And turned it opposite against the new moon;
Whose beams reflecting on it with full force,
Showed all those lines, to them that stood behind,
Most plainly writ in circle of the moon,
And then he said, Not I, but the new moon
Fair Cynthia persuades you this and that;
With like collusion shalt thou not blind me:
But for abusing both the moon and me,
Long shalt thou be eclipsed by the moon,
And long in darkness live, and see no light.
A way with him, his doom hath no reverse.
What is eclipsed, will one day shine again:
Though winter frowns, the Spring will ease my pain.
Time, from the brow, doth wipe out every stain.
I think the Sun is not so long in passing through the twelve signs, as the son of a fool hath bin dis∣putting here, about had I wist. Out of doubt, the Poet is bribed of some that have a mess of cream to eat, before my Lord go to bed yet, to hold him half the night with riff, raffe, of the rumming of Elanor. If I can tell what it means, pray god, I may never get breakfast more, when I am hungry. Troth, I am of opinion, he is one of those Hieroglificall writers, that by the figures of beasts, planets, and of stones, express the mind, as we doe in A. B. C. or one that writes under hair, as I have heard of a certain Notary Histions, who following Da∣rius in the Persian wars, and desirous to disclose some se∣crets of import, to his friend Aristagoras, that dwelt afar off, found out this means: He had a servant that had been
long sick of a payne in his eyes, whom, under pretence of cu∣ring his malady, he shau'd from one side of his head, to the other, and with a soft pencil wrote upon his scalp, (as on parchment) the discourse of his business, the fellow all the while imagining, his master had done nothing but noynt his head with a feather. After this, hee kept him secretly in his tent, till his hair was somewhat grown, and then wild him to go to Aristagoras into the country, and bid him shave him, as he had done, and he should have perfect remedy. He did so: Aristagoras shau'd him with his own hands, read his friends letter; and when hee had done, washed it out, that no man should perceive it else, and sent him home to buy him a night∣cap. If I wist there were any such knavery, or Peter Bales Brachigraphy, under Sols bushy hair, I would have a Barber, my host of the Murrions head, to be his Interpretour, who would whet his razor on his Richmond cap, and give him the terrible cut, like himself, but he would come as near as a quart pot, to the construction of it. To be sententious, not superfluous, Sol should have been beholding to the Harbour, and not the beard-master. Is it pride that is shadowed un∣der  this two-leg'd Sun, that never came nearer heaven, then Dubbers hill? That pride is not my sin, Slovens Hall, where I was borne, be my record. As for covetousness, intem∣perance and exaction, I meet with nothing in a whole year, but a cup of wine, for such vices to bee conversant in. Pergite porro, my good children, and multiply the sins of your ab∣surdities, till you come to the full measure of the grand hiss, and you shall hear how we will purge room with censuring your imperfections.
Vertumnus, call Orion.
Orion, Vrion, Orion; my Lord thou must look up∣on: Orion, gentleman dogge-keeper, huntsman, come into the court: look you bring all bounds, and no bandogs. Peace there, that we may hear their horns blow.
Sir, wast thou that called vs from our game?
How durst thou (being but a petty God)
Disturb me in the entrance of my sports?
It was I, Orion, cause thee to be called.
It is I, dread Lord, that humbly will obey.
How haps't thou left the heavens, to hunt below?
As I remember, thou were Hireus son,
Whom of a huntsman Jove chose for a star,
And thou art called the Dog-starre, art thou not?
Pleases your honour, heavens circumference
Is not enough for him to hunt and range,
But with those venome-breathed cures he leads,
He comes to chase health from our earthly bounds:
Each one of those foule-mouthed mangy dogs
Governs a day, (no dog but hath his day)
And all the days by them so governed,
The Dog-daies hight, infectious fosterers
Of meteors from carrion that arise,
And putrefied bodies of dead men,
Are they engendered to that ugly shape,
Being nought else but preserved corruption.
It is these that in the entrance of their reign
The plague and dangerous agues have brought in.
They are and bark at night against the Moon,
For fetching in fresh tides to cleanse the streets.
They vomit flames, and blast the ripened fruits:
They are deaths messengers unto all those,
That sicken while their malice bears sway.
A tedious discourse, built on no ground,
A silly fancy Autumn hast thou told,
Which no Philosophy doth warrantize,
No old received poetry confirms.
I will not grace thee by confuting thee:
Yet in a jest (since thou railest so against dogs)
Isle speak a word or two in their defence:
That creature's best that comes most near to men.
That dogs of all come nearest, thus I prove:
First they excel vs in all outward sense,
Which no one of experience will deny,
They hear, they smell, they see better then we,
To come to speech they have it questionless,
Although we understand them not so well:
They bark as good old Saxon as may be,
And that in more variety then we:
For they have one voice when they are in chase,
Another, when they wrangle for their meat,
Another, when we beat them out of doors.
That they have reason, this I will allege,
They choose those things that are most fit for them,
And shun the contrary all that they may,
They know what is for their own diet best,
And seek about for it very carefully.
At sight of any whip they run away,
As runs a thief from noise of hue and cry:
Nor live they on the sweat of others brows,
But have their trades to get their living with,
Hunting and conie-catching, two fine arts:
Yea, there be of them as there be of men,
Of every occupation more or less:
Some cariers, and they fetch, some watermen,
And they will dive and swim when you bid them:
Some butchers, and they worry sheep by night:
Some cooks, and they do nothing but turn spits.
Chrisippus holds, dogs are Logicians,
In that by study and by canuasing,
They can distinguish twixt three several things,
As when he comes where three broad ways meet,
And of those three hath staid at two of them,
By which he guesses that the game went not,
Without more pause he runs on the third,
Which, as Chrisippus saith, infinuates,
As if he reasoned thus within himself:
Either he went this, that, or yonder way,
But neither that, nor yonder, therefore this:
But whether they Logicians be or no,
Cinicks they are, for they will snarl and bite,
Right courtiers to flatter and to fawn,
Valiant to set upon the enemies,
Most faithful and most constant to their friends;
Nay they are wise, as Homer witnesses,
Who talking of Vlisses coming home,
Saith all his household, but Argus his Dog,
Had quite forgot him: I, and his deep insight,
Nor Pallas Art in altering of his shape,
Nor his base weeds, nor absence twenty years,
Could go beyond, or any way delude.
That Dogs Physicians are, thus I infer,
They are ne'er sick, but they know their disease,
And find out means to ease them of their grief,
Special good Surgeons to cure dangerous wounds:
For stricken with a stake into the flesh,
This policy they use to get it out:
They trail one of their feet upon the ground,
And gnaw the flesh about where the wound is,
Till it be clean drawn out: and then, because
Ulcers and sores kept foul, are hardly cured,
They like and purify it with their tongue,
And well observe Hipocrates old rule,
The only medicine for the foot, is rest:
For if they have the least hurt in their feet,
They bear them up, and look they be not stirred:
When humours rise, they eat a sovereign herb,
Whereby what cloys their stomachs, they cast up,
And as some writers of experience tell,
They were the first invented vomiting.
Sham'st thou not, Autumn, unadvisedly
To slander such rare creatures as they be?
We called thee not, Orion, to this end,
To tell a story of dogs qualities.
With all thy hunting how are we enrich?
What tribute pay thou vs for thy high place?
What tribute should I pay you out of nought?
Hunters doe hunt for pleasure, not for gain.
While Dog-dayes last, the harvest safely thrives:
The sun burns hot, to finish up fruits grouth:
There is no bloud-letting to make men weak:
Physicians with their Cataposia,
r. tittle Elinctoria
Masticatorum and Cataplasmata:
Their Gargarismes, Clisters, and pitched clothes,
Their perfumes, sirrups, and their treacles,
Refrain to poison the sick patients,
And dare not minister till I be out.
Then none will bathe, and so are fewer drowned:
All lust is perilsome, therefore less used.
In brief, the year without me cannot stand:
Summer, I am thy staff, and thy right hand.
A broken staff, a lame right hand I had,
If thou were all the stay that held me up.
Nihil violentum perpetuum.
No violence that lives to old age.
Ill-gouern'd star, that never boad'st good luck,
I banish thee a twelue-month and a day,
Forth of my presence, come not in my sight,
Nor show thy head, so much as in the night.
I am content, though hunting be not out,
We will go hunt in hell for better hap.
One parting blow, my hearts, unto our friends,
To bid the fields and huntsmen all farewell:
Toss up your bugle horns unto the stars.
Toil finds ease, peace follows after wars.
Faith, this Scene of Orion, is right prandium caninum, a dogs dinner, which as it is without wine, so here's a coil about dogs, without wit. If I had thought the ship of fools would have stay de to take in fresh water at the Isle of dogs, I would have furnished it with a whole kennel of col∣lections to the purpose. I have had a dog my self, that would dream, and talk in his sleep, turn round like Ned fool, and sleep all night in a porridge pot. Mark but the skirmish between sixpence and the fox, and it is miracu∣lous, how they overcome one another in honourable courtesy. The fox, though he wears a chain, runs as though hee were free, mocking vs (as it is a crafty beast) because we ha∣uing a Lord and master to attend on, run about at our plea∣sures, like masterless men. Young sixpence, the best page his master hath, plays a little, and retires. I warrant, he will not be far out of the way, when his master goes to dinner. Learn of him, you diminutive urchins, howe to behave your selves in your vocation, take not up your standings in a nut∣tree, when you should be waiting on my Lords trencher. Shoot but a bit at buttes, play but a span at points. What ever you doe, memento more: remember to rise betimes in the morning.
Vertumnus, call Harvest.
Harvest, by west, and by north, by south and southeast, show thy self like a beast. Goodman Harvest yeoman, come in, and say what you can: room for the sith and the siccles there.
Merry, merry, merry, cheery, cheery, cheery,
Trowel the black bowl to me,
Hey derry, derry, with a poop and a lerry,
Isle trowel it again to thee:
Hooky, hooky, we have shorn,
and we have bound,
And we have brought Harvest
home to town.
Harvest, the Bailey of my husbandry,
What plenty hast thou heaped into our Barnes?
I hope thou hast sped well thou art so blithe.
Sped well, or ill sir, I drink to you on the same:
Is your throat clear to help vs to sing, hooky, hooky?
Hooky, hooky, we have shorn,
and we have bound,
And we have brought harvest
home to town.
Thou Coridon, why answer not direct?
Answer? why friend, I am no tipster, to say, A∣non, anon, sir: but leave you to molest me, goodman tawny leaves, for fear (as the proverb says, leave is light) so I mow off all your leaves with my sith.
Mock not, &amp; mow not too long you were best,
For fear we whet not your since upon your pate.
Since thou art so perverse in answering,
Harvest, hear what complaints are brought to me.
Thou art accused by the public voice,
For an ingrosser of the common store,
A Carl, that hast no conscience, nor remorse,
But dost impoverish the fruitful earth,
To make thy garners rise up to the heavens.
To whom gives thou? who feeds at thy board?
No alms, but unreasonable gain,
Disgests what thy huge iron teeth devour:
Small beer, course bread, the hynds and beggars cry,
Whilst thou with hold both the malt and flower,
And giu'st vs bran, and water, (fit for dogs.)
Hooky, hooky, if you were not my Lord, I would say you lye. First and foremost you say I am a Grocer. A Grocer is a citizen: I am no citizen, therefore no Grocer. A hoorder up of grain: that's false; for not so much but my el∣bows eat wheat every time I lean on them. A Carl: that is as much to say, as a conny-catcher of good fellowship. For that one word, you shall pledge me a carouse: eat a spoonful of the curd to allay your choler. My mates and fellows, sing no more, Merry, merry: but weep out a lamētable hooky, hooky, and let your Sickles cry, Sick, sick, and very sick, &amp; sick, and for the time; for Harvest your master is abused without reason or rime. I have no conscience I; Isle come nearer to you, and yet I am no scab, nor no louse. Can you make proof where ever I sold away my conscience, or pound it? doe you know who would buy it, or lend any money upon it? I think I have given you the pose; blow your nose, master constable. But to say that I impoverish the earth, that I rob the man in the moon, that I take a purse on the top of Paules steeple; by this straw and third I swear, you are no gentle∣man, no proper man, no honest man, to make me sing, O man in desperation.
I must give credit unto what I hear;
For other then I hear, attract I nought.
I, I, nought seek, nought have: an ill husband is the first steppe to a knave. You object I feed none at my board. I am sure, if you were a hog, you would never say so: for, surreuerence of their worships, they feed at my stable, table, every day. I keep good hospitality for hens &amp; geese; Gleaners are oppressed with heavy burdens of my bounty. They rake me, and eat me to the very bones, till there be no∣thing left but gravel and stones, and yet I give no alms, but devour all. They say when a man cannot hear well, you hear with your harvest ears: but if you heard with your harvest ears, that is, with the ears of corn, which my alms∣cart scatters, they would tell you, that I am the very poor mans box of pity, that there are more holes of liberality open in harvests heart, then in a sieve, or a dust-boxe. Suppose you were a craftsman, or an Artificer, and should come to buy corn of me, you should have bushels of me, not like the Bakers loaf, that should weigh but six ounces, but usury for your money, thousands for one: what would you have more? Eat me out of my apparel, if you will, if you suspect me for a miser.
I credit thee, and think thou were belide.
But tell me, had thou a good crop this year?
Hay, Gods plenty, which was so sweet and so good, that when I ierted my whip, and said to my horses but Hay, they would go as they were mad.
But hay alone thou say not; but hay-ree.
I sing hay-ree, that is, hay and rye: meaning, that they shall have hay and rye their belly-fulls, if they will draw hard; So wee say, wa, hay, when they go out of the way: meaning, that they shall want hay, if they will not doe as they should doe.
How thrive thy oats, thy barley, and thy wheat?
My oats grew like a cup of beer that makes the brewer rich: my rye like a Cavalier, that wears a huge feather
in his cap, but hath no courage in his heart; had a long stalk, a goodly husk, but nothing so great a kernel as it was wont: my barley, even as many a novice is crossebitten, as soon as ever hee peepes out of the shell, so was it frost-bitten in the blade, yet picked up his crumbs again afterword, and bade, Fill pot, hostess, in spite of a dear year. As for my Peas and my Fetches, they are famous, and not to be spoken of.
I, I, such country buttoned caps as you,
Doe want no fetches to undo great towns.
Will you make good your words, that wee want no fetches?
I, that he shall.
Then fetch vs a cloak-bag, to carry away your self in.
Plough-swaynes are blunt, and will taunt bitterly.
Harvest, when all is done, thou art the man,
Thou doest me the best service of them all:
Rest from thy labours till the year renues,
And let the husbandmen sing of thy praise.
Rest from my labours, and let the husbandmen sing of my praise? Nay, we doe not mean to rest so; by your leave, we will have a largess amongst you, ever we part.
A largess, a largess, a largess.
Is there no man that will give them a hiss for a largess?
No, that there is not, goodman Lundgis: I see, charity waxes cold, and I think this house be her habitatiō, for it is not very hot; we were as good even put up our pipes, and sing Merry, merry, for we shall get no money.
Merry, merry, merry, cheery, cheery, cheery,
Trowel the black bowl to me:
Hey derry, derry, with a poop and a lerrie,
Isle trowel it again to thee:
Hooky, bookie, we have shorn and we have bound,
And we have brought harvest home to town.
Well, go thy ways, thou bundle of straw; Isle give thee this gift, thou shalt be a Clown while thou liu'st. As lusty as they are, they run on the score with Georges wife for their posit, and God knows who shall pay goodman Yeo∣mans, for his wheat sheaf: they may sing well enough, Trowel the black bowl to me, trowel the black bowl to me: for, a hundredth to one, but they will bee all drunk, ever they go to bed: yet, of a slavering fool, that hath no conceit in any thing, but in carrying a wand in his hand, with commendation when he runs by the high way side, this stripling Harvest hath done reasonable well. O that some body had had the wit to set his thatched suite on fire, and so lighted him out: If I had had but a Jet ring on my finger, I might have done with him what I list; I had spoiled him, I had took his apparel prisoner; for it being made of straw, &amp; the nature of let, to draw straw unto it, I would have nailde him to the pommel of my chair, till the play were done, and then have carried him to my chamber door, and laid him at the threshold as a wisp, or a piece of mat, to wipe my shoes on, every time I come up dirty.
Vertumnus, call Bacchus.
Bacchus, Baccha, Bacchum, god Bacchus, god fat∣back, Baron of double beer, and bottle ale, come in &amp; show thy nose that is nothing pale: back, back there, god barrel∣belly may enter.
Monsieur Mingo, for quaeffing doth surpass,
In Cup, in Canne, or glass.
God Bacchus doe me right,
And dubbe me knight Domingo.
Wherefore did thou call me, Vertumnus? hast any drink to give me? One of you hold my Asle while I light: walk him up and down the hall, till I talk a word or two.
What, Bacchus: still animus in patinis, no mind but on the pot?
Why, Summer, Summer, how would doe, but for rain? What is a fair house without water coming to it? Let me see how a smith can work, if hee have not his trough standing by him. What sets an edge on a knife? the grindstone alone? no, the moist element powered vpō it, which grinds out all gaps, sets a point upon it, &amp; scowres it as bright as the firmament. So, I tell thee, give a soldier wine before he goes to battle, it grinds out all gaps, it makes him forget all scars and wounds, and fight in the thickest of his enemies, as though hee were but at foils, amongst his fellows. Give a scholar wine, going to his book, or being about to invent, it sets a new point on his wit, it glazeth it, it scowres it, it gives him acumen. Plato saith, vinum esse fomitem quēdam, et incit abi∣lem ingenij virtutisque. Aristotle saith, Nulla est magna scientia absque mixture dementia. There is no excellent knowledge without mixture of madness. And what makes a man more mad in the head then wine? Queen been vult poyein, debet axtá pinion, he that will doe well, must drink well. Prome, prome, potum prome: Ho butler, a fresh pot. Nuns est bibēdum, nuns pede libero terra pulsanda: a pox on him that leaves his drink be∣hind him; hey Rendouow.
It is wines custom, to be full of words.
I pray thee, Bacchus, give vs vicissitudinem loquendi.
A fiddlestick, ne'er tell me I am full of words. Foecundi calices, quem non fecere desertum: aut epi, aut abi, either
take your drink, or you are an infidel.
I would about thy vintage question thee:
How thrive thy vines? had thou good store of grapes?
Vinum quasivenenum, wine is poison to a sick body; a sick body is no sound body; Ergo, wine is a pure thing, &amp; is poi∣son to all corruption. Try-lill, the hūters hoop to you: isle stand to it, Alexander was a brave man, and yet an arrant drunkard.
Fie, drunken sot, forget thou where thou art?
My Lord asks thee, what vintage thou hast made?
Our vintage, was a vintage, for it did not work upon the advantage, it came in the vauntgard of Summer, &amp; winds and storms met it by the way, and made it cry, Alas and welladay.
That was not well, but all miscarried not?
Faith, shall I tel you no lye? Because you are my coūtry∣man, &amp; so forth, &amp; a good fellow, is a good fellow, though he have never a penny in his purse: We had but even pot luck, a little to moisten our lips, and no more. That same Sol, is a Pa∣began, and a Proselite, hee shined so bright all summer, that he burned more grapes, then his beams were worth, were every beam as big as a weavers beam. A fabis abstinendum: faith, he should have abstaind: for what is flesh &amp; blud without his liquor?
Thou want no liquor, nor no flesh and blood.
I pray thee may I ask without offence?
How many tons of wine hast in thy paunch?
Me thinks, that, built like a round church,
Should yet have some of Iulius Caesars wine:
I warrant, it was not broached this hundred year.
Hear, thou dow-belly, because thou talk, and talk, &amp; dare not drink to me a black Jack, wilt thou give me leave, to broach this little kilderkin of my corps, against thy back? I know thou art but a mycher, &amp; dare not stand me. A voni, moūsieur Winter, a frolic vpsy freeze, cross, ho, super nagulū. 
Grammercy, Bacchus, as much as though I did.
For this time thou must pardon me perforce.
What, give me the disgrace? Go to, I say, I am no Pope, to pardō any man. Ran, ran, tarra, cold beer makes good
blood. S. George for Englād: somewhat is better then nothing. Let me see, hast thou done me justice? why so: thou art a king, though there were no more kings in the cards but the knave. Summer, wilt thou have a demi culuering, that shall cry husty tusty, and make thy cup fly fine meal in the Element?
No, keep thy drink, I pray thee, to thy self.
This Pupillonian in the fools coat, shall have a cast of martins, &amp; a whiff. To the health of Captain Rinocerotry: look to it, let him have weight and measure.
What an ass is this? I cannot drink so much, though I should burst.
Fool, doe not refuse your moist sustenance; come, come, dogs head in the pot, doe what you are borne to.
If you will needs make me a drunkard against my will, so it is, isle try what burden my belly is of.
Crouch, crouch on your knees, fool, when you pledge god Bacchus.
Ho, well shot, a tutcher, a tutcher: for quaffing Toy doth pass, in cup, in canne, or glass.
God Bacchus doe him right, and dubbe him knight.
Rise up Sir Robert Tospot.
No more of this, I hate it to the death.
No such deformer of the soul and sense,
As is this swinish damn'd-borne drunkenness.
Bacchus, for thou abuse so earths fruits,
Impris'ned live in cellars and in vawtes,
Let none commit their counsels unto thee:
Thy wrath be fatal to thy dearest friends,
Unarmed run upon thy foemens swords,
Never fear any plague, before it fall:
Dropsies, and watery tympanies haunt thee,
Thy lungs with surfeting be putrefied,
To cause thee have an odious stinking breath,
Slaver and drivel like a child at mouth,
Bee poor and beggarly in thy old age,
Let thy own kinsmen laugh, when thou complaynst,
And many tears gain nothing but blind scoffs.
This is the guerdon due to drunkenness;
Shame, sickness, misery, follow excess.
Now on my honour, Simon Summer, thou art a bad member, a Dunse, a mongrel, to discredit so worshipful an art after this order. Thou hast cursed me, and I will bless thee: Never cup of Nipitaty in London, come near thy niggardly habitation. I beseech the gods of good fellowship, thou moist fall into a consumption with drinking small beer. Every day moist thou eat fish, and let it stick in the midst of thy maw, for want of a cup of wine to swim away in. Venison be Vene∣number to thee: &amp; may that Vintner have the plague in his house, that sells thee a drop of claret to kill the poison of it. As many wounds moist thou have, as Caesar had in the Senate house, and get no white wine to wash them with: And to conclude, pine away in melancholy and sorrow, before thou hast the fourth part of a dram of my Juice to cheer up thy spirits.
Hale him away, he barks like a wolf,
It is his drink, not hee that rails on vs.
Nay soft, brother Summer, back with that foot, here is a snuff in the bottom of the Jack, enough to light a man to bed withal, we'll leave no flocks behind vs what∣soever wee doe.
Go drag him hence I say when I command.
Since we must needs go, let's go merrily.
Farewell, sir Robert Tosse-pot: sing amain, Monsieur Myngo, whilst I mount up my Ass.
Of all gods, this Bacchus is the ill-fauourd'st misshapen god that ever I saw. A pox on him, he hath crest∣ned me with a new nickname of sir Robert Tosse-pot, that will not part frō me this twelmonth. Ned fools clothes are so per∣fumde with the beer he poured on me, that there shall not be a Dutchmā within 20 mile, but he'll smell out &amp; claim kindred
of him. What a beastly thing is it, to bottle up ale in a mās belly, whē a man must set his guts on a gallō pot last, only to purchase the alehouse title of a boon companion? Carouse, pledge me and you dare: S'wounds, isle drink with thee for all that ever thou art worth. It is euē as 2. men should strive who should run fur∣thest into the sea for a wager. Me thinks these are good house∣hold terms; Will it please you to be here, sir? I cōmend me to you: shall I be so bold as trouble you? saving your tale I drink to you. And if these were put in practise but a year or two in taverns, wine would soon fall from six and twenty pound a tun, and be beggars money, a penny a quart, and take up his Inn with wast beer in the alms tub. I am a sinner as others: I must not say much of this argument. Every one when hee is whole, can give advice to them that are sick. My masters, you that be good fellows, get you into corners, and soup off your provender closely: report hath a blister on her tongue: open taverns are tel-tales. Non peccat, quicun{que} potest peccasse negare.
Isle call my servants to account said I?
A bad account: worse servants no man hath.
Quos credis sides effuge, tutus eris:
The proverb I have proved to be too true,
Totidem domi hostess habemus, quote seruos.
And that wise caution of Democritus,
Seruns necessary possession, non atom dulcis:
No where fidelity and labour dwells.
Hope, young heads count to build on had I wist.
Conscience but few respect, all hunt for gain:
Except the Cammell have his provender
Hung at his mouth, he will not travel on.
Tyresias to Narcissus promised
Much prosperous hap, and many golden days,
If of his beauty he no knowledge took.
Knowledge breeds pride, pride breeds discontent.
Black discontent, thou vrgest to revenge.
Revenge ops not her ears to poor men's prayers.
That dolt destruction, is she without doubt,
That hales her forth and feeds her with nought.
Simplicity and plainness, you I love:
Hence double diligence, thou mean deceit.
Those that now serpent-like creep on the ground,
And seem to eat the dust, they crouch so low:
If they be disappointed of their pray,
Most traitorously will trace their tails and sting.
Yea, such as like the Lapwing build their nests
In a mans dung, come up by drudgery,
Will be the first, that like that foolish bird,
Will follow him with yelling and false cries.
Well sung a shepherd (that now sleeps in skies)
Dumb swains do love, &amp; not vain chattering pies.
In mountains Poets say Echo is hid,
For her deformity and monstrous shape:
Those mountains are the houses of great Lords,
Where Scanter with his hundredth voices sounds
A hundredth trumps at once with rumour filled:
A woman they imagine her to be,
Because that sex keeps nothing close they hear:
And that's the reason magic writers frame,
There are more witches women then of men;
For women generally for the most part,
Of secrets more desirous of, then men,
Which having got, they have no powerto hold.
In these times had Echoes first fathers lived,
No woman, but a man she had been faind.
(Though women yet will want no news to prate.)
For men (mean men) the skumme &amp; dross of all,
Will talk and babble of they know not what,
Upbraid, deprave, and taunt, they care not whom:
Sumises pass for sound approved truths:
Familiarity and conference,
That were the sinews of societies,
Are now for vnderminings only used,
And novel wits, that love none but themselves,
Think wisdoms height as falsehood silly couched,
Seeking each other to o'rethrow his mate.
O friendship, thy old temple is defaced.
Embracing every guileful courtesy,
Hath overgrown fraud-wanting honesty.
Examples live but in the idle schools:
Sinon bears all the sway in princes courts:
Sickness, be thou my souls physician:
Bring the Apothecary death with thee.
In earth is hell, true hell felicity,
Compared with this world the den of wolves.
My Lord, you are too passionate without cause.
Grieve not for that which cannot be recal'd:
Is it your servants carelessness you plain?
Tulle by one of his own slaves was slain.
The husbandman close in his bosom nursed
A subtle snake, that after wrought his bane.
Seruos fideles liberalitaes facet:
Where on the contrary, seruitutem:
Those that attend vponilliberall Lords,
Whose couetize yields nought else but fair looks,
Even of those fair looks make their gainful use.
For as in Ireland and in Denmark both
Witches for gold will sell a man a wind,
Which in the corner of a napkin wrapped,
Shall blow him safe unto what coast he will:
So make ill servants sale of their Lords wind,
Which wrapped up in a piece of parchment,
Blows many a knave forth danger of the law.
Enough of this, let me go make my will.
Ah it is made, although I hold my peace,
These two will share betwixt them what I have.
The surest way to get my will performed,
Is to make my executor my heir:
And he, if all be given him and none else,
Vnfallibly will see it well performed.
Lyons will feed, though none bid them go to.
Ill grows the tree affords ne'er a graft.
Had I some issue to sit in my throne,
My grief would die, death should not hear me groan.
But when perforce these must enjoy my wealth,
Which thank me not, but enter't as a pray,
Bequeathed it is not, but clean cast away.
Autumn, be thou successor of my seat:
Hold, take my crown: look how he grasps for it.
Thou shalt not have it yet: but hold it too;
Why should I keep that needs I must forgo?
Then (duty laid aside) you do me wrong:
I am more worthy of it far then he.
He hath no skill nor courage for to rule,
A weather-beaten banckrout ass it is,
That scatters and consumes all he hath:
Eche one do pluck from him without control.
He is nor hot nor cold, a silly soul,
That fine would please eche party, if so he might:
He and the spring are scholars favourites.
What scholars are, what thriftless kind of men,
Your self be judge, and judge of him by them.
When Cerberus was headlong drawn from hell,
He voided a black poison from his mouth,
Called Aconitum, whereof ink was made:
That ink with reeds first laid on dried barks,
Served men a while to make rude works withal,
Till Harms, secretary to the Gods,
Or Harms Trismegistus as some will,
Weary with graving in blind characters,
And figures of familiar beasts and plants,
Invented letters to write lies withal.
In them he pend the fables of the Gods,
The giants war, and thousand tales besides.
After eche nation got these toyesin use,
There grew up certain drunken parasites,
Termed Poets, which for a meals meat or two,
Would promise monarchs immortality:
They vomited in verse all that they knew,
Found causes and beginnings of the world,
Fetched pedigrees of mountains and of floods,
From men and women whom the Gods transformed:
If any town or city, they passed by,
Had in compassion (thinking them mad men)
Forborne to whip them, or imprison them,
That city was not built by humane hands,
T'was raised by musique, like Megara walls,
Apollo, poets patron founded it,
Because they found one fitting favour there:
Musaeus, Lynus, Homer, Orpheus,
Were of this trade, and thereby won their fame.
Famamalum, quo non velocius vllum.
Next them, a company of ragged knaves,
Sun-bathing beggars, lazy hedge-creepers,
Sleeping face upwards in the fields all night,
Dreamed strange devices of the Sun and Moon,
And they like Gipsies wandering up and down,
Told fortunes, juggled, nicknamed all the stars,
And were of idiots termed Philosophers:
Such was Pithagoras the silencer,
Prometheus, Thales, Milesius,
Who would all things of water should be made:
Anaximander, Anaximenes,
That positively said the air was God;
Zenocrates, that said there were eight Gods:
And Cratoniates, Alcmeon too,
Who thought the Sun and Moon, &amp; stars were gods:
The poorer sort of them that could get nought,
Professed, like beggarly Franciscan Friars,
And the strict order of the Caponchins,
A voluntary wretched poverty,
Contempt of gold, thin fare, and lying hard:
Yet he that was most vehement in these,
Diogenes the Cinicke and the Dog,
Was taken coining money in his Cell.
What an old Ass was that? Me thinks, hee should have kind Carret roots rather: for as for money, he had no use for, except it were to melt, and soder up holes in his tub withal.
It were a whole Olimpiades work to tell,
How many devilish, ergo armed arts,
Sprung all as vices, of this Idleness:
For even as soldiers not employed in wars,
But living loosely in a quiet state,
Not having wherewithal to maintain pride,
Nay scarce to find their bellies any food,
Nought but walk melancholy, and devise
How they may cousin Marchats, fleece young heirs,
Creep into favour by betraying men,
Rob churches, beg waste toys, court city dames,
Who shall undo their husbands for their sakes:
The baser rabble how to cheat and steal,
And yet be free from penalty of death.
So those word-warriers, lazy star-gazers,
Used to no labour, but to lowze themselves,
Had their heads filled with coosning fantasies,
They plotted how to make their poverty,
Better esteemed of, then high Sovereignty:
They thought how they might plant a heauē on earth,
Whereof they would be principal lowe gods,
That heaven they called Contemplation,
As much to say, as a most pleasant sloth,
Which better I cannot compare then this,
That if a fellow licensed to beg,
Should all his life time go from fair to fair,
And buy gape-seede, having no business else.
That contemplation like an aged weed,
Engendered thousand sects, and all those sects
Were but as these times, cunning shrouded rogues,
Grammarians some: and wherein differ they
From beggars, that profess the Peddlers French?
The Poets next, slovenly tattered slaves,
That wander, and sell Ballets in the streets.
Historiographers others there be,
And the like lazers by the high way side,
That for a penny, or a halfe-penny,
Will call each knave a good faced Gentleman,
Give honour unto Tinkers, for good Ale,
Prefer a Cobbler fore the Black prince far,
If he bestow but blacking of their shoes:
And as it is the Spittle-houses guise,
Over the gate to write their founders names,
Or on the outside of their walls at least,
In hope by their examples others moved.
Will be more bountiful and liberal,
So in the forefront of their Chronicles,
Or Peroration operis,
They learnings benefactors reckon up,
Who built this college, who gave that Free-schoole,
What King or Queen advanced Scholars most,
And in their times what writers flourished;
Rich men and magistrates whilst yet they live,
They flatter palpably, in hope of gain.
Smooth-tounged Orators, the fourth in place,
Lawyers, our common-wealth entitles them,
Meereswash-bucklers, and ruffianly mates,
That will for twelve pence make a doughty fray,
Set men for straws together by the ears.
Sky measuring Mathematicians;
Golde-breathing Alcumists also we have,
Both which are subtle wetted humorists,
That get their meals by telling miracles,
Which they have seen in travailing the skies,
Vain boasters, liars, make-shifts, they are all,
Men that removed from their inkehorne terms,
Bring forth no action worthy of their bread.
What should I speak of pale physicians?
Who as Fismenus non nasatus was,
(Upon a wager that his friends had laid)
Hired to live in a privy a whole year:
So are they hired for lucre and for gain,
All their whole life to smell on excrements.
Very true, for I have heard it for a proverb many a time and oft, Hunc os fatidum, fah, he stinks like a phi∣sicion.
Innumerable monstrous practises,
Hath loitering contemplation brought forth more,
Which it were too long particular to recite:
Suffice they all conduce unto this end,
To banish labour, nourish slothfulness,
Pamper up lust, devise newfangled sins.
Nay I will justify there is no vice,
Which learning and wild knowledge brought not in,
Or in whose praise some learned have not wrote.
The art of murder Machiauel hath pend:
Whoredom hath Ouid to uphold her throne:
And Aretine of late in Italy,
Whose Cortigiana touches bawds their trade.
Gluttony Epicurus doth defend,
And books of you are of cookery confirm:
Of which Platina hath not writ the least.
Drunkenness of his good behaviour
Hath testimonial from where he was borne:
That pleasant work de art bibendi,
A drunken Dutchman spued outfew years since:
Nor wants sloth (although sloths plague bee want).
His paper pillars for to lean upon,
The praise of nothing pleads his worthiness.
Folly Erasmus sets a flourish on.
For baldness, a bald ass, I have forgot,
Patched up a pamphletarie periwig.
Slovenry Grobianus magnifieth:
Sodomitrie a Cardinal commends,
And Aristotle necessary deems.
In brief all books, divinity except,
Are nought but tales of the devils laws,
Poison wrapped up in sugared words,
Mans pride, damnations props, the worlds abuse:
Then censure (good my Lord) what bookmen are
If they be pestilent members in a state;
He is unfit to sit at sterne of state,
That favours such as will o'rethrow his state:
Blessed is that government where no art thrives,
Vox populi, vex Dei:
The vulgars voice, it is the voice of God.
Yet Tully saith, Non est consilium in vulgo, non ratio, non discrimen, non differentia:
The vulgar have no learning, wit, nor sense.
The mistocles having spent all his time
In study of Philosophy and arts,
And noting well the vanity of them,
Wished with repentance, for his folly past,
Some would teach him you are of oblivion,
How to forget the arts that he had learned.
And Cicero, whom we alleged before,
(As saith Valerius) stepping into old age,
Despised learning, loathed eloquence.
Naso, that could speak nothing but pure verse,
And had more wit then words to utter it,
And words as choice as ever Poet had,
Cried and exclaimed in bitter agony,
When knowledge had corrupted his chaste mind,
Discite queen sapitis non haec qua scimus inerts,
Sed trepidas aces, &amp; fera bella sequi.
You that be wise, and ever mean to thrive,
O study not these toys we sluggards use,
But follow arms, and waite on barbarous wars.
Young men, young boys, beware of Schoolemasters,
They will infect you, mar you, blear your eyes:
They seek to lay the curse of God on you,
Namely confusion of languages,
Wherewith those that the tower of Babel built,
Accursed were in the worlds infancy.
Latin, it was the speech of Infidels.
Logic hath nought to say in a true cause.
Philosophy is curiosity:
And Socrates was therefore put to death,
Only for he was a Philosopher:
Abhor, contemn, despise, these damned snares.
Out upon it, who would be a Scholar? not I, I promise you: my mind always gave me, this learning was such a filthy thing, which made me hate it so as I did: when I should have been at school, construing Bat, mi fili, mi fili, mi Bat, I was close under a hedge, or under a barn wall, playing at span Counter, or Jack in a box: my master beat me, my father beat me, my mother gave me bread and butter, ye all this would not make me a squitter-booke. It was my desti∣no, I thank her as a most courteous goddess, that she hath not cast me away upon gibridge. O, in what a mighty vain am I now against Horne-bookes! Here before all this comp∣no, I profess my self on open enemy to Ink and paper. Isle make it good upon the Accidence body, that In speech is the devils Pater noster: Nouns and Pronouns, I pronounce you as traitors to boys buttocks, Syntaxis and Prosody, you are tormentors of wit, &amp; good for nothing but to get a school∣master two pence a week. Hang copies, fly out phrase books, let pens be turned to picktooths: bowls, cards &amp; dice, you are the true liberalsciēces, Isle ne'er be Goosequil, gentlemē, while I live.
Winter, with patience unto my grief,
I have attended thy invective tale:
So much vntrueth wit never shadowed:
Against her own bowels thou Arts weapons turn:
Let none believe thee, that will ever thrive:
Words have their course, the wind blows where it lists;
He erres alone, in error that persists.
For thou against Autumn such exceptions take,
I grant, his ouer-seer thou shalt be,
His treasurer, protector, and his staff,
He shall do nothing without thy consent;
Provide thou for his weal, and his content.
Thanks, gracious Lord. so Isle dispose of him,
As it shall not repent you of your gift.
On such conditions no crown will I take.
I challenge Winter for my enemy,
A most insaciate miserable carl,
That, to fill up his garners to the brim,
Cares not how he indammageth the earth:
What poverty he makes it to endure!
He ouer-bars the crystal streams with ye,
That none but he and his may drink of them:
All for a foul Back-winter he lays up;
Hard craggy ways, and uncouth slippery paths
He frames, that passengers may slide and fall:
Who quakes not, that hears but his name?
O, but two sons he hath, worse then himself,
Christmas the one, a pinch-back, cut-throat churl,
That keeps no open house, as he should do,
Delights in no game or fellowship,
Loves no good deeds, and hates talk,
But sits in a corner turning Crabs,
Or coughing o'er a warmed pot of Ale:
Back-winter the other, that's his none sweet boy,
Who like his father takes in all points,
An elf it is, compact of envious pride,
A miscreant, borne for a plague to men.
A monster, that devours all he meets:
Were but his father dead, so he would reign:
Yea he would go goodneere, to deal by him,
As Nabuchodonozors ungracious son,
Euilmerodach by his father dealt:
Who, when his sire was turned to an Ox,
Full greedily suatcht up his sovereignty,
And thought himself a king without control.
So it fell out, seven years expired and gone,
Nabuchodonozor came to his shape again,
And dispossessed him of the regiment:
Which my young prince no little grieving at,
When that his father shortly after did,
Fearing lest he should come from death again,
As he came from an Ox to be a man,
Wild that his body spoiled of coverture,
Should be cast forth into the open fields,
For Birds and Ravens, to devour at will,
Thinking if they bare every one of them,
A bill full of his flesh into their nests,
He would not rise, to trouble him in haste.
A virtuous son, and Isle lay my life on it, he was a Cavalier and a good fellow.
Pleases your honour, all he says, is false.
For my own part I love good husbandry,
But hate dishonourable couetize.
Youth ne'er aspires to virtues perfect growth,
Till his wilde oatesbe sown: and so the earth,
Until his weeds be rotted, with my frosts,
Is not for any seed, or tillage fit.
He must be purged that hath surfeited:
The fields have surfeited with Summer fruits,
They must be purged, made poor, oppressed with snow,
Ere they recover their decayed pride,
For ouerbarring of the streams with Ice.
Who locks not poison from his childrens taste?
When Winter reigns, the water is so cold,
That it is poison, present death to those
That wash, or bathe their limbs, in his cold streams.
The slipprier that ways are under vs,
The better it makes vs to heed our steps,
And look ever we presume too rashly on:
If that my sons have misbehau'd themselves,
A Gods name let them answer't fore my Lord.
Now I beseech your honour it may be so.
With all my heart: Vertumnus, go for them.
This same Harry Baker is such a necessary fell∣low to go on errants, as you shall not find in a country. It is pity but he should have another silver arrow, if it be but for crossing the stage, with his cap on.
To weary out the time until they come,
Sing me some doleful ditty to the Lute,
That may complain my near approaching death.
Adieu, farewell earths bliss,
This world uncertain is,
Fond are lifes lustful joys,
Death proves them all but toys,
None from his darts can fly,
I am sick, I must dye.
Lord have mercy on vs.
Rich men, trust not in wealth,
Gold cannot buy you health,
Physic himself must fade.
All things, to end are made,
The plague full swift goes hye,
I am sick, I must dye,
Lord have mercy on vs.
Beauty is but a flower,
Which wrinkles will devour,
Brightness falls from the ayre,
Queens have died young, and fair,
Dust hath closed Helens eye.
I am sick, I must dye,
Lord have mercy on vs.
Strength stoops unto the grave,
Worms feed on Hector brave,
Swords may not fight with fate,
Earth still holds op her gate,
Come, come, the bells do cry.
I am sick, I must dye,
Lord have mercy on vs.
Wit with his wantonness,
Tastes deaths bitterness,
Hells executioner,
Hath no ears for to hear,
What vain art can reply.
I am sick, I must dye,
Lord have mercy on vs.
Haste therefore eche degree,
To welcome destiny:
Heaven is our heritage,
Earth but a players stage,
Mount wee unto the sky.
I am sick, I must dye,
Lord have mercy on vs.
Beshrew me, but thy song hath moved me.
Lord have mercy on vs, how lamentable it is▪
I have dispatcht, my Lord, I have brought you them you sent me for.
What say thou? hast thou made a good batch?
I pray thee give me a new loaf.
Christmas, how chaūce thou come not as the rest,
Accompanied with some musique, or some song?
A merry Carroll would have graced thee well,
Thy ancestors have used it heretofore.
I, antiquity was the mother of ignorance: this latter world that sees but with her spectacles, hath spied a pad in those sports more then they could.
What, is it against thy conscience for to sing?
No nor to say, by my troth, if I may get a good bargain.
Why, thou should spend, thou should not care to get. Christmas is god of hospitality.
So will he never be of good husbandry. I may say to you, there is many an old god, that is now grown out of fashion. So is the god of hospitality.
What reason can thou give he should be left?
No other reason, but that Gluttony is a sin, &amp; too many dunghills are infectious. A mans belly was not made for a powdering beef tub: to feed the poor twelve days, &amp; let them starve all the year after, would but stretch out the guts wider then they should be, &amp; so make famine a bigger den in their bellies, then he had before. I should kill an ox, &amp; have some such fellow as Milo to come and eat it up at a mouth-full.
Or like the Sybarites, do nothing all one year, but bid ghestes against the next year. The scraping of trenchers you think would put a man to no charges. It is not a hundredth pound a year would serve the scullions in dishclouts. My house stands upon vaults, it will fall if it be ouer-loden with a multitude. Be∣sides, have you never read of a city that was vnderminde and destroyed by Mowles? So, say I keep hospitality, and a whole fair of beggars bid me to dinner every day, what with making legs, when they thank me at their going away, and settling their wallets handsomely on their backs, they would shake as many lice on the ground, as were able to undermine my house, and undo me utterly: It is their prayers would build it again, if it were overthrown by this vermin, would it? I pray, who begun feasting, and gourmandize first, but Sardanapalus, Narrow, Heliogabalus, Commodus, tyrāts, whoremasters, unthrifts? Some call them Emperors, but I respect no crowns, but crowns in the purse. Any mā may wear a silver crown, that hath made a fray in Smithfield, &amp; lost but a piece of his brain pan. And to tell you plain, your golden crowns are little better in sub∣stance, and many times got after the same sort.
Grosse-headed sot, how light he makes of state!
Who treads not on stars when they are fallen?
Who talks not of states, when they are dead?
A fool conceits no further then he sees,
He hath no sconce of ought, but what he feels.
I, I, such wise men as you, come to beg at such fools doors as we be.
Thou shutst thy door, how should we beg of thee?
No alms but thy sink carries from thy house.
And I can tell you, that's as plentiful alms for the plague, as the sheriffs tub to them of Newgate.
For feasts thou keep none, cankers thou feedst:
The worms will curse thy flesh another day,
Because it yields them no fatter pray.
What worms do another day I care not, but Isle be sworn upon a whole Kilderkin of single Beer, I will not
have a worme-eaten nose like a Pursuivant, while I live. Feasts ere but puffing up of the flesh, the purueyers for diseases, tra∣uell, cost, time ill spent. O, it were a trim thing to send, as the Romans did, round about the world for provision for one ban∣quet. I must rigge ships to Samos for Peacocks, to Paphos for Pigeons, to Austria for Oysters, to Phases for Pheasants, to Ara∣bia for Phoenixes, to Meander for Swans, to the Orcades for Geese, to Phrigia for Woodcocks, to Malta for Cranes, to the Isle of Man for Puffins, to Ambrosia for Goats, to Tartole for Lampreys, to Egypt for Dates, to Spain for Chestnuts, and all for one feast.
O sir, you need not, you may buy them at Lone∣don better cheap.
Liberalit as liberalit ate perit, love me a little and love me long: our feet must have wherewithal to feed the stones, out backs walls of wool to keep out the cold that besieges our warm blood, our doors must have bars, our dubblets must have buttons. Item, for an old sword to scrape the stones before the door with, three halfe-pence for stitching a wooden tanckard that was burst. These Water-bearers will empty the conduit and a mans coffers at once. Not a Porter that brings a man a letter, but will have his penny. I am afraid to keep past one or two servants, least hungry knaves they should rob me: and those I keep, I warrant I do not pamper up too lusty, I keep them under with red Herring and poor Iohn all the year long. I have damned up all my chimneys for fear (though I burn nothing but small cole) my house should be set on fire with the smoke. I will not deny, but once in a dozen year when there is a great rot of sheep, and I know not what to do with them, I keep open house for all the beg∣gers, in some of my out-yardes, marry they must bring bread with them, I am no Baker.
As good men as you, and have thought no scorn to serve their prentiships on the pillory.
Winter, is this thy son? hear how he talks?
I am his father, therefore may not speak,
But otherwise I could excuse his fault.
Christmas, I tell thee plain, thou art a snudge.
And were not that we love thy father well,
Thou should have felt, what longs to Avarice.
It is the honour of Nobility,
To keep high days and solemn festivals:
Then, to set their magnificence to view,
To frolic open with their favourites,
And use their neighbours with all courtesy,
When thou in hugger mugger spend thy wealth.
Amend thy manners, breathe thy rusty gold:
Bounty will win thee love, when thou art old.
I, that bounty would I fine meet, to borrow money of, he is fairly blessed now a days, that scopes blows when he begs. Verb dandi &amp; reddendi, go together in the Grammar rule: there is no giving but with condition of resto∣ring: ah Benedicite, well is he hath no necessity of gold no of su∣stenance; slow good hap comes by chance; flattery best fares; Arts are but idle wares; fair words want giving hāds; the Leto begs that hath no lands; fie on thee thou scurvy knave, that hast nought, and yet goosed brave; a prison be thy death bed, or be hanged all save the head.
Back-winter, stand forth.
Stand forth, stād forth, hold up your head, speak out.
What, should I stand? or whether, should I go?
Autumn accuses thee of sundry crimes,
Which here thou art to clear, or to confess.
With thee, or Autumn, have I nought to do:
I would you were both hanged face to face.
Is this the reverence that thou ow'st to vs?
Why not? what art thou?
Shalt thou always live?
It is the veriest Dog in Christendom.
That's for he barks at such a knave as thou.
Would I could bark the sun out of the sky,
Turn Moon and stars to frozen Meteors,
And make the Ocean a dry land of Ice,
With tempest of my breath, turn up high trees,
On mountains heap up second mounts of snow,
Which melted into water, might fall down,
As fell the deluge on the former world.
I hate the ayre, the fire, the Spring, the year,
And what so ever brings mankind any good.
O that my looks were lightning to blast fruits!
Would I with thunder presently might dye,
So I might speak in thunder, to slay men.
Earth, if I cannot injure thee enough,
Isle bite thee with my teeth, Isle seratch thee thus,
Isle beat down the partition with my heals,
Which as a mud-vault severs hell and thee.
Spirits, come up, it is I that knock for you,
One that envies the world, far more then you:
Come up in millions, millions are to few,
To execute the malice I intend.
O scelus inauditum, O vox damnatorum!
Not raging Haecuba, whose hollow eyes
Gave suck to fifty sorrows at one time,
That mid wife to so many murders was,
Used half the execrations that thou dost.
More I will use, if more I may prevail:
Back-winter comes but seldom forth abroad,
But when he comes, he pinches to the proof;
Winter is mild, his son is rough and sterne.
Ouid could well write of my tyranny,
When he was banished to the frozen Soon.
And banished be thou frō my fertile bounds.
Winter, imprison him in thy dark Cell,
Or with the winds, in bellowing caves of brass,
Let sterne Hipporlatos locke him up safe,
Ne'er to peep forth, but when thou faint and weak
Want him to aid thee in thy regiment.
I will peep forth, thy kingdom to supplant:
My father I will quickly freeze to death,
And then sole Monarch will I sit and think,
How I may banish thee, as thou dost me.
I see my downfall written in his brows:
Convey him hence, to his assigned hell.
Fathers are given to love their sons too well.
No by my troth, nor mothers neither, I am sure I could never find it. This Back-winter plays a railing part to no purpose, my small learning finds no reason for it, except as a Back-winter or an after winter is more raging tempestuous, and violent then the beginning of Winter, so he brings him in stamping and raging as if he were mad, when his father is a jolly mild quiet old man, and stands still and does nothing. The court accepts of your meaning; you might have writ in the margent of your play-booke, Let there be a few rushes laid in the place where Back-winter shall tumble, for fear of raying his clothes: or set down, Enter Back-winter, with his boy, bringing a brush after him, to take off the dust if need re∣quire. But you will ne'er have any ward-robe wit while you live. I pray you hold the book well, we be not nonplus in the latter end of the play.
This is the last stroke, my tongs clock must strike,
My last will, which I will that you perform:
My crown I have disposed already of.
Item, I give my withered flowers, and herbs,
Unto dead corses, for to deck them with,
My shady walks to great men's servitors,
Who in their masters shadows walk secure,
My pleasant open ayre, and fragrant smells,
To Croydon and the grounds abutting round,
My heate and warmth to toiling labourers,
My long days to bondsman, and prisoners,
My short nights to young married souls,
My drought and thirst, to drunkards quenchless throats,
My fruits to Autumn my adopted heir,
My murmuring springs, musicians of sweet sleep,
To murmuring male-contents, with their well tuned cares,
Channel'd in a sweet falling quaterzaine,
Do lull their ears asleep, listening themselves.
And finally, O words, now cleanse your course,
Unto Eliza that most sacred Dame,
Whom none but Saints and Angels ought to name;
All my fair days remaining, I bequeath
To waite upon her till she be returned.
Autumn, I charge thee, when that I am dead,
Be pressed and serviceable at her beck,
Present her with thy goodliest ripened fruits,
Unclothe no Arbors where she ever sate,
Touch not a tree, thou think she may pass by.
And Winter, with thy wrythen frosty face,
Smooth up thy visage when thou look on her,
Thou never look on such bright majesty:
A charmed circle draw about her court,
Wherein warm days may dance, &amp; no cold come,
On seas let winds make war, not vex her rest,
Quiet enclose her bed, thought fly her breast.
Ah gracious Queen, though Summer pine away,
Yet let thy flourishing stand at a stay,
First droop this vniuersals aged frame,
Ever any malady thy strength should tame:
Heaven raise up pillars to uphold thy hand,
Peace may have still his temple in thy land.
Lo, I have said, this is the total sum.
Autumn and Winter, on your faithfulness,
For the performance I do firmly build.
Farewell, my friends, Summer bids you farewell,
Archers, and bowlers, all my followers,
A dieu, and dwell with desolation,
Silence must be your masters mansion:
Slow marching thus, descend I to the feends.
Weep heavens, morn earth, here Summer ends.
Autumn hath all the Summers fruitful treasure,
Gone is our sport, fled is poor Croydens pleasure:
Short days, sharpe days, long nights come on a pace,
Ah who shall hide vs, from the Winters face?
Cold doth increase, the sickness will not cease,
And here we lye God knows, with little ease:
From winter, plague &amp; pestilence, good Lord deliver vs.
London doth morn, Lambith is quite forlorn,
Trades cry, Woe worth, that ever they were borne:
The want of Term, is town and Cities harms,
Close chambers we do want, to keep vs warm,
Long banished must we live from our friends:
This lowe built boss, will bring vs to our ends.
From winter, plague &amp; pestilence, good Lord deliver vs.
How is it? how is it? you that be of the graver sort, do you think these youths worthy of a Plaudit for pray∣ing for the Queen, and singing of the Litany? they are poor fellows I must needs say, and have bestowed great labour in sowing leaves, and grass, and straw, and moss upon cast suites. You may do well to warm your hands with clapping, before you go to bed, and send them to the tavern with merry hearts. Here is a pretty boy comes with an Epilogue, to get  him audacity. I pray you sit still a little, and hear him say his lesson without book. It is a good boy, be not afraid, turn thy face to my Lord. Thou and I will play at poutch, to more∣row morning for a breakfast. Come and sit on my knee, and Isle dance thee, if thou can not endure to stand.
VLisses a Dwarf, and the prolocutor for the Graecians, gave me leave that am a Pygmy, to doe an Embassage to you from the Cranes: Gentlemen (for Kings are no better) certain humble Animals, called our Actors, commend them unto you; who, what offence they have com∣meted, I know not (except it be in purloining some hours out of times treasury, that might have been better employed; but by me (the agent for their imperfections) they humbly crave pardon, if happily some of their terms have trot awry, or their tongues slumbled unwittingly on any mans content. In much Corn is some Cockle; in a heap of coin here and there a piece of Copper; wit hath his dregs as well as wine; words their waste, Ink his blots, every speech his Parenthesis, Poetical fury, as well Crabs as Sweetings for his Summer fruits. Nemo sapit omnibus horis. Their folly is deceased, their fear is yet living. Nothing can kill an Ass but cold: cold entertainment, discouraging scoffs, authorized disgraces, may kill a whole litter of young Asses of them here at once, that have travelled thus far in impudence, only in hope to sit a sunning in your smiles. The Romans dedicated a Temple to the fever quartain, thinking it some great God, because it shook them so: and another, to Ill fortune in Exquilliis a Mountain in Room, that it should not plague them at Cards and Dice. Your Graces frowns are to them shaking fevers, your least disfavours, the greatest ill fortune that may betide them. They can build no Temples, but themselves and their best endeavours, with all prostrate reverence, they here dedicate and offer up, wholly to your service. Sis bonus, O faelixque tuis. To make the gods merry, the celestial clown Vulcan tuned his poled foot, to the measures of Apolloes Lute, and danced a limping Galliard in Ioues starry hall.
To make you merry that are the Gods of Art, and guides un∣to heaven, a number of rude Vulcans, unwieldy speakers, ham∣mer-headed clowns (for so it pleases them in modesty to name themselves) have set their deformities to view, as it were in a dance here before you. Bear with their wants, lull me∣lancholie asleep with their absurdities, and expect hereafter better fruits of their industry. Little creatures often terrify great beasts: the Elephant flies from a Ram, the Lyon from a Cock and from fire; the Crocodile from all Sea-fish, the Whale from the noise of parched bones; light toys chase great cares. The greatfoole Toy hath mart the play: Good night, Gentlemen; I go, let him be carried away.
WilSummer. Is it true Iackanapes, doo you serve me so? As sure as this coat is too short for me, all the Points of your hoase for this are condemned to my pocket, if you and I ever play at span Counter more. Valet, spectators, pay for this sport with a Plaudit, and the next time the wind blows from this corner, we will make you ten times as merry.
Barbarus hic ego sum, queen non intelligor vlli.

IF Music be the food of Love, play on,
Give me excess of it: that surfeiting,
The appetite may sicken, and so dye.
That strain again, it had a dying fall:
O, it came ore my ear, like the sweet sound
That breathes upon a bank of Violets;
Stealing, and giving Odour. Enough, no more,
It is not so sweet now, as it was before.
O spirit of Love, how quick and fresh art thou,
That notwithstanding thy capacity,
Receives as the Sea. Nought enters there,
Of what validity, and pitch so ere,
But falls into abatement, and low price
Even in a minute; so full of shapes is fancy,
That it alone, is high fantastical.
Will you go hunt my Lord?
What Curio?
The Hart.
Why so I do, the Noblest that I have:
O when mine eyes did see Oliuia first,
Me thought she purged the ayre of pestilence;
That instant was I turned into a Hart,
And my desires like fell and cruel hounds,
Ere since pursue me. How now what news from her?
So please my Lord, I might not be admitted,
But from her handmaid do return this answer:
The Element it self, till seven years heate,
Shall not behold her face at ample view:
But like a Cloystresse she will veiled walk,
And water once a day her Chamber round
With eye-offending brine: all this to season
A brothers dead love, which she would keep fresh
And lasting, in her sad remembrance.
O she that hath a heart of that fine frame
To pay this debt of love but to a brother,
How will she love, when the rich golden shaft
Hath killed the flock of all affections else
That live in her. When Liver, Brain, and Heart,
These sovereign thrones, are all supplied and filled
Her sweet perfections with one self king:
Away before me, to sweet beds of Flowers,
Loue-thoughts lye rich, when canopied with bowers.
What Country (Friends) is this?
This is Illyria Lady.
And what should I do in Illyria?
My brother he is in Elizium,
Perchance he is not drowned: What think you sailors?
It is perchance that you your self were saved.
O my poor brother, and so perchance may he be.
True Madam, and to comfort you with chance,
Assure your self, after our ship did split,
When you, and those poor number saved with you,
Hung on our driving boat: I saw your brother
Most provident in peril, bind himself,
(Courage and hope both teaching him the practise)
To a strong Mast, that lived upon the sea:
Where like Orion on the Dolphins back,
I saw him hold acquaintance with the waives,
So long as I could see.
For saying so, there's Gold:
Mine own escape unfolds to my hope,
Whereto thy speech serves for authority
The like of him. Know thou this Country?
I Madam well, for I was bred and borne
Not three hours travail from this very place:
Who governs here?
A noble Duke in nature, as in name.
What is his name?
Orsino.
Orsino: I have heard my father name him.
He was a Bachelor then.
And so is now, or was so very late:
For but a month ago I went from hence,
And then it was fresh in murmur (as you know
What great ones do, the less will prattle of,)
That he did seek the love of fair Oliuia.
What's she?
A virtuous maid, the daughter of a Count
That did some tweluemonth since, then leaving her
In the protection of his son, her brother,
Who shortly also did: for whose dear love
(They say) she hath abjured the sight
And company of men.
O that I served that Lady,
And might not be delivered to the world
Till I had made mine own occasion mellow
What my estate is.
That were hard to compass,
Because she will admit no kind of suite,
No not the Dukes.
There is a fair behaviour in thee Captain,
And though that nature, with a beauteous wall
Doth oft close in pollution: yet of thee
I will believe thou hast a mind that suites
With this thy fair and outward character.
I prithee (and Isle pay thee bounteously)
Conceal me what I am, and be my aid,
For such disguise as happily shall become
The form of my intent. Isle serve this Duke,
Thou shalt present me as an Eunuch to him,
It may be worth thy pains: for I can sing,
And speak to him in many sorts of Music,
That will allow me very worth his service.
What else may hap, to time I will commit,
Only shape thou thy silence to my wit.
Be you his Eunuch, and your Mute Isle bee,
When my tongue blabs, then let mine eyes not see.
I thank thee: Lead me on.
What a plague means my Niece to take the death of her brother thus? I am sure care's an enemy to life.
By my troth sir Toby, you must come in earlier a nights??? your Cousin, my Lady, takes great exceptions to your ill hours.
Why let her except, before excepted.
I, but you must confine your self within the modest limits of order.
Confine? Isle confine my self no finer then I am: these clothes are good enough to drink in, and so bee these boots too: and they be not, let them hang them???selves in their own straps.
That quaffing and drinking will undo you: I heard my Lady talk of it yesterday: and of a foolish knight that you brought in one night here, to be his wore
Who, Sir Andrew Aguecheek?
I he.
He's as tall a man as any's in Illyria.
What's that to the purpose?
Why he he's three thousand ducats a year.
I, but he will have but a year in all these ducats: He's a very fool, and a prodigal.
Fie, that you'll say so: he plays of th Viol-de-ga???boys, and speaks three or four languages word for word without book, &amp; hath all the good gifts of nature.
He hath indeed, almost natural: for besides that he's a fool, he's a great quarreller: and but that hee hath the gift of a Coward, to allay the gust he hath in quarrel???ling, it is thought among the prudent, he would quickly have the gift of a grave.
By this hand they are scoundrels and substra???ctor??? that say so of him. Who are they?
They that add moreour, hoe's drunk nightly in your company.
With drinking healths to my Niece: Isle drink to her as long as there is a passage in my throat, &amp; drink in Illyria: he's a Coward and a Coistrel that will not drink to my Niece??? till his brains turn of th toe, like a parish top. What wench? Castiliano vulgo: for here coms Sir Andrew Agueface.
Sir Toby Belch. How now sir Toby Belch?
Sweet sir Andrew.
Bless you fair Shrew.
And you too sir.
Accost Sir Andrew, accost.
What's that?
My Nieces Chamber-maid.
Good Mistress accost, I desire better acquaintance
My name is Mary sir.
Good mistress Mary, accost.
You mistake knight: Accost, is front her, board her, woe her, assail her.
By my troth I would not undertake her in this company. Is that the meaning of Accost?
Far you well Gentlemen.
And thou let part so Sir Andrew, would thou might never draw sword again.
And you part so mistress, I would I might never draw sword again: Fair Lady, doe you think you have fools in hand?
Sir, I have not you by 'th hand.
Marry but you shall have, and hears my hand.
Now sir??? thought is free: I pray you bring your hand to 'th Buttry bar, and let it drink.
Wherefore (sweet-heart?) What's your Meta???phor?
It's dry sir.
Why I think so: I am not such an ass, but I can keep my hand dry. But what's your jest?
A dry jest Sir.
Are you full of them?
I Sir, I have them at my fingers ends: marry now I let go your hand, I am barren.
O knight, thou lack a cup of Canary: when did I see thee so put down?
Never in your life I think, unless you see Ca???nary put me down: me thinks sometimes I have no more wit then a Christian, or an ordinary man he's: but I am a great eater of beef, and I believe that does harm to my wit.
No question.
And I thought that, I'd forswear it. Isle ride home to morrow sir Toby.
Pur-quoy my dear knight?
What is purquoy? Do, or not do? I would I had bestowed that time in the tongues, that I have in fencing dancing, and bear-baiting; O had I but followed the Arts.
Then had thou had an excellent head of hair.
Why, would that have mended my hair?
Past question, for thou see it will not cool my nature
But it becomes we well enough, dost not?
Excellent, it hangs like flax on a distaff: &amp; I hope to see a huswife take thee between her legs, &amp; spin it off.
Faith Isle home to morrow sir Toby, your niece will not be seen, or if she be it's four to one, she'll none of me: the Count himself here hard by, woos her,
She'll none of th Count, she'll not match aboue his degree, neither in estate, years, nor wit: I have heard her swear it. Tut there's life in it man.
Isle stay a month longer. I am a fellow of th strangest mind in th world: I delight in Masks and Re???uels sometimes altogether.
Art thou good at these kicke-chawses Knight?
As any man in Illyria, whatsoever he be, under the degree of my betters, &amp; yet I will not compare with an old man.
What is thy excellence in a galliard, knight?
Faith, I can cut a caper.
And I can cut the Mutton too't.
And I think I have the backe-tricke, simply as strong as any man in Illyria.
Wherefore are these things hid? Wherefore have these gifts a Curtain before 'em? Are they like to take dust, like mistress Mals picture? Why dost thou not go to Church in a Galliard, and come home in a Carranto? My very walk should be a Jig: I would not so much as make water but in a Sinke-a-pace: What do thou mean? Is it a world to hide virtues in? I did think by the excellent constitution of thy leg, it was formed un???der the star of a Galliard.
I, it is strong, and it does indifferent well in a damned coloured stock. Shall we sit about some Revels?
What shall we do else: were we not borne under Taurus?
Taurus? That sides and heart.
No sir, it is legs and thighs: let me see thee ca???per. Ha, higher: ha, ha, excellent.
If the Duke continue these favours towards you Cesario, you are like to be much advanced, he hath known you but three days, and already you are no stranger.
You either fear his humour, or my negligence, that you call in question the continuance of his love. Is he inconstant sir, in his favours.
No believe me.
I thank you: here comes the Count.
Who saw Cesario hoe?
On your attendance my Lord here.
Stand you awhile aloof. Cesario,
Thou know no less, but all: I have unclasped
To thee the book even of my secret soul.
Therefore good youth, address thy gate unto her,
Be not denied access, stand at her doors,
And tell them, there thy fixed foot shall grow
Till thou have audience.
Sure my Noble Lord,
If she be so abandoned to her sorrow
As it is spoke, she never will admit me.
Be clamorous, and leap all civil bounds,
Rather then make vnprofited return,
Say I do speak with her (my Lord) what then?
O then, unfold the passion of my love,
Surprise her with discourse of my dear faith;
It shall become thee well to act my woes:
She will attend it better in thy youth,
Then in a Nuntio's of more grave aspect.
I think not so, my Lord.
Dear Lad, believe it;
For they shall yet belie thy happy years,
That say thou art a man: Dianas lip
Is not more smooth, and rubious: thy small pipe
Is as the maidens organ, shrill, and sound,
And all is semblatiue a women's part.
I know thy constellation is right apt
For this affair: some four or five attend him,
All if you will: for I my self am best
When least in company: prosper well in this,
And thou shalt live as freely as thy Lord,
To call his fortunes thine.
Isle do my best
To woe your Lady: yet a barrefull strife,
Who ere I woe, my self would be his wife.
Nay, either tell me where thou hast bin, or I will not open my lips so wide as a bristle may enter, in way of thy excuse: my Lady will hang thee for thy absence.
Let her hang me: hee that is well hanged in this world, needs to fear no colours.
Make that good.
He shall see none to fear.
A good lenton answer: I can tell thee where yt saying was borne, of I fear no colours.
Where good mistress Mary?
In the wars, &amp; that may you be bold to say in your foolery.
Well, God give them wisdom that have it: &amp; those that are fools, let them use their talents.
Yet you will be hanged for being so long absent, or to be turned away: is not that as good as a hanging to you?
Many a good hanging, prevents a bad marriage: and for turning away, let summer bear it out.
You are resolute then?
Not so neither, but I am resolved on two points
That if one break, the other will hold: or if both break, your gaskins fall.
Apt in good faith, very apt: well go thy way, if sir Toby would leave drinking, thou were as witty a piece of Eves flesh, as any in Illyria.
Peace you rogue, no more of that: here comes my Lady: make your excuse wisely, you were best.
Wit, and't be thy will, put me into good fooling: those wits that think they have thee, doe very oft prove fools: and I that am sure I Jack thee, may pass for a wise man. For what says Quinapalus, Better a witty fool, then a foolish wit. God bless thee Lady.
Take the fool away.
Do you not hear fellows, take away the Lady.
Go too, y' are a dry fool: Isle no more of you: be???sides you grow dis-honest.
Two faults Madonna, that drink &amp; good counsel will amend: for give the dry fool drink, then is the fool not dry: bid the dishonest man mend himself, if he mend, he is no longer dishonest; if hee cannot, let the Botcher mend him: any thing that's mended, is but patched: virtue that transgresses, is but patched with sin, and sin that a???mends, is but patched with virtue. If that this simple Sillogisme will serve, so: if it will not, what remedy?
As there is no true Cuckold but calamity, so beauties a flower; The Lady bad take away the fool, therefore I say again, take her away.
Sir, I bad them take away you.
Misprision in the highest degree. Lady, Cucullus non facet monachum: that's as much to say, as I wear not motley in my brain: good Madonna, give me leave to prove you a fool.
Can you do it?
Dexterously, good Madonna.
Make your proof.
I must catechise you for it Madonna, Good my Mouse of virtue answer me.
Well sir, for want of other idleness, Isle bide your proof.
Good Madonna, why mournst thou?
Good fool, for my brothers death.
I think his soul is in hell, Madonna.
I know his soul is in heaven, fool.
The more fool (Madonna) to morn for your Brothers soul, being in heaven. Take away the Fool, Gentlemen.
What think you of this fool Maluolio, doth he not mend?
Yes, and shall do, till the pangs of death shake him: Infirmity that decays the wise, doth ever make the better fool.
God send you sir, a speedy Infirmity, for the better increasing your folly: Sir Toby will be sworn that I am no Fox, but he will not pass his word for two pence that you are no Fool.
How say you to that Maluolio?
I marvel your Ladyship takes delight in such a barren rascal: I saw him put down the other day, with an ordinary fool, that has no more brain then a stone. Look you now, he's out of his guard already: unless you laugh and minister occasion to him, he is gaged. I protest I take these Wisemen, that crow so at these set kind of fools, no better then the fools Zanies.
O you are ficke of selfe-loue Maluolio, and taste with a distempered appetite. To be generous, guitlesse, and of free disposition, is to take those things for Bird-bolts, that you deem Cannon bullets: There is no slan???der in an allowed fool, though he do nothing but rail; nor no railing, in a known discreet man, though hee do nothing but reprove.
Now Mercury endue thee with leasing, for thou speak well of fools.
Madam, there is at the gate, a young Gentle???man, much desires to speak with you.
From the Count Orsino, is it?
I know not (Madam) it is a fair young man, and well attended.
Who of my people hold him in delay???
Sir Toby Madam, your kinsman.
Fetch him off I pray you, he speaks nothing but madman: Fie on him. Go you Maluolio; If it be a??? suit from the Count, I am sick, or not at home. What you will, to dismiss it.
Now you see sir, how your fooling grows old, &amp; peo???ple dislike it.
Thou hast spoke for vs (Madonna) as if thy eldest son should be a fool: whose scull, Jove cram with brains, for here he comes.
One of thy kin has a most weak Pia-mater.
By mine honour half drunk. What is he at the gate Cousin?
A Gentleman.
A Gentleman? What Gentleman?
It is a Gentleman here. A plague of these pickle herring: How now Sot.
Good Sir Toby.
Cousin, Cousin, how have you come so early by this Lethargy?
Lechery, I defy Lechery: there's one at the gate.
I marry, what is he?
Let him be the devil and he will, I care not: give me faith say I. Well, it's all one.
What's a drunken man like, fool?
Like a drowned man, a fool, and a mad man:
One draught aboue heate, makes him a fool, the second maddes him, and a third drowns him.
Go thou and seek the Coroner, and let him sit of my Cos: for he's in the third degree of drink: hoe's drowned: go look after him.
He is but mad yet Madonna, and the fool shall look to the madman.
Madam, yond young fellow swears hee will speak with you. I told him you were sick, he takes on him to understand so much, and therefore comes to speak with you. I told him you were asleep, he seems to have a fore knowledge of that too, and therefore comes to speak with you. What is to be said to him Lady, hoe's fortified against any denial.
Tell him, he shall not speak with me.
He's been told so: and hee says he will stand at your door like a Sheriffs post, and be the supporter to a bench, but he will speak with you.
What kind of man is he?
Why of mankind.
What manner of man?
Of very ill manner: he will speak with you, will you, or no.
Of what personage, and years is he?
Not yet old enough for a man, nor young enough for a boy: as a squash is before tic a pescod, or a Coddling when tic almost an Apple: Tic with him in standing wa???la, between boy and man. He is very well-fauour'd, and he speaks very shrewishly: One would think his mothers milk were scarce out of him.
Let him approach: Call in my Gentlewoman.
Gentlewoman, my Lady calls.
Give me my veil: come throw it ore my face,
We'll once more hear Orsinos Embassy.
The honourable Lady of the house, which is she?
Speak to me, I shall answer for her: your will.
Most radiant, exquisite, and unmatchable beau???tie. I pray you tell me if this bee the Lady of the house, for I never saw her. I would bee loath to cast away my speech: for besides that it is excellently well pend, I have taken great pains to con it. Good Beauties, let me su???stain no scorn; I am very comptible, even to the least sinister usage.
Whence came you sir?
I can say little more then I have studied, &amp; that question's out of my part. Good gentle one, give me modest assurance, if you be the Lady of the house, that
may proceed in my speech.
Are you a Comedian?
No my profound heart: and yet (by the very fangs of malice, I swear) I am not that I play. Are you the Lady of the house?
If I do not usurp my self, I am.
Most certain, if you are she, you do usurp your self: for what is yours to bestow, is, not yours to re???serve. But this is from my Commission: I will on with my speech in your praise, and then show you the heart of my message.
Come to what is important in it: I forgive you the praise.
Alas, I took great pains to study it, and it is Poetical.
It is the more like to be feigned, I pray you keep it in. I heard you were saucy at my gates, &amp; allowed your approach rather to wonder at you, then to hear you. If you be not mad, be gone: if you have reason, be brief: it is not that time of Moon with me, to make one in so skipping a dialogue.
Will you hoist sail sir, here lies your way.
No good swabber, I am to hull here a little lone???ger. Some mollification for your Giant, sweet Lady; tell me your mind, I am a messenger.
Sure you have some hiddeous matter to deliver, when the courtesy of it is so fearful. Speak your office.
It alone concerns your ear: I bring no over???ture of war, no taxation of homage; I hold the Olyffe in my hand: my words are as full of peace, as matter.
Yet you began rudely. What are you? What would you?
The rudeness that hath appeared in me, have I learned from my entertainment. What I am, and what I would, are as secret as maiden-head: to your ears, Di???uinity; to any others, profanation.
Give vs the place alone,
We will hear this divinity. Now sir, what is your text?
Most sweet Lady.
A comfortable doctrine, and much may bee said of it. Where lies your Text?
In Orsinoes bosom.
In his bosom? In what chapter of his bosom?
To answer by the method in the first of his hart.
O, I have read it: it is heresy. Have you no more to say?
Good Madam, let me see your face.
Have you any Commission from your Lord, to negotiate with my face: you are now out of your Text: but we will draw the Curtain, and show you the picture. Look you sir, such a one I was this present: First not well done?
Excellently done, if God did all.
It is in grain sir, twill endure wind and wea???there.
Tic beauty truly blent, whose red and white,
Natures own sweet, and cunning hand laid on:
Lady, you are the cruellest she alive,
If you will lead these graces to the grave,
And leave the world no copy.
O sir, I will not be so hard-hearted: I will give out divers scedules of my beauty. It shall be Inuentoried and every particle and vtensile labell'd to my will: As, Item two lips indifferent red, Item two grey eyes, with lids to them: Item, one neck, one chin, &amp; so forth. Were you sent hither to praise me?
I see you what you are, you are too proud:
But if you were the devil, you are fair:
My Lord, and master loves you: O such love
Could be but recompensed, though you were crowned
The nonpareil of beauty.
How does he love me?
With adorations, fertile tears,
With groans that thunder love, with sighs of fire.
Your Lord does know my mind, I cannot love him
Yet I suppose him virtuous, know him noble,
Of great estate, of fresh and stainless youth;
In voices well divulged, free, learned, and valiant,
And in dimension, and the shape of nature,
A gracious person; But yet I cannot love him:
He might have took his answer long ago.
If I did love you in my masters flame,
With such a suffering, such a deadly life:
In your denial, I would find no sense,
I would not understand it.
Why, what would you?
Make me a willow Cabin at your gate,
And call upon my soul within the house,
Write loyal Cantons of contemned love,
And sing them loud even in the dead of night:
Hallow your name to the reuerberate hills,
And make the babbling Gossip of the air,
Cry out Oliuia: O you should not rest
Between the elements of ayre, and earth,
But you should pity me.
You might do much:
What is your Parentage?
Aboue my fortunes, yet my state is well:
I am a Gentleman.
Get you to your Lord:
I cannot love him: let him send no more,
Unless (perchance) you come to me again,
To tell me how he takes it: Fare you well:
I thank you for your pains: spend this for me.
I am no feed post, Lady; keep your purse,
My Master, not my self, lacks recompense.
Love make his heart of flint, that you shall love,
And let your fervor like my masters be,
Placed in contempt: Farewell fair cruelty.
What is your Parentage?
Aboue my fortunes, yet my state is well;
I am a Gentleman. Isle be sworn thou art,
Thy tongue, thy face, thy limbs, actions, and spirit.
Do give thee fiue-fold blazon: not too fast: soft, soft,
Unless the Master were the man. How now?
Even so quickly may one catch the plague?
Me thinks I feel this youths perfections
With an invisible, and subtle stealth
To creep in at mine eyes. Well, let it be.
What hoe, Maluolio.
Here Madam, at your service.
Run after that same peevish Messenger
The Counts man: he left this Ring behind him
Would I, or not: tell him, Isle none of it.
Desire him not to flatter with his Lord,
Nor hold him up with hopes, I am not for him:
If that the youth will come this way to morrow,
Isle give him reasons for it: hie thee Maluolio.
Madam, I will.
I do I know not what, and fear to find
Mine eye too great a flatterer for my mind:
Fate, show thy force, our selves we do not owe,
What is decreed, must be: and be this so.
Will you stay no longer: nor will you not that I go with you.
By your patience, no: my stars shine darkly over me; the malignancy of my fate, might perhaps di???stemper yours; therefore I shall crave of you your leave, that I may bear my evils alone. It were a bad recom???pence for your love, to lay any of them on you.
Let me yet know of you, whither you are bound.
No sooth sir: my determinate voyage is mere extravagancy. But I perceive in you so excellent a touch of modesty, that you will not extort from me, what I am willing to keep in: therefore it charges me in manners, the rather to express my self: you must know of me then Antonio, my name is Sebastian (which I called Rodo???rigo) my father was that Sebastian of Mescaline, whom I know you have heard of. He left behind him, my self, and a sister, both borne in an hour: if the Heavens had been pleased, would we had so ended. But you sir, al???ter'd that, for some hour before you took me from the breach of the sea, was my sister drowned.
Alas the day.
A Lady sir, though it was said she much resem???bled me, was yet of many accounted beautiful: but ???hogh I could not with such estimable wonder ouer-farre be???leeue that, yet thus far I will boldly publish her, she bore a mind that envy could not but call fair: She is drowned already sir with salt water, though I seem to drown her remembrance again with more.
Pardon me sir, your bad entertainment.
O good Antonio, forgive me your trouble.
If you will not murder me for my love, let me be your servant.
If you will not undo what you have done, that is kill him, whom you have recovered, desire it not. Fare ye well at once, my bosom is full of kindness, and I am yet so near the manners of my mother, that upon the least occasion more, mine eyes will tell tales of me: I am bound to the Count Orsino's Court, farewell.
The gentleness of all the gods go with thee:
I have many enemies in Orsino's Court,
Else would I very shortly see thee there:
But come what may, I do adore thee so,
That danger shall seem sport, and I will go.
Were not you even now, with the Countess O???levy?
Even now sir, on a moderate pace, I have since a???riu'd but hither.
She returns this Ring to you (sir) you might have saved me my pains, to have taken it away your self. She adds moreover, that you should put your Lord into a desperate assurance, she will none of him. And one thing more, that you be never so hardy: o come again in his affairs, unless it bee to report your Lords taking of this: receive it so.
She took the Ring of me, Isle none of it.
Come sir, you peevishly threw it to her: and her will is, it should be so returned: If it bee worth stoo???ping for, there it lies, in your eye: if not, bee it his that finds it.
I left no Ring with her: what means this Lady?
Fortune forbid my out-side have not charmed her:
She made good view of me, indeed so much,
That me thought her eyes had lost her tongue,
For she did speak in starts distractedly.
She loves me sure, the cunning of her passion
Invites me in this churlish messenger:
None of my Lords Ring? Why he sent her none;
I am the man, if it be so, as tic,
Poor Lady, she were better love a dream:
Disguise, I see thou art a wickedness,
Wherein the pregnant enemy does much.
How easy is it, for the proper false
In women's waxen hearts to set their forms:
Alas, O frailty is the cause, not wee,
For such as we are made, if such we bee:
How will this fadge? My master loves her dearly,
And I (poor monster) fond as much on him:
And she (mistaken) seems to dote on me:
What will become of this? As I am man,
My state is desperate for my masters love:
As I am woman (now alas the day)
What thriftless sighs shall poor Oliuia breath?
O time, thou must vntangle this, not I,
It is too hard a knot for me t'vnty.
Approach Sir Andrew: not to bee a bed after midnight, is to be up betimes, and Deliculo surgery, thou know.
Nay by my troth I know not: but I know, to be up late, is to be up late.
A false conclusion: I hate it as an vnfill'd Canne. To be up after midnight, and to go to bed then is early: so that to go to bed after midnight, is to go to bed be???times. Does not our lives consist of the four Eel???mints?
Faith so they say, but I think it rather consists of eating and drinking.
The art a scholar; let vs therefore eat and drink Marian I say, a stoop of wine.
Here comes the fool in faith.
How now my harts: Did you never see the Pic???ture of we three?
Welcome ass, now let's have a catch.
By my troth the fool has an excellent breast. I had rather then forty shillings I had such a leg, and so sweet a breath to sing, as the fool has. Insooth thou wast in very gracious fooling last night, when thou spoke of Pigrogromitus, of the ??apians passing the Equinoctial of Queubus: it was very good in faith: I sent thee six pence
for thy Lemon, had it?
I did impeticos thy gratillity: for Maluolios nose is no Whip-stocke. My Lady has a white hand, and the Mermidons are no bottle-ale houses.
Excellent: Why this is the best fooling, when all is done. Now a song.
Come on, there is six pence for you. Let's have a song.
There's a testrill of me too: if one knight give a
Would you have a loue-song, or a song of good life?
A love song, a love song.
I, I. I care not for good life.
O Mistress mine where are you roaming?
O stay and hear, your true loves coming,
That can sing both high and low.
Trip no further pretty sweating.
Journeys end in lovers meeting,
Every wise mans son doth know.
Excellent good, in faith.
Good, good.
What is love, tic not hereafter,
Present mirth, hath present laughter:
What's to come, is still unsure.
In delay there lies no plenty,
Then come kiss me sweet and twenty:
Youths a stuff will not endure.
A mellifluous voice, as I am true knight.
A contagious breath.
Very sweet, and contagious in faith.
To hear by the nose, it is dulcet in contagion. But shall we make the Welkin dance indeed? Shall wee rowze the night-Owle in a Catch, that will draw three souls out of one Weaver? Shall we do that?
And you love me, let's do it: I am dog at a Catch.
By our lady sir, and some dogs will catch well.
Most certain: Let our Catch be, Thou Knave.
Hold thy peace, thou Knave knight. I shall be con???strained in it, to call thee knave, Knight.
It is not the first time I have constrained one to call me knave. Begin fool: it begins, Hold thy peace.
I shall never begin if I hold my peace.
Good in faith: Come begin.
What a caterwauling doe you keep here? If my Lady have not called up her Steward Maluolio, and bid him turn you out of doors, never trust me.
My Lady's a Catayan, we are politicians, Maluolios a Peg-a-ramsie, and Three merry men be wee. Am not I consanguinious? Am I not of her blood: telly valley. La???die, There dwelt a man in Babylon, Lady, Lady.
Beshrew me, the knights in admirable fooling.
I, he do's well enough if he be disposed, and so do I too: he does it with a better grace, but I do it more natural.
O the twelfe day of December.
For the love of God peace.
My masters are you mad? Or what are you? Have you no wit, manners, nor honesty, but to gabble like Tinkers at this time of night? Do ye make an Ale???house of my Ladies house, that ye squeak out your Cos???ers Catches without any mitigation or remorse of voice? Is there no respect of place, persons, nor time in you?
We did keep time sir in our Catches. Snack up.
Sir Toby, I must be round with you. My Lady bad me tell you, that though she harbors you as her kins???man, she's nothing allied to your disorders. If you can separate your self and your misdemeanours, you are well???come to the house: if not, and it would please you to take leave of her, she is very willing to bid you farewell.
Farewell dear heart, since I must needs be gone.
Nay good Sir Toby.
His eyes do show his days are almost done.
Is it even so?
But I will never dye.
Sir Toby there you lye.
This is much credit to you.
Shall I bid him go.
What and if you do?
Shall I bid him go, and spare not?
O no, no, no, no, you dare not.
Out of tune sir, ye lye: Art any more then a Stew???art? Dost thou think because thou art virtuous, there shall be no more Cakes and Ale?
Yes by S. Anne, and Ginger shall bee hot y' th mouth too.
The art in th right. Go sir, rub your Chain with crumbs. A stope of Wine Maria.
Mistress Mary, if you prized my Ladies savour at any thing more then contempt, you would not give means for this uncivil rule; the shall know of it by this hand.
Go shake your ears.
It were as good a deed as to drink when a mans a hungry, to challenge him the field, and then to break promise with him, and make a fool of him.
Do it knight, Isle write thee a Challenge: or Isle deliver thy indignation to him by word of mouth.
Sweet Sir Toby be patient for to night: Since the youth of the Counts was to day with my Lady, she is much out of quiet. For Monsieur Maluolio, let me alone with him: If I do not gull him into an ayword, and make him a common recreation, do not think I have wit e???nough to lye straight in my bed: I know I can do it.
Possess vs, possess vs, tell vs something of him.
Marry sir, sometimes he is a kind of Puritan.
O, if I thought that, Id beat him like a dog.
What for being a Puritan, thy exquisite reason, dear knight.
I have no exquisite reason for it, but I have reason good enough.
The diu'll a Puritan that hee is, or any thing constantly but a time-pleaser, an affectioned Ass, that cons State without book, and utters it by great swarths. The best persuaded of himself: so crammed (as he thinks) with excellencies, that it is his grounds of faith, that all that look on him, love him: and on that vice in him, will my revenge find notable cause to work.
What wilt thou do?
I will drop in his way some obscure Epistles of love, wherein by the colour of his beard, the shape of his leg, the manner of his gate, the expressure of his eye, forehead, and complexion, he shall find himself most feelingly personated. I can write very like my Lady your Niece, on a forgotten matter wee can hardly make distinction of our hands.
Excellent, I smell a device.
I have it in my nose too.
He shall think by the Letters that thou wilt drop
that they come from my Niece, and that shoe's in love with him.
My purpose is indeed a horse of that colour.
And your horse now would make him an Ass.
Ass, I doubt not.
O twill be admirable.
Sport royal I warrant you: I know my Phy???sick will work with him, I will plant you two, and let the Fool make a third, where he shall find the Letter: observe his construction of it: For this night to bed, and dream on the event: Farewell.
Good night Penthisilea.
Before me she's a good wench.
She's a beagle true bred, and one that adores me: what of that?
I was adored once too.
Let's to bed knight: Thou had need send for more money.
If I cannot recover your Niece, I am a foul way out.
Send for money knight, if thou hast her not in th end, call me Cut.
If I do not, never trust me, take it how you will.
Come, come, Isle go burn some Sack, tic too late to go to bed now: Come knight, come knight.
Give me some Music; Now good morrow friends.
Now good Cesario, but that piece of song,
That old and Antique song we heard last night;
Me thought it did relieve my passion much,
More then light airs, and recollected terms
Of these most brisk and giddy-paced times.
Come, but one verse.
He is not here (so please your Lordship) that should sing it?
Who was it?
Fest??? the lester my Lord, a fool that the Lady Oliuiaes Father took much delight in. He is about the house.
Seek him out, and play the tune the while.
Come hither Boy, if ever thou shalt love
In the sweet pangs of it, remember me:
For such as I am, all true Lovers are,
Unstaid and skittish in all motions else,
Save in the constant image of the creature
That is beloved. How dost thou like this tune?
It gives a very echo to the seat
Where love is thron???d.
Thou dost speak masterly,
My life upon it, young though thou art, thine eye
Hath staid upon some favour that it loves:
Hath it not boy?
A little, by your favour.
What kind of woman first?
Of your complexion.
She is not worth thee then. What years in faith?
About your years my Lord.
Too old by heaven: Let still the woman take
An elder then her self, so wears she to him;
So sways she level in her husbands heart:
For boy, however we do praise our seiues,
Our fancies are more giddy and vnfirme,
More longing, wavering, sooner lost and worn,
Then women's are.
I think it well my Lord.
Then let thy Love be younger then thy self,
Or thy affection cannot hold the bent:
For women are as Roses, whose fair flower
Being once displayed, doth fall that very hour.
And so they are: alas, that they are so:
To die, even when they to perfection grow.
O fellow come, the song we had last night:
Mark it Cesario, it is old and plain;
The Spinsters and the Knitters in the Sun,
And the free maids that weave their thread with bones,
Do use to chant it: it is silly sooth,
And dallies with the innocence of love,
Like the old age.
Are you ready Sir?
I prithee sing.
Come away, come away death,
And in sad cypress let me be laid.
Fie away, fie away breath,
I am slain by a fair cruel maid:
My shroud of white, stuck all with Ew, O prepare it.
My part of death no one so true did share it.
Not a flower, not a flower sweet
On my black coffin, let there be strewne:
Not a friend, not a friend greet
My poor corpse, where my bones shall be thrown:
A thousand thousand sighs to save, lay me ?? where
Sad true lover never find my grave, to weep there.
There's for thy pains.
No pains sir, I take pleasure in singing sir.
Isle pay thy pleasure then.
Truly sir, and pleasure will be paid one time, or another.
Give me now leave, to leave thee.
Now the melancholy God protect thee, and the Tailor make thy doublet of changeable Taffeta, for thy mind is a very Opal. I would have men of such constan???cie put to Sea, that their business might be every thing, and their intent every where, for that's it, that always makes a good voyage of nothing. Farewell.
Let all the rest give place: Once more Cesario,
Get thee to yond same sovereign cruelty:
Tell her my love, more noble then the world
Prizes not quantity of dirty lands,
The parts that fortune hath bestowed upon her:
Tell her I hold as giddily as Fortune:
But it is that miracle, and Queen of Iems
That nature pranks her in, attracts my soul.
But if she cannot love you sir.
It cannot be so answered.
Sooth but you must.
Say that some Lady, as perhaps there is,
Hath for your love as great a pang of heart
As you have for Oliuia: you cannot love her:
You tel her so: Must she not then be answered?
There is no women's sides
Can bide the beating of so strong a passion,
As love doth give my heart: no women's heart
So big, to hold so much, they lack retention.
Alas, their love may be called appetite,
No motion of the Liver, but the Palate,
That suffer surfeit, cloyment, and revolt,
But mine is all as hungry as the Sea,
And can digest as much, make no compare
Between that love a woman can bear me,
And that I owe Oliuia.
I but I know.
What dost thou know?
Too well what love women to men may owe:
In faith they are as true of heart, as we.
My Father had a daughter loved a man
As it might be perhaps, were I a woman
I should your Lordship.
And what's her history?
A blank my Lord: she never told her love,
But let concealment like a worm in th bud
Feed on her damask cheek: she pined in thought,
And with a greene and yellow melancholy,
She sate like Patience on a Monument,
Smiling at grief. Was not this love indeed?
We men may say more, swear more, but indeed
Our shows are more then will: for still we prove
Much in our vows, but little in our love.
But died thy sister of her love my Boy?
I am all the daughters of my Fathers house,
And all the brothers too: and yet I know not.
Sir, shall I to this Lady?
I that's the Theme,
To her in haste: give her this Jewel: say,
My love can give no place, bide no deny.
Come thy ways Signior Fabian.
Nay Isle come: if I loose a scruple of this sport, let me be boiled to death with Melancholy.
Would thou not be glad to have the niggard???lie Rascally sheepe-biter, come by some notable shame?
I would exult man: you know he brought me out of favour with my Lady, about a Bear-baiting here.
To anger him we'll have the Bear again, and we will fool him black and blew, shall we not sir An???drew?
And we do not, it is pity of our lives.
Here comes the little villain: How now my Mettle of India?
Get ye all three into the box tree: Maluolio's coming down this walk, he has been yonder in the Sun practising behaviour to his own shadow this half hour: observe him for the love of Mockery: for I know this Letter will make a contemplative Idiot of him. Close in the name of jesting, lye thou there: for here comes the Trowt, that must be caught with tickling.
It is but Fortune, all is fortune. Maria once told me she did affect me, and I have heard her self come thus near, that should she fancy, it should bee one of my complexion. Besides she uses me with a more ex???altered respect, then any one else that follows her. What should I think on it?
Heere's an ouer-weening rogue.
Oh peace: Contemplation makes a rare Turkey Cock of him, how he jets under his advanced plumes.
Slight I could so beat the Rogue.
Peace I say.
To be Count Maluolio.
Ah Rogue.
Pistol him, pistol him.
Peace, peace.
There is example for it: The Lady of the Stra???chy, married the yeoman of the wardrobe.
Fie on him Iezabel.
O peace, now he's deeply in: look how image???nation blows him.
Having been three months married to her, sitting in my state.
O for a stone-bow to hit him in the eye.
Calling my Officers about me, in my branched Velvet gown: having come from a day bed, where I have left Oliuia sleeping.
Fire and Brimstone.
O peace, peace.
And then to have the humour of state: and after a demure travail of regard: telling them I know my place, as I would they should doe theirs: to ask for my kinsman Toby.
Bolts and shackles.
Oh peace, peace, peace, now, now.
Seven of my people with an obedient start, make out for him: I frown the while, and perchance wind up my watch, or play with my some rich Jewel: Toby approaches; curtsies there to me.
Shall this fellow live?
Though our silence be drawn from vs with cars, yet peace.
I extend my hand to him thus: quenching my familiar smile with an austere regard of control.
And do's not Toby take you a blow of the lips, then?
Saying, Cosine Toby, my Fortunes having cast me on your Niece, give me this prerogative of speech.
What, what?
You must amend your drunkenness.
Out scab.
Nay patience, or we break the sinews of our plot?
Besides you waste the treasure of your time, with a foolish knight.
That's me I warrant you.
One sir Andrew.
I knew it was I, for many do call me fool.
What employment have we here?
Now is the Woodcock near the gin.
Oh peace, and the spirit of humours intimate rea???ding aloud to him.
By my life this is my Ladies hand: these bee her very C's??? her ??'s, and her T's, and thus makes she het great P's. It is in contempt of question her hand.
Her C's, her ??'s, and her T's: why that?
To the unknown beloved, this, and my good Wishes: Her very Phra???es: By your leave wax. Soft, and the im???pressure her Lucrece, with which she uses to seal: tic my Lady: To whom should this be?
This wins him, Liver and all.
Jove knows I love, but who,
Lips do not move, no man must know.
No man must know. What follows?
The numbers alter???d: No man must know,
If this should be thee Maluolio?
Marry hang thee broke.
I may command where I adore, but silence like a Lu???cress knife:
With bloodless stroke my heart doth gore, M.O.A.I. doth sway my life.
A fustian riddle.
Excellent Wench, say I.
M.O.A.I. doth sway my life. Nay but first let me see, let me see, let me see.
What dish a poison has she dressed him?
And with what wing the stallion checks at it?
I may command, where I adore: Why she may command me: I serve her, she is my Lady. Why this is evident to any formal capacity. There is no obstruction in this, and the end: What should that Alphabetical po???sition portend, if I could make that resemble something in me? Softly, M.O.A.I.
O I, make up that, he is now at a cold sent.
Sowter will cry upon it for all this, though it bee as rank as a Fox.
M. Maluolio, M. why that begins my name.
Did not I say he would work it out, the Cur is excellent at faults.
M. But then there is no consonance in the sequel that suffers under probation: A. should follow, but O. does.
And O shall end, I hope.
I, or Isle cudgel him, and make him cry O.
And then I. comes behind.
I, and you had any eye behind you, you??? might see more detraction at your heals, then Fortunes before you.
M, O, A, I. This simulation is not as the former: and yet to crush this a little, it would bow to me, for e???very one of these Letters are in my name. Soft, here foal???lowes prose: If this fall into thy hand, revolve. In my stars I am aboue thee, but be not afraid of greatness: Some are become great, some achieves greatness, and some have greatness thrust upon em. Thy fates open their hands, let thy blood and spirit embrace them, and to in???ur thy self to what thou art like to be: cast thy humble slough, and appear fresh. Be opposite with a kinsman, surly with servants: Let thy tongue tang arguments of state; put thy self into the trick of singularity. She thus advises thee, that sighs for thee. Remember who commended thy yellow stockings, and wished to see thee ever cross garter'd: I say remember, go too, thou art made if thou desire to be so: If not, let me see thee a ste???ward still, the fellow of servants, and not worthy to touch Fortunes singers Farewell, She that would alter services with thee, that fortunate unhappy daylight and champion discovers not more: This is open, I will bee proud, I will read pollticke Authors, I will baffle Sir Toby, I will wash off gross acquaintance, I will be point devise, the very man. I do not now fool my self, to let imagination jade me; for every reason excites to this, that my Lady loves me. She did commend my yellow stockings of late, she did praise my leg being crosse-garter'd, and in this she manifests her self to my love, &amp; with a kind of injunction drives me to these habits of her liking. I thank my stars, I am happy: I will bee strange, stout, in yellow stockings, and cross Garter'd, even with the swiftness of putting on. Jove, and my stars be praised. Here is yet a postscript. Thou can not choose but know who I am. If thou entertainst my love, let it appear in thy smiling, thy smiles become thee well. There???fore in my presence still smile, deero my sweet, I prithee. Jove I thank thee, I will smile, I will do every thing that thou wilt have me.
I will not give my part of this sport for a pensi???on of thousands to be paid from the Sophie.
I could marry this wench for this device.
So could I too.
And ask no other dowry with her, but such ano???there jest.
Nor I neither.
Here comes my noble gull catcher.
Wilt thou set thy foot of my neck.
Or of mine either?
Shall I play my freedom at tray-trip, and become thy bond slave?
In faith, or I either?
Why, thou hast put him in such a dream, that when the image of it leaves him, he must run mad.
Nay but say true, do's it work upon him?
Like Aqua vite with a Midwife.
If you will then see the fruits of the sport, mark his first approach before my Lady: hee will come to her in yellow stockings, and it is a colour she abhors, and cross garter'd, a fashion she detests: and hee will smile upon her, which will now be so vnsuteable to her dispo???sition, being addicted to a melancholy, as she is, that it cannot but turn him into a notable contempt: if you will see it follow me.
To the gates of Tartar, thou most excellent devil of wit.
Isle make one too.
Save thee Friend and thy Music: dost thou live by thy Tabor?
No sir, I live by the Church.
Art thou a Churchman?
No such matter sir, I do live by the Church: For, I do live at my house, and my house doth stand by the Church
So thou moist say the Kings lies by a beggar, if a beggar dwell near him: or the Church stands by thy Ta???bore, if thy Tabor stand by the Church.
You have said sir: To see this age: A sentence is but a cheu'rill glove to a good wit, how quickly the wrong side may be turned outward.
Nay that's certain: they that dally nicely with words, may quickly make them wanton.
I would therefore my sister had had no name Sir.
Why man?
Why sir, her names a word, and to dally with that word, might make my sister wanton: But indeed, words are very Rascals, since bonds disgraced them.
Thy reason man?
Troth sir, I can yield you none without words, and words are grown so false, I am loath to prove rea???son with them.
I warrant thou art a merry fellow, and care for nothing.
Not so sir, I do care for something: but in my con???science sir, I do not care for you: if that be to care for no???thing sir, I would it would make you invisible.
Art not thou the Lady Oliuia's fool?
No indeed sir, the Lady Oliuia has no folly, she will keep no fool sir, till she be married, and fools are as like husbands, as Pilchers are to Herrings, the Hus???bands the bigger, I am indeed not her fool, but his cor???rupter of words.
I saw thee late at the Count Orsino's.
Foolery sir, does walk about the Orb like the Sun, it shines every where. I would be sorry sir, but the Fool should be as oft with your Master, as with my Mi???stress: I think I saw your wisdom there.
Nay, and thou pass upon me, Isle no more with thee. Hold there's expenses for thee.
Now Jove in his next commodity of hair, send thee a beard.
By my troth Isle tell thee, I am almost sick for one, though I would not have it grow on my chin. Is thy Lady within?
Would not a pair of these have bred sir?
Yes being kept together, and put to use.
I would play Lord Pandarus of Phrygia sir, to bring a Cressida to this Troylus.
I understand you sir, tic well begged.
The matter I hope is not great sir; begging, but a beggar: Cressida was a beggar. My Lady is within sir. I will construe to them whence you come, who you are, and what you would are out of my welkin, I might say Eel???meant, but the word is overworn.
This fellow is wise enough to play the fool,
And to do that well, craves a kind of wit:
He must observe their mood on whom he jests,
The quality of persons, and the time:
And like the Haggard, check at every Feather
That comes before his eye. This is a practice,
As full of labour as a Wise-mans Art:
For folly that he wisely shows, is fit;
But wisemens folly fallen, quite taint their wit.
Save you Gentleman.
And you sir.
Dieu vou guard Monsieur.
Et vouz oozy vostre seruiture.
I hope sir, you are, and I am yours.
Will you encounter the house, my Niece is desi???rous you should enter, if your trade be to her.
I am bound to your Niece sir, I mean she is the list of my voyage.
Taste your legs sir, put them to motion.
My legs do better understand me sir, then I un???derstand what you mean by bidding me taste my legs.
I mean to go sir, to enter.
I will answer you with gate and entrance, but we are prevented.
Most excellent accomplished Lady, the heavens rain O???dours on you.
That youth's a rare Courtier, rain odours, well.
My matter hath no voice Lady, but to your own most pregnant and vouchsafed ear.
Odours, pregnant, and vouchsafed: Isle get 'em all three already.
Let the Garden door be shut, and leave me to my hearing. Give me your hand sir.
My duty Madam, and most humble service???
What is your name?
Cesario is your servants name, fair Princess.
My servant sir? It was never merry world, Since lowly feigning was called complement: y' are servant to the Count Orsino youth.
And he is yours, and his must needs be yours: your servants servant, is your servant Madam.
For him, I think not on him: for his thoughts,
Would they were blanks, rather then filled with me.
Madam, I come to whet your gentle thoughts
On his behalf.
O by your leave I pray you.
I bad you never speak again of him;
But would you undertake another suite
I had rather hear you, to solicit that,
Then Music from the spheres.
Dear Lady.
Give me leave, beseech you: I did send,
After the last enchantment you did hear,
A Ring in chase of you. So did I abuse
My self, my servant, and I fear me you:
Under your hard construction must I sit,
To force that on you in a shameful cunning
Which you knew none of yours. What might you think?
Have you not set mine Honour at the stake,
And baited it with all the vnmuzled thoughts
That tyrannous heart can think? To one of your receiving
Enough is shown, a Cyprus, not a bosom,
Hides my heart: so let me hear you speak.
I pity you.
That's a degree to love.
No not a grize: for tic a vulgar proof
That very oft we pity enemies.
Why then me thinks it is time to smile again:
O world, how apt the poor are to be proud?
If one should be a prey, how much the better
To fall before the Lion, then the Wolf?
The clock upbraids me with the waste of time:
Be not afraid good youth, I will not have you,
And yet when wit and youth is come to harvest,
your wife is like to reap a proper man:
There lies your way, due West.
Then Westward hoe:
Grace and good disposition attend your Ladyship:
you'll nothing Madam to my Lord, by me:
Stay: I prithee tell me what thou think of me?
That you do think you are not what you are.
If I think so, I think the same of you.
Then think you right: I am not what I am.
I would you were, as I would have you be.
Would it be better Madam, then I am?
I wish it might, for now I am your fool.
O what a deal of scorn, looks beautiful?
In the contempt and anger of his lip,
A murdrous guilt shows not it self more soon,
Then love that would seem hid: Loves night, is noon.
Cesario, by the Roses of the Spring,
By maid-hood, honour, truth, and every thing,
I love thee so, that maugre all thy pride,
Nor wit, nor reason, can my passion hide:
Do not extort thy reasons from this clause,
For that I woo, thou therefore hast no cause:
But rather reason thus, with reason fetter;
Love sought, is good: but given unsought, is better.
By innocence I swear, and by my youth,
I have one heart, one bosom, and one truth,
And that no woman has, nor never none
Shall mistress be of it, save I alone.
And so adieu good Madam, never more,
Will I my Masters tears to you deplore.
Yet come again: for thou perhaps may move
That heart which now abhors, to like his love.
No faith, Isle not stay a jot longer:
Thy reason dear venom, give thy reason.
You must need??? yield your reason, Sir An???drew?
Marry I saw your Niece do more favours to the Counts Serving-man, then ever she bestowed upon me: I saw't in th Orchard.
Did she see the while, old boy, tell me that.
As plain as I see you now.
This was a great argument of love in her toward you.
S'light; will you make an Ass o'me.
I will prove it legitimate sir, upon the Oaths of judgment, and reason.
And they have been grand Jury men, since before Noah was a Sailor.
She did show favour to the youth in your sight, only to exasperate you, to awake your dormouse valour, to put fire in your Heart, and brimstone in your Liver: you should then have accosted her, and with some excel???lent jests, fire-new from the mint, you should have banged the youth into dumbness: this was looked for at your hand, and this was b???ulkt: the double gilt of this oppor???tunitie you let time wash off??? and you are now sailed into the North of my Ladies opinion, where you will hang like an ysickle on a Dutchmans beard, unless you do re???deem it, by some laudable attempt, either of valour or policy.
And't be any way, it must be with Valour, for policy I hate: I had as lief be a Brownest, as a Politi???cian.
Why then build me thy fortunes upon the basis of valour. Challenge me the Counts youth to sight with him hurt him in eleven places, my Niece shall take note of it, and assure thy self, there is no loue-Broker in the world, can more prevail in mans commendation with woman, then report of valour.
There is no way but this sir Andrew.
Will either of you bear me a challenge to him?
???o, write it in a martial hand, be cursed and brief: it is no matter how witty, so it bee eloquent, and full of invention: taunt hi??? with the license of Ink: if thou thou'st him some thrice, it shall not be amiss, and as ma???ny Lies, as will lye in thy sheet of paper, although the sheet were big enough for the bed of Ware in Eng???land, set 'em down, go about it. Let there bee gaulle e???nough in thy ink, though thou write with a Goo???e-pen, no matter: about it.
Where shall I find you?
We'll call thee at the Cubiculo: Go.
This is a dear Manikin to you Sir Toby.
I have been dear to him lad, some two thousand strong, or so.
We shall have a rare Letter from him; but you'll not deliver it.
Never trust me then: and by all means stir on the youth to an answer. I think Oxen and waine-ropes cannot hale them together. For Andrew, if he were opened and you find so much blood in his Liver, as will clog the foot of a flea, Isle eat the rest of the anatomy.
And his opposite the youth bears in his visage no great presage of cruelty.
Look where the youngest Wren of mine comes.
If you desire the spleen, and will laugh your selves into stitches, follow me; yond gull Maluolio is tur???ned Heathen, a very Renegade; for there is no christian that means to be saved by believing rightly, can ever believe such impossible passages of grossenesse. Hoe's in yellow stockings.
And cross garter'd?
Most villainously: like a Pedant that keeps a School in th Church: I have dogged him like his murthe???rer. He does obey every point of the Letter that I dropped, to betray him: He does smile his face into more lines, then is in the new Map, with the augmentation of the Indies: you have not seen such a thing as tic: I can hard???lie forbear hue???ling things at him, I know my Lady will strike him: if she doe, he will smile, and take it for a great favour.
Come bring vs, bring vs where he is.
I would not by my will have troubled you,
But since you make your pleasure of your pains,
I will no further chide you.
I could not stay behind you: my desire
(More sharpe then filed steel) did spur me forth,
And not all love to see you (though so much
As might have drawn one to a longer voyage)
But jealousy, what might befall your rrauell,
Being skilless in these parts: which to a stranger,
Unguided, and vnfriended, often prove
Rough, and vnhospitable. My willing love,
The rather by these arguments of fear
Set forth in your pursuit.
My kind Anthonio,
I can no other answer make, but thanks,
And thanks: and ever oft good turns,
Are shuffled off with such vncurrant pay:
But were my worth, as is my conscience firm,
You should find better dealing: what's to do?
Shall we go see the relics of this Town?
To morrow sir, best first go see your Lodging?
I am not weary, and it is long to night
I pray you let vs satisfy our eyes
With the memorials, and the things of fame
That do renown this City.
Would youl'd pardon me:
I do not without danger walk these streets.
Once in a sea-fight against the Count his galleys,
I did some service, of such note indeed,
That were I tan here, it would scarce be answered.
Belike you slew great number of his people.
Th offence is not of such a bloody nature,
Albeit the quality of the time, and quarrel
Might well have given vs bloody argument:
It might have since been answered in repaying
What we took from them, which for Traffiques sake
Most of our City did. Only my self stood out,
For which if I be lapsed in this place
I shall pay dear.
Do not then walk too open.
It doth not fit me: hold sir, here's my purse,
In the South Suburbs at the Elephant
Is best to lodge: I will bespeak our diet,
Whiles you beguile the time, and feed your knowledge
With viewing of the Town, there shall you have me.
Why I your purse?
Happily your eye shall light upon some toy
You have desire to purchase: and your store
I think is not for idle Markets, sir.
Isle be your purse-bearer, and leave you
For an hour.
To the Elephant.
I do remember.
I have sent after him, he says he will come:
How shall I feast him? What bestow of him?
For youth is bought more oft, then begged, or borrowed.
I speak too loud: Whore's Maluolio, he is sad, and civil,
And suites well for a servant with my fortunes,
Where is Maluolio?
He's coming Madame:
But in very strange manner. He is sure possessed Madam.
Why what's the matter, does he rave?
No Madam, he does nothing but smile: your La???dyship were best to have some guard about you, if hee come, for sure the man is tainted in's wits.
Go call him hither.
I am as mad as hee,
If sad and merry madness equal bee.
How now Maluolio?
Sweet Lady, ho, ho.
Smile thou? I sent for thee upon a sad occasion.
Sad Lady, I could be sad:
This does make some obstruction in the blood:
This crosse-gartering, but what of that?
If it please the eye of one, it is with me as the very true
Sonnet is: Please one, and please all.
Why how doest thou man?
What is the matter with thee?
Not black in my mind, though yellow in my legs: It did come to his hands, and Commands shall be executed. I think we doe know the sweet Roman hand.
Wilt thou go to bed Maluolio?
To bed? I sweet heart, and Isle come to thee.
God comfort thee: Why dost thou smile so, and kiss thy hand so oft?
How do you Maluolio?
At your request:
Yes Nightingales answer Daws.
Why appear you with this ridiculous bold???ness before my Lady.
Be not afraid of greatness: it was well writ.
What meanst thou by that Maluolio?
Some are borne great.
Ha?
Some achieve greatness.
What say thou?
And some have greatness thrust upon them.
Heaven restore thee.
Remember who commended thy yellow stock???ings.
Thy yellow stockings?
And wished to see thee cross garter'd.
Cross garter'd?
Go too, thou art made, if thou desire to be so.
Am I made?
If not, let me see thee a servant still.
Why this is very Midsommer madness.
Madame, the young Gentleman of the Count Orsino's is returned, I could hardly entreat him back: he attends your Ladyships pleasure.
Isle come to him.
Good Maria, let this fellow be look???d too. Whore's my Cosine Toby, let some of my people have a special care of him, I would not have him miscarry for the half of my Dowry.
Oh ho, do you come near me now: no worse man then sir Toby to look to me. This concurs direct???lie with the Letter, she sends him on purpose, that I may appear stubborn to him: for she incites me to that in the Letter. Cast thy humble slough says she: be oppo???site with a Kinsman, surly with servants, let thy tongue langer with arguments of state, put thy self into the trick of singularity: and consequently sets down the manner how: as a sad face, a reverend carriage, a slow tongue, in the habit of some Sir of note, and so forth. I have lymde her, but it is Ioues doing, and Jove make me thankful. And when she went away now, let this Fell???low be looked too: Fellow? not Maluolio, nor after my degree, but Fellow. Why every thing adheres together, that no dram of a scruple, no scruple of a scruple, no obstacle, no incredulous or unsafe circumstance: What can be said? Nothing that can be, can come between me, and the full prospect of my hopes. Well Jove, not I, is the doer of this, and he is to be thanked.
Which way is hee in the name of sanctity. If all the devils of hell be drawn in little, and Legion himself possessed him, yet Isle speak to him.
Here he is, here he is: how first with you sir?
How first with you man?
Go off, I discard you: let me enjoy my private: go off.
Lo, how hollow the s???end speaks within him; did not I tell you? Sir Toby, my Lady prays you to have a care of him.
Ah ha, does she so?
Go too, go too: peace, peace, wee must deal gently with him: Let me alone. How do you Maluolio? How first with you? What man, defy the devil: consider, he's an enemy to mankind.
Do you know what you say?
La you, and you speak ill of the devil, how he takes it at heart Pray God he be not bewitched.
Carry his water to the wise woman.
Marry and it shall be done to morrow morning if I live. My Lady would not loose him for more then isle say.
How now mistress?
Oh Lord.
Prithee hold thy peace, this is not the way: Doe you not see you move him? Let me alone with him.
No way but gentleness, gently, gently: the Fiend is rough, and will not be roughly used.
Why how now my bawcock? how dost you chuck?
Sir.
I biddy, come with me. What man, tic not for gravity to play at cherry pit with satan Hang him foul Col???i???r.
Get him to say his prayers, good sir Toby get him to pray.
My prayers Minx.
No I warrant you, he will not hear of godly???ness.
Go hang your selves all: you are idle shallow things, I am not of your element, you shall know more hereafter.
First possible?
If this were plaid upon a stage now, I could con???damn it as an improbable fiction.
His very genius hath taken the infection of the device man.
Nay pursue him now, least the device take ayre, and taint.
Why we shall make him mad indeed.
The house will be the quieter.
Come, we'll have him in a dark room &amp; bound. My Niece is already in the belief that he's mad: we may carry it thus for our pleasure, and his penance, till our ve???rye pastime tyred out of breath, prompt vs to have mercy on him: at which time, we will bring the device to the bar and crown thee for a finder of madmen: but see, but see.
More matter for a May morning.
Heere's the Challenge, read it: I warrant there's vinegar and pepper in it.
First so saucy?
I, first? I warrant him: do but read.
Give me.
Youth, whatsoever thou art, thou art but a scurvy fellow.
Good, and valiant.
Wonder not, nor admire not in thy mind why I doe call thee so, for I will show thee no reason for it.
A good note, that keeps you from the blow of ye Law
Thou come to the Lady Oliuia, and in my sight she uses thee kindly: but thou lie in thy throat, that is not the matter I challenge thee for.
Very brief, and to exceeding good sence-lesse.
I will way-lay thee going home, where if it be thy chance to kill me.
Good.
Thou kilst me like a rogue and a villain.
Still you keep of th windy side of the Law: good.
Fartheewell, and God have mercy upon one of our souls. He may have mercy upon mine, but my hope is better, and so look to thy self. Thy friend as thou uses him, &amp; thy sworn enemy, Andrew Aguecheek.
If this Letter move him not, his legs cannot:
Isle gived him.
You may have very sit occasion fot't: he is now in some commerce with my Lady, and will by and by depart.
Go sir Andrew: scout me for him at the corner of the Orchard like a bum-bailiff: so soon as ever thou see him, draw, and as thou draw, swear horrible: for ???t comes to pass oft, that a terrible oath, with a swagge???ring accent sharply twanged off, gives manhood more approbation, then ever proof it self would have earned him. Away.
Nay let me alone for swearing.
Now will not I deliver his Letter: for the behaui???our of the young Gentleman, gives him out to be of good capacity, and breeding: his employment between his Lord and my Niece, confirms no less. Therefore, this Letter being so excellently ignorant, will breed no terror in the youth: he will find it comes from a Clodde-pole. But sir, I will deliver his Challenge by word of mouth; set upon Aguecheek a notable report of valour, and drive the Gentleman (as I know his youth will aptly receive it) into a most hideous opinion of his rage, skill, fury, and impetuosity. This will so fright them both, that they will kill one another by the look, like Cockatrices.
Here he comes with your Niece, give them way till he take leave, and presently after him.
I will meditate the while upon some horrid message for a Challenge.
I have said too much unto a hart of stone,
And laid mine honour too vnchary on it:
There's something in me that reproues my fault:
But such a head-strong potent fault it is,
That it but mocks reproof.
With the same hauiour that your passion bears,
Goes on my Masters griefs.
Here, wear this Jewel for me, tic my picture:
Refuse it not, it hath no tongue, to vex you:
And I beseech you come again to morrow.
What shall you ask of me that Isle deny,
That honour (saved) may upon asking give.
Nothing but this, your true love for my master.
How with mine honour may I give him that,
Which I have given to you.
I will acquit you.
Well??? come again to morrow: far-thee-well,
A Fiend like thee might bear my soul to hell.
Gentleman, God save thee.
And you sir.
That defence thou hast, betake the too't: of what nature the wrongs are thou hast done him, I know not: but thy interceptor full of despite, bloody as the Hun???la, attends thee at the Orchard end: dismount thy tucke, be yare in thy preparation, for thy assailant is quick, skill???full, and deadly.
You mistake sir I am sure, no man hath any quar???rell to me: my remembrance is very free and clear from any image of offence done to any man.
You'll find it otherwise I assure you: therefore, if you hold your life at any price, betake you to your guard: for your opposite hath in him what youth, strength, skill, and wrath, can furnish man withal.
I pray you sir what is he?
He is knight dubbed with vnhatch'd Rapier, and on carpet consideration, but he is a devil in private brawl, souls and bodies hath he divorced three, and his incense???meant at this moment is so implacable, that satisfaction can be none, but by pangs of death and sepulchre: Hob, nob, is his word: gived or take it.
I will return again into the house, and desire some conduct of the Lady. I am no fighter, I have heard of some kind of men, that put quarrels purposely on o???theirs, to taste their valour: belike this is a man of that quirk.
Sir, no: his indignation derives it self out of a ve???rye competent injury, therefore get you on, and give him his desire. Back you shall not to the house, unless you undertake that with me, which with as much safety you might answer him: therefore on, or strip your sword stark naked: for meddle you must that's certain, or for???swear to wear iron about you.
This is as uncivil as strange. I beseech you doe me this courteous office, as to know of the Knight what my offence to him is: it is something of my negligence, nothing of my purpose.
I will doe so. Seignior Fabian, stay you by this Gentleman, till my return.
Pray you sir, do you know of this matter?
I know the knight is incensed against you, even to a mortal arbitrament, but nothing of the circumstance more.
I beseech you what manner of man is he?
Nothing of that wonderful promise to read him by his form, as you are like to find him in the proof of his valour. He is indeed sir, the most skilful, bloody, &amp; fatal opposite that you could possibly have found in any part of Illyria: will you walk towards him, I will make your peace with him, if I can.
I shall bee much bound to you for it: I am one, that had rather go with sir Priest, then sir knight: I care not who knows so much of my mettle.
Why man hee???s a very devil, I have not seen such a firago: I had a pass with him, rapier, scabbard, and all: and he gives me the stuck in with such a mortal motion that it is inevitable: and on the answer, he pays you as surely, as your feet hits the ground they step on. They say, he has bin Fencer to the Sophie.
Pox on it, Isle not meddle with him.
I but he will not now be pacified,
Fabian can scarce hold him yonder.
Plague on it, and I thought he had been valiant, and so cunning in Fence, I'd have seen him damned ere I'd have challenged him. Let him let the matter slip, and Isle give him my horse, gray Copilot.
Isle make the motion: stand here, make a good show on it, this shall end without the perdition of souls, marry Isle ride your horse as well as I ride you.
I have his horse to take up the quarrel, I have persuaded him the youths a devil.
He is as horribly conceited of him: and pants, &amp; looks pale, as if a Bear were at his heals.
There's no remedy sir, he will fight with you for's oath sake: marry hee hath better bethought him of his quarrel, and hee finds that now scarce to bee worth tal???king of: therefore draw for the supportance of his vow, he protests he will not hurt you.
Pray God defend me: a little thing would make me tell them how much I lack of a man.
Give ground if you see him furious.
Come sir Andrew, there's no remedy, the Gen???tleman will for his honours sake have one bowt with you: he cannot by the Duello avoid it: but hee has promised me, as he is a Gentleman and a Soldier, he will not hurt you. Come on, too't.
Pray God he keep his oath.
I do assure you tic against my will.
Put up your sword: if this young Gentleman
Have done offence, I take the fault on me:
If you offend him, I for him defy you.
You sir? Why, what are you?
One sir, that for his love dares yet do more
Then you have heard him brag to you he will.
Nay, if you be an vndertaker, I am for you.
O good sir Toby hold: here come the Officers.
Isle be with you anon.
Pray sir, put your sword up if you please.
Marry will I sir: and for that I promised you Isle be as good as my word. Hee will bear you easily, and rains well.
This is the man, do thy Office.
Anthonio, I arrest thee at the suit of Count Orsino
You do mistake me sir.
No sir, no jot: I know your favour well:
Though now you have no sea-cap on your head:
Take him away, he knows I know him well.
I must obey. This comes with seeking you:
But there's no remedy, I shall answer it:
What will you do: now my necessity
Makes me to ask you for my purse. It grieves me
Much more, for what I cannot do for you,
Then what befalls my self: you stand amazed,
But be of comfort.
Come sir away.
I must entreat of you some of that money.
What money sir?
For the fair kindness you have showed me here,
And part being prompted by your present trouble,
Out of my lean and low ability
Isle lend you some???hinge: my having is not much,
Isle make division of my present with you:
Hold, there's half my Coffer.
Will you deny me now,
First possible that my deserts to you
Can lack persuasion. Do not tempt my misery,
Least that it make me so unsound a man
As to upbraid you with those kindnesses
That I have done for you.
I know of none,
Nor know I you by voice, or any feature:
I hate ingratitude more in a man,
Then lying, vainness, babbling drunkenness,
Or any taint of vice, whose strong corruption
Inhabits our frail blood.
Oh heavens themselves.
Come sir, I pray you go.
Let me speak a little. This youth that you see here,
I snatched one half out of the jaws of death,
Relieved him with such sanctity of Jove;
And to his image, which me thought did promise
Most venerable worth, did I devotion.
What's that to vs, the time goes by: Away.
But oh, how wild an idol proves this God:
Thou hast Sebastian done good feature, shame.
In Nature, there's no blemish but the mind:
None can be called deformed, but the unkind.
Virtue is beauty, but the beauteous evil
Are empty trunks, ore-flourish'd by the devil.
The man grows mad, away with him:
Come, come sir.
Lead me on.
Me thinks his words do from such passion fly
That he believes himself, so do not I:
Prove true imagination, oh prove true,
That I dear brother, be now tan for you.
Come hither Knight, come hither Fabian: Weel whisper ore a couplet or two of most sage saws.
He named Sebastian: I my brother know
Yet living in my glass: even such, and so
In favour was my Brother, and he went
Still in this fashion, colour, ornament,
For him I imitate: Oh if it prove,
Tempests are kind, and salt waives fresh in love.
A very dishonest paltry boy, and more a coward then a Hare, his dishonesty appears, in leaving his friend here in necessity, and denying him: and for his coward???ship ask Fabian.
A Coward, a most devout Coward, religious in it.
Slid Isle after him again, and beat him.
Do, cuff him soundly, but never draw thy sword
And I do not.
Come, let's see the event.
I dare lay any money, twill be nothing yet.
Will you make me believe, that I am not sent for you?
Go too, go too, thou art a foolish fellow,
Let me be clear of thee.
Well held our in faith: No, I do not know you, nor I am not sent to you by my Lady, to bid you come speak with her: nor your name is not Master C???sario, nor this is not my nose neither: Nothing that is so, is so.
I prithee vent thy folly some-where else, thou know not me.
Vent my folly: He has heard that word of some great man, and now applies it to a fool. Vent my foal???lie: I am afraid this great lubber the World will prove a Cockney: I prithee now vngird thy strangeness, and tell me what I shall vent to my Lady? Shall I vent to his that thou art coming?
I prithee foolish greek depart from me, there's money for thee, if you tarry longer, I shall give worse payment.
By my troth thou hast an open hand: these Wise???men that give fools money, get themselves a good re???port, after fourteen years purchase.
Now sir, have I met you again: ther's for you.
Why there's for thee, and there, and there,
Are all the people mad?
Hold sir, or Isle throw your dagger ore the house.
This will I tell my Lady straight, I would not be in some of your coats for two pence.
Come on sir, hold.
Nay let him alone, Isle go another way to work with him: Isle have an action of Battery against him, if there be any law in Illyria: though I stroke him first, yet it's no matter for that.
Let go thy hand.
Come sir, I will not let you go. Come my young soldier put up your iron: you are well fleshed: Come on.
I will be free from thee. What would you now?
If thou dare tempt me further, draw thy sword.
What, what? Nay then I must have an Ounce or two of this malapert blood from you.
Hold Toby, on thy life I charge thee hold.
Madam.
Will it be ever thus? Ungracious wretch,
Fit for the Mountains, and the barbarous Caves,
Where manners ne'er were preached: out of my sight.
Be not offended, dear Cesario:
Rudesbey be gone. I prithee gentle friend,
Let thy fair wisdom, not thy passion sway
In this uncivil, and unjust extent
Against thy peace. Go with me to my house,
And hear thou there how many fruitless pranks
This Ruffian hath botched up, that thou thereby
May smile at this: Thou shalt not choose but go:
Do not deny, beshrew his soul for me,
He started one poor heart of mine, in thee.
What relish is in this? How runs the stream?
Or I am mad, or else this is a dream:
Let fancy still my sense in Lethe sleep,
If it be thus to dream, still let me sleep.
Nay come I prithee, would thoud'st be ruled by me
Madam, I will.
O say so, and so be.
Nay, I prithee put on this gown, &amp; this beard, make him believe thou art sir Topas the Curate, doe it quickly. Isle call sir Toby the whilst.
Well, Isle put it on, and I will dissemble my self in it, and I would I were the first that ever dissembled in
such a gown. I am not tall enough to become the function well, nor lean enough to bee thought a good Student: but to be said an honest man and a good house???keeper goes as fairly, as to say, a careful man, &amp; a great scholar. The Competitors enter.
Jove bless thee M. Parson.
Bonos dies sir Toby: for as the old hermit of Prig that never saw pen and ink, very wittily said to a Niece of King Gorbodacke, that that is, is: so I being M. Parson, am M. Parson; for what is that, but that? and is, but is?
To him ???r Topas.
What hoe, I say, Peace in this prison.
The knave counterfeits well: a good knave.
Who calls there?
Sir Topas the Curate, who comes to visit Maluo???leo the Lunatic.
Sir Topas, sir Topas, good sir Topas go to my Lady.
Out hyperbolical fiend, how vex thou this man? Talk thou nothing but of Ladies?
Well said M. Parson.
Sir Topas, never was man thus wronged, good sir Topas do not think I am mad: they have laid me here in hideous darkness.
Fie, thou dishonest satan: I call thee by the most modest terms, for I am one of those gentle ones, that will use the devil himself with courtesy: say thou that house is dark?
As hell sir Topas.
Why it hath bay Windows transparent as bari???cadoes, and the clear stores toward the South north, are as lustrous as Ebony: and yet complain thou of obe???struction?
I am not mad sir Topas, I say to you this house is dark.
Madman thou err: I say there is no darkness but ignorance, in which thou art more puzzled then the Egyptians in their fog.
I say this house is as dark as Ignorance, though Ignorance were as dark as hell; and I say there was no???for man thus abused, I am no more mad then you are, make the trial of it in any constant question.
What is the opinion of Pythagoras concerning Wilde-fowle?
That the soul of our grandam, might happily inhabit a bird.
What think thou of his opinion?
I think nobly of the soul, and no way approve his opinion.
Fare thee well: remain thou still in darkness, thou shalt hold the opinion of Pythagoras, ere I will allow of thy wits, and fear to kill a Woodcock, lest thou dis???possess the soul of thy grandam. Fare thee well.
Sir Topas, sir Topas.
My most exquisite sir Topas.
Nay I am for all waters.
Thou might have done this without thy berd and gown, he sees thee not.
To him in thine own voice, and bring me word how thou findst him: I would we were well rid of this knavery. If he may bee conveniently delivered, I would he were, for I am now so far in offence with my Niece, that I cannot pursue with any safety this sport the up???shot. Come by and by to my Chamber.
Hey Robin, jolly Robin, tell me how thy Lady does.
Fool.
My Lady is unkind, party.
Fool.
Alas why is she so?
Fool, I say.
She loves another. Who calls, ha?
Good fool, as ever thou wilt deserve well at my hand, help me to a Candle, and pen, ink, and paper: as I am a Gentleman, I will live to bee thankful to thee for it.
M. Maluolio?
I good Fool.
Alas sir, how fell you besides your five wits?
Fool, there was never man so notoriously a???bus'd: I am as well in my wits (fool) as thou art.
But as well: then you are mad indeed, if you be no better in your wits then a fool.
They have here propertied me: keep me in darkness, send Ministers to me, Asses, and doe all they can to face me out of my wits.
Advise you what you say: the Minister is here. Maluolio, Maluolio, thy wits the heavens restore: en???devour thy self to sleep, and leave thy vain bible babble.
Sir Topas.
Maintain no words with him good fellow.
Who I sir, not I sir. God buy you good sir Topas: Mar???rye Amen. I will sir, I will.
Fool, fool, fool I say.
Alas sir be patient. What say you sir, I am shent for speaking to you.
Good fool, help me to some light, and some paper, I tell thee I am as well in my wits, as any man in Illyria.
Well-a-day, that you were sir.
By this hand I am: good fool, some ink, pa???per, and light: and convey what I will set down to my Lady: it shall advantage thee more, then ever the bea???ring of Letter did.
I will help you too't. But tel me true, are you not mad indeed, or do you but counterfeit.
Believe me I am not, I tell thee true.
Nay, Isle ne'er believe a madman till I see his brains
I will fetch you light, and paper, and ink.
Fool, Isle requite it in the highest degree:
I prithee be gone.
I am gone sir, and anon sir,
Isle be with you again:
In a trice, like to the old vice,
your need to sustain.
Who with dagger of lath, in his rage and his wrath,
cries ah ha, to the devil:
Like a mad lad, pair thy nails dad,
Adieu good man devil.
This is the ayre, that is the glorious Sun,
This pearl she gave me, I do feel it, and see it,
And though tic wonder that enwraps me thus,
Yet it is not madness. Whore's Anthonio then,
I could not find him at the Elephant,
Yet there he was, and there I found this credit,
That he did range the town to seek me out,
His council now might do me golden service,
For though my soul disputes well with my sense,
That this may be some error, but no madness,
Yet doth this accident and flood of Fortune,
So far exceed all instance, all discourse,
That I am ready to distrust mine eyes,
And wrangle with my reason that persuades me
To any other trust, but that I am mad,
Or else the Ladies mad; yet if it were so,
She could not sway her house, command her followers,
Take, and give back affairs, and their dispatch,
With such a smooth, discreet, and stable bearing
As I perceive she do's: there's something in it
That is deceiueable. But here the Lady comes.
Blame not this haste of mine: if you mean well
Now go with me, and with this holy man
Into the Chantry by: there before him,
And underneath that consecrated roof,
Plight me the full assurance of your faith,
That my most jealous, and too doubtful soul
May live at peace. He shall conceal it,
Whiles you are willing it shall come to note,
What time we will our celebration keep
According to my birth, what do you say?
Isle follow this good man, and go with you,
And having sworn truth, ever will be true.
Then lead the way good father, &amp; heavens so shine,
That they may fairly note this act of mine.
Now as thou love me, let me see his Letter.
Good M. Fabian, grant me another request.
Any thing.
Do not desire to see this Letter.
This is to give a dog, and in recompense desire my dog again.
Belong you to the Lady Oliuia, friends?
I sir, we are some of her trappings.
I know thee well: how doest thou my good Fellow?
Truly sir, the better for my foes, and the worse for my friends.
Just the contrary: the better for thy friends.
No sir, the worse.
How can that be?
Marry sir, they praise me, and make an ass of me, now my foes tell me plainly, I am an Ass: so that by my foes sir, I profit in the knowledge of my self, and by my friends I am abused: so that conclusions to be as kisses, if your four negatives make your two affirmatives, why then the worse for my friends, and the better for my foes.
Why this is excellent.
By my troth sir, no: though it please you to be one of my friends.
Thou shalt not be the worse for me, there's gold.
But that it would be double dealing sir, I would you could make it another.
O you give me ill counsel.
Put your grace in your pocket sir, for this once, and let your flesh and blood obey it.
Well, I will be so much a sinner to be a double dealer: there's another.
Primo, secundo, tertio, is a good play, and the old saying is, the third pays for all: the triplex sir, is a good tripping measure, or the belles of S. Bennet sir, may put you in mind, one, two, three.
You can fool no more money out of me at this throw: if you will let your Lady know I am here to speak with her, and bring her along with you, it may awake my bounty further.
Marry sir, lullaby to your bounty till I come a???gen. I go sir, but I would not have you to think, that my desire of having is the sin of covetousness: but as you say sir, let your bounty take a nap, I will awake it anon.
Here comes the man sir, that did rescue me.
That face of his I do remember well,
yet when I saw it last, it was besmeared
As black as Vulcan, in the smoke of war:
A bawbling Vessel was he Captain of,
For shallow draught and bulk vnprizable,
With which such scathfull grapple did he make,
With the most noble bottom of our Fleet,
That very envy, and the tongue of loss
Cried fame and honour on him: What's the matter?
Orsino, this is that Anthonio
That took the Phoenix, and her fraught from Candy,
And this is he that did the Tiger board,
When your young Nephew Titus lost his leg;
Here in the streets, desperate of shame and state,
In private brabble did we apprehend him.
He did me kindness sir, drew on my side,
But in conclusion put strange speech upon me,
I know not what it was, but distraction.
Notable Pirate, thou salt-water Thief,
What foolish boldness brought thee to their mercies,
Whom thou in terms so bloody, and so dear
Hast made thine enemies?
Orsino: Noble sir,
Be pleased that I shake off these names you give me:
Anthonio never yet was Thief, or Pirate,
Though I confess, on base and ground enough
Orsino's enemy. A witchcraft drew me hither:
That most ungrateful boy there by your side,
From the rude seas enraged and foamy mouth
Did I redeem: a wrack past hope he was:
His life I gave him, and did thereto add
My love without retention, or restraint,
All his in dedication. For his sake,
Did I expose my self (pure for his love)
Into the danger of this adverse Town,
Drew to defend him, when he was beset:
Where being apprehended, his false cunning
(Not meaning to partake with me in danger)
Taught him to face me out of his acquaintance,
And grew a twenty years removed thing
While one would wink: denied me mine own purse,
Which I had recommended to his use,
Not half an hour before.
How can this be?
When came he to this Town?
To day my Lord: and for three months before,
No interim, not a minutes vacancy,
Both day and night did we keep company.
Here comes the Countess, now heaven walks on earth:
But for thee fellow, fellow thy words are madness,
Three months this youth hath tended upon me,
But more of that anon. Take him aside.
What would my Lord, but that he may not have,
Wherein Oliuia may seem serviceable?
Cesario, you do not keep promise with me.
Madam:
Gracious Oliuia.
What do you say Cesario? Good my Lord.
My Lord would speak, my duty hushes me.
If it be ought to the old tune my Lord,
It is as fat and fulsome to mine ear
As howling after Music.
Still so cruel?
Still so constant Lord.
What to perverseness? you uncivil Lady
To whose ingrate, and vnauspicious Altars
My soul the faithfull'st offerings have breathed out
That ere devotion tendered. What shall I do?
Even what it please my Lord, that shall become him
Why should I not, (had I the heart to do it)
Like to the Egyptian thief, at point of death
Kill what I love: (a savage jealousy,
That sometime savours nobly) but hear me this:
Since you to non-regardance cast my faith,
And that I partly know the instrument
That screwes me from my true place in your favour:
Live you the Marble-brested Tyrant still.
But this your Minion, whom I know you love,
And whom, by heaven I swear, I tender dearly,
Him will I tear out of that cruel eye,
Where he sits crowned in his masters spite.
Come boy with me, my thoughts are ripe in mischief:
Isle sacrifice the Lamb that I do love,
To spite a Ravens heart within a Dove.
And I most jocund, apt, and willingly,
To do you rest, a thousand deaths would dye.
Where goes Cesario?
After him I love,
More then I love these eyes, more then my life,
More by all mores, then ere I shall love wife.
If I do feign, you witnesses aboue
Punish my life, for tainting of my love.
Aye me detested, how am I beguiled?
Who does beguile you? who does do you wrong?
Hast thou forgot thy self? Is it so long?
Call forth the holy Father.
Come, away.
Whether my Lord? Cesario, Husband, stay.
Husband?
I Husband. Can he that deny?
Her husband, sirrah?
No my Lord, not I.
Alas, it is the baseness of thy fear,
That makes thee strangle thy propriety:
Fear not Cesario, take thy fortunes up,
Be that thou know thou art, and then thou art
As great as that thou fear.
O welcome Father:
Father, I charge thee by thy reverence
Here to unfold, though lately we intended
To keep in darkness, what occasion now
Reveals before it is ripe: what thou dost know
Hath newly past, between this youth, and me.
A Contract of eternal bond of love,
Confirmed by mutual jointer of your hands,
Attested by the holy close of lips,
Strengthened by enterchangement of your rings,
And all the Ceremony of this compact
Sealed in my function, by my testimony:
Since when, my watch hath told me, toward my grave
I have travailed but two hours.
O thou dissembling Cub: what wilt thou be
When time hath sowed a grizzle on thy case?
Or will not else thy craft so quickly grow,
That thine own trip shall be thine overthrow:
Farewell, and take her, but direct thy feet,
Where thou, and I (henceforth) may never meet.
My Lord, I do protest.
O do not swear,
Hold little faith, though thou hast too much fear.
For the love of God a Surgeon, send one pre???sently to sir Toby.
What's the matter?
He has broke my head across, and has given Sir Toby a bloody Coxcomb too: for the love of God your help, I had rather then forty pound I were at home.
Who has done this sir Andrew?
The Counts Gentleman, one Cesario: we took him for a Coward, but hoe's the very devil incardinate.
My Gentleman Cesario?
Odd's lifelings here he is: you broke my head for nothing, and that that I did, I was set on to do it by sir Toby.
Why do you speak to me, I never hurt you:
you drew your sword upon me without cause,
But I bespoke you fair, and hurt you not.
If a bloody coxcomb be a hurt, you have hurt me: I think you set nothing by a bloody Coxcomb. Here comes sir Toby halting, you shall hear more: but if he had not been in drink, hee would have tickel'd you other gates then he did.
How now Gentleman? how first with you?
That's all one, has hurt me, and there's the end on it:
Sot, did see Dicke Surgeon, sot?
O he's drunk sir Toby an hour agony: his eyes were set at eight in th morning.
Then he's a Rogue, and a posy measures panyn: I hate a drunken rogue.
Away with him? Who hath made this havoc with them?
Isle help you sir Toby, because we'll be dressed to???gether.
Will you help an Ass-head, and a coxcomb, &amp; a knave: a thin faced knave, a gull?
Get him to bed, and let his hurt be looked too.
I am sorry Madam I have hurt your kinsman:
But had it been the brother of my blood,
I must have done no less with wit and safety.
You throw a strange regard upon me, and by that
I do perceive it hath offended you:
Pardon me (sweet one) even for the vows
We made each other, but so late ago.
One face, one voice, one habit, and two persons,
A natural Perspective, that is, and is not.
Anthonio: O my dear Anthonio,
How have the hours racked, and tortured me,
Since I have lost thee?
Sebastian are you?
Fear thou that Anthonio?
How have you made division of your self,
An apple cleft in two, is not more twin
Then these two creatures. Which is Sebastian?
Most wonderful.
Do I stand there? I never had a brother:
Nor can there be that Deity in my nature
Of here, and every where. I had a sister,
Whom the blind waives and surges have devoured:
Of charity, what kin are you to me?
What Countryman? What name? What Parentage?
Of Mescaline: Sebastian was my Father,
Such a Sebastian was my brother too:
So went he suited to his watery tomb:
If spirits can assume both form and suite,
You come to fright vs.
A spirit I am indeed,
But am in that dimension grossly clad,
Which from the womb I did participate.
Were you a woman, a??? the rest goes even,
I should my tears let fall upon your cheek,
And say, thrice welcome drowned Viola.
My father had a moil upon his brow.
And so had mine.
And did that day when Viola from her birth
Had numbered thirteen years.
O that record is lively in my soul,
He finished indeed his mortal act
That day that made my sister thirteen years.
If nothing lets to make vs happy both,
But this my masculine usurped attire:
Do not embrace me, till each circumstance,
Of place, time, fortune, do co-here and jump
That I am Viola, which to confirm,
Isle bring you to a Captain in this Town,
Where lye my maiden weeds: by whose gentle help,
I was preserved to serve this Noble Count:
All the occurrence of my fortune since
Hath been between this Lady, and this Lord.
So comes it Lady, you have been mistook:
But Nature to her bias drew in that.
You would have bin contracted to a Maid,
Nor are you therein (by my life) deceived,
You are betrothed both to a maid and man.
Be not amazed, right noble is his blood:
If this be so, as yet the glass seems true,
I shall have share in this most happy wrack,
Boy, thou hast said to me a thousand times,
Thou never should love woman like to me.
And all those sayings, will I over swear,
And all those swearings keep as true in soul,
As doth that Orbit Continent, the fire,
That severs day ftom night.
Give me thy hand,
And let me see thee in thy women's weeds.
The Captain that did bring me first on shore
Hath my Maids garments: he upon some Action
Is now in durance, at Maluolio's suite,
A Gentleman, and follower of my Ladies.
He shall enlarge him: fetch Maluolio hither,
And yet alas, now I remember me,
They say poor Gentleman, he's much distract.
A most extracting frenzy of mine own
From my remembrance, clearly banished his.
How does he sirrah?
Truly Madam, he holds Beelzebub at the staves end as well as a man in his case may do: has here writ a letter to you, I should have giuen't you to day morning. But as a madmans Epistles are no Gospels, so it skills not much when they are delivered.
Open it, and read it.
Look then to be well edified, when the Fool delivers the Madman. By the Lord Madam.
How now, art thou mad?
No Madam, I do but read madness: and your Ladyship will have it as it ought to bee, you must allow Vox.
Prithee read in thy right wits.
So I do Madonna: but to read his right wits, is to read thus: therefore, perpend my Princess, and give ear.
Read it you, sirrah.
Reads. By the Lord Madam, you wrong me, and the world shall know it: Though you have put me into darkness, and given your drunken Cosine rule over me, yet have I the benefit of my senses as well as your Lady???ship. I have your own letter, that induced me to the semblance I put on; with the which I doubt not, but to do my self much right, or you much shame: think of me as you please. I leave my duty a little unthought of, and speak out of my injury.
Did he write this?
I Madame.
This savours not much of distraction.
See him delivered Fabian, bring him hither:
My Lord, so please you, these things further thought on,
To think me as well a sister, as a wife,
One day shall crown the alliance on it, so please you,
Here at my house, and at my proper cost.
Madam, I am most apt to embrace your offer:
Your Master quits you; and for your service done him,
So much against the mettle of your sex,
So far beneath your soft and tender breeding,
And since you called me Master, for so long:
Here is my hand, you shall from this time bee
your Masters Mistress.
A sister, you are she.
Is this the Madman?
I my Lord, this same: How now Maluolio?
Madam, you have done me wrong,
Notorious wrong.
Have I Maluolio? No.
Lady you have, pray you peruse that Letter.
You must not now deny it is your hand,
Write from it if you can, in hand, or phrase,
Or say, tic not your seal, not your invention:
You can say none of this. Well, grant it then,
And tell me in the modesty of honour,
Why you have given me such clear lights of favour,
Bad me come smiling, and crosse-garter'd to you,
To put on yellow stockings, and to frown
Upon sir Toby, and the lighter people:
And acting this in an obedient hope,
Why have you suffered me to be imprisoned,
Kept in a dark house, visited by the Priest,
And made the most notorious gecko and gull,
That ere invention plaid on? Tell me why?
Alas Maluolio, this is not my writing,
Though I confess much like the Character:
But out of question, tic Marries hand.
And now I do bethink me, it was she
First told me thou wast mad; then came in smiling,
And in such forms, which here were presupposed
Upon thee in the Letter: prithee be content,
This practice hath most shrewdly past upon thee:
But when we know the grounds, and authors of it,
Thou shalt be both the Plaintiff and the Judge
Of thine own cause.
Good Madam hear me speak,
And let no quarrel, nor no brawl to come,
Taint the condition of this present hour,
Which I have wondered at. In hope it shall not,
Most freely I confess my self, and Toby
Set this device against Maluolio here,
Upon some stubborn and uncourteous parts
We had conceived against him. Maria writ
The Letter, at sir Tobyes great importance,
In recompense whereof, he hath married her:
How with a sportful malice it was followed,
May rather pluck on laughter then revenge,
If that the injuries be justly weighed,
That have on both sides past.
Alas poor Fool, how have they baffel'd thee?
Why some are borne great, some achieve great???ness, and some have greatness thrown upon them. I was one sir, in this Interlude, one sir Topas sir, but that's all one: By the Lot Fool, I am not mad: but do you re???member, Madam, why laugh you at such a barren rascal, and you smile not he's gaged: and thus the whirlegigge of time, brings in his revenges.
Isle be revenged on the whole pack of you?
He hath been most notoriously abused.
Pursue him, and entreat him to a peace:
He hath not told vs of the Captain yet,
When that is known, and golden time convents
A solemn Combination shall be made
Of our dear souls. Mean time sweet sister,
We will not part from hence. Cesaerio come
(For so you shall be while you are a man:)
But when in other habits you are seen,
Orsino's Mistress, and his fancies Queen.
When that I was and a little tine boy, with hey, ho, the wind and the rain:
A foolish thing was but a toy, for the rain it rains every day.
But when I came to mans estate, with hey ho, &amp;c.
Against Knaves and Thieves men shut their gate, for the rain, &amp;c.
But when I came alas to wine, with hey ho, &amp;c.
By swaggering could I never thrive, for the rain, &amp;c.
But when I came unto my beds, with hey ho??? &amp;c.
With tospottes still had drunken heads, for the rain, &amp;c.
A great while ago the world begone, hey ho, &amp;c.
But that's all one, our Play is done, and we'll strive to please you every day.

OLd Iohn of Gaunt, time-honoured Lancaster,
Hast thou according to thy oath and band
Brought hither Henry Herford thy bold son:
Here to make good ye boisterous late appeal,
Which then our leisure would not let vs hear,
Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?
I have my Liege.
Tell me moreover, hast thou sounded him,
If he appeal the Duke on ancient malice,
Or worthily as a good subject should
On some known ground of treachery in him.
As near as I could sift him on that argument,
On some apparent danger seen in him,
Aimed at your Highness, no inveterate malice.
Then call them to our presence face to face,
And frowning brow to brow, our selves will hear
The accuser, and the accused, freely speak;
High stomach•d are they both, and full of ire,
In rage, deaf as the sea; hasty as fire.
Many years of happy days befall
My gracious Sovereign, my most loving Liege.
Each day still better others happiness,
Until the heavens envying earths good hap,
Add an immortal title to your Crown.
We thank you both, yet one but flatters vs,
As well appears by the cause you come,
Namely, to appeal each other of high treason.
Cousin of Hereford, what dost thou object
Against the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray?
First, heaven be the record to my speech,
In the devotion of a subjects love,
Tendering the precious safety of my Prince,
And free from other misbegotten hate,
Come I appealant to this Princely presence.
Now Thomas Mowbray do I turn to thee,
And mark my greeting well: for what I speak,
My body shall make good upon this earth,
Or my divine soul answer it in heaven.
Thou art a Traitor, and a Miscreant;
Too good to be so, and too bad to live,
Since the more fair and crystal is the sky,
The vglier seem the clouds that in it fly:
Once more, the more to aggravate the note,
With a foul Traitors name stuff I thy throat,
And wish (so please my Sovereign) ere I move,
What my tong speaks, my right drawn sword may prove
Let not my cold words here accuse my zeal:
It is not the trial of a Women's war,
The bitter clamour of two eager tongues,
Can arbitrate this cause betwixt vs twain:
The blood is hot that must be cooled for this.
Yet can I not of such tame patience boast,
As to be hushed, and nought at all to say.
First the fair reverence of your Highness curbs me,
From giving reins and spurs to my free speech,
Which else would post, until it had returned
These terms of treason, doubly down his throat.
Setting aside his high bloods royalty,
And let him be no Kinsman to my Liege,
I do defy him, and I spit at him,
Call him a slanderous Coward, and a Villain:
Which to maintain, I would allow him odds,
And meet him, were I tide to run afoot,
Even to the frozen ridges of the Alps,
Or any other ground inhabitable,
Where ever Englishman durst set his foot.
Mean time, let this defend my loyalty,
By all my hopes most falsely doth he lie.
Pale trembling Coward, there I throw my gage,
Disclaiming here the kindred of a King,
And lay aside my high bloods Royalty,
Which fear, not reverence makes thee to except.
If guilty dread hath left thee so much strength,
As to take up mine Honours pawn, then stoop.
By that, and all the rites of Knight-hood else,
Will I make good against thee arm to arm,
What I have spoken, or thou can devise.
I take it up, and by that sword I swear,
Which gently laid my Knight-hood on my shoulder,
Isle answer thee in any fair degree,
Or Chivalrous design of knightly trial:
And when I mount, alive may I not light,
If I be Traitor, or unjustly fight.
What doth our Cousin lay to Mowbraies charge?
It must be great that can inherit vs,
So much as of a thought of ill in him.
Look what I said, my life shall prove it true,
That Mowbray hath received eight thousand Nobles,
〈◊〉 •am of landings for your Highness Soldiers,
•e which he hath detained for lewd employments,
like a false Traitor, and inuirious Villain.
Besides I say, and will in battle prove,
Or here, or elsewhere to the furthest Verge
That ever was surveyed by English eye,
That all the Treasons for these eighteen years
Complotted, and contrived in this Land,
Fetched from false Mowbray their first head and spring▪
Further I say▪ and further will maintain
Upon his bad life, to make all this good.
That he did plot the Duke of Glousters death,
Suggest his soon believing adversaries,
And consequently, like a Traitor Coward,
Sluc'd out his innocent soul through streams of blood:
Which blood, like sacrificing Abels cries,
(Even from the toonglesse caverns of the earth)
To me for justice, and rough chastisement:
And by the glorious worth of my descent,
This arm shall do it, or this life be spent.
How high a pitch his resolution soars:
Thomas of Norfolk, what say thou to this?
Oh let my Sovereign turn away his face,
And bid his ears a little while be deaf,
Till I have told this slander of his blood,
How God and good men, hate so foul a liar.
Mowbray, impartial are our eyes and ears,
Were he my brother, nay our kingdoms heir,
As he is but my fathers brothers son;
Now by my Scepters awe, I make a vow,
Such neighbour-neerenesse to our sacred blood,
Should nothing privilege him, nor partialize
The vn-stooping firmness of my upright soul.
He is our subject (Mowbray) so art thou,
Free speech, and fearless, I to thee allow.
Then Bullingbrooke, as low as to thy heart,
Through the false passage of thy throat; thou lie:
Three parts of that receipt I had for Callice,
Disbursed I to his Highness soldiers;
The other part reserved I by consent,
For that my Sovereign Liege was in my debt,
Upon remainder of a dear Account,
Since last I went to France to fetch his Queen:
Now swallow down that Lye. For Glousters death,
I slew him not; but (to mine own disgrace)
Neglected my sworn duty in that case:
For you my noble Lord of Lancaster,
The honourable Father to my foe,
Once I did lay an ambush for your life,
A trespass that doth vex my grieved soul:
But ere I last received the Sacrament,
I did confess it, and exactly begged
Your Graces pardon, and I hope I had it.
This is my fault: as for the rest appealed,
It issues from the rancour of a Villain,
A recreant, and most degenerate Traitor,
Which in my self I boldly will defend,
And interchangeably hurl down my gage
Upon this ouer-weening Traitors foot,
To prove my self a loyal Gentleman,
Even in the best blood chambered in his bosom▪
In hast whereof, most heartily I pray
Your Highness to assign our Trial day.
Wrath-kindled Gentlemen be ruled by me:
Let's purge this choler without letting blood:
This we prescribe, though no Physician,
Deep malice makes too deep incision.
Forget, forgive, conclude, and be agreed▪
Our Doctors say, This is no time to bleed.
Good Uncle, let this end where it begun▪
We'll calm the Duke of Norfolk▪ you, your son.
To be a make-peace shall become my age,
Throw down (my son) the Duke of Norfolkes gage.
And Norfolk, throw down hi•
When Harris when Obedience bids,
Obedience bids I should not bid again.
Norfolk, throw down, we bid; there is no boot.
My self I throw (dread Sovereign) at thy foot.
My life thou shalt command, but not my shame,
The one my duty owes, but my fair name
Despite of death, that lives upon my grave
To dark dishonours use, thou shalt not have.
I am disgraced, impeached, and baffel'd here,
Pierced to the soul with slanders venomed spear:
The which no balm can cure, but his heart blood
Which breathed this poison.
Rage must be withstood:
Give me his gage: Lyons make Leopards tame.
Yea, but not change his spots: take but my sha•,
And I resign my gage▪ My dear, dear Lord,
The purest treasure mortal times afford
Is spotless reputation: that away,
Men are but gilded loame, or painted clay.
A Jewel in a ten times barred up Chest,
Is a bold spirit, in a loyal breast.
Mine Honour is my life; both grow in one:
Take Honour from me, and my life is done.
Then (dear my Liege) mine Honour let me try,
In that I live; and for that will I die.
Cousin, throw down your gage,
Do you begin.
Oh heaven defend my soul from such foul sin.
Shall I seem Crestfallen in my fathers sight,
Or with pale beggar-feare impeach my hight
Before this out-dar'd dastard? Ere my tongue,
Shall wound mine honour with such feeble wrong;
Or sound so base a parley: my teeth shall tear
The slavish motive of recanting fear.
And spit it bleeding in his high disgrace,
Where shame doth harbour, even in Mowbrayes face.
We were not borne to sue, but to command,
Which since we cannot do to make you friends,
Be ready, (as your lives shall answer it)
At Coventry, upon S. Lambert day:
There shall your swords and Lances arbitrate
The swelling difference of your settled hate:
Since we cannot atone you, you shall see
Justice design the Victors Chivalry.
Lord Marshall, command our Officers at Arms,
Be ready to direct these home Alarms.
Alas, the part I had in Glousters blood,
Doth more solicit me then your exclaims,
To stir against the Butchers of his life.
But since correction lies in those hands
Which made the fault that we cannot correct,
Put we our quarrel to the will of heaven,
Who when they see the hours ripe on earth,
Will reign hot vengeance on offenders heads.
Finds brotherhood in thee no sharper spur?
Hath love in thy old blood no living fire?
Edwards seven sons (whereof thy self art one)
Were as seven violles of his Sacred blood,
Or seven fair branches springing from one root:
Some of those seven are dried by natures course,
Some of those branches by the destinies cut:
But Thomas, my dear Lord, my life, my Glouster,
One Viol full of Edwards Sacred blood,
One flourishing branch of his most Royal root
Is cracked, and all the precious liquor spilt;
Is hacked down, and his summer leafes all voted
By Envies hand, and Murders bloody Axe.
Ah Gaunt! His blood was thine, that bed, that womb,
That mettle, that selfe-mould that fashioned thee,
Made him a man: and though thou liu'st, and breath,
Yet art thou slain in him: thou dost consent
In some large measure to thy Fathers death,
In that thou see thy wretched brother dye,
Who was the model of thy Fathers life.
Call it not patience (Gaunt) it is despair,
In suffering thus thy brother to be slaughtered,
Thou show the naked pathway to thy life,
Teaching sterne murder how to butcher thee:
That which in mean men we entitle patience
Is pale cold cowardice in noble breasts:
What shall I say, to safeguard thine own life,
The best way is to avenge my Glousters death.
Heavens is the quarrel: for heavens substitute
His Deputy anointed in his sight,
Hath cause his death, the which if wrongfully
Let heaven revenge: for I may never lift
An angry arm against his Minister.
Where then (alas may I) complaint my self?
To heaven, the widows Champion to defence
Why then I will: farewell old Gaunt.
Thou go to Coventry, there to behold
Our Cosine Herford, and fell Mowbray fight:
O sit my husbands wrongs on Herfords spear,
That it may enter butcher Mowbrayes breast:
Or if misfortune miss the first career,
Be Mowbrayes sins so heavy in his bosom,
That they may break his foaming Coursers back,
And throw the Rider headlong in the Lists,
A Gaytiffe recreant to my Cosine Herford:
Farewell old Gaunt, thy sometimes brothers wife
With her companion Grief, must end her life.
Sister farewell: I must to Coventry,
As much good stay with thee, as go with me.
Yet one word more: Grief bounds where it falls,
Not with the empty hollowness, but weight:
I take my leave, before I have begun,
For sorrow ends not, when it seems done.
Commend me to my brother Edmund York.
Lo, this is all: nay, yet depart not so,
Though this be all, do not so quickly go,
I shall remember more. Bid him, Oh, what?
With all good speed at Plashy visit me.
Alack, and what shall good old York there see
But empty lodgings, and unfurnished walls,
Vn-peopel'd Offices, untrodden stones?
And what hear there for welcome, but my groans?
Therefore commend me, let him not come there,
To seek out sorrow, that dwells every where:
Desolate, desolate will I hence, and dye,
The last leave of thee, takes my weeping eye.
My L. Aumerle, is Harry Herford armed.
Yea, at all points, and longs to enter in.
The Duke of Norfolk, sprightfully and bold,
Stays but the summons of the Appealants Trumpet.
Why then the Champions, are prepared, and stay
For nothing but his Majesties approach.
Marshall, demand of yonder Champion
The cause of his arrival here in Arms,
Ask him his name, and orderly proceed
To swear him in the justice of his cause.
In Gods name, and the Kings, say who you art,
And why thou come thus knightly clad in Arms?
Against what man thou come, and what's thy quarrel,
Speak truly on thy knighthood, and thine oath,
As so defend thee heaven, and thy valour.
My name is Tho. Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk,
Who hither comes engaged by my oath
(Which heaven defend a knight should violate)
Both to defend my loyalty and truth,
To God, my King, and his succeeding issue,
Against the Duke of Herford, that appeals me:
And by the grace of God, and this mine arm,
To prove him (in defending of my self)
A Traitor to my God, my King, and me,
And as I truly fight, defend me heaven.
Marshall: Ask yonder Knight in Arms,
Both who he is, and why he comes hither,
Thus placed in habiliments of war:
And formerly according to our Law
Depose him in the justice of his cause.
What is thy name? and wherefore come you hither
Before King Richard in his Royal Lists?
Against whom come thou? and what's thy quarrel?
Speak like a true Knight, so defend thee heaven.
Harry of Herford, Lancaster, and Derby,
Am I: who ready here do stand in Arms,
To prove by heavens grace, and my bodies valour,
In Lists, on Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk,
That he's a Traitor foul, and dangerous,
To God of heaven, King Richard, and to me,
And as I truly fight, defend me heaven.
On pain of death, no person be so bold,
Or daring hardy as to touch the Lists,
Except the Marshall, and such Officers
Appointed to direct these fair designs.
Lord Marshall, let me kiss my Sovereigns hand,
And bow my knee before his Majesty:
For Mowbray and my self are like two men,
That vow a long and weary pilgrimage,
Then let vs take a ceremonious leave
And lo•ing farewell of our several friends.
The Appealant in all duty greets your Highness,
And craves to kiss your hand, and take his leave.
We will descend, and fold him in our arms.
Cousin of Herford, as thy cause is just,
So be thy fortune in this Royal fight:
Farewell, my blood, which if to day thou shed,
Lament we may, but not revenge thee dead.
Oh let no noble eye profane a tear
For me, if I be gored with Mowbrayes spear:
As confident, as is the Falcons flight
Against a bird, do I with Mowbray fight.
My loving Lord, I take my leave of you,
Of you (my Noble Cousin) Lord Aumerle;
Not sick, although I have to do with death,
But lusty, young, and cheerely drawing breath.
Lo, as at English Feasts, so I regreete
The daintiest last, to make the end most sweet.
Oh thou the earthy author of my blood,
Whose youthful spirit in me regenerate,
Doth with a two-fold rigour lift me up
To reach at victory aboue my head,
Add proof unto mine Armour with thy prayers,
And with thy blessings steel my Lances point,
That it may enter Mowbrayes waxen Coat,
And few•nish new the name of Iohn a Gaunt,
Even in the lusty hauiour of his son.
Heaven in thy good cause make thee prosperous
Be swift like lightning in the execution,
And let thy blows doubly redoubled.
Fall like amazing thunder on the Cask
Of thy amazed pernicious enemy.
Rouse up thy youthful blood, be valiant, and live.
Mine innocence, and S. George to thrive.
How ever heaven or fortune cast my lot,
There lives, or dies, true to Kings Richards Throne,
A loyal, just, and upright Gentleman:
Never did Captive with a freer heart,
Cast off his chains of bondage, and embrace
His golden uncontrolled enfranchisement,
More then my dancing soul doth celebrate
This Feast of Battle, with mine Adversary.
Most mighty Liege, and my companion Peers,
Take from my mouth, the wish of happy years,
As gentle, and as iocond, as to jest,
Go I to fight: Truth, hath a quiet breast.
Farewell, my Lord, securely I espy
Virtue with Valour, couched in thine eye:
Order the trial Marshall, and begin.
Harry of Herford, Lancaster, and Derby,
Receive thy Lance, and heaven defend thy right.
Strong as a tower in hope, I cry Amen.
Go bear this Lance to Thomas D. of Norfolk.
Harry of Herford, Lancaster, and Derby,
Stands here for God, his Sovereign, and himself,
On pain to be found false, and recreant,
To prove the Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Mowbray,
A Traitor to his God, his King, and him,
And dares him to set forwards to the fight.
Here stands Tho: Mowbray Duke of Norfolk
On pain to be found false and recreant,
Both to defend himself, and to approve
Henry of Herford, Lancaster, and Derby,
To God, his Sovereign, and to him disloyal:
Courageously, and with a free desire
Attending but the signal to begin.
Sound Trumpets, and set forward Combatants:
Stay, the King hath thrown his Warder down.
Let them lay by their Helmets &amp; their Spears,
And both return back to their Chairs again:
Withdraw with vs, and let the Trumpets sound,
While we return these Dukes what we decree.
Draw near and list
What with our Council we have done.
For that our kingdoms earth should not be soiled
With that dear blood which it hath fostered,
And for our eyes do hate the dire aspect
Of civil wounds ploughed up with neighbours swords,
Which so roused up with boisterous untuned drums,
With harsh resounding Trumpets dreadful bray,
And grating shock of wrathful iron Arms,
Might from our quiet Confines fright fair peace,
And make vs wade even in our kindreds blood:
Therefore, we banish you our Territories.
You Cousin Herford, upon pain of death,
Till twice five Summers have enriched our fields,
Shall not regreet our fair dominions,
But tread the stranger paths of banishment.
Your will be done: This must my comfort be,
That Sun that warmes you here, shall shine on me:
And those his golden beams to you here lent,
Shall point on me, and gild my banishment.
Norfolk: for thee remains a heavier dombe,
Which I with some unwillingness pronounce,
The sly slow hours shall not determinate
The dateless limit of thy dear exile:
The hopeless word, of Never to return,
Breath I against thee, upon pain of life.
A heavy sentence, my most Sovereign Liege,
And all unlooked for from your Highness mouth:
A dearer merit, not so deep a maim,
As to be cast forth in the common ayre
Have I deserved at your Highness hands.
The Language I have learned these forty years
(My native English) now I must forgo,
And now my tongues use is to me no more,
Then an unstringed Vyall, or a Harp,
Or like a cunning Instrument cased up,
Or being open, put into his hands
That knows no touch to tune the harmony.
Within my mouth you have engaol'd my tongue,
Doubly percullist with my teeth and lips,
And dull, unfeeling, barren ignorance,
Is made my Jailer to attend on me:
I am too old to fawn upon a Nurse,
Too far in years to be a pupil now:
What is thy sentence then, but speechless death,
Which robs my tongue from breathing native breath?
It boots thee not to be compassionate,
After our sentence, plaining comes too late.
Then thus I turn me from my countries light
To dwell in solemn shades of endless night.
Return again, and take an oath with thee,
Lay on our Royal sword, your banished hands;
Swear by the duty that you owe to heaven
(Our part therein we banish with your selves)
To keep the Oath that we administer:
You never shall (so help you Truth, and Heaven)
Embrace each others love in banishment,
Nor ever look upon each others face,
Nor ever write, regreete, or reconcile
This lowering tempest of your home-bred hate,
Nor ever by advised purpose meet,
To plot, contrive, or complot any ill,
Against Vs, our State, our Subjects, or our Land.
I swear.
And I, to keep all this.
Norfolk, so fare, as to mine enemy,
By this time (had the King permitted vs)
One of our souls had wandered in the ayre,
Banished this frail sepulchre of our flesh,
As now our flesh is banished from this Land.
Confess thy Treasons, ere thou fly this Realm,
Since thou hast far to go, bear not along
The clogging burden of a guilty soul.
No Bullingbroke: If ever I were Traitor,
My name be blotted from the book of Life,
And I from heaven banished, as from hence:
But what thou art, heaven, thou, and I do know,
And all too soon (I fear) the King shall rue.
Farewell (my Liege) now no way can I stray,
Save back to England, all the worlds my way.
Uncle, even in the glasses of thine eyes
I see thy grieved heart: thy sad aspect,
Hath from the number of his banished years
Plucked four away: Six frozen Winters spent,
Return with welcome home, from banishment.
How long a time lies in one little word:
Four lagging Winters, and four wanton springs
End in a word, such is the breath of Kings.
I thank my Liege, that in regard of me
He shortens four years of my sons exile:
But little vantage shall I reap thereby.
For ere the six years that he hath to spend
Can change their Moons, and bring their times about,
My oyle-dride Lamp, and time-bewasted light
Shall be extinct with age, and endless night:
My inch of Taper, will be burnt, and done,
And blindfold death, not let me see my son.
Why Uncle, thou hast many years to live.
But not a minute (King) that thou can give;
Shorten my days thou can with sudden sorrow,
And pluck nights from me, but not lend a morrow:
Thou can help time to furrow me with age,
But stop no wrinkle in his pilgrimage:
Thy word is currant with him, for my death,
But dead, thy kingdom cannot buy my breath.
Thy son is banished upon good advice,
Whereto thy tongue a party-verdict gave,
Why at our Justice seem thou then to lower?
Things sweet to taste, prove in digestion sour:
You urged me as a Judge, but I had rather
you would have bid me argue like a Father.
Alas, I looked when some of you should say,
I was too strict to make mine own away:
But you gave leave to my unwilling tong,
Against my will, to do my self this wrong.
Cosine farewell: and Uncle bid him so:
Six years we banish him, and he shall go.
Cosine farewell: what presence must not know
From where you do remain, let paper show.
My Lord, no leave take I, for I will ride
As far as land will let me, by your side.
Oh to what purpose dost thou horde thy words,
That thou teturnst no greeting to thy friends?
I have too few to take my leave of you,
When the tongues office should be prodigal,
To breath the abundant dolor of the heart.
Thy grief is but thy absence for a time.
Joy absent, grief is present for that time.
What is six Winters, they are quickly gone?
To men in joy, but grief makes one hour ten.
Call it a travel that thou take for pleasure.
My heart will sigh, when I miscall it so,
Which finds it an enforced Pilgrimage.
The sullen passage of thy weary steppes
Esteem a soil, wherein thou art to set
The precious Jewel of thy home return.
Oh who can hold a fire in his hand
By thinking on the frosty Caucasus?
Or cloy the hungry edge of appetite,
by bare imagination of a Feast?
Or Wallow naked in December snow
by thinking on fantastic summers heate?
Oh no, the apprehension of the good
Gives but the greater feeling to the worse:
Fell sorrows tooth, doth ever ranckle more
Then when it bites, but lances not the sore.
Come, come (my son) Isle bring thee on thy way
Had I thy youth, and cause, I would not stay.
Then Englands ground farewell: sweet soil adieu,
My Mother, and my Nurse, which bears me yet:
Where ere I wander, boast of this I can,
Though banished, yet a true-borne Englishman.
We did observe. Cosine Aumerle,
How far brought you high Herford on his way?
I brought high Herford (if you call him so) but to the next high way, and there I left him.
And say, what store of parting tears were shed?
Faith none for me: except the Northeast wind
Which then grew bitterly against our face,
Awaked the sleepy rhew me, and so by chance
Did grace our hollow parting with a tear.
What said our Cousin when you parted with him?
Farewell: and for my hart disdained yt my tongue
Should so profane the word, that taught me craft
To counterfeit oppression of such grief,
That word seemed buried in my sorrows grave.
Marry, would the word Farewell, have lengthened hours,
And added years to his short banishment,
He should have had a volume of Farwels,
but since it would not, he had none of me.
He is our Cousin (Cousin) but it is doubt,
When time shall call him home from banishment,
Whether our kinsman come to see his friends,
Our self, and Bushy: here Bagot and Greene
Observed his Courtship to the common people:
How he did seem to dive into their hearts,
With humble, and familiat curtsy,
What reverence he did throw away on slaves;
Wooing poor Craftsmen, with the craft of souls,
And patient vnder-bearing of his Fortune,
As it were to banish their affects with him.
Off goes his bonnet to an Oyster-wench,
A brace of Dray-men bid God speed him well,
And had the tribute of his supple knee,
With thanks my Countrymen, my loving friends,
As were our England in reversion his,
And he our subjects next degree in hope.
Well, he is gone, &amp; with him go these thoughts:
Now for the Rebels, which stand out in Ireland,
Expedient manage must be made my Liege
Ere further leisure, yield them further means
For their advantage, and your Highness loss.
We will our self in person to this war,
And for our Coffers, with too great a Court,
And liberal Largess, are grown somewhat light,
We are enforced to farm our royal Realm,
The Revenue whereof shall furnish vs
For our affairs in hand: if that come short
Our Substitutes at home shall have Blanke-charters:
Whereto, when they shall know what men are rich,
They shall subscribe them for large sums of Gold,
And send them after to supply our wants:
For we will make for Ireland presently.
what news?
Old Iohn of Gaunt is very sick my Lord,
Suddenly taken, and hath sent post haste
To entreat your Majesty to visit him.
Where lies he?
At Ely house.
Now put it (heaven) in his Physicians mind,
To help him to his grave immediately:
The lining of his coffers shall make Coats
To deck our soldiers for these Irish wars.
Come Gentlemen, let's all go visit him:
Pray heaven we may make hast, and come too late.
Will the King come, that I may breath my last
In wholesome counsel to his unstaid youth?
Vex not your self, nor strive not with your breath,
For all in vain comes counsel to his ear.
Oh but (they say) the tongues of dying men
Enforce attention like deep harmony;
Where words are scarce, they are seldom spent in vain,
For they breath truth, that breath their words in pain.
He that no more must say, is listened more,
Then they whom youth and ease have taught to gloss,
More are men's ends marked, then their lives before,
The setting Sun, and Music is the close
As the last taste of sweets, is sweetest last,
Writ in remembrance, more then things long past;
Though Richard my lives counsel would not hear,
My deaths sad tale, may yet vndeafe his ear.
No, it is stopped with other flattering sounds
As praises of his state: then there are sound
Lasc•ious Meeters▪ to whose venom sound
The open ear of youth doth always listen.
Report of fashions in proud Italy,
Whose: manners still our tardy apish Nation
Limps after in base imitation.
Where doth the world thrust forth a vanity,
So it be new, there's no respect how vile,
That is not quickly buz'd into his ears?
That all too late comes counsel to be heard,
Where will doth mutiny with wits regard:
Direct not him, whose way himself will choose,
Tic breath thou lackst, and that breath wilt thou loose.
Me thinks I am a Prophet new inspired,
And thus expiring, do foretell of him,
His rash fierce blaze of Riot cannot last,
For violent fires soon burn out themselves,
Small showers last long, but sudden storms are short,
He tyres betimes, that spurs too fast betimes;
With eager feeding, food doth choke the feeder:
Light vanity, insatiate cormorant,
Consuming means soon preys upon it self.
This royal Throne of Kings, this sceptred Isle,
This earth of Majesty, this seat of Mars,
This other Eden, demi paradise,
This Fortress built by Nature for her self,
Against infection, and the hand of war:
This happy breed of men, this little world,
This precious stone, set in the silver sea,
Which serves it in the office of a wall,
Or as a Moat defensive to a house,
Against the envy of less happier Lands,
This blessed plot, this earth, this Realm, this England,
This Nurse, this teeming womb of Royal Kings,
Feared by their breed, and famous for their birth,
Renowned for their deeds, as far from home,
For Christian service, and true Chivalry,
As is the sepulchre in stubborn Jury
Of the Worlds ransom, blessed Maries Son.
This Land of such dear souls, this deere-deere Land,
Dear for her reputation through the world,
Is now Leas'd out (I dye pronouncing it)
Like to a Tenement or pelting Farm.
England bound in with the triumphant sea,
Whose rocky shore beats back the envious siege
Of watery Neptune, is now bound in with shame,
With Inky blots, and rotten Parchment bonds.
That England, that was wont to conquer others,
Hath made a shameful conquest of it self.
Ah! would the scandal vanish with my life,
How happy then were my ensuing death?
The King is come, deal mildly with his youth,
For young hot Colts, being raged, do rage the more.
How fares our noble Uncle Lancaster?
What comfort man? How first with aged Gaunt?
Oh how that name befits my composition:
Old Gaunt indeed, and gaunt in being old:
Within me grief hath kept a tedious fast,
And who abstains from meat, that is not gaunt?
For sleeping England long time have I watched,
Watching breeds leanness, leanness is all gaunt.
The pleasure that some Fathers feed upon,
Is my strict fast, I mean my Childrens looks,
And therein fasting, hast thou made me gaunt:
Gaunt am I for the grave, gaunt as a grave,
Whose hollow womb inherits nought but bones.
Can sick men play so nicely with their names?
No, misery makes sport to mock it self:
Since thou dost seek to kill my name in mec,
I mock my name (great King) to flatter thee.
Should dying men flatter those that live?
No, no, men living flatter those that dye.
Thou now a dying, say thou flatter me.
Oh no, thou die, though I the sicker be.
I am in health, I breath, I see the •ill.
Now he that made me, knows I see thee ill:
Ill in my self to see, and in thee, seeing ill,
Thy death-bed is no lesser then the Land,
Wherein thou lie in reputation sick,
And thou too careless patient as thou art,
Commit thy' anointed body to the cure
Of those Physicians, that first wounded thee.
A thousand flatterers sit within thy Crown,
Whose compass is no bigger then thy head,
And yet incaged in so small a Verge,
The waste is no whit lesser then thy Land:
Oh had thy Grandsire with a Prophets eye,
Seen how his sons son, should destroy his sons,
From forth thy reach he would have laid thy shame,
Deposing thee before thou were possessed,
Which art possessed now to depose thy self.
Why (Cosine) were thou Regent of the world,
It were a shame to let his Land by lease:
But for thy world enjoying but this Land,
Is it not more then shame, to shame it so?
Landlord of England art thou, and not King:
Thy state of Law, is bond slave to the law,
And—
And thou, a lunatic leane-witted fool,
Presuming on an Agues privilege,
Dare with thy frozen admonition
Make pale our cheek, chafing the Royal blood
With fury, from his native residence?
Now by my Seats right Royal Majesty,
Were it thou not Brother to great Edwards son,
This tongue that runs so roundly in thy head,
Should run thy head from thy irreverent shoulders.
Oh spare me not, my brothers Edwards son,
For that I was his Father Edwards son:
That blood already (like the Pelican)
Thou hast tapped out, and drunkenly caroused.
My brother Gloucester, plain well meaning soul
(Whom fair befall in heaven amongst happy souls)
May be a president, and witness good,
That thou respect not spilling Edwards blood:
Toyne with the present sickness that I have,
And thy unkindness be like crooked age,
To crop at once a too-long withered flower.
Live in thy shame, but dye not shame with thee,
These words hereafter, thy tormentors bee.
Convey me to my bed, then to my grave,
Love they to live, that love and honour have.
And let them dye, that age and sullens have,
For both hast thou, and both become the grave.
I do beseech your Majesty impute his words
To wayward sickliness, and age in him:
He loves you on my life▪ and holds you dear
As Harry Duke of Herford, were he here.
Right, you say true: as Herfords love, so his;
As theirs, so mine: and all be as it is.
My Liege, old Gaunt commends him to your Majesty.
What says he?
Nay nothing, all is said:
His tongue is now a stringlesse instrument,
Words, life, and all, old Lancaster hath spent.
Be York the next, that must be bankrupt so,
Though death be poor, it ends a mortal wo.
The ripest fruit first false, and so doth he,
His time is spent, our pilgrimage must be:
So much for that. Now for our Irish wars,
We must supplant those rough rug-headed Kernes,
Which live like venom, where no venom else
But only they, have privilege to live.
And for these great affairs do ask some charge▪
Towards our assistance, we do seize to vs
The plate, coin, revenues, and movables,
Whereof our Uncle Gaunt did stand possessed.
How long shall I be patient? Oh how long
Shall tender duty make me suffer wrong?
Not Glousters death, nor Herfords banishment,
Nor Gaunts rebukes, nor Englands private wrongs,
Nor the prevention of poor Bullingbrooke,
About his marriage, nor my own disgrace
Have ever made me sour my patient cheek,
Or bend one wrin•kle on my Sovereigns face:
I am the last of noble Edwards sons,
Of whom thy Father Prince of Wales was first,
In war was never Lyon raged more fierce:
In peace, was never gentle Lamb more mild,
Then was that young and Princely Gentleman,
His face thou hast, for even so looked he
Accomplished with the number of thy how•rs:
But when he frowned, it was against the Fre•ch,
And not against his friends: h•s noble hand
Did w•n what he did spend: and spe•t not that
Which his triumphant fathers hand had won:
His hands were guilty of no kindreds blood,
But bloody with the enemies of his kin:
Oh Richard York is too far gone with grief,
Or else he never would compare between.
Why Uncle,
What's the matter?
Oh my Liege, pardon me if you please, if not
I pleased not to be pardoned, am content with all:
Seek you to seize, and gripe into your hands
The Royalties and Rights of banished Herfo•d?
Is not Gaunt dead? and doth not Herford live?
Was not Gaunt just? and is not •arry true?
Did not the one deserve to have an heir?
Is not his heir a well-deseruing son?
Take Herfords rights away, and take from time
His Charters, and his customary rights:
Let not to morrow then ensue to day,
Be not thy self. For how art thou a King
But by fair sequence and succession?
Now before God, God forbid I say true,
If you do wrongfully seize Herfords right,
Call in his Letters Patents that he hath
By his Attorneys general, to sue
His Livery, and deny his offered homage,
You pluck a thousand •angers on your head,
You loose a thousand well-disposed hearts,
And prick my tender patience to those thoughts
Which honour and allegiance cannot think.
Think what you will: we sei•e into our hands,
His plate, his goods, his money, and his lands.
Isle no• be by the while: My Liege farewell,
What will ensue hereof, there's none can tell.
But by bad cou•ses may be understood,
That their events can never fall out good.
Go Bushy to the Earl of Wiltshire straight,
Bid him repair to vs to Ely house,
To see this business: to morrow next
We will for Ireland, and it is time, I trow:
And we create in absence of our self
Our Uncle York, Lord Governor of England:
For he is just, and always lou•d vs well.
Come on out Queen, to morrow must we part,
Be merry, for our time of stay is short.
Well Lords, the Duke of Lancaster is dead.
And living too, for now his son is Duke.
Barely in title, not in revenue.
Richly in both, if justice had her right.
My heart is great: but it must break with silence,
Er't be disburdened with a liberal tongue.
Nay speak thy mind: &amp; let him ne'er speak more
That speaks thy words again to do thee harm.
Tends that you would speak to the Du▪ of Hereford,
If it be so, out with it boldly man,
Quick is mine ear to hear of good towards him.
No good at all that I can do for him,
Unless you call it good to pity him,
Berest and gelded of his patrimony.
Now before heaven, it is shame such wrongs are borne,
In him a royal Prince, and many more
Of noble blood in this declining Land;
The King is not himself, but basely led
By Flatterers, and what they will inform
Merely in hate against any of vs all,
That will the King severely prosecute
Against vs, our lives, our children, and our heirs.
The Commons hath he piled with grievous taxes
And quite lost their hearts: the Nobles hath he find
For ancient quarrels, and quite lost their hearts.
And daily new ex•ctions are deuis'd,
As blanks▪ benevolences, and I wot not what:
But what of Gods name doth become of this?
Wars hath not wasted it, for warred he hath not.
But basely yielded upon compromise,
That which his Ancestors achieved with blows:
More hath he spent in peace, then they in wars.
The Earl of Wiltshire hath the realm in Farm.
The Kings grown bankrupt like a broken man.
Reproach, and dissolution hangs over him.
He hath not money for these Irish wars:
(His burdenous taxations notwithstanding)
But by the robbing of the banished Duke.
His noble Kinsman, most degenerate King:
But Lords, we hear this fearful tempest sing,
Yet seek no shelter to avoid the storm:
We see the wind sit sore upon our salles,
And yet we strike not, but securely perish
We see the very wrack that we must suffer,
And •avoided is the danger now
For •erst•ng so the causes of our wrack.
Not so: even through the hollow eyes of death,
I sp• life peering: but I dare not say
How near the tidings of our comfort is.
Nay let vs share thy thoughts, as thou dost ours
Be confident to speak Northumberland,
We three, are but thy self, and speaking so,
Thy words are but as thoughts, therefore be bold.
Then thus: I have from Port le Blown
A Bay in Britain, received intelligence,
That Harry Duke of Herford, Rainald Lord Cobham,
That late broke from the Duke of Exeter,
His brother Archbishop, late of Canterbury,
Sir Thomas Erpingham Sir Iohn Rainston,
Sir Iohn Norberie, Sir Robert W•terton, &amp; Francis Quoint,
All these well furnished by the Duke of Britain,
With eight tall ships, three thousand men of war
Are making hither with all due expedience,
And shortly mean to touch our Northern shore:
Perhaps they had ere this, but that they stay
The first departing of the King for Ireland.
If then we shall shake off our slavish yoke,
Imp out our drooping Countries broken wing,
Redeem from brooking pawn the blemished Crown,
Wipe off the dust that hides our Scepters gilt,
And make high Majesty look like it self,
Away with me in post to Rauenspurgh,
But if you faint, as fearing to do so,
Stay, and be secret, and my self will go.
To horse, to horse, urge doubts to them yt fear.
Hold out my horse, and I will first be there.
Madam, your Majesty is too much sad,
You promised when you parted with the King,
To lay aside selfe-harming heaviness,
And entertain a cheerful disposition.
To please the King, I did: to please my self
I cannot do it: yet I know no cause
Why I should welcome such a guest as grief,
Save bidding farewell to so sweet a guest
As my sweet Richard; yet again me thinks,
Some unborn sorrow, ripe in fortunes womb
Is coming towards me, and my inward soul
With nothing trembles, at something it grieves,
More then with parting from my Lord the King.
Each substance of a grief hath twenty shadows
Which shows like grief it self, but is not so:
For sorrows eye, glazed with blinding tears,
Divides one thing entire, to many objects,
Like perspectives, which rightly gazed upon
Show nothing but confusion, eyed awry,
Distinguish form: so your sweet Majesty
Looking awry upon your Lords departure,
Find shapes of grief, more then himself to wail,
Which looked on as it is, is nought but shadows
Of what it is not: then thrice-gracious Queen,
More then your Lords departure weep not, more's not seen;
Or if it be, it is with false sorrows eye,
Which for things true, weep things imaginary.
It may be so: but yet my inward soul
Persuades me it is otherwise: how ere it be,
I cannot but be sad: so heavy sad,
As though on thinking on no thought I think,
•aches me with heavy nothing faint and shrink.
It is nothing but conceit (my gracious Lady.)
It is nothing less: conceit is still derived
From some fore father grief, mine is not so,
For nothing hath begot my something grief,
Or something, hath the nothing that I grieve,
It is in reversion that I do possess,
But what it is, that is not yet known, what
I cannot name, it is nameless woe I wot.
Heaven save your Majesty, and well met Gentle∣men:
I hope the King is not yet shipped for Ireland.
Why hop'st thou so? Tic better hope he is:
For his designs crave hast, his hast good hope,
Then wherefore dost thou hope he is not shipped?
That he our hope, might have retired his power,
and driven into despair an enemies hope,
Who strongly hath set footing in this Land.
The banished Bullingbrooke repeales himself,
And with vp-lifted Arms is safe arrived
At Rauenspurg.
Now God in heaven forbid.
O Madam it is too true: and that is worse,
The L. Northumberland, his young son Henrie Percie,
The Lords of Rosse, Beaumont, and Willoughby,
With all their powerful friends are fled to him.
Why have you not proclaimed Northumberland
And the rest of the revolted faction, Traitors?
We have: where upon the Earl of Worcester
Hath broke his staff, resigned his Stewardship,
And al the household servant, fled with him to Bullinbrook
So Greene, thou art the midwife of my woe,
And Bullinbrooke my sorrows dismal heir:
Now hath my soul brought forth her prodigy,
And I a gasping new delivered mother,
Have woe to woe, sorrow to sorrow joined.
Despair not Madam.
Who shall hinder me?
I will despair, and be at enmity
With cozening hope; he is a Flatterer,
A Parasite, a keeper back of death,
Who gently would dissolve the bands of life,
Which false hopes linger in extremity.
Here comes the Duke of York.
With signs of war about his aged neck,
Oh full of careful business are his looks:
Uncle▪ for heavens sake speak comfortable words:
Comfort's in heaven, and we are on the earth,
Where nothing lives but crosses, care and grief:
Your husband he is gone to sail far off,
Whilst others come to make him loose at home:
Here am I left to vnder-prop his Land,
Who weak with age, cannot support my self:
Now comes the sick hour that his surfeit made,
Now shall he try his friends that flattered him.
My Lord, your son was gone before I came.
He was: why so: go all which way it will▪
The Nobles they are fled, the Commons they are cold,
And will I fear revolt on Herfords side.
Sir, get thee to Plathie to my sister Gloster,
Bid her send me presently a thousand pound,
Hold, take my Ring.
My Lord, I had forgot
To tell your Lordship, to day I came by, and called there,
But • shall grieve you to report the rest.
What is it knave?
An hour before I came, the Duchess died.
Heaven for his mercy, what a tide of woes
Come rushing on this woeful Land at once?
I know not what to do: I would to heaven
(So my untruth had not provoked him to it)
The King had cut off my head with my brothers.
What, are there posts dispatcht for Ireland?
How shall we do for money for these wars?
Come sister (Cozen I would say) pray pardon me.
Go fellow, get thee home, poouide some Carts,
And bring away the Armour that is there.
Gentlemen, will you muster men?
If I know how, or which way to order these affairs
Thus disorderly thrust into my hands,
Never believe me. Both are my kinsmen,
The one is my Sovereign, whom both my oath
And duty bids defend: the other again
Is my kinsman, whom the King hath wronged,
Whom conscience, and my kindred bids to right:
Well, somewhat we must do: Come Cozen,
Isle dispose of you. Gentlemen, go muster up your men,
And meet me presently at Barkley Castle:
I should to Plashy too: but time will not permit,
All is uneven, and every thing is left at six and seven.
The wind sits fair for news to go to Ireland,
But none returns: For vs to levy power
Proportionable to the enemy, is all impossible.
Besides our nearness to the King in love,
Is near the hate of those love not the King.
And that's the wavering Commons, for their love
Lies in their purses, and who so empties them,
By so much fills their hearts with deadly hate.
Wherein the king stands generally condemned
If judgment lye in them, then so do we,
Because we have been ever near the King.
Well: I will for refuge straight to Bristol Castle,
The Earl of Wiltshire is already there.
Thither will I with you, for little office
Will the hateful Commons perform for vs,
Except like Cures, to tear vs all in pieces:
Will you go along with vs?
No; I will to Ireland to his Majesty:
Farewell, if hearts presages be not vain,
We three here part, that neu'r shall meet again.
That's as York thrives to beat back Bullinbroke
Alas poor Duke, the task he undertakes
I• numbering sands, and drinking Oceans dry,
Where one on his side sights, thousands will fly.
Farewell at once, for once, for all, and ever.
Well, we may meet again.
I fear me never.
How far is it my Lord to Berkley now?
Believe me noble Lord,
I am a stranger here in Gloucestershire,
These high wilde h•lles, and rough vneeuen ways,
Draws out our miles, and makes them wearisome:
And yet our fair discourse hath been as sugar,
Making the hard way sweet and delectable:
But • bethink me, what a weary way
From Rauenspurgh to Cottshold will be found,
In Rosse and Willoughby, wanting your company,
Which I protest hath very much beguiled
The tediousness, and process of my travel:
But theirs is sweetened with the hope to have
The present benefit that I possess;
And hope to joy, is little less in joy,
Then hope enjoyed: By this, the weary Lords
Shall make their way seem short, as m•no hath done,
By sight of what I have, your Noble Company.
Of much less value is my Company,
Then your good words: but who comes here?
It is my Son, young Harry Percie,
Sent from my Brother Worcester: Whence soever.
Harry, how fares your Uncle?
I had thought, my Lord, to have learned his health of you.
Why, is he not with the Queen?
No, my good Lord, he hath forsook the Court,
Broken his Staff of Office, and dispersed
The Household of the King.
What was his reason?
He was not so resolved, when we last spake together.
Because your Lordship was proclaimed Traitor.
But hee, my Lord, is gone to Rauenspurgh,
To offer service to the Duke of Hereford,
And sent me over by Barkely, to discover
What power the Duke of York had levied there,
Then with direction to repair to Rauenspurgh.
Have you forgot the Duke of Hereford (Boy.)
No, my good Lord; for that is not forgot
Which ne'er I did remember: to my knowledge,
I never in my life did look on him.
Then learn to know him now: this is the Duke.
My gracious Lord, I tender you my service,
Such as it is, being render▪ raw, and young,
Which elder days shall ripen and confirm
To more approved service, and desert.
I thank thee gentle Percie, and be sure
I count my self in nothing else so happy.
As in a Soul remembering my good Friends:
And as my Fortune ripens with thy Love,
It shall be still thy true Loves recompense,
My Heart this Covenant makes, my Hand thus seals it.
How far is it to Barkely? and what stir
Keeps good old York there, with his Men of War?
There stands the Castle, by yond tuft of Trees,
Manned with three hundred men, as I have heard,
And in it are the Lords of York, Barkely, and Seymor,
None else of Name, and noble estimate.
Here con n• the Lords of Rosse and Willoughby,
Bloody with spurring, si• red with hasle.
Welcome my Lords, I wot your love pursues
A banished Pray• 〈◊〉 my Treasury
〈◊〉 that vasel 〈…〉, which more enrich•d,
Shall be your love, and lab was recompense.
Your presence makes vs rich, most Noble Lord.
And sure surmounts our labour to attain it.
Evermore thanks, the Exchequer of the poor,
Which till my infant-fortune comes to years,
Stands for my Bounty: but who comes here?
It is my Lord of Barkely, as I guess.
My Lord of Hereford, my Message is to you.
My Lord, my Answer is to Lancaster,
And I am come to seek that Name in England,
And I must find that Title in your Tongue,
Before I make reply to aught you say.
Mistake me not, my Lord, it is not my meaning
To raze one Title of your Honour out.
To you, my Lord, I come (what Lord you will)
From the most glorious of this Land,
The Duke of York, to know what pricks you on
To take advantage of the absent time,
And fright our Native Peace with selfe-borne Arms.
I shall not need transport my words by you,
Here comes his Grace in Person. My Noble Uncle.
Show me thy humble heart, and not thy knee,
Whose duty is deceivable, and false.
My gracious Uncle.
Tut, tut, Grace me no Grace, nor Uncle me,
I am no Traitors Uncle; and that word Grace,
In an ungracious mouth, is but profane.
Why have these banished, and forbidden Legs,
Dared once to touch a Dust of Englands Ground?
But more then why, why have they dared to march
So many miles upon her peaceful Bosom,
Frighting her pale-fac'd Villages with War,
And oftentation of despised Arms?
Come thou because the anointed King is hence?
Why foolish Boy, the King is left behind,
And in my loyal Bosom lies his power.
Were I bu• now the Lord of such hot youth,
A• when brave Gaunt, thy Father, and my self
Rescued the Black Prince, that young Mars of men,
From forth the Ranks of many thousand French:
Oh then, how quickly should this Arm of mine,
Now Prisoner to the Palsy, chastise thee,
And minister correction to thy Fault.
My gracious Uncle, let me know my Fault,
On what Condition stands it, and wherein?
Even in Condition of the worst degree,
In gross Rebellion, and detested Treason:
Thou art a banished man, and here art come
Before the expiration of thy time,
In braving Atm•s against thy Sovereign.
As I was banished, I was banished Hereford,
But as I come, I come for Lancaster.
And Noble Uncle, I beseech your Grace
Look on my Wrongs with an indifferent eye:
You are my Father, for me thinks in you
I see old Gaunt alive. Oh then my Father,
Will you permit, that I shall stand condemned
A wandering Vagabond; my Rights and Royalties
Plucked from my arms •erforce, and given away
To upstart Unthrifts? Wherefore was I borne?
If that my Cousin King, be King of England,
It must be granted, I am Duke of Lancaster.
You have a Son, Aumerle, my Noble Kinsman,
Had you first died, and he been thus trod down,
He should have found his Uncle Gaunt a Father,
To rowze his Wrongs, and chase them to the bay.
I am denied to sue my Livery here,
And yet my Letters Patents give me leave:
My Fathers goods are all distraynd▪ and sold,
And these, and all, are all amiss employed.
What would you have me doe? I am a Subject,
And challenge Law: Attorneys are denied me;
And therefore personally I lay my claim
To my Inheritance of free Descent.
The Noble Duke hath been too much abused.
It stands your Grace upon, to doe him right.
Base men by his endowments are made great.
My Lords of England, let me tell you this,
I have had feeling of my Cousins Wrongs,
And laboured all I could to doe him right:
But in this kind, to come in braving Arms,
Be his own Carver, and cut out his way,
To find out Right with Wrongs, it may not be;
And you that doe abet him in this kind,
Cher•sh Rebellion, and are Rebels all.
The Noble Duke hath sworn his coming is
But for his own; and for the right of that,
Wee all have strongly sworn to give him aid,
And let him neu'r see Joy, that breaks that Oath.
Well, well, I see the issue of these Arms,
I cannot mend it, I must needs confess,
Because my power is weak, and all ill left:
But if I could, by him that gave me life,
I would attach you all, and make you stoop
Unto the Sovereign Mercy of the King.
But since I cannot, be it known to you,
I doe remain as Neuter. So fare you well,
Unless you please to enter in the Castle,
And there repose you for this Night.
An offer Uncle, that wee will accept:
But wee must win your Grace to go with vs
To Bristow Castle, which they say is held
By Bushy, Bagot, and their Accomplices,
The Caterpillars of the Commonwealth,
Which I have sworn to weed, and pluck away.
It may be I will go with you: but yet Isle pause,
For I am loath to break our Countries Laws:
Nor Friends, nor Foes, to me welcome you are,
Things past redress, are now with me past care.
My Lord of Salisbury, we have stayed ten days,
And hardly kept our Countrymen together,
And yet we hear no tidings from the King;
Therefore we will disperse our selves: farewell.
Stay yet another day, thou trusty Welshman,
The King reposes all his confidence in thee.
It is thought the King is dead, we will not stay;
The Bay-trees in our Country all are withered,
And Meteors fright the fixed Stars of Heaven;
The pale-fac'd Moon looks bloody on the Earth,
And leane-look'd Prophets whisper fearful change;
Rich men look sad, and Ruffians dance and leap,
The one in fear, to loose what they enjoy,
The other to enjoy by Rage, and War:
These signs fore-run the death of Kings.
Farewell, our Countrymen are gone and fled;
As well assured Richard their King is dead.
Ah Richard, with eyes of heavy mind,
I see thy Glory, like a shooting Star,
Fall to the base Earth, from the Firmament:
Thy Sun sets weeping in the lowly West,
Witnessing Storms to come, Woe, and Unrest:
Thy Friends are fled, to wait upon thy Foes,
And crossly to thy good, all fortune goes.
Bring forth these men:
Bushy and Greene, I will not vex your souls,
(Since presently your souls must part your bodies)
With too much urging your pernicious lives,
For it were no Charity: yet to wash your blood
From off my hands, here in the view of men,
I will unfold some causes of your deaths.
You have mis-led a Prince, a Royal King,
A happy Gentleman in Blood, and Lineaments,
By you vnhappied, and disfigured clean:
You have in manner with your sinful hours
Made a Divorce betwixt his Queen and him,
Broke the possession of a Royal Bed,
And stained the beauty of a fair Queens Cheeks,
With tears drawn frō her eyes, with your foul wrongs.
My self a Prince, by fortune of my birth,
Near to the King in blood, and near in love,
Till you did make him mis-interprete me,
Have stooped my neck under your injuries,
And sighed my English breath in foreign Clouds,
Eating the bitter bread of banishment;
While you have fed upon my Seignories,
Dis-park'd my Parks, and felled my Forest Woods;
From mine own Windows torn my Household Coat,
Razed out my Impress, leaving me no sign,
Save men's opinions, and my living blood,
To show the World I am a Gentleman.
This, and much more, much more then twice all this,
Condemns you to the death: see them delivered over
To execution, and the hand of death.
More welcome is the stroke of death to me,
Then Bullingbrooke to England.
My comfort is, that Heaven will take our souls,
And plague Injustice with the pains of Hell.
My Lord Northumberland, see them dispatched:
Uncle, you say the Queen is at your House,
For Heavens sake fairly let her be entreated,
Tell her I send to her my kind commends;
Take special care my Greetings be delivered.
A Gentleman of mine I have dispatched
With Letters of your love, to her at large.
Thanks gentle Uncle: come Lords away,
To fight with Glendoure, and his Accomplices;
A while to work, and after holiday.
Barkloughly Castle call you this at hand?
Yea, my Lord: how brook: your Grace the ayre,
After your late tossing on the breaking Seas?
Needs must I like it well: I weep for joy
To stand upon my Kingdom once again.
Dear Earth, I doe salute thee with my hand,
Though Rebels wound thee with their Horses hooves:
As a long parted Mother with her Child,
Plays fondly with her tears, and smiles in meeting;
So weeping, smiling, greet I thee my Earth,
And doe thee favour with my Royal hands.
Feed not thy Sovereigns Foe, my gentle Earth,
Nor with thy Sweets, comfort his ravenous sense:
But let thy Spiders, that suck up thy Venom,
And heauie-gated Toads lye in their way,
Doing annoyance to the treacherous feet,
Which with usurping steps doe trample thee.
Yield stinging Nettles to mine Enemies;
And when they from thy Bosom pluck a Flower,
Guard it I prithee with a lurking Adder,
Whose double tongue may with a mortal touch
Throw death upon thy Sovereigns Enemies.
Mock not my senseless Conjuration, Lords;
This Earth shall have a feeling, and these Stones
Prove armed Soldiers, ere her Native King
Shall falter under foul Rebellious Arms.
Fear not my Lord, that Power that made you King
Hath power to keep you King, in spite of all.
He means, my Lord, that we are too remiss,
Whilst Bullingbrooke through our security,
Grows strong and great, in substance and in friends.
Discomfortable Cousin, know thou not,
That when the searching Eye of Heaven is hid
Behind the Globe, that lights the lower World,
Then Thieves and Robbers range abroad unseen,
In Murders and in Out-rage bloody here:
But when from under this Terrestrial Ball
He fires the proud tops of the Eastern Pines,
And darts his Lightning through every guilty hole,
Then Murders, Treasons, and detested sins
(The Cloak of Night being plucked from off their backs)
Stand bare and naked, trembling at themselves.
So when this Thief, this Traitor Bullingbrooke,
Who all this while hath reuell'd in the Night,
Shall see vs rising in our Throne, the East,
His Treasons will sit blushing in his face,
Not able to endure the sight of Day;
But selfe-affrighted, tremble at his sin.
Not all the Water in the rough rude Sea
Can wash the Balm from an anointed King;
The breath of worldly men cannot depose
The Deputy elected by the Lord:
For every man that Bullingbrooke hath pressed,
To lift shrewd Steel against our Golden Crown,
Heaven for his Richard hath in heavenly pay
A glorious Angel: then if Angels fight,
Weak men must fall, for Heaven still guards the right.
Welcome my Lord, how far off lies your Power?
Nor near, nor farther off, my gracious Lord,
Then this weak arm; discomfort guides my tongue,
And bids me speak of nothing but despair:
One day too late, I fear (my Noble Lord)
Hath clouded all thy happy days on Earth:
Oh call back Yesterday, bid Time return,
And thou shalt have twelve thousand fighting men:
To day, to day, unhappy day too late
Orethrowes thy Joys, Friends, Fortune, and thy State;
For all the Welshmen hearing thou were dead,
Are gone to Bullingbrooke, dispersed, and fled.
Comfort my Liege, why looks your Grace so pale?
But now the blood of twenty thousand men
Did triumph in my face, and they are fled,
And till so much blood thither come again,
Have I not reason to look pale, and dead?
All Souls that will be safe, fly from my side,
For Time hath set a blot upon my pride.
Comfort my Liege, remember who you are.
I had forgot my self. Am I not King?
Awake thou sluggard Majesty, thou sleep:
Is not the Kings Name forty thousand Names?
Arm, arm my Name: a puny subject strikes
At thy great glory. Look not to the ground,
Ye Favourites of a King: are wee not high?
High be our thoughts: I know my Uncle York
Ha•h Power enough to serve our turn.
But who comes here?
More health and happiness betide my Liege,
Then can my care-tun'd tongue deliver him
Mine ear is open, and my heart prepared:
The worst is worldly loss, thou can unfold:
Say, Is my Kingdom loft? why it was my Care:
And what loss is it to be rid of Care?
Strives Bullingbrooke to be as Great as wee?
Greater he shall not be: If hee serve God,
We'll serve him too, and be his Fellow so.
Revolt our Subjects? That we cannot mend,
They break their Faith to God, as well as vs:
Cry Woe, Destruction, Ruin, Loss, Decay,
The worst is Death, and Death will have his day.
Glad am I, that your Highness is so armed
To bear the tidings of Calamity.
Like an unseasonable stormy day,
Which make the Silver Rivers drown their Shores,
As if the World were all dissolved to tears:
So high, aboue his Limits, swells the Rage
Of Bullingbrooke, covering your fearful Land
With hard bright Steel, and hearts harder then Steel:
White Bears have armed their thin and hairelesse Scalps
Against thy Majesty, and Boys with Women's Voices,
Strive to speak big, and clap their female joints
In stiff vnw•eldie Arms: against thy Crown
Thy very Beads-men learn to bend their Bows
Of double fatal Yew: against thy State
Yea Distaffe-Women manage rusty Bills:
Against thy Seat both young and old rebel,
And all goes worse then I have power to tell.
Too well, too well thou tell a Tale so ill.
Where is the Earl of Wiltshire? where is Bagot?
What is become of Bushy? where is Greene?
That they have let the dangerous Enemy
Measure our Confines with such peaceful steps?
If we prevail, their heads shall pay for it.
I warrant they have made peace with Bullingbrooke.
Peace have they made with him indeed (my Lord.)
Oh Villains, Vipers, damned without redemption,
Dogs, easily won to fawn on any man,
Snakes in my heart blood-warm'd, that sting my heart,
Three Iudasses, each one thrice worse then Iudas,
Would they make peace? terrible Hell make war
Upon their spotted Souls for this Offence.
Sweet Love (I see) changing his property,
Turns to the sourest, and most deadly hate:
Again vncurse their Souls; their peace is made
With Heads, and not with Hands: those whom you curse
Have felt the worst of Deaths destroying hand,
And lye full low, graved in the hollow ground.
Is Bushy Greene, and the Earl of Wiltshire dead?
Yea all of them at Bristow lost their heads.
Where is the Duke my Father with his Power?
No matter where; of comfort no man speak:
Let's talk of Graves, of Worms, and Epitaphs,
Make Dust our Paper, and with Rainy eyes
Write Sorrow on the Bosom of the Earth.
Let's choose Executors, and talk of Wills:
And yet not so; for what can we bequeath,
Save our deposed bodies to the ground?
Our Lands, our Lives, and all are Bullingbrookes,
And nothing can we call our own, but Death,
And that small Model of the barren Earth,
Which serves as Paste, and Cover to our Bones:
For Heavens sake let vs sit upon the ground,
And tell sad stories of the death of Kings:
How some have been deposed, some slain in war,
Some haunted by the Ghosts they have deposed,
Some poisoned by their Wives, some sleeping killed,
All murdered. For within the hollow Crown
That rounds the mortal Temples of a King,
Keeps Death his Court, and there the Antique sits
Scoffing his State, and grinning at his Pomp,
Allowing him a breath, a little Scene,
To Monarchize, be feared, and kill with looks,
Infusing him with self and vain conceit,
As if this Flesh, which walls about our Life,
Were Brass impregnable: and humoured thus,
Comes at the last, and with a little Pin
Bores through his Castle Walls, and farewell King.
Cover your heads, and mock not flesh and blood
With solemn Reverence: throw away Respect,
Tradition, Form, and Ceremonious duty,
For you have but mistook me all this while:
I live with Bread like you, feel Want,
Taste Grief, need Friends: subjected thus,
How can you say to me, I am a King?
My Lord, wise men ne'er wail their present woes,
But presently prevent the ways to wail:
To fear the Foe, since fear oppresses strength,
Gives in your weakness, strength unto your Foe;
Fear, and be slain, no worse can come to fight,
And fight and die, is death destroying death,
Where fearing, dying, pays death servile breath.
My Father hath a Power, enquire of him,
And learn to make a Body of a Limb.
Thou chide me well: proud Bullingbrooke I come
To change Blows with thee, for our day of Doom:
This ague fit of fear is ouer-blowne,
An easy task it is to win our own.
Say Scroope, where lies our Uncle with his Power?
Speak sweetly man, although thy looks be sour.
Men judge by the complexion of the Sky
The state and inclination of the day;
So may you by my dull and heavy Eye:
My Tongue hath but a heavier Tale to say:
I play the Torturer, by small and small
To lengthen out the worst, that must be spoken.
Your Uncle York is joined with Bullingbrooke,
And all your Northern Castles yielded up,
And all your Southern Gentlemen in Arms
Upon his Faction.
Thou hast said enough.
Beshrew thee Cousin, which did lead me forth
Of that sweet way I was in, to despair:
What say you now? What comfort have we now?
By Heaven Isle hate him everlastingly.
That bids me be of comfort any more.
Go to Flint Castle, there Isle pine away,
A King, Woes slave, shall Kingly Woe obey:
That Power I have, discharge, and let 'em go
To ear the Land, that hath some hope to grow,
For I have none. Let no man speak again
To alter this, for counsel is but vain.
My Liege, one word.
He does me double wrong,
That wounds me with the flatteries of his tongue.
Discharge my followers: let them hence away,
From Richards Night, to Bullingbrookes fair Day.
So that by this intelligence we learn
The Welshmen are dispersed, and Salisbury
Is gone to meet the King, who lately landed
With some few private friends, upon this Coast.
The news is very fair and good, my Lord, Richard, not far from hence, hath hid his head.
It would beseem the Lord Northumberland,
To say King Richard: alack the heavy day,
When such a sacred King should hide his head.
Your Grace mistakes: only to be brief,
Left I his Title out.
The time hath been,
Would you have been so brief with him, he would
Have been so brief with you, to shorten you,
For taking so the Head, your whole heads length.
Mistake not (Uncle) farther then you should.
Take not (good Cousin) farther then you should.
Least you mistake the Heavens are ore your head.
I know it (Uncle) and oppose not my self
Against their will. But who comes here?
Welcome Harry: what, will not this Castle yield?
The Castle royally is manned, my Lord,
Against thy entrance.
Royally? Why, it contains no King?
Yes (my good Lord)
It doth contain a King: King Richard lies
Within the limits of yond Lime and Stone,
And with him, the Lord Aumerle, Lord Salisbury,
Sir Stephen Scroope, besides a Clergy man
Of holy reverence; who, I cannot learn.
Oh, belike it is the Bishop of Carl•le.
Noble Lord,
Go to the rude Ribs of that ancient Castle,
Through Brazen Trumpet send the breath of Parley
Into his ruined Ears, and thus deliver:
Henry Bullingbrooke upon his knees doth kiss
King Richards hand, and sends allegiance
And true faith of heart to his Royal Person: hither come
Even at his feet, to lay my Arms and Power,
Provided, that my Banishment repealed,
And Lands restored again, be freely granted:
If not, Isle use the advantage of my Power,
And lay the Summers dust with showers of blood,
Rayn'd from the wounds of slaughtered Englishmen;
The which, how far off from the mind of Bullingbrooke
It is, such Crimson Tempest should bedrench
The fresh greene Lap of fair King Richards Land,
My stooping duty tenderly shall show.
Go signify as much, while here we march
Upon the Grassy Carpet of this Plain:
Let's march without the noise of threatening Drum,
That from this Castles tattered Battlements
Our fair Appointments may be well perused.
Me thinks King Richard and my self should meet
With no less terror then the Elements
Of Fire and Water, when their thundering smoke
At meeting tears the cloudy Cheeks of Heaven:
Be he the fire, Isle be the yielding Water;
The Rage be his, while on the Earth I rain
My Waters on the Earth, and not on him.
March on, and mark King Richard how he looks.
See, see, King Richard doth himself appear
As doth the blushing discontented Sun,
From out the fiery Portal of the East,
When he perceives the envious Clouds are bent
To dim his glory, and to stain the tract
Of his bright passage to the Occident.
Yet looks he like a King: behold his Eye
(As bright as is the Eagles) lightens forth
Controlling Majesty: alack, alack, for woe,
That any harm should stain so fair a show.
Wee are amazed, and thus long have we stood
To watch the fearful bending of thy knee,
Because we thought our self thy lawful King:
And if we be, how dare thy joints forget
To pay their awful duty to our presence?
If we be not, show vs the Hand of God,
That hath dismissed vs from our Stewardship,
For well wee know, no Hand of Blood and Bone
Can gripe the sacred Handle of our Sceptre,
Unless he doe profane, steal, or usurp.
And though you think, that all, as you have done,
Have torn their Souls, by turning them from vs,
And we are barren, and bereft of Friends:
Yet know, my Master, God Omnipotent,
Is mustering in his Clouds, on our behalf,
Armies of Pestilence, and they shall strike
Your Children yet unborn, and vnbegot,
That lift your Vassal Hands against my Head,
And threat the Glory of my precious Crown.
Tell Bullingbrooke, for yond me thinks he is,
That every stride he makes upon my Land,
Is dangerous Treason: He is come to op
The purple Testament of bleeding War;
But ere the Crown he looks for, live in peace,
Ten thousand bloody crowns of Mothers Sons
Shall ill become the flower of Englands face,
Change the complexion of her Maid-pale Peace
To Scarlet Indignation, and bedew
Her Pastors Grass with faithful English Blood.
The King of Heaven forbid our Lord the King
Should so with civil and uncivil Arms
Be rushed upon: Thy thrice-noble Cousin,
Harry Bullingbrooke, doth humbly kiss thy hand,
And by the Honourable Tomb he swears,
That stands upon your Royal Grandsires Bones,
And by the Royalties of both your Bloods,
(Currents that spring from one most gracious Head)
And by the buried Hand of Warlike Gaunt,
And by the Worth and Honour of himself,
Comprising all that may be sworn, or said,
His coming hither hath no further scope,
Then for his Lineal Royalties, and to beg
Enfranchisement immediate on his knees:
Which on thy Royal party granted once,
His glittering Arms he will commend to Rust,
His barbed Steeds to Stables, and his heart
To faithful service of your Majesty:
This swears he, as he is a Prince, is just,
And as I am a Gentleman, I credit him.
Northumberland, say thus: The King returns,
His Noble Cousin is right welcome hither,
And all the number of his fair demands
Shall be accomplished without contradiction:
With all the gracious utterance thou hast,
Speak to his gentle hearing kind commends,
We doe debase our self (Cousin) doe we not,
To look so poorly, and to speak so fair?
Shall we call back Northumberland, and send
Defiance to the Traitor, and so die?
No, good my Lord, let's fight with gentle words,
Till tune lend friends, and friends their helpeful Swords.
Oh God, oh God, that ere this tongue of mine,
That laid the Sentence of dread Banishment
On yond proud man, should take it off again
With words of sooth: Oh that I were as great
As is my Grief, or lesser then my Name,
Or that I could forget what I have been,
Or not remember what I must be now:
Swell thou proud heart? Isle give thee scope to beat,
Since Foes have scope to beat both thee and me.
Northumberland comes back from Bulling∣brooke.
What must the King doe now? must he submit?
The King shall doe it: Must he be deposed?
The King shall be contented: Must he loose
The Name of King? of Gods Name let it go.
Isle give my Jewels for a set of Beads,
My gorgeous Palace, for a Hermitage,
My gay Apparel, for an Almes-mans Gown,
My figured Goblets, for a Dish of Wood,
My Sceptre, for a Palmers walking Staff,
My Subjects, for a pair of carved Saints,
And my large Kingdom, for a little Grave,
A little little Grave, an obscure Grave.
Or Isle be buried in the Kings high-way,
Some way of common Trade, where Subjects feet
May hourly trample on their Sovereigns Head:
For on my heart they tread now, whilst I live;
And buried once, why not upon my Head?
Aumerle, thou weep (my tender-hearted Cousin)
We'll make foul Weather with despised Tears:
Our sighs, and they, shall lodge the Summer Corn,
And make a Dearth in this revolting Land.
Or shall we play the Wantons with our Woes,
And make some pretty Match, with shedding Tears?
As thus: to drop them still upon one place,
Till they have fretted vs a pair of Graves,
Within the Earth: and therein laid there lies
Two Kinsmen, dug their Graves with weeping Eyes?
Would not this ill, doe well? Well, well, I see
I talk but idly, and you mock at me.
Most mighty Prince, my Lord Northumberland,
What says King Bullingbrooke? Will his Majesty
Give Richard leave to live, till Richard die?
You make a Leg, and Bullingbrooke says I.
My Lord, in the base Court he doth attend
To speak with you, may it please you to come down.
Down, down I come, like glist'ring Phaeton,
Wanting the manage of unruly Jade.
In the base Court? base Court, where Kings grow base,
To come at Traitors Calls, and doe them Grace.
In the base Court come down: down Court, down King,
For night-Owls shrike, where moūting Larks should sing.
What says his Majesty?
Sorrow, and grief of heart
Makes him speak fondly, like a frantic man:
Yet he is come.
Stand all apart,
And show fair duty to his Majesty.
My gracious Lord.
Fair Cousin,
You debase your Princely Knee,
To make the base Earth proud with kissing it.
Me rather had, my Heart might feel your Love,
Then my vnpleas'd Eye see your Curtsy.
Up Cousin, up, your Heart is up, I know,
Thus high at least, although your Knee below.
My gracious Lord, I come but for mine own.
Your own is yours, and I am yours, and all.
So far be mine, my most redoubted Lord,
As my true service shall deserve your love.
Well you deserved:
They well deserve to have,
That know the strong'st, and surest way to get.
Uncle give me your Hand: nay, dry your Eyes,
Tears show their Love, but want their Remedies.
Cousin, I am too young to be your Father,
Though you are old enough to be my Heir.
What you will have, Isle give, and willing to,
For doe we must, what force will have vs doe.
Set on towards London:
Cousin, is it so?
Yea, my good Lord.
Then I must not say, no.
What sport shall we devise here in this Garden,
To drive away the heavy thought of Care?
Madame, we'll play at Bowls.
Twill make me think the World is full of Rubs,
And that my fortune runs against the Bias.
Madame, we'll Dance.
My Legs can keep no measure in Delight,
When my poor Heart no measure keeps in Grief.
Therefore no Dancing (Girl) some other sport.
Madame, we'll tell Tales.
Of Sorrow, or of Grief?
Of either, Madame.
Of neither, Girl.
For if of Joy, being altogether wanting,
It doth remember me the more of Sorrow:
Or if of Grief, being altogether had,
It adds more Sorrow to my want of Joy:
For what I have, I need not to repeat;
And what I want, it boots not to complain.
Madame, Isle sing.
It is well that thou hast cause:
But thou should please me better, would thou weep.
I could weep, Madame, would it doe you good.
And I could sing, would weeping doe me good,
And never borrow any Tear of thee.
But stay, here comes the Gardeners,
Let's step into the shadow of these Trees.
My wretchedness, unto a Row of Pins,
They'll talk of State: for every one doth so,
Against a Change; Woe is fore-runne with Woe.
Go bind thou up yond dangling Apricots,
Which like unruly Children, make their Sire
Stoup with oppression of their prodigal weight:
Give some supportance to the bending twigs.
Go thou, and like an Executioner
Cut off the heads of too fast growing sprays,
That look too lofty in our Common-wealth:
All must be even, in our Government.
You thus employed, I will go root away
The noisome Weeds, that without profit suck
The Soils fertility from wholesome flowers.
Why should we, in the compass of a Pale,
Keep Law and Form, and due Proportion,
Showing as in a Model our firm Estate?
When our Sea-walled Garden, the whole Land,
Is full of Weeds, her fairest Flowers choked up,
Her Fruit-trees all vnpruin'd, her Hedges ruined,
Her Knots disordered, and her wholesome Herbs
Swarming with Caterpillars.
Hold thy peace.
He that hath suffered this disordered Spring,
Hath now himself met with the Fall of Leaf.
The Weeds that his broad-spreading Leaves did shelter,
That seemed, in eating him, to hold him up,
Are pulled up, Root and all, by Bullingbrooke:
I mean, the Earl of Wiltshire, Bushy, Greene.
What are they dead?
They are,
And Bullingbrooke hath seized the wasteful King.
Oh, what pity is it, that he had not so trimmed
And dressed his Land, as we this Garden, at time of year,
And wound the Bark, the skin of our Fruit-trees,
Least being ouer-proud with Sap and Blood,
With too much riches it confound it self?
Had he done so, to great and growing men,
They might have lived to bear, and he to taste
Their fruits of duty. Superfluous branches
We lop away, that bearing boughs may live:
Had he done so, himself had borne the Crown,
Which waste and idle hours, hath quite thrown down.
What think you the King shall be deposed?
Depressed he is already, and deposed
It is doubted he will be. Letters came last night
To a dear Friend of the Duke of Yorkes,
That tell black tidings.
Oh I am pressed to death through want of speaking:
Thou old Adams likeness, set to dress this Garden:
How dares thy harsh rude tongue sound this unpleasing news
What Eve? what Serpent hath suggested thee,
To make a second fall of cursed man?
Why dost thou say, King Richard is deposed,
Dare thou, thou little better thing then earth,
Divine his downfall? Say, where, when, and how
Came thou by this ill-tydings? Speak thou wretch.
Pardon me Madam. Little joy have I
To breath these news; yet what I say, is true;
King Richard, he is in the mighty hold
Of Bullingbrooke, their Fortunes both are weighed:
In your Lords Scale, is nothing but himself,
And some few Vanities, that make him light:
But in the Balance of great Bullingbrooke,
Besides himself, are all the English Peers,
And with that odds he weighs King Richard down.
Post you to London, and you'll find it so,
I speak no more, then every one doth know.
Nimble mischance, that art so light of foot,
Doth not thy Embassage belong to me?
And am I last that knows it? Oh thou think
To serve me last, that I may longest keep
Thy sorrow in my breast. Come Ladies go,
To meet at London, Londons King in woe.
What was I borne to this: that my sad look,
Should grace the Triumph of great Bullingbrooke.
Gard'ner, for telling me this news of woe,
I would the Plants thou graft, may never grow.
Poor Queen, so that thy State might be no worse,
I would my skill were subject to thy curse:
Here did she drop a tear, here in this place
Isle set a Bank of Few, sour Herb of Grace:
Rue, even for ruth, here shortly shall be seen,
In the remembrance of a Weeping Queen.
Call forth Bagot.
Now Bagot, freely speak thy mind,
What thou dost know of Noble Glousters death:
Who wrought it with the King, and who performed
The bloody Office of his Timeless end.
Then set before my face, the Lord Aumerle.
Cousin, stand forth, and look upon that man.
My Lord Aumerle, I know your daring tongue
Scorns to unsay, what it hath once delivered.
In that dead time, when Glousters death was plotted,
I heard you say. Is not my arm of length,
That reaches from the restful English Court
As far as Callis, to my Uncles head.
Amongst much other talk, that very time,
I heard you say, that you had rather refuse
The offer of an hundred thousand Crowns,
Then Bullingbrookes return to England; adding withal,
How blessed this Land would be, in this your Cousins death.
Princes, and Noble Lords:
What answer shall I make to this base man?
Shall I so much dishonour my fair Stars,
On equal terms to give him chastisement?
Either I must, or have mine honour soiled
With the Attainder of his slanderous Lips.
There is my Gage, the manual Seal of death
That marks thee out for Hell. Thou lie,
And will maintain what thou hast said, is false,
In thy heart blood, though being all too base
To stain the temper of my Knightly sword.
Bagot forbear, thou shalt not take it up.
Excepting one, I would he were the best
In all this presence, that hath moved me so.
If that thy valour stand on sympathize:
There is my Gage, Aumerle, in Gage to thine:
By that fair Sun, that shows me where thou stand,
I heard thee say (and vauntingly thou spoke it)
That thou were it cause of Noble Glousters death.
If thou deny it, twenty times thou lie,
And I will turn thy falsehood to thy hart,
Where it was forged with my Rapiers point.
Thou dare not (Coward) live to see the day.
Now by my Soul, I would it were this hour.
Fitzwater thou art damned to hell for this.
Aumerle, thou lye'st: his Honour is as true
In this Appeal, as thou art all unjust:
And that thou art so, there I throw my Gage
To prove it on thee, to the extremest point
Of mortal breathing. Seize it, if thou dare.
And if I do not, may my hands rot off,
And never brandish more revengeful Steel,
Over the glittering Helmet of my Foe.
My Lord Fitz-water:
I do remember well, the very time
Aumerle, and you did talk.
My Lord,
It is very true: You were in presence then,
And you can witness with me, this is true.
As false, by heaven,
As Heaven it self is true.
Surrey, thou Lie.
Dishonourable Boy;
That Lye, shall lie so heavy on my Sword,
That it shall render Vengeance, and Revenge,
Till thou the Lye-giuer, and that Lye, doe lye
In earth as quiet, as thy Fathers Scull.
In proof whereof, there is mine Honours pawn,
Engage it to the Trial, if thou dare.
How fondly dost thou spur a forward Horse?
If I dare eat, or drink, or breathe, or live,
I dare meet Surrey in a Wilderness,
And spit upon him, whilst I say he Lies,
And Lies, and Lies: there is my Bond of Faith,
To tie thee, to my strong Correction.
As I intend to thrive in this new World,
Aumerle is guilty of my true Appeal.
Besides, I heard the banished Norfolk say,
That thou Aumerle did send two of thy men,
To execute the Noble Duke at Callis.
Some honest Christian trust me with a Gage,
That Norfolk lies: here doe I throw down this,
If he may be repealed, to try his Honour.
These differences shall all rest under Gage,
Till Norfolk be repealed: repealed he shall be;
And (though mine Enemy) restored again
To all his Lands and Seignories: when hoe's returned,
Against Aumerle we will enforce his Trial.
That honourable day shall ne'er be seen.
Many a time hath banished Norfolk fought
For Iesu Christ, in glorious Christian field
Streaming the Ensign of the Christian Cross,
Against black Pagans, Turks, and Saracens:
And toiled with works of War, retired himself
To Italy, and there at Venice gave
His Body to that pleasant Countries Earth,
And his pure Soul unto his Captain Christ,
Under whose Colours he had fought so long.
Why Bishop, is Norfolk dead?
As sure as I live, my Lord.
Sweet peace conduct his sweet Soul
To the Bosom of good old Abraham.
Lords Appealants, your differēces shall all rest under gage,
Till we assign you to your days of Trial.
Great Duke of Lancaster, I come to thee
From plume-pluckt Richard, who with willing Soul
Adopts thee Heir, and his high Sceptre yields
To the possession of thy Royal Hand.
Ascend his Throne, descending now from him,
And long live Henry, of that Name the Fourth.
In Gods Name, Isle ascend the Regal Throne.
Mary, Heaven forbid.
Worst in this Royal Presence may I speak,
Yet best beseeming me to speak the truth.
Would God, that any in this Noble Presence
Were enough Noble, to be upright Judge
Of Noble Richard: then true Nobleness would
Learn him forbearance from so foul a Wrong.
What Subject can give Sentence on his King?
And who sits here, that is not Richards Subject?
Thieves are not judged, but they are by to hear,
Although apparent guilt be seen in them:
And shall the figure of Gods Majesty,
His Captain, Steward, Deputy elect,
Anointed, Grown'd, planted many years,
Be judged by subject, and inferior breathe,
And he himself not present? Oh, forbid it, God,
That in a Christian Climate, Souls refined
Should show so heinous, black, obscene a deed.
I speak to Subjects, and a Subject speaks,
Stirred up by Heaven, thus boldly for his King.
My Lord of Hereford here, whom you call King,
Is a foul Traitor to proud Herefords King.
And if you Crown him, let me prophecy,
The blood of English shall manure the ground,
And future Ages groan for his foul Act.
Peace shall go sleep with Turks and Infidels,
And in this Seat of Peace, tumultuous Wars
Shall Kin with Kin, and Kind with Kind confound.
Disorder, Horror, Fear, and Mutiny
Shall here inhabit, and this Land be called
The field of Golgotha, and dead men's Sculls.
Oh, if you rear this House, against this House
It will the woefullest Division prove,
That ever fell upon this cursed Earth.
Prevent it, resist it, and let it not be so,
Least Child, Child's Children cry against you, Woe.
Well have you argued Sir: and for your pains,
Of Capital Treason we arrest you here.
My Lord of Westminster, be it your charge,
To keep him safely, till his day of Trial.
May it please you, Lords, to grant the Commons Suit?
Fetch hither Richard, that in common view
He may surrender: so we shall proceed
Without suspicion.
I will be his Conduct.
Lords, you that here are under our Arrest,
Procure your Sureties for your Days of Answer:
Little are we beholding to your Love,
And little looked for at your helping Hands.
Alack, why am I sent for to a King,
Before I have shook off the Regal thoughts
Wherewith I reigned? I hardly yet have learned
To insinuate, flatter, bow, and bend my Knee.
Give Sorrow leave a while, to tuture me
To this submission. Yet I well remember
The favours of these men: were they not mine?
Did they not sometime cry, All hail to me?
So Iudas did to Christ: but he in twelve,
Found truth in all, but one; I, in twelve thousand, none.
God save the King: will no man say, Amen?
Am I both Priest, and Clarke? well then, Amen.
God save the King, although I be not hee:
And yet Amen, if Heaven doe think him me.
To doe what service, am I sent for hither?
To doe that office of thine own good will,
Which tyred Majesty did make thee offer:
The Resignation of thy State and Crown
To Henry Bullingbrooke.
Give me the Crown. Here Cousin, seize ye Crown:
Here Cousin, on this side my Hand, on that side thine.
Now is this Golden Crown like a deep Well,
That owes two Buckets, filling one another,
The emptier ever dancing in the ayre,
The other down, unseen, and full of Water:
That Bucket down, and full of Tears am I,
Drinking my Griefs, whilst you mount up on high.
I thought you had been willing to resign.
My Crown I am, but still my Griefs are mine:
You may my Glories and my State depose,
But not my Griefs; still am I King of those.
Part of your Cares you give me with your Crown.
Your Cares set up, do not pluck my Cares down.
My Care, is loss of Care, by old Care done,
Your Care, is gain of Care, by new Care won:
The Cares I give, I have, though given away,
They attend the Crown, yet still with me they stay:
Are you contended to resign the Crown?
I, no; no, I: for I must nothing bee:
Therefore no, no, for I resign to thee.
Now, mark me how I will undo my self.
I give this heavy Weight from off my Head,
And this unwieldy Sceptre from my Hand,
The pride of Kingly sway from out my Heart.
With mine own Tears I wash away my Balm,
With mine own Hands I give away my Crown,
With mine own Tongue deny my Sacred State,
With mine own Breath release all duteous Oaths;
All Pomp and Majesty I doe forswear:
My Manors, Rents, Revenues, I forgo;
My Acts, Decrees, and Statutes I deny:
God pardon all Oaths that are broke to me,
God keep all Vows vnbroke are made to thee.
Make me, that nothing have, with nothing grieved,
And thou with all pleased, that hast all achieved.
Long may thou live in Richards Seat to sit,
And soon lye Richard in an Earthy Pit.
God save King Henry, vn-King'd Richard says,
And send him many years of Sunne-shine days.
What more remains?
No, more: but that you read
These Accusations, and these grievous Crimes,
Committed by your Person, and your followers,
Against the State, and Profit of this Land:
That by confessing them, the Souls of men
May deem, that you are worthily deposed.
Must I doe so? and must I rauell out
My weau'd-vp follies? Gentle Northumberland,
If thy Offences were upon Record,
Would it not shame thee, in so fair a troupe,
To read a Lecture of them? If thou would,
There should thou find one heinous Article,
Containing the deposing of a King,
And cracking the strong Warrant of an Oath,
Marked with a Blot, damned in the Book of Heaven.
Nay, all of you, that stand and look upon me,
Whilst that my wretchedness doth bait my self,
Though some of you, with Pilot, wash your hands,
Showing an outward pity: yet you Pilots
Have here delivered me to my sour Cross,
And Water cannot wash away your sin.
My Lord dispatch, read o'er these Articles.
Mine Eyes are full of Tears, I cannot see:
And yet salt-Water blinds them not so much,
But they can see a sort of Traitors here.
Nay, if I turn mine Eyes upon my self,
I find my self a Traitor with the rest:
For I have given here my Souls consent,
T'vndeck the pompous Body of a King;
Made Glory base; a Sovereignty, a Slave;
Proud Majesty, a Subject; State, a Peasant.
My Lord.
No Lord of thine, thou haught-insulting man;
No, nor no mans Lord: I have no Name, no Title;
No, not that Name was given me at the Font.
But it is usurped: alack the heavy day,
That I have worn so many Winters out,
And know not now, what Name to call my self.
Oh, that I were a Mockery, King of Snow,
Standing before the Sun of Bullingbrooke,
To melt my self away in Water-drops.
Good King, great King, and yet not greatly good,
And if my word be Sterling yet in England,
Let it command a Mirror hither straight,
That it may show me what a Face I have,
Since it is Bankrupt of his Majesty.
Go some of you, and fetch a Looking-Glasse.
Read o'er this Paper, while yc Glass doth come.
Fiend, thou torments me, ere I come to Hell.
Urge it no more, my Lord Northumberland.
The Commons will not then be satisfied.
They shall be satisfied: Isle read enough,
When I doe see the very Book indeed,
Where all my sins are writ, and that's my self.
Give me that Glass, and therein will I read.
No deeper wrinkles yet? hath Sorrow struck
So many Blows upon this Face of mine,
And made no deeper Wounds? Oh flattering Glass,
Like to my followers in prosperity,
Thou dost beguile me. Was this Face, the Face
That every day, under his House-hold Roof,
Did keep ten thousand men? Was this the Face,
That like the Sun, did make beholders wink?
Is this the Face, which faced so many follies,
That was at last out-fac'd by Bullingbrooke?
A brittle Glory shines in this Face,
As brittle as the Glory, is the Face,
For there it is, cracked in an hundred shivers.
Mark silent King, the Moral of this sport,
How soon my Sorrow hath destroyed my Face.
The shadow of your Sorrow hath destroyed
The shadow of your Face.
Say that again.
The shadow of my Sorrow: ha, let's see,
It is very true, my Grief lies all within,
And these external manner of Laments,
Are merely shadows, to the unseen Grief,
That swells with silence in the tortured Soul.
There lies the substance: and I thank thee King
For thy great bounty, that not only giu'st
Me cause to whale, but teach me the way
How to lament the cause. Isle beg one Boon,
And then be gone, and trouble you no more.
Shall I obtain it?
Name it, fair Cousin.
Fair Cousin? I am greater then a King:
For when I was a King, my flatterers
Were then but subjects; being now a subject,
I have a King here to my flatterer:
Being so great, I have no need to beg.
Yet ask.
And shall I have?
You shall.
Then give me leave to go.
Whither?
Whither you will, so I were from your sights.
Go some of you, convey him to the Tower.
Oh good: convey: Conveyors are you all,
That rise thus nimbly by a true Kings fall.
On Wednesday next, we solemnly set down
Our Coronation: Lords, prepare your selves.
A woeful Pageant have we here beheld.
The Woes to come, the Children yet unborn,
Shall feel this day as sharpe to them as Thorne.
You holy Clergymen, is there no Plot
To rid the Realm of this pernicious Blot.
Before I freely speak my mind herein,
You shall not only take the Sacrament,
To bury mine intents, but also to effect
What ever I shall happen to devise.
I see your Brows are full of Discontent,
Your Heart of Sorrow, and your Eyes of Tears.
Come home with me to Supper, Isle lay a Plot
Shall show vs all a merry day.
This way the King will come: this is the way
To Iulius Caesars ill-erected Tower:
To whose flint Bosom, my condemned Lord
Is doomed a Prisoner, by proud Bullingbrooke.
Here let vs rest, if this rebellious Earth
Have any resting for her true Kings Queen.
But soft, but see, or rather doe not see,
My fair Rose wither: yet look up; behold,
That you in pity may dissolve to dew,
And wash him fresh again with true-loue Tears.
Ah thou, the Model where old Troy did stand,
Thou Map of Honour, thou King Richards Yombe,
And not King Richard: thou most beauteous Inn,
Why should hard-fauor'd Grief be lodged in thee,
When Triumph is become an Ale-house Guest.
Join not with grief, fair Woman, do not so,
To make my end too sudden: learn good Soul,
To think our former State a happy Dream,
From which awaked, the truth of what we are,
Shows vs but this. I am sworn Brother (Sweet)
To grim Necessity; and hee and I
Will keep a League till Death. High thee to France,
And Cloister thee in some Religious House:
Our holy lives must win a new Worlds Crown,
Which our profane hours here have stricken down.
What, is my Richard both in shape and mind
Transformed, and weakened? Hath Bullingbrooke
Deposed thine Intellect? hath he been in thy Heart?
The Lyon dying, thrusts forth his Paw,
And wounds the Earth, if nothing else, with rage
To be o're-powr'd: and wilt thou, Pupill-like,
Take thy Correction mildly, kiss the Rod,
And fawn on Rage with base Humility,
Which art a Lyon, and a King of Beasts?
A King of Beasts indeed: if aught but Beasts,
I had been still a happy King of Men.
Good (sometime Queen) prepare thee hence for France:
Think I am dead, and that even here thou take,
As from my Death-bed, my last living leave.
In Winters tedious Nights sit by the fire
With good old folks, and let them tell thee Tales
Of woeful Ages, long ago betide:
And ere thou bid good-night, to quit their grief,
Tell thou the lamentable fall of me,
And send the hearers weeping to their Beds:
For why? the senseless Brands will sympathize
The heavy accent of thy moving Tongue,
And in compassion, weep the fire out:
And some will morn in ashes, some coal-black,
For the deposing of a rightful King.
My Lord, the mind of Bullingbrooke is changed.
You must to Pomfret, not unto the Tower.
And Madame, there is order taken for you:
With all swift speed, you must away to France.
Northumberland, thou Ladder wherewithal
The mounting Bullingbrooke ascends my Throne,
The time shall not be many hours of age,
More then it is, ere foul sin, gathering head,
Shall break into corruption: thou shalt think,
Though he divide the Realm, and give thee half,
It is too little, helping him to all:
He shall think, that thou which know the way
To plant unrightful Kings, wilt know again,
Being ne'er so little urged another way,
To pluck him headlong from the usurped Throne.
The Love of wicked friends converts to Fear;
That Fear, to Hate; and Hate turns one, or both,
To worthy Danger, and deserved Death.
My guilt be on my Head, and there an end:
Take leave, and part, for you must part forthwith.
Doubly divorced? (bad men) ye violate
A two-fold Marriage; twixt my Crown, and me,
And then betwixt me, and my married Wife.
Let me vn-kisse the Oath twixt thee, and me;
And yet not so, for with a Kiss it was made.
Part vs, Northumberland: I, towards the North,
Where shivering Cold and Sickness pines the Climb:
My Queen to France: from whence, set forth in pomp,
She came adorned hither like sweet May;
Sent back like Hollowmas▪ or shortest of day.
And must we be divided? must we part?
I, hand from hand (my Love) and heart frō heart.
Banish vs both, and send the King with me.
That were some Love, but little Policy.
Then whither he goes, thither let me go.
So two together weeping, make one Woe.
Weep thou for me in France; I, for thee here:
Better far off, then near, be ne'er the near.
Go, count thy Way with Sighs; I, mine with Groans.
So longest Way shall have the longest Moans.
Twice for one step Isle groan, ye Way being short,
And piece the Way out with a heavy heart.
Come, come, in wooing Sorrow let's be brief,
Since wedding it, there is such length in Grief:
One Kiss shall stop our mouths, and dumbly part;
Thus give I mine, and thus take I thy heart.
Give me mine own again: it were no good part,
To take on me to keep, and kill thy heart.
So, now I have mine own again, be gone,
That I may strive to kill it with a groan.
We make Woe wanton with this fond delay:
Once more adieu; the rest, let Sorrow say.
My Lord, you told me you would tell the rest,
When weeping made you break the story off,
Of our two Cousins coming into London.
Where did I leave?
At that sad stop, my Lord,
Where rude misgoverned hands, from Windows tops,
Threw dust and rubbish on King Richards head.
Then, as I said, the Duke, great Bullingbrooke,
Mounted upon a hot and fiery Steed,
Which his aspiring Rider seemed to know,
With slow, but stately pace, kept on his course:
While all tongues cried, God save thee Bullingbrooke.
You would have thought the very windows spake,
So many greedy looks of young and old,
Through Casements darted their desiring eyes
Upon his visage: and that all the walls,
With painted Imagery had said at once,
Iesu preserve thee, welcome Bullingbrooke.
Whilst he, from one side to the other turning,
Bare-headed, lower then his proud Steeds neck,
Bespoke them thus: I thank you Countrymen:
And thus still doing, thus he past along.
Alas poor Richard, where rides he the whilst?
As in a Theater, the eyes of men
After a well graced Actor leaves the Stage,
Are idly bent on him that enters next,
Thinking his prattle to be tedious:
Even so, or with much more contempt, men's eyes
Did scowl on Richard: no man cried, God save him:
No joyful tongue gave him his welcome home,
But dust was thrown upon his Sacred head,
Which with such gentle sorrow he shook off,
His face still combating with tears and smiles
(The badges of his grief and patience)
That had not God (for some strong purpose) steeled
The hearts of men, they must perforce have melted,
And Barbarism it self have pitied him.
But heaven hath a hand in these events,
To whose high will we bound our calm contents.
To Bullingbrooke, are we sworn Subjects now,
Whose State, and Honour, I for aye allow.
Here comes my son Aumerle.
Aumerle that was,
But that is lost, for being Richards Friend.
And Madam, you must call him Rutland now:
I am in Parliament pledge for his truth,
And lasting fealty to the new-made King.
Welcome my son: who are the Violets now,
That strew the greene lap of the new-come Spring?
Madam, I know not, nor I greatly care not,
God knows, I had as lief be none, as one.
Well, bear you well in this new-spring of time
Least you be cropped before you come to prime.
What news from Oxford? Hold those Justs &amp; Triumphs?
For ought I know my Lord, they do.
You will be there I know.
If God prevent not, I purpose so.
What Seal is that that hangs without thy bosom?
Yea, look thou pale? Let me see the Writing.
My Lord, it is nothing.
No matter then who sees it,
I will be satisfied, let me see the Writing.
I do beseech your Grace to pardon me,
It is a matter of small consequence,
Which for some reasons I would not have seen.
Which for some reasons sir, I mean to see:
I fear, I fear.
What should you fear?
It is nothing but some bond, that he is entered into
For gay apparel, against the Triumph.
Bound to himself? What doth he with a Bond
That he is bound to? Wife, thou art a fool.
Boy, let me see the Writing.
I do beseech you pardon me, I may not show it.
I will be satisfied: let me see it I say.
Treason, foul Treason, Villain, Traitor, Slave.
What's the matter, my Lord?
Hoe, who's within there? Saddle my horse.
Heaven for his mercy: what treachery is here?
Why, what is it my Lord?
Give me my boots, I say: Saddle my horse:
Now by my Honour, my life, my troth,
I will appeach the Villain.
What is the matter?
Peace foolish Woman.
I will not peace. What is the matter Son?
Good Mother be content, it is no more
Then my poor life must answer.
Thy life answer?
Bring me my Boots, I will unto the King.
Strike him Aumerle. Poor boy, you art amazed,
Hence Villain, never more come in my sight.
Give me my Boots, I say.
Why York, what wilt thou do?
Wilt thou not hide the Trespass of thine own?
Have we more Sons? Or are we like to have?
Is not my teeming date drunk up with time?
And wilt thou pluck my fair Son from mine Age,
And rob me of a happy Mothers name?
Is he not like thee? Is he not thine own?
Thou fond mad woman:
Wilt thou conceal this dark Conspiracy?
A dozen of them here have tan the Sacrament,
And interchangeably set down their hands
To kill the King at Oxford.
He shall be none:
We'll keep him here: then what is that to him?
Away fond woman: were hee twenty times my Son, I would appeach him.
Had thou groaned for him as I have done,
Thou would be more pitiful:
But now I know thy mind; thou dost suspect
That I have been disloyal to thy bed,
And that he is a Bastard, not thy Son:
Sweet York, sweet husband, be not of that mind:
He is as like thee, as a man may bee,
Not like to me, nor any of my Kin,
And yet I love him.
Make way, unruly Woman.
After Aumerle. Mount thee upon his horse,
Spur post, and get before him to the King,
And beg thy pardon, ere he do accuse thee,
Isle not be long behind: though I be old,
I doubt not but to ride as fast as York:
And never will I rise up from the ground,
Till Bullingbrooke have pardoned thee: Away be gone.
Can no man tell of my unthrifty Son?
It is full three months since I did see him last.
If any plague hang over vs, it is he,
I would to heaven (my Lords) he might be found:
Enquire at London, amongst the Taverns there:
For there (they say) he daily doth frequent,
With unrestrained loose Companions,
Even such (they say) as stand in narrow Lanes,
And rob our Watch, and beat our passengers,
Which he, young wanton, and effeminate Boy
Takes on the point of Honour, to support
So dissolute a crew.
My Lord, some two days since I saw the Prince,
And told him of these Triumphs held at Oxford.
And what said the Gallant?
His answer was: he would unto the Stews,
And from the commonest creature pluck a Glove
And wear it as a favour, and with that
He would unhorse the lustiest Challenger.
As dissolute as desperate, yet through both,
I see some sparks of better hope: which elder days
May happily bring forth. But who comes here?
Where is the King?
What means our Cousin, that hee stares
And looks so wildely?
God save your Grace. I do beseech your Majesty
To have some conference with your Grace alone.
Withdraw your selves, and leave vs here alone:
What is the matter with our Cousin now?
For ever may my knees grow to the earth,
My tongue cleave to my roof within my mouth,
Unless a Pardon, ere I rise, or speak.
Intended, or committed was this fault?
If on the first, how heinous ere it bee,
To win thy after love, I pardon thee.
Then give me leave, that I may turn the key,
That no man enter, till my tale me done.
Have thy desire.
My Liege beware, look to thy self,
Thou hast a Traitor in thy presence there.
Villain, Isle make thee safe.
Stay thy revengeful hand, thou hast no cause to fear.
Open the door, secure foole-hardy King:
Shall I for love speak treason to thy face?
Open the door, or I will break it open.
What is the matter (Uncle) speak, recover breath,
Tell vs how near is danger,
That we may arm vs to encounter it.
Peruse this writing here, and thou shalt know
The reason that my haste forbids me show.
Remember as thou read, thy promise past:
I do repent me, read not my name there,
My heart is not confederate with my hand.
It was (villain) ere thy hand did set it down.
I tore it from the Traitors bosom, King.
Fear, and not Love, begets his penitence;
Forget to pity him, least thy pity prove
A Serpent, that will sting thee to the heart.
Oh heinous, strong, and bold Conspiracy,
O loyal Father of a treacherous Son:
Thou sheer, immaculate, and silver fountain,
From whence this stream, through muddy passages
Hath had his current, and defiled himself.
Thy overflow of good, converts to bad,
And thy abundant goodness shall excuse
This deadly blot, in thy digressing son.
So shall my Virtue be his Vices bawd,
And he shall spend mine Honour, with his Shame;
As thriftless Sons, their scraping Fathers Gold.
Mine honour lives, when his dishonour dies,
Or my shamed life, in his dishonour lies:
Thou kill me in his life, giving him breath,
The Traitor lives, the true man's put to death.
What hoe (my Liege) for heavens sake let me in.
What shrill-voic'd Suppliant, makes this eager cry?
A woman, and thine Aunt (great King) it is I.
Speak with me, pity me, open the door,
A Beggar begs, that never begged before.
Our Scene is altered from a serious thing,
And now changed to the Beggar, and the King.
My dangerous Cousin, let your Mother in,
I know she's come, to pray for your foul sin.
If thou do pardon, whosoever pray,
More sins for this forgiveness, prosper may.
This festered joint cut off, the rest rests sound,
This let alone, will all the rest confound.
O King, believe not this hard-hearted man,
Love, loving not it self, none other can.
Thou frantic woman, what dost you make here,
Shall thy old dugs, once more a Traitor rear?
Sweet York be patient, hear me gentle Liege.
Rise up good Aunt.
Not yet, I thee beseech.
For ever will I kneel upon my knees,
And never see day, that the happy sees,
Till thou give joy: until thou bid me joy.
By pardoning Rutland, my transgressing Boy.
Unto my mothers prayers, I bend my knee.
Against them both, my true joints bended be.
Pleads he in earnest? Look upon his Face,
His eyes do drop no tears: his prayers are in jest:
His words come from his mouth, ours from our breast.
He prays but faintly, and would be denied,
We pray with heart, and soul, and all beside:
His weary joints would gladly rise, I know,
Our knees shall kneel, till to the ground they grow:
His prayers are full of false hypocrisy,
Ours of true zeal, and deep integrity:
Our prayers do out-pray his, then let them have
That mercy, which true prayers ought to have.
Good Aunt stand up.
Nay, do not say stand up.
But Pardon first, and afterwards stand up.
And if I were thy Nurse, thy tongue to teach,
Pardon should be the first word of thy speech.
I never longed to hear a word till now:
Say Pardon (King,) let pity teach thee how.
The word is short: but not so short as sweet,
No word like Pardon, for Kings mouth's so meet.
Speak it in French (King) say Pardon'ne moi.
Dost thou teach pardon, Pardon to destroy?
Ah my sour husband, my hard-hearted Lord,
That set's the word it self, against the word.
Speak Pardon, as it is currant in our Land,
The chopping French we do not understand.
Thine eye begins to speak, set thy tongue there,
Or in thy piteous heart, plant thou thine ear,
That hearing how our plaints and prayers do pearce,
Pity may move thee, Pardon to rehearse.
Good Aunt, stand up.
I do not sue to stand,
Pardon is all the suite I have in hand.
I pardon him, as heaven shall pardon me.
O happy vantage of a kneeling knee:
Yet am I sick 〈◊〉 fear: Speak it again,
Twice saying Pardon, doth not pardon twain,
But makes one pardon strong.
I pardon him with all my hart.
A God on earth thou art.
But for our trusty brother-in-Law, the Abbot,
With all the rest of that consorted crew,
Destruction straight shall dog them at the heals:
Good Uncle help to order several powers
To Oxford, or where ere these Traitors are:
They shall not live within this world I swear,
But I will have them, if I once know where.
Uncle farewell, and Cousin adieu:
Your mother well hath pried, and prove you true.
Come my old son, I pray heaven make thee new.
Did thou not mark the King what words hee spake?
Have I no friend will rid me of this living fear:
Was it not so?
Those were his very words.
Have I no Friend? (quoth he:) he spake it twice,
And urged it twice together, did he not?
He did.
And speaking it, he wistly looked on me,
As who should say, I would thou were it the man
That would divorce this terror from my heart,
Meaning the King at Pomfret: Come, let's go;
I am the Kings Friend, and will rid his Foe.
I have bin studying, how to compare
This Prison where I live, unto the World:
And for because the world is populous,
And here is not a Creature, but my self,
I cannot do it: yet Isle hammer't out.
My Brain, Isle prove the Female to my Soul,
My Soul, the Father: and these two beget
A generation of still breeding Thoughts;
And these same Thoughts, people this Little World
In humours, like the people of this world,
For no thought is contented. The better sort,
As thoughts of things Divine, are intermixed
With scruples, and do set the Faith it self
Against the Faith: as thus: Come little ones: &amp; then again,
It is as hard to come, as for a Camel
To thread the postern of a Needles eye.
Thoughts tending to Ambition, they do plot
Unlikely wonders; how these vain weak nails
May tear a passage through the Flinty ribs
Of this hard world, my ragged prison walls:
And for they cannot, dye in their own pride.
Thoughts tending to Content, flatter themselves,
That they are not the first of Fortunes slaves,
Nor shall not be the last. Like silly Beggars,
Who sitting in the Stocks, refuge their shame
That many have, and others must sit there;
And in this Thought, they find a kind of ease,
Bearing their own misfortune on the back
Of such as have before endured the like.
Thus play I in one Prison, many people,
And none contented. Sometimes am I King;
Then Treason makes me wish my self a Beggar,
And so I am. Then crushing penury,
Persuades me, I was better when a King:
Then am I king'd again: and by and by,
Think that I am vn-king'd by Bullingbrooke,
And straight am nothing. But what ere I am,
Nor I, nor any man, that but man is,
With nothing shall be pleased, till he be eased
With being nothing, Music do I hear?
Ha, ha? keep time: How sour sweet Music is,
When Time is broke, and no Proportion kept?
So is it in the Music of men's lives:
And here have I the daintiness of ear,
To hear time broke in a disordered string:
But for the Concord of my State and Time,
Had not an ear to hear my true Time broke.
I wasted Time, and now doth Time waste me:
For now hath Time made me his numbering clock;
My Thoughts, are minutes; and with Sighs they jar,
Their watches on unto mine eyes, the outward Watch,
Whereto my finger, like a Dialls point,
Is pointing still, in cleansing them from tears.
Now sir, the sound that tells what hour it is,
Are clamorous groans, that strike upon my heart,
Which is the bell: so Sighs, and Tears, and Groans,
Show Minutes, Hours, and Times: but my Time
R•ns posting on, in Bullingbrookes proud joy,
While I stand fooling here, his jack of the Clock.
This Music mads me, let it sound no more,
For though it have help madmen to their wits,
In me it seems, it will make wise-men mad:
Yet blessing on his heart that gives it me;
For it is a sign of love, and love to Richard,
Is a strange Brooch▪ in this all-hating world.
Hail Royal Prince.
Thanks Noble Peer,
The cheapest of vs, is ten groats too dear.
What art thou? And how come thou hither?
Where no man ever comes, but that sad dog
That brings me food, to make misfortune live?
I was a poor Groom of thy Stable (King)
When thou were it King: who travelling towards York,
With much ado, at length have gotten leave
To look upon my (sometimes Royal) masters face.
O how it yearned my heart, when I beheld
In London streets, that Coronation day,
When Bullingbrooke rode on Roan Barberry,
That horse, that thou so often hast bestride,
That horse, that I so carefully have dressed.
Rode he on Barberry? Tell me gentle Friend,
How went he under him?
So proudly, as if he had disdained the ground.
So proud, that Bullingbrooke was on his back;
That Jade hath eat bread from my Royal hand.
This hand hath made him proud with clapping him.
Would he not stumble? Would he not fall down
(Since Pride must have a fall) and break the neck
Of that proud man, that did usurp his back?
Forgiveness horse: Why do I rail on thee,
Since thou created to be awed by man
Was it borne to bear? I was not made a horse,
And yet I bear a burden like an Ass,
Spur-gall'd, and tired by la•nti•g Bullingbrooke.
Fellow, give place here is 〈◊〉 •nger •y.
If •thou love me, 〈◊〉 thou with away.
What thy tongue da•s not, that my heart shall say.
My Lord, will please you to fall too?
Taste of it first, as thou were it wont to doo.
My Lord I dare not: Sir Pierce of Exton,
Who lately came from the King, commands the contrary.
The devil take Henrie of Lancaster, and thee;
Patience is stale, and I am weary of it.
Help, help, help.
How now? what means Death in this rude assault?
Villain, thine own hand yields thy deaths instrument,
Go thou and fill another room in hell.
That hand shall burn in neuer-quenching fire,
That staggers thus my person. Exton, thy fierce hand,
Hath with the Kings blood, stained the Kings own land.
Mount, mount my soul, thy seat is up on high,
Whilst my gross flesh sinks downward, here to dye.
As full of Valour, as of Royal blood,
Both have I spilt: Oh would the deed were good.
For now the devil, that told me I did well,
Says, that this deed is chronicled in hell.
This dead King to the living King Isle bear,
Take hence the rest, and give them burial here.
Kind Uncle York, the latest news we hear,
Is that the Rebels have consumed with fire
Our Town of Ciceter in Gloucestershire,
But whether they be tan or slain, we hear not.
Welcome my Lord: What is the news?
First to thy Sacred State, wish I all happiness:
The next news is, I have to London sent
The heads of Salsbury, Spencer, Blunt, and Kent:
The manner of their taking may appear
At large discoursed in this paper here.
We thank thee gentle Percy for thy pains,
And to thy worth will add right worthy gains.
My Lord, I have from Oxford sent to London,
The heads of Broccas, and Sir Bennet Seely,
Two of the dangerous consorted Traitors,
That sought at Oxford, thy dire overthrow.
Thy pains Fitzwaters shall not be forgot,
Right Noble is thy merit, well I wot.
The grand Conspirator, Abbot of Westminster,
With clog of Conscience, and sour Melancholy,
Hath yielded up his body to the grave:
But here is Carlisle, living to abide
Thy Kingly doom, and sentence of his pride.
Carlisle, this is your doom:
Choose out some secret place, some reverend room
More then thou hast, and with it joy thy life:
So as thou liu'st in peace, dye free from strife:
For though mine enemy▪ thou hast ever been,
High sparks of Honour in thee have I seen.
Great King, within this Coffin I present
Thy buried fear. Herein all breathless lies
The mightiest of thy greatest enemies
Richard of Bordeaux, by me hither brought.
Exton, I thank thee not, for thou hast wrought
A deed of Slaughter, with thy fatal hand,
Upon my head, and all this famous Land.
From your own mouth my Lord, did I this deed.
They love not poison, that do poison need,
Nor do I thee: though I did wish him dead,
I hate the Murderer, love him murdered.
The guilt of conscience take thou for thy labour,
But neither my good word, nor Princely favour.
With Caine go wander through the shade of night,
And never show thy head by day, nor light.
Lords, I protest my soul is full of woe,
That blood should sprinkle me, to make me grow.
Come morn with me, for that I do lament,
And put on sullen Black incontinent:
Isle make a voyage to the Holy-land,
To wash this blood off from my guilty hand.
March sadly after, grace my mourning here,
In weeping after this untimely Beer.

HVng be ye heavens with black, yield day to night;
Comets importing change of Times and States,
Brandish your crystal Tresses in the Sky,
And with them scourge the bad revolting Stars,
That have consented unto Henries death:
King Henry the Fifth, too famous to live long,
England ne'er lost a King of so much worth.
England ne'er had a King until his time:
Virtue he had, deserving to command,
His brandished Sword did blind men with his beams,
His Arms spread wider then a Dragons Wings:
His sparkling Eyes, replete with wrathful fire,
More dazzled and drove back his Enemies,
Then mid-day Sun, fierce bent against their faces.
What should I say? his Deeds exceed all speech:
He ne'er lift up his Hand, but conquered.
We morn in black, why mourn we not in blood?
Henry is dead, and never shall revive:
Upon a Wooden Coffin we attend;
And Deaths dishonourable Victory,
We with our stately presence glorify,
Like Captives bound to a Triumphant Carre.
What? shall we curse the Planets of Mishap,
That plotted thus our Glories overthrow?
Or shall we think the subtile-witted French,
Conjurers and Sorcerers, that afraid of him,
By Magic Verses have contrived his end.
He was a King, blessed of the King of Kings.
Unto the French, the dreadful Iudgement-Day
So dreadful will not be, as was his sight.
The Battles of the Lord of Hosts he fought:
The Churches Prayers made him so prosperous.
The Church? where is it?
Had not Church-men prayed,
His thread of Life had not so soon decayed.
None doe you like, but an effeminate Prince,
Whom like a Schoole-boy you may ouer-awe.
Gloster, what ere we like, thou art Protector,
And look to command the Prince and Realm.
Thy Wife is proud, she holds thee in awe,
More then God or Religious Church-men may.
Name not Religion, for thou love the Flesh,
And ne'er throughout the year to Church thou go,
Except it be to pray against thy foes.
Cease, cease these Jars, &amp; rest your minds in peace:
Let's to the Altar: Heralds wait on vs;
In stead of Gold, we'll offer up our Arms,
Since Arms avail not, now that Henry's dead,
Posterity await for wretched years,
When at their Mothers moistened eyes, Babes shall suck,
Our Isle be made a Nourish of salt Tears,
And none but Women left to whale the dead.
Henry the Fifth, thy Ghost I invoke:
Prosper this Realm, keep it from Civil Broils,
Combat with adverse Planets in the Heavens;
A far more glorious Star thy Soul will make,
Then Iulius Caesar, bright—
My honourable Lords, health to you all:
Sad tidings bring I to you out of France,
Of loss, of slaughter, and discomfiture:
Guyen, Champaign, Rheimes, Orleans,
Paris, Guysors, Poictiers, are all quite lost.
What say thou man, before dead Henry's Coarse?
Speak softly, or the loss of those great Towns
Will make him burst his Lead, and rise from death.
Is Paris lost? is Roan yielded up?
If Henry were recalled to life again,
These news would cause him once more yield the Ghost.
How were they lost? what treachery was used?
No treachery, but want of Men and Money.
Amongst the Soldiers this is muttered,
That here you maintain several Factions:
And whilst a Field should be dispatcht and fought,
You are disputing of your Generals.
One would have lingering Wars, with little cost;
Another would fly swift, but wants Wings:
A third thinks, without expense at all,
By guileful fair words, Peace may be obtained.
Awake, awake, English Nobility,
Let not sloth dim your Honours, new begot;
Cropped are the Flower-de-Luces in your Arms
Of Englands Coat, one half is cut away.
Were our Tears wanting to this Funeral,
These Tidings would call forth her flowing Tides.
Me they concern, Regent I am of France:
Give me my steeled Coat, Isle fight for France.
Away with these disgraceful wailing Robes;
Wounds will I lend the French, in stead of Eyes,
To weep their intermissive Miseries.
Lords view these Letters, full of bad mischance.
France is revolted from the English quite,
Except some petty Towns, of no import.
The Dolphin Charles is crowned King in Rheimes:
The Bastard of Orleans with him is joined:
Reynold, Duke of Aniou, doth take his part,
The Duke of Alanson flies to his side.
The Dolphin crowned King? all fly to him?
O whither shall we fly from this reproach?
We will not fly, but to our enemies throats.
Bedford, if thou be slack, Isle fight it out.
Gloster, why doubt thou of my forwardness?
An Army have I mustered in my thoughts,
Wherewith already France is ouer-run.
My gracious Lords, to add to your laments,
Wherewith you now bedew King Henries hearse,
I must inform you of a dismal fight,
Betwixt the stout Lord Talbot, and the French.
What? wherein Talbot overcame, is it so?
O no: wherein Lord Talbot was o'rethrown:
The circumstance Isle tell you more at large.
The tenth of August last, this dreadful Lord,
Retiring from the Siege of Orleans,
Having full scarce six thousand in his troupe,
By three and twenty thousand of the French
Was round encompassed, and set upon:
No leisure had he to enranke his men.
He wanted Pikes to set before his Archers:
In stead whereof, sharpe Stakes plucked out of Hedges
They pitched in the ground confusedly,
To keep the Horsemen off, from breaking in.
More then three hours the fight continued:
Where valiant Talbot, aboue humane thought,
Enacted wonders with his Sword and Lance.
Hundreds he sent to Hell, and none durst stand him:
Here, there, and every where enraged, he slew.
The French exclaimed, the Devil was in Arms,
All the whole Army stood agaz'd on him.
His Soldiers spying his undaunted Spirit,
A Talbot, a Talbot, cried out amain,
And rushed into the Bowels of the Battle.
Here had the Conquest fully been sealed up,
If Sir Iohn Falstaff had not played the Coward.
He being in the Vauward, placed behind,
With purpose to relieve and follow them,
Cowardly fled, not having struck one stroke.
Hence grew the general wrack and massacre:
Enclosed were they with their Enemies.
A base Wallon, to win the Dolphins grace,
Thrust Talbot with a Spear into the Back,
Whom all France, with their chief assembled strength,
Durst not presume to look once in the face.
Is Talbot slain then? I will slay my self,
For living idly here, in pomp and ease,
Whilst such a worthy Leader, wanting aid,
Unto his dastard foe-men is betrayed.
O no, he lives, but is took Prisoner,
And Lord Scales with him, and Lord Hungerfor•:
Most of the rest slaughtered, or took likewise.
His Ransom there is none but I shall pay.
Isle hale the Dolphin headlong from his Throne,
His Crown shall be the Ransom of my friend:
Four of their Lords Isle change for one of ours.
Farewell my Masters, to my Task will I,
Bonfires in France forthwith I am to make,
To keep our great Saint Georges Feast withal.
Ten thousand Soldiers with me I will take,
Whose bloody deeds shall make all Europe quake.
So you had need, for Orleans is besieged,
The English Army is grown weak and faint:
The Earl of Salisbury craves supply,
And hardly keeps his men from mutiny,
Since they so few, watch such a multitude.
Remember Lords your Oaths to Henry sworn:
Either to quell the Dolphin utterly,
Or bring him in obedience to your yoke.
I doe remember it, and here take my leave,
To go about my preparation.
Isle to the Tower with all the hast I can,
To view the Artillery and Munition,
And then I will proclaim young Henry King.
To Eltam will I, where the young King is,
Being ordained his special Governor,
And for his safety there Isle best devise.
Each hath his Place and Function to attend:
I am left out; for me nothing remains:
But long I will not be Jack out of Office▪
The King from Eltam I intend to send.
And sit at chiefest Sterne of public Weal.
Mars his true moving, even as in the Heavens,
So in the Earth, to this day is not known.
Late did he shine upon the English side:
Now we are Victors, upon vs he smiles.
What Towns of any moment, but we have?
At pleasure here we lye, near Orleans:
Otherwhiles, the famished English, like pale Ghosts,
Faintly besiege vs one hour in a month.
They want their Porridge, &amp; their fat Bull Beef:
Either they must be dieted like Mules,
And have their Provender tied to their mouths,
Or piteous they will look, like drowned Mice.
Let's raise the Siege: why live we idly here?
Talbot is taken, whom we wont to fear:
Remains none but mad-brayn'd Salisbury,
And he may well in fretting spend his gall,
Nor men nor Money hath he to make War.
Sound, sound Alarm, we will rush on them.
Now for the honour of the forlorn French:
Him I forgive my death, that kills me,
When he sees me go back one foot, or fly.
Who ever saw the like? what men have I?
Dogs, Cowards, Dastards: I would ne'er have fled,
But that they left me amidst my Enemies.
Salisbury is a desperate Homicide,
He fights as one weary of his life:
The other Lords, like Lyons wanting food,
Doe rush upon vs as their hungry prey.
Froysard, a Countryman of ours, records,
England all Oliuers and Rowlands breed,
During the time Edward the third did reign:
More truly now may this be verified;
For none but Samsons and Goliasses
It sends forth to skirmish: one to ten?
Lean raw-bon'd Rascals, who would ever suppose,
They had such courage and audacity?
Let's leave this Town,
For they are hayre-brayn'd Slaves,
And hunger will enforce them to be more eager:
Of old I know them; rather with their Teeth
The Walls they'll tear down, then forsake the Siege.
I think by some odd Gimmals or Device
Their Arms are set, like Clocks, still to strike on;
Else ne'er could they hold out so as they doe:
By my consent, we'll even let them alone.
Be it so.
Whore's the Prince Dolphin? I have news for him.
Bastard of Orleans, thrice welcome to vs.
Me thinks your looks are sad, your cheer appalled.
Hath the late overthrow wrought this offence?
Be not dismayed, for succour is at hand:
A holy Maid hither with me I bring,
Which by a Vision sent to her from Heaven,
Ordained is to raise this tedious Siege,
And drive the English forth the bounds of France:
The spirit of deep Prophecy she hath,
Exceeding the nine Sibyls of old Rome:
What's past, and what's to come, she can descry.
Speak, shall I call her in? believe my words,
For they are certain, and infallible
Go call her in: but first, to try her skill,
Reignier stand thou as Dolphin in my place;
Question her proudly, let thy Looks be sterne,
By this means shall we found what skill she hath.
Fair Maid, is it thou wilt doe these won∣dross feats?
Reignier, is it thou that think to beguile me?
Where is the Dolphin? Come, come from behind,
I know thee well, though never seen before.
Be not amazed, there's nothing hid from me;
In private will I talk with thee apart:
Stand back you Lords, and give vs leave a while.
She takes upon her bravely at first dash.
Dolphin, I am by birth a Shepherds Daughter,
My wit vntrayn'd in any kind of Art:
Heaven and our Lady gracious hath it pleased
To shine on my contemptible estate.
Lo, whilst I waited on my tender Lambs,
And to Suns parching heat displayed my cheeks,
Gods Mother deigned to appear to me,
And in a Vision full of Majesty,
Willed me to leave my base Vocation,
And free my Country from Calamity:
Her aid she promised, and assured success.
In complete Glory she reueal'd her self:
And whereas I was black and answered before,
With those clear Rays, which she infused on me,
That beauty am I blessed with, which you may see.
Ask me what question thou can possible,
And I will answer vnpremeditated:
My Courage try by Combat, if thou dare,
And thou shalt find that I exceed my Sex.
Resolve on this, thou shalt be fortunate,
If thou receive me for thy Warlike Mate.
Thou hast astonished me with thy high terms:
Only this proof Isle of thy Valour make,
In single Combat thou shalt buckle with me;
And if thou vanquish, thy words are true,
Otherwise I renounce all confidence.
I am prepared: here is my keene-edg'd Sword,
Decked with fine Flower-de-Luces on each side,
The which at Touraine, in S. Katherines Church-yard,
Out of a great deal of old Iron, I chose forth.
Then come a Gods name, I fear no woman.
And while I live, Isle ne'er fly from a man.
Stay, stay thy hands, thou art an Amazon,
And fight with the Sword of Debora.
Christs Mother helps me, else I were too weak.
Who ever helps thee, it is thou that must help me:
Impatiently I burn with thy desire,
My heart and hands thou hast at once subdued.
Excellent Puzel, if thy name be so,
Let me thy servant, and not Sovereign be,
It is the French Dolphin sues to thee thus.
I must not yield to any rights of Love,
For my Profession's sacred from aboue:
When I have chased all thy Foes from hence,
Then will I think upon a recompense.
Mean time look gracious on thy prostrate Thrall.
My Lord me thinks is very long in talk.
Doubtless he shriues this woman to her smock,
Else ne'er could he so long protract his speech.
Shall wee disturb him, since hee keeps no mean?
He may mean more then we poor men do know,
These women are shrewd tempters with their tongues.
My Lord, where are you? what devise you on?
Shall we give o'er Orleans, or no?
Why no, I say: distrustful Recreants,
Fight till the last gasp: Isle be your guard.
What she says, Isle confirm: we'll fight it out.
Assigned am I to be the English Scourge.
This night the Siege assuredly Isle raise:
Expect Saint Martins Summer, Halcyons days,
Since I have entered into these Wars.
Glory is like a Circle in the Water,
Which never cease to enlarge it self,
Till by broad spreading, it disperse to nought.
With Henries death, the English Circle ends,
Dispersed are the glories it included:
Now am I like that proud insulting Ship,
Which Caesar and his fortune bare at once.
Was Mahomet inspired with a Dove?
Thou with an Eagle art inspired then.
Helen, the Mother of Great Constantine,
Nor yet S. Philips daughters were like thee.
Bright Star of Venus, fallen down on the Earth,
How may I reverently worship thee enough?
Leave off delays, and let vs raise the Siege.
Woman, do what thou can to save our honours,
Drive them from Orleans, and be immortalised.
Presently we'll try: come, let's away about it,
No Prophet will I trust, if she prove false.
I am come to survey the Tower this day;
Since Henries death, I fear there is Conveyance:
Where be these Warders, that they wait not here?
Open the Gates, it is Gloster that calls.
Who's there, that knocks so imperiously?
It is the Noble Duke of Gloster.
Who ere he be, you may not be let in.
Villains, answer you so the Lord Protector?
The Lord protect him, so we answer him,
We doe no otherwise then wee are willed.
Who willed you? or whose will stands but mine?
There's none Protector of the Realm, but I:
Break up the Gates, Isle be your warrantize;
Shall I be flouted thus by dunghill Grooms?
What noise is this? what Traitors have wee here?
Lieutenant, is it you whose voice I hear?
Open the Gates, here's Gloster that would enter.
Have patience Noble Duke, I may not open,
The Cardinal of Winchester forbids:
From him I have express commandment,
That thou nor none of thine shall be let in.
Faint-hearted Wooduile, prize him before me?
Arrogant Winchester, that haughty Prelate,
Whom Henry our late Sovereign ne'er could brooke?
Thou art no friend to God, or to the King:
Open the Gates, or Isle shut thee out shortly.
Open the Gates unto the Lord Protector,
Or we'll burst them open, if that you come not quickly.
How now ambitious Vmpheir, what means this?
Peeled Priest, dost thou command me to be shut out?
I doe, thou most usurping Proditor,
And not Protector of the King or Realm.
Stand back thou manifest Conspirator,
Thou that contrived to murder our dead Lord,
Thou that giu'st Whores Indulgences to sin,
Isle canvas thee in thy broad Cardinals Hat,
If thou proceed in this thy insolence.
Nay, stand thou back, I will not budge a foot:
This be Damascus, be thou cursed Cain,
To slay thy Brother Abel, if thou wilt.
I will not slay thee, but Isle drive thee back:
Thy Scarlet Robes, as a Child's bearing Cloth,
Isle use, to carry thee out of this place.
Doe what thou dare, I beard thee to thy face.
What? am I dared, and bearded to my face?
Draw men, for all this privileged place,
Blew Coats to Tawny Coats, Priest, beware your Beard,
I mean to tug it, and to cuff you soundly.
Under my feet I stamp thy Cardinals Hat:
In spite of Pope, or dignities of Church,
Here by the Cheeks Isle drag thee up and down.
Gloster, thou wilt answer this before the Pope.
Winchester Goose, I cry, a Rope, a Rope.
Now beat them hence, why doe you let them stay?
Thee Isle chase hence, thou Wolf in Sheep array.
Out Tawney-Coates, out Scarlet Hypocrite.
Fie Lords, that you being supreme. Magistrates,
Thus contumeliously should break the Peace.
Peace Mayor, thou know little of my wrongs:
Here's Beauford, that regards nor God nor King,
Hath here distrayn'd the Tower to his use.
Here's Gloster, a Foe to Citizens,
One that still motions War, and never Peace,
O're-charging your free Purses with large Fines;
That seeks to overthrow Religion,
Because he is Protector of the Realm;
And would have Armour here out of the Tower,
To Crown himself King, and suppress the Prince.
I will not answer thee with words, but blows.
Nought rests for me, in this tumultuous strife,
But to make open Proclamation.
Come Officer, as loud as ever thou can, cry:
Cardinal, Isle be no breaker of the Law:
But we shall meet, and break our minds at large.
Gloster, we'll meet to thy cost, be sure:
Thy heart-blood I will have for this days work.
Isle call for Clubs, if you will not away:
This Cardinal's more haughty then the Devil.
Mayor farewell: thou dost but what thou may.
Abominable Gloster, guard thy Head,
For I intend to have it ere long.
See the Coast cleared, and then we will depart.
Good God, these Nobles should such stomachs bear,
I my self fight not once in forty year.
Sirrha, thou know how Orleans is besieged,
And how the English have the Suburbs won.
Father I know, and oft have shot at them,
How ever unfortunate, I missed my aim.
But now thou shalt not. Be thou ruled by me:
Chief Master Gunner am I of this Town,
Something I must doe to procure me grace:
The Princes espyals have informed me,
How the English, in the Suburbs close entrenched,
Went through a secret Grate of Iron Bars,
In yonder Tower, to ouer-peere the City,
And thence discover, how with most advantage
They may vex vs with Shot or with Assault.
To intercept this inconvenience,
A Piece of Ordnance against it I have placed,
And even these three days have I watched,
If I could see them. Now doe thou watch,
For I can stay no longer.
If thou spy any, run and bring me word,
And thou shalt find me at the Governors.
Father, I warrant you, take you no care,
Isle never trouble you, if I may spy them.
Talbot, my life, my joy, again returned?
How were thou handled, being Prisoner?
Or by what means got's thou to be released?
Discourse I prithee on this Turrets top.
The Earl of Bedford had a Prisoner,
Called the brave Lord Ponton de Sautrayle,
For him was I exchanged, and ransomed.
But with a baser man of Arms by far,
Once in contempt they would have bartered me:
Which I disdaining, scorned, and craved death,
Rather then I would be so piled esteemed:
In fine, redeemed I was as I desired.
But O, the treacherous Falstaff wounds my heart,
Whom with my bare fists I would execute,
If I now had him brought into my power.
Yet tell thou not, how thou were enter∣tain'd.
With scoffs and scorns, and contumelious taunts,
In open Market-place produced they me,
To be a public spectacle to all:
Here, said they, is the Terror of the French,
The Scar-Crow that affrights our Children so.
Then broke I from the Officers that led me,
And with my nails dug stones out of the ground,
To hurl at the beholders of my shame.
My grisly countenance made others fly,
None durst come near, for fear of sudden death.
In Iron Walls they deemed me not secure:
So great fear of my Name amongst them were spread,
That they supposed I could rend Bars of Steel,
And spurn in pieces Posts of Adamant.
Wherefore a guard of chosen Shot I had,
That walked about me every Minute while:
And if I did but stir out of my Bed,
Ready they were to shoot me to the heart.
I grieve to hear what torments you endured,
But we will be revenged sufficiently.
Now it is Supper time in Orleans:
Here, through this Grate, I count each one,
And view the Frenchmen how they fortify:
Let vs look in, the sight will much delight thee:
Sir Thomas Gargraue, and Sir William Glandsdale,
Let me have your express opinions,
Where is best place to make our Battery next?
I think at the North Gate, for there stands Lords.
And 〈◊〉 here, at the Bulwark of the Bridge.
For ought I see, this City must be famished,
Or with light Skirmishes enfeebled.
O Lord have mercy on vs, wretched sinners.
O Lord have mercy on me, woeful man.
What chance is this, that suddenly hath crossed vs?
Speak Salisbury; at least, if thou can, speak:
How far'st thou, Mirror of all Martial men?
One of thy Eyes, and thy Cheeks side struck off?
Accursed Tower, accursed fatal Hand,
That hath contrived this woeful Tragedy.
In thirteen Battles, Salisbury of raceme:
Henry the Fifth he first trained to the Wars.
Whilst any Trump did sound, or Drum struck up,
His Sword did ne'er leave striking in the field.
Yet liu'st thou Salisbury? though thy speech doth fail,
One Eye thou hast to look to Heaven for grace.
The Sun with one Eye views all the World.
Heaven be thou gracious to none alive,
If Salisbury wants mercy at thy hands.
Bear hence his Body, I will help to bury it.
Sir Thomas Gargraue, hast thou any life?
Speak unto Talbot, nay, look up to him.
Salisbury cheer thy Spirit with this comfort,
Thou shalt not dye whiles—
He beckons with his hand, and smiles on me:
As who should say, When I am dead and gone,
Remember to avenge me on the French.
Plantaginet I will, and like thee,
Play on the Lute, beholding the Towns burn:
Wretched shall France be only in my Name.
What stir is this? what tumult's in the Heavens?
Whence comes this Alarm, and the noise?
My Lord, my Lord, the French have gathered head,
The Dolphin, with one Join de Puzel joined,
A holy Prophetess, new risen up,
Is come with a great Power, to raise the Siege.
Hear, hear, how dying Salisbury doth groan,
It irk• his heart he cannot be revenged.
Frenchmen, Isle be a Salisbury to you.
Puzel or Pussel, Dolphin or Dog-fish,
Your hearts Isle stamp out with my Horses heals,
And make a Quagmire of your mingled brains.
Convey me Salisbury into his Tent,
And then we'll try what these dastard Frenchmen dare.
Where is my strength, my valour, and my force?
Our English Troupes retire, I cannot stay them,
A Woman clad in Armour chase them.
Here, here she comes. Isle have a bowt with thee:
Devil, or Devils Dam, Isle conjure thee:
Blood will I draw on thee, thou art a Witch,
And straightway give thy Soul to him thou serve.
Come, come, it is only I that must disgrace thee.
Heavens, can you suffer Hell so to prevail?
My breast Isle burst with straining of my courage,
And from my shoulders crack my Arms asunder,
But I will chastise this high-minded Strumpet.
Talbot farewell, thy hour is not yet come,
I must go Victual Orleans forthwith:
O're-take me if thou can, I scorn thy strength.
Go, go, cheer up thy hungry-starued men,
Help Salisbury to make his Testament,
This Day is ours, as many more shall be.
My thoughts are whirled like a Potters Wheel,
I know not where I am, nor what I doe:
A Witch by fear, not force, like Hannibal,
Drives back our troupes, and conquers as she lists:
So Bees with smoke, and Doves with noisome stench,
Are from their Hyues and Houses driven away.
They called vs, for our fierceness, English Dogs,
Now like to Whelps, we crying run away,
Hark Countrymen, either renew the fight,
Or tear the Lyons out of Englands Coat;
Renounce your Soil, give Sheep in Lyons stead:
Sheep run not half so treacherous from the Wolf,
Or Horse or Oxen from the Leopard,
As you fly from your oft-subdued slaves.
It will not be, retire into your Trenches:
You all consented unto Salisburies death,
For none would strike a stroke in his revenge.
Puzel is entered into Orleans,
In spite of vs, or ought that we could doe.
O would I were to dye with Salisbury,
The shame hereof, will make me hide my head.
Advance our waving Colours on the Walls,
Rescued is Orleans from the English.
Thus Join de Puzel hath performed her word.
Divinest Creature, Astrea's Daughter,
How shall I honour thee for this success?
Thy promises are like Atones Garden,
That one day bloomed, and fruitful were the next.
France, triumph in thy glorious Prophetess,
Recovered is the Town of Orleans,
More blessed hap did ne'er befall our State.
Why ring not out the Bells aloud,
Throughout the Town?
Dolphin command the Citizens make Bonfires,
And feast and banquet in the open streets,
To celebrate the joy that God hath given vs.
All France will be replete with mirth and joy,
When they shall hear how we have played the men.
It is Join, not we, by whom the day is won:
For which, I will divide my Crown with her,
And all the Priests and Fryers in my Realm,
Shall in procession sing her endless praise.
A statelier Pyramid to her Isle rear,
Then Rhodophe's or Memphis ever was.
In memory of her, when she is dead,
Her Ashes, in an Urn more precious
Then the rich-iewel'd Coffer of Darius,
Transported, shall be at high Festivals
Before the Kings and Queens of France.
No longer on Saint Dennis will we cry,
But Join de Puzel shall be France's Saint.
Come in, and let vs Banquet Royally,
After this Golden Day of Victory.
Sirs, take your places, and be vigilant:
If any noise or Soldier you perceive
Near to the walls, by some apparent sign
Let vs have knowledge at the Court of Guard.
Sergeant you shall. Thus are poor Servitors
(When others sleep upon their quiet beds)
Constrained to watch in darkness, rain, and cold.
Lord Regent, and redoubted Burgundy,
By whose approach, the Regions of Artoys,
Wallon, and Picardy, are friends to vs:
This happy night, the Frenchmen are secure,
Having all day caroused and banqueted,
Embrace we then this opportunity,
As fitting best to quittance their deceit,
Contrived by Art, and baleful Sorcery.
Coward of France, how much he wrongs his fame,
Despairing of his own arms fortitude,
To join with Witches, and help of Hell.
Traitors have never other company.
But what's that Puzell whom they tear me so pure?
A Maid, they say.
A Maid? And be so martial?
Pray God she prove not masculine ere long:
If underneath the Standard of the French
She carry Armour, as she hath begun.
Well, let them practise and converse with spirits.
God is our Fortress, in whose conquering name
Let vs resolve to scale their flinty bulwarks.
Ascend brave Talbot, we will follow thee.
Not altogether: Better far I guess,
That we do make our entrance several ways:
That if it chance the one of vs do fail,
The other yet may rise against their force.
Agreed; Isle to yond corner.
And I to this.
And here will Talbot mount, or make his grave.
Now Salisbury, for thee and for the right
Of English Henry, shall this night appear
How much in duty. I am bound to both.
Arm, arm, the enemy doth make assault.
How now my Lords? What all unready so?
Unready? I and glad we escaped so well.
It was time (I trow) to wake and leave our beds,
Hearing Alarms at our Chamber doors.
Of all exploits since first I followed Arms,
Ne'er heard I of a warlike enterprise
More venturous, or desperate then this.
I think this Talbot be a Fiend of Hell.
If not of Hell, the Heavens sure favour him.
Here comes Charles, I marvel how he sped?
Tut, holy Join was his defensive Guard.
Is this thy cunning, thou deceitful Dame?
Did thou at first, to flatter vs withal,
Make vs partakers of a little gain,
That now our loss might be ten times so much?
Wherefore is Charles impatient with his friend?
At all times will you have my Power alike?
Sleeping or waking, must I still prevail,
Or will you blame and lay the fault on me?
Improvident Soldiers, had your Watch been good,
This sudden Mischief never could have fallen.
Duke of Alanson, this was your default,
That being Captain of the Watch to Night,
Did look no better to that weighty Charge.
Had all your Quarters been as safely kept,
As that whereof I had the government,
We had not been thus shamefully surprised.
Mine was secure.
And so was mine, my Lord.
And for my self, most part of all this Night
Within her Quarter, and mine own Precinct,
I was employed in passing to and fro,
About relieving of the Sentinels.
Then how, or which way, should they first break in?
Question (my Lords) no further of the case,
How or which way; it is sure they found some place,
But weakly guarded, where the breach was made:
And now there rests no other shift but this,
To gather our Soldiers, scattered and disperc't,
And lay new Plat-formes to endammage them.
Isle be so bold to take what they have left:
The Cry of Talbot serves me for a Sword,
For I have laden me with many Spoils,
Using no other Weapon but his Name.
The Day begins to break, and Night is fled,
Whose pitchy Mantle ouer-vayl'd the Earth.
Here sound Retreat, and cease our hot pursuit.
Bring forth the Body of old Salisbury,
And here advance it in the Market-Place,
The middle Centaur of this cursed Town.
Now have I paid my Vow unto his Soul:
For every drop of blood was drawn from him,
There hath at least five Frenchmen dyed to night.
And that hereafter Ages may behold
What ruin happened in revenge of him,
Within their chiefest Temple Isle erect
A Tomb, wherein his Corps shall be interred:
Upon the which▪ that every one may read,
Shall be engraved the sack of Orleans,
The treacherous manner of his mournful death,
And what a terror he had been to France.
But Lords, in all our bloody Massacre,
I muse we met not with the Dolphins Grace,
His new-come Champion, virtuous Join of Acre,
Nor any of his false Confederates.
It is thought Lord Talbot, when the fight began,
Roused on the sudden from their drowsy Beds,
They did amongst the troupes of armed men,
Leap o'er the Walls for refuge in the field.
My self, as far as I could well discern,
For smoke, and dusky vapours of the night,
Am sure I scared the Dolphin and his Trull,
When Arm in Arm they both came swiftly running,
Like to a pair of loving Turtle-Doues,
That could not live asunder day or night.
After that things are set in order here,
We'll follow them with all the power we have.
All hail, my Lords: which of this Princely train
Call ye the Warlike Talbot, for his Acts
So much applauded through the Realm of France?
Here is the Talbot, who would speak with him?
The virtuous Lady, Countess of Ouergne,
With modesty admiring thy Renown,
By me entreats (great Lord) thou would vouchsafe
To visit her poor Castle where she lies,
That she may boast she hath beheld the man,
Whose glory fills the World with loud report.
Is it even so? Nay, then I see our Wars
Will turn unto a peaceful Comic sport,
When Ladies crave to be encountered with.
You may not (my Lord) despise her gentle suit.
Ne'er trust me then: for when a World of men
Could not prevail with all their Oratory,
Yet hath a Women's kindness ouer-rul'd:
And therefore tell her, I return great thanks,
And in submission will attend on her.
Will not your Honours bear me company?
No, truly, it is more then manners will:
And I have heard it said, Unbidden Guests
Are often welcomes when they are gone.
Well then, alone (since there's no remedy)
I mean to prove this Ladies curtsy.
Come hither Captain, you perceive my mind.
I doe my Lord, and mean accordingly.
Porter, remember what I gave in charge,
And when you have done so, bring the Keys to me.
Madame, I will.
The Plot is laid, if all things fall out right,
I shall as famous be by this exploit,
As Scythian Tomyris by Cirrus death.
Great is the rumour of this dreadful Knight,
And his achievements of no less account:
Fine would mine eyes be witness with mine ears,
To give their censure of these rare reports.
Madame, according as your Ladyship desired,
By Message craved, so is Lord Talbot come.
And he is welcome: what? is this the man?
Madame, it is.
Is this the Scourge of France?
Is this the Talbot, so much feared abroad?
That with his Name the Mothers still their Babes?
I see Report is fabulous and false.
I thought I should have seen some Hercules,
A second Hector, for his grim aspect,
And large proportion of his strong knit Limbs.
Alas, this is a Child, a silly Dwarf:
It cannot be, this weak and writhled shrimp
Should strike such terror to his Enemies.
Madame, I have been bold to trouble you:
But since your Ladyship is not at leisure,
Isle sort some other time to visit you.
What means he now?
Go ask him, whither he goes?
Stay my Lord Talbot, for my Lady craves,
To know the cause of your abrupt departure?
Marry, for that shoe's in a wrong belief,
I go to certify her Talbot's here.
If thou be he, then art thou Prisoner.
Prisoner? to whom?
To me, bloodthirsty Lord:
And for that cause I trained thee to my House.
Long time thy shadow hath been thrall to me,
For in my Gallery thy Picture hangs:
But now the substance shall endure the like,
And I will chain these Legs and Arms of thine,
That hast by Tyranny these many years
Wasted our Country, slain our Citizens,
And sent our Sons and Husbands captivate.
Ha, ha, ha.
Laugh thou Wretch?
Thy mirth shall turn to moan.
I laugh to see your Ladyship so fond,
To think, that you have ought but Talbots shadow,
Whereon to practise your severity.
Why? art not thou the man?
I am indeed.
Then have I substance too.
No, no, I am but shadow of my self:
You are deceived, my substance is not here;
For what you see, is but the smallest part,
And least proportion of Humanity:
I tell you Madame, were the whole Frame here,
It is of such a spacious lofty pitch,
Your Roof were not sufficient to contain it.
This is a Riddling Merchant for the nonce,
He will be here, and yet he is not here:
How can these contrarieties agree?
That will I show you presently.
How say you Madame? are you now persuaded,
That Talbot is but shadow of himself?
These are his substance, sinews, arms, and strength,
With which he yokes your rebellious Necks,
Razes your Cities, and subverts your Towns,
And in a moment makes them desolate.
Victorious Talbot, pardon my abuse,
I find thou art no less then Fame hath bruited,
And more then may be gathered by thy shape.
Let my presumption not provoke thy wrath,
For I am sorry, that with reverence
I did not entertain thee as thou art.
Be not dismayed, fair Lady, nor misconstrue
The mind of Talbot, as you did mistake
The outward composition of his body.
What you have done, hath not offended me:
Nor other satisfaction doe I crave,
But only with your patience, that we may
Taste of your Wine, and see what Cates you have,
For Soldiers stomachs always serve them well.
With all my heart, and think me honoured,
To feast so great a Warrior in my House.
Great Lords and Gentlemen,
What means this silence?
Dare no man answer in a Case of Truth?
Within the Temple Hall we were too loud,
The Garden here is more convenient.
Then say at once, if I maintained the Truth:
Or else was wrangling Somerset in the error?
Faith I have been a Traunt in the Law,
And never yet could frame my will to it,
And therefore frame the Law unto my will.
Judge you, my Lord of Warwick, then be∣tweene vs.
Between two Hawks, which flies the higher pitch,
Between two Dogs, which hath the deeper mouth,
Between two Blades, which bears the better temper,
Between two Horses, which doth bear him best,
Between two Girls, which hath the merryest eye,
I have perhaps some shallow spirit of Judgement:
But in these nice sharpe Quillets of the Law,
Good faith I am no wiser then a Daw.
Tut, tut, here is a mannerly forbearance:
The truth appears so naked on my side,
That any purblind eye may find it out.
And on my side it is so well apparelled,
So clear, so shining, and so evident,
That it will glimmer through a blind-mans eye.
Since you are tongue-tied, and so loath to speak,
In dumb significants proclaim your thoughts:
Let him that is a true-borne Gentleman,
And stands upon the honour of his birth,
If he suppose that I have pleaded truth,
From off this Brier pluck a white Rose with me.
Let him that is no Coward, nor no Flatterer,
But dare maintain the party of the truth,
Pluck a red Rose from off this Thorne with me.
I love no Colours: and without all colour
Of base insinuating flattery,
I pluck this white Rose with Plantagenet.
I pluck this red Rose, with young Somerset,
And say withal, I think he held the right.
Stay Lords and Gentlemen, and pluck no more
Till you conclude, that he upon whose side
The fewest Roses are cropped from the Tree,
Shall yield the other in the right opinion.
Good Master Vernon, it is well objected:
If I have fewest, I subscribe in silence.
And I.
Then for the truth, and plainness of the Case,
I pluck this pale and Maiden Blossom here,
Giving my Verdict on the white Rose side.
Prick not your finger as you pluck it off,
Least bleeding, you doe paint the white Rose red,
And fall on my side so against your will.
If I, my Lord, for my opinion bleed,
Opinion shall be Surgeon to my hurt,
And keep me on the side where still I am.
Well, well, come on, who else?
Unless my Study and my Books be false,
The argument you held, was wrong in you;
In sign whereof, I pluck a white Rose too.
Now Somerset, where is your argument?
Here in my Scabbard, meditating, that
Shall dye your white Rose in a bloody red.
Mean time your cheeks do counterfeit our Roses:
For pale they look with fear, as witnessing
The truth on our side.
No Plantagenet:
It is not for scare, but anger, that thy cheeks
Blush for pure shame, to counterfeit our Roses,
And yet thy tongue will not confess thy error.
Hath not thy Rose a Canker, Somerset?
Hath not thy Rose a Thorne, Plantagenet?
I, sharpe and piercing to maintain his truth,
Whiles thy consuming Canker eats his falsehood.
Well, Isle find friends to wear my bleeding Roses,
That shall maintain what I have said is true,
Where false Plantagenet dare not be seen.
Now by this Maiden Blossom in my hand,
I scorn thee and thy fashion peevish Boy.
Turn not thy scorns this way, Plantagenet.
Proud Poole, I will, and scorn both him and thee.
Isle turn my part thereof into thy throat.
Away, away, good William de la Poole,
We grace the Yeoman, by conversing with him.
Now by Gods will thou wrong'st him, Somerset:
His Grandfather was Lionel Duke of Clarence,
Third Son to the third Edward King of England:
Spring Crestlesse Yeomen from so deep a Root?
He bears him on the place's Privilege,
Or durst not for his craven heart say thus.
By him that made me, Isle maintain my words
On any Plot of Ground in Christendom.
Was not thy Father Richard, Earl of Cambridge,
For Treason executed in our late Kings days?
And by his Treason, stand not thou attainted,
Corrupted, and exempt from ancient Gentry?
His Trespass yet lives guilty in thy blood,
And till thou be restored, thou art a Yeoman.
My Father was attached, not attainted,
Condemned to dye for Treason, but no Traitor;
And that Isle prove on better men then Somerset,
Were growing time once ripened to my will.
For your partaker Poole, and you your self,
Isle note you in my Book of Memory,
To scourge you for this apprehension:
Look to it well, and say you are well warned.
Ah, thou shalt find vs ready for thee still:
And know vs by these Colours for thy Foes,
For these my friends in spite of thee shall wear.
And by my Soul, this pale and angry Rose,
As Cognisance of my blood-drinking hate,
Will I for ever, and my Faction wear,
Until it wither with me to my Grave,
Or flourish to the height of my Degree.
Go forward, and be choked with thy ambition:
And so farewell, until I meet thee next.
Have with thee Poole: Farewell ambitious Ri∣chard.
How I am braved, and must perforce endure it?
This blot that they object against your House,
Shall be whipped out in the next Parliament,
Called for the Truce of Winchester and Gloucester:
And if thou be not then created York,
I will not live to be accounted Warwick.
Mean time, in signal of my love to thee,
Against proud Somerset, and William Poole,
Will I upon thy party wear this Rose.
And here I prophecy: this brawl to day,
Grown to this faction in the Temple Garden,
Shall send between the Red-Rose and the White,
A thousand Souls to Death and deadly Night.
Good Master Ʋernon, I am bound to you,
That you on my behalf would pluck a Flower.
In your behalf still will I wear the same.
And so will I.
Thanks gentle.
Come, let vs four to Dinner: I dare say,
This Quarrel will drink Blood another day.
Kind Keepers of my weak decaying Age,
Let dying Mortimer here rest himself.
Even like a man new haled from the Wrack,
So fare my Limbs with long Imprisonment:
And these gray Locks, the Pursuiuants of death,
Nestor-like aged, in an Age of Care,
Argue the end of Edmund Mortimer.
These Eyes, like Lamps, whose wasting Oil is spent,
Wax dim, as drawing to their Exigent.
Weak Shoulders, ouer-borne with burdening Grief,
And pyth-lesse Arms, like to a withered Vine,
That droupes his sappe-lesse Branches to the ground.
Yet are these Feet, whose strength-lesse stay is numme,
(Unable to support this Lump of Clay)
Swift-winged with desire to get a Grave,
As witting I no other comfort have.
But tell me, Keeper, will my Nephew come?
Richard Plantagenet, my Lord, will come:
We sent unto the Temple, unto his Chamber,
And answer was returned, that he will come.
Enough: my Soul shall then be satisfied.
Poor Gentleman, his wrong doth equal mine.
Since Henry Monmouth first began to reign,
Before whose Glory I was great in Arms,
This loathsome sequestration have I had;
And even since then, hath Richard been obscured,
Deprived of Honour and Inheritance.
But now, the Arbitrator of Despairs,
Just Death, kind Umpire of men's miseries,
With sweet enlargement doth dismiss me hence:
I would his troubles likewise were expired,
That so he might recover what was lost.
My Lord, your loving Nephew now is come.
Richard Plantagenet, my friend, is he come?
I, Noble Uncle, thus ignobly used,
Your Nephew, late despised Richard, comes.
Direct mine Arms, I may embrace his Neck,
And in his Bosom spend my latter gasp.
Oh tell me when my Lips doe touch his Cheeks,
That I may kindly give one fainting Kiss.
And now declare sweet Stem from Yorkes great Stock,
Why did thou say of late thou were despised?
First, lean thine aged Back against mine Arm,
And in that ease, Isle tell thee my Disease.
This day in argument upon a Case,
Some words there grew twixt Somerset and me:
Among which terms, he used his lavish tongue,
And did upbraid me with my Fathers death;
Which obloquy set bars before my tongue,
Else with the like I had requited him.
Therefore good Uncle, for my Fathers sake,
In honour of a true Plantagenet,
And for Alliance sake, declare the cause
My Father, Earl of Cambridge, lost his Head.
That cause (fair Nephew) that imprisoned me,
And hath detained me all my flowering Youth,
Within a loathsome Dungeon, there to pine,
Was cursed Instrument of his decease.
Discover more at large what cause that was,
For I am ignorant, and cannot guess.
I will, if that my fading breath permit,
And Death approach not, ere my Tale be done.
Henry the Fourth, Grandfather to this King,
Deposed his Nephew Richard, Edwards Son,
The first begotten, and the lawful Heir
Of Edward King, the Third of that Descent.
During whose Reign, the Percies of the North,
Finding his Usurpation most unjust,
Endeavoured my advancement to the Throne.
The reason moved these Warlike Lords to this,
Was, for that (young Richard thus removed,
Leaving no Heir begotten of his Body)
I was the next by Birth and Parentage:
For by my Mother, I derived am
From Lionel Duke of Clarence, third Son
To King Edward the Third; whereas hee,
From Iohn of Gaunt doth bring his Pedigree,
Being but fourth of that Heroic Lyne.
But mark: as in this haughty great attempt,
They laboured, to plant the rightful Heir,
I lost my Liberty, and they their Lives.
Long after this, when Henry the Fifth
(Succeeding his Father Bullingbrooke) did reign:
Thy Father, Earl of Cambridge, then derived
From famous Edmund Langley, Duke of York,
Marrying my Sister, that thy Mother was;
Again, in pity of my hard distress,
Levied an Army, weaning to redeem,
And have installed me in the Diadem:
But as the rest, so fell that Noble Earl,
And was beheaded. Thus the Mortimers,
In whom the Title rested, were suppressed.
Of which, my Lord, your Honour is the last.
True; and thou see, that I no Issue have,
And that my fainting words doe warrant death:
Thou art my Heir; the rest, I wish thee gather:
But yet be wary in thy studious care.
Thy grave admonishments prevail with me:
But yet me thinks, my Fathers execution
Was nothing less then bloody Tyranny.
With silence, Nephew, be thou politic,
Strong fixed is the House of Lancaster,
And like a Mountain, not to be removed.
But now thy Uncle is removing hence,
As Princes doe their Courts, when they are cloyed
With long continuance in a settled place.
O Uncle, would some part of my young years
Might but redeem the passage of your Age.
Thou dost then wrong me, as yt slaughterer doth,
Which gives many Wounds, when one will kill.
Morn not, except thou sorrow for my good,
Only give order for my Funeral.
And so farewell, and fair be all thy hopes,
And prosperous be thy Life in Peace and War.
And Peace, no War, befall thy parting Soul.
In Prison hast thou spent a Pilgrimage,
And like a Hermit ouer-past thy days.
Well, I will locke his Council in my Breast,
And what I doe imagine, let that rest.
Keepers convey him hence, and I my self
Will see his Burial better then his Life.
Here dyes the dusky Torch of Mortimer,
Choked with Ambition of the meaner sort.
And for those Wrongs, those bitter Injuries,
Which Somerset hath offered to my House,
I doubt not, but with Honour to redress.
And therefore haste I to the Parliament,
Either to be restored to my Blood,
Or make my will the advantage of my good.
Come thou with deep premeditated Lines?
With written Pamphlets, studiously deuis'd?
Humfrey of Gloster, if thou can accuse,
Or ought intend to lay unto my charge,
Doe it without invention, suddenly,
As I with sudden, and extemporal speech,
Purpose to answer what thou can object.
Presumptuous Priest, this place cōmands my patiēce,
Or thou should find thou hast dishonoured me.
Think not, although in Writing I preferred
The manner of thy vile outrageous Crimes,
That therefore I have forged, or am not able
Ʋerbatim to rehearse the Method of my Pen.
No Prelate, such is thy audacious wickedness,
Thy lewd, pestiserous, and dissentious pranks,
As very Infants prattle of thy pride.
Thou art a most pernicious Usurer,
Froward by nature, Enemy to Peace,
Lascivious, wanton, more then well beseems
A man of thy Profession, and Degree.
And for thy Treachery, what's more manifest?
In that thou layd'st a Trap to take my Life,
As well at London Bridge, as at the Tower.
Beside, I fear me, if thy thoughts were sifted,
The King, thy Sovereign, is not quite exempt
From envious malice of thy swelling heart.
Gloster, I doe defy thee. Lords vouchsafe
To give me hearing what I shall reply.
If I were covetous, ambitious, or perverse,
As he will have me: how am I so poor?
Or how haps it, I seek not to advance
Or raise my self? but keep my wonted Calling.
And for Dissention, who prefers Peace
More then I doe? except I be provoked.
No, my good Lords, it is not that offends,
It is not that, that hath incensed the Duke:
It is because no one should sway but hee,
No one, but hee, should be about the King;
And that engenders Thunder in his breast,
And makes him roar these Accusations forth.
But he shall know I am as good.
As good?
Thou Bastard of my Grandfather.
I, Lordly Sir: for what are you, I pray,
But one imperious in another Throne?
Am I not Protector, saucy Priest?
And am not I a Prelate of the Church?
Yes, as an Out-law in a Castle keeps,
And uses it, to patronage his Theft.
Irreverent Gloucester.
Thou art reverent,
Touching thy Spiritual Function, not thy Life.
Rome shall remedy this.
Roam thither then.
My Lord, it were your duty to forbear.
I, see the Bishop be not ouer-borne:
Me thinks my Lord should be Religious,
And know the Office that belongs to such.
Me thinks his Lordship should be humbler,
It fitteth not a Prelate so to plead.
Yes, when his holy State is touched so near.
State holy, or unhallowed, what of that?
Is not his Grace Protector to the King?
Plantagenet I see must hold his tongue,
Least it be said, Speak Sirrha when you should:
Must your bold Verdict enter talk with Lords?
Else would I have a fling at Winchester.
Uncles of Gloster, and of Winchester,
The special Watch-men of our English Weal,
I would prevail, if Prayers might prevail,
To join your hearts in love and amity,
Oh, what a Scandal is it to our Crown,
That two such Noble Peers as ye should jar?
Believe me, Lords, my tender years can tell,
Civil dissention is a viperous Worm,
That gnaws the Bowels of the Common-wealth.
What tumult's this?
An Uproar, I dare warrant,
Begun through malice of the Bishops men.
Oh my good Lords, and virtuous Henry,
Pity the City of London, pity vs:
The Bishop, and the Duke of Glosters men,
Forbidden late to carry any Weapon,
Have filled their Pockets full of peeble stones;
And banding themselves in contrary parts,
Doe pelt so fast at one another Pate,
That many have their giddy brains knocked out:
Our Windows are broke down in every Street,
And we, for fear, compelled to shut our Shops.
We charge you, on allegiance to our self,
To hold your slaughtering hands, and keep the Peace:
Pray Uncle Gloster mitigate this strife.
Nay, if we be forbidden Stones, we'll fall to it with our Teeth.
Doe what ye dare, we are as resolute.
You of my household, leave this peevish broil,
And set this unaccustomed fight aside.
My Lord, we know your Grace to be a man
Just, and upright; and for your Royal Birth,
Inferior to none, but to his Majesty:
And ere that we will suffer such a Prince,
So kind a Father of the Commonwealth,
To be disgraced by an Inke-horne Mate,
Wee and our Wives and Children all will fight,
And have our bodies slaughtered by thy foes.
I, and the very parings of our Nails
Shall pitch a Field when we are dead.
Stay, stay, I say:
And if you love me, as you say you doe,
Let me persuade you to forbear a while.
Oh, how this discord doth afflict my Soul.
Can you, my Lord of Winchester, behold
My sighs and tears, and will not once relent?
Who should be pitiful, if you be not?
Or who should study to prefer a Peace,
If holy Church-men take delight in broils?
Yield my Lord Protector, yield Winchester,
Except you mean with obstinate repulse
To slay your Sovereign, and destroy the Realm.
You see what Mischief, and what Murder too,
Hath been enacted through your enmity:
Then be at peace, except ye thirst for blood.
He shall submit, or I will never yield.
Compassion on the King commands me stoup,
Or I would see his heart out, ere the Priest
Should ever get that privilege of me.
Behold my Lord of Winchester, the Duke
Hath banished moody discontented fury,
As by his smoothed Brows it doth appear:
Why look you still so sterne, and tragical?
Here Winchester, I offer thee my Hand.
Fie Uncle Beauford, I have heard you preach,
That Malice was a great and grievous sin:
And will not you maintain the thing you teach?
But prove a chief offender in the same.
Sweet King: the Bishop hath a kindly gyrd:
For shame my Lord of Winchester relent;
What, shall a Child instruct you what to doe?
Well, Duke of Gloster, I will yield to thee
Love for thy Love, and Hand for Hand I give.
I, but I fear me with a hollow Heart.
See here my Friends and loving Countrymen,
This token serves for a Flag of Truce,
Betwixt our selves, and all our followers:
So help me God, as I dissemble not.
So help me God, as I intend it not.
Oh loving Uncle, kind Duke of Gloster,
How joyful am I made by this Contract.
Away my Masters, trouble vs no more,
But join in friendship, as your Lords have done.
Content, Isle to the Surgeons.
And so will I.
And I will see what Physic the Tavern af∣fords.
Accept this Scroll, most gracious Sovereign,
Which in the Right of Richard Plantagenet,
We doe exhibit to your Majesty.
Well urged, my Lord of Warwick: for sweet Prince,
And if your Grace mark every circumstance,
You have great reason to doe Richard right,
Especially for those occasions
At Eltam Place I told your Majesty.
And those occasions, Uncle, were of force:
Therefore my loving Lords, our pleasure is,
That Richard be restored to his Blood.
Let Richard be restored to his Blood,
So shall his Fathers wrongs be recompenc't.
As will the rest, so wills Winchester.
If Richard will be true, not that all alone,
But all the whole Inheritance I give,
That doth belong unto the House of York,
From whence you spring, by Lineal Descent.
Thy humble servant vows obedience,
And humble service, till the point of death.
Stoop then, and set your Knee against my Foot,
And in reguerdon of that duty done,
I girt thee with the valiant Sword of York:
Rise Richard, like a true Plantagenet,
And rise created Princely Duke of York.
And so thrive Richard, as thy foes may fall,
And as my duty springs, so perish they,
That grudge one thought against your Majesty.
Welcome high Prince, the mighty Duke of York.
Perish base Prince, ignoble Duke of York.
Now will it best avail your Majesty,
To cross the Seas, and to be Crowned in France:
The presence of a King engenders love
Amongst his Subjects, and his loyal Friends,
As it dis-animates his Enemies.
When Gloster says the word, King Henry goes,
For friendly counsel cuts off many Foes.
Your Ships already are in readiness.
I, we may march in England, or, in France,
Not seeing what is likely to ensue:
This late dissention grown betwixt the Peers,
Burns under fained ashes of forged love,
And will at last break out into a flame,
As festered members rot but by degree,
Till bones and flesh and sinews fall away,
So will this base and envious discord breed.
And now I fear that fatal Prophecy,
Which in the time of Henry, named the Fifth,
Was in the mouth of every sucking Babe,
That Henry borne at Monmouth should win all,
And Henry borne at Windsor, loose all:
Which is so plain, that Exeter doth wish,
His days may finish, ere that haplesse time.
These are the City Gates, the Gates of Roan,
Through which our Policy must make a breach.
Take heed, be wary how you place your words,
Talk like the vulgar sort of Market men,
That come to gather Money for their Corn.
If we have entrance, as I hope we shall,
And that we find the slothful Watch but weak,
Isle by a sign give notice to our friends,
That Charles the Dolphin may encounter them.
Our Sacks shall be a mean to sack the City
And we be Lords and Rulers over Roan,
Therefore we'll knock.
Che la.
Peasauns la pour gins de France,
Poor Market folks that come to sell their Corn.
Enter, go in, the Market Bell is rung.
Now Roan, Isle shake thy Bulwarks to the ground.
Saint Dennis bless this happy Stratagem,
And once again we'll sleep secure in Roan.
Here entered Pucell, and her Practisants:
Now she is there, how will she specify?
Here is the best and safest passage in.
By thrusting out a Torch from yonder Tower,
Which once discerned, shows that her meaning is,
No way to that (for weakness) which she entered.
Behold, this is the happy Wedding Torch,
That joins Roan unto her Countrymen,
But burning fatal to the Talbonites.
See Noble Charles the Beacon of our friend,
The burning Torch in yonder Turret stands.
Now shine it like a Commit of Revenge,
A Prophet to the fall of all our Foes.
Defer no time, delays have dangerous ends,
Enter and cry, the Dolphin, presently,
And then doe execution on the Watch.
France, thou shalt rue this Treason with thy tears,
If Talbot but survive thy Treachery.
Pucell that Witch, that damned Sorceress,
Hath wrought this Hellish Mischief unawares,
That hardly we escaped the Pride of France.
God morrow Gallants, want ye Corn for Bread?
I think the Duke of Burgonie will fast,
Before he will buy again at such a rate.
It was full of Darnel: doe you like the taste?
Scoff on vile Fiend, and shameless Courtesan,
I trust ere long to choke thee with thine own,
And make thee curse the Harvest of that Corn.
Your Grace may starve (perhaps) before that time.
Oh let no words, but deeds, revenge this Trea∣son.
What will you doe, good gray-beard?
Break a Lance, and run a-Tilt at Death,
Within a Chair.
Foul Fiend of France, and Hag of all despite,
Encompassed with thy lustful Paramours,
Becomes it thee to taunt his valiant Age,
And twit with Cowardice a man half dead?
Damsel, Isle have a bowt with you again,
Or else let Talbot perish with this shame.
Are ye so hot, Sir: yet Pucell hold thy peace,
If Talbot doe but Thunder, Rain will follow.
God speed the Parliament: who shall be the Speaker?
Dare ye come forth, and meet vs in the field?
Belike your Lordship takes vs then for fools,
To try if that our own be ours, or no.
I speak not to that railing Hecate,
But unto thee Alanson, and the rest.
Will ye, like Soldiers, come and fight it out?
Seignior no.
Seignior hang: base Muleteers of France,
Like Peasant foot-Boyes doe they keep the Walls,
And dare not take up Arms, like Gentlemen.
Away Captains, let's get vs from the Walls,
For Talbot means no goodness by his Looks.
God b'uy my Lord, we came but to tell you
That wee are here.
And there will we be too, ere it be long,
Or else reproach be Talbots greatest fame.
Vow Burgonie, by honour of thy House,
Pricked on by public Wrongs sustained in France,
Either to get the Town again, or dye.
And I, as sure as English Henry lives,
And as his Father here was Conqueror;
As sure as in this late betrayed Town,
Great Cordelions Heart was buried;
So sure I swear, to get the Town, or dye.
My Vows are equal partners with thy Vows.
But ere we go, regard this dying Prince,
The valiant Duke of Bedford: Come my Lord,
We will bestow you in some better place,
Fitter for sickness, and for crazy age.
Lord Talbot, doe not so dishonour me:
Here will I sit, before the Walls of Roan,
And will be partner of your weal or woe.
Courageous Bedford, let vs now persuade you.
Not to be gone from hence: for once I read,
That stout Pendragon, in his Litter sick,
Came to the field, and vanquished his foes.
Me thinks I should revive the Soldiers hearts,
Because I ever found them as my self.
Undaunted spirit in a dying breast,
Then be it so: Heavens keep old Bedford safe.
And now no more ado, brave Burgonie,
But gather we our Forces out of hand,
And set upon our boasting Enemy.
Whither away Sir Iohn Falstaff, in such haste?
Whither away? to save my self by flight,
We are like to have the overthrow again.
What? will you fly, and leave Lord Talbot?
I, all the Talbots in the World, to save my life.
Cowardly Knight, ill fortune follow thee.
Now quiet Soul, depart when Heaven please,
For I have seen our Enemies overthrow.
What is the trust or strength of foolish man?
They that of late were daring with their scoffs,
Are glad and fine by flight to save themselves.
Lost, and recovered in a day again,
This is a double Honour, Burgonie:
Yet Heavens have glory for this Victory.
Warlike and Martial Talbot, Burgonie
Enshrines thee in his heart, and there erects
Thy noble Deeds, as Valors Monuments.
Thanks gentle Duke: but where is Pucel now?
I think her old Familiar is asleep.
Now whore's the Bastards braves, and Charles his glikes?
What all amort? Roan hangs her head for grief,
That such a valiant Company are fled.
Now will we take some order in the Town,
Placing therein some expert Officers,
And then depart to Paris, to the King,
For there young Henry with his Nobles lye.
What wills Lord Talbot, pleases Burgonie.
But yet before we go, let's not forget
The Noble Duke of Bedford, late deceased,
But see his Exequies fulfilled in Roan.
A braver Soldier never couched Lance,
A gentler Heart did never sway in Court.
But Kings and mightiest Potentates must die,
For that's the end of humane misery.
Dismay not (Princes) at this accident,
Nor grieve that▪ Roan is so recovered:
Care is no cure, but rather corrosive,
For things that are not to be remedied.
Let frantic Talbot triumph for a while,
And like a Peacock sweep along his tail,
We'll pull his Plumes, and take away his Train,
If Dolphin and the rest will be but ruled.
We have been guided by thee hitherto,
And of thy Cunning had no diffidence,
One sudden Foil shall never breed distrust.
Search out thy wit for secret policies,
And we will make thee famous through the World.
We'll set thy Statue in some holy place,
And have thee reverenced like a blessed Saint.
Employ thee then, sweet Virgin, for our good.
Then thus it must be, this doth Join devise:
By fair persuasions, mixed with sugared words,
We will entice the Duke of Burgonie
To leave the Talbot, and to follow vs.
I marry Sweating, if we could doe that,
France were no place for Henryes Warriors,
Nor should that Nation boast it so with vs,
But be extirped from our Provinces.
For ever should they be expuls'd from France,
And not have Title of an Earldom here.
Your Honours shall perceive how I will work,
To bring this matter to the wished end.
Hark, by the sound of Drum you may perceive
Their Powers are marching unto Paris-ward.
There goes the Talbot with his Colours spread,
And all the Troupes of English after him.
Now in the Rereward comes the Duke and his:
Fortune in favour makes him lag behind.
Summon a Parley, we will talk with him.
A Parley with the Duke of Burgonie.
Who craves a Parley with the Burgonie?
The Princely Charles of France, thy Countrey-man.
What say thou Charles? for I am marching hence.
Speak Pucell, and enchant him with thy words.
Brave Burgonie, undoubted hope of France,
Stay, let thy humble Hand-maid speak to thee.
Speak on, but be not ouer-tedious.
Look on thy Country, look on fertile France,
And see the Cities and the Towns defaced,
By wasting Ruin of the cruel Foe,
As looks the Mother on her lowly Babe,
When Death doth close his tender-dying Eyes.
See, see the pining Malady of France:
Behold the Wounds, the most unnatural Wounds,
Which thou thy self hast given her woeful Breast.
Oh turn thy edged Sword another way,
Strike those that hurt, and hurt not those that help:
One drop of Blood drawn from thy Countries Bosom,
Should grieve thee more then streams of foreign gore.
Return thee therefore with a flood of Tears,
And wash away thy Countries stained Spots.
Either she hath bewitched me with her words,
Or Nature makes me suddenly relent.
Besides, all French and France exclaims on thee,
Doubting thy Birth and lawful Progeny.
Who ioyn'st thou with, but with a Lordly Nation,
That will not trust thee, but for profits sake?
When Talbot hath set footing once in France,
And fashioned thee that Instrument of Ill,
Who then, but English Henry, will be Lord,
And thou be thrust out, like a Fugitive?
Call we to mind, and mark but this for proof:
Was not the Duke of Orleans thy Foe?
And was he not in England Prisoner?
But when they heard he was thine Enemy,
They set him free, without his Ransom paid,
In spite of Burgonie and all his friends.
See then, thou fight against thy Countrymen,
And ioyn'st with them will be thy slaughter-men.
Come, come, return; return thou wandering Lord,
Charles and the rest will take thee in their arms.
I am vanquished:
These haughty words of hers
Have battered me like roaring Cannon-shot,
And made me almost yield upon my knees.
Forgive me Country, and sweet Countrymen:
And Lords accept this hearty kind embrace.
My Forces and my Power of Men are yours.
So farewell Talbot, Isle no longer trust thee.
Done like a Frenchman: turn and turn a∣gain.
Welcome brave Duke, thy friendship makes vs fresh.
And doth beget new Courage in our Breasts.
Pucell hath bravely played her part in this,
And doth deserve a Coronet of Gold.
Now let vs on, my Lords,
And join our Powers,
And seek how we may prejudice the Foe.
My gracious Prince, and honourable Peers,
Hearing of your arrival in this Realm,
I have a while given Truce unto my Wars,
To doe my duty to my Sovereign.
In sign whereof, this Arm, that hath reclaimed
To your obedience, fifty Fortresses,
Twelve Cities, and seven walled Towns of strength,
Beside five hundred Prisoners of esteem;
Lets fall his Sword before your Highness feet:
And with submissive loyalty of heart
Ascribes the Glory of his Conquest got,
First to my God, and next unto your Grace.
Is this the Lord Talbot, Uncle Gloucester,
That hath so long been resident in France?
Yes, if it please your Majesty, my Liege▪
Welcome brave Captain, and victorious Lord.
When I was young (as yet I am not old)
I doe remember how my Father said,
A stouter Champion never handled Sword.
Long since we were resolved of your truth,
Your faithful service, and your toil in War:
Yet never have you tasted our Reward,
Or been reguerdon'd with so much as Thanks,
Because till now, we never saw your face.
Therefore stand up, and for these good deserts,
We here create you Earl of Shrewsbury,
And in our Coronation take your place.
Now Sir, to you that were so hot at Sea,
Disgracing of these Colours that I wear,
In honour of my Noble Lord of York
Dare thou maintain the former words thou spoke?
Yes Sir, as well as you dare patronage
The envious barking of your saucy Tongue,
Against my Lord the Duke of Somerset.
Sirrha, thy Lord I honour as he is.
Why, what is he? as good a man as York.
Hark ye: not so: in witness take ye that.
Villain, thou know
The Law of Arms is such,
That who so draws a Sword, it is present death,
Or else this Blow should broach thy dearest Blood.
But Isle unto his Majesty, and crave,
I may have liberty to avenge this Wrong,
When thou shalt see, Isle meet thee to thy cost.
Well miscreant, Isle be there as soon as you,
And after meet you, sooner then you would,
Lord Bishop set the Crown upon his head.
God save King Henry of that name the sixth.
Now Governor of Paris take your oath,
That you elect no other King but him;
Esteem none Friends, but such as are his Friends,
And none your Foes, but such as shall pretend
Malicious practises against his State:
This shall ye do, so help you righteous God.
My gracious Sovereign, as I rode from Calice,
To haste unto your Coronation:
A Letter was delivered to my hands,
Writ to your Grace, from the Duke of Burgundy.
Shame to the Duke of Burgundy, and thee:
I vowed (base Knight) when I did meet the next,
To tear the Garter from thy Cravens leg,
Which I have done, because (unworthily)
Thou was it installed in that High Degree.
Pardon me Princely Henry, and the rest:
This Dastard, at the battle of Poictiers,
When (but in all) I was six thousand strong,
And that the French were almost ten to one,
Before we met, or that a stroke was given,
Like to a trusty Squire, did run away.
In which assault, we lost twelve hundred men.
My self, and divers Gentlemen beside,
Were there surprised, and taken prisoners.
Then judge (great Lords) if I have done amiss:
Or whether that such Cowards ought to wear
This Ornament of Knighthood, yea or no?
To say the truth, this fact was infamous,
And ill beseeming any common man;
Much more a Knight, a Captain, and a Leader.
When first this Order was ordained my Lords,
Knights of the Garter were of Noble birth;
Valiant, and Virtuous, full of haughty Courage,
Such as were grown to credit by the wars:
Not fearing Death, nor shrinking for Distress,
But always resolute, in most extremes.
He then, that is not furnished in this sort,
Doth but usurp the Sacred name of Knight,
Profaning this most Honourable Order,
And should (if I were worthy to be Judge)
Be quite degraded, like a Hedge-borne Swain,
That doth presume to boast of Gentle blood.
Stain to thy Countrymen, thou hear thy doom:
Be packing therefore, thou that was it a knight:
Henceforth we banish thee on pain of death.
And now Lord Protector, view the Letter
Sent from our Uncle Duke of Burgundy.
What means his Grace, that he hath changed his Stile?
No more but plain and bluntly? (To the King.)
Hath he forgot he is his Sovereign?
Or doth this churlish Superscription
Pretend some alteration in good will?
What's here? I have upon especial cause,
Moved with compassion of my Countries wrack,
Together with the pitiful complaints
Of such as your oppression feeds upon,
Forsaken your pernicious Faction,
And joined with Charles, the rightful king of France.
O monstrous Treachery: Can this be so?
That in alliance, amity, and oaths,
There should be found such false dissembling guile?
What? doth my Uncle Burgundy revolt?
He doth my Lord, and is become your foe.
Is that the worst this Letter doth contain?
It is the worst, and all (my Lord) he writes.
Why then Lord Talbot there shall talk with him,
And give him chastisement for this abuse.
How say you (my Lord) are you not content?
Content, my Liege? Yes: But yt I am prevented,
I should have begged I might have been employed.
Then gather strength, and march unto him straight:
Let him perceive how ill we brooke his Treason,
And what offence it is to flout his Friends.
I go my Lord, in heart desiring still
You may behold confusion of your foes.
Grant me the Combat, gracious Sovereign.
And me (my Lord) grant me the Combat too.
This is my Servant, hear him Noble Prince.
And this is mine (sweet Henry) favour him.
Be patient Lords, and give them leave to speak.
Say Gentlemen, what makes you thus exclaim,
And wherefore crave you Combat? Or with whom?
With him (my Lord) for he hath done me wrong.
And I with him, for he hath done me wrong.
What is that wrong, whereof you both complain
First let me know, and then Isle answer you.
Crossing the Sea, from England into France,
This Fellow here with envious carping tongue,
Upbraided me about the Rose I wear,
Saying, the sanguine colour of the Leaves
Did represent my Masters blushing cheeks:
When stubbornly he did repugn the truth,
About a certain question in the Law,
Argued betwixt the Duke of York, and him:
With other vile and ignominious terms.
In confutation of which rude reproach,
And in defence of my Lords worthiness,
I crave the benefit of Law of Arms.
And that is my petition (Noble Lord:)
For though he seem with forged quaint conceit
To set a gloss upon his bold intent,
Yet know (my Lord) I was provoked by him,
And he first took exceptions at this badge,
Pronouncing that the paleness of this Flower,
Bewrayed the faintness of my Masters heart.
Will not this malice Somerset be left?
Your private grudge my Lord of York, will out,
Though ne'er so cunningly you smother it.
Good Lord, what madness rules in brain∣sick men,
When for so slight and frivolous a cause,
Such factious aemulations shall arise?
Good Cousins both of York and Somerset,
Quiet your selves (I pray) and be at peace.
Let this dissention first be tried by fight,
And then your Highness shall command a Peace.
The quarrel touches none but vs alone,
Betwixt our selves let vs decide it then.
There is my pledge, accept it Somerset.
Nay, let it rest where it began at first.
Confirm it so, mine honourable Lord.
Confirm it so? Confounded be your strife,
And perish ye with your audacious prate,
Presumptuous vassals, are you not ashamed
With this immodest clamorous outrage,
To trouble and disturb the King, and Vs?
And you my Lords, me thinks you do not well
To bear with their perverse Objections:
Much less to take occasion from their mouths,
To raise a mutiny betwixt your selves.
Let me persuade you take a better course.
It grieves his Highness,
Good my Lords, be Friends.
Come hither you that would be Combatants:
Henceforth I charge you, as you love our favour,
Quite to forget this Quarrel, and the cause.
And you my Lords: Remember where we are,
In France, amongst a fickle wavering Nation:
If they perceive dissention in our looks,
And that within our selves we disagree;
How will their grudging stomachs be provoked
To wilful Disobedience, and Rebel?
Beside, What infamy will there arise,
When Foreign Princes shall be certified,
That for a toy, a thing of no regard,
King Henries Peers, and chief Nobility,
Destroyed themselves, and lost the Realm of France?
Oh think upon the Conquest of my Father,
My tender years, and let vs not forgo
That for a trifle, that was bought with blood.
Let me be Umpire in this doubtful strife:
I see no reason if I wear this Rose,
That any one should therefore be suspicious
I more incline to Somerset, than York:
Both are my kinsmen, and I love them both.
As well they may vpbray'd me with my Crown,
Because (forsooth) the King of Scots is Crowned.
But your discretions better can persuade,
Then I am able to instruct or teach:
And therefore, as we hither came in peace,
So let vs still continue peace, and love.
Cousin of York, we institute your Grace
To be our Regent in these parts of France:
And good my Lord of Somerset, unite
Your Troops of horsemen, with his Bands of foot,
And like true Subjects, sons of your Progenitors,
Go cheerfully together, and digest
Your angry Choler on your Enemies.
Our Self, my Lord Protector, and the rest,
After some respit, will return to Calice;
From thence to England, where I hope ere long
To be presented by your Victories,
With Charles, Alanson, and that Traitorous rout.
My Lord of York, I promise you the King
Prettily (me thought) did play the Orator.)
And so he did, but yet I like it not,
In that he wears the badge of Somerset.
Tush, that was but his fancy, blame him not,
I dare presume (sweet Prince) he thought no harm.
And if I wish he did. But let it rest,
Other affairs must now be managed.
Well did thou Richard to suppress thy voice:
For had the passions of thy heart burst out,
I fear we should have seen deciphered there
More rancorous spite, more furious raging broils,
Then yet can be imagined or supposed:
But howsoever, no simple man that sees
This earring discord of Nobility,
This shouldering of each other in the Court,
This factious bandying of their Favourites,
But that it doth presage some ill event.
It is much, when Scepters are in Childrens hands:
But more, when Envy breeds unkind division,
There comes the ruin, there begins confusion.
Go to the Gates of Bordeaux Trumpeter,
Summon their General unto the Wall.
English Iohn Talbot (Captains) call you forth,
Servant in Arms to Harry King of England,
And thus he would. Open your City Gates,
Be humble to vs, call my Sovereign yours,
And do him homage as obedient Subjects,
And Isle withdraw me, and my bloody power.
But if you frown upon this proffered Peace,
You tempt the fury of my three attendants,
Lean Famine, quartering Steel, and climbing Fire,
Who in a moment, even with the earth,
Shall lay your stately, and ayre-brauing Towers,
If you forsake the offer of their love.
Thou ominous and fearful Owl of death,
Our Nations terror, and their bloody scourge,
The period of thy Tyranny approaches,
On vs thou can not enter but by death:
For I protest we are well fortified,
And strong enough to issue out and fight.
If thou retire, the Dolphin well appointed,
Stands with the snares of War to tangle thee.
On either hand thee, there are squadrons pitched,
To wall thee from the liberty of Flight;
And no way can thou turn thee for redress,
But death doth front thee with apparent spoil,
And pale destruction meets thee in the face:
Ten thousand French have tan the Sacrament,
To rive their dangerous Artillery
Upon no Christian soul but English Talbot:
Lo, there thou standst a breathing valiant man
Of an invincible unconquered spirit:
This is the latest Glory of thy praise,
That I thy enemy dew thee withal:
For ere the Glass that now begins to run,
Finish the process of his sandy hour,
These eyes that see thee now well coloured,
Shall see thee withered, bloody, pale, and dead.
Hark, hark, the Dolphins drum, a warning bell,
Sings heavy Music to thy timorous soul,
And mine shall ring thy dire departure out,
He Fables not, I hear the enemy:
Out some light Horsemen, and peruse their Wings.
O negligent and heedless Discipline,
How are we park'd and bounded in a pale?
A little Heard of Englands timorous Dear,
Mazed with a yelping kennel of French Cures.
If we be English Dear, be then in blood,
Not Rascall-like to fall down with a pinch,
But rather moody mad: And desperate Stags,
Turn on the bloody Hounds with heads of Steel,
And make the Cowards stand aloof at bay:
Sell every man his life as dear as mine,
And they shall find dear Dear of vs my Friends.
God, and S. George, Talbot and Englands right,
Prosper our Colours in this dangerous fight.
Are not the speedy scouts returned again,
That dogged the mighty Army of the Dolphin?
They are returned my Lord, and give it out,
That he is marched to Bordeaux with his power
To fight with Talbot as he marched along.
By your espyals were discovered
Two mightier Troops then that the Dolphin led,
Which joined with him, and made their march for Bordeaux
A plague upon that Villain Somerset,
That thus delays my promised supply
Of horsemen, that were levied for this siege.
Renowned Talbot doth expect my aid,
And I am lowted by a Traitor Villain,
And cannot help the noble Chevalier:
God comfort him in this necessity:
If he miscarry, farewell Wars in France.
Thou Princely Leader of our English strength,
Never so needful on the earth of France,
Spur to the rescue of the Noble Talbot,
Who now is girdled with a waste of Iron,
And hemmed about with grim destruction:
To Bordeaux warlike Duke, to Bordeaux York,
Else farewell Talbot, France, and Englands honour.
O God, that Somerset who in proud heart
Doth stop my Cornets, were in Talbots place,
So should wee save a valiant Gentleman,
By forteyting a Traitor, and a Coward:
Mad ire, and wrathful fury makes me weep,
That thus we dye, while remiss Traitors sleep.
O send some succour to the distressed Lord.
He dies, we loose: I break my warlike word:
We morn, France smiles: We loose, they daily get,
All long of this vile Traitor Somerset.
Then God take mercy on brave Talbots soul,
And on his Son young Iohn, who two hours since,
I met in travail toward his warlike Father;
This seven years did not Talbot see his son,
And now they meet where both their lives are done.
Alas, what joy shall noble Talbot have,
To bid his young son welcome to his Grave:
Away, vexation almost stoppes my breath,
That sundried friends greet in the hour of death.
Lucy farewell, no more my fortune can,
But curse the cause I cannot aid the man.
Maine, Bloys, Poytiers, and Tours, are won away,
Long all of Somerset, and his delay.
Thus while the Vulture of sedition,
Feeds in the bosom of such great Commanders,
Sleeping neglect doth betray to loss:
The Conquest of our scarse-cold Conqueror,
That euer-liuing man of Memory,
Henrie the fifth: Whiles they each other cross,
Lives, Honours, Lands, and all, hurry to loss.
It is too late, I cannot send them now:
This expedition was by York and Talbot,
Too rashly plotted. All our general force,
Might with a sally of the very Town
Be buckled with: the ouer-daring Talbot
Hath sullied all his gloss of former Honour
By this unheedful, desperate, wilde adventure:
York set him on to fight, and dye in shame,
That Talbot dead, great York might bear the name.
Here is Sir William Lucy, who with me
Set from our ore-matcht forces forth for aid.
How now Sir William, whether were you sent?
Whether my Lord, from bought &amp; sold L. Talbot,
Who ringed about with bold adversity,
Cries out for noble York and Somerset,
To beat assailing death from his weak Regions,
And whiles the honourable Captain there
Drops bloody sweat from his warre-wearied limbs,
And in advantage lingering looks for rescue,
You his false hopes, the trust of Englands honour,
Keep off aloof with worthless emulation:
Let not your private discord keep away
The levied succours that should lend him aid,
While he renowned Noble Gentleman
Yield up his life unto a world of odds.
Orleans the Bastard, Charles, Burgundy,
Alanson, Reignard, compass him about,
And Talbot perishes by your default.
York set him on, York should have sent him aid.
And York as fast upon your Grace exclaims,
Swearing that you with-hold his levied host,
Collected for this expedition.
York lies: He might have sent, &amp; had the Horse:
I owe him little Duty, and less Love,
And take foul scorn to fawn on him by sending.
The fraud of England, not the force of France,
Hath now entrapped the Noble-minded Talbot:
Never to England shall he bear his life,
But dies betrayed to fortune by your strife.
Come go, I will dispatch the Horsemen strait:
Within six hours, they will be at his aid.
Too late comes rescue, he is tan or slain,
For fly he could not, if he would have fled:
And fly would Talbot never though he might.
If he be dead, brave Talbot then adieu.
His Fame lives in the world. His Shame in you.
O young Iohn Talbot, I did send for thee▪
To tutor thee in stratagems of War,
That Talbots name might be in thee revived,
When sapless Age, and weak unable limbs
Should bring thy Father to his drooping Chair.
But O malignant and ill-boading Stars,
Now thou art come unto a Feast of death,
A terrible and vnauoyded danger:
Therefore dear Boy, mount on my swiftest horse,
And Isle direct thee how thou shalt escape
By sudden flight. Come, dally not, be gone.
Is my name Talbot? and am I your Son?
And shall I fly? O, if you love my Mother,
Dishonour not her Honourable Name,
To make a Bastard, and a Slave of me:
The World will say, he is not Talbots blood,
That basely fled, when Noble Talbot stood.
Fly, to revenge my death, if I be slain.
He that flies so, will ne'er return again.
If we both stay, we both are sure to dye.
Then let me stay, and Father doe you fly:
Your loss is great, so your regard should be;
My worth unknown, no loss is known in me.
Upon my death, the French can little boast;
In yours they will, in you all hopes are lost.
Flight cannot stain the Honour you have won,
But mine it will, that no Exploit have done.
You fled for Vantage, every one will swear:
But if I bow, they'll say it was for fear.
There is no hope that ever I will stay,
If the first hour I shrink and run away:
Here on my knee I beg Mortality,
Rather then Life, preserved with Infamy.
Shall all thy Mothers hopes lye in one Tomb?
I rather then Isle shame my Mothers Womb,
Upon my Blessing I command thee go.
To fight I will, but not to fly the Foe.
Part of thy Father may be saved in thee.
No part of him, but will be shame in me.
Thou never had Renown, nor can not lose it.
Yes, your renowned Name: shall flight abuse it?
Thy Fathers charge shall clear thee from yt stain.
You cannot witness for me, being slain.
If Death be so apparent, then both fly.
And leave my followers here to fight and dye?
My Age was never tainted with such shame.
And shall my Youth be guilty of such blame?
No more can I be severed from your side,
Then can your self, your self in twain divide:
Stay, go, doe what you will, the like doe I;
For live I will not, if my Father dye.
Then here I take my leave of thee, fair Son,
Borne to eclipse thy Life this afternoon:
Come, side by side, together live and dye,
And Soul with Soul from France to Heaven fly.
Saint George, and Victory; fight Soldiers, fight:
The Regent hath with Talbot broke his word,
And left vs to the rage of France his Sword.
Where is Iohn Talbot? pause, and take thy breath,
I gave thee Life, and rescued thee from Death.
O twice my Father, twice am I thy Son:
The Life thou gau'st me first, was lost and done,
Till with thy Warlike Sword, despite of Fate,
To my determined time thou gau'st new date.
When frō the Dolphins Crest thy Sword struck fire,
It warmed thy Fathers heart with proud desire
Of bold-faced Victory. Then Leaden Age,
Quickened with Youthful Spleen, and Warlike Rage,
Beat down Alanson, Orleans, Burgundy,
And from the Pride of Galley rescued thee.
The ireful Bastard Orleans, that drew blood
From thee my Boy, and had the Maidenhood
Of thy first fight, I soon encountered,
And interchanging blows, I quickly shed
Some of his Bastard blood, and in disgrace
Bespoke him thus: Contaminated, base,
And misbegotten blood, I spill of thine,
Mean and right poor, for that pure blood of mine,
Which thou did force from Talbot, my brave Boy.
Here purposing the Bastard to destroy,
Came in strong rescue. Speak thy Fathers care:
Art thou not weary, Iohn? How dost thou fare?
Wilt thou yet leave the Battle, Boy, and fly,
Now thou art sealed the Son of Chivalry?
Fly, to revenge my death when I am dead,
The help of one stands me in little stead.
Oh, too much folly is it, well I wot,
To hazard all our lives in one small Boat,
If I to day dye not with Frenchmens Rage,
To morrow I shall dye with mickle Age.
By me they nothing gain, and if I stay,
It is but the shortening of my Life one day.
In thee thy Mother dyes, our Households Name,
My Deaths Revenge, thy Youth, and Englands Fame:
All these, and more, we hazard by thy stay;
All these are saved, if thou wilt fly away.
The Sword of Orleans hath not made me smart,
These words of yours draw Life-blood from my Heart.
On that advantage, bought with such a shame,
To save a paltry Life, and slay bright Fame,
Before young Talbot from old Talbot fly,
The Coward Horse that bears me, fall and dye:
And like me to the peasant Boys of France.
To be Shames scorn, and subject of Mischance.
Surely, by all the Glory you have won,
And if I fly, I am not Talbots Son.
Then talk no more of flight, it is no boot,
If Son to Talbot, dye at Talbots foot.
Then follow thou thy desperate Sire of Create,
Thou Icarus, thy Life to me is sweet:
If thou wilt fight, fight by thy Fathers side,
And commendable proved, let's dye in pride.
Where is my other Life? mine own is gone.
O, whore's young Talbot? where is valiant Iohn?
Triumphant Death, smeared with Captivity,
Young Talbots Valour makes me smile at thee.
When he perceived me shrink, and on my Knee,
His bloody Sword he brandished over me,
And like a hungry Lyon did commence
Rough deeds of Rage, and sterne Impatience:
But when my angry Guardant stood alone,
Tendering my ruin, and assailed of none,
Dizzie-ey'd Fury, and great rage of Heart,
Suddenly made him from my side to start
Into the clustering Battle of the French:
And in that Sea of Blood, my Boy did drench
His ouer-mounting Spirit; and there died
My Icarus, my Blossom, in his pride.
O my dear Lord, lo where your Son is borne.
Thou antique Death, which laugh vs here to scorn,
Anon from thy insulting Tyranny,
Coupled in bonds of perpetuity,
Two Talbots winged through the lither Sky,
In thy despite shall scope Mortality.
O thou whose wounds become hard favoured death,
Speak to thy father, ere thou yield thy breath,
Brave death by speaking, whither he will or no:
Imagine him a Frenchman, and thy Foe.
Poor Boy, he smiles, me thinks, as who should say,
Had Death been French, then Death had dyed to day.
Come, come, and lay him in his Fathers arms,
My spirit can no longer bear these harms.
Soldiers adieu: I have what I would have,
Now my old arms are young Iohn Talbots grave.
Had York and Somerset brought rescue in,
We should have found a bloody day of this.
How the young whelp of Talbots raging wood,
Did flesh his punie-sword in Frenchmens blood.
Once I encountered him, and thus I said:
Thou Maiden youth, be vanquished by a Maid.
But with a proud Majestic high scorn
He answered thus: Young Talbot was not borne
To be the pillage of a Giglot Wench:
So rushing in the bowels of the French,
He left me proudly, as unworthy fight,
Doubtless he would have made a noble Knight:
See where he lies enhearsed in the arms
Of the most bloody Nursser of his harms.
Hew them to pieces, hack their bones asunder,
Whose life was Englands glory, Gallia's wonder.
Oh no forbear: For that which we have fled
During the life, let vs not wrong it dead.
Herald, conduct me to the Dolphins Tent,
To know who hath obtained the glory of the day.
On what submissive message art thou sent?
Submission Dolphin? Ti• a mere French word:
We English Warriors wot not what it means.
I come to know what Prisoner; thou hast tan,
And to survey the bodies of the dead.
For prisoners ask thou? Hell our prison is.
But tell me whom thou seek?
But whore's the great Alcides of the field,
Valiant Lord Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury?
Created for his rare success in Arms,
Great Earl of Washford, Waterford, and Valence,
Lord Talbot of Goodrig and Vrchinfield,
Lord Strange of Blackmere, Lord Verdon of Alton,
Lord Cromwell of Wingefield, Lord Furniuall, of Sheffield,
The thrice victorious Lord of Falconbridge,
Knight of the Noble Order of S. George,
Worthy S. Michael, and the Golden Fleece,
Great Marshall to Henry the sixth,
Of all his Wars within the Realm of France.
Heere's a silly stately stile indeed:
The Turk that two and fifty Kingdoms hath,
Writes not so tedious a Stile as this.
Him that thou magnifi'st with all these Titles,
Stinking and fly-blowne lies here at our feet.
Is Talbot slain, the Frenchmens only Scourge,
Your Kingdoms terror, and black Nemesis?
Oh were mine eye-balles into Bullets turned,
That I in rage might shoot them at your faces.
Oh, that I could but call these dead to life,
It were enough to fright the Realm of France.
Were but his Picture left amongst you here,
It would amaze the proudest of you all.
Give me their Bodies, that I may bear them hence,
And give them Burial, as beseems their worth.
I think this upstart is old Talbots Ghost,
He speaks with such a proud commanding spirit:
For Gods sake let him have him, to keep them here,
They would but stink, and putrefy the ayre.
Go take their bodies hence.
Isle bear them hence: but from their ashes shall be reared
A Phoenix that shall make all France afeared.
So we be rid of them, do with him what you wilt.
And now to Paris in this conquering vain,
All will be ours, now bloody Talbots slain.
Have you perused the Letters from the Pope,
The Emperor, and the Earl of Arminack?
I have my Lord, and their intent is this,
They humbly sue unto your Excellence,
To have a godly peace concluded of,
Between the Realms of England, and of France.
How doth your Grace affect their motion?
Well (my good Lord) and as the only means
To stop effusion of our Christian blood,
And stablish quietness on every side.
I marry Uncle, for I always thought
It was both impious and unnatural,
That such immanity and bloody strife
Should reign among Professors of one Faith.
Beside my Lord, the sooner to effect,
And surer bind this knot of amity,
The Earl of Arminacke near knit to Charles,
A man of great Authority in France,
Proffers his only daughter to your Grace,
In marriage, with a large and sumptuous Dowry.
Marriage Uncle? Alas my years are young:
And fitter is my study, and my Books,
Than wanton dalliance with a Paramour.
Yet call the Ambassadors, and as you please,
So let them have their answers every one:
I shall be well content with any choice
Tends to Gods glory, and my Countries weal.
What, is my Lord of Winchester installed,
And called unto a Cardinals degree?
Then I perceive, that will be verified
Henry the Fifth did sometime prophecy.
If once he come to be a Cardinal,
He will make his cap coequal with the Crown.
My Lords Ambassadors, your several suites
Have bin considered and debated on,
Your purpose is both good and reasonable:
And therefore are we certainly resolved,
To draw conditions of a friendly peace,
Which by my Lord of Winchester we mean
Shall be transported presently to France.
And for the proffer of my Lord your Master,
I have informed his Highness so at large,
As liking of the Ladies virtuous gifts,
Her Beauty, and the value of her Dower,
He doth intend she shall be Englands Queen.
In argument and proof of which contract,
Bear her this Jewel, pledge of my affection.
And so my Lord Protector see them guarded,
And safely brought to Dover, wherein shipped
Commit them to the fortune of the sea.
Stay my Lord Legate, you shall first receive
The sum of money which I promised
Should be delivered to his Holiness,
For clothing me in these grave Ornaments.
I will attend upon your Lordships leisure.
Now Winchester will not submit, I trow,
Or be inferior to the proudest Peer;
Humfrey of Gloster, thou shalt well perceive,
That neither in birth, or for authority,
The Bishop will be ouer-borne by thee:
Isle either make thee stoop, and bend thy knee,
Or sack this Country with a mutiny.
These news (my Lords) may cheer our droo∣ping spirits:
It is said, the stout Parisians do revolt,
And turn again unto the warlike French.
Then march to Paris Royal Charles of France,
And keep not back your powers in dalliance.
Peace be amongst them if they turn to vs,
Else ruin combat with their Palaces.
Success unto our valiant General,
And happiness to his accomplices.
What tidings send our Scouts? I prithee speak.
The English Army that divided was
Into two parties, is now conjoined in one,
And means to give you battle presently.
Somewhat too sudden Sirs, the warning is,
But we will presently provide for them.
I trust the Ghost of Talbot is not there:
Now he is gone my Lord, you need not fear.
Of all base passions, Fear is most accursed.
Command the Conquest Charles, it shall be thine:
Let Henry fret, and all the world rapine.
Then on my Lords, and France be fortunate.
The Regent conquers, and the Frenchmen fly.
Now help ye charming Spells and Periapts,
And ye choice spirits that admonish me,
And give me signs of future accidents.
You speedy helpers, that are substitutes
Under the Lordly Monarch of the North,
Appear, and aid me in this enterprise.
This speedy and quick appearance argues proof
Of your accustomed diligence to me.
Now ye Familiar Spirits, that are culled
Out of the powerful Regions under earth,
Help me this once, that France may get the field.
Oh hold me not with silenee ouer-long:
Where I was wont to feed you with my blood,
Isle lop• member off, and give it you,
In earnest of a further benefit:
So you do condescend to help me now.
No hope to have redress? My body shall
Pay recompense, if you will grant my suite.
Cannot my body, nor blood-sacrifice,
Entreat you to your wonted furtherance?
Then take my soul; my body, soul, and all,
Before that England give the French the foil.
See, they forsake me. Now the time is come,
That France must vale her lofty plumed Crest,
And let her head fall into Englands lap.
My ancient Incantations are too weak,
And hell too strong for me to buckle with:
Now France, thy glory droopcth to the dust.
Damsel of France, I think I have you fast,
Vnchaine your spirits now with spelling Charms,
And try if they can gain your liberty.
A goodly prize, fit for the devils grace.
See how the ugly Witch doth bend her brows,
As if with Circa, she would change my shape.
Changed to a worser shape thou can not be:
Oh, Charles the Dolphin is a proper man,
No shape but his can please your dainty eye.
A plaguing mischief light on Charles, and thee,
And may ye both be suddenly surprised
By bloody hands, in sleeping on your beds.
Fell banning Hag, Enchantress hold thy tongue.
I prithee give me leave to curse awhile.
Curse Miscreant, when thou come to the stake
Be what thou wilt, thou art my prisoner.
Oh Fairest Beauty, do not fear, nor fly:
For I will touch thee but with reverend hands,
I kiss these fingers for eternal peace,
And lay them gently on thy tender side.
Who art thou, say? that I may honour thee.
Margaret my name, and daughter to a King,
The King of Naples, who so ere thou art.
An Earl I am, and Suffolk am I called.
Be not offended Natures miracle,
Thou art allotted to be tan by me:
So doth the Swan her downy Signets save,
Keeping them prisoner underneath his wings:
Yet if this servile usage once offend,
Go, and be free again, as Suffolkes friend.
Oh slay: I have no power to let her pass,
My hand would free her, but my heart says no.
As plays the Sun upon the glassy streams,
Twinkling another counterfeited beam,
So seems this gorgeous beauty to mine eyes.
Fine would I woe her, yet I dare not speak:
Isle call for Pen and Ink, and write my mind:
Fie De la Pole, disable not thy self:
Hast not a Tongue? Is she not here?
Wilt thou be daunted at a Women's sight?
I: Beauties Princely Majesty is such,
Confounds the tongue, and makes the senses rough.
Say Earl of Suffolk, if thy name be so,
What ransom must I pay before I pass?
For I perceive I am thy prisoner.
How can thou tell she will deny thy suite,
Before thou make a trial of her love?
Why speak thou not? What ransom must I pay?
She's beautiful; and therefore to be Wooed:
She is a Woman; therefore to be Won.
Wilt thou accept of ransom, yea or no?
Fond man, remember that thou hast a wife,
Then how can Margaret be thy Paramour?
I were best to leave him, for he will not hear.
There all is marred: there lies a cooling card.
He talks at random: sure the man is mad.
And yet a dispensation may bee had.
And yet I would that you would answer me:
Isle win this Lady Margaret. For whom?
Why for my King: Tush, that's a wooden thing.
He talks of wood: It is some Carpenter.
Yet so my fancy may be satisfied,
And peace established between these Realms.
But there remains a scruple in that too:
For though her Father be the King of Naples,
Duke of Aniou and Mayne, yet is he poor,
And our Nobility will scorn the match.
Hear ye Captain? Are you not at leisure?
It shall be so, disdain they ne'er so much:
Henry is youthful, and will quickly yield.
Madam, I have a secret to reveal.
What though I be inthral'd, he seems a knight
And will not any way dishonour me.
Lady, vouchsafe to listen what I say.
Perhaps I shall be rescued by the French,
And then I need not crave his courtesy.
Sweet Madam, give me hearing in a cause.
Tush, women have been captivate ere now.
Lady, wherefore talk you so?
I cry you mercy, it is but Quid for Quo.
Say gentle Princess, would you not suppose
Your bondage happy, to be made a Queen?
To be a Queen in bondage, is more vile,
Than is a slave, in base servility:
For Princes should be free.
And so shall you.
If happy England• Royal King be free.
Why what concerns his freedom unto me?
Isle undertake to make thee Henries Queen,
To put a Golden Sceptre in thy hand,
And set a precious Crown upon thy head,
If thou wilt condescend to be my—
What?
His love.
I am unworthy to be Henries wife.
No gentle Madam, I unworthy am
To woe so fair a Dame to be his wife,
And have no portion in the choice my self.
How say you Madam, are ye so content?
And if my Father please, I am content.
Then call our Captains and our Colours forth,
And Madam, at your Fathers Castle walls,
We'll crave a parley, to confer with him.
See Reignier see, thy daughter prisoner.
To whom?
To me.
Suffolk, what remedy?
I am a Soldier, and unapt to weep,
Or to exclaim on Fortunes fickleness.
Yes, there is remedy enough my Lord,
Consent, and for thy Honour give consent,
Thy daughter shall be wedded to my King,
Whom I with pain have wooed and won thereto:
And this her easy held imprisonment,
Hath gained thy daughter Princely liberty.
Speaks Suffolk as he thinks?
Fair Margaret knows,
That Suffolk doth not flatter, face, or fine.
Upon thy Princely warrant, I descend,
To give thee answer of thy just demand.
And here I will expect thy coming.
Welcome brave Earl into our Territories,
Command in Aniou what your Honour pleases.
Thanks Reignier, happy for so sweet a Child,
Fit to be made companion with a King:
What answer makes your Grace unto my suite?
Since thou dost deign to woe her little worth,
To be the Princely Bride of such a Lord:
Upon condition I may quietly
Enjoy mine own, the Country Maine and Aniou,
Free from oppression, or the stroke of War,
My daughter shall be Henries, if he please.
That is her ransom, I deliver her,
And those two Counties I will undertake
Your Grace shall well and quietly enjoy.
And I again in Henries Royal name,
As Deputy unto that gracious King,
Give thee her hand for sign of plighted faith.
Reignier of France, I give thee Kingly thanks,
Because this is in Traffic of a King.
And yet me thinks I could be well content
To be mine own Attorney in this case.
Isle over then to England with this news.
And make this marriage to be solemnised:
So farewell Reignier, set this Diamond safe
In Golden Palaces as it becomes.
I do embrace thee, as I would embrace
The Christian Prince King Henrie were he here.
Farewell my Lord, good wishes, praise, &amp; prayers,
Shall Suffolk ever have of Margaret.
Farewell sweet Madam: but hark you Margaret,
No Princely commendations to my King?
Such commendations as becomes a Maid,
A Virgin, and his Servant, say to him.
Words sweetly placed, and modesty directed,
But Madame, I must trouble you again,
No loving Token to his Majesty?
Yes, my good Lord, a pure unspotted heart,
Never yet taint with love, I send the King.
And this withal.
That for thy self, I will not so presume,
To send such peevish tokens to a King.
Oh were thou for my self: but Suffolk stay,
Thou may not wander in that Labyrinth,
There Minotaurs and ugly Treasons lurk,
Solicit Henry with her wondrous praise.
Bethink thee on her Virtues that surmount,
Mad natural Graces that extinguish Art,
Repeat their semblance often on the Seas,
That when thou come to kneel at Henries feet,
Thou may bereave him of his wits with wonder.
Bring forth that Sorceress condemned to burn.
Ah Ione, this kills thy Fathers heart out-right,
Have I sought every Country far and near,
And now it is my chance to find thee out,
Must I behold thy timeless cruel death:
Ah Ione, sweet daughter Ione, Isle die with thee.
Decrepit Miser, base ignoble Wretch,
I am descended of a gentler blood.
Thou art no Father, nor no Friend of mine.
Out, out: My Lords, and please you, it is not so
I did beget her, all the Parish knows:
Her Mother lives yet, can testify
She was the first fruit of my Bachelorship.
Graceless, wilt thou deny thy Parentage?
This argues what her kind of life hath been,
Wicked and vile, and so her death concludes.
Fie Ione, that thou wilt be so obstacle:
God knows, thou art a collop of my flesh,
And for thy sake have I shed many a tear:
Deny me not, I prithee, gentle Ione.
Peasant avaunt. You have suborned this man
Of purpose, to obscure my Noble birth.
It is true, I gave a Noble to the Priest,
The morn that I was wedded to her mother.
Kneel down and take my blessing, good my Girl.
Wilt thou not stoop? Now cursed be the time
Of thy nativity: I would the Milk
Thy mother gave thee when thou suck her breast,
Had bin a little Rats-bane for thy sake.
Or else, when thou did keep my Lambs afield,
I wish some ravenous Wolf had eaten thee.
Doest thou deny thy Father, cursed Drab?
O burn her, burn her, hanging is too good.
Take her away, for she hath lived too long,
To fill the world with vicious qualities.
First let me tell you whom you have condemned;
Not me, begotten of a Shepherd Swain,
But issued from the Progeny of Kings.
Virtuous and Holy, chosen from aboue,
By inspiration of Celestial Grace,
To work exceeding miracles on earth.
I never had to do with wicked Spirits.
But you that are polluted with your lusts,
Stained with the guiltless blood of Innocents,
Corrupt and tainted with a thousand Vices:
Because you want the grace that others have,
You judge it straight a thing impossible
To compass Wonders, but by help of devils.
No misconceived, Ione of Air hath been
A Virgin from her tender infancy,
Chaste, and immaculate in very thought,
Whose Maiden-blood thus rigorously effus'd,
Will cry for Vengeance, at the Gates of Heaven.
I, I: away with her to execution.
And hark ye sirs: because she is a Maid,
Spare for no Faggots, let there be enough:
Place barrels of pitch upon the fatal stake,
That so her torture may be shortened.
Will nothing turn your unrelenting hearts?
Then Ione discouet thine infirmity,
That wartanteth by Law, to be thy privilege.
I am with child ye bloody Homicides:
Murder not then the Fruit within my Womb,
Although ye hale me to a violent death.
Now heaven forfend, the holy Maid with child?
The greatest miracle that ere ye wrought
Is all your strict preciseness come to this?
She and the Dolphin have bin juggling,
I did imagine what would be her refuge.
Well go too, we'll have no Bastards live,
Especially since Charles must Father it.
You are deceived, my child is none of his,
It was Alanson that enjoyed my love.
Alanson that notorious Macheuile?
It dyes, and if it had a thousand lives.
Oh give me leave, I have deluded you,
It was neither Charles, nor yet the Duke I named,
But Reignier King of Naples that prevailed.
A married man, that's most intolerable.
Why here's a Girl: I think she knows not well
(There were so many) whom she may accuse.
It's sign she hath been liberal and free.
And yet forsooth she is a Virgin pure,
Strumpet, thy words condemn thy Bra•, and thee.
Use no entreaty, for it is in vain.
Then lead me hence: with whom I leave my curse▪
May never glorious Sun reflex his beams
Upon the Country where you make abode:
But darkness, and the gloomy shade of death
Environ you, till Mischief and Despair,
Drive you to break your necks, or hang your selves.
Break thou in pieces, and consume to ashes,
Thou foul accursed minister of Hell.
Lord Regent, I do greet your Excellence
With Letters of Commission from the King.
For know my Lords, the States of Christendom,
Moved with remorse of these outrageous broils,
Have earnestly implored a general peace,
Betwixt our Nation, and the aspiring French;
And here at hand, the Dolphin and his Train
Approaches, to confer about some matter.
Is all our travel turned to this effect,
After the slaughter of so many Peers,
So many Captains, Gentlemen, and Soldiers,
That in this quarrel have been overthrown,
And sold their bodies for their Countries benefit,
Shall we at last conclude effeminate peace?
Have we not lost most part of all the Towns,
By Treason, Falsehood, and by Treachery,
Our great Progenitors had conquered:
Oh Warwick, Warwick, I foresee with grief
The utter loss of all the Realm of France.
Be patient York, if we conclude a Peace
It shall be with such strict and severe Covenants,
As little shall the Frenchmen gain thereby.
Since Lords of England, it is thus agreed,
That peaceful truce shall be proclaimed in France,
We come to be informed by your selves,
What the conditions of that league must be.
Speak Winchester, for boiling choler chokes
The hollow passage of my poisoned voice,
By sight of these our baleful enemies.
Charles, and the rest, it is enacted thus:
That in regard King Henry gives consent,
Of mere compassion, and of lenity,
To ease your Country of distressful War,
And suffer you to breath in fruitful peace,
You shall become true Liegemen to his Crown.
And Charles, upon condition thou wilt swear
To pay him tribute, and submit thy self,
Thou shalt be placed as Viceroy under him,
And still enjoy thy Regal dignity.
Must he be then as shadow of himself?
Adorn his Temples with a Coronet,
And yet in substance and authority,
Retain but privilege of a private man?
This proffer is absurd, and reasonless.
It is known already that I am possessed
With more then half the Gallian Territories,
And therein reverenced for their lawful King.
Shall I for lucre of the rest unvanquished,
Detract so much from that prerogative,
As to be called but Viceroy of the whole?
No Lord Ambassador, Isle rather keep
That which I have, than coveting for more
Be cast from possibility of all.
Insulting Charles, hast thou by secret means
Used intercession to obtain a league,
And now the matter grows to compromise,
Stand thou aloof upon Comparison.
Either accept the Title thou usurp,
Of benefit proceeding from our King,
And not of any challenge of Desert,
Or we will plague thee with incessant Wars.
My Lord, you do not well in obstinacy,
To cavil in the course of this Contract:
If once it be neglected, ten to one
We shall not find like opportunity.
To say the truth, it is your policy,
To save your Subjects from such massacre
And ruthless slaughters as are daily seen
By our proceeding in Hostility,
And therefore take this compact of a Truce,
Although you break it, when your pleasure serves.
How say thou Charles?
Shall our Condition stand?
It Shall:
Only reserved you claim no interest
In any of our Towns of Garrison.
Then swear Allegiance to his Majesty,
As thou art Knight, never to disobey,
Nor be Rebellious to the Crown of England,
Thou nor thy Nobles, to the Crown of England.
So, now dismiss your Army when ye please:
Hang up your Ensigns, let your Drums be still,
For here we entertain a solemn peace.
Your wondrous rare description (noble Earl)
Of beauteous Margaret hath astonished me:
Her virtues graced with external gifts,
Do breed Loves settled passions in my heart,
And like as rigour of tempestuous gusts
Provokes the mightiest Hulk against the tide,
So am I driven by breath of her Renown,
Either to suffer Shipwreck, or arrive
Where I may have fruition of her Love.
Tush my good Lord, this superficial tale,
Is but a preface of her worthy praise:
The chief perfections of that lovely Dame,
(Had I sufficient skill to utter them)
Would make a volume of enticing lines,
Able to ravish any dull conceit.
And which is more, she is not so Divine,
So full replete with choice of all delights,
But with as humble lowliness of mind,
She is content to be at your command:
Command I mean, of Virtuous chaste intents,
To Love, and Honour Henry as her Lord.
And otherwise, will Henry ne'er presume:
Therefore my Lord Protector, give consent,
That Marg'ret may be Englands Royal Queen.
So should I give consent to flatter sin,
You know (my Lord) your Highness is betrothed
Unto another Lady of esteem,
How shall we then dispense with that contract,
And not deface your Honour with reproach?
As doth a Ruler with unlawful Oaths,
Or one that at a Triumph, having vowed
To try his strength, forsakes yet the Lists
By reason of his Adversaries odds.
A poor Earls daughter is unequal odds,
And therefore may be bro•e without offence.
Why what (I pray) is Margaret more then that?
Her Father is no better than an Earl,
Although in glorious Titles he excel.
Yes my Lord, her Father is a King,
The King of Naples, and Jerusalem,
And of such great Authority in France,
As his alliance will confirm our peace,
And keep the Frenchmen in Allegiance.
And so the Earl of Arminacke may doe,
Because he is near Kinsman unto Charles.
Beside, his wealth doth warrant a liberal dower,
Where Reignier sooner will receive, than give.
A Dowre my Lords? Disgrace not so your King,
That he should be so abject, base, and poor,
To choose for wealth, and not for perfect Love.
Henry is able to enrich his Queen,
And not to seek a Queen to make him rich,
So worthless Peasants bargain for their Wives,
As Market men for Oxen, Sheep, or Horse.
Marriage is a matter of more worth,
Then to be dealt in by Attorneyship:
Not whom we will, but whom his Grace affects,
Must be companion of his Nuptial bed.
And therefore Lords, since he affects her most,
Most of all these reasons binds vs,
In our opinions she should be preferred,
For what is wedloeke forced? but a Hell,
An Age of discord and continual strife.
Whereas the contrary brings bliss,
And is a pattern of Celestial peace.
Whom should we match with Henry being a King,
But Margaret, that is daughter to a King:
Her peerless feature, joined with her birth,
Approves her sit for none, but for a King.
Her valiant courage, and undaunted spirit,
(More then in women commonly is seen)
Will answer our hope in issue of a King.
For Henry, son unto a Conqueror,
Is likely to beget more Conquerors,
If with a Lady of so high resolve,
(As is fair Margaret) he be linked in love.
Then yield my Lords, and here conclude with me,
That Margaret shall be Queen, and none but she.
Whether it be through force of your report,
My Noble Lord of Suffolk: Or for that
My tender youth was never yet attained
With any passion of inflaming Jove,
I cannot tell: but this I am assured,
I feel such sharpe dissention in my breast,
Such fierce alarms both of Hope and Fear,
As I am sick with working of my thoughts.
Take therefore shipping, post my Lord to France,
Agree to any covenants, and procure
That Lady Margaret do vouchsafe to come
To cross the Seas to England, and be crowned.
King Henries faithful and anointed Queen.
For your expenses and sufficient charge,
Among the people gather up a tenth.
Be gone I say, for till you do return,
I rest perplexed with a thousand Cares.
And you (good Uncle) banish all offence:
If you do censure me, by what you were,
Not what you are, I know it will excuse
This sudden execution of my will.
And so conduct me, where from company,
I may revolve and ruminate my grief.
I grief I fear me, both at first and last.
Thus Suffolk hath prevailed, and thus he goes
As did the youthful Paris once to Greece,
With hope to find the like event in love,
But prosper better than the Trojan did:
Margaret shall now be Queen, and rule the King:
But I will rule both her, the King, and Realm.

WHat, Death and Fortune cross the way of Love?
Why, what is Love, but Fortunes tenis-ball?
Nay, what are you both, but subjects unto Death?
And I command you to forbear this place:
For here the mouth of sad Melpomene,
Is wholly bent to tragedies discourse;
And what are Tragedies but acts of death?
Here means the wrathful muse in seas of tears,
And loud laments to tell a dismal tale:
A tale wherein she lately hath bestowed,
The huskie humour of her bloody quill,
And now for tables takes her to her tongue.
Why thinks Death, Love knows not the history?
Of brave Erastus and his Rodian dame:
It was I that made their harts consent to love,
And therefore come I now as fittest person,
To serve for chorus to this Tragedy.
Had not I been, they had not dyed so soon.
Had I not been, they had not dyed so soon.
Nay then it seems you both doo miss the mark,
Did not I change long love to sudden hate?
And then reaching their hatred into love:
And then from love deliver them to death?
Fortune is chorus. Love and death be gone.
I tell thee Fortune, and thee wanton Love,
I will not down to everlasting night,
Till I have moralised this Tragedy,
Whose chiefest actor was my sable dart.
Nor will I up into the brightsome sphere,
From whence I sprung, till in the chorus place,
I make it known to you and to the world,
What interest Love hath in Tragedies.
Nay then though Fortune have delight in change,
Isle stay my flight, and cease to turn my wheel,
Till I have shown by demonstration,
What interest I have in a Tragedy.
Tush, Fortune can doo more then Love or Death.
Why stay we then, lets give the Actors leave.
And as occasion serves, make our return.
Why when Perseda wilt thou not assure me?
But shall I like a mastlesse ship at sea,
Go every way and not the way I would:
My love hath lasted from mine infancy,
And still increased as I grew my self,
When did Perseda pastime in the streets,
But her Erastus ouer-eied her sport:
When did thou with thy sampler in the Sun,
Sit sowing with thy feres, but I was by
Marking thy lily hands dexterity:
Comparing it to twenty gracious things.
When did thou sing a note that I could hear,
But I have framed a ditty to the tune,
Figuring Perseda twenty kind of ways.
When did thou go to Church on holidays,
But I have waited on thee too and fro:
Marking my times as Falcons watch their flight.
When I have mist thee how have I lamented,
As if my thoughts had been assured true.
Thus in my youth, now since I grew a man,
I have persevered to let thee know,
The meaning of my true harts constancy:
Then be not nice Perseda as women wont,
To hasty lovers whose fancy soon is fled:
My love is of a long continuance,
And merits not a strangers recompense.
Enough Erastus thy Perseda knows,
She whom thou would have thine, Erastus knows,
Nay my Perseda knows, and then tic well.
I watch you vantages, thine be it then,
I have forgot the rest, but thats the effect:
Which to effect, accept this carkanet,
My Grandam on her death bed gave it me,
And there, even there I vowed unto my self,
To keep the same until my wandering eye,
Should find a harbour for my hart to dwell.
Even in thy breast doo I elect my rest,
Let in my hart to keep thine company.
And sweet Perseda accept this ring,
To equal it, receive my hart to boot,
It is no boot, for that was thine before?
And far more welcome is this change to me.
Then sunny days to naked Savages,
Or news of pardon to a wretch condemned,
That waits for the fearful stroke of death.
As careful will I be to keep this chain,
As doth the mother keep her children,
From waterpits, or falling in the fire.
Over mine armour will I hang this chain,
And when long combat makes my body faint,
The sight of this shall show Persedas name,
And ad fresh courage to my fainting limbs.
This day the eager Turk of Tripolis,
The Knight of Malta, hououred for his worth,
And he thats titled by the golden spur.
The Moore upon his hot barbarian horse,
The fiery Spaniard bearing in his face,
The empress of a noble warrior.
The sudden Frenchman, and the bigbound Dane,
And English Arthers hardy men at arms,
Eclipped Lyons of the western world:
Eche one of these approved combatants,
Assembled from several corners of the world,
Are hither come to try their force in arms,
In honour of the Prince of Cypress nuptials.
Amongst these worthies will Erastus troupe,
Though like a Gnatamongst a hive of Bees:
Know me by this thy precious carkanet,
And if I thrive, in valour as the glass
That takes the Sun-beames burning with his force:
Isle be the glass, and thou that heavenly Sun,
From whence Isle borrow what I do at chieue.
And sweet Perseda unnoted though I be,
Thy beauty yet shall make me known ere night.
Young slips are never graft in windy days,
Young scholars never entered with the rod,
Ah my Erastus there are Europes Knights,
That carryhonour graven in their helmes,
And they must win it dear that win it thence.
Let not my beauty prick thee to thy bane,
Better sit still then rise and ouer-tane.
Counsel me not, for my intent is sworn,
And be my fortune as my love deserves.
So be thy fortune as thy features serves.
And then Erastus lives without compare.
Here comes a Messenger to haste me hence,
I know your message, hath the Princess sent for me?
She hath, and desires you to consort her to the triumphs.
Who saw my Master?
O sir, are you heeere?
The Prince and all the outlandish Gentlemen,
Are ready to go to the triumphs, they stay for you.
Go sir, bid my men bring my horse, and a dozen slaves.
You shall have your horses and two dozen of slaves.
Wish me good hap Perseda and Isle win
Such glory, as no time shall ere race out,
Or end the period of my youth in blood.
Such fortune as the good Andromache,
Wished valiant Hector wounded with the Greeks,
I wish Erastus in his maiden wars.
Overcome with valour these high minded Knights,
As with thy virtue thou hast conquered me,
Heavens hear my hearty prayer and it effect.
Brave knights of Christendom, and turkish both,
Assembled he ere in thirsty honours cause,
To be enrolled in the brass leaved book,
Of never wasting perpetuity.
Put Lambe-like mildness to your Lyons strength,
And be our tilting like two brothers sports,
That exercise their war with friendly blows.
Brave Prince of Cypress, and our son in law,
Welcome these worthies by their several countries,
For in thy honour hither are they come,
To grace thy nuptials with their deeds at arms.
First welcome thrice renowned Englishman,
Graced by thy country, but ten times more
By thy approved valour in the field,
Upon the onset of the enemy,
What is thy motto when thou spurs thy horse.
In Scotland was I made a Knight at arms,
Where for my countries cause I charged my Lance:
In France I took the Standard from the King,
And give the flower of Galley in my crest.
Against the light foot Irish have I served,
And in my skin bear tokens of their skins:
Our word of courage all the world hath heard,
Saint George for England, and saint George for me.
Like welcome unto thee fair Knight of France,
Well famed thou art for discipline in war,
Upon the encounter of thine enemy,
What is thy mot renowned Knight of France.
In Italy I put my knighthood on,
Where in my shirt but with my single Rapier,
I combated a Roman much renownd,
His weapons point empoisoned for my bane,
And yet my stars did bode my victory,
Saint Denis is for France and that for me.
Welcome Castilian too amongst the rest,
Forfame doth sound thy valour with the rest:
Upon thy first encounter of thy foe,
What is thy word of courage brave man of Spain?
At fourteen years of age was I made Knight,
When twenty thousand Spaniards were in field,
What time a daring Rutter made a challenge
To change a bullet with our swift flight shot,
And I with single heed and level hit,
The haughty challenger and struck him dead.
The golden Fleece is that we cry upon,
And Iaques, Iaques, is the Spaniards choice.
Next, welcome unto thee renowned Turk,
Not for thy lay, but for thy worth in arms:
Upon the first brave of thine enemy,
What is thy noted word of charge, brave Turk?
Against the Sophie in three pitched fields,
Under the conduct of great Soliman,
Have I been chief commander of an host,
And put the flint heart Perseans to the sword.
The desert plains of Africa have I stained,
With blood of Moors, and there in three set battles faugh???,
Marched conqueror through Asia,
Along the coasts held by the Portinguze,
Even to the verge of gold, aboording Spain
Hath Brusor led a valiant troop of Turks,
And made some Christians kneel to Mahomet:
Him we adore, and in his name I cry,
Mahomet for me and Solyman.
Now Signeur Basilisco you we know,
And therefore give not you a strangers welcome,
You are a Rutter borne in Germanie,
Upon the first encounter of your foe:
What is your brave upon the enemy?
I fight not with my tongue, this is my Oratrix.
Laying his hand upon his sword.
Why Signeur Basilisco is ita she sword?
I, and so are all blades with me: behold my instance
Party, each female is the weaker vessel,
And the vigour of this arm infringes,
The temper of any blade, quoth my assertion,
And thereby gather, that this blade being arprooued wea???kerr than this limb, may very well bear a feminine Epitheton.
Tic well proved, but whats the word that glories your Country?
Sooth to say, the earth is my Country,
As the air to the foul, or the marine moisture,
To the red guild fish: I repute my self no coward:
For humility shall mount. I keep no table
To character my fore-passed conflicts.
As I remember, there happened a sore drought
In some part of Belgia, that the juice grass,
Was seared with the Sun Gods Element.
I held it policy, to put the men children
Of that climate to the sword,
That the mothers tears might relieve the perched earth.
The men died, the women wept, and the grass grew,
Else had my Frize-land horse perished,
Whose loss would have more grieved me,
Than the ruin of that whole Country.
Upon a time in Ireland I fought,
On horseback with an hundred Kernes,
From Titans Eastern uprise, to his Western downfall:
Insomuch that my Steed began to faint:
I conjecturing the cause to be want of water, dismounted:
In which place there was no such Element,
Enraged therefore with this Semitor,
All on foot like an Herculean offspring,
Endured some three or four hours combat,
In which process, my body distilled such dewy showers of sweat,
That from the warlike wrinkles of my front,
My Palfrey cooled his thirst.
My mercy in conquest, is equal with my manhood in fight,
The tear of an infant, hath bin the ransom of a conquered city,
Whereby I purchased the surname of Pities adomant.
Rough words blow my choler,
As the wind doth Mulcibers work house,
I have no word, because no country,
Each place is my habitation,
Therefore each countries word mine to pronounce.
Princes, what would you?
I have seen much, heard more, but done most,
To be brief, hee that will try me, let him waft me with his arm.
I am his, for some five lances.
Although it go against my stars to jest,
Yet to gratulate this beninge Prince,
I will suppress my condition.
He is beholding to you greatly sir:
Mount ye brave Lordings, forwards to the tilt,
My self will censure of your chivalry,
And with impartial eyes behold your deeds,
Forward brave Ladies, place you to behold
The fair demeanour of these warlike Knights.
I am melancholy: an humour of Venus belegereth me.
I have rejected with contemptible frowns,
The sweet glances of many amorous girls, or rather ladies:
But certes, I am now captivated with the reflecting eye
Of that admirable comet Perseda.
I will place her to behold my triumphs,
And do woonders in his sight,
O heavens, she comes, accompanied with a child,
Whose chin bears no impression of manhood,
Not an hair, not an excrement.
My sweet Perseda.
Peace Infant thou blasphemest.
You are deceived sir, he swore not,
I tell thee Easter he did worse, he called that Lady his,
Easter: O extempore, o floras!
O harsh vnedicate, illiterate peasant,
Thou abuse the phrase of the Latin.
By gods fish friend, take you the Latins part, isle abuse you to.
What sans dread of our indignation?
Sans: what languidge is that?
I think thou art a word maker by thine occupation.
I, terms thou me of an occupation,
Nay then this fiery humour of choler is suppressed,
By the thought of love. Fair Lady,
Now by my troth she is gon.
I, hath the Infant transported her hence,
He saw my anger figured in my brow,
And at his best advantage stole away,
But I will follow for revenge.
Nay, but here you sir,
I must talk with you before you go.
O if thou be magnanimous, come before me.
Nay, if thou be a right warrior, get fro?? under me.
What would thou have me a Typhon,
To bear up Peleon or Ossa?
Typhon me no Typhons,
But swear upon my Dudgeon dagger,
Not to go till I give thee leave,
But stay with me, and look upon the tilters.
O thou seekst thereby to dim my glory.
I care not for that, wilt thou not swear?
O I swear, I swear.
By the contents of this blade,
By the contents of this blade,
I the aforesaid Basilisco,
I the aforesaid Basilisco,
Knight good fellow, knight, knight.
Knave good fellow, knave, knave.
Will not offer to go from the side of Piston.
Will not offer to go from the side of Piston,
Without the leave of the said Piston obtained,
Without the leave of the said Piston,
Licensed, obtained and granted.
Enjoy thy life and live, I give it thee.
I enjoy my life at thy hands, I confess it,
I am up, but that I am religious in mine oath,
What would you do sir, what would you do,
Will you up the ladder sir, and see the tilting.
Better a Dog fawn on me, then bark,
Now sir, how likes thou this course.
Their Lances were couched to hie,
And their Steeds ill borne.
It may be so, it may be so,
Now sir, how like you this course.
Pretty, pretty, but not famous,
Well for a learner, but not for a warrior.
By my faith, me thought it was excellent.
I in the eye of an infant, a Peacocks tail is glorious.
O well run, the bay horse with the blew tail,
And the silver knight, are both down,
By Cock and Pie, and Mouse foot,
The English man is a fine Knight.
Now by the marble face of the Welkin,
Hee is a brave warrior.
What an oath is there, fie upon thee extortioner.
Now comes in the infant that courts my mistress,
Oh that my lance were in my rest,
And my Beaver closed for this encounter.
O well ran, my moister hath overthrown the Turk.
Now fie upon the Turk,
To be dismounted by a Child it vexes me.
O well run Moister, he hath overthrown the French???man.
It is the fury of his horse, not the strength of his arm
I would thou would remit my oath,
That I might assail thy moister.
I give thee leave, go to thy destruction,
But syrra wheres thy horse?
Why my Page stands holding him by the bridle.
Well go mount thee, go.
I go, and Fortune guide my Lance.
Take the braginst knave in christendom with thee:
Truly I am sorry for him,
He just like a knight, heel jostle like a Jade.
It it a world to here the fool prate and brag,
He will jet as if it were a Goose on a greene:
He goes many times supperless to bed,
And yet he takes Physic to make him lean.
Last night he was bidden to a Gentlewoman's to supper,
And because he would not be put to carve,
He wore his hand in a scarf, and said he was wounded:
He wears a coloured lath in his scabbard,
And when it was found upon him, he said he was wrathful,
He might not wear no iron. He weres Civet,
And when it was asked him, where he had that musk,
He said, all his kindred smelt so:
Is not this a counterfeit fool?
Well isle up and see how he speeds.
Now by the faith of a squire, he is a very faint knight,
Why my moister hath overthrown him
And his Curtal, both to the ground,
I shall have old laughing,
It will be better then the Fox in the hole for me.
Brave Gentlemen, by all your free consents,
This Knight unknown, hath best demeand himself,
According to the proclimation made,
The prize and honour of the day is his,
But now unmask thy self, that we may see,
What warlike wrinkles time hath charactered,
With ages print upon thy warlike face.
Accord to his request, brave man at arms,
And let me see the face that vanquished me.
Unmask thy self, thou well approved knight.
I long to see thy face brave warrior.
Nay valiant sir, we may not be denied,
Fair Ladies should be coy to show their faces,
Least that the sun should tan them with his beams,
Isle be your page this once, for to disarm you.
Thats the reason, that he shall help
Your husband to arm his head,
Oh the policy of this age is wonderful.
What young Erastus, is it possible?
Erastus be thou honoured for this deed.
So young, and of such good accomplishment,
Thrive fair beginner as this time doth promise,
In virtue, valour, and all worthiness:
Give me thy hand, I vow my self thy friend.
Thanks worthy sir, whose favourable hand,
Hath entered such a youngling in the war,
And thanks unto you all, brave worthy sirs,
Impose me task, how I may do you good,
Erastus will be dutiful in all.
Leave protestations now, and let vs hie,
To tread lauolto, that is women's walk,
There spend we the remainder of the day,
Though overborne, and foiled in my course,
Yet have I partners in mine infamy.
Tic wondrous, that so young a toward warrior,
Should bide the shock of such approved knights,
As he this day hath matched and mated too,
But virtue should not envy good desert,
Therefore Erastus happy, and thy fortune,
But my Lucina, how she changed her colour,
When at the encounter I did loose a stirrup,
Hanging her head as partner of my shame,
Therefore will I now go visit her,
And please her with this Carcanet of worth,
Which by good fortune I have found to day,
When valour fails, then gould must make the way.
O cursed Fortune enemy to Fame,
Thus to disgrace thy honoured name,
By overthrowing him that far hath spread thy praise,
Beyond the course of Titans burning rays,
Page set a side the gesture of my enemy,
Give him a Fiddlers fee, and send him packing.
Ho, God save you sir, have you burst your shin,
I villain, I have broke my shin bone,
My back bone, my channel bone, and my thigh bone,
Beside two dozen small inferior bones.
A shrewd loss by my faith sir,
But wheres your coursers tail.
He lost the same in service.
There was a hot piece of service, where he lost his tail
But how chance his nose is slit.
For presumption, for covering the Emperors Mare.
Marry a foul fault, but why are his ears cut?
For neighing in the Emperors Court.
Why then thy Horse hath bin a Colt in his time,
True, thou hast said.
O touch not the cheek of my Palphrey,
Least he dismount me while my wounds are greene,
Page, run, bid the surgeon bring his incision.
Yet stay isle ride along with thee my self.
And isle bear you company,
Come sir, let me see how finely you'll cry this chain
Why what was it worth?
It was worth more, then thou and all thy kin are worth,
It may be so, but what must he have that finds it?
Why a hundred Crowns.
Why then isle have ten for the crying it.
Ten Crowns, and had but six pence,
For crying a little wench of thirty years old &amp; upwards,
That had lost her self betwixt a tavern &amp; a bow die house.
I that was a wench, but this is Gold,
She was poor, but this is rich.
Why then by this reckoning, a Hackneyman
Should have ten shillings for horsing a Gentlewoman,
Where he hath but ten pence of a beggar.
Why and reason good,
Let them pay, that best may,
As the Lawyers use their rich Clients,
When they let the poor go under Form pauperise.
Why then I pray thee cry the Chain for me,
Sub form pauperise,
For money goes very low with me at this time.
I sir, but your moister is, though you be not.
I but hee must not know
That thou cry est the Chain for me,
I do but use thee to save me a labour,
That am to make inquiry after it,
Well sir, you'll see me considered, will you not?
I marry will I, why what lighter payment can there be, then consideration.
O yes.
How now sir, what are you crying?
A chain sir, a chain, that your man bad me cry.
Get you away sir, I advise you
Meddle with no Chains of mine,
You paltry knave, how durst thou be so bold,
To cry the chain, when I bid thou should not,
Did I not bid thee only underhand,
Make privy inquiry for it through the town,
Least public rumour might advertise her,
Whose knowledge were to me a second death?
Why would you have me run up and down the town? and my shoes are done.
What you want in shoes, isle give ye in blows.
I pray you sir hold your hands,
And as I am an honest man,
Isle do the best I can to find your chain.
Ah treacherous Fortune, enemy to Love,
Did thou advance me for my greater fall,
In dalying war, I lost my chiefest peace,
In hunting after praise, I lost my love,
And in loves shipwreck will my life miscarry,
Take thou the honour, and give me the chain,
Wherein was linked the sum of my delight.
When she delivered me the Carkanet,
Keep it quoth she, as thou would keep my self:
I kept it not, and therefore she is lost,
And lost with his is all my happiness,
And loss of happiness is worse then death.
Come therefore gentle death and ease my grief,
Cut short what malice Fortune misintends,
But stay a while good Death, and let me live,
Time may restore what Fortune took from me:
Ah no, great losses seldom are restored.
What if my Chain shall never be restored,
My innocence shall clear my negligence.
Ah! but my love is ceremonious,
And looks for justice at her lovers hand,
Within forced furrows of her clowding brow,
As storms that fall amid a sun shine day,
I read her just desires, and my decay.
I long till Brusor be returned from Rhodes,
To know how he hath borne him against the Christians,
That are assembled there to try their valour,
But more to be well assured by him,
How Rhodes is fenced, and how I best may lay,
My never failing siege to win that plot,
For by the holy Alcaron I swear,
Isle call my Soldiers home from Persia,
And let the Sophie breath, and from the Russian broils
Call home my hardy, dauntless Janissaries,
And from the other skirts of Christendom,
Call home my Bassowes and my men of war,
And so beleager Rhodes by sea and land.
That Key will serve to open all the gates,
Through which our passage cannot find a stop,
Till it have pricked the hart of Christendom,
Which now that paltry Island keeps from scath.
Say brother Amurath, and Haleb, say,
What think you of our resolution?
Great Soliman, heavens only substitute,
And earths commander under Mahomet:
So counsel I, as thou thy self hast said.
Pardon me dread Sovereign, I hold it not
Good policy, to call your forces home
From Persea and Polonia, bending them
Upon a paltry Isle of small defence.
A common press of base superfluous Turks,
May soon beleuied for so slight a task.
Ah Soliman, whose name hath shook thy foes,
As withered leaves with Autume thrown down,
Fog not thy glory with so foul eclipse,
Let not thy Soldiers sound a base retire,
Till Persea stoop, and thou be conqueror.
What scandal were it to thy mightiness,
After so many valiant Bassowes slain,
Whose blood hath bin manured to their earth,
Whose bones hath made their deep ways passable.
To sound a homeward, dull, and harsh retreat,
Without a conquest, or a mean revenge,
Strive not for Rhodes, by letting Persea slip,
The ones a Lyon almost brought to death,
Whose skin will countervail the hunters toil;
The other is a Wasp with threatening sting.
Whose Honey is not worth the taking up.
Why Haleb did thou not hear our brother swear
Upon the Alcaron religiously:
That: he would make an universal Camp
Of all his scattered laegions: and dare thou
Infer a reason why it is not meet,
After his Highness swears it shall be so,
Were it not thou art my fathers son,
And striving kindness wrestled not with ire,
I would not hence, till I had let thee know,
What it were to thwart a Monarchs holy oath.
Why, his highness gave me leave to speak my will,
And far from flattery I spoke my mind,
And did discharge a faithful subjects love,
Thou Aristippus like did flatter him,
Not like my brother, or a man of worth,
And for his highness vow I crossed it not,
But gave my censure, as his highness bad,
Now for thy chastisement, know Amurath,
I scorn them as a rechlesse Lion scorns,
The humming of a gnat in Summers night,
I take it Haleb thou art friend to Rhodes.
Not half so much am I a friend to Rhodes,
As thou art enemy to thy Sovereign.
I charge thee say wherein, or else by Mahomet,
Isle hazard duty in my Sovereigns presence.
Not for thy threats, but for my self I say,
It is not meet, that one so base as thou,
Should come about the person of a King.
Must I give aim to this presumption?
Your Highness knows, I speak in duteous love.
Your Highness knows I spake at your command,
And to the purpose, far from flattery.
Thinks thou I flatter, now I flatter not,
What dismal Planets guides this fatal hour,
Villain, thy brothers groans do call for thee.
To wander with them through eternal night.
Oh Soliman for loving thee I die,
No Amurath, for murdering him thou die:
Oh Haleb how shall I begin to morn,
Or how shall I begin to shed salt tears.
For whom no words nor tears can well suffice.
Ah that my rich imperial Diadem,
Could satisfy thy cruel destiny:
Or that a thousand of our Turkish souls,
Or twenty thousand millious of our foes,
Could ransom thee from fell deaths tyranny,
To winthy life would Soliman be poor,
And live in servile bondage all my days,
Accursed Amurath, that for a worthless cause,
In blood hath shortened our sweet Halebs days,
Ah what is dearer bond then brotherhood,
Yet Amurath thou were my brother too,
If wilful folly did not blind mine eyes,
I, I, and thou as virtuous as Haleb,
And I as dear to thee as unto Haleb,
And thou as near to me as Haleb was,
Ah Amurath: why were thou so unkind to him
For uttering but a th warting word?
And Haleb, why did not thy harts counsel,
Bridle the fond intemperance of thy tongue?
Nay wretched Solyman, why did not thou
Withhold thy hand, from heaping blood on blood,
Might I not better spare one joy then both,
If love of Haleb forced me on to wrath,
Cursed be that wrath that is the way to death,
If justice forced me on, cursed be that justice
That makes the brother, Butcher of his brother,
Come Janissaries, and help me to lament,
And bear my joys on either side of me:
I, late my joys, but now my lasting sorrow,
Thus, thus, let Soliman pass on his way,
Bearing in either hand his hearts decay.
Now Death and Fortune which of all vs three,
Hath in the Actors shown the greatest power.
Have not I taught Erastus and Perseda,
By mutual tokens to seal up their loves?
I but those tokens, the Ring and Carkanet,
Were Fortunes gifts, Love gives no gould or jewels.
Why what is jewels, or what is gould but earth,
An humour knit together by compression,
And by the worlds bright eye, first brought to light,
Only to feed men's eyes with vain delight.
Loves works are more then of a mortal temper,
I couple minds together by consent.
Who gave Rhodes Princes to the Ciprian Prince: but Love.
Fortune that first by chance brought them together,
For till by Fortune persons meet each other,
Thou can not teach their eyes to wound their hearts.
I made those Knights of several sect and countries
Each one by arms to honour his beloved,
Nay onealone to honour his beloved,
The rest by turning of my tickle wheel,
Came short in reaching of fair honours mark:
I gave Erastus only that days prize,
A sweet renown, but mixed with bitter sorrow:
For in conclusion of his happiness,
I made him loose the precious Carcanet,
Whereon depended all his hope and joy.
And more then so: for he that found the chain,
Even for that Chain shall be deprived of life.
Besides, Love hath enforced a fool,
The fond Bragardo to presume to arms.
I but thou see how he was overthrown.
By Fortunes high displeasure:
I and by Death had been surprised,
If Fates had given me leave:
But what I mist in him and in the rest,
I did accomplish on Haleb and Amurath,
The worthy brethren of great Soliman,
But wherefore stay we, let the sequel prove,
Who is greatest, Fortune, Death, or Love.
As fits the time, so now well fits the place,
To cool affection with our words and looks.
If in our thoughts be semblance sympathy.
My words, my looks, my thoughts are all on thee.
Ferdinando is Lucinaes only joy.
What pledge thereof?
An oath, a hand, a kiss.
O holy oath, fair hand, and sugared kiss:
Oh never may Fernando lack such bliss,
But say my dear, when shall the gates of heaven?
Stand all wide op for celestial Gods,
With gladsome looks to case at Hymens robes.
When shall the graces, or Lucinas hand,
With Rosie chaplets deck thy golden tresses,
And Cupped bring me to thy nuptial bed,
Where thou in joy and pleasure must attend.
A bliffull war with me thy chiefest friend.
Full fraught with love, and burning with desire,
I long have longed for light of Hymens lights.
Then that same day, whose warm &amp; pleasant sight,
Brings in the spring, with many gladsome flowers,
Be our first day of joy and perfect peace:
Till when, receive this precious Carcanet,
In sign, that as these links are interlaced,
So both our hearts are still combined in one,
Which never can be parted but by death.
And if I live this shall not be forgot:
But see Ferdinando where Perseda comes,
Whom women love for virtue, men for beauty,
All the world loves, none hates but envy.
All hail brave Cauelere: God morrow Madam,
The fairest shine that shall this day be seen.
Except Persedas beauteous excelence,
Shame to loves Queen, and Empress of my thoughts.
Marry thrice happy is Persedas chance,
To have so brave a champion to his Squire.
His Squire: her Knight, and who so else denies,
Shall fe eel the rigour of my Sword and Lance.
O Sir, not I.
Here is none but friends, yet let me challenge you,
For gracing me with a malignant stile,
That I was fairest, and yet Perseda fairer.
We Ladies stand upon our beauties much.
Herein Lucina let me buckler him.
Not Mars himself had ear so fair a Buckler.
Love makes him blind,
And blind can judge no colours.
Why then the mends is made, and we still friends,
Still friends, still foes, she wears my Carcanet,
Ah false Erastus, how am I betrayed.
What ails you madam, that your coulor changes.
A sudden qualm, I therefore take my leave.
Weal bring you home,
No, I shall soon get home.
Why then farewell: Fernando lets away.
Say worlds bright star,
Whence springs this sudden change,
Is it unkindness at the little praise
I gave Lucina with my glossing stile?
No, no, her beauty far surpasses mine,
And from my neck, her neck hath won the praise.
What is it then, if love of this my person,
By favour and by justice of the heavens,
At last have percst through thy tralucent breast,
And thou misdoubts, perhaps that isle prove coy,
Oh be assured tic far from noble thoughts,
To tyrannise over a yielding foe.
Therefore be blithe, sweet love abandon fear,
I will forget thy former cruelty.
Ah false Erastus full of treachrie.
I always told you that such coward knights,
Were faithless swains and worthy no respect,
But tell me sweet love, what is his offence?
That I with words and stripes may chastise him,
And bring him bound for thee to tread upon.
Now must I find the means to rid him hence,
Go thou forthwith arm thee from top to toe,
And come an hour hence unto my lodging,
Then will I tell thee this offence at large,
And thou in my behalf shalt work revenge.
I thus should men of valour be employed,
This is good argument of thy true love,
I go, make reasoning that Erastus dyes,
Unless forewarnd, the weakoning coward flies,
Thou foolish coward flies. Erastus lives,
The fairest shape, but foulest minded man,
That ere sun saw within our hemisphere,
My tongue to tell my woes is all to weak,
I must vnclaspe me, or my heart will break:
But inward cares are most pent in with grief,
Vnclasping therefore yields me no relief.
Ah that my moist and cloud compacted brain,
Could spend my cares in showers of weeping rain.
But scalding sighs like blasts of boisterous winds,
Hinder my tears from falling on the ground,
And I must die by closure of my wound.
Ah false Erastus, how had I misdoone,
That thou should quit my love with such a scorn.
Here comes the Synon to my simple hart,
Isle frame my self to his dissembling art.
Desire persuades me on, fear pulls me back.
Tush I will to her, innocence is bold,
How fares Perseda my sweet second self?
Well, now Erastus my hearts only joy
Is come to join both hearts in union.
And till I came whereas my love did dwell,
My pleasure was but pain, my solace woe.
What love means my Erastus, pray thee tell?
Matchless Perseda, she that gave me strength,
To win late conquest from many victors hands,
Thy name was conqueror, not my chivalry:
Thy looks did arm me, not my coat of steel,
Thy beauty did defend me, not my force.
Thy favours bore me, not my light foot Steed,
Therefore to thee I owe both love and life.
But wherefore makes Perseda such a doubt,
As if Erastus could forget himself:
Which if I do, all vengeance light on me.
Aye me, how graceless are these wicked men?
I can no longer hold my patience.
Ah how thine eyes can forge alluring looks,
And fine deep oaths to wound poor silly maids,
Are there no honest drops in all thy cheeks,
To check thy fraudful countenance with a blush:
Call thou me love, and love another better,
If heavens were just, thy teeth would tear thy tongue,
For this thy periurde false disloyalty.
If heavens were just, men should have open breasts,
That we therein might read their guileful thoughts.
If heavens were just, that power that forces love,
Would never couple Wolves and Lambs together.
Yes, heavens are just, but thou art so corrupt,
That in thee, all their influence doth change.
As in the Spider good things turn to poison.
Ah false Erastus, how had I misdone?
That thou should pawn my true affections pledge,
To her whose worth will never equal mine.
What, is Lucinaes wealth exceeding mine?
Yet mine sufficient to encounter thine.
Is she more fair then I? thats not my fault,
Nor her desert: whats beauty but a blast?
Soon cropped with age, or with infirmities.
Is she more wise? her years are more then mine,
What ere she be? my love was more then hers,
And for her chastity let others judge.
But what talk I of her? the fault is thine,
If I were so disgratious in thine eye,
That she must needs enjoy my interest,
Why did thou deck her with my ornament?
Could nothing serve her but the Carcanet?
Which as my life I gave to thee in charge,
Could thou abuse my true simplicity?
Whose greatest fault was over loving thee,
Isle keep no tokens of thy perjury.
Here give her this, Perseda now is free,
And all my former love is turned to hate.
Ah stay my sweet Perseda hear me speak.
What are thy words? but Sirens guileful songs:
That please the ear, but seek to spoil the heart.
Then view my tears, that plead for innocence,
What are thy tears? but Circes magic seas,
Where none scope wrecked, but blindfold Mariners.
If words &amp; tears displease, then view my looks,
That plead for mercy at thy rigorous hands.
What are thy looks? but like the Cockatrice,
That seeks to wound poor silly passengers.
If words, nor tears, nor looks, may win remorse,
What then remains for my perplexed heart?
Hath no interpreters but words, or tears, or looks.
And they are all as false as thou thy self.
Hard doom of death before my case be known,
My judge unjust, and yet I cannot blame her,
Since Love and jealousy missead her thus.
My self in fault, and yet not worthy blame,
Because that Fortune made the fault, not Love.
The ground of her unkindness grows, because I lost
The precious Carcanet she gave to me:
Lucina hath it, as her words import,
But how she got it, heavens knows, not I,
Yet this is some aleagement to my sorrow,
That if I can but get the Chain again,
I boldly then shall let Perseda know,
That she hath wronged Erastus and her friend:
Ah Love, and if thou be of heavenly power,
Inspire me with some present stratagem,
It must be so, Lucinas a frank Gaimster,
And like it is, in play sheele hazard it,
For if report but blazon her aright,
Shees a frank gaimster, and inclined to play, Ho Piston?
Here sir, what would you with me,
Desire Guelpio &amp; signior Iulio come speak with me
And bid them bring some store of crowns with them,
And sir, provide me four Visards,
Four Gowns, a box, and a Drum,
For I intend to go in mummery,
I will sir.
Ah virtuous Lamps of ever turning heavens,
Incline her mind to play, and mine to win,
Nor do I covet but what is mine own,
Then shall I let Perseda understand,
How jealousy had armed her tongue with malice,
Ah were she not Perseda whom my heart,
No more can fly, then iron can Adamant,
Her late unkindness would have changed my mind.
How now Erastus, wherein may we pleasure thee?
Sirs thus it is, we must in mummery,
Unto Lucina, neither for love nor hate,
But if we can, to win the chain she wears,
For though I have some interest therein,
Fortune may make me moister of mine own,
Rather then isle seek justice against the Dame,
But this assure your selves it must be mine,
By game, or change, by one devise or other.
The rest isle tell you when our sport is done.
Why then lets make vs ready and about it,
What store of Crowns have you brought?
Fear not for money man, isle bear the Box,
I have some little reply, if need require.
I but hear you Moister, was not he a fool?
That went to shoot, and left his arrows behind him.
Yes, but what of that?
Mary that you may loose your money,
And go without the chain, unless you carry false dice.
Mas the fool says true, lets have some got.
Nay I use not to go without a pair of false Dice.
Here are tall men and little men.
Hie men and low men, thou would say.
Come sirs lets go, Drumsler pray for me,
And isle reward thee: and sir Pistrn,
Mar not our sport with your foolery.
I warrant you sir, they get not one wise word of me,
I marry, this shows that Charleman is come,
What shall we play here? content,
Since Signior Ferdinand will have it so.
I were it Cleopatraes union:
Signior Fernando, I am sure tic you,
And Gentlemen, unmask ere you depart,
That I may know to whom my thanks is due,
For this so courteous and unlooked for sport:
No wilt not be, then sup with me tomorrow,
Well then isle look for you, till then farewell.
Gentlemen, each thing hath sorted to our wish,
She took me for Fernando, marked you that:
Your gould shall be repairde with double thanks,
And fellow Drumsler, isle reward you well.
But is there no reward for my false dice?
Yes sir, a guarded suit from top to toe.
Dazzle mine eyes, or first Lucinas chain,
False treacher, lay down the chain that thou hast stole,
He lewdly lies that calls me treacherous.
That lye my weapon shall put down thy throat:
Fly Erastus, ere the Governor have any news,
Whose near alye he was, and chief delight,
Nay Gentlemen, fly you and save yourselves,
Least you partake the hardness of my fortune.
Ah fickle and blind guidresse of the world,
What pleasure hast thou in my misery?
Wast not enough when I had lost the Chain,
Thou did bereave me of my dearest love,
But now when I should reposesse the same,
To cross me with this haplesse accedent:
Ah if but time and place would give me leave,
Great ease it were for me to purge my self,
And to acuse fell Fortune, Love and Death.
For all these three conspire my tragedy,
But danger waits upon my words and steps,
I dare not stay, for if the Governor
Surprise me here, I die by marshall law,
Therefore I go. But whether shall I go?
Ifinto any stay a dioyning Rhodes,
They will betray me to Phyllippos hands,
Forloue, or gain, or flattery.
To Turkie must I go, the passage short,
The people warlike, and the king renownd,
For all heroyicall and kingly virtues,
Ah hard attempt, to tempt a foe for aid,
Necessity yet says it must be so,
Or suffer death for Ferdinandos death,
Whom honours title forced me to misdo,
By checking his outrageous insolence.
Piston, here take this chain, and give it to Perseda,
And let her know what hath befallen me,
When thou hast delivered it, take ship and follow me,
I will be in Constantinople.
Farewell my country dearer then my life;
Farewell sweet friends, dearer then country soil,
Farewell Perseda, dearest of them all,
Dearer to me, then all the world besides.
Now am I growing into a doubtful agony
What I were best to do, to run away with this Chain,
Or deliver it, and follow my moister.
If I deliver it and follow my moister, I shall have thanks.
But they will make me never the fatter,
If I run away with it, I may live upon credit
All the while I wear this chain,
Or dominere with the money when I have sold it,
Hitherto all goes well, but if I be taken,
I marry sir, then the case is altered, I and haltered to,
Of all things I do not love to preach
With a halter about my neck,
Therefore for this once, isle be honest against my will,
Perseda shall have it, but before I go, isle be so bold
As to dive into this Gentleman's pocket, for good luck sake.
If he deny me not: how say you sir, are you content?
A plain case, Quitacet consitiri videtur.
See where his body lies.
I, I, I see his body all to soon,
What barbarous villain first that rifles him.
Ah Ferdinand, the stay of my old age,
And chief remainder of our progeny,
Ah loving cousin how art thou misdone,
By false Erastus, ah no by treachery,
For well thy valour hath been often tried,
But whilst I stand and weep, and spend the time
In fruitless plaints, the murderer will escape,
Without revenge, sole salve for such a sore,
Say villain, wherefore did thou rifle him?
Faith sir for pure good will,
Seeing he was going towards heaven,
I thought to see, if he had a passport to S. Nicholas or no,
Some sot he seems to be, it were pity to hurt him:
Sir can thou tell who slew this man?
I sir very well, it was my moister Erastus.
Thy moister, and whether is he gone now?
To fetch the Sexton to bury him I think.
It were pity to imprison such a sot,
Now it fits my wisdom to counterfeit the fool.
Come hither sir, thou know me
For the Governor of the city, dost thou not?
I forsooth sir.
Thou art a bondsman, and would fine be free?
I forsooth sir.
Then do but this, and I will make thee free,
And rich wiihall, learn where Erastus is,
And bring me word, and isle reward thee well.
That I will sir, I shall find you at the Castle, shall I not?
Yes.
Why isle be here, as soon as ever I come again.
But for assurance that he may not scope,
VVeele lay the ports and havens round about,
And let a proclamation straight be made,
That he that can bring forth the murderer,
Shall have three thousand Ducats for his pains,
My self will see the body borne from hence,
And honoured with Balm and funeral.
God sends fortune to fools.
Did you ever see wise man escape as I have done,
I must betray my moister: I but when can you tell?
See where Perseda comes, to save me a labour.
After my most hearty commendations,
This is to let you understand,
That my moister was in good health at the sending hereof,
Yours for ever and ever and ever.
In most humble wise Piston.
This makes me think that I have been to cruel,
How got he this from of Lucinas arm?
Faith in a mummery, and a pair of false dice,
I was one of the mummers my self, simple as I stand here.
I rather think it cost him very dear.
I so it did, for it cost Ferdinando his life.
How so?
After we had got the chain in mummery,
And lost our box in counter cambio,
My moister wore the chain about his neck,
Then Ferdinando met vs on the way,
And reuild my moister, saying he stole the chain,
With that they drew, &amp; there Ferdinando had the prickado.
And whether fled my poor Erastus then?
To Constantinople whether I must follow him,
But ere he went, with many sighs and tears,
He delivered me the chain, and bad me give it you,
For perfect argument that he was true,
And you too credulous.
Ah stay, no more, for I can here no more.
And I can sing no more.
My hart had armed my tongue with injury,
To wrong my friend, whose thoughts were ever true,
An poor Erastus how thy stars maling:
Thou great commander of the swift winged winds,
And dreadful Neptune bring him back again,
But Eolus and Neptune let him go,
For here is nothing but revenge and death,
Then let him go, isle shortly follow him,
Not with slow sails, but with loves golden wings,
My ship shall be borne with tears, and blown with sighs
So will I soar about the Turkish land,
Until I meet Erastus my sweet friend.
And then and there, fall down amid his arms,
And in his bosom there power forth my soul,
For satisfaction of my trespass past.
Fair Love, according unto thy command,
I seek Erastus and will combat him.
I seek him, find him, bring him to my sight,
For till we meet, my hart shall want delight.
My petty fellow, where hast thou hid thy moister,
Marry sir in an Armorours shop,
Where you had not best go to him.
Why so, I am in honour bound to combat him,
I sir, but he knowing your fierce conditions,
Hath planted a double cannon in the door,
Ready to discharge it upon you, when you go by,
I tell you for pure good will.
In Knightly courtesy, I thank thee,
But hopes the coistrel to escape me so,
Thinks he bare cannon shot can keep me back:
Why wherefore serves my targe of proof, but for the bullet
That once put by, I roughly come upon him,
Like to the wings of lightning from aboue,
I with a martial look astonish him,
Then false he down poor wretch upon his knee,
And all to late, repents his surquedry.
Then do I take him on my fingers point,
And thus I bear him thorough every street,
To be a laughing stock to all the town.
That done, I lay him at my mistress feet,
For her to give him doom of life or death.
I but here you sir, I am bound
In pain of my masters displeasure,
To have about at cuffs, before you and I part,
Ha, ha, ha, Eagles are challenged by paltry flies,
Thy folly gives thee privilege, begone, begone,
No, no sir, I must have about with you sir thats flat,
That for retaining one so virtuous,
Least my moister turn me out of service.
Why, art thou weary of thy life?
No by my faith sir.
Then fetch thy weapons, and with my single fist,
Isle combat thee, my body all unarmed.
Why lend me thine, and save me a labour.
I tell thee, if Alcides lived this day,
He could not wield my weapons.
Why wilt thou stay till I come again?
I upon my honour.
That shall be when I come from Turkey.
Is this little desperate fellow gon,
Doubtless he is a very tall fellow,
And yet it were disgrace to all my chivalry,
To combat one so base:
Isle send some Crane to combat with the Pigmew,
Not that I fear, but that I scorn to fight.
Fortune thou made Fernando find the chain,
But yet by Loves instruction he was taught,
To make a present of it to his Mistress,
But Fortune would not let her keep it long,
Nay rather Love, by whose suggested power,
Erastus used such dice, as being false,
Ran not by Fortune, but necessity.
Mean time I brought Fernando on the way,
To see and challenge what Lucina lost.
And by that challenge I abridgde his life,
And forced Erastus into banishment,
Parting him from his love, in spite of Love,
But with my golden wings isle follow him,
And give him aide and succour in distress.
And doubt not to, but Fortune will be there,
And cross him too, and sometimes flatter him,
And lift him up, and throw him down again.
And here and there in ambush Death will stand,
To mar what Love or Fortune takes in hand.
How long shall Soliman spend his time,
And waste his days in fruitless obsequies,
Ads but a trouble to my brothers ghost:
Perhaps my grief and long continual moan,
Which but for me would now have took their rest,
Then farewell sorrow, and now revenge draw near.
In controversy touching the Isle of Rhodes,
My brothers died, on Rhodes isle he revenged,
Now tell me Brusor whats the news at Rhodes?
Hath the young prince of Cypress married
Cornelia, daughter to the Governor.
He hath my Lord, with the greatest pomp,
That ere I saw at such a festival.
What greater then at our coronation?
Inferior to that only.
At tilt, who won the honour of the day?
A worthy Knight of Rhodes, a matchless man,
His name Erastus, not twenty years of age,
Not tall, but well proportioned in his limbs,
I never saw, except your excellence,
A man whose presence more delighted me,
And had he worshipped Mahomet for Christ,
He might have borne me through out all the world,
So well I loved and honoured the man.
These praises Brusor touch me to the heart,
And makes me wish that I had been at Rhodes,
Under the habit of some errant knight,
Both to have seen and tried his valour.
You should have seen him foil and overthrow,
All the Knights that there encountered him.
What ere he be, even for his virtues sake,
I wish that fortune of our holy wars,
Would yield him prisoner unto Soliman:
We may our selves be famd for virtues.
But let him pass, and Brusor tell me now,
How did the Christians use our Knights?
As if that we and they had been on sect,
What think thou of their valour and demeanour?
Brave men at arms, and friendly out of arms,
Courteous in peace, in battle dangerous,
Kind to their foes, and liberal to their friends,
And all in all, their deeds heroical.
Then tell me Brusor, how is Rhodes fenced,
For either Rhodes shall be brave Solymans,
Or cost me more brave Soldiers
Then all that Isle will bear.
Their fleet is weak:
Their horse, I deem them fifty thousand strong,
Their footmen more, well exercised in war,
And as it seems, they want no needful vittaile.
How ever Rhodes be fencd by sea or land,
It either shall be mine, or bury me:
Whats he that thus boldly enters in?
His habit argues him a Christian,
I worthy Lord a forlorn Christian.
Tell me man, what madness brought thee hither?
Thy virtuous fame, and mine own misery.
What misery? speak, for though you Christians,
Account our Turkish race but barbarous,
Yet have we ears to hear a just complaint,
And justice to defend the innocent,
And pity, to such as are in poverty,
And liberal hands to such as merit bounty,
My gracious Sovereign, as this Knight,
Seems by grief tied to silence,
So his deserts binds me to speak for him.
This is Erastus the Rhodian worthy,
The flower of chivalry and courtesy,
Is this the man that thou hast so described?
Stand up fair knight, that what my heart desires,
Mine eyes may view with pleasure and delight,
This face of thine should harbour no deceit.
Erastus isle not yet urge to know the cause,
That brought thee hither,
Least with the discourse, thou should afflict thy self,
And cross the fulness of my joyful passion,
But that we are assured,
Heavens brought thee hither for our benefit,
Know thou that Rhodes, nor all that Rhodes contains,
Shall win thee from the side of Soliman,
If we but find thee well inclined to vs.
If any ignoble or dishonourable thoughts,
Should dare attempt, or but creep near my heart:
Honour should force disdain to root it out,
As ayre bred Eagles, if they once perceive,
That any of their brood but close their sight,
When they should case against the glorious Sun,
They straight way seas upon him with their talents,
That on the earth it may untimely die,
For looking but a scue at heavens bright eye.
Erastus, to make thee well assured,
How well thy speech and presents likes vs,
Ask what thou wilt, it shall be granted thee.
Then this my gracious Lord is all I crave,
That being banished from my native soil,
I may have liberty to live a Christian.
I that, or any thing thou shalt desire,
Thou shalt be Captain of our Janissaries,
And in our counsel shalt thou sit with vs,
And be great Solimans adopted friend.
The least of these surpass my best desert,
Unless true loyalty may seem desert.
Erastus, now thou hast obtained thy boon,
Deny not Soliman this own request;
A virtuous envy pricks me with desire,
To try thy valour, say art thou content?
I, if my Sovereign say content, I yield.
Then give vs Swords and Targets,
And now Erastus think me thine enemy,
But ever after thy continual friend,
And spare me not, for then thou wrongst my honour.
Nay, nay Erastus, throw not down thy weapons,
As if thy force did fail, it is enough
That thou hast conquered Soliman by strength,
By courtesy let Soliman conquer thee.
And now from arms to counsel sir thee down:
Before thy coming I vowed to conquer Rhodes,
Say wilt thou be our Lieutenant there,
And further vs in manage of these wars?
My gracious Sovereign, without presumption,
If poor Erastus may once more entreat,
Let not great Solimans command,
To whose behest I vow obedience,
Enforce me sheath my slaughtering blade,
In the dear bowels of my countrymen:
And were it not that Soliman hath sworn,
My tears should plead for pardon to that place:
I speak not this to shrink away for fear,
Or hide my head in time of dangerous storms,
Employ me else where in thy foreign wars,
Against the Persians or the barbarous Moore,
Erastus will be foremost in the battle.
Why fauourst thou thy countrymen so much,
By whose cruelty thou art exiled?
Tic not my country, but Phylippos wrath,
It must be told, for Ferdinandos death,
Whom I in honours cause have reft of life,
Nor suffer this or that to trouble thee,
Thou shalt not need Phylippo nor his Isle,
Nor shalt thou war against thy Countrymen,
I like thy virtue in refusing it,
But that our oath may have his currant course,
Brusor, go levy men,
Prepare a fleet, to assault and conquer Rhodes,
Mean time Erastus and I will strive,
By mutual kindness to excel each other.
Brusor be gon, and see not Soliman,
Till thou hast brought Rhodes in subjection.
And now Erastus come and follow me.
Where thou shalt see what pleasures and what sports,
My Minions and my Euenukes can devise,
To drive away this melancholy mood.
Oh moister, see where I am,
Say Piston whats the news at Rhodes,
Cold and comfortless for you,
Will you have them all at once?
I.
Why the Governor will hang you &amp; he catch you.
Ferdinando is buried, your friends commend them to you:
Perseda hath the chain, and is like to die for sorrow.
I thats the grief, that we are parted thus.
Come follow me and I will hear the rest,
For now I must attend the Emperor.
Accursed Chain, unfortunate Perseda.
Accursed Chain, vnforrunate Lucina,
My friend is gone, and I am desolate.
My friend is gone, and I am desolate,
Return him back fair stars or let me die.
Return him back fair heavens, or let me die,
For what was he but comfort of my life?
For what was he but comfort of my life?
But why was I so careful of the Chain.
But why was I so careless of the chain,
Had I not lost it, my friend had not been slain.
Had I not asked it, my friend had not departed,
His parting is my death.
His deaths my lives departing,
And here my tongue doth stay, with swollen harts grief,
And here my swollen harts grief doth stay my tongue.
For whom weep you?
Ah, for Fernandos dying.
For whom morn you?
Ah, for Erastus flying,
Why Lady is not Basilisco here?
Why Lady doth not Basilisco live?
Am not I worth both these for whom you morn:
Then take one half of me, and cease to weep,
Orif you gladly would enjoy me both,
Isle serve the one by day, the other by night,
And I will pay you both your sound delight.
Ah how unpleasant is mirth to melancholy.
My heart is full, I cannot laugh at folly.
See, see, Lucinae hates me like a Toad,
Because that when Erastus spake my name,
Her love Fernando died at the same,
So dreadful is our name to cowardice.
On the otherside, Perseda takes it unkindly,
That ere he went I brought not bound unto her,
Erastus that faint hearted run away:
Alas how could I, for his man no sooner
Informd him, that I sought him up and down,
But he was gon in twinkling of an eye:
But I will after my delicious love,
For well I wot, though she dissemble thus,
And cloak affection with his modesty,
With love of me her thoughts are over gone,
More then was Phillis with his Demophon.
Brave prince of Cypress, and our son in law,
Now there is little time to stand and talk,
The Turks have past our Galleys and are landed,
You with some men at arms shall take the Tower,
I with the rest will down unto the strane:
If we be beaten back weal come to you,
And here in spite of damned Turks, weal gain
A glorious death or famous victory.
About it then.
Drum sound a parley to the Citttzens.
What parley craves the Turkish at our hands.
We come with mighty Solimans command,
Monarch and mighty Emperor of the world,
From East to Weast, from South, to Septentrion,
If you resist, expect what war affords,
Mischief, murder, blood, and extremity,
What wilt thou yield and try our clemency?
Say I, or no; for we are peremptory.
Your Lord usurps in all that he posesseth,
And that great God which we do truly worship,
Shall strengthen vs against your insolence.
Now if thou plead for mercy, tic to late:
Come fellow Soldiers, let vs to the breach,
Thats made already on the other side.
Now Rhodes is yoked, and stoops to Soliman,
There lies the Governor, and there his son:
Now let their souls tell sorry tidings to their ancestors,
What millions of men oppressed with ruin and scath,
The Turkish armies did in Christendom,
What say these prisoners, will they turn Turk, or no?
First Iulio will die ten thousand deaths.
And Guelpio, rather then deny his Christ.
Then stab the slaves, and send their souls to hell.
I turn, I turn, oh save my life I turn.
For bear to hurt him: when we land in Turkie
He shall be circumcised and have his rites.
Think you I turn Turque,
For fear of servile death thats but a sport,
I faith sirno:
Tic for Perseda whom I love so well,
That I would follow her, though she went to hell.
Now for these Ladies: their lives privilege
Hangs on their beauty, they shall be preserved,
To be presented to great Soliman,
The greatest honour Fortune could afford.
The most dishonour that could ere befall.
Now Fortune, what hast thou done in this later passage
I placed Erastus in the favour,
Of Solyman the Turkish Emperor.
Nay that was Love, for I couched my self
In poor Erastus eyes, and with a look
Orespred with tears, bewitched Solyman,
Beside I sat on valiant Brusors tongue,
To guide the praises of the herodian knight.
Then in the Ladies passions, I showed my power,
And lastly Love made Basiliscos tongue,
To counter check his hart by turning Turk,
And save his life, in spite of deaths despite.
How chance it then, that Love and Fortunes power
Could neither save Philippo nor his son,
Nor Guelpio, nor signior Iulio,
Nor rescue Rhodes from out the hands of Death.
Why Brusors victory was Fortunes gift.
But had I slept, his conquest had been small.
Wherefore stay we, theirs more behind, which proves
That though Love wink, Loves not stark blind.
Faith moister, me thinks you are unwise.
That you wear not the high Sugerloafe hat,
And the gilded gown the Emperor gave you,
Peace fool, a sable weed fits discontent, Away, be gon.
Isle go provide your supper,
A shoulder of mutton, and never a Sallet.
I must confess that Solyman is kind,
Past all compare, and more then my desert,
But what helps gay garments, when the minds oppressed,
What pleases the eye, when the sense is altered,
My heart is over whelmed with thousand woes,
And melancholy leads my soul in triumph,
No marvel then if I have little mind,
Of rich embroidery or costly ornaments,
Of honours titles, or of wealth, or gain,
Of music, viands, or of dainty dames,
No, no, my hope full long ago was lost,
And Rhodes it self is lost, or else destroyed,
If not destroyed, yet bound and captivate,
If captivate, then forced from holy faith:
If forced from faith, for ever miserable,
For what is misery, but want of God,
And God is lost, if faith be overthrown.
Why how now Erastus, always in thy dumps?
Still in black habit fitting funeral?
Cannot my love persuade thee from this mood,
Nor all my fair entreats and blandishments,
Were thou my friend, thy mind would jump with mine,
For what are friends, but one mind in two bodies.
Perhaps thou doubts my friendships constancy,
Then dost thou wrong the measure of my love,
Which hath no measure, and shall never end,
Come Erastus sit thee down by me,
And isle impart to thee our Brusors news,
News to our honour, and to thy content:
The Governor is slain that sought thy death.
A worthy man though not Erastus friend,
The Prince of Cypress to, is likewise slain.
Fair blossom, likely to have proved good fruit.
Rhodes is taken, and all the men are slain.
Except some few that turn to Mahomet.
I there it is, now all my friends are slain,
And fair Perseda murdered or deflowerd.
Ah gracious Solyman now show thy love,
In not denying thy poor suppliant:
Suffer me not to stay here in thy presence,
But by my self lament me once for all,
Here if I stay, I must suppress my tears,
And tears suppressed will but increase my sorrow.
Go then, go spend thy mornings all at once,
That in thy presence Soliman may joy.
For hitherto have I reaped little pleasure,
Well well Erastus, Rhodes may bless thy birth,
For his sake only will I spare them more,
From spoil, pillage, and oppression,
Then Alexander spared warlike Thebes
For Pindarus: or then Augustus
Spared rich Alexandria for Arias sake.
My gracious Lord, rejoice in happiness:
All Rhodes is yoked, and stoops to Solyman.
First thanks to heaven, and next to Brusors valour,
Which isle not guerdon with large promises,
But straight reward thee with a bounteous largess:
But what two Christian Virgins have we here?
Part of the spoil of Rhodes, which were preserved
To be presented to your mightiness.
This present pleases more then all the rest,
And were their garments turned from black to white,
I should have deemed them Junoes goodly Swans,
Or Venus milk white Doves, so mild they are,
And so adorned with beauties miracle.
Here Brusor this kind Turtle shall be thine,
Take her and use her at thy pleasure:
But this kind Turtle is for Soliman,
That her captivity may turn to bliss.
Fair looks resembling Phoebus radiant beams,
Smooth forehead like the table of high Jove,
Small pensild eye brows, like to glorious rainbows,
Quick lampelike eyes, like heavens two brightest orbs,
Lips of pure Coral breathing Ambrosia,
Cheeks, where the Rose and Lilly are incombate,
Neck whiter then the Snowy Apenines,
Breasts like two overflowing Fountains,
Twixt which a vale leads to the Elision shades,
Where under covert lies the fount of pleasure,
Which thoughts may guess, but tongue must not profane.
A sweeter creature nature never made,
Love never rainted Solyman till now,
Now fair Virgin let me hear thee speak.
What can my tongue utter, but grief and death.
The sound is honey, but the sense is gall:
The sweating bless me with a cheerful look.
How can mine eyes dart forth a pleasant look,
When they are stopped with floods of flowing tears.
If tongue with grief, and eyes with tears be filled,
Say Virgin, how doth thy heart admit,
The pure affection of great Soliman?
My thoughts are like pillars of Adamant,
Too hard to take an new impression.
Nay then I see my stooping makes her proud,
She is my vassal, and I will command,
Coy Virgin know thou what offence it is,
To thwart the will and pleasure of a king?
Why thy life is done, if I but say the word.
Why thats the period that my heart desires.
And die thou shalt, unless thou change thy mind.
Nay then Perseda grows resolute,
Solimans thoughts and mine resemble,
Lives paralise that never can be joined.
Then kneel thou down,
And army hands receive the stroke of death,
Domde to thy self by thine own wilfulness.
Strike, strike, thy words pierce deeper then thy blows.
Brusor hide her, for her looks withhold me,
O Brusor thou hast not hid her lips,
For there sits Venus with Cupped on her knee,
And all the Graces smiling round about her,
So craving pardon that I cannot strike.
Her face is covered over quite my Lord.
Why, so.
O Brusor, see thou not her milk white neck,
That Alabaster tower,
Twill break the edge of my keen Semitor,
And pieces flying back will wound my self.
Now she is all covered my Lord.
Why now at last she dyes.
O Christ receive my soul.
Hark Brusor she calls on Christ,
I will not send her to him,
Her words are music,
The self same music that in ancient days,
Brought Alexander from war to banqueting,
And made him fall from skirmishing to kissing.
No my dear Love would not let me kill thee,
Though Majesty would turn desire to wrath,
There lies my sword, humbled at thy feet,
And I my self that govern many kings,
Entreat a pardon for my rash misdeed.
Now Soliman wrongs his imperial state,
But if thou love me, and have hope to win,
Grant me one boon that I shall crave of thee,
What ere it be, Perseda I grant it thee,
Then let me live a Christian Virgin still,
Unless my state shall alter by my will,
My word is past, and I recall my passions,
What should he do with crown and Empery,
That cannot govern private fond affections,
Yet give me leave in honest sort to court thee,
To ease, though not to cure, my malady:
Come sit thee down upon my right hand here,
This seat I keepevoide for another friend:
Go Janissaries call in your Governor,
So shall I joy between two captive friends,
And yet my self becaptiue to them both,
If friendships yoke were not at liberty:
See where he comes my other best beloved.
My sweet and best beloved.
My sweet and best beloved:
For thee my dear Erastus have I lived.
And I for thee, or else I had not lived.
What words in affection doo I see?
Ah pardon me great Soliman, for this is she,
For whom I mourned more then for all Rhodes,
And from whose absence I derived my sorrow.
And pardon me my Lord, for this is he,
For whom I thwarted Solimans entreats,
And for whose exile I lamented thus.
Even from my childhood have I tendered thee,
Witness the heavens of my unfeigned love.
By this one accedent I well perceive,
That heavens and heavenly powers do manage love,
I love them both, I know not which the better,
They love each other best, what then should follow,
But that I conquer both by my deserts,
And join their hands, whose hearts are knit already,
Erastus and Perseda come you hither,
And both give me your hands,
Erastus, none but thou could win Perseda,
Perseda, none but thou could win Erastus
From great Soliman, so well I love you both:
And now to turn late promises to good effect,
Be thou Erastus Governor of Rhodes,
By this thou shalt dismiss my garrison.
Must he reap that for which I took the toil?
Come envy then and sit in friendships seat,
How can I love him that enjoys my right.
Give me a crown, to crown the bride withal,
Perseda, for my sake wear this crown:
Now is she fairer then she was before,
This title so augments her beauty as the fire,
That lay with honours hand racked up in ashes,
Reuies again to flames, the force is such,
Remove the cause, and then the effect will die,
They must depart, or I shall not be quiet,
Erastus and Perseda, marvel not,
That all in hast I wish you to depart,
There is an urgent cause, but privy to my self,
Command my shipping for to waft you over.
My gracious Lord, when?? Erastus doth forget this favour,
Then let him live abandond and forlorn.
Nor will Perseda slack even in her prayers
And still solicit God for Soliman,
Whose mind hath proved so good and gracious.
Farewell Erastus, Perseda farewell to.
Me thinks I should not part with two such friends,
The one so renownd for arms and courtesy,
The other so adorned with grace and modesty:
Yet of the two Perseda moos me most,
I and so moos me, that I now repent,
That ere I gave away my hearts desire,
What was it but abuse of Fortunes gift,
And therefore Fortune now will be revenged.
What was it but abuse of loves command,
And therefore mighty Love will be revenged:
What was it but abuse of heavens that gave her me,
And therefore angry heavens will be revenged:
Heavens, Love, and Fortune, all three have decreed,
That I shall love her still, and lack her still,
Like ever thirsting wretched Tantalus:
Foolish Soliman, why did I strive,
To do him kindness, and undo my self?
Well governed friends do first regard themselves.
I now occasion serves to stumble him,
That thrust his sickle in my harvest corn,
Pleases your Majesty to hear Brusor speak.
To one past cure, good counsel comes too late,
Yet say thy mind.
With secret letters woe her, and with gifts,
My lines and gifts will but return my shame.
Here me my Lord, let me go over to Rhodes,
That I may plead in your affections cause,
One woman may do much to win another.
Indeed Lucina were her husband from her,
She happily might be won by thy persuades,
But whilst he lives there is no hope in her.
Why lives he then to grieve great Soliman,
This only remains, that you consider,
In two extremes the least is to be chosen,
If so your life depend upon her love,
And that her love depends upon his life,
Is it not better that Erastus die
Ten thousand deaths, then Soliman should perish?
I say thou so? why then it shall be so,
But by what means shall poor Erastus die?
This shall be the means,
Isle fetch him back again,
Under colour of great consequence,
No sooner shall he land upon our shore,
But witness shall be ready to accuse him,
Oftreason done against your mightiness,
And then he shall be doomed by marshall law,
Oh fine devise, Brusor get thee gone,
Come thou again, but let the lady stay,
To win Perseda to my will, mean while,
Will I prepare the judge and witnesses,
And if this take effect, thou shalt be Viceroy,
And fair Lucina Queen of Tripolie,
Brusor be gone, for till thou come I languish.
And now to ease my troubled thoughts at last,
I will go sit among my learned Euenukes,
And here them play, and see my minions dance,
For till that Brusor bring me my desire,
I may assuage, but never quench loves fire.
Since the expugnation of the Rhodian Isle,
Me thinks a thousand years are overpassed,
More for the lack of my Persedas presence,
Then for the loss of Rhodes that paltry Isle,
Or for my friends that there were murdered,
My valour every where shall purchase friends,
And where a man lives well, there is his country.
Alas the Christians are but very shallow,
In giving judgment of a man at arms,
A man of my desert and excellence.
The Turks whom they account for barbarous,
Having forehard of Basiliscoes worth,
A number under prop me with their shoulders,
And in procession bare me to the Church,
As I had been a second Mahomet,
I fearing they would adore me for a God,
Wisely informd them that I was but man,
Although in time perhaps I might aspire,
To purchase Godhood, as did Hercules,
I mean by doing wonders in the world:
A midst their Church they bound me to a pillar,
And to make trial of my valiancy,
They lopped a collop of my tendrest member.
But think you Basilisco squished for that,
Even as a Cow for tickling in the horn,
That done, they set me on a milk white Ass,
Compassing me with goodly ceremonies,
That day me thought, I sat in Pompeyes Chair,
And viewed the Capitol, and was Romes greatest glory.
I would my moister had left
Some other to be his agent here:
Faith I am weary of the office already,
What Seignior Tremomundo,
That rid a pilgrimage to beg cakebread.
O take me not unprovided, let me fetch my weapons.
Why I meant nothing but a Basolus Manus.
No, did thou not mean to give me the privy stab?
No by my troth sir.
Nay if thou had, I had not feared thee I,
I tell thee my skin holds out Pistol proof.
Pistol proof? isle try if it will hold out pin prove,
O shoot no more great God I yield to thee.
I see his skin is but pistol prof from the girdle upward
What sud deign agony was that?
Why saw thou not, how Cupped God of love,
Not daring look me in the marshall face,
Came like a coward stealing after me,
And with his pointed dart pricked my posteriors.
Then here my opinion concerning that point,
The Ladies of Rhodes hearing that you have lost,
A capitol part of your Lady ware,
Have made their petition to Cupped,
To plague you aboue all other,
As one preiuditiall to their muliebritie,
Now sir, Cupped seeing you already hurt before,
Thinks it a greater punishment to hurt you behind,
Therefore I would wish you to have an eye to the back door
Sooth thou says, I must be fencd behind,
Isle hang my target there.
Indeed that will serve to bear of some blows,
When you run away in a fray.
Sir, sir, what art thou?
That thus incrochest upon my familiarity,
Without special admittance.
Why do you not know me? I am Erastus man.
What art thou that petty pygmy,
That chalneged me at Rhode;:
Whom I refused to combat for his minority,
Where is Erastus I owe him chastisement in Persedas quarrel.
Do not you know that they are all friends,
And Erastus married to Perseda,
And Erastus made governor of Rhodes,
And I left here to be their agent?
O coelum, O terra, O maria Neptune,
Did I turn Turk to follow her so far,
The more shame for you.
And is she linked in liking with my foe?
Thats because you were out of the way.
O wicked Turque for to steal her hence.
O wicked turn coat that would have her staye.
The truth is, isle be a Turk no more.
And I fear thou wilt never prove good christian.
I will after to take revenge.
And isle stay here about my masters business.
Farewell Constantinople, I will to Rhodes.
Farewell counterfeit fool,
God send him good shipping:
Tic noisd about, that Brusor is sent,
To fetch my moister back again,
I cannot be well till I hear the rest of the news,
Therefore Isle about it straight.
Now Fortune what hast thou done in this latter act?
I brought Perseda to the presence,
Of Soliman the Turkish Emperor,
And gave Lucina into Brusors hands.
And first I stung them with consenting love,
And made great Soliman sweet beauties thrall,
Humble himself at fair Persedas feet,
And made him praise love and captives beauty:
Again, I made him to recall his passions,
And give Perseda to Erastus hands,
And after make repentance of the deed.
Mean time I filled Erastus sails with wind,
And brought him home unto his native land.
And I subornd Brusor with envious rage,
To counsel Soliman to slay his friend,
Brusor is sent to fetch him back again,
Mark well what follows, for the history
Proves me chief actor in this tragedy.
Perseda, these days are our days of joy.
What could I more desire then thee to wife,
And that I have: or then to govern Rhodes,
And that I doe, thanks to great Soliman,
And thanks to gracious heavens, that so
Brought Soliman from worse to better,
For though I never told it thee till now,
His heart was purposd once to do thee wrong.
I that was before he knew thee to be mine,
But now Perseda, lets forget old griefs,
And let our studies wholly be employed,
To work each others bliss and hearts delight.
Our present joys will be so much the greater,
When as we call to mind fore passed griefs,
So singes the Mariner upon the shore,
When he hath past the dangerous time of storms:
But if my Love will have old griefs forgot,
They shall lie buried in Persedas breast.
Welcome Lord Brusor.
And Lucina to.
Thanks Lord governor.
And thanks to you Madame.
What hasty news brings you so soon to Rhodes?
Although to me you never come to soon.
So it is my Lord, that upon great affairs,
Importuning health and wealth of Soliman,
His highness by me entreats you,
As ever you respect his future love,
Or have regard unto his courtesy,
To come your self in person and visit him,
Without inquiry what should be the cause.
Were there no ships to cross the Seas withal,
My arms should frame mine oars to cross the seas,
And should the seas turn tide to force me back.
Desire should frame me wings to fly to him,
I go Perseda thou must give me leave.
Though loath, yet Solimans command prevails,
And sweet Perseda I will stay with you,
From Brusor my beloved, and Isle want him,
Till he bring back Erastus unto you.
Lord Brusor come tic time that we were gon.
Perseda farewell, be not angry,
For that I carry thy beloved from thee,
We will return with all speed possible,
And thou Lucina, use Perseda so,
That for my carrying of Erastus hence,
She curse me not, and so farewell to both.
Come Lucina lets in, my heart is full.
Lord marshall, see you handle it cunningly,
And when Erastus comes our periurd friend,
See he be condemned by marshall law,
Here will I stand to see and not be seen.
Come fellows see when this matter comes in question,
You stagger not: and Janissaries,
See that your strangling cords be ready.
Ah that Perseda were not half so fair,
Or that Soliman were not so fond,
Or that Perseda had some other love,
Whose death might save my poor Erastus life,
See where he comes, whom though I dearly love,
Yet must his blood be spilt for my behoof,
Such is the force of morrow burning love.
Erastus, Lord Governor of Rhodes,
I arrest you in the Kings name.
What thinks Lord Brusor of this strange arrest,
Hast thou entrapped me to this treachery:
Intended well I wot without the leave
Or licence of my Lord great Soliman.
Why then appeal to him, where thou shalt know
And be assured that I betray thee not.
Yes, thou, and I, and all of vs betray him.
No, no, in this case no appeal shall serve.
Why then to thee, or unto any else,
I here protest by heavens unto you all,
That never was there man more true or just,
Or in his deeds more loyal and upright,
Or more loving, or more innocent,
Than I have been to gracious Soliman,
Since first I set my feet on Turkish land.
My self would be his witness if I durst,
But bright Persedaes beauty stops my tongue.
Why sirs, why face to face express you not,
The treasons you reueald to Soliman?
That very day Erastus went from hence,
He sent for me into his Cabinet,
And for that man that is of my profession.
I never saw them I until this day.
His Cabin door fast shut, he first began
To question vs of all sorts of fireworks,
Wherein, when we had fully resolved him,
What might be done, he spredding on the board,
A huge heap of our imperial coin,
All this is yours quoth he, if you consent,
To leave great Soliman and serve in Rhodes.
Why that was treason, but onwards with the rest.
What have we heer, my moister before the marshall?
We said not I, nor durst we say him nay,
Because we were already in his galleys,
But seemed content to fly with him to Rhodes,
With that he pursed the gould, and gave it vs.
The rest I dare not speak it is so bad.
Heavens heer you this, and drops not vengeance on them
The other wit. The rest, and worst, will I discourse in brief,
Will you consent quoth he to fire the fleet,
That lies hard by vs here in Bosphoron,
For be it spoke in secret here quoth he,
Rhodes must no longer bear the turkish yoke,
We said the task might easily be performed,
But that we lacked such drugs to mix with powder,
As were not in his galleys to be got,
At this he leapt for joy, swearing and promisiug,
That our reward should be redoubled:
We came aland not minding for to return,
And as our duty and aleageance bound vs,
We made all known unto great Soliman,
But ere we could summon him a land,
His ships were past a kenning from the shore,
Belike he thought we had betrayed his treasons.
That all is true that here you have declared.
Both lay your hands upon the Alcaron.
Foul death betide me if I swear not true,
And mischief light on me, if I swear false.
Mischief and death shall light upon you both.
Erastus thou see what witness hath produced against thee,
What answer thou unto their accusations?
That these are Synons and my self poor Troy.
Now it rests, I appoint thy death,
Wherein thou shalt confess isle favour thee,
For that thou were beloved of Soliman,
Thou shalt forthwith be bound unto that post,
And strangled as our Turkish order is.
Such favour send all Turks I pray God.
I see this train was plotted ere I came,
What boots complaining wheres no remedy:
Yet give me leave before my life shall end,
To moan Perseda, and accuse my friend.
O unjust Soliman, O wicked time,
Where filthy lust must murder honest love.
Dispatch, for our time limited is past.
Alas, how can he but be short, whose tongue
Is fast tide with galling sorrow.
Farewell Perseda, no more but that for her:
Inconstant Soliman, no more but that for him,
Unfortunate Erastus, no more but that for me:
Lo this is al, &amp; thus I leave to speak.
Marie sir this is a fair warning for me to get me gon.
O save his life, if it be possible,
I will not loose him for my kingdoms worth,
Ah poor Erastus art thou dead already,
What bold presumer durst be so resolved,
For to bereave Erastus life from him,
Whose life to me was dearer then mine own,
Wast thou and thou, Lord marshall bring them het her,
And at Erastus hand let them receive,
The stroke of death, whom they have spoiled of life:
What is thy hand to weak? then mine shall help,
To send them down to everlasting night,
To waite upon thee through eternal shade,
Thy soul shall not go mourning hence alone:
Thus die and thus, for thus you murdered him,
But soft me thinks he is not satisfied,
The breath doth murmur softly from his lips,
And bids me kill those bloody witnesses,
By whose treachery Erastus dyed:
Lord Marshall, hale them to the towers top,
And throw them headlong down into the valley,
So let their treasons with their lives have end.
Your self procured vs.
Is this our hier?
Speak not a word, least in my wrathful surie,
I doom you to ten thousand direful torments:
And Brusor see Erastus be entered,
With honour in a kingly sepulchre,
Why when Lord marshall? great Hectors son,
Although his age did plead for innocence:
Was sooner tumbled from the fatal tower.
Then are those periurde wicked witnesses.
Why now Erastus Ghost is satisfied:
I, but yet the wicked Judge survives,
By whom Erastus was condemned to die,
Brusor, as thou love me stab in the marshall,
Least he detect vs unto the world,
By making known our bloody practises,
And then will thou and I hoist sail to Rhodes,
Where thy Lucina and my Perseda lives.
I will my lord: lord Marshal, it is his highness pleasure
That you commend him to Erastus soul.
Here ends my dear Erastus tragedy,
And now begins my pleasant Comedy,
But if Perseda understand these news,
Our seane will prove but tragicomical.
Fear not my Lord, Lucina plays her part,
And woos apace in Solimans behalf.
Then Brusor come, and with some few men,
Lets sail to Rhodes with all convenient speed,
For till I fouled Perseda in mine arms,
My troubled ears are deft with loves alarms.
Now signior Basilisco, which like you,
The Turkish or our nation best.
That which your ladyship will have me like,
I am deceived but you were circumcised,
Indeed I was a littlc cut in the porpoise.
What means made you to steal back to Rhodes???
The mighty pinckanied brand bearing God,
To whom I am so long true servitor,
When he espy de my weeping floods of tears,
For your depart, he bad me follow him:
I followed him, he with his fire brand,
Parted the seas, and we came over drieshod.
A matter not unlikely: but how chance,
Your turkish bonnet is not on your head?
Because I now am Christian again,
And that by natural means, for as
The old Cannon says very prettily,
Nihill est tam natural, quote eo modo colligatum est.
And so forth: so I became a Turk to follow her,
To follow her, am now returned a Christian.
O Lady and mistress, weep and lament,
And wring your hands, for my Moister
Is condemned and executed.
Be patient sweet Perseda, the fool but jests,
Ah ho, my nightly dreams foretold me this,
Which foolish woman fondly I neglected,
But say what death dyed my poor Erastus?
Nay, God be praisd, his death was reasonable,
He was but strangled,
But strangled, ah double death to me,
But say, wherefore was he condemned to die?
For nothing but hie treason.
What treason, or by whom was he condemned?
Faith two great knights of the post, swore upon the
Alcaron, that he would have fired the Turks Fleet.
Was Brusor by?
I.
And Soliman?
No but I saw where he stood,
To here and see the matter well conveyed.
Accursed Soliman, profane Alcaron,
Lucina, came thy husband to this end?
To lead a Lamb unto the slaughterhouse,
Hast thou for this, in Solimans behalf?
With cunning words tempted my chastity,
Thou shalt aby for both your treacheries,
It must be so, Basilisco do thou love me, speak,
I more then I love either life or soul,
What shall I stab the Emperout for thy sake.
No, but Lucina if thou love me, kill her,
The point will mar her skin.
What dare thou not, give me the dagger then,
Theres a reward for all thy treasons past,
Yet dare I bear her hence, to do thee good.
No let her lie, a pray to ravening birds:
Nor shall her death alone suffice for his,
Rhodes now shall be no longer Solimans,
VVeele fortify our walls, and keep the town,
In spite of proud insulting Soliman,
I know the lecher hopes to have my love,
And first Perseda, shall with this hand die,
Then yield to him and live in infamy.
I will ruminate. Death which the poets
Fine to be pale and meager;
Hath deprived Erastus trunk from breathing vitality,
A brave Cauelere, but my approved foeman:
Let me see: where is that Alcides, surnamed Hercules?
The only Club man of his time: dead.
Where is the eldest son of Pryam?
That abraham coloured Troion: dead.
Where is the leader of the Mirmidons,
That well knit Accill: dead.
Where is that furious Aiax, the son of Telamon,
Or that fraudful squire of Ithaca, Iclipt Vlisses? dead,
Where is tipsy Alexander, that great cup conqueror,
Or Pompey that brave warrior? dead:
I am my self strong, but I confess death to be stronger,
I am valiant, but mortal,
I am a dorned with natures gifs,
A giddy goddess, that now gives and anon takes,
I am wise, but quiddits will not answer death:
To conclude in a word, to be captious virtuous, ingenious,
Or to be nothing when it pleases death to be envious.
The great Turque, whose seat is Constantinople,
Hath beleagred Rhodes, whose chieftain is a woman.
I could take the rule upon me,
But the shrub is safe when the Cedar shakes:
I love Perseda as one worthy,
But I love Basilisco as one I hold more worthy.
My fathers son, my mothers solace, my proper self.
Faith he can doe little that cannot speak,
And he can doe less that cannot run away.
Then sith mans life is as a glass, and a phillip may crack it,
Mine is no more and a bullet may pearce it:
Therefore I will play least in sight.
The gates are shut, which proves that Rhodes re???uolts,
And that Perseda is not Solimans.
Ah Brusor see where thy Lucina lies
Butcherd dispightfullie without the walls.
Unkind Perseda, could thou use her so?
And yet we used Perseda little better.
Nay gentle Brusor stay thy tears a while,
Least with thy woes thou spoil my commedie,
And all to soon be turned to Tragedies.
Go Brusor, bear her to thy priuatetent,
Where we at leisure will lament her death,
And with our tears be wail her obsequies:
For yet Perseda lives for Soliman.
Drum sound parley, were it not for her,
I would sack the town ere I would sound a parley.
At whose entreaty is this parley sounded?
At our entreaty, therefore yield the town.
Why what art thou that boldly bids vs yield?
Great Soliman, Lord of all the world.
Thou art not Lord of all, Rhodes is not thine.
It was, and shall be maugre who says no.
I that say no will never see it thine.
Why what art thou that dares resist my force?
A Gentleman and thy mortal enemy,
And one that dares thee to the single combat:
First tell me, doth Perseda live or no?
She lives to see the wrack of Soliman,
Then isle combat thee what ere thou art.
And in Erastus name isle combat thee,
And here I promise thee on my Christian faith,
Then will I yield Perseda to thy hands.
That if thy strength shall over match my right,
To use, as to thy liking shall seem best,
But ere I come to enter single fight,
First let my tongue utter my hearts despite,
And thus my tale begins: thou wicked tyrant,
Thou murderer, accursed homicide,
For whom hell gapes, and all the ugly feends
Do waite for to receive thee in their jaws:
Ah perjured and in human Soliman,
How could thy heart harbour a wicked thought?
Against the spotless life of poor Erastus?
Was he not true? would thou had been as just,
Was he not valiant? would thou had bin as virtuous,
Was he not loyal? would thou had been as loving:
Ah wicked tyrant in that one mans death,
Thou hast betrayed the flower of Christen dome,
Dyed he because his worth obscured thine,
In slaughtering him thy virtues are defamed,
Did thou misdo him, in hope to win Perseda,
Ah foolish man, therein thou art deceived,
For though she live, yet will she near live thine,
Which to approve, isle come to combat thee.
Injurious foul mouthed knight, my wrathful arm
Shall chastise and rebuke these injuries.
I but here you, are you so foolish to fight with him?
I sir, why not, as long as I stand by?
Isle not defend Erastus innocence,
But thee, maintaining of Persedas beauty,
I now I lay Perseda at thy feet,
But with thy hand first wounded to the death,
Now shall the world report that Soliman,
Slew Erastus in hope to win Perseda,
And murdered her for loving of his husband.
What my Perseda, ah what have I done,
Yet kiss me gentle love before thou die.
A kiss I grant thee, though I hate thee deadly,
I loved thee dearly and accept thy kiss,
Why did thou love Erastus more then me,
Or why did not give Soliman a kiss
Ere this unhappy time, then had thou lived:
Ah let me kiss thee too before I die,
Nay die thou shalt for thy presumption,
For kissing her whom I do hold so dear,
I will not kiss his sir, but give me leave
To weep over his, for while she lived,
Sheeloued me dearly, and I loved his.
If thou did love his villain as thou said,
Then wait on her thorough eternal night.
Ah Perseda, how shall I morn for thee?
Fair springing rose, ill plucked before thy time.
Ah heavens that hitherto have smiled on me,
Why doe you unkindly lower on Soliman?
The loss of half my Realms, nay crowns decay,
Could not have pricked so near unto my heart,
As doth the loss of my Persedaes life:
And with her life, I likewise loose my love,
And with her love my hearts felicity,
Even for Erastus death, the heavens have plagued me.
Ah no the heavens did never more occurs me,
Then when they made me Butcher of my love,
Yet justly how can I condemn my self,
When Brusor lives that was the cause of all.
Come Brusor, help to lift her body up,
Is she not fair?
Even in the hour of death.
Was she not constant?
As firm as are the poles whereon heaven lies.
Was she not chaste?
As is Pandora or Dianaes thoughts.
Then tell me? his treasons set aside,
What was Erastus in thy opinion?
Fair spoken, wise, courteous, and liberal:
Kind, even to his foes, gentle and affable,
And all, in all, his deeds heroyacall.
Ah, was he so? how durst thou then ungracious Counsellor,
First cause me murder such a worthy man,
And after tempt so virtuous a woman,
Be this therefore the last that ere thou speak:
Janissaries, take him straight unto the block,
Off with his head, and suffer him not to speak.
And now Perseda here I lay me down,
And on thy beauty still contemplate,
Until mine eyes shall surfeit by my gazing:
But stay let me see what paper is this.
Tyrant my lips were saw with deadly poison,
To plague thy hart that is so full of poison.
What am I poisoned? then Janissaries,
Let me see Rhodes recovered ere I die,
Soldiers, assault the town on every side,
Spoil all, kill all, let none escape your fury,
Say Captain, is Rhodes recovered again.
It is my Lord, and stoops to Soliman.
Yet that alayes the fury of my pain,
Before I die, for doubtless die I must,
I fates, injurious fates, have so decreed,
For now I feel the poison gins to work,
And I am weak even to the very death,
Yet some thing more contentedly I die,
For that my death was wrought by her devise,
Who living was my joy, whose death my woe.
Ah Janissaries now dyes your Emperor,
Before his age hath seen his mellowed years,
And if you ever loved your Emperor,
Affright me not with sorrows and laments,
And when my soul from body shall depart,
Trouble me not but let me pass in peace,
And in your silence let your love be shown:
My last request for I command no more,
Is that my body, with Persedas be,
Entered, where my Erastus lies entombed,
And let one Epitaph contain vs all:
Ah now I feel the paper told me true,
The poison is dispersed through every vain,
And boils like Etna in my frying guts,
Forgive me dear Erastus my unkindness:
I have revenged thy deaths with many deaths,
And sweet Perseda fly not Soliman,
When as my gliding ghost shall follow thee,
With eager mood, thorough eternal night:
And now pale Death sits on my panting soul,
And with revenging ire doth tyrannise:
And says for Solimans too much amiss,
This day shall be the period of my bliss.
I gave Erastus woe and misery,
Amidst his greatest joy and jollity.
But I that have power in earth and heaven aboue,
Stung them both with never failing love.
But I bereft them both of love and life.
Of life, but not of love, for even in death,
Their souls are knit, though bodies be disioynd,
Thou did but wound their flesh, their minds are free,
Their bodies buried, yet they honour me.
Hence foolish Fortune, and thou wanton Love,
Your deeds are trifles, mine of consequence,
I give worlds happiness, and woes increase.
By joining persons, I increase the world.
By wastning all, I conquer all the world,
And now to end our difference at last,
In this last act, note but the deeds of death,
Where is Erastus now but in my triumph?
Where are the murderers but in my triumph?
VVheres judge and witness but in my triumph?
Wheres false Lucina but in my triumph?
Wheres fair Perseda but in my triumph?
VVheres Basilisco but in my triumph?
VVheres faithful Piston but in my triumph?
VVheres valiant Brusor but in my triumph?
And wheres great Soliman but in my triumph?
Their loves and fortunes ended with their lives,
And they must wait upon the Carre of death:
Pack Love and Fortune, play in Commodities,
For powerful death best fitteth Tragedies.
I go, yet Love shall never yield to Death.
But Fortune shall, for when I waste the world,
Then times and kingdoms Fortunes shall decay.
Mean time will Fortune govern as she may.
I now will Death in his most haughty pride,
Fetch his imperial Carre from deepest hell,
And ride in triumph through the wicked world,
Sparing none but sacred Cynthias friend,
Whom Death did fear before her life began,
For holy fates have graven it in their tables,
That Death shall die if he attempt her end,
Whose life is heavens delight and Cynthias friend.

TO sit on Honours seat, it is a lofty reach,
To seek for praise by making brags, oft times doth get a breach.
We list not ride the rolling rackes, that dims the crystal skies,
We mean to set no glimmering glance before your courteous eyes:
We search not Plutoes pensive pit, nor taste of Limbo lake:
We do not show of warlike fight, as shield and sword to shake:
We speak not of the powers divine, no yet of furious sprights:
We do not seek high hills to clime, nor talk of loves delights▪
We do not here present to you the threshar with his flail,
No do we here present to you the milk-maid with her pail:
We show not you of country toil, as headgear with his bill:
We do not bring the husbandman to lop and top with skill:
We pay not here the Gardeners part to plant, to set and sow:
You marvel then what wares we have to furnish out our show.
Your patience yet we crave a while till we have trimd our stall:
Then young and old come and behold our wares, &amp; buy them all.
Then if our wares shall seem to you, well woven, good &amp; fine,
We hope we shall your custom have again another time.
Lady Conscience, what shall we say to our estates,
to whom shall we complain?
O• how shall we avridge such fates, as heaps up our pain?
Tic Lucar now that rules the rout, tic she is all in all,
•is she that holds her head so stout, in fine tic she that works our fall.
Oh Conscience, I fear, I fear a day,
that we by her and Usury shall quite be cast away.
Indeed I fear the worst, for every man doth sew
and comes from countries strange and far, of her to have view.
Although they ought to seek true Love and Conscience clear:
but Love and Conscience few doo like, that •eane on Lucars chair.
Men ought be ruled by vs, we ought in them bear sway:
so should each neighbor live by other in good estate always.
For Lucar men come from Italy, Barbary, Turkie,
From Jury: nay the Pagan himself,
Endangers his body to gape for her pelf.
They forsake mother, prince country, religion, kiffe and kin,
Nay men care not what they forsake, so lady Lucar they win.
That we poor ladies may sigh te see our states thus turned and tossed,
and worse and worse is like to be, where Lucar rules the roast.
You say the truth, yet God I trust will not admit it so,
that Love and Conscience by Lucars lust shall catch an overthrow.
Good ladies rest content, and you no doubt shall see
them plagued with painful punishment for such their cruelty:
And if true Love and Conscience live from Lucars lust lascivious,
thou Fame a triple crown will give, which lasts ay victorious.
God grant that Conscience keep within the bounds of right,
and that vile Lucar doo not daunt her heart with deadly spite.
And grant O God that Love be found in city, town &amp; country,
which causes wealth and peace abound, and pleases God almighty.
But Ladies, first your pleasure to walk abroad a while,
and recreate your selves with measure your sorrows to beguile.
Pass on good Fame, your steps doo frame, on you we will attend,
and pray to God that holds the rod, our states for to defend.
Nay no less than a farmer, a right honest man,
but my to•ng cannot stay me to tell what I am:
Nay, who is it that knows me not by my party coloured head?
They may well think that see me, my honesty is fled.
Tush, a fig for honesty, tut let that go.
Sith men, women, and children my name and doings do know.
My name is Dissimulation, and no base mind I bear,
For my outward effects my inward zeal do declare:
For men do dissemble with their wives, &amp; their wives with them again,
So that in the hearts of them I always remain:
The child dissembles with his father, the sister with her brother,
the maiden with her mistress, and the young man with his lover,
There is Dissimulation between neighbor and neighbor, friend and
friend, one with another.
Between the servant and his moister, between brother and brother,
then why make you it strange that ever you knew me,
Seeing so often I range throughout every degree?
But forget my baseness, isle towards London as fast as I can,
to get entertainment of one of the three Ladies, like an honest man.
They say there is preferment in London to have,
Mas and there be isle be passing and brave:
Why isle be no more a miller, because the maidens call me dusty pole,
One thumps me on the neck, and another strikes me on the nole:
And you see I am a handsome fellow, mark the comporknance of my stature,
Faith isle go seek peraduentures, and be a serving creature.
Whither away good fellow? I pray thee declare.
Mary isle clare thee, to London, would thou did go there.
What if I did, would it be better for thee?
I marry should it, for I love honest company.
Agreed, there is a bargen, but what shall I call thee?
Cause thou art an honest man isle tel thee, my name is Simplicity
A name agreeing to thy nature, but stay here comes more com∣pany.
Huff once aloft, and if I may hit in the right vain,
Where I may beguile easily without any great pain:
I will flaunt it and brave it after the lusty swash,
Isle deceive thousands, what care I who lie in the lash.
What Fraud well met, whither trauellest thou this way?
To London, to get entertainment there if I may,
Of the three ladies, Lucar, Love, and Conscience,
What care I to serve the Devil, so I may get pence?
O Fraud I know thee for a deceitful knave,
And art thou gotten so bon•acion and brave?
I knew thee when thou dwelt at a place called Grauesend,
And the guests knew thee too, because thou wast not their friend,
For when thou would bring reckoning to thy guess,
thou would say twice so much, and swear it cost thy dame no less.
So thou did deceive them, and thy dame too:
And because they spied thy knavery, away thou did go.
Then thou did go into Hertfordshire to a place called Ware,
And because horses stood at hay for a penny a night there,
Do that thou could get nothing that kind of way,
thou did grease the horses teeth, that they should not eat hay▪
And 〈◊〉 tell the rider his horse no hay would eat,
Do the man would say, give him some other kind of meat.
Sir shall Igiue him •ates, fetches peas barley, or bread,
But what ere thou gazed him, thou 〈◊〉 three quart•s when he was in bed,
And •ow thou art so proud with thy filching &amp; coosning art,
But I think one day thou wilt be proud of the Rope and the Cart:
take a w•se fellows counsel Fraud, leave thy coosning and filching.
Thou horse•n rascal swad avaunt, isle bang thee for thy brawling,
how dare thou defame a Gentleman that hath so large a living?
A goodly Gentleman Ostler, I think none of you al believe him.
What a clinchpoop drudge is this? I can forbear him no more.
My good friend Fraud refrain, and care not therefore,
tic Simplicity that patch, he knows not good from bad,
And to stand in contention with him, I would think you were ma•
But tell me Fraud tell me, hast thou been an Ostler in thy days?
Faith I have proved an hundred such ways,
For when I could not thrive by all other trades,
I became a squire to wai•e upon •ades.
But then was then, and now is now, so let that pass,
I am as thou see me, what care? the devil what I was.
Y•• say you go to London, in faith have with you than.
Nay come and go with me, good honest man:
For if thou go with him, he will teach thee all his knavery,
there is none will go with him that hath any honesty.
A bots on thy ma•ley beard, I know thee thou art Dissimulation,
And hast thou got an honest mans coat to semble this fashion?
Isle tell thee what, thou wilt even semble &amp; cog with thine own father:
A couple of false knaves together, a thief and a broker:
thou makst towns folk believe thou art an honest man in the country▪
yet dost nothing but cog, lye, and foist with hypocrisy.
You shall be hanged together and go alone together for me,
For if I should go the folks would say, we were knaves all three.
Friend Usury, I think we are well near at our journeys end:
But know thou whom I have espied?
No.
Fraud our great friend.
And I see another that is now come into my remembrance.
Who is that?
Mary M. Da•ie Dissimulation, a good helper, and our old ac∣quaintance.
Now all the cards in the stock are dealt about,
the four knaves in a cluster comes ruffling out.
What Fraud and Dissimulation happily found out,
I marvel what piece of work you two go about?
Faith sir we met by chance, and towards London are ben•
And to London we hye it is our chiefest intent,
to see if we can get entertainment of the Ladies or no.
And for the self same matter even thither we go.
Then we are luckily well met, &amp; seeing we wish al for one thing,
I would we our wills and wishing might win.
Yes they will be sure to win the devil and all,
Or else theyle make a man to spue out his gall:
O that vile Usury, he lent my father a little money, &amp; for breking one day,
He took the see•simple of his house and mill quite away:
And yet he borrowed not half a quarter so much as it cost,
But I think if it had been but a shilling it had been lost:
So he kilt my father with sorrow, and undid me quite,
And you deal with him sirs, you shall find him a knave full of spite,
And Simon I perse I. Symonie too, he is a knave for the nonce,
He loves to have twenty livings at once:
And if he let an honest man as I am to have one,
H•le let it so dear that he shall be undone.
And he seeks to get Parsons livings into his hand,
And puts in some odd dunce that to his payment will stand:
So, if the parsonage be worth forty or fifty pound a year,
He will give one twenty nobles to mumble service once a month there.
What rascal is he, that speaks by vs such villainy?
Sirs, he was at vs erewhile too, it is no matter, it is a simple
soul called Simplicity.
But here come two of the Ladies, therefore make ready.
But which of vs all shall first break the matter?
Mary let Symonie doo it, for he finely can flatter.
Nay sirs, because none of vs shall have pre-eminence aboue other,
we will sing in fellowship together like brother and brother.
Of troth agreed my masters let it be so.
Nay and they sing, isle sing too.
Good Ladies take pity, and grant our desire.
 Speak boldly and tell me what •st you require.
 Your service good Ladies, is that we doo crave.
 We like not nor list not such servants to have▪
 If you entertain vs, we trusty will be,
but if you refrain vs, then most unhappy:
We will come we will run we will bend at our beck,
we will ply, we will hie, for fear of a check.
 You doe fine, you doe flatter, you do lie, you doe prate,
you will steal, you will rob, you will kill in your hate:
I deny you, I defy you, then cease off your talking,
I refrain you, I disdain you, therefore get you walking.
What Fraud, Dissimulation, Usury, and Symonie,
How dare you for shame presume so boldly,
As once to show your selves before Love and Conscience,
Not yielding your lewd lives first to repentance?
Think you not that God will plague your wicked practises,
If you intend not to amend your lives so far amiss?
Think you not God knows your thoughts words and works,
And what secret mischiefs in your hearts there lurks?
then how dare you offend his heavenly majesty,
With your dissembling deceit, your flattery, and your Usury?
Tut sirs, seeing lady Conscience is so scrupulous,
I will not speak to her, for I see it is frivolous.
But what say you lady Love, will you grant vs favour?
Isle no such servants so ill of behaviour:
Servants more fitter for Lucar than Love,
And happy are they which refrain for to prove:
Shameless, pitiless, graceless, and quite past honesty,
then who of good conscience but will hate your company.
Here is scrupulous Conscience and nice Love indeed,
Tush, if they will not, others will, I know we shall speed.
But lady I stand still behind, for I am none of their compan•….
Why, what art thou? oh I know thou art simplicity.
I faith, I am simplicity, and would fine serve ye.
No, I may have no fools to dwell with me.
Why, then lady Love will you have me than?
Yes simplicity thou shalt be my man.
But shall I be your good man?
Yea my good man indeed.
I but I would be your goodman, &amp; swap up a wedding with speed
No, Love may not marry in any case with Simplicity,
But if thou wilt serve me, isle receive it willingly,
And if thou wilt not, what remedy.
Yes isle serve ye, but will you go in to dinner, for I am hungry?
Come lady Conscience, will you walk home from this company?
With right good will, for their sights likes not me.
Fraud is the clubbish knave, and Usury the hard hearted knave
And Symonie the diamond dainty knave,
And Dissimulation the spiteful knave of spade.
Come there any more knaves, come there any more:
I see four knaves stand on a row.
Away Drudge, be gone quickly.
I wis, doe thrust out mine eyes with a Lady.
Did you ever see Gentleman so rated at before,
But it skils not, I hope one day to turn them both out at door.
We were arrantly flouted, railed at, and scoffed in our kind,
That same Conscience is a wild terror to mans mind:
Yet faith I care not, for I have borne many more than these,
When I was conversant with the Clergy beyond the Seas,
And he that will live in this world must not care what such say,
For they are blossoms blown down, not to be found after May.
Faith care that care will, for I care not a point,
I have shifted hitherto, and whilst I live I will ieopard a joint:
And at my death I will leave my inheritor behind,
That shall be of the right stamp to follow my mind:
Therefore let them prate till their hearts ache, and spit out their evil,
She cannot quail me, if she came in likeness of the great devil.
Mass Fraud, thou hast a doughty hart to make a hangman of,
For thou hast good skill to help men from the coffe,
But we were arrantly flouted, yet I thought she had not known me,
But I perceive though Dissimulatiō do disguise him, Conscience can see.
What though Conscience perceive it, all the world cannot beside?
Tush there be a thousand places where we our selves may provide:
But look sirs, here comes a lusty Lady towards vs in haste,
But speak to her if you will, that we may be all placed.
I pray thee doe, for thou art the likeliest to speed.
Why then isle to it with a stomach in hope of good speed,
Fair Lady, all the Gods of good fellowship kiss ye (I would say bless ye)
Thou art very pleasant &amp; full of thy roperipe, I would say rhetoric
Lady you took me at the worst, I beseech you therefore,
To pardon my boldness offending no more.
We do, the matter is not great, but what would thou have?
How shall I call thee, and what first thou doest crave?
I am called Dissimulation, and my earnest request,
Is to crave entertainment for me and the rest,
Whose names are Fraud, Usury, and Symonie,
Great caters for your health, wealth▪ and prosperity.
Fra•d, Dissimulation, Usury, and Symonie,
Now truly I thank you for proffering your service to me:
You are all heartily welcome, and I will appoint straight way,
where each one in his office in great honour shall stay.
But Usury did thou never know my grandmother the old Lady Lu∣car
of Uenice.
Yes Madame, I was servant unto her, and lived there in bliss.
But why came thou into England, seeing Uenice is a City
where Usury by Lucar may live in great glory?
I have often heard your good grandmother tell,
that she had in England a daughter, which her far did excel:
And that England was such a place for Lucar to bide,
as was not in Europe and the whole world beside:
then lusting greatly to see you and the country, she being dead,
I made hast to come over to serve you in her stead.
Gramercy Usury, &amp; doubt not but to live here as pleasantly,
and pleasanter too: but whence came you Symonie, tell me.
My birth, nursery &amp; bringing up hithertoo hath bin in Rome, that
ancient religious city:
On a time the monks a friars made a banquet, whereto they invited me
with certain other English merchants, which belike were of their fa∣miliaritie.
So talking of many matters, amongst others one began to 〈◊〉
of the abundant substance still brought to that state.
Soon said the increase of their substance and wealth,
came from other Princes, and was brought thither by ••ealth:
But the friars and monks with all the ancient company,
said that it first came, and is now upheld by me Symonie:
which the Englishmen gave ear too, then they flattred a little too much,
as English merchants can do for advantage when increase it doth tush:
And being a shipboord merry, and overcome with drink on a day,
the wind served, they hoist sail, and so brought me away:
and landing here, I heard in what great estimation you were,
made bold to your honour to make my repair.
Well Symonie, I thank thee, but as for Fraud &amp; Dissimulation
I know their long continuance, and after what fashion.
Therefore Dissimulation, you shall be my steward,
An office that every mans case by you must be preferred.
And you Fraud shall be my rent-gatherer, my letter of leases &amp; my put∣chaser
of land,
so that many old bribes will come to thy hand.
And Usury because I know you be trusty, you shall be my secretary,
to •eale amongst merchants, to bargen and exchange money.
And Symonie, because you are a sly fellow, &amp; have you• tongue liberal,
we will place you over such matters as are Ecclesiastica••
And though we appoint sundry offices where now ye are in,
yet jointly we mean to use you together ofttimes in one thing.
Lady we rest at your command in ought we can or may.
Then master Day to my palace hast thee away,
〈◊〉 will Crafty Conveyance my butler to make ready
The best fare in the house, to welcome thee and thy company:
but stay Dissimulation, my self will go with thee.
Gentlemen isle go before, but see in any case,
so soon as ye please resort to my place.
Doubt not fair Lady, we will not long absent be.
Fellow Symonie this fell out pat, so well as heart could wish,
we are cunning anglers, we have caught the fattest fish,
Certainly it is true that her grandmother told.
Here is good to be done by use of silver and gold.
And seeing we are so well settled in this country,
Rich and poor shall be pinched whosoever come to me.
Sir, being at Rome, and dwelling in the Friarie,
they would talk how England yearly sent over a great mass of money:
and that this little Yland was more worth to the Pope,
than three bigger Realms that had a great deal more scope:
For here were smoke pence, peter pence, and powle pence to be paid,
besides much other money that to the Popes use was made.
Why, it is but lately since the Pope received this fine,
Not much more than 33. years since, it was in Queen Maries time.
But England had never known what this great had meant,
Had friar Austen from the Pope not hither been sent.
For the Pope hearing it to be a little Yland, sent him with a great Are∣my
over.
And winning the victory, he landed about Rye, Sandwich, or Dover.
Then he erected laws having the people in subjection,
and for the most part, England hath paid tribute so long.
I hearing of the great store and wealth in the Country,
could not choose but persuade myself the people loved symonie.
But stay your talk till some other time, we forget my Lady,
Of troth you say true, for she bad vs make hast,
but my talk me thought savoured well, and had a good taste.
Me judge in my minda dat me be not very far
from de place where dwells my Lady Lucar:
But here come vne shanty mans so he doo.
Pray ye heartily ••gnior leta me speaka you,
Pray ye do ye know un gentleman dat meshier Day doo call•
Yes sir, my self am he, and what would you withal?
Good a my friend meshier Day, help me pray ye heartily,
〈◊〉 have sum acquaintance a with Madonna Lucar your Lady.
•ir upon condition I will, therefore I would you should know,
That on me and my fellow• you must largely bestow:
Whose names are Fraud, Usury, and Symony, men of great credit and
calling,
And to get my Ladies good will and theirs it is no small thing
But tell me can you be content to win Lucar by Dissimulation?
A good a my friend axe me no shush a question,
For he dat will live in de world must be of the world sure,
And de world will love his own, so long as the world endure.
I commend you wit Sir, but here comes my Lady.
Come hider, heers too tree Crowns for de speak me.
Well sir I think you, I will go speak for you.
Moister Day Dissimulation, what new acquaintance have ye gotten there?
Such a one Madam that unto your state hath great care:
And surely in my mind the Gentleman is worthy
To be well thought on for his liberality, bounty, &amp; great care to seek ye.
Gentleman, you are heartily welcome, how are you called, I pray
you tell vs?
Madonna, me be a Merchant and be called senior Merkadorus.
But I pray you tell me what Countryman.
Me be Madonna an Italian.
Yet let me trouble ye, I beseech ye whence came ye?
For serua voutra boungrace, me come form Turkie.
Gramercy, but senior Mercadore dare you not undertake,
Secretly to convey good commodities out of this country for my sake?
Madonna, me doe for love of you think no pain too mush,
And to doe any ting for you me will not grush:
Me will a forsake a my Fader, Moder, King, Country, &amp; more den dat,
Me will lie and forswear my self for a quarter so much as my hat.
What is dat for love of Lucar me dare or will not doe:
Me care not for all the world, the great Devil, nay make my God angry
for you.
You say well Mercadorus, yet Lucar by this is not throwly won
But give ear and I will show what by thee must be done:
Thou must carry over Wheat, Peas, Barley, Oats, and Fetches, and
all kind of grain,
Which is well sold beyond sea and bring such merchants great gain.
Then thou must carry beside leather, tallow, beef, bacon, bell mettell, and
every thing,
And for these good commodities, trifles into England thou must bring:
As Bugles to make bibles, coloured bones, glass beads to make brace∣lets
withal:
For every day Gentlewomen of England doe ask for such trifles from
stall to stall,
And you must bring more, as Amber, Jet, Coral, Crystal, and every
such babble,
That is slight pretty and pleasant, they care not to have it profitable.
And if they demand wherefore your wares and merchandise agree,
You must lay Jet will take up a straw, Amber will make one fat,
Corrall will look pale when you besicke, and Crystal will stanch blad,
So with lying, flattering, and glossing you must utter your ware,
And you shall win me to your will, if you can deceitfully swear.
Think ye not dat me have carried over corn, Ledar, Beef and
Bacon too all tic while:
And brought header many bibles this country men to beguile?
Yes, shall me tell you Madonna, me and my countrimans have sent over,
Bell mettell for make ordinance, yea and ordinance it self beside,
Day my country and other countries bee so well furnished as dis country,
and has never been spied.
New I perceive you love me, and if you continue in this still,
You shall not only be with me, but command me when &amp; where you will.
Lady, for to do all dis and more for you me be content:
But I think some skall knave will put a bill in da Parliament,
For dat such a tings shall not be brought here.
Tush Mercadore, I warrant thee, thou neatest not to fear•
What and one do? there is some other will flatter and say,
They do no hurt to the country, and with a slight fetch that bill away.
And if they doe not so, that by act of Parliament it be past,
I knew you merchants have many a slight and subtle cast,
So that you will by stealth bring over great store,
And say it was in the Realm a long time before.
For being so many of these trifles here as there is at this day,
You may increase them at pleasure, when you send over sea,
And doe but give the searcher an odd, bribe in his hand,
I warrant you he will let you scope roundly with such things in and out the land•
But senior Mercadore, I pray you •ral•e in with me,
And as I find you kind to me, so will I savour ye,
Me tank my good Lady. But M. Dissimulation, here is for
your fellows, Fraud, Usury, and Symonie, and say me give it d•m.
I marry Sir, these bribes have welcome been,
Good saith I perceive, Dissimulation, Fraud, Symonie and Usury shall live
In spite of Love and Conscience, though their hearts it doth grieve.
Mas masters, he that cannot lie, cog, dissemble and flatter now a days,
Is not worthy to live in the world, nor in the Court to have praise.
I beseech you good M. Dissimulation, befriend a poor man,
To serve Lady Lucar and lu•e sir. isle consider hereafter if I can.
What, consider me• doest thou think that I am a bribe taker?
Faith it lies not in me to further thy matter.
Good M. Dissimulatten help me, I am almost quite undone,
But yet my living hitherto with Conscience I have won,
But my true working, my ca•lie ti•ing and my late going to bed,
Is scant able to find myself, wife and children dry break
For there be such a sort of strangers in this country.
That work fine to please the eye, though it be deceitfully,
And that which is slight, and seems to the eye well,
Shall sooner than a piece of good work be proffered to sell,
And our Englishmen be grow•e so foolish and nice,
That they will not give a penny about the ordinary price.
Faith I cannot help thee, tic my fellow Fraud must pleasure thee
Here comes my fellow Fraud, speak to him, and isle do what I can.
I beseech you be good unto me right honest Gentleman.
Why and whereto? what would thou have me doe?
That my estate you will so much prefer,
As to get me to be a workman to Lady Lucar:
And sir I doubt not but to please you so well for your pain,
That you shall think very well of 〈◊〉 if I in her service remain.
Good fellow Fraud do so much for I see he is very willing to live
And some piece of work to thee for thy pains he will give.
Well upon that condition I will but I care not so much for his gifts,
As that he will by my name declare how he came by his great thrifts,
And that he will set out in every kind of thing,
That Fraud is a good husband, and great profit doth bring.
Therefore the next piece of work that thou d•est make,
Let me see how deceitful thou wilt do it for my sake.
Yes ••r I will s•r, of that be you sure,
Isle honour your name while life doth end••e.
Fellow Fraud, here comes a Citizen as I deem.
Nay rather a Lawyer, or some petty fogger, he doth seem.
Gentleman, my earnest suite is to desire ye,
That unto your Ladies service you would help me:
For I am an attorney of the law and pleader at the bar,
And have a great desire to plead for Lady Lucar.
I have been earnest Sir, as is needful in such a case,
For fear an other come before me, and obtain my place.
I have pleaded for Love and Conscience till I w•s weary,
I had in my Clients, and many matters, that made my purse light, and
my heart heavy.
Therefore let them plead for Conscience that list for me,
Isle plead no more for such as bring nothing but beggary.
Sir, upon this condition that you'll keep men in law,
Ten or twelve years for matters not worth a straw:
And that you will make an ill matter seem good and firmable in deed,
Faith I am content for me part that you shall speed.
Nay fellow thou know that Symonie and Usury hath an 〈◊〉
matter in law at this time,
Naw if thou can handle the matter so subtle and 〈◊〉,
•s to plead that ill matter good and firmable at the bar,
Then thou shalt show thy self worthy to win Lady Lucar.
Therefore tell me if you can and will do it or no.
If you doe it, be sure to get my Ladies good will ere you go.
By my honesty well remembered, I had quite forgot,
Tic about that, a fortnight ago sell cut the matter I wot.
Tush sir, I can make black white, and white black again,
Tut he that will be a Lawyer, must I aue a thousand ways to fine,
And many times we L•wires do one befriend another,
And let good matters slip, tut we agree like brother and brother,
Why sir, what shall let vs to wrest and turn the law as we list,
Seeing we have them printed in the palms of out fist?
Therefore doubt you not, but make bold report,
That I can, and will plead their ill cause in good kind of sort.
Of troth how likest thou this fellow Dissimulation?
Mary I like him well, hee is a cunning Clarke, and one of our profession.
But come sir, go with vs and we will prefer you.
Good M. Fraud remember me.
Leave thy prating, I will I tell thee.
Good M. Dissimulation think on me.
Thou art too importunate and greedy.
Come after dinner, or some other time when we are at leisure.
Come after dinner, or some other time indeed,
For full little do they think of a poor mans need:
These fellows will do nothing for pity and love,
And thrice happy are they that hath no need them to prove.
God he knows the world is grown to such a stay,
That men must use Fraud and Dissimulation too, or beg by the way.
Therefore isle do as the most doth, the fewest shall laugh me to scorn,
And be a fellow amongst good fellows to hold by S. Lukes horn.
Good cousin Simplicity do something for me.
Yes faith cousin Sincerity, isle do any thing for thee?
What would thou have me do for thee can tell that?
Mas I cannot tell what should do for me, except thou would give me
a new hat.
Alas I am not able to give thee a new.
Why then I marvel how thou doest doe:
Doest thou get thy living amongst beggars from door do door?
Indeed cousin Sincerity, I thought thou wast not so poor.
Nay cousin Simplicity I got my living hardly but yet I hope just
And with good Conscience too although I am restrained from my lust.
But this it is cousin Simplicity, I would request you do for me:
Which is, to get Lady Love, and Lady Conscience hand to latter:
That by their means I may get some benefice to make me live the better
Yes Isle do so much for thee cousin, but hast thou any here?
I behold they are ready drawn, if assined they were.
Let me see cousin, for I can read:
Mas tic bravely done, did thou it indeed?
Mistress Conscience, I have a matter to bequest you too.
What first? I doubt not but tic some wise thing if it be for you,
Mary my cousin Sincerity, wad bestre to scribe these papers here
That he may get some preferment, but I know not where.
Be these your letters? what would you have me doe, and how shall
I call ye?
Lady, my name is Sincerity.
And from whence came ye?
I came from Oxford, but in Cambridge I studied late,
Having nothing, thought good if I could, to make better my state.
But if I had in stead of Divinity, the Law, Astronomy, Astrology,
Phislognomie, Palmistry, Arithmetike, Logic, Mas•cke, Phis•cke, or
any such thing,
I had not doubted then, but to have had some better living.
But Divines that preach the word of God sincerely and truly,
Are in these days little or nothing set by.
God grant the good Preachers be not taken away for our unthankfulness
There was never more preaching and less following, the people live so
amiss:
But what is he that may not on the Saba•th day attend to hear Gods word?
But we will rather run to bowls, sit at the alehouse, than one hour afford:
Telling a tale of Robin hood, sitting at Cards, playing at kettels, or some
other vain thing,
That I fear Gods vengeance on your head it will bring.
God grant amendment, but Lady Conscience I pray,
In my behalf unto Lucar do what ye may.
Mas my cousin can say his book well, I had not thought it,
Hes worthy to have a benefice, and it will hit.
God be blessed Sincerity, for the good comfort I have of thee,
I would it lay in vs to pleasure such believe me.
We will do what we can: But ultra posse non e•t esse, you know,
It is Lucar that hath brought vs poor souls so low.
For we have sold our house, we are brought so poor,
And fear by her shortly to be shut out of door.
Yet to subscribe our name we will with all our hart,
Perchance for our sake some thing she will impart:
Come hither Simplicity, let me write on thy back.
Here is the right picture of that fellow that sits in the corner.
Lady, me thinks you are bus•e.
I •aue done sir, I was setting my hand to a letter to Lucar for our
friend Sincerity.
But I would lady Love were here too.
She is at home with me, but if it please you, so much in her be∣half
isle doo.
I pray you heartily, and it shall suffice that turn well enough:
Good Simplicity, once more thy body do bow.
I think you'll make me serve to be a washing block for you.
I would do it for you, but am afraid yonder boy will mock me.
No isle warrant thee.
Here take thy letters Sincerity, &amp; prosperous be they to thee.
I yield you most hearty thanks my good lady.
I Conscience, pleases it you to walk home and dine with me.
Thanks my good f•iend Hospitality.
But tell me sir, have you invited to dinner any strangers?
No sure, none but lady Love, and three or four honest neighbours.
•as my lady is gotten to dinner already,
I believe she rose at ten of clock she is so hungry.
What if I should come to dinner, is there any good cheer?
Theres bread &amp; bear, one joint of meat, &amp; welcome thy best fare.
Why, art thou called Hospitality, &amp; hast no better cheer than that
Faith and thou hast no more meat for so many, theile ne'er be fat,
what if my cousin nay my self alone to dinner should come?
where should my lady and the te•• dine? for I would eat up every crum.
Thou art an old •ser doest thou keep no better fare in thy house?
Hast no great bag pudding, nor hogs face, that is called sows
My friend, Hospitality doth not consist in great fare and ban∣quetting.
But in doing good unto the poor, and to yield them some refreshing.
Therefore if thou and Sincerity will come and take part,
Such as there is isle give you with a free and willing hart.
•e speaks well cousin, lets go to d•nner with him.
the old man shall not think but we will pleasure him.
Faith he might have richer fellows to take his part,
But he shall never have better eating fellows if hee would swelte his
heart.
Here be they that will eat with the proudest of them.
For my mother said I could eat as much as five men.
Nay I am sure the gift of eating is given to me,
For our Maids would never believe I put all the meat in my belly,
But yonder comes a Knave, my lady Lucars cogging man,
Give me your letters cousin, isle prefer you if I can.
Dissimulation, out upon him, he shall be no spokeman for me.
Why then you are a fool cousin Sincerity,
Give me am then, for I know heal do it for me,
Seeing thou wilt have it, here receive it, but it grieves my har•
that this dissembling wretch should speak on my part.
Hear ye sir, I would request to liver this letter,
to your good wholesome misters lady Lucar.
Where had thou it tell me?
Mary of my cousin Sincerity.
Why I have nothing to do in it, tic not to me thou should com•
I have not to do with Sincerities matters, tic my fellow Symonies
room.
Thou art a kin to the lawyer, thou wilt do nothing without a fee,
But thou, Fraud, Usury, nor yet Symonie shall have nothing of me.
And thou wilt do it, do it, and thou wilt not choose:
Both thee and their dealing I hate and refuse.
Why, and I am not bound to thee so far as knave go,
And therefore in despite of thee and thy cousin, there thy letters be,
What, think thou by captious words to make me do it?
Let them deliver your letters that hath a stomach to it
Faith cousin, hes such a tester in and semblation knave;
that heal do nothing les some bribery he have.
Theres a great many such promoting knaves that gets their living,
With nothing else but facing, lying, swearing and flattering.
Why he has a face like a black dog, and blushes like the back side of
a chimney.
I was not for nothing thy Godfathers a cogging 〈◊〉 gave thee.
But here comes his mistress lady Lucar,
Now cousin isle liver your letter.
Mistress lady Lucar, hears a letter for ye.
Hast thou a letter for me?
Yes by saint Marie.
How say you cousin, she reads your letter?
And you can flatter, perhaps you shall speed better.
Thou speak the truth Simplicity, for flatterers now a days,
live Gentlemen-like, and with prating get praise.
Sir, I have read the tenure of your letter, wherein I find,
that at the request of Love and Conscience I should show my self kind,
And bestow some spiritual living on you, parsonage, or benefice,
For you stand greatly in need, as appears by this.
And trust me would do for you, but it lies not in me,
For all such matters are referred to my servant Symonie.
You must speak to him, and if you can get his good will,
then be sure of mine, their minds to fulfil.
Lady, I shall never get his goodwill for want of ability,
For he will do nothing except one bring money.
And if you grant it not, then it is past all doubt,
I shall be never the nearer, but go quite without.
Madam, isle tell you what you may give,
Not hurting your self whereby he may live,
And without my fellow Symonies consent,
If to follow my mind you are any whit bent.
Pray thee what is it? for thou know while for their house
I am bargaining,
And it be never so little, I must seem to do something.
Why, have not you the parsonage of S. Nihal to bestow?
if you give him that, Symonie shall never know.
Thou says true indeed: draw near Sincerity,
Lo for their sakes I will bestow frankly on thee,
The parsonage of saint Nihil isle give thee to pleasure them withal,
And such another to it, if thou watch till it fall.
My lady axes you when you will take possession of your house,
and lend the rest of the money.
What are they so hasty? belike they spent it merrsly.
Faith no, for they would eat it if they could get it, when they
are a hungry.
But you may be happy, for you have sped well to day
You may thank God and good company that you came this way,
The parsonage of S. Michels, bear Lady if you have nothing else,
you shall be sure of a living, beside a good ring of Bells.
Cousin, isle tell thee what thou shalt do, sell the bells and make money,
Thou majesty well be Simplicity for thou show thy folly.
I have a parsonage, but of what? of saint Nihil, and Nihil is nothing.
Then where is the Church, or any Bells for to ring?
Thou understand her not, she was set for to ••out,
I thought coming in their names I should go without,
Tic call to see that Lucar •os not Love and Conscience:
But God I trust will one day yield her just recompense.
Cousin, you said that some thing to me you would give,
When you had gotten preferment of Lucar to live:
And I trust you will remember your poor cousin simplicity,
you know to lady Conscience and cry body I did speak for you.
Good Simplicity hold thy peace, my state is yet nought,
I will help thee sure, if ever I get ought.
But here comes sir Nicholas Nemo, to him I will go,
And see if for their sakes he will any thing bestow.
You come from Love and Conscience, as seems 〈◊〉 here,
My special good friends, whom I account of most dear,
And you are called Sincerity, your state shows the same,
you are welcome to me for their sakes, and for your own name,
And for their sakes you shall set what I will do for you,
Without Dissimulation, Fraud, Usury, or Symonie:
For they will do nothing without some kind of gain,
such cankered corruption in their harts doth remain.
But come in to dinner with me, and when you have din••,
you shall have.
You shall have, but what? a living that is blown down with
the wind.
Now cousin dismember your friends, seeing two livings you have
One that this man promised, and another that lady Lucar gave.
Mas you'll be a jolly man and you had three or four more,
Lets beg apace cousin, and we shall get vs great store.
Do thou get some more letters, and isle get them scribed of misters Love
and Conscience,
And wele go beg livings together, wele beg no small pence.
How says thou cousin wut do so much?
If we can speak fair and semble, we shall be plague rich.
Good Simples•tie content thee, I am never the better for this,
But of force must leave off, seeing how vain it is:
Nor boots it •inceritie to look for relief.
So few regard that to me is a grief.
This was Nicholas Nemo, and no man hath no place.
then how can I speed well in this kind of case?
And no man bid me to dinner, when shall I dine?
Or how shall I find him, where, when, and at what time?
wherefore the relief had and to be had is small,
But to speak truth, the relief is nothing at all.
But come Simplicity, let vs go see what may be had,
Sincerity in these days was sure borne to be sad.
Come lets go to dinner cousin, for the Gentleman I think hath
almost dined.
But if I get vitals enough isle warrant you isle not be behind.
What if thou can not get it, then how wilt thou eat?
Mary on this fashion, with both hands at once, ye shall see when
I get meat.
why his name was Nemo, and Nemo hath no being.
I believe cousin you be not hungry, that you stand prating,
Faith isle go do him a pleasure▪ because the hath need.
why and h•le needs have meat eat, a shall see how isle feed,
I believe he will not did me come again to him,
Mas and he do, a shall find a fellow that has his eating.
Lady Conscience, is there any body within your house can you
tell?
There is no body at all be ye sure, I know certainly well.
You know when one comes to take possession of any piece of land
There must not be one within, for against the order of law it doth
stand.
Therefore I thought good to ask you, but I pray you think not a∣miss:
For both you, and almost all other knows, that an old custom it is.
You say truth, take possession when you please, good leave have 〈◊〉
Doubt you not, there is neither man, woman, nor child, that will or shall
hinder you.
Why then I will boldly enter.
Who is more bold than Usury to venture?
He makes the matter dangerous where is no need at all,
But he thinks it no pe•illous to seek every mans fall:
Both he and Lucar hath so pinched vs, we know not what to doe,
Were it not for Hospitality, we knew not whither to go.
Great is the misery that we poor ladies abide,
And much more is the cruelty of Lucar and Usury beside.
O Conscience, thou art not accounted of, O Love, thou art little set by,
For almost every one, true love, and pure conscience doth deny:
So hath Lucar crept into the bosom of man, woman and child,
That every one doth practise his dear friend to beguile.
But God grant Hospitality be not by them over pressed,
In whom all our stay and chiefest comfort doth rest▪
But Usury hates Hospitality and cannot him abide,
Because he for the poor and comfortless doth provide.
Here he comes, that hath undone many an honest man,
And daily seeks to destroy, deface, and bring to ruin if he can.
Now sir, have you took possession as your dear lady wild you•
I have done, and I think you have received your money,
But this to you: my lady wild me to bid you provide some other thou••
out of hand,
For she would not by her will have Love and Conscience to dwell on
her land:
Therefore tic best to provide ye•
So shall you save charges, for a less house may serueyt.
I pray you heartily let vs stay there, and we will be content
to give you ten pound a year, which is the old rent.
Ten pound a year, that were a state jest,
If I should take the old rent to follow your request:
Nay after forty pound a year you shall have it for a quarter,
And you may think too, you are befriended in this matter:
But no longer than for a quarter to you isle set it,
For my lady perhaps will sell it, or to some other will let it.
Well, sith we are driven to this hard and bitter drift,
We accept it, and are contended to make bare and hard shift.
Then get you gone, and see at a day your rent be ready.
We must have patience perforce, seeing there is no remedy.
What a fool was I to let it so reasonable?
I might so well have had after threescore, as such a trifle,
For seeing they were distressed they would have given largely▪
I was a right sot, but isle be overseen no more believe me.
Ah my good a friend M. Usury, be my trot you be very well
met:
Me be much beholding to you for your good will, me be in your debt.
But a me take a your part so mesh against a scale shurle called Hospitality:
Did speak against you, and says you bring good honest men to beggary.
I thank you sir, did he speak such evil of me as now you say?
I doubt not but to reward him for his treachery one day.
But I pray tell a me how fare a my lady all dis while?
Marie well sir, and here she comes if my self I do not beguile.
What senior Mercadore, I have not seen you this many a day,
I marvel what is the cause you kept so long away
Shall me say to you Madame, 〈◊〉 me have had such business
for you in hand,
For send away good commodities out of dis little country England:
Me have now sent over brass, copper pewter, and many odar ting,
And for dat me sall ha for Gentlewoman's fine trifles, that great profit
will bring.
I perceive you have been mindful of me, for which I thank
ye:
But Usury tell me, how have you sped in that you went about?
Indifferently Lady, you need not to doubt,
I have taken possession, and because they were destitute,
I have let it for a quarter my tale to conclude.
Marry I have a little raised the rent, but it is but after forty pound by
the year:
But if it were to let now, would let it more dear.
Indeed it is but a trifle, it makes no matter,
I force it not greatly, being but for a quarter.
Madonna me a you vat you sall do, let them to stranger dat
are content,
To dwell in a little room, and pay mush rent:
For you know da Frenchmans and Flamings in dis country be many,
So dat they make shift to be ten houses in one very gladly.
And be content a for pay fifty or threescore pound a year,
For dat which da Englishman's say twenty mark is too dear.
Why senior Mercadore, think you not that I
Have infinite numbers in London that my want doth supply.
Beside in Bristow, Northampton, Norwich, Westchester, Canterbury,
Dover, Sandwich, Rye, Porchmouth, Plimmouth, and many mo,
That great rents upon little room do bestow.
Yes I warrant you, and truly I may thank the strangers for this,
That they have made houses so dear, whereby I live in bliss.
But senior Mercadore, dare you to travel undertake:
And go amongst the Moors, Turks, and Pagans for my sake?
Madonna, me dare go to de Turks, Moors, Pagans, and
more too,
What do me care and me go to da great devil for you.
Command a me Madonna▪ and you sall see plain,
Data for your sake me refuse no pain.
Then senior Mercadore I am forthwith to send ye
From hence, to search •or some new toys in Barberry or in Turkie,
Such trifles as you think will please wantons best:
For you know in this country tic their chiefest request.
Indeed de Gentlewoman's here buy so much vain toys,
Dat me strangers laugh a to think wherein da have deir joys.
Feet Madonna me will search all da strange countries me can tell,
But me will have such tings dat please this Gentlewoman's vell.
Why then let vs provide things ready to hast you away.
A voutro commaundemento Madonna me obey.
Now proceed with thy tale and isle heart thee.
And so sir as I was about to tell you,
This same Presco, and this some Cracko, be both my parishioners no•
And sir they fell out marvelously about you:
The same Cracko took your part, and said that the Clergy
Was maintained by you, and upheld very worshipfully.
So sir, Presco he would not grant that in any case,
But said that you did corrupt the clergy, and dishonour that holy place.
Now sir I was weary to hear them at such great strife,
For I love to please men so long as I have life:
Therefore I beseech your maistership to speak to Lady Lucar,
That I may be her Chaplain, or else to serve her.
What is your name?
Sir Peter.
What more?
Forsooth Pleaseman.
Then your name is sir Peter Pleaseman.
Yea forsooth.
And please woman too now and th•n,
You know that homo is indifferent.
Now surely a good scholar in my judgment,
I pray you of what University were ye?
Di no University truly.
Mary I have gone to school in a College, where I have studied two
or three places o• Divinity:
And all for lady Lucars sake, sir you may steadfastly believe me.
Nay I believe ye▪ but of what religion are you can ye tell?
Mary 〈◊〉 of all religions, I know not my self very well.
You are a Prote stant now, and I think to that now will grant
Indeed I have been a Catholic▪ mary now for the most part
a Protestant.
But and if my service may please her, hark in your care sir,
I warrant you my religion shall not offend her.
You say well, but if I help you to such great preferment,
Would you be willing for my pain,
I shall have yearly half the gain.
For it is reason you know that if I help you to a living,
That you should unto me be somewhat beholding,
Yea 〈◊〉, and reason good, isle be as your mastership please,
I care not what you do, so I may live at ease.
Then this man is answered, sir Peter please•an come with m•
And isle prefer you straight way to my lady.
Oh sir I thank yt.
You think I am going to market to buy roast meat, do ye not?
But see how you are deceived, for well I wot,
I am neither going to the Butchers to buy mutton, veale nor beef,
But am going to a bloudsucket, and who is it? faith Usury that thief.
Why sirs, it was no marckle he vndood my father that was called Plain
dealing,
when he has undone my Lady and Conscience too with his vsuring.
Trust him not sirs, for heal flatter bonacion and sore,
till he has gotten the Bakers vantage, then heal turn you out of door.
Simplicity, now of mine honesty very heartily well met,
What Semblation swear not, for thou swearest by that thou
could never get:
Thou have honesty now? thy honesty is quite gone:
Mary thou had honesty at xi. of clock, but it went from you ere noon:
why, how can thou have honesty, when it dare not come me thee?
I warrant Semblation, he that has less honesty than thou, may
defy thee:
thou hast honesty sir reverence, come out dog, where art thou?
Even as much honesty as hath my mothers great hoggish sow:
No faith thou moist put out mine eye with honesty, &amp; thou had it here,
Hast not left it at the alehouse in gage for a pot of strong beer?
Pray thee leave prating Simplicity, and tell me what thou
hast there?
Why, tic nothing for thee, thou doest not deal with such kind
of ware.
Sir there is no beceit in a bag pudding, is there? nor in a plain put∣ding
pie:
Sir isle tell thee, I will not tell thee, and yet isle tell thee, now I mem∣ber
me too:
Can tell, or would know whither with this parliament I go?
Faith even to s•ckswill thy fellow Usury I am sent,
With my lady Loves gown, and lady Conscience too, for a quarters
rent.
Alas poor lady Love, art thou driven so low?
Some little pittance on thee isle bestow.
Hold Simplicity, carry her three or four Ducats from me,
And commend me to her even very heartily.
Duck eggs, yes isle carry them, and it were as many as this
would hold.
Tush thou know not what I mean, take this, tic gold.
Mas tic gold indeed, why, wilt lend away thy gold, hast thou
no more need?
I think thou art grown plaguy rich with thy dissembling trade,
But isle carry my lady the gold, for this will make her well apaid.
And 〈◊〉, carry lady Loves gown back again, for my fell∣low
Usury
Shall not have her gown, I am sure so much he will befriend me.
But what shall Conscience gown do, shall I carry it back again too?
Nay, let Conscience gown and skin to Usury go.
If no body cared for Conscience more than I,
They would hang her up like bacon in a chimney to dry.
Faith I told thee thou caredst not for Conscience nor honesty:
I think indeed it will never be the death of thee.
But isle go conspatch my arrant so soon as I can tell ye,
For now I ha gold, I would fine have some good meat in my belly.
Nay isle hie me after, that I may send back lady Loves gown.
For I would not have Love bought quite out of town.
Mary for Conscience tut, I care not two straws,
Why I should take care for her, I know no kind of cause.
Oh what shall I say? Usury hath undone me, and now he
hates me to the death.
And seeks by all means possible for to bereave me of breath.
I cannot rest in any place, but he hunts and follows me every where▪
That I know no place to abide, I live so much in fear.
But out alas, here comes he that will shorten my days,
O have I caught your old gray beard you be the man whom
the people so praise:
You are a frank Gentleman, and full of liberality.
Why, who had all the praise in London or England, but M. Hospitality?
But isle moister you now isle hold you a great.
What will you kill me?
No, isle do nothing but cut thy throat.
O help, help, help for Gods sake.
What lamentable cry was that I heard one make?
O lady Conscience, now or never help me.
why, what wilt thou do with him Usury?
what will I do with him? mary cut his throat and then no more
O doest thou not remember that thou shalt dearly answer for
Hospitality that good member, reframe it therefore.
Refrain me no refraining nor answer me no answering▪
The matter is answered well enough in this thing,
For Gods sake spare him, for country sake spare him, for pity sake
spare him; for Love sake spare him, for Conscience sake forbear him.
Let country, pity, Love, Conscience, &amp; all go in respect of my self,
He shall die, come ye feeble wretch, isle dress ye like an elf.
But yet Usury, consider the lamentable cry of the poor,
For lack of Hospitality, fatherless children are turned out of door.
Consider again the complaint of the sick, blind and lame,
That will cry unto the Lord for vengeance on thy head in his name.
Is the fear of God so far from thee that thou hast no feeling at all?
O repent Usury, leave Hospitality, and for mercy at the Lords hand
call.
Leave prating Conscience, thou can not mollify my hart,
He shall in despite of thee and all other fe•le his deadly smart.
Yet isle not commit the murder openly,
But hale the villain into a corner, and so kill him secretly.
Come ye miserable drudge, and receive thy death▪
Help good lady, help, he will stop my breath.
Alas I would help thee, but I have not the power.
Farewell lady Conscience, you shall have Hospitality in London
nor England no more.
O help, help help some good body.
Who is that calls for help so hastily?
Out alas thy fellow Usury hath killed Hospitality.
Now Gods blessing on his heart, why it was time he were dead▪
He was an old churl, with never a good tooth in his head.
And he ne'er kept no good cheer that I could see:
For if one had not come at dinner time hee should have gone away
hungry.
I could never get my belly full of meat,
He had nothing but beef, bread and chief for me to eat.
Now I would have had some Pies or bag puddings with great lumps
of •at:
But he did keep my mouth well enough from that.
Faith and he be dead, he is dead, let him go to the devil and he will.
Or if he will not go thither, let him even lie there still.
Isle ne'er make a lamentation for an old churlde,
For he has lived a great while, and now tic time that he were out of the
world.
What Conscience, thou look like a poor pigeon pulled of late.
what Lucar, thou look like a whore full of deadly hate.
Alas Conscience, I am sorry for thee, but cannot weep.
Alas Lucar, I am sorry for thee that thou can no honesty keep:
But such as thou art, such are thy attenders on thee,
As appears by thy servant Usury, that hath killed that good member
Hospitality.
Faith Hospitality is killed and hath made his will,
And hath given Dissimulation three trees upon a high hill.
Come hither Dissimulation, and hie you hence •o fast as you may
And help thy fellow Usury to convey himself out of the way,
Further, will the Justices, if they chance to see him, not to know him▪
Or know him, not by any means to hinder him.
And they shall command thrice so much at my hand.
Go trudge, run out away, how doest thou stand?
Nay good lady▪ send my fellow Simone,
For I have an earnest suite to ye.
Then Symonie go do what I have wild.
I run Madam your mind shall be fulfild.
Well well Lucar, •udeo &amp; tace•, I see and say nothing:
But I fear the plague of God on thy head it will bring.
Good lady grant that Love be your waiting maid,
For I think being brought so low, she will be well apaid.
Speak thou in good earnest, or doest thou but dissemble?
I know not how to have thee, thou art so variable.
Lady, though my name be Dissimulation, yet I speak bon•
side now,
If it please you my petitions to allow.
S••nd by, isle answer thee anon: what news Symonie
Bring thou of thy fellow Usury?
Mary madam good news: for Usury •es close
Hid in a rich mans house, that will not let him lose,
Until they see the matter brought to a good end,
For Usury in this country hath many a good friend:
And late I saw Hospitality carried to burying.
I pray thee tell me who were they that followed him?
There were many of the clergy and many of the nobility•
And many right worshipful rich Citizens,
Substantial, gracious and very wealthy Farmers.
But to see how the poor followed him it was a wonder,
Never yet at any burial was seen such a number.
But what say the people to the murder?
Many are sorry, and say tic great pity that he was slain▪
But wh• be they? the poor beggarly people that so complain:
As for the other they say it was a cruel bloody fact,
But I perceive none will hinder the murderer for this cruel act.
Tic well, I am glad of it, now Dissimulation if thou can get
Lones good will.
I am contented with all my heart to grant there until.
Thanks to you lady, and I doubt not but she
With a little entreaty will thereto agree.
Now I have it in my breeches, and very well can tell,
That I and my lady with misters Lucar shall dwell.
But if I be her serving fellow, and dwell there,
I must learn to cog lie, foist and swear.
And surely I shall never learn, marie and it were to lie a bed all 〈◊〉
To that kind of lying I should give a good say.
Or if it were to eat ones meat, then I knew what for to do.
How say you strra, can I not, isle be drudge by you?
Now to you little mouse, did I not tell you before,
That I should ere it were long turn you both out of door?
How say you pretty soul, first come to pass, yea or no?
Me thinks I have pulled your peacocks plumes somewhat low.
And yet you be so stout as though you felt no grief,
But ere it be long you will come puling to me for relief.
Well Lucar well, you know pride will have a fall:
What avails it thee to win the world, and loo•e thy soul withal•
Yet better it is to live with little, and keep a conscience clear.
Which is to God a sacrifice, and accounted of most dear.
Nay Conscience, and you be b•okish isle leave ye,
And the cold ground to comfort your feet isle bequeath ye.
Me think you being so deeply learned, may do well to keep a school.
Why, I have seen so cunning a Clarke in time to prove a fool.
Sir, if thou should marry my Lady thou would keep her brave.
For me thinks thou art a plague rich knave.
Rich I am, but as for knave keep to thy self.
Come give me my Ladies gown thou ass•headed elf.
Why isle go with thee, for I must dwell with my Lady.
Pack hence away, •ask Drum• entertainment, she will none
of thee.
This is as my cousin and I went to M. Nemos thou•e,
There was no man to •id a dog drink, or to change a man a •ou•e,
But lady Conscience (nay who there) scratch that name away,
Can she be a lady that is turned out of all her array?
Do not be called no more lady, and if you be wise,
For every body will mock you, and say you be not worth two butter fly•.
What remedy Simplicity? I cannot do withal:
But what shall we go do? or whereto shall we fall?
Why to our vittails, what else have we to do?
And mark if I cannot eat twenty times so much as you.
If I go lie in an Inn, it will grieve me to see,
The deceit of the Ostler, the powling of the Tipster, as in most houses
〈◊〉 lodging they be,
If in a brewers house, at the •for plenty of water, and scarceness of mal•
I should grieve,
whereby to enrich themselves, all other with unsavoury thin drink they
deceive.
If in a jennets house, with his great deceit in tanning,
If in a Weavers house, with his great coosening in weaving.
If in a Bakers house, with light bread, and very evil working.
If in a Chandlers with deceitful weights, false measures, selling for a
halfepeny that is scant worth a farthing.
And if in an A•lehouse, with the great resort of poor unthrifts, that with
swearing at the Cards consume their lives,
Having greater delight to spend a shilling that way, than a great at
home to sustain their needy children and wives.
For which I judge it best form to get some solitary place,
where I may with patience this my heavy cross embrace,
And learn to sell broom, whereby to get my living,
Using that as a quiet mean to keep my self from begging▪
wherefore Simplicity if thou wilt do the like,
•attlee thy self 〈◊〉 it, and with true labour thy living do seek.
No faith M. Conscience isle not for and I should sell broom,
the Maids would cousin me too competually with their old shoo•e.
And too I cannot work, and you would hang me out of the way.
For when I was a miller, Will did grind the meal while I did play.
Therefore isle have as easy an occupation as I had when my Father
was alive,
Faith isle go even a begging, why tic a good trade a man shall be sure to
thrive.
For I am sure my prayers will get bread and cheese, and my singing will
get me drink.
Then shall not I do better than M. Conscience? tell me as you think.
Therefore God Pan in the Ketch•n, and God Pot in the buttery,
Come and resist me, that I may sing with the more meliositie.
But sir•, mark my cauled countenance when I begin,
But yonder is a fellow that gapes to b••e me, or else to eat that which
I sing.
Why thou art a fool, can not thou keep thy mouth strait together•
And when it comes sna• at it as my fathers dog wo• do at a liver.
But thou art so greedy,
That thou think to eat it before it come •ie thee.
Simplicity sings, and sperience doth prove,
No biding in London for Conscience and Love,
The Country hath no pear.
Where Conscience c•mes not once a year••
And Love so welcome to every town,
•s wind that blows the houses down.
Sing down down, down, down, down.
Simplicity sings it, and spertence doth prove,
No dwelling in London, no biding in London for Conscience and Love.
Now sir, hast eaten up my song? and ye have ye shall eat no
more to day,
For every body may see your belly is grown bigger with eating up our
play.
He has 〈◊〉 his belly but I am never a whit the better,
Therefore isle go seek some vitals, and member for eating up my song
you shall be my debtor.
But senior Mercadorus tell me, did ye serve me well or no?
That having gotten my money would seem the country to forgo:
You know I lent you two thousand ducats for three m•nthes space,
And ere the time came you got another thousand by flattery, and thy
smooth face.
So when the time came that I should have received my money,
You were not to be found, but were fled out of the country,
Surely if we that be Jaws should deal so one with an other,
We should not be trusted again of our own brother
But many of you Christians make no conscience to falsify your faith
and break your day.
I should have been paid at three months end, and now it is two year
you have been away.
Well I am glad you be come again to Turkie now I trust I shall re∣ceiue
the interest of you so well as the principal
A good a moister Geronto pray heartily bare a me a little while,
And me shall pay ye all without any deceit or guile:
Me have much business for buy pretty knacks to send to England.
Good sir, bear a me four five days, meal dispatch your money out of
hand.
Senior Mercadore, I know no reason why, because you have
dealt with me so ill,
Sure you did it not for need, but of set purpose and will:
And to bear with ye four or five days goes sore against my mind,
Least you should steal away, and forget to leave my money behind.
•ra heartily do 〈◊〉 no such ting my good friend a me,
Be me trot and fact meal pay you all every penny.
Isle take your faith and troth once more, &amp; trust to your honesty
In hope that for my long tarrying you will •eale well with me.
Tell me what good ware for England you do lack.
O no lack some pretty fine toy, or some fantastic new knack
For da Gentlewoman's in England buy mush tings for fantasy•
You pleasure a me sir, vat me mean a dare buy.
I understand you sir, but keep tutch with me, and isle bring
you to great store,
Such as I know you came to this country for
As Musk, •mber, sweet Powders, fine odors pleasant perfumes,
and many such toys,
Wherein I perceive consists that country Gentlewoman's joys.
Besides I have Diamonds, Rubies, Emerodes, Sapphires, Smara∣dines,
Opals Onacles, Iacynthes, Aggattes, Turkasir, and almost
of all kind of precious stones:
And many fit things to suck money from such greene headed wantons.
Fatta me good friend me tank you most heartily always,
Me shall a content your debt within dis two or tree day.
Well, see you hold your promise, and another tune you shall
command me.
Come, go we home, where our commodities you may at pleasure see,
New brooms, greene brooms, will you buy any,
Come maidens, come quickly, let me take a penny.
My brooms are not steeped,
but very well bound:
My brooms be not crooked,
out smooth cut and round.
I wish it should please you
to buy of my broom,
Then would it well case me,
if market were done.
Have you any •lt boots,
or any old shoes:
Pouch rings or Bu••ins,
to cope for new broom.
If so you have maidens,
I pray you bring hither:
Tha• you and I friendly
may •argen together.
New brooms, greene brooms, will you buy any:
Come Maidens, come quickly, let me take a penny.
Thus am I driven to make a virtue of necessity,
And seeing God almighty will have it so. I embrace it thankfully•
Desiring God to mollify and listen Usuries hard heart,
That the poor people feel not the like penury and smart:
But Usury to made tolerable amongst Christians as a necessary thing
So that going beyond the limits of our law, they extort, and many to
misery bring.
But if we should follow Gods law, we should not receive aboue that we
lend.
For if we lend for reward how can we say we are our neighbours fren••
O how blessed shall that man be that lends without abuse:
But thrice accursed shall he be that greatly covets use:
For he that covets over much insaciate is his mind,
So that to per•urie and cruelty he wholly is inclined:
Wherewith they sore oppress the poor, by divers sundry ways,
Which makes them cry unto the Lord to shorten cutthrotes days:
Paule calls them thieves that doth not give the needy of their store,
And thrice accursed are they that take one penny from the poor,
But while I stand reasoning thus I forget my market clean,
And sith God hath ordained this way, I am to use the mean,
Have ye any old shoes, or have ye any boots, have ye any bus•ins, or w••
ye buy any broom.
Who bargens or chops with Conscience, what will no customer come?
Who is it that cries brooms, what Conscience selling brooms
aboue the street?
What Usury, it is great pity thou art vnhanged yet.
Believe me Conscience, it grieves me thou art brought so low.
Believe me Usury it grieves me thou wast not hanged long ago
For if thou had been hanged before thou slowest Hospitality,
Thou had not made me and thousands more to feel the like poverty.
Me thought I heard one cry brooms along the door.
I mary Madam it was Conscience, who seems to be offended
at me very sore.
Alas Conscience art thou become a poor broom wife?
Alas Lucar, wilt thou continue a harlot all days of thy life?
Alas me thinks it is a grief to thee that thou art so poor.
Alas Lucar, me thinks it is no pain to thee that thou still
platest the whore.
Well well Conscience, that sharpe tongue of thine hath not been
thy furtherance.
If thou had kept thy tongue, thou had kept thy friend, and not have
had such hinderance.
But wottest thou who shall be married to morrow?
Love with my Dissimulation:
For I think to bid the guess, they are by this time well no gone,
And having occasion to buy brooms, I care not if I buy them all.
Then give me a shilling, and with a good will have them you
shall.
Usury, carry in these brooms, and give them to the maid.
For I know of such store she will be well apaid.
Hold Conscience, though thy brooms be not worth a quarter so much,
Yet to give thee a piece of gold I do it not grutch:
And if thou would follow my mind, thou should not live in such sort,
But pass thy days with pleasure store of every kind of sport.
I think you lead the world in a string, for every body follows
you,
And sith every one doth it, why may not I do it too:
For that I see your free heart▪ and great liberality,
I marvel not that all people are so willing to follow ye.
Then sweet soul, mark what I would have thee do for me,
That is to deck up thy poor Cottage handsomely:
And for that purpose I have five thousand crowns in store,
And when it is spent thou shalt have twice so much more.
But only see thy rooms be neat when I shall thither resort,
With familiar friends to pass the time in sport:
For the Deputy, Constable, and spiteful neighbours do spy, pry, and eye
about my house:
That I dare not be once merry within▪ but still mute like a mouse.
My good lady Lucar, I will fulfil your mind in every kind of
thing.
So that you shall be welcome at all hours, whosoever you bring.
And all the dogs in the town shall not bark at your doings I trow,
For your full pretence and intent I do thoroughly know,
Even so well as if you had opened the very secrets of your hart,
For which I doubt not but to rest in your favour by my desert.
But here comes your man Usury.
Isle send him home for the money.
Usury, steppe in and bring me the box of all abomination that stands
in the window:
It is little and round, painted with divers colours, and is pretty to the
show.
Madam, is there any superscription thereon?
Have I not told you the name: for shame get you gone.
Well my wench, I doubt not but our pleasures shall excel,
Seeing thou hast got a corner fit where few neighbours dwell,
And they be of the poorest sort which sits our turn so right:
Because they dare not speak against our sports and sweet delight,
And if they should (alas) their words would nought at all be weighed,
And for to speak before my face, they will be all afraid.
Madam, I deem this same be it, so far as I can guess.
Thou says the truth, tic it in deed, the outside shows no less.
But Usury I think Dissimulation hath not seen you since your co••∣ming
home.
therefore go see him, he will rejoice when to him you are shown,
It is a bussie time with him, help to further him if you can.
He may command me to attend at board to be his man.
Hold here my sweet, and then over to see what doth want,
the more I do behold this face, the more my mind doth daunt:
This face is of favour, these cheeks are reddy and white,
these lips are cherry red, and full of deep delight,
Quick rolling eyes, her temples high, and forehead white as snow,
Her eye-browes seemly set in frame, with dimpled chin below:
O how beauty hath adorned thee with every seemly hue,
In limbs, in looks, with all the rest proportion keeping due:
Sure I have not seen a finer soul in every kind of part,
I cannot choose but kiss thee with my lips, that love thee with my
heart.
I have told the crowns, and here are just so many as you to me
did say.
Then when thou wilt thou majesty depart, and homewards take
thy way,
And I pray thee make haste in decking of thy rome,
that I may find thy lodging fine, when with my friend I come.
Isle make speed, and where I have with brooms ofttimes been
roaming.
I mean henceforth not to be seen, but sit to watch your coming.
O how joyful may I be that such success doe find,
No marvel, for poverty and desire of Lucar do force them follow my
〈◊〉
Now may I rejoice in full contentation,
That shall marry Love with Dissimulation:
And have spotted Conscience with all abomination,
But I forget my self, for I must to the wedding,
Both vauntingly and flauntingly, although I had no bidding.
Sir, although you be my moister, I would not have you to up∣brayd
my name,
But I would have you use the right skill and title of the same:
For my name is neither scoggin nor scragging, but ancient Coggin:
Sir my ancestors were five of the four worthies,
And your self are of my near kin.
Indeed thou says true, for Coggin is a kinsman to Dissimu∣lotion.
But tell me have you taken the names of the guests?
Yea sir.
Let me hear after what fashion.
There is first and foremost moister Forgery, and master Flattery
Moister Perjury, and moister Injury:
Moister Cruelty, and moister Pickerie, moister Bribery, and moister
Treachery:
Moister Wink at wrong, and moister Headstrong, mistress privy theft,
and moister deep Deceit, moister Abomination, and mistress Forni∣cation
his wife, Fardinando false-waight, and Frissit false-measure
his wife.
Stay, Fornication &amp; Frissit false-measure are often familiar
with my Lady Lucar, and one of them she accounts her friend:
Therefore they shall sit with the bride in the midst, and the men a•
each end:
Let me see, there are sixteen, even as many as well near is able:
to dine in the summer parlour at the playing table:
Beside my fellow Fraud, and you fellow Symonie,
But I shall have a great miss of my fellow Usury.
Take no care for that, he came home yesterday even no longer,
His pardon was quickly begged, and that by a Courtier.
And sir, since he came he had like to have slain good neighbourhood and
liberality,
Had not true friendship stepped between them very suddenly:
But sir, he hit true friendship such a blow on the ear,
That he keeps out of all men's sight, for shame or for fear.
Now of my troth it is a pretty jest, hath he made true friend∣ship
hide his head?
Sure if it be so, good neighbourhood and liberality for fear are fled.
But fellow Dissimulation tel me, what Priest shall marry ye?
Mary that shall an old friend of mine M. Doctor Hypocrisy.
Why will you not have sir Peter Pleasman to supply that want?
Indeed sir peter is a good Priest, but Doctor Hypocrisy is
most ancient.
But 〈◊〉 Eoggin, I pray you go to inuit the guess,
And tell them that they need not disturb their quietness:
Desire them to come at dinner time, and it shall suffice.
•ecause I know they will be loath so early to rise.
But at any hand will Doctor Hypocrisy,
That he meet vs at the Church very early:
For I would not have all the world to wonder at our match.
It is an old proverb, tic good having a hatch before the door, but isle
have a door before the hatch.
Sir, I will about it as fast as I can hie,
Isle first to that scald bald knave Doctor Hypocrisy.
But fellow Dissimulation, how dare thou marry with Love,
bearing no love at all?
For thou doest nothing but dissemble, then thy love must needs be
small.
Thou can not love but from the teeth forward,
Sure the wife that marries thee shall highly be prefard.
Tush tush, you are a merry man, I warrant I know what I 〈◊〉
And can yield a good reason for it I may say unto you.
What and if the world should change, and run all on her side?
Then might I by her means still in good credit abide.
Thou know Love is ancient, and lives peaceably without any
strifs,
Then sure the people will think well of me because she is my wife.
Trust me thou art as crafty to have an eye to the maine chance,
As the taylor that out of seven yards stole one and a halt of durance.
He served at that inn she devil in the likeness of S. Ratherme,
Such Taylors will thrive, that out of a doublet and a pair of hose can
steal their wise an Aporn•.
The Doublet sleeve three fingers were too short,
The Uene•ians came nothing near the knee.
Then for to make them long enough I pray thee what did
hee?
Two pieces set an handful broad to lengthen them withal,
Yet for all that be••w the knee by no means they could fall.
He seeing that, desired the party to buy as much to make another pair,
The party did, yet for all that he stole a quarter there.
Now 〈◊〉 I can him thank, he could his occupation:
My fellow Fraud would laugh to hear one dressed of such a fashion,
But fellow Symonie, I thank you heartily for comparing the Taylor
to me,
As who should say his knavery and my policy did agree.
Not so, but i was the willinger to tell thee, because I know it
to be a true tale,
And to see how Artificers do extol Fraud, by whom they bear their
sale.
But come let vs walk, and talk no more of this,
Your policy was very good, and so no doubt was his.
Senior Mercadore, why do you not pay me? think you I
will be mocked in this sort?
This is three times you have flouted me, it seems you make thereat
a sport.
Truly pay me my money and that even now presently,
Or by mighty Mahomet I swear, I will forthwith arrest ye.
Ha pray a bear wit me tree or four days, me have much bu∣sinesse
in hand.
Me be troubled wit letters you see here dat comes from England.
Tush this is not my matter, I have nothing therewith to do,
Pay me my money or isle make you, before to your lodging you go.
I have officers stand watching for you, so that you cannot pass by,
Therefore you were best to pay me, or else in prison you shall lie.
Arrest me dou s•al knave, mary do if dou dare,
Me will not pay de one penny, arrest me, doo, me do not care,
Me will be a Turk, me came header for dat cause,
Therefore me care not for de so much as two straws.
This is but your words, because you would defeat me,
I cannot think you will forsake your faith so lightly.
But seeing you drive me to doubt, isle try your honesty:
Therefore be sure of this, isle go about it presently.
Mary farewell and be hanged, sat seal drunken Jew,
I warrant ye me shall be able very vell to pay you.
My Lady Lucar have sent me here dis letter,
Praying me to cousin de Jew for love a her.
Therefore meal go to get a some Turks apparel.
Dat me may cousin da Jew, and end dis quarrel.
To the wedding, to the wedding, to the wedding go we,
To the wedding a begging, a begging all three.
TOm Beggar shall brave it, and wily Will too,
Simplicity shall knave it where ever we go:
With lustily Bravado, take care that care will,
To catch it, and snatch it, we have the brave skill.
Oar fingers are lime-twigges, and Barbers we be,
To catch shears from hedges most pleasant to see:
Then to the Ilewife roundly we set them to sale,
And spend the money merrily upon her good ale.
To the wedding, to the wedding, to the wedding go we,
To the wedding a begging, a begging all three.
Now truly my masters, of all occupations under the sun, beg∣ging
is the best,
For when a man is weary, then may he lay him down to rest.
Tell me, is it not a Lords life in s•mmer to louse one under a hedge,
And then leaving that game, may go clepe and coll his Madge?
Or else may walk to take the wholesome ayre abroad for his delight,
Where he may tumble on the grass, have sweet smells, and see mame a
pretty sight.
Why, an Emperor for all his wealth can have but his pleasure,
And surely I would not loose my charter of liberty, for all the Kings
treasure.
Shall I tell thee Tom Beggar, by the faith of a Gentleman,
this ancient freedom I would not forgo,
If I might have whole mines of money at my will to bestow.
Then a mans mind should be troubled to keep that he had,
And you know it were not for me, it would make my valiant mind mad.
For now we neither pay Church money, subsidies, fifteens, scot nor lot,
All the payings we par, is to pay the good ale pot.
But fellow beggars you cousin me, &amp; take away at the best meat.
And leave me nothing but browne bread, or sin of fish to eat.
When you be at the alehouse, you drink up the strong ale, and give me
small bear:
You tell me tic better than the strong, to make me sing clear.
Indeed you know with my singing I get twice as much as ye,
But and you serve me so you shall sing your selves, and beg alone for me.
We stand prating here, come let vs go to the gate,
Mas I am greatly afraid we are come somewhat too late,
Good gentle M. Porter, your reward so bestw,
On a poor lame man, that hath but a patre of legs to go.
For Gods sake good mas Porter, give somewhat to the blind,
that the way to the Alehouse in his sleep cannot find.
For the good Lords sake take compassion on the poor.
How now sirs, you are vengeance hasty, can ye not tarri••
But stand •auling so at my Ladies door.
Here take it amongst you, yet it were a good alms deed to give you
nothing.
Because you were so hasty and kept such a calling.
I beseech yt not so sir, for we are very hungry,
that made vs so earnest, but we are sorry we troubled ye.
look how greedy they be, like dogs that fall a snatching,
You shall see that I shall have the greatest alms, because I said nothing
Fraud knows me, therefore heal be my friend I am sure of that:
they have nothing but lean beef, ye shall see I shall have a piece thats
fat.
Moister Fraud you have forgot me pray ye let me have my share,
Faith all is gone, thou come too late, thou see al is given there
By the faith of a Gentleman I have it not, I would I were able to
give thee more.
O sir, I saw your arms hang out at a stable door.
Indeed my arms are at the Painters, belike he hung them out to dry
I pray thee tell me what they were, if thou can them descry.
Mary there was never a scutchin, but there was 2 trees rampant
And then over them lay a sower tree percent,
With a man like you in a greene field pendant,
Having a hempten halter about his neck, with a knot under the left
ear, because you are a younger brother.
Then sir, there stands on each hand holding up the crease,
I worthy Oct•ers hand in a dish of grease:
Besides all this, on the helmet stands the hangmans hand,
Ready to turn the Ladder whereon your picture did stand:
Then under the helmet hung tables like chains, and for what they are
I cannot devise.
Except it be to make you hang fast, that the crows might pick out
your eyes.
What a swad is this? I had been better to have sent him to
the back door,
to have gotten some alms amongst the rest of the poor.
Thou praist thou can not tell what, or else art not well in thy wit,
I am sure my arms are not blast so far abroad as yet.
O yes sir, your arms were known a great while ago,
For your elder brother Deceit did give those arms too,
Mary the difference is all, which is the knot under the left ear.
the Painter says when he is hanged, you may put out the knot without
fear.
I am sure they were your arms, for there was written in Roman
letters round about the hempten collar,
Given by the worthy valiant Captain moister Fraud the O••lar.
Now God be with ye sir, isle get me even close to the back door.
Farewell Com beggar, and wily Will, lle beg with you no more.
O farewell Simplicity, we art very loath to lose thy company.
Now he to gone give care to me. You seem to be sound men in
every joint and him.
And can ye live in this sort to •o up and down the country a begging?
O base minds I trow, I had rather hack it out by the high way side,
Than such misery and pen•rye still to abide.
Sirs, if you will be rue•de by me, and do what I shall say,
Isle bring ye where we shall have a notable fine pray.
It is so sirs, that merchant, one Market•rus, is coming from Turkey
And it is my Ladies pleasure that he robbed should be,
She hath sworn that we shall be all sharers alike,
And upon that willed me some such companions as you be to seek.
O worthy Captain Fraud, you have wo•no my noble hart:
You shall see how manfully I can play my part.
And here is wily Will, as good a fellow as your heart can wish,
To go a fishing with a crank through a window, or to set lime twigs
to catch a pan, pot, or dish.
He says true for I tell you I am one that will not give back,
Not for a double shot out of a black Jack.
O sir, you bring vs a bed when ye talk of this gear,
Come, shall we go worthy Captain? I long till we be there.
I, let vs about it, to provide our weapons ready,
And when the time serves, I my self will conduct ye.
O valiantly spoken, come wily Will, two pots of ale wele bestow
On our Captain courageously for a parting blow.
Sir Gerontus, because you are the palinti•e, you first your mind
shall say,
Declare the cause you did arrest this merchant yesterday.
Then learned Judge attend; this Mercadorus, whom you
see in place,
Did borrow two thousand ducats of me, but for a five weeks space.
Then sir, before the day came, by his flattery he obtained one thousand
more,
And promised me at two months end I should receive my store:
But before the time expired, he ws closely fled away,
So that I never heard of him, at least this two years day,
till at the last I met with him, and did the money did demand,
Who swear to me at five days end he would pay me out of hand.
The five days came, and three days more, then one day he requested:
I perceiving that he flouted me, have got him thus arrested:
And now he comes in Turkish weeds to defeat me of my money,
But I trow he will not forsake his faith, I deem he hath more honesty.
Sir Gerontus you know, if any man forsake his faith, King,
country, and become a Mahomet.
All debts are paid, tic the law of our Realm, and you may not gain∣say
it.
most true (reverend judge) we may not, nor i will not against
our Laws grudge.
Semo: Mercadorus is this true that Gerontus doth tell?
My Lord judge, de matter, and circumstance be true me know well.
But me will be a Turk, and for dat cause me came here.
Then it is but a folly to make many words. Senior Mercado∣rus
draw near.
Lay your hand on this book, and say after me.
With a good will my Lord judge, me be all ready.
Not for any devotion, but for Lucars sake of my money.
Say I Mercadorus doo utterly renounce before all the world,
my duty to my Prince, my honour to my parents, and my good will to
my country.
Furthermore I protest and swear to be true to this country
during life, and thereupon I forsake my Christian faith.
Stay there most puissant judge. Senior mercadorus, consider
what you d••,
Pay me the principal, as for the interest, I forgive it you:
And yet the interest is allowed amongst you Christians, as well as in
Turkey
Therefore respect your faith, and do not seem to deceive me.
No point da interest, no point da principal.
Then pay me the one half, if you will not pay me all.
No point da half, no point denere, me will be a Turk I say,
me be weary of my Christs religion, and for dat me come away.
Well seeing it is so, I would be loath to hear the people say, it
was long of me
Thou forsakest thy saith, wherefore I forgive thee frank and free:
Protesting before the judge, and all the world, never to demand penny
nor halfepeny.
O sir Gerontus, me take a your prosser, and tank you most
heartily.
But •eneor mercadorus, I trow ye will be a Turk for all this.
Senior no, not for all da god in da world, me forsake a my Christ.
Why then it is as sir Gerontus said, you did more for the gre∣dines
of the money.
Then for any zeal or good will you bare to Turkey.
Oh sir, you make a great offence,
You must not judge a my conscience.
One may judge and speak truth, as appears by this,
Jaws seek to excel in Christianity, &amp; Christians in Iewishnes.
Uell vell, but me tank you sir Gerontus wit all my very hart.
Much good may it do you sir, I repent it not for my part.
But yet I would not have this holden you to serve another so,
Seek to pay &amp; keep day with men so a good name on you will go.
You say vel sir, it dus•• good dat me have coosend de Jew,
Faith I would my lady Lucar de whole matter now knew.
Uat is dat me well not do for her sweet sake,
But now me will p••uide my journey toward England to take.
Me be a Turk, no, it will make my lady Lucar to sin•e,
When she knows how me did da scale Jew beguile.
Mistress Love, I marvel not a little what •oy conceit is crept
into your head,
that you seem so sad and sorrowful since the time you first did wed,
tell me sweet wench what thou ails, and if I can ease thy grief,
I will be pressed to pleasure thee in yielding of relief.
Sure thou make me for to think somewhat hath chanced amiss.
I pray thee tell me what thou ails, and what the matter is.
My grief alas I shame to show, because my bad intent
Hath brought on me a just reward, and eke a strange event.
Shall I be counted Love, nay rather lascivious Lust,
Because unto Dissimulation I did repose such trust?
But now i moan too late, and blush my hap to tell,
My head in monstrous sort alas, doth more and more still swell.
Is your head then swollen good mistress Love, I pray you let 〈◊〉
see.
Of truth it is behold a face that seems to smile on me:
It is fair and well favoured, with a countenance smooth and good,
Wonder is the worst, to see two faces in a hood.
Come lets go, wele find some sports to spurn away such toys,
Were it not for lucar, sure Love had lost her joys,
Why, but must I be whipped moister Constable indeed?
You may save your labour, for I have no need.
I must needs see thee punished, there is no remedy,
Except thou wilt confess, and tell me.
Where thy fellows are become that did the robbery.
Indeed moister Constable, I do not know of their ••ealing.
For I did not see them since we went together a begging:
Therefore pray ye sir be miserable to me, and let me go,
For I labour to get my living with begging you know.
Thou wast seen in their company a little before the deed was
done.
therefore it is most likely thou know where they are become.
Why moister Constable, if a sheep go among wolves all day.
Shall the sheep be blamed if they s•eale any thing away?
Yea mary shall he, for it is a great presumption,
that keeping them company, he is of like profession.
But dispatch sirs, strip him, and whip him:
Stand not to reason the question.
Indeed it was fraud so it was, it was not I,
And here he comes himself, ask him if I lie.
What says thou villain? I would advise thee hold thy tongue.
I know him to be a wealthy man, and a Burgess of the town.
Sir, and it please your mastership, here is one •aunders you with 〈◊〉
He saith you were the chief doer of a robbery.
What says the rascal? but you know,
It stands not with my credit to brawl:
But good moister Constalbe for his slanderous report,
Pay him double, and in as great a matter command me you shall.
M. Constable, must the countnance carry out the knave,
Why then if one will face folks out, some fine repar•meant he must have.
Come sir sack sauce: make quick dispatch at once,
You shall see how finely we will fetch the skin from your bones.
Nay but tell me be you both right handed or no?
What is that to thee, why would thou so same know?
Mary if you should both be right handed, the one would hind•
the other,
then it would not be done finely according to order:
For if you whip me not with credit it is not worth a pin,
therefore I pray you M. Constable, let me be whipped on the skin.
Whereon dost thou think they would whip thee I pray thee de∣clare?
that thou put vs in mind, and take so great care.
I was afraid you would have worn out my clothe• with whip∣ping,
then afterword I should go naked a begging.
Have no doubt of that, we will savour thy clothes,
Thou shalt judge that thy self, by feeling the blows.
Serviceable Diligence, bring hither such prisoners as are in
your custody.
My diligence shall be applied very willingly.
Pleases it you, there are but three prisoners so far as I know,
which are Lucar and Conscience, with a deformed creature much like
Bi••once the base daughter of Iuno.
Nor where is that wretch Dissimulation?
He hath transformed himself after a strange fashion.
Fraud: where is he become?
He was seen in the streets walking in a Citizens gown.
What is become of Usury?
He was seen at the Exchange very lately.
Tell me, when you heard of Simony?
He was seen this day walking in Paules, having conference &amp;
very great familiarity with some of the Clergy.
Fetch Lucar and Conscience to the Bar.
Behold worthy judge, here ready they are.
Stand forth: Diligence divide them a sunder.
Lucar, thou art indicted by the name of Lucar,
To have committed adultery with mercadorus the merchant, and Cre∣ticus
the Lawyer.
Thou art also indicted for the robbery of mercadore.
Lastly, and chiefly, for the consenting to the murder of Hospitality.
What says thou, art thou guilty or not in these causes?
Not guilty, where are mine accusers, they may shame to show
their faces?
I warrant you none comes, nor dare to discredit my name:
In despite of the teeth of them that dare: I speak in disdain.
Impudent, can thou deny deeds so manifestly known.
In denial stands trial: I shame not, let them be shown,
It grinds my gall, they should slander me on this sort:
they are some old cankered currish corrupt Carlos that gave me this report.
My soul craves revenge on such my sacred foes,
And revengement I will have, if body and soul I lose.
Thy hateful heart declares thy wicked life,
In the abundance of thy abomination all evils are rife:
But what says thou Conscience to thy accusation
that art accused to have been hawde unto Lucar, and spotted with all
abomination.
What should I say, nay what would I say in this our naughty
living.
Good Conscience if thou love me say nothing.
Diligence, suffer her not to stand prating.
What letter is that in thy bosom Conscience? Diligence reach
it hither.
Conscience speak on, let me heart what thou can say,
For I know in singleness thou wilt a truth bewray.
My good Lord I have no way to excuse my self,
She hath corrupted me by flattery, and her accursed •elf:
What need further trial, sith I Conscience am a thousand witnesses,
I cannot choose but condemn vs all in living amiss
Such terror doth affright me, that living, I wish to die:
I am afraid there is no spark left for me of Gods mercy.
Conscience where had thou this letter?
It was put into my bosom by Lucar:
Willing me to keep secret our lascivious living,
I cannot but condemn vs all in this thing.
How now malapert stand you still in defence or no?
This letter declares thy guilty Conscience, how says thou is it not for
Tell me, why stand thou in a maze? speak quickly:
Had thou thy tongue so liberal, and now stand to study?
O Conscience thou hast kilt me, by thee I am overthrown.
It is happy that by Conscience thy abomination is known,
Wherefore I pronounce judgment against thee on this wise:
Thou shalt pass to the place of darkness, where thou shalt hear fear∣full
cries.
Weeping, wailing, gnashing of teeth, and torment without end,
Burning in the lake of fire and brunstone because thou can not amend:
Wherefore Diligence convey her hence, throw her down to the lowest
hell,
Where the infernal sprites and damned ghosts do dwell.
And bring forth Love.
Declare that cause Conscience at large, how thou con••est so spotted,
Whereby many by thee hath been greatly infected:
For under the colour of Conscience thou deceiuedst many,
Causing them to defile the temple of God, which is mans body:
A clean conscience is a sacrifice: Gods own resting place,
Why wast thou then corrupted so, and spotted on thy face?
When Hospitality had his throat cut up Usury,
He oppressed me with cruelty, and brought me to beggary:
Turning me out of house and home, and in the end,
my gown to pait my rent, to him I did send;
So driven to that extremity, I have fallen to that you see,
Yet after judgment I hope of Gods mercy.
O Conscience, shall cankered quam corrupt thy heart?
Or shall want in this world cause thee to feel everlasting sma•t
O Conscience what a small time thou hast on earth to live,
why doest thou not then, to God all honour give?
Considering the time is everlasting that thou shalt live in bliss,
If by thy life thou rise from death, to judgment mercy, and forgiveness.
Stand aside Conscience, bring Love to the bar.
What says thou to thy deformity, who was the cause?
Lady Lucar.
Did Lucar choke thee so, that thou gave thy self over to lust?
And did prodigal expenses cause thee in Dissimulation to trust?
Thou wast pure Love, and art thou become a monster,
Bolstring thy self upon the lasciviousness of Lucar?
Love answer for thy self, speak in thy defence.
I cannot choose but yield, confounded by Conscience.
Then judgment I pronounce on thee, because thou followed
Lucar,
Whereby thou hast sold thy soul to feel like torment with her,
Which torments comprehended are in the worm of Conscience,
who raging still, shall ne'er have end, a plague for thine offence,
Care shall be thy comfort, and sorrow shall thy life sustain,
thou shalt be dying, yet never dead, but pining still in endless pain.
Diligence convey her to Lucar, let that be her reward,
Because unto her cankered coin she gave her whole regard.
But as for Conscience, carry her to prison,
there to remain until the day of general session:
Thus we make an end,
Knowing that the best of vs all may amend:
UUhich God grant to his good will and pleasure,
That we be not corrupted with the unsatiate desire of vanishing earthly
treasure:
For Covetousness is the cause of wresting mans Conscience,
Therefore restrain thy lust, and thou shalt shun the offence.

