Our Poet slumbering in the Muses laps,
Hath seen a Woman seated in the Moon,
A point beyond the ancient Theoric:
And as it was so he presents his dream.
Here in the bounds of fair Utopia,
Where lovely Nature being only Queen,
Bestows such workmanship on earthly mould:
That Heavens themselves envy her glorious work.
But all in vain: for (malice being spent)
They yield themselves to follow Natures doom,
And fair Pandora sits in Cynthias orb.
This but the shadow of our Authors dream,
Argues the substance to be near at hand:
At whose appearance I most humbly crave,
That in your forehead she may read content.
If many faults escape in her discourse,
Remember all is but a Poets dream,
The first he had in Phoebus holy bower,
But not the last, unless the first displease.
NAture descends from far aboue the spheres,
To frolic here in fair Utopia,
VVheremy chief works do flourish in their prime,
And wanton in their first simplicity.
Here I survey the pictured firmament,
With hurtles flames in concave of the Moon,
The liquid substance of the welkins waste:
Where moystures treasury is clouded up,
The mutual Jointer of all swelling seas,
And all the creatures which their waives contain,
Lastly the rundle of this Massive earth,
From utmost face unto the Centers point,
All these, and all their endless circumstance,
Here I survey, and glory in my self.
But what means Discord so to knit the brows,
With sorrows cloud eclipsing our delights?
It grieves my hart, that still in every work,
My fellow Concorde frustrates my desire,
When I to perfect up some wondrous deed,
Do bring forth good and bad, or light and dark,
Pleasant and sad, mooing and fixed things,
Frail and immortal, or like contraries:
She with her hand vnites them all in one,
And so makes void the end of mine attempt.
I tell thee Discord while you twain attend
On Natures train, your work must prove but one,
And in your selves though you be different,
Yet in my service must you well agree.
For Nature works her will from contraries,
But see where our Utopian Shepherds come.
Thou Sovereign Queen and Author of the world,
Of all that was, or is, or shall be framed.
To finish up the heap of thy great gifts,
Vouchsafe thy simple servants one request.
Stand up, and tell the sum of your desire,
The boon were great that Nature would not grant:
It ever was and shall be still my joy,
With wholesome gifts to bless my workmanship.
We crave fair goddess at thy heavenly hands,
To have as every other creature hath,
A sure and certain means among our selves,
To propagate the issue of our kind:
As it were comfort to our sole estate,
So were it ease unto thy working hand.
Each Fish that swims in the floating sea,
Each winged foul that soars in the ayre,
And every beast that feeds on the ground,
Have mates of pleasure to uphold their brood:
But thy Utopians, poor and simple men,
As yet bewail their want of female sex.
A female shall you have my lovely swains,
Like to your selves, but of a purer mold:
Mean while go hence, and tend your tender flocks,
And when I send her, see you hold her dear. 
Now Virgins put your hands to holy work,
That we may frame new wonders to the world. 
When I arrayed this lifeless Image thus,
It was decreed in my deep providence,
To make it such as our Utopians crave,
A mirror of the earth, and heavens despite,
The matter first when it was void of form,
Was purest water, earth, and ayre, and fire,
And when I shaped it in a matchlesle mould,
(Whereof the like was never seen before)
It grew to this impression that you see,
And wants nothing now but life and soul.
But life and soul I shall inspire from heaven.
So hold it fast, till with my quickening breath,
I kindle inward seeds of sense and mind.
Now fire be turned to choler, ayre to blood,
Water to humour purer then it self,
And earth to flesh more clear then Crystal rock.
And Discord stand aloof, that Consorts hands,
May join the spirit with the flesh in league. 
Now do I feel how life and inward sense,
Imparts motion unto every limb.
Then let her stand or move or walk alone. 
Herein hath Nature gone beyond her self,
And heaven will grudge at beauty of the earth,
When it espies a second son below.
Now every part performs her functions dew,
Except the tongue whose strings are yet entire.
Discord, vnlose her tongue, to serve her turn,
For in distress that must be her defence:
And from that root will many mischiefs grow,
If once she spot her state of innocence. 
Hail heavenly Queen, the author of all good,
Whose will hath wrought in me the fruits of life,
And filled me with an understanding soul,
To know the difference twixt good and bad. 
I make thee for a solace unto men,
And see thou follow our commanding will.
Now art thou Natures glory and delight,
Compact of every heavenly excellence:
Thou art indowd with Saturns deep conceit???
Thy mind as hawte as Iupiters high thoughts,
Thy stomach Lion-like, like Mauors hart,
Thine eyes bright beamde, like Sol in his array,
Thy cheeks more fair, then are fair Uenus cheeks,
Thy tongue more eloquent then Mercuries,
Thy forehead whiter then the silver Moons:
Thus have I robbed the Planets for thy sake.
Besides all this, thou hast proud Iunoes arms,
Auroraes hands, and lovely Thetis foot:
Use all these well, and Nature is thy friend,
But use them ill, and Nature is thy foe.
Now that thy name may suite thy qualities,
I give to thee Pandora for thy name.
What creature have we here? a new found gawde?
A second man, less perfect then the first?
A woman this forsooth, but made in hast,
To rob vs Planets of our ornaments.
Is this the Saint, that steals my Iunoes arms?
Mine eyes? then govern thou my daylight carre.
My cheeks? then Cupped be at thy command.
My tongue? thou pretty Parrot speak a while,
My forehead? then fair Cynthia shine by night,
What foul contempt is this you Planets use???
Against the glory of my words and work?
It was my will, and that shall stand for law,
And she is framed to darken all your prides.
Ordained not I your motions, and your selves?
And dare you check the author of your lives?
Were not your lights contriude in Natures shop?
But I have means to end what I begun.
And make Death triumph in your lives decay:
If thus you cross the mead of my deserts,
Be sure I will dissolve your harmony,
When once you touche the fixed period:
Mean while I leave my worthy workmanship???
Here to obscure the pride of your disdain. 
Then in revenge of Nature and her work,
Let vs conclude to show our Empery:
And bend our forces against this earthly star.
Each one in course shall signorize awhile,
That she may feel the influence of her beams,
And rue that she was formed in our despite:
My turn is first, and Saturn will begin. 
And Isle begin where Saturn makes an end,
And when I end, then Mars shall tyrrannize,
And after Mars then Sol shall marshall her.
And after Sol each other in his course:
Come let vs go, that Saturn may begin.
I shall instill such melancholy mood,
As by corrupting of her purest blood,
Shall first with sullen sorrows cloud her brain,
And then surround her heart with froward care:
She shall be sick with passions of the hart,
Selfwild, and toungtide, but full fraught with tears??? 
Gracious Pandora: Nature thy good friend
Hath sent Gunophilus to waite on thee,
For honours due that appertains her will,
And for the graces of thy lovely self,
Gunophilus will serve in humble sort,
And is resolved to live and die with thee.
If Nature wild, then do attend on me,
But little service have I to command,
If I my self might choose my kind of life,
Nor thou, nor any else should stay with me,
I find my self unfit for company.
How so fair Mistress in your flouring youth,
When pleasures joy should sit in every thought?
Avaunt sir sauce, play you the Question?
VVhats that to thee, if I be sick or sad?
Either demean thy self in better sort,
Or get thee hence and serve some other where.
A sour beginning: but no remedy,
Nature hath bound me, and I must obey:
I see that servants must have Merchants ears,
To bear the blast and brunt of every wind.
What throbs are these that labour in my breast?
What swelling clouds, that overcast my brain?
I burst, unless by tears they turn to rain.
I grudge and grieve, but know not well whereat:
And rather choose to weep then speak my mind,
For fretful sorrow captivates my tongue. 
See where she sits, in whom we must delight,
Beware she sleeps: no noise for waking her.
A sleep? why see how her alluring eyes,
With open looks do glance on every side.
O eyes more fair then is the morning star.
Nature her self is not so lovely fair.
Let vs with reverence kiss her Lilly hands, 
And by deserts in service win her love.
Sweet Dame, if Stesias may content thine eye,
Command my Neat, my flock, and tender Kids:
Whereof great store do overspread our plains,
Grant me sweet Mistress but to kiss thy hand. 
No Stesias no, Learchus is the man:
Thou mirror of Dame Natures cunning work,
Let me but hold thee by that sacred hand???
And I shall make thee our Utopian Queen,
And set a gilded Chapplet on thy head,
That Nymphs and Satyrs may admire thy pomp. 
These twain and I have fortunes all alike.
Sweet Natures pride, let me but see thy hand,
And servant like, shall Melos waite on thee:
And bear thy train: as in the glorious heavens,
Perseus supports his love Andromeda:
Whose thirty stars, whether they rise or fall.
He falls or rises, hanging at her heals. 
O then to bless the love of Iphicles,
Whose heart doth hold thee dearer then himself???
Do but behold me with a loving look,
And I will lead thee in our solemn dance,
Teaching thee tunes, and pleasant lays of love. 
No kiss? nor touche? nor friendly look?
What churlish influence deprives her mind?
For Nature said, that she was innocent,
And fully fraught with virtuous qualities:
But speak sweet love: thou can not speak but well.
She is not tongue tide, that I know by proof.
Speak once Pandora to thy loving friends.
Rude knaves, what mean you thus to trouble me?
She spake to you my masters, I am none of your company.
Alas she weeping sounds: Gunophilus
O help to rear thy Mistress from the ground.
This is the very passion of the heart,
And melancholy is the ground thereof.
O then to sift that humour from her heart,
Let vs with Rundelayes delight her ear:
For I have heard that Music is a mean,
To calm the rage of melancholy mood. 
What songs? what pipes? &amp; fiddling have we here?
Will you not suffer me to take my rest? 
What shall we do to vanquish her disease?
The death of that were life to our desires:
But let vs go, we must not leave her thus. 
Saturn hath laid foundation to the rest:
Whereon to build the ruin of this dame:
And spot her innocence with vicious thoughts,
My turn is past, and Iupiter is next. 
A Jove principium, sunt &amp; Iouis omnia plane.
Now Iupiter shall rule Pandoraes thoughts,
And fill her with Ambition and Disdain:
I will enforce my influence to the worst,
Least other Planets blame my regiment.
Though rancor now be rooted from my hart???
I feel it burdened in an other sort:
By day I think of nothing but of rule,
By night my dreams are all of Empery.
Mine ears delight to hear of Soueraingtie,
My tongue desires to speak of princely sway,
My eye would every object were a crown.
Dane was fair, and Laeda pleased me well,
Lovely Calisco set my hart on fire:
And in mine eye Europe was a gem,
But in the beauty of this Paragon,
Dame Nature far hath gone beyond her self,
And in this one are all my loves contained.
And come what can come, Iupiter shall prove,
If fair Pandora will accept his love:
But first I must discuss this heavenly cloud:
That hydes me from the sight of mortal eyes.
Behold Pandora where thy lover sits,
High Jove himself, who ravished with thy blaze,
Receives more influence then he powers on thee???
And humbly sues for succour at thy hands.
Why what art thou? more then Vtopian swains?
The king of Gods, one of immortal race,
And he that with a beck controls the heavens.
Why then Pandora doth exceed the heavens,
Who neither fears nor loves Iupiter.
Thy beauty will excuse what ere thou say,
And in thy looks thy words are priuiledgd.
But if Pandora did conceive those gifts,
That Jove can give, she would esteem his love,
For I can make thee Empress of the world,
And seat thee in the glorious firmament.
The words of Empress and of firmament,
More please mine ears then Iupiter mine eyes:
Yet if thy love be like to thy protest:
Give me thy golden sceptre in my hand.
But not as purchase of my precious love,
For that is more then heaven it self is worth.
There, hold the sceptre of Eternal Jove,
But let not Majesty increase thy pride.
What lack I now but an imperial throne,
And Ariadnaes star-lyght Diadem.
False periurd Iupiter and full of guile,
Are these the fruits of thy new government??????
Is Iunoes beauty and thy wedlock vow,
And all my kindness trodden under foot?
Wast not enough to fancy such a trull.
But thou must yield thy sceptet to her hand?
I thought that Ganimede had wened thy hart,
From lawless lust of any women's love:
But well I see that every time thou strayest,
Thy lust but looks for strumpet stars below.
Why know, Pandora scorns both Jove and thee,
And there she lays his sceptre on the ground.
This shall with me to our Celestial court,
Where gods (fond Iupiter) shall see thy shame:
And laugh at Love for tainting Majesty,
And when you please, you will repair to vs,
But as for thee, thou shameless counterfeit:
Thy pride shall quickly loose her painted plumes,
And feel the heavy weight of Iunoes wrath. 
Let Iuno fret, and move the powers of heaven,
Yet in her self Pandora stands secure:
Am I not Natures darling and his pride?
Hath she not spent her treasure all on me?
Yet be thou wise (I counsel thee for love)
And fear displeasure at a goddess hand.
I tell thee Iupiter, Pandoras worth
Is far exceeding all your goddesses:
And since in her thou dost obscure my praise,
Here (to be short) I do abjure thy love.
I may not blame thee for my beams are cause,
Of all this insolence and proud disdain:
But to prevent a second raging storm,
If jealous Iuno should by chance return,
Here ends my love: Pandora now farewell. 
And art thou clouded up? fare as thou list,
Pandoraes hart shall never stoop to Jove:
Gunophilus, base vassal as thou art,
How haps when Iuno was in presence here,
Thou did not honour me with kneel and crouch,
And lay thy hands under my precious foot? 
To make her know the height of my desert.
Base peasant, humbly watch my stately looks,
And yield applause to every word I speak:
Or from my service Isle discarde thee quite. 
Fair and dread Sovereign, Lady of the world,
Even then when jealous Iuno was in place:
As I behold the glory of thy face,
My feeble eyes admiring majesty,
Did sink into my hart such holly fear,
That very fear amazing every sense,
VVithheld my tongue from saying what I would:
And freest my joints from bowing when they should.
I now Gunophilus thou please me,
These words and curses prove thee dutiful.
Now Stesias speak.
Learchus, plead for love.
Now Cyprian Queen, guitar of loving thoughts, Help Iphicles.
Melos must speed, or dye.
Whether now my masters in such post hast?
Her excellence is not at leisure now.
O sweet Gunophilus further our attempts.
And we shall make thee rich with our rewards.
Stay here until I know her further pleasure:
Stesias &amp; his felows humbly crave access to your excel??ce.
I now thou fittest my humour: Let them come.
Come on masters.
Tel on my dear, when comes that happy hour,
Whereon thy love shall guerdon my desire.
How long shall sorrows winter pinch my hart?
And luke warm hopes be child with freezing fear,
Before my suite obtain thy sweet consent?
How long shall death, encroaching by delays,
A bridge the course of my decaying life:
Before Pandora love poor Iphicles?
How long shall cares cut off my flowering prime,
Before the harvest of my love be in?
O speak sweet love.
Some gentle words sweet love.
O let thy tongue first salve Learchus wound,
That first was made with those immortal eyes
The only promise of thy future love,
Will drown the secret heaps of my despair,
In endless Ocean of expected joys.
Although my breast, yet never harboured love,
Yet should my bounty free your servitude:
If love might well consort our Majesty,
And not debase our matchless dignity.
Sweet honey words, but saw with bitter gaul.
They draw me on, and yet they put me back.
They hold me up, and yet they let me fall.
They give me life, and yet they let me dye.
But as thou wilt, so give me sweet or sour:
For in thy pleasure must be my content.
Whether thou draw me on, or put me back,
I must admire thy beauties wilderness.
And as thou wilt, so let me stand or fall:
Love hath decreed thy word must govern me.
And as thou wilt, so let me live or dye,
In life or death I must obey thy will.
I please my self in your humility,
Yet will I make some trial of your faith,
Before I stoop to favour your complaints:
For wot ye well Pandora knows her worth,
He that will purchase things of greatest prize,
Must conquer by his deeds, and not by words:
Go then all four, and slay the savage Boar,
Which roving up and down with ceaseless rage,
Destroys the fruit of our Vtopian fields,
And he that first presents me with his head,
Shall wear my glove in favour of the deed.
We go Pandora.
Nay we run.
We fly.
Thus must Pandora exercise these swains,
Commanding them to dangerous exploits:
And were they kings my beauty should command,
Sir Gunophilus bear up my train. 
Mars comes entreated by the Queen of heaven,
To summon Jove from this his regiment:
Such jealous humour crows in her brain,
That she is mad till he return from hence.
Now Sovereign Jove king of immortal kings,
Thy lovely Iuno long hath looked for thee,
And till thou come thinks every hour a year.
And Jove will go the sooner to assuage,
Her frantic, idle, and suspicious thoughts,
For well I know Pandora troubles her,
Nor will she calm the tempest of her mind,
Till with a whirlwind of outrageous words,
She beat mine ears, and weep cursed hart away. 
Yet will I go, for words are but a blast,
And sun-shine will ensue when storms are past. 
Now bloody Mars begins to play his part,
Isle work such war within Pandoraes breast,
(And somewhat more for Iunoes fair request)
That after all her churlishness and pride:
She shall become a vixen Martialist.
Here let vs stay till fair Pandora come,
And then shall Stesias have his due reward.
And why not Iphicles as well as you?
The prize is mine, my sword cut off his head.
But first my spear did wound him to the death.
He fell not down till I had goard his side.
Content you all, Learchus did the deed,
And I will make it good who ear says nay.
Melos will dye before he lose his right.
Nay then tic time to snatch, the head is mine.
Lay down, or I shall lay thee on the earth.
I, so, fair and far off, for fear of hurt,
See how the cowards counterfeit a fray:
Strike home you dastard swains, strike home I say,
Fight you in jest? let me bestur me then,
And see if I can cudgel ye all four. 
What? is my mistress mankind on the sudden?
Alas why strikes Pandora her best friends?
My friends, base peasants,
My friends would fight like men:
Avaunt, or I shall lay you all for dead. 
See cruel fair, how thou hast wronged thy friend. 
To spill his blood that kept it but for thee,
Theirs my desert: And here is my reward, 
I dare not say of an ungrateful mind:
But if Pandora had been well advised,
This dare I say, that Stesias had been spared.
Begone I say, before I strike again.
O stay sweet mistress and be satisfied.
Base vassal how dare thou presume to speak?
Wilt thou encounter any deed of mine, 
How long have you been made a counsellor?
Here strike thy fill make lavish of my life,
That in my death my love may find relief:
Lance up my side, that when my heart leaps out,
Thou moist behold how it is scorched with love,
And every way croswounded with desire,
There shalt thou read my passions deep engraven,
And in the midst only Pandoraes name.
What telst thou me of love and fancies fire?
Fire of debate is kindled in my hart,
And were it not that thou art all unarmed,
Be sure I should make trial of thy strength,
But now the death of some fierce savage beast:
In blood shall end my furies tragedy,
For fight I must, or else my gall will burst. 
Ah ruthless hart, harder then Adamant,
Whose ears are deaf against affections plaints.
And eyes are blind, when sorrow sheds her tears:
Neither contented that I live nor dye.
But fondling as I am, why grieve I thus?
Is not Pandora mistress of my life?
Yes, yes, and every act of hers is just.
Her hardest words are but a gentle wind:
Her greatest wound is but a pleasing harm,
Death at her hands is but a second life. 
Mars hath enforced Pandora against her kind,
To manage arms and quarrel with her friends:
And thus I leave her, all incensed with ire:
Let Sol cool that which I have set on fire. 
In looking down upon this baser world,
I long have seen and rude Pandoraes harms,
But as my self by nature am inclined,
So shall she now become, gentle and kind,
Abandoning all rancour, pride, and rage,
And changing from a Lion to a Lamb,
She shall be loving liberal and chaste,
Discreet and patient, merciful and mild,
Inspired with poetry and prophecy,
And virtues appertaining womanhood.
Tell me Gunophilus how doth Stesias now?
How fares he with his wound? unhappy me,
That so unkindly hurt so kind a friend,
But Stesias if thou pardon what is past,
I shall reward thy sufferance with love,
These eyes that were like two malignant stars,
Shall yield their comfort with their sweet aspect.
And these my lips that did blaspheme thy love,
Shall speak thee fair and bless thee with a kiss,
And this my hand that hurt thy tender side,
Shall first with herbs recur the wound it made,
Then plight my faith to thee in recompense.
And thou Gunophilus I pray thee pardon me,
That I misdid thee in my witless rage,
As time shall yield occasion be thou sure,
I will not fail to make thee some amends.
I so content me in this pleasant calm.
That former storms are utterly forgot.
We follow still in hope of grace to come,
O sweet Pandora deign our humble suites.
O grant me love or wound me to the death.
Stand up: Pandora is no longer proud,
But shames at folly of her former deeds,
But why stands Stesias like a man dismayed?
Draw near I say and thou with all the rest.
Forgive the rigour of Pandoraes hand,
And quite forget the faults of my disdain.
Now is the time if you consent all four,
Wherein Isle make amends for old offence.
One of you four shall be my wedlock mate,
And all the rest my well-beloved friends:
But vow you here in presence of the Gods,
That when I choose, my choice shall please you all.
Then make I vow, by Pallas shepherds Queen,
That Stesias will allow Pandoraes choice.
But if he speed that less deserves then I,
Isle rather dye, then grudge or make complaint.
I swear the like by all our country gods,
And I by our Deans holy head.
And I by Ceres and her sacred Nymphs.
Then love and Hymen bless me in my choice.
You all are young and all are lovely fair,
All kind, and courteous and of sweet demean,
All right and valiant, all in flowering prime,
But since you grant my will his liberty,
Come Stesias take Pandora by the hand,
And with my hand I plight my spotless faith.
The word hath almost slain me with delight.
The word with sorrow kills me outright.
O happy Stesias, but unhappy me,
Come let vs go and weep our want else where
Stesias hath got Pandora from vs all. 
Their sad depart would make my hart to earn,
Were not the joys that I conceive in thee:
Go, go, Gunophilus without delay,
Gather me balm and cooling Violets,
And of our holly herb Nicotian,
And bring with all pure honey from the hyue,
That I may here compound a wholesome salve,
To heal the wound of my unhappy hand.
I go.
Blessed be the hand that made so happy wound,
For in my sufferance have I won thy love,
And blessed thou, that having tried my faith,
Hast given admittance to my harts desert,
Now all is well, and all my hurt is whole,
And I in paradise of my delight.
Come lovely spouse, let vs go walk the woods,
Where warbling birds record our happiness:
And whisling leaves make music to our mirth,
And Flora strews her bower to welcome thee.
But first sweet husband, be thou ruled by me,
Go make provision for some holy rytes:
That zeal may prosper our new joined love,
And by and by my self will follw thee.
Stay not my decree, for in thy looks I live.
I feel my self inspyrd, but wot not how,
Nor what it is, unless some holy power:
My heart foretells me many things to come,
And I am full of unacquainted skill:
Yet such as will not issue from my tongue,
But like Siballaes golden prophesies,
Affecting rather to be clad in verse,
(The certain badge of great Apolloes gift)
Then to be spread and soiled in vulgar words,
And now to ease the burden of my bulk,
Like Sibill, thus Pandora must begin,
Come my Pandora, Stesias stays for thee.
Peace man, with reverence here &amp; note my words,
For from Pandora speaks the Laureate God.
Utopia Stesias Phoenici soluit amorem,
Numina caelorum dum pia praecipiunt.
And backward thus the same, but double sense.
Praecipiunt pia dum celorum Numina, amorem
Soluit Phoenici Stesias Utopia.
He soberly repeating these verses, first forward and then??? backward, says.
If soluere amorem signify to love,
Then means this prophecy good to Stesias:
But if it signisie to withdraw love,
Then is it ill aboadement to vs both:
But speak Pandora while the God inspires.
Idaliis prior hic pueris est: aequoris Alt??????
Pulchrior hec nymphs, &amp; prior Aoniis.
And backward thus, but still all one in sense.
Aoniis prior, &amp; nymphs hec pulchrior alti
Aequoris est: pueris hic prior Idaliis.
He soberly repeating these also, backward and forward, says:
Forward and back, these also are alike
And sense all one, the pointing only changed:
They but import Pandoraes praise and mine.
Even now begins my fury to retire,
And now with Stesias hence will I retire. 
Phoebus away, thou makst her too precise,
Isle have her witty, quick, and amorous,
Delight in revels and in banqueting,
Wanton discourses, music and merry songs.
Bright Cyprian Queen entreat Pandora fair.
For though at first Phoebus envied her looks,
Yet now doth he admire her glorious hew.
And swears that neither Daphne in the spring,
Nor glistening Thetis in her orient robe,
Nor shamefaced morning gert in silver clouds.
Are half so lovely as this earthly saint.
And being so fair my beams shall make her light,
For Lenity is Beauties waiting maid.
Make Chastity Pandoraes waiting maid,
For modest thoughts beseems a woman best.
Away with chastity and modest thoughts,
Quo mihi fortune si non conceditur vti?
Is she not young? then let her to the world,
All those are strumpets that are over chaste,
Defying such as keep their company,
Tic not the touching of a women's hand,
Kissing her lips, hanging about her neck.
A speaking look, no nor a yielding word,
That men expect, believe me Sol tic more,
And were Mars here he would protest as much.
But what is more then this is worse then nought,
I dare not stay least she infect me too. 
what is he gone, then light foot Ioculus,
Set me Pandora in a dancing vain,
Fair mother I will make Pandora blithe,
And like a Satire hop upon these plains. 
Go Cupped give her all the golden shafts.
And she will take thee for a forester.
I will and you shall see her straight in love.
Here Uenus sit, and with thy influence,
Govern Pandora, Natures miracle.
Prithee be quiet wherefore should I dance?
Thus dance the Satyrs on the even lawns.
Thus pretty Satyr will Pandora dance.
And thus will Cupped make her melody.
Were I a man I could love thee.
I am a maiden wilt thou have me?
But Stesias saith you are not.
What then? I care not.
Nor I.
Nor I,
Then merely farewell my maiden head.
These be all the tears Isle shed,
Turn about and trip it.
????????? Uenus. Cupped and Ioculus, come leave her now.
The boys are gone and I will follow them.
I will not follow them they are to young.
What honey thoughts are in Pandoraes brain?
Hospitis est tepedo nocte recepta sui.
Ah I envy her, why was not I so?
And so will I be, where is Iphicles,
Melos, Learchus? any of the three?
I cure the sick? I study Poetry?
I think of honour and of chastity?
No: love is fitter then Pandoraes thoughts,
Yet not the love of Stesias alone,
Learchus is as fair as Stesias,
And Melos loulier then Learchus far.
But might I chose, I would have Iphicles,
And of them all Stesias deserves the least.
Must I be tide to him? no Isle be loose,
As loose as Helen, for I am as fair.
Mistress, here be the herbs for my masters wound???
Pretty Gunophilus, give me the herbs:
Where did thou gather them my lovely boy?
Upon Learchus plain.
I fear me Cupped danced upon the plain,
I see his arrow head upon the leaves.
And I his golden quiver and his bow.
Thou dost dissemble, but I mean good sooth,
These herbs have wrought some wondrous effect,
Had they this virtue from thy Lily hands?
Lets see thy hands my fair Gunophilus.
It may be they had, for I have not washed them this many a day.
Such slender fingers hath Ioues Ganymede,
Gunophilus, I am love sick for thee.
O that I were worthy you should be sick for me.
I languish for thee, therefore be my love.
Better you languish then I be beaten,
Pardon me, I dare not love, because of my Moister.
Isle hide thee in a wood, and keep thee close.
But what if he come a hunting that way.
Isle say thou art a Satire of the woods.
Then I must have horns.
I so thou shalt, Isle give thee Stesias horns.
Why he hath none,
But he may have shortly,
Ye say true, and of that condition I am yours.
I may not speak of love, for I have vowed,
Ne'er to solicit her, but rest content.
Therefore only gaze eyes to please your selves,
Let not my inward sense know what you see,
Least that my fancy do ate upon her still.
Pandora is divine, but say not so,
Least that thy heart hear thee and break in tawine,
I may not court her, what a hell is this?
Gunopilus: Isle have a banquet straight,
Go thou provide it, and then meet me here.
I will? but by your leave Isle stay a while.
Happy are those that be Pandoraes guests,
Then happy is Learchus, he is my guest.
And greater joy doe I conceive therein,
Then Tantalus that feasted with the Gods.
Mistress, the banquet.
What of the banquet?
You have bid no body to it,
VVhats that to you? Go and prepare it.
And in the mean time you will be in love with him.
I pray let me stay and bid him prepare the bouquet.
A way ye peasant.
Now she begins to love me.
Learchus had I marked this golden hair,
I had not chosen Stesias for my love,
But now.
Lovely Pandora, if a shepherds tears,
May move thee unto rues, pity my state,
Make me thy love, though Stesias be thy choice,
And I in stead of love will honour thee.
Had he not spoke I should have courted him:
Wilt thou not say Pandora is to light,
If she take thee instead of Stesias?
Rather isle dye then have but such a thought.
Then shepherd this kiss shall be our nuptials.
This kiss hath made me wealthier then Pan.
Then come again: Now be as great as Jove.
Let Stesias never touch these lips again.
None but Learchus: Now sweet love begone,
Least Stesias take thee in this amorous vain,
But go no farther then thy bower my love,
Isle steal from Stesias and meet thee straight.
I will Pandora, and against thou come.
strew all my bower with flags and water mints. 
A husband? what a foolish word is that?
Give me a lover, let the husband go.
O Iphicles, behold??? the heavenly Nymph.
We may behold her but she scorns our love.
Are these the shepherds that made love to me?
Yea and the shepherds that yet love thee still.
O that Pandora would regard my suite.
They look like water Nymphs, but speak like men,
Thou should be Nature in a mans attire,
And thou young Ganimayde Minion to Jove.
Then would I make a world and give it thee.
Then would I leave great Jove, to follow thee.
Melos is loveliest, Melos is my love,
Come hither Melos I must tell thee news,
News tragical to thee and to thy flock. 
Melos I love thee, meet me in the vale, 
I saw him in the VVolues mouth, Melos fly.
O that so fair a Lamb should be devoured:
Isle go and rescue him.
Could Iphicles go from thee for a Lamb,
The wolf take all my flock, so I have thee,
Will me to dive for pearl into the sea,
To fetch the feathers of the Arabian bird,
The Golden Apples from the Hesperian wood,
Maremaydes glass, Floras habiliment,
So I may have Pandora for my love.
He that would do all this, must love me well,
And why should he love me and I not him?
Wilt thou for my sake go into yon grove?
And we will sing unto the wilde birds notes.
And be as pleasant as the Western wind,
That kisses flowers and wantons with their leaves.
Will I? O that Pandora would.
I will and therefore follow Iphicles.
Did base Learchus court my heavenly love?
Pardon me Pan if to revenge this deed,
I shed the blood of that dissembling swain,
With Jealous fire my heart begins to burn.
Ah bring me where he is Gunophilus,
Least he entice Pandora from my bower.
I know not where he is, but here heel be:
I must provide the banquet, and be gone.
What will the shepherds banquet with my wife.
O light Pandora can thou be thus false?
Tell me where is this wanton banquet kept?
That I may hurl the dishes at their heads,
Mingle the wine with blood and end the feast,
With Tragic outcries like the Theban Lord,
Where fair Hippodamia was espousd.
Here in this place, for so she pointed me.
Where might I hide me to hehold the same.
O in this cave for over this theyle sit.
But then I shall not see them when they kiss,
Yet you may here what they say, if they kiss isle hole???low,
But do so then my sweet Gunophilus
And as a strong wind bruising from the earth,
So will I rise out of this hollow vault:
making the woods shake with my furious words.
But if they come not at all, or when they come do use themselves honestly, then come not out, least you see???ming Jealous make her over hate you.
Not for the world unless I hear thee call,
Or else their wanton speech provoke me forth.
Well in then, were not a pretty jest to bury him quick, I warrant it would be a good while ear she would scratch him out of his grave with her nails, and yet she might too, for she hath digd such vaults in my face that ye may go from my chin to my eyebrows betwixt the skin and the flesh, wonder not at it good people I can prove there hath been two or three merchants with me to hire romes to lay in wine, but that they doe not stand so conue???niently as they wold wish, for indeed they are every one too near my mouth, and I am a great drinker, I had had a quar???ters rent before hand. Well be it known unto all men that I have done this to cornute my master, for yet I could no???for have opportunity. You would little think my neck is grown away with looking back as I have been a kissing, for fear he should come, and yet it is a fair example, beware of kissing brethren. What doth the cave open? ere she and he have done heel pick the lock with his horn.
Now have I played with wanton Iphicles.
Yea and kept touch with Melos, both are pleased,
Now were Learchus here? but stay me thinks
here is Gunophilus Isle go with him.
Mistress my master is in this cave thinking to meet you and Learchus here.
What is he Jealous? come Gunophilus
In spite of him Isle kiss thee twenty times.
O look how my lips quiver for fear.
Where is my husband speak Gunophilus.
He is in the woods and will be here anon.
I but he shall not.
His fellow swains will meet me in this bower,
Who for his sake I mean to entertain,
If he knew of it he would meet them here.
Ah where so ere he be, safe may he be,
Thus hold I up my hands to heaven for him,
Thus weep I for my dear love Stesias.
When will the shepherds come?
Immediately, prepare the banquet straight,
Mean time Isle pray that Stesias may be here,
Bring Iphicles and Melos with thee and tell them
Of my husband. Descendit ad inferos.
You'll love them then???
No, only thee, yet let them sit with me,
Content, so you but sit with them.
Why hath Pandora thus deluded me?
Learchus whist my husbands in this cave,
Thinking to take vs together here.
Shall I slay him, and enjoy thee still?
No, let him live but had he Argos eyes,
He should not keep me from Learchus love,
Thus will I hang about Learchus neck:
And suck out happiness from forth his lips.
And this shall be the heaven that Isle aim at.
Sic vos non vobis, sic vos non vobis.
what meanst thou by that?
Here is a comment upon my words,
Wherefore doest thou break the glass.
Isle answer it, shall I provide a banquet and be co send of the best dish? I hope sir you have said grace, and now may I fall too.
Away base swain.
Sir as base as I am Isle go for currant here.
What? will Pandora be thus light?
O you stand upon the weight, well if she were twenty grains lighter I would not refuse her provided always, she be not clipped within the ringe.
Gunophilus thou art too malapert.
Think nothimg, for I can not shift him off,
Sir provide the banquet you are best.
I will and that incontinently for indeed I cannot ab???stein.
Here take thou Melos favours, keep it close,
For he and Iphicles will straight be here,
I love them not, they both importune me,
Yet must I make as if I love them both.
Here they come.
Welcome Learchus to Pandoraes feast.
What makes Learchus here?
wherefore should Melos banquet with my love?
My heart rises against this Iphicles.
Melos my love. Sit down sweet Iphicles.
She daunts Learchus with a strange aspect.
I like not that she whispers unto him.
I warrant you.
Hers to the health of Stesias my love,
Would he were here to welcome you all three.
I will go seek him in the busky groves.
You lose your labour then, he is at his flock.
I he ways more his flock then me. she weeps.
weep not Pandora for he loves thee well.
And I love him.
But why is Melos sad?
For thee I am sad, thou hast injured me,
Knows not Melos I love him.
Thou iniurest me and I will be revenged.
Hath Iphicles forgot my words.
If I should hollow they were all undone.
They both are lealious yet mistrust me not.
Here Melos.
I pledge thee Iphicles.
Learchus go thou know my mind.
Shall I sit here thus to be made a stale.
Lovely Pandora means to follow me:
Farewell this feast, my bouquet comes not yet. 
Let him go.
Pandora go with me to Stesias.
No, rather go with me.
Away base Iphieles.
Coward hand of, or else Isle strike thee down,
My husband here is you, will you strive for wine???
Give vs a fresh cup, I will have ye friends.
I defy thee Iphicles.
I thee Melos.
Both of them are drunk.
Is this thy love to me?
Nay if you fall out farewell,
Now will I go meet Learchus. 
I see thy Juggling, thou shalt want thy will.
Follow me if thou dare, and fight it out.
If I dare, Yes I dare and will? Come thou.
Hollow, hollow.
where is the villain that hath kissed my love
No body master.
why strive they then?
Tvvas for a cup of wine, they were all drunk.
whither is my wife gone?
To seek you.
Ah Pandora pardon me thou art chaste,
Thou midst me to suspect her, take thou that.
O master I did for good will to you.
And I beat thee for good will to her.
What hast thou to doe betvvixt man and wife.?
Too much with the man, too little with the wife.
Empress of love give Harms leave to reign,
My course comes next therefore resign to me.
Ascend thou winged pursuivant of Jove.
Now shall Pandora be no more in love,
And all these swains that were her fauorits,
Shall understand there mistress hath played false,
And loathing her blab all to Stesias.
Now is Pandora in my regiment,
And I will make her false and full of slights,
Thievish, lying, subtle, eloquent.
For these alone belong to Mercury.
Unkind Pandora to delude me thus.
Too kind Learchus that hath loud her thus.
Too foolish Melos that yet dotes on her.
Black be the Ivory of her teasing face,
Dimde be the sun-shine of her ravishing eyes.
Fair may her face be, beautiful her eyes,
O Iphicles abjure her, she is false.
To thee Learchus and to Melos false,
Nay to vs all too false and full of guile,
How many thousand kisses gave she me.
And every kiss mixed with an amorous glance.
How oft have I leand on her silver breast,
She singing on her Lute, and Melos being the note.
But waking, what sweet pastime have I had,
For love is watchful, and can never sleep.
But ere I slept.
When I had list.
What then?
Caetera quis nescit?
Melos prevents me that I should have said.
Blush Iphicles and in thy Rosie cheeks.
Let all the heat that feeds thy heart appear.
Droop not fair Iphicles for her misdeeds:
But to revenge it hast to Stesias.
Yea he shall know she is lascivious.
In this complaint Isle join with thee, let vs go.
Stay here he comes.
O Stesias what a heavenly love hast thou?
A love as chaste as is Apolloes tree:
As modest as a vestal Virgins eye,
And yet as bright as Glow worms in the night:
With which the morning decks her lovers hair.
O fair Pandora, blessed Stesias.
O foul Pandora, cursed Stesias.
What meanst thou Iphicles?
Ah is she fair that is lascivious?
Or that swain blessed that she makes but a stale.
He means thy love unhappy Stesias.
My love? no Shepherds this is but a stale,
To make me hate Pandora whom I love,
So whispered late the false Gunophilus,
Let it suffice that I believe you not.
Love is deaf, blind, and incredulous,
I never hung about Pandoraes neck,
She never termed me fair and thee black swain.
She played not unto Melos in her bower,
Nor is his greene bower strewd with Primrose leaves.
I kissed her not, nor did she term me love,
Pandora is the love of Stesias.
Sir, bid your Mistress come hither.
I shall sir.
I never hung about Pandoraes neck,
She played not unto Melos in her bower,
I kill her not, nor did she term me love.
These words argue Pandora to be light.
She played the wanton with these amorous swains,
By all these streams that interlaced these floods.
Which may be venom to her thirsty soul.
Isle be revenged as never shepherd was,
Now foul Pandora, wicked Stesias.
Mistress tic true I hard them, venture not.
Fence with her tongue, and guarded with her wit.
Thus goes Pandora unto Stesias.
Detested falsor that to Stesias eyes.
Art more insestious then the Basilisk
Gunophilus, Pandora is undone,
Her love, her joy, her life hath lost his wits,
Offer a Kyd in Esculapias fane,
That he may cure him, least I dye outright,
Isle offer it Esculapius, but he shall not have him, for when he comes to him self I must answer it.
Go I say.
Stay I am well tic thou that makst me rave,
Thou playdst the wanton with my fellow swains.
Then dye Pandora: art thou in thy wits.
And call me wanton? 
O Moister what have you done.
Divine Pandora rise and pardon me.
I cannot but forgive thee Stesias,
But by this light, if.
Look how she winks.
O stay my love I know it was their devise
He that will win me must have Stesias shape.
Such golden hair, such Alabaster looks,
Wilt thou know why I loved not Iupiter?
Because he was unlike my Stesias.
Was ever silly shepherd thus abused?
All three afirmd Pandora held them dear.
It was to bring me in disgrace with thee,
That they might have some hope I would be theirs.
I cannot walk but they importune me.
How many amorous letters have they sent.
What gifts? yet all in vain to prove which true,
Isle bear this slander with a patient mind,
Speeke them all fair and ere the sun go down,
Isle bring thee where they use to lie in weight,
To rob me of my honour in the groves,
Do so sweet wife, and they shall buy it dear
I cannot stay my sheep must to the fouled. 
Go Stesias as simple as a sheep,
And now Pandora summon all thy wits,
To be revenged upon these long toungd swains,
Gunophilus bear Iphicles this ring:
Tell him I rave and language for his love.
Will him to meet me in this mead alone,
And swear his fellows have deluded him,
Bear this to Melos say that for his sake,
I stabbed my self, and had not thou been near,
I had been dead, but yet I am alive.
Calling for Melos whom I only love,
And to Learchus bear these passionate lines,
Which if he be not flint will make him come.
I will, and you shall see how cunningly Isle use them stay here and I will send them to you one after another, and then use them as your wisdom shall think good.
That letter did I pen doubting the worst,
And dipped the Napking in the Lambkins blood.
For Iphicles were he compact of Iron,
My ring is Adamant to draw him forth,
Let women learn by me to be revenged.
Isle make them bite their tongues and eat their words,
Yea swear unto my husband all is false.
My wit is pliant and invention sharpe,
To make these nouises that injure me.
Young Iphicles must boast I favoured him,
Here I protest as Helen to her love:
Oscula luctanti tantummodo pauca proternus
abstulit: vlterius, nil habit ille mei.
And whats a kiss? too much for Iphicles?
Melos is wily, and Learchus false,
Here is Pandoraes ring, and she is mine:
It was a stratagem laid for my love,
O foolish Iphicles what hast thou done?
Must thou betray her unto Stesias.
Here will I sit till I see Iphicles,
Sighing my breath, out weeping my heart blood,
Go soul and fly unto my liefest love,
A fairer subject then Elysium.
Can I hear this? can I view her? O no.
But I will view thee my sweet Iphicles,
Thy looks are physic, suffer me to gaze,
That for thy sake am thus distempered.
Pale be my looks to witness my amiss.
And mine to show my love: lovers are pale.
And so is Iphicles.
And so Pandora let me kiss my love,
And add a better colour to his cheeks.
O bury all thy anger in this kiss,
And mate me not with uttering my offence.
Who can be angry with one whom she loves?
Rather had I to have no thoughts at all.
Then but one ill thought of my Iphicles:
Go unto Stesias and deny thy words,
For he hath thrust me from his cabinet.
And as I have done, I will love thee still,
Delay no time, hast gentle Iphicles,
And meet me on Enepeus sedgy banks.
When shall I meet thee, tell me my bright love.
At midnight Iphicles, till then farewell.
Farewell Pandora, Isle to Stesias.
Thus will I serve them all, now Melos come,
I love thee too, as much as Iphicles.
This is Pandoraes blood, hast Melos hast,
And in her presence lance thy flesh as deep:
Wicked Learchus, subtle Iphicles:
You have undone me by your reaching wit.
Gunophilus, where is Gunophilus?
Give me the knife thou pulledst from my breast:
Melos is gone, and left Pandora here,
Witness ye wounds, witness ye silver streams,
That I am true, to Melos only true,
And he betrayed me unto Stesias.
Forgive me love, it was not I alone,
It was Learchus, and false Iphicles.
Tic not Learchus, nor that Iphicles,
That grieves me, but that Melos is unkind,
Melos for whom Pandora strained her voice,
Playing with every letter of his name:
Melos, for whom Pandora made this wound,
Melos, for whom Pandora now will dye.
Divine Pandora, stay thy desperate hand,
May summers lightning burn our Autumn crop,
The thunders teeth plow up our fairest groves,
The scorching sun-beames, dry up all our springs,
And ruff winds blast the beauty of our plains,
If Melos love not thee, more then his heart.
So Melos swears, but tic a lovers other.
Once guilty, and suspected evermore,
Isle ne'er be guilty more, suspect me not.
Nor I suspect thee more, mistrust me not,
Learchus never touched Pandoraes lips,
Nor Iphicles received a friendly word:
Melos hath al my favours and for all,
Doe only this and Isle be only thine,
Go unto Stesias and deny thy words,
And as the sun goes down Isle meet thee hear.
I will Pandora, and to cure thy wound,
Receive these virtuous herbs which I have found.
A pretty swain worthy Pandoraes love,
But I have written to Learchus I,
And I will keep my promise though I dye,
which is to cozen him as he did me,
Learchus my love Learchus,
O the iteration of my name argues her affection,
Was it my desert? thine alas Pandora,
It was my destiny to be credulous to these miscreants.
Look, look she is writing to you again.
What is he come then shall my tongue declaim,
Yet am I bashful and afraid to speak.
Blush not Pandora who hath made most fault?
I that solicit thee which loves me not.
I that betrayed thee, which offended not.
Learchus pardon me.
Pandora pardon me.
All friends and so they kissed.
I can but smile to think thou wast deceiud,
Learchus thou must to my husband straight,
And say that thou art sorry for thy words,
And in the evening isle meet thee again,
Under the same grove where we both sat last.
I will Pandora, but look where he comes.
Then give me leave to dissemble.
Tic not thy sorrow that can make amends,
Were I aman thou should repent thy words.
Learchus will you stand unto your words.
O Stesias pardon me it was their deceit.
I am sorry that I iniurd her,
They lay the fault on thee, and thou on them,
But take thee that.
Ah Stesias leave: you shall not fight for me,
Go, go Learchus I am Stesiasses.
Art thou?
No no Learchus, she doth but say so.
Out of my ground Learchus, from my land,
And from hence forward come not near my lawns,
Pandora come: Gunophilus away.
Learchus meet me straight, the time draws nigh.
The time draws nigh, O that the time were now,
I go to meet Pandora at the grove.
When will the sun go down? fly Phoebus fly,
O that thy steeds were winged with my swift thoughts:
Now should thou fall in Thetis azure arms,
And now would I fall in Pandoraes lap.
Wherefore did Iupiter create the day?
Sweet is the night when every creature sleeps,
Come night, come gentle night, for thee I stay.
Wherefore doth Iphicles desire the night?
Whose that Melos? thy words did make me afraid,
I wish for midnight but to take the VVolfe,
Which kills my sheep, for which I made a snare:
Melos farewell, I must go watch my flocks.
And I my love? here she will meet me straight, 
See where she comes hiding her blushing eyes.
My love Pandora for whose sake I live?
Hide not thy beauty which is Melos sun.
Here is none but vs too, lay aside thy vale.
Here is Stesias, Melos you are deceaud.
Pandora hath deceaud me I am undone.
So will not I sir, I mean simply.
Come hast thou all his Jewels and his pearls?
I all, but tell me which way shall we go?
Unto the sea side, and take shipping straight.
Well I am revenged at last of my Moister, I pray God I may be thus even with all mine enemies: only to run away with their wives.
Gunophilus, for thee I have done this.
I and for your self too, I am sure you will not beg by the way.
For thee Isle beg and dye Gunophilus.
I so I think, the world is so hard, that if ye beg ye may be sure to be starved.
I prithee be not so churlish.
O this is but mirth, do you not know
Comes facetus est tanquam vehiculus in via:
A merry companion is as good as a VVagon,
For you shall be sure to ride though ye go a foot.
Gunophilus, setting this mirth aside,
Dost thou not love me more then all the world?
Be you as steadfast to me as Isle be to you, and we two will go to the worlds end, and yet we cannot, for the world is round, and seeing tys round, lets dance in the cir???cle, come turn about.
When I forsake thee, then heaven it self shall fall.
No, God forbid, then perhaps we should have Larks.
This is Enip?????????, here she should be,
What is it midnight? time hath been my friend,
Come sweet Pandora all is safe and whist,
Whither flies my love.
Follow me, follow me, here comes Stesias.
She hath betrayed me whither shall I fly?
Either to the river, or else to thy grave.
The evenings past, yea midnight is at hand.
And yet Pandora comes not at the grove.
But Stesias is her deputy he comes.
And with his shephooke greetes Learchus thus.
Pardon me Stesias, it was Pandoraes wiles,
That hath betrayed me, trust her not, she is false.
Why doest thou tell me the contrary take that,
She is honest but thou would seduce her.
Away from my grove, out of my land,
Did I not give thee warning?
Now other planets??? influence is done,
To Cynthia lowest of the erring stars,
Is beauteous Pandora given in charge.
And as I am so shall Pandora bee,
New fangled, fickle, slothful, foolish, mad,
Inspight of nature that envies vs all.
Come, come Pandora, we must make more hast,
Or Stesias will overtake vs both.
I cannot go no faster, I must rest.
We are almost at the the sea side I pray thee rise.
O I am faint and weary, let me sleep.
Pandora if thou love me let vs go.
Why doest thou waken me isle remember this.
What are you angry with me.
No with my self for loving such a swain,
What fury made me dote upon these looks,
Like winters picture are his withered cheeks,
His hair as ravens plumes, ah touch me not.
His hands are like the sins of some foul fish,
Look ehow he mowes like to an aged ape,
Over the chain Jack, or isle make thee leap.
What a sudden change is here?
Now he swears by his ten bones, down I say.
Did I not tell you I should have Larks,
where is the larks, come weel go catch some straight?
No let vs go a fishing with a net?
With a net? no, an angle is enough:
An angle, a net, no none of both.
Isle wade into the water, water is fair,
And stroke the fishes under neath the gills.
But first Isle go a hunting in the wood,
I like not hunting, let me have a hawk
What wilt thou say and if I love thee still?
Any thing, what you will.
But shall I have a gown of oken leaves,
A chaplet of red berries, and a fane.
Made of the morning dew to cool my face.
How often will you kiss me in an hour,
And where shall me sit till the sun be down,
For Nocte latent mend.
what then?
I will not kiss thee till the sun be down,
Thou art deformd, the night will cover thee,
We women must be modest in the day,
O tempt me not until the evening come.
Lucretia tota sis licit vsque die. Thaida nocte volo.
Hate me a days, and love me in the night,
Call thou me Thais? go and love not me,
I am not Thais Isle be Lucretia I,
Give me a knife and for my chastity,
Isle dye to be canonised a saint.
But you will love me when the sun is down???
No but I will not.
Did you not promise me.
No I, I saw thee not till now.
Do you see me now.
I and loath thee.
Belike I was a spirit all this while?
A spirit, a spirit, whither may I fly.
I see Pandora and Gunophilus.
And I see Stesias welcome Stesias.
Gunophilus thou hast inveigled her,
And robbed me of my treasure and my wife.
Isle strip thee to the skin for this offence,
And put thee in a wood to be deuourd,
Of empty Tigers, and of hungry VVolues,
Nor shall thy sad looks move me unto rues,
Pardon me master she is Lunatic,
Foolish and frantic, and I followed her.
Only to save the goods and bring her back:
Why think you I would run away with her?
He need not for Isle run away with him,
And yet I will go home with Stesias,
So I shall have a white lamb coloured black,
Two little sparrows, and a spotted fawn.
I fear it is too true that he reports.
Nay stay a while and you shall see her dance.
No, no, I will not dance, but I will sing,
Stesias hath a white hand, but his nails are black,
His fingers are long and small, shall I make them crack.
One two and three, I love him, and he loves me.
Beware of the shephooke,
Isle tell you one thing,
If you ask me why I sing,
I say ye may go look.
Pandora speak, love thou Gunophilus?
I, if he be a fish, for fish is fine,
Sweet Stesias help me to a whiting moppe.
Now I perceive that she is lunatic,
What may I do to bring her to her wits?
Speak gentle moister and entreat her fair???
Pandora, my love Pandora.
Isle not be fair??? why call you me your love.
Love is a little boy, so am not I.
I will allure her with fair promises,
And when I have her in my levy bower,
Pray to our water Nymphs and Sylvan gods,
To cure her of this piteous lunacy,
Give me a running stream in both my hands,
A blew kings fisher, and a pebble stone,
And Isle catch butter flies upon the sand,
And thou Gunophilus shalt clip their wings.
Isle give thee streams whose pebble shall be pearl,
Love birds whose feathers shall be beaten gold.
Muskflyes with amber berries in their mouths,
Milk white Squirrels, singing Popiniayes,
A boat of dear skins, and a fleeting Isle,
A sugar cane, and line of twisted silk.
Where be all these.
I have them in my bower, come follow me?
Streams with pearl? birds with golden feathers?
Musk flies, and amber berries? white Squirrels,
And singing Popiniayes? a boat of dear skins?
Come Isle go, Isle go.
I was ne'er in love with her till now, O absolute Pandora, because foolish, for folly is women's perfection. To talk Idly, to loke wildly, to laugh at every breach and play with a feather, is that would make a Stoyke in love, yea thou thy self.
O Marcifili annum jam audientem Cratippum idque Athaenis. Gravity in a woman, is like to a gray beard upon a breach???ing boys chin, which a good Scholemaister would cause to be clipped, and the wise husband to be avoided.
Gunophilus, where is thy Mistress?
A kitchen a blew kings fisher.
Tell vs where is she?
A gathering little pebbles.
What dost thou mock vs.
No: but if she were here she would make mowes at the proudest of you.
What meanest thou by this.
I mean my mistress is become foolish.
A just reward for one so false as she.
Such hap betide those that intend vs ill.
Never were simple shepherds so abused.
Gunopholus thou hast betrayed vs all.
Thou brought this ring from her which made me come???
And thou this bloody napkin unto me.
And thou this flattering letter unto me.
Why I brought you the ring thinking you and she should be married together. And being hurt as she told me. I had thought she had sent for you as a surgeon.
But why brought thou me this letter?
Only to certify you that she was in health,
As I was at the bringing hereof.
And thus being loath to trouble you, I commit you to God.
Yours as his own Gunophilus.
The wicked youngling flouts vs, let him go.
Immortal Pan where ere this lad remains,
Revenge the wrong that he hath done thy swains.
O that a creature so divine as she,
Whose beauty might enforce the heavens to blush,
And make fair Nature angry at the hart,
That she hath made her to obscure her self,
Should be so fickle and so full of slights,
And feigning love to all, love none at all.
Had she been constant unto Iphicles,
I would have clad her in sweet Floras robes:
Have set Dianaes garland on her head,
Made her sole mistress of my wanton flock,
And sing in honour of her deity,
where now with tears I curse Pandoraes name.
The springs that smiled to see Pandoraes face,
And leapt aboue the banks to touch her lips???
The proud plains dancing with Pandoraes weight,
The Jocund trees that vald when she came near
And in the murmur of their whispering leaves,
Did seem to say Pandora is our Queen,
witness how fair and beautiful she was,
But now alone how false and treacherous.
Here I abjure Pandora, and protest,
To live for ever in a single life.
The like vow makes Learchus to great Pan.
And Iphicles though soar against his will.
In witness of my vow I rend these lines,
O thus be my love dispersed into the ayre.
Here lie the bloody Napkin which she sent,
And with it my affection, and my love.
Break, break, Pandoraes ring, and with it break,
Pandoraes love, that almost burst my heart.
Ah whither runs my love Pandora? stay,
Gentle Pandora stay, run not so fast.
Shall I not stamp upon the ground? I will,
Who saith Pandora shall not rend her hair?
Where is the grove that asked me how I did?
Give me an angle for the fish will bite.
Look how Pandora raves, now she is stark mad.
For you she raves, that meant to ravish her,
Help to recover her or else ye dye.
May she with raving dye? do what thou dare.
She over reached vs with deceitful guile???
And Pan, to whom we prayed hath wrought revenge.
Isle have the Ocean put into a glass,
And drink it to the health of Stesias.
Thy head is full of hediockes Iphicles,
So shake them of, now let me see thy hand,
Look where a blazing star is in this line,
And in the other two and twenty sons.
Come come Pandora sleep within my arms,
Thine arms are firebrands, whirs Gunophilus,
Go kiss the echo, and bid love untruss,
Go fetch the black Goat with the brazen heel,
And tell the Bell-wether I hear him not.
Not, not, not, that you should not come unto me
This night, not at all, at all, at all.
She is a sleep, master shall I vvake her?
O no Gunophilus there let her sleep,
And let vs pray that she may be recurd.
Stesias thou pettiest her that loves thee not
The words we told thee Stesias were too true.
Never did Iphicles dissemble yet,
Believe me Stesias she hath been untrue.
Yet will you slay me with your slanderous words
Did you not all svveare for her chastity.
It was her subtle wit that made vs swear,
For Stesias know she showed love to vs all,
And severally sent for vs by this svvayne,
And unto me he brought such honey lines,
As ouercomd, I flew unto her bower.
Who when I came, svvore she loud me a lone.
VVil'ing me to deny the words I spoke,
And she at night would meet me in the grove.
Thus meaning simply, lo I was betrayed,
Gunophilus brought me a bloody cloth,
Saying for my love she was almost slain,
And when I came she used me as this svvaine,
Protesting love, and pointing me this place,
And by this bearer I received a ring,
And many a loving word that drew me forth,
O that a woman should dissemble so.
She then for svvore Learehus and this svvaine,
Saying that Iphicles was only hers,
Whereat I promised to deny my words.
And she to meet me at Enepius banks,
VVert thou the messenger unto them all.
I was, and all that they have fayde is true,
She lo???e not you, not them, but me alone,
How oft hath she run up and down the lavvnes.
Calling aloud where is Gunophilus.
Ah how my hart swells at these miscreants words.
Come let vs leave him in this pensive mood.
Fret, Stesias fret, while we dance on the plain.
Such fortune happen to incredulus swains.
Sweet is a single life, Stesias farewell.
Go life, fly soul, go wretched Stesias,
Cursed be Utopia for Pandoraes sake,
Let wild bores with their tusks plow up my lawns,
Devouring VVoules come shake my tender lambs,
Drive up my goats unto some steepy rock,
And let them fall down headlong in the sea,
She shall not live, nor thou Gunophilus,
To triumph in poor Stesias overthrow.
Stay shepherd, stay.
Hurt not Pandora lovely Stesias.
What means my love to look so pale and wan.
For thee base strumpet am I pale and wanne.
Speak mildly, or Isle make thee crabbed swain.
Take her again, and love her Stesias.
Not for Utopia, no, not for the world.
Ah can thou frown on her that looks so sweet???
Have I offended thee? Isle make amends.
And what can thou demand more at her hand?
To slay her self that I may live alone.
Flint hearted shepherd thou deserve her not.
If thou be Jove convey her from the earth,
And punish this Gunophilus her man.
O Jove, let this be my punishment, to live still with Pandora.
Envious planets you have done your worst.
Yet in despite of you Pandora lives,
And seeing the shepherds have abiurd her love,
She shall be placed in one of your seven orbs.
But thou that hast not served her as I wild,
Vanish into a Haythorne as thou standst???
Near shalt thou wait upon Pandora more.
O Nature place Pandora in my sphere,
For I am old, and she will make me young.
With me, and I will leave the Queen of heaven.
With me, and Uenus shall no more be mine.
With me, and Isle forget fair Daphnes love.
With me, and isle turn Cupped out of doors.
with me, and isle forsake Aglauros love.
No fair Pandora stay with Cynthia,
And I will love thee more then all the rest:
Rule thou my star, while I stay in the woods,
Or keep with Pluto in the infernal shades.
Go where thou wilt so I be rid of thee,
Speak my Pandora where wilt thou be?
Not with old Saturn for he looks like death.
Nor yet with Iupiter least Iuno storm.
Nor with thee Mars, for Venus is thy love,
Nor with thee Sol, thou hast two Paramours.
The sea borne Thetis and the ruddy morn.
Nor with thee Uenus least I be in love,
With blindfold Cupped or young Ioculus
Nor with thee Harms, thou art full of slights,
And when I need thee Jove will send thee forth.
Say Cynthia, shall Pandora rule thy star,
And wilt thou play Diana in the woods?
Or Hecate in Plutos regiment?
I Pandora.
Fair Nature let thy hand maid dwe'l with her,
For know that change is my felicity,
And fickleness Pandoraes proper form,
Thou midst me sullen first, and thou Jove proud,
Thou bloody minded, he a Puritan.
Thou Venus midst me love all that I saw,
And Harms to deceive all that I love,
But Cynthia made me idle, mutable, forgetful,
Foolish, fickle, frantic, mad,
These be the humours that content me best,
And therefore will I stay with Cynthia.
And Stesias since thou set so light on her,
Be thou her slave, and follow her in the Moon.
Isle rather dye then bear her company,
Nature will have it so attend on her.
Isle have thee be her vassal, murmur not.
Then to revenge me of Gunophilus,
Isle rend this hathorne with my furious hands???
And bear this bush, if ear she look but back,
Isle scratch her face that was so false to me.
Now rule Pandora in fair Cynthias steed,
And make the moon inconstant like thy self,
Reign thou at women's nuptials, and their birth,
Let them be mutable in all their loves.
Fantastical, childish, and foolish, in their desires,
Demanding toys: and stark mad
When they cannot have their will.
Now follow me ye wandering lights of heaven,
And grieve not, that she is not placed with you,
All you shall glance at her in your aspects,
And in conjunction dwell with her a space.
O that they had my room.
I charge thee follow her, but hurt her not.

PRince of Navarre my honourable brother,
Prince Conti, and my good Lord Admiral,
I Wish this union and religious league,
Knit in these hands thus joined in nuptial rites,
May not desolve, till death desolve our lives,
And that the native sparks of princely love,
That kindled first this motion in our hearts:
May still be feweld in our progeny.
The many favours which your grace hath shown,
From time to time, but specially in this:
Shall bind me ever to your highness will,
In what Queen Mother or your grace commands.
Thanks son Navarre, you see we love you well,
That link you in marriage with our daughter heer:
And as you know our difference in Religion,
Might be a means to cross you in your love.
Well Madam, let that rest:
And now my Lords the marriage rites performed,
We think it good to go and consummate the rest,
With hearing of a holy Mass: Sister, I think your self will bear vs company.
I will my good Lord,
The rest that will not go (my Lords) may stay:
Come Mother let vs go to honour this solemnity.
Which Isle desolve with blood and cruelty.
Prince Conti and my good L. Admiral,
Now Guise may storm but doe vs little hurt:
Having the King, Qu. Mother on our sides,
To stop the malice of his envious heart,
That seeks to murder all the Protestants:
Have you not heard of late how he decreed,
If that the King had given consent thereto,
That all the protestants that are in Paris,
Should have been murdered the other night?
My Lord I marvel that th'aspiring Guise,
Dares once adventure without the Kings consent,
To meddle or attempt such dangerous things.
My L. you need not marvel at the Guise,
For what he doth the Pope will ratify:
In murder, mischief, or in tyranny.
But he that sits and rules aboue the clouds,
Doth hear and see the prayers of the just:
And will revenge the blood of innocents,
That Guise hath slain by treason of his heart,
And brought by murder to their timeless ends.
My Lord, but did you mark the Cardinal,
The Guises brother and the Duke Dumain:
How they did storm at these your nuptiallrites,
Because the house of Burbon now comes in,
And joins your linnage to the crown of France?
And thats ye cause that Guise so frowns at vs,
And beats his brains to catch vs in his trap:
Which he hath pitched within his deadly toil.
Come my Lords lets go to the Church and pray,
That God may still defend the right of France:
And make his Gospel flourish in this land.
If ever Hymen lowered at marriage rites,
And had his alters decked with dusky lights:
If ever sun stained heaven with bloody clouds,
And made  look with terror on the world:
If ever day were turned to ugly night.
And night made semblance of the hue of hell,
This day, this hour, this fatal night,
Shall fully show the fury of them all,
Apothecary.
My Lord.
Now shall I prove and guerdon to the full,
The love thou bear unto the house of Guise:
Where are those perfumed gloves which I sent
To be poisoned, hast thou done them? speak,
Will every savour breed a pangue of death?
See where they be my good Lord,
And he that smells but to them, dyes.
Then thou remain resolute.
I am my Lord, in what your grace commands till death.
Thanks my good friend, I will requite thy love,
Go then present them to the Queen Navarre:
For she is that huge blemish in our eye,
That makes these upstart heresies in France:
Be gone my friend present them to her strait.
Soldier.
My Lord,
Now come thou forth and play thy tragic part.
Stand in some window opening near the street,
And when thou see the Admiral ride by,
Discharge thy musket and perform his death:
And then Isle guerdon thee with store of crowns.
I will my Lord.
Now Guise begins those deep engendered thoughts,
To burst abroad those never dying flames,
Which cannot be extinguished but by blood.
Oft have I leveled, and at last have learned,
That peril is the chiefest way to happiness,
And resolution honours fairest aim.
What glory is there in a common good,
That hanges for every peasant to achieve?
That like I best that flies beyond my reach,
Set me to scale the high Pyramids,
And thereon set the Dradem of France,
Isle either rend it with my nails to nought,
Or mount the top with my aspiring wings,
Although my downfall be the deepest hell.
For this, I wake, when others think I sleep,
For this, I waite, that scorns attendance else:
For this, my quenchless thirst whereon I build,
Hath often pleaded kindred to the King.
For this, this head, this heart, this hand and sword,
Contrives, imagines and fully executes,
Matters of import, aimde at by many,
Yet understood by none.
For this, hath heaven engendered me of earth,
For this, this earth sustains my bodies weight,
And with this went Isle counterpoise a Crown,
Or with seditions weary all the world:
For this, from Spain the stately Catholickes,
Sends Indian gold to coin me French ecues:
For this have I a largess from the Pope,
A pension and a dispensation too:
And by that privilege to work upon,
My policy hath framed religion,
Religion: O Diabole.
Fie, I am ashamed how ever that I seem,
To think a word of such a simple sound,
Of so great matter should be made the ground.
The gentle King whose pleasure uncontrolled,
Weakens his body, and will waste his Realm,
If I repair not what he ruinates:
Him as a child I daily win with words,
So that for proof, he barely bears the name:
I execute, and he sustains the blame.
The Mother Queen works wonders for my sake,
And in my love entombs the hope of France:
Rifling the bowels of her treasury,
To supply my wants and necessity.
Paris hath full five hundred Colleges,
As Monasteries, Priories, Abbeys and halles,
Wherein are thirty thousand able men,
Besides a thousand sturdy student Catholics,
And more of my knowledge in one cloister keeps,
Five hundred fat Franciscan Fryers and priests.
All this and more, if more may be comprisde,
To bring the will of our desires to end.
Then Guise since thou hast all the Cards,
Within thy hands to shuffle or cut, take this as surest thing:
That right or wrong, thou deal thy self a King.
I but, Navarre, Navarre, tic but a nook of France,
Sufficient yet for such a petty King:
That with a rabblement of his heretics,
Blinds Europs eyes and troubles our estate:
Him will we
But first lets follow those in France,
That hinder our possession to the crown:
As Caesar to his soldiers, so say I:
Those that hate me, will I learn to loath.
Give me a look, that when I bend the brows,
Pale death may walk in furrows of my face:
A hand, that with a grasp may gripe the world,
An ear, to hear what my detractors say,
A royal seat, a sceptre and a crown:
That those which doe behold, they may become
As men that stand and case against the Sun.
The plot is laid, and things shall come to pass:
Where resolution strives for victory.
Madam, I beseech your grace to except this simple gift.
Thanks my good friend, hold take thou this reward.
I humbly thank your Majesty.
Me thinks the gloves have a very strong perfume,
The sent whereof doth make my head to ache.
Doth not your grace know the man that gave them you?
Not well, but do remember such a man.
Your grace was ill advised to take the then,
Considering of these dangerous times.
Help son Navarre I am poisoned.
The heavens forbid your highness such mishap.
The late suspicion of the Duke of Guise,
Might well have moved your highness to beware:
How you did meddle with such dangerous gifts.
Too late it is my Lord if that be true
To blame her highness, but I hope it be
Only some natural passion makes her sick.
O no, sweet Margret, the fatal poison
Works within my head, my brain pan breaks,
My heart doth faint, I dye.
My Mother poisoned here before my face:
O gracious God, what times are these?
O grant sweet God my days may end with hers,
That I with her may dye and live again.
Let not this heavy chance my dearest Lord,
Forwhose effects my soul is massacred)
nfect thy gracious breast with fresh supply,
o aggravate our sudden misery.
Come my Lords let vs bear her body hence,
nd see it honoured with just solemnity.
What are you hurt my L. high Admiral?
I my good Lord shot through the arm.
We are betrayed come my Lords, and let vs go tell the King of this.
These are the cursed Guisians that doe seek our death.
Oh fatal was this marriage to vs all.
My noble son, and princely Duke of Guise,
Now have we got the fatal straggling dear:
Within the compass of a deadly toil,
And as we late decreed we may perform.
Madam, it will be noted through the world,
An action bloody and tyrannical:
Chiefly since under safety of our word,
They justly challenge their protection:
Besides my heart relents that noble men,
Only corrupted in religion, Ladies of honour,
Knights and Gentlemen, should for their conscience taste such rutheles ends.
Though gentle minds should pity others pains,
Yet will the wisest note their proper griefs:
And rather seek to scourge their enemies,
Then be themselves base subjects to the whip.
Me thinks my Lord, Enjoy hath well advised,
Your highness to consider of the thing,
And rather choose to seck your countries good,
Then pity or relieve these up start heretics.
I hope these reasons may serve my princely Son,
To have some care for fear of enemies:
Well Madam, I refer it to your Majesty,
And to my Nephew here the Duke of Guise:
What you determine, I will ratify.
Thanks to my princely son, then tell me Guise,
What order will you set down for the Massacre?
Thus Madame.
They that shall be actors in this Massacre,
Shall wear white crosses on their Burgonets:
And tie white linen scarfs about their arms.
He that wants these, and is suspected of heresy,
Shall dye, be he King or Emperor.
Then Isle have a peal of ordinance shot from the tower,
At which they all shall issue out and set the streets.
And then the watchword being given, a bell shall ring,
Which when they hear, they shall begin to kill:
And never cease until that bell shall cease,
Then breath a while.
How now fellow, what news?
And it please your grace the Lord high Admiral,
Riding the streets was traitorously shot,
And most humble entreats your Majesty
To vifite him sick in his bed.
Messenger, tell him I will see him strait.
What shall we doe now with the Admiral?
Your Majesty were best go visit him,
And make a show as if all were well.
Content, I will go visit the Admiral.
And I will go take order for his death.
How fares it with my Lord high Admiral,
Hath he been hurt with villains in the street?
I vow and swear as I am King of France,
To find and to repay the man with death:
With death delayed and torments never used,
That durst presume for hope of any gain,
To hurt the noble man their sovereign loves.
Ah my good Lord, these are the Guisians,
That seek to massacre our guiltless lives.
Assure your self my good Lord Admiral,
I deeply sorrow for your treacherous wrong:
And that I am not more secure my self,
Then I am careful you should be preserved.
Coffin, take twenty of our strongest guard,
And under your direction see they keep,
All treacherous violence from our noble friend,
Repaying all attempts with present death,
Upon the cursed breakers of our peace.
And so be patient good Lord Admiral,
And every hour I will visit you.
I humbly thank your royal Majesty.
Enjoy, Dumaine, Gonzago, Retes,
Swear by the argent crosses in your burgoners,
To kill all that you suspect of heresy.
I swear by this to be unmerciful.
I am disguised and none knows who I am.
And therefore mean to murder all I meet.
And so will I.
And I.
Away then, break into the Admirals house,
I let the Admiral be first dispatchr.
The Admiral chief standard bearer to the Lutherans,
Shall in the entrance of this Massacre,
Be murdered in his bed. Gonzago conduct them thither,
And then beset his house that not a man may live.
That charge is mine, Swizers keep you the streets,
And at each corner shall the Kings guard stand.
Come sirs follow me.
Cousin, the Captain of the Admirals guard,
Placed by my brother, will betray his Lord:
Now Guise shall catholiques flourish once again,
The head being of, the members cannot stand.
But look my Lord, ther's some in the Admirals house.
In lucky time, come let vs keep this lane,
And slay his servants that shall issue out.
Where is the Admiral?
O let me pray before I dye.
Then pray unto our Lady, kiss this cross.
O God forgive my sins.
Gonzago, what, is he dead?
I my Lord.
Then throw him down.
Now cousin view him well, it may be it is some other, and he escaped.
Cousin tic he, I know him by his look.
See where my Soldier shot him through the arm.
He mist him near, but we have struck him now.
Ah base Shatillian and degenerate, chief standard bearer to the Lutherans,
Thus in despite of thy Religion,
The Duke of Guise stamps on thy liveless bulk.
A way with him, cut of his head and hands.
And send them for a present to the Pope:
And when this just revenge is finished,
Unto mount Falcon will we drag his coarse:
And he that living hated so the cross,
Shall being dead, be hanged thereon in chains.
Enjoy, Gonzago, Retes, if that you three,
Will be as resolute as I and Dumaine:
There shall not a Huguenot breath in France.
I swear by this cross, we'll not be partial,
But slay as many as we can come near.
Mountsorrell, go shoot the ordinance of,
That they which have already set the street
May know their watchword, then told the bell,
And so lets forward to the Massacre.
I will my Lord,
And now my Lords let vs closely to our business.
Enjoy will follow thee.
And so will Dumaine.
Come then, lets away.
Tu tu, tu, let none escape, murder the Hugonets.
Kill them, kill them.
Lorraine, Lorraine, follow Lorraine, Sir,
Are you a preacher of these heresies?
I am a preacher of the word of God,
And thou a traitor to thy soul and him.
Dearly beloved brother, thus tic written.
Stay my Lord, let me begin the psalm.
Come drag him away and throw him in a ditch.
Who is that which knocks there?
Mountsorrell from the Duke of Guise.
Husband come down, heir's one would speak with you from the Duke of Guise.
To speak with me from such a man as he?
I, I, for this Seroune, and thou shalt hate.
O let me pray before I take my death.
Despatch then quickly.
O Christ my Saviour.
Christ, villain, why dare thou presume to call on Christ, without the intercession of some Saint? Sancta Iacobus hee was my Saint, pray to him.
O let me pray unto my God.
Then take this with you.
What fearful cries comes from the river Rene,
That frights poor Ramus sitting at his book?
I fear the Guisians have past the bridge,
And mean once more to menace me.
Fly Ramus fly, if thou wilt save thy life,
Tell me Taleus, wherefore should I fly?
The Guisians are hard at thy door, and mean to murder vs: hark, hark they come, Isle leap out at the window.
Sweet Taleus stay.
Who goes there?
Tic Taleus, Ramas bedfellow.
What art thou?
I am as Ramus is, a Christian.
O let him go, he is a catholic.
Come Ramus, more gold, or thou shalt have the stab.
Alas I am a scholar, how should I have gold?
All that I have is but my stipend from the King,
Which is no sooner received but it is spent.
Who have you there?
Tic Ramus, the Kings professor of Logic.
Stab him.
O good my Lord, wherein hath Ramus been so offencious.
Marry sir, in having a smack in all,
And yet did never sound any thing to the depth.
Was it not thou that scoftes the Organon,
And said it was a heap of vanities?
He that will be a flat decotamest,
And seen in nothing but Epetomies:
Is in your judgment thought a learned man.
And he forsooth must go and preach in Germany:
Excepting against Doctors actions,
And ipsi dixie with this quiddity,
Argumentum testimonis est in art fetialis.
To contradict which, I say Ramus shall dye:
How answer you that? your nego argumentum cannot serve, sir, kill him.
O good my Lord, let me but speak a word.
Well, say on.
Not for my life doe I desire this pause,
But in my latter hour to purge my self,
In that I know the things that I have wrote,
Which as I hear one Shekins takes it ill:
Because my places being but three, contains all his:
I knew the Organon to be confused,
And I reduced it into better form.
And this for Aristotle will I say,
That he that despises him, can ne'er
Be good in Logic or Philosophy.
And thats because the blockish thorbonest,
Attribute as much unto their works,
As to the service of the eternal God.
Why suffer you that peasant to declaim?
Stab him I say and send him to his friends in hell.
Ne'er was there Colliers son so full of pride.
My Lord of Enjoy, there are a hundred Protestants.
Which we have chaste into the river Rene,
That swim about and so preserve their lives:
How may we doe? I fear me they will live.
Go place some men upon the bridge,
With bows and darts to shoot at them they see,
And sink them in the river as they swim.
Tic well advised Dumain, go see it strait be done.
And in the mean time my Lord, could we devise,
To get those pedantes from the King Navarre,
that are tutors to him and the prince of Conti.
For that let me alone, Cousin stay you heer,
And when you see me in, then follow hard.
How now my Lords, how fare you?
My Lord, they say that all the protestants are massacred.
I, so they are, but yet what remedy:
I have done what I could to stay this broil.
But yet my Lord the report doth run,
That you were one that made this Massacre.
Who I, you are deceived, I rose but now.
Murder the Hugonets, take those pedantes hence.
Thou traitor Guise, lay of thy bloody hands.
Come let vs go tell the King.
Come sirs, Isle whip you to death with my punniards point.
A way with them both.
And now sirs for this night let our fury stay.
Yet will we not that the Massacre shall end,
Gonzago post you to Orleans,
Retes to Deep, Mountsorrell unto Roan,
And spare not one that you suspect of heresy.
and now stay that bell that to ye devils matins rings
Now every man put of his burgonet,
And so convey him closely to his bed.
My Lords of Poland I must needs confess,
The offer of your Prince Electors, far
Beyond the reach of my deserts:
For Poland is as I have been enformde,
A martial people, worthy such a King,
As hath sufficient counsel in himself,
To lighten doubts and frustrate subtle foes.
And such a King whom practise long hath taught,
To please himself with manage of the wars.
The greatest wars within our Christian bounds,
I mean our wars against the Muscouites:
And on the other side against the Turk,
Rich Princes both, and mighty Emperors:
Yet by my brother Charles our King of France,
And by his graces council it is thought,
that if I undertake to wear the crown
Of Poland, it may prejudice their hope
Of my inheritance to the crown of France:
For if th'almighty take my brother hence,
By due descent the Regal seat is mine.
With Poland therefore must I covenant thus,
That if by death of Charles, the diadem
Of France be cast on me, then with your leaves
I may retire me to my native home.
If your commission serve to warrant this,
I thankfully shall undertake the charge
Of you and yours, and carefully maintain
the wealth and safety of your kingdoms right.
All this and more your highness shall command,
For Polands crown and kingly diadem.
Then come my Lords, lets go.
Now sir, what shall we doe with the Admiral?
Why let vs burn him for an heretic.
O no, his body will infect the fire, and the fire the air, and so we shall be poisoned with him.
What shall we doe then?
Lets throw him into the river.
Oh twill corrupt the water, and the water the fish, and by the fish our selves when we cate them.
Then throw him into the ditch.
No, no, to decide all doubts, be ruled by me, lets hang him here upon this tree.
Agreed.
Now Madame, how like you our lusty Admiral?
Believe me Guise he becomes the place so well,
As I could long ere this have wished him there.
But come lets walk aside, thair's not very sweet.
No by my faith Madam.
Sirs, take him away and throw him in some ditch.
And now Madam as I understand,
There are a hundred Hugonets and more,
Which in the woods doe hold their synagogue:
And daily meet about this time of day,
And thither will I to put them to the sword.
Doe so sweet Guise, let vs delay no time,
For if these stragglers gather head again,
And disperse themselves throughout the Realm of France,
It will be hard for vs to work their deaths.
Be gone, delay no time sweet Guise.
Madam, I go as whirl-windes rage before a storm,
My Lord of Lorraine have you marked of late,
How Charles our son begins for to lament:
For the late nights work which my Lord of Guise
Did make in Paris amongst the Hugonites?
Madam, I have heard him solemnly vow,
With the rebellious King of Navarre,
For to revenge their deaths upon vs all.
I, but my Lord let me alone for that,
For Katherine must have her will in France:
As I doe live, so surely shall he dye.
And Henry then shall wear the diadem.
And if he grudge or cross his Mothers will,
Isle disinherit him and all the rest:
For Isle rule France, but they shall wear the crown:
And if they storm, I then may pull them down.
Come my Lord lets vs go.
Down with the Hugonites, murder them.
O Mounser de Guise, hear me but speak.
No villain, that tongue of thine,
That hath blasphemde the holy Church of Rome,
Shall drive no plaints into the Guises ears,
To make the justice of my heart relent:
Tu, tu, tu, let none escape:
So, drag them away.
O let me stay and rest me heer a while,
A griping pain hath ceased upon my heart:
A sudden pang, the messenger of death.
O say not so, thou kill thy mothers heart.
I must say so, pain forces me complain.
Comfort your self my Lord and have no doubt,
But God will sure restore you to your health.
O no, my loving brother of Navarre.
I have deserved a scourge I must confess,
Yet is there patience of another sort,
Then to misdo the welfare of their King:
God grant my nearest friends may prove no worse.
O hold me up, my sight begins to fail,
My sinews shrink, my brains turn upside down,
My heart doth break, I faint and dye.
What art thou dead, sweet son speak to thy Mother,
O no, his soul is fled from out his breast,
And he nor hears, nor sees vs what we doe:
My Lords, what rests there now for to be done?
But that we presently despatch Ambassadors
To Poland, to call Henry back again,
To wear his brothers crown and dignity.
Epernoune, go see it presently be done,
And bid him come without delay to vs.
Madam, I will.
And now my Lords after these funerals be done,
We will with all the speed we can provide,
For Henries coronation from Polonie:
Come let vs take his body hence.
And now Navarre whilst that these broils doe last,
My opportunity may serve me fit,
To steal from France, and hye me to my home.
For heers no safety in the Realm for me,
And now that Henry is called from Poland,
It is my due by just succession:
And therefore as speedily as I can perform,
Isle muster up an army secretly,
For fear that Guise joined with the K. of Spain,
Might seem to cross me in mine enterprise.
But God that always doth defend the right,
Will show his mercy and preserve vs still.
The virtues of our true Religion,
Cannot but march with many graces more:
Whose army shall discomfort all your foes,
And at the length in Pampelonia crown,
In spite of Spain and all the popish power,
That holds it from your highness wrongfully:
Your Majesty her rightful Lord and Sovereign.
Truth Pleshe, and God so prosper me in all,
As I entend to labour for the truth,
And true profession of his holy word:
Come Pleshe, lets away whilst time doth serve,
Viue la Roy, viue la Roy,
Welcome from Poland Henry once again,
Welcome to France thy fathers royal seat,
Here hast thou a country void of fears,
A warlike people to maintain thy right,
A watchful Senate for ordaining laws,
A loving mother to preserve thy state,
And all things that a King may wish besides:
All this and more hath Henry with his crown.
And long may Henry enjoy all this &amp; more,
Viue la Roy, viue la Roy.
Thanks to you al. The guitar of all crowns,
Grant that our deeds may well deserve your loves:
And so they shall, if fortune speed my will,
And yield your thoughts to height of my deserts.
What says our Minions, think they Henries heart
Will not both harbour love and Majesty?
Put of that fear, they are already ioynde,
No person, place, or time, or circumstance,
Shall slack my loves affection from his bent,
As now you are, so shall you still persist,
Remooueles from the favours of your King.
We know that noble minds change not their thoughts
For wearing of a crown: in that your grace,
Hath worn the Poland diadem, before
you were invested in the crown of France:
I tell thee Mugeroun we will be friends,
And fellows to, what ever storms arise.
Then may it please your Majesty to give me leave,
To punish those that doe profane this holy feast.
How meanst thou that?
O Lord, mine ear.
Come sir, give me my buttons and heers your ear.
Sir, take him away.
Hands of good sellow, I will be his bail
For this offence: go sir, work no more,
Till this our Coronation day be past:
And now our solemn rites of Coronation done,
What now remains, but for a while to feast,
And spend some days in barriers, tourny, tilt,
and like disports, such as doe fit the Court?
Lets go my Lords, our dinner stays for vs.
My Lord Cardinal of Lorraine, tell me,
How likes your grace my sons pleasantness?
His mind you see runs on his minions,
And all his heaven is to delight himself:
And whilst he sleeps securely thus in ease,
Thy brother Guise and we may now provide,
To plant our selves with such authority,
as not a man may live without our leaves.
Then shall the Catholic faith of Rome,
Flourish in France, and none deny the same,
Madam, as in secrecy I was told,
My brother Guise hath gathered a power of men,
Which as he saith, to kill the Puritans,
But tic the house of Burbon that he means.
Now Madam must you insinuate with the King,
And tell him that tic for his Countries good,
And common profit of Religion.
Tush man, let me alone with him,
To work the way to bring this thing to pass:
And if he doe deny what I doe say,
Isle dispatch him with his brother presently.
And then shall Mounser wear the diadem:
Tush, all shall dye unless I have my will.
For while she lives Katherine will be Queen.
Come my Lords, let vs go seek the Guise,
And then determine of this enterprise.
Go fetch me pen and ink.
I will Madam.
That I may write unto my dearest Lord.
Sweet Mugeroune, tic he that hath my heart,
And Guise usurps it, cause I am his wife:
Fine would I find some means to speak with him
but cannot, and therefore am enforced to write,
That he may come and meet me in some place,
Where we may one enjoy the others sight.
So, set it down and leave me to my self.
She writes. O would to God this quill that here doth write,
Had late been plucked from out fair Cupids wing:
That it might print these lines within his heart.
What, all alone my love, and writing too:
Iprethee say to whom thou writes?
To such a one my Lord, as when she reads my lines, will laugh I fear me at their good array.
I pray thee let me see.
O no my Lord, a woman only must partake the secrets of my heart.
But Madam I must see.
Are these your secrets that no man must know?
O pardon me my Lord.
Thou trothles and unjust, what lines are these?
Am I grown old, or is thy lust grown young,
Or hath my love been so obscured in thee,
That others needs to comment on my text?
Isall my love forgot which held thee dear?
I, dearer then the apple of mine eye?
Is Guises glory but a cloudy mist,
In sight and judgment of thy lustful eye?
More du, were not the fruit within thy womb,
Of whose increase I set some longing hope:
This wrathful hand should strike thee to the hart.
Hence strumpet, hide thy head for shame,
And fly my presence if thou look to live.
O wicked sex, perjured and unjust,
Now doe I see that from the very first,
Her eyes and looks sowed seeds of perjury,
But villain he to whom these lines should go,
Shall buy her love even with his dearest blood.
My Lords, sith in a quarrel just and right,
We undertake to manage these our wars:
Against the proud disturbers of the faith,
I mean the Guise, the Pope, and King of Spain,
Who set themselves to tread vs under foot,
And rent our true religion from this land.
But for you know our quarrel is no more,
But to defend their strange inventions,
Which they will put vs to with sword and fire:
We must with resolute minds resolve to fight,
In honour of our God and countries good.
Spain is the counsel chamber of the pope,
Spain is the place where he makes peace and war,
And Guise for Spain hath now incensed the King,
To send his power to meet vs in the field.
Then in this bloody brunt they may behold,
The sole endeavour of your princely care,
To plant the true succession of the faith,
In spite of Spain and all his heresies.
The power of vengeance now encamps it self,
Upon the haughty mountains of my breast:
plays with her goary colours of revenge,
Whom I respect as leaves of boasting greene,
That change their colour when the winter comes,
When I shall vaunt as victor in revenge.
How now sir, what news?
My Lord, as by our scouts we understand,
A mighty army comes from France with speed:
Which are already mustered in the land,
And means to meet your highness in the field.
In Gods name, let them come.
This is the Guise that hath incensed the King,
To levy arms and make these civil broils
But can thou tell who is their general?
Noty et my Lord, for thereon doe they stay:
But as report doth go, the Duke of Ioyeux
Hath made great suit unto the King therefore.
It will not countervail his pains I hope,
I would the Guise in his steed might have come,
But he doth lurk within his drowsy couch,
And makes his footstool on security:
So he be safe he cares not what becomes,
Of King or Country, no not for them both.
But come my Lords, let vs away with speed,
And place our selves in order for the fight.
My sweet Ioyeux, I make thee General,
Of all my army now in readiness:
To march against the rebellious King Navarre.
At thy request I am content thou go,
Although my love to thee can hardly suffer,
Regarding still the danger of thy life.
Thanks to your Majesty, and so I take my leave.
Farewell to my Lord of Guise and Epernoune,
Health and hearty farewell to my Lord Ioyeux.
So kindly Cousin of Guise you and your wife doe both salute our lovely Minions.
Remember you the letter gentle sir, which your wife writ to my dear Minion, and her chosen friend?
How now my Lord, faith this is more then need,
Am I thus to be jested at and scorned?
Tic more then kingly or Imperious.
And sure if all the proudest Kings in
Christendom, should bear me such derision:
They should know how I scorned them and their mocks.
I love your Minions, dote on them your self,
I know none else but holds them in disgrace:
And heer by all the Saints in heaven I swear,
That villain for whom I bear this deep disgrace:
Even for your words that have incensed me so,
Shall buy that strumpets favour with his blood.
Whether he have dishonoured me or no.
Par la more du, Il mera.
Believe me this jest bites sore.
My Lord, it were good to make them friends
For his oaths are seldom spent in vain.
How now Mugeroun, metst thou not the Guise at the door?
Not I my Lord, what if I had?
Marry if thou had, thou might have had the stab,
For he hath solemnly sworn thy death.
I may be stabbed, and live till he be dead,
But wherefore bears he me such deadly hate?
Because his wife bears thee such kindly love.
If that be all, the next time that I meet her,
Isle make her shake offloue with her heals.
But which way is he gone, Isle go make a walk on purpose from the Court to meet with him.
I like not this, come Epernoune lets go seek the Duke and make them friends.
The Duke is slain and all his power dispersed,
And we are graced with wreathes of victory:
Thus God we see doth ever guide the right,
To make his glory great upon the earth.
The terror of this happy victory,
I hope will make the King surcease his hate:
And either never manage army more
Or also employ them in some better cause.
How many noble men have lost their lives,
In prosecution of these cruel arms,
Is ruth and almost death to call to mind:
But God we know will always put them down,
That lift themselves against the perfect truth,
Which Isle maintain so long as life doth last,
And with the Q. of England join my force:
To beat the papal Monarck from our lands,
And keep those relics from our countries coasts.
Come my Lords now that this storm is overpassed,
Let vs away with triumph to our tents.
Sir, to you sir, that dares make the Duke a cuckold,
And use a counterfeit key to his privy Chamber door: And although
you take out nothing but your own, yet you put in that which displeases him, and so forestall his market, and set up your standing where you should not: and whereas hee is your Landlord, you will take upon you to be his, and till the ground that he himself should occupy, which is his own free land. If it be not too free there's the question: and though I come not to take possession (as I would I might) yet I mean to keep you out, which I will if this geareholde: what are ye come so soon? have at ye sir.
Hold thee tall Soldier, take thee this and fly.
Lye there the Kings delight, and Guises scorn.
Revenge it Henry as thou list or dare,
I did it only in despite of thee.
My Lord of Guise, we understand that you have gathered a power of men, what your intent is yet we cannot learn, but we presume it is not for our good.
Why I am no traitor to the crown of France.
What I have done tic for the Gospel sake.
Nay for the Popes sake, and thine own benefit.
What Peer in France but thou (aspiring Guise)
Durst be in arms without the Kings consent?
I challenge thee for treason in the cause.
Ah base Epernoune, were not his highness here,
Thou should perceive the D. of Guise is moved.
Be patient Guise and threat not Epernoune,
Least thou perceive the King of France be moved.
Why? I am a Prince of the Valoyses line,
Therefore an enemy to the Burbonites.
I am a juror in the holy league,
And therefore hated of the Protestants.
What should I doe but stand upon my guard?
And being able, Isle keep an host in pay.
Thou able to maintain an host in pay,
That lives by foreign exhibition.
The Pope and King of Spain are thy good friends,
Else all France knows how poor a Duke thou art.
I, those are they that feed him with their gold,
To counter maund our will and check our friends.
My Lord, to speak more plainly, thus it is
Being animated by Religious zeal,
I mean to muster all the power I can,
To overthrow those sexious Puritan
And know my Lord, the Pope will sell his triple crown,
I, and the catholic Philip King of Spain,
Ere I shall want, will cause his Indians,
To rip the golden bowels of America.
Navarre that cloaks them underneath his wings
Shall feel the house of Lorraine is his foe:
Your highness needs not fear mine armies force,
Tic for your safety and your enemies wrack.
Guise, wear our crown, and be thou King of France,
And as Dictator make or war or peace,
Whilst I cry placate like a Senator,
I cannot brook thy haughty insolence,
Dismiss thy camp or else by our Edict,
Be thou proclaimed a traitor throughout France.
The choice is hard, I must dissemble.
My Lord, in token of my true humility,
And simple meaning to your Majesty:
I kiss your graces hand, and take my leave,
Intending to dislodge my camp with speed.
Then farewell Guise, the King and thou are friends.
But trust him not my Lord, for had your highness,
Seen with what a pomp he entered Paris,
And how the Citizens with gifts and shows
Did entertain him and promised to be at his command:
Nay, they feared not to speak in the streets,
That the Guise durst stand in arms against the King,
For not effecting of his holiness will.
Did they of Paris entertain him so?
Then means he present treason to our state.
Well, let me alone, whose within there?
Make a discharge of all my counsel strait,
And Isle subscribe my name and seal it straight.
My head shall be my counsel, they are false:
And Epernoune I will be ruled by thee.
My Lord, I think for safety of your royal person,
It would be good the Guise were made away,
And so to quite your grace of all suspect.
First let vs set our hand and seal to this,
And then Isle tell thee what I mean to doe.
So, convey this to the counsel presently.
And Epernoune though I seem mild and calm,
Think not but I am tragical within:
Isle secretly convey me unto Bloyse,
For now that Paris takes the Guises part,
Here is no staying for the King of France,
Unless he mean to be betrayed and dye:
But as I hue, so sure the Guise shall dye.
My Lord, I am advertised from France,
That the Guise hath taken arms against the King,
And that Paris is revolted from his grace.
Then hath your grace fit opportunity,
To show your love unto the King of France:
Offering him aide against his enemies,
Which cannot but be thankfully received.
Bartus, it shall be so, post then to France,
And there salute his highness in our name,
Assure him all the aide we can provide,
Against the Guisians and their accomplices.
Bartus be gone, commend me to his grace,
And tell him ere it be long, Isle visit him.
I will my Lord.
Pleshe,
My Lord.
Pleshe, go muster up our men with speed,
And let them march away to France amain:
For we must aide the King against the Guise.
Be gone I say, tic time that we were there.
I go my Lord.
That wicked Guise I fear me much will be,
The ruin of that famous Realm of France:
For his aspiring thoughts aim at the crown,
And takes his vantage on Religion,
To plant the Pope and popelings in the Realm,
And bind it wholly to the Sea of Rome:
But if that God doe prosper mine attempts,
And send vs safely to arrive in France:
We'll beat him back, and drive him to his death,
That basely seeks the ruin of his Realm.
Come on sirs, what, are you resolutely bent,
Hating the life and honour of the Guise?
What, will you not fear when you see him come?
Fear him said you? tush, were he here, we would kill him presently.
O that his heart were leaping in my hand.
But when will he come that we may murder him?
Well, then I see you are resolute.
Let vs alone, I warrant you.
Then sits take your standings within this Chamber,
For anon the Guise will come.
You will give vs our money.
I, I, fear not, stand close, so be resolute:
Now false the star whose influence governs France,
Whose light was deadly to the Protestants
Now must he fall and perish in his height.
Now Captain of my guard, are these murtherears ready?
They be my good Lord.
But are they resolute and armed to kill,
Hating the life and honour of the Guise?
I warrant ye my Lord.
Then come proud Guise and here disgordge thy breast,
Surchargde with surfeit of ambitious thoughts:
Breath out that life wherein my death was hid,
And end thy endless treasons with thy death.
Halla varlet hey: Epernoune, where is the King?
Mounted his royal Cabonet.
I prithee tell him that the Guise is here.
And please your grace the Duke of Guise,
doth crave access unto your highness.
Let him come in.
Come Guise and see thy traitorous guile outreached,
And perish in the pit thou made for me.
Good morrow to your Majesty.
Good morrow to my loving Cousin of Guise.
How fares it this morning with your excellence?
I heard your Majesty was scarcely pleased,
That in the Court I bare so great a train.
They were to blame that said I was displeased,
And you good Cousin to imagine it.
It were hard with me if I should doubt my kin,
Or be suspicious of my dearest friends:
Cousin, assure you I am resolute,
Whatsoever any whisper in mine ears,
Not to suspect disloyalty in thee,
And so sweet Cousin farewell.
So, now sues the King for favour to the Guise,
And all his Minions stop when I command:
Why this tic to have an army in the field,
Now by the holy sacrament I swear,
As ancient Romans over their Captive Lords,
So will I triumph over this wanton King,
And he shall follow my proud Chariots wheels.
Now doe I but begin to look about,
And all my former time was spent in vain:
Hold Sword, for in thee is the Duke of Guises hope.
Villain, why dost thou look so ghastly? speak.
O pardon me my Lord of Guise.
Pardon thee, why what hast thou done?
O my Lord, I am one of them that is set to murder you.
To murder me villain.
I my Lord, the rest have taine their standings in the next room, therefore good my Lord go not forth.
Yet Caesar shall go forth, let mean conceits, and baser men fear death: tut they are peasants,
I am Duke of Guise: and princes with their looks, engender fear.
Stand close, he is coming, I know him by his voice.
As pale as ashes, nay then tic time to look about.
Down with him, down with him.
Oh I have my deaths wound, give me leave to speak.
Then pray to God, and ask forgiveness of the King.
Trouble me not, I near offended him.
Nor will I ask forgiveness of the King.
Oh that I have not power to stay my life,
Nor immortality to be revenged:
To dye by Peasants, what a grief is this?
Ah Sextus, be revenged upon the King,
Philip and Parma, I am slain for you:
Pope excommunicate, Philip depose,
The wicked branch of cursed Valois his line.
Viue la messa, perish Hugonets,
Thus Coesar did go forth, and thus he dyed.
What have you done? then stay a while and Isle go call the King, but see where he comes.
My Lord, see where the Guise is slain.
Ah this sweet sight is physic to my soul,
Go fetch his son for to behold his death:
Surchargde with guilt of thousand massacres:
Mounser of Lorraine sink away to hell,
And in remembrance of those bloody broils:
To which thou didstalure me being alive:
And here in presence of you all I swear,
I ne'er was King of France until this hour:
This is the traitor that hath spent my gold,
In making foreign wars and civil broils.
Did he not drawa sort of English priests,
From Doway to the Seminary at Remes,
To hatch forth treason against their natural Queen?
Did he not cause the King of Spaines huge fleet,
To threaten England and to menace me?
Did he not injure Mounser thats deceased?
Hath he not made me in the Popes defence,
To spend the treasure that should strength my land:
In civil broils between Navarre and me?
Tush, to be short, he meant to make me Munke,
Or else to murder me, and so be King.
Let Christian princes that shall hear of this,
(As all the world shall know our Guise is dead)
Rest satisfied with this that heer I swear,
Ne'er was there King of France so yoked as I.
My Lord heer is his son.
Boy, look where your father lies,
My father slain, who hath done this deed?
Sir it was I that slew him, and will slay thee too, and thou prove such a traitor.
Art thou King, and hast done this bloody deed?
Isle be revenged.
A way to prison with him, Isle clip his wings or ere he pass my hands, away with him.
But what avails that this traitors dead,
When Duke Dumaine his brother is alive,
And that young Cardinal that is grown so proud?
Go to the Governor of Orleans,
And will him in my name to kill the Duke.
Get you a way and strangle the Cardinal,
These two will make one entire Duke of Guise,
Especially with our old mothers help.
My Lord, see where she comes, as if she droupt to hear these news.
And let her droup, my heart is light enough.
Mother, how like you this device of mine?
I slew the Guise, because I would be King.
King, why so thou were before.
Pray God thou be a King now this is done.
Nay he was King and countermanded me,
But now I will be King and rule my self,
And make the Guisians stop that are alive.
I cannot speak for grief, when thou wast borne,
I would that I had murdered thee my son.
My son: thou art a changeling, not my son.
I curse thee and exclaim thee miscreant,
Traitor to God, and to the realm of France.
Cry out, exclaim, houle till thy throat be hoarse,
The Guise is slain, and I rejoice therefore:
And now will I to arms, come Epernoune:
And let her grieve her heart out if she will.
A way, leave me alone to meditate,
Sweet Guise, would he had died so thou were here:
To whom shall I bewray my secrets now,
Or who will help to build Religion?
The Protestants will glory and insult,
Wicked Navarre will get the crown of France,
The Popedome cannot stand, all goes to wrack.
And all for thee my Guise, what may I doe?
But sorrow seize upon my toiling soul,
For since the Guise is dead, I will not live.
Murder me not, I am a Cardinal.
Were thou the Pope thou might not scope from vs.
What will you fyle your hands with Churchmens blood?
Shed your blood, O Lord no: for we entend to strangle you.
Then there is no remedy but I must dye.
No remedy, therefore prepare your self.
Yet lives my brother Duke Dumaiue, and many more:
To revenge our deaths upon that cursed King.
Upon whose heart may all the furies gripe,
And with their paws drench his black soul in hell.
Yours my Lord Cardinal, you should have said.
So, pluck amain, he is hard hearted, therefore pull with violence.
Come take him away.
My noble brother murdered by the King,
Oh what may I doe, for to reuengethy death?
The Kingsalone, it cannot satisfy.
Sweet Duke of Guise our prop to lean upon,
Now thou art dead, here is no stay for vs:
I am thy brother, and isle revenge thy death,
And root Valoys his line from forth of France,
And beat proud Burbon to his native home.
That basely seeks to join with such a King.
Whose murderous thoughts will be his overthrow.
Hee wild the Governor of Orleans in his name,
That I with speed should have been put to death.
But thats prevented, for to end his life.
His life, and all those traitors to the Church of Rome,
That durst attempt to murder noble Guise.
My Lord, I come to bring you news, that your brother the Cardinal of Lorraine by the Kings consent is lately strangled unto death.
My brother Carden all slain and I alive?
O words of power to kill a thousand men.
Come let vs away and levy men,
Tic war that must assuage this tyrants pride.
My Lord, hear me but speak.
I am a Friar of the order of the Iacobyns,
That for my conscience sake will kill the King.
But what doth move thee aboue the rest to doe the deed?
O my Lord, I have been a great sinner in my days, and the deed is meritorious.
But how wilt thou get opportunitye?
Tush my Lord, let me alone for that.
Friar come with me,
We will go talk more of this within.
Brother of Navarre, I sorrow much,
That ever I was proved your enemy,
And that the sweet and princely mind you bear,
Was ever troubled with injurious wars:
I vow as I am lawful King of France,
To recompense your reconciled love,
With all the honours and affections,
That ever I vouchsafed my dearest friends.
It is enough if that Navarre niay be,
Esteemed faithful to the King of France:
Whose service he may still command till death.
Thanks to my Kingly Brother of Navarre.
Then here wee'llye before Lucrecia walls,
Girting this strumpet City with our siege,
Till surfeiting with our afflicting arms,
She cast her hateful stomach to the earth.
And it please your Majesty here is a Friar of the order of the Iacobins, sent from the President of Paris, that craves access unto your grace.
Let him come in.
I like not this Friars look.
It were not amiss my Lord, if he were searched.
Sweet Epernoune, our Friars are holy men,
And will not offer violence to their King,
For all the wealth and treasure of the world,
Friar, thou dost acknowledge me thy King:
I my good Lord, and will dye therein.
Then come thou near, and tell what news thou bring.
My Lord, the President of Paris greetes your grace, and sends his duty by these spydye lines, humbly craving your gracious reply.
Isle read them Friar, and then Isle answer thee.
Sancte Iacobus, now have mercy upon me.
O my Lord, let him live a while.
No, let the villain dye, and feel in hell, just torments for his treachery.
What, is your highness hurt?
Yes Navarre, but not to death I hope.
God shield your grace from such a sudden death:
Go call a surgeon hither strait.
What irreligious Pagans parts be these,
Of such as hold them of the holy church?
Take hence that damned villain from my sight.
Ah, had your highness let him live,
We might have punished him to his deserts.
Sweet Epernoune all Rebels under heaven, shall take example by their punishment, how they bear arms against their sovereign.
Go call the English Agent hither strait,
Isle send my sister England news of this,
And give her warning of her treacherous foes.
Pleases your grace to let the Surgeon search your wound.
The wound I warrant ye is deep my Lord,
Search Surgeon and resolve me what thou see.
Agent for England, send thy mistress word,
What this detested Iacobin hath done.
Tell her for all this that I hope to live,
Which if I doe, the Papal Monarck goes to wrack.
And antechristian kingdom falls.
These bloody hands shall tear his triple Crown,
And fire accursed Rome about his ears.
He fire his crazed buildings and incense,
The papal to wers to kiss the holy earth.
Navarre, give me thy hand, I here do swear,
To ruinate that wicked Church of Rome,
That hatches up such bloody practises.
And here protest eternal love to thee,
And to the Queen of England specially,
Whom God hath blessed for hating Papestry.
These words revive my thoughts and comforts me,
To see your highness in this virtuous mind.
Tell me Surgeon, shall I live?
Alas my Lord, the wound is dangerous, for you are stricken with a poisoned knife.
A poisoned knife, what shall the French king die e,
Wounded and poisoned, both at once?
O that that damned villain were alive again,
That we might torture him with some new found death.
He died a death too good, the devil of hell torture his wicked soul.
Ah curse him not sith he is dead, O the fatall poison works within my breast, tell me Surgeon and flatter not, may I live?
Alas my Lord, your highness cannot live.
Surgeon, why say thou so? the King may live.
Oh no Navarre, thou must be King of France.
Long may you live, and still be King of France.
Or else dye Epernoune.
Sweet Epernoune thy King must dye.
My Lords, fight in the quarrel of this valiant Prince,
For he is your lawful King and my next heir:
Valoyses lyne ends in my tragedy.
Now let the house of Bourbon wear the crown,
And may it never end in blood as mine hath done.
Weep not sweet Navarre, but revenge my death.
Ah Epernoune, is this thy love to me?
Henry thy King wipes of these childish tears,
And bids thee whet thy sword on Sextus bones,
That it may keenly slice the Catholics.
He loves me not that sheds most tears,
But he that makes most lavish of his blood.
Fire Paris where these treacherous rebels lurk,
Idye Navarre, come bear me to my Sepulchre.
Salute the Queen of England in my name,
And tell her Henry dyes her faithful friend.
Come Lords, take up the body of the King.
That we may see it honourably entered:
And then I vow for to revenge his death,
As Rome and all those popish Prelates there,
Shall curse the time that ere Navarre was King.
And ruled in France by Henries fatal death.

