VOuchsafe Immortals, and (aboue the rest)
Great Iupiter, our Cities sole Protector,
That if (provoked against vs by our evils,)
You needs will plague vs with your ceasles wroth,
At least to choose those forth that are in fault,
And save the rest in these tempestuous broils:
Else let the mischief that should them befall,
Be poured on me, that one may die for all.
Oft hath such sacrifice appeased your ires,
And oft ye have your heavy hands with-held
From this poor people, when (with one mans loss,)
Your pity hath preserved the rest vntucht:
But we disloiall to our own defence,
Faint-harted do those liberties enthral,
Which (to preserve unto our after good)
Our fathers hazarded their derest blood.
Yet Brutus Manlius, hardy Sceuola,
And stout Camillus, are returned fro Styx,
Desiring Arms to aid our Capitol.
Yea, come they are, and fiery as before,
Vndera Tyrant see our bastard harts
Lye idly sighing, while our shameful souls
Endure a million of base controls.
Poisoned Ambition (rooted in high minds)
It is thou that train'st vs into all these errors:
Thy mortal couetize peruerts our laws,
And tears our freedom from our franchised harts.
Our Fathers found thee at their former walls;
And humbled to their of-spring left thee dying.
Yet thou reviving, foyl'dst our Infant Town,
With guiltless blood by brothers hands out-lanched.
And hongst (O Hell) upon a Forte half finished,
Thy monstrous murder for a thing to mark.
"But faith continues not where men command.
"Equals are ever bandying for the best:
"A state divided cannot firmly stand.
"Two Kings within one realm could never rest.
This day we see, the Father and the son,
Have fought like foes Pharsalias misery;
And with their blood made marsh the parched plains,
While th'earth that groaned to bear their carcasses,
Bewailed th'insatiat humours of them both;
That as much blood in wilful folly spent,
As were to tame the world sufficient.
Now Parthia fear no more, for Crassus death
That we will come thy borders to besiege:
Nor fear the darts of our courageous troops.
For those brave soldiers that were (sometime) wont
To terrify thee with their names, are dead.
And civil fury, fiercer then thine hosts,
Hath in a manner this great Town ore-turn'd;
That meanwhile was the terror of the world.
Of whom so many Nations stood in fear,
To whom so many Nations prostrate stooped,
Ore whom (save heaven) nought could signorize,
And whom (save heaven) nothing could affright.
Impregnable, immortal, and whose power,
Could never have been curbed, but by it self.
For neither could the flaxen-haird high Dutch,
(A martial people matting after Arms,)
Nor yet the fierce and fiery humoured French,
The More that travels to the Lybian sands,
The Greek, Th'Arabian, Macedons or Medes,
Once dare t'assault it, or attempt to lift
Their humbled heads, in presence of proud Rome.
But by our Laws from liberty restraynd,
Like Captives lived eternally enchained.
But Rome (alas) what helps it that thou ty'dst
The former World to thee in vassalage?
What helps thee now t'haue tamed both land and Sea?
What helps it thee that under thy control,
The Morn and Mid-day both by East and West,
And that the golden Sun where ere he drive
His glittering Chariot, finds our Ensigns spread?
Sith it contents not thy posterity;
But as a bait for pride (which spoils vs all,)
Embarks vs in so perilous a way,
As menaces our death, and thy decay.
For Rome thou now resembles a Ship,
At random wandering in a boisterous Sea,
When foaming billows feel the Northern blasts:
Thou toyl'st in peril, and the windy storm,
Doth topside-turuey toss thee as thou flotest.
Thy Mast is shivered, and thy maine-saile torn,
Thy sides sore beaten, and thy hatches broke.
Thou want thy tackling, and a Ship vnrig'd
Can make no shift to combat with the Sea.
See how the Rocks do heave their heads at thee,
Which if thou sholdst but touch, thou straight becomst
A spoil to Neptune, and a sportful pray
To the Glauc's and Tritons, pleased with thy decay.
Thou vaunt'st not of thine Ancestors in vain,
But vainly count'st thine own victorious deeds.
What helps vs the things that they did then,
Now we are hated both of Gods and men?
"Hatred accompanies prosperity,
"For one man grieves at another good,
"And so much more we think our misery,
"The more that Fortune hath with others stood:
"So that we filled are seen as wisdom would,
"To bridle time with reason as we should.
"For we are proud when Fortune favours vs,
"As if inconstant Chance were always one,
"Or standing now, she would continue thus.
"O fools look back and see the rolling stone,
"Whereon she blindly lighting sets her foot,
"And slightly sows that seldom takes root.
Heaven heretofore (inclined to do vs good,)
Did favour vs, with conquering our foes,
When jealous Italy (exasperate,
With our vp-rising) sought our Cities fall.
But we, soon tickled with such flattering hopes,
Waged further war with an insatiate hart,
And tyerd our neighbour Countries so with charge,
As with their loss, we did our bounds enlarge.
Carthage and Sicily we have subdued,
And almost yoked all the world beside:
And soly through desire of public rule,
Rome and the earth are waxen all as one:
Yet now we live despoild and robbed by one,
Of th'ancient freedom wherein we were borne.
And even that yoke that wont to tame all others,
Is heavily returned upon our selves.
"A note of Chance that may the proud control,
"And show Gods wrath against a cruel soul.
"For heaven delights not in vs, when we doe
"That to another, which our selves dysdaine:
"Judge others as thou would be judged again.
"And do but as thou would be done unto.
"For sooth to say (in reason) we deserve,
"To have the selfsame measure that we serve.
What right had our ambitious ancestors,
(Ignobly issued from the Carte and Plough,)
To enter Asia? What, were they the heirs
To Persia or the Medes, first Monarchies?
What interest had they to Afferique?
To Gaul or Spain? Or what did Neptune owe vs
Within the bounds of further Brittany?
Are we not thieves and robbers of those Realms
That ought vs nothing but revenge for wrongs?
What touches vs the treasure or the hopes,
The lives or liberties of all those Nations,
Whom we by force have held in servitude?
Whose mournful cries and shrieks to heaven ascend,
Importuning both vengeance and defence
Against this City, rich of violence.
"It is not enough (alas) our power t'extend,
"Or ouer-runne the world from East to West,
"Or that our hands the Earth can comprehend,
"Or that we proudly doe what like vs best.
"He lives more quietly whose rest is made,
"And can with reason chasten his desire,
"Then he that blindly toils for a shade,
"And is with others Empire set on fire.
"Our bliss consists not in possessions,
"But in commanding our affections
"In virtues choice, and vices needful chase
"Far from our harts, for staining of our face.
Upon thy back (where misery doth sit)
O Rome, the heavens with their wrathful hand,
Revenge the crimes thy fathers did commit.
But if (their further fury to withstand,
Which ore thy walls thy wrack sets menacing)
Thou dost not seek to calm heavens ireful king,
A further plague will pester all the land.
"The wrath of heaven (though urged,) we see is slow
"In punishing the evils we have done:
"For what the Father hath deserved, we know
"Is spared in him, and punished in the son.
"But to forgive the apter that they be,
"They are the more displeased when they see,
"That we continue our offence begun.
"Then from her loathsome Cave doth Plague repair,
"That breaths her heavy poisons down to hell:
"Which with their noisome fall corrupt the ayre,
"Or maigre famine, which the weak foretell,
"Or bloody war, (of other woes the worst,)
"Which where it lights doth show the Land accursed,
"And ne'er did good where ever it befell.
War that hath sought Th'Ausonian fame to rear,
In warlike Emonye, (now grown so great
With Soldiers bodies that were buried there,)
Which yet to sack vs toils in bloody sweat:
T'enlarge the bounds of conquering Thessalie,
Through murder, discord, wrath, and enmity,
Even to the peaceful Indians pearled seat.
Whose entrails fyerd with rancor, wrath and rage,
The former petty combats did displace,
And Camp to Camp did endless battles wage:
Which on the Mountain tops of warlike Thrice,
Made thundering Mars (Dissentions common friend,)
Amongst the forward Soldiers first descend,
Armed with his blood-besmeard keen Coutelace.
Who first attempted to excite to Arms,
The troops enraged with the Trumpets sound,
Head-long to run and reck no after harms,
Where in the flowered Meads dead men were found;
Falling as thick (through warlike cruelty,)
As ears of Corn for want of husbandry;
That (wasteful) shed their grain upon the ground.
O war, if thou were subject but to death,
And by desert mighst fall to Phlegiton,
The torment that Ixion suffered,
Or his whose soul the Vulter seizes on,
Were all too little to reward thy wrath:
Nor all the plagues, that fiery Pluto hath
The most outrageous sinners laid upon.
Accursed Catiues, wretches that wee are,
Perceive we not that for the fatal dombe,
The Fates make hast enough: but we (by war)
Must seek in Hell to have a hapless room.
Or fast enough doe foolish men not die,
But they (by murder of themselves) must hie,
Hopeless to hide them in a hapless tomb?
All sad and desolate our City lies,
And (for fair Corne-ground are our fields surcloid)
With worthless Gorse, that yearly fruitless dyes;
And choke the good which else we bad enjoyed.
Death dwells within vs, and if gentle Peace
Descend not soon, our sorrows to surcease,
Latium (already quaild) will be destroyed.
AND will ye needs bedew my dead-grown joys,
And nourish sorrow with eternal tears?
O eyes, and will ye (cause I cannot dry
Your ceaseless springs) not suffer me to die?
Then make the blood fro forth my branch-like veins,
Like weeping Rivers trickle by your vaults;
And sponge my bodies heate of moisture so,
As my displeased soul may shun my hart.
Heavens let me dye, and let the Destinies,
Admit me passage to the infernal Lake;
That my poor ghost, may rest where powerful fate,
In Deaths sad kingdom hath my husband lodged.
Fain would I die, but darksome ugly Death,
With-holds his dart, and in disdain doth fly me,
Maliciously knowing that hells horror,
Is milder then mine endless discontent.
And that if Death upon my life should seize,
The payne supposed would procure mine ease.
But ye sad Powers that rule the silent deeps,
Of dead-sad Night, where sins doe mask unseen:
You that amongst the darksome mansions
Of pining ghosts, twixt sighs, and sobs and tears,
Do exercise your mirthless Empory.
Ye gods (at whose arbitrament all stand,)
Dislodge my soul, and keep it with your selves,
For I am more then half your prisoner.
My noble husbands (more then noble souls,)
Already wander under your commands.
O then shall wretched I, that am but one,
(Yet once both theirs,) survive now they are gone?
Alas thou should, thou should Cornelia,
Have broke the sacred thread that tide thee here,
When as thy husband Crassus (in his flower)
Did first bear Arms, and bare away my love.
And not (as thou hast done) go break the bands,
By calling Hymen once more back again.
Less hapless, and more worthily thou might,
Have made thine ancestors and thee renound:
If (like a royal Dame) with faith fast kept,
Thou with thy former husbands death had slept.
But partial Fortune, and the powerful Fates,
That at their pleasures wield our purposes,
Bewitched my life, and did beguile my love.
Pompey, the fame that ran of thy frail honours,
Made me thy wife, thy love, and (like a thief)
From my first husband stole my faithless grief.
But if (as some believe) in heaven or hell,
Be heavenly powers, or infernal spirits,
That care to be avenged of Lovers oaths;
Oaths made in marriage, and after broke.
Those powers, those spirits (moved with my light faith,)
Are now displeased with Pompey and my self.
And doe with civil discord (furthering it)
Untie the bands, that sacred Hymen knit.
Else only I, am cause of both their wraths,
And of the sin that ceeleth up thine eyes;
Thine eyes (O deplorable Pompey) I am she,
I am that plague, that sacks thy house and thee.
For it is not heaven, nor Crassus (cause hee sees
That I am thine) in jealousy pursues vs.
No, it is a secrete cross, an unknown thing,
That I received, from heaven at my birth,
That I should heap misfortunes on their head,
Whom once I had received in marriage bed.
Then ye the noble Romulists that rest,
Hence-forth forbear to seek my murdering love,
And let their double loss that held me dear,
Bid you beware for fear you be beguiled.
Ye may be rich and great in Fortunes grace,
And all your hopes with hap may be effected,
But if ye once be wedded to my love:
Clouds of adversity will cover you.
So (pestilently) fraught with change of plagues,
Is mine infected bosom from my youth.
Like poison that (once lighting in the body)
No sooner tutcheth then it taints the blood;
One while the hart, another while the liver,
(According to th'encountring passages)
Nor spares it what purely feeds the hart,
More then the most infected filthiest part.
Pompey what help it thee, (say dearest life,)
Tell me what help thy warlike valiant mind
T'encounter with the least of my mishaps?
What help it thee that under thy command
Thou saw the trembling earth with horror missed?
Or (where the sun forsakes th'Ocean sea,)
Or (watered his Coursers in the West)
T'haue made thy name be far more famed and feared,
Then Summers thunder to the silly Heard?
What help it, that thou saw when thou were young,
Thy Helmet decked with coronets of Baize?
So many enemies in battle ranged?
Beat back like flies before a storm of hail?
T'haue looked askance and see so many Kings
To lay their Crowns and Scepters at thy feet?
To embrace thy knees, and humbled by their fate,
T'attend thy mercy in this morneful state?
???las and here-withall, what help it thee,
That even in all the corners of the earth,
Thy wandering glory, was so greatly known?
And that Rome saw thee while thou tryumph'dst thrice
O'er three parts of the world that thou had yoked?
That Neptune weltering on the windy plains,
Escaped not free fro thy victorious hands?
Since thy hard hap, since thy fierce destiny,
(Envious of all thine honours) gave thee me.
???y whom the former course of thy fair deeds,
Might (with a biting bridle) bee restraind;
By whom the glory of thy conquests got,
Might die disgraced with mine unhappiness.
O hapless wife, thus ominous to all,
Worse then Megera, worse then any plague.
What foul infernal, or what stranger hell,
Hence-forth wilt thou inhabit, where thy hap,
None others hopes, with mischief may entrap.
What end (O race of Scipio,) will the Fates
Afford your tears? Will that day never come
That your disastrous griefs shall turn to joy,
And we have time to bury our annoy?
Ne'er shall I see that day, for Heaven and Time,
Have failed in power to calm my passion.
Nor can they (should they pity my complaints)
Once ease my life, but with the pangs of death.
"The wide worlds accidents are apt to change.
"And tickle Fortune stays not in a place.
"But (like the Clouds) continually doth range,
"Or like the Sun that hath the Night in chase.
"Then as the Heavens (by whom our hopes are guided)
"Doe coast the Earth with an eternal course,
"We must not think a misery betided,
"Will never cease, but still grow worse and worse.
"When Isie Winter's past, then comes the spring,
"Whom Summers pride (with sultry heate) pursues;
"To whom mild Autumn doth earths treasure bring,
"The sweetest season that the wise can choose.
"Heavens influence was ne'er so constant yet,
"In good or bad as to continue it.
When I was young, I saw against poor Sylla,
Proud Cynna, Marius, and Carbo fleshed,
So long, till they began tiranize the Town,
And spilt such store of blood in every street,
As there were none but dead-men to be seen.
Within a while, I saw how Fortune plaid,
And wound those Tyrants underneath her wheel,
Who lost their lives, and power at once by one,
That (to revenge himself) did (with his blade)
Commit more murder then Rome ever made.
Yet Sylla, shaking tyranny aside,
Returned due honours to our Common-wealth,
Which peaceably retained her ancient state,
Grown great without the strife of Citizens.
Till this ambitious Tyrants time, that toyld
To stoop the world, and Rome to his desires.
But flattering Chance that trained his first designs,
May change her looks, and give the Tyrant over,
Leaving our City, where so long ago,
Heavens did their favours lavishly bestow.
It is true, the Heavens (at least-wise if they please)
May give poor Rome her former liberty.
But (though they would,) I know they cannot give
A second life to Pompey, that is slain.
Morn not for Pompey, Pompey could not die
A better death, then for his Countries weal.
For oft he searched amongst the fierce alarms,
But (wishing) could not find so fair an end;
Till fraught with years, and honour both at once,
Hee gave his body (as a Barricade)
For Romes defence, by Tyrants ouer-laide.
Bravely he died, and (happily) takes it ill,
That (envious) we rapine at heavens will.
Alas, my sorrow would be so much less,
If he had died (his fauchin in his fist.)
Had hee amidst huge troops of Armed men
Been wounded, by another any way,
It would have calmed many of my sighs.
For why, t'haue seen his noble Roman blood
Mixed with his enemies, had done him good.
But hee is dead, (O heavens) not dead in fight,
With pike in hand upon a Forte besieged
Defending of a breach, but basely slain:
Slain traitorously, without assault in war.
Yea, slain he is, and bitter chance decreed
To have me there, to see this bloody deed.
I saw him, I was there, and in mine arms
He almost felt the poygnard when he fell.
Whereat, my blood stopped in my straggling veins,
Mine hair grew bristled, like a thorny grove:
My voice lay hid, half dead within my throat.
My frightful hart (stunt in my stone-cold breast)
Faintly redoubled every feeble stroke.
My spirit (chained with impatient rage,)
Did raving strive to break the prison op,
(Enlarged,) to drown the payne it did abide,
Insolitary Lethes sleepy tide.
Thrice (to absent me from this hateful light,)
I would have plund'd my body in the Sea.
And thrice detained, with doleful shrieks and cries,
(With arms to heaven vprea'd) I began exclaim
And bellow forth against the Gods themselves,
A bedroll of outrageous blasphemies.
Till (grief to hear, and hell for me to speak,)
My woes waxed stronger, and my self grew weak.
Thus day and night I toil in discontent,
And sleeping wake, when sleep it self that rides
Upon the mists, scarce moistened mine eyes.
Sorrow consumes me, and in steed of rest,
With folded arms I sadly sit and weep.
And if I wink, it is for fear to see,
The fearful dreams effects that trouble me.
O heavens, what shall I doe? alas must I,
Must I my self, be murderer of my self?
Must I my self be forced to op the way,
Whereat my soul in wounds may sally forth?
Madam, you must not thus transpose your self.
We see your sorrow, but who sorrows not?
The grief is common. And I muse, besides
The servitude that causes all our cares,
Besides the baseness wherein we are yoked,
Besides the loss of good men dead and gone,
What one he is that in this broil hath bin
And mourns not for some man of his kin?
If all the world were in the like distress,
My sorrow yet would never seem the less.
"O, but men bear mis-fortunes with more ease,
"The more indifferently that they fall,
"And nothing more (in vprores) men can please,
"Then when they see their woes not worst of all.
"Our friends mis-fortune doth increase our own.
"But ours of others will not be acknown.
"Yet one mans sorrow will another tutch.
"I when himself will entertain none such.
"Another tears, draw tears fro forth our eyes.
"And choice of streams the greatest River dries.
When sand within a VVhirle-poole lies vnwet,
My tears shall dry, and I my grief forget.
What boot your tears, or what avails your sorrow
Against th'ineuitable dart of Death?
Think you to move with lamentable plaints
Persiphone, or Plutos gastlie spirits,
To make him live that's locked in his tomb,
And wanders in the Center of the earth?
"No, no, Cornelia, Caron takes not pain,
"To ferry those that must be fetched again.
Proserpina indeed neglects my plaints,
And hell it self is deaf to my laments;
Unprofitably should I waste my tears,
If over Pompey I should weep to death;
With hope to have him be revived by them.
Weeping avails not, therefore doe I weep.
Great losses, greatly are to be depror'd,
The loss is great that cannot be restored.
"Nought is immortal underneath the Sun,
"All things are subject to Deaths tyranny:
"Both Clowns &amp; Kings one selfsame course must run,
"And whatsoever lives, is sure to die.
Then wherefore morn you for your husbands death
Sith being a man, he was ordained to die?
Sith Ioues owns sons, retaining humane shape,
No more then wretched we their death could scope.
Brave Scipio, your famous ancestor,
That Romes high worth to Affrique did extend;
And those two Scipios (that in person fought,
Before the fearful Carthaginian walls,)
Both brothers, and both wars fierce lightning fierce;
Are they not dead? Yes, and their death (our dearth)
Hath hid them both embowel'd in the earth.
And those great Cities, whose foundations reached
From deepest hell, and with their tops tushed heaven:
Whose lofty Towers, (like thorny-pointed spears)
Whose Temples, Palaces, and walls embossed,
In power and force, and fierceness, seemed to threat
The tyred world, that trembled with their weight;
In one days space (to our eternal mons)
Have we not seen them turned to heaps of stones?
Carthage can witness, and thou heavens hand-work
Fair Ilium, razed by the conquering Greeks;
Whose ancient beauty, worth and weapons, seemed
Sufficient t'haue tamed the Mermidons.
"But whatso'ere hath been begun, must end.
"Death (happily that our willingness doth see)
"With brandished dart, doth make the passage free;
"And timeless doth our souls to Pluto send.
Would Death had steeped his date in Lerna-s blood,
That I were drowned in the Tartarean deeps.
I am an offering fit for Acheron.
A match more equal never could be made,
Then I, and Pompey, in th'Elisian shade.
"Death's always ready, and our time is known
"To be at heavens dispose, and not our own.
Can wee be ouer-hastie to good hap?
What good expect wee in a fiery gap?
To scope the fears that follows Fortunes glances.
"A noble mind doth never fear mischances.
"A noble mind disdains servitude.
Can bondage true nobility exclude?
How if I doe, or suffer that I would not?
"True nobles never doth the thing it should not.
Then must I dye.
Yet dying think this still;
"No fear of death should force vs to doe ill.
If death be such, why is your fear so rife?
My works will show I never feared my life.
And yet you will not that (in our distress,)
We ask Deaths aid to end lifes wretchedness.
"We neither ought to urge nor ask a thing,
"Wherein we see so much assurance lies.
"But if perhaps some fierce offended King,
"(To fright vs) set pale death before our eyes,
"To force vs doe that goes against our hart;
"It were more then base in vs to dread his dart.
"But when for fear of an ensuing ill,
"We seek to shorten our appointed race,
"Then it is (for fear) that we our selves doe kill,
"So fond we are to fear the worlds disgrace.
It is not for frailty or faint cowardice,
That men (to shun mischances) seek for death.
But rather he that seeks it, shows himself,
Of certain courage, against uncertain chance.
"He that retires not at the threats of death,
"Is not as are the vulgar, slightly feed.
"For heaven it self, nor hells infectious breath,
"The resolute at any time have stayed.
"And (sooth to say) why fear we when we see,
"The thing we fear, less then the fear to be.
Then let me die my liberty to save,
For it is a death to live a Tyrants slave.
Daughter, beware how you provoke the heavens,
Which in our bodies (as a tower of strength)
Have placed our souls, and fortefide the same;
As discreet Princes set their Garrisons,
In strongest places of their Provinces.
"Now, as it is not lawful for a man,
"At such a Kings departure or decease,
"To leave the place, and falsify his faith,
"So in this case, we ought not to surrender
"That dearer part, till heaven it self command it.
"For as they lent vs life to doe vs pleasure,
"So look they for return of such a treasure.
"WHat ever the massy Earth hath freight,
"Or on her nurse-like back sustains,
"Upon the will of Heaven doth waite,
"And doth no more then it ordains.
"All fortunes, all felicities,
"Upon their motion doe depend.
"And from the stars doth still arise,
"Both their beginning and their end.
"The Monarchies that cover all
"This earthly round with Majesty,
"Have both their rising and their fall,
"From heaven and heavens variety.
"Frail men, or mans more frail defence,
"Had never power, to practise stays
"Of this celestial influence,
"That governs and guides our days.
"No cloud but will be ouer-cast.
"And what now flourished, must fade.
"And that that fades, revive at last,
"To flourish as it first was made.
"The forms of things doe never die,
"because the matter that remains,
"Reforms another thing thereby,
"That still the former shape retains.
The roundness of two boules cross-cast,
'(so they with equal pace be aimed,)
Shows their beginning by their last,
which by old nature is new-fram'd.
'So peopled cities that of yore
'were desert fields where none would bide,
'Become forsaken as before,
'yet after are re-edified.
Perceive we not a petty vain,
cut from a spring by chance or art,
Engenders fountains, whence-againe,
those fountains doe to floods convert?
Those floods to waives, those waives to seas,
that oft exceed their wonted bounds:
And yet those seas (as heavens please)
return to springs by vnder-grounds.
Even so our city (in her prime)
prescribing Princes every thing,
Is now subdued by conquering Time:
and lives subject to a King.
And yet perhaps the sun-bright crown,
that now the Tyrants head doth deck,
May turn to Rome with true renoune,
If fortune chance but once to check.
The stately walls that once were reared,
and by a shepherds hands erect,
(With hapless brothers blood besmeared)
shall show by whom they were infect.
And once more unjust Tarquins frown,
(with arrogance and rage inflamed)
Shall keep the Romaine valor down;
and Rome it self a while be tamed.
And chastest Lucrece once again,
(because her name dishonoured stood)
Shall by herself be careless slain,
and make a river of her blood;
Scorning her soul a seat should build
within a body, basely seen.
By shameless rape to be defiled,
that erst was clear as heavens Queen.
But heavens as tyranny shall yoke
our bastard harts, with servile thrall;
So grant your plagues (which they provoke,)
may light upon them once for all.
And let another Brutus rise,
bravely to fight in Romes defence,
To free our Town from tyranny,
and tyrannous proud insolence.
THE cheerful Cock (the sad nights comforter,)
Waiting upon the rising of the Sun,
Doth sing to see how Cynthia shrinks her horn,
While Clitie takes her progress to the East.
Where wringing wet with drops of silver dew,
Her wonted tears of love she doth renew.
The wandering Swallow with her broken song,
The Country-wench unto her work awakes;
While Citherea sighing walks to seek
Her murdered love, transformed into a Rose.
Whom (though she see) to crop she kindly fears;
But (kissing) sighs, and dews him with her tears.
Sweet tears of love, remembrancers to time.
Time past with me that am to tears converted,
Whose mournful passions, dull the mornings joys.
Whose sweeter sleeps, are turned to fearful dreams.
And whose first fortunes, (filled with all distress,)
Afford no hope of future happiness.
But what disastrous or hard accident,
Hath bathed your blubbered eyes in bitter tears?
That thus consort me in my misery.
Why doe you beat your breasts? why morn you so?
Say gentle sisters, tell me, and believe
It grieves me that I know not why you grieve.
O poor Cornelia, have not we good cause,
For former wrongs to furnish vs with tears?
O but I fear that Fortune seeks new flaws,
And still (vnsatisfide) more hatred bears.
Wherein can Fortune further injure vs,
Now we have lost our conquered liberty,
Our Common-wealth, our Empire, and our honours,
Under this cruel Tarquins tyranny?
Under his outrage now are all our goods,
Where scattered they run by Land and Sea
(Like exiled vs) from fertile Italy,
To proudest Spain, or poorest Getulie.
And will the heavens that have so oft defended
Our Romaine walls, from fury of fierce kings,
Not (once again) return our Senators,
That from the Lybique plains, and Spanish fields,
With fearless harts do guard our Romaine hopes?
Will they not once again encourage them,
To fill our fields with blood of enemies.
And bring from Affrique to our Capitol,
Upon their helmes the Empire that is stole.
Then home-borne household gods, and ye good spirits,
To whom in doubtful things we seek access,
By whom our family, hath been adorned,
And graced with the name of African.
Doe ye vouchsafe that this victorious title,
Be not expired in Cornelias blood;
And that my Father now (in th'Affrique wars)
The selfsame style by conquest may continue.
But wretched that I am, alas I fear.
What fear you Madam?
That the frowning heavens,
Oppose themselves against vs in their wrath.
Our loss (I hope) hath satis-fide their ire.
O no, our loss lifts Caesars fortunes hyer.
Fortune is fickle.
But hath fayld him never.
The more unlike she should continue ever.
My fearful dreams doe my despairs redouble.
Why suffer you vain dreams your head to trouble?
Who is not troubled with strange visions?
That of our spirit are but illusions.
God grant these dreams, to good effect bee brought.
We dream by night what we by day have thought.
The silent Night that long had soiurned,
Now began to cast her sable mantle off,
And now the sleepy Waine-man softly drove,
His slow-pac'd Teem, that long had trailed.
When (like a slumber, if you term it so)
A dullness, that disposes vs to rest,
Began close the windows of my watchful eyes,
Already tyerd and laden with my tears.
And lo (me thought) came gliding by my bed,
The ghost of Pompey, with a ghastly look;
All pale and brawne-falne, not in triumph borne,
Amongst the conquering Romans as we used,
When he (enthroniz'd,) at his feet beheld
Great Emperors, fast bound in chains of brass.
But all amazed, with fearful hollow eyes,
His hair and beard, deformed with blood and sweat,
Casting a thyn course lynsel ore his shoulders,
That (torn in pieces) trailed upon the ground.
And (gnashing of his teeth) unlocked his jaws,
Which (slightly covered with a scarce-seene skin,)
This solemn tale, he sadly did begin.
Sleep thou Cornelia? sleepst thou gentle wife,
And see thy Fathers misery and mine?
Wake dearest sweet, and (ore our Sepulchers)
In pity show thy latest love to vs.
Such hap (as ours) attends on my sons,
The selfsame foe and fortune following them.
Send Sextus over to some foreign Nation,
Far from the common hazard of the wars;
That (being yet saved) he may attempt no more,
To avenge the valor that is tried before.
He said. And suddenly a trembling horror,
A chyl-cold shivering (settled in my veins)
Brake up my slumber; When I opt my lips
Three times to cry, but could nor cry, nor speak.
I moved mine head, and flonge abroad mine arms
To entertain him, but his airy spirit,
Beguiled mine embraces, and (unkind)
Left me embracing nothing but the wind.
O valiant soul, when shall this soul of mine,
Come visit thee in the Elision shades?
O dearest life; or when shall sweetest death,
Dissolve the fatal trouble of my days,
And bless me with my Pompeys company?
But may my father (O extreme mishap)
And such a number of brave regiments,
Made of so many expert Soldiers,
That loved our liberty and followed him,
Be so discomfited? O would it were but an illusion.
Madam never fear.
Nor let a senseless Idol of the night,
Increase a more then needful fear in you.
My fear proceeds not of an idle dream,
For it is a truth that hath astonished me.
I saw great Pompey, and I heard him speak;
And thinking to embrace him, opt mine arms,
When drowsy sleep that waked me at unawares,
Did with his flight unclose my fearful eyes
So suddenly, that yet me thinks I see him.
Howbe-it I cannot tush him, for he slides
More swiftly from me then the Ocean glides.
"These are vain thoughts, or melancholy shows,
"That wont to haunt and trace by cloistred tombs:
"Which oath's appear in sad and strange disguises.
"To pensive minds deceived, (with their shadows)
"They counterfeit the dead in voice and figure;
"Divining of our future miseries.
"For when our soul the body hath disgaged,
"It seeks the common passage of the dead,
"Down by the fearful gates of Acheron.
"Where when it is by Oecus adjudged,
"It either turns to the Stygian Lake,
"Or stays for ever in th'Elisian fields;
"And ne'er returns to the Corse entered;
"To walk by night, or make the wise afraid.
"None but inevitable conquering Death,
"Descends to hell, with hope to rise again;
"For ghosts of men are locked in fiery gates,
"Fast-guarded by a fell remorseless Monster.
"And therefore think not it was Pompeys spryte,
"But some false Daemon that beguiled your sight.
Then O worlds Queen, O town that did extend
Thy conquering arms beyond the Ocean,
And throngdst thy conquests from the Lybian shores
Down to the Scithian swift-foote fearless Porters,
Thou art embossed; and at this instant yielded
Thy proud neck to a miserable yoke.
Rome thou art tamed, &amp; th'earth dewd with thy blood
Doth laugh to see how thou art signiorizd.
The force of heaven exceeds thy former strength.
For thou that wont'st to tame and conquer all,
Art conquered now with an eternal fall.
Now shalt thou march (thy hands fast bound behind thee)
Thy head hung down, thy cheeks with tears besprent,
Before the victor; While thy rebel son,
With crowned front triumphing follows thee.
Thy bravest Captains, whose coragious harts
(Joined with the right) did re-enforce our hopes,
Now murdered lye for Foul to feed upon.
Petreus, Cato, and Scipio are slain,
And Iuba that amongst the Mores did reign.
Now you whom both the gods and Fortunes grace,
Hath saved from danger in these furious broils,
Forbear to tempt the enemy again,
For fear you feel a third calamity.
Caesar is like a brightly flaming blaze
That fiercely burns a house already fired;
And ceaseless launching out on every side,
Consumes the more, the more you seek to quench it,
Still darting sparkles, till it find a train
To seize upon, and then it flames amain.
The men, the Ships, wher-with poor Rome affronts him,
All powreles, give proud Caesars wrath free passage.
Nought can resist him, all the power we raise,
Turns but to our misfortune, and his praise.
It is thou (O Rome) that nursed his insolence.
It is thou (O Rome) that gau'st him first the sword
Which murder-like against thy self he draws:
And violates both God and Natures laws.
Like moral Esops mysled Country swain,
That fownd a Serpent pining in the snow,
And full of foolish pity took it up,
And kindly laid it by his household fire,
Till (waxen warm) it nimbly began to stir,
And stung to death the fool that fostered her.
O gods that once had care of these our walls,
And fearless kept vs from th'assault offoes.
Great Iupiter, to whom our Capitol
So many Oxen yearly sacrificed.
Minerua, Stator, and stout Thracian Mars,
Father to good Quirinus our first founder.
To what intent have ye preserved our Town?
This stately Town so often hazarded,
Against the Samnites, Sabins, and fierce Latins?
Why from once footing in our Fortresses,
Have ye repeld the lusty warlike Gaules?
Why from Molossus and false Hanibal,
Have ye reserved the noble Romulists?
Or why from Catlins lewd conspiracies,
Preserved ye Rome by my prevention?
To cast so soon a state so long defended,
Into the bondage where (enthrald) we pine?
To serve (no stranger, but amongst vs) one
That with blind frenzy builds up his throne?
But if in vs be any vigour resting,
If yet our harts retain one drop of blood,
Caesar thou shalt not vaunt thy conquest long,
Nor longer hold vs in this servitude.
Nor shalt thou bathe thee longer in our blood.
For I divine that thou must vomit it,
Like to a Cur that Carrion hath devoured,
And cannot rest until his maw be scoured.
Think thou to signiorize, or be the King
Of such a number, nobler then thy self?
Or think thou Romains bear such bastard harts,
To let thy tyranny be unrevenged?
No, for me thinks I see the shame, the grief,
The rage, the hatred that they have conceived:
And many a Romaine sword already drawn,
T'enlarge the liberty that thou vsurpst.
And thy dismembered body (stabbed and torn,)
Dragd through the streets, disdained to bee borne.
Amongst the rest of mine extreme mishaps,
I find my fortune not the least in this,
That I have kept my Moister company,
Both in his life and at his latest hour.
Pompey the great, whom I have honoured,
With true devotion both alive and dead.
One selfsame ship contained vs when I saw
The murdering Egiptians bereave his life;
And when the man that had affright the earth,
Did homage to it with his dearest blood.
O'er whom I shed full many a bitter tear,
And did perform his obsequies with sighs:
And on the strond upon the River side,
(Where to my sighs the waters seemed to turn)
I woaue a Coffin for his corse of Seggs,
That with the wind did wave like bannerets.
And laid his body to be burned thereon.
Which when it was consumed I kindly took,
And sadly closed within an earthen Urn
The asshi??? relics of his hapless bones.
Which having escaped the rage of wind and Sea,
I bring to fair Cornelia to inter
Within his Elders Tomb that honoured her.
Ayh-me, what see I?
Pompeys tender bones,
which (in extremes) an earthen Urn contains.
O sweet, dear, deplorable cinders,
O miserable woman, living dying.
O poor Cornelia, borne to be distressed,
Why liu'st thou toiled, that (dead) might lye at rest?
O faithless hands that under cloak of love,
Did entertain him, to torment him so.
O barbarous, inhumaine, hateful traitors,
This your disloyal dealing hath defamed
Your King, and his inhospitable seat,
Of the extremest and most odious crime,
That against the heavens might bee imagined.
For ye have basely broke the Law of Arms,
And out-rag'd over an afflicted soul;
Murdered a man that did submit himself,
And injured him that ever used you kindly.
For which misdeed, be Egipt pestered,
With battle, famine, and perpetual plagues.
Let Espies, Serpents, Snakes, and Lybian Bears,
Tigers, and Lyons, breed with you for ever.
And let fair Nylus (wont to nurse your Corn)
Cover your Land with Toads and Crocadils,
That may infect, devour and murder you.
Else earth make way, and hell receive them quick.
A hateful race, amongst whom there doth abide
All treason, luxury, and homicide:
Cease these laments.
I doe but what I ought to morn his death:
Alas that profits nought.
Will heaven let treason be unpunished?
Heavens will perform what they have promised.
I fear the heavens will not hear our prayer.
The plaints of men oppressed, doe pierce the ayre.
Yet Caesar lives still.
"Due punishment
"Succeeds not always after an offence.
"For oftentimes it is for our chastisement
"That heaven doth with wicked men dispense.
"That when they list, they may with usury,
"For all misdeeds pay home the penalty.
This is the hope that feeds my hapless days,
Else had my life been long ago expired.
I trust the gods that see our hourly wrongs,
Will fire his shameful body with their flames.
Except some man (resolved) shall conclude,
With Caesars death to end our servitude.
Else (god to fore) my self may live to see,
His tired corse lye toiling in his blood:
Gored with a thousand stabs, and round about,
The wronged people leap for inward joy.
And then come Murder, then come ugly Death,
Then Lethe open thine infernal Lake,
Isle down with joy: because before I died,
Mine eyes have seen what I in hart desired.
Pompey may not revive, (and Pompey dead)
Let me but see the murdrer murdered.
Caesar bewailed his death.
His death hee mournd, whom while hee lived, to live like him hee scorn.
Hee punished his murdrers.
Who murdered him but hee that followed Pompey with the sword?
He murdered Pompey that pursued his death,
And cast the plot to catch him in the trap.
He that of his departure took the spoil,
Whose fell ambition (founded first in blood)
By nought but Pompeys life could be with-stood.
Photis and false Achillas he beheadded.
That was, because that Pompey being their friend, they had determined once of Caesars end.
What got he by his death?
Supremacy.
Yet Caesar speaks of Pompey honourably.
Words are but wind, nor meant he what he spoke.
He will not let his statues be broke.
By which disguise (what ere he doth pretend)
His own from being broke he doth defend.
And by the trains where-with he vs allures,
His own estate more firmly he assures.
He took no pleasure in his death you see.
Because himself of life did not bereave him.
Nay, he was moved with former amity.
He never trusted him but to deceive him.
But, had he loved him with a love unfeigned,
Yet had it been a vain and trustless league;
"For there is nothing in the soul of man
"So firmly grounded, as can qualify,
"Th'inextinguible thirst of signiory.
"Not heavens fear, nor Countries sacred love,
"Not ancient laws, nor nuptial chaste desire,
"Respect of blood, or (that which most should move,)
"The inward zeal that Nature doth require:
"All these, nor any thing we can devise,
"Can stoop the hart resolved to tyrannise.
I fear your griefs increase with this discourse.
My griefs are such, as hardly can be worse.
"Time calmeth all things.
No time qualifies my doleful spirits endless miseries.
My grief is like a Rock, whence (ceaseless) strain
Fresh springs of water at my weeping eyes:
Still fed by thoughts, like floods with winters rain.
For when to ease th'oppression of my hart,
I breathe an Autumn sorth of fiery sighs,
Yet herewithal my passion neither dyes,
Nor dries the heate the moisture of mine eyes.
Can nothing then recur these endless tears?
Yes, news of Caesars death that medcyn bears.
Madam, beware, for should hee hear of this, his wrath against you t'will exasperate.
I neither stand in fear of him nor his.
It is policy to fear a powerful hate.
What can he doe?
Madam what cannot men that have the power to doe what pleases them?
He can doe me no mischief that I dread.
Yes, cause your death.
Thrice happy were I dead.
With rigorous torments.
Let him torture me.
Pull me in pieces, famish, fire me up,
Fling me alive into a Lyons denn:
There is no death so hard torments me so,
As his extreme triumphing in our woe.
But if he will torment me, let him then
Deprive me wholly of the hope of death;
For I had died before the fall of Rome,
And slept with Pompey in the peaceful deeps,
Save that I live in hope to see ere long,
That Caesars death shall satisfy his wrong.
"FOrtune in power imperious,
"Used ore the world and worldlings thus
"to tirannize,
"When she hath hooped her gifts on vs,
"away she flies.
"Her feet more swift then is the wind,
"Are more inconstant in their kind
"then Autumn blasts,
"A women's shape, a women's mind,
"that seldom lasts.
"One while she bends her angry brow,
"And of no labour will allow.
"Another while,
"She flares again, I know not how,
"still to beguile.
"Fickle in our adversities,
"And fickle when our fortunes rise,
"she scoffs at vs:
"That (blind herself) can blear our eyes,
"to trust her thus.
"The Sun that lends the earth his light,
"Beheld her never over night
"lye calmly down,
"But in the morrow following, might
"perceive her frown.
"She hath not only power and will,
"T'abuse the vulgar wanting skill,
"but when she list,
"To Kings and Clowns doth equal ill.
"without resist.
"Mischance that every man abhors,
"And cares for crowned Emperors
"she doth reserve,
"As for the poorest labourers
"that work or starve.
"The Merchant that for private gain,
"Doth send his Ships to pass the maine,
"upon the shore,
"In hope he shall his wish obtain,
"doth thee adore.
"Upon the sea, or on the Land,
"Where health or wealth, or vines doe stand,
"thou can doe much,
"And often helpst the helps hand,
"thy power is such.
"And many times (disposed to jest)
"Against one whose power and cause is best,
"(thy power to try,)
"To him that ne'er put spear in rest
"giu'st victory.
"For so the Lybian Monarchy,
"That with Ausonian blood did die
"our warlike field,
"To one that ne'er got victory,
"was urged to yield.
"So noble Marius, Arpins friend,
"That did the Latin state defend
"from Cymbrian rage,
"Did prove thy fury in the end
"which nought could swag.
"And Pompey whose days happily led,
"So long thou seem'dst t'haue favoured,
"in vain it is said
"When the Pharsalian field be led
"implored thine aid.
"Now Caesar swollen with honours heate,
"Sits signiorizing in her seat,
"and will not see,
"That Fortune can her hopes defeat
"what ever they be.
"From chance is nothing franchised.
"And till the time that they are dead,
"is no man blessed.
"He only that no death doth dread,
"doth live at rest.
ACcursed Rome, that arm'st against thy self
A Tyrants rage, and make a wretch thy King.
For one mans pleasure (O injurious Rome,)
Thy children against thy children thou hast armed;
And think not of the rivers of their blood,
That erst was shed to save thy liberty,
Because thou ever hated Monarchy.
Now o'er our bodies (tumbled up on heaps,
Like cocks of Hay when July shears the field)
Thou buildst thy kingdom, and thou set thy King.
And to be servile, (which torments me most,)
Employ our lives, and lauishest our blood.
O Rome, (accursed Rome) thou murdrest vs,
And massacrest thy self in yielding thus.
Yet are there Gods, yet is there heaven and earth,
That seem to fear a certain Thunderer,
No, no, there are no Gods, or if there be,
They leave to see into the worlds affairs;
They care not for vs, nor account of men,
For what we see is done, is done by chance.
It is Fortune rules, for equity and right,
Have neither help nor grace in heavens sight.
Scipio hath wrenched a sword into his breast,
And launc'd his bleeding wound into the sea.
Undaunted Cato, tore his entrails out.
Affranius and Faustus murdered dyed.
Iuba-and Petreus fiercely combating,
Have each done other equal violence.
Our Army's broken, and the Lybian Bears
Devour the bodies of our Citizens.
The conquering Tyrant, high in Fortunes grace,
Doth ride triumphing o'er our Common-wealth.
And mournful we behold him bravely mounted
(With stern looks) in his Chariot, where he leads
The conquered honour of the people yok't.
So Rome to Caesar yields both power and pelf,
And o'er Rome Caesar reigns in Rome it self.
But Brutus shall wee dissolutely sit,
And see the tyrant live to tyrannize?
Or shall their ghosts that did to doe vs good,
Plain in their Tombs of our base cowardice?
Shall lamed Soldiers, and grave gray-haird men,
Point at vs in their bitter tears, and say,
See where they go that have their race forgot.
And rather choose (unarmed) to serve with shame,
Then (armed) to save their freedom and their fame.
????????? swear by heaven, th'Immortals highest throne,
Their Temples, Altars, and their Images,
To see (for one,) that Brutus suffer not
His ancient liberty to be repressed.
I freely marched with Caesar in his wars,
Not to be subject, but to aid his right.
But if (enuenom'd with ambitious thoughts)
He lift his hand imperiously o'er vs,
If he determine but to reign in Rome,
Or followed Pompey but to this effect:
Or if (these civil discords now dissolved)
He render not the Empire back to Rome,
Then shall he see, that Brutus this day bears,
The selfsame Arms to be avenged on him.
And that this hand (though Caesar blood abhor,)
Shall toil in his, which I am sorry for.
I love, I love him dearly. "But the love
"That men their Country and their birth-right bear,
"Exceeds all loves, and dearer is by far
"Our Countries love, then friends or children are.
If this brave care be nourished in your blood,
Or if so frank a will your soul possess,
Why hast we not even while these words are uttered,
To sheathe our new-ground swords in Caesars throat?
Why spend we day-light, and why dies he not,
That by his death we wretches may revive?
We stay too-long, I burn till I be there
To see this massacre, and send his ghost
To theirs, whom (subtly) he for Monarchy,
Made fight to death with show of liberty.
Yet happily he (as Sylla meanwhile did,)
When he hath rooted civil war from Rome,
Will there-withall discharge the power he hath.
Caesar and Sylla, Brutus be not like.
Sylla (assaulted by the enemy)
Did arm himself (but in his own defence)
Against both Cynnas host and Marius.
Whom when he had discomfited and chased,
And of his safety thoroughly was assured,
He laid apart the power that he had got,
And gave up rule, for he desired it not.
Where Caesar that in silence might have slept,
Nor urged by ought but his ambition,
Did break into the hart of Italy.
And like rude Brennus brought his men to field,
Traversed the seas: And shortly after (backed
With wintered soldiers used to conquering,)
He aimed at vs, bent to exterminate,
Who ever sought to intercept his state.
Now, having got what he hath gaped for,
(Dear Brutus) think you Caesar such a child,
Slightly to part with so great signiory.
Believe it not, he bought it dear you know,
And trailed too far to leave it so.
But Cassius, Caesar is not yet a King.
No, but Dictator, in effect as much.
He doth what pleases him, (a princely thing,)
And wherein differ they whose power is such?
Hee is not bloody.
But by bloody jars
he hath unpeopled most part of the earth.
Both Gaul and Affrique perished by his wars.
Egypt, Emathia, Italy and Spain,
Are full of dead men's bones by Caesar slain.
Th'infectious plague, and Famins bitterness,
Or th'Ocean (whom no pity can assuage,)
Though they contain dead bodies numberless,
Are yet inferior to Caesars rage.
Who (monster-like) with his ambition,
Hath left more Tombs then ground to lay them on.
Soldiers with such reproach should not be blamed.
He with his soldiers hath himself defamed.
Why then you think there is no praise in war.
Yes, where the causes reasonable are.
He hath enriched the Empire with new states.
Which with ambition now he ruinates.
He hath revenged the Gaules old injury,
And made them subject to our Romaine Laws.
The restful Almaynes with his cruelty,
He rashly stirred against vs without cause.
And hazarded our City and our selves
Against a harmless Nation, kindly given,
To whom we should do well (for some amends,)
To render him, and reconcile old friends.
These Nations did he purposely provoke,
To make an Army for his after-ayde,
Against the Romains, whom in policy
He trained in war to steal their signiory.
"Like them that (striving at the Olympian sports,
"To grace themselves with honour of the game)
"Anoint their sinews fit for wrestling,
"And (ere they enter) use some exercise.
The Gaules were but a fore-game fished about
For civil discord, wrought by Caesars sleights,
Whom (to be King himself) he so one removed.
Teaching a people hating servitude,
To fight for that that did their deaths conclude.
The wars once ended, we shall quickly know,
Whether he will restore the state or no.
No Brutus, never look to see that day,
For Caesar holds signiory too dear.
But know, while Cassius hath one drop of blood,
To feed this worthless body that you see,
What reck I death to doe so many good,
In spite of Caesar, Cassius will be free.
A generous or true ennobled spirit,
Detests to learn what tastes of servitude.
Brutus I cannot serve nor see Rome yoked,
No, let me rather dye a thousand deaths.
"The stiftneckt horses champ not on the bit,
"Nor meekly bear the rider but by force:
"The sturdy Oxen toil not at the Plough,
"Nor yield unto the yoke but by constraint.
Shall we then that are men, and Romains borne,
Submit vs to vnvrged slavery?
Shall Rome that hath so many ouer-throwne,
Now make herself a subject to her own?
O base indignity. A beardless youth,
Whom King Nicomides could ouer-reach,
Commands the world, and bridled all the earth,
And like a Prince controls the Romulists.
Brave Romaine Soldiers, sterne-borne sons of Mars,
And none, not one, that dares to undertake
The intercepting of his tyranny.
O Brutus speak, O say Seruilius,
Why cry you aim, and see vs used thus?
But Brutus lives, and sees, and knows, and feels,
That there is one that curbs their Countries weal.
Yet (as he were the semblance, not the son,
Of noble Brutus, his great Grandfather,)
As if he wanted hands, sense, sight, or hart,
He doth, devises, sees nor dares ought,
That may exstirpe or raze these tyrannies.
Nor ought doth Brutus that to Brute belongs,
But still increases by his negligence,
His own disgrace, and Caesars violence.
The wrong is great, and ouer-long endured;
We should have practised, conspierd, conjured,
A thousand ways, and weapons to repress,
Or kill out-right this cause of our distress.
"WHo prodigally spends his blood,
"Bravely to doe his country good,
"And lives to no other end,
"But resolutely to attempt
What may the innocent defend,
'And bloody Tyrants rage prevent;
'And he that in his soul assured,
'Hath waters force, and fire endured,
'And past the pikes of thousand hostess,
To free the truth from tyranny,
'And fearless scowres in danger coasts,
"T'enlarge his countries liberty,
"Were all the world his foes before,
"Now shall they love him euer-more.
"His glory spread abroad by Fame,
"On wings of his posterity,
"From obscure death shall free his name,
"To live in endless memory.
"All after ages shall adore,
"And honour him with hymns therefore.
"Yearly the youth for joy shall bring,
"The fairest flowers that grow in Rome.
"And yearly in the Summer sing,
"O'er his heroic kingly Tomb.
"For so the two Athenians,
"That from their fellow citizens,
"Did freely chase vile servitude,
"Shall live for valiant prowess blessed.
"No Sepulchre shall ere exclude,
"Their glory equal with the best.
"But when the vulgar, mad and rude,
"Repay good with ingratitude,
"Hardly then they them reward:
"That to free them fro the hands
"Of a Tyrant, ne'er regard
"In what plight their person stands.
"For high Jove that guides all,
"When he lets his just wrath fall,
"To revenge proud Diadems,
"With huge cares doth cross Kings lives,
"Raising treasons in their Realms,
"By their children, friends or wives.
"Therefore he whom all men fear,
"Fears all men every where.
"Fear that doth engender hate,
"(Hate enforcing them thereto)
"Makes many vnder-take,
"Many things they would not doe.
"O how many mighty Kings
"Live in fear of petty things.
"For when Kings have sought by wars,
"Stranger Towns to have o'rethrowne,
"They have caught deserved skarrs,
"Seeking that was not their own.
"For no Tyrant commonly,
"Living ill, can kindly die.
"But either traitorously surprised
"Doth coward poison quail their breath,
"Or their people have deuis'd,
"Or their guard to seek their death.
"He only lives most happily,
"That free and far from majesty,
"Can live content, although unknown:
"He fearing none, none fearing him.
"Meddling with nothing but his own,
"While gazing eyes at crowns grow dim.
O Rome that with thy pride dost ouer-peare,
The worthiest Cities of the conquered world.
Whose honour got by famous victories,
Hath filled heavens fiery vaults with frightful horror.
O lofty towers, O stately battlements,
O glorious temples, O proud Palaces,
And you brave walls, bright heavens masonry,
Graced with a thousand kingly diadems.
Are ye not stirred with a strange delight,
To see your Caesars matchless victories?
And how your Empire and your praise begins
Through fame, which hee of stranger Nations wins?
O beauteous Tyber, with thine easy streams,
That glide as smoothly as a Parthian shaft;
Turn not thy crispie tides like silver curl,
Back to thy grass-greene banks to welcome vs?
And with a gentle murmur hast to tell
The foaming Seas the honour of our fight?
Trudge not thy streams to Tritons Mariners
To bruit the praises of our conquests past?
And make their vaunts to old Oceanus,
That hence-forth Tyber shall salute the seas,
More famed then Tiger or fair Euphrates?
Now all the world (well-nigh) doth stoop to Rome.
The sea, the earth, and all is almost ours.
Be'it where the bright Sun with his neyghbor beams,
Doth early light the Pearled Indians.
Or where his Chariot stays to stop the day,
Till heaven unlock the darkness of the night.
Be'it where the Sea is wrapped in Crystal Ise,
Or where the Summer doth but warm the earth.
Or here, or there, where is not Rome renownd?
There lives no King, (how great so ever he be,)
But trembles if he once but hear of me.
Caesar is now earths fame, not Fortunes terror,
And Caesars worth hath stained old soldiers praises.
Rome, speak no more of either Scipio,
Nor of the Fabij, or Fabritians,
Here let the Decij and their glory die.
Caesar hath tamed more Nations, tan more Towns,
And fought more battles then the best of them.
Caesar doth triumph over all the world,
And all they scarcely conquered a nook.
The Gaules that came to Tiber to carouse,
Did live to see my soldiers drink at Loyre;
And those brave Germains, true borne Martialists,
Beheld the swift Rheyn vnder-run mine Ensigns;
The Britains (locked within a watery Realm,
And wald by Neptune,) stooped to me at last.
The faithless Moore, the fierce Numidian,
Th'earth that the Euxine sea makes sometimes marsh,
The stony-harted people that inhabit
Where seau'nfold Nilus doth disgorge it self,
Have all been urged to yield to my command.
Yea, even this City that hath almost made
An universal conquest of the world.
And that brave warrior my brother in law,
That (ill advised) ripened at my glory.
Pompey that second Mars, whose haught renown
And noble deeds, were greater then his fortunes.
Proved to his loss but even in one assault
My hand, my hap, my hart exceeded his;
When the Thessalian fields were purpled ore
With either Armies murdered soldiers go.
When hee (to conquering accustomed,)
Did (conquered) fly, his troops discomforted.
Now Scipio, that longed to show himself
Descent of African, (so famed for Arms)
He durst affront me and my warlike bands,
Upon the Coasts of Lybia, till he lost
His scattred Army: and to shun the scorn
Of being taken captive, kilt himself.
Now therefore let vs triumph Anthony.
And rendering thanks to heaven as we go
For brideling those that did malign our glory,
Lets to the Capitol.
Come on brave Caesar,
And crown thy head, and mount thy Chariot.
Th'impatient people run along the streets,
And in a route against thy gates they rush,
To see their Caesar after dangers past,
Made Conqueror and Emperor at last.
I call to witness heavens great Thunderer,
That against my will I have maintained this war,
Nor thirsted I for conquests bought with blood.
I joy not in the death of Citizens.
But through my selfe-wild enemies despite,
And Romains wrong, was I constrained to fight.
They sought t'eclipse thy fame, but destiny
Reversed th'effect of their ambition.
And Caesars praise increased by their disgrace
That reckt not of his virtuous deeds: But thus
We see it fares with the envious.
I never had the thought to injure them.
Howbeit I never meant my greatness should,
By any others greatness be o're-ruld.
For as I am inferior to none,
So can I suffer no Superiors.
Well Caesar, now they are discomfited,
And Crows are feasted with their carcases.
And yet I fear you have too kindly saved
Those, that your kindness hardly will requite.
Why Anthony, what would you wish me doe?
Now shall you see that they will pack to Spain,
And (joined with the Exiles there encamped,)
Until the isle spirit that doth them defend,
Doe bring their treasons to a bloody end.
I fear not those that to their weapons fly,
And keep their state in Spain, in Spain to die.
Whom fear thou then Mark Anthony?
The hateful crew,
That wanting power in field to conquer you,
Have in their coward souls devised snares
To murder thee, and take thee at unawares.
Will those conspire my death that live by me?
In conquered foes what credit can there be?
Besides their lives, I did their goods restore.
O but their Countries good concerns them more.
What, think they me to be their Countries foe?
No, but that thou usurp the right they owe.
To Rome have I submitted mighty things.
Yet Rome endures not the command of Kings.
Who dares to contradict our Emporie?
Those whom thy rule hath robed of liberty.
I fear them not whose death is but deferd.
I fear my foe until he be entered.
A man may make his foe his friend you know.
A man may easier make his friend his foe.
Good deeds the cruellest hart to kindness bring,
But resolution is a deadly thing.
If Citizens my kindness have forgot,
whom shall I then not fear?
Those that are not.
What, shall I slay them all that I suspect?
Else cannot Caesars Emporie endure.
Rather I will my life and all neglect.
Nor labour I my vain life to assure.
But so to die, as dying I may live,
And leaving off this earthly Tomb of mine,
Ascend to heaven upon my winged deeds.
And shall I not have lived long enough
That in so short a time am so much famed?
Can I too-soone go taste Cocytus flood?
No Anthony, Death cannot injure vs,
'For he lives long that dyes victorious.
Thy praises show thy life is long enough,
But for thy friends and Country all too-short.
Should Caesar live as long as Nestor did,
Yet Rome may wish his life eternized.
Heaven sets our time, with heaven may nought dispense.
But we may shorten time with negligence.
But Fortune and the heavens have care of vs.
Fortune is fickle, Heaven imperious.
What shall I then doe?
As befits your state,
Maintain a watchful guard about your gate.
What more assurance may our state defend
Then love of those that doe on vs attend?
There is no hatred more if it be moved,
Then theirs whom we offend, and once beloved.
Better it is to die then be suspicious.
It is wisdom yet not to be credulous.
The quiet life that carelessly is led,
Is not lonely happy in this world,
But Death it self doth sometime pleasure vs.
That death that comes unsent for or unseen,
And suddenly doth take vs at unwary,
Me thinks is sweetest; And if heaven were pleased,
I could desire that I might die so well.
The fear of evil doth afflict vs more,
Then th'euill it self, though it be ne'er so sore.
OFaire Sun that gently smiles,
From the Orient-pearled Isles,
Guilding these our gladsome days,
With the beauty of thy rays:
Free fro rage of civil strife,
Long preserve our Caesars life.
That from sable Affrique brings,
Conquests whereof Europe rings.
And fair Venus thou of whom
The Eneades are come,
Henceforth vary not thy grace,
From Iulus happy race.
Rather cause thy dearest son,
By his triumphs new begun,
To expel fro forth the Land,
???irce wars quenchless fire-brand.
That of care acquitting vs,
(Who at last adore him thus)
He a peaceful star appear,
From our walls all woes to clear.
And so let his warlike brows,
Still be decked with Laurel boughs,
And his statues new set
With many a fresh-flowrd Coronet.
So, in every place let be,
Feasts, and Masks, and mirthful glee,
Strewing Roses in the street,
When their Emperor they meet.
He his foes hath conquered,
Never leaving till they fled,
And (abhorring blood,) at last
Pardoned all offences past.
"For high Jove the heavens among,
"(Their support that suffer wrong,)
"Doth oppose himself again
"Bloody minded cruel men.
"For he shortneth their days,
"Or prolongs them with dispraise:
"Or (his greater wrath to show,)
"Gives them over to their foe.
Caesar, a Citizen so wronged
Of the honour him belonged,
To defend himself from harms,
Was enforced to take up Arms.
For he saw that Envies dart,
(Pricking still their poisoned hart,
For his sudden glory got,)
Made his envious foe so hot.
Wicked Envy feeding still,
Foolish those that doe thy will.
For thy poisons in them pour
Sundry passions every bore.
And to choler doth convert,
Purest blood about the hart.
Which (ore-flowing of their breast)
Suffered nothing to digest.
"Other men's prosperity,
"Is their infelicity.
"And their choler then is raised
"When they hear another praised.
"Neither Phoebus fairest eye,
"Feasts, nor friendly company,
"Mirth, or what so ever it be,
"With their bumor can agree.
"Day or night they never rest,
"Spiteful hate so pecks their breast.
"Pinching their perplexed lunges,
"With her fiery poisoned tongues.
"Fire-brands in their breasts they bear,
"As if Tesiphon were there.
"And their souls are pierced as sore
"As Prometheus ghost, and more.
"Wretches, they are woe-begone,
"For their wound is always one.
"Nor hath Chyron power or skill,
"To recur them of their ill.
Unhappy man, amongst so many wrecks
As I have suffered both by Land and Sea,
That scornful destiny denies my death.
Oft have I seen the ends of mightier men,
Whose coats of steel base Death hath stolen into.
And in this direful war before mine eyes,
Beheld their corses scattred on the plains,
And endless numbers killing by my side,
Nor those ignoble, but the noblest Lords.
Amongst whom aboue the rest that moves me most,
Scipio (my dearest Moister) is deceased.
And Death that sees the Nobles blood so rife,
Full-gorged triumphs, and disdains my life.
We are undone.
Scipio hath lost the day.
But hope the best, and harken to his news.
O cruel fortune.
These mis-fortues yet
must I report to sad Cornelia.
Whose cease les grief (which I am sorry for)
Will aggravate my former misery.
Wretch that I am, why leave I not the world?
Or wherefore am I not already dead?
O world, O wretch.
Is this th'vndaunted hart
that is required in extremities?
Be more confirmed. And Madam, let not grief
abuse your wisdom like a vulgar wit.
Happily the news is better then the noise,
Let's hear him speak.
O no, for all is lost.
Farewell dear Father.
Hee is saved perhaps.
Me thinks I hear my Masters daughter speak.
What sighs, what sobs, what plaints, what passions
have we endured Cornelia for your sake?
Where is thine Emperor?
Where our Captains are.
Where are our Legions? Where our men at Arms?
Or where so many of our Romaine souls?
The earth, the sea, the vultures and the Crows,
Lyons and Bears are their best Sepulchers.
O miserable.
Now I see the heavens, are heaped with rage and horror against this house.
O earth, why op'st thou not?
Why wail you so?
Assure your self that Scipio bravely dyed,
And such a death excels a servile life.
Say Messenger,
The manner of his end will happily comfort this your discontent.
Discourse the manner of his hard mishap,
And what disastrous accident did break,
So many people bent so much to fight.
Caesar, that wisely knew his soldiers harts,
And their desire to be approved in Arms,
Sought nothing more then to encounter vs.
And therefore (faintly skirmishing) in craft,
Lamely they fought, to draw vs further on.
Oft (to provoke our wary wel-taught troops)
He would attempt the entrance on our bars.
Nay, even our Trenches, to our great disgrace,
And call our soldiers cowards to their face.
But when he saw his wiles nor bitter words,
Could draw our Captains to endanger vs,
Coasting along and following by the foot,
He thought to tyre and weary vs fro thence.
And got his willing hosts to march by night,
With heavy Armour on their hardened backs,
Down to the Sea-side; Where before fair Tapsus,
He made his Pyoners (poor weary souls)
The selfsame day, to dig and cast new Trenches,
And plant strong Barricades. Where he (encamped)
Resolved by force to hold vs hard at work.
Scipio, no sooner heard of his designs,
But being afraid to loose so fit a place,
Marched on the sudden to the selfsame City.
Where few men might doe much, which made him see
Of what importance such a Town would be.
The fields are spread, and as a household Camp
Of creeping Emmets, in a Country Farm,
That come to forage when the cold begins:
Leaving their crannies to go search about,
Cover the earth so thick, as scarce we tread
But we shall see a thousand of them dead.
Even so our battles scattred on the sands,
Did scour the plains in pursuit of the foe.
One while at Tapsus we begin t'entrench,
To ease our Army if it should retire.
Another while we softly fally forth.
And wakeful Caesar that doth watch our being,
(When he perceives vs marching o'er the plain,)
Doth leap for gladness. And (to murder vowed)
Runs to the Tent for fear we should be gone,
And quickly claps his rusty Armour on.
For true it is, that Caesar brought at first,
An host of men to Affrique, meanly Armed,
But such as had brave spirits, and (combating)
Had power and wit to make a wretch a King.
Well, forth to field they marched all at once,
Except some few that stayed to guard the Trench.
Them Caesar soon and subt'ly sets in rank.
And every Regiment (warned with a word
Bravely to fight for honour of the day.)
He shows that ancient soldiers need not fear,
Them that they had so oft disordered.
Them that already dreamed of death orflight.
That tyer'd, would ne'er hold out, if once they see
That they o're-layd them in the first assault.
Meane-while our Emperor (at all points armed)
Whose silver hairs and honourable front,
Were (warlike) locked within a plumed cask,
In one hand held his Targe of steel embossed,
And in the other grasped his Coutelas:
And with a cheerful look surueigh'd the Camp.
Exhorting them to charge, and fight like men,
And to endure what ere betided them.
For now (quoth he) is come that happy day,
Wherein our Country shall approve our love.
Brave Romains know, this is the day and hour,
That we must all live free, or friendly die.
For my part (being an ancient Senator,)
An Emperor and Consul, I disdain
The world should see me to become a slave.
I'll either conquer, or this sword you see,
(Which brightly shone) shall make an end of me.
We fight not we like thieves, for others wealth.
We fight not we t'enlarge our scant confines.
To purchase fame to our posterities,
By stuffing of our trophies in their houses.
But it is for public freedom that we fight,
For Rome we fight, and those that fled for fear.
Nay more, we fight for safety of our lives,
Our goods, our honours, and our ancient laws.
As for the Empire, and the Romaine state
(Due to the victor) thereon ruminate.
Think how this day the honourable Dames,
With blubbered eyes, and hands to heaven vprear'd,
Sit invocating for vs to the Gods,
That they will bless our holy purposes.
Me thinks I see poor Rome in horror clad,
And aged Senators in sad discourse,
Morn for our sorrows and their servitude.
Me thinks I see them (while lamenting thus)
Their harts and eyes lye hovering over vs.
On then brave men, my fellows and Romes friends,
To show vs worthy of our ancestors:
And let vs fight with courage and conceit,
That we may rest the Masters of the field:
That this brave Tyrant valiantly beset,
May perrish in the press before our faces.
And that his troops (as tushed with lightning flames)
May by our horse, in heaps be ouer-throwne,
And he (blood-thirsting) wallow in his own.
This said; His Army crying all at once,
With joyful tokens did applaud his speeches.
Whose swift shrill noise did pierce into the clouds,
Like Northern winds that beat the horned Alps.
The clattring Armour buckling as they paced,
Ronge through the Forests with a frightful noise,
And every Echo took the Trumpets clange.
When (like a tempest raised with whire-winds rage,)
They ran at euer-each other hand and foot.
Where-with the dust, as with a darksome cloud,
Arose, and ouer-shadowed horse and man.
The Darts and Arrows on their Armour glanced,
And with their fall the trembling earth was shaken.
The ayre (that thickened with their thundering cries,)
With pale wanne clouds discoloured the Sun.
The fire in sparks fro forth their Armour flew,
And with a duskish yellow, choked the heavens.
The battles locked, (with bristle-poynted spears)
Doe at the half pike freely charge each other,
And dash together like two lusty Bulls,
That (jealous of some Heifer in the Heard,)
Run head to head, and (sullen) will not yield,
Till dead or fled, the one forsake the field.
The shivered Lances (rattling in the ayre,)
Fly forth as thick as moates about the Sun:
When with their swords (fleshed with the former fight,)
They hew their Armour, and they cleave their casks,
Till streams of blood, like Rivers fill the Downs.
That being infected with the stench thereof
Surcloyes the ground, and of a Champant Land,
Makes it a Quagmire, where (kneedeepe) they stand.
Bloodthirsty Discord, with her snaky hair,
A fearful Hag, with fier-darting eyes,
Runs cross the Squadrons with a smoky brand:
And with her murdering whip encourages
The overforward hands, to blood and death.
Bellona fired with a quenchless rage,
Runs up and down, and in the thickest throng,
Cuts, casts the ground, and matting makes a poole,
Which in her rage, free passage doth afford,
That with our blood she may anoint her sword.
Now we of our side, urge them to retreat,
And now before them, we retire as fast.
As on the Alps the sharpe Nor-North-east wind,
Shaking a Pynetree with their greatest power,
One while the top doth almost touch the earth,
And then it rises with a counterbuffe.
So did the Armies press and charge each other,
With selfsame courage, worth and weapons to;
And prodigal of life for liberty,
With burning hate let each at other fly.
Thrice did the Cornets of the soldiers (cleared,)
Turn to the Standard to be new supplied;
And thrice the best of both was fine to breathe.
And thrice recomforted they bravely ran,
And fought as freshly as they first began.
Like two fierce Lyons fighting in a Desert,
To win the love of some fair Lioness,
When they have vomited their long-growne rage,
And proved each others force sufficient,
Peasant regardant softly they retire.
Their iawbones died with foaming forth and blood.
Their lungs like spunges, rammed within their sides,
Their tongues discovered, and their tails long trailing.
Till jealous rage (engendered with rest,)
Returns them sharper set then at the first;
And makes them couple when they see their prize,
With bristled backs, and fire-sparkling eyes,
Till tyer'd or conquered, one submits or flies.
Caesar, whose kinglike looks like day-bright stars,
Both comfort and encourage his to fight,
Marched through the battle (laying still about him.)
And subt'ly marked whose hand was happiest.
Who nicely did but dyp his spear in blood,
And who more roughly smeared it to his fist.
Who (staggering) fell with every feeble wound,
And who (more strongly) paced it through the thickest,
Him he inflamed, and spurred, and filled with horror.
As when Alecto in the lowest hell,
Doth breathe n???w heate within Orestes breast,
Till out-ward rage with inward grief begins,
A fresh remembrance of our former sins.
For then (as if provoked with pricking goades,)
Their warlike Armies, (fast locked foot to foot,)
Stooping their heads low bent to toss their staves,
They fiercely open both Battalions.
Cleave, break, and raging tempest-like o're-turne,
What ever makes head to meet them in this humour.
Our men at Arms (in brief) begin to fly.
And neither prayers, entreaty, nor example
Of any of their leaders left alive,
Had power to stay them in this strange carrier.
Straggling, as in the fair Calabrian fields,
When Wolves for hunger ranging fro the wood,
Make forth amongst the flock, that scattered flies
Before the Shepherd, that resistless lies.
O cruel fortune.
None resisting now,
the field was filled with all confusion,
of murder, death, and direful massacres.
The feeble bands that yet were left entire,
Had more desire to sleep then seek for spoil.
No place was free from sorrow, every where
Lay Armed men, ore-troden with their horses.
Dismembered bodies drowning in their blood,
And wretched heaps lie mourning of their maims.
Whose blood, as from a sponge, or bunch of Grapes
Crushed in a VVine-presse, gushes out so fast,
As with the sight doth make the sound aghast.
Some should you see that had their heads half cloven,
And on the earth their brains lye trembling.
Here one new wounded, helps another dying.
Here lay an arm, and there a leg lay shivered.
Here horse and man (o're-turnd) for mercy cried,
With hands exstended to the merciless.
That stopped their ears, and would not hear a word,
But put them all (remorseless) to the sword.
He that had hap to scope, doth help a fresh,
To re-enforce the side whereon he served.
But seeing that there the murdering Enemy,
Pesle-mesle, pursued them like a storm of hail,
They began retire where Iuba was encamped;
But there had Caesar estsoones tyrannised.
So that despairing to defend themselves,
They laid aside their Armour, and at last,
Offred to yield unto the enemy.
Whose stony hart, that ne'er did Romaine good,
Would melt with nothing but their dearest blood.
And Scipio my Father,
when he beheld
His people so discomfited and scorned.
When he perceived the labour profitles,
To seek by new encouraging his men,
To come upon them with a fresh alarm.
And when he saw the enemies pursuit,
To beat them down as fierce as thundering flints,
And lay them level with the charged earth,
Like ears of Corn with rage of windy showers,
Their battles scattred, and their Ensigns taken.
And (to conclude) his men dismayed to see,
The passage choked with bodies of the dead;
(Incessantly lamenting th'extreame loss,
And souspirable death of so brave soldiers.)
He spurs his horse, and (breaking through the press)
Trots to the Haven, where his ships he finds,
And hopeless trusts to the trustless winds.
Now had he thought to have arrived in Spain,
To raise new forces, and return to field.
But as one mischief draws another on,
A sudden tempest takes him by the way,
And casts him up near to the Coasts of Hyppon.
Where th'aduerse Navy sent to scour the seas,
Did hourly keep their ordinary course;
Where seeing himself at anchor slightly shipped,
Besieged, betrayed by wind, by land, by sea,
(All raging mad to rig his better Vessels,
The little while this naual conflict lasted,)
Behold his own was fiercely set upon.
Which being sore beaten, till it brake again,
Ended the lives of his best fighting men.
There did the remnant of our Romaine nobles,
Before the foe, and in their Captains presence
Dye bravely, with their fauchins in their fists.
Then Scipio, (that saw his ships through-galled,
And by the foe fulfild with fire and blood,
His people put to sword, Sea, Earth and Hell,
And Heaven it self conjured to injure him,)
Stepts to the Poop, and with a princely visage
Looking upon his weapon did with blood,
Sighing he sets it to his breast, and said:
Since all our hopes are by the Gods beguiled,
What refuge now remains for my distress,
But thee my dearest nere-deceiuing sword?
Yea, thee my latest fortunes firmest hope.
By whom I am assured this hap to have,
That being free borne, I shall not die a slave,
Scarce had he said, but cruelly resolved,
He wrenched it to the pommel through his sides,
That fro the wound the smoky blood ran bubbling,
VVhere-with he staggred; And I stepped to him
To have embraced him. But he (being afraid
T'attend the mercy of his murdering foe,
That still pursued him and oppressed his ships,)
Crawld to the Deck, and life with death to ease,
Headlong he threw himself into the seas.
O cruel Gods, O heaven, O direful Fates,
O radiant Sun that slightly guildst our days,
O night stars, full of infelicities,
O triple titled Heccat Queen and Goddess,
Bereave my life, or living strangle me.
Confound me quick, or let me sink to hell.
Thrust me fro forth the world, that amongst the spirits
The infernal Lakes may ring with my laments.
O miserable, desolate, distressful wretch,
Worn with mishaps, yet in mishaps abounding.
What shall I doe, or whether shall I fly
To avenge this out-rage, or revenge my wrongs?
Come wrathful Furies with your Ebon locks,
And feed your selves with mine inflamed blood.
Ixions torment, Sysiph's rolling stone,
And th'Eagle tyering on Prometheus,
Be my eternal tasks; That th'extreame fire,
Within my hart, may from my hart retire.
I suffer more, more sorrows I endure,
Then all the Captives in the infernal Court.
O troubled Fate, O fatal misery,
That vnprouoked, deal so partially.
Say fretful heavens, what fault have I committed,
Or wherein could mine innocence offend you,
When (being but young) I lost my first love Crassus?
Or wherein did I merrite so much wrong,
To see my second husband Pompey slain?
But amongst the rest, what horrible offence,
What hateful thing (unthought of) have I done,
That in the midst of this my mournful state,
Nought but my Fathers death could expiate?
shy death dear Scipio, Romes eternal loss,
Whose hopeful life preserved our happiness.
Whose silver hairs encouraged the weak.
Whose resolutions did confirm the rest.
Whose end, sith it hath ended all my joys,
O heavens at least permit, of all these plagues,
That I may finish the Catastrophe.
Sith in this widowhood, of all my hopes
I cannot look for further happiness.
For both my husbands and my Father gone,
What have I else to wreak your wrath upon.
Now as for happy thee, to whom sweet Death,
Hath given blessed rest for lifes bereaving,
O envious Iulia, in thy jealous hart
Avenge not thy wrong upon Cornelia.
But sacred ghost, appease thine ire, and see
My hard mishap in marrying after thee.
O see mine anguish; Happily seeing it,
T'will move compassion in thee of my pains:
And urge thee (if thy hart be not of flint,
Or drunk with rigour,) to repent thy self;
That thou enflam'dst so cruel a revenge
In Caesars hart, upon so slight a cause.
And made him raise so many mournful Tombs,
Because thy husband did revive the lights
Of thy forsa ken bed; (Unworthily)
Opposing of thy fretful jealousy,
Against his mishap, as it my help had bin,
Or as if second marriage were a sin.
Was never City where calamity,
Hath soiour'd with such sorrow as in this.
Was never state wherein the people stood
So careless of their conquered liberty,
And careful of another tyranny.
O Gods, that erst of Carthage took some care,
Which by our Fathers (pitiless) was spoiled.
When thwarting Destiny, at Affrique walls
Did topside turuey turn their Common-wealth.
When forceful weapons fiercely took away,
Their soldiers (sent to nourish up those wars.)
When (feared) their golden Palaces fell down.
When through the slaughter th'Afrique seas were did,
And sacred Temples quenchlesly inflamed.
Now is our hapless time of hopes expired.
Then satis-fie your selves with this revenge,
Content to count the ghosts of those great Captains,
Which (conquered) perished by the Romaine swords.
The Hannons, the Amilcars, Asdrubals,
Especially, that proudest Hanniball,
That made the fair Thrasymene so desert.
For even those fields that mored to bear their bodies,
Now (laden) groan to feel the Romaine corses.
Their earth we purple ore, and on their Tombs
We heap our bodies, equalling their ruin.
And as a Scipio did reverse their power,
They have a Scipio to revenge them on.
Weep therefore Roman Dames, and from henceforth,
Voling your Crystal eyes to your fair bosoms,
Rain showers of grief upon your Rose-like cheeks,
And dew your selves with springtides of your tears.
Weep Ladies weep, and with your reeking sighs,
Thicken the passage of the purest clouds,
And press the ayre with your continual plaints.
Beat at your Ivory breasts, and let your robes
(Defaced and rent) be witness of your sorrows.
And let your hair that wont be wreathed in tresses,
Now hang neglectly, dangling down your sholders,
Careless of Art, or rich accoutrements.
That with the gold and pearl we used before,
Our mournful habits may be decked no more.
Alas what shall I doe? O dear companions,
Shall I, O shall I live in these laments?
Widowed of all my hopes, my haps, my husbands,
And last, not least, bereft of my best Father;
And of the joys mine ancestors enjoyed,
When they enjoyed their lives and liberty.
And must I live to see great Pompeys house,
(A house of honour and antiquity)
Usurped in wrong by lawless Anthony?
Shall I behold the sumptuous ornaments,
(Which both the world and Fortune heaped on him,)
Adorn and grace his graceless Enemy?
Or see the wealth that Pompey gained in war,
Sold at a pike, and borne away by strangers?
Dye, rather die Cornelia; And (to spare
Thy worthless life that yet must one day perrish,)
Let not those Captains vainly lie interred,
Or Caesar triumph in thine infamy,
That were the wife to th'one, and th'others daughter.
But if I die before I have entombed,
My drowned Father in some Sepulchre,
Who will perform that care in kindness for me?
Shall his poor wandering limbs lie still tormented,
Tossed with the salt waives of the wasteful Seas?
No lovely Father, and my dearest husband,
Cornelia must live, (though life she hates)
To make your Tombs, &amp; morn upon your hearses.
Where (languishing,) my famous faithful tears
May trickling bathe your generous sweet cinders.
And afterword (both wanting strength and moisture,
Fulfilling with my latest sighs and gasps,
The happy vessels that enclose your bones,)
I will surrender my surcharged life.
And (when my soul Earths prison shall forgo,)
Increase the number of the ghosts be-low.

VIctorious Princes summoned to appear
Within the Continent of Africa,
From seauenfold Nylus to Taprobany,
Where fair Apollo darting forth his light
Plays on the Seas.
From Gadis Lands where stowt Hercules,
Imblasde his trophies on two posts of brass,
To Tanais whose swift declining floods,
Inuirons rich Europe to the North,
All fetched from out your Courts by beauty to this Coast,
To seek and sue for fair Angelica.
Sith none but one must have this happy prize,
At which you all have leveled long your thoughts;
Set each man forth his passions how he can,
And let her Censure make the happiest man.
The fairest flower that glories Africa,
Whose beauty Phoebus dares not dash with showers,
Over whose Climate never hung a Cloud,
But smiling Titan lights the Horizon:
Egypt is mine and there I hold my State,
Seated in Cairye and in Babylon;
From thence the matchless beauty of Angelica,
Whose hew as bright as are those silver Doves,
That wanton Venus manth upon her fist,
Forced me to cross and cut th'atlanticke Seas,
To ouersearch the fearful Ocean,
Where I arrived to eternize with my Lance,
The matchless beauty of fair Angelica.
Nor Tilt, nor Tourney, but my Spear and shield,
Resounding on their Crests and sturdy Helmes
Topped high with Plumes, like Mars his Burgonet,
Inchasing on their Curats with my blade,
That none so fair, as fair Angelica.
But leaving these such glories as they be,
I love my Lord, let that suffice for me.
Cuba my seat, a Region so enriched,
With favours sparkling from the smiling heavens,
As those that seeks for traffic to my Coast,
Accounted like that wealthy Paradise,
From whence flows Gyhon and swift Euphrates:
The earth within her bowels hath inwrapt,
As in the massy storehouse of the world,
Millions of gold as bright as was the shower,
That wanton Jove sent down to Dane:
Marching from thence to manage Arms abroad,
I past the triple parted Regiment,
That froward Saturn gave unto his sons,
Erecting Statues of my Chivalry,
Such and so brave as never Hercules,
Vowed for the love of lovely Iole:
But leaving these such glories as they be,
I love my Lord, let that suffice for me.
And I my Lord am Mandrecarde of Mexico,
Whose Climate fairer than Tyberius,
Seated beyond the Sea of Trypoly,
And richer than the plot Hesperides,
Or that same Isle wherein Vlysses love,
Luld in her lap the young Telegone,
That did but Venus tread a dainty step,
So would she like the land of Mexico,
As Paphos and brave Cypress set aside,
With me sweet lovely Venus would abide.
From thence mounted upon a Spanish Bark,
Such as transported Iason to the fleece:
Come from the South, I furrowd Neptunes Seas,
Northeast as far as is the frozen Rhine,
Leaving fair Voya crossed up Danuby,
As hie as Saba whose enhancing streams,
Cuts twixt the Tartars and the Russians:
There did I act as many brave attempts,
As did Pirothousfor his Proserpine.
But leaving these such glories as they be,
I love my Lord, let that suffice for me.
The bordring Lands seated here in ken,
Whose shores are sprinkled with rich Orient Pearl,
More bright of hew than were the Margarets,
That Caesar found in wealthy Albion,
The sands of Tagus all of burnished gold,
Made Thetis never prouder on the Clefts,
That overpeer the bright and golden shore,
Than doo the rubbish of my Country Seas:
And what I dare, let say the Portugal,
And Spaniard tell, who mand with mighty Fleets,
Came  to their King.
Filling our seas with stately Argosies,
Caluars and Magars hulks of burden great,
Which Brandemart rebated from his coast,
And sent them home ballast with little wealth
But leaving these such glories as they bee,
I love (my Lord) let that suffice for me.
Lords of the South, &amp; Princes of esteem,
Viceroys unto the State of Africa:
I am no King, yet am I princely borne,
Descended from the royal house of France,
And nephew to the mighty Charlemain,
Surnamde Orlando the County Palatine.
Swift Fame that sounded to our Western seas
The matchless beauty of Angelica,
Fairer than was the Nymph of Mercury,
Who when bright Phoebus mounts up his coach
And tracts Aurora in her silver steps,
And sprinkles from the folding of her lap,
White lilies, roses and sweet violets.
Yet thus believe me, Princes of the South,
Although my Countries love dearer than pearl,
Or mines of gold might well have kept me back;
The sweet conversing with my King and friends,
(Left all for love) might well have kept me back;
The Seas by Neptune hoised to the heavens,
Whose dangerous flaws might well have kept me back;
The savage Mores &amp; Anthropagei
Whose lands I past might well have kept me back;
The doubt of entertainment in the Court
When I arrived might well have kept me back:
But so the fame of fair Angelica,
Stamped in my thoughts the figure of her love,
As neither Country, King, or Seas, or Cannibals,
Could by despairing keep Orlando back.
I list not boast in acts of chivalry,
(An humour never fitting with my mind)
But come there forth the proudest champion
That hath suspicion in the Palatine,
And with my trusty sword Durandell
Single, Isle register upon his helm,
What I dare doo for fair Angelica.
But leaving these, such glories as they bee;
I love my Lord.
Angelica her self shall speak for me.
Daughter thou hearst what love hath here alleadgd,
How all these Kings by beauty summoned here,
Puts in their pleas for hope of Diadem,
Of noble deeds, of wealth and chivalry,
All hoping to possess Angelica.
Sith fathers will may hap to aim amiss,
(For parents thoughts in love oft step awry)
Choose thou the man who best contents thee,
And he shall wear the Africa Crown next me.
For trust me Daughter, like of whom thou please,
Thou satisfied, my thoughts shall be at ease.
Kings of the South, Viceroys of Africa,
Sith Fathers will hangs on his Daughters choice,
And I as erst Princess Andromache,
Seated amidst the crew of Priams sons,
Have liberty to choose where best I love;
Must freely say, for fancy hath no fraud,
That far unworthies Angelica
Of such as deign to grace her with their loves.
The Sultan with his seat in Babylon,
The Prince of Cuba and of Mexico,
Whose wealthy crowns might win a women's will;
Young Brandemard master of all the Isles,
Where Neptune planted hath his treasury:
The worst of these men of so high import,
As may command a greater Dame than I.
But Fortune or some deep inspiring fate,
Venus or else the bastard brat of Mars,
Whose bow commands the motions of the mind,
Hath sent proud love to enter such a plea,
As nonsutes all your Princely evidence,
And flat commands that maugre Majesty,
I choose Orlando, County Palatine.
How likes Marsillus of his daughters choice?
As fits Marsillus of his daughters spouse.
Highly thou wrongst vs, King of Africa,
To brave thy neighbor Princes with disgrace,
To tie thy honour to thy daughters thoughts,
Whose choice is like that Greekish giglots love,
That left her Lord Prince Menelaus,
And with a swain made scope away to Troy.
What is Orlando but a straggling mate,
Banished for some offence by Charlemain,
Skipped from his country as Anchises son,
And means as he did to the Carthage Queen,
To pay her ruth and ruin for her love.
Injurious Cuba, ill it fits thy gre
To wrong a stranger with discourtesy.
Were not the sacred presence of Angelica
Prevails with me (as Venus smiles with Mars)
To set a Super sedeas of my wrath,
Soon should I teach thee what it were to brave.
And French man were not against the law of arms
In place of parley for to draw a sword,
Untaught companion I would learn you know
What duty longs to such a Prince as hee.
Then as did Hector fore Achilles Tent,
Trotting his Courser softly on the plains,
Proudly dared forth the stoutest youth of Greece:
So who stands heist in his own conceit,
And thinks his courage can perform the most,
Let him but throw his gauntlet on the ground,
And I will pawn my honour to his gage,
He shall ere night be met and combated.
Shame you not Princes at this bad agree,
To wrong a stranger with discourtesy.
Believe me Lords, my daughter hath made choice,
And maugre him that thinks him most agreeud,
She shall enjoy the County Palatine.
But would these Princes follow my advise
And enter arms as did the Greeks against Troy;
Nor he nor thou should have Angelica.
Let him be thought a dastard to his death.
That will not sell the travels he hath past,
Dearer than for a women's fooleries.
What says the mighty Mandricard?
I vow to hie me home to Mexico,
To troop my self with such a crew of men,
As shall so fill the downs of Africa
Like to the plains of watery Thessalie,
When as an Easternegale whistling aloft
Had overspread the ground with Grasshoppers:
Then see Marsillus if the Palatine
Can keep his Love from falling to our lots,
Or thou can keep thy Country free from spoil.
Why think you Lords with haughty menaces
To dare me out within my Palace gates?
Or hope you to make conquest by constraint
Of that which never could be got by love?
Pass from my Court, make hast out of my land
Stay not within the bounds Marsillus holds;
Least little brooking these unfitting braves,
My choler ouer-slip the law of Arms,
And I inflict revenge on such abuse.
Isle beard &amp; brave thee in thy proper town,
And here inskonce my self despite of thee,
And hold thee play till Mandricard return.
What says the mighty Sultan of Egypt?
That when Prince Menelaus with all his mates,
Had ten years held their siege in Asia,
Folding their wrothes in cinders of fair Troy:
Yet for their arms grew by conceit of love,
Their Trophies was but conquest of a girl:
Then trust me Lords Isle never manage arms,
For women's loves that are so quickly lost.
Tush my Lords why and you upon terms
Let vs to our Skonce, and you my Lord to Mexico.
I sirs, inskonce ye how you can, see what we dare,
And thereon set your rest.
Boast not too much Marsillus in thy self,
Nor of contentment in Angelica;
For Sacrepant must have Angelica,
And with her Sacrepant must have the Crown:
By hook or crook I must and will have both.
Ah sweet Revenge incense their angry minds,
Till all these Princes weltering in their bloods,
The Crown doo fall to County Sacrepant.
Sweet are the thoughts that smother from conceit:
For when I come and set me down to rest,
My chair presents a throne of Majesty:
And when I set my bonnet on my head,
Me thinks I fit my forehead for a Crown:
And when I take my truncheon in my fist,
A Sceptre then comes tumbling in my thoughts.
My dreams are Princely, all of Diadems,
Honour: me thinks the title is too base.
Mighty, glorious and excellent:
I these my glorious Genius sound within my mouth
These please the care, and with a sweet applause,
Makes me in terms coequal with the Gods.
Then these Sacrepant, and none but these.
And these or else make hazard of thy life.
Let it suffice, I will conceal the rest.
Sir.
My Lord.
My Lord. How basely was this Slave
brought up?
That knows no titles fit for dignity,
To grace his Master with Hyperboles.
My Lord. Why the basest Baron of fair Africa,
Deserves as much: yet County Sacrepant,
Must he a swain salute with name of Lord.
Sir, what thinks the Emperor of my colours,
Because in field I wear both blue and red at once?
They deem my Lord, your Honour lives
at peace,
As one thats neuter in these mutinies,
And covets to rest equal friends to both:
Neither envious to Prince Mandricard,
Nor wishing ill unto Marsillus,
That you may safely pass where ere you please,
With friendly salutations from them both.
I, so they guess, but level far awry;
For if they knew the secrets of my thoughts,
Mine Emblem sorts to another sense.
I wear not these as one resolved to peace,
But blue and red as enemy to both.
Blue, as hating King Marsillus;
And red, as in revenge to Mandricard:
Foe unto both, friend only to my self,
And to the crown, for thats the golden mark,
Which makes my thoughts dream on a Diadem
 all men presage I shall be King:
 to me for peace,
 of his cap ten mile of,
Two things more &amp; then I cannot mis the crown.
O what be those my good Lord.
First must I get the love of fair Angelica.
Now am I full of amorous conceits,
Not that I doubt to have what I desire,
But how I might best with mine honour woo,
Write, or entreat: fie that fitteth not,
Send by Ambassadors: no thats too base.
Flatly command I thats for Sacrepant:
Say thou art Sacrepant and art in love
And who in Africa dare say the County nay.
O Angelica, fairer then Chloris when in al her pride
Bright Mayas son intrapther in the net,
Wherewith Vulcan entangled the God of war.
Your honour is so far in contemplation of
Angelica,
As you have forgot the second in attaining to the
crown.
Thats to be done by poison, prowess, or
any means of treachery to put to death the traitrous
Orlando. But who is this comes here. Stand
close.
I am sent on imbassage to the right mightie
and magnificent: alias, the right proud and ponetificall
the County Sacrepant. For Marsillus &amp; Orlondon
knowing him to be as full of prowess as police,
and fearing least in leaning to the other faction,
hee might greatly prejudice them, they seek first to
hold the candle before the devil: &amp; knowing him
to be a Thrasonicall mad-cap, they have sent me a
Gnathonicall companion, to give him lattice fit for
his lips. Now sir, knowing his astronomical humours,
as one that gazes so high at the stars, as he never
looks on the pavement in the streets. But whist,
Lupus est in fabula.
Sir, thou that ruminatest to thy self a catalogue
of privy conspiracies, what art thou?
God save your Majesty?
My Majesty, come hither my well nutrimented
Knave, whom take me to bee?
The mighty Mandricard of Mexico.
I hold these salutations as ominous, for
saluting me by that which I am not, hee presages
what I shall be; for so did the Lacedaemonians by Agathocles,
who of a base potter, wore the Kingly
Diadem, but why deem thou me to be the mightie
Mandricard of Mexico?
Marie sir.
Stay there, were thou never in France.
Yes, if it please your Majesty.
So it seems for there they salute their king
by the name of Sir, Monsieur, but forward.
Such sparks of peerless Majesty,
From those looks flames like lightning from the East
As either Mandricard, or else some greater Prince.
Methinks these salutations makes my thoughts
To be heroical. But say to whom art thou sent?
To the County Sacrepant.
Why I am he.
It pleases your Majesty to jest.
What ere I seem, I tell thee I am he.
Then may it please your honour: the Emperor
Marsillus together with his daughter Angelica
and Orlando entreats your Excellence to dine
with them.
Is Angelica there?
There my good Lord.
Sir.
My Lord.
Villain, Angelica sends for me.
See that thou entertain that happy messenger.
And bring him in with thee.
Princes of France, the sparkling light of fame,
Whose glories brighter than the burnished gates,
From whence Latonas lordly son doth march,
When mounted on his coach tinseld with flames,
He triumphs in the beauty of the heavens.
This is the place where Rodamant lies hid:
Here lies he like the thief of Thessaly,
Which scuds abroad, and searches for his pray;
And being gotten, straight he gallops home,
As one that dares not break a spear in field.
But trust me Princes I have girt his fort,
And I will sack it, or on this Castle wall,
Isle write my resolution with my blood.
Therefore drum sound a parley.
Who is that troubles our sleeps?
Why sluggard, see thou not Lycaons son
The hardy plough-swaine unto mighty Jove,
Hath tract his silver furrows in the heavens,
And turning home his ouer-watched teem,
Gives leave unto Apollos Chariot.
I tell thee sluggard, sleep is far unfit
For such as still have hammering in their heads,
But only hope of honour and revenge.
These called me forth to rouse thy master up.
Tell him from me, false coward as he is,
That Orlando the County Palatine,
Is come this morning with a band of French,
To play him hunts-vp with a point of war.
Isle be his minstrel with my drum and fife:
Bid him come forth, and dance it if he dare,
Let Fortune throw her favours where she list.
French-man between half sleeping &amp; awake
Although the misty veil strained over Cynthia,
Hinders my sight from nothing all thy crew:
Yet for I know thee and thy straggling grooms
Can in conceit build Castles in the Sky:
But in your actions like the stammering Greek,
Which breathes his courage bootless in the air.
I wish thee well Orlando: get thee gone,
Say that a Sentinel did suffer thee:
For if the Round or Court of Guard should hear
Thou or thy men were braying at the walls,
Charles wealth the wealth of all his Western mines,
Found in the mountains of Transalpine France,
Might not pay ransom to the King for thee.
Brave Sentinel if nature hath enchased,
Asympathie of courage to thy tale,
And like the champion of Andromache,
Thou or thy master dare came out the gates,
Maugre the watch, the round, or Court of guard,
I will attend to abide the coward here.
If not, but still the craven sleeps secure,
Pitching his guard within a trench of stones;
Tell him his walls shall serve him for no proof,
But as the son of Saturn in his wrath
Poshed all the mountains at Typheus head,
And topsy turuie turned the bottom up,
So shall the Castle of proud Rodamant:
And so brave Lords of France, lets to the fight.
The Fox is escaped, but here is his case:
I mist him ne'er, it was time for him to trudge.
How now my Lord of Aquitaine?
My Lord, the Court of guard is put unto
the sword,
And all the watch that thought themselves so sure;
So that not one within the Castle breaths.
Come then, lets post amain to find out
Rodamant,
And then in triumph march unto Marsillus.
I marvel Motor what my 
To enter league with County Sacrepant?
Madam, the king your fathers wise enough,
He knows the County (like to Cassius)
Sits sadly dumping, aiming Caesars death,
Yet crying Ave to his Majesty.
But Madame mark a while, and you shall see,
Your Father shake him off from secrecy.
So much I guess, for when he wild I should
Give entertainment to the doting Earl,
His speech was ended with a frowning smile.
Madame, see where he comes; Isle be gone.
How fares my fair Angelica?
Well that my Lord so friendly is in league
(As honour will him with Marsillus.
Angelica shall I have a word or two with thee
What pleases my Lord for to command.
Then know my love, I cannot paint my grief
Nor tell a tale of Venus and her son,
Reporting such a Catalogue of toys.
It fits not Sacrepant to be effeminate,
Only guy leave my fair Angelica,
To say the County is in love with thee.
Pardon my Lord, my loves are ouer-past,
So firmly is Orlando printed in my thoughts,
As  left no place for any else.
Why ouer-weening Damsel, see thou not,
Thy lawless love unto this straggling mate.
Hath filled our Africa Regions full of blood,
And wilt thou still persevere in thy love?
Tush leave the Palatine, and go with me.
Brave County know where sacred Love vnites,
The knot of Gordian at the shrine of Jove,
Was never half so hard or intricate,
As be the bands which lovely Venus ties.
Sweet is my love: and for I love my Lord,
Seek not unless as Alexander did,
To cut the plough-swaines traces with thy sword,
Or slice the slender fillets of my life:
Or else my Lord, Orlando must be mine.
Stand I on love? Stoop I to Venus lure,
That never yet did fear the God of war?
Shall men report that County Sacrepant
Held lovers pains for pining passions?
Shall such a Siren offer me more wrong,
Than they did to the Prince of Ithaca?
No: as he his cares, so County stop thine eye.
Go to your needle (Lady) and your clouts.
Go to such milk-sops as are fit for love:
I will employ my busy brains for war,
Let not my Lords denial breed offence,
Love doth allow her favours but to one,
Nor can there sit within the sacred shrine
Of Venus, more than one installed hart.
Orlando is the Gentleman I love,
And more than he may not enjoy my love.
Damsel be gone, fancy hath taken leave;
Where I took hurt there have I heald my self,
As those that with Achilles lance were wounded,
Fetched help at self same pointed spear.
Beauty began brave, and beauty hath repulse:
And Beauty get ye gone to your Orlando.
My Lord: hath love amated him whose
thoughts
Have ever been heroical and brave?
Stand you in dumps like to the Mirmydon,
Trapt in the tresses of Polixena:
Who amid the glory of his chivalry,
Sat daunted with a maid of Asia.
Think thou my thoughts are lunacies of love?
No, they are brands feared in Plutoes forge,
Where sits Tsiphone tampering in flames
Those torches that doo set on fire Revenge,
I lovd the Dame, but bravd by her repulse,
Hate calls me on to quittance all my ills:
Which first must come by offering prejudice
Unto Orlando her beloved Love.
O how may that be brought to pass my
Lord?
Thus. Thou see that Motor &amp; Angelica
Are still so secret in their private walks,
As that they trace the shady lands,
And thickest shadowed groves;
Which well may breed suspicion of some love.
Now than the French no Nation under heaven
Is sooner tutcht with stings of jealousy.
And what of that my Lord?
Hard by for solace in a secret Grove,
The County once a day fails not to walk:
There solemnly he ruminates his love.
Upon those shrubs that compass in the spring,
And on those trees that border in those walks,
Isle silly have engravn on every bark
The names of Motor and Angelica.
Hard by Isle have some roundelays hung up.
Wherein shall be some posies of their loves,
Fraughted so full of fiery passions,
As that the County shall perceive by proof,
Motor hath won his fair Angelica.
Is this all my Lord?
No. For thou like to a shepherd shalt bee Cloathd,
With staff and bottle like some country swain,
That tends his flocks seeding upon these downs,
There see thou buzz into the Counties eats,
That thou hast often seen within these woods
Base Motor sporting with Angelica.
And when he hears a shepherds simple tale,
He will not think tic faind.
Then either a matting mood will end his love,
Or worse betide him through fond jealousy.
Excellent. My Lord, see how I will play
the Shepherd.
And mark thou how I play the carver,
Therefore be gone, and make the ready straight.
Thus all alone and like a shepherds swain,
As Paris (when Oenon lovd him well)
Forgot he was the son of Priamus,
All clad in gray sate piping on a reed;
So I transformed to this Country shape,
Haunting these groves to work my masters will,
To plague the Palatine with jealousy,
And to conceit him with some deep extreme.
Here comes the man unto his wonted walk.
Orgalio, go see a Centernell be placed,
And bid the soldiers keep a Court of guard,
So to hold watch till secret here alone,
I meditate upon the thoughts of love.
I will my Lord.
Fair Queen of love, thou mistress of delight,
Thou gladsome lamp that waitst on Phoebes train,
Spredding thy kindness through the earring Orbs,
That in their union praise thy lasting powers.
Thou that hast staid the fiery Phlegons course,
And made the Coach-man of the glorious wane
To droop, in view of Daphnes excellence.
Fair pride of morn, sweet beauty of the Even,
Look on Orlando languishing in love.
Sweet solitary groves, whereas the Nymphs
With pleasance laugh to see the Satyrs play;
Witness Orlandos faith unto his love.
Tread she these lands, kind Flora boast thy pride;
Seek she for shades, spread Cedars for her sake,
Fair Flora make her couch amidst thy flowers,
Sweet Crystal springs, wash ye with roses,
When she longs to drink. Ah, thought my heaven;
Ah heaven that knows my thought.
Smile joy, in her that my content hath wrought.
The heaven of love is but a pleasant hell,
Where none but foolish wife imprisned dwell.
Orlando, what contrary thoughts be these,
That flock with doubtful motions in thy mind?
Heavn smiles, &amp; trees do boast their summers pride:
What? Venus writes her triumphs here beside.
Yet when thine eye hath seen, they hart shall rue
The tragic chance that shortly shall ensue.
Angelica. Ah sweet and heavenly name,
Life to my life, and essence to my joy.
But soft this Gordian knot together co-unites
A Motor partner in her peerless love.
Unkind: and will she bend her thoughts to change?
Her name, her writing? Ah foolish and unkind.
No name of hers; unless the brookes relent
To hear her name, and Rhodanus vouchsafe
To raise his moistened lockes from out the reeds,
And flow with calm along his turning bounds:
No name of hers, unless Zephyrus blow
Her dignities along Ardenia woods;
Where all the world for wonders doo await.
And yet her name; for why Angelica:
But mixed with Motor, not Angelica.
Only by me was lovd Angelica,
Only for me must live Angelica.
I find her drift, perhaps the modest pledge
Of my content, hath with a secret smile
And sweet disguise restraind her fancy thus,
Figuring Orlando under Motors name:
Fine drift (fair Nymph) Orlando hopes no less.
Yet more are Muses masking in these trees,
Framing their ditties in conceited lines,
Making a Goddess in despite of me,
That have no other but Angelica.
Poor hapless man, these thoughts containe
the hell,
Angelica is Lady of his hart,
Angelica is substance of his joy,
Angelica is medcine of his smart,
Angelica hath healed his annoy.
Ah false Angelica. What have we more?
Let groves, let rocks, let woods, let watery springs,
The Cedar, Cypress, Laurel, and the Pine,
Joy in the notes of love that Motor sings,
Of those sweet looks Angelica of thine.
Then Motor in Angelica take delight,
Early, at morn, at noon, at even and night.
What dares Motor court my Venus?
What may Orlando deem?
Aetna forsake the bounds of Sicily,
For now in me thy restless flames appear,
Refused, contemnd, disdained: what worse than these?
Orgalio.
My Lord.
Boy, view these trees carved with true love knots,
The inscription Motor and Angelica:
And read these verses hung up of their loves.
Now tell me boy, what dost thou think?
By my troth my Lord, I think Angelica
is a woman.
And what of that?
Therefore inconstant, mutable, having
their loves hanging in their ey-lids; that as they are
got with a look, so they are lost again with a wink.
But here is a Shepherd, it may be he can tell vs news.
What messenger hath Ate sent abroad,
With idle looks to listen my laments.
Sir, who wronged happy Nature so,
To spoil these trees with this Angelica?
Yet in her name (Orlando) they are blessed.
I am a shepherd swain, thou wandering
Knight,
That watch my flocks, not one that follow love.
As follow love? why dare thou dispraise
my heaven,
Or once disgrace or prejudice her name?
Is not Angelica the Queen of love,
Decked with the compound wreath of Adons flours
She is.
Then speak thou peasant, what is he that dares
Attempt to court my Queen of love.
Or I shall send thy soul to Charons charge.
Brave knight since fear of death enforces still
In greater minds submission and relent:
Know that this Motor whose unhappy name
Is mixed with the fair Angelicas,
Is even that Motor that enjoys her love.
You cave bears witness of their kind content,
Yon meadows talk the actions of their joy.
Our Shepherds in their songs of solace sing,
Angelica doth none but Motor love.
Angelica doth none but Motor love?
Shall Motor then possess Orlandos love?
Dainty and gladsome beams of my delight,
Delicious brows, why smiles your heaven for those
That wandering make you prove Orlandos foes:
Lend me your plaints, you sweet Arcadian Nymphs,
That wont to wail your new departed loves:
Thou weeping flood, leave Orpheus wail for me,
And Titans Nieces gather all in one
Those fluent springs of your lamenting tears,
And let them flow along my faintfull looks.
Now is the fire late smothered in suspect,
Kindled and burns within his angry breast.
Now have I done the will of Sacrepant.
Foemineum servile genus, crudele, superbum:
Discourteous women, Natures fairest ill,
The woe of man, that first created curse;
Base female sex, sprung from black Ates loins,
Proud, disdainful, cruel and unjust:
Whose words are shaded with enchanting wills,
Worse than Medusa, mateth all our minds,
And in their harts sits shameless treachery
Turning a truthles vile circumference.
O could my fury paint their furies forth,
For hells no hell compared to their harts,
Too simple devils to conceal their arts.
Borne to be plagues unto the thoughts of men,
Brought for eternal pestilence to the world.
O Femmenelle in genio de tout mall sede,
Comet, vulge, mute, fachilmente,
Contrario, zero, propria de la fed;
O infelice, miserate, cred,
Importune, superbia, dispetoze:
Prove de more, de fed, de consilia,
Timmorare, crudele, ineque, ingrate,
Par pestelenze eternal monte nate.
Villain, what art thou that follow me?
Alas my Lord, I am your servant Orgalio
 thou art Motor that rinsed away
with Angelica.
No by my troth my Lord, I am Orgalio,
ask all these people else.
Art thou Orgalio? tell me where Motor is.
My Lord look where he sits.
What, sits he here, and braves me too?
No truly Sir, I am not he.
Yes villain.
Help, help, my Lord of Aquitaine.
O my Lord of Aquitaine the Count Orlondon
is run mad, and taking of a shepherd by the
heals, rends him as one would tear a Lark. See
where he comes with a leg on his neck.
Villain, provide me straight a Lions skin,
Thou see I now am mighty Hercules:
Look wheres my massy club upon my neck.
I must to hell, to seek for Motor and Angelica,
Or else I dye.
You that are the rest, get you quickly away,
Provide ye horses all of burnished gold,
Saddles of cork because Isle have them light,
For Charlemain the Great is up in arms.
And Arthur with a crew of Britons comes
To seek for Motor and Angelica.
Ah my Lord Orlando.
Orlando, what of Orlando?
He my Lord runs matting through the woods,
Like mad Orestes in his greatest rage.
Step but aside into the bordring grove,
There shall you see engraven on every tree,
The lawless love of Motor and Angelica.
O see my Lord, not any shrub but bears
The cursed stamp that wrought the Counties rage
If thou be mighty King Marsillus,
For whom the County would adventure life:
Revenge it on the false Angelica.
Trust me Orgalio, Theseus in his rage,
Did never more revenge his wronged Hyppolitus,
Than I will on the false Angelica.
Go to my Court, and drag me Motor forth
Tear from his breast the daring villains hart,
Next take that base and damned adulteress,
(I scorn to title her with daughters name:)
Put her in rags, and like some shepherdess,
Exile her from my kingdom presently,
Delay not good Orgalio, see it done.
How now my friend, what fellow hast thou there?
He says my Lord that hee is servant unto
Mandricard.
To Mandricard?
It fits me not to sway the Diadem,
Or rule the wealthy Realms of Barbary,
To stain my thoughts with any cowardice.
Thy master bravde me to my teeth,
He backed the Prince of Cuba for my foe,
For which not he nor his shall scope my hands.
No soldier, think me resolute as hee.
It grieves me much that Princes disagree,
Sith black repentance follows afterword.
But leaving that, pardon me gracious Lord.
For thou intreatst and newly art arrived,
And yet thy sword is not imbrewd in blood,
Upon conditions I will pardon thee;
That thou shalt never tell thy master Mandricard,
Nor any fellow soldier of the camp,
That King Marsillus licenst thee depart:
He shall not think I am so much his friend,
That he or one of his shall scope my hand.
I swear my Lord, &amp; vow to keep my word.
Then take my banderoll of red,
Mine, and none but mine shall honour thee,
And safe conduct thee to port Catthagene.
But say my Lord, if Mandricard were here
What favour should he find or life or death?
I tell thee friend, it fits not for a King
To prize his wrath before his courtesy.
Were Mandricard the King of Mexico
In prison here, and craved but liberty;
So little hate hangs in Marsillus breast,
As one entreaty should quite race it out.
But this concerns not thee, therefore farewell.
Thanks &amp; good fortune fall to such a king, thee
As covets to be counted courteous.
Blush Mandricard, the honour of thy foe disgraces
Thou wrongest him that wishes thee but well
Thou bring store of men from Mexico
To battle him that scorns to injure thee,
Pawning his colours for thy warrantize.
Back to thy ships, and hie thee to thy home,
Bouge not a foot to aid Prince Rodomant,
But friendly gratulate these favours found,
And mediate on nought but to be friends.
Woods, trees, leaves; leaves, trees, woods:
tria sequuntur tria. Ho Minerua, salve, God morrow
how doo you to day? Tell me sweet Goddess, will
Jove send Mercury to Calipso to let me go. Will
he? why then hes a Gentleman eueriehaire a the
head on him. But ho Orgalio, where art thou boy?
Here my Lord, did you call me?
No, nor name thee.
Then God be with you.
Nay pree thee good Orgalio stay,
Can thou not tell me what to say?
No by my troth.
O this it is, Angelica is dead.
Why then she shall be buried.
But my Angelica is dead.
Why it may be so.
But shees dead and buried.
I, I think so.
Nothing but I think so, and it may be so.
What doo ye mean my Lord?
Why shall I tell you that my Love is dead,
and can ye not weep for her.
Yes yes my Lord I will.
Well doo so then. Orgalio.
My Lord.
Angelica is dead.
Ah, poor slave, so, cry no more now.
Nay I have quickly done.
Orgalio.
My Lord.
Motors Angelica is dead.
Why doo ye beat me my Lord?
Why slave, wilt thou weep for Motors Anlica,
thou must laugh for her.
Laugh? yes, Isle laugh all day and you will.
Orgalio.
My Lord.
Motors Angelica is dead.
Ha ha ha ha.
So, tic well now.
Nay this is easier than the other was.
Now away, seek the herb Moly, for I must
to hell, to seek for Motor and Angelica.
I know not the herb Moly in faith.
Come Isle lead ye to it by the ears.
Tic here my Lord, tic here.
Tic indeed, now to Charon, bid him dress
his boat, for he had never such a passenger.
Shall I tell him your name?
No, then he will be afraid, &amp; not be at home.
Sir Raf, and thoult go with me Isle let
thee see the bravest mad man that ever thou saw.
Sir Tom: I believe it was he that was at
our town a sunday, Isle tell thee what he did sir: he
came to our house, when all our folks were gone
to Church, and there was no body at home but I, &amp;
I was turning of the spit, and he comes in, &amp; bad me
fetch him some drink. Now I went and fetched him
some, &amp; ere I came again, by my troth he ran away
with the rost-meate spit and all, &amp; so we had nothing
but porridge to dinner.
By my troth that was brave, but sirrha
he did so course the boys last sunday: and if ye call
him mad-man, heel run after you, &amp; tickle your ribs
so with his flap of leather that he hath as it passes.
Oh Tom look where he is, call him mad-man.
Mad-man, mad-man.
Mad-man, mad-man.
What say thou villain?
So now you shall be both my Soldiers.
Your soldiers, we shall have a mad Captaine
then.
You must fight against Motor.
Yes let me alone with him for a bloody nose.
Come then and Isle give you weapons strait,
Thus causeles banished from thy native home,
Here sit Angelica and rest a while,
For to bewail the fortunes of thy love.
This way she went, &amp; far she cannot be.
See where she is my Lord, speak as if you
knew her not.
Fair shepherdess for so thy sitting seems,
Or Nymph for less thy beauty cannot be:
What feed you sheep upon these downs?
Daughter I am unto a bordering Swain,
That tend my flocks within these shady groves.
Fond girl thou least, thou art Angelica.
I thou art she that wronged the Palatine.
For I am known albeit I am disguised,
Yet dare I turn the lie into thy throat,
Sith thou reportst I wronged the Palatine.
Nay then thou shalt be used according to
thy deserts, come bring her to our Tents.
But stay what Drum is this?
Now see Angelica the fruits of all your love.
Soldiers, this is the City of great Babilon,
Where proud Darius was rebated from,
Play but the men and I will lay my head,
Weal sack and raze it ere the sun be set.
Yea and scratch it too,
March fair fellow frying-pan.
Orgalio, know thou the cause of my laughla?
No by my troth, nor no wise-man else.
Why sir to think that if the enemy were
fled ere we come, weal not leave one of our own
soldiers alive, for wee two will kill them with our
fists.
Foe come lets go home again, heel set
Probatum est upon my headpeece anon.
No, no, thou shalt not be hurt, nor thee,
Back soldiers, look where the enemy is.
Captain, they have a woman amongst
them.
And what of that?
Why strike you down the men, and then
let me alone to thrust in the woman.
No I am challenged the single fight,
Syrra, left you challenge me the combat.
Frantic companion, lunatic &amp; wood,
Get thee hence, or else I vow by heaven,
Thy madness shall not privilege thy life.
I tell thee villain Motor wronged me so,
Sith thou art come his Champion to the field,
Isle learn thee know I am the Palatine.
Look my Lord here is one kilt.
Who kilt him?
You my Lord I think.
I? No, no, I see who kilt him.
Come hither gentle sir, whose prowess hath performed
such an act, think not the courteous Palatine
will hinder that thine Honour hath atchieude, Orgalio
fetch me a sword, that presently this squire may
be dubbed a Knight.
Thanks gentle Fortune that sends me
such good hap,
Rather to die by him I love so dear,
Than live and see my Lord thus lunatic.
Here my Lord.
If thou be come of Lancelots worthy
line welcome thou art,
Kneel down sir Knight, rise up sir Knight,
Here take this sword, and hie thee to the fight.
Now tell me Orgalio, what dost thou think,
Will not his Knight prove a valiant Squire?
He cannot choose being of your making
But wheres Angelica now?
Faith I cannot tell.
Villain find her out,
Or else the torments that Ixion feels,
The rolling stone, the tubs of the Belides,
Villain wilt thou find her out.
Alas my Lord, I know not where she is.
Run to Charlemain, spare for no cost,
Tell him Orlando sent for Angelica.
Faith Isle fetch you such an Angelica as you
never saw before.
As though that Sagittarius in his pride,
Could take brave Laeda from stout Iupiter?
And yet forsooth Motor, base Motor durst
Attempt to reave Orlando of his love.
Sir, you that are the messenger of Jove,
You that can sweep it through the milk white path
That leads unto the Senate house of Mars.
Fetch me my shield tempered of purest steel,
My helm forgd by the Cyclops for Anchises son,
And see if I dare not combat for Angelica.
Come away, and take heed you laugh not.
No I warrant you, but I think I had best go
back and shave my beard.
Tush, that will not be seen.
Well you will give me the half crown ye
promised me.
Doubt not of that man.
Sir, did not see me serve the fellow a fine
trick, when we came over the market place.
why, how was that?
Why hee comes to me, and said; Gentlewoman,
wilt please you take a pint or a quart. No Gentlewoman
said I, but your friend and Doritie.
Excellent: come see where my Lord is.
My Lord, here is Angelica.
Mas thou say true, tic she indeed;
How fares the fair Angelica?
Well I thank you heartily.
Why art thou not that same Angelica,
Whose hew as bright as fair Erythea
That darkes Canopus with her silver hew?
Yes forsooth.
Are not these the beauteous checks,
Wherein the Lilies and the native Rose
Sits equal suited with a blushing red?
He makes a garden plot in my face.
Are not my dere those radiant eyes,
Whereout proud Phoebus flashes out his beams?
Yes, yes, with squibs and crackers braueiy.
You are Angelica?
Yes marry am I.
Wheres your sweet heart Motor?
Orgalio, give me eighteen pence, &amp; let me go.
Speak strumpet, speak.
Marry sir he is drinking a pint or a quart.
Why strumpet, worse than Mars his trothless
love.
Falser than faithless Cresida: strumpet thou shalt not scope.
Come, come, you doo not use me like a gentlewoman;
and if I be not for you I am for another.
Are you, that will I try.
He beats him out.
Brave Peers of France, sith wee have past
the bounds,
Whereby the wrangling billows seeks for straits
To war with Tellus, and her sruitsull mines:
Sith we have furrowd through those wandering tides
Of Tyrrhene seas, and made our galleys dance
Upon the Hyperborian billows crests,
That braves with streams the watery Occident:
And found the rich and wealthy Indian clime,
Sought to by greedy minds for hurtful gold.
Now let vs seek to avenge the Lamp of France,
That lately was eclipsed in Angelica.
Now let vs seek Orlando forth our Peer,
Though from his former wits lately estranged,
Yet famous in our favours as before.
And sith by chance we all encountered bee
Let seek revenge on her that wrought his wrong.
But being thus arrived in place unknown,
Who shall direct our course unto the Court,
Where brave Marsillus keeps his royal State.
Lo here, two Indian Palmers hard at hand
Who can perhaps resolve our hidden doubts.
Palmers, God speed.
Lordings, we greet you well.
Where lies Marsillus Court, friend can thou tel.
His Court is his camp, the Prince is now
in arms.
In arms? Whats he that dares annoy so
great a King.
Such as both love &amp; fury doth confound,
Fierce Sacrepant, incensed with strange desires,
Wars on Marsillus, and Rodamant being dead,
Hath levied all his men, and traitor-like
Assails his Lord, and loving sovereign.
And Mandricard who late hath been in arms,
To prosecute revenge against Marsillus,
Is now through favours past become his friend.
Thus stands the state of matchless India.
Palmer, I like thy brave and brief discourse,
And could thou bring vs to the Princes camp,
We would acknowledge friendship at thy hands.
Ye stranger Lords, why seek ye out Marselves?
In hope that he whose Empire is so large,
Will make both mind and Monarchy agree.
Whence are you Lords, and what request
you here?
Aquestion ouer-hautie for thy weed,
Fit for the King himself for to propound.
O sir, know that under simple weeds
The Gods have maskt, then deem not with disdain
To answer to this Palmers question,
Whose coat includes perhaps as great as yours.
Haughty their words, their persons full of state,
Though habit be but mean, their minds excel.
Well Palmers know that Princes are in India arrived
Yea even those western princely peers of France,
That through the world adventures undertake,
To find Orlando late incensed with rage.
Then Palmers sith you know our stiles and state,
Advise vs where your King Marsillus is.
Lordings of France, here is Marsillus,
That bids you welcome into India,
And will in person bring you to his camp.
Marsillus, and thus disguised?
Even Marsillus, and thus disguised.
But what request these Princes at my hand?
We sue for law and justice at thy hand,
We seek Angelica thy daughter out;
That wanton maid, that hath eclipsed the joy
Of royal France, and made Orlando mad.
My daughter Lords, why shees exiled,
And her grieud father is content to lose
The pleasance of his age to countnance law.
Not only exile shall await Angelica,
But death and bitter death shall follow her,
Then yield vs right Marsillus, or our swords
Shall make thee fear to wrong the Pieres of France.
Words cannot daunt me Princes bee as|
surde,
But law and justice shall overrule in this,
And I will bury fathers name and love,
The hapless maid banished from out my Land,
Wanders about in woods and ways unknown,
Her if ye find with fury persecute,
I now disdain the name to be her Father,
Lords of France what would you more of me.
Marsillus wee commend thy Princely
mind,
And will report thy justice through the world,
Come Peers of France lets seek Angelica,
Left for a spoil to our revenging thoughts.
Orgalio, is not my love like those purple
coloured swans,
That gallop by the Coach of Cynthia.
Yes marry is she my Lord.
Is not her face siluerd like that milke-white
shape,
When love came dancing downeto Simile.
It is my Lord.
Then go thy ways and clime up to the Clouds,
And tell Apollo that Orlando sits,
Making of verses for Angelica.
And if he doo deny to send me down
The shirt which Deianyra sent to Hercules,
To make me brave upon my wedding day;
Tell him Isle pass the Alps, and up to Meroe,
(I know he knows that watery lakish hill)
And pull the harp out of the minstrelis hands,
And pawn it unto lovely Proserpine,
That she may fetch the fair Angelica.
But my Lord Apollo is a sleep &amp; will not
hear me,
Then tell him he is a sleepy knave:
But sir let no body trouble me, for I must lie
down a while and talk with the stars.
What old acquaintance well met.
Ho you would have me play Angelica again,
would ye not?
Not, but I can tell thee where thou may
earn two or three shillings this morning, even with
the turning of a hand.
Two or three shillings, tush thou wot
cousin me thou, but and thou can tell where I may
earn a groat, Isle give thee six pence for thy
pains.
Then play a fit of mirth to my Lord.
Why he is mad still is he not.
No, no, come play.
At which side doth he use to give his reward.
Why of any side.
Doth he not use to throw the chamber pot
sometimes? Twould grieve me he should wet my
fiddle strings.
Tush I warrant thee.
Who is this, Shan Cuttelero? heartily wellcome,
Shan Cuttelero.
No sir, you should have said Shan the Fidideldero.
What, hast thou brought me my sword?
A sword? No no sir, thats my fiddle.
But dost thou think the temper to be good
And will it hold, when thus and thus we Motor do
assail?
Lord sir, you'll break my living.
You told me your master was not mad.
Tel me, why hast thou mart my sword?
The pummels well, the blade is curtald short.
Villain why hast thou made it so,
O Lord Sir, will you answer this?
Orgalio who is this?
Faith my Lord some old witch I think.
O that my Lord would but conceit my
tale.
Then would I speak and hope to find redress.
Fair Polixena, the pride of Illion,
Fear not Achilles ouer-madding boy,
Pyrrus shall not, &amp;c.
Sounes Orgalio, why suffer thou this old trot
to come so nigh me?
come, come, stand by, your breath stinks.
What, be all the Trogians fled,
Then give me some drink.
Here Palatine drink, and ever be thou
better for this draught.
What here the paltry bottle that Darius
quaft,
Else would I set my mouth to Tigers streams,
And drink up overflowing Euphrates,
My eyes are heavy, and I needs must sleep.
Melissa strikes with her wand, and the Satyrs
enter with music and play round about him,
which done, they stay, he awakes and speaks.
What shows are these that fill mine eyes
With view of such regard as heaven admires,
To see my slumbering dreams,
Skies are fulfild with lamps of lasting joy,
That boast the pride of haught Latonas son,
He lightneth all the candles of the night.
Nymosene hath kissed the kingly Jove,
And entertained a feast within my brains,
Making her daughter solace on my brow,
Me thinks I feel how Cynthia tunes conceits
Of sad repent, and meloweth those desires
Which frenzies scares had ripened in my head.
Ate Isle kiss thy restless cheek a while,
And suffer vile repent to bide control,
O vos Sylvan, Satire, Faunique, Deaque,
Nymph Hamadriades, Driades, Persaeque potentes,
O vos queen colts lacusque laeosque profundos,
Infernasque domus, &amp; negro palatia Ditis:
Tuque Demogorgon queen noctis fata gubernas,
Queen regis infernum, solemque, solumque, coelumque,
Exaudite preces, filiasque aufert icantes,
In caput Orlandi coelestes spargite lympus,
Spargite, quis misere reuocetur raptator vmbras
Orlando la enema.
What sights, what shows, what fearful
shapes are these?
More dreadful then appeared to Hecuba,
When fall of Troy was figured in her sleep.
Iuno me thought sent down from heaven by
love.
Came swiftly sweeping through the gloomy air
And calling Fame the Satyrs and the nymphs,
She gave them viols full of heavenly dew,
With that mounted on her parti-coloured coach
Being drawn with peacocks proudly through
the air,
She flew with Iris to the sphere of love.
What fearful thoughts arise upon this show?
What desert grove is this? How thus disguised?
Where is Orgalio?
Heremy Lord.
Sirah, how came I thus disguised,
Like made Orestes quaintly thus disguised?
Like mad Orestes, nay my Lord, you may
boldly justify the comparison, for Orestes was
never so mad in his life as you were.
What was I mad? What fury hath inchanted
me?
A fury sure worse than Megera was,
That reft her son from trusty Pilades.
Why, what art thou, some Sybel or some
goddess, freely speak?
Time not affords to tell each circumstance?
But thrice hath Cynthia changed her hew
Since thou infected with a lunacy,
Hast gadded up and down these lands &amp; groves
Performing strange and ruthful stratagems,
All for the love of fair Angelica,
Whom thou with Motor did suppose plaide
false,
But Sacrepant had graven these rundelaies,
To sting thee with infecting jealousy;
The swain that told thee of their oft converse,
Was servant unto County Sacrepant,
And trust me Orlando, Angelica though true to
thee,
Is banished from the court,
And Sacrepnat this day bids battle to Marsillius
The armies ready are to give assail,
And on a hill that ouerpeeres them both,
Stands all the worthy matchless peers of France
Who are in quest to seek Orlando out.
Muse not at this, for I have told thee true,
I am she that cured thy disease,
Here take these weapons given thee by the fates,
And hie thee County to the battle straight.
Thanks sacred Gods for thy helping hand
Thither will I hie to be revenged.
Alarms.
Viceroys you are dead,
For Sacrepant already crowned a king,
Heaves up his sword to have your diadems.
Traitor, not dead, or any wit dismayed,
For dear we prize the smallest drop of blood.
Stay Princes, base not your selves to cumbat
such a dog.
Mount on your coursers, follow those that fly,
And let your conquering swoordes be tainted in
their bloods
Pass ye, for him he shall be combated.
Why what art thou that bravest me thus?
I am thou see a mercenary soldier
Homely, yet of such haughty thoughts;
As noght can serve to quech th'aspiring thoughts
That burns as doe the fires of Cicely,
Unless I win that princely diadem,
That seems so ill upon thy cowards head.
Coward. To arms sir boy, I will not brooke
these braves,
If Mars himself even from his fiery throne,
Came armed with all his furnitures of war.
Oh villain, thou hast slain a prince.
Then moist thou think that Mars himself
Came down to veil thy plumes, and heave thee
from thy pomp.
Proud that thou art, I reck not of thy gre,
But I will have the conquest of my sword,
Which is the glory of thy diadem.
These words bewraie thou art no base born
moore,
But by descent sprung from some royal line,
Then freely tell me whats thy name.
Nay first let me know thine?
Then know that thou hast slain Prince
Sacrepant.
Sacrepant. Then let me at thy dying day
entreat,
By that same sphere wherein thy soul shall rest,
If love deny not passage to thy ghost,
Thou tell me whether thou wrongdst Angelica
or no.
O thats the sting that pricks my conscience
Oh thats the hell my thoughts abhor to think,
I tel thee knight, for thou doest seem no less,
That I ingravde the rundelaies on the trees,
And hung the sedulet of poor Motors love,
Intending so to breed debate,
Between Orlando and Angelica,
O thus I wronged Orlando and Angelica.
Now tell me what shall I call thy name.
Then dead is the fatal author of my ill,
Base villain, vassal, unworthy of a crown,
Know that the man that struck the fatal stroke,
Is Orlando the County Palatine,
Whom fortune sent to quittance all my wrongs
Thou foiled and slain, it now behooves me straight
To hie me fast to massacre thy men,
And so farewell thou devil in shape of man.
Hath Demogorgon ruler of the fates,
Set such a baleful period on my life,
As none might end the days of Sacrepant,
But mighty Orlando rival of my love,
Now holds the fatal murderers of men,
The sharpened knife ready to cut my thread,
Ending the scene of all my tragedy,
This day, this hour, this minute ends the days
Of him that lived worthy old Nestors age.
Phoebus put on thy fable suited wreath,
Clad all thy spheres in dark and mourning
weeds.
Parcht be the earth to drink up every spring,
Let corn and trees be blasted from aboue,
Heaven turn to brass, &amp; earth to wedge of steel
The world to cinders, Mars come thundering
down,
And never sheath thy swift revenging sword,
Till like the deluge in Dewcalions days,
The higgest mountains swim in streams of
blood.
Heaven, earth, men, beasts, &amp; every living thing
Consume and end with county Sacrepant.
Fought is the field, &amp; Sacrepant is slain,
With such a massacre of all his men,
As Mars descending in his purple robe,
Vows with Bellona in whole heaps of blood
To banquet all the demi gods of war.
See where hee lies slaughtered without
the camp,
And by a simple swain, a mercenary,
Who bravely took the combat to himself,
Might I but know the man that did the deed,
I would my Lord eternize him with fame.
Leaving the factious county to his death,
Command my Lord his body be conveyed
Unto some place as likes your Highness best,
See Marsillus posting thorough Africa,
We have found this straggling girl Angelica,
Who for she wronged her love Orlando
Chiefest of the Western peers,
Conversing with so mean a man as Motor was,
We will have her punished by the laws of France,
To end her burning lust in flames of fire.
Beshrew you lordings but you doe your
worst.
Fire, famine, and as cruel death,
As fell to Neros mother in his rage.
Father, if I may dare to call thee so,
And Lords of France come from the Western
seas.
In quest to find mighty Orlando out,
Yet ere I die let me have leave to say,
Angelica held ever in her thoughts,
Most dear the love of County Palatine:
What wretch hath wronged vs with suspect of love,
I know not I, nor can accuse the man:
But by the heavens whereto my soul shall fly,
Angelica did never wrong Orlando.
I speak not this as one that cares to live,
For why, my thoughts are fully malecontent,
And I conjure you by your Chivalry,
You quit Orlandos wrong upon Angelica.
Strumpet fear not, for by fair Mayas
son,
This day thy soul shall vanish up in fire,
As Simile when Iuno wild the trull,
To entertain the glory of her love.
Frenchman, for so thy quaint array imports,
Be thou a Pier, or be thou Charlemain,
Or had thou Hector or Achilles hart,
Or never daunted thoughts of Hercules,
That did in courage far surpass them all,
I tell thee sir, thou least in thy throat,
The greatest brave transalpine France can brooke,
In saying that sacred Angelica,
Did offer wrong unto the Palatine:
I am a common mercenary soldier,
Yet for I see my Princess is abused
By new come stragglers from a foreign coast,
I dare the proudest of these western Lords
To crack a blade in trial of her right.
Why foolish hardy daring simple groom,
Follower of fond conceited Phaeton:
Know thou to whom thou speak?
Brave soldier (for so much thy courage
These men are princes, dipped within the blood (says)
Of Kings most royal, seated in the West,
Unfit to accept a challenge at your hand.
Yet thanks that thou would in thy Lords defence
Fight for my daughter, but her guilt is known.
I, rest thee soldier, Angelica is false,
False, for she hath no trial of her right:
Soldier, let me die for the miss of all.
Were thou as stout as is proud Theseus,
In vain thy blade should offer my defence:
For why, these be the champions of the world,
Twelve Peers of France that never yet were foiled.
How Madam, the twelve Peers of France?
Why let them be twelve devils of hell:
What I have said Isle pawn my sword
To seal it on the shield of him that dares
Malgrado of his honour combat me.
Marry sir, that dare I.
Yar a welcome man sir.
Chastise the groom (Oliuer) &amp; learn
him know,
We are not like the boys of Africa.
Hear you sir: You that so peremptorily
bad him fight,
Prepare your weapons for your turn is next,
Tic not one Champion that can discourage me,
Come are ye ready.
So stand aside, and Madam if my fortune last it out,
Isle guard you  with twelve Pieres of France.
Oh  how can thou stand &amp; see a slave
Disgrace the house of France: Syrra prepare you,
For angry  sits on my sword to be revenged.
Well said Frenchman, you have made a
goodly oration: But you had best to use your sword
better, lest I beswinge you.
How so ere disguised in base or Indian shape,
Oger can well discern thee by thy blows,
For either thou art Orlando or the devil.
Then to assure you that I am no devil,
Here is your friend and companion Orlando.
And none can be more glad than Oger is
That he hath found his Cousin in his sense.
When as I felt his blows upon my shield,
My teeth did chatter and my thoughts conceived,
Who might this be if not the Pallatine.
So had I said, but that report did tell,
My Lord was troubled with a lunacy.
So was I Lordinges: but give me leave a
while,
Humbly as Mars did to his Paramour,
So to submit to fair Angelica.
Pardon thy Lord, fair saint Angelica,
Whose love stealing by steps into extremes,
Grew by suspicion to a causeles lunacy.
O no my Lord, but pardon my amiss,
For had not Orlando lovde Angelica
Ne'er had my Lord fallen into these extremes,
Which we will parley private to our selves:
Ne'er was the Queen of Cypress half so glad,
As is Angelica to see her Lord,
Her dear Orlando settled in his sense.
Thanks my sweet love.
But why stands the Prince of Africa,
And Mandrecarde the King of Mexico,
So deep in dumps when all rejoice beside:
First know my Lord, I slaughtered Sacrepant,
I am the man that did the slave to death,
Who frankly there did make confession,
That he ingravde the Roundelays on the trees,
And hung the schedules of poor Motors love,
Intending by suspect to breed debate,
Deeply twixt me and fair Angelica:
His hope had hap but we had all the harm,
And now Revenge leaping from out the seat,
Of him that may command sterne Nemesis,
Hath poured those treasons justly on his head.
What saith my gracious Lord to this?
I stand amazed, deep ouerdrencht
with joy,
To hear and see this unexpected end,
So well I rest content ye Pieres of France,
Sith it is provde Angelica is clear,
Her and my Crown I freely will bestow,
Upon Orlando the County Palatine.
Thanks my good Lord, &amp; now my friends
of France,
From , be merry, we will hasten home,
So soon as King  will consent,
To let his daughter  with vs to France,
Mean while weal richly rigge up all our Fleet,
More brave than was that gallant Grecian keel,
That brought away the Colchyan fleece of gold.
Our Sails of sandal spread into the wind,
Our ropes and tacklings all of finest silk,
Fetched from the native looms of laboring worms,
The pride of Barbary, and the glorious wealth,
That is transported by the Western bounds:
Our stems cut out of gleaming Ivory,
Our planks and sides framed out of Cypress wood,
That bears the name of Cyparissus change,
To burst the billows of the Ocean Sea,
Where Phoebus dips his amber-tresses oft,
And kisses Thetis in the days decline,
That Neptune proud shall call his Tritons forth,
To cover all the Ocean with a calm:
So rich shall be the rubbish of our barks,
Tan here for ballas to the ports of France,
That Charles himself shall wonder at the sight.
Thus Lordings when our bankettings be done,
And Orlando espoused to Angelica,
Weal furrow through the moving Ocean,
And cheerly frolic with great Charlemain.

WHY looks my lord like to a troubled sky,
When heavens bright shine, is shadowed with a fog:
A late we ran the dear and through the Lands
Stripped with our nagges the lofty frolic bucks,
That scudded fore the teisers like the wind,
Ne'er was the Dear of merry Fresingfield,
So lustily pulled down by jolly mates,
Nor shard the Farmers such fat venison,
So frankly dealt this hundred years before:
Nor have I seen my lord more frolic in the chase,
And now changed to a melancholy dump.
After the Prince got to the keepers lodge
And had been iocand in the house a while:
Tossing of ale and milk in country cannes,
Whether it was the countries sweet content:
Or else the bonny damsel filled vs drink
That seemed so stately in her stammel red:
Or that a qualm did cross his stomach then,
But straight he fell into his passions.
Sir Raphe, what say you to your moister,
Shall he thus all amort live malecontent.
Hear thou Ned, nay look if hee will speak to me.
What say thou to me fool?
I pree thee tell me Ned, art thou in love with the keepers daughter?
How if I be, what then?
Why then sirha Isle teach thee how to deceive love.
How Raphe.
Marry sirha Ned, thou shalt put on my cap, and my coat, and my dagger, and I will put on thy clothes, and thy sword, and so thou shalt be my fool.
And what of this?
Why so thou shalt beguile Love, for Love is such a proud scab, that he will never meddle with fools nor children, Is not Raphes counsel good Ned.
Tell me Ned Lacie, did thou mark the maid,
How lively in her country weeds she looked:
A bonier wench all Suffolk cannot yield,
All Suffolk, nay all England holds none such.
Sirha, Will Ermsby, Ned is deceived.
Why Raphe?
He says all England hath no such, and I say, and Isle stand to it, there is one better in Warwickshire.
How proouest thou that Raphe?
Why is not the Abbot a learned man, and hath red many books, and think thou he hath not more learning than thou to choose a bonny wench, yes I warrant thee by his whole grammar.
A good reason Raphe.
I tell the Lacie, that hersparkling eyes,
Doe lighten forth sweet Loves alluring fire:
And in her tresses she doth fold the looks
Of such as gaze upon her golden hair,
Her bshfull white mixed with the mornings red,
Luna doth boast upon her lovely cheeks,
Her front is beauties table where she paints,
The gloes of her gorgeous excellence:
Her teeth are shelves of precious Margaritas,
Richly enclosed with rute curroll cleues.
Tush Lacie, she is beauties overmatch,
If thou suruaist her curious imagery.
I grant my lord the damsel is as fair,
As simple Suffolks homely towns can yield:
But in the court be quainter dames than she,
Whose faces are enriched with honours taint,
Whose beauties stand upon the stage of fame,
And vaunt their trophies in the courts of love.
Ah Ned, but had thou watched her as my self,
And seen the secret beauties of the maid,
Their courtly coins were but foolery.
Why how watched you her my lord?
When as she swept like Venus through the house,
And in her shape fast folded up my thoughts:
Into the Milkhouse went I with the maid,
And there amongst the cream-boles she did shine,
As Palace, amongst her Princely housewifery:
She turned her smock over her Lily arms,
And dived them into milk to run her cheese:
But whiter than the milk her crystal skin,
Checked with lines of Azure made her blush,
That art or nature durst bring for compare,
Ermsbie if thou had seen as I did note it well,
How beauty plaid the huswife, how this girl
Like Lucrece laid her fingers to the work,
Thou would with Trquine hazard Room and all
To win the lovely maid of Fresingfield.
Sirha Nd, would fine have her?
I Raphe.
Why Ned I have laid the plot in my head thou shalt have her already.
Isle give thee a new coat and learn me that.
Why sir Ned weel ride to Oxford to Friar icon, oh he is a brave scholar sir, they say he is a brave Ngromancer, that he can mke women of devils, and hee can juggle cats into Costermongers.
And how then Raphe?
Marry sirha thou shalt go to him, and because thy fathere Harry shall not miss thee, hee shall turn me into thee; and Isle to the Court, and Isle prince it out, and he shall make thee eithere a silken purse, full of gold, or else a fine wrought sinocke.
But how shall I have the maid?
Marry sirha, if thou be a silken purse full of gold, then on sundays sheele hang thee by her side, and you must not say a word, Now sir when she comes into a great press of people, for fear of the cut-purse on a sudden sheele swap thee into her plackerd, then sirha being there you may plead for your self.
Excellent policy.
But how if I be a wrought smoke.
Then sheele put thee into her chest and lay th into Lavender, and upon some good day sheele put thee on, and at night when you go to bed, then being turned from a smock to a man, you may make up the match.
Wonderfully wisely counselled Raphe.
Raphe shall have a new coat.
God thank you when I have it on my back Ned,
Lacie the fool hath laid a perfect plot,
For why our country Margret is so coy,
And stands so much upon her honest points,
That marriage or no market with the maid:
Ermsbie, it must be nigromaticke spells,
And charms of art that must enchain her love,
Or else shall Edward never win the girl,
Therefore my wags weal horse vs in the morn;
And post to Oxford to this jolly Friar,
Bacon shall by his magic doe this deed.
Content my lord, and thats a speedy way
To wean these head-strong puppies from the teat,
I am unknown, not taken for the Prince,
They only deem vs frolic Courtiers,
That revel thus among our lieges game:
Therefore I have duised a policy,
Lcie, thou know next friday is S. Iames,
And then the country flocks to Harlston fair,
Then will the keepers daughter frolic there,
And ouer-shine the troupe of all the maids,
That come to see, and to be seen that day.
Haunt thee disguised among the country swains,
Fain thart a farmers son, not far from thence,
Espy her loves, and who she likes best:
Coat him, and court her to control the clown,
Say that the Courtier tyred all in greene,
That helped her handsomely to run her cheese,
And filled her fathers lodge with venison,
Commends him, and sends fairings to herself,
Buy some thing worthy of her parentage,
Not worth her beauty for Lacie then the fair,
Afford no Jewel fitting for the maid:
And when thou talk of me, note if she blush,
Oh then sh loves, but if her cheeks wax pale,
Disdain it is. Lcie send how she fares,
And spare no time nor cost to win her loves.
I will my lord so execute this charge,
As if that Lacie were in love with her.
Send letters speedily to Oxford of the news.
And sirha Lacie, buy me a thousand thousand million of fine bells.
What wilt thou do with them Raphe?
Mary every time that Ned sighs for the keepers daughter, Isle tie a bell about him, and so within three or four days I will send word to hi father Harry, that his son and my moister Ned is become Loves morris dance.
Well Lacie, ooke with care unto thy charge,
And I will hast to Oxford to the Friar,
That he by art, and thou by secret gifts,
Moist make me lord of merry Fresingfield.
God send your honour your harts desire.
Miles where are you?
Hi sum dosissime &amp; reuerendissime doctor.
Attuliins librs ms de Necromantia.
Ass quam byum &amp; quam icundum, habitares librs innumber.
Now masters of our Academic state,
That rule in Oxford Vizroies in your place,
Whose heads contain Maps of the liberal arts,
Spending your time in depth of learned skill,
Why flock you thus to Basins secret Cell,
A Fier newly stalde in ,
Say whats your mind, that I may make reply.
Bacon we hear, that long we have spect,
That thou art read in Magicks myserie,
In Piromancie to divine by flames,
To tell by Hadromaticke, ebbes and tides,
By Aeromancie, to discover doubts,
To plain out questions, as Apollo did.
Well moister Bden, what of all this?
Marie ir he doth but fulfil by rehearsing of these names the Fable of the Fox and the gpes, that which is above vs, pertains nothing to vs.
I tell thee Bacon, Oxford makes report,
Nay England, and the court of Henrie says,
Thart making of a brazen head by art,
Which shall unfold strange doubts and Aphorism,
And read a lecture in Philosophy,
And by the help of Devils and ghastly fiends,
Thou meanst ere many years or days be past,
To compass England with a wall of brass.
And what of this?
What of this moister, why he doth speak mystically, for he knows if your skill fail to make a brazen head, yet mothere waters strong ale will it his turn to make him have a coppernose.
Bacon we come not grieving at thy skill,
But ioieng that our Academy yields
A man supposed the wonder ofthe world,
For if thy cunning work these miracles,
England and Europe shall admire thy fame,
And Oxford shall in characters of brass,
And statues, such as were built up in Rome,
Eternize Friar Bacon for his art.
Then gentle Friar, tell vs thy intent.
Seeing you come as friends unto the friar
Resolve you doctors, Bacon can by books,
Make storming Bores thunder from his cave,
And dim fair Luna to a dark Eclipse,
The great arch-ruler, potentate of hell,
Trembles, when Bacon bids him, or his fiends,
Bow to the force of his Pentageron.
What art can work, the frolic friar knows,
And therefore will I turn my Magic books,
And strain out Necromancy to the deep,
I have contrivd and framed a head of brase,
(I made Belcephon hammer ut the stuff)
And that by art shall read Philosophy,
And I will strengthen England by my skill,
That if ten Caesars livd and raigd in Rome,
With all the legions Europe doth contain,
They should not touch a grass of English ground,
The work that Ninus reared at Babylon,
The brazen walls framed by Semiramis,
Carved out like to the portal of the sun,
Shall not be such as rings the English stand:
From Dover to the market place of Ri.
Is this possible?
Isle bring ye to or three witnesses.
What be those?
Marry ir three or four as honest devils, and good companions as any be in hell.
No doubt but magic may doe much in this,
For he that reads but Mathematicke rules,
Shall find conclusions that avail to work,
Wonder that pass the common sense of men.
But Bacon roves a bow beyond his reach,
And tells of more than magic can perform:
Thinking to get a fame by fooleries,
Have I not past as far instate of schools:
And red of many secrets, yet to think,
That heads o Brass can utter any voice,
Or more, to tell of depe philosophy,
This is a fable Aes had forgot.
Burden thou wrongst me in detracting thus,
Bacon loves not to stuff himself with lies:
But tell me fore these Doctors if thou dare,
Of certain questions I shall move to thee.
I will ask what thou can.
Marry si heel straight be on your pickpacke to know whether the feminine or the masculine gender be most worthy.
Were you not yesterday moister Burden at Henly upon the Thembs?
I was, what then?
What book studied you there on all night?
I, none at all I red not there a lie.
Then doctors, Friar Basins art knows nought.
What say you to this moister Burden doth hee not touch you?
I pass not of his frivolous speeches.
Nay moister Burden, my moister ere hee hath done with you, will turn you from a doctor to a dunce, and shake you so small, that he will leave no more learning in you than is in Baaims Ass.
Masters, for that learned Burdens skill is deep,
And sore he doubts of Basins Cabalisme:
Isle show you why he haunts to Henly oft,
Not doctors for to taste the fragrant air:
But there to spend the night in Alcumie,
To multiply with secret spells of art.
Thus private steals he learning from vs all,
To prove my sayings true, Isle show you straight,
The book he kepes at Henly for himself.
Nay now my moister goes to conjuration, take heed.
Masters stand still, fear not, Isle show you but his book.
Pe omnes deos infernales Belcephon.
Oh moister cease your conjuration, or you spoil all, for hears a she duell cme with a shoulder of mutton o spit, you have mart the devils supper, but no doubt hee thinks our Colledge fare is slender, and so hath sent you his cooke with a shouldder of mutton to make it exceed.
Oh where am I, or whats become of me.
What art thou?
Hostess at Henly mistress of the Bell.
How came thou here.
As I was in the kitchen amongst the maids,
Spitting the meat against supper for my guess:
A motion moved me to look forth of door.
No sooner had I pried into the yard,
But straight a whirlwind hoisted me from thence,
And mounted me aloet unto the clouds:
As in a trance I thought nor feared nought,
Nor know I where or whether I was tan:
Nor where I am, nor what these persons be.
No, know you not moister Burden.
Oh yes good sir, he is my daily guest,
What moister Burden, it was but yesternight,
That you and I at Henly plaid at cards.
I know not what we did, a pox of all conjuring Friars.
Now jolly Friar tell vs, is this the book that Burden is so careful to look on?
It is, but Burden tell me now,
Think thou that Basins Nicromanticke skill,
Cannot perform his head and wall of Brass,
When he can fetch thine hostess in such post.
Isle warrant you moister, if moister Burden could conjure as well as you, hee would have his book every night from Henly to study on at Oxford.
Burden what are you mated by this frolic Friar,
Look how he droops, his guilty conscience
Drives him to bash and makes his hostess blush.
Well mistress for I will not have you mist,
You shall to Henly to cheer up your guests
Fore supper gin, Burden bid her adieu,
Say farewell to your hostess sore she goes,
Sirha away, and set her safe at home.
Moister Burden, when shall we see you at Henly.
The devil take thee and Henly too.
Moister shall I make a good motion.
Whats that?
Marry sir now that my hostess is gone to provide
supper, conjure up another spirit, and send doctor Burden ying after.
Thus rulers of our Accademicke state,
You have seen the Friar frame his art by proo:
And as the college called Brasnno
Is under him and he the moister there:
So surely shall this head of brass be framed,
And yield forth strange and uncouth Aphrismes:
And Hell and Heccate shall fale the Fr,
But I will circle England round with brass.
So be it, &amp; nno&amp; sempr, Amen.
By my troth Margret hears a whether is able to make a man call his father whoreson, if this whether hold wee shall have hay good cheap, and butter and cheese at Harlston will bear no price.
Thomas, maids when they come to see the fair,
Count not to make a cope for dearth of hay,
When we have turned our butter to the salt,
And set our cheese safely upon the rackes.
Then let our fathers prise it as they please,
We country sluts of merry Fresingfield,
Come to buy needless noughts to make vs fine,
And look that young men should be frank this day,
And court vs with such fairings as they can.
Phus is blithe and frolic looks from heaven,
As when he courted lovely Simile:
Swearing the peddlers shall have empty packs,
If that fair whether may make chapman buy.
But lovely Peggie Simile is dead,
And therefore Phbus from his palace pries,
And seeing such a sweet and seemly saint,
Shows all his glories for to court your self.
This is a fairing gentle sir indeed,
To sooth me up with suc smooth flattery,
But learn of me your scoes to broad before:
Well Ione our beauties must abide their jests,
We serve the turn iniolly Fresingfield.
Margret a farmers daughter for a farmers son,
I warrant you the meanest of vs both,
Shall have a mate to lead vs from the Church:
But Thomas whats the news? what in a dump.
Give me your hand, we are near a peddlers shop,
Out with your purse we must have fairings now.
Faith Ione and shall, Isle bestow a fairing on you, and then we will to the Taurn, and snap off a pint of wine or two.
Whence are you sir, of Suffolk, for your  are finer than the common sort of men?
Faith lovely girl, I am of Backless by,
Your neighbour not aboue six miles from hence,
A farmers son that never was so queen,
But that he could do curtsy to such dames:
But trust me Margret I am sent in charge,
From him that reveled in your fathers house,
And filled his Lodge with cheer and venison,
Tyred in greene, he sent you this rich purse:
His token, that he helped you run your cheese,
And in the milkhouse chatted with your self.
To me, you forget your self.
Women are often weak in memory
Oh pardon sir, I call to mind the man,
It were little manners to refuse his gift,
And yet I hope he sends it not for love:
For we have little leisure to debate of that.
What Margret blush not, maids must have their loves.
Nay by the mass she looks pale as if she were angry.
Sirha are you of Beckls? I pray how doth goodman Cob, my father bought a horse of him, Isle tell you Marget, a were good to be a gentleman's jade, for of all things the foul hilding could not abide a doongcart.
How different is this farmer from the rest,
That erst as yet hath pleased my wandering sight,
His words are witty, quickened with a smile,
His curtsy gentle, smelling of the court,
Facile and debonair in all his deeds,
Proportiond as was Paris, when in gray,
He courted Aenon in the vale by Troy.
Great lords have come and pleaded for my love,
Who but the keepers lase of Fresingfield,
And yet me thinks this Farmers jolly son,
Passes the proudest that hath pleased mine eye.
But Peg disclose not that thou art in love,
And show as yet no sign of love to him,
Although thou well would wish him for thy love
Keep that to thee till time doth serve thy turn,
To show the grief wherein thy heart doth burn.
Come Ione and Thomas, shall we to the fair,
You Beckls man will not forsake vs now,
Not whilst I may have such quaint girls as you,
Well if you chance to come by Fresingfield,
Make but a step into the keepers lodge,
And such poor fare as Woodmen can afford,
Butter and cheese, cream, and fat venison,
You shall have store, and welcome therewithal.
Gramarcies Peggie, look for me are long.
Great men of Europe, monarchs of the West,
Ringd with the walls of old Ocnus,
Whose lotie surges like the batmints,
That compassed high built Babel in with towers,
Welcome my lords, welcome brave westeme kings,
To Englands shore, whose promontory cleeues,
Shows Albion is another little world,
Welcome says English Henrie to you all,
Chielie unto the lovely Eleanor,
Who dared or Edwards sake cut through the seas,
And venture as Agenors dmsell through the deep,
To get the love of Henries wanton son.
Englands rich Monarch brave Plantagenet,
The Pyren mounts swelling aboue the clouds,
That ward the wealthy Castle in with walls,
Could not detain the beauteous Eleanor,
But hearing of the fame of Edwards youth,
She dared to brooke Neptunus haughty pride,
And bide the brunt of froward Eolus,
Then may fair England welcome her the more.
After that English Henrie by his lords,
Had sent prince Edwards lovely counterfeit,
A present to the Castle Elinor,
The comely pourtrat of so brave a man,
The virtuous fame discoursed of his deeds,
Edwards courageous resolution,
Done at the holy land fore Damas walls,
Led both mine eye and thoughts in equal links,
To like so of the English Monarchs son,
That I attempted perils for his sake.
Where is the Prince, my lord?
He posted down, not long since from the court,
To Suffolk side, to merry Fremingham,
To sport himself amongst my fallow dear,
From thence by packets sent to Hampton house,
We hear the Prince is ridden with his lords,
To Oxford, in the Academy there,
To hear dispute amongst the learned men,
But we will send forth letters for my son,
To will him come from Oxford to the court.
Nay rather Henrie let vs as we be,
Ride for to visit Oxford with our train,
Fine would I see your Universities,
And what learned men your Academy yields,
From Haspurg have I brought a learned clarke,
To hold dispute with English Orators.
This doctor surnamde Iaques Vandermast,
A Germaine borne, past into Padua,
To Florence, and to fair Bolonia,
To Paris, Rheims, and stately Orleans,
And talking there with men of art, put down
The chiefest of them all in Aphorisms,
In Magic, and the Mathematicke rules,
Now let vs Henrie try him in your schools.
He shall my lord, this motion likes me well,
Weal progress straight to Oxford with our trains,
And see what men our Academy brings.
And wonder Vandermast welcome to me
In Oxford shalt thou find a jolly friar,
Called Friar Baon, Englands only flower
Set him but Non-plus in his magic spells,
And make him yield in Mathematicke rules,
And for thy glory I will bind thy brows,
Not with a poets garlandmade of Bays,
But with a coronet of choicest gold,
Whilst then we fit to Oxford with our troupes,
Lets in and banquet in our English court.
Where be these vacabond knaves that they attend no better on their maiste?
If it please your honour we are all ready at an inch.
Sirha Ned, Isle have no more post horse to ride on,
Isle have another fetch.
I pray you how is that my Lord?
Marry sir, Isle send to the Isle of Eely for four or five dozen of Geese, and Isle have them tide six and six together with whipcord, Now upon their backs will I have a fair field bed, with a Canopy, and so when it is my pleasure Isle flee into what place I please; this will be easy.
Your honour hath said well, but shall we to Brazennose College before we pull off our boots.
Warren well motioned, wee will to the Friar
Before we revel it within the town.
Raphe see you keep your countenance like a Prince.
Wherefore have I such a company of cutting knaves to wait upon me, but to up and defend my countenance against all mine enemies: have you not good swords and bucklers.
Stay who comes here.
Some scholar, and weal ask him where Friar Bacon is.
Why thou arrant dunce shall I never make thee good scholar, doth not all the town try out, and say, Friar Basins subsiser is the greatest blockhead in all Oxford, why thou can not speak one word of true Latin.
No sir, yes what is this else; g um tuus home, I am your man, I warrant you sir as good Tullies phrase as any is in Oxford.
Come on sirha, what part of speech is Eg.
Eg, that is I, marry nomen sbstant.
How prove you that?
Why sir let him prove himself and a will, I can b hard felt and understood.
Oh gross dunce.
Come let vs break off this dispute between these two. Sirha, where is Brazennose College.
Not far from Copper-smithes hall.
What doest thou moke me.
Not I sir, but what would you at Brazennose?
Mrrie we would speak with friar Bacon.
Whose men be you.
Marry scholar here is our moister.
Sirha I am the moister of these good fellows, may thou not know me to be a Lord by my reparrell.
Then hears good game for the hawk, for heers the moister fool, and a couie of Cockscombs, one wise man I think would spring you all.
Gogs wounds Warren kill him.
Why Ned I think the deull be in my sheath, I cannot get out my dagger.
Nor I mine, Swones Ned I think I am bewitched.
A company of scabs, the proudest of you all draw your weapon if he can,
See how boldly I speak now my moister is by.
I strive in vain, but if my sword be shut,
And conjured fast by magic in my sheath,
Villain here is my fist.
Oh I beseech you conjure his hands too, that he may not lift his arms to his head, for he is light fingered.
Ned strike him, Isle warrant thee by mine honour.
What means the English prince to wrong my man,
To whom speak thou.
To thee.
Who art thou.
Could you not judge when all your swords grew fast
That friar Bcon was not far from hence:
Edward king Henries son and Prince of Wales,
Thy oole disguid cannot conceal thy selle,
I know both Armby and the Suslex Erle,
Else Friar Bacon had but little skill.
Thou come in post from merry Fresingfield
Fast fancied to the keepers bonny lass,
To crave some succour of the jolly Friar,
And Lacie Ear of Lincoln hast thou left,
To treat fair Margret to allow thy loves:
But friends are men, and love can baffle lords.
The Earl both woes and courts her for himself.
Ned this is strange, the friar knows al.
Appollo could not utter more than this.
I stand amazed to hear this jolly Friar,
Tell even the very secrets of my thoughts:
But learned Bacon since thou know the cause,
Why I did post so fast from Fresingfield.
Help Friar at a pinch, that I may have
The love of lovely Margret to my self;
And as I am true Prince of Wales, Isle give
Living and lands to strength thy college state.
Good Friar help the Prince in this.
Why servant Ned, will not the friar doe it. Were not my sword glued to my scabbard by conjuration, I would cut off his head and make him do it by force.
In faith my lord, your manhood and your sword all alike, they are so fast conjured that we shall never see them.
Wat doctor in a dump, tush help the prince,
And thou shalt see how liberal he will prove,
Crave not such actions, greater dumps than these,
I will my lord strain out my magic spells,
For this day comes the earl to Fresingfield,
And fore that night shuts in the day with dark,
Theile be betothed each to other fast:
But come with me, weel to my study straight,
And in a glass propectiue I will show
Whats done this day in mrry Fresingfield.
Gramercies Bacon, I will quite thy pain.
But send your train my lord into the town,
My scholar shall go bring them to their Inn:
Mean while weal see the knavery of the earl.
Warren leave me and Ermsbie, take the fool,
Let him be moister and go revel it,
Till I and Friar Bacon take a while.
We will my lord.
Faith Ned and Isle lord it out till thou come, Isle be Prince of Wales over all the black pots in Oxford.
Now frolic dart, welcome to my Cell,
Here tempers Friar Bacon many toys:
And holds this place his consistory court,
Wherein the devils pleads homage to his words,
Within this glasle prpectiue thou shalt see
This day whats done in merry Fresingfield,
Twixt lovely Peggie and the Lincoln earl.
Friar thou gladst me, nowshall Edward try,
How Lacie means to his sovereign lord.
Stand there and look directly in the glass,
What sees my lord.
I see the keepers lovely lass appear,
As bright-sunne as the paramour of Mars,
Only attended by a jolly friar.
Sit still and keep the crystal in your eye,
But tell me friar Bungay is it true,
That this fair courteous country swain,
Who says his father is a farmer no,
Can be lord Lacie earl of Lincolnshire.
Peggie tic true, tic Lacie for my life,
Or else mine art and cunning both doth fail:
Left by prince Edward to procure his loves,
For he in greene that help you run your cheese,
Is son to Henry and the prince of Wales.
Be what he will his lure is but for lust.
But did lord Lacie like poor Margret,
Or would he deign to wed a country lass,
Friar, I would his humble handmaid be,
And for great wealth, quite him with curtsy.
Why Margret doest thou love him.
His personage like the pride ofvaunting Troy,
Might well avouch to shadow Hellens cape:
His wits quick and ready in conceit,
As Greece afforded in her chiefest prime
Courteous, ah Friar full of pleasing smiles,
Trust me I love too much to tell thee more,
Suffice to me he is Englands paramour.
Hath not each eye that viewed thy pleasing face,
Surnamed thee fair maid of Fresingfield.
Yes Bungay, and would God the loely Earl
Had that in esse, thatso many sought.
Fear not, the Friar will not be behind,
To show his cunning to entangle love.
I think the Friar courts the bonny wench,
Bacon, me thinks he is a lusty churl.
Now look my lord.
Gogs wounds Bacon here comes Lacie.
Sit still my lord and mark the commedie.
Hears Lacie, Margret step aside awhile.
Daphne the damsel, that caught Phoebus fast,
And locked him in the brightness of her looks,
Was not so beauteous in Appollos eyes,
As is fre Margret to the Lincoln earl,
Recant thee Lacie thou art put in trust,
Edward thy sovereigns son hath chosen thee
A secret friend to court her for himself:
And dare thou wrong thy Prince with treachery.
Lacie, love makes no acception of a friend,
Nor deems it of a Prince, but as a man:
Honour bids thee control him in his lust,
His wooing is not for to wed the girl,
But to entrap her and beguile the lass:
Lacie thou love, then brooke not such abuse,
But wed her, and abide thy Princes frown:
For better die, then see her live disgraced.
Come Friar I will shake him from his dumps,
How cheer you sir, a penny for your thought:
Your early up, pray God it be the near,
What come from Backless in a morn so soon.
Thus watchful are such men as live in love,
Whose eyes brooke broken slumbers for their sleep,
I tell thee Peggie since last Harlston fair,
My mind hath felt a heap of passions.
A trusty man that court it for your friend,
Woo you still for the courtier all in greene.
I marvel that he sues not for himself.
Peggie, I pleaded first to get your grace for him,
But when mine is furuaid your beauteous looks
Love like a wag, straight dived into my heart,
And there did shrine the Idea of your self:
Pity me though I be a farmers son,
And measure not my riches but my love.
You are vere hasty for to garden well,
Seeds must have time to sprout before they spring,
Love ought to creep as doth the dials shade,
For timely ripe is rotten too too soon.
Deus hic, room for a merry Friar,
What youth of Backless, with the keepers lass,
Tic well, but tell me here you any news.
No, Friar what news.
Here you not how the purseuants do post,
With proclamations through each country town:
For what gentle friar tell the news.
Dwelst thou in Backless &amp; hearsed not of these news,
Lacie the Earl of Lincoln is late fled
From Windsor court disguised like a swain,
And lurks about the country here unknown.
Henrie suspects him of some treachery,
And therefore doth proclaim in every way,
That who can take the Lincoln earl, shall have
Paid in the Exchequer twenty thousand crowns.
The earl of Lincoln, Friar thou art mad,
It was some other, thou mistake the man:
The earl of Lincoln, why it cannot be.
Yes very well my lord, for you are he,
The keepers daughter took you prisoner,
Lord Lacie yield, Isle be your gailor once.
How familiar they be Bacon.
Sit still and mark the sequel of their loves.
Then am I double prisoner to thy self,
Peggie, I yield, but are these news iniest,
In st with you, but earnest unto me:
For why, these wrongs do wring me at the heart,
Ah how these earls and noble men of birth,
Flatter and fine to forge poor women's ill.
Believe me lass, I am the Lincoln earl
I not deny, but tyred thus in rags
I lived disguised to win fair Piggies love.
What love is there where wedding ends not love?
I meant fair girl to make thee Laces wife.
I  think that earls will stoop so low,
Say, shall I make thee countess ere I sleep.
Handmaid unto the earl so please himself
A wife in name, but servant in obedience.
The Lincoln countess, for it shall be so,
Isle plight the bands and seal it with a kiss.
Gogs wounds Bacon they kiss, Isle stab them,
Oh hold your hands my lord it is the glass.
Collar to see the traitors gre so well,
Made me think the shadows substances.
It were a long poinard my lord, to reach between
Oxford and Fresingfield, but it still and see more.
Well lord of Lincoln, if your loves be knit,
And tha your tongues and thoughts do both agree:
To avoid ensuing jars, Isle hamper up the match,
Isle take my portico forth, and wed you here,
Then go to bed and seal up your desires.
Friar content, Peggie how like you this?
What likes my lord is pleasing unto me.
Then hand-fast hand, and I will to my book,
What sees my lord now.
Bacon, I see the lovers hand in hand,
The Friar ready with his portico there,
To wed them both, then am I quite undone,
Bacon help now, if ere thy magic served,
Help Bacon, stop the marriage now,
If devils or necromancy may suffice,
And I will give thee forty thousand crowns.
Fear not my lord, Isle stop the jolly Friar,
For mumbling up his orisons this day.
Why speak not Bungay, Friar to thy book.
How look thou friar, as a man disttaught
To see if he will take this task in hand.
Stay what rumour is this, the town is up in a mutinie, what hurly burly is this?
Nay masters if you were ne'er so good, you shall before the doctors to answer your misdemeanour.
Whats the matter fellow?
Marie sir, here is a company of rufflers that drinking in the Tavern have made a great brawl, and almost kilde the vintner.
Salve doctor Burden, this lubberly lurden,
Ill shaped and ill faced, disdained and disgraced,
What he tells unto vbis, mentitur de nobis.
Who is the moister and youe of this crew?
Ass asinum mundi, fugura rotundi,
Neat sheat and fine, as brisk as a cup of wine.
What are you?
I am father doctor as a man would say, the Belwethere of this company, these are my lords, and I the prince of Wales.
Are you Edward the kings son?
Sir Miles, bring hither the tipster that drew the wine, and I warrant when they see how soundly I have broke his head, theile say it was done by no less man than a prince.
I cannot believe that this is the prince of Wales.
And why so sir?
For they say the prince is a brave &amp; a wise gentleman.
Why and think thou doctor that he is not so?
Dare thou detract and derogate from him,
Being so lovely and so brave a youth.
Whose face shining with many a sugared smile,
Bewrays that he is bred of princely race.
And yet moister doctor, to speak like a proctor,
And tell unto you, what is veriment and true,
To cease of this quarrel, look but on his apparel,
Then mark but my talis, he is great prince of Walis,
The cheese of our gregis, and fili regis,
Then ware what is done, for he is Henries white son.
Doctors whose doting nightcaps are not capable of my ingenious dignity, know that I am Edward Plantagenet, whom if you displease, will make a ship that shall hold all your colleges, and so carry away the Niniuersitie with a fair wind, to the Bankeside in Southwark, how say thou Ned Warraine, shall I not do it?
Yes my good lord, and if it please your lordship, I will gather up al your old pantophles, and with the cork, make you a Pinnace of five hundred tun, that shall serve the turn marvelous well, my lord.
And I my lord will have Pioners to undermine the town, that the very Gardens and orchards be carried away for your summer walks.
And I with scientia, and great diligentia,
Will conjure and charm, to keep you from harm,
That vtrum horum mauis, your very great nauis,
Like Bartlets ship, from Oxford do skip,
With Colleges and schools, full laden with fools,
Quid dices ad hoc, worshipful domino Dawcocke.
Why harebraind courtiers, are you drunk or mad,
To taunt vs up with such scurilitie,
Deem you vs men of base and light esteem,
To bring vs such a fop for Henries son,
Call out the beadls and convey them hence,
Straight to Bocardo, let the roisters lie
Close clapped in bolts, until theirwits be tame.
Why shall we to prison my lord?
What say Miles, shall I honour the prison with my presence?
No no, out with your blades, and hamper these jade,
Have a flourish and a crash, now play revel dash,
And teach these Sacerdos, that the Bocardos,
Like pezzants and elves, are meet for themselves.
To the prison with them constable.
Well doctors seeing I have sported me,
With laughing at these mad and merry wags,
Know that prince Edward is at Brazennose,
And this attired like the prince of Wales,
Is Raphe, king Henries only loved fool,
I, earl of Essex, and this Ermsbie
Oe of the privy chamber to the king,
Who while the prince with Friar Bacon stays,
Have reveled it in Oxford as you see.
My lord pardon vs, we knew not what you were,
But courtiers may make greater skips than these,
Wilt please your honour dine with me to day?
I will moister doctor, and satisfy the vintner for h hurt, only I must desire you to imagine him all this forenoon the prince of Wales.
I will sir.
And upon that I will lead the way, only I will have Miles go before me, because I have heard Henrie say, that wisedome must go before Majesty.
Lacie thou can not shroud thy traitrous thoughts,
Nor cover as did Cassius all his wiles,
For Edward hath an eye that looks as far,
As Lncaeus from the shores of Grecia,
Did not I sit in Oxford by the Friar,
And see the court the maid of Fresingfield,
Seahog thy flattering fancies with a kiss,
Did not proud Bngay draw his portasse forth,
And joining hand in hand had married you,
If Friar Bcon had not stroke him ,
And mounted him upon a spirits back,
That we might chat at Oxford with the friar,
Traitor what answerst, is not all this true?
Truth all my Lord and thus I make reply,
At Harlstone fair there courting for your grace,
When as mine eye uruaid her curious shape,
And drew the beauteous glory of her looks,
To dive into the center of my heart.
Love taught me that your honour did but jest,
That princes were in fancy but as men,
How that the lovely maid of Fresingfield,
Was fitter to be Laces wedded wie,
Than concubine unto the prince of Wales.
Injurious Lacie did I love thee more
Than Alexander his Hephestion;
Did I unfold the passion of my love,
And locke them in the closet of thy thoughts,
Were thou to Edward second to himself,
Sole friend, and partner of his secret loves,
And could a glance of fading beauty break,
Theinchained fetters of such private friends,
Base coward, false, and too effeminate,
To be coriuall with a prince in thoughts,
From Oxford have I posted since I dined,
To quite a traitor fore that Edward sleep.
It was I my Lord, not Lacie stepped awry,
For oft he sued and courted for yourself,
And still wood for the courtier all in greene,
But I whom fancy made but over fond,
Pleaded my self with looks as if I lovd,
I fed mine eye with gazing on his face,
And still bewitched lovd Lacie with my looks,
My hart with sighs, mine eyes pleaded with tear,
My face held pity and content at once,
And more I coud not siphr out by signs
But that I lovd Lord Lacie with my heart,
Then worthy Edward measure with thy mind,
If women's faours will not force men fall,
If beauty and if das of  ove,
Is not of force to bury thoughts of friends.
I tell thee Peggie I will have thy loves
Edward or none shall conquer Margret,
In Frigates bottomd with rich Sethin planks,
Topped with the lofty firs of Lebanon,
Stemd and incast with burnished luorie
And overlaid with plates of Persian wealth,
Like Thetis shalt thou wanton on the waives
And draw the Dolphins to thy lovely eyes,
To dance lauoltas in the purple streams,
Sirens with harps and silver psalteries,
Shall weight with music at thy frigates stem,
And entertain fair Margret with her lays,
England and Englands wealth shall wait on thee,
Britain shall bend unto her princes love,
And doe due homage to thine excellence,
If thou wilt be but Edwards Margret.
Pardon my lord if Ioues great royalty,
Sent me such presents as to Dane,
If Phoebus tied in Latonas webs,
Come courting from the beauty of his lodge,
The dulcet tunes of frolic Mercury,
Not all the wealth heavens treasury affords,
Should make me leave lord Lacie or his love.
I have learned at Oxford then this point ofschooles,
Abate causa, llitur effectus,
Lacie the cause that Margret cannot love,
Nor fix her liking on the English Prince,
Take him away, and then the effects will fail,
Villain prepare thy self for I will bathe
My poinard in the bosom of an eatle.
Rather then live, and miss fair Margrets love,
Prince Edward stop not at the fatal doom,
But stab it home, end both my loves and life.
Brave Prince of Wales, honoured for royal deeds,
It were sin to stain fair Venus courts with blood,
Loves conquests ends my Lord in curtsy,
Spare Lacie gentle Edward, let me die,
For so both you and he doe cease your loves.
Lacie shall die as traitor to his Lord.
I have deserved it, Edward act it well.
What hopes the Prince to gain by Laces death?
To end the loves twixt him and Margaret.
Why, thinks king Henries son that Margrets love,
Hangs in the uncertain balance of proud time,
That death shall make a discord of our thonghts,
No, stab the earl, and fore the morning sun
Shall vaunt him thrice, over the lofty east,
Margret will meet her Lacie in the heavens.
If ought betides to lovely Margret,
That wrongs or wrings her honour from content,
Europes rich wealth nor Englands monarchy,
Should not allure Lacie to ouerliue,
Then Edward short my life and end her loves.
Rid me, and keep a friend worth many loves.
Nay Edward keep a love worth many friends.
And if thy mind be such as am hath blast,
Then princely Edward let vs both abide
The fatal resolution of thy rage,
Banish thou fancy, and embrace revenge,
And in one tomb knit both our carcasses,
Whose hearts were linked in one perfect love,
Edward Art thou that famous prince of Wales,
Who at Damasco beat the Saracens,
And broughtst home triumph on thy lances point,
And shall thy plumes be pulled by Venus down,
Is it princely to dissever lovers leagues,
To part such friends as glory in their loves,
Leave Ned, and make a virtue of this fault,
And further Peg and Lacie in their loves,
So in subduing fancies passion,
Conquering thy self thou get the richest spoil,
Lacie rise up, fair Peggie hears my hand,
The prince of Wales hath conquered all his thoughts
And all his loves he yields unto the earl,
Lacie enjoy the maid of Fresingfield,
Make her thy Lincoln countess at the church,
And Ned as he is true Plantagenet,
Will give h to thee frankly for thy wie.
Humbly I take her of my sovereign,
As if that Edward gave me Englands right,
And richt me with the Albion diadem.
And doth the English Prince mean true,
Will he vouchsafe to cease his former loves,
And yield the title of a country maid,
Unto lord Lacie.
I will fair Pig as I am true lord.
Then lordly sir, whose conquest is as great,
In conquering love as Caesars victories,
Margret as mild and humble in her thoughts,
As was Aspatia unto Cirrus self,
Yields thanks, and next lord Lacie, doth nshrine
Edward the second secret in her heart.
Gramercy Peggie, now that vows are past,
And that your loves are not be revolt:
Once Lacie friends again, come we will post
To Oxford, for this day the king is there,
And brings for Edward Castle Ellinor.
Peggie I must go see and view my wife,
I pray God I like her as I loved thee.
Beside, lord Lincoln we shall heye dispute,
Twixt friar Bacon, and learned Vandermast,
Peggie weal leave you for a week or two.
As it please lord Lacie, but loves foolish looks,
Think footsteps Miles, and minutes to be hours.
Isle hasten Peggie to make short return,
But please your houour go unto the lodge,
We shall have butter, cheese, and venison.
And yesterday I brought for Margret,
A lusty bottle of neat claret wine,
Thus can we feast and entertain your grace.
Tic cheer lord Lacie for an Emperor,
If he respect the person and the place:
Come let vs in, for I will all this night,
Ride post until I come to Basins cell.
Trust me Plantagenet these Oxford schools
Are richly seated near the river side:
The mountains full of fat and fallow dear,
The batling pastures laid with kine and flocks,
The town gorgeous with high built colleges,
And scholars seemly in their grave attire.
Learned in searching principles of art,
What is thy judgment, Iaquis Vandermast.
That lordly are the buildings of the town,
Spacious the romes and full of pleasant walks:
But for the doctors how that they be learned,
It may be meanly, for ought I can here.
I tell thee Germane, Haspurge holds none such,
None red so deep as Oxenford contains,
There are within our accademicke state,
Men that may lecture it in Germanie,
To all the doctors of your Belgic schools.
Stand to him Bungay, charm this Vandermast,
And I will use thee as a royal king.
Wherein dare thou dispute with me.
In what a Doctor and a Friar can.
Before rich Europes worthies put thou forth
The doubtful question unto Vandermast.
Let it be this, whether the spirits of piromancie
or Geomancie, be most predominant in magic.
I say of Piromancie.
And I of Geomancie.
The cabalists that wright of magic spell,
As Harms, Melchie, and Pithagoras,
Affirm that amongst the quadruplicitie
Of elemental essence, Terra is but thought,
To be a punctum squared to the rest:
And that the compass of ascending elements
Exceed in bigness as they doe in height.
Judging the concave circle of the son,
To hold the rest in his circomference,
If then as Harms says the fire be greatst,
Purest and only gives shapes to spirits:
Then must these Demones that haunt that place
Be every way superior to the rest.
I reason not of elemental shapes,
Nor tell I of the concave latitudes,
Noting their essence nor their quality,
But of the spirits that Piromancie calls,
And of the vigourof the Geomanticke fiends,
I tell thee Germane magic haunts the grounds,
And those strange necromantick spells
That work such shows and wondering in the world,
Are acted by those Geomanticke spirits,
That Harms calls Terraefilii.
The fiery spirits are but transparent shades,
That lightly pass as Heralts to bear news,
But earthly fiends closed in the lowest deep,
Dissever mountains if they be but charged,
Being more gross and massy in their power.
Rather these earthly geomantike spirits,
Are dull and like the place where they remain:
For when proud Lucipher fell from the heavens,
The spirits and angels that did sin with him,
Retained their local essence as their faults,
All subject under Lunas continent,
They which offended less hang in the fire,
And second faults did rest within the air,
But Lucifer and his proud hearted fiends,
Were thrown into the center of the earth,
Having less understanding than the rest,
As having greater sin, and lesser grace.
Therefore such gross and earthly spirits doe serve,
For Jugglers, Witches, and wild sorcerers,
Whereas the Piromanticke gemij,
Are mighty, swift, and of far reaching power,
But grant that Geomancie hath most force,
Bungay to please these mighty potentates,
Prove by some instance what thy art can doe.
I will.
Now English Harry here begins the game,
We shall see sport between these learned men.
What wilt thou doe.
Show thee the tree leavd with refined gold,
Whereon the fearful dragon held his seat,
That watched the garden called Hesperides,
Subdued and won by conquering Hercules.
Well done.
What say you royal lordings to my friar,
Hath he not done a point of cunning skill.
Each scholar in the Nicromanticke spells,
Can doe as much as Bungay hath performed,
Bur as Almenas bastard rasd this tree,
So will I raise him up as when he lived,
And cause him pull the Dragon from his seat,
And tear the branches piecemeal from the root,
Hercules Prod, Prdi Hercules.
Hercules appears in his Lions skin.
Quis me ult.
Ioues bastard son thou lybian Hercules
Pull off the sprigs from off the Hesperian tree,
As once thou did to win the golden fruit.
Fiat.
Now Bungay if thou can by magic charm,
The fiend appearing like great Hercules,
From pulling down the branches of the tree,
Then art thou worrhy to be counted learned.
I cannot.
Cease Hercules until I give thee charge,
Mighty commander of this English Isle,
Henrie come from the stout Plantagenets,
Bungay is learned enough to be a Friar.
But to compare with Iaquis Vandermast,
Oxford and Cambridge must go seek their celles,
To find a man to match him in his art.
I have given non-plus to the Paduans,
To them of Sign, Florence, and Bologna,
Reimes, Louain and fair Rotherdam,
Franckford, Lutrech and Orleans:
And now must Henrie if he do me right,
Crown me with laurel as they all have done.
All hail to this royal company,
That sit to hear and see this strange dispute:
Bungay, how standst thou as a man amazed,
What hath the Germane acted more than thou,
What art thou that questions thus.
Men call me Bacon.
Lordy thou look, as if that thou were learned,
Thy countenance, as if science held her seat
Between the circled arches of thy brows.
Now Monarcks hath the Germain found his match.
Bestir thee Iaquis take not now the foil,
Least thou doest loose what foretime thou did gain.
Bacon, wilt thou dispute.
No, unless he were more learned than Vandermast.
For yet tell me, what hast thou done?
Raised Hercules to ruinate that tree,
That Bongay mounted by his magic spells.
Set Hercules to work.
Now Hercules, I charge thee to thy task,
Pull off the golden branches from the root.
Idare not, See thou not great Bacon here,
Whose frown doth act more than thy magic can.
By all the thrones and dominations,
Virtues, powers and mighty Herarchies,
I charge thee to obey to Vandermast.
Bacon, that bridles headstrong Blcephon
Andrules Amenoth guide erof the North:
Binds me from yielding unto Vandermast.
How now Vandermast, have you met with your match.
Never before was known to Vandemast,
That men held duils in such obedient awe,
Bacon doth more than art or else I fail.
Why Vandermast art thou overcome,
Bacon dispute with him, and tri his skill:
I come not Monatckes for to hold dispute,
With such a novice as is Vandermast,
I come to have your royalties to die
With Friar Baon eere in Brazennose,
And for this Germane oubles but the place
And holds this audience wih a long suspense,
Isle sed him to his Academy hence,
Thou Hercules whom Vandermast did raise,
Transport the Germane unto Haspurge straight,
That he may learn by travail against the springs,
More secret dooms and Aphorisms of art,
Vanish the tree and thou away with him.
Why Bacon whether doest thou send him,
To Haspurge there your highness at return,
Shall find the Germane in his study safe.
Bacon, thou hast honoured England with thy skill,
And made fair Oxford famous by thine art,
I will be English Henrie to thy self,
But tell me shall we dine with thee to day.
With me my Lord, and while I it my cheer,
See where Prince Edward comes to welcome you:
Gracious as the morning star of heaven,
Is this Prince Edward Henries royal son,
How martall i the figure of his face,
Yt lovely and bet with Amorets.
Nd, where hast thou been.
At Framingham my Lord, to try your bucks.
I they could scope they teisers or the toil:
But hearing of these lordly Potentates
Landed, and prograst up to Oxford town,
I posted to give entertain to them,
Chief to the Almaine Monarch, next to him,
And joint with him, Castle and Saxonie,
Are welcome as they may b to the English Court.
Thus for the men, but see Venus appears,
Or one that overmatch eth Venus in her shape,
Sweet Ellinor, beauties highswelling pride,
Rich natures glory, and her wealth at once:
Fair of all fairs, welcome to Albion,
Welcome to me, and welcome to thine own,
If that thou dainst the welcome from my self.
Martial Plantagenet, Henries high minded son
The mark that Ellinor did count her aim,
I likte thee fore I saw thee, now I love,
And so as in so short a time I may:
Yet so as time shall never break that so,
And therefore so accept of Ellinor.
Fear not my Lord, this couple will agree,
If love may creep into their wanton eyes:
And therefore Edward I accept thee here,
Without suspense, as my adopted son.
Let me that joy in these consorting greets,
And glory in these honours done to Ned,
Yield thanks for all these favours to my son,
And rest a true Plantagenet to all.
Saluete mnes reges, that govern your Greges, in Saxono and Spain, in England and in Almaine: for all this frolic table must I cover thee table, with trenchers, salt and cloth, and thenlooke for your broth.
What pleasant fellow is this.
Tic my lord, doctor Basins poor scholar.
My moister hath made me sewer of these great lords, and God knows I am as serviceable at a table, as a sow is under n apple tree: tic no matter, their cheer shall not be great, and therefore what skils where the salt stand before or behind.
Theseschollers knows more skill in actiomes,
How to use quips and sleights of Sophistry,
Than for to cover courtly for a king.
Spill sir, why doe you think I never carried twopeny chop before in my life: by your leave, Nobel dcus, for here comes doctor Basins pecus, being in his full age, to carry a mess of pottage.
Lordings admire not if your cheer be this,
For we must keep our Accademicke fare,
No riot where Philosophi doth rain,
And therefore Henrie place these Potentates,
And bid them fall unto their frugal cates.
Presumptuous Friar, what scoffst thou at a king,
What doest thou taunt vs with thy peasants fare,
And give vs cates fit for country swains,
Henrie proceeds this jest of thy consent,
To twit vs with such a pittance of such price,
Tell me, and Frederick will not grieve the long.
By Henries honour and the royal faith
The English monarcke bears to his friend:
I knew not of the friars feeble fare,
Nor am I pleased he entertains you thus.
Content thee Frederick for I showed the cates
To let thee see how scholars se to feed:
How little mate refines our English wits,
Miles take away, and let it be thy dinner.
Marry sir I will, this day shall be a festival day with me,
For I shall exceed in the highest degree.
I tell thee Monarch, all the Germane Peers
Could not aoord thy entertainmentsuch,
So royal and so full of Majesty,
As Bacon will present to Frederick,
The Basest waiter that attends thy cups,
Shall be in honours greater than thy self:
And for thy cates rich Alexandria drugs,
Fetched by Carueils from Aegypts richest straights:
Found in the wealthy strond of Africa,
Shall royallize the table of my king,
Wines richer than the Gyptian courtesan,
Quat to Augustus kingly countermatch,
Shall be caroused in glish Henries feasts
Candy shall yield the richest of her canes,
Persia down her volga by Canows,
Send dwn the secrets of her spicery.
The Africa Dates mirab les of Spain,
Conserves, and Suckets from Tiberias,
Cates from Iudea choicer than the lamp
That fired Rome with sparks of gluttony,
Shall bewtisie the board for Frederick,
And therefore grudge not at a friars feast.
Come frolic keeper of our lieges game,
Whose table spread hath ever venison,
And Jacks of wines to welcome passengers,
Know I am in love with jolly Margret,
That ouer-shines our damsels as the moon,
Darkneth the brightest sparkles of the night,
In Laxfield here my land and living lies,
Isle make thy daughter joyla of it all,
So thou consent to give her to my wise,
And I can spend five hundredth marks a year.
I am the lanlord keeper of thy holds,
By copy all thy living lies in me.
Laxfield did never see me raise my due,
I will infeofe fair Margret in all,
So she will take her to a lusty squire.
Now courteous gentls, if the Keepers girl,
Hath pleased the lking fancy of you both,
And with her beauty hath subdued your thoughts,
Tic doubtful to decide the question.
It joys me that such men of great esteem,
Should lay their liking on this base estate,
And that her state should grow so fortunate,
To be a wife to meaner men than you.
But sith such squires will stoop to keepers fee,
I will to avoid displeasure of you both,
Call Margret forth, and she shall make her choice,
Content Keeper send hrvnto vs.
Why Serlsby is thy wife so lately dead,
Are all thy loves so lightly passed over,
As thou can wed before the year be out,
I live not Lambert to content the dead,
Nor was I wedded but for life to her,
The graves ends and begins a married state.
Peggie the lovely slower of all towns,
Suffolks fair Helen, and rich Englands star,
Whose beautietempered with her housewifery,
Makes England talk of merry Frsingield.
I cannot trick it up with poesies,
Nor paint my passions with comparisons,
Nor tell a tall of Phebus and his loves,
But this beeleue me Laxfield here is mine,
Of ancient rent seven hundred pounds a year,
And if thou can but love acountrie squire,
I will infeoffe thee Margret in all,
I can not flatter, try me if thou please.
Brave neighbouring squires the stay of Suffolks clie,
A Keepers daughters is too base in gre
To match with men accounted of such worth,
But might I notdisplease I would reply,
Say Peggy nought shall make vs discontent.
Then gentles note that love hath little stay,
Nor can the flames that Venus sets on fire,
Be kindled but by fancies motion,
Then pardon gentles, if a maids reply
Be doubtful, while I have debated with my self,
Who or of whom love shall constrain me like,
Let it be me and trust me Margret,
The meads environed with the silver streams,
Whose Batling pastures fatneth all my flocks,
Yielding forth fleeces stapled with such wool,
As Lempster cannot yield more finer stuff
And forty kine with fair and burnished heads,
With strutting duggs that paggle to the ground,
Shall serve thy dary if thou wed with me.
Let pass the country wealth as flocks and kine,
And lands that wave with Ceres golden sheues
filling my barnes with plenty of the fields,
But peggie if thou wed thy self to me,
Thou shalt have garments of Imbrodred silk,
Lawns and rich networks for thy head attire
Costly shall be thy fare habiliments,
If thou wilt be but Lambert loving wife.
Content you gentles you have proffered fair
And more than fits a country maids degree,
But give me leave to counsel me a time,
For fancy blooms not at the first assault,
Give me but ten days respite and I will reply,
Which or to whom my self affectionats.
Lambert I tell thee thou art importunate,
Such beauty fits not such a base esquire
It is for Serlsby to have Margret.
Think thou with wealth to over reach me
Serlsby, I scorn to brooke thy country braves
I dare thee Coward to maintain this wrong,
At dint of rapier single in the field.
Isle aunswee Lambrt what I have avouched
Margret farewell, another time shall serve.
Isle follow Peggie farwell to thy self,
Listen how well le answer for thy loe.
How Fort tempes lucky hippos with frowns,
And wrongs me wih the sweets of my delight,
Love is my blise, and love is now my bale,
Shall I be Helen in my forward fates,
As I am Helen in my machles he
And set rich Suolke with my face afire,
If lovely Lacie were but with hi Peggy,
The cloudy darckenese of his bitter rowne
Would chk the pride of these aspiring squires,
Before the tee of ten days be expired,
When as they look for aswear of their loves,
My Lord will come to merry Fisingfield,
And end their fancies, and their follies both,
Till when Peggie be bth and of good cheer.
Fair lovely damsel which way leads this path,
How might I post mevno Frisingfield,
which footpath leads to the keepers lodge?
You way is eddy and this path is right,
My self do dwe herby in Frisingfield,
And if the keeper be the an you seek,
I am his daughter may  the cause?
Lovely and once blod of my lord,
No meruale if his ey was odg so low,
when brighr  is not n the he aens,
The Lincoln earl hath ent you letters here,
And with them, just an hundrd pounds in gold,
Sweet bonny wnch read them and make reply.
The scrolls that Jove sent Dane
Wrapped in rich closures of fine burnished gold,
Were not more welcome than these lines to me.
Tell me whilst that I doe unrip the seals,
Lives Lacie well, how fares my lovely Lord?
Well, if that wealth may make men to live well.
THe blooms of the Almond tree grow in a night, and vanish in a mom, the flies Homer (fair Peggie) take life with the Sun, and die with the dew, fancy that slips in with a case, goes out with a wink; and too timely loves, have ever the shortest length. I write this as thy grefe, and my folly, who at Frisingfield lovd that which time hath taught me to be but mean dainties, eyes are dissenblers, and fancy is but queasy, therefore know Margret, I have chosen a Spanish Lade to be my wife, chief weighting woman to the Pricess Ellinour, a Lady saire, and no less fair thn thy self, honourble and wealthy, in that I forsake thee I leave thee to thine own liking and for thy dowre I have sent thee an hundred pounds, and ever assure thee of my favour, which shall avail thee and thine much. Farewell.
Fond Atae doomer of bad boding fates,
That wrappes proud Fortune in thy snaky locks,
Did thou enchant my byrth-day with such stars,
As lightened mischief from their infancy,
If heavens had vowed, iftars had made decree,
To show on me their froward influence,
If Lcie had but lovd, heavens hell and all,
Could not have wronged the ptience of my mind.
It grieves me damsel, but the Ear is forced
To love the Lady, by the Kings command.
The wealth combined within the English shelves,
Europes commander no the English King,
Should not have moude the love of Peggie from her Lord.
What answer shall I return to my Lord?
First for thou came from Lacie whom I lovd,
Ah give me leave to sigh at every thought,
Take thou my friend the hundred pound he sent,
For Margrets resolution craves no dower,
The world shall be to her as vanity,
Wealth trash, love hate, pleasure despair,
For I will straight to stately Fremingham,
And in the abbey there be shorn a Nun
And yield my loves and liberty to God,
Fellow I give thee this, not for the news,
For those be hateful unto Margret,
But for thart Laces man once Margrets love.
What I have heard what passions I have seen
Isle make report of them unto the Earl.
Say that she joys his fancies be at rest,
And prays that his misfortune may be hers.
Miles where are you?
Here sir.
How chance you tarry so long?
Think you that the watching of the brazen head craves no furniture? I warrant you sir I have so armed my self, that if all your devils come I will not fear them an inch.
Miles thou know that I have dived into hell,
And sought the darkest palaces of fiends,
That with my Magic spells great Belcephon,
Hath left his lodge and kneeled at my cell,
The rafters of the earth rent from the poles,
And three-formd Luna hid her filuer looks,
Trembling upon her concave continent,
When Bacon red upon his Magic book,
With seven years tossing nigromanticke charms,
Poring upon dark Hecats principles,
I have framed out a monstrous head of brass,
That by theinchaunting forces of the devil,
Shall tell out strange and uncouth Aphorisms,
And girt fair England with a wall of brass,
Bungay and I have watched these threescore day,
And now our vital spirits crave some rest,
If Argos livd and had his hundred eyes,
They could not ouerwatch Phobeters night,
Now Miles in thee rests Friar Basins weal,
The honour and renown af all his life,
Hangs in the watching of this brazen-head,
Therefore I charge thee by the immortal God
That holds the souls of men within his fist,
This night thou watch, for ere the morning star
Sends out his glorious glister on the north,
The head will speak, then Miles upon thy life,
Wake me for then by Magic art Isle work,
To end my seven years task with excellence,
If that awinke but shut thy watchful eye,
Thenfarewell Basins glory and his fame,
Draw close the courtaines Miles now for thy life,
Be watchful and
So, I thought you would talk your self a sleep anon, and tic no marvel, for Bungay on the days, and he on the nights, have watched Just these ten and fifty days, now this is the night, and tic my task and no more. Now Iesus bless me what a goodly head it is, and a nose, you talk of ns atom glrficar, but here is a nose, that I warrant may be called nos atom ppolar for the people of the parish, well I am furnished with weapons,, now sit I will set me down by a post, and make it as good as a watch-man to wake me if I chance to slumber.
I thought goodman head, I would call you out of your memento, passion a God I have almost broke my pate, Up Miles to your  task, take your browne bill in your hand, hears some of your masters hobgoblins abroad.
Time is.
Time is, Why moister Brazenhead have you such a capital nose, and answer you with syllables, Time is: is this all my masters cunning, to spend seven years study about Time is: well sir, it may be we shall have some better orations of it anon, well Isle watch you as narrowly as ever you were watched, and Isle play with you as the Nightingale with the Slowworme, Isle set a prick against my breast: now rest there Miles, Lord have mercy upon me, I have almost kilt my selse: up Miles list how they rumble.
Time was.
Well friar Bacon, you spent your seven years study well that can make your Head speak but two words at once, Time was: yea marie, time was when my moister was a wise man, but that was before he began to make the Brasen-head, you shall lie while your aree ache and your Head speak no better: well I will watch and walk up and down, and be a Perepatetian and a Philosopher of Aristotles stamp, what a fresh noise, take thy pistols in hand Miles.
Time is past.
Moister moister, up, hells broken loose, your Head speaks, and theres such a thunder and lightning, that I warrant all Oxford is up in arms, out of your bed and take a browne bill
in your hand, the latter day is come.
Miles I come, oh passing warily watched,
Bacon will make thee next himself in love,
When spake the Head
When spake the Head, did not you say that hee should tell strange principles of Philosophy, why sir it speaks but two words at a time.
Why villain hath it spoken oft.
Oft, I marie hath it thrice: but in all those three times it hath uttered but seven words.
As how
Marie sir, the first time he said, Time is, as if Fabius cumentator should have prononst a sentence, he said Time was, and the third time with thunder and lightning, as in great choler, he said Time is past.
Tic past indeed, a villain time is past,
My life, my fame, my glory, all are past:
Bacon, the turrets of thy hope are ruined down,
Thy seven years study lies in the dust:
Thy Brazen-head lies broken through a slave
That watched, and would not when the Head did will,
What said the Head first.
Even sir, Time is,
Villain if thou had called to Bacon then,
If thou had watched and waked the sleepy friar,
The Brazen-head had uttered Aphorisms,
And England had been circled round with brass,
But proud Astmroth ruler of the North,
And Demegorgon moister of the fates,
Grudge that a mortal man should work so much,
Hell trembled at my deep commanding spells,
Fiends frowned to see a man their overmatch,
Bacon might bossed more than a man might boast:
But now the braves of Bacon hath an end,
Europes conceit of Bacon hath an end:
His seven years practise sorts toill end:
And villain sith my glory hath an end,
I will appoint thee fatal to some end,
Villain avoid getthee from Basins sight:
Wigt go ome and range about the world,
And peri as a vagabond on earth.
Why then sir you forbid me your service.
My service villain with a fatal curse,
That direful plagues and mischief fall on thee.
Tic no matter I am against you with the old proverb, The more the foxes cursed the better he fares: God be with you sir, Isle take but a book in my hand, a wide sleeved gown on my back, and a crowned cap on my head, and see if I can want promotion.
Some fiend or ghost haunt on thy weary steps,
Until they doe transport thee quick to hell,
For Bacon shall have never merry day,
To loose the fame and honour of his Head.
Now lovely Prince the prince of Albions wealth,
How fares the lady Ellinor and you:
What have you courted and found Castle fit,
To answer England in equiuoence
Wilt be a match twixt bonny Nil and thee.
Should Paris enter in the courts of Greece,
And not lie fettered in fair Hellens looks,
Or Phobus scope those piercing amorits,
That Daphne glanced at his ditie:
Can Edward then it by a flame and freeze,
Whose heat puts Helen and fair Daphne down,
Now Monarcks ask the lady if we gre.
What madam hath my son found grace or no.
Seeing my lord his lovely counterfeit,
And hearing how his mind and shape agreed,
I come not trooped with all this warlike train,
Doubting of love, but so affectionate
As Edward hath in England what he won in Spain.
A match my lord, these wantons needs must love,
Men must have wives and women will be wed,
Lets hast the day to honour up the rites.
Sirha Harry, shall Ned marry Nil.
I Raphe, how then.
Marry Harry follow my counsel, send for friar Bacon to marry them, for heel so conjure him and her with his Necromancy, that they shall love together like pig and lamb whilst they live.
But hearst thou Raphe, art thou content to have llinor to thy lady.
I so she will promise me two things.
Whats that Raphe.
That she will never scold with Ned nor fight with me, Sirha Harry I have put her down with a thing unpossible,
Whats that Raphe.
Why Harry did thou ever see that a woman could both hold her tongue and her hands, no but when egge-pies grows on apple-trees, then will thy gray mare prove a bagpiper.
What says the lord of Castle and the earl of Lincoln, that they are in such earnest and secret talk.
I stand my lord amazed at his talk
How he discourses of the constancy,
Of one surnam'd foot beauties excellence,
The fair maid of merry Fresingfield.
Tic true my lord, tic wondrous for to hear,
Her beauty passing Marces paramour:
Her virgins right as rich as Vistas was,
Lacie and Ned hath told me miracles.
What says lord Lacie, shall she be his wife.
Or else lord Lacie is unfit to live,
May it please your highness give me leave to post
To Fresingfield Ilefetch the bonny girl,
And prove in true appearance at the court
What I have vouched often with my tongue.
Lacie, go to the quirie of my stable,
And take such coursers as shall fit thy turn,
Hie thee to Frefingfield and bring home the lass,
And for her fame flies through the English coast,
If it may please the lady Ellinor,
One day shall match your excellence and her,
We Castle ladies are not very coy,
Your highnesle may command a greater boon,
And glad were I to grace the Lincoln earl
With being partner of his marriage day.
Gramercy Nil for I do love the lord,
As he thats second to my self in love.
You love her, madam Nil, never believe him you though he swears he loves you.
Why Raphe.
Why his love is like unto a tipsters glass that is broken with every tutch, for he loved the fair maid of Fresingfield once out of all hoe, nay Ned never wink upon me, I care not I.
Raphe tells all, you shall have a good secretary of him,
But Lacie haste thee post to Fresingfield:
For ere thou hast fitted all things for her state,
The solemn marriage day will be at hand.
I go my lord.
How shall we pass this day my lord.
To horse my lord, the day is passing fair,
Weal fly the partridge or go rouse the dear,
Follow my lords, you shall not want for sport.
What means the friar that frolicked it of late,
To sit as melancholy in his cell:
To sit as melancholy in his cell,
As if he had neither lost nor won to day.
Ah Bungay my Brazen-head is spold,
My glory gone, my seven years study lost:
The fame of Bacon bruited through the world,
Shall end and perish with this deep disgrace.
Bacon hath built foundation on his fame,
So surely on the wings of true report,
With acting strange and uncouth miracles,
As this cannot infringe what he deserves.
Bungay sit down, for by prospective skill,
I find this day shall fall out ominous,
Some deadly act shall tide me ere I sleep:
But what and wherein little can I guess.
My mind is heavy what so ere shall hap.
Whose that knocks.
Two scholars that desires to speak with you.
Bid the come in, Now my youths what would you aue.
Sir we are Suffolk men and neighbouring friends,
Our fathers in their countries lusty squires,
Their lands adjoin, in Crackfield mine doth dwell,
And his in Laxfield, we are college mates,
Sworn brothers as our fathers lives as friends.
To what end is ail this.
Hearing your worship kept within your cell
A glass prospective wherein men might see,
What so their thoughts or hearts desire could wish,
We come to know how that our fathers fare.
My glass is free for every honest man,
Sit down and you shall see ere long,
How or in what state your friendly father lives,
Mean while tell me your names.
Mine Lambert.
And mine Serlsbie.
Bungay, I smell there will be a tragedy.
Serlsby thou hast kept thine hour like a man,
You are worthy of the title of a squire:
That durst for proof of thy affection,
And for thy mistress favour prize thy blood,
Thou know what words did pass at Fresingfield,
Such shameless braves as manhood cannot brooke:
I for I scorn to bear such piercing taunts,
Prepare thee Serlsbie one of vs will die.
Thou see I single thee the field,
And what I spake, Isle maintain with my sword:
Stand on thy guard I cannot scold it out.
And if thou kill me, think I have a son,
That lives in Oxford in the Brodgates hall,
Who will revenge his fathers blood with blood.
And Serlsbie I have there a lusty boy,
That dares at weapon buckle with thy son,
And lives in Broadgates too as well as thine,
But draw thy Rapier for weal have about.
No lusty yonkers look within the glass,
And tell me if you can discern your ires.
Serlsbie tic hard, thy father offers wrong,
To combat with my father in the field.
Lambert thou least, my fathers is the abuse,
And thou shalt find it, if my father harm.
How goes it sirs.
Our fathers are in combat hard by Fresingfield.
Sit still my friends and see the event.
Why standst thou Serlsbie doubt thou of thy life,
A venue man, fair Margret craves so much.
Then this for her.
Ah well thrust.
But mark the ward.
Oh I am slain.
And I, Lord have mercy on me.
My father slain, Serlby ward that.
And so is mine Lambert, Isle quite thee well.
O strange stratagem.
See Friar where the fathers both lie dead.
Baconthy magic doth effect this massacre:
This glass prospective works many woes,
And therefore seeing these brave lusty brutes,
These friendly youths did perish by thine art,
End all thy magic and thine art at once:
The poniard that did end the fatal lives,
Shall break the cause officiate of their woes,
So fade the glass, and end with it the shows,
That Necromancy did infuse the crystal with.
What means learned Bacon thus to break his glass.
I tell thee Bungay it repents me sore,
That ever Bacon meddled in this art,
The hours I have spent in piromanticke spells,
The fearful tossing in the latest night,
Of papers full of Nigromanticke charms,
Conjuring and adiuring devils and fiends,
With stole and alb and strange Pentaganon,
The wresting of the holy name of God,
As Sother, Elaim, and Adonaie,
Alpha, Mnoth, and Tetragramiton,
With praying to the fiue-fould powers of heave,
Are instances that Bacon must be damde,
For using devils to countervail his God.
Yet Bacon cheer thee, drown not in despair,
Sins have their salves repentance can do much,
Think mercy sits where Justice holds her seat,
And from those wounds those bloody Jaws did pierce
Which by thy magic oft did bleed a fresh,
From thence for thee the dew of mercy drops,
To wash the wrath of hie Iehouahs ire,
And make thee as a new borne babe from sin,
Bungay Isle spend the remnant of my life
In pure devotion praying to my God,
That he would save what Bacon vainly lost.
Margret be not so headstrong in these vows,
Oh bury not such beauty in a cell:
That England hath held famous for the hue,
Thy fathers hair like to the silver blooms:
That beautify the shrubs of Africa
Shall fall before the dated time of death,
Thus to forgo his lovely Margret.
A father when the hermony of heaven,
sounds the measures of a lively faith:
The vain Illusions of this flttering world,
Seems odious to the thoughts of Margret,
I loved once, lord Lacie was my love,
And now I hate my self for that I lovd,
And doted more on him than on my God:
For this I scourge my self with sharpe repent
But now the touch of such aspiring sins
Tells me all love is lust but love of heavens:
That beauty used for love is vanity,
The world contains nought but alluring baits:
Pride, flattery, and inconstant thoughts,
To shun the pricks of death I leave the world,
And vow to meditate on heavenly bliss,
To live in Framingham a holy Nun,
Holy and pure in conscience and in deed:
And for to wish all maids to learn of me,
To seek heavens joy before earths vanity.
And will you then Margret be shor a Nun, and so leave vs all.
Now farewell world the engine of all woe,
Farewell to friends and father, welcome Christ:
Adieu to dainty robes, this base attire
Better befits an humble mind to God,
Than all the show of rich habiliments,
Love, oh Love, and with fond Love farewell,
Sweet Lacie whom I loved once so dear,
Ever be well, but never in my thoughts,
Least I offend to think on Laces love:
But even to that as to the rest farewell.
Come on my wags weere near the keepers lodge,
Here have I oft walked in the watery Meads,
And chatted with my lovely Margret.
Sirha Ned, is not this the keeper.
Tic the same.
The old lecher hath gotton holy mutton to him a Nun my lord.
Keeper how forest thou holla man, what cheer,
How doth Peggie thy daughter and my love.
Ah good my lord, oh wo is me for Pig,
See where she stands clad in her Nuns attire,
Ready for to be shorn in Framingham:
She leaves the world because she left your love,
Oh good my lord persuade her if you can.
Why how now Margret, what a malecontent,
A Nun, what holy father taught you this,
To task your self to such a tedious life,
As die a maid, it were injury to me.
To smother up such beauty in a cell.
Lord Lacie thinking of thy former miss,
How fond the prime of wanton years were spent
In love, Oh fie upon that fond conceit,
Whose hap and essence hangs in the eye,
I leave both love and loves content at once,
Betaking me to him that is true love,
And leuing all the world for love of him.
Whence Peggie comes this Metamorphosis,
What shorn a Nun, and I have from the co urt,
Posted with coursers to convey thee hence,
To Windsor, where our Marriage shall be kept,
Thy wedding robes are in the tailors hands,
Come Peggy leave these peremptory vows.
Did not my lord resign his interest,
And make divorce twixt Margret and him
It was but to try sweet Piggies constancy,
But will fair Margret leave her love and Lord?
Is not heavens joy before earths fading bliss,
And life aboue sweeter than life in love,
Why then Margret will be shorn a Nun,
Margret hath made a vow which may not be revoked.
We cannot stay my Lord, and if she be so strict,
Our leisure grants vs not to woo a fresh.
Choose you fair damsel, yet the choice is yours,
Either a solemn Nunnery, or the court,
God, or Lord Lacie, weich contents you best,
To be a Nun, or else Lord Laces wife.
A good motion, Peggie your answer must be short.
The flesh is frail, my Lord doth know it well,
That when he comes with his enchanting face,
What so er betide I cannot say him nay,
Off goes the habit of a maidens heart,
And seeing Fortune will, fair Fremingham,
And all the show of holy Nuns farewell,
Lacie for m, if he will be my lord.
Peggie thy Lord, thy love, thy husband,
Trust me, by truth of knighthood, that the King
Stays for to marry matchless Ellinour,
Until I bring thee richly to the court,
That one day may both marry her and thee,
How say thou Keeper art thou glad of this?
As if the English King had given
The park and decree of Frisingfield to me.
I pray thee my Lord of Sussex why art thou in a brown study?
To see the nature of women, that be they never so near God, yet they love to die in a mans arms.
What have you fit for breakfast? we have hied and posted all this night to Frisingfield.
Butter and cheese and humbls of a Dear,
Such as poor Keepers have within their lodge.
And not a bottle of wine?
Weal find one for my Lord.
Come Sussex lets in, we shall have more, for she speaks least, to hold her promise sure.
How restless are the ghosts of hellish spirits,
When every charmer with his Magic spells
Calls vs from nine-fold trenched Blegiton,
To scud and ouer-scoure the earth in post,
Upon the speedy wings of swiftest winds,
Now Bacon hath raised m from the darkest deep,
To search about the world for Miles his man,
For Miles, and to torment his lasy bones,
For careless watchidg of his Brazen head,
See where he comes, Oh he is mine.
A scholar quoth you, marry sir I would I had been made
a botlemaker when I was made a scholar, for I can get neither to be a Deacon, Reader, nor Schoolmaster, no, not the clarke of a parish, some call me dunce, another saith my head is as full of Latin as an eggs full of oatemeale, thus I am tormented that the devil and Friar Bacon, haunts me, good Lord heers one of my masters devils, Isle go speak to him, what moister Plutus, how chere you?
Dost thou know me?
Know you sir, why are not you one of my masters devils, that were wont to come to my moister Doctor Bacon, at Brazen-nose?
Yes marry am I.
Good Lord M. Plutus I have seen you a thousand times at my masters and yet I had never the manners to make you drink, but sir, I am glad to see how conformable you are to the statute, I warrant you heesasyeomanlya man, as you shall see, mark you masters, heers a plain honest man, without welt or guard, but I pray you sir do you come lately from hell?
I marry how then,
Faith tic a place I have desired long to see, have you not good tippling houses there, may not a man have a lusty fire there, apot of good ale, a pair of cards, a swinging piece of chalk, and a browne toast that will clap a white waistcoat on a cup of good drink?,
All thisyou may have there.
You are for me friend, and I am for you, but I pray you, may I not have an office there?
Yes a thousand, what would thou be?
By my troth sir in a place where I may profit my self, I know hell is a hot place, and men are marvelous dry, and much drink is spent there, I would be a tipster.
Thou shalt.
Theres nothing lets me from going with you, but that tic a long journey, and I have never a horse.
Thou shalt ride on my back.
Now surely hers acourteous devil, that for to pleasure
his friend will not stick to make a jade of himself, but I pray you goodman fiend let me move a question to you.
Whats that?
I pray you whether is your pace a trot or an amble?
An amble.
Tic well, but take heed it be not a trot,
But tic no matter Isle prevent it.
What dost?
Marry friend I put on my spurs, for if I find your pace either a trot or else uneasy, Isle put you to a false gallop, Isle make you feel the benefit of my spurs.
Get up upon my back.
Oh Lord here is even a goodly marvel, when a man rides to hell on the Devils back.
Great potentates earths miracles for state,
Think that prince Edward humbles at your feet,
And for these favours on his martial sword,
He vows perpetual homage to yourselves,
Yielding these honours unto Ellinour.
Gramercies Lordlings, old Plantagenet,
That rules and sways the Albion diadem,
With tears discovers these conceived joys,
And vows requital, if his men at arms,
The wealth of England, or due honours done
To Ellinour, may quite his favourites.
But all this while what say you to the Dames,
That shine like to the crystal lamps of heaven?
If but a third were added to these two
They did surpass those gorgeous images,
That gloried Ida with rich beauties wealth.
Tic I my lords who humbly on my knee,
Must yield her orisons to mighti Jove,
For lifting up his handmaid to this state,
Brought from her homely cottage to the court,
And grist with Kings Princes and Emperors,
To whom (next to the noble Lincoln Earl)
I vow obedience, and such humble love,
As may a handmaid to such mighty men.
Thou mrtiall man that wears the Almaine crown,
And you the western Potentates of might,
The Albion Princess, English Edwards wife,
Proud that the lovely star of Frisingfield,
Fair Margret, Countess to the Lincoln Earl,
Attends on Ellinour, gramercies Lord for her,
Tic I give thanks for Margret to you all,
And rest for her due bounden to your selves.
Seeing the marriage is solemnised,
Lets march in triumph to the royal feast,
But why stands Friar Bacon here so mute?
Repentant for the follies of my youth,
That Magicks secret mysteries misled,
And joyful that this royal marriage,
Portendes such bliss unto this matchless realm.
Why Bacon what strange euet shall happe to this land
Or what shall grow from Edward and his Queen.
I find by deep praescience of mine art,
Which once I tempered in my secret cell,
That here where Brute did build his Troynouant,
From forth the royal garden of a King,
Sall flourish out, so rich and fair a bud,
Whose brightness shall deface proud Phoebus flowr,
And ouer-shadow Albion with her leaves.
Till then, Mars shall be moister of the field,
But then the stormy threats of wars shall cease,
The horse shall stamp as careless of the pike,
Dums shall be turned to timbrells of delight,
With wealthy favours, plenty shall enrich,
The strond that gladded wandering Brute to see,
And peace from heaven shall harbour in these leaves,
That gorgeous beautifies this matchless flower,
Appollos Hellitropian then shall stoop,
And Venus hyacinth shall veil her top,
Iuno shall shut her Gilliflowers up,
And Palace bay shall bash her brightest greene
Ceres carnation in consort with those,
Shall stoop and wonder at Dianas rose.
This Prophecy is mystical,
But glorious commanders of Europas love,
That makes fair England like that wealthy Isle,
Circled with Gihen, and first Euphrates,
In royallising Henries Albion,
With presence of your princely mightiness,
Lets march, the tables all are spread,
And viands such as Englands wealth affords,
Are ready set to furnish out the boards,
You shall have welcome mighty potentates,
It rests to furnish up this royal feast,
Only your hearts be frolic for the time,
Craves that we taste of nought but iouysaunce,
Thus glories England over all the west.

1 what mean you, my masters, to appear thus before your times? Doe you not know that I am the Prologue? Do you not see this long black velvet cloak upon my back? Have you not sounded thrice? Do I not look pale, as fearing to bee out in my speech Nay, have I not all the signs of a Prologue about me? Then, to what nd come you to interrupt me?
2 I have a Prologue to speak too.
3 And I another.
1 O superfluous, and more then ever I heard of! three Prlogues to one play!
2 Have you not seen three ropes to told one bell, three doors to one house, three ways to one town?
1 I grant you: but I never heard of any that had three heads to one body, but Cerberus. But what doth your Prologue mean?
2 I come to excuse the name of the Play?
3 I the errors in the Play.
1 And I the Author that made the Play. Touching the name, why is it called, True and Strange, or The four Prentices of London? A Gentleman that heard the subject discoursed, said it was not possible to be true; and none here are bound to believe it.
2 Tic true, that Alexander at thirty years of age conquarrelled the whole world; but strange he should doe so. If we should not believe things recorded in former ages, wee were
not worthy that succeeding times should believe things done in these our ages.
1 But what authority have you for your History? I am one of those that will believe nothing that is not in the Chronicle.
2 Our authority is a Manuscript, a book writ in parchmeant; which not being public, nor general in the world, wee rather thought fit to exemplify to the public censure, things concealed and obscured, such as are not common with every one, than such Historical Tales as every one can tell by the fire in Winter. Had not ye rather, for novelties sake, see Jerusalem ye never saw, then London that ye see hourly? So much touching the name of our History.
1 You have satisfied me; and, I hope, all that hear me. Now what have you to speak concerning the errors in the Play?
3 We acknowledge none: For the errors we could find, we would willingly amend; but if these cleere-sighted Gentlemen, with the eyes of their judgements, looking exactly into vs, find any imperfections which are hid from our selves, our request is, you would rather look over them, then through them, not with a troubled eye, that makes one object to seem two, but with a favourable eye, which hath power in it self to make many to seem none at all.
1 Oh now I understand you. Three Prologues to our Play, pardon me, you've need of three hundred, me thinks, and all little enough. But to end our beginning in a word. Thus much by the patience of these Gentlemen.
Spectators, should you oppose your judgements against vs: where we are three, which some would think too many; were we three thousand, we think our selves to few. Our Author submits his labours to you, as the Authors of all the content he hath within this circumference.
But for your sakes, this only we dare say,
We promised you, and we'll perform a Play.
DAughter, thou see how Fortune turns er wheel.
Wee that but late were mounted up aloft,
Lul'd in the skirt of that inconstant Dame,
Are now thrown head-long by her ruthless hand,
To kiss that earth whereon our feet shoelt stand.
What censuring eye, that sees me thus deject,
Would take this shape to bee that famous Duke,
Which hath made Boloigne through the world renowned,
And all our race with fame and honour crowned?
But father how can you endure a slave
To triumph in your fortunes; and here stand
In soul deject, and banished from your land?
Isle tell thee Girl. The French King, and my self,
Upon some terms grew in a strange debate,
And taking careful vantage of the time,
Whilst I with all my powers, in aide of William
The Norman Duke, now English Conqueror,
Was busily employed; hee seized my right,
Planting another, and supplanting me.
This is the ground of my extremity.
If for King Williams sake now Conqueror,
You lost your birth-right and inheritance:
How comes it that hee sees you in this state,
And lifts not up your fortunes ruinate?
A conquered Kingdom is not easily kept,
Hee hath so much ado to guard his own,
That mine is buried in oblivion;
And I am forced to loose the name of Earl,
And live in Landn like a Citizen.
My four sons are bound prentice to four Trades.
Godfrey my eldest boy I have made a Mercer;
Guy my next son, enrol'd in Gold-smithes Trade;
My third son Charles bound to an Haberdasher;
Young Justice is a Grocer: all high borne,
Yet of the Citty-trades they have no scorn.
Thus bare necessity hath made me seek
Some refuge, to sustain our poverty.
And having placed my sons in such a sort,
The little wealth I have left, I leave to thee.
My self will travail to the holy Land;
And ere I lie within the earths vast womb,
Pay my devout vows at my Saviours Tomb.
Was that the cause you sent for my four brothers?
Their wished sight will cheer my aged heart:
And I will bless them all before I part.
I wonder, brothers, why my father hath sent for vs thus early: that, all business set aprt, wee must meet togethere this morning.
I know not the reason. I had much ado to get leave of my Moister to be spared from my attendance in the Shop, and
serving of Customers.
Faith as soon as I heard but the messenger say, my father must speak with me: I left my Tanakrd to guard the Conduit; and away came I.
I beshrew him, I should have been at breake-fast with two or three good boys this morning: but that match is disappointed by this meeting.
See where my brothers are already come.
Godfrey, Guy, Charles, young Justice all at once,
Divide a fathers blessing in four parts,
And share my prayers amongst you equally.
First Godfrey, tell me how thou lik'st thy Trade?
And knowing in thy thoughts what thou hast ben,
How can thou brooke to be as thou art now?
Bound must obey: Since I have undertook
To serve my Moister truly for seven years,
My duty shall both answer that desire,
And my old Masters profit every way.
I praise that City which made Princes Trades-men:
Where that man, noble or ignoble borne,
That would not practise some mechanic skill.
Which might support his state in penury,
Should die the death; not suffered like a drone,
To suck the honey from the public Hive.
I hold it no disparage to my birth,
Though I be borne an Earl, to have the skill
And the full knowledge of the Mercers Trade.
And were I now to be create a new,
It should not grieve me to have spent my time
The secrets of so rich a Trade to know,
By which advantage and much profits grow.
Well hast thou done to overcome thy fate,
Making thy mind conformed to thy state.
How likes my Guy, the Gold-smithes faculty.
As a good refuge in extremity.
Say I be borne a Prince, and be cast down
By some sinister chance, or fortunes frown:
Say I be banished: when I have a Trade,
And in my self a means to purchase wealth,
Though my state waste, and towering honours fall,
Tht still stays with me in the extream'st of all.
What says my third son Charles?
If I should say I would not brooke those bonds,
Which God, and fate, and you, have tied me in;
You would be preaching disobedience.
Or should I say the Citty-trades are base
For such a great mans sons to take on them:
Your fatherly regard would straight advise me
To chastise my rebellious thoughts; and say,
Son, you by this may live another day.
Therefore, as my two brothers, I reply;
You ask me if I like it; I say I.
What says my youngest boy?
Father, I say, Hawking is a pretty sport,
And Hunting is a Princely exercise;
To ride a great horse, oh it is admirable!
Justice I know it is: but to my question.
How can thou brooke to be a Prentice, boy?
Me thinks I could endure it for seven years,
Did not my Moister keep me in too much.
I cannot go to breake-fast in a morning
With my kind mates and fellow-Prentises,
But he cries Justice, one bid Justice come:
And my name Justice is in every room.
If I might once a week but see a Tilting,
Six days I would all unto my business close,
And ere the weeks end win that idle day.
Hee will not let me see a mu,
Nor in a May-day morning ch in May.
I am no sooner got into the Fencing-schoole,
To play a venew with some friend I bring;
But Justice, Justice, all the street must ring.
Hee will allow me not one how for sport.
I must not strike a soote-ball in the street,
But hee will frown: not view the dancing-schoole,
But hee will miss straight: not suffer me
So much as take up cudgels in the street,
But hee will chide: I must not go to buffets;
No, though I bee provoked; that's the hell,
Were it not for this, I could endure it well.
Sons, ye must all forget your birth and honours,
And look into the times necessity.
I know ye are persuaded: Think not, sons, the names of Prentice can disparage you.
For howsoever of you esteemed they bee,
Even Kings themselves have of these Trades been free.
I made a vow to see the holy Land,
And in the same my Saviours Sepulchre.
Having so well disposed you; I will now
First bless you Boys, and then prefer my vow.
With much ado, do I contain my spirit.
Within these bands, that have enclosed me round.
Though now this cafe the noble Sun doth shroud;
Time shall behold that Sun break through this cloud.
My Genius bids my soul have patience,
And says I shall not be a Prentice long.
I scorn it not: but yet my sp me,
To have this hand catch at the Crown of Fame.
An Haberdasher is the Trade Ivse:
But the soft wool feels in my hand like steel:
And I could wish each hat comes through my hand
Were turned into an Helmet, and each Helmet
Upon a Soldiers head, for me to lead.
War is the walk which I desire to tread.
I am a Grocer: Yet had rather see
A fair guilt sword hung in a velvet sheath,
Then the best Barberry sugar in the world;
Were it a freight of price inestimable.
I have a de of prompting in my brain,
That says; Though I be bound to a suee Trade,
I must forgo it, I keep too much in
I would fast from meat and drink a Summers day,
To see swords clafh, or view a desperate fray.
Bridle these humours sons, expel them clean,
And your high Spirits within your breasts contain:
Whilst I my tedious Pilgrimage prepare,
To spend my age in poverty and prayer.
My first-borne, fist fare-well; my second next:
Charles, Justice, Daughter: Here my blessings say,
Your wishes bear me on my sacred way.
Even to the place you travail, there to ascend
With those devout prayers you to heaven commend.
Brothers, since wee are now as strangers here,
Yet by our fathers provident care so placed,
That wee may live secure from penury:
So let vs please our Masters by our care,
That we our ruined fortunes may repair.
Brother, if I knew where to go to war,
I would not stay in London one hour longer.
An hour! By heaven I would not stay a minute.
A minute! not a moment. Would you put a moment
Into a thousand parts, that thousandth part
Would not I linger, might I go to war.
Why, I would presently run from my Moister,
Did I but hear where were a drum to follow.
Would you so brother?
I good faith, sweet Sister,
I would show him as fine a pair of heals, as light and nimble, as any the neatest cork shoe in all the Town turns up: I would i'faith.
And leave me here alone?
Alone? why sister,
Can you be left alone amongst multitudes?
London is sull of people every where.
Well, leave this jesting: wee forget our selves.
Sister, weal have you to our fathers house,
T'enioy the small possessions left you there:
Return we to our Masters and our charge,
Left seeking this our ltering to excuse,
With forged inventions wee their ears abuse.
I hear a drum. I have as much power to sit,
Sort out my wares, and scrible on a Shop-board,
When I but hear the music of a drum,
As to abstain from meat when I am hungry.
I'll know what news before I stir a foot.
By heaven I am enamoured of this tune,
It is the best Music in the world to me.
My legs are marching straight when I but hear it.
Rn, tan, tan: Oh I could lead a drum
Wit a good grace, if I but saw behind me
An hundred soldiers follow in even ranks.
Had I but here a band of men to lead,
Methinkes I could do wonders: Oh it is brave
To be a Captain, and command to have.
All Commanders, Captains, Liefetenants, Geutletlemen of Compaines, Sergeants, Corporals, or common Soldiers whatsoever, that will accompany to the holy wars at Hierusalem, Robert Duke of Normandy the Kings son: they shall have pay and place, according to their deserts. And so God save King William Surnamed the Conqueror.
Ran, tan, tan. Now by S. George, he tells gallant news: Isle home no more; Ile run away to night.
If I cast Bole, or Spoon, or Salt again,
Before I have beheld Hierusalem,
Let me turn Pagan.
Hats and Caps adieu:
For I must leave you, if the Drum say true.
Nay then have with you brothers; for my spirit
With as much vigour hath burst forth as thine,
And can as hardly be restrained as yours.
Give me your hands I will consort you too:
Let's try what London Prentices can doe.
For my Trades sake, if good success I have,
The Grocers Arms shall in mine Ensign wave.
And if my valour bring me to command,
The Gold-smithes Arms shall in my colours stand.
So of vs all: then let vs in one ship
Launch all together: and as wee are brothers,
So let vs enter zealous amity,
And still prevail by our united strength.
I know our hearts are one; sister Fare-well.
Trust me in vain you should persuade our stay:
For wee are bent, consort vs with your prayers.
Farewell.
Farewell.
God!
Heaven.
Fte.
Fortune.
Make vs happy men, To win.
Wear.
Vanquish.
Overcome.
Amen.
Have you all left me midst a world of strangers,
Here only to my self: not to protect me,
Or to defend me from apparent wrong?
Since it is so, I'll follow after you:
In some disguise I will pursue their steps,
And unto God and fortune yield my self.
Toward sea they are gone, and unto sea must I,
A Virgins unexpected fate to try.
Thus have you seen these brothers shipped to Sea,
Bound on their voyage to the holy Land,
All bent to try their fortunes in one Bark.
Now to avoid all dilatory news,
Which might with-hold you from the Stories pith,
And substance of the matter wee entend:
I must entreat your patience to forbear,
Whilst we do feast your eye, and starve your ear.
For in dumb shows, which were they writ at large,
Would ask a long and tedious circumstance:
Their infant fortunes I will soon express,
And from the truth in no one point digress.
Ye have seen the father of these four fair sons,
Already gone his weary pilgrimage:
Godfrey, Guy, Charles, and Justice, pressed to sea
To follow Robert Duke of Normandy.
Imagine now ye see the air made thick
With stormy tempests, that disturb the sea:
And the four winds at war among themselves:
And the weak barks wherein the brothers sail,
Split on strange rocks, and they enforced to swim:
To save their desperate lives: where what befell the
Dispersed to several corners of the world,
We will make bold to explain it in dumb Show:
For from their fortunes all our Scene must grow,
Those Citizens you see were Bullonoyes,
Kept under bondage of that tyrannous Earl,
To whom the French King gave that ancient seat,
Which to the wronged Pilgrim did belong.
But in the height of his ambition,
Godfrey, by Shipwreck thrown upon that Coast,
Stirs up th'oppressed City to revolt:
And by his valour was th'y surper slain;
The City from base bondage freed again.
The men of Bulloigne, wondering what strong hand
Had been the means of their deliverance,
Besought him to make known his birth and state:
Which Godfrey did. The people, glad to see
Their natural Prince procure their liberty,
Homage to him, create him Earl of Bulloig;
And reposesse him in his fathers seat.
Where we will leave him having honour won;
And now return unto the second son.
As the French King did with his daughter walk
By the Sea-side: from far they might espy
Oe on a rafter float upon the waives,
Who as he drew more near unto the shore,
They might discern a man, though basely clad,
Yet sparks of honour kindled in his eyes.
Him   sight the beauteous Lady loves;
And prays her father to receive him home:
To which the King accords; and in his Court
Makes him a great and special Officer.
There leave we Guy a gallant Courtier proved,
And of the beauteous Lady well beloved.
Charles the third son, is by the winds and waives
Borne on a Plank as far as Italy,
And lands just at a lofty Mountains foot:
Upon whose top a many out-law'd Thieves,
Bandits, Brauoes, such as keep in Caves,
Made their abode. This crew assails young Charles:
Who in the becking stekes their Captain dead.
They wondering at his valour, and being now
Without a Leader, humbly seek to him
To be their Chieftain, and command their strength:
Which at their carnest suite hee undertakes.
Wee leave him there, thinking his brothers drowned,
Nor knowing yet his father there lies bound.
Justice, the youngest of the four, was cast
Upon the coast of Ireland; and from thence
Hee comes to travail to Hierusalem;
Supposing his three brethren drowned by sea.
Thus have you seen these four, that were but now
All in one Fleet, a many thousand leagues
Severed from one another: Guy in France,
Godfrey in Bulloigne, Charls in Italy,
Justice in Ireland amongst the Irish kernes.
Yet Gentlemen, the self same wind and fortune
That parted them, may bring them altogether.
Their sister follows them with zealous feet:
Be patient, ye will wonder when they meet.
Four London Prentices will ere they die,
Advance their towering fame aboue the sky;
And win such glorious praise as never fades,
Unto themselves and honour of their Trades.
Grant them your wonted patience to proceed,
And their keen swords shall make the Pagans bleed.
Fie stranger, can a skin so white and soft
Cover an heart obdurate, hard a flint?
Since I first saw thee floating on the waives,
The fire of love flew from your radiant eye,
Which like a Sunne-beame pierced unto my heart.
Sweet Lady, all my powers I owe to you:
For by your favour I ascend this height,
Which seats me in the favour of a Prince.
A Prince, that did he know me, in the stead 
Of doing me honour would cut off my head.
Hee did exile my father; cast me down;
And spurt with envious hate, distressed vs all.
Since fortune then, and the devouring Seas,
Have robed me of my brothers, and none left
Of all my fathers sons alive but I:
Take this advantage, and be secret, Guy.
Meet this occasion; and conclude with fate,
To raise again thy fathers ruined state.
Fie niggard, can you spend such precious breath,
Speak to your self so many words apart;
And keep their sound from my attentive ear,
Which save your words no music loves to hear?
What would you have me say?
Would I might teach thee!
Oh that I had the guidance of thy tongue! 
But what would that avail thee foolish Girl?
Small hope in those instructions I should find,
To rule your tongue, if not to guide your mind.
My tongue, my thoughts, my heart, my hand, my sword,
Are all your servants, Who hh done you wrong?
I doubt not of your valour. But resolve me
And tell me one thing truly I shall ask you.
Be it not my birth, no question I'll deny.
Doubt not my truth for honour scorns to lie.
I do believe you: Fair Knight do you love?
To ride a horse as well as any man;
To make him mount, curuet, to leap, and spring;
To chide the bit, to gallop, trot the ring.
I did not ask you if you love to ride.
Some thing I mean; which though my tongue deny,
Look on me, you may read it in mine eye.
But do you love?
To march, to plant a battle, lead an Host,
To be a Soldier and to go to war,
To talk of Flanks, of Wings, of skonces, Holds,
To see a sally, or to give a Charge,
To lead a Vaward, Rereward, or maine Host;
By heaven I love it as mine own dear life.
I know all this; your words are but delays.
Could you not love a Lady that loves you?
It is hard when women are enforced to woo.
Where is my man to bring me certain news,
The Kings Commission sends me to the wars:
The villain loiters in my business.
All this is from the matter gentle Knight:
The Kings Commission may be signed at leisure.
What say you to my question?
You would have me tell you true.
Either speak true, or do not speak at all.
Then as I am true Knight I honour you,
And to your service will espouse my sword.
I wish you as I wish the glorious Sun,
That it may ever shine; without whose lustre
Perpetual darkness should o'reshade the earth.
But tell me Lady, what you mean by love.
To love a Lady, is with heart entire
To make her Mistress of his whole desire:
To sigh for her, and for her love to weep;
As his own heart her precious favours keep:
Never be from her, in her bosom dwell;
To make her presence heaven, her absence hell.
Write Sonnets in her praise, admire her beauty:
Attend her, serve her, count his service duty.
Make her the sole commandress of his powers,
And in the search of love, loose all his hours.
It is pretty for some fool that could endure it:
How near am I unto this love, sweet Lady?
I love to mount a Steed, whose heavy trot
Cracks all my sinews, makes my Armour crash:
I love to march up to the neck in snow.
To make my pillow of a cake of Ice,
That in the morning, when I stretch my limbs,
My hair hangs thick with dropping Icicles,
And my brigt Arms be frozen to the earth.
I love to see my face be'd in blood:
To have a gaping wound upon my flesh,
Whose very mouth would make a Lady sound.
I love no chamber-musicke; but a Drum,
To give me unts-vp. Could your Grace endure
To lie all night within a sheet of Maile,
By a drawn sword that parts not from my side,
Embrace a body full of wounds and skarres,
And hear no language but of blood and wars?
Such is my life; such may my honour prove:
Make war a Lady, I that Lady love.
Fie, fie, you run quite from the by as elaine,
To love that dearly, which wee hate so deadly.
If love and I be one, you hate vs both.
Then can I love no Lady by my troth.
Madame fare-well; for under my command
The King your father sends ten thousand men,
To win the holy Town Hierusalem.
Thither must I; esteeming your high honour
Like a bright Comet and unmatched Star;
But love no woman in the world, save war.
Go flint; strike fire upon thy enemies steel,
Whilst I descend one step from fortunes wheel.
Thou goosed before, love bids me follow after:
By thee, the King thy Lord must loose his daughter.
Theeus, and good fellows, speak what should I call you?
There's not a rogue among you that fears God,
Nor one that hath a touch of honesty.
Robbers, and knaves, and rascals all together,
Sweet consort of wild villains list to me.
Am not I well preferred to become Captain
Unto a crew of such pernicious flaues?
I shall have such a coil to make you Christians,
And bring you to some shape of honesty,
That re I do it, I shall make your bodies
Nothing but scarre-crowes, to hang round these Trees.
Brave Captain courageous whom death cannot daunt; wee have been all Gentlemen and House-holders; But I was banished for nothing but getting of Bastards; but this fellow ed from Venice, for killing a man cowardly on the Rialto; some for one villainy, and some for another. Our Captae that you killed, and now supply his place, poisoned a worthy Merchant in the City with rates-bane; and flying hither, for his valour we made him our General. But now brave Canallero, to thee alone wee sing Honononero.
Well, I must have you now turn honest Thieves.
Hee that commits a rape, shall sure be hanged:
He that commits a murder, shall be murdered
With the same weapon that did act the deed.
Hee that robs pilgrims, or poor Travellers,
That for devotions sake do pass these Mountains,
Hee shall bee naked tied to arms of Trees,
And in the days heate stung with Wasps and Bees.
Ye slaves, I'll teach you some civility.
Captain, what shall he be done withal, that lies with a wench with her will, if hee bee hung that lies with one against her well.
I'll have him whipped.
See, see, I think the Captain hath been a Cooke in his time, han fit sweet meat with sour sauce. But what a fool is our Captain, to prescribe Laws to Out-lawes? If we would have kept the Laws before in the City, wee needed not to have been driven now to lead our lives in the Country. But Captain, since you are our Captain, we will resign unto you all our treasures and prisoners, and our spoils. Take possession of them in Gods name, that came to vs in the devils name.
Your prisoners, spoils, and treasure all bring forth,
That I may seize them as mine own by right;
As heir to him whom I have slain in fight.
Villains I know you drag me to my death:
And ye shall do me an exceeding grace.
I am deceived but I have seen that face.
Come, come you old gray-beard, you must before our Captain: if he say Vie then live; if not, thou die if thou were his father.
Villain, thou least if thou were my brother:
He shall not die. Upon your low knees fall,
And ask him pardon, or I'll hang you all.
Tweene joy and fear amazed in heart I stand:
Doth my son Charles lead this unruly band.
Your only son, and all the sons you have,
And borne his fathers desperate life to save.
How came thou here? why dost thou call thy self
My only son? having three brothers more,
Which unto me thy beauteous mother bore.
Once we were four, all fellow-prentices;
And after fellow-souldiers, pressed to serve
The good Duke Robert in his holy wars.
But in a storm, our ships so bravely manned,
Were wrecked; and save my self none swam to land.
They perished there: I by the waives and winds
Was driven upon this Coast of Italy,
Where landing naked, save my trusty sword,
This crew of bold Bandetto's set upon me:
But in the dangerous fight, by chance I slue
The luckless Captain of this damned crew:
Who since have made me Captain, here to stay,
Till fortune grant me a more prosperous way.
Mine eyes have vowed to die the self same death
My sons have done: son let me weep a while,
To bring the like destruction to my eyne;
These in salt tears; they in a sea of brine.
Is this our Captains father? what villains were we to use him so roughly?
If the old fornicator had but told vs so much, wee should have had the grace, either to have set him see, or fortune to have used him more gently.
Since father we have met this happy day,
Secure with me amongst these Out-lawes stay.
Not for the world; since I have lost my sons,
All outward joys are from my heart removed:
Vain pleasures I abhor, all things defy,
That teach not to despair, or how to die,
Yet ere I leave the world I vow to see,
His holy blessed Tomb that died for me.
Then take along with you this bag of gold
To bear your charge in every Inn you come:
Deny it not, relief is comfortable.
Thanks my dear son, expense it will defray,
And serve to deal to poor men by the way.
And now fare-well sweet Charles, thou all my sons,
For now the last sand in my howre-glasse runs.
Ye two conduct him safe beyond the mountains.
Shall I be one?
And I another?
Ye know the passages, be it your charge.
I am glad the silly man is weak and old:
By heaven my fingers tickle at his gold.
Old man is your purse afloat? I have vowed to cut his throat, but to have it every groat.
And now return we to survey our Cave,
Peruse our treasure got by rape and spoil,
Though won by others, yet possessed by vs:
Yet henceforth shall be used no violence.
I'll make these villains work in several Trades,
And in these Forests make a Common-wealth.
When them to civil nurture I can bring,
They shall proclaim me of these Mountains King.
I think these upright craggy mounaine tops,
Are (if the truth were known) high way to heaven:
For it is straight, and narrow, and some places
Are for the steepness, inaccessible.
Fair fall a rala, and a gale of wind,
Or I had gone to heaven away by water
Nearer then this by land; that way they found,
Who in the salt remorseless seas were drowned,
My brothers, whom I dream on when I sleep;
And my eyes waking at their fortunes weep.
Forgetting them; the sendly Irish Coast
Gave me safe harbour; thence I have travailed hither
Even to these lofty hills of Italy,
After Prince Robert Duke of Normandy.
It is safer sitting in my Masters Shop,
Crying what lack you, then it is here to stay,
To Wolves and wilde beasts to be made a prey.
Moister, so Christ save me, I shall waite on thee; Wake for thee when thou sleep, run for thee when thou bid, and fly a thy errands, like a narrow from a bow, when thou want wine, or meat, to drink or eat, or any other necessary provision.
Now I have left my best friend in the grave,
My friendship and my service you shall have.
Well, fortune hath preserved me to some end.
It is for some thing, that I did not sink,
When the salt waives my mouth and ears did drink.
I might have fed the Haddockes; but some power,
Is my good Moister, and preserves me still.
Well, sword in all my troubles stand me by,
Thou art bound to win me somewhat ere I die.
Give v the gold my Captain you, you old Anatomy.
Gray-beard deliver, or you are but dead.
Tke it my friends; full little needs this strife.
First take the gold, and after take my life.
Nay you old Jack a lent, six weeks and upwards: though you be our Captains father, you cannot stay there, and for furety that you shall not go back, and tell him what we have done to you, we'll kill you, and fling you into some Cole-pit.
Content, and when wee have done, wee will return him word we have conducted thee past all danger of the Mountains: And now prepare thee for the fatal stroke.
Thou dost me a great kindness, let it come;
God take my soul, now when thou wilt strike home.
He strikes his own soul down to Erebus,
That lifts a sword that shall but touch his hair.
And by S. Patrick I'll make him Garter his hose with his guts, that strikes any stroke here.
Whom have wee here? a Gentleman and his waterspaniel? Let's robs them too, and after kill thee.
Content, content. Sir stand.
Yes I will stand, base wretch, when thou shalt fall;
And strike thee dead, and trampling on thy bulk
By stamping with my foot crush out thy soul.
Take that you slave, for bidding Justice stand.
Now father go in peace.
Thanks my fair son,
By whose stout valour I have freedom won.
I can bestow upon you nought but thanks,
Unless you will divide this gold with me.
No, father, keep it; thou art old and poor:
But when I want, my sword shall purchase more.
By viewing him my former griefs abound,
Even such a one was Justice that was drowned:
Which had hee lived, his stature, years, and all,
Would have resembled his, so straight, so tall,
So fair, so strong, of such a worthy spirit.
But his blessed soul, by this, doth heaven inherit.
Grief for his death so near my heart doth dwell,
That for my life I cannot say fare-well.
The Captains father, whom the slaves had killed
Had not our coming interuented them,
Resembles mine in gesture, face, and look.
But the old Earl my father is by this
Within the walls of fair Jerusalem.
Else had I had surely took this aged man
T'haue asked him blessing. But what next cusues?
I find these Mountains will be full of news.
Captain, a prize! we two were assailed by two hundred, and of them two hundred. we killed all but these two. These are the remainder of them that are left alive.
Go two or three of you, and fetch them in:
If they resist you, take their weapons from them.
I had rather some body else should attempt them then I now: But since their is no other remedy, Give me three or four of the stourest of our crew, and then GOD and S. Anthony.
More Thieves and villains have begirt vs round.
Now Justice, for the honour of thy name,
Return them to their Captain back with shame.
Now by mine honour, the best piece of flesh
That ever in these woods held Out-law play.
Even such a spirit had Justice when he lived:
We must not loose this Gallant, if wee can,
We'll strive to make him our Companion.
Ye slaves, Isle beat you all into a mouse-hole:
And like a baited Lyon at a stake,
Kill all the cures that come but near to bark.
Ye Gulls, have ye no better men amongst you.
Defy your Captain from me: here I stand,
To dare him to a combat hand to hand.
I were a Bastard, not my fathers son,
Should I refuse it.
By all the land I have left me in the world, that's but my grave: Captain thou honour me.
By all the wealth I brought into these woods,
That's but my sword, thou dost the like to me.
Thou shalt have fair play, Gallant, by mine honour.
False was my mother to my fathers bed,
If I should ask more odds of Hercules.
Hee dies upon my sword, disturbs our fray,
Or in the fight dares disadvantage thee.
Were I the world-commanding Alexander,
I would make thee my Ephestion for that word.
I love thee for thy valour, Captain Thief.
It is that preserves thee from our violence,
An honoured mind lies in this Ot-lawes shape.
So much I rekon of thy chivalry,
That were thou moister of an Indian Mine,
Thou should not be diminished one denier.
Securely fight, thy purse is sanctuary'd,
And in this place shall beard the proudest Theife.
An honoured minded villain, by my sword,
A right good fellow, and an honest Theife.
If I should have thee prostrate at my mercy,
I will not kill thee for thy liberal offer.
Yet win it lad, and take it without fail:
I scorn to have my purse govnder bail.
He goes beyond me in heroic thoughts:
To thine I stake down this: stand all apart.
He that steps in, be subject to our curses:
And now the betterman take both the purses.
It is a match, I'll seize them to thy grief.
Now True man try, if thou anst rob a Thief.
If ye were borne of women, aid a woman.
Why what's the matter?
Oh turn the edges of your swords against him,
That in the Forest would have ravished me.
Cease thy pursuit, and stranger pause a while,
To hear the tenor of this Ladies plaint.
Why then Kings truce. But let the pues lie:
They'll fall o my advantage by and by.
Now tell me Lady, what's your suite to me?
To save my life from foul inchsteady.
For passing by these Countries on my way,
To pay my zealous vows in Golgotha,
Attended only by a little page:
This villain with a crew of russian thieves,
Seized what we had first, haled my page from me:
And after would have wrecked my chastity.
But being swift of foot, fear lent me wings
Hither (I hope in happy time) to fly,
Either to save mine honour, or to die,
Thy honour and thy life are both secured:
And for a Ladies sake you much resemble,
Command my sword, my subjects, and my cave.
Where succour, all offencelesse, you shall have.
Sir go you, and scour about the hill.
I go.
How like is he to Charles by Shipwreck dead!
And he to Justice perished in the waives!
But they are bh immortal Saints in heaven:
Yet I am glad because these shapes are theirs.
My happy coming hath tan up their strife,
Preserving mine own honour and my life.
So blushed my sister: and this Out-law Theife
Hath a resemblance to my brother Charles:
But she in London lives a Virgin pure:
He in some huge Whales belly too too sure.
A pretty wench'ifaith, I'll marry her,
And make her Queen of all this Out-law crew.
I am half in love already, at first sight:
How will this raging flame increase by might?
Fair beauteous maid, resign your love to me;
Mistress of all these Forests you shall be.
Love me, I'll kiss away these tears of grief;
Sweet wench embrace a True-man, scorn a Thief.
How now sir Sauce! you are as bold me thinks,
As if you were a Free-man of our Trade.
None but my self plead interest in this Maid.
My interest is as much; in this it is greater,
Because that of the two, I love her better.
Proud passenger, I'll make thee eat that word.
If I eat air, thou shalt digest my sword.
Revive this quarrel, let the former die:
Fight we for her, and let the purses lie.
Out-law, I rather love to fight, then brawl:
I'll win from thee thy wench, thy purse, and all.
Stay Gentlemen.
By heaven, I scorn to stay,
Till both the purses I have tan away.
My sword for me, my Mistress, and my gold.
My resolution shall my claim uphold.
What do you mean Gentlemen to fight among your selves, that should be friends, and had more need to take one another part, to fight against your enemies. Wee shall all be slain, killed, murdered, Massacred. For my own part, if I had nine lives like a cat; they were all sure to die one dogs death.
Why? What's the matter fellow?
Oh noble Captain, we shall all be slain. Tankard a Prince of Italy, with an Army hath beset the foot of the Mountains, and hath vowed to make Venison of all vs poor Out-lawes, and kill vs like Dear. God be with you: I'll go shift for one.
Dear we will be too him, before he do it,
And dearly sell our desperate karcases.
Kind stranger wilt thou take a Truce with me,
Thou shalt divide with me my dignity:
Wee two will jointly o'er these Mountains reign,
And by our valours, our estates maintain.
Because I hear thy life in jeopardy,
And thou hast dealt with me so honourably:
Receive my hand; now I am wholly thine.
And ye mad rogues, I am half your Captain now.
Look when ye see me nod, ye crouch and kneel,
Make legs, and curtsies, and keep bare your Crowns.
It is hard to teach them manners that are Clowns.
But for my own part, here's a leg, here's a cap, here's a knee,
All these sweet half Captain, I reserve for thee.
Speak, do you all accept me?
We do, we do.
Then brother thief, I am turned Out-law too.
But to do no man wrong; I make that Law,
Only to pass this tedious Summer here,
Till wee our downe-cast fortunes may uproar.
You share with me in end, in mind, in all.
But hark, I hear our enemies Drums do brawl.
Their voice is welcome: Oh that I had with me
As many good lads, honest Prentices, 
From Eastcheape, Canwicke-streete, and London-stone,
To end this battle, as could wish themselves
Under my conduct if they knew me here;
The doubtful days success we need not fear.
Oh for some Cheapside boys for Charles to lead:
Thy would stick to it, when these Out-lawes fail.
Wishes are wind, let's think our selves well manned,
We'll sooner die, then fly, so make a stand.
Are these the Out-lawes that disturb our peace?
Think they these Mountain tops can shelter them
From our revenge, and just assembled Arms?
Come, come, let vs prepare to answer them.
Which be the chief of these confounded Troupes?
Prince, I am one of them.
And I another.
I am his friend.
And I his out-law-brother.
How dare you stand contemptuous' against your Liege?
Captains ye are our men.
That wee deny:
I am a stranger Tared.
So am I.
Such valour is reported to appear 
In the brave deeds of these rude Foresters,
That wee could rather wish they were our friends,
To dwell in Cities, then keep out in Caves.
Considering now what wars we have in hand,
Their martial spirits might much advantage vs,
Wold they but keep within some honoured bound.
We'll work them if we can to our alliance,
And rather motion love, then proud defiance.
Why comes the County Palatine in Arms,
To fight against unarmed Foresters?
If thou wilt win renown, bend thy brave forces
Against Pagans that beege Hierusalem.
Small fame and honour can thou win thee here,
Besides our cheap lives thou shalt purchase dear.
We have reformed these villains since we came,
And taught them manners and civility:
All rape and murder we repay with death:
Amongst vs doth not live a ravisher.
I have heard no less, but that you weed out such
As pass the bounds of Christian honesty:
Which makes me rather offer peace then war.
But what bright virgin stands so discontent?
My life.
My love.
The word had been well spent,
If I had said mine too: for I protest,
Of all this number I affect her best.
Believe me fellow-partner in my rule,
You offer wrong to impart in this my love.
Half of al's mine, I claim it as my due:
In which bright Virgin, I except not you.
I do contain my love with much ado:
For her (me thinks) I could turn Out-law too.
What, do you think to have a double share?
Half of her's mine; I will not bate an hair.
By thine own words thou gau'st me half at least.
But I'll have all, my Title is increased.
Stay Captains, for our anal Crowns revenues,
We would not loose the weakest of you both,
So much do we affect your Chiualries.
Let me take up this mutual enmity:
Your quarrel is for her; both would enjoy her.
You claim her as your right.
It is true I do.
And Captain, you say she belongs to you.
True (valiant Prince) my hopes shall his destroy:
Thou art mine own, sweet wench, God give vs joy.
Then till this strict contention ended be,
Deliver this bright virgin unto me.
Here shall our former hate and discord cease:
This Lady shall be Hostage of your peace.
Unto thy charge we give ten thousand men. 
As many soldiers we resign to thee. 
Make me her keeper till these wars be done:
Ye have the price, I my content have won.
Honour hath taught the Palatine to speak.
Since what we both desire, one can but have,
Take charge of her. Let me receive the charge
Of a great Army, and commanding power:
Before I marry, I must win my Dower.
So say I too, and Out-law life adieu.
And welcome love, which I must keep for you.
Their Drums shall scold, mine shall have time to cease,
And whilst they war, with her I'll make my peace.
Are you content, sweet Lady?
I must do
That which amongst you all best pleases you.
I am a prisoner; prisoners must obey.
You say I shall, and I must not say nay.
Do so, sweet love.
Till these wars ended be
I prithee sweet love, keep thy heart to me.
Come Captain, we bequeath you to your charge,
To march with speed towards the holy wars.
This Lady, as our life we will esteem,
And place her in the honour of a Queen.
What art thou with thy brow confrontest me?
One that thinks scorn to give least place to thee.
Thou know me not to set my name so light.
I reck thee not, my frown thou can not .
Wee are no babe; or if we were, yet know
Thy proud face cannot like a Bug-beare show.
Thou hast struck fire upon a flinty spirit.
Think thou, because thou lead the French Kings troupes,
And art Commander of a few bold French,
That we will yield the upper hand to thee?
I let thee know thou hast dishonoured me.
I let thee know thou hast done as much by me.
Think thou, thou can outface me? proud man, no:
Know I esteem thee as too weak a foe.
Now by my Knight-hood I'll revenge this wrong;
And for that word, thy heart shall curse thy tongue.
What mean these hasty Princes thus to jar,
And bend their swords against their mutual breasts,
Whose edge were sharpened for their enemies crests?
He shall not march before me.
But I will.
Zounds but thou shalt not, by this blessed day,
I'll pitch thee like a bar out of my way.
Thy arms want strength, thou can not toss me so.
No, can they not? by heaven I'll try a throw.
Princes, I charge you by the honoured zeal,
And love to him for whom ye come to fight,
To cease this envy and abortive jar.
The fields are broad enough for both to march,
And neither have the vantage of the ground.
Robert, mine arm shall act a wondrous thing,
I'll hurl him like a stone out of a sling.
Not have the way? I'll fling thee on the earth,
And then march over thee with all my Troupes.
Robert of Normandy, by all the honour
Thou hop'st t'atchiue thee in these holy wars,
Stand from betwixt vs, let's but try one fall
I'll cast his corke-like trunk by wondrous skill,
As Hercules threw Lycas from an Hill.
For Gods sake and our Saviours, in whose book
Ye now are entered as his soldiers pressed,
In whose Camp Royal if ye mutiny
Ye are found guilty by his martial Law,
And worthy death: I charge you Princes both,
T'abandon this injurious enmity.
Stand you betwixt the Soldiers, lest this sting
Of blind seditions, reign in this our Army
And feed upon our bodies like a plague.
Princes I charge you by your Saviours blood
Shed for your sins, ye shed none at this time.
Well let him march before, I will resign:
Toert prevails; French-man the right is thine.
I will not march first; but in curtsy
I will resign that honoured place to thee;
But what a King should say, I should not do
With violent rage that would I run into.
Go on, by heaven you shall, I yield it you;
By heaven you shall, the place I freely grant.
Friendship can more with me, then rude constraint.
Thy honoured love with honour I return,
What thou would give me, I resign thee back;
This kind reply to me stands like a charm,
Then royally let's march on arm in arm.
Such just proportion Princes still should keep.
Brave Lord of Bulloigne join your Troupes with ours,
That are by birth approved Englishmen:
And Lord of France that under your conduct
Have ready armed ten thousand fighting men,
To fight with vs for fair solemn,
Direst by misbelieving Infidels,
Let vs unite a friendly Christian league.
We have entered, valiant Lords, upon our way
Even to the midst of fertile Lumbardy,
By writers termed the Garden of the world.
Half o our way we have overcome already:
Then let vs here in camp upon these Downs.
But stay, what threatening voice of warfare sounds.
Had not young Justice in the seas been drowned,
I should have said, he treads upon this ground.
And but none escaped the dangerous seas save I,
This French-man I should think my brother Guy.
Princes, my Moister County Palatine,
Wondering what bold foot durst presume to tread
Upon his Confines without asking leave,
Sends me to know the cause of your arrive:
Or why the armed hooves of your fiery seeds
Dare wound the fore-head of his peaceful Land.
Dare? sends thy Lord in that ambitious key
Or hath the pride of thy refined tongue
Gilded thy message with these words of scorn?
Add thou unto thy message, Knight, or no?
The naked tenor of my Masters mind
Thus I enfold; rash saucy insolent,
That by audacious boldness have not feared
To break into my Sovereigns royal pale;
I charge you to return the way you came,
And step by step tell every tedious stride,
That you have measured rashly in his Land:
Or by the honour of his name he swears,
To chase you from the margent of his Coast,
With a vnnumbred Army and huge Host.
March back again? Oh scandal to our names
Have we deserved to be so censured on,
Though not one man upon my part would stand,
Alone I'll pierce the bowels of his Land.
Basely retire, and thirty thousand strong?
Were the whole worlds power ambushed in our way
Yet would we on. Return dishonourably?
Forward Il'e march, though every step I tread
Plunge me in blood, thus high aboue my head.
Princes, have patience, let me answer him.
Knight, I condemn not thee for speaking boldly
The proud defiance that thy Moister sends:
But mildly we return our pleasures thus.
We do confess it was some ouer-sight
To march so far, without some notice given
Unto the Lord and Prince that owes the Land:
And we could wish that we had craved his leave.
But since it is thus, that we have marched thus far,
And basely to retire is infamous.
(If not with leave) wee forward mean to go:
Despite of King or Emp'rour shall say no.
I will inform the Prince my Sovereign so.
That young Knights face, me thinks, I well should know.
I see the swords were sharped against Infidels,
Must be employed to lavish Christian blood.
Upon his soul lye all the heinous guilt,
Who being a Christian Prince, forbids and bars
Our quiet passage to these Pagan wars.
This bickering will but keep our arms in ur,
The holy battles better to endure.
Well, God for vs, for our intent is good:
Charged be their souls with all this Christian blood.
What art thou brau'st the County Palatine?
My name is Robert Duke of Normandy.
Speak, will ye all retire the way ye came?
God keep Duke Robert from so foul a shame.
Basely retire when we have marched thus far?
rst we will vnpeople this thy Land by war.
Then will we drive you back by our maine force,
And seize upon your Troupes of Foot and Horse.
So say you: bu should you attempt to do it,
We straight should overthrow you Horse and Foot.
So said, so done, brave Lord, were gallant play.
But you would at the first push shrink away.
No proud Italians all our pirits are fire,
Which burns not down-ward, but is made t'aspire.
Prince we confess wee did foeget ou selves,
Presuming on that ancient privilege
Which every Christian brother Prince should claim
One in the interest of another name
An error we confess, though not a fault.
But basely with dishonour back to fly,
And to be held as cowards we deny.
And nothing else can satisfy mine ire,
But whence ye came the same way to retire.
And that I'll never do.
Nor I.
Nor I.
Then shall ye on these Lumbard Champaines die.
To Arms brave Soldiers.
Strike up warlike Dumme.
Prepare you, Christian Princes, now we come.
Stay brave Prince Tancred, stay great Norman Duke.
Out of my zeal to God and Christendom,
To inch the blood which should be broached this day,
Unto the grief of all that honour CHRIST,
And joy to such as love Idolatry:
I make this challenge general through the Host
Of him that interrupts vs on our way.
If any proud Italian dare take up
The honoured gage which I have here thrown down,
And fight a single combat for our passage;
These shall be made our strict conditions.
If him I conquer, all our Host shall march
Without all let and contradiction:
If I be vanquished by thy Champions hand,
Our Army shall march bake out of thy land.
A Princely motion to save Christian blood.
Great Prince of Italy, upon my knee
I humbly beg I may thy Champion be.
Thou hast thy suite; thy valour hath been tried:
With a rough brow see thou confront his pride.
Then what ten thousand Christian lives should right,
These two brave Lords will end in single fight.
It is agreed.
Stand to it, brave Outlaw-brother Would I were one of them.
And I the other.
What weapon wilt thou use?
That which next comes.
Give me this Partisan: now strike up drums.
Give me this soldiers; Trumpet, sound a charge:
I'll stop the passage which he seeks t'enlarge.
Princes stand off, my warlike arm this day
For all your Troupes shall win a prosperous way.
Thou can not enter though the way stood op:
My heart, and this, thy passage vows to stop.
Yet will I through.
Thou shalt not, this says nay.
Oh but behold! I have this to hew my way.
I would not loose my Champion for the world.
Nor I this Prince: For were these spirits spent,
All Christendom their fortunes might lament.
Part them on equal odds, and equal terms:
Both a like valiant, both have honour wono,
More valorous live not underneath the Sun.
We will reserve their haughty Chiualries,
To exercise against Gods enemies.
They have won honour, I have idly stood:
By my good stars I'll have a challenge too,
If any in their Camp dares answer me.
Give me thy Pike, a Pike a Prince may trail,
And at that weapon will I challenge all.
Great Prince, these fiery Princes that came hither
To brave our forces, had a Champion
To challenge vs: Are we as valiant,
And shall we ail to do the like to them?
Give me but leave, my Lord, to send one boast
T'affright them, like a devil, through their Host.
It pleases vs; then when thou wilt begin.
What Champion shall we have to answer him?
I should esteem him my immortal foe,
That should attempt to take away the honour
Of such a strong encounter from my hand.
Champion appear betwixt our Royal Hoists,
Let's seedy strength make good thy haughty boasts.
I am here; stand thou forth on the adverse par
Survey me well, brave Hector I resemble,
Whose very brow did make the Greeks to tremble.
But I Achilles, proud ambitious boy,
Will drag thy Coarse about the walls of Troy.
Give me thy Pike, I'll toss it like a reed,
And with this bulrush make mine enemy bleed.
Rapier and Pike, is that thy honoured play?
Look down ye Gods, this combat to survey.
Rapier and Pike, this combat shall decide:
Gods, Angels, Men, shall see me tame thy pride.
Thou dost thy self wrong to ore-charge thine arm,
With such a weapon as thou can not wield.
I'll teach thee; thou shalt like my zany be.
And feign to do my cuning after me.
Thou would instruct thy Moister at this play.
Think thou this rye-strew can ore-rule my arm?
Thus do I bear him when I use to march:
Thus can I fling him up, and catch him thus: 
Then thus, to try the siewes of my arm.
But thou should charge him thus, advance him thus,
Thus should thou take him, when thou see from far
The violent horses run to break our ranks.
All that is nothing, I can toss him thus.
I thus: it is easier sport then the Baloone.
We trifle time, this shall thy rage withstand.
With this, ou Host shall pierce thy Sovereigns Land.
That Host should loose ten thousand Pagans lives
With the rich honour of their overthrow,
That should but loose his Champion in this combat
If both should perish, our brave Christian Army
Should be more weak by thousands then it was.
Their matchless valour have prevailed with vs,
Freely enjoy the pleasures of our Land,
Our Army here we do conjoin with yours,
To ad them to the fair Hierusalem.
We pawn our faith to this perpetual league:
And now we show our selves that Christian Host,
In which true peace should flourish and abound:
Unto this peace let Drums and Trumpets sound.
Champions embrace, and all your sterne debate 
Pour in abundance on the Pagans heads.
Princes and Lords, let our united bands
Win back Iudea from the Pagans hands.
Thus have I maskt my bashful modesty
Under the habit of a trusty Page,
And now my servants servant am I made.
Love, that transformed the Gods to sundry shapes,
Hath wrought in me this Metamorphosis.
My love and Lord, that honoured me a woman,
Loves me a youth, employs me every where,
I serve him, waite upon him, and he swears
He favours both my truth and diligence:
And now I have learnt to be a perfect Page,
He will have none to truss his points but me,
At board to waite upon his cup but me:
To bear his Target in the field, but me.
Nay, many a thing, which makes me blush to speak,
He will have none to lie with him but me,
I dream and dream, and things come in my mind:
Only I hide my eyes; but my poor heart
Is bared and kept from loves satiety.
Like Tantals, such is my poor repast,
I see the Apples that I cannot taste.
I'll stay my time, and hope yet, ere I die,
My heart shall feast as richly as my eye.
Counsel brave Lords, the Christian Army marches
Even to our gates with paces undisturbed:
The hollow earth resounds with weight of arms,
And shrinks to bear so huge a multitude.
They make a valley as they march along,
And raising hills encompass either side.
Counsel, brave Lords, these terrors to decide.
Ioues great Vice-gerent over all the world:
Let vs confront their pride, and with our powers
Disperse the strength of their assembled Troupes.
Zion is ours by conquest: All Iudaea
Is the rich honour of our conquering swords.
Shall we not guard it then, and make our breasts
The walls that shall defend Jerusalem?
They shall march over vs, that march this way:
Before the Christians shall attain these walls
With dead men's faces we will pave the earth.
I cannot judge the Christians are so mad
To come in way of battle, but of peace.
They rather travel in devotion,
To pay their vows at their Messia's Tomb,
And so, as Pilgrims, not as Soldiers come.
Your own power blinds you and hath skreend your eyes,
My hairs do wear experience livery:
But yours, the badge of youth and idleness.
Their Army stands upon a Mountain top,
Like a huge Forest: their tall Pikes, like Pines,
In height do ouer-peere the lower Trees;
Their Horsemen ride like Centaur's in the meads,
And scout abroad for pillage and for prey:
Courage is their good Captain.
Courage! no.
Pale fear, and black destruction, leads the so.
I say again, the Christian Princes lead
An Army, for their power, invincible.
Victorious hope sits hovering on their plumes:
Their gilded Armour shines against the Sun,
Dazzling our eyes from top of yonder Hill
Like the bright streakes that flow from Paradise.
Oh conquest worthy the brave Persian swords?
Let vs descend from forth the Town and meet them.
No.
Yes.
Should Jove himself in Thunder answer I
When we say no; weed pull him from the sky.
Should Sultan, Sophie, Priest, or Presbyter,
Or Gods, or devils, or men, gainsay our will:
Him, them, or thee, would the brave Persian Kill.
Quench your hot spleens with drops of sweet advice,
Temper your rage with counell mighty Kings.
I say e will make peace with Christendom.
I say the Pean scorns to be colleague,
Or to have part with them of Christendom.
Yet hear my age.
Yet hearken to my youth.
My tongue give place unto the Sold age.
But I applaud the Persians youthful rage.
Stay Lords, our grave experience doth foresee
The mischiefs that attend on this debate.
We tread the path of our destruction,
By our dissentions grow the Christians strong,
Whom our united hearts may easily quell.
Brave Persian Sophie, we commend your hate
To them that have abhorred our Pagan gods:
Yet temper it with wisdom, valiant Prince.
It is our security I would increase,
When with my words I mention gentle peace.
Experience doth instruct the Soldans tongue,
Hearken to him, hee speaks judicially.
My tongue a while gives licence to mine ear:
The depth of your grave wisdoms let vs hear.
Then thus, let's send unto the Christians Host,
To know what cause hath brought them thus far armed.
If peaceably they come to visit here
The ancient Relics of their Saviours Tomb;
Peace shall conduct them in, and guard them out.
But if they come to conquer Syons Hill,
And make irruption through our triple walls;
Death and despair shall ambush in their way,
And we will seize the ensigns they display.
My youth yields willingly to your grave years,
Let it be so. But whom shall we elect
To be created Lords Ambassadors?
Moretes shall be one, for I am sure
He will employ his tongue, peace to prour.
Turnus another, he that all things dares,
Will with defiance stir them up to war.
Moretes and brave Turnus, speed you straight
Unto the Christian Host: Say, if they come
Like Pilgrims, to behold the Sepulchre,
Our gates stand open to receive them in:
And be you painful to persuade a peace.
But if they stand upon their hostile ground,
Say that our breasts are armed, our swords are keen,
Bold are our hearts, and fiery is our spleen,
And so be gone.
I to persuade a peace.
I go the surious rage of war t'encrease.
We will mean time conduct, our royal host:
One half is mine, the other you shall lead,
To intercept them ere they win the sight
Of these invincible and high-built walls.
Brave Persians, we will both in ambush lie:
Sure now the Christians are all come to die.
Bhold, brave Christian Prince, all the glory
That Tancred can inherit in this world.
Part of it's mine.
And part belongs to me.
An heavenly mixture, now beshrew my heart,
But Godfrey with the rest could cry half part.
I am all hers.
That Lady seems to me
The fairest creature ever eye did see.
Tancred, of all, thy face best pleases me.
Fair Lady.
Madame:
Mistrsse.
Beauteous love.
Bright Goddess.
Nymph.
Love whom ye will say I:
So ye affect not my beloved Guy.
Lords, she is mine.
When did my interest cease
When I am here, you brother Out-law peace.
Why should not I enjoy her?
Why not I?
She can have none but me.
That we deny:
Princes, what means this frenzy in your hearts?
Or hath some Negromanticke Conjurer
Raised by his Art some ury in my shape,
To work sedition in the Christian Camp?
You have confirmed by general Parliament
A Statute, that must stand inviolate;
Namely, that mutiny in Prince or Peasant
Is death, a Kingdom cannot save his life.
Then whence proceed these strange contentions?
I seized her first.
I first her thoughts did prove.
I plead the composition for my love.
If wealth will win the thoughts of that chaste Lady,
Ile bid as fair as any for her love.
If valour may achieve her, I'mongst many
Will bid more warlike blows for her then any.
Ny, if you go to scrambling, this for me.
Speed they that list, so you repulsed be.
Yet hear me Princes.
Hence with frivolous words.
Stand we to prate, when others draw their sword
Speak thou my cause.
This shall my pleader be.
Thou art for vs.
And sword speak thou for me.
He that best loves me, pierce me with his sword,
Lest I become your general overthrow.
I do conjure you by the love you bear me,
Either to banish this hostility,
Or all at once to act my Tragedy.
A blow is death proclaimed by Parliament:
Can ye make Laws, &amp; be the first that break them?
Knew I that this my beauty bred this strife,
With some black poison I would stain my cheeks,
Till I looked fouler then an Aethiop.
Still do ye brandish your contentious swords?
This night shall end my beauty, and to morrow
Look to behold my Crystal eyes scratched out,
My visage martyrd, and my hair torn off:
He that best loves it, ransom it with peace:
I will preserve it, if your fury cease.
But if ye still persist, the heavens I call
As my vows witness, I will hate ye all.
To show my love, my sword shall sleep in rest.
I'll keep mine sharpe for the brave Soldans crest.
Peace sword.
The Norman Robert keeps his keen,
T'abate the fury of the Soldans spleen.
My sword cries truce.
Blade when thou next art seen
Thou make thy Lord a King, his Love a Queen.
You have redeemed my beauty, your last jar
Had made perfection with my face at war.
Lady, the virtuous motions of your heart
Add to the abundant graces of your fame,
It was your beauty that did blind our souls,
And in our close breasts placed oblivion.
It is true, we have ordained a strict decree,
That whosoever in our Christian Host
Strikes with a sword in hostile enmity,
Forfeits his life, then break off this debate,
And keep our own decrees iuiolate.
Health to the Christians from the mighty Sultan.
Death and detrustion from the Persian Sophie.
That tongue brings peace, to thee will I attend.
That tongue brings war, thy motions we commend.
Speak peace, thy looks are smooth, we will list to thee.
Speak war, bring war, and we to war agree.
The Babylonian Sultan, mighty Princes,
Sends me to know the cause of this your March
Into a land so far remote from ye.
If ye intend to see your Prophets Tomb,
As holy Pilgrims, peace shall guard your way.
Peace we defy: let's hear what thou can say.
Proceed, proceed.
Do; and I'll sound my Drum
To drown his voice, that doth for parlance come.
Why, I am borne to nothing in this world
But what my sword can conquer. Should we yield
Our fortunes to base composition,
I have no hopes mine honour to increase.
Cursed be his base ear that attends to peace.
Let me conclude my message.
Pagan, no:
Wars friend speak thou, I am to Peace a foe.
The Persian Sophie thus instructs my tongue
That Prince amongst you whose heroic breast
Dares show it self to his triumphant spear,
(Excepting but the name of Christian)
Like to the Persian Gods he honours him.
But should he know a heart in these proud Troupes,
And know that heart to be addict to peace,
He would hate him like a man that should blaspheme.
In Zion Towers hangs his victorious flag,
Blowing defiance this way: and it shows
Like a red meteor in the troubled air;
Or like a blazing comet, that fore-tels
The fall of Princes.
Thine own Princes all.
Then in one word, destruction to you all.
I had not thought such spirits had remained
Within the warlike breasts of Infidels.
Dares the Majestic spirit of thy King
Answer a challenge? dares he pawn his Crown
Against the hazard of ten thousand lives?
And who should fight against him?
I.
Thou!
I, against him, and thee, and all the world.
That interdicts my honour.
Me!
Thee.
Fire, rage, and fury, all my veins do swell.
Be mute my tongue, bright sword my fury tell.
Fire mount' against his mad fury, check his rage.
Burn out then flame, his blood thy heate shall swag.
What have ye done? injustice staines our crests
If for this act ye have not loft their lives.
I will not bear the badge of Christendom
In such a Bedlam mad society.
Cease to determine of their haire-braine rage,
Till ye have sent the Pagans from our Tents.
It is well adieu'd. Soldiers take charge of the
Till we determine of our Embassy.
I fear me Turnus, had you known before
The spirits of these haughty Christians,
T'haue been so full of envious chivalry,
You would have tempered some part of your rage.
You see they strive, and fight amongst themselves,
To practise hate against they meet with vs.
Morates, no, we scorn all abject fears,
And they shall know our hearts as great as theirs.
It shall be so. Attend me, Pagan Lords;
We come not with grey gowns, and Pilgrims staves,
Beads at our sides, and sandals on our feet,
Fear in our hearts, entreaty in our tongues,
To beg a passage to our Prophets grave.
But our soft Beaver Fell we have turned to iron,
Our gowns to armour, and our shells to plumes,
Our walking staves we have changed to Cemytars,
And so with pilgrims hearts, not pilgrims habits,
We come to hew way through your maine Armies,
And offer at the Tomb our contrite hearts
Made purple with as many Pagans bloods,
As wee have in our breasts religious thoughts.
And so be gone, no words in trifling wast,
Death follows after you with wings of hast.
That Prince speaks Music, which doth cheer my heart.
Princes adieu, with terror I depart.
Now to these other Captaine-mutiners.
What shall be done with them?
Even what you please.
We have lived with pain, and we can die with ease:
What God hath made, a Gods name do you mar,
Death is the least I fear, now to the bar.
Lords give me leave to temper our decree,
The Law is death, but such is our regard
Of Christian blood, we moderate it thus.
Because we know your words, your lives are saved:
Yet that the world shall see we prise our Laws,
And are not partial should we sit on Kings;
Wee doom you everlasting banishment
From out the Christian Army.
Banishment?
Tis was your doing; well, I'll be revenged:
By all the hopes that I have lost, I will.
Princes, your dooms are upright, I obey them,
And voluntarily exile my self.
(Against my furious spirit) I could weep
To leae this royal Army, and to loose
The honour promised in the Pagans deaths.
Farewell to all, with tears of grfe I go.
Ye are all my friends, thou only art my foe.
Hold me o still; where ere I nxt shall meet thee,
This sword, like thunder, on thy crst shall greet thee.
Banished the Camp I go, but not so far,
But I will make one in this Christian war,
Like an unknown Knight I will bear a shield,
In it engraven the Trade I did profess,
When once I was a Gold-smith in Cheapid:
And if I prosper, to these arms I'll add
Some honour, and the scutcheon I shall bear,
Shall to the Pagans bring pale death, and fear.
Adieu brave Christian Lords; for I must tray,
A banished man can never miss his way.
Why do you look so sad upon their griefs?
Ah pardon me. My heart begot a thought
At their departure, which had been of force
T'haue strained a tear or two from my moist eye.
How like was he to Justice! he to Guy!
A leaden weight of grief lies at my heart,
And I could wish my self were anisht too,
To bear them in their sorrows company.
These, for examples sake, must be removed,
And though their absence will much weaken vs,
Yet we had rather put vs in Gods guard,
Lessening our own strength, then to bear with that
Which might in time lead to our overthrow.
March forward Lords; our love we will defer.
Prince Tancred, till our wars chief heat be spent,
Keep still this beauteous Lady in your Tent.
My Lord is banished, what shall poor I do?
There is no way, but I must after too.
But ere I go, some cunning I must use,
To make this Lady my Lords love refuse.
Fair youth, why have you singled me along?
Is it to share joy, or partake my moan?
Whether you please.
Invention help me now, 
To bring her out of love with my sweet Lord,
For should she love him I were quite undone.
Madame, in faith, how many suitors have you?
More then I wish I had: Fst, the French General.
Oh God, I fear, I think I am accursed.
She loves him best, because she names him first.
The English Robert, County Palatine;
Two Gentlemen that took me in the woods;
One is now banished, but the other still
Stays in the Army; the, the Bulloigne Duke,
And which of all these is the properes man?
Faith let me hear thy judgment.
Prince Robert is a gallant Gentlemen:
But the French Lord uncomely, and vnshap'd.
Tancred's a proper man, but the French Lord,
He hath no making, no good shape at all.
I could not love a man of his complexion:
I would not ue him if I were a Lady,
Had he more Crowns then Care conquered.
I see no such defects in that French Lord.
I, I, it is so. Upon my life sh loves him.
I must devise some plot, or they will use
Some means to meet, and mrye out of hand.
Lady, he was my Moister, but believe me,
He is the most ine man for women,
That ever breathed; nay, Madame, which is more,
He loves vary, ad delights in change.
Ad I heard him say, should he be married,
He would make his wife a Cucke-queane.
Why though he do; it is ver in a woman,
If she can bear his imperfections.
Upon my life they are made sure alreddy,
Shoe's pleased with any imperfections.
Wat should I do?
Now fair youth, list to me,
I will acquaint thee with a secrecy.
These Lords so trouble me with their vain suites,
That I am tired and wearied, and resolve
To steal away in secret from the Camp.
My Guy is gone, and she would follow him:
I must prevent it, or else loose my love.
Wilt thou consort me, bear me company,
And share with me in joy and misery?
Madame I will. She loves him, and no wonder.
I'll go, be it but to keep them still asunder.
Then from their Tents this night we'll steal away,
And through the wide woods and the Forests stray.
Then your reports sound nought but death and war.
The Christians would not lend an ear to peace.
Since they demean themselves so honourably,
This earth shall give them honourable graves.
By pride her self are their proud Ensigns byno:
War in their tongues sits, in their faces scorn.
Our resolutions shall control base fears.
Wee are proud as they; our swords shall answer theirs.
Did thou deliver our strict Embassy?
I did, my Lord.
Did they not quake to hear it?
No more then Rocks hake with a puff of breath,
They come resolved, and not in fear of death.
Looked they not pale?
With fury, not with feae.
The'were mad, because your forces were not there.
Did you not dah their spirits? fell not their .
Down to the earth, when thou did speak of vs?
Went not a fearful murmu through their Host,
When thou did number our vnnumbred power?
Did not their faint swords tremble in their hands,
At that name Sultan?
Or when thou namd'st me,
My power, my strength, my matchless chivalry:
Fell they not flat upon the earth with fear?
No, but their proud hearts bounded in their breasts,
Their plumes flew bravely on their golden crests:
And they were ready to have fallen at jar,
Which of them first should with the Persian war.
There was no tongue but breathed defiance forth:
I could not see a face but menaced death:
No hand, but brandished a victorious sword.
They all cry Battle, Battle, peace defy,
And not a heart but promised victory.
There's not an heart shall scope our tyranny,
Since they provoke ou indignation,
Like the vast Ocean shall our courage rise,
To drown their pride, and all their powers surprise.
My Cemytar is like the bolt of Jove,
That never touches but it strikes with death.
Oh how I long, till we with spears in rests,
Strike out the lightning from their high-plum'd crests.
I would burn off this beard in such a flame,
As I could kindle with my puissant blows:
Yet the least hair I value at more worth
Then all the Christian Empire.
Speak, brave Sultan,
Shall our bared horses clime yond Mountain tops,
And bid them battle where they pitch their Tents.
Courage cries, on; but good advice saith, stay.
Experience bids vs fight another way.
Why should we tire our Troupes in search of them,
That with audacious boldness secke out vs?
Let vs stand to receive them when they come,
And with a grove of Pikes growing on this earth
Where now no tree appears, toss up their bodies,
Whose coerces by your strong arms kept ale,
May hang like bloody pendants on your staves.
Oh sight best pleasing to the Pan gods!
In the skies fore-head shall the bright Sun stand
Amazed to view that glorious spectacle,
And with the pleasing sight forget his way,
Tograce our Trophy with perpetual day.
But how shall we receive their armed Troops?
What special order will your grace assign
To them that shall command your Companies?
It shall be thus. This way the Christians march,
The body of our Host shall stay behind,
To be a strength to fair Hierusalem.
But we with certain soldiers secretly,
Will lie in ambush: The great Persian Sophie,
With Turnus, and a chief command of men,
Shall guard that way: my self, and thou Morates
Will keep this pssage with a troupe select,
To seize on their fore-runners, scouts, and spies.
Assist vs fate, ere-long the world shall know
Our glories by the Christians overthrow.
This is my Quarter: these my men shall be.
Morates, thou and these hall follow me.
Oh whether will blind love conduct my steps?
Prince Tancreds Dear, and English Roberts Joy,
Is fled in secret, and hath left our Tents.
Thus like an Errant and Adventurous Knight,
I have left the Host to follow her fair search,
And durst not trust the air with my intent.
This way, they say, she went; the Campe's secure.
This way unknown, in secret I pursue her.
This way my love went like a shooting star,
Whose blazing train doth guilde the firmament.
Such glorious beauty adds she to the way,
Making the dark night-pathes, shine bright as day.
Ye honoured Arms arewell, and Camp adieu,
I do forsake my self her to pursue.
Behold a traveller! I will enquire
If chance hath cast his eye upon my love.
I was about to ask of yonder man,
Whether her beauty had enriched his sight:
But'tis my rival Robert; Charles obscure thee.
For should he see thee, he would quickly judge
What Adamant had drawn me to these woods.
One case I see hath made vs errants both.
To be found wandering thus I should be loath.
Love that drew me, hath drawn that knight along
Being but a child, a Giant's not so strong.
Stand Christians, by your Crosses on your breasts
Yee're marked for death, and base destruction.
What are ye, that, like cowards, with such odds
Assault vs thus vnfurnisht for the wars.
I am the Sultan; these my me at arms,
That lie to intercept you, and prepare
For your accursed lives this fatal snare.
The Sultan, the grand enemy to CHRIST,
The devils Lieutenant, Vice-roy under him!
Brave English Robert, since our frowning stars
Have brought vs to this narrow exigent,
And trained vs hither with a chain of love
To perish by the swords of Infidels:
Stand foot to foot.
Tush, I am Pagans swords proof, and my stars,
Have marked me for a Conqueror in these wars.
Upon them, soldiers; pity they despise,
Scarce can the world afford a richer prize.
Thou glorious eye of heaven, be ever blind:
Mask thy bright face in clouds eternally:
Dark vapours and thick mists thy front embrace
And never shine to look on my disgrace.
A prisoner, Robert! this my comfort bee:
He makes me bound that best can set me free.
Take them to guard, this entrance to our wars
Is full of spirit, and begets much hope.
We will not yet exame what ye are,
Till tortures wring it from your slavish tongues.
That done, your bloods these champaines shall imbrue
Mean time we'll waite for more of your loose crew.
I am turned wilde man since I used these Foeacts:
And I have won more weapons in these woods,
From Out-lawes, whom my sword hath vanquished,
Then I can carry on my back with ease.
I have swords, targets, Pikes, and Partisans,
Pollaxes, maces, clubs, and horse-mens sty,
Darts, halberds, long swords, Pistols, Petronels,
All which I have conquered. At this Mountain ridge
Two villains with these weapons set upon me:
But with my sword I made them turn their heals,
And leaves these Trophies which I thus support,
And bear upon my shoulders Conqueror-like,
What? do I see an ambush? by their arms
They should be Pagans: Robert prisoner!
With him a Christian Leader! Oh my God,
Thou hast either brought me to revive my name
By rescuing these, or here to die with sham.
Come life, come death; a banished man will try,
To live with honour, or with honour die.
Robert break from thy guard, make them dismayed,
Receive these weapons, God hath sent thee aid.
God, and Saint George.
Now by the Soldans Crown,
If I can wield this weapon, he shall down.
The Christians God for vs.
What, are they free?
Alarm Drums, the heathen powers for me.
Some Angel in the habit of a Knight,
Hath reskued vs: such heavy downright blows
Could never come from any mortal arm.
For every blow he reached, was certain death.
What is that power, if heavenly power he be,
That we may laud and praise his Deity?
Departed on a sudden ere we know,
To whom our freedoms, and our lives we owe!
By that inscription graven on his shield,
We may perhaps descry him in the camp
Cease admiration then; let these events,
Hasten our steps back to survey our Tents.
Godfrey!
Tancred!
Well met my Lords in these unpeopled paths:
What hath your love made you to leave the field.
Godfry ne'er dreamt to have met with Tancred her
The Lady that hath fled from our chaste love,
(Whom Tancred I do more affectionate,
Because she much resembles my fair sister)
Hath caused me so much to forget my self,
And play the wanderer in these unknown woods. 
But soft, that drum should speak the Pagans tongue:
I fear we are betrayed, I, I, it is so:
Tancred, we are round compassed by the foe.
Thank me for this; for, next th'Almighty Powers,
I have been the means to save your desperate lius.
Now, Christian Princes, I am quit with you
For all the grace you have done me in the Camp;
And now you owe me for my banishment.
And though you have exiled me from your Tents,
You have not power to keep me from the wars.
Upon this shield I bear the Grocers Arms,
Unto which Trade I was enroled and bound:
And like a strange Knight, I will aid the Christians,
Thou Trade which did sustain my poverty,
Did helpless, help me; though I left thee then,
Yet that the world shall see I am not ingrate,
Or scorning that, which gave my fortunes breath,
I will enlarge these Arms, and make their name
The original and life of all my fame.
But I am tired with travail, Shield lie there,
Oh that I could but see that lusty spirit,
My arch-foe, rival in my banishment,
To be revenged, and end my hostile hate!
I'll dream I fight with him to ease my spleen,
And in that thought I lay me on this Greene.
Arms ye are full of hope and sweet success,
The famous Art, whose honoured badge ye are,
First, when I lived amongst London-prentises,
Gave me an honest and a pleasant life,
Now in these woods have won me fame &amp; honour:
And I have rescued Princes with this shield:
And Princes are indebted to these Arms.
And if I live, in memory of this
Within their fair Hall shall this Scutcheon hang,
Till some smooth pen Historifie my name,
What obiect's that? A Knight a sleep or dead?
Oh, it is the Basse, and ground of all my hate;
I'll kill the villain: Oh dishonoured thought!
Art thou not son unto the Bullen Duke,
And can thou hatch dishonour? Arch-foe live.
I scorn advantage, should I fight with Mars.
He bears this shield I will exchange with his,
And leave a Motto written in mine own
Shall make him quake to read. Be swift my pen,
T'affright his sense when he shall wake again.
It is done. Then go with me and mine stay here,
Which in despite of thee, base Knight, I wear.
The hours have ouer-runne me with swift pace,
And time hath fastened to him swallows wings.
Come sword, come Shield; but soft, thou art a stranger,
And pardon me good shield, I know thee not.
What have we here?
Ask not who that Shield doh owe,
For he is thy mortal foe:
And where ere he sees that shield,
Ctie, Borough, Grove, or Field
Hee that bears it, bears his bane,
By his hand he must be slain.
Thine, in spite of thee, he will bear,
(If thou dare) his Scutcheon wear.
Hee writ this, that thy shield will keep,
And might have in thee being asleep.
It is a fine fellow; by this light, hee is
An honest Rogue, and hath a good conceit.
Wear it? I'll wear it. If I do no! well,
He needed not to have put in the word (Dare)
For I dare: dare I?, he shall see I dare.
Belike he fears I dare not challenge mine.
Were it fastened to the arm of Beelzebub,
I would fight with him with firebrands for my shield.
But dares he wear mine? On my lie he dares:
I love him like my brother for this act:
And I will bear this shield with as much pride,
As sate I in a chariot by Ioues side.
Shine bright my Stars, to do me ome fair grace,
Bring vs to meet in some auspicious place.
Nay you coardly Lady, that run away from the Camp, and dare not stand to it, I am glad I have light on you; choose your weapon, choose your weapon; I am a Souldier, and a martial man, and I will offer you the right of
Are: If you vanquish me, I'll be your captain, if you be ca down I'll carry you back prisoner.
I wear a weapon that I dare not draw:
Fie on this womanish fear, what shall I do.
Some of my fathers spirit revives in me
Give me thy weapon, boy, and thou shalt see,
I for vs both will win sweet liberty.
I was never o ouer-reacht; and, but for shame, and that I am a man at arms, I would run away, and take me to my legs. Have at thee sweet Lady.
Base villain, dare thou offer violence
Unto a Lady; stay, maintain thy challenge.
You think you have a fool in hand; no by my faith, not I. If you have any business to the Camp, farewell, I am running thither as fast as I can.
Mount up my soul, unto the height of joy!
Saving my foe, whose honoured shield I bear,
None living did I more desire to meet.
Saving those Christian Lords that seek my love
None living did I more desire to shun.
Well met, brave Saint, in these unpeopled paths,
Fear no rude force, for I am civil borne,
Descended from a Princely parentage
And though an exile from the Christians Camp,
Yet in my heart I wear the Croe of CHRIST,
Even in as deep a crimson as the best.
Love me, though I am Landless, and remote
From the fair clime where first I breathed this air,
Yet know I bear a Kingdom in this sword,
And ere I die, look to behold this Front
Impaled and circled with a royal Crown.
I never marked this Gallant half so much:
He hath my brothers eye, my fathers brow,
And he is Justice all from top to .
I had a sister, Lady, with that red,
That gives a crimson cture to your cheek,
With such a hand hid in a glove of snow,
That spake all music, like your heavenly tongue;
And for her sake, fair Saint, I honour you.
I had a brother, had not the rude seas
Dpriu'd me of him, with that manly look,
That grace, that courage, I behold in you.
A Prince, whom had the rude seas never seen,
Even such another had young Justice been.
Justice! even such an accent gave her tongue,
So did my name sound in my sisters mouth,
Oh Bella Franca, were it thou not obscured
Within a cloud and mask of poverty,
Such fame ere this had thy rare virtues won,
Thus had thy beauty checked the all-seeing Sun.
It is my brother Justice.
View her well.
Imagine her but thus attired, and she
Would Bella Franca, and my sister bee.
But strip my brother from his Prentice cote,
His cap, his common soldiers base disguise:
Even such a Gallant as this seems to me,
Such would my brother, my sweet Justice be.
Sister!
Brother!
Make me immortal then, by heaven I vow,
I am richer then the Persian Sophie now.
All Asia flows not with more plenteous treasure,
Then I, to embrace my brother, my hearts plur.
How did you scope the waives?
How have you past
The perilous Land, and crossed the Seas so vast?
Where are my brothers, Justice?
Oh, those words,
Pierce to my heart like Darts, and pointed swords,
Omit these passions, sister, they are dead.
But to forget these griefs, what youth is this?
Page to the Prince of France.
It is he I hate,
As chief occasion of my banishment.
Yet, my sweet brother, do not blame the youth,
Full well he hath demeaned himself with me.
He never, since we entered in these woods,
Left me in my distress; when we alone
Sit in these deserts never by rude force
Did do me the least shame, or violence.
A good cause why I lead so chaste ali fe,
A jealous man may trust me with his wife.
Well, sir, for your truth and honesty
I pardon thee, though I detest thy Lord.
Then let me change my habit, gentle sir,
Least in this shape I chance to meet my Moister.
Then, if you please, I'll cloth me like a Lady,
And waite upon your sister in your Tent.
Nay, if it please thee; I am well content.
My plot is good; well, howsoever it prove,
'T will either end my life, or win my love.
Come, best part of my self, we now will go
To whale our fortunes, and discourse our woe.
I will disguised unto the famous siege,
And in these Arms make known my valours proofs:
You shall in secret in my Tent abide.
I to achieve fame will my spirits employ,
After this grief my heart divines much joy.
Behold the high walls of ,
Which Titus and Uesp once brake down:
From off these Turrets have the ancient Jaws
Seen worlds of people mustering on these Plains.
Oh Princes, which of all your eyes are dry,
To look upon this Temple, now destroyed.
Yondr did stand the great Iohs House,
In midst of all his people, there he dwelt:
Vssels of gold did serve his Sacrifice,
And with him for the people spke the Priests.
There was the Arc, the Show-bread, Aarons Rod,
Sanctum, Sanctorum, and the Cherubines.
Now in that holy place, where GOD himself
Was personally present, Pagans dwell.
False Gods are reared, each Temple Idols bears.
Oh who can see this, and abstain from tears?
This way, this sacred path our Saviour trod,
When he came riding to Hierusalem,
Whilst the religious people spread his way
With flowers, and garments, and Hosanna cried.
Yonder did stand the great Church, where he taught,
Confuting all the Scribes and Pharisees.
This place did witness all his miracles:
Within this place did stand the judgment seat,
Where Pontius Pilot with the Elders sate,
Where they condemned him to be whipped and crowned,
To be derided, mocked, and crucified,
His hands bored through with nails, his side with Spears.
Oh, who can see this place, and keep his tears?
On yond side of the Town he died for vs:
At whose departure all these walls did shake,
And the destroyed Temples veil did rend:
The groves are to be seen, from which Ghosts rose,
There stood the Cross, there stands the Sepulchre:
The place still bears the name of Dead men's bones.
And still the Tomb our Saviours Livery wears.
What eye can see it, and not melt in tears?
No soldier but shall look with reverence
Upon these fair and glorious Monuments.
To swear, or speak profanely, shall be death.
I cast my heart as low as to this earth,
And wish that I could march upon my knees,
In true submission, and right holy zeal.
Oh since our wars are Gods, abandon fears,
But in contrition weep repentant tears.
Sound a Parley; I see your hearts are fired,
Your souls with victory from heaven inspired.
Why swarm these Christians to our Citie walls?
Look (foreigners) do not not the lofty Spires,
And these cloud-kissing Turrets that you see,
Strike deadly terror in your wounded souls?
Go Persian, flourish my vermilion flag,
Advance my Standard high, the sight whereof
Will drive these stragglers in disordered ranks,
And in a hurly burly throng them hence.
See how they quake, to view our martial looks!
As when a sturdy Ciclops reares aloft
A boisterous Truncheon amongst a troupe of Dwarfs.
Sultan and Sophie, ye damned hel-hounds both,
So quakes the Eagle to behold a gnat,
The Lyon to behold a Marmoset.
I'll beard and brave you in your own belief,
As when the heathen God, whom you call Jove,
Wared with the Giant, great Enceldus,
And flung him from Olympus two-topt Mount
The swains stood trembling to behold his fall,
That with his weight did make the earth to groan.
So, Soldn, look, when I have skal'd these walls,
And won the place where now thou stand secure,
To be hurled head-long from the proudest Tower,
In scorn of thee, thy false gods, and their power.
We will assail you like rebounding Rocks,
Bandied against the battlements of heaven:
We'll turn thy City into desert plains:
And thy proud Spires that seems to kiss  Clouds,
Shall with their guilt-tops pave the merry streets,
As all too base for vs to march upon.
Sest thou this shield, how ever this device
Seems not to rank with Empercurs; Sold, know
This shield shall give thy fatal overthrow.
Such peals of Thunder did I never hear,
I think that very words these walls will tear.
This shield you see, includes two mysteries;
A Virgin crowned it is the Mrcers Arms,
Withal the picture of my love that's fled.
Both these I'll grace, and add to them thy head.
Me thinks I see pale death fly from their words:
Their speech so strong; how powerull are their swords!
Since first I bore this shield I quartered it
With this red Lyon, whom I singly once
Slew in the Forest; thus much have I already
Added unto the Haberdashers Arms.
But ere I leave these fair Iudaean Bounds,
Uno this Lyon I'll add all your Crowns.
Send for some prisoners, martyr, torture them
Even in the face of all the Christian Host.
It shall be so Moretes, bring them forth.
No drop of blood false from a Christian heart,
But thy hearts blood shall ransom.
Bring them forth,
Devise new tortures:
Oh for some rare Artist,
That could invent a death more terrible
Then are the ever lasting pangs of hell.
Oh brethren, let not me move you to ruth:
Happy is he that suffers for the truth.
The joys to come exceed the present grief;
Secure your selves, for CHRIST is my relief.
Why shrinks the warm blot from my troubled heart?
Why starts my hair up at this heavy sight?
Say father, are not you the Bullen Earl?
Fair son, I was the happen Bullen Earl:
But now my son
Call no man son but me.
Father, my sword shall win you liberty.
Peace forged Bastard whatsoere tho be:
My reverend father, call none son but me,
For in this sword doth rest thy liberty.
Such mercy, as my sword affords to Pagans,
He finds that calls me bastard; I am Charles,
Father you know me since I reskued you,
I am your only son, the rest are dead.
I know thee Charles.
But father, I am Godfrey;
That by my valour have regained your right:
Have got your Dukedom from th'insulting French,
And am my self invested Bullens Duke.
I know thee Godfrey..
Godfrey!
Brother Charles!
The confident assurance of thy death,
Made me to give the lie to my own thoughts.
The selfsame strong opinion blided me,
Else for my brother I had challenged thee:
Brother, you might have known me by the Arms
Which I have borne in honour of my Trade.
Ah, but the resolution of thy death
Made me to loose such thought.
Let vs rejoice,
And to your plausiue fortunes give our voice.
Prince Robert, did the time afford vs leave,
We would discourse the sum of our escapes:
But to our fathers reskue.
Yield him slaves.
Tush, we will keep him spite of all your braves.
Be that our quarrel.
With courage, courage strives,
We fight for CHRIST, our father, and our lives.
Here stands my Ensige, and by it a Crown,
That you shall know the Persian honourable, 
Hee that can fetch this Ensign from the walls,
(Which I my self will guard) and leave some token
Behind him, that his sword hath conquered it,
He shall enjoy them both.
And here stands mine, 
The Babylonian Emperors royal Standard.
By it I plant the rich Cicilian Crown,
Guarded by me and my all-conquering troupes.
He that but leaves a note he hath been here,
And scopes unslain, although he win them not,
That Chrisian will I honour.
Drums, alarm.
As loud and proud defiance our Drum sounds.
For CHRIST, my father, conquest, &amp; two Crowes:
Now the first wall is won, the Ensigns seized,
The Crowns surprised, the Christians have the day:
What shall we leave the Town?
I, leave the Town.
It is best, 'is best to take vs to the field.
I think 'is best that we make good the breach,
And have no thought of marching towards the field:
We leave a place of much security.
Why then make good the breach,
It shall be so.
Gather our forces to make good the breach.
Tush, why should we be pent up in a Town?
Let's op the gates and boldly issue out,
Leaving some few Pikes to make good the breach.
What say you Lords? LORDS Then let vs issue out.
Set op the gates, and let vs issue our.
And o expose vs to the general spoil.
Keep the gates shut, defend them manully.
These Christians fight like devils; keep fast the gates,
Ad once again let vs make good the wall.
Make good the walls, make good the walls.
Triumphant honour hovers ore our Arms
What gallant spirit bravely hath borne hence
The Emperors Standard, slaughtered his proud Guard,
And in the teed thereof hung up his Shield?
Witness this royal Crown upon my head,
I seized the Ensign, I hung up that Shield.
What puissant arm snatched hence the Sophies Standard?
This Crown upon my head, says it was I.
Forgetful Charles, brave Robert see the Knight,
Whose valour freed vs from the Soldans hands.
Renowned Christian, ever honoured be,
It was thy sword prored vs liberty.
By heaven not I, I never came in place,
Where Robert or that Gallant were distressed:
But there are others thankless, whom I freed,
And now too proud forget that honoured deed.
It was he releast vs; honoured stranger thank,
But they are idle offerings from true hearts.
Prince Tancred and my self, owe thee our lives.
You mock me Princes, never did my sword
Drink drop of Pagans blood to set you free:
But Robert and that Prince unthankful be.
Whose shield is that?
Mine.
Then to you we owe
Thanks for our lives, the Pagans overthrow.
The shield I challenge, but the act deny,
I never gave you life or liberty.
Whose shield is that?
Mine.
Then by thee we live,
Thou did our desperate lives and freedom give.
What mean you Princes to deride a stinger?
These eyes did never see you two in danger.
Who owes that shield?
I: and who owes that?
I.
Thou know me then.
Thanks fortune, that I do.
Have at te slave.
Brave foe have at thee too.
What ere your quarrel be, contend no more
He draws his sword'gainst me that fights again:
For I am foe to all dissension.
So are we all, then end these wars in words,
The Pagans aue employment for your swords.
For one blow more, take here my Crown amongst you,
Now that my spleen is up, it will not down,
I'll give you all I have for one bout more.
Lords, take mine too: by heaven I'll pawn my life
Against the Soldans head, to bring it you,
So you will let vs try this maistry.
Kingdoms nor Crowns can hire it at our hands,
It shall not be, we say it shall not be.
What are you Lords? we charge you by his honour
Whom in your outward habit you profess,
To tell vs both what and from whence ye are.
You charge vs deeply. I a banished man,
Whom you for mutiny expulst the Camp,
Yet was I leader of ten thousand French,
But thought by you unworthy of these wars.
Since my exile (Prince Robert view me well)
I freed you two from base captivity.
It was I that brought you weapons in the woods,
And then you termed me some Celeiall power,
But being now in safety, you forget
Your dangers past, and cancel that great debt.
Nay I am sure you long to know me too.
I am your Out-law brother, one of your Leaders,
Banished with him: that from the Persians rage
Freed Tancred, and that valiant man at Arms;
How ever now they can forget my prowess.
What need you more, I am he that won this Crow,
And from these high walls plucked that Ensign down.
You have redeemed all your offences past,
Deserving best in this society:
But when you freed me, you did bear that shield.
I did, but since exchanged it with my foe.
And you did bear that shield.
True, I did so.
Ah had I been awake, thou know my mind,
Thou had writ thy ruin in blood.
Thy words are mine.
Leave brother Godfrey, &amp; the Bullen Duke.
How!
What!
Do you not know these faces?
Brother Charles.
Brother!
Charles!
I'll question with them, for may it not be
The might escape the seas as well as we?
I had a brother, sir, resembled you.
I had a brother too resembled you:
The Bullen Duke, if ever you have heard
Of such a man, had once a son like you.
I, and another son as much like you.
My brothers name was Estace.
Godfrey mine.
That Duke called his son Charles.
Mine called his Guy.
My brother Justice!
Godfrey!
Guy!
And Charles!
Brothers!
This accident breeds wonders in my thoughts.
Oh let me urse that head that envied thee.
Nay curse my heart that emulated thee.
My brother Out-law, and my own true brother!
For ever thus let vs embrace each other.
When I was cast upon the Bullen Strand,
I thought none had escaped the seas but I.
When I was thrown upon the Frch Kings Coast,
I thought none had escaped the Seas but I.
I thought the seas had favoured none but me,
When I attained the shores of Italy.
Ireland took me, and there I first touched ground,
Presuming that my brothers all were drowned.
Were ye the four young London Prentices,
That in the ships were wrecked on Goodwins sands?
Were said to have perished then of no repute?
Now come the least of you to lead an Host,
And to be found the sons to a great Duke?
Witness my shield the Trade I have proest.
Witness my shield I am one amongst the rest.
Witness thou mine.
And witness thou for me.
We witness all your martial chivalry.
And now my foe-turn'd brother, end our hate,
And praise that Power Divine who guides our state.
Divide we hands and hearts: what hatred rests,
Power out in Thunder on the Pagans crests.
Our joys are not at ull, they shall not yet
Know where my sister and their love remains,
Until these warros hau end. Oh had our God
Not laid our fortunes open, but a brother
Been brought in triumph to a sisters bed,
Clouds of despair had maskt our Sun of joy.
Yet will I keep her secret, and the rather,
To crown our haps when we have freed our father.
Christians once more defiance in my tongue,
Sounds dismal terror in your fearful ears.
The Princes whom I serve, grieve they have mur'd
Such an huge Army in a wall of stone,
And they are thus resolved;
To leave all place of scorned advantages,
And in a pitched field end this glorious war.
Say, will ye meet them?
Though he trust his strength,
Yet will we meet his forces face to face,
When the dry earth shall quaff your bloods apace.
And tell the Soldn from a Christian Prince,
That won from him these colours, and this Crown,
In that pitched field my head this Crown shall bear,
And skaralike these athwart my breast I'll wear.
This for the Persian's sake I'll wear in sight,
And under his own ensign this day fight.
Go tell the Sultan that he wears my Crown.
Fortune hath given it me, it is mine own.
If thou hast more to say concerning war,
Omit thy braves and trifling circumstance:
We'll meet you sooner then you can desire.
Be gone, be gone, our hearts are all on fire.
Brave Lords, our conquests will be honourable,
Because we have to deal with honoured foes:
Our pikes stand to receive you like a wood,
We'll flake our white steeds in your Christian blood.
Prepare to meet them, and appoint our powers,
This day the City and themselves are ours.
Thou under whom we fight, this day defend vs,
For unto thy protection we commend vs.
Great Monarchs, Kings, and Princes of the East,
Ye come t'encounter with a valiant foe;
Such as have swam huge Rivers, climbed the Alps;
That can endure sharpe hunger; such as shrink not
To have their bloods sod with the dog days heat,
Nor to be crudled with cold Saturnes rod.
What honour were it for an Host of Giants,
To combat with a Pygmy Nation?
No, Lords, the foe we must encounter with,
Is full of spirit and majestic spleen,
Strong, hardy, and their hearts invincible.
Destoy these, and you win your selves a name,
And all the nations of the earth shall fear you.
The more renowned the foe is, the more famous
Shall be our conquest, the more great their fall.
Come Lords, divide we our battalions.
Be yours the Vaward.
I will give the charge.
Turnus, have you the Rere-ward. I the battle,
Moretes, thou this day shalt lead the horse
Take thou the Cornet, Turnus thou the Archers,
Be thine the Guidon, I the men at Arms
Be mine this Ensign.
Then mount our Canons, let our flanking pieces
Rail on the Christian Army with wide mouths.
For I this day will lead the forlorn hope,
The Camisado shall be given by me.
Already they have placed their battery,
Their Ordinance stand fit to beat the Flanks.
My Cannoniers need no instruction.
Come, let vs line our Pikes with Musketeers,
And so attend the Christians fatal charge.
Princes, this day we are espousd to death:
A better place to die in, then this vale, in which our Saviours Sepulere remains,
What man in all our Army could desire?
Speak, how have you disposed our Officers.
Your Grace is Captain General of the Army.
And Godfrey you high Marshall, and Moister of the Camp,
And as assistants you have under you
The Sergeant Mayor, Quarter-maister, Provost,
And Captain of the Spyons.
My brother Guy chief General of the Horse
To serve him his Lifetenant Colonel
Captains and Skout-maisters.
My brother Charles General of the Artillery,
Under him his Lifetenant commissaries of Munitions,
Gentlemen of the Artillery, Colonel of Pyoners,
Trench Masters, and carriage Masters.
My brother Justice Treasurer of the Camp,
And under him the Auditors, Muster-maisters, &amp; Commissaries.
Prince Tancred is our Royal Secretary,
Without whom nothing is concluded on.
Thus are the special Offices disposed.
Princes, what order take you for the assault.
One half maintain the battery beat the walls,
Whilst the other keeps them play in the open fields.
We shall not need to block the breach with Forts,
Victuals and forage are at pleasure ours.
Stockadoes, Palizadoes, stop their waters.
Bulwarks and Curtains all are bettered down
And we are safe entrenched by Pyoners.
Our Case-mates, Cavaliers, and Counterscarfes,
Are well surveyed by all our Enginers.
Fortifications, Ramparts, Parapets;
That we at pleasure may assault the way,
Which leads unto the gate Antiochia.
Whilst you intend the walls, shall my bard horse
Give a brave onset, shivering all their Pikes,
Armed with their Grieves and Maces, and broad Swords,
Proof Cuiraces, and open Burganets.
Yet let vs look our battle be well manned,
With shot, Bills, Halberds, and proof Targettiers.
No man but knows his charge. Brothers and friends,
See where they stand for vs; this night shall hide
All their bright glory which now swells with pride.
Christians?
Pagans?
Behold our Camp.
Sultan, survey os too.
From Ganges to the Bay of Cal,
From Turkey and the three-fold Arabia:
From Sauxin Eastward unto Nubia's bounds,
From Lybia and the Land of Mauritans,
And from the red Sea to the wilderness,
Have we unpeopled Kingdoms for these wares,
To be revenged on you base Christians.
From England, the best brood of martial spirits,
Whose walls the Ocean washes white as snow,
For which you srangers call it Albion:
From France, a Nation both renowned and feared,
From Scotland, Wales, even to the Irish Coast,
Beyond the pillars great Alcides reared,
At Gades in Spain unto the Pyr H,
Have we assembled men of dauntless spirits,
To scourge you hence ye damned Infidels.
Within our troupes are sturdy bands of Moors,
Of Babylonians, Persians, Bactrians,
Of Gracious, Russians, of Tartarians, Turks,
Even from the floods that grow from Paradise
Unto this place where the Brooke Kedron runs.
Within our Troupes are English, French, Scotch, Dutch,
Italians of Prince Tancred's Regiment.
Even from the Seas that wall in Albion,
As far as any River or Brooke runs,
That Christian  on, have we people here,
To make our streets red with your Christian blood.
To drown you slaves in a vermilion flood.
To burn your bodies o'er your Prophets grave.
To lead your Emperor Captive like a slave.
To make your guide trot by my chariot wheel.
To lash your armour with these rods of seel.
Then to rpe you all, ye Persian powers,
Assist our courage, make the conquest ours.
God match thy might with theirs, protect vs to;
To let this people know what thou can do.
A charge, a charge, rail drums, and Cannons roar,
Christians, at home your friends abroad deplore.
Christians at home abroad our conquests fame;
Thou God of Hosts this day make known thy name.
Oh God, that multitude should more then manhood,
That we should thus be borne down with a press,
Be thronged and shouldered from the place we keep!
For every man we lead, the foe hath ten,
Their weapons tops appear aboue their heads,
In as thick number as the spikes of grain
Upon a well-til'd land: they have more lives,
Then all our tired arms could send to death,
If they should yold their bare breasts to our swords.
What should we do? we are encompassed round,
Girded with thousand thousands in a ring.
And like a man left on a dangerous rock,
That waits the climbing tide rise to destroy him:
What way so e'e he looks, sees nought but death:
So we; the bloody tide grows up apace,
Whose waives will swallow vs and all our race.
Whore's Guy and Justice?
Gone to scale a Tower
In which our father lies: Oh I did see them
Cut down a wood of men upon the sudden.
Their swords cut lances, as a sith cuts grass:
Their valour seems to me miraculous.
Thou Saviour of the world, whose Cross we bear,
Infuse our hearts with courage, theirs with fear.
A Zion, a Zion.
A Jerusalem.
A father, and in him a Crown of joy.
A Zion, a Jerusalem, a father.
Through their Decurians, centuions and Legio,
Captains of thousands, and ten thousands guards,
We have ventured even upon the Cannons mouth,
And scaled the bull works where their Ordinance plaid.
The strength of Amies triumphs in those Ares,
We have surprised the Fortress and the Hold:
My shield I have had cut peece-meale from mine arm.
But now you would have taken me for an Archer,
So many arrows were stuck here and here,
The Pagans thought to make a Quiver of me.
See brother, how the foe fresh forces gather!
A Zion, a Jerusalem, a father.
An Enginer, call forth an Enginer.
Why, what to do, my Lord?
Ile make these Turrets dance among the Clouds,
Before the Christians shall inhabit them.
Yet there is hope of conquest, fight brave Sultan.
These Christians rage, like spirits conjured up,
Their thundering Ordinance spit huge clouds of fire,
They run against the walls like iron rams,
And bear them down before them with their breasts.
Fortune thou art too envious of our glory,
Behold the two greatest Emperors of the earth,
The Babylonian Sultan, and great Sophie;
Vnueile thine eyes, and look upon our false.
Fortune and fate, and death, the devil and all,
Oppose themselves against vs. Now what news?
Death.
What news bring thou?
Confusion,
That death was once my aue, but now my Lord.
Confusion was once page unto my sword.
Is the day lost?
Lost.
Must we needs despair?
Despair.
We will not, we will die resoluedly,
The Palace we will make a slaughter-house,
The streets a Shambles, Kennels shall run blood,
Down from Mount Zion, with uch hideous  noise,
As when great showers of waterfals from Hills.
Through which way did they make irruption first?
Through the gate, called Antiochia.
The selfsame breach that Roman Titus made,
When he destroyed this City, they burst op.
There is some virtue in the Cross they wear,
It makes them strong as Lyons, swift as Roes.
Their resolutions make them Conquerors.
They have tan our Royal Standard from the walls,
In place whereof they have advanced their Cro
I will not I survive so whole a shame,
Once more unite our powers, (I mean our selfes)
For all powers else have failed vs; bravely fight,
That our declining sun may make there night!
Christians, base Christians, hear vs when we call,
Eternal darkness shall confound you all.
Now smooth again the wrinkles of your brows,
And wash the blood from off your hands in milk:
With penitential praises laud our God,
Ascribe all glory to the heavenly Powers,
Since Zion and Hierusalem are ours.
We do abhor a heart puffed up with pride,
That attributes these conquests to our strength;
It was God that strengthened vs and weakened them,
And gave vs Zion and Hierusalm.
Thou that dost muster Angels in the sky,
That in thy self hast power of victory:
Make thy name shine, bright as the noone-tide Sun,
Since Zion and Jerusalem are won.
My former want hath now sufficient store,
For having seen this, I desire no more.
How fair and smooth my stream of pleasure runs,
To look at once on Zion and my sons!
Shores of abundance rain into our lips,
To make repentance grow within our hearts.
What greater earthly bliffe could heaven power down,
Then Zion, our dear father, and this Town?
Then to confirm these conquests God hath given vs,
Sealed with the blood of Kings and Emperous;
Let vs elect a King, that may maintain
Our honours with the deaths of Monarchs slain.
Call forth the Patriarch of Jerusalem,
His right hand must be queath that dignity.
With tears I speak it, lagging in the train
Of the diressed Sultan he was .
Praised be our God, we have revenged his death.
Great Potentates consort him to his grave.
What man, for gravity and sanctity,
May we think worthy of this honoured place?
Whose years, devotion, and most sacred life,
Better can fit that holy place, then his
Whose worthy sons have brought to end these wars?
Princes, join hands, invest him all at once.
My fervent zeal, bids I should not deny:
It brings my soul to heaven before I die.
But Princes, whom will ye elect the King,
To guard this City from succeeding peril.
Robert of Normandy.
Oh chose Prince Tancred rather,
Too weak is my desert, and I refuse it.
Then put it too most voices.
Robert of Normandy.
Princes, we much commend you for your loves:
But letters from England tell me William's dead,
And by succession left the Crown to me.
I say Prince Godfrey hath deserved it best.
So Tanered says.
And so say all the rest.
Princes, ye press me down with too muh hoors,
And load a soul that cannot bear them up.
Dissuade me not, no counsel I will hear.
Behold a Crown which Godfrey means to wear! 
This made the blood run from our Saviours Brow
No Crown but this ean Godfreyes heart allow.
Prayers are my pride, devotion draws my sword,
No pomp but this can Bullens soul afford.
My vow's irrevocable, state I refuse;
No other Crown but this will Godsrey choose.
If he refuse the place, elect Prince Guy;
Most voices; shall he have the Sceptre?
I.
Then Crown him straight, and henceforth let his name
Be through the world called Guy of Lessingham.
All these desire it, I consent with them;
Long lie Prince Guy, King of Hierusalem.
The Crown is burst, and parted from my head;
I fear the heavens are angry with your choice.
Sono Guy they are not. By Divine instinct
The heavens have lent me a Prophetic spirit.
This she was thy troublous reign, muteness from far,
Shall fright thy Towns and Provinces with war.
If it be nothing else, Crown me again,
We have a heart our Kingdom to maintain.
What honours do my brothers heads await?
Prince Justice, you shall wear this Crown of State,
Be King of Sicil and command that Isle.
Lord Charles, the crown of Cyprus longs to you,
That in the fight the King of Cyprus slue.
One general voice at once proclaim them Kings.
In memory of this solemnity,
Here will I leave this Scutcheon borne by me:
That in what coast so ever my bones be laid,
This shield may be an honour to my Trade.
Mine shall hang there, a trophy of my fame,
My Trade is famous by King Justice name.
In memory a king hath borne this shield,
I add these Chalices to this Argent Field.
In honour of my first profession
That shield in all these wars by Godfrey borne,
I crown this Maids head with a wreath of Thorne.
Oh were my daughter here this joy to see;
How light her soul! how glad would my heart bee!
Would I had now my love.
Or I that Dame,
That adds to beauties sun a brighter flame.
Were the fair virgin here, I would renown
Her glorious beauty with the English Crown.
Princes, Ie fit you all, Lady come forth.
The lovely Princes.
Fair Mistress!
Lady!
Madame!
Honoured Saint!
Nay pardon me, love comes not by constraint.
But Princes, will you grant me patience,
Before I part, I mean to please you all.
First holy Patriarch, tell me of all others,
Whom in the world you most dsire to see.
My daughter.
Prince Godfrey, Charles and Justice, whom say you?
Next your self our sister.
And whom you?
My love.
Who's that?
Your honoured self fair Maid.
Nay, I'll make good the words that I have said.
Father, I give a daughter to your hand:
Brothers, behold, here doth your sister stand.
Tancred behold the Lady you once ceased,
Only I leave Prince Robert here displeased.
My daughter Bella Franca!
Sister!
Love!
I am to happy, and too full of joy.
Heaven powers on me more good then I can bear:
I that before was starved, now surfeit here.
Princes, and Lady, nothing can displease vs,
For we partake in all this glad content,
And with applause rejoice this accident.
Tancred rejoice, your love, and you your friends,
Where you begin with marriage, our love ends.
Kings, &amp; kings Peers, to heaven ascribe the glory,
Whilst we to Chronicles report this story.
Make love unto my sister! it is most strange,
Now Guy I would thy had thy French love here.
My heart should grant her what I then refused.
Now having got this state of dignity,
I grieve that I have so obdurate been,
But for amends would make her Syons Queen.
And well remembered brother, I must now
Entreat you for a pretty boy your Page,
That hath on some occasion tray'd from you.
Oh brother, whore's the villain?
Pardon him, and I will tell you.
Great were th'offence, I would not clear for you.
The poor boy, brother, stays within my Tent,
But so disguised you cannot know him now,
For hoe's turned wench: and but I know the wag,
To be a oy, to see him thus transformed,
I should hue sworn he had been a we indeed.
Pray, let me see him, brother in that habit,
I would not loose the villain for more gold,
Then Zion would be sold for; he will blush
To be tan tardy in his Maids attire.
You have pardoned him?
I have.
Then lack appear:
Nay blush not to be in your women's gear.
Leap heart, dance spirit, be merry jocund soul,
It is she undoubtedly.
You know me then!
I do, it was that disguise,
That all this wisle hath blinded my clear eyes.
Fie, are you not ashamed to kiss a boy,
And in your arms to grasp him with such joy?
She is no boy, you do mistake her quite.
A boy, a Page, a wagtail by this light.
What say you sister?
Sure he told me so,
For if he be a maid, I made him one.
Do not mistake the sex man, for he's none,
It is a rogue, a wag, his name is Jack,
A notable dissembling lad, a Crack.
Brother, it is you that are deceived in her,
Beshrew her, she hath been my bedfellow
A yare and more, yet I had not the grace.
Brothers receive a sister; reverent father
Accept a daughter, whilst I take a wife,
And of a great Kings daughter make a Queen.
This is the beauteous virgin, the French Lady,
To whom my fortune still remains in debt.
A Lady, then I cry you mercy brother,
A gallon Bride would I hd such another.
A wondrous change! she that your Page hath been
Is now at length transformed to be your Qeven.
Pardon me `Guy,' my love drew me along,
No homeless lust.
Fair Saint, I did you wrong.
If fortune had not been your friend in this,
You had not lain thus long without a kiss.
Father, embrace her; brothers; sister, all.
This fortune makes our joys mere comical.
The fame of our success all Europe rings:
The father, Patriarch, sees his sons all Kings.
The heavens are full of bounty; then brave Princes,
First in the Temple hang these Trophies up,
As a remembrance of your fortunes past.
You good old father, wear your Patriarchs Robes,
Prince Godfrey, walk you with your Crown of Thorn;
Guy with his Lady; Tancred with his wife:
Charles with his Crown of Cyprus, and young Justice
Crowned with the rich Sicilian Diadem;
I with the honour of the Pagans deaths.
So in Procession walk we to CHRISTS Tomb,
With humble hearts to pay our Pilgrims vows.
Repair we to our Countries, that once done,
For Syn and Jerusalem are won.

OF Israels sweetest singer now I sing,
His holy stile and happy victories,
Whose Muse was dipped in that inspiring dew,
Arch-angels stilled from the breath of Jove,
Decking her temples with the glorious flowers,
Heavens raind on tops of Zion and Mount Synai,
Upon the bosom of his ivory Lute,
The Cherubins and Angels laid their breasts,
And when his consecrated fingers struck
The golden wiers of his ravishing harp,
He gave alarm to the host of heaven,
That winged with lightning, brake the clouds and cast
Their crystal armour, at his conquering feet.
Of this sweet Poet Ioues Musician,
And of bis beauteous son I press to sing.
Then help divine Adonay to conduct,
Upon the wings of my well tempered verse,
The hearers minds aboue the towers of Heaven,
And guide them so in this thrice haughty flight,
Their mounting feathers scorch not with the fire,
That none can temper but thy holy hand:
To thee for succour flies my feeble muse,
And at thy feet her iron Pendoth use.
HOt sun, cool fire, tempered with sweet air,
Black shade, fair nurse, shadow my white hair
Shine sun, burn fire, breath air, and ease me,
Black shade, fair nurse, shroud me and please me
Shadow (my sweet nurse) keep me from burning
Make not my glad cause, cause of mourning.
Let not my beauties fire,
Inflame unstaid desire,
Nor pierce any bright eye,
That wanders lightly.
Come gentle Zephyr tricked with those perfumes
That erst in Eden sweetened Adams love,
And stroke my bosom with the silken fan:
This shade (sun proof) is yet no proof for thee,
Thy body smoother then this wauelesse spring,
And purer then the substance of the same,
Can creep through that his lances cannot pierse.
Thou and thy sister soft and sacred air,
Goddess of life and governess of health,
Keeps every fountain fresh and arbor sweet,
No brazen gate, her passage can repulse,
Nor bushly thicket, bar thy subtle breath,
Then deck thee with thy loose delightsome robes,
And on thy wings bring delicate perfumes,
To play the wantons with vs through the leaves,
What tunes, what words, what looks, what wonders pierce
My soul, incensed with a sudden fire,
What tree, what shade, what spring, what paradise
Enjoys the beauty of so fair a dame?
Feet Eua placed in perfect happiness,
Lending her praise-notes to the liberal heavens,
Struck with the accents of Arch-angels tunes,
Wrought not more pleasure to her husbands thoughts,
Then this fair women's words and notes to mine.
May that sweet plain that bears her pleasant weight,
Be still enameld with discoloured flowers,
That precious fount, bear sand of purest gold,
And for the Pebble, let the silver streams
That pierce earths bowels to maintain the sorce,
Play upon Rubies, Sapphires, Chrisolites,
The brims let be embraced with golden curls
Of moss that sleeps with sound the waters make,
For joy to feed the fount with their recourse,
Let all the grass that beautifies her bower,
Bear Manna every morn in steed of dew,
Or let the dew be sweeter far then that
That hangs like chains of pearl on Hormone hill,
Or balm which trickled from old Irons beard.
Cusay, come up and serve thy lord the King.
What service doth my lord the King command?
See Cusay see, the flower of Israel,
The fairest daughter that obeys the King,
In all the land the lord subdued to me.
Fairer then Isacs lover at the well,
Brighter then inside bark of new hewn Caedar,
Sweeter then flames of fine perfumed myrrh.
And comelier then the silver clouds that dance
On Zephires wings before the king of heaven.
Is it not Bethsabe the Hethites wife
Vrias, now at Rabid siege with Ioab?
Go know, and bring her quickly to the King,
Tell her, her graces hath found grace with him.
I will my lord.
Bright Bethsabe shall wash in Dauids bower,
In water mixed with purest Almond flower,
And bath her beauty in the milk of kids,
Bright Bethsabe gives earth to my desires,
Verdure to earth, and to that verdure flowers,
To flowers, sweet Odors, and to Odors wings,
That carry pleasures to the hearts of Kings.
Fair Bethsabe, the King of Israel
From forth his Princely tower hath seen thee bath,
And thy sweet graces have found grace with him,
Come then and kneel unto him where he stands,
The King is gracious, and hath liberal hands.
Ah what is Bethsabe to please the King,
Or what is Dauid, that he should desire
For fickle beauties sake his servants wife?
Dauid (thou know fair dame) is wise and just,
Elected to the heart of Israels God,
Then doe not thou expostulate with him
For any action that contents his soul.
My lord the King, elect to Gods own heart,
Should not his gracious jealousy incense,
Whose thoughts are chaste, I hate incontinence.
Woman thou wrongst the King &amp; doubt his honor,
Whose truth maintains the crown of Israel,
Making him stay, that bad me bring thee strait.
The Kings poor handmaid will obey my lord,
Then come and doe thy duty to his grace,
And doe what seems favour in his sight.
Now comes my lover tripping like the Roe,
And brings my longings tangled in her hair,
To joy her love Isle build a kingly bower,
Seated in hearing of a hundred streams,
That for their homage to her sovereign joys,
Shall as the serpents sold into their nests,
In oblique turnings wind the nimble waives,
About the circles of her curious walks,
And with their murmur summon easeful sleep,
To lay his golden sceptre on her brows,
Open the doors, and entertain my love,
Open I say, and as you open sing,
Welcome fair Bethsabe King Dauids darling.
Welcome fair Bethsabe King Dauids darling,
Thy bones fair covering, erst discovered fair,
And all mine eyes with all thy beauties pierced,
As heavens bright eye burns most when most he climes
The crooked Zodiake with his fiery sphere,
And shines furthest from this earthly globe:
So since thy beauty scorched my conquered soul,
I called thee nearer for my nearer cure.
Too near my lord was your unarmed heart,
When furthest off my haplesse beauty pierced,
And would this dreary day had turned to night,
Or that some pitchy cloud had cloaked the Sun,
Before their lights had cause my lord to see
His name disparaged, and my chastity.
My love, if want of love have left thy soul,
A sharper sense of Honour then thy King,
(For love leads Princes sometimes from their seats,)
As erst my heart was hurt, displeasing thee,
So come and taste thy ease, with easing me.
One medicine cannot heal our different harms.
But rather make both ranckle at the bone,
Then let the King be cunning in his cure,
Least flattering both, both perish in his hand.
Leave it to me my dearest Bethsabe,
Whose skill is conversant in deeper cures,
And Cusay hast thou to my servant Ioab,
Commanding him to send Vrias home
With all the speed can possibly be used.
Cusay will fly about the Kings desire.
Courage ye mighty men of Israel,
And charge your fatal instruments of war
Upon the bosoms of proud Ammons sons,
That have disguised your Kings Ambassadors,
Cut half their beards, and half their garments off,
In spite of Israel, and his daughters sons,
Ye fight the holy battles of Iehoua,
King Dauids God, and ours and Iacobs God
That guides your weapons to their conquering strokes,
Orders your footsteps, and directs your thoughts
To stratagems that harbour victory:
He casts his sacred eiesight from on high,
And sees your foes run seeking for their deaths,
Laughing their labours and their hopes to scorn,
While twixt your bodies, and their blunted swords,
He puts on armour of his honours proof,
And makes their weapons wound the senseless winds.
Before this city Rabid we will lie,
And shoot forth shafts as thick and dangerous
As was the hail that Moises mixed with fire,
And threw with fury round about the fields
Devouring Pharoes friends, and Egypt fruits.
First mighty captains, Ioab and Abisay,
Let vs assault and scale this kingly Tower,
Where all their conduits and their fountains are,
Then we may easily take the city too.
Well hath Vrias counseld our attempts,
And as he spake vs, so assault the Tower,
Let Hanon now the king of Ammons son,
Repulse our conquering passage if he dare.
What would the shepherds dogs of Israel
Snatch from the mighty issue of King Ammon,
The valiant Amonnes, and haughty Syrians?
Tic not your late successive victories,
Can make vs yield, or quail our courages,
But if ye date assay to scale this Tower,
Our angry swords shall smite ye to the ground,
And avenge our losses on your hateful lives.
Hanon, thy father Nahas gave relief
To holy Dauid in his haplesse exile,
Lived his fixed date, and died in peace:
But thou in steed of reaping his reward,
Hast trod it vnderfoot, and scorned our King,
Therefore thy days shall end with violence,
And to our swords thy vital blood shall cleave.
Hence thou that bear poor Israels shepherds hook,
The proud lieutenant of that base borne King,
And kep within the compass of his fold,
For if ye seek to feed on Ammons fruits,
And stray into the Syrians fruitful Medes,
The mastiues of our land, shall werry ye,
And pull the weasels from your greedy throats.
Who can endure these Pagans blasphemies,
My soul ripens at this disparagement.
Assault ye valiant men of Dauids host,
And beat these railing dastards from their doors.
Thus have we won the Tower, which we will keep,
Maugre the sons of Ammon, and of Syria.
Where is lord Ioab leader of the host?
Here is lord Ioab, leader of the host.
Cusay come up, for we have won the hold.
In happy hour then is Cusay come.
What news then brings lord Cusay from the king.
His majesty commands thee out of hand
To send him home Vrias from the wars,
For matter of some service he should doe.
Tic for no choler hath surprised the King,
(I hope lord Cusay) against his servants truth.
No rather to prefer Vrias truth.
Here take him with thee then, and go in peace,
And tell my lord the King that I have fought
Against the city Rabid with success,
And skaled where the royal palace is,
The conduit heads and all their sweetest springs,
Then let him come in person to these walls,
With all the soldiers he can bring besides,
And take the city as his own exploit,
Least I surprise it, and the people give
The glory of the conquest to my name.
We will Lord Ioab, and great Israels God
Bless in thy hands the battles of our King.
Earewell Vrias, hast away the King.
As sure as Ioab breaths a victor here,
Vrias will hast him, and his own return.
Let vs descend, and op the palace gate,
Taking our soldiers in to keep the hold.
Let vs Abisay, and ye sons of Iuda,
Be valiant, and maintain your victory.
What means my lord, the Kings beloved son
That wears upon his right triumphant arm,
The power of Israel for a royal favour,
That holds upon the Tables of his hands,
Banquets of honour, and all thoughts content
To suffer pale and grizzly abstinence
To sit and feed upon his fainting cheeks,
And suck away the blood that cheers his looks.
Ah Ionadab it is my sisters looks,
On whose sweet beauty I bestow my blood,
That makes me look so amorously lean,
Her beauty having seafd upon my heart
So merrily consecrate to her content,
Sets now such guard about his vital blood,
And views the passage with such piercing eyes,
That none can scope to cheer my pining cheeks,
But all is thought too little for her love.
Then from her heart thy looks shall be relieved,
And thou shalt joy her as thy soul desires.
How can it be my sweet friend Ionadab,
Since Thamar is a virgin and my sister?
Thus it shall be, lie down upon thy bed,
Faining thee fever sick, and ill at ease,
And when the king shall come to visit thee,
Desire thy sister Thamar may be sent
To dress some dainties for thy malady:
Then when thou hast her solely with thy self,
Enforce some favour to thy manly love:
See where she comes, entreat her in with thee.
What ails Ammon with such sickly looks,
To daunt the favour of his lovely face?
Sweet Thamar sick, &amp; wish some wholesome cates
Dressed with the cunning of thy dainty hands.
That hath the King commanded at my hands
Then come and rest thee, while I make thee ready
Some dainties, easeful to thy crazed soul.
I go sweet sister, eased with thy sight.
Why should a Prince, whose power may command,
Obey the rebel passions of his love,
When they contend but against his conscience,
And may be governed or suppressed by will.
Now Ammon lose those loving knots of blood,
That sokte the courage from thy kingly heart,
And give it passage to thy withered cheeks:
Now Thamar ripened are the holy fruits
That grew on plants of thy virginity,
And rotten is thy name in Israel,
Poor Thamar, little did thy lovely hands
Foretell an action of such violence,
As to contend with Ammons lusty arms,
Sinnewd with vigour of his landless love,
Fair Thamar now dishonour hunts thy foot,
And follows thee through every covert shade,
Discovering thy shame and nakedness
Even from the valeyes of Iehosophat,
Up to the lofty mounts of Lebanon,
Where Caedars stirred with anger of the winds,
Sounding in storms the tale of thy disgrace,
Tremble with fury, and with murmur shake
Eearth with their feet, and with their heads the heavens,
Beating the clouds into their swiftest rack,
To bear this wonder round about the world.
Hence from my bed, whose sight offends my soul
As doth the parbreake of disgorged bears.
Unkind, unprincely, and unmanly Ammon
To force, and then refuse thy sisters love:
Adding unto the fright of thy offence,
The baneful torment of my published shame,
O doe not this dishonour to thy love,
Nor clog thy soul with such increasing sin,
This second evil far exceeds the first.
Iethray come thrust this woman from my sight,
And bolt the door upon his if she strive.
Go madame go, away, you must be gone,
My lord hath done with you, I pray depart.
Whether alas, ah whether shall I fly
With folded arms, and all amassed soul,
Cast as was Eua from that glorious soil
(Where al delights sat bating winged with thoughts,
Ready to nestle in her naked breasts)
To bare and barren vales with floods made wast,
To desert woods, and hills with lightening scorched,
With death, with shame, with hell, with horror sit,
There will I wander from my fathers face,
There Absolon, my brother Absolon,
Sweet Absolon shall hear his sister morn,
There will I live with my windy sighs,
Night Ravens and Owls to rend my bloody side,
Which with a rusty weapon I will wound,
And make them passage to my panting heart:
Why talk thou wretch, and leaust the deed undone.
Rend hair and garments as thy heart is rent,
With inward fury of a thousand griefs,
And scatter them by these unhallowed doors.
To figure Ammons resting cruelty,
And Tragic spoil of Thamars chastity.
What causes Thamar to exclaim so much?
The cause that Thamar shames to disclose.
Say, I thy brother will revenge that cause.
Ammon our fathers son hath forced me,
And thrusts me from him as the scorn of Israel.
Hath Ammon forced thee? by Dauids hand,
And by the covenant God hath made with him,
Ammon shall bear his violence to hell,
Traitor to Heaven, traitor to Dauids throne,
Traitor to Absolon and Israel.
This fact hath Iacobs ruler seen from heaven,
And through a cloud of smoke, and tower of fire
(As he rides vaunting him upon the greenes)
Shall tear his chariot wheels with violent winds,
And throw his body in the bloody sea,
At him the thunder shall discharge his bolt,
And his fair spouse, with bright and fiery wings
Sit ever burning on his hateful bones,
My self as swift as thunder, or his spouse,
Will hunt occasion with a secret hate,
To work false Ammon an ungracious end:
Go in my sister, rest thee in my house,
And God in time shall take this shame from thee.
Nor God nor Time will doe that good for me.
My Absolon, what makst thou here alone,
And bears such discontentment in thy brows?
Great cause hath Absolon to be displeased,
And in his heart to shroud the wounds of wrath.
Against whom should Absolon be thus displeased?
Against wicked Ammon thy ungracious son,
My brother and fair Thamars by the King,
My stepbrother, by mother, and by kind,
He hath dishonoured Dauids holiness,
And fixed a blot of lightness on his throne,
Forcing my sister Thamar when he faind
A sickness, sprung from root of hemous lust.
Hath Ammon brought this evil on my house,
And suffered sin to smite his fathers bones,
Smite Dauid deadlier then the voice of heaven,
And let hates fire be kindled in thy heart,
Frame in the arches of thy angry brows,
Making thy forehead like a comet shine,
To force false Ammon tremble at thy looks,
Sin with his seuenfold crown and purple robe,
Begins his triumphs in my guilty throne,
There sits he watching with his hundred eyes,
Our idle minutes, and our wanton thoughts,
And with his baits made of our frail desires,
Gives vs the hook that hales our souls to hell:
But with the spirit of my kingdoms God,
Isle thrust the flattering Tyrant from his throne,
And scourge his bondslaves from my hallowed court
With rods of iron, and thorns of sharpened steel:
Then Absolon revenge not thou this sin,
Leave it to me, and I will chasten him.
I am content, then grant my lord the king
Himself with all his other lords would come
Up to my sheep feast on the plain of Hazor.
Nay my fair son, my self with all my lords
Will bring thee too much charge, yet some shall go.
But let my lord the king himself take pains,
The time of year is pleasant for your grace,
And gladsome Summer in her shady robes,
Crowned with Roses and with planted flowers,
With all her nymphs shall entertain my lord
That from the thicket of my verdant groves,
Will sprinckle honey dews about his breast,
And cast sweet balm upon his kingly head,
Then grant thy servants boon, and go my lord.
Let it content my sweet son Absolon,
That I may stay and take my other lords.
But shall thy best beloved Ammon go?
What needs it that Ammon go with thee.
Yet doe thy son and servant so much grace.
Ammon shall go, and all my other lords,
Because I will give grace to Absolon.
Pleases my lord the king, his servant Ioab
Hath sent Vrias from the Syrian wars.
Welcome Vrias from the Syrian wars,
Welcome to Dauid as his dearest lord.
Thanks be to Israels God, and Dauids grace,
Vrias finds such greeting with the king.
No other greeting shall Vrias find,
As long as Dauids sways the elected seat,
And consecrated throne of Israel.
Tell me Vrias of my servant Ioab
Fights he with truth the battles of our God,
And for the honour of the Lords anointed?
Thy servant Ioab fights the chosen wars
With truth, with honour, and with high success,
And against the wicked King of Ammons sons,
Hath by the finger of our souereines God,
Besieged the city Rabid, and achieved
The court of waters, where the conduits run,
And all the  delight  springs:
Therefore he wishes Dauids mightiness
Should number out the host of Israel,
And come in person to the city Rabid,
That so her conquest may be made the kings,
And Ioab fight as his inferior.
This hath dot God, and Ioabs prowess done,
Without Vrias valours, I am sure,
Who since his true conversion from a Hethite,
To an adopted son of Israel,
Hath sought like one whose arms were lift by heaven,
And whose bright sword was edged with Israels wrath:
Go therefore home Vrias, take thy rest,
Visit thy wife and household with the joys
A victor and a favourite of the Kings
Should exercise with honour after arms.
Thy servants bones are yet not half so crade,
Nor constitute on such a sickly mould,
That for so little service he should fine,
And seek (as cowards) refuge of his home:
Not are his thoughts so sensually stirred,
To stay the arms with which the lord would smite
And fill  circle with his conquered foes,
For wanton bosom of a flattering wife.
Vrias hath a beauteous sober wife,
Yet young, and framed of tempting flesh and blood,
Then when the King hath summoned thee from arms,
If thou unkindly should refrain her bed,
Sin might be laid upon Vrias soul,
If Bethsabe by frailty hurt her fame:
Then go Vrias,  in her love,
Whom God hath knit to thee, tremble to lose.
The King is much too tender of my ease,
The arc, and Israel, and Iuda dwell
In palaces, and rich pavilions,
But Ioab and his brother in the fields,
Suffering the wrath of Winter and the Sun:
And shall Vrias (of more shame then they)
Banquet and loiter, in the work of heaven?
As sure as thy soul doth live my lord,
Mine ears shall never lean to such delight,
When holy labour calls me forth to fight.
Then be it with Vrias manly heart,
As best his fame may shine in Israel.
Thus shall Vrias heart be best content,
Till thou dismiss me back to Ioabs hands,
This ground before the king my masters doors,
Shall be my couch, and this vnwearied arm,
The proper pillow of a soldiers head,
For never will I lodge within my house,
Till Ioab triumph in my secret vows.
Then fetch some flagons of our purest Wine,
That we may welcome home our hardy friend,
With full carouses to his fortunes past,
And to the honours of his future arms,
Then will I send him back to Rabid siege,
And follow with the strength of Israel.
Arise Vrias, come and pledge the King.
If Dauid think me worthy such a grace,
I will be bold, and pledge my lord the king.
Absolon and Cusay both shall drink
To good Vrias, and his happiness.
We will my lord to please Vrias soul.
I will begin Vrias to thy self,
And all the treasure of the Ammonites,
Which here I promise to impart to thee,
And bind that promise with a full carous.
What seems pleasant in my souereines eyes,
That shall Vrias doe till he be dead
Fill him the cup, follow ye lords that love
Your souereines health, and doe as he hath done.
Ill may he thrive or live in Israel,
That loves not Dauid, or denies his charge.
Vrias, Here is to Abisais health, lord Ioabs brother, &amp; thy louing friend.
I pledge lord Absolon and Abisais health.
Here now Vrias, to the health of Ioab,
And to the pleasant journey we shall have,
When we return to mighty Rabid siege.
Cusay I pledge thee all, with all my heart,
Give me some drink ye servants of the king,
Give me my drink.
Well done my good Vrias, drink thy fill,
That in thy fullness Dauid may rejoice.
I will my lord.
Now lord Vrias, one carouse to me.
No sir, Isle drink to the King,
Your father is a better man then you.
Doe so Vrias, I will pledge thee straight.
I will indeed my lord and sovereign,
I once in my days be so bold.
Fill him his glass.
Fill me my glass.
Quickly I say.
Quickly I say.
Here my lord, by your favour now I drink to you.
I pledge thee good Vrias presently.
Here then Vrias, once again for me,
And to the health of Dauids children.
Dauids children?
I Dauids children, wilt thou pledge me man?
Pledge me man.
Pledge me I say, or else thou love vs not.
What doe you talk, doe you talk?
Isle no more, Isle lie down here.
Rather Vrias go thou home and sleep.
O ho sir, would you make me break my sentence.
Home sir, no indeed sir? Isle sleep upon mine arm,
Like a soldier, sleep like a man as long as I live in Israel.
If nought will serve to save his wives renown,
Isle send him with a letter unto Ioab
To put him in the forefront of the wars,
That so my purposes may take effect.
Help him in sirs.
Come rise Vrias, get thee in and sleep.
I will not go home sir, thats flat.
Then come and rest thee upon Dauids bed.
On before my lords, on before.
O proud revolt of a presumptuous man,
Laying his bridle in the neck of sin,
Ready to bear him past his grave to hell,
Like as the fatal Raven, that in his voice
Carries the dreadful summons of our deaths,
Flies by the fair Arabian spiceries,
Her pleasant gardens, and delightsome parks,
Seeming to curse them with his hoarse exclaims,
And yet doth stoop with hungry violence
Upon a piece of hateful carrion:
So wretched man, displeased with those delights,
Would yield a quickening savor to his Soul,
Pursues with eager and vnstanched thirst,
The greedy longings of his loathsome flesh,
If holy Dauid so shoke hands with sin,
What shall our baser spirits glory in.
This kingly giving lust her reign,
Pursues the sequel with a greater ill.
Vrias in the forefront of the wars,
Is murdered by the hateful Heathens sword,
And Dauid joys his too dear Bethsabe,
Suppose this past, and that the child is borne,
Whose death the Prophet solemnly doth morn.
Morn Bethsabe, bewail thy foolishness,
Thy sin, thy shame, the sorrow of thy soul,
Sin, shame, and sorrow swarm about thy soul,
And in the gates and entrance of my heart,
Sadness with wreathed arms hangs her complaint.
No comfort from the ten stringed instrument,
The twinkling Cymbal, or the Ivory Lute,
Nor doth the sound of Dauids kingly Harp,
Make glad the broken heart of Bersabe.
Jerusalem is filled with thy complaint,
And in the streets of Zion fits thy grief:
The babe in sick, sick to the death I fear,
The fruit that sprung from thee to Dauids house,
Nor may the pot of Honey and of Oil,
Glad Dauid or his handmaids countenance.
Vrias, woe is me to think hereon,
For who is it among the sons of men,
That saith not to my soul, the King hath sind,
Dauid hath done amiss, and Bersabe
Laid snares of death unto Vrias life.
My sweet Vrias, fallen into the pit
Art thou, and gone even to the gates of hell,
For Bersabe, that would not shroud her shame.
O what is it to serve the lust of Kings,
How Lyonlike thy rage when we resist,
But Bersabe in humbleness attend,
The grace that God will to his handmaid send.
The babe is sick, and sad is Dauids heart,
To see the guiltless bear the guilties pain.
Dauid hang up thy Harp, hang down thy head,
And dash thy ivory Lute against the stones.
The dew that on the hill of Hormone false,
Rains not on Syons tops, and lofty towers,
And Dauids thoughts are spent in pensiveness,
The plains of Gath and Askaron rejoice.
The babe is sick, sweet babe, that Bersabe
With women's pain brought forth to Israel.
But what saith Nathan to his lord the king?
Thus Nathan saith unto his Lord the King:
There were two men both dwellers in one town,
The one was mighty and exceeding rich
In Oxen, sheep and cattle of the field,
The other poor having nor Ox, nor Calfe,
Nor other cattle, save one little Lamb,
Which he had bought and nourished by the hand,
And it grew up, and fed with him and his,
And eat and drank as he and his were wont,
And in his bosom slept, and was to live
As was his daughter or his dearest child.
There came a stranger to this wealthy man,
And he refused and spared to take his own,
Or of his store to dress or make him meat,
But took the poor mans sheep, partly poor mans store,
And dressed it for this stranger in his house:
What (tell me) shall be done to him for this?
Now as the lord doth live, this wicked man
Is judged, and shall become the child of death,
Four fold to the poor man shall he restore,
That without mercy took his lamb away.
Thou art the man, and thou hast judged thy self,
Dauid, thus saith the Lord thy God by me:
I thee anointed King in Israel,
And saved thee from the tyranny of Saul,
Thy masters house I gave thee to possess,
His Wives into thy bosom did I give,
And Iuda and Jerusalem withal,
And might (thou know) if this had ben too small,
Have given thee more.
Wherefore then hast thou gone so far astray,
And hast done evil, and sinned in my sight?
Vrias thou hast killed with the sword,
Yea with the sword of the vncircumcised
Thou hast him slain, wherefore from this day forth,
The sword shall never go from thee and thine:
For thou hast tan this Hethites wife to thee,
Wherefore behold, I will (saith Iacobs God)
In thine own house stir evil up to thee,
Yea I before thy face will take thy Wives,
And give them to thy neighbour to possess:
This shall be done to Dauid in the day,
That Israel openly may see thy shame.
Nathan, I have against the Lord, I have
Sinned, O sinned grievously, and lo
From heavens throne doth Dauid throw himself,
And groan and grovel to the gates of hell.
Dauid stand up, Thus saith the Lord by me,
Dauid the King shall live, for he hath seen
The true repentant sorrow of thy heart,
But for thou hast in this misdeed of thine
Stirred up the enemies of Israel
To triumph and blasphe me the God of hosts,
And say, He set a wicked man to reign,
Over his loved people and his Tribes:
The child shall surely die, that erst was borne,
His mothers sin, his kingly fathers scorn.
How just is Iacobs God in all his works!
But must it die that Dauid loves so?
O that the mighty one of Israel
Nill change his dome, and says the babe must die,
Morn Israel and weep in Zion gates,
Wither ye Caedar trees of Lebanon,
Ye sprouting Almons with your flowering tops,
Droop, drown, and drench in Hebrons fearful streams.
The babe must die that was to Dauid borne,
His mothers sin his kingly fathers scorn.
What tidings brings Cusay to the King?
To thee the servant of King Dauids court,
This brings Cusay, as the Prophet spake,
The Lord hath surely stricken to the death,
The child new borne by that Vrias wife,
That by the sons of Ammon erst was slain.
Cusay be still, the King is vexed sore,
How shall he speed that brings this tidings first,
When while the child was yet alive, we spake,
And Dauids heart would not be comforted?
Yea Dauids heart will not be comforted,
What murmur ye the servants of the King,
What tidings tells Cusay to the King?
Say Cusay, lives the child, or is he dead?
The child is dead, that of Vrias wife, Dauid begat.
Vrias wife says thou?
The child is dead, then cease Dauids shame,
Fetch me to eat, and give me Wine to drink,
Water to wash, and Oil to clear my looks,
Bring down your Shalmes, your Cymbals, and your Pipes,
Let Dauids Harp and Lute, his hand and voice,
Give laud to him that loves Israel,
And sing his praise, that shendeth Dauids fame,
That put away his sin from out his sight,
And sent his shame into the streets of Gath,
Bring ye to me the mother of the babe,
That I may wipe the tears from off her face,
And give her comfort with this hand of mine,
And deck fair Bersabe with ornaments,
That she may bear to me another son,
That may be loved of the Lord of hosts:
For where he is, of force must Dauid go,
But never may he come where Dauid is.
Fair Bersabe, sit thou, and sigh no more,
And sing and play you servants of the King,
Now sleeps Dauids sorrow with the dead,
And Bersabe lives to Israel.
Now arms, and warlike engines for assault,
Prepare at once ye men of Israel,
Ye men of Iuda and Jerusalem,
That Rabbi may be taken by the King,
Least it be called after Ioabs name,
Nor Dauids glory shine in Zion streets,
To Rabbi marches Dauid with his men
To chastise Ammon and the wicked ones.
Set up your mules, and give them well to ear,
And let vs meet our brothers at the feast,
Accursed is the moister of this feast,
Dishonour of the house of Israel,
His sisters slander, and his mothers shame.
Shame be his share that could such ill contrive,
To ravish Thamar, and without a pause
To drive her shamefully from out his house,
But may his wickedness find just reward.
Therefore doth Absolon conspire with you,
That Ammon die what time he sits to eat,
For in the holy Temple have I sworn
Wreak of his villainy in Thamars rape.
And here he comes, bespeak him gently all,
Whose death is deeply graved in my heart.
Our shearers are not far from hence I wot,
And Ammon, to you all his brethren
Gives such welcome as our fathers erst
Were wonr in Iuda and Jerusalem,
But specially Lord Absolon to thee,
The honour of thy house and progeny.
Sit down and dine with me King Dauids son,
Thou fair young men, whose hairs shine in mine eve
Like golden wires of Dauids ivory Lute.
Ammon, where be thy shearers and thy men,
That we may power in plenty of thy vines,
And eat thy goats milk, and rejoice with thee.
Here comes Ammons shearers and his men,
Absolon sit and rejoice with me.
Drink Absolon in praise of Israel,
Welcome to Ammons fields from Dauids court.
Die with thy draught perish and die accursed,
Dishonour to the honour of vs all,
Die for the villainy to Thamar done,
Unworthy thou to be Kings Dauids son.
O what hath Absolon for Thamar done,
Murdered his brother, great king Dauids son.
Run Ionadab away, and make it known,
What cruelty this Absolon hath shown.
Ammon, thy brother Adonia shall
Bury thy body among the dead men's bones,
And we will make complaint to Israel
Of Ammons death, and pride of Absolon.
This is the town of the vncircumcised,
The city of the kingdom, this is it,
Rabbi where wicked Hannon sits king:
Despoil this King, this Hannon of his crown,
Vnpeople Rabbi, and the streets thereof,
For in their blood and slaughter of the slain,
Lies the honour of King Dauids line.
Ioab, Abyshai, and the rest of you,
Fight ye this day for great Jerusalem.
And see where Hannon shows him on the walls,
Why then do we forbear to give assault,
That Israel may as it is promised,
Subdue the daughters of the Gentles Tribes,
All this must be performed by Dauids hand.
Hark to me Hannon, and remember well,
As sure as he doth live that kept my host,
What time our young men by the poole of Gibeon,
Went forth against the strength of Isboseth,
And twelve to twelve did with their weapons play,
So sure art thou, and thy men of war
To feel the sword of Israel this day,
Because thou hast defied Iacobs God,
And suffered Rabbi with the Philislime
To rail upon the tribe of Beniamin.
Hark man, as sure as Saul thy moister fell,
And gored his sides upon the mountain tops
And Ionathan, Abinadab, and Melchisua
Watered the dales and deeps of Askaron
With bloody streams that from Gilboa ran
In channels through the wilderness of Ziph,
What time the sword of the vncircumsed
Was drunken with the blood of Israel:
So sure shall Dauid perish with his men,
Under the walls of Rabbi, Hannons town.
Hannon, the God of Israel hath said,
Dauid the King shall wear that crown of thine,
That weighs a Talent of the finest gold,
And triumph in the spoil of Hannons town,
When Israel shall hale thy people hence,
And turn them to the tile-kill, man and child,
And put them under harrows made of iron,
And hew their bones with axes, and their limbs
With iron swords divide and tear in twain.
Hannon, this shall be done to thee and thine,
Because thou hast defied Israel.
To arms, to arms, that Rabbi feel revenge,
And Hannons town become king Dauids spoil.
Now clattering arms, and wrathful storms of war,
Have thundered over Rabbaes raced towers,
The wreakful ire of great Iehouaes arm,
That for his people made the gates to rend,
And clothed the Cherubins in fiery coats,
To fight against the wicked Hannons town,
Pay thanks ye men of Iuda to the King,
The God of Zion and Jerusalem,
That hath exhalted Israel to this,
And crowned Dauid with this diadem.
Beauteous and bright is he among the Tribes,
As when the sun attired in glist'ring robe,
Comes dancing from his oriental gate,
And bride groome-like hurls through the gloomy air
His radiant beams, such doth King Dauid show,
Crowned with the honour of his enemies town,
Shining in riches like the firmament,
The starry vault that ouerhangs the earth,
So looks Dauid King of Israel.
Ioab, why doth not Dauid mount his throne,
Whom heaven hath beautified with Hannons crown,
Sound Trumpets, Shalmes, and Instruments of praise
To Iacobs God for Dauids victory.
Why doth the King of Israel rejoice,
Why sits Dauid crowned with Rabbaes rule,
Behold there hath great heaviness befallen
In Ammons fields by Absolons misdeed,
And Ammons shearers, and their feast of mirth
Absalon hath overturned with his sword,
Nor lives any of King Dauids sons,
To bring this bitter tidings to the King.
Ay me, how soon are Dauids triumphs dashed,
How suddenly declines Dauids pride,
As doth the daylight settle in the west,
So dim is Dauids glory, and his get.
Die Dauid, for to thee is left no seed,
That may revive thy name in Israel.
In Israel is left of Dauids seed.
Comfort your lord, you servants of the King,
Behold thy sons return in mourning weeds,
And only Ammon, Absalon hath slain.
Welcome my sons, deeret to me you are
Then is this golden crown, or Hannons spoil.
O tell me then, tell me my sons I say,
How comes it to pass, that Absolon
Hath slain his brother Ammon with the sword?
Thy sons O King went up to Ammons fields
To feast with him, and eat his bread and oil,
And Absalon upon his mule doth come,
And to his men he saith, When Ammons heart
Is merry and secure, then strike him dead,
Because he forced Thamar shamefully,
And hated her, and threw her forth his doors:
And this did he, and they with him conspire,
And kill thy son in wreak of Thamars wrong.
How long shall Iuda and Jerusalem
Complain and water Zion with their tears?
How long shall Israel lament in vain,
And not a man among the mighty ones
Will hear the sorrows of King Dauids heart?
Ammon thy life was pleasing to thy Lord,
As to mine ears the Music of my Lute,
Or songs that Dauid tuneth to his Harp,
And Absalon hath tan from me away
The gladness of my sad distressed soul.
God save King Dauid, King of Israel,
And bless the gates of Zion for his sake.
Woman, why mourn thou, rise from the earth,
Tell me what sorrow hath befallen thy soul.
Thy servants soul O King is troubled sore,
And greenous is the anguish of her heart,
And from Thecoa doth thy handmaid come.
Tell me, and say, thou woman of Thecoa,
What ails thee, or what is come to pass.
Thy servant is a widow in Thecoa,
Two sons thy handmaid had, and they (my lord)
Fought in the field, where no man went betwixt,
And so the one did smite and slay the other.
And lo behold the kindred doth arise,
And cry on him that smote his brother,
That he therefore may be the child of death,
For we will follow and destroy the heir.
So will they quench that sparkle that is left,
And leave nor name, nor issue on the earth,
To me, or to thy handmaids husband dead.
Woman return, go home unto thy house,
I will take order that thy son be safe,
If any man say otherwise then well,
Bring him to me, and I shall chastise him:
For as the Lord doth live, shall not a hair
Shed from thy son, or fall upon the earth.
Woman to God alone belongs revenge,
Shall then the kindred slay him for his sin?
Well hath King Dauid to his handmaid spoke,
But wherefore then hast thou determined
So hard a part against the righteous Tribes
To follow and pursue the banished,
When as to God alone, belongs revenge.
Assuredly thou say against thy self,
Therefore call home again the banished,
Call home the banished, that he may live,
And raise to thee some fruit in Israel.
Thou woman of Thecoa answer me,
Answer me one thing I shall ask of thee,
Is not the hand of Ioab in this work?
Tell me is not his finger in this fact?
It is my lord, his hand is in this work,
Assure thee, Ioab captain of thy host,
Hath put these words into thy handmaids mouth,
And thou art as an angel from on high,
To understand the meaning of my heart,
Lo where he comes to his lord the King.
Say Ioab, did thou send this woman in
To put this parable for Absalon.
Ioab my lord did bid this woman speak,
And she hath said, and thou hast understood.
I have and am content to do the thing,
Go fetch my son, that he may live with me.
Now God be blessed for King Dauids life,
Thy servant Ioab hath found grace with thee,
In that thou sparest Absolon thy child,
A beautiful and fair young man is he,
In all his body is no blemish seen,
His hair is like the wire of Dauids Harp,
That twines about his bright and ivory neck:
In Israel is not such a goodly man,
And here I bring him to entreat for grace.
Hast thou slain in the fields of Hazor
Ah Absalon my son, ah my son Absolon,
But wherefore doe I vex thy spirit so,
Live and return from Gesur to thy house,
Return from Gesur to Jerusalem,
What boots it to be bitter to thy soul,
Ammon is dead, and Absolon survives.
Father I have offended Israel,
I have offended Dauid and his house,
For Thamars wrong hath Absolon misdone,
But Dauids heart is free from sharpe revenge,
And Ioab hath got grace for Absalon.
Depart with me you men of Israel,
You that have followed Rabbi with the sword,
And ransack Ammons richest treasuries,
Live Absalon my son, live once in peace,
Peace with thee, and with Jerusalem.
Dauid is gone, and Absolon remains,
Flowering in pleasant spring time of his youth,
Why lives Absalon, and is not honoured
Of Tribes and Elders, and the mightiest ones,
That round about his Temples he may wear
Garlands and wreaths set on with reverence,
That every one that hath a cause to plead,
Might come to Absolon, and call for right?
Then in the gates of Zion would I sit,
And publish laws in great Jerusalem,
And not a man should live in all the land,
But Absolon would doe him reasons due,
Therefore I shall address me as I may,
To love the men and Tribes of Israel.
Proud lust the bloudiest traitor to our souls,
Whose greedy throat, nor earth, air, sea, or heaven,
Can glut or satisfy with any store,
Thou art the cause these torments suck my blood,
Piercing with venom of thy poisoned eyes,
The strength and marrow of my tainted bones:
To punish Pharoh, and his cursed host,
The waters shrink at great Adonaies voice,
And sandy bottom of the sea appeared,
Offering his service at his servants feet,
And to inflict a plague on Dauids sin,
He makes his bowels traitors to his breast,
Winding about his heart with mortal gripes.
Ah Absalon the wrath of heaven inflames
Thy scorched bosom with ambitious heat,
And Satan sets thee on a lusty tower,
Showing thy thoughts the pride of Israel
Of choice to cast thee on her ruthless stones,
Weep with me then ye sons of Israel.
Lie down with Dauid, and with Dauid morn,
Before the holy one that sees our hearts,
Season this heavy soil with showers of tears,
And fill the face of every flower with dew,
Weep Israel, for Dauids soul dissolves,
Lading the fountains of his drowned eyes,
And powers her substance on the senseless earth.
Weep Israel, O weep for Dauids soul,
Strewing the ground with hair and garments torn,
For tragic witness of your hearty woes.
O would our eyes were conduits to our hearts,
And that our hearts were seas of liquid blood,
To power in streams upon this holy Mount,
For witness we would die for Dauids woes.
Then should this mount of Olives seem a plain,
Drowned with a sea, that with our sighs should roar,
And in the murmur of his mounting waives,
Report our bleeding sorrows to the heavens,
For witness we would die for Dauids woes.
Earth cannot weep enough for Dauids woes,
Then weep you heavens, and all you clouds dissolve,
That piteous stars may see our miseries,
And drop their golden tears upon the ground,
For witness how they weep for Dauids woes.
Now let my sovereign raise his prostrate bones.
And morn not as a faithless man would doe,
But be assured, that Iacobs righteous God,
That promised never to forsake your throne,
Will still be just and pure in his vows.
Sadoc high priest, preserver of the arc,
Whose sacred virtue keeps the chosen crown,
I know my God is spotless in his vows,
And that these hairs shall greet my grave in peace:
But that my son should wrong his tendered soul,
And fight against his fathers happiness,
Turns all my hopes into despair of him,
And that despair, feeds all my veins with grief.
Think of it Dauid, as a fatal plague,
Which grief preserves, but prevents not,
And turn thy drooping eyes upon the troupes
That of affection to thy worthiness,
Doe swarm about the person of the King,
Cherish their valours, and their zealous loves,
With pleasant looks, and sweet encouragements.
Me thinks the voice of Ithay fills mine ears.
Let not the voice of Ithay loath thine ears,
Whose heart would balm thy bosom with his tears.
But wherefore goosed thou to the wars with vs,
Thou art a stranger here in Israel,
And son to Achis mighty king of Gath,
Therefore return, and with thy father stay,
Thou came but yesterday, and should I now
Let thee partake these troubles here with vs?
Keep both thy self, and all thy soldiers safe,
Let me abide the hazards of these arms,
And God requite the friendship thou hast showed.
As sure as Israels God gives Dauid life,
What place or peril shall contain the King,
The same will Ithay share in life and death.
Then gentle Ithay be thou still with vs,
A joy to Dauid, and a grace to Israel.
Go Sadoc now, and bear the arc of God
Into the great Jerusalem again,
If I find favour in his gracious eyes,
Then will he lay his hand upon my heart
Yet once again before I visit death,
Giving it strength and virtue to mine eyes,
To taste the comforts, and behold the form
Of his fair arc, and holy tabernacle,
But if he say my wonted love is worn,
And I have no delight in Dauid now,
Here lie I armed with an humble heart,
T embrace the pains that anger shall impose,
And kiss the sword my lord shall kill me with,
Then Sadoc take Ahimaas thy son,
With Ionathan son to Abiathar,
And in these fields will I repose my self,
Till they return from you some certain news.
Thy servants will with joy obey the King,
And hope to cheer his heart with happy news.
Now that it be no grief unto the King,
Let me for good inform his majesty,
That with unkind and graceless Absalon,
Achitophel your ancient counsellor,
Directs the state of this rebellion.
Then doth it aim with danger at my crown,
O thou that holdst his raging bloody bound,
Within the circle of the silver moon,
That girds earths center with his watery scarf,
Limit the counsel of Achitophel,
No bounds extending to my souls distress,
But turn his wisdom into foolishness.
Happiness and honour to my lord the King.
What happiness or honour may betide
His state that toils in my extremities?
O let my gracious sovereign cease these griefs,
Unless he wish his servant Cusayes death,
Whose life depends upon my lords relief,
Then let my presence with my sighs, persume
The pleasant closet of my sovereigns soul.
No Cusay no, thy presence unto me,
Will be a burden since I tender thee,
And cannot break thy sighs for Dauids sake:
But if thou turn to fair Jerusalem,
And say to Absalon, as thou hast been
A trusty friend unto his fathers seat,
So thou wilt be to him, and call him King,
Achitophels counsel may be brought to nought.
Then having Sadoc and Abiathar,
All three may learn the secrets of my son,
Sending the message by Ahimaas,
And friendly Ionathan, who both are there,
Then rise, referring the success to heaven.
Cusay I rise, though with vnweldie bones,
I carry arms against my Absalon.
Now you that were my fathers concubines,
Liquor to his enchased and lustful fire,
Have seen his honour shaken in his house,
Which I possess in sight of all the world.
I bring ye forth for soils to my renown,
And to eclipse the glory of your King,
Whose life is with his honour fast enclosed
Within the entrails of a Jetty cloud,
Whose dissolution shall power down in showers
The substance of his life and swelling pride:
Then shall the stars light earth with rich aspects,
And heaven shall burn in love with Absalon,
Whose beauty will suffice to chaste all mists,
And cloth the suns sphere with a triple fire,
Sooner then his clear eyes should suffer stain,
Or be offended with a lowering day.
Thy fathers honour, graceless Absalon,
And ours thus beaten with thy violent arms,
Will cry for vengeance to the host of heaven,
Whose power is ever armed against the proud,
And will dart plagues at thy aspiring head,
For doing this disgrace to Dauids throne.
To Dauids throne, to Dauids holy throne,
Whose sceptre angels guard with swords of fire,
And sit as Eagles on his conquering fist,
Ready to prey upon his enemies,
Then think not thou the captain of his foes,
Were thou much swifter then Azahell was,
That could out-pace the nimble footed Roe,
To scope the fury of their thumping beaks,
Or dreadful scope of their commanding wings.
Let not my lord the King of Israel
Be angry with a silly women's threats,
But with the pleasure he hath erst enjoyed,
Turn them into their cabinets again,
Till Dauids conquest be their overthrow.
Into your bowers ye daughters of Disdain,
Gotten by fury of unbridled lust,
And wash your couches with your mourning tears,
For grief that Dauids kingdom is decayed.
No Absalon, his kingdom is enchained
Fast to the finger of great Iacobs God,
Which will not lose it for a rebels love.
If I might give advise unto the King,
These concubines should buy their taunts with blood.
Amasa no, but let thy martial sword
Empty the pains of Dauids armed men,
And let these foolish women scope our hands
To recompense the shame they have sustained.
First Absolon was by the Trumpets sound
Proclaimed through Hebron King of Israel,
And now is set infaire Jerusalem
With complete state, and glory of a crown.
Fifty fair footmen by my chariot run,
And to the air whose rupture rings my fame,
Where ere I ride they offer reverence.
Why should not Absolon, that in his face
Carries the final purpose of his God,
That is, to work him grace in Israel,
Endeavour to achieve with all his strength,
The state that most may satisfy his joy,
Keeping his statutes and his covenants pure,
His thunder is entangled in my hair,
And with my beauty is his lightning quenched,
I am the man he made to glory in,
When by the errors of my fathers sin,
He lost the path that led into the land,
Wherewith our chosen ancestors were blessed.
Long may the beauteous King of Israel live,
To whom the people doe by thousands swarm.
What means Cusay so to greet his foe,
In this the love thou shewdst to Dauids soul,
To whose assistance thou hast vowed thy life,
Why leave thou him in this extremity.
Because the Lord and Israel chooses thee,
And as before I served thy fathers turn,
With counsel acceptable in his sight,
So likewise will I now obey his son.
Then welcome Cusay to king Absalon,
And now my lords and loving counsellors,
I think it time to exercise our arms
Against forsaken Dauid and his host,
Give counsel first my good Achitophel,
What times and orders we may best observe,
For prosperous manage of these high exploits.
Let me choose out twelve thousand valiant men,
And (while the night hides with her sable mists
The close endeavours cunning soldiers use)
I will assault thy discontented fire,
And while with weakness of their weary arms,
Surchargd with toil to shun thy sudden power,
The people fly in huge disordered troupes
To save their lives, and leave the King alone,
Then will I smite him with his latest wound,
And bring the people to thy feet in peace.
Well hath Achitophel given his advise,
Yet let vs hear what Cusay counsels vs,
Whose great experience is well worth the ear.
Though wise Achitophel be much more meet
To purchase hearing with my lord the King,
For all his former counsels, then my self,
Yet not offending Absolon or him,
This time it is not good, nor worth pursuit:
For well thou know thy fathers men are strong,
Chafing as she bears robbed of their whelps.
Besides the King himself a valiant man,
Trained up in feats and stratagems of war,
And will not for prevention of the worst
Lodge with the common soldiers in the field:
But now I know his wonted policies
Have taught him lurk within some secret cave,
Guarded with all his stoutest soldiers,
Which if the forefront of his battle faint,
Will yet give out that Absalon doth fly,
And so thy soldiers be discouraged.
Dauid himself withal, whose angry heart
Is as a Lyons, let of his walk,
Will fight himself, and all his men to one,
Before a few shall vanquish him by fear.
My counsel therefore, is with Trumpets sound
To gather men from Dan to Bersabe,
That they may march in number like sea sands,
That nestle close in another neck:
So shall we come upon him in our strength,
Like to the dew that false in showers from heaven,
And leave him not a man to march withal.
Besides if any city succour him,
The nnmbers of our men shall fetch vs ropes,
And we will pull it down the rivers stream,
That not a stone be left to keep vs out.
What says my lord to Cusaies counsel now?
I fancy Cusaies counsel better far
Then that is given vs from Achitophel,
And so I think doth every soldier here.
Cusaies counsel is better then Achitophels.
Then march we after Cusaies counsel all,
Sound trumpets through the bounds of Israel,
And muster all the men will serve the King,
That Absalon may glut his longing soul
With sole fruition of his fathers crown.
Ill shall they fare that follow thy attempts,
That skornes the counsel of Achitophel.
Thus hath the power of Iacobs jealous God
Fulfild his servant Dauids drifts by me,
And brought Achitophels advise to scorn.
God save lord Cusay, and direct his zeal
To purchase Dauids conquest against his son.
What secrets hast thou gleande from Absalon.
These sacred priests that bear the arc of God,
Achitophel advised him in the night
To let him choose twelve thousand fighting men,
And he would come on Dauid at unawares,
While he was weary with his violent toil:
But I advised to get a greater host,
And gather men from Dan to Bersabe,
To come upon him strongly in the fields,
Then send Ahimaas and Ionathan
To signify these secrets to the King,
And will him not to stay this night abroad,
But get him over Iordane presently,
Least he and all his people kiss the sword.
Then go Ahimaas and Ionathan,
And straight convey this message to the King.
Father we will if Absalons chief spies
Prevent not this devise, and stay vs here.
The man of Israel, that hath ruled as King,
Or rather as the Tyrant of the land,
Bolstering his hateful head upon the throne,
That God unworthily hath blessed him with,
Shall now I hope, lay it as low as hell,
And be deposed from his detested chair.
O that my bosom could by nature bear,
A sea of poison to be powr'de upon
His cursed head that sacred balm hath graced,
And consecrated King of Israel:
Or would my breath were made the smoke of hell,
Infected with the sighs of damned souls,
Or with the reeking of that serpents gorge,
That feeds on adders, toads, and venomous roots,
That as I opened my revenging lips
To curse the shepherd for his Tyranny,
My words might cast rank poison to his pores,
And make his swollen and ranckling sinews crack,
Like to the combat blows that break the clouds,
When Ioues stout champions fight with fire,
See where he comes, that my soul abhors.
I have prepared my pocket full of stones
To cast at him, mingled with earth and dust,
Which bursting with disdain, I greet him with.
Come forth thou murderer and wicked man,
The Lord hath brought upon thy cursed head
The guiltless blood of Saule and all his sons,
Whose royal throne thy baseness hath usurped,
And to revenge it deeply on thy soul,
The Lord hath given the kingdom to thy son,
And he shall wreak the traitrous wrongs of Saule,
Even as thy sin hath still importund heaven,
So shall thy murders and adultery
Be punished in the sight of Israel,
As thou deserust with blood, with death, and hell.
Why doth his dead dog curse my lord the King,
Let me alone to take away his head.
Why medleth thus the son of Zeruia
To interrupt the action of our God?
Semei uses me with this reproach,
Because the Lord hath sent him to reprove
The sins of Dauid, printed in his brows,
With blood that blushes for his conscience guilt,
Who dares then ask him why he curses me?
If then thy conscience tell thee thou hast sind,
And that thy life is odious to the world,
Command thy followers to shun thy face,
And by thy self here make away thy soul,
That I may stand and glory in thy shame.
I am not desperate Semei like thy self,
But trust unto the covenant of my God,
Founded on mercy with repentance built,
And finished with the glory of my soul.
A murderer, and hope for mercy in thy end
Hate and destruction sit upon thy brows
To watch the issue of thy damned ghost,
Which with thy latest gasp theile take and tear,
Hurling in every pain of hell a piece.
Hence murderer, thou shame to Israel,
Foul lecher, drunkard, plague to heaven and earth.
What is it piety in Dauids thoughts,
So to abhor from laws of policy
In this extremity of his distress,
To give his subjects cause of carelessness,
Send hence the dog with sorrow to his grave.
Why should the sons of Zeruia seek to check
His spirit which the Lord hath thus inspired:
Behold my son which issued from my flesh,
With equal fury seeks to take my life.
How much more then the son of Iemini,
Chiefly since he doth nought but Gods command,
It may be he will look on me this day
With gracious eyes, and for his cursing bless,
The heart of Dauid in his bitterness.
What doest thou fret my soul with sufferance
O that the souls of Isboseth and Abner,
Which thou sentst swimming to their graves in blood,
With wounds fresh bleeding, gasping for revenge,
Were here to execute my burning hate:
But I will hunt thy font with curses still,
Hence Monster, Murderer, Mirror of Contempt.
Long life to Dauid, to his enemies death.
Welcome Ahimaas and Ionathan,
What news sends Cusay to thy lord the King.
Cusay would wish my lord the King,
To pass the river Iordane presently,
Least he and all his people perish here.
For wise Achitophel hath counseld Absalon
To take advantage of your weary arms,
And come this night upon you in the fields.
But yet the Lord hath made his counsel scorn,
And Cusaies policy with praise preferred,
Which was to number every Israelite,
And so assault you in their pride of strength.
Abiathar besides entreats the King
To send his men of war against his son,
And hazard not his person in the field.
Thanks to Abiathar, and to you both,
And to my Cusay, whom the Lord requite,
But ten times treble thanks to his soft hand,
Whose pleasant touch hath made my heart to dance,
And play him praises in my zealous breast,
That turned the counsel of Achitophel
After the prayers of his servants lips.
Now will we pass the river all this night,
And in the morning sound the voice of war,
The voice of bloody and unkindly war.
Then tell vs how thou wilt divide thy men,
And who shall have the special charge herein.
Ioab, thy self shall for thy charge conduct,
The first third part of all my valiant men,
The second shall Abisaies valour lead,
The third fair Ithay, which I most should grace,
For comfort he hath done to Dauids woes,
And I my self will follow in the midst.
That let not Dauid, for though we should fly,
Ten thousand of vs were not half so much
Esteemed with Dauids enemies, as himself,
Thy people loving thee, deny thee this.
What seewes them best, then that will Dauid doe,
But now my lords and captains hear his voice
That never yet pierced piteous heaven in vain,
Then let it not slip lightly through your ears,
For my sake spare the young man Absalon.
Ioab thy self did once use friendly words
To reconcile my heart incensed to him,
If then thy love be to thy kinsman sound,
And thou wilt prove a perfect Israelite,
Friend him with deeds, and touch no hair of him,
Not that fair hair with which the wanton winds
Delight to play, and loves to make  curl,
Wherein the Nightingales would build their nests,
And make sweet bowers in every golden tress,
To sing their lover every night asleep.
O spoil not Ioab, Ioues fair ornaments,
Which he hath sent to solace Dauids soul.
The best ye see (my lords) are swift to sin,
To sin our feet are washed with milk of Roes,
And dried again with coals of lightening.
O Lord thou see the proudest sins, poor slave,
And with his bridle, pulsed him to the grave,
For my sake then spare lovely Absalon.
Wee will my lord for thy sake favour him.
Now hath Achitophel ordered his house,
And taken leave of every pleasure there,
Hereon depends Achitophels delights,
And in this circle must his life be closed.
The wise Achitophel, whose counsel proved
Ever as sound for fortunate success,
As if men asked the Oracle of God,
Is now used like the fool of Israel,
Then set thy angry soul upon her wings,
And let her fly into the shade of death,
And for my death, let heaven for ever weep,
Making huge floods upon the land I leave,
To ravish them, and all their fairest fruits.
Let all the sighs I breathed for this disgrace,
Hang on my hedges like eternal mists,
As mourning garments for their masters death.
Op earth, and take thy miserable son
Into the bowels of thy cursed womb,
Once in a surfeit thou did spue him forth,
Now for fell hunger suck him in again,
And be his body poison to thy veins,
And now thou hellish instrument of heaven,
Once execute th'arrest of Ioues just doom,
And stop his breast that curses Israel.
Now for the crown and throne of Israel,
To be confirmed with virtue of my sword,
And writ with Dauids blood upon the blade,
Now Jove let forth the golden firmament,
And look on him with all thy fiery eyes,
Which thou hast made to give their glories light,
To show thou love the virtue of thy hand,
Let fall a wreath of stars upon my head,
Whose influence may govern Israel,
With state exceeding all her other Kings.
Fight lords and captains, that your sovereigns face
May shine in honour brighter then the sun,
And with the virtue of my beauteous rays,
Make this fair land as fruitful as the fields,
That with sweet milk and honey overflowed.
God in the whizzing of a pleasant wind,
Shall march upon the tops of Mulberry trees,
To cool all breasts that burn with any griefs,
As meanwhile he was good to Moyses men.
By day the Lord shall sit within a cloud,
To guide your footsteps to the fields of joy,
And in the night a pillar bright as fire
Shall go before you like a second sun,
Wherein the essence of his godhood is,
That day and night you may be brought to peace,
And never swerve from that delightsome path,
That leads your souls to perfect happiness.
This shall he doe for joy when I am King:
Then fight brave captains that these joys may fly
Into your bosoms with sweet victory.
What angry angel sitting in these shades,
Hath laid his cruel hands upon my hair,
And holds my body thus twixt heaven and earth?
Hath Absalon no soldier near his hand,
That may untwine me this unpleasant curl,
Or wound this tree that ravishes his lord?
O God behold the glory of thy hand,
And choicest fruit of Natures workmanship,
Hang like a rotten branch upon this tree,
Fit for the axe, and ready for the fire.
Since thou withholdst all ordinary help
To lose my body from this bond of death,
O let my beauty fill these senseless plys,
With sense and power to lose me from this plague,
And work some wonder to prevent his death,
Whose life thou midst a special miracle.
My lord I saw the young prince Absalon
Hang by the hair upon a shady ok,
And could by no means get himself vnlosde,
Why slewst thou not the wicked Absalon,
That rebel to his father and to heaven,
That so I might have given thee for thy pains
Ten silver sickles, and a golden wast.
Not for a thousand sickles would I slay
The son of Dauid, whom his father charged,
Nor thou Abisay, nor the son of Gath,
Should touch with stroke of deadly violence.
The charge was given in hearing of vs all,
And had I done it, then I know thy self,
Before thou would abide the Kings rebuke,
Would have accused me as a man of death.
I must not now stand trifling here with thee.
Help Ioab, help, O help thy Absalon,
Let not thy angry thoughts be laid in blood,
In blood of him, that sometimes nourished thee,
And softened thy sweet heart with friendly love,
O give me once again my fathers sight,
My dearest father, and my princely sovereign,
That shedding tears of blood before his face,
The ground may witness, and the heavens record,
My last submission sound and full of ruth.
Rebel to nature, hate to heaven and earth,
Shall I give help to him, that thirsts the soul
Of his dear father, and my sovereign lord?
Now see the Lord hath tangled in a tree
The health and glory of thy stubborn heart,
And made thy pride curbed with a senseless plant,
Now Absalon how doth the Lord regard
The beauty whereupon thy hope was built,
And which thou thoughtst his grace did glory in?
Findst thou not now with fear of instant death,
That God affects not any painted shape,
Or goodly personage, when the virtuous soul
Is stuffed with nought but pride and stubbornness?
But preach I to thee, while I should revenge
Thy cursed sin that stains Israel,
And makes her fields blush with her childrens blood?
Take that as part of thy deserved plague,
Which worthily no torment can inflict.
O Ioab, Ioab, cruel ruthless Ioab,
Herewith thou woundst thy Kingly sovereigns heart,
Whose heavenly temper hates his childrens blood,
And will be sick I know for Absalon.
O my dear father, that thy melting eyes
Might pierce this thicket to behold thy son,
Thy dearest son gored with a mortal dart
Yet Ioab pity me, pity my father, Ioab,
Pity his souls distress that mourns my life,
And will be dead I know to hear my death.
If he were so remorseful of thy state,
Why sent he me against thee with the sword?
All Ioab means to pleasure thee withal,
Is to dispatch thee quickly of thy pain,
Hold Absalon, Ioabs pity is in this,
In this proud Absalon is Ioabs love.
Such love, such pity Israels God send thee,
And for his love to Dauid pity me,
Ah my dear father, see thy bowels bleed,
See death assault thy dearest Absalon,
See, pity, pardon, pray for Absalon.
See where the rebel in his glory hangs,
Where is the virtue of thy beauty Absalon,
Will any of vs here now fear thy looks?
Or be in love with that thy golden hair,
Wherein was wrapped rebellion against thy sire,
And cords prepared to stop thy fathers breath?
Our captain Ioab hath begun to vs,
And here is an end to thee, and all thy sins.
Come let vs take the beauteous rebel down,
And in some ditch amids this darksome wood,
Bury his bulk beneath a heap of stones,
Whose stony heart did hunt his fathers death.
Well done tall soldiers take the Traitor down,
And in this myerie ditch inter his bones,
Covering his hateful breast with heaps of stones,
This shady thicket of dark Ephrami
Shall ever lower on his cursed grave.
Night Ravens and Owls shall ring his fatal knell,
And sit exclaiming on his damned soul,
There shall they heap their preys of Carrion,
Till all his grave be clad with stinking bones
That it may loath the sense of every man,
So shall his end breed horror to his name,
And to his traitrous fact eternal shame.
Oh dreadful president of his just doom,
Whose holy heart is never touched with ruth
Of fickle beauty, or of glorious shapes,
But with the virtue of an upright soul,
Humble and zealous in his inward thoughts,
Though in his person loathsome and deformed.
Now since this story lends vs other store,
To make a third discourse of Dauids life,
Adding thereto his most renowned death,
And all their deaths, that at his death he judged,
Here end we this, and what here wants to please,
We will supply with treble willingness.
What boots it Absalon, unhappy Absalon,
Sighing I say what boots it Absalon,
To have disclosed a far more worthy womb
Soldiers of Israel, and ye sons of Iuda,
That have contended in these irksome broils,
And ripped old Israels bowels with your swords:
The godless general of your stubborn arms
Is brought by Israels helper to the grave:
A grave of shame, and scorn of all the Tribes,
Now then to save your honours from the dust,
And keep your bloods in temper by your bones,
Let Ioabs ensign shroud your manly heads,
Direct your eyes, your weapons, and your hearts
To guard the life of Dauid from his foes.
Error hath maskt your much too forward minds,
And you have sind against the chosen state,
Against his life, for whom your lives are blessed,
And followed an usurper to the field,
In whose just death your deaths are threatened,
But Ioab pities your disordered souls,
And therefore offers pardon, peace, and love,
To all that will be friendly reconciled
To Israels weal, to Dauid, and to heaven.
Amasa, thou art leader of the host,
That under Absalon have raised their arms
Then be a captain wise and politic,
Careful and loving for thy soldiers lives,
And lead them to this honourable league.
I will, at least Isle doe my best,
And for the gracious offer thou hast made,
I give thee thanks as much as for my head.
Then you deceived poor souls of Israel,
Since now ye see the errors you incurd,
With thanks and due submission be appeasde,
And as ye see your captains president
Here cast me then our swords at Ioabs feet,
Submitting with all zeal and residence
Our goods and bodies to his gracious hands.
Stand up and take ye all your swords again,
Dauid and Ioab shall be blessed herein.
Now let me go inform my lord the King,
How God hath freed him from his enemies.
Another time Ahimaas, not now,
But Cusay go thy self, and tell the King
The happy message of our good success.
I will my lord, and thank thee for thy grace.
What if thy servant should go to my lord?
What news hast thou to bring since he is gone?
Yet doe Ahimaas so much content,
That he may run about so sweet a charge.
Run if thou wilt, and peace be with thy steps,
Now follow, that you may salute the King
With humble hearts and reconciled souls.
We follow Ioab to our gracious King,
And him our swords shall honour to our deaths.
What means my lord, the lamp of Israel,
From whose bright eyes all eyes receive their light,
To dim the glory of his sweet aspects,
And paint his countenance with his hearts distress?
Why should his thoughts retain a sad conceit,
When every pleasure kneels before his throne,
And sues for sweet acceptance with his grace,
Take but your Lute, and make the mountains dance,
Retriue the suns sphere, and restrain the clouds,
Give ears to trees, make savage Lyons tame,
Impose still silence to the loudest winds,
And fill the fairest day with foulest storms,
Then why should passions of much meaner power,
Bear head against the heart of Israel.
Fair Bersabe, thou might increase the strength,
Of these thy arguments drawn from my skill,
By urging thy sweet sight to my conceits,
Whose virtue ever served for sacred balm
To cheer my pinings past all earthly joys,
But Bethsabe, the daughter of the highest,
Whose beauty builds the towers of Israel,
She that in chains of pearl and unicorn,
Leads at her train the ancient golden world,
The world that Adam held in Paradise,
Whose breath refineth all infectious aires,
And makes the meadows smile at her repair.
She, She my dearest Bethsabe,
Fair peace, the goddess of our graces here,
Is fled the streets of fair Jerusalem,
The fields of Israel, and the heart of Dauid,
Leading my comforts in her golden chains,
Linked to the life and soul of Absalon.
Then is the pleasure of my sovereigns heart,
So wrapped within the bosom of that son,
That Solomon, whom Israels God affects,
And gave the name unto him for his love,
Should be no salve to comfort Dauids soul?
Solomon (my love) is Dauids lord,
Or God hath named him lord of Israel
In him (for that, and since he is thy son)
Must Dauid needs be pleased at the heart,
And he shall surely sit upon my throne:
But Absalon the beauty of my bones,
Feet Absalon the counterfeit of love,
Sweet Absalon, the image of content,
Must claim a portion in his fathers care,
And be in life and death King Dauids son.
Yet as my lord hath said, let Solomon reign,
Whom God in naming, hath anointed King.
Now is he apt to learn th'eternall laws,
Whose knowledge being rooted in his youth,
Will beautify his age with glorious fruits,
While Absalon incensed with graceless pride,
Usurps and staines the kingdom with his sin,
Let Solomon be made thy staff of age,
Fair Israels rest, and honour of thy race.
Tell me my Solomon, wilt thou embrace
Thy fathers precepts graved in thy heart,
And satisfy my zeal to thy renown,
With practise of such sacred principles
As shall concern the state of Israel?
My royal father, if the heavenly zeal
Which for my welfare seeds upon your soul,
Were not sustained with virtue of mine own,
If the sweet accents of your cheerful voice
Should not each hour beat upon mine ears
As sweetly as the breath of heaven to him
That gasped scorched with the Summers sun,
I should be guilty of vnpardoned sin,
Fearing the plague of heaven, and shame of earth:
But since I vow my self to learn the skill
And holy secrets of his mighty hand
Whose cunning tunes the music of my soul,
It would content me (father) first to learn
How th'eternall framed the firmament,
Which bodies lead their influence by fire?
And which are filled with hoary Winters ise?
What sign is reign, and what star is fair?
Why by the rules of true proportion
The year is still divided into months,
The months to days, the days to certain hours?
What fruitful race shall fill the future world?
Or for what time shall this round building stand?
What Magistrates, what Kings shall keep in awe
Men's minds with bridles of th'eternall law?
Wade not too far my boy in waives too deep,
The feeble eyes of our aspiring thoughts
Behold things present, and record things past:
But things to come, exceed our humane reach,
And are not painted yet in angels eyes:
For those, submit thy sense, and say, Thou power
That now art framing of the future world,
Know all to come, not by the course of heaven,
By frail conjectures of inferior signs,
By monstrous floods, by flights and flocks of birds,
By bowels of a sacrificed beast;
Or by the figures of some hidden art:
But by a true and natural presage,
Laying the ground and perfect architect
Of all our actions now before thine eyes,
From Adam to the end of Adams seed,
O heaven protect my weakness with thy strength,
So look on me that I may view thy face,
And see these secrets written in thy brows.
O sun come dart thy rays upon my moon,
That now mine eyes eclipsed to the earth,
May brightly be refined and shine to heaven.
Transform me from this flesh, that I may live
Before my death, regenerate with thee.
O thou great God, ravish my earthly sprite,
That for the time a more then humane skill
May feed the Organons of all my sense,
That when I think, thy thoughts may be my guide,
And when I speak, I may be made by choice
The perfect echo of thy heavenly voice.
Thus say my son, and thou shalt learn them all.
A secret fury ravishes my soul,
Lifting my mind aboue her humane bounds,
And as the Eagle roused from her stand,
With violent hunger (cowering in the air)
Seizes her feathered prey, and thinks to feed,
But seeing then a cloud beneath her feet,
Lets fall the foul, and is emboldened
With eyes intent to bedare the sun,
And stieth close unto his stately sphere:
So Solomon mounted on the burning wings
Of zeal divine, lets fall his mortal food,
And cheers his senses with celestial air,
Treads in the golden starry Labyrinth,
And holds his eyes fixed on Iehouaes brows,
Good father teach me further what to doe.
See Dauid how his haughty spirit mounts
Even now of height to wield a diadem,
Then make him promise that he may succeed,
And rest old Israels bones from broils of war.
Nathan thou Prophet, sprung from Iesses root,
I promise thee, and lovely Bethsabe,
My Solomon shall govern after me.
He that hath touched thee with this righteous thought
Preserve the harbour of thy thoughts in peace.
My lord, thy servants of thy watch have seen
One running hitherward from forth the wars.
If hee bee come alone, he brings news.
Another hath thy servant seen my lord,
Whose running much resembles Sadocs son.
He is a good man, and good tidings brings.
Peace and content be with my lord the King,
Whom Israels God hath blessed with victory.
Tell me Ahimaas, lives my Absalon?
I saw a troupe of soldiers gathered,
But know not what the tumult might import.
Stand by, until some other may inform
The heart of Dauid with a happy truth.
Happiness and honour live with Dauids soul,
Whom God hath blessed with conquest of his foes.
But Cusay lives the young man Absalon?
The stubborn enemies to Dauids peace,
And all that cast their darts against his crown,
Fare ever like the young man Absalon,
For as he rid the woods of Ephraim
(Which fought for thee as much as all thy men)
His hair was tangled in a shady oak,
And hanging there (by Ioab and his men)
Sustained the stroke of well deserved death.
Hath Absalon sustained the stroke of death?
Die Dauid for the death of Absalon,
And make these cursed news the bloody darts,
That through his bowels rip thy wretched breast.
Hence Dauid, walk the solitary woods,
And income Caedars shade the thunder slew,
And fire from heaven hath made his branches black
Sit mourning the decease of Absalon,
Against the body of that blasted plant
In thousand shivers break thy ivory Lute,
Hanging thy stringlesse harp upon his boughs,
And through the hollow sapless sounding trunk,
Bellow the torments that perplex thy soul.
There let the winds sit sighing till they burst,
Let tempest muffled with a cloud of pitch,
Threaten the forests with her hellish face,
And (mounted fiercely on her iron wings)
Rend up the wretched engine by the roots
That held my dearest Absalon to death.
Then let them toss my broken Lute to heaven,
Even to his hands that beats me with the strings,
To show how sadly his poor shepherd sings.
Die Bethsabe to see thy Dauid morn,
To hear his tunes of anguish and of hell,
O help my Dauid, help thy Bethsabe,
Whose heart is pierced with thy breathie swords,
And bursts with burden of ten thousand griefs.
Now sits thy sorrows sucking of my blood,
O that it might be poison to their powers,
And that their lips might draw my bosom dry,
So Dauids love might ease him, though she die.
These violent passions come not from aboue,
Dauid and Bethsabe offend the highest,
To morn in this immeasurable sort.
O Absalon, Absalon, O my son, my son,
Would God that I had died for Absalon:
But he is dead, ah dead, Absalon is dead,
And Dauid lives to die for Absalon.
Why lies the Queen so prostrate on the ground?
Why is this company so Tragic hewed?
Why is the King now absent from his men?
And marches not in triumph through the gates?
Dauid awake, if sleep have shut thine eyes,
Sleep of affection, that thou can not see
The honour offered to the victors head,
Ioab brings conquest pierced on his spear,
And joy from all the Tribes of Israel.
Thou man of blood, thou sepulchre of death,
Whose marble breast entomb my bowels quick,
Did I not charge thee, nay entreat thy hand,
Even for my sake to spare my Absalon?
And hast thou now in spite of Dauids health,
And scorn to doe my heart some happiness,
Given him the sword, and spilt his purple soul?
What? irkes it Dauid, that he victor breaths,
That Iuda and the fields of Israel,
Should cleanse their faces from their childrens blood?
What art thou weary of thy royal rule?
Is Israels throne a Serpent in thine eyes,
And he that set thee there, so far from thanks,
That thou must curse his servant for his sake?
Hast thou not said, that as the morning light,
The cloudless morning, so should be thine house,
And not as flowers by the brightest rain,
Which grows up quickly, and as quickly fades?
Hast thou not said, the wicked are as thorns,
That cannot be preserved with the hand,
And that the man shall touch them, must be armed
With coats of iron, and garments made of steel,
Or with the shaft of a defenced spear?
And art thou angry he is now cut off,
That lead the guiltless swarming to their deaths,
And was more wicked then an host of men?
Advance thee from thy melancholy den,
And deck thy body with thy blissful robes,
Or by the Lord that sways the heaven, I swear,
Isle lead thine armies to another King,
Shall cheer them for their princely chivalry,
And not sit daunted, frowning in the dark,
When his fair looks, with Oil and Wine refreshed,
Should dart into their bosoms gladsome beams,
And fill their stomachs with triumphant feasts,
That when elsewhere sterne war shall sound his trump,
And call another battle to the field,
Fame still may bring thy valiant soldiers home,
And for their service happily confess
She wanted worthy trumps to sound their prowess,
Take thou this course and live, refuse, and die.
Come brother, let him sit there till he sink,
Some other shall advance the name of Ioab.
O stay my lords, stay, Dauid mourns no more,
But rises to give honour to your acts.
Then happy art thou Dauids fairest son,
That freed from the yoke of earthly toils,
And sequestered from sense of humane sins;
Thy soul shall joy the sacred cabinet
Of those divine Ideas, that present
Thy changed spirit with a heaven of bliss.
Then thou art gone, ah thou art gone my son
To heaven I hope my Absalon is gone,
Thy soul there placed in honour of the Saints
Or angels clad with immortality,
Shall reap a seuenfold grace, for all thy griefs,
Thy eyes now no more eyes but shining stars,
Shall deck the flaming heavens with novel lamps,
There shalt thou taste the drink of Seraphins,
And cheer thy feelings with archangels food,
Thy day of rest, thy holy Sabboth day
Shall be eternal, and the curtain drawn,
Thou shalt behold thy sovereign face to face,
With wonder knit in triple unity,
Unity infinite and innumerable,
Courage brave captains, Ioab; tale hath stirred,
And made the suit of Israel preserd.
Bravely resolved and spoken like a King,
Now may old Israel, and his daughters sing.

Cress cruor sanguines, satietur sanguine cress,
Quodspero scitio. O scitio, scitio, vendicta.
Truth well met.
Thanks Poetry, what makes thou upon a stage?
Shadows.
Then will I add bodies to the shadows,
Therefore depart and give Truth leave
To show her pageant.
Why will Truth be a Player?
No, but Tragedy like for to present
A Tragedy in England done but late,
That will revive the hearts of drooping minds.
Whereof?
Marry thus.
Richard Plantagenet of the House of York,
Claiming the Crown by wars, not by dissent,
Had as the Chronicles make manifest,
In the two and twentieth year of Henry the sixth,
By act of Parliament entailed to him
The Crown and titles to that dignity,
And to his offspring lawfully begotten,
After the decease of that forenamed King,
Yet not contented for to stay the time,
Made wars upon King Henry then the sixth,
And by outrage suppressed that virtuous King,
And won the Crown of England to himself,
But since at Wakefield in a battle pitched,
Outrageous Richard breathed his latest breath,
Leaving behind three branches of that line,
Three sons: the first was Edward now the King,
George of Clarence, and Richard Glosters Duke,
Then Henry claiming after his decease
His stile, his Crown and former dignity
Was quite suppressed, till this Edward the fourth.
But tell me truth, of Henry what ensued?
Imprisoned he, in the Tower of London lies,
By strict command, from Edward Englands King,
Since cruelly murdered, by Richard Glosters Duke.
Whose Ghost was that did appear to vs?
It was the ghost of George the duke of Clarece,
Who was attested in King Edwards reign,
Falsely of Treason to his royalty,
Imprisoned in the Tower was most unnaturally,
By his own brother, shame to parents stock,
By Glosters Duke drowned in a but of wine.
What shield was that he let fall?
A shield containing this, in full effect,
Blood sprinkled, springs: blood spilt, craves due revenge:
Whereupon he writes, Cress cruor,
Sanguis satietur, sanguine cress,
Quote spero scitio: O scitio scitio, vendicta.
What manner of man was this Richard Duke of Gloster?
A man ill shaped, crooked backed, lame armed, withal,
Valiantly minded, but tyrannous in authority,
So during the minority of the young Prince,
He is made Lord Protector over the Realm.
Gentiles suppose that Edward now hath reigned
Full two and twenty years, and now like to die,
Hath summoned all his Nobles to the Court,
To swear allegiance with the Duke his brother,
For truth unto his son the tender Prince,
Whose fathers soul is now near flight to God,
Leaving behind two sons of tender age,
Five daughters to comfort the haplesse Queen,
All under the protection of the Duke of Gloster:
Thus gentles, excuse the length by the matter,
And here begins Truths Pageant, Poetry
Wend with me.
Long live my sovereign, in all happiness.
An honourable age with Cressus wealth,
Hourly attend the person of the King.
And welcome you Peers of England unto your King.
For our unthankfulness the heavens hath thrown thee down.
I fear for our ingratitude, our angry God doth frown.
Why Nobles, he that lay me here,
Can raise me at his pleasure.
But my dear friends and kinsmen,
In what estate I now lie it is seen to you all,
And I feel my self near the dreadful stroke of death.
And the cause that I have requested you in friendly wise
To meet together is this,
That where malice &amp; envy sowing sedition in the harts of men
So would I have that admonished and friendly favours,
Overcome in the heart of yon Lord Marcus and Lord Hastings
Both, for how I have governed these two and twenty years,
I leave it to your discretions.
The malice hath still been an enemy to you both,
That in my life time I could never get any leg of amity betwixt you,
Yet at my death let me entreat you to embrace each other,
That at my last departure you may send my soul
To the joys celestial:
For leaving behind me my young son,
Your lawful King after my decease,
May be by your wise and grave counsel so governed,
Which no doubt may bring comfort
To his famous realm of England.
But (what saith Lord Marcus and Lord Hastings)
What not one word? nay then I see it will not be,
For they are resolute in their ambition.
Ah yield Lord Hastings,
And submit your selves to each other:
And you Lord Marcus, submit your self,
See here the aged King my father,
How he sues for peace betwixt you both:
Consider Lord Marcus, you are son to my mother the Queen,
And therefore let me entreat you to mitigate your wrath,
And in friendly sort, embrace each other.
Nay cease thy speech Elizabeth,
It is but folly to speak to them,
For they are resolute in their ambitious minds,
Therefore Elizabeth, I feel my self at the last instant of death,
And now must die being thus tormented in mind.
May it be that thou Lord Marcus,
That neither by entreaty of the Prince,
curtuous word of Elizabeth his daughter,
May withdraw thy ambition from me.
May it be that thou Lord Hastings,
Can not perceive the mark his grace aims at.
No I am resolute, except thou submit.
If thou be resolute give up the upshot,
And perhaps thy head may pay for the losses
Ah Gods, sith at my death you jar,
What will you do to the yoon Prince after my decease?
For shame I say, depart from my presence, and leave me to my self,
For these words strikes a second dying to my soul:
Ah my Lords, I thought I could have commanded
A greater thing then this at your hands,
But sith I cannot, I take my leave of you both,
And so depart and trouble me no more.
With shame and like your Majesty I submit therefore,
Craving humble pardon on my knees,
And would rather that my body shall be a pray to mine enemy,
Rather then I will offend my Lord at the hour
And instance of his death.
Ah thanks Lord Hastings.
Ah yield Lord Marcus, sith Lord Hastings
Is contentented to be united.
Ah yield Lord Marcus, thou art too obstinate.
My gracious Lord, I am content,
And humbly crave your graces pardon on my knee,
For my foul offence,
And see my Lord my breast opened to mine adversary,
That he may take revenge, then once it shall be said,
I will offend my gracious suffereigne.
Now let me see you friendly give one an other your hands.
With a good will ant like your grace,
Therefore Lord Marcus take here my hand,
Which was once vowed and sworn to be thy death,
But now through entreaty of my Prince,
I knit a league of amity for ever.
Well Lord Hastings, not in show but in deed,
Take thou here my hand, which was once vowed
To a shivered thy body in peecemeales,
That the fowls of the ayre should have fed
Their young withal,
But now upon aleageance to my Prince, I vow perfect love
And live friendship for ever.
Now for confirming of it, here take your oaths.
If I Lord Hastings falsify my league of friendship
Vowed to Lord Marcus, I crave confusion.
Like oath take I, and crave confusion.2 pages missing
Even when the greatest of his torments had left him.
But are the nobles agreed to the contentment of the Prince?
The Nobles and Peers are agreed as the King would wish them.
Lodwicke thou reuiuest me.
I but few thought that the agreement and his life would have ended together.
Why Lodwicke is he dead.
In brief mistress Shore, he hath changed his life.
His life, ah me unhappy woman,
Now is misery at hand,
Now will my foes triumph at this my fall,
Those whom I have done most good, will now forsake me.
Ah Hursly, when I entertained thee first,
I was far from change, so was I Lodwicke,
When I restored thee thy lands.
Ah sweet Edward, farewell my gracious Lord and sovereign,
For now shall Shores wife be a mirror and looking glass,
To all her enemies.
Thus shall I find Lodwicke, and have cause to say,
That all men are inconstant.
Why mistress Shore, for the loss of one friend,
Will you abandon the rest that wish you well?
Ah Lodwicke I must, for when the tree decays
Whose fruitful branch have flourished many a year,
Then farewell those joyful days and osspring of my heart,
But say Lodwicke, who hath the King made Protector
During the enormity of the young Prince.
He hath made his brother Duke of Gloster Protector.
Ah me, then comes my ruin and decay,
For he could never abide me to the death,
No he always hated me whom his brother loved so well,
Thus must I lament and say, all the world is inconstant.
But mistress Shore, comfort your self,
And think well of my Lord,
Who hath always been a helper unto you.
Indeed Lodwicke to condemn his honour I cannot,
For he hath always been my good Lord,
For as the world is fickle, so changes the minds of men.
Why mistress Shore, rather then want should oppress
You, that little land which you begged for me of the King,
Shall be at your dispose.
Thanks good Lodwicke.
O moister Morton, you are very welcome met,
I hope you think on me for my money.
I pray sir bear with me, and you shall have it,
With thanks too.
Nay, I pray sir let me have my money,
For I have had thanks and too much more then I looked for.
In faith sir you shall have it,
But you must bear with me a little,
But sir, I marvel how you can be so greedy for your money,
When you see sir, we are so uncertain of our own.
How so uncertain of mine own?
Why doest thou know any body will come to rob me?
Why no.
Wilt thou come in the night and cut my throat?
No.
Wilt thou and the rest of thy companions,
Come and set my house on fire?
Why no, I tell thee.
Why how should I then be uncertain of mine own?
Why sir, by reason the King is dead.
O sir! is the King dead?
I hope he hath given you no quittance for my debt.
No sir, but I pray stay a while, and you shall have it
As soon as I can.
Well I must be content, where nothing is to be had,
The King loses his right they say,
But who is this?
Marry sir it is mistress Shore,
To whom I am more beholding too for my service,
Then the dearest friend that ever I had.
And I for my sons pardon.
Now mistress Shore, how fare you?
Well Morton, but not so well as thou hast known me,
For I think I shall be driven to try my friends one day.
God forfend mistress Shore,
And happy be that Sun shall shine upon thee,
For preserving the life of my son.
Gramercies good father,
But how doth thy son, is he well?
The better that thou lives, doth he.
Thanks father, I am glad of it,
But come moister Lodwicke shall we go?
And you Morton, you'll bear vs company.
I mistress Shore,
For my Lord thinks long for our coming.
There there, huffer, but by your leave,
The Kings death is a maim to her credit,
But they say, there is my Lord Hastings in the Court,
He is as good as the As of hearts at maw,
Well even as they brew, so let them bake for me:
But I must about the streets, to see and I can meet
With such cold customers as they I met withal even now,
Mass if I meet with no better,
I am like to keep a bad hoshold of it.
My friends depart,
The hour commands your absence.
Leave me, and every man look to his charge.
Renowned and right worthy Protector,
Whose excelency far deserves the name of king then protector,
Sir William Casbie wishes my Lord,
That your grace may so govern the young Prince,
That the Crown of England may flourish in all happiness.
Ah young Prince, and why not I?
Or who shall inherit Plantagines but his son?
And who the King deceased, but the brother?
Shall law bridle nature, or authority hinder inheritance?
No, I say no: Principality brookes no equality,
Much less superiority,
And the title of a King, is next under the degree of a God,
For if he be worthy to be called valiant,
That in his life wins honour, and by his sword wins riches,
Why now I with renown of a soldier, which is never sold but
By weight, nor changed but by loss of life,
I reaped not the gain but the glory, and since it becomes
A son to maintain the honour of his deceased father,
Why should not I hazard his dignity by my brothers sons?
To be baser then  I disdain,
And to be more then Protector, the law deny,
Why my father got the Crown, my brother won the Crown,
And I will wear the Crown,
Or isle make them hop without their crowns that denies me:
Have I removed such logs out of my sight, as my brother Clarece
And king Henry the sixth, to suffer a child to shadow me,
Nay more, my nephew to disinherit me,
Yet most of all, to be released from the yoke of my brother
As I term it, to become subject to his son,
No death nor hell shall not withhold me, but as I rule I will reign,
And so reign that the proudest enemy shall not abide
The sharpest shower. Why what are the babes but a puff of
Gun-pouder? a mark for the soldiers, food for fishes,
Or lining for beds, devices enough to make them away,
Wherein I am resolute, and determining, needs no counsel,
Ho, whose within?
May it please your Majesty.
Ha villain, Majesty.
I speak but upon that which shall be my good Lord.
But whats he with thee?
A Messenger with a letter from the right honourale
The Duke of Buckingham.
Sir give place.
Ah how this title of Majesty, animates me to my purpose,
Rise man, regard no fall, happily this letter brings good luck,
May it be, or is it possible,
Doth Fortune so much favour my happiness
That I no sooner devise, but she sets abroach?
Or doth she but to try me, that raising me aloft,
My fall may be the greater, well laugh on sweet change,
Be as be may, I will never fear colours nor regard ruth,
Valour brings fame, and fame conquers death.
Perciuall.
My Lord.
For so thy letter declares thy name,
Thy trust to thy Lord, is a sufficient warrant
That I utter my mind fully unto thee,
And seeing thy Lord and I have been long foes,
And have found now so fit opportunity to join league,
To allay the proud enemy, tell him thus as a friend,
I do accept of his grace, and will be as ready to put in practise
To the uttermost of my power, what ere he shall be to devise,
But whereas he hath writ that the removing of the young
Prince from the Queens friends might do well,
Tell him thus, it is the only way to our purpose,
For he shall shortly come up to London to his Coronation,
At which instant, we will be both present,
And where by the help of thy Lord, I will so play my part,
That isle be more then I am, and not much less then I look for
No nor a hair breadth from that I am,
Aiudge thou what it is Perciual.
God send it my Lord, but my Lord willed me to satisfie you, and to tell you by word of mouth that he hath in readiness a brave company of men.
What power hath he?
A brave band of his own.
What number?
My Lord, to the number of five hundredth footmen. And horsemen eiders unto him, is my Lord Chamberlain, and my Lord Hastings.
Sounes, dares he trust the Lord Hastings.
I my Lord as his own life, he is secret I warrant you.
Well Perciuall, this matter is weighty and must not be slipped, therefore return this answer to thy Lord, that to morrow I will meet him, for to day I cannot, for now the funeral is past I must set a screen before the fire for fear of suspicion: again, I am now to strengthen my self by the controversy that is betwixt the kindred of the King deceased, and the Queen thats liuing, the young Prince is yet in hucsters handling, and they not thoroughly friends, now must I so work, that that water that drives the mill may drown it. I climb Perciuall, I regard more the glory then the gain, for the very name of a King redouble a mans life with fame, when death hath done his worst, and so commend me to thy Lord, and take thou this for thy pains.
I thank your grace, I humbly take my leave.
Why so, now Fortune make me a King, Fortune give me a kingdom, let the world report the Duke of Gloster was a King, therefore Fortune make me King, if I be but King for a year, nay but half a year, nay a month, a week, three days, one day, or half a day, nay an hour, swoons half an hour, nay sweet Fortune, clap but the Crown on my head, that the wassals may but once say, God save King Richards life, it is enough. Sirrha, who is there?
My Lord.
What hear thou about the Court?
Joy my Lord of your Protectorship for the most part,
Some murmur, but my Lord they be of the baser sort.
A mighty arm will sway the baser sort, authority doth terrify.
But what other news hear thou?
This my Lord, they say the young king is coming up to his coronation, attended on by his two uncles, Earl Rivers &amp; Lord Gray, and the rest of the Queens kindred.
A parlous bone to ground upon, and a rush stiffly knit, which if I could find a knot, I would give one half to the dogs and set fire on the other.
It is reported my Lord, but I know not whether it be true or no, that the Duke of Buckingham is up in the Marches of Wales with a band of men, and as they say, hee aims at the Crown.
Tush a shadow without a substance, and a fear without a cause: but yet if my neighbours house bee on fire, let me seek to save mine own, in trust is treason, time slippth, it is ill jesting with edge tools, or dallying with Princes matters, Isle strike whilst the iron is hot, and Isle trust never a Duke of Buckingham, no never a Duke in the world, further then I see him. And sirrha, so follow me.
I see my Lord is fully resolved to climb, but how hee climbs isle leave that to your judgements, but what his fall will be thats hard to say: But I marvel that the Duke of Buckingham and he are now become such great friends, who had wont to love one another so well as the spider doth the fly: but this I have noted, since he hath had the charge of Protector, how many noble men hath fled the realm, first the Lord Marcus son to the Queen, the Earl of Westmorland and Northumberland, are secretly fled: how this gear will cotton I know not. But what do I meddling in such matters, that should meddle with the untying of my Lords points, faith do even as a great many do beside, meddle with Princes matters so long, till they prove themselves beggars in the end. Therefore I for fear I should be taken nipping with any words, Isle set a locke on my lips, for fear my
tongue grow too wide for my mouth.
Right loving uncles, and the rest of this company, my mother hath written, and thinks it convenient that we dismiss our train, for fear the town of Northampton is not able to receiue vs: and again my uncle of Gloster may rather think we come of malice against him and his blood: therefore my Lords, let me here your opinions, for my words and her letters are all one: and besides I my self give consent.
Then thus may it please your grace, I will show my opinion. First note the two houses of Lancaster and York, the league of friendship is yet but greene betwixt them, and little cause of variance may cause it break, and thereby I think it not requisite to discharge the copany because of this. The Duke of Buckingham is up in the Marches of VVales with a great power, and with him is joined the Protector, for what cause I know not, therefore my Lords, I have spoken my mind boldly, but do as your honours shall think good.
Why my Lord Rivers, wherefore is he Protector but for the Kings safety?
I sir Thomas Vaughan, and therefore a traitor, because he is Protector.
We have the Prince in charge, therefore we need not care.
We have the Prince, but they the authority.
Why take you not the Duke of Buckingham for the Kings friend?
Yes, and yet we may misdoubt the Duke of Gloster as a foe.
Why then my Lord Rivers, I think it is convenient that we leave you here behind vs at Northamton, for conference with them, and if you hear their pretence be good towards the King, you may in Gods name make return &amp; come with them,
but if not, leave them and come to vs with speed. For my sister the Queen hath willed that we should dismiss our company, and the King himself hath agreed to it, therefore we must needs obey.
If it please your grace I am content, and humbly take my leave of you all.
Farewell good uncle, ah gods, if I do live my fathers years as God forbid but I may, I will so root out this malice &amp; envy sown among the nobility, that I will make them weary that were the first beginners of these mischiefs.
Worthily well spoken of your princely Majesty,
Which no doubt shows a king-like resolution.
A toward young Prince, and no doubt forward to all virtue, whose reign God long prosper among vs.
But come uncle, let vs forward of our journey towards London.
We will attend upon your Majesty.
Come on mine Ost, what doest thou understand my tale or no?
I faith my guest you have amazed me already, and to hear it again, it will mad me altogether, but because I may think upon it the better, I pray you let me hear it once more.
Why then thus, I serve the right honourable the Lord Protector.
I, I know that too well.
Then this is his graces pleasure, that this night he will be lodged in thy house, thy fare must be sumptuous, thy lodgings cleanly, his men used friendly and with great courtesy, and that he may have his lodging prepared as near Lord River  sible may be
Why sir if this be all, this is done already.
Nay more.
Nay sir, &amp; you love me no more, here is too much already.
Nay, my Lords graces pleasure is further, that when all thy guess have tan their chambers, that thou convey into my Lords hands the keys of every several chamber, and what my Lords pleasure is further, thou shalt know in the morning.
How locke in my guess like prisoners, why doe you hear my guess? me thinks there should be little better then treason in these words you have uttered.
Treason villain, how dare thou have a thought of treason against my Lord, therefore you were best be brief, and tell me whether you will do it or no?
Alas what shall I do? who were I best to offend? shall I betray that good old Earl that hath lain at my house this forty years? why and I doe hee will hang me: nay then on the other side, if I should not do as my Lord Protector commands, he will chop off my head, but is there no remedy?
Come sir be brief, there is no remedy, therefore be brief and tell me straight.
Why then sir here is my hand, tell my Lord Protector he shall have it, I will do as he commands me, but even against my will, God is my witness.
Why then farewell mine Ost.
Farewell even the worst guest that ever came to my house, A masters, masters, what a troublesome vocation am I crept into, you think we that be In-keepers get all the world, but I think I shall get a fair halter to my neck, but I must go see all things done to my great grief.
Ho mine Ost, Chamberlain wheres my key?
What pend up like a prisoner? But stay, I fear I am betrayed,
The sudden sight of Glosters Duke, doth make me sore afraid:
Isle speak to him, and gently him salute,
Tho in my heart I envy much the man;
God morrow my Lord Protector to your grace,
And Duke of Buckingham God morrow too,
Thanks noble Dukes for our good cheer, &amp; for your copany.
Thou wretched Earl, whose aged head imagines nought
but treachery,
Like Iudas thou admitted wast to sup with vs last night,
But heavens prevented thee our else, and left thee in this plight:
Greeu'st thou that I the Gloster Duke, should as Protector sway?
And were you he was left behind, to make vs both away?
Wilt thou be ringleader to wrog, &amp; must you guide the realm?
Nay over board al such mates I hurl, whilst I do guide the helm:
Isle weed you out by one and one, Isle burn you up like chafe,
Isle rend your stock up by the roots, that yet in triumphs laugh.
Alas good Dukes for ought I know, I never did offend,
Except unto my Prince vnloyall I have been,
Then show just cause, why you exclaim so rashly in this sort,
So falsely thus me to condemn, upon some false report:
But am I here as prisoner kept, imprisoned here by you?
Then know, I am as true to my Prince, as the proudest in thy crew.
A bravely spoke good old Earl, who tho his limbs be number.
He hath his tongue as much at use, as tho his years were young.
Spekest you the truth, how dare you speak, for justice to apeale?
When as thy packing with thy Prince, thy falsehood do reveal.
A Rivers blush, for shame to speak, like traitor as thou art.
A brayd you me as traitor to your grace:
No although a prisoner, I return defiance in thy face.
The Chronicles I record, talk of my fidelity, &amp; of my progeny,
Where, as in a glass you moist behold, thy ancestors &amp; their treachery.
The wars in France, Irish coflicts, &amp; Scotland knows my trust,
When thou hast kept thy skin vnscard, and let thine armour rust
How thou unjustly here exclaim'st,
Yea far from love or kin,
Was this the oath which at our princes death,
With vs thou did combine?
But time permits now, to tell thee all my mind:
For well tic known that but for fear, you never wold have clind.
Let Commons now have it in hand, the matter is begun,
Of whom I fear the lesser sort, upon thy part will run.
My Lords, I cannot breath it out in words like to you: but this,
My honour I will set to sale, let any comman man come in,
And say Earl Rivers faith unto his Prince did quail,
Then will I lose my lands and life, but if none so can doo,
Then thou Protector iniur'st me, and thy copartner too:
But since as Judges here you are, and taking no remorse,
Spare me not, let me have law, in justice do your worst.
My Lord, lay down a cooling card, this game is gone too far,
You have him fast, now cut him off, for fear of civil war.
Injurious Earl, I hardly brooke, this portion thou hast given,
Thus with my honour me to touch, but thy ruth shall begin.
But as thou art I leave thee here,
Unto the officers custody,
First bare him to Pomphret Castle,
Charge them to keep him secretly:
And as you hear from me so deal,
Let it be done immediately:
Take from our Garrison one whole band,
To guard him thither safely.
And send thou me to common Jail?
Nay then I know thy mind:
God bless these young and tender babes,
That I do leave behind.
And God aboue protect them day and night,
Those are the marks thou aim at, to rid them from their right.
Farewell sweet England and my country men,
Earl Rivers leads the way:
Yet would my life might rid you from this thrall,
But for my stock &amp; kindred to the Queen, I greatly fear the all.
And thus disloyal Duke farewell, when ever this is known,
The shame and infamy thereof, be sure will be thine own.
So now my Lord of Buckingham, let vs hoist up sail while the wind serves, this hot beginning must have a quick dispatch, therefore I charge and command straightly, that every high way be laid close, that none may be suffered to carry this news before we our selves come, for if word come before vs, then is our pretence bewraid, and all we have done to no effect. If any ask the cause why they may not pass, use my authority, and if he resist shoot him through. Now my Lord of Buckingham, let vs take post horse to Stony Stratford, where happily isle say such grace to the Princes dinner, that I will make the deuoutest of them forget what meat they eat and yet all for the best I hope.
Lord Gray, you do discomfort the King by reason of your heaviness.
Alas sir Richard, how can I be merry when we have so great a charge of his grace: and again this makes me to grieve the more, because wee cannot hear from Earl Rivers, which makes me think the Protector and he have been at some words.
Why good uncle comfort your self, no doubt my unkle Earl Rivers is well, &amp; is coming no doubt with my uncle of Gloster to meet vs, else we should have heard to the countryrye. If any have cause to fear, it is my self, therefore good uncle comfort your self and be not sad.
The sweet joyce of such a grape would comfort a man were he half dead, and the sweet words of such a Prince would make men carlesse of mishaps, how dangerous soever.
Lord Gray, we hear now by all likelihoods the Protector not to be far, therefore wee are to entertain him and the Duke of Buckingham with courtesy, both for the Princes behalf and for our own.
Sir Richard Hapc, I shall hardly show the Protector or the Duke of Buckingham any merry countenance, considering how hardly I have been used by them both, but yet for love to my prince I will bridle my affectio, but in good time they come.
Long live my Princely Nephew in all happiness.
Thanks uncle of Gloster for your courtesy, yet you have made hast, for we looked not for you as yet.
Therein I show my humble duty to your grace, whose life I wish to redouble your deceased fathers days.
Thanks good uncle.
Long live my gracious Prince.
Thanks Buckingham, but uncle you will bear vs company towards London?
For that cause we came.
Gentlemen on before keep your rooms, how now Lord Gray, doo you jostle in the presence of the King? This is more then needs.
My Lord, I scarce touched you, I hope it be no offence.
Sir no great offence, but inward envy will burst out, No Lord Gray, you cannot hide your malice to vs of the Kings blood.
Why good uncle let me know the cause of your suddeign quarrel?
Marry thus noble Nephew, the old wound of envy, being rubbed by Lord Greys venomous rashness, is grown to such a venomous sore that it is incurable, without remove of dead flesh.
Lord Gray, I do so much dislike thy abuse, that were it not in presence of the Prince, I would bid thee combat: but thus and it shall like your grace, I arest, &amp; attach this Lord Gray, Sir Thomas Vaughon, and Richard Hapce, of high treason to your grace. And that Lord Gray hath conueyed money out of the Tower to relieve our enemies the Scots, and now by currying favour with your Majesty, he thinks it to be hid.
Only this I add, you govern the Prince without my authority, allowing me no more then the bare name of Protector, which I will have in the despite of you, and therefore as your competitor Earl Rivers is already imprisoned, so shall you be, till time afford the law to take place.
But whereas we are attached as traitors to his grace, and govern him without your authority, why we have authority from the mother Queen. And for the delivery of the money to the Scots, it was done by a general consent of you all, and that I have your hands to show for my discharge, therefore your arest &amp; attachment is not lawful: &amp; yet as lawful as your quarrel is right.
Thy presumption condemns thee Lord Gray, thy arest is lawful. Therefore see them speedily and secretly imprisoned, and after the coronation they shall answer it by law, mean while, Officers look to your charge.
A Gods, and is it justice without my consent? Am I a King and bear no authority? My loving kindred committed to prison as traitors in my presence, and I stand to give aim at them. A Edward, would thou lie by thy fathers side, or else he had lived till thou had bin better able to rule. If my near kindred be committed to prison, what remains for me, a crown? A but how? so beset with sorrows, that the care &amp; grief will kill me ere I shall enjoy my kingdom. Well since I cannot command, I will entreat Good uncle of Gloster, for all I can say little, but for my uncle Lord Gray, what need he be a thief or convey money out of the Tower, when he hath sufficient of his own? But good uncle let me bail them all: If not, I will bail my uncle Lord Gray if I may.
Your grace undertakes you know not what, the matters are perilous, especially against the Lord Gray.
What perilous matters, considering he is a friend to vs?
He may be a friend to win favour, &amp; so climb to promotion in respect of his equals. His equals, nay his betters.
I know my uncle will conceal no treason, or dangerous seeresie from vs.
Yes secrets that are too subtle for babes, Alas my Lord you are a child, and they use you as a child: but they consult and conclude of such matters, as were we not careful, would prove prejudicial to your Majesties person. Therefore let not your grace fear any thing by our determination, for as my authority is only under your grace, so shall my loyalty deserve hereafter
the just recompense of a true subject, therefore I having charge fro my brother your father, &amp; our late deceased king, during the minority of your grace, I will use my authority as I see good.
Ay me unhappy king.
Nay let not your grace be dismayed for our imprisonmet, but I would we could warrant your grace from harm, &amp; so we humbly take our leaves of your grace, hoping that ere long we shall answer by law to the shame &amp; disgrace of you all.
Go, you shall answer it by law.
But come uncle shall we to Lone. to our untimely cronatio?
What else and please your majesty, where by the way I will appoint trusty Officers about you.
Sound Trumpet in this parley, God save the King.
Richard.
May it please your grace to show to your children the cause of your heaviness, that we knowing it, may be copartners of your sorrows.
Ay me poor husbandless queen, &amp; you poor fatherless princes.
Good mother expect the living, and forget the dead. What tho our father be dead, yet behold his children, the image of himself.
Ay poor Princes, my mourning is for you and for your brother, who is gone up to an untimely crownation.
Why mother he is a Prince, and in hands of our two uncles, Earl Rivers, &amp; Lord Gray, who will no doubt be carefull of his estate.
I know they will, but kings have mortal enemies, as well as friends that esteem and regard them. A sweet children, when I am at rest my nightly dreams are dreadful. Me thinks as I lie in my bed, I see the league broken which was sworn at the death of your kingly father, tic this my children and many other causes of like importance, that makes your aged mother to lameant as she doth.
May it please your grace.
A my son, no more grace, for I am so sore disgraced, that without Gods grace, I fall into despair with my self, but who is this?
What art thou that with thy ghastly looks preaseth into sanctuary, to affright our mother Queen.
A sweet Princes, doth my countenance bewray me? My news is doubtful and heavy.
Then utter it to vs, that our mother may not hear it.
A yes my friend, speak what ere it be.
Then thus may it please your grace, The young prince coming up to his coronation, attended on by his two uncles, Earl Rivers, and Lord Gray, and the rest of your kindred, was by the Duke of Buckingham and the Protector, met at stony Stratford, where on a sudden grew malice between the Duke of Buckingham and the Lord Gray, but in the end, the Duke of Buckinghams malice grew so great, that he arrested and attached all those of your kindred of high treason, whereupon the Protector being too rash in judgment, hath committed them all to Pomphret Castle.
Where I fear he will butcher them all, but where is the Prince my son?
He remains at London in the Bishops palace, in the hands of the Protector.
A traitors, will they lay hands on their Prince, and imprison his Peers, which no doubt means well towards him: But tell me, art not thou servant to the Arch-Bishop of York?
Yes and it please your grace, for himself is here at hand with Letters from the Council, and here he comes.
But here my friend, grief had almost made me forget thy reward.
A come my Lord, thou bring the heavy news, come shoot thine arrow, and hit this heart that is almost dead with grief already.
What ere my news be, have patience, the Duke of Gloster
greets your grace.
Draw home my Lord, for now you hit the mark.
The Prince your son doth greet your grace.
A happy gale that blew that arrow by, A let me see the Letter that he sent, perhaps it may prolong my life a while.
How doth my brother, is he in health my Lord?
In health sweet Prince, but lunges to have thy companie.
I am content, if my mother will let me go.
Content or not, sweet Prince it must be so.
Hold, and have they persuaded thee my son to have thy brother too away from me, nay first I will know what shall become of thee, before I send my other son to them.
Look on this Letter and advise your self, for thus the Council hath determined.
And have they chosen thee among the rest; for to persuade me to this enterprise? No my Lord, and thus persuade your self, I will not send him to be butchered.
Your grace misdoubts the worst, they send for him onlie to have him bedfellow to the King, and there to stay &amp; keep him company. And if your son miscarry, then let his blood be laid unto my charge: I know their drifts and what they do pretend, for they shall both this night sleep in the Tower, and to morrow they shall come forth to his happy cronation. Upon my honour this is the full effect, for see the ambushed nobles are at hand to take the Prince away from you by force, if you will not by fair means let him go.
Why my Lord will you break Sanctuary, and bring in rebels to affright vs thus? No, you shall rather take away my life before you get my boy away from me.
Why Madame have you taken Sanctuary?
I my Lord, and high time too I trow.
A heavy case when Princes fly for aide, where cutthroats, rebels, and bankerouts should be. But Madame what answer do you return, if I could persuade you, it were best to let him go.
But for I see you counsel for the best, I am content that you shall have my son, in hope that you will send him safe to me, here I deliver him into your hands.
Farewell my boy, commend me to thy brother.
Mother farewell, and farewell sister too, I will but see my brother and return to you.
Tears stops my speech. Come let vs in my Lord.
I will attend upon your grace. Hold take the Prince, the Queen &amp; I have done, Isle take my leave, and after you isle come.
How now my friend, shall I go to my brother?
What else sweet Prince, and for that cause wee are come, to bear you company.
Why thus by keeping company, am I become like unto those with whom I keep company. As my Lord hopes to wear the Crown, so I hope by that means to have preferment, but in steed of the Crown, the blood of the headles light upon his head: he hath made but a wrong match, for blood is a threatner and will have revenge. He makes havoc of all to bring his purpose to pass: all those of the Queens kindred that were commeted to Pomphret Castle, hee hath caused them to be secretly put to death without iudgemet: the like was never seen in England. He spares none whom he but mistrusted to be a hinderer to his proceedings, he is straight chopped up in prison The valiant Earl of Oxford being but mistrusted, is kept close prisoner in Hames Castle. Again, how well Doctor Shaw hath pleased my Lord, that preached at Paules Cross yesterday, that proved the two Princes to be bastards, whereupon in the after noon came down my Lord Mayor and the Aldermen to Baynard Castle, and offered my Lord the whole estate upon him, and offered to make him King, which he refused so faintly, that if it had been offered once more, I know he would have taken it, the Duke of Buckingham is gone about it, and is now in the Guild Hall making his Oration. But here comes my Lord.
Catesby content thee, I have warned the Lord Hastings to this Court, and since he is so hard to be won, tic better to cut him off then suffer him, he hath been all this while partaker to our secrets, and if he should but by some mislike utter it, then were we all cast away.
Nay my Lord do as you will, yet I have spoken what I can in my friends cause.
Goto no more ado Catesby, they say I have bin a long sleeper to day, but isle be awake anon to some of their costs. But sirrha are those men in readiness that I appointed you to get?
I my Lord, &amp; give diligent attendance upon your grace.
Goto, look to it then Catesby, get thee thy weapons ready, for I will enter the Court.
I will my Lord.
Doth my Lord say he hath been a long sleeper to day? There are those of the Court that are of another opinion, that thinks his grace lies never log enough a bed. Now there is court held to day by diverse of the Council, which I fear me will cost the Lord Hastings and the Lord Standley their best caps: for my Lord hath willed me to get half a dozen ruffians in readiness, and when he knocks with his fist upon the board, they to rush in, and to cry, treason, treason, and to lay hands upon the Lord Hastings, and the Lord Stanley, which for fear I should let slip, I will give my diligent attendance.
Come bring him away, let this suffice, thou and that accursed sorceress the mother Queen hath bewitched me, with assistance of that famous strumpet of my brothers, Shores wife: my withered arm is a sufficient testimony, deny it if thou can: lay not Shores wife with thee last night?
That she was in my house my Lord I cannot deny, but not for any such matter. If.
If villain, feed thou me with Ifs &amp; ands, go fetch me a Priest, make a short shrift, and dispatch him quickly For by the blessed Saint Paule I swear, I will not dine till I see the
traitors head, away sir Thomas, suffer him not to speak, see him executed straight, &amp; let his copartner the Lord Standly be carried to prison also, tic not his broke head I have given him, shall exscues him.
Catesbie go you and see it presently proclaimed throughout the City of London by a Herald of Arms, that the cause of his death and the rest, were for conspiring by Witchcraft the death of me and the Duke of Buckingham, that so they might govern the King and rule the realm, I think the proclamation be almost done.
I my good Lord, and finished too.
Well then about it. But hear thou Catesbie, mean while I will listen after success of the Duke of Buckingham, who is labouring all this while with the Citizens of London to make me King, which I hope shall be shortly, for thou see our foes now are fewer, and we nearer the mark then before, and when I have it, look thou for the place of thy friend the Lord Hastings, mean while about thy business.
I thank your grace.
Now sirrha to thee, there is one thing more undone, which grieves me more then all the rest: and to say the truth, it is of more importance then all the rest.
Ah that my Lord would utter it to his Page, then should I count my self a happy man, if I could ease my Lord of that great doubt.
I commend thy willingness, but it is too mighty and reaches the stars.
The more weighty it is, the sooner shall I by doing it, increase your honours good liking toward me.
Be assured of that, but the matter is of weight &amp; reat importance, and doth concern the state.
Why my Lord, I will choke them with gifts that sha perform it, therefore good my Lord, trust me in this cause.
Indeed thy trust I know to be so true, that I care not to
utter it unto thee. Come hither, &amp; yet the matter is too weightie for so mean a man.
Yet good my Lord, utter it.
Why thus it is, I would have my two Nephews the young Prince and his brother secretly murdered, Sownes vilelain tic out, wilt thou do it? or wilt thou betray me?
My Lord you shall see my forwardness herein, I am acquainted with one Iames Terrell, that lodgeth-hard by your honours chamber, with him my Lord will I so work, that soon at night you shall speak with him.
Of what reputation or calling is that Terrell, may we trust him with that which once known, were the utter confuzion of me and my friends for ever?
For his trust my Lord, I dare be bound, only this, a poor gentleman he is, hoping for preferment by your grace, and upon my credit my Lord, he will see it done.
Well in this be very circumspect and sure with thy diligence, be liberal, and look for a day to make thee bless thy self, wherein thou seruedst so good a Lord. And now that Shores wives goods be confiscate, go from me to the Bishop of Lonedon, and see that she receive her open penance, let her be turned out of prison, but so bare as a wretch that worthily hath deserued that plague: and let there be straight proclaimation made by my Lord the Mayor, that none shall relieve her nor pity her, and privy spies set in every corner of the City, that they may take notice of them that relieves her: for as her beginning was most famous aboue all, so will I have her end most infamous aboue all. Have care now my boy, and win thy masters heart for ever.
Ah unfortunate Shores wife, dishonour to the King, a shame to thy country, and the only blot of defame to all thy kindred: Ay why was I made fair that a King should favour me? But my friends should have preferred discipline before officetion: for they know of my folly, yea my own husband knew of my breach of disloyalty, and yet suffered me, by reason hee
knew it bootless to kick against the prick. A sweet King Edward, little did thou think Shores wife should have been so hardly used, thy unnatural brother not consent with my goods which are yet confiscate in his custody, but yet more to add to my present misery, hath proclaimed upon great penalty, that none whatsoever, shall either aide or succour me, but here being comfortless to die in the streets with hunger. I am constrained to beg, but I fear tic in vain, for none will pity me. Yet here come one to whom I have done good, in restoring his lands that were lost, now will I try him to see if he will give me anything.
A time how thou suffrest fortune to alter estates, &amp; championgest the minds of the good for the worst. How many headless Peers sleep in their graves, whose places are furnish with they inferiors? Such as are neither nobly borne, nor virtuously minded. My heart hardly bewails the loss of the young King, by the outrage of the Protector, who hath proclaimed himself King, by the name of Richard the third. The Commons murmure at it greatly, that the young King and his brother should be imprisoned, but to what end tic hard to say, but many think they shall never come forth again. But God do all for the best and that the right heirs may not be utterly overthrown.
A gods what a grief is it for me to ask, where I have given.
A my good Lord Hastings, how innocently thou diedst the heavens bear witness.
Good sir take pity upon me, and relieve me.
Indeed tic pity to see so fair a face to ask for alms; But tell me, hast thou no friends?
Yes sir I had many friends, but when my chiefest friend of all died, the rest then forsook me.
Belike then thy fact was notorious, that thy fiends leauing thee would let thee go as a spoil for villains. But hearst
thou, I prithee tell me the truth, and as I am a gentleman, I will pity thee?
A Lodowick, tell thee the truth, why half this intreatie served thee, when thy lands had been clean gone had it not been for Shores wife, and doest thou make me so long to beg for a little.
Indeed my lands I had restored me by mistress Shore, but may this be she?
I Lodowicke, I am she that begged thy lands of King Edward the fourth, therefore I pray thee bestow something on me.
A gods what is this world, and how uncertain are riches? Is this she that was in such credit with the King? Nay more, that could command a King indeed? I cannot deny but my lands she restored me, but shall I by relieving of her hurt my self, no: for straight proclamation is made that none shall succour her, therefore for fear I should be seen talk with her, I will shun her company and get me to my chamber, and there set down in heroical verse, the shameful end of a Kings Concubine, which is no doubt as wonderful as the desolation of a kingdom.
A Lodowick if thou wilt give me nothing, yet stay and talk with me. A no he shuns my company, all my friends now forsake me: In prosperity I had many, but in adversity none. A gods have I this for my good I have done, for when I was in my chiefest pomp, I thought that day well spent wherein I might pleasure my friend by suits to the King, for if I had spoken, he would not have said nay. For tho he was King, yet Shores wife swayed the sword. I where need was, there was I bountiful, and mindful I was still upon the poor to relieve them and now none will know me nor succour me: therefore here shall I die for want of sustenance. Yet here comes another whom I have done good unto in saving the life of his son, well I will try him, to see if he will give me any thing.
No men no laws, no Princes no orders, alls hushed neighbore now hes king, but before he was king how was the tems thwacked with ruffians? what frays had we in the streets? Now he hath proclaimed peace between Scotland and England for six years, to what end I know not, usurpers had need to be wise.
A good sir relieve me, and bestow something upon me.
A neighbour, hedges have eyes, and high-wayes have ears, but who first a beggar-woman? the streets are full of them, In faith. But hears thou, hast thou no friends that thou goosed a begging so?
Yes sir I had friends, but they are all dead as you are.
Why am I dead neighbour? why thou arrant queen what meanst thou by that?
I mean they are dead in charity. But I pray sir, had not you the life of your son saved in the time of king Edward the fourth, by one Shores wife?
Yes mary had I, but art thou a sprig of the same bough? I promise you neighbor I thought so, that so idle a huswife could not be without the acquaintance of so noble a strumpet: well for her sake isle give thee somewhat.
Nay then know, that I am she that saved the life of thy condemned son.
Who art thou Shores wife? Lye still purse, neighbour I would not for twenty pounds have given her one farthing, the proclamation is so hard by king Richard. Why minion are you she that was the dishonour to the King? the shame to her husband, the discredit to the City? Hear you, lay your fingers to work, and get thereby somewhat to maintain you. O neighbore I grow very choleric, and thou did save the life of my son, why if thou had not, another would: and for my part, I would he had been hanged seven years ago, it had saved me a great deal of money then. But come let vs go in, &amp; let the queen alone.
Alas thus am I become an open shame to the world, here shall I die in the streets for want of sustenance, alas is my fact so heinous that none will pity me? Yet here comes anothere to whom I have done good, who is least able to pleasure me, yet I will try him, to see if he will give me any thing.
Now sir, who but king Richard bears sway, and hath proclaimed Iohn Earl of Linclone, heir apparent to the Crown, the young Princes they are in the Tower, nay some says more, they are murdered. But this makes me to muse, the Duke of Bucking ham and the King is at such variance, that did all in all to help him to the Crown, but the Duke of Buckingham is rid down to Breaknock. Castle in Wales, and there he means to raise up a power to pull down the usurper: but let them agree as they will, for the next fair wind isle over seas.
A Shores wife, so near driven, to beg of a serving-man, I, necessity hath no law, I must needs. Good sir relieve me, and give me something.
Why what art thou?
In brief Morton, I am Shores wife, that have done good to all.
A fool, and ever thy own enemy. In troth mistress Shore, my store is but small, yet as it is, weal part stakes, but soft I cannot do what I would, I am watched.
Good Morton relieve me.
What should I relieve my Kings enemy?
Why thou promised thou would.
I tell thee I will not, &amp; so be answered. Sownes I would with all my heart, but for yonder villain, a plague on him.
An honest fellow I warrant him. How now Shores wife, will none relieve thee?
No none will relieve her, that hath been good to all.
Why it were pity to do thee good, but me thinks she is fulsome and stinks.
If I be fulsome shun my company, for none but thy Lord sought my misery, and he hath undone me.
Why hath he undone thee? nay thy wicked and naughtie life hath undone thee, but if thou want maintenance, why doest thou not fall to thy old trade again?
Nay villain, I have done open penance, and am sorry for my sins that are past.
Sownes is Shores wife become an holy whore, nay then we shall never have done.
Why hang thee, if thy faults were so written in thy forehead as mine is, it would be as wrong with thee. But I prethie leave me, and get thee from me.
And cannot you keep the City but you must run gadding to the Court, and you stay here a little longer, isle make you be set away, and for my part, would all whoores were so serued, then there would be fewer in England then there be. And so farewell good mistress Shore.
And all such usurping kings as thy Lord is, may come to a shameful end, which no doubt I may live yet to see. Therefore sweet God forgive all my foul offence:
And though I have done wickedly in this world,
Into hell fire, let not my soul be hurled.
Moister Terrell, the King hath written, that for one night I should deliver you the keys, and put you in full posseszion But good M. Terrell, may I be so bold to demand a queston without offence?
Else God forbid, say on what ere it be.
Then this moister Terrell, for your coming I partly know the cause, for the king oftentimes hath sent to me to have them both dispatcht, but because I was a servant to their fathere being Edvvard the fourth, my heart would never give me to do the deed.
Why sir Robert you are beside the matter, what need
you use such speeches what matters are between the King and me, I pray you leave it, and deliver me the keys.
A here with tears I deliver you the keys, and so farwell moister Terrell.
Alas good sir Robert, hee is kind hearted, but it must not prevail, what I have promised the King I must perform. But ho Miles Forest.
Here sir.
Miles Forest, have you got those men I spake of, they must be resolute and pitiless.
I warrant you sir, they are such pitiless villains, that all London cannot match them for their villainy, one of their names is Will Sluter, yet the most part calls him black Will, the other is Jack Dentin, two murderous villains that are resolute.
I prithee call them in that I may see them, and speak with them.
Ho Will and Jack.
Here sir, we are at hand.
These be they that I told you of.
Come hither sirs, to make a long discourse were but a folly, you seem to be resolute in this cause that Miles Forest hath delivered to you, therefore you must cast away pity, &amp; not so much as think upon favour, for the more stern that you are, the more shall you please the King.
Zownes sir, ne'er talk to vs of favour, tic not the first that Jack and I have gone about.
Well said, but the Kings pleasure is this, that he will have no blood shed in the deed doing, therefore let me hear your advises?
Why then I think this moister Terrell, that as they sit at supper there should be two dags ready charged, and so suddeinly to shoot them both through.
No, I like not that so well, what says thou Will, what is thy opinion?
Tush, hears more ado then needs, I pray bring me where they are, and isle take them by the heals and beat their brains against the walls.
Nay that I like not, for tic too tyrannous.
Then hear me moister Terrell, let Will take one, and isle take another, and by the life of Jack Douton weal cut both their throats.
Nay sirs, then hear me, I will have it it done in this order, when they be both a bed and at rest, Miles Forest thou shalt bring them up both, and between two feather beds smother them both.
Why this is very good, but stand aside, for here comes the Princes, isle bring you word when the deed is done.
How fares my noble Lord and loving brother?
A worthy brother, Richard Duke of York, my cause of sorrow is not for my self, but this is it that adds my sorrow more, to see our uncle whom our father left as our Protector in minority, should so digress from duty, love and zeal, so unkindly thus to keep vs up prisoners, and know no sufficient cause for it.
Why brother comfort your self, for tho he detain vs a while, he will not keep vs long, but at last he will send vs to our loving mother again: whither if it please God to send vs, I doubt not but our mother would keep vs so safe, that all the Prelates in the world should not deprive her of vs again: so much I assure my self of. But here comes Miles Forest, I prethy Miles tell my kingly brother some merry story to pass away the time, for thou see he is melancholy.
No Miles, tell me no merry story, but answer me to one question, what was he that walked with thee in the Gardeign, me thought he had the keys?
My Lord, it was one that was appointed by the King o be an aid to sir Thomas Brokenbury.
Did the King, why Miles Forest, am not I King?
I would have said my Lord your uncle the Protector.
Nay my kingly uncle I know he is now, but let him enjoy both Crown and kingdom, so my brother and I may but enjoy our lives and liberty. But tell me, is sir Robert Brokenbery clean discharged?
No my Lord, he hath but charge for a night or two.
Nay then, new officers, new laws, would we had kept the old still. But who are they whose ghastly looks doth present a dying fear to my living body. I prithee tell me Miles what are they?
One my Lord is called Jack Dentin, the other is called Will Slawter. But why starts your grace?
Slawter, I pray God he come not to slaughter my brothere and me, for from murder and slaughter, good Lord deliver vs. But tell me Miles is our lodging prepared?
I my Lord, if it please your brother &amp; you to walk up.
Then come brother, we will go to bed.
I will attend upon your grace.
Come Miles Forest bear vs company.
Sirs stay you two here, and when they are a sleep isle call you up.
I promise thee Will, it grieves me to see what moan these young Princes make, I had rather then forty pounds I had ne'er tan it in hand, tic a dangerous matter to kill innocent princes, I like it not.
Why you base slave, are you faint hearted, a little thing would make me strike thee, I promise thee.
Nay go forward, for now I am resolute: but come, lets too it.
I prithee stay, heel call vs up anon. But sirrha Jack, did thou mark how the King started when he heard my name? What will he do when he feels me?
But ho sirs, come softly, for now they are at rest.
Come we are ready, by the mass they are a sleep indeed.
I hear they sleep, and sleep sweet Princes, never wake
no more, for you have seen the last light in this world.
Come press them down, it boots not to cry again,  upon them so lustily. But moister Forest now they are dead t shall we do with them?
Why go and bury them at the heap of stones at the stair foot  I go and tell moister Terrell that the deed is done.
Well we will, farewell moister Forest.
I  now Miles Forest, is this deed dispatcht?
I sir, a bloody deed we have performed.
But tell me, what hast thou done with them?
I have conveyed them to the stairs foot among a heap of stones, and anon isle carry them where they shall be no more found again, nor all the cronicles shall ne'er make mentio what shall become of them: yet good moister Terrell, tell the King my name, that he may but reward me with a kingly thanks.
I will go certify the King with speed, that Miles Forest,
Will Slawter, and Jack Dentin, they three have done the deed.
And so farewell.
Ah good my Lord, save my life.
Ah villain, how can thou ask for mercy, when thou hast so unjustly betrayed me?
I desire your grace but give me leave to speak.
I speak thy last villain, that those that hear it, may see how unjustly thou hast betrayed me.
Then thus my Lord. First, the proclamation was death to him that harboured your grace.
Ah villain, and a thousand crowns to him that could
betray me.
Ah my Lord, my obeisance to my Prince is more.
Ah villain, thou betraiedst me for lucre, and not for dutie to thy Prince, why Banister, a good servant thinks his life well spent, that spends it in the quarrel of his moister. But villain make thy self ready, and here receive thy death.
Henry Duke of Buckingham, I arest thee in King Richards name as a traitor.
Well Herald, I will obey thy rest. But am I arrested in King Richards name, usurping Richard, that insatiate blood succour, that traitor to God &amp; man. Ah Richard, did I in Guild-Hall plead the Orator for thee, and held thee in all thy sly and wicked practises, and for my reward doest thou a lot me death? Ah Buckingham, thou plaidst thy part and made him King, and put the lawful heirs besides: why then is Buckingham guilty now of his death? yet had not the Bishop of Ely fled, I had escaped.
Come, the Duke of Buckingham shall not die:
We will take him away by force.
Why villains, will you bee Traitors to your Prince?
Nay good my friends give me leave to speak, and let me entreat you to lay your weapons by. Then know this country men, the cause I am arrested this, Is for bringing in your lawful King, which is Henry Earl of Richmond now in Bittaine, and means ere long to land at Milford Haven in Wales, where I doo know hee shall have aid of the chiefest of the Welch, hee is your lawful King, and this a wrongful usurper. When you shall hear of him landed in that plce,
then take up weapons and amain to him, hee is the man must reeve you of this yoke, and send the usurper headless to his home, and poor Buckingham prays upon his knees; to bless good Richmond in his enterprise, and when the conquest shall be given to him, grant he may match with Lady Elizabeth, as promise hath to fore by him been past, while then my friends, leave me alone to death, and let me take this punishment in peace. Ah Buckingham, was not thy meaning good in displacing the usurper, to raise a lawful king? Ah Buckingham, it was too late, the lawful heirs were smothered in the Tower, sweet Edward and thy brother, I ne'er slept quiet thinking of your deaths. But vaunt Buckingham, thou wast altogether innocent of their deaths. But thou vilain, whom of a child I nursed thee up, and hast so unjustly betrayed thy Lord? Let the curse of Buskingham ne'er depart from thee. Let vengeance, mischiefs, tortures, light on thee and thine. And after death thou moist more torture feel, then when Excon turns the restless wheel. And ban thy soul where ere thou seem to rest. But come my my friends, let me away.
My Lord we are sorry. But come lay hands on Banister.
The goal is got, and golden Crown is won,
And well deserve thou to wear the same,
That ventured hast thy body and thy soul,
But what boots Richard, now the Diadem
Or kingdom got, by murder of his friends,
My fearful shadow that still follows me,
Hath sommond me before the severe judge,
My conscience witness of the blood I spilt,
Accuses me as guilty of the fact,
The fact, a damned judgment craves,
Whereas impartial justice hath condemned.
Me thinks the Crown which I before did wear,
Enchased with Pearl and costly Diamonds,
Is turned now into a fatal wreathe,
Of fiery flames, and ever burning stars,
And raging fiends hath past there ugly shapes,
In student lakes, addressed to tend on me,
If it be thus, what wilt thou do in this extremity?
Nay what can thou do to purge thee of thy guilt?
Even repent, crave mercy for thy damned fact,
Appeal for mercy to thy righteous God,
Ha repent, not I, crave mercy they that list.
My God, is none of mine. Then Richard be thus resolved,
To pace thy soul in vallence with their blood,
Soul for soul, and body for body, yea mary Richard,
Thats good, Catesbie.
You called my Lord, I think?
It may be so. But what think thou Catesbie?
Of what my Lord?
Why of all these troubles.
Why my Lord, I hope to see them happily ouercom'd.
How villain, doest thou hope to see me happily overcomed?
Who you my Lord?
Ay villain, thou points at me, thou hope to see me ouercom'd.
No my good Lord, your enemies or else not.
Ha, ha, good Catesbie, but what hear thou of the Duke of Buckingham?
Why he is dead my Lord, he was executed at Salisbury yesterday.
Why tic impossible, his friends hopes that he shall outline me, to be my head.
Out-liue you, Lord thats strange.
No Catesbie, if a do, it must be in fems,
And since they hope he shall out live me, to be my head,
He hops without his head, &amp; rests among his fellow rebels.
Mary no force my Lord.
But Catesbie, what hear thou of Henry Earl of Richmond?
Not a word my Lord.
No: hear thou not he lives in Britain,
In favour with the Duke.
Nay more, Lady Margaret his mother conspires against vs,
And persuades him that hee is lineally descended from Henry
The fourth, and that he hath right to the Crown,
Therefore tell me what think thou of the Earl?
My Lord, I think of the Earl as he doth deserve, A most famous gentleman.
Villain doest thou praise my foe, and commend him to my face?
Nay my Lord, I wish he were as good a friend as he is a foe, else the due deserts of a traitor.
Whats that?
Why my Lord, to loose his head.
Yea mary, I would it were off quickly, then
But more to the strengthening of his title,
She goes about to marry him to the Queens eldest daughter,
Lady Elizabeth.
Indeed my Lord that I heard was concluded,
By all the nobility of Britain.
Why then there it goes,
The great devil of hell go with all.
A marriage begun in mischief, shall end in blood:
I think that accursed sorreresse the mother Queen,
Doth nothing but bows me, and hatches conspiracies,
And brings out perilous birds to wound
Their Countries weal,
The Earl is up in Arms,
And with him many of the Nobility,
He hath aid in France,
He is rescued in Britain,
And means shortly to arrive in England:
But all this spites me not so much,
As his escape from Landoyse the Dukes Treasuror,
Who if he had been pricked forth for revenge,
He had ended all by apprehending of our foe,
But now he is in disgrace with the Duke,
And we farther off our purpose then to fore,
But the Earl hath not so many biting dogs abroad,
As we have sleeping cures at home here,
Ready for rescue.
But my Lord, I marvel how he should get aide there,
Considering he is no friend to Britain.
Ay so thou moist marvel how the Duke of Britain,
Durst wake such a foe as England against him,
But evil fare makes open war.
But who comes there Catsbie?
Ha one of our spurs to revenge:
The Lord Standley, father in law to Lady Margaret,
His coming is to vs Catsbie,
Were not that his life might serve,
For apprehension against our foe,
He should have neither Judge nor Jury,
But guilty death without any more ado.
Now Lord Standley, what news?
Have you received any letters of your late embassage into
Britain? What answer have you received of your letters?
Why my Lord, for that I sent, I have received.
And how doth your son then, is he in health?
For his health my Lord, I do not mistrust.
Faith tell vs, when means he to arrive in England?
And how many of our Nobility is with him?
And what power is with him?
And please your grace,
His power is unknown to me,
Nor willingly would not I be privy to such causes.
Oh good words Lord Standley, but give
me leave to glean out of your golden field of eloquence, how brave you plead ignorance as though you knew not of your sons departure into Britain out of England.
Not I my Lord.
Why is not his mother thy wife, &amp; dares he pass over without the blessing of his mother, whose husband thou art?
I desire your majesty but give me leave to speak?
Yea speak Standley, no doubt some fine coloured tale,
And like your grace, whereas you mistrust that I knew of my sons departure, out of England into Britain, God I take to record it was unknown to me, nor know not yet what his pretence is: for at his departure, was I one of the privy councell to your brother King Edward the fourth, and that she was able to relieve him without my help: I hope her sufficiency is known to your grace. Therefore I humbly crave pardon.
Well Standley, I fear it will be proved to the countryrye, that thou did furnish him both with money and munition, which if it be, then look for no favour at my hands, but the due deserts of a traitor: but let this pass. Whats your repair to our presence?
Only this my Lord, that I may repair from the court, to my house in the country.
Ay sir, that you might be in Cheshire and Lancashire, then should your Posts pass invisible into Britain, and you to depart the realm at your pleasure, or else I to suffer an intollerable foe under me, which I will not. But Standley to be brief, thou shalt not go. But soft Richard, but that it were better to be alone then to have noisome company, he shall go, leaving for his loyalty a sufficient pledge. Come hither Standley, thou shalt go, leaving me here thy son and heir George Standley for a pledge, that hee may perish for thy fault if need should be, if thou likest this, go, If not, answer me briefly, and say quickly no.
I am to advise my self upon a secret cause, and of a matter that concerns me near: say that I leave my son unto the King, and that I should but aide Earl Richmond, my son
George Standley dies, but if my faith be kept unto my Prince, George Standley lives. Well I will except the Kings proffer. And please your grace I am content, and will leave my son to pledge.
Here come hither, and with thee take this lesson.
Thou art set free for our defence,
Thou shalt upon thy pledge make this promise,
Not only to stay the hinderance of the Earl,
But to prevent his purpose with thy power.
Thou shalt not seek by any means to aide or rescue him.
This done, of my life thy son doth live:
But otherwise thy son dies and thou too; if I catch thee:
And it shall go hard but I will catch thee.
And you shall go apace, and yet go without me. But I humbly take my leave of your grace. Farewell George.
How now, what do you give him letters?
No my Lord, I have done: The second sight is sweet, of such a son.
Carry George Standley to prison.
Alas my Lord, shall I go to prison?
Shall you go to prison, what a questions that?
So prick the lamb, and wound the damme.
How likest thou this Catesbie?
Oh my Lord so excellent, that you have imprisoned his son.
Nay now will we look to the rest,
But I sent the Lord Louell to the mother Queen,
Concerning my suit to her daughter Elizabeth,
But see in good time here he is.
How now Louell, what news?
What saith the mother Queen to my suit?
My Lord very strange she was at the first,
But when I had told her the cause, she gave consent:
Desiring your majesty to make the nobility privy to it.
God have mercy Louell, but what said Lady Elizabeth
Why my Lord, strange, as women will be at the first But through entreaty of her mother, she quickly gave consent And the Queen wild me to tel your grace, that she means to leave Sanctuary, and to come to the court with al her daughters.
I marry Louell let not that opportunity slip, look to it Catesbie, be careful for it Louell, for thereby hangs such a chance, that may enrich vs and our heirs for ever. But sirs hard ye nothing of the Scottish Nobles that met at Nottingham, to confer about the marriage of my Niece.
Not a word my Lord.
Gogs wounds who is that? search the villain, has he any dags about him?
No my Lord I have none.
From whence comes thou?
From the Peers at Nottingham and Scotland, &amp; they greet your Majesty.
Sirrha is the marriage concluded between the Scottish Earl and the fair Lady Rosa.
Prithee tell vs, is it concluded?
How says thou, is it concluded?
Nay will you give me leave to tell you that? Why you villains will you know the secrets of my letter by interrupting messengers that are sent to me? Away I say, begone, it is time to look about: away I say, what here yet villains?
My Lord, I have somewhat to say besides?
Then speak it, what hast thou to say?
This my Lord, when the Peers of England and Scotland met at Nottingham together, to confer about the marriage of your Neese, it was straight determined that she should be married with the Scottish Earl. And further my Lord, the Council commanded me to deliver unto your grace the treasons of Captain Blunt, who had the Earl of Oxford in charge in Hames castle, now are they both fled, and purposes to aid the Earl of Richmond against your grace. Now my Lord I take my leave.
Messenger stay, hath Blunt betrayed, doth Oxford rebell and aide the Earl Richmond, may this be true, what is our prison so weak, our friends so fickle, our Ports so ill looked too, that they may pass and repose the seas at their pleasures, then every one conspires, spoils our Conflex, conquers our Castles, and Arms themselves with their own weapons vnresisted? O villains, rebels, fugitives, thieves, how are we betrayed, when our own swoordes shall beat vs, and our own subjects seeks the subuertion of the state, the fall of their Prince, and sack of their country, of his, nay neither must nor shall, for I will Army with my friends, and cut off my enemies, &amp; beard them to their face that dares me, and but one, I one, one beyond the seas that troubles me: well his power is weak, &amp; we are strong, therefore I will meet him with such melody, that the singing of a bullet shall send him merrily to his logest home. Come follow me.
Welcome dear friends and loving country-men,
Welcome I say to Englands blissful Isle,
Whose forwardness I cannot but commend,
That thus do aide vs in our enterprise,
My right it is, and sole inheritance,
And Richard but usurps in my authority,
For in his tyranny he slaughtered those
That would not succour him in his attempts,
Whose guiltless blood craves daily at Gods hands;
Revenge for outrage done to their harmless lives:
Then courage countrymen, and never be dismayed,
Our quarrels good, and God will help the right,
For we may know by dangers we have past,
That God no doubt will give vs victory.
If love of gold, or fear of many foes,
Could once have daunted vs in our attempts,
Thy foot had never touched the English shore,
And here Earl Oxford plites his faith to thee,
Never to leave in what we have vndertane,
But follow still with resolution,
Till thou be crowned as conqueror in the field,
Or lose thy life in following of thy right:
Thy right brave Richmond, which we will maintain
Maugre the proudest bird of Richards brood.
Then cousin Richmond being resolved thus,
Let vs straight to Aarms, &amp; God and S. George for vs.
As this brave Earl have said, so say we all,
We will not leave thee till the field be won,
Which if with fortunate success we can perform,
Think then Earl Richmond that I followed thee,
And that shall be honour enough for me.
So saith Landoyse that honours Richmond so
With love unfeigned for his valor past,
That if your honour lead the way to death,
Peeter Landoys hath sworn to follow thee.
For if Queen mother do but keep her word,
And what the Peers have promised be performed,
Touching the marriage with Elizabeth,
Daughter to our King Edward the fourth,
And by this marriage join in unity
Those famous Houses Lancashire and York,
Then England shall no doubt have cause to say,
Edwards coronation was a joyful day.
And tic is all Landoys desires to see.
Thanks Landoys, and here Earl Richmonds vows,
If their kind promises take but effect,
That as they have promised I be made King,
I will so deal in governing the state,
Which now lies like a savage shultred grove,
Where brambles, briers, and thorns, ouer-grow those sprigs,
Which if they might but spring to their effect,
And not be crossed so by their contraries,
Making them subject to these outrages,
Would prove such members of the Commonwealth,
That England should in them be honoured,
As much as ever was the Roman state,
When it was governed by the Councels rule,
And I will draw my sword brave country-men,
And never leave to follow my resolve,
Till I have mowed those brambles, briers and thorns
That hinder those that long to do vs good.
Why we have escaped the dangeroust brunt of all,
Which was his garrison at Milford Haven,
Shall we dismay, or dant our friends to come?
Because he took the Duke of Buckingham?
No worthy friends, and loving country-men,
Oxford did never bear so base a mind,
He will not wink at murders secretly put up,
Nor suffer upstarts to enjoy our rights,
Nor live in England under an usurping king,
And this is Oxfords resolution.
But Blunt, look whose that knocks.
My Lord, tic a messenger from the mother Queen,
And the Lady Standley your mother, with letters.
Admit him straight, now shall we hear some news.
Long live Earl Richmond.
The mother Queen doth greet your honour.
Welcome my friend, how fares our mother &amp; the rest?
In health my Lord, and glad to hear of your arrival safe.
My friend, my mother hath written to me of certain that are coming in our aide, the report of whose names are referd to thee to deliver.
First, theirs the Lord Talbut, the Earl of Shreuesbury son and heir, with a brave band of his own.
There is also the Lord Fits Harbart, the Earl of Pembrookes son and heir.
Of the Gentlemen of the Welch, there is sir Prise up Thomas, and sir Thomas up Richard, &amp; sir Owen Williams, brave gentlemen my Lord. These are the chief.
Are these the full number of all that come?
Only two more my Lord, which I have left unnamed,
the one is sir Thomas Denis a Western gentleman, and joined with him one Arnoll Butler, a great many are willing, but dares not as yet.
Doth Arnoll Butler come, I can hardly brooke his treachery, for hee it was that wrought my disgrace with the King.
Well my Lord, wee are now to strengthen our selves with friends, and not to reap up old quarrels, say that Arnoll Butler did injury you in the time of peace, the mends is twice made, if he stand with you in the time of wars.
Well my friend, take this for thy good news,
And commend me to our mother and the rest.
Thus my Lords, you see God still provides for vs:
But now my Lords touching the placing of our battle best,
And how we may be least endangered,
Because I will be foremost in this fight,
To encounter with that bloody murderer,
My self will lead the vaward of our troop,
My Lord of Oxford, you as our second self,
Shall hall have the happy leading of the rear,
A place I know which you will well deserve,
And Captain Blunt, Peter Landoyse and you,
Shall by in quarters, as our battles scowtes,
Provided, thus your bow-men Captain Blunt,
Must scatter here and there to gaull their horse,
As also when that our promised friends do come,
Then must you hold hard skirmish with our foes,
Till I by cast of a counter march,
Have joined our power with those that come to vs,
Then casting close, as wings on either side,
We will give a new prauado on the foe,
Therefore let vs towards Aderstoe amain,
Where we this night God-willing will encamp,
From thence towards Lichfield, we will march next day,
And nearer London, bid King Richard play.
Where shall I find a place to sigh my fill,
And wail the grief of our sore troubled King?
For now he hath obtained the Diadem,
But with such great discomfort to his mind,
That he had better lived a private man, his looks are ghastly,
Hideous to behold, and from the privy sentire of his heart,
There comes such deep fetched sighs and fearful cries,
That being with him in his chamber oft,
He moos me weep and sigh for company,
For if he hear one stir he rises up,
And claps his hand upon his dagger straight,
Ready to stab him, what so ere he be,
But he must think this is the just revenge,
The heavens have powered upon him for his sins,
Those Peers which he unkindly murdered,
Doth cry for justice at the hands of God,
And he in justice sends continual fear,
For to affright him both at bed and board,
But stay, what noise is this, who have we here?
Why to Earl Richmonds Camp to serve with him,
For we have left to serve King Richard now.
Why comes there any more?
A number more.
Why these are the villains my Lord would have put his life into their hands.
A Richard, now do my eyes witness that thy end is at hand, For thy commons make no more account of thee then of a priuate man, yet will I as duty binds, give thee advertisements of their unjust proceedings. My moister hath lifted out many, and yet hath left one to lift him out of all, not only of his Crown, but also of his life. But I will in, to tell my Lord of what is happined.
Good my Lord depart, and leave me to my self.
I pray my Lord, let me go along with you.
My Lord it may not be, for I have promised my father that none shall come but my self, therefore good my Lord depart.
Good my Lord have a care of your self, I like not these night walks and scouting abroad in the evenings so disguised, for you must not now that you are in the usurpers dominions, and you are the only mark he aims at, and your last nights absence bred such amazement in our soldiers, that they like men wanting the power to follow Arms, were on a sudden more liker to fly then to fight: therefore good my Lord, if I may not stand near, let me stand aloof off.
Content thee good Oxford, and tho I confess my self bound to thee for thy especial care, yet at this time I pray thee hold me excused. But farewell my Lord, here comes my Lord and father.
Captain I pray thee bring me word when thou doest descry the enemy. And so farewell, and leave me for a while.
How fares my gracious Lord and father?
In good health my son, &amp; the better to see thee thus foreword in this laudable enterprise, but omitting vain circumstances, and to come briefly to the purpose, I am now in few words to deliver much matter. For know this, when I came to crave leave of the King to depart from the court, the king very furiously began to charge me that I was both acquainted with thy practises and drifts, and that I knew of thy landing, and by no means would grant me leave to go, till as pledge of my loyaltie and true dealing with the king, I should leave my young son George Standley. Thus have I left my son in the hands of a tyrant, only of purpose to come and speak with thee.
But omitting this, I pray tell me, shall I look for your help in the battle?
Son I cannot, for as I will not go to the usurper, no
more I will not come to thee.
Why then it is bootless for vs to stay, for all we presumed upon, was on your aide.
Why son, George Standlyes death would doo you no pleasure.
Why the time is too troublesome, for him to tend to follow execution.
O son, tyrants expect no time, and George Standley being young and a grissell, is the more easy to be made away.
This news goes to my heart, but tic in vain for me to look for victory, when with a mole-hill, we shall encounter with a mountain.
Why son, see how contrary you are, for I assure you, the chiefest of his company are liker to fly to thee, then to fight against thee: and for me, think me not so simple but that I can at my pleasure fly to thee, or being with them, fight so faintly, that the battle shall be won on thy part with small encountering. And note this besides, that the King is now come to Lester, and means to morrow to bid thee battle in Bosworth.
Come my Lord, I do descry the enemy.
Why then son farewell, I can stay no longer.
Yet good father, one word more ere you depart,
What number do you think the kings power to be?
Mary some twenty thousand. And so farewell.
And we hardly five thousand, being beset with many enemies, hoping upon a few friends, yet despair not Richmond, but remember thou fight in right, to defend thy country from the tyranny of an usurping tyrant, therefore Richmond go foreword, the more dangerous the battle is in attaining, it proves the more honourable being obtained. Then forward Richmond, God and saint George, for me.
The hell of life that hangs upon the Crown,
The daily cares, the nightly dreams,
The wretched crews, the treason of the foe,
And horror of my bloody practise past,
Strikes such a terror to my wounded conscience,
That sleep I, wake I, or whatsoever I do,
Me thinks their ghoasts comes gaping for revenge,
Whom I have slain in reaching for a Crown.
Clarence complains, and cries for revenge.
My Nephues bloods, Revenge, revenge, doth cry.
The headless Peers comes preasing for revenge.
And every one cries, let the tyrant die.
The Sun by day shines hotly for revenge.
The Moon by night eclipses for revenge.
The stars are turned to Comets for revenge.
The Planets change their courses for revenge.
The birds sing not, but sorrow for revenge.
The silly lambs sits bleating for revenge.
The screeking Raven sits croaking for revenge.
Whole heads of beasts comes bellowing for revenge.
And all, yea all the world I think,
Cries for revenge, and nothing but revenge.
But to conclude, I have deserved revenge.
In company I dare not trust my friend,
Being alone, I dread the secret foe:
I doubt my food, least poison lurk therein.
My bed is uncouth, rest refrains my head.
Then such a life I count far worse to be,
Then thousand deaths unto a damned death:
How wast death I said? who dare attempt my death?
Nay who dare so much as once to think my death?
Though enemies there be that would my body kill,
Yet shall they leave a never dying mind.
But you villains, rebels, traitors as you are,
How came the foe in, preasing so near?
Where, where, slept the garrison that should a beat them back?
Where was our friends to intercept the foe?
All gone, quite fled, his loyalty quite laid a bed?
Then vengeance, mischief, horror, with mischance,
Wilde-fire, with whirl winds, light upon your heads,
That thus betrayed your Prince by your untruth.
Frantic man, what meanst thou by this mood? Now he is come more need to beat him back.
Sour is his sweet that savours thy delight, great is his power that threats thy overthrow.
The bad rebellion of my foe is not so much, as for to see my friends do fly in flocks from me.
May it please your grace to rest your self content, for you have power enough to defend your land.
Dares Richmond set his foot on land with such a small power of straggling fugitives?
May it please your grace to participate the cause that thus doth trouble you?
The cause Buzzard, what cause should I participate to thee? My friends are gone away, and fled from me, keep silence villain, least I by post do send thy soul to hell, not one word more, if thou doest love thy life.
My Lord.
Yet again vilaine,  Catesbie is it thou? What comes the Lord Standley or no?
My Lord, he answers no.
Why did not tell him then, I would send his son George Standleys head to him.
My Lord I did so, &amp; he answered, he had another son left to make Lord Standley.
O vilaine wild, and breaker of his oath, the bastards ghost shall hant him at the heals, and cry revenge for his wild fathers wrongs, go Louell, Catsbie, fetch George Standly forth, him with these hands will I butcher for the dead, and send his headless body to his fire.
Leave off executions now the foe is here that
threatens vs most cruelly of our lives.
Zownes, foe me no foes, the fathers fact condemns the son to die.
But guiltless blood will for revengement cry.
Why was not he left for fathers loyalty?
Therein his father greatly injured him.
Did not your selves in presence, see the bonds sealed and assigned?
What tho my Lord, the vardits own, the titles doth resign.
The bond is broke and I will sue the fine, except you will hinder me, what will you have it so?
In doing true justice, else we answer no.
His treacherous father hath neglect his word and done imparshall past by dint of sword, therefore sirrha go fetch him, Zownes draw you cuts who shall go, I bid you go Catesby. A Richard, now moist thou see thy end at hand, why sirs why fear you thus? why we are ten to one, if you seek promotion, I am a King already in possession, better able to perform then he. Louell, Catesby, lets join lovingly and devoutly together, and I will divide my whole kingdom amongst you.
We will my Lord.
We will my Lord, a Catesbie, thou look like a dog, and thou Louell too, but you will run away with them that be gone, and the devil go with you all, God I hope, God, what talk I of God, that have served the devil all this while. No, fortune and courage for me, and join England against me with England, Join Europe with Europe, come Christendom, and with Christendom the whole world, and yet I will never yield but by death only. By death, no die, part not childishly from thy Crown, but come the devil to claim it, strike him down, &amp; tho that Fortune hath decreed, to set revenge with triumphs on my wretched head, yet death, sweet death, my latest friend, hath sworn to make a bargain for my lasting fame, and this, I this very day, I hope with this lame hand of mine, to rake out that hateful heart of Richmond, and when I have it, to eat it panting hot with salt, and drink his blood luke warm, tho I
be sure twil poison me. Sirs you that be resolute follow me, the rest go hang your selves.
A horse, a horse, a fresh horse.
A fly my Lord, and save your life.
Fly villain, look I as tho I would fly, no first shall this dull and senseless ball of earth receive my body cold and void of sense, you watery heavens roll on my gloomy day, and darksome clouds close up my cheerful sound, down is thy sun Richard, never to shine again, the birds whose feathers should adorn my head, hovers aloft &amp; dares not come in sight, yet faint not man, for this day if Fortune will, shall make thee King possessed with quiet Crown, if Fates deny, this ground must be my grave, yet golden thoughts that reached for a Crown, daunted before by Fortunes cruel spite, are come as comforts to my drooping heart, and bids me keep my Crown and die a King. These are my last, what more I have to say, isle make report among the damned souls.
How may I know the certain true report of this victorious battle fought to day, my friend what ere thou be, tel unto me the true report, which part hath won the victory, whether the King or no?
A no, the King is slain and he hath lost the day, and Richmond he hath won the field, and triumphs like a valiant conqueror.
But who is slain besides our Lord and sovereign?
Slain is the worthy Duke of Northfolke he, &amp; with him sir Robert Brokenby, Lieutenant of the Tower, besides Louell, he made also a partner in this Tragedy.
But wheres sir William Catsby?
Hee is this day beheaded on a stage at Lester, because
he took part with my Lord the King. But stay Report, &amp; thou shalt hear me tell the brief discourse. And how the battle fell then know Report, that Richard came to field mounted on horseback, with as high resolve as fierce Achillis amongst the stirdie Greeks, whom to encounter worthy Richmond, came accompanied with many followers, and then my Lord displayed his colours straight, and with the charge of Trumpet, Drum, and Fyfe, these brave battalions straight encountered, but in the skirmish which cotinued long, my Lord began faint, which Richmonte straight perceived, and presently did sound afresh alarm, but worthy Richard that did never fly, but followed honour to the gates of death, straight spurt his horse to encounter with the Earl, in which encountry Richmond did prevail, &amp; taking Richard at advantage, then he threw his horse and him both to the ground, and there was worthy Richard wounded, so that after that he ne'er recovered strength. But to be brief, my myster would not yield, but with his loss of life he lost the field. Report farewell.
Now noble Peers and worthy country-men, since God hath given vs fortune of the day, let vs first give thanks unto his Deity, &amp; next with honours fitting your deserts, I must be grateful to my country men, and worthy Oxford for thy service shown in hot encountering of the enemy, Earl Richmonte binds himself in lasting bonds of faithful love &amp; perfact unity. Sorry I am for those that I have lost by our so dangerous encountering with the foe, but sorrow cannot bring the dead to life: and therefore are my sorrows spent in vain. Only to those that live, thus much I say, I will maintain them with a manuall pay. And loving father, lastly to your self, tho not the least in our expected aide, we give more thanks for your unlooked for aide, then we have power on sudden to declare, but for your thanks I hope it shall suffice that I in nature love &amp; honour you.
Well spoken son, and like a man of worth, whose resolutio in this battle past, hath made thee famous amongst thy enemies. And think my son, I glory more to hear what praise the common people gave of thee, then if the Peers by general full consent had set me down to wear the Diadem. Then live my son thus loved of thy friends, and for thy foes prepare to combat them.
And Oxford vows perpetual love to thee, wishing as many honours to Earl Richmond, as Caesar had in conquering the world, &amp; I doubt not but if fair fortune follow thee, to see thee honoured amongst thy country men, as Hector was among the Lords of Troy, or Ylley amongst the Roman Senators.
How fares our lovely mother Queen?
In health Earl Richmond, glad to hear the news that God hath given thee fortune of the day. But tell me Lords, where is my son Lord Marquess Dorset, that he is not here? what was he murdered in this Tragedy?
No lovely Queen your son doth live in France, for being distressed and driven by force of tempest to that shore, and many of our men being sick and dead, we were enforced to ask the King for aide, as well for men as for munition, which then the King did willingly supply, provided, that as hostage for those men, Lord Marquess Dorset should be pledge with the. But Madame now our troubled war is done, Lord Marquess Dorset shall come home again.
Richmond, gramercies for thy kind good news, which is no little comfort to thy friends, to see how God hath been thy happy guide in this late conquest of our enemies. And Richmond, as thou art returned with victory, so we will keep our words effectually.
Then Madame for our happy battles victory, first thanks to heaven, next to my foreword country-men, but Madame pardon me tho I make bold to charge you with a promise that you made, which was confirmed by diverse of the Peers, touching the marriage of Elizabeth, and having ended what I promised you, Madam, I look and hope to have my due.
Then know my son, the Peers by full consent, in that thou hast freed them from a tyrants yoke, have by election chosen thee as King, first in regard they account thee virtuous, next, for that they hope all foreign broils shall cease, and thou wilt guide and govern them in peace, then sit thou down my son, and here receive the Crown of England as thy proper own, sit down.
Henry the seventh, by the grace of God, King of England, France, and Lord of Ireland, God save the King.
Long live Henry the seventh, King of England.
Thanks loving friends and my kind country-men, and here I vow in presence of you all, to root abuses from this common wealth, which now flows faster then the furious tide that overflows beyond the banks of Nile. And loving father, and my other friends, whose ready forwardness hath made me fortunate, Richmond will still in honourable love count himself to be at your dispose, nor do I wish to enjoy a longer life, then I shall live to think upon your love. But what saith fair Elizabeth to vs? for now wee have welcomed our other friends, I must bid you welcome Lady amongst the rest, and in my wellcome crave to be resolved, how you resolve touching my profred love unto you, here your mother and the Peers agree, and all is ended, if you condescend.
Then know my Lord, that if my mother please, I must in duty yield to her command, for when our aged father left his life, he willed vs honour still our mothers age: and therefore as my duty doth command, I do commit my self to her dispose.
Then here my Lord, receive thy royal spouse, vertuous Elizabeth, for both the Peers and Commons do agree, that this fair Princess shall be wife to thee. And we pray all,
that fair Elizabeth may live for aye, and never yield to death.
And so say I, thanks  you all my Lords, that thus have honoured Richmond with a Crown, and if I live, then make account my Lords I will deserve this with more then common love.
And now were but my form George Standley here,
How happy were our present meeting then,
But he is dead, nor shall I evermore see my sweet
Boy whom I do love so dear, for well I know the usurper
In his rage hath made a slaughter of my aged joy.
Take comfort gentle father, for I hope my brother George will turn in safe to vs.
A no my son, for he that joys in blood, will work his fury on the innocent.
But how now what noise is this?
Behold Lord Standley we bring thy son, thy son George Standley, whom with great danger we have saved from fury of a tyrants doom.
And lives George Standley? Then happy that I am to see him freed thus from a tyrants rage. Welcome my son, my sweet George welcome home.
Thanks my good father, and George Standley joys to see you joined in this assembly. And like a lamb kept by a greedy Woolfe within the enclosed sentire of the earth, expecting death without delivery, even from this danger is George Standley come, to be a guest to Richmond &amp; the rest: for when the bloody butcher heard your honour did refuse to come to him, hee like a savage tiger then enraged, commanded straight I should be murdered, &amp; sent these two to execute the deed, but they, but they, that knew how innocet I was, did post him off with many long delays, alleging reasons to allay his rage, but it was in vain, for he like to a starved Lioness still called for blood, saying that I should die. But to be brief, when both the battles joined, these two and others, shifted me away.
Now seeing that each thing turns to our content,
I will it be proclaimed presently, that traytrous Richard
Be by our command, drawn thrugh the streets of Lester,
Stark naked on a Colliers horse let him be laid,
For as of others pains he had no regard,
So let him have a traitors due reward.
Now for our marriage and our nuptial rytes,
Our pleasure is they be solemnised
In our Abbey of Westminster, according to the ancient custom due,
The two and twentieth day of August next,
Set forwards then my Lords towards London straight,
There to take further order for the state.
Thus Gentles may you here behold, the joining of these Houses both in one, by this brave Prince Henry the seauenth, who was for wit compared to Solomon, his government was virtuous every way, and God did wondrously increase his store, he did subdue a proud rebellious Lord, that did encounla him upon black health. He died when he had reigned full three and twenty years eight months, and some odd days, and lies buried in Westminster. He died &amp; left behind a son.
A son he left, a Harry of that name, a worthy, valiant, and victorious Prince, for on the fifth year of his happy reign, hee entered France, and to the Frenchmens costs, hee won Turwen, and Turney. The Emperor served this King for common pay, and as a mersonary prince did follow him. Then after Morle and Morles, conquered he, and still did keep the French men at a bay. And lastly in this Kings decreasing age, he conquered Bullen, and after when he was turned home he died, when he had reigned full thirty eight years, nine months and some odd days, and was buried in Windsor. He died and left three famous springs behind him.
Edward the sixth, he did restore the Gospel to his light, and fineshed that his father left undone. A wise young Prince, given greatly to his book. He brought the English service first in use, and died when he had reigned six years, five months, &amp; some odd days, and lies buried in Westminster.
Next after him a Mary did succeed, which married
Philip King of Spain, she reigned five years, four months, and some odd days, and is buried in Westminster. When she was dead, her sister did succeed.
Worthy Elizabeth, a mirror in her age, by whose wise life and civil government, her country was defended from the cruelty of famine, fire and sword, wars, fearful mizzengers.
This is that Queen as writers truly say,
That God had marked down to live for aye.
Then happy England amongst thy neighbor Isles,
For peace and plenty still attends on thee:
And all the favourable Planets smiles
To see thee live, in such prosperity.
She is that lamp that keeps fair Englands light,
And through her faith her country lives in peace:
And she hath put proud Antichrist to flight,
And been the means that civil wars did cease.
Then England kneel upon thy hairy knee,
And thank that God that still provides for thee.
The Turk admires to hear her government,
And babies in ury, sound her princely name,
All Christian Princes to that Prince hath sent,
After her rule was rumord forth by fame.
The Turk hath sworn never to lift his hand,
To wrong the Princess of this blessed land.
It were vain to tell the care this Queen hath had,
In helping those that were oppressed by war:
And how her Majesty hath still been glad,
When she hath heard of peace proclaimed from far.
Ieneua, France, and Flanders hath set down,
The good she hath done, since she came to the Crown.
For which, if ere her life be tan away,
God grant her soul may live in heaven for aye.
For if her Graces days be brought to end,
Your hope is gone, on whom did peace depend.

WHo's there?
Nay answer me: Stand &amp; unfold your self.
Long live the King.
Barnardo?
He.
You come most carefully upon your hour.
It is now struck twelve, get thee to bed Francisco.
For this relief much thanks: It is bitter cold,
And I am sick at heart.
Have you had quiet Guard?
Not a Mouse stirring.
Well, goodnight. If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus, the Rivals of my Watch, bid them make hast.
I think I hear them. Stand: who's there?
Friends to this ground.
And Leige-men to the Dane.
Give you good night.
O farewell honest Soldier, who hath relieved you?
Barnardo he's my place: give you goodnight.
Holla Barnardo.
Say, what is Horatio there?
A piece of him.
Welcome Horatio, welcome good Marcellus.
What, he's this thing appeared again to night.
I have seen nothing.
Horatio says, it is but our Fantasy,
And will not let belief take hold of him
Touching this dreaded sight, twice seen of vs,
Therefore I have entreated him along
With vs, to watch the minutes of this Night,
That if again this Apparition come,
He may approve our eyes, and speak to it.
Tush, tush, twill not appear.
Sit down awhile,
And let vs once again assail your ears,
That are so fortified against our Story,
What we two Nights have seen.
Well, sit we down,
And let vs hear Barnardo speak of this.
Last night of all,
When yond same Star that's Westward from the Pole
Had made his course to illume that part of Heaven
Where now it burns, Marcellus and my self,
The Bell then beating one.
Peace, break thee of:
Look where it comes again.
In the same figure, like the King that's dead.
Thou art a Scholar; speak to it Horatio.
Looks it not like the King? Mark it Horatio.
Most like: It harrows me with fear &amp; wonder
It would be spoke too.
Question it Horatio.
What art thou that usurp this time of night,
Together with that Fair and Warlike form
In which the Majesty of buried Denmark
Did sometimes march: By Heaven I charge thee speak.
It is offended.
See, it stalks away.
Stay: speak; speak: I Charge thee, speak.
It is gone, and will not answer.
How now Horatio? You tremble &amp; look pale:
Is not this something more then Fantasy?
What think you on it?
Before my God, I might not this believe
Without the sensible and true avouch
Of mine own eyes.
Is it not like the King?
As thou art to thy self,
Such was the very Armour he had on,
When the Ambitious Norway combated:
So frowned he once, when in an angry parley
He smote the sledded Pollax on the Ice.
It is strange.
Thus twice before, and just at this dead hour,
With Martial stalk, hath he gone by our Watch.
In what particular thought to work, I know not:
But in the gross and scope of my Opinion,
This boades some strange erruption to our State.
Good now sit down, &amp; tell me he that knows
Why this same strict and most observant Watch,
So nightly toils the subject of the Land,
And why such daily Cast of Brazon Cannon
And Foreign Mart for Implements of war:
Why such impress of Shipwrights, whose sore Task
Do's not divide the Sunday from the week,
What might be toward, that this sweaty hast
Doth make the Night ioynt-Labourer with the day:
Who is it that can inform me?
That can I,
At least the whisper goes so: Our last King,
Whose Image even but now appeared to vs,
Was (as you know) by Fortinbras of Norway,
(Thereto pricked on by a most emulate Pride)
Dared to the Combat. In which, our Valiant Hamlet,
(For so this side of our known world esteemed him)
Did slay this Fortinbras: who by a Sealed Compact,
Well ratified by Law, and Heraldry,
Did forfeit (with his life) all those his Lands
Which he stood seized on, to the Conqueror:
Against the which, a Moity competent
Was gaged by our King: which had returned
To the Inheritance of Fortinbras,
Had he bin Vanquisher, as by the same Covenant
And carriage of the Article design,
His fell to Hamlet. Now sir, young Fortinbras,
Of vnimproued Mettle, hot and full,
Hath in the skirts of Norway, here and there,
Shark'd up a List of Landless Resolutes,
For Food and Diet, to some Enterprise
That hath a stomach in it: which is no other
(And it doth well appear unto our State)
But to recover of vs by strong hand
And terms Compulsative, those foresaid Lands
So by his Father lost: and this (I take it)
Is the maine Motive of our Preparations,
The Source of this our Watch, and the chief head
Of this post-hast, and Romage in the Land.
But soft, behold: Lo, where it comes again:
Isle cross it, though it blast me. Stay Illusion:
If thou hast any sound, or use of Voice,
Speak to me. If there be any good thing to be done,
That may to thee do ease, and grace to me; speak to me.
If thou art privy to thy Countries Fate
(Which happily foreknowing may avoid) Oh speak.
Or, if thou hast vp-hoorded in thy life
Extorted Treasure in the womb of Earth,
(For which, they say, you Spirits oft walk in death)
Speak of it. Stay, and speak. Stop it Marcellus.
Shall I strike at ir with my Partisan?
Do, if it will not stand.
It is here.
It is here.
It is gone.
We do it wrong, being so Majestic
To offer it the show of Violence,
For it is as the Ayre, invulnerable,
And our vain blows, malicious Mockery.
It was about to speak, when the Cock crew.
And then it started, like a guilty thing
Upon a fearful Summons. I have heard,
The Cock that is the Trumpet to the day,
Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding Throat
Awake the God of Day: and at his warning,
Whether in Sea, or Fire, in Earth, or Ayre,
The extravagant, and erring Spirit, hies
To his Confine. And of the truth herein,
This present Object made probation.
It faded on the crowing of the Cock.
Some says, that ever against that Season comes
Wherein our Saviours Birth is celebrated,
The Bird of Dawning sings all night long:
And then (they say) no Spirit can walk abroad,
The nights are wholesome, then no Planets strike,
No Faiery talks, nor Witch hath power to Charm:
So hallowed, and so gracious is the time.
So have I heard, and do in part believe it.
But look, the Morn in Russet mantle clad,
Walks o'er the dew of you high Eastern Hill,
Break we our Watch up, and by my advice
Let vs impart what we have seen to night
Unto young Hamlet. For upon my life,
This Spirit dumb to vs, will speak to him:
Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it,
As needful in our Loves, fitting our Duty?
Let do it I pray, and I this morning know
Where we shall find him most conveniently.
Though yet of Hamlet our dear Brothers death
The memory be greene: and that it vs befitted
To bear our hearts in grief, and our whole Kingdom
To be contracted in one brow of woe:
Yet so far hath Discretion fought with Nature,
That we with wisest sorrow think on him,
Together with remembrance of our selves.
Therefore our sometimes Sister, now our Queen,
The Imperial Ioyntresse of this warlike State,
Have we, as it were, with a defeated joy,
With one Auspicious, and one Dropping eye,
With mirth in Funeral, and with Dirge in Marriage,
In equal Scale weighing Delight and Dole
Taken to Wife; nor have we herein barred
Your better Wisdoms, which have freely gone
With this affair along, for all our Thanks.
Now follows, that you know young Fortinbras,
Holding a weak supposal of our worth;
Or thinking by our late dear Brothers death,
Our State to be disjoined, and out of Frame,
Colleagued with the dream of his Advantage;
He hath not failed to pester vs with Message,
Importing the surrender of those Lands
Lost by his Father: with all Bonds of Law
To our most valiant Brother. So much for him.
Now for our self, and for this time of meeting
Thus much the business is. We have here writ
To Norway, Uncle of young Fortinbras,
Who Impotent and Bedrid, scarcely hears
Of this his Nephews purpose, to suppress
His further gate herein. In that the Leuies,
The Lists, and full proportions are all made
Out of his subject: and we here dispatch
You good Cornelius, and you Voltemand,
For bearing of this greeting to old Norway,
Giving to you no further personal power
To business with the King, more then the scope
Of these dilated Articles allow:
Farewell and let your hast commend your duty.
In that, and all things, will we show our duty.
We doubt it nothing, heartily farewell.
And now Laertes, what's the news with you?
You told vs of some suite. What is it Laertes?
You cannot speak of Reason to the Dane,
And loose your voice. What would thou beg Laertes,
That shall not be my Offer, not thy Asking?
The Head is not more Native to the Heart,
The Hand more Instrumental to the Mouth,
Then is the Throne of Denmark to thy Father.
What would thou have Laertes?
Dread my Lord,
Your leave and favour to return to France???
From whence, though willingly I came to Denmark
To show my duty in your Coronation,
Yet now I must confess, that duty done,
My thoughts and wishes bend again towards France,
And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.
Have you your Fathers leave?
What says Pollonius?
He hath my Lord:
I do beseech you give him leave to go.
Take thy fair hour Laertes, time be thine,
And thy best graces spend it at thy will:
But now my Cousin Hamlet, and my Son?
A little more then kin, and less then kind.
How is it that the Clouds still hang on you?
Not so my Lord, I am too much in the Sun.
Good Hamlet cast thy nightly colour off,
And let thine eye look like a Friend on Denmark.
Do not for ever with thy veiled lids
Seek for thy Noble Father in the dust;
Thou know it is common, all that lives must dye,
Passing through Nature, to Eternity.
I Madam, it is common.
If it be;
Why seems it so particular with thee.
Seems Madam? Nay, it is: I know not Seems:
It is not alone my Inky Cloak (good Mother)
Nor Custo??mary suites of solemn Black,
Nor windy suspiration of forced breath,
No, nor the fruitful River in the Eye,
Nor the dejected hauiour of the Visage,
Together with all Forms, Moods, shows of Grief,
That can denote me truly. These indeed Seem,
For they are actions that a man might play:
But I have that Within, which passes show;
These, but the Trappings, and the Suites of woe.
It is sweet and commendable
In your Nature Hamlet,
To give these mourning duties to your Father:
But you must know, your Father lost a Father,
That Father lost, lost his, and the Survivor bound
In filial Obligation, for some term
To do obsequious Sorrow. But to persevere
In obstinate Condolement, is a course
Of impious stubbornness. It is unmanly grief,
It shows a will most incorrect to Heaven,
A Heart vnfortified, a Mind impatient,
An Understanding simple, and vnschool'd:
For, what we know must be, and is as common
As any the most vulgar thing to sense,
Why should we in our peevish Opposition
Take it to heart? Fie, it is a fault to Heaven,
A fault against the Dead, a fault to Nature,
To Reason most absurd, whose common Theme
Is death of Fathers, and who still hath cried,
From the first Coarse, till he that dyed to day,
This must be so. We pray you throw to earth
This unprevailing woe, and think of vs
As of a Father; For let the world take note,
You are the most immediate to our Throne,
And with no less Nobility of Love,
Then that which dearest Father bears his Son,
Do I impart towards you. For your intent
In going back to School in Wittenberg.
It is most retrograde to our desire:
And we beseech you, bend you to remain
Here in the cheer and comfort of our eye,
Our chiefest Courtier Cousin, and our Son.
Let not thy Mother lose her Prayers Hamlet:
I prithee stay with vs, go not to Wittenberg.
I shall in all my best
Obey you Madam.
Why it is a loving, and a fair Reply,
Be as our self in Denmark. Madam come,
This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet
Sits smiling to my heart; in grace whereof,
No iocond health that Denmark drinks to day,
But the great Cannon to the Clouds shall tell,
And the Kings Rouce, the Heavens shall bruit again,
Respeaking earthly Thunder. Come away.
Oh that this too too solid Flesh, would melt,
Thaw, and resolve it self into a Dew:
Or that the Everlasting had not fixed
His Cannon against Selfe-slaughter. O God, O God!
How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable
Seems to me all the uses of this world?
Fie on it? Oh fie, fie, it is an vnweeded Garden
That grows to Seed: Things rank, and gross in Nature
Possess it merely. That it should come to this:
But two months dead: Nay, not so much; not two,
So excellent a King, that was to this
Hiperion to a Satire: so loving to my Mother,
That he might not between the winds of heaven
Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and Earth
Must I remember: why she would hang on him,
As if increase of Appetite had grown
By what it fed on; and yet within a month?
Let me not think on it: Frailty, thy name is woman.
A little Month, or ere those shoes were old,
With which she followed my poor Fathers body
Like Niobe, all tears. Why she, even she.
(O Heaven! A beast that wants discourse of Reason
Would have mourned longer) married with mine Uncle,
My Fathers Brother: but no more like my Father,
Then I to Hercules. Within a Month?
Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous Tears
Had left the flushing of her gauled eyes,
She married. O most wicked speed, to post
With such dexterity to Incestuous sheets:
It is not, nor it cannot come to good.
But break my heart, for I must hold my tongue.
Hail to your Lordship.
I am glad to see you well:
Horatio, or I do forget my self.
The same my Lord,
And your poor Servant ever.
Sir my good friend,
Isle change that name with you:
And what make you from Wittenberg Horatio?
My good Lord.
I am very glad to see you: good even Sir.
But what in faith make you from Wittemberge?
A truant disposition, good my Lord.
I would not have your Enemy say so;
Nor shall you doe mine ear that violence,
To make it truster of your own report
Against your self. I know you are no Truant:
But what is your affair in Elsenour?
We'll teach you to drink deep, ere you depart.
My Lord, I came to see your Fathers Funeral.
I pray thee doe not mock me (fellow Student)
I think it was to see my Mothers-Wedding.
Indeed my Lord, it followed hard upon.
Thrift, thrift Horatio: the Funeral Baked meats
Did coldly furnish forth the Marriage Tables;
Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven,
Ere I had ever seen that day Horatio.
My father, me thinks I see my father.
Oh where my Lord?
In my minds eye (Horatio)
I saw him once; he was a goodly King.
He was a man, take him for all in all:
I shall not look upon his like again.
My Lord, I think I saw him yesternight.
Saw? Who?
My Lord, the King your Father.
The King my Father?
Season your admiration for a while
With an attent ear; till I may deliver
Upon the witness of these Gentlemen,
This marvel to you.
For Heavens love let me hear.
Two nights together, had these Gentlemen
(Marcellus and Barnardo) on their Watch
In the dead wast and middle of the night
Been thus encountered. A figure like your Father,
Armed at all points exactly, Cap a Pe,
Appears before them, and with solemn march
Goes slow and stately: By them thrice he walked,
By their oppressed and feare-surprized eyes,
Within his Truncheons length; whilst they bestil'd
Almost to Jolly with the Act of fear,
Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me
In dreadful secrecy impart they did,
And I with them the third Night kept the Watch,
Whereas they had delivered both in time,
Form of the thing; each word made true and good,
The Apparition comes. I knew your Father:
These hands are not more like.
But where was this?
My Lord upon the platform where we watched.
Did you not speak to it?
My Lord, I did;
But answer made it none: yet once me thought
It lifted up it head, and did address
It self to motion, like as it would speak:
But even then, the Morning Cock crew loud;
And at the sound it shrunk in hast away,
And vanished from our sight.
Tic very strange.
As I doe live my honoured Lord it is true
And we did think it writ down in our duty
To let you know of it.
Indeed, indeed Sirs; but this troubles me.
Hold you the watch to Night???
We doe my Lord.
Armed, say you?
Armed, my Lord.
From top to toe?
My Lord, from head to foot.
Then saw you not his face?
O yes, my Lord, he wore his Beaver up.
What, looked he frowningly?
A countenance more in sorrow then in anger.
Pale, or red?
Nay very pale.
And fixed his eyes upon you?
Most constantly.
I would I had been there.
It would have much amazed you.
Very like, very like: staid it long?
While one with moderate hast might tell a hun???dred.
Longer, longer.
Not when I saw't.
His Beard was grisly? no.
It was, as I have seen it in his life,
A Sable Silvered.
Isle watch to Night; perchance twill wake a???gain.
I warrant you it will.
If it assume my noble Fathers person,
Isle speak to it, though Hell it self should gape
And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,
If you have hitherto concealed this sight;
Let it bee treble in your silence still:
And whatsoever else shall hap to night,
Give it an understanding but no tongue;
I will requite your loves; so, fare ye well:
Upon the Platform twixt eleven and twelve,
Isle visit you.
Our duty to your Honour.
Your love, as mine to you: farewell.
My Fathers Spirit in Arms? All is not well:
I doubt some foul play: would the Night were come;
Till then sit still my soul; foul deeds will rise,
Though all the earth orewhelm them to men's eyes.
My necessaries are imbark't; Farewell:
And Sister, as the Winds give Benefit,
And Convoy is assistant; doe not sleep,
But let me hear from you.
Doe you doubt that?
For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favours,
Hold it a fashion and a toy in Blood;
A Violet in the youth of Primy Nature;
Froward, not permanent; sweet not lasting
The suppliance of a minute? No more.
No more but so.
Think it no more:
For nature crescent does not grow alone,
In thewes and Bulk: but as his Temple waxes,
The inward service of the Mind and Soul
Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,
And now no soil nor cautell doth besmirch
The virtue of his fear: but you must fear
His greatness weighed, his will is not his own;
For hee himself is subject to his Birth:
Hee may not, as unvalued persons doe,
Carve for himself; for, on his choice depends
The sanctity and health of the wool State.
And therefore must his choice be circumscribed
Unto the voice and yielding of that Body,
Whereof he is the Head. Then if he says he loves you,
It fits your wisdom so far to believe it;
As he in his peculiar Sect and force
May give his saying deed: which is no further,
Then the maine voice of Denmark goes withal.
Then weigh what loss your Honour may sustain,
If with too credent ear you list his Songs;
Or lose your Heart; or your chaste Treasure open
To his vnmastred importunity.
Fear it Ophelia, fear it my dear Sister,
And keep within the rear of your Affection;
Out of the shot and danger of Desire.
The chariest Maid is Prodigal enough,
If she unmask her beauty to the Moon:
Virtue it self scopes not calumnious strokes,
The Canker Galls, the Infants of the Spring
Too oft before the buttons be disclosed,
And in the Morn and liquid dew of Youth,
Contagious blastments are most imminent.
Be wary then, best safety lies in fear;
Youth to it self rebels, though none else near.
I shall the effect of this good Lesson keep,
As watchmen to my heart: but good my Brother
Doe not as some ungracious Pastors doe,
Show me the steep and thorny way to Heaven;
Whilst like a puffed and reckless Libertine
Himself, the Primrose path of dalliance treads,
And reaks not his own read.
Oh, fear me not.
I stay too long; but here my Father comes:
A double blessing is a double grace;
Occasion smiles upon a second leave.
Yet here Laertes? Aboard, aboard for shame,
The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,
And you are staid for there: my blessing with you;
And these few Precepts in thy memory,
See thou Character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,
Nor any vnproportion'd thought his Act:
Be thou familiar; but by no means vulgar:
The friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,
Grapple them to thy Soul, with hoops of Steel:
But doe not dull thy palm, with entertainment
Of each vnhatch't, vnfledg'd Comrade. Beware
Of entrance to a quarrel: but being in
Bear't that the opposed may beware of thee.
Give every man thine ear; but few thy voice:
Take each mans censure; but reserve thy judgment:
Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy;
But not expressed in fancy; rich, not gawdies
For the Apparel oft proclaims the man.
And they in France of the best rank and station,
Are of a most select and generous cheff in that.
Neither a borrower, nor a lender be;
For lone, oft loses both it self and friend:
And borrowing dulls the edge of Husbandry.
This aboue all; to thine own self be true:
And it must follow, as the Night??? the Day,
Thou can not then be false to any man.
Farewell: my Blessing season this in thee.
Most humbly doe I take my leave, my Lord.
The time invites you, go, your servants tend.
Farewell Ophelia, and remember well
What I have said to you.
Tic in my memory locked,
And you your self shall keep the key of it.
Farewell.
What first Ophelia he hath said to you?
So please you, something touching the L. Hamlet.
Marry, well bethought:
Tic told me he hath very oft of late
Given private time to you; and you your self
Have of your audience been most free and bounteous.
If it be so, as so tic put on me;
And that in way of caution: I must tell you,
You doe not understand your self so clearly,
As it behooves my Daughter, and your Honour.
What is between you, give me up the truth?
He hath my Lord of late, made many tenders
Of his affection to me.
Affection, puh. You speak like a greene Girl,
Vnsifted in such perilous Circumstance.
Doe you believe his tenders, as you call them?
I do not know, my Lord, what I should think.
Marry Isle teach you; think your self a Baby,
That you have tan his tenders for true pay,
Which are not starling. Tender your self more dearly;
Or not to crack the wind of the poor Phrase,
Roaming it thus, you'll tender me a fool.
My Lord, he hath importuned me with love,
In honourable fashion.
I, fashion you may call it, go too, go too.
And hath given countenance to his speech,
My Lord, with all the vows of Heaven.
I, Springes to catch Woodcocks. I doe know
When the Blood burns, how Prodigal the Soul
Gives the tongue vows: these blazes, Daughter,
Giving more light then heate; extinct in both,
Even in their promise, as it is a making;
You must not take for fire. For this time Daughter,
Be somewhat scanter of your Maiden presence;
Set your entreatments at a higher rate,
Then a command to parley. For Lord Hamlet,
Believe so much in him, that he is young,
And with a larger tether may he walk,
Then may be given you. In few, Ophelia,
Doe not believe his vows; for they are Brokers,
Not of the eye, which their Inuestments show:
But mere implorators of unholy Suits,
Breathing like sanctified and pious bonds,
The better to beguile. This is for all:
I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth,
Have you so slander any moment leisure,
As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet:
Look too't, I charge you; come your ways.
I shall obey my Lord.
The Ayre bites shrewdly: is it very cold?
It is a nipping and an eager ayre.
What hour now?
I think it lacks of twelve.
No, it is struck.
Indeed I heard it not: then it draws near the season,
Wherein the Spirit held his wont to walk.
What does this mean my Lord?
The King doth wake to night, and takes his rouse,
Keeps wassels and the swaggering vpspring reels,
And as he dreines his draughts of Rhenish down,
The kettle Drum and Trumpet thus bray out
The triumph of his Pledge.
Is it a custom?
I marry first;
And to my mind, though I am native here,
And to the manner borne: It is a Custom
More honoured in the breach, then the observance.
Look my Lord, it comes.
Angels and Ministers of Grace defend vs:
Be thou a Spirit of health, or Goblin damned,
Bring with thee airs from Heaven, or blasts from Hell,
Be thy events wicked or charitable,
Thou come in such a questionable shape
That I will speak to thee. Isle call thee Hamlet,
King, Father, Royal Dane: Oh, oh, answer me,
Let me not burst in Ignorance; but tell
Why thy Canonised bones Hearsed in death,
Have burst their cerments, why the Sepulchre
Wherein we saw thee quietly enurn'd???
Hath op'd his ponderous and Marble jaws,
To cast thee up again? What may this mean?
That thou dead Coarse again in complete steel,
Reuisits thus the glimpses of the Moon,
Making Night hideous? And we fools of Nature,
So horridly to shake our disposition,
With thoughts beyond thee; reaches of our Souls,
Say, why is this? wherefore? what should we doe?
It beckons you to go away with it,
As if it some impartment did desire
To you alone.
Look with what courteous action
It wafts you to a more removed ground:
But doe not go with it.
No, by no means.
It will not speak: then will I follow it.
Doe not my Lord.
Why, what should be the fear?
I doe not set my life at a pins fee;
And for my Soul, what can it doe to that?
Being a thing immortal as it self:
It waives me forth again; Isle follow it.
What if it tempt you toward the Flood my Lord?
Or to the dreadful Sonnet of the Cliff,
That beetles o'er his base into the Sea,
And there assumes some other horrible form,
Which might deprive your Sovereignty of Reason,
And draw you into madness think of it?
It wafts me still: go on, Isle follow thee.
You shall not go my Lord.
Hold off your band.
Be ruled, you shall not go.
My fate cries out,
And makes each petty Artery in this body,
As hardy as the Nemian Lions nerve:
Still am I called? Vnhand me Gentlemen:
By Heaven, Isle make a Ghost of him that lets me:
I say away, go on, Isle follow thee.
He waxes desperate with imagination.
Let's follow; it is not fit thus to obey him.
Have after, to what issue will this come?
Something is rotten in the State of Denmark.
Heaven will direct it.
Nay, let's follow him.
Where wilt thou lead me? speak; Isle go no fur???there.
Mark me.
I will.
My hour is almost come,
When I to sulphurous and tormenting Flames
Must render up my self.
Alas poor Ghost.
Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing
To what I shall unfold.
Speak, I am bound to hear.
So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.
What?
I am thy Fathers Spirit,
Doomed for a certain term to walk the night;
And for the day confined to fast in Fierce,
Till the foul crimes done in my days of Nature
Are burnt and purged away? But that I am forbid
To tell the secrets of my Prison-House;
I could a Tale unfold, whose lightest word
Would harrow up thy soul; freeze thy young blood,
Make thy two eyes like Stars, start from their Spheres,
Thy knotty and combined locks to part,
And each particular hair to stand an end,
Like Quills upon the fretful Porpentine:
But this eternal blazon must not be
To ears of flesh and blood; lift Hamlet, oh lift,
If thou did ever thy dear Father love.
Oh Heaven!
Revenge his foul and most unnatural Murder.
Murder?
Murder most foul, as in the best it is;
But this most foul strange, and unnatural.
Hast, hast me to know it,
That with wings as swift
As meditation, or the thoughts of Love,
May sweep to my Revenge.
I find thee apt,
And duller should thou be then the fat weed
That rots it self in ease, on Lethe Wharf,
Would thou not stir in this. Now Hamlet hear:
It's given out, that sleeping in mine Orchard,
A Serpent stung me: so the whole ear of Denmark,
Is by a forged process of my death
Rankly abused: But know thou Noble youth,
The Serpent that did sting thy Fathers life,
Now wears his Crown.
O my Prophetic soul: mine Uncle?
I that incestuous, that adulterate Beast
With witchcraft of his wits, hath Traitorous gifts.
Oh wicked Wit, and Gifts, that have the power
So to seduce? Won to to this shameful Lust
The will of my most seeming virtuous Queen:
Oh Hamlet, what a falling off was there,
From me, whose love was of that dignity,
That it went hand in hand; even with the Vow
I made to her in Marriage; and to decline
Upon a wretch, whose Natural gifts were poor
To those of mine, But Virtue, as it never will be moved,
Though Lewdness court it in a shape of Heaven:
So Lust, though to a radiant Angel linked,
Will sate it self in a Celestial bed, &amp; prey on Garbage.
But soft, me thinks I sent the Mornings Ayre;
Brief let me be: Sleeping within mine Orchard,
My custom always in the afternoon;
Upon my secure hour thy Uncle stole
With juice of cursed Hebenon in a Viol,
And in the Porches of mine ears did pour
The leaperous Distilment; whose effect
Holds such an enmity with blood of Man,
That swift as Quick-siluer, it courses through
The natural Gates and Allies of the Body;
And with a sudden vigour it doth posit
And curd, like Aygre droppings into Milk,
The thin and wholesome blood: so did it mine;
And a most instant Tetter baked about.
Most Lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust,
All my smooth Body.
Thus was I, sleeping, by a Brothers hand,
Of Life, of Crown, and Queen at once dispatcht;
Cut off even in the Blossoms of my Sin,
Vnhouzzled, disappointed, vnnaneld,
No reckoning made, but sent to my account
With all my imperfections on my head;
Oh horrible, Oh horrible, most horrible:
If thou hast nature in thee bear it not;
Let not the Royal Bed of Denmark be
A Couch for Luxury and damned Incest.
But howsoever thou pursue this Act,
Taint not thy mind; nor let thy Soul contrive
Against thy Mother ought; leave her to heaven,
And to those Thorns that in her bosom lodge,
To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once;
The Glowworm shows the Matine to be near,
And gins to pale his vneffectuall Fire:
Adieu, adieu, Hamlet: remember me.
Oh all you host of Heaven! Oh Earth; what else?
And shall I couple Hell? Oh fie: hold my heart;
And you my sinews, grow not instant Old;
But bear me stiffly up: Remember thee?
I, thou poor Ghost, while memory holds a seat
In this distracted Globe: Remember thee?
Yea, from the Table of my Memory,
Isle wipe away all trivial fond Records,
All saws of Books, all forms, all presures past,
That youth and observation copied there;
And thy Commandment all alone shall live
Within the Book and Volume of my Brain,
Vnmixt with baser matter; yes, yes, by Heaven:
Oh most pernicious woman!
Oh Villain, Villain, smiling damned Villain!
My Tables, my Tables; meet it is I set it down,
That one may smile, and smile and be a Villain;
At least I'm sure it may be so in Denmark;
So Uncle there you are: now to my word;
It is; Adieu, Adieu, Remember me: I have sworn't.
My Lord, my Lord.
Lord Hamlet.
Heaven secure him.
So be it.
Illo, ho, ho, my Lord.
Hello, ho, ho, boy; come bird, come.
How ist't my Noble Lord?
What news, my Lord?
Oh wonderful!
Good my Lord tell it.
No you'll reveal it.
Not I, my Lord, by Heaven.
Nor I, my Lord.
How say you then, would heart of man once think it?
But you'll be secret?
I, by Heaven, my Lord.
There's ne'er a villain dwelling in all Denmark
But hoe's an arrant knave.
There needs no Ghost my Lord, come from the Grave, to tell vs this.
Why right, you are in the right;
And so, without more circumstance at all,
I hold it-fit that we shake hands, and part:
You, as your business and desires shall point you:
For every man he's business and desire,
Such as it is: and for mine own poor part,
Look you, Isle go pray.
These are but wild and hurling words, my Lord.
I'm sorry they offend you heartily:
Yes faith, heartily.
There's no offence my Lord.
Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is my Lord,
And much offence too, touching this Vision here:
It is an honest Ghost, that let me tell you:
For your desire to know what is between vs,
O'er master't as you may. And now good friends,
As you are Friends, Scholars and Soldiers,
Give me one poor request.
What is it my Lord? we will.
Never make known what you have seen to night.
My Lord, we will not.
Nay, but swear it.
Infaith my Lord, not I.
Nor I my Lord: in faith.
Upon my sword.
We have sworn my Lord already.
Indeed, upon my sword, Indeed.
Swear.
Ah ha boy, say thou so. Art thou there true-penny? Come one you here this fellow in the selleredge Consent to swear.
Propose the Oath my Lord.
Never to speak of this that you have seen.
Swear by my sword.
Swear.
Hic &amp; vbique? Then we'll shift for ground,
Come hither Gentlemen,
And lay your hands again upon my sword,
Never to speak of this that you have heard:
Swear by my Sword.
Swear.
Well said old Mole, can work in the ground so fast?
A worthy Pioner, once more remove good friends.
Oh day and night: but this is wondrous strange.
And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.
There are more things in Heaven and Earth, Horatio,
Then are dream't of in our Philosophy. But come,
Here as before, never so help you mercy,
How strange or odd so ere I bear my self;
(As I perchance hereafter shall think meet
To put an Antique disposition on:)
That you at such time seeing me, never shall
With Arms encombred thus, or thus, head shake;
Or by pronouncing of some doubtful Phrase;
As well, we know, or we could and if we would,
Or if we list to speak; or there be and if there might,
Or such ambiguous giving out to note,
That you know ought of me; this not to doe:
So grace and mercy at your most need help you:
Swear.
Swear.
Rest, rest perturbed Spirit: so Gentlemen,
With all my love I doe commend me to you;
And what so poor a man as Hamlet is,
May doe to express his love and friending to you,
God willing shall not lack: let vs go in together,
And still your fingers on your lips I pray,
The time is out of joint: Oh cursed spite,
That ever I was borne to set it right.
Nay, come let's go together.
Give him his money, and these notes Reynoldo.
I will my Lord.
You shall doe marvels wisely: good Reynoldo,
Before you visit him you make inquiry
Of his behaviour.
My Lord, I did intend it.
Marry, well said;
Very well said. Look you Sir,
Enquire me first what Danskers are in Paris;
And how, and who; what means; and where they keep:
What company, at what expense: and finding
By this encompassement and drift of question,
That they doe know my son: Come you more nearer
Then your particular demands will touch it,
Take you as it were some distant knowledge of him,
And thus I know his father and his friends,
And in part him. Doe you mark this Reynoldo?
I, very well my Lord.
And in part him, but you may say not well;
But if it be hee I mean, hes very wilde;
Addicted so and so; and there put on him
What forgeries you please: marry, none so rank,
As may dishonour him; take heed of that:
But Sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips,
As are Companions noted and most known
To youth and liberty.
As gaming my Lord.
I, or drinking, fencing, swearing,
Quarrelling, drabbing. You may go so far.
My Lord that would dishonour him.
Faith no, as you may season it in the charge;
You must not put another scandal on him,
That hee is open to Incontinence;
That's not my meaning: but breath his faults so quaintly,
That they may seem the taints of liberty;
The flash and out-breake of a fiery mind,
A savageness in vnreclaim'd blood of general assault.
But my good Lord.
Wherefore should you doe this?
I my Lord, I would know that.
Marry Sir, heere's my drift,
And I believe it is a fetch of warrant:
You laying these slight sulleyes on my Son,
As it were a thing a little soiled in the working:
Mark you your party in converse; him you would sound,
Having ever seen. In the prenominate crimes,
The youth you breath of guilty, be assured
He closes with you in this consequence:
Good sir, or so, or friend, or Gentleman.
According to the Phrase and the Addition???
Of man and Country.
Very good my Lord.
And then Sir does he this?
He does: what was I about to say?
I was about to say something: where did I leave?
At closes in the consequence:
At friend, or so, and Gentleman.
At closes in the consequence, I marry,
He closes with you thus. I know the Gentleman,
I saw him yesterday, or tother day;
Or then or then, with such and such; and as you say,
There was he gaming, there o'er took in's Rouse,
There falling out at Tennis; or perchance,
I saw him enter such a house of sail;
Videlicet, a Brothel, or so forth. See you now;
Your bait of falsehood, takes this Cape of truth;
And thus doe we of wisdom and of reach
With windlasses, and with assays of Bias,
By indirections find directions out:
So by my former Lecture and advice
Shall you my Son; you have me, have you not?
My Lord I have.
God buy you; fare you well.
Good my Lord.
Observe his inclination in your self.
I shall my Lord.
And let him ply his Music.
Well, my Lord.
Farewell:
How now Ophelia, what's the matter?
Alas my Lord, I have been so affrighted.
With what, in the name of Heaven?
My Lord, as I was sowing in my Chamber,
Lord Hamlet with his doublet all unbraced,
No hat upon his head, his stockings fouled,
Vngartred, and down gived to his Ankle,
Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,
And with a look so piteous in purport,
As if he had been loosed out of hell,
To speak of horrors: he comes before me.
Mad for thy Love?
My Lord, I doe not know: but truly I do fear it.
What said he?
He took me by the wrist, and held me hard;
Then goes he to the length of all his arm;
And with his other hand thus o'er his brow,
He false to such perusal of my face,
As he would draw it. Long staid he so,
At last, a little shaking of mine Arm:
And thrice his head thus waving up and down;
He raised a sigh, so piteous and profound,
That it did seem to shatter all his bulk,
And end his being. That done, he lets me go,
And with his head over his shoulders turned,
He seemed to find his way without his eyes,
For out adores he went without their help;
And to the last, bended their light on me.
Go with me, I will go seek the King,
This is the very ecstasy of Love,
Whose violent property foredoes it self,
And leads the will to desperate Undertakings,
As oft as any passion under Heaven,
That does afflict our Natures. I am sorry,
What have you given him any hard words of late?
No my good Lord: but as you did command,
I did repell his Letters, and denied
His access to me.
That hath made him mad.
I am sorry that with better speed and judgment
I had not quoted him. I fear he did but trifle,
And meant to wrack thee: but beshrew my jealousy:
It seems it is as proper to our Age,
To cast beyond our selves in our Opinions,
As it is common for the younger sort
To lack discretion. Come, go we to the King,
This must be known, wc being kept close might move
More grief to hide, then hate to utter love.
Welcome dear Rosincrance and Guildensterne.
Moreover, that we much did long to see you,
The need we have to use you, did provoke
Our hasty sending. Something have you heard
Of Hamlets transformation: so I call it,
Since not the exterior, nor the inward man
Resembles that it was. What it should bee
More then his Fathers death, that thus hath put him
So much from the understanding of himself,
I cannot deem of. I entreat you both,
That being of so young days brought up with him:
And since so Neighboured to his youth, and humour,
That you vouchsafe your rest here in our Court
Some little time: so by your Companies
To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather
So much as from Occasions you may glean,
That opened lies within our remedy.
Good Gentlemen, he hath much talked of you,
And sure I am, two men there are not living,
To whom he more adheres. If it will please you
To show vs so much Gentry, and good will,
As to expend your time with vs awhile,
For the supply and profit of our Hope,
Your Visitation shall receive such thanks
As fits a Kings remembrance.
Both your Majesties
Might by the Sovereign power you have of vs,
Put your dread pleasures, more into Command
Then to Entreaty.
We both obey,
And here give up our selves, in the full bent,
To lay our Services freely at your feet,
To be commanded.
Thanks Rosincrance, and gentle Guildensterne.
Thanks Guildensterne and gentle Rosincrance.
And I beseech you instantly to visit
My too much changed Son.
Go some of ye,
And bring the Gentlemen where Hamlet is.
Heavens make our presence and our practises
Pleasant and helpful to him.
Amen.
The Ambassadors from Norway, my good Lord,
Are joyfully returned.
Thou still hast bin the Father of good News.
Have I, my Lord? Assure you, my good Liege,
I hold my duty, as I hold my Soul,
Both to my God, one to my gracious King:
And I do think, or else this brain of mine
Hunts not the trail of Policy, so sure
As I have used to do: that I have found
The very cause of Hamlets Lunacy.
Oh speak of that, that I do long to hear.
Give first admittance to the Ambassadors,
My News shall be the News to that great Feast.
Thy self do grace to them, and bring them in.
He tells me my sweet Queen, that he hath found
The head and source of all your Sons distemper.
I doubt it is no other, but the maine,
His Fathers death, and our o're-hasty Marriage.
Well, we shall sift him. Welcome good Friends:
Say Voltumand, what from our Brother Norway?
Most fair return of Greetings, and Desires.
Upon our first, he sent out to suppress
His Nephews Leuies, which to him appeared
To be a preparation against the Poleak:
But better looked into, he truly found
It was against your Highness, whereat grieved,]
That so his Sickness, Age, and Impotence
Was falsely borne in hand, sends out Arrests
On Fortinbras, which he (in brief) obeys,
Receives rebuke from Norway: and in fine,
Makes Vow before his Uncle, never more
To give the assay of Arms against your Majesty.
Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy,
Gives him three thousand Crowns in Annual Fee,
And his Commission to employ those Soldiers
So levied as before, against the Poleak:
With an entreaty herein further shown,
That it might please you to give quiet pass
Through your Dominions, for his Enterprise,
On such regards of safety and allowance,
As therein are set down.
It likes vs well:
And at our more considered time we'll read,
Answer, and think upon this Business.
Mean time we thank you, for your well-tooke Labour.
Go to your rest, at night we'll Feast together.
Most welcome home.
This business is very well ended.
My Liege, and Madam, to expostulate
What Majesty should be, what Duty is,
Why day is day; night, night; and time is time,
Were nothing but to waste Night, Day??? and Time.
Therefore, since Brevity is the Soul of Wit,
And tediousness, the limbs and outward flourishes,
I will be brief. Your Noble Son is mad:
Mad call I it; for to define true Madness,
What is it, but to be nothing else but mad.
But let that go.
More matter, with less Art.
Madam??? I swear I use no Art at all:
That he is mad, it is true: It is true it is pity,
And pity it is true: A foolish figure,
But farewell it: for I will use no Art.
Mad let vs grant him then: and now remains
That we find out the cause of this effect,
Or rather say, the cause of this defect;
For this effect defective, comes by cause,
Thus it remains, and the remainder thus. Perpend,
I have a daughter: have, whilst she is mine,
Who in her Duty and Obedience, mark,
Hath given me this: now gather, and surmise.
That's an ill Phrase, a wild Phrase, beautified is a wild Phrase: but you shall hear these in her excellent white bosom, these.
Came this from Hamlet to her.
Good Madam stay awhile, I will be faithful.
Doubt thou, the Stars are fire,
Doubt, that the Sun doth move:
Doubt Truth to be a Lier,
But never Doubt, I love.
O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these Numbers: I have not Art to reckon my groans; but that I love thee best, oh most Best be???leeue it. Adieu.
Thine evermore most dear Lady, whilst this Machine is to him, Hamlet.
This in Obedience hath my daughter showed me:
And more aboue hath his soliciting,
As they fell out by Time, by Means, and Place,
All given to mine ear.
But how hath she received his Love?
What do you think of me?
As of a man, faithful and Honourable.
I wold fine prove so. But what might you think?
When I had seen this hot love on the wing,
As I perceived it, I must tell you that
Before my Daughter told me, what might you
Or my dear Majesty your Queen here, think,
If I had played the Desk or Table-booke,
Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,
Or looked upon this Love, with idle sight,
What might you think? No, I went round to work,
And (my young Mistress) thus I did bespeak
Lord Hamlet is a Prince out of thy Star,
This must not be: and then, I Precepts gave her,
That she should locke her self from his Resort,
Admit no Messengers, receive no Tokens:
Which done, she took the Fruits of my Advice,
And he repulsed. A short Tale to make,
Fell into a Sadness, then into a Fast,
Thence to a Watch, thence into a Weakness,
Thence to a Lightness, and by this declension
Into the Madness whereon now he raves,
And all we wail for.
Do you think it is this?
It may be very likely.
Hath there been such a time, I'd fain know that,
That I have positively said, it is so,
When it proved otherwise?
Not that I know.
Take this from this; if this be otherwise,
If Circumstances lead me, I will find
Where truth is hid, though it were hid indeed
Within the Center.
How may we try it further?
You know sometimes
He walks four hours together, here
In the Lobby.
So he he's indeed.
At such a time Isle loose my Daughter to him,
Be you and I behind an Arras then,
Mark the encounter: If he love her not,
And be not from his reason fallen thereon;
Let me be no Assistant for a State,
And keep a Farm and Carters.
We will try it.
But look where sadly the poor wretch Comes reading.
Away I do beseech you, both away,
Isle board him presently.
Oh give me leave. How does my good Lord Hamlet?
Well, God-a-mercy.
Do you know me, my Lord?
Excellent, excellent well: y' are a Fishmonger.
Not I my Lord.
Then I would you were so honest a man.
Honest, my Lord?
I sir, to be honest as this world goes, is to bee one man picked out of two thousand.
That's very true, my Lord.
For if the Sun breed Magots in a dead dog, being a good kissing Carrion???
Have you a daughter?
I have my Lord.
Let her not walk in the Sun: Conception is a blessing, but not as your daughter may conceive. Friend look too't.
How say you by that? Still harping on my daugh???la: yet he knew me not at first; he said I was a Fishmon???ger: he is far gone, far gone: and truly in my youth, I suffered much extremity for love: very near this. Isle speak to him again. What do you read my Lord?
Words, words, words.
What is the matter, my Lord?
Between who?
I mean the matter you mean, my Lord.
Slanders Sir: for the Satirical slave says here, that old men have gray Beards; that their faces are wrin???kled; their eyes purging thick Amber, or Plum-Tree Gum: and that they have a plentiful locke of Wit, together with weak Hams. All which Sir, though I most powerfully, and potently believe; yet I hold it not Honesty to have it thus set down: For you your self Sir, should be old as I am, if like a Crab you could go backward.
Though this be madness,
Yet there is Method in it: will you walk
Out of the ayre my Lord?
Into my Grave?
Indeed that is out of the Ayre:
How pregnant (sometimes) his Replies are?
A happiness,
That often Madness hits on,
Which Reason and Sanity could not
So prosperously be delivered of.
I will leave him,
And suddenly contrive the means of meeting
Between him, and my daughter.
My Honourable Lord, I will most humbly
Take my leave of you.
You cannot Sir take from me any thing, that I will more willingly part withal, except my life, my life.
Fare you well my Lord.
These tedious old fools.
You go to seek my Lord Hamlet; there hee is.
God save you Sir.
Mine honoured Lord?
My most dear Lord?
My excellent good friends? How dost thou Guildensterne? Oh, Rosincrane??? good Lads: How doe ye both?
As the indifferent Children of the earth.
Happy, in that we are not ouer-happy: on For???tunes Cap, we are not the very Button.
Nor the Soales of her Shoo?
Neither my Lord.
Then you live about her waste, or in the mid???dl of her favour?
Faith, her priuates, we.
In the secret parts of Fortune? Oh, most true ??? she is a Strumpet. What's the news?
None my Lord; but that the World's grown honest.
Then is Doomsday near: But your news is not true. Let me question more in particular: what have you my good friends, deserved at the hands of Fortune, that she sends you to Prison hither?
Prison, my Lord?
Denmark's a Prison.
Then is the World one.
A goodly one, in which there are many Con???fines, Wards, and Dungeons; Denmark being one of the worst.
We think not so my Lord.
Why then it is none to you; for there is nothing either good or bad, but thinking makes it so: to me it is a prison.
Why then your Ambition makes it one: it is too narrow for your mind.
O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell, and count my self a King of infinite space; were it not that I have bad dreams.
Which dreams indeed are Ambition: for the very substance of the Ambitious, is merely the shadow of a Dream.
A dream it self is but a shadow.
Truly, and I hold Ambition of so airy and light a quality, that it is but a shadows shadow.
Then are our Beggars bodies; and our Mo???narchs and out-stretcht Heroes the Beggars Shadows: shall wee to the Court: for, by my fey I cannot rea???son?
We'll wait upon you.
No such matter. I will not sort you with the rest of my servants: for to speak to you like an honest man: I am most dreadfully attended; but in the beaten way of friendship. What make you at Elsonower?
To visit you my Lord, no other occasion.
Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks; but I thank you: and sure dear friends my thanks are too dear a halfepeny; were you not sent for? Is it your own inclining? Is it a free visitation? Come, deal justly with me: come, come; nay speak.
What should we say my Lord?
Why any thing. But to the purpose; you were sent for; and there is a kind confession in your looks; which your modesties have not craft enough to co???lore, I know the good King &amp; Queen have sent for you.
To what end my Lord?
That you must teach me: but let me conjure you by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonance of our youth, by the Obligation of our euer-preserued love, and by what more dear, a better proposer could charge you withal; be even and direct with me, whether you were sent for or no.
What say you?
Nay then I have an eye of you: if you love me hold not off.
My Lord, we were sent for.
I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation prevent your discovery of your secrecy to the King and Queen: moult no feather, I have of late, but wherefore I know not, lost all my mirth, forgone all custom of ex???ercise; and indeed, it goes so heavenly with my deposit???on; that this goodly frame the Earth, seems to me a ster???rill Promontory; this most excellent Canopy the Ayre, look you, this brave ore-hanging, this Majestic Roof, fretted with golden fire: why, it appears no other thing to me, then a foul and pestilent congregation of va???pours. What a piece of work is a man! how Noble in Reason? how infinite in faculty? in form and moving how express and admirable? in Action, how like an An???gel? in apprehension, how like a God? the beauty of the world, the Paragon of Animals; and yet to me, what is this Quintessence of Dust? Man delights not me; no, nor Woman neither; though by your smiling you seem to say so.
My Lord, there was no such stuff in my thoughts.
Why did you laugh, when I said, Man delights not me?
To think, my Lord, if you delight not in Man, what Lenton entertainment the Players shall receive from you: wee coated them on the way, and hither are they coming to offer you Service.
He that plays the King shall be welcome; his Majesty shall have Tribute of me: the adventurous Knight shall use his Foil and Target: the Lover shall not sigh gratis, the humorous man shall end his part in peace: the Clown shall make those laugh whose lungs are tickled a' the sere: and the Lady shall say her mind freely; or the blank Verse shall halt for it: what Players are they?
Even those you were wont to take delight in the Tragedians of the City.
How chances it they travail? their resi???dence both in reputation and profit was better both ways.
I think their Inhibition comes by the means of the late Innovation?
Doe they hold the same estimation they did when I was in the City? Are they so followed?
No indeed, they are not.
How comes it? doe they grow rusty?
Nay, their endeavour keeps in the wonted pace; But there is Sir an airy of Children, little Yeses, that cry out on the top of question; and are most tyrannically clapped for it: these are now the
fashion, and so be-ratled the common Stages (so they call them) that many wearing Rapiers, are afraid of Goose-quils, and dare scarce come thither.
What are they Children? Who maintains 'em? How are they escoted? Will they pursue the Quality no longer then they can sing? Will they not say afterwards if they should grow themselves to common Players (as it is like most if their means are not better) their Wri???ters do them wrong, to make them exclaim against their own Succession.
Faith there he's been much to do on both sides: and the Nation holds it no sin, to tar them to Con???trouersie. There was for a while, no money bid for argue???meant, unless the Poet and the Player went to Cuffs in the Question.
Is it possible?
Oh there he's been much throwing about of Brains.
Do the Boys carry it away?
I that they do my Lord. Hercules &amp; his load too.
It is not strange: for mine Uncle is King of Denmark, and those that would make mowes at him while my Father lived; give twenty, forty, an hundred Ducats a piece, for his picture in Little. There is some???thing in this more then Natural, if Philosophy could find it out.
There are the Players.
Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsonower: your hands, come: The appurtenance of Welcome, is Fashion and Ceremony. Let me comply with you in the Garb, left my extent to the Players (which I tell you must show fairly outward) should more appear like entertainment then yours. You are welcome: but my Uncle Father, and Aun??? Mother are deceived.
??? ???hat my dear Lord?
????????? but mad North, North-West: when the Wind is Southerly ??? know a Hawk from a Handsaw.
Well be with you Gentlemen.
Hark you Guildensterne, and you too: at each care a hearer: that great Baby you see there, is not yet out of his swathing clouts.
Happily he's the second time come to them: for they say, an old man is twice a child.
I will Prophecy. Hee comes to tell me of the Players. Mark it, you say right Sir: for a Monday more???ning it was so indeed.
My Lord, I have News to tell you.
My Lord, I have News to tell you.
When Rossius an Actor in Rome???
The Actors are come hither my Lord.
Buzz, buzz.
Upon mine Honour.
Then can each Actor on his Ass ???
The best Actors in the world, either for Trage???die, Comedy, History, Pastoral: Pastoricall-Comicall-Historicall-Pastorall: Tragicall-Historicall: Tragicall-Comicall-Historicall-Pastorall: Scene indiuible, or Po???em unlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor Plautus too light, for the law of Writ, and the Liberty. These are the only men.
O Iephta Judge of Israel, what a Treasure had thou?
What a Treasure had he, my Lord?
Why one fair Daughter, and no more???
The which he loved passing well.
Still on my Daughter.
Am I not in the right old Iephta?
If you call me Iephta my Lord, I have a daugh???la that I love passing well.
Nay that follows not.
What follows then, my Lord?
Why, As by lot, God wot: and then you know, It came to pass, as most like it was: The first row of the Pons Chans???n will show you more. For look where my Abridgements come.
Y' are welcome Masters, welcome all. I am glad to see thee well: Welcome good Friends. O my old Friend? Thy face is valiant since I saw thee last: Come thou to beard me in Denmark? What, my young Lady and Mi???stress? By our lady your Ladyship is nearer Heaven then when I saw you last, by the altitude of a Choppine. Pray God your voice like a piece of vncurrant Gold be not cracked within the ring. Masters, you are all welcome: we'll even to it like French Falconers, fly at any thing we see: we'll have a Speech straight. Come give vs a taste of your qua???lity: come, a passionate speech.
What speech, my Lord?
I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was never Acted: or if it was, not aboue once, for the Play I remember pleased not the Million, it was Cauiarie to the General: but it was (as I received it, and others, whose judgment in such matters, cried in the top of mine) an excellent Play: well digested in the Scoenes, set down with as much modesty, as cunning. I remember one said, there was no Sallets in the lines, to make the matter sa???uoury; nor no matter in the phrase, that might indite the Author of affectation, but called it an honest method. One chief Speech in it, I chiefly loved, it was Aeneas Tale to Dido, and thereabout of it especially, where he speaks of Priams slaughter. If it live in your memory, begin at this Line, let me see, let me see: The rugged Pyrrhus like the Hyrcanian Beast. It is not so: it begins with Pyrrhus
The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose Sable Arms
Black as his purpose, did the night resemble
When he lay couched in the Ominous Horse,
Hath now this dread and black Complexion smeared
With Heraldry more dismal: Head to foot
Now is he to take Geulles, horridly Tricked
With blood of Fathers, Mothers, Daughters, Sons,
Baked and impacted with the parching streets,
That lend a tyrannous, and damned light
To their wild Murders, roasted in wrath and fire,
And thus o're-sized with coagulate gore,
With eyes like Carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus
Old Grandsire Priam seeks.
Fore God, my Lord, well spoken, with good ac???cent??? and good discretion.
Anon he finds him,
Striking too short at Greeks. His antique Sword,
Rebellious to his Arm, lies where it falls
Repugnant to command: unequal match,
Pyrrhus it Priam drives, in Rage strikes wide:
But with the whiff and wind of his fell Sword,
The vnnerued Father false. Then senseless Illium,
Seeming to feel his blow, with flaming top
Stoops to his Base, and with a hideous crash
Takes Prisoner Pyrrhus ear. For lo, his Sword
Which was declining on the Milky head
Of Reverend Priam, seemed in the Ayre to stieke:
So as a painted Tyrant Pyrrhus stood,
And like a Neutral to his will and matter, did nothing.
But as we often see against some storm,
A silence in the Heavens, the Rack stand still,
The bold winds speechless, and the Orb below
As hush as death: Anon the dreadful Thunder
Doth rend the Region. So after Pyrrhus pause,
A roused Vengeance sets him new a-worke,
And never did the Cyclops hammers fall
On Mars his Armours, forged for proof Eterne,
With less remorse then Pyrrhus bleeding sword
Now falls on Priam.
Out, out, thou Strumpet-Fortune, all you Gods,
In general Synod take away her power:
Break all the Spokes and Fallies from her wheel,
And boule the round Naue down the hill of Heaven,
As low as to the Fiends.
This is too long.
It shall to 'th Barbers, with your beard. Pry???thee say on: He's for a Jig, or a tale of Bawdry, or hee sleeps. Say on; come to Hecuba.
But who, O who, had seen the ennobled Queen.
The ennobled Queen?
That's good: Ennobled Queen is good.
Run bare-foot up and down,
Threatening the flame
With Bison Rheum: A clout about that head,
Where late the Diadem stood, and for a Robe
About her lank and all ore-teamed Lomes,
A blanket in the Alarm of fear caught up.
Who this had seen, with tongue in Venom steeped,
Against Fortunes State, would Treason have pronounced?
But if the Gods themselves did see her then,
When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport
In mincing with his Sword her Husbands limbs,
The instant Burst of Clamour that she made
(Unless things mortal move them not at all)
Would have made milch the Burning eyes of Heaven,
And passion in the Gods.
Look where he he's not turned his colour, and he's tears in's eyes. Pray you no more.
'I is well, Isle have thee speak out the rest, soon. Good my Lord, will you see the Players well be???stowed. Do ye hear, let them be well used: for they are the Abstracts and brief Chronicles of the time. After your death, you were better have a bad Epitaph, then their ill report while you lived.
My Lord, I will use them according to their de???sart.
Gods bodykins man, better. Use every man after his desert, and who should scope whipping: use them after your own Honour and Dignity. The less they deserve, the more merit is in your bounty. Take them in.
Come sirs.
Follow him Friends: we'll hear a play to more???row. Dost thou hear me old Friend, can you play the murder of Gonzago?
I my Lord.
We'll have it to morrow night. You could for a need study a speech of some dozen or sixteen lines, which I would set down, and insert in it? Could ye not?
I my Lord.
Very well. Follow that Lord, and look you mock him not. My good Friends, Isle leave you till night you are welcome to Elsonower?
Good my Lord.
I so, God buy'ye: Now I am alone.
Oh what a Rogue and Peasant slave am I?
Is it not monstrous that this Player here,
But in a Fixion, in a dream of Passion,
Could force his soul so to his whole conceit,
That from her working, all his visage warmed;
Tears in his eyes, distraction in's Aspect,
A broken voice, and his whole Function suiting
With Forms, to his Conceit? And all for nothing?
For Hecuba?
What's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,
That he should weep for her? What would he doe,
Had he the Motive and the Cue for passion
That I have? He would drown the Stage with tears,
And cleave the general ear with horrid speech:
Make mad the guilty, and apale the free,
Confound the ignorant, and amaze indeed,
The very faculty of Eyes and Ears Yet I,
A dull and muddy-metled Rascal, peak
Like Iohn a-dreames, vnpregnant of my cause,
And can say nothing: No, not for a King,
Upon whose property, and most dear life,
A damned defeat was made. Am I a Coward?
Who calls me Villain? breaks my pate across?
Plucks off my Beard, and blows it in my face?
Tweakes me by' the Nose? gives me the Lye in the Throat,
As deep as to the Lungs? Who does me this?
Ha? Why I should take it: for it cannot be,
But I am Pigeon-Liuer'd, and lack Gall
To make Oppression bitter, or ere this,
I should have fatted all the Region Kites
With this Slaves Offal, bloody: a Bawdy villain,
Remorseless, Treacherous, Lecherous, kindles villain!
Oh Vengeance!
Who? What an Ass am I? I sure, this is most brave,
That I, the Son of the Dear murdered,
Prompted to my Revenge by Heaven, and Hell,
Must (like a Whore) vnpacke my heart with words,
And fall a Cursing like a very Drab,
A Scullion? Fie upon it: Foh. About my Brain.
I have heard, that guilty Creatures sitting at a Play,
Have by the very cunning of the Scoene,
Been struck so to the soul, that presently
They have proclaimed their Malefactions.
For Murder, though it have no tongue, will speak
With most miraculous Organ. Isle have these Players,
Play something like the murder of my Father,
Before mine Uncle. Isle observe his looks,
Isle tent him to the quick: If he but blench
I know my course. The Spirit that I have seen
May be the Devil, and the Devil hath power
To assume a pleasing shape, yea and perhaps
Out of my Weakness, and my Melancholy,
As he is very potent with such Spirits,
Abuses me to damn me. Isle have grounds
More Relatiue then this: The Ploy's the thing,
Wherein Isle catch the Conscience of the King.
And can you by no drift of circumstance
Get from him why he puts on this Confusion:
Grating so harshly all his days of quiet
With turbulent and dangerous Lunacy.
He does confess he feels himself distracted,
But from what cause he will by no means speak.
Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,
But with a crafty Madness keeps aloof:
When we would bring him on to some Confession
Of his true state.
Did he receive you well?
Most like a Gentleman.
But with much forcing of his disposition.
Niggard of question, but of our demands
Most free in his reply.
Did you assay him to any pastime?
Madam, it so fell out, that certain Players
We ore-wrought on the way: of these we told him,
And there did seem in him a kind of joy
To hear of it: They are about the Court,
And (as I think) they have already order
This night to play before him.
It is most true:
And he beseeched me to entreat your Majesties
To hear, and see the matter.
With all my heart, and it doth much content me
To hear him so inclined. Good Gentlemen,
Give him a further edge, and drive his purpose on
To these delights.
We shall my Lord.
Sweet Gertrude leave vs too,
For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither,
That he, as it were by accident, may there
Affront Ophelia. Her Father, and my self (lawful espials)
Will so bestow our selves, that seeing unseen
We may of their encounter frankly judge,
And gather by him, as he is behaved,
If it be the affliction of his love, or no.
That thus he suffers for.
I shall obey you,
And for your part Ophelia, I do wish
That your good Beauties be the happy cause
Of Hamlets wildenesse: so shall I hope your Virtues
Will bring him to his wonted way again,
To both your Honours.
Madam, I wish it may.
Ophelia, walk you here. Gracious so please ye
We will bestow our selves: Read on this book,
That show of such an exercise may colour
Your loneliness. We are oft too blame in this,
It is too much proved, that with Devotions visage,
And pious Action, we do surge o'er
The devil himself.
Oh it is true:
How smart a lash that speech doth give my Conscience?
The Harlots Cheek beautied with plaist'ring Art
Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it,
Then is my deed, to my most painted word.
Oh heavy burden!
I hear him coming, let's withdraw my Lord.
To be, or not to be, that is the Question:
Whether it is Nobler in the mind to suffer
The Slings and Arrows of outrageous Fortune,
Or to take Arms against a Sea of troubles,
And by opposing end them: to dye, to sleep
No more; and by a sleep, to say we end
The Heart-ake, and the thousand Natural shocks
That Flesh is heir too? It is a consummation
Devoutly to be wished. To dye to sleep,
To sleep, perchance to Dream; I, there's the rub,
For in that sleep of death, what dreams may come,
When we have shufflel'd off this mortal coil,
Must give vs pause. There's the respect
That makes Calamity of so long life:
For who would bear the Whips and Scorns of time,
The Oppressors wrong, the poor mans Contumely,
The pangs of dispriz'd Love, the Laws delay,
The insolence of Office, and the Spurns
That patient merit of the unworthy takes,
When he himself might his Quietus make
With a bare Bodkin? Who would these Farthels bear
To grunt and sweat under a weary life,
But that the dread of something after death,
The undiscovered Country, from whose Borne
No Traveller returns, Puzels the will,
And makes vs rather bear those ills we have,
Then fly to others that we know not of.
Thus Conscience does make Cowards of vs all,
And thus the Native hew of Resolution
Is sicklied o'er, with the pale cast of Thought,
And enterprises of great pith and moment,
With this regard their Currants turn away,
And loose the name of Action. Soft you now,
The fair Ophelia? Nymph, in thy Orisons
Be all my sins remembered.
Good my Lord,
How does your Honour for this many a day?
I humbly thank you: well, well, well.
My Lord, I have Remembrances of yours,
That I have longed long to re-deliuer.
I pray you now, receive them.
No, no, I never gave you ought.
My honoured Lord, I know right well you did,
And with them words of so sweet breath composed,
As made the things more rich, then perfume left:
Take these again, for to the Noble mind
Rich gifts wax poor, when givers prove unkind.
There my Lord.
Ha, ha: Are you honest?
My Lord.
Are you fair?
What means your Lordship?
That if you be honest and fair, your Honesty should admit no discourse to your Beauty.
Could Beauty my Lord, have better Commerce then your Honesty?
I truly: for the power of Beauty, will sooner transform Honesty from what it is, to a Bawd, then the force of Honesty can translate Beauty into his likeness. This was sometime a Paradox, but now the time gives it proof. I did love you once.
Indeed my Lord, you made me believe so.
You should not have believed me. For virtue cannot so inoculate our old stock, but we shall-rellish of it. I loved you not.
I was the more deceived.
Get thee to a Nunnery. Why would thou be a breeder of Sinners? I am my self indifferent honest, but yet I could accuse me of such things, that it were bet???la my Mother had not borne me. I am very proud, re???uengefull, Ambitious, with more offences at my beck, then I have thoughts to put them in imagination, to give them shape, or time to act them in. What should such
Fellows as I do, crawling between Heaven and Earth. We are arrant Knaves all, believe none of vs. Go thy ways to a Nunnery. Whore's your Father?
At home, my Lord.
Let the doors be shut upon him, that he may play the Fool no way, but in's own house. Farewell.
O help him, you sweet Heavens.
If thou doest Marry, Isle give thee this Plague for thy Dowry. Be thou as chaste as Ice, as pure as Snow, thou shalt not escape Calumny. Get thee to a Nunnery. Go, Farewell. Or if thou wilt needs Marry, marry a fool: for Wise men know well enough, what monsters you make of them. To a Nunnery go, and quickly too. Far???well.
O heavenly Powers, restore him.
I have heard of your pratlings too well enough. God has given you one pace, and you make your self an???other: you gidge, you amble, and you lisp, and nickname Gods creatures, and make your Wantonness, your Eg???norance. Go too, Isle no more on it, it hath made me mad. I say, we will have no more Marriages. Those that are married already, all but one shall live, the rest shall keep as they are. To a Nunnery, go.
O what a Noble mind is here o're-throwne?
The Courtiers, Soldiers, Scholars: Eye, tongue, sword,
The expectancy and Rose of the fair State,
The glass of Fashion, and the mould of Form,
The observed of all Observers, quite, quite down.
Have I of Ladies most deject and wretched,
That sucked the Honey of his Music Vows:
Now see that Noble, and most Sovereign Reason,
Like sweet Bells ???angled out of tune, and harsh,
That unmatched Form and Feature of blown youth,
Blasted with ecstasy. Oh woe is me,
To have seen what I have seen: see what I see.
Love? His affections do not that way tend,
Nor what he spake, though it lacked Form a little,
Was not like Madness. There's something in his soul?
O'er which his Melancholy sits on brood,
And I do doubt the hatch, and the disclose
Will be some danger, which to prevent
I have in quick determination
Thus set it down. He shall with speed to England
For the demand of our neglected Tribute:
Happily the Seas and Countries different
With variable Objects, shall expel
This something settled matter in his heart:
Whereon his Brains still beating, puts him thus
From fashion of himself. What think you on it?
It shall do well. But yet do I believe
The Origin and Commencement of this grief
Sprung from neglected love. How now Ophelia?
You need not tell vs, what Lord Hamlet said,
We heard it all. My Lord, do as you please,
But if you hold it fit after the Play,
Let his Queen Mother all alone entreat him
To show his Griefs: let her be round with him,
And Isle be placed so, please you in the ear
Of all their Conference. If she find him not,
To England send him: Or confine him where
Your wisdom best shall think.
It shall be so:
Madness in great Ones, must not vnwatch'd go.
Speak the Speech I pray you, as I pronounced it to you trippingly on the Tongue: But if you mouth it, as many of your Players do, I had as live the Town-Cryer had spoke my Lines: Nor do not saw the Ayre too much your hand thus, but use all gently; for in the very Tor???rent, Tempest, and (as I may say) the Whirlwind of Passion, you must acquire and beget a Temperance that may give it Smoothness. O it offends me to the Soul, to see a robustious Pery-wig-pated Fellow, tear a Passi???on to tatters, to very rags, to split the ears of the Groundlings: who (for the most part) are capable of nothing, but inexplicable dumb shows, &amp; noise: I could have such a Fellow whipped for o're-doing Termagant: it out-Herod's Herod. Pray you avoid it.
I warrant your Honour.
Be not too tame neither: but let your own Discretion be your Tutor. Suit the Action to the Word, the Word to the Action, with this special observance: That you ore-stop not the modesty of Nature; for any thing so ouer-done, is fro?? the purpose of Playing, whose end both at the first and now, was and is, to hold as it were the Mirror up to Nature; to show Virtue her own Feature, Scorn her own Image, and the very Age and Body of the Time, his form and pressure. Now, this ouer-done, or come tardy off, though it make the vnskil???full laugh, cannot but make the Judicious grieve; The censure of the which One, must in your allowance o're-way a whole Theater of Others. Oh, there bee Players that I have seen Play, and heard others praise, and that highly (not to speak it profanely) that neither having the accent of Christians, nor the gate of Christian, Pagan, or Norman, have so strutted and bellowed, that I have thought some of Natures Iouerney-men had made men, and not made them well, they imitated Humanity so ab???hominably.
I hope we have reformed that indifferently with vs, Sir.
O reform it altogether. And let those that play your Clowns, speak no more then is set down for them. For there be of them, that will themselves laugh, to set on some quantity of barren Spectators to laugh too, though in the mean time, some necessary Question of the Play be then to be considered: that's Villainous, &amp; shows a most pitiful Ambition in the Fool that uses it. Go make you ready.
How now my Lord,
Will the King hear this piece of Work?
And the Queen too, and that presently.
Bid the Players make hast.
Will you two help to hasten them?
We will my Lord.
What hoe, Horatio?
Here sweet Lord, at your Service.
Horatio, thou art even as just a man
As ere my Conversation coap'd withal.
O my dear Lord.
Nay, do not think I flatter:
For what advancement may I hope from thee,
That no Revenue hast, but thy good spirits
To feed &amp; cloth thee. Why should the poor be flattered?
No, let the Candied tongue, like absurd pomp,
And crook the pregnant Hindges of the knee,
Where thrift may follow faining? Dost thou hear,
Since my dear Soul was Mistress of my choice,
And could of men distinguish, her election
Hath sealed thee for her self. For thou hast been
As one in suffering all, that suffers nothing.
A man that Fortunes buffets, and Rewards
Hath 'tane with equal Thanks. And blessed are those,
Whose Blood and Judgment are so well co-mingled,
That they are not a Pipe for Fortunes finger,
To sound what stop she please. Give me that man,
That is not Passions Slave, and I will wear him
In my hearts Core: I, in my Heart of heart,
As I do thee. Something too much of this.
There is a Play to night before the King,
One Scoene of it comes near the Circumstance
Which I have told thee, of my Fathers death.
I prithee, when thou see that Act afoot,
Even with the very Comment of my Soul
Observe mine Uncle: If his occulted guilt,
Do not it self unkennel in one speech,
It is a damned Ghost that we have seen:
And my Imaginations are as foul
As Vulcans Stythe. Give him needful note,
For I mine eyes will riuet to his Face:
And after we will both our judgements join,
To censure of his seeming.
Well my Lord.
If he steal ought the whilst this Play is Playing,
And scope detecting, I will pay the Theft.
They are coming to the Play: I must be idle.
Get you a place.
How fares our Cousin Hamlet?
Excellent In faith, of the Chameleons dish: I eat the Ayre promise-cramm'd, you cannot feed Capons so.
I have nothing with this answer Hamlet, these words are not mine.
No, nor mine. Now my Lord, you plaid once in the University, you say?
That I did my Lord, and was accounted a good Actor.
And what did you enact?
I did enact Iulius Caesar, I was killed in the Capitol:
Brutus killed me.
It was a bruit part of him, to kill so Capital a Calfe there. Be the Players ready?
I my Lord, they stay upon your patience.
Come hither my good Hamlet, sit by me.
No good Mother, here's Mettle more attractive.
Oh ho, do you mark that?
Lady, shall I lye in your Lap?
No my Lord.
I mean, My Head upon your Lap?
I my Lord.
Do you think I meant Country matters?
I think nothing, my Lord.
That's a fair thought to lie between Maids legs
What is my Lord?
Nothing.
You are merry, my Lord?
Who I?
I my Lord.
Oh God, your only Iigge-maker: what should a man do, but be merry. For look you now cheerful???lie my Mother looks, and my Father dyed within's two Hours.
Nay, it is twice two months, my Lord.
So long? Nay then let the Devil wear black, for Isle have a suite of Sables. Oh Heavens! dye two mo???nods ago, and not forgotten yet? Then there's hope, a great mans Memory, may out-liue his life half a year: But by our lady he must build Churches then: or else shall he suffer not thinking on, with the Hoby-horsse, whose Epitaph is, For o, For o, the Hoby-horse is forgot.
What means this, my Lord?
Marry this is Meshing Malicho, that means Mischief.
Belike this show imports the Argument of the Play?
We shall know by these Fellows: the Players cannot keep counsel, they'll tell all.
Will they tell vs what this show meant?
I, or any show that you'll show him. Bee not you ashamed to show, he will not shame to tell you what it means.
You are nought, you are nought, Isle mark the Play.
For vs, and for our Tragedy,
Here stooping to your Clemency:
We beg your hearing Patiently.
Is this a Prologue, or the Poesy of a Ring?
It is brief my Lord.
As Women's love.
Full thirty times hath Phoebus Cart gon round,
Neptunes salt Wash, and Tellus Orbit ground:
And thirty dozen Moons with borrowed sheen,
About the World have times twelve thirties been,
Since love our hearts, and Hymen did our hands
Unite commutual, in most sacred Bands.
So many journeys may the Sun and Moon
Make vs again count o'er, ere love be duone.
But woe is me, you are so sick of late,
So far from cheer, and from your form state,
That I distrust you: yet though I distrust,
Discomfort you (my Lord) it nothing must:
For women's Fear and Love, holds quantity,
In neither ought, or in extremity:
Now what my love is, proof hath made you know,
And as my Love is sized, my Fear is so.
Faith I must leave thee Love, and shortly too:
My operant Powers my Functions leave to do:
And thou shalt live in this fair world behind,
Honoured, beloved, and happily, one as kind.
For Husband shalt thou???
Oh confound the rest:
Such Love, must needs be Treason in my breast:
In second Husband, let me be accursed,
None wed the second, but who killed the first.
Wormwood, Wormwood.
The instances that second Marriage move,
Are base respects of Thrist, but none of Love.
A second time, I kill my Husband dead,
When second Husband kisses me in Bed.
I do believe you. Think what now you speak:
But what we do determine, oft we break:
Purpose is but the slave to Memory,
Of violent Birth, but poor validity:
Which now like Fruit unripe sticks on the Tree,
But fall unshaken, when they mellow bee.
Most necessary it is, that we forget
To pay our selves, what to our selves is debt:
What to our selves in passion we propose,
The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.
The violence of other Grief or Joy,
Their own ennactors with themselves destroy:
Where Joy most Revels, Grief doth most lament;
Grief joys, Joy grieves on slender accident.
This world is not for aye, nor it is not strange
That even our Loves should with our Fortunes change.
For it is a question left vs yet to prove,
Whether Love lead Fortune, or else Fortune Love.
The great man down, you mark his favourites flies,
The poor advanced makes Friends of Enemies:
And hitherto doth Love on Fortune tend,
For who not needs, shall never lack a Friend:
And who in want a hollow Friend doth try,
Directly seasons him his Enemy.
But orderly to end, where I begun,
Our Wills and Fates do so contrary run,
That our Devices still are overthrown,
Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own.
So think thou wilt no second Husband wed.
But die thy thoughts, when thy first Lord is dead.
Nor Earth to give me food, nor Heaven light,
Sport and repose locke from me day and night:
Each opposite that blanks the face of joy,
Meet what I would have well, and it destroy:
Both here, and hence, pursue me lasting strife,
If once a Widow, ever I be Wife.
If she should break it now.
It is deeply sworn:
Sweet, leave me here a while,
My spirits grow dull, and fine I would beguile
The tedious day with sleep.
Sleep rock thy Brain,
And never come mischance between vs twain.
Madam, how like you this Play?
The Lady protests to much me thinks.
Oh but she'll keep her word.
Have you heard the Argument, is there no Of???fence in it?
No, no, they do but jest, poison in jest, no Of???fence in the world.
What do you call the Play?
The Mouse-trap: Marry how? Tropically: This Play is the Image of a murder done in Vienna: Gon???zago is the Dukes name, his wife Baptist: you shall see anon: it is a knavish piece of work: But what of that? Your Majesty, and wee that have free souls, it touches vs not: let the gail d???jade winch: our withers are vnrung.
This is one Lucianus nephew to the King.
You are a good Chorus, my Lord.
I could interpret between you and your love: if I could see the Puppets dallying.
You are keen my Lord, you are keen.
It would cost you a groaning, to take off my edge.
Still better and worse.
So you mistake Husbands.
Begin Murderer. Pox, leave thy damnable Faces, and begin.
Come, the croaking Raven doth bellow for Re???avenge.
Thoughts black, hands apt,
Drugs fit, and Time agreeing:
Confederate season, else, no Creature seeing:
Thou mixture rank, of Midnight Weeds collected,
With Hecats Ban, thrice blasted, thrice infected,
Thy natural Magic, and dire property,
On wholesome life, usurp immediately.
He poisons him in th Garden for's estate: His name's Gonzago: the Story is extant and writ in choice Italian. You shall see anon how the Murderer gets the love of Gonzago's wife.
The King rises.
What, frighted with false fire.
How fares my Lord?
Give o'er the Play.
Give me some Light. Away.
Lights, Lights, Lights.
Why let the stricken Dear go weep,
The Hart vngalled play:
For some must watch, while some must sleep;
So runs the world away.
Would not this Sir, and a Forest of Feathers, if the rest of my Fortunes turn Turk with me; with two Provincial Roses on my raced Shoes, get me a Fellowship in a cry of Players sir.
Half a share.
A whole one I,
For thou dost know: Oh Demon dear,
This Realm dismantled was of Jove himself,
And now reigns here.
A very very Paiocke.
You might have Rim'd.
Oh good Horatio, Isle take the Ghosts word for a thousand pound. Did perceive?
Very well my Lord.
Upon the talk of the poisoning?
I did very well note him.
Oh, ha? Come some Music. Come ye Recorders:
For if the King like not the Comedy,
Why then belike he likes it not party.
Come some Music.
Good my Lord, vouchsafe me a word with you.
Sir, a whole History.
The King, sir.
I sir, what of him?
Is in his retirement, marvelous distempered.
With drink Sir?
No my Lord, rather with choler.
Your wisdom should show it self more ri???cher, to signify this to his Doctor: for for me to put him to his Purgation, would perhaps plundge him into far more Choler.
Good my Lord put your discourse into some frame, and start not so wildely from my affair.
I am tame Sir, pronounce.
The Queen your Mother, in most great affli???ction of spirit, hath sent me to you.
You are welcome.
Nay, good my Lord, this curtsy is not of the right breed. If it shall please you to make me a whole???some answer, I will doe your Mothers commandment: if not, your pardon, and my return shall bee the end of my Business.
Sir, I cannot.
What, my Lord?
Make you a wholesome answer: my wits dis???eased. But sir, such answers as I can make, you shall com???mand: or rather you say, my Mother: therefore no more but to the matter. My Mother you say.
Then thus she says: your behaviour hath stroke her into amazement, and admiration.
Oh wonderful Son, that can so astonish a Mother. But is there no sequel at the heals of this Mo???theirs admiration?
She desires to speak with you in her Closet, ere you go to bed.
We shall obey, were she ten times our Mother.
Have you any further Trade with vs?
My Lord, you once did love me.
So I do still, by these pickers and stealers.
Good my Lord, what is your cause of distem???per? You do freely bar the door of your own Liber???tie, if you deny your griefs to your Friend.
Sir I lack Advancement.
How can that be, when you have the voice of the King himself, for your Succession in Denmark?
I, but while the grass grows, the Proverb is something musty.
O the Recorder. Let me see, to withdraw with you, why do you go about to recover the wind of me, as if you would drive me into a toil?
O my Lord, if my Duty be too bold, my love is too unmannerly.
I do not well understand that. Will you play upon this Pipe?
My Lord, I cannot.
I pray you.
Believe me, I cannot.
I do beseech you.
I know no touch of it, my Lord.
It is as easy as lying: govern these Ventiges with your finger and thumb, give it breath with your mouth, and it will discourse most excellent Music. Look you, these are the stoppes.
But these cannot I command to any utterance of harmony, I have not the skill.
Why look you now, how unworthy a thing you make of me: you would play upon me; you would seem to know my stops: you would pluck out the heart of my Mystery; you would sound me from my lowest Note, to the top of my Compass: and there is much Mu???sick, excellent Voice, in this little Organ, yet cannot you make it. Why do you think, that I am easier to bee plaid on, then a Pipe? Call me what Instrument you will, though you can fret me, you cannot play upon me. God bless you Sir.
My Lord; the Queen would speak with you, and presently.
Do you see that Cloud? that's almost in shape like a Camel.
By' the Miss, and it's like a Camel indeed.
Me thinks it is like a Weasel.
It is backed like a Weasel.
Or like a Whale?
Very like a Whale.
Then will I come to my Mother, by and by:
They fool me to the top of my bent.
I will come by and by.
I will say so.
By and by, is easily said. Leave me Friends:
It is now the very witching time of night,
When Churchyards yawn, and Hell it self breaths out
Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot blood,
And do such bitter business as the day
Would quake to look on. Soft now, to my Mother:
Oh Heart, loose not thy Nature; let not ever
The Soul of Narrow, enter this firm bosom:
Let me be cruel, not unnatural,
I will speak Daggers to her, but use none:
My Tongue and Soul in this be Hypocrites.
How in my words soever she be shent,
To give them Seals, never my Soul consent.
I like him not, nor stands it safe with vs,
To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you,
I your Commission will forthwith dispatch,
And he to England shall along with you:
The terms of our estate, may not endure
Hazard so dangerous as doth hourly grow
Out of his Lunacies.
We will our selves provide:
Most holy and Religious fear it is
To keep those many many bodies safe
That live and feed upon your Majesty.
The single
And peculiar life is bound
With all the strength and Armour of the mind,
To keep it self from noyance: but much more,
That Spirit, upon whose spirit depends and rests
The lives of many, the cease of Majesty
Dies not alone; but like a Gulf doth draw
What's near it, with it. It is a massy wheel
Fixed on the Somnet of the highest Mount,
To whose huge Spoakes, ten thousand lesser things
Are mortised and adjoined: which when it falls,
Each small annexment, petty consequence
Attends the boisterous Ruin. Never alone
Did the King sigh, but with a general groan.
Arm you, I pray you to this speedy Voyage;
For we will Fetters put upon this fear,
Which now goes too free-footed.
We will haste vs.
My Lord, he's going to his Mothers Closet:
Behind the Arras Isle convey my self
To hear the Process. Isle warrant she'll tax him home,
And as you said, and wisely was it said,
It is meet that some more audience then a Mother,
Since Nature makes them partial, should o're-heare
The speech of vantage. Ear you well my Liege,
Isle call upon you ere you go to bed,
And tell you what I know.
Thanks dear my Lord.
Oh my offence is rank, it smells to heaven,
It hath the primal eldest curse upon it,
A Brothers murder. Pray can I not,
Though inclination be as sharpe as will:
My stronger guilt, defeats my strong intent,
And like a man to double business bound,
I stand in pause where I shall first begin,
And both neglect; what if this cursed hand
Were thicker then it self with Brothers blood,
Is there not Rain enough in the sweet Heavens
To wash it white as Snow? Whereto serves mercy,
But to confront the visage of Offence?
And what's in Prayer, but this two-fold force,
To be fore-stalled ere we come to fall,
Or pardoned being down? Then Isle look up,
My fault is past. But oh, what form of Prayer
Can serve my turn? Forgive me my foul Murder:
That cannot be, since I am still possessed
Of those effects for which I did the Murder.
My Crown, mine own Ambition, and my Queen:
May one be pardoned, and retain the offence?
In the corrupted currants of this world,
Offences gilded hand may shove by Justice,
And oft it is seen, the wicked prize it self
Buys out the Law; but it is not so aboue,
There is no shuffling, there the Action lies
In his true Nature, and we our selves compelled
Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
To give in evidence. What then? What rests?
Try what Repentance can. What can it not?
Yet what can it, when one cannot repent?
Oh wretched state! Oh bosom, black as death!
Oh limed soul, that struggling to be free,
Art more engaged: Help Angels, make assay:
Bow stubborn knees, and heart with strings of Steel,
Be soft as sinews of the new-borne Babe,
All may be well.
Now might I do it pat, now he is praying,
And now Isle do it, and so he goes to Heaven,
And so am I revenged: that would be scanned,
A Villain kills my Father, and for that
I his foul Son, do this same Villain send
To heaven. Oh this is hire and Salary, not Revenge.
He took my Father grossly, full of bread,
With all his Crimes broad blown, as fresh as May,
And how his Audit stands, who knows, save Heaven:
But in our circumstance and course of thought
It is heavy with him: and am I then revenged,
To take him in the purging of his Soul,
When he is fit and seasoned for his passage? No.
Up Sword, and know thou a more horrid hent
When he is drunk asleep: or in his Rage,
Or in the incestuous pleasure of his bed,
At gaming, swearing, or about some act
That he's no relish of Salvation in it,
Then trip him, that his heals may kick at Heaven,
And that his Soul may be as damned and black
As Hell, whereto it goes. My Mother stays,
This Physic but prolongs thy sickly days.
My words fly up, my thoughts remain below,
Words without thoughts, never to Heaven go.
He will come straight:
Look you lay home to him,
Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with,
And that your Grace hath scree'nd, and stood between
Much heate, and him. Isle silence me e'ene here:
Pray you be round with him.
Mother, mother, mother.
Isle warrant you, fear me not.
Withdraw, I hear him coming.
Now Mother, what's the matter?
Hamlet, thou hast thy Father much offended.
Mother, you have my Father much offended.
Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.
Go, go, you question with an idle tongue.
Why how now Hamlet?
Whats the matter now?
Have you forgot me?
No by the Rood, not so:
You are the Queen, your Husbands Brothers wife,
But would you were not so. You are my Mother.
Nay, then Isle set those to you that can speak.
Come, come, and sit you down, you shall not boudge:
You go not till I set you up a glass,
Where you may see the inmost part of you?
What wilt thou do? thou wilt not murder me?
Help, help, hoe.
What hoe, help, help, help.
How now, a Rat? dead for a Ducat, dead.
Oh I am slain.
Oh me, what hast thou done?
Nay I know not, is it the King?
Oh what a rash, and bloody deed is this?
A bloody deed, almost as bad good Mother,
As kill a King, and marry with his Brother.
As kill a King?
I Lady, it was my word.
Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool farewell,
I took thee for thy Betters, take thy Fortune,
Thou find to be too busy, is some danger.
Lean wringing of your hands, peace, sit you down,
And let me wring your heart, for so I shall
If it be made of penetrable stuff;
If damned Custom have no braz'd it so,
That it is proof and bulwark against Sense.
What have I done, that thou dare wag thy tong,
In noise so rude against me?
Such an Act
That blurs the grace and blush of Modesty,
Calls Virtue Hypocrite, takes off the Rose
From the fair forehead of an innocent love,
And makes a blister there. Makes marriage vows
As false as Decors Oaths. Oh such a deed,
As from the body of Contraction plucks
The very soul, and sweet Religion makes
A rapsidie of words. Heavens face doth glow,
Yea this solidity and compound mass,
With tristful visage as against the doom,
Is thought-sicke at the act.
Aye me; what act, that roars so loud, &amp; thun???ders in the Index.
Look here upon this Picture, and on this,
The counterfeit presentment of two Brothers:
See what a grace was seated on his Brow,
Hyperions curls, the front of Jove himself,
An eye like Mars, to threaten or command
A Station, like the Herald Mercury
New lighted on a heauen-kissing hill:
A Combination, and a form indeed,
Where every God did seem to set his Seal,
To give the world assurance of a man.
This was your Husband. Look you now what follows.
Here is your Husband, like a Mildewed ear
Blasting his wholesome breath. Have you eyes?
Could you on this fair Mountain leave to feed,
And batten on this Moore? Ha? Have you eyes?
You cannot call it Love: For at your age,
The hey-day in the blood is tame, it's humble,
And waits upon the Judgment: and what Judgment
Would step from this, to this? What devil was it,
That thus hath consent you at hoodman-blinde?
O Shame! where is thy Blush? Rebellious Hell,
If thou can mutiny in a Matrons bones,
To flaming youth, let Virtue be as wax,
And melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame,
When the compulsive Ordure gives the charge,
Since Frost it self, as actively doth burn,
As Reason panders Will.
O Hamlet, speak no more.
Thou turn mine eyes into my very soul,
And there I see such black and greened spots,
As will not leave their Tinct.
Nay, but to live
In the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,
Stewed in Corruption; honying and making love
Over the nasty Sty.
Oh speak to me, no more,
These words like Daggers enter in mine ears.
No more sweet Hamlet.
A Murderer, and a Villain:
A Slave, that is not twentieth part the tithe
Of your precedent Lord. A vice of Kings,
A Cutpurse of the Empire and the Rule.
That from a shelf??? the precious Diadem stole,
And put it in his Pocket.
No more.
A King of shreds and patches.
Save me; and hover o'er me with your wings
You heavenly Guards. What would you gracious figure?
Alas he's mad.
Do you not come your tardy Son to chide,
That laps't in Time and Passion, lets go by
The important acting of your dread command? Oh say.
Do not forget: this Visitation
Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
But look Amazement on thy Mother fits;
O step between her, and her fighting Soul,
Conceit in weakest bodies, strongest works.
Speak to her Hamlet.
How is it with you Lady?
Alas, how is it with you?
That you bend your eye on vacancy,
And with their corporal ayre do hold discourse.
Forth at your eyes, your spirits wildely peep,
And as the sleeping Soldiers in the Alarm,
Your bedded hair, like life in excrements,
Start up, and stand an end. Oh gentle Son,
Upon the heate and flame of thy distemper
Sprinkle cool patience. Whereon do you look?
On him, on him: look you how pale he glares,
His form and cause conjoined, preaching to stones,
Would make them capable. Do not look upon me,
Least with this piteous action you convert
My sterne effects: then what I have to do,
Will want true colour; tears perchance for blood.
To who do you speak this?
Do you see nothing there?
Nothing at all, yet all that is I see.
Nor did you nothing hear?
No, nothing but our selves.
Why look you there: look how it steals away:
My Father in his habit, as he lived,
Look where he goes even now out at the Portal.
This is the very coinage of your Brain,
This bodiless Creation ecstasy is very cunning i???.
Ecstasy?
My Pulse as yours doth temperately keep time,
And makes as healthful Music. It is not madness
That I have uttered; bring me to the Test
And I the matter will re-word: which madness
Would gambol from. Mother, for love of Grace,
Lay not a flattering Unction to your soul,
That not your trespass, but my madness speaks:
It will but skin and film the Ulcerous place,
Whilst rank Corruption mining all within,
Infects unseen. Confess your self to Heaven,
Repent what's past, avoid what is to come,
And do not spread the Compost or the Weeds,
To make them rank. Forgive me this my Virtue,
For in the fatness of this purse times,
Virtue it self, of Vice must pardon beg,
Yea courb, and woe, for leave to do him good.
Oh Hamlet,
Thou hast cleft my heart in twain.
O throw away the worser part of it,
And live the purer with the other half.
Good night, but go not to mine Uncles bed,
Assume a Virtue, if you have it not, refrain to night,
And that shall lend a kind of easiness
To the next abstinence. Once more goodnight,
And when you are desirous to be blessed,
Isle blessing beg of you. For this same Lord,
I do repent: but heaven hath pleased it so,
To punish me with this, and this with me,
That I must be their Scourge and Minister.
I will bestow him, and will answer well
The death I gave him: so again, good night???
I must be cruel, only to be kind;
Thus bad begins, and worse remains behind.
What shall I do?
Not this by no means that I bid you do:
Let the blunt King tempt you again to bed,
Pinch Wanton on your cheek, call you his Mouse,
And let him for a pair of reechie kisses,
Or padling in your neck with his damned Fingers,
Make you to rauell all this matter out,
That I essentially am not in madness,
But made in craft. It were good you let him know,
For who that's but a Queen, fair, sober, wise,
Would from a Paddock, from a Bat, a Gibe,
Such dear concernings hide, Who would do so,
No in despite of Sense and Secrecy,
Vnpegge the Basket on the houses top:
Let the Birds fly, and like the famous Ape
To try Conclusions in the Basket, creep
And break your own neck down.
Be thou assured, if words be made of breath,
And breath of life: I have no life to breath
What thou hast said to me.
I must to England, you know that?
Alack I had forgot: It is so concluded on.
This man shall set me packing:
Isle lug the Guts into the Neighbor room,
Mother goodnight. Indeed this Counsellor
Is now most still, most secret, and most grave,
Who was in life, a foolish prating Knave.
Come sir, to draw toward an end with you.
Good night Mother.
There's matters in these sighs.
These profound heaves
You must translate; Tic fit we understand them.
Where is your Son?
Ah my good Lord, what have I seen to night?
What Gertrude? How do's Hamlet?
Mad as the Seas, and wind, when both contend
Which is the Mightier, in his lawless fit
Behind the Arras, hearing something stir,
He whips his Rapier out, and cries a Rat, a Rat,
And in his brainish apprehension kills
The unseen good old man.
Oh heavy deed:
It had bin so with vs had we been there:
His Liberty is full of threats to all,
To you your self, to vs, to every one.
Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answered?
It will be laid to vs, whose providence
Should have kept short, restrained, and out of haunt,
This mad young man. But so much was our love,
We would not understand what was most fit,
But like the Owner of a foul disease,
To keep it from divulging, let's it feed
Even on the pith of life. Where is he gone?
To draw apart the body he hath kilt,
O'er whom his very madness like some Oar
Among a Mineral of Mettels base
Shows it self pure. He weeps for what is done.
Oh Gertrude, come away:
The Sun no sooner shall the Mountains touch,
But we will ship him hence, and this wild deed,
We must with all our Majesty and Skill
Both countenance, and excuse.
Ho Guildenstern:
Friends both go join you with some further aid:
Hamlet in madness hath Polonius slain,
And from his Mother Closets hath he dragged him.
Go seek him out, speak fair, and bring the body
Into the Chapel. I pray you hast in this.
Come Gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends,
To let them know both what we mean to do,
And what's untimely done. Oh come away,
My soul is full of discord and dismay.
Safely stowed.
Hamlet, Lord Hamlet.
What noise? Who calls on Hamlet?
Oh here they come.
What have you done my Lord with the dead body?
Compounded it with dust, whereto it is Kin.
Tell vs where it is??? that we may take it thence,
And bear it to the Chapel.
Do not believe it.
Believe what?
That I can keep your counsel, and not mine own. Besides, to be demanded of a Spundge, what re???plication should be made by the Son of a King.
Take you me for a Spundge, my Lord?
I sir, that sokes up the Kings Countenance, his Rewards, his Authorities (but such Officers do the King best service in the end. He keeps them like an Ape in the corner of his iaw, first mouthed to be last swallowed, when he needs what you have gleaned, it is but squee???zing you, and Spundge you shall be dry again.
I understand you not my Lord.
I am glad of it: a knavish speech sleeps in a foolish ear.
My Lord, you must tell vs where the body is, and go with vs to the King.
The body is with the King, but the King is not with the body. The King, is a thing ???
A thing my Lord?
Of nothing: bring me to him, hide Fox, and all after.
I have sent to seek him, and to find the body:
How dangerous is it that this man goes loose:
Yet must not we put the strong Law on him:
Hoe's loved of the distracted multitude,
Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes:
And where it is so, the Offenders scourge is weighed
But nearer the offence: to bear all smooth, and even,
This sudden sending him away, must seem
Deliberate pause, diseases desperate grown,
By desperate appliance are relieved,
Or not at all.
How now? What hath befallen?
Where the dead body is bestowed my Lord,
We cannot get from him.
But where is he?
Without my Lord, guarded to know your pleasure.
Bring him before vs.
Hoe, Guildensterne? Bring in my Lord.
Now Hamlet, whore's Polonius?
At Supper.
At Supper? Where?
Not where he eats, but where he is eaten, a cer???taine convocation of worms are even at him. Your worm is your only Emperor for diet. We fat all creatures else to fat vs, and we fat our self for Magots. Your fat King, and your lean Beggar is but variable service to dishes, but to one Table that's the end.
What dost thou mean by this?
Nothing but to show you how a King may go a Progress through the guts of a Beggar.
Where is Polonius.
In heaven, send thither to see. If your Mizzen???ger find him not there, seek him in th other place your self: but indeed, if you find him not this month, you shall nose him as you go up the stairs into the Lobby.
Go seek him there.
He will stay till ye come.
Hamlet, this deed of thine, for thine especial safety
Which we do tender, as we dearly grieve
For that which thou hast done, must send thee hence
With fiery Quickness. Therefore prepare thy self,
The Bark is ready, and the wind at help,
The Associates tend, and every thing at bent
For England.
For England?
I Hamlet.
Good.
So is it, if thou knew our purposes.
I see a Cherub that see's him: but come, for England. Farewell dear Mother.
Thy loving Father Hamlet.
My Mother: Father and Mother is man and wife: man &amp; wife is one flesh, and so my mother. Come, for England.
Follow him at foot,
Tempt him with speed aboard:
Delay it not, Isle have him hence to night.
Away, for every thing is Sealed and done
That else leanes on the Affair, pray you make haft.
And England, if my love thou holdst at ought,
As my great power thereof may give thee sense,
Since yet thy Cicatrice looks raw and red
After the Danish Sword, and thy free awe
Pays homage to vs; thou moist not coldly set
Our Sovereign Process, which imports at full
By Letters conjuring to that effect
The present death of Hamlet. Do it England,
For like the Hectic in my blood he rages,
And thou must cure me: Till I know it is done,
How ere my hippos, my joys were ne'er begun.
Go Captain, from me greet the Danish King,
Tell him that by his license, Fortinbras
Claims the conveyance of a promised March
Over his Kingdom. You know the Rendezvous:
If that his Majesty would ought with vs,
We shall express our duty in his eye,
And let him know so.
I will do it, my Lord.
Go safely on.
I will not speak with her.
She is importunate, indeed distract, her mood will needs be pitied.
What would she have?
She speaks much of her Father; says she hears
There's tricks in the world, and hems, and beats her heart,
Spurns enviously at Straws, speaks things in doubt,
That carry but half sense: Her speech is nothing,
Yet the vnshaped use of it doth move
The hearers to Collection; they aim at it,
And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts,
Which as her winks, and nods, and gestures yield them,
Indeed would make one think there would be thought,
Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.
It were good she were spoken with,
For she may strew dangerous conjectures
In ill breeding minds. Let her come in.
To my sick soul (as sins true Nature is)
Each toy seems Prologue, to some great amiss,
So full of Artless jealousy is guilt,
It spill's it self, in fearing to be spilt.
Where is the beauteous Majesty of Denmark.
How now Ophelia?
How should I your true love know from another one?
By his Cockle hat and staff, and his Sandal shoon.
Alas sweet Lady: what imports this Song?
Say you? Nay pray you mark.
He is dead and gone Lady, he is dead and gone,
At his head a grasse-greene Turf, at his heals a stone.
Nay but Ophelia.
Pray you mark.
White his Shrow'd as the Mountain Snow.
Alas, look here my Lord.
Larded with sweet flowers:
Which bewept to the grave did not go,
With true-loue showers.
How do ye, pretty Lady?
Well, God dil'd you. They say the Owl was a Bakers daughter. Lord, wee know what we are, but know not what we may be. God be at your Table.
Conceit upon her Father.
Pray you let's have no words of this: but when they ask you what it means, say you this:
Tomorrow is S. Valentines day, all in the morning betime,
And I a Maid at your Window to be your Valentine.
Then up he rose, &amp; don'd his clothes, &amp; duped the chamber door,
Let in the Maid, that out a Maid, never departed more.
Pretty Ophelia.
Indeed la? without an oath Isle make an end out.
By gis, and by S. Charity,
Alack, and sie for shame:
Young men will do it, if they come too't,
By Cock they are too blame.
Quoth she before you tumbled me,
You promised me to Wed:
So would I ha done by yonder Sun,
And thou had not come to my bed.
How long hath she bin this?
I hope all will be well. We must bee patient, but I cannot choose but weep, to think they should lay him in the cold ground: My brother shall know of it, and so I thank you for your good counsel. Come, my Coach: Goodnight Ladies: Goodnight sweet Ladies: Goodnight, goodnight.
Follow her close,
Give her good watch I pray you:
Oh this is the poison of deep grief, it springs
All from her Fathers death. Oh Gertrude, Gertrude,
When sorrows comes, they come not single spies,
But in Battaliaes. First, her Father slain,
Next your Son gone, and he most violent Author
Of his own just remove: the people muddied,
Thick and unwholesome in their thoughts, and whispers
For good Polonius death; and we have, done but greenly
In hugger mugger to inter him. Poor Ophelia
Divided from her self, and her fair Judgment,
Without the which we are Pictures, or mere Beasts.
Last, and as much containing as all these,
Her Brother is in secret come from France,
Keeps on his wonder, keeps himself in clouds,
And wants not Buzzers to infect his ear
With pestilent Speeches of his Fathers death,
Where in necessity of matter Beggard,
Will nothing stick our persons to Arraign
In ear and ear. O my dear Gertrude, this,
Like to a murdering Piece in many places,
Gives me superfluous death.
Alack, what noise is this?
Where are my Switzers?
Let them guard the door. What is the matter?
Save your self, my Lord.
The Ocean (ouer-peering of his List)
Eats not the Flats with more impittious haste
Then young Laertes, in a Riotous head,
Ore-beares your Officers, the rabble call him Lord,
And as the world were now but to begin,
Antiquity forgot, Custom not known,
The Ratifiers and props of every word,
They cry choose we? Laertes shall be King,
Caps, hands, and tongues, applaud it to the clouds,
Laertes shall be King, Laertes King.
How cheerfully on the false Trail they cry,
Oh this is Counter you false Danish Dogs.
The doors are broke.
Where is the King, sirs? Stand you all without.
No, let's come in.
I pray you give me leave.
We will, we will.
I thank you: Keep the door.
Oh thou wild King, give me my Father.
Calmly good Laertes.
That drop of blood, that calms
Proclaims me Bastard:
Cries Cuckold to my Father, brands the Harlot
Even here between the chaste vnsmirched brow
Of my true Mother.
What is the cause Laertes,
That thy Rebellion looks so Gyant-like?
Let him go Gertrude: Do not fear our person:
There's such Divinity doth hedge a King,
That Treason can but peep to what it would,
Acts little of his will. Tell me Laertes,
Why thou art thus Incensed? Let him go Gertrude.
Speak man.
Whore's my Father?
Dead.
But not by him.
Let him demand his fill.
How came he dead? Isle not be Iuggel'd with.
To hell Allegiance: Vows, to the blackest devil.
Conscience and Grace, to the profoundest Pit.
I dare Damnation: to this point I stand,
That both the worlds I give to negligence,
Let come what comes: only Isle be revenged
Most thoroughly for my Father.
Who shall stay you?
My Will, not all the world,
And for my means, Isle husband them so well,
They shall go far with little.
Good Laertes:
If you desire to know the certainty
Of your dear Fathers death, if writ in your revenge,
That Soop-stake you will draw both Friend and Foe,
Winner and Looser.
None but his Enemies.
Will you know them then.
To his good Friends, thus wide Isle op my Arms:
And like the kind Life-rend'ring Politician,
Repast them with my blood.
Why now you speak
Like a good Child, and a true Gentleman.
That I am guiltless of your Fathers death,
And am most sensible in grief for it,
It shall as level to your Judgment pierce
As day do's to your eye.
How now? what noise is that?
Oh heate dry up my Brains, tears seven times salt,
Burn out the Sense and Virtue of mine eye.
By Heaven, thy madness shall be payed by weight,
Till our Scale turns the beam. Oh Rose of May,
Dear Maid, kind Sister, sweet Ophelia:
Oh Heavens, is it possible, a young Maids wits,
Should be as mortal as an old mans life?
Nature is fine in Love, and where it is fine,
It sends some precious instance of it self
After the thing it loves.
They bore him bare faced on the Beer,
Hey non nony, nony, hey nony:
And on his grave rains many a tear,
Fare you well my Dove.
Had thou thy wits, and did persuade Re???avenge, it could not move thus.
You must sing down adown, and you call him a-downe-a. Oh, how the wheel becomes it? It is the false Steward that stole his masters daughter.
This nothings more then matter.
There's Rosemary, that's for Remembrance.
Pray love remember: and there is Paconcies, that's for Thoughts.
A document in madness, thoughts &amp; remem???bronco fitted.
There's Fennel for you, and Columbines: ther's Few for you, and heere's some for me. Wee may call it Herbe-Grace a Sundays: Oh you must wear your Few with a difference. There's a Daisy, I would give you some Violets, but they withered all when my Father die???ed: They say, he made a good end;
Thought, and Affliction, Passion, Hell it self:
She turns to Favour, and to prettiness.
And will he not come again,
And will he not come again:
No, no, he is dead, go to thy Death-bed,
He never will come again.
His Beard as white as Snow,
All Flaxen was his Pole:
He is gone, he is gone, and we cast away moan,
Gramercy on his Soul.
And of all Christian Souls, I pray God.
God buy ye.
Do you see this, you Gods?
Laertes, I must common with your grief,
Or you deny me right: go but apart,
Make choice of whom your wisest Friends you will,
And they shall hear and judge twixt you and me;
If by direct or by Collateral hand
They find vs touched, we will our Kingdom give,
Our Crown, our Life, and all that we call Ours
To you in satisfaction. But if not,
Be you content to lend your patience to vs,
And we shall jointly labour with your soul
To give it due content.
Let this be so:
His means of death, his obscure burial;
No Trophy, Sword, nor Hatchment o'er his bones,
No Noble rite, nor formal ostentation,
Cry to be heard, as it were from Heaven to Earth,
That I must call in question.
So you shall:
And where the offence is, let the great Axe fall.
I pray you go with me.
What are they that would speak with me?
Sailors sir, they say they have Letters for you.
Let them come in,
I do not know from what part of the world
I should be greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.
God bless you Sir.
Let him bless thee too.
Hee shall Sir, and't please him. There's a Letter for you Sir: It comes from the Ambassadors that was bound for England, if your name be Horatio, as I am let to know it is.
When thou shalt have overlooked this, give these Fellows some means to the King: They have Letters for him. Ere we were two days old at Sea, a Pirate of very Warlike appointment gave vs Chase. Finding our selves too slow of Sail, we put on a compelled Valour. In the Grapple, I boarded them: On the instant they got clear of our Ship, so I alone became their Prisoner. They have dealt with me, like Thieves of Mercy, but they knew what they did. I am to doe a good turn for them. Let the King have the Letters I have sent, and repair thou to me with as much hast as thou would fly death. I have words to speak in your ear, will make thee-dumbe, yet are they much too light for the bore of the Matter. These good Fellows will bring thee where I am. Rosincrance and Guildensterne, hold their course for England. Of them I have much to tell thee, Farewell.
Come, I will give you way for these your Letters,
And do it the speedier, that you may direct me
To him from whom you brought them.
Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,
And you must put me in your heart for Friend,
Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,
That he which hath your Noble Father slain,
Pursued my life.
It well appears. But tell me,
Why you proceeded not against these feats,
So crimefull, and so Capital in Nature,
As by your Safety, Wisdom, all things else,
You mainly were stirred up?
O for two special Reasons,
Which may to you (perhaps) seem much vnsinnowed,
And yet to me they are strong. The Queen his Mother,
Lives almost by his looks: and for my self,
My Virtue or my Plague, be it either which,
She's so conjunctive to my life and soul;
That as the Star moves not but in his Sphere,
I could not but by her. The other Motive,
Why to a public count I might not go,
Is the great love the general gender bear him,
Who dipping all his Faults in their affection,
Would like the Spring that turns Wood to Stone,
Convert his Gyves to Graces. So that my Arrows
Too slightly timbered for so loud a Wind,
Would have reverted to my Bow again,
And not where I had armed them.
And so have I a Noble Father lost,
A Sister driven into desperate terms,
Who was (if praises may go back again)
Stood Challenger on mount of all the Age
For her perfections. But my revenge will come.
Break not your sleeps for that,
You must not think
That we are made of stuff, so flat, and dull,
That we can let our Beard be shook with danger,
And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more,
I loved your Father, and we love our Self,
And that I hope will teach you to imagine???
How now? What News?
Letters my Lord from Hamlet. This to your Majesty: this to the Queen.
From Hamlet? Who brought them?
Sailors my Lord they say, I saw them not:
They were given me by Claudio, he received them.
Laertes you shall hear them:
Leave vs.
High and Mighty, you shall know I am set naked on your Kingdom. To morrow shall I beg leave to see your Kingly Eyes. When I shall (first asking your Pardon thereunto) re???count the Occasions of my sudden, and more strange return.
Hamlet.
What should this mean? Are all the rest come back?
Or is it some abuse? Or no such thing?
Know you the hand?
It is Hamlets Character, naked and in a Post???script here he says alone: Can you advise me?
I'm lost in it my Lord; but let him come,
It warmes the very sickness in my heart,
That I shall live and tell him to his teeth;
Thus did thou.
If it be so Laertes, as how should it be so:
How otherwise will you be ruled by me?
If so you'll not o'er rule me to a peace.
To thine own peace: if he be now returned,
As checking at his Voyage, and that he means
No more to undertake it; I will work him
To an exploit now ripe in my Device,
Under the which he shall not choose but fall;
And for his death no wind of blame shall breath,
But even his Mother shall vncharge the practice,
And call it accident: Some two Months hence
Here was a Gentleman of Normandy,
I'ue seen my self, and served against the French,
And they ran well on Horseback; but this Gallant
Had witchcraft in it; he grew into his Seat,
And to such wondrous doing brought his Horse,
As had he been encorps't and demy-Natur'd
With the brave Beast, so far he past my thought,
That I in forgery of shapes and tricks,
Come short of what he did.
A Norman was it?
A Norman.
Upon my life Lamont.
The very same.
I know him well, he is the Brooch indeed,
And Gem of all our Nation.
Hee mad confession of you,
And gave you such a Masterly report,
For Art and exercise in your defence;
And for your Rapier most especially,
That he cried out, to would be a sight indeed,
If one could match you Sir. This report of his
Did Hamlet so envenom with his Envy,
That he could nothing doe but wish and beg,
Your sudden coming ore to play with him;
Now out of this.
Why out of this, my Lord?
Laertes was your Father dear to you?
Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,
A face without a heart?
Why ask you this?
Not that I think you did not love your Father,
But that I know Love is begun by Time:
And that I see in passages of proof,
Time qualifies the spark and fire of it:
Hamlet comes back: what would you undertake,
To show your self your Fathers son indeed,
More then in words?
To cut his throat in the Church.
No place indeed should murder Sancturize;
Revenge should have no bounds: but good Laertes
Will you doe this, keep close within your Chamber,
Hamlet returned, shall know you are come home:
We'll put on those shall praise your excellence,
And set a double varnish on the fame
The Frenchman gave you, bring you in fine together,
And wager on your heads, he being remiss,
Most generous, and free from all contriving,
Will not peruse the Foils? So that with ease,
Or with a little shuffling, you may choose
A Sword vnbaited, and in a pass of practice,
Requite him for your Father.
I will do it,
And for that purpose Isle anoint my Sword:
I bought an Unction of a Mountebank
So mortal, I but dipped a knife in it,
Where it draws blood, no Cataplasme so rare,
Collected from all Simples that have Virtue
Under the Moon, can save the thing from death,
That is but scratched withal: Isle touch my point,
With this contagion, that if I gall him slightly,
It may be death.
Let's further think of this,
Weigh what convenience both of time and means
May fit vs to our shape, if this should fail;
And that our drift look through our bad performance,
It were better not assaid; therefore this Project
Should have a back or second, that might hold,
If this should blast in proof: Soft, let me see
We'll make a solemn wager on your comings,
I have it: when in your motion you are hot and dry,
As make your bouts more violent to the end,
And that he calls for drink; Isle have prepared him
A Chalice for the nonce; whereon but sipping,
If he by chance escape your venomed stuck,
Our purpose may hold there; how sweet Queen.
One woe doth tread upon another heel,
So fast they'll follow: your Sister's drowned Laertes.
Drowned! O where?
There is a Willow grows aslant a Brooke,
That shows his whore leaves in the glassy stream:
There with fantastic Garlands did she come,
Of Crow-slowers, Nettles, Daisies, and long Purples,
That liberal Shepherds give a grosser name;
But our cold Maids doe Dead Men's Fingers call them:
There on the pendant boughs, her Coronet weeds
Clambering to hang; an envious sliver broke,
When down the weedy Trophies, and her self,
Fell in the weeping Brooke, her clothes spread wide,
And Mermaid-like, a while they bore her up,
Which time she chanted snatches of old tunes,
As one incapable of her own distress,
Or like a creature Native, and endued
Unto that Element: but long it could not be,
Till that her garments, heavy with her drink,
Pulled the poor wretch from her melodious buy,
To muddy death.
Alas then, is she drowned?
Drowned, drowned.
Too much of water hast thou poor Ophelia,
And therefore I forbid my tears: but yet
It is our trick, Nature her custom holds,
Let shame say what it will; when these are gone
The woman will be out: Adieu my Lord,
I have a speech of fire, that fine would blaze,
But that this folly doubts it.
Let's follow, Gertrude:
How much I had to doe to calm his rage?
Now fear I this will give it start again;
Therefore let's follow.
Is she to bee buried in Christian burial, that wilfully seeks her own salvation?
I tell thee she is, and therefore make her Grave straight, the Coroner hath sate on her, and finds it Chri???stian burial.
How can that be, unless she drowned her self in her own defence?
Why it is found so.
It must be Se offendendo, it cannot bee else: for here lies the point; If I drown my self wittingly, it are???gues an Act: and an Act hath three branches. It is an Act to doe and to perform; argall she drowned her self wittingly.
Nay but hear you Goodman Deluer.
Give me leave; here lies the water; good: here stands the man; good: If the man go to this wa???la and drown himsele; it is will he nill he, he goes; mark you that? But if the water come to him &amp; drown him; hee drowns not himself. Argall, hee that is not guilty of his own death, shortens not his own life.
But is this law?
I marry is it, Crowners Quest Law.
Will you ha the truth on it: if this had not been a Gentlewoman, she should have been buried out of Christian Burial.
Why there thou say. And the more pity that great folk should have countenance in this world to drown or hang themselves, more then their even Christi???an. Come, my Spade; there is no ancient Gentlemen, but Gardeners, Ditchers and Graue-makers; they hold up Adams Profession.
Was he a Gentleman?
He was the first that ever bore Arms.
Why he had none.
What, ar't a Heathen? how dost thou under???stand the Scripture? the Scripture says Adam dug; could hee dig without Arms? Isle put another que???stion to thee; if thou answer me not to the purpose, con???fesse thy self???
Go too.
What is he that builds stronger then either the Mason, the Shipwright, or the Carpenter?
The Gallows maker; for that Frame outliues a thousand Tenants.
I like thy wit well in good faith, the Gallows does well; but how does it well? it does well to those that doe ill: now, thou dost ill to say the Gallows is built stronger then the Church: Argall, the Gallows may doe well to thee. Too't again, Come.
Who builds stronger then a Mason, a Ship???wright, or a Carpenter?
I, tell me that, and vnyoake.
Marry, now I can tell.
Too't.
Mass, I cannot tell.
Cudgel thy brains no more about it; for your dull Ass will not mend his pace with beating; and when you are asked this question next, say a Graue-maker: the Houses that he makes, lasts till Doomsday: go, get thee to Yaughan, fetch me a stoup of Liquor.
In youth when I did love, did love,
me thought it was very sweet:
To contract O the time for a my behove,
O me thought there was nothing meet.
He's this fellow no feeling of his business, that he sings at Graue-making?
Custom hath made it in him a property of ea???sinesse.
It is ee'n so; the hand of little Employment hath the daintier sense.
But Age with his stealing steps
hath caught me in his clutch:
And hath shipped me intill the Land,
as if I had never been such.
That Scull had a tongue in it, and could sing once: how the knave iowles it to the ground as if it were Coins Iaw-bone, that did the first murder: It might be the Pate of a Politician which this Ass o'er Of???feces: one that could circumvent God, might it not?
It might, my Lord.
Or of a Courtier, which could say, Good More???row sweet Lord: how dost thou, good Lord? this might be my Lord such a one, that praised my Lord such a ones Horse, when he meant to beg it; might it not?
I, my Lord.
Why ee'n so: and now my Lady Worms, Chapless, and knocked about the Mozart with a Sextons Spade; heere's fine Revolution, if wee had the trick to see it. Did these bones cost no more the breeding??? but to play at Loggets with 'em? mine ache to think on it.
A Pickhaxe and a Spade, a Spade,
for and a shrowding-Sheete:
O a Pit of Clay for to be made,
for such a Guest is meet.
There's another: why might not that bee the Scull of of a Lawyer? where be his Quiddits now? his Quillets? his Cases? his Tenures, and his Tricks? why doe's he suffer this rude knave now to knock him about the Sconce with a dirty Shovel, and will not tell him of his Action of Battery? hum. This fellow might be in's time a great buyer of Land, with his Statutes, his Recog???nizances, his Fines, his double Vouchers, his Recoveries: Is this the fine of his Fines, and the recovery of his Reason???ueries, to have his fine Pate full of fine Dirt? will his Vouchers vouch him no more of his Purchases, and dou???ble ones too, then the length and breadth of a pair of Indentures? the very Conveyances of his Lands will hardly lye in this Box; and must the Inheritor himself have no more? ha?
Not a jot more, my Lord.
Is not Parchment made of Sheep-skinnes?
I my Lord, and of Calf-skins too.
They are Sheep and Calves that seek out issue???rance in that. I will speak to this fellow: whose Graue's this Sir?
Mine Sir:
O a Pit of Clay for to be made,
for such a Guest is meet.
I think it be thine indeed: for thou least in it.
You lye out on it Sir, and therefore it is not yours: for my part, I doe not lye in it; and yet it is mine.
Thou dost lye in it, to be in it and say it is thine: it is for the dead, not for the quick, therefore thou lie.
It is a quick lye Sir, twill a way again from me to you.
What man dost thou dig it for?
For no man Sir.
What woman then?
For none neither.
Who is to be buried in it?
One that was a woman Sir; but rest her Soul, shoe's dead.
How absolute the knave is? wee must speak by the Card, or equivocation will undo vs: by the Lord Horatio, these three years I have taken note of it, the Age is grown so picked, that the toe of the Peasant comes so near the heals of our Courtier, hee galls his Kibe. How long hast thou been a Graue-maker?
Of all the days in the year, I came too't that day that our last King Hamlet o'er came Fortinbras.
How long is that since?
Cannot you tell that? every fool can tell that: It was the very day, that young Hamlet was borne, hee that was mad, and sent into England.
I marry, why was he sent into England?
Why, because he was mad; hee shall recover his wits there; or if he do not, it's no great matter there.
Why?
Twill not be seen in him, there the men are as mad as he.
How came he mad?
Very strangely they say.
How strangely?
Faith e'ene with loosing his wits.
Upon what ground?
Why here in Denmark: I have bin sixeteen here, man and Boy thirty years.
How long will a man lie 'i the earth ere he rot?
I faith, if he be not rotten before he die (as we have many pocky Coerces now adays, that will scarce hold the laying in) he will last you some eight year, or nine year. A Tanner will last you nine year.
Why he, more then another?
Why sir, his hide is so tanned with his Trade, that he will keep out water a great while. And your water, is a sore Decayer of your whoreson dead body. Here is a Scull now: this Skull, has lain in the earth three &amp; twenty years.
Whose was it?
A whoreson mad Fellows it was;
Whose doe you think it was?
Nay, I know not.
A pestlence on him for a mad Rogue, a pou'rd a Flagon of Rhenish on my head once. This same Scull Sir, this same Scull sir, was Yoricks Scull, the Kings Easter.
This?
E'ene that.
Let me see. Alas poor Yorick, I knew him Ho???ratio, a fellow of infinite Jest; of most excellent fancy, he hath borne me on his back a thousand times: And how abhorred my Imagination is, my gorge rises at it. Here hung those lips, that I have kissed I know not how oft. Where be your libs now? Your Gambols? Your Songs? Your flashes of Merriment that were wont to set the Table on a Roar? No one now to mock your own Jeering? Quite chopfalne? Now get you to my Ladies Chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch thick, to this favour she must come. Make her laugh at that: pry???thee Horatio tell me one thing.
What's that my Lord?
Dost thou think Alexander looked of this fa???shion in the earth?
E'ene so.
And smelt so? Puh.
E'ene so, my Lord.
To what base uses we may return Horatio. Why may not Imagination trace the Noble dust of A???lexander, till he find it stopping a bunghole.
It were to consider: to curiously to consider so.
No faith, not a jot. But to follow him thither with modesty enough, &amp; likeliehood to lead it; as thus. Alexander died: Alexander was buried: Alexander re???turns into dust; the dust is earth; of earth we make Loom, and why of that Loom (whereto he was conuer???ted) might they not stop a Beer-barrel?
Imperial Caesar, dead and turned to clay,
Might stop a hole to keep the wind away.
Oh, that that earth, which kept the world in awe,
Should patch a Wall, to expel the winters flaw.
But soft, but soft, aside; here comes the King.
The Queen, the Courtiers. Who is that they follow,
And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken,
The Coarse they follow, did with desperate hand,
Fore do it own life; it was some Estate.
Couch we a while, and mark.
What Ceremony else?
That is Laertes, a very Noble youth: Mark.
What Ceremony else?
Her Obsequies have bin as far enlarged.
As we have warrantis, her death was doubtful,
And but that great Command, o're-swaies the order,
She should in ground vnsanctified have lodged,
Till the last Trumpet. For charitable prayer,
Shards, Flints, and Peebles, should be thrown on her:
Yet here she is allowed her Virgin Rites,
Her Maiden strewments, and the bringing home
Of Bell and Burial.
Must there no more be done?
No more be done:
We should profane the service of the dead,
To sing sage Requiem, and such rest to her
As to peace-parted Souls.
Lay her in the earth,
And from her fair and unpolluted flesh,
May Violets spring. I tell thee (churlish Priest)
A Ministering Angel shall my Sister be,
When thou least howling?
What, the fair Ophelia?
Sweets, to the sweet farewell.
I hoped thou should have bin my Hamlets wife:
I thought thy Bride-bed to have decked (sweet Maid)
And not to have strewed thy Grave.
Oh terrible wore,
Fall ten times treble, on that cursed head
Whose wicked deed??? thy most Ingenious sense
Deprived thee of. Hold off the earth a while,
Till I have caught her once more in mine arms:
Now pile your dust, upon the quick, and dead,
Till of this flat a Mountain you have made,
To o'er top old Pelion, or the skyish head
Of blew Olympus.
What is he, whose griefs
Bears such an Emphasis? whose phrase of Sorrow
Conjure the wandering Stars, and makes them stand
Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,
Hamlet the Dane.
The devil take thy soul.
Thou prai'st not well,
I prithee take thy fingers from my throat;
Sir though I am not Spleenatiue, and rash,
Yet have I something in me dangerous,
Which let thy wisenesse fear. Away thy hand.
Pluck them asunder.
Hamlet, Hamlet.
Good my Lord be quiet.
Why I will fight with him upon this Theme.
Until my eielids will no longer wag.
Oh my Son, what Theme?
I loved Ophelia; forty thousand Brothers
Could not (with all there quantity of Love)
Make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?
Oh he is mad Laertes,
For love of God forbear him.
Come show me what thou'lt doe.
Woo't weep? Woo't fight? Woo't tear thy self?
Woo't drink up Esile, eat a Crocodile?
Isle do it. Dost thou come here to whine;
To outface me with leaping in her Grave?
Be buried quick with her, and so will I.
And if thou prate of Mountains; let them throw
Millions of Akers on vs; till our ground
Singeing his pate against the burning Zone,
Make Ossa like a wart. Nay, and thoul't mouth,
Isle rant as well as thou.
This is mere Madness:
And thus awhile the fit will work on him:
Anon as patient as the female Dove,
When that her golden Cuplet are disclosed;
His silence will sit drooping.
Hear you Sir:
What is the reason that you use me thus?
I loud you ever; but it is no matter:
Let Hercules himself doe what he may,
The Cat will Mew, and Dog will have his day.
I pray you good Horatio wait upon him,
Strengthen you patience in our last nights speech,
We'll put the matter to the present push:
Good Gertrude set some watch over your Son,
This Grave shall have a living Monument:
An hour of quiet shortly shall we see;
Till then, in patience our proceeding be.
So much for this Sir; now let me see the other,
You doe remember all the Circumstance.
Remember it my Lord?
Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting,
That would not let me sleep; me thought I lay
Worse then the muteness in the Bilboes, rashly,
(And praise be rashness for it) let vs know,
Our indiscretion sometimes serves vs well,
When our dear plots do paule, and that should teach vs,
There's a Divinity that shapes our ends,
Rough-hew them how we will.
That is most certain.
Up from my Cabin
My sea-gowne scarfed about me in the dark,
Groped I to find out them; had my desire,
Fingered their Packet, and in fine, withdrew
To mine own room again, making so bold,
(My fears forgetting manners) to vnseale
Their grand Commission, where I found Horatio,
Oh royal knavery: An exact command,
Larded with many several sorts of reason;
Importing Denmarks health, and Englands too,
With hoo, such Bugs and Goblins in my life,
That on the superuize no leisure bated,
No not to stay the grinding of the Axe,
My head shoud be struck off.
First possible?
Here's the Commission, read it at more leisure:
But wilt thou hear me how I did proceed?
I beseech you.
Being thus benetted round with Villains,
Ere I could make a Prologue to my brains,
They had begun the Play. I sate me down,
Deuis'd a new Commission, wrote it fair,
I once did hold it as our Statists doe,
A baseness to write fair; and laboured much
How to forget that learning: but Sir now,
It did me Yeomans service: wilt thou know
The effects of what I wrote?
I, good my Lord.
An earnest Conjuration from the King,
As England was his faithful Tributary,
As love between them, as the Palm should flourish,
As Peace should still her wheaten Garland wear,
And stand a Comma 'tweene their amities,
And many such like Assis of great charge,
That on the view and know of these Contents,
Without debatement further, more or less,
He should the bearers put to sudden death,
Not shriving time allowed.
How was this sealed?
Why, even in that was Heaven ordinate;
I had my fathers Signet in my Purse,
Which was the Model of that Danish Seal:
Folded the Writ up in form of the other,
Subscribed it, gived the impression, placed it safely,
The changeling never known: Now, the next day
Was our Sea Fight, and what to this was sement,
Thou know already.
So Guildensterne and Rosincrance, go too't.
Why man, they did make love to this employment
They are not near my Conscience; their debate
Doth by their own insinuation grow:
It is dangerous, when the baser nature comes
Between the pass, and fell incensed points
Of mighty opposites.
Why, what a King is this?
Does it not, think thee, stand me now upon
He that hath killed my King, and whored my Mother,
Popped in between the election and my hopes,
Thrown out his Angle for my proper life,
And with such cozenage; is it not perfect conscience,
To quit him with this arm? And is it not to be damned
To let this Canker of our nature come
In further evil.
It must be shortly known to him from England
What is the issue of the business there.
It will be short,
The interim's mine, and a mans life's no more
Then to say one: but I am very sorry good Horatio,
That to Laertes I forgot my self;
For by the image of my Cause, I see
The Portraiture of his; Isle count his favours:
But sure the bravery of his grief did put me
Into a Towering passion.
Peace, who comes here?
Your Lordship is right welcome back to Den???mark.
I humbly thank you Sir, dost know this waterflie?
No my good Lord.
Thy state is the more gracious; for it is a vice to know him: he hath much Land, and fertile; let a Beast be Lord of Beasts, and his Crib shall stand at the Kings Mess; it is a Chowgh; but as I saw spacious in the pos???session of dirt.
Sweet Lord, if your friendship were at leisure,
I should impart a thing to you from his Majesty.
I will receive it with all diligence of spirit; put your Bonnet to his right use, it is for the head.
I thank your Lordship, it is very hot.
No, believe me it is very cold, the wind is Northerly.
It is indifferent cold my Lord indeed.
Me thinks it is very sultry, and hot for my Complexion.
Exceedingly, my Lord, it is very sultry, as it were I cannot tell how: but my Lord, his Majesty bad me sig???knife to you, that he he's laid a great wager on your head: Sir, this is the matter.
I beseech you remember.
Nay, in good faith, for mine ease in good faith: Sir, you are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes is at his weapon.
What's his weapon?
Rapier and dagger.
That's two of his weapons; but well.
The sir King he's waged with him six Barberry Whore???ses, against the which he impon'd as I take it, six French Rapiers and Poniards, with their assigns, as Girdle, Hangers or so: three of the Carriages infaith are very dear to fancy, very responsiue to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and of very liberal conceit.
What call you the Carriages?
The Carriages Sir, are the hangers.
The phrase would bee more Germaine to the matter: If we could carry Cannon by our sides; I would it might be Hangers till then; but on six Barberry Whore???ses against six French Swords: their Assigns, and three liberal conceited Carriages, that's the French but a???against the Danish; why is this impon'd as you call it?
The King Sir, hath laid that in a dozen passes be???tweene you and him, hee shall not exceed you three hits; He hath one twelve for mine, and that would come to imediate trial, if your Lordship would vouchsafe the Answer.
How if I answer no?
I mean my Lord, the opposition of your person in trial.
Sir, I will walk here in the Hall; if it please his Majesty, it is the breathing time of day with me; let the Foils bee brought, the Gentleman willing, and the King hold his purpose; I will win for him if I can: if not, Isle gain nothing but my shame, and the odd hits.
Shall I redeliver you ee'n so?
To this effect Sir, after what flourish your na???ture will.
I commend my duty to your Lordship.
Yours, yours; hee does well to commend it himself, there are no tongues else for's tongue.
This Lapwing runs away with the shell on his head.
He did Comply with his Dug before hee sucked it: thus had he and mine more of the same Heavy that I know the drossy age dotes on; only got the tune of the time, and outward habit of encounter, a kind of yeasty collection, which carries them through &amp; through the most fond and winnowed opinions; and doe but blow them to their trials: the Bubbles are out.
You will lose this wager, my Lord.
I doe not think so, since he went into France, I have been in continual practice; I shall win at the odds: but thou would not think how all here a???bout my heart: but it is no matter.
Nay, good my Lord.
It is but foolery; but it is such a kind of gain-giuing as would perhaps trouble a woman.
If your mind dislike any thing, obey. I will fore???stall their repair hither, and say you are not fit.
Not a whit, we defy Augury; there's a special Providence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be now, it is not to come: if it bee not to come, it will bee now: if it be not now; yet it will come; the readiness is all, since no man he's ought of what he leaves. What is it to leave be???times?
Come Hamlet, come, and take this hand from me.
Give me your pardon Sir, I'ue done you wrong,
But pardon't as you are a Gentleman.
This presence knows,
And you must needs have heard how I am punished
With sore distraction? What I have done
That might your nature honour, and exception
Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness:
Was???t Hamlet wronged Laertes? Never Hamlet.
If Hamlet from himself be tan away:
And when he's not himself, do's wrong Laertes,
Then Hamlet does it not, Hamlet denies it:
Who does it then? His Madness? If it be so,
Hamlet is of the Faction that is wronged,
His madness is poor Hamlets Enemy.
Sir, in this Audience,
Let my disclaiming from a purposed evil,
Free me so far in your most generous thoughts,
That I have shot mine Arrow o'er the house,
And hurt my Mother.
I am satisfied in Nature,
Whose motive in this case should stir me most
To my Revenge. But in my terms of Honour
I stand aloof, and will no reconcilement,
Till by some elder Masters of known Honour,
I have a voice, and president of peace
To keep my name vngorg'd. But till that time,
I do receive your offered love like love,
And will not wrong it.
I do embrace it freely,
And will this Brothers wager frankly play.
Give vs the Foils: Come on.
Come one for me.
Isle be your foil Laertes, in mine ignorance,
Your Skill shall like a Star in the darkest night,
Stick fiery off indeed.
You mock me Sir.
No by this hand.
Give them the Foils young Osricke,
Cousin Hamlet, you know the wagot.
Very well my Lord,
Your Grace hath laid the odds a' the weaker side.
I do not fear it,
I have seen you both:
But since he is bettered, we have therefore odds.
This is too heavy,
Let me see another.
This likes me well,
These Foils have all a length.
I my good Lord.
Set me the Stopes of wine upon that Table:
If Hamlet give the first, or second hit,
Or quit in answer of the third exchange,
Let all the Battlements their Ordinance fire,
The King shall drink to Hamlets better breath,
And in the Cup an union shall he throw
Richer then that, which four successive Kings
In Denmarkes Crown have worn.
Give me the Cups,
And let the Kettle to the Trumpets speak,
The Trumpet to the Cannoneer without,
The Cannons to the Heavens, the Heaven to Earth,
Now the King drinks to Hamlet. Come, begin,
And you the Judges bear a wary eye.
Come on sir.
Come on sir.
One.
No.
Judgment.
A hit, a very palpable hit.
Well: again.
Stay, give me drink.
Hamlet, this Pearl is thine,
Here's to thy health. Give him the cup,
Isle play this bout first, set by awhile.
Come: Another hit; what say you?
A touch, a touch, I do confess.
Our Son shall win.
He's fat, and scant of breath.
Heere's a Napkin, rub thy brows,
The Queen Carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.
Good Madam.
Gertrude, do not drink.
I will my Lord;
I pray you pardon me.
It is the poisoned Cup, it is too late.
I dare not drink yet Madam,
By and by.
Come, let me wipe thy face.
My Lord, Isle hit him now.
I do not thinke't.
And yet it is almost against my conscience.
Come for the third.
Laertes, you but daily,
I pray you pass with your best violence,
I am afeared you make a wanton of me.
Say you so? Come on.
Nothing neither way.
Have at you now.
Part them, they are incensed.
Nay come, again.
Look to the Queen there hoe.
They bleed on both sides. How is it my Lord?
How is it Laertes?
Why as a Woodcock
To mine Sprindge, Osricke,
I am justly killed with mine own Treachery.
How does the Queen?
She sounds to see them bleed.
No, no, the drink, the drink.
Oh my dear Hamlet, the drink, the drink,
I am poisoned.
Oh Villainy! How? Let the door be locked.
Treachery, seek it out.
It is here Hamlet.
Hamlet, thou art slain,
No Medicine in the world can do thee good.
In thee, there is not half an hour of life;
The Treacherous Instrument is in thy hand.
Vnbated and envenomed: the foul practise
Hath turned it self on me. Lo, here I lye,
Never to rise again: Thy Mothers poisoned:
I can no more, the King, the King's too blame.
The point envenomed too,
Then venom to thy work.
Treason, Treason.
O yet defend me Friends, I am but hurt.
Here thou incestuous, murdrous,
Damned Dane,
Drink off this Potion: Is thy Union here?
Follow my Mother.
He is ???justly served.
It is a poison temp'red by himself:
Exchange forgiveness with me, Noble Hamlet;
Mine and my Fathers death come not upon thee,
Nor thine on me.
Heaven make thee free of it, I follow thee.
I am dead Horatio, wretched Queen adieu,
You that look pale, and tremble at this chance,
That are but Mutes or audience to this act:
Had I but time (as this fell Sergeant death
Is strick'd in his Arrest) oh I could tell you.
But let it be: Horatio, I am dead,
Thou liu'st, report me and my causes right.
To the unsatisfied.
Never believe it.
I am more an Antike Roman then a Dane:
Heere's yet some Liquor left.
As the art a man, give me the Cup.
Let go, by Heaven Isle have it.
Oh good Horatio, what a wounded name,
(Things standing thus unknown) shall live behind me.
If thou did ever hold me in thy heart,
Absent thee from felicity awhile,
And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain,
To tell my Story.
What warlike noise is this?
Young Fortinbras, with conquest come fro?? Poland
To the Ambassadors of England gives this warlike volley.
O I dye Horatio:
The potent poison quite ore-crowes my spirit,
I cannot live to hear the News from England,
But I do prophecy the election lights
On Fortinbras, he he's my dying voice,
So tell him with the occurrents more and less,
Which have solicited. The rest is silence.
Now crack a Noble heart:
Goodnight sweet Prince,
And flights of Angels sing thee to thy rest,
Why do's the Drum come hither?
Where is this sight?
What is it ye would see;
If ought of woe, or wonder, cease your search.
His quarry cries on havoc. Oh proud death,
What feast is toward in thine eternal Cell.
That thou so many Princes, at a shoot,
So bloodily hast struck.
The sight is dismal,
And our affairs from England come too late,
The ears are senseless that should give vs hearing,
To tell him his commandment is fulfilled,
That Rosincrance and Guildensterne are dead:
Where should we have our thanks?
Not from his mouth,
Had it the ability of life to thank you:
He never gave commandment for their death.
But since so jump upon this bloody question,
You from the Polake wars, and you from England
Are here arrived. Give order that these bodies
High on a stage be placed to the view,
And let me speak to the yet unknowing world,
How these things came about. So shall you hear
Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts,
Of accidental judgements, casual slaughters
Of death's put on by cunning, and forced cause,
And in this upshot, purposes mistook,
Fallen on the Inuentors heads. All this can I
Truly deliver.
Let vs hast to hear it,
And call the Noblest to the Audience.
For me, with sorrow, I embrace my Fortune,
I have some Rites of memory in this Kingdom,
Which are to claim, my vantage doth
Inuit me,
Of that I shall have always cause to speak,
And from his mouth
Whose voice will draw on more:
But let this same be presently performed,
Even whiles men's minds are wilde,
Lest more mischance
On plots, and errors happen.
Let four Captains
Bear Hamlet like a Soldier to the Stage,
For he was likely, had he been put on
To have proved most royally:
And for his passage,
The Soldiers Music, and the rites of War
Speak loudly for him.
Take up the body; Such a sight as this
Becomes the Field, but here shows much amiss.
Go, bid the Soldiers shoot.

Never tell me, I take it much unkindly
That thou (Iago) who hast had my purse,
As if ye strings were thine, should know of this.
But you'll not hear me. If ever I did dream
Of such a matter, abhor me.
Thou told me,
Thou did hold him in thy hate.
Despise me
If I do not. Three Great-ones of the City,
(In personal suite to make me his Lieutenant)
Off-capt to him: and by the faith of man
I know my price, I am worth no worse a place.
But he (as loving his own pride, and purposes)
Euades them, with a bombast Circumstance,
Horribly stuffed with Epithets of war,
Non-suites my Mediators. For certes, says he,
I have already chose my Officer. And what was he?
For-sooth, a great Arithmetician,
One Michael Cassio, a Florentine,
(A Fellow almost damned in a fair Wife)
That never set a Squadron in the Field,
Nor the division of a Battle knows
More then a Spinster. Unless the Bookish Theoricke:
Wherein the Tongued Consuls can propose
As Masterly as he. Mere prattle (without practise)
Is all his Souldiership. But he (Sir) had the election;
And I (of whom his eyes had seen the proof
At Rhodes, at Cyprus, and on others grounds
Christened, and Heathen) must be be-leed, and calmed
By Debtor, and Creditor. This Counter-caster,
He (in good time) must his Lieutenant be,
And I (bless the mark) his Mooreships Ancient.
By heaven, I rather would have bin his hangman.
Why, there's no remedy.
It is the curse of Service;
Preferment goes by Letter, and affection,
And not by old gradation, where each second
Stood Heir to the first. Now Sir, be judge your self,
Whether I in any just term am Affin'd
To love the Moore?
I would not follow him then.
O Sir content you.
I follow him, to serve my turn upon him.
We cannot all be Masters, nor all Masters
Cannot be truly followed. You shall mark
Many a duteous and knee-crooking knave;
That (doting on his own obsequious bondage)
Wears out his time, much like his Masters Ass,
For nought but Provender, &amp; when he's old Cashiered.
Whip me such honest knaves. Others there are
Who trimmed in Forms, and visages of Duty,
Keep yet their hearts attending on themselves,
And throwing but shows of Service on their Lords
Doe well thrive by them.
And when they have lined their Coats
Doe themselves Homage.
These Fellows have some soul,
And such a one do I profess my self. For (Sir)
It is as sure as you are Rodorigo,
Were I the Moore, I would not be Iago:
In following him, I follow but my self.
Heaven is my Judge, not I for love and duty,
But seeming so, for my peculiar end:
For when my outward Action doth demonstrate
The native act, and figure of my heart
In Complement extern, it is not long after
But I will wear my heart upon my sleeve
For Daws to peck at; I am not what I am.
What a fall Fortune do's the Thicks-lips owe
If he can carryit thus?
Call up her Father:
Rouse him, make after him, poison his delight,
Proclaim him in the Streets. Incense her kinsmen,
And though he in a fertile Climate dwell,
Plague him with Flies: though that his Joy be Joy,
Yet throw such chances of vexation on it,
As it may loose some colour.
Here is her Fathers house, Isle call aloud.
Doe, with like timorous accent, and dire yell,
As when (by Night and Negligence) the Fire
Is spied in populus Cities.
What hoe: Brabantio, Siginor Brabantio, hoe.
Awake: what hoe, Brabantio: Thieves, Thieves.
Look to your house, your daughter, and your Bags,
Thieves, Thieves.
Aboue. What is the reason of this terrible
Summon? What is the matter there?
Signior is all your Family within?
Are your Doors locked?
Why? Wherefore ask you this?
Sir, y' are robed, for shame put on your Gown,
Your heart is burst, you have lost half your soul
Even now, now, very now, an old black Ram
Is tupping your white Ewe. Arise, arise,
Awake the snorting Citizens with the Bell,
Or else the devil will make a Grand-sire of you.
Arise I say.
What, have you lost your wits?
Most reverend Signior, do you know my voice?
Not I: what are you?
My name is Rodorigo.
The worsser welcome:
I have charged thee not to haunt about my doors:
In honest plainness thou hast heard me say,
My Daughter is not for thee. And now in madness
(Being full of Supper, and distempring draughts)
Upon malicious knavery, dost thou come
To start my quiet.
Sir, Sir, Sir.
But thou must needs be sure,
My spirits and my place have in their power
To make this bitter to thee.
Patience good Sir.
What tell thou me of Robbing?
This is Venice: my house is not a Grange.
Most grave Brabantio,
In simple and pure soul, I come to you.
Sir: you are one of those that will not serve God, if the devil bid you. Because we come to do you service, and you think we are Russians, you'll have your Daughla covered with a Barberry horse, you'll have your Nophewes neigh to you, you'll have Coursers for Cozens: and Gannets for Germans.
What profane wretch art thou?
I am one Sir, that comes to tell you, your Daughla and the Moore, are making the Beast with two backs.
Thou art a Villain.
You are a Senator.
This thou shalt answer. I know thee Rodorigo.
Sir, I will answer any thing. But I beseech you
If it be your pleasure, and most wise consent,
(As partly I find it is) that your fair Daughter,
At this odd Even and dull watch of the night
Transported with no worse nor better guard,
But with a knave of common hire, a Gundelier,
To the gross clasps of a Lascivious Moore:
If this be known to you, and your Allowance,
We then have done you bold, and saucy wrongs.
But if you know not this, my Manners tell me,
We have your wrong rebuke. Do not believe
That from the sense of all Civility,
I thus would play and trifle with your Reverence.
Your Daughter (if you have not given her leave)
I say again, hath made a gross revolt,
Tying her Duty, Beauty, Wit, and Fortunes
In an extravagant, and wheeling Stranger,
Of here, and every where: straight satisfy your self.
If she be in her Chamber, or your house,
Let loose on me the Justice of the State
For thus deluding you.
Strike on the Tinder, hoe:
Give me a Taper: call up all my people,
This Accident is not unlike my dream,
Belief of it oppresses me already.
Light, I say, light.
Farewell: for I must leave you.
It seems not meet, nor wholesome to my place
To be producted, (as if I stay, I shall,)
Against the Moore. For I do know the State,
(How ever this may gall him with some check)
Cannot with safety cast-him. For he's embarked
With such loud reason to the Cyprus Wars,
(Which even now stands in Act) that for their souls
Another of his Fathom, they have none,
To lead their Business. In which regard,
Though I do hate him as I do hell opines,
Yet, for necessity of present life,
I must show out a Flag, and sign of Love,
(Which is indeed but sign) that you shall surely find him
Lead to the Sagitary the raised Search:
And there will I be with him. So farewell.
It is too true an evil. Gone she is,
And what's to come of my despised time,
Is nought but bitterness. Now Rodorigo,
Where did thou see her? (Oh unhappy Girl)
With the Moore say thou? (Who would be a Father?)
How did thou know it was she? (Oh she deceives me
Past thought:) what said she to you? Get more Tapers
Raise all my Kindred. Are they married think you?
Truly I think they are.
Oh Heyn: how got she out?
Oh treason of the blood.
Fathers, from hence trust not your Daughters minds
By what you see them act. Is there not Charms,
By which the property of Youth, and Maidhood
May be abused? Have you not read Rodorigo,
Of some such thing?
Yes Sir: I have indeed.
Call up my Brother: oh would you had had her.
Some one way, some another. Doe you know
Where we may apprehend her, and the Moore?
I think I can discover him, if you please
To get good Guard, and go along with me.
Pray you lead on. At every house Isle call,
(I may command at most) get Weapons (hoe)
And raise some special Officers of might:
On good Rodorigo, I will deserve your pains.
Though in the trade of War I have slain men,
Yet do I hold it very stuff of the conscience
To do no contrived Murder: I lack Iniquity
Sometime to do me service. Nine, or ten times
I had thought t'haue yerk'd him here under the Ribs.
It is better as it is.
Nay but he prated,
And spoke such scurvy, and provoking terms
Against your Honour, that with the little godliness I have
I did full hard forbear him. But I pray you Sir,
Are you fast married? Be assured of this,
That the Magnifico is much beloved,
And hath in his effect a voice potential
As double as the Dukes: He will divorce you.
Or put upon you, what restraint or grievance,
The Law (with all his might, to enforce it on)
Will give him Cable.
Let him do his spite;
My Services, which I have done the Signory
Shall out-tongue his Complaints. It is yet to know,
Which when I know, that boasting is an Honour,
I shall promulgate. I fetch my life and being,
From Men of Royal Siege. And my demerits
May speak (vnbonnetted) to as proud a Fortune
As this that I have reached. For know Iago,
But that I love the gentle Desdemona,
I would not my vnhoused free condition
Put into Circumscription, and Confine,
For the Seas worth. But look, what Lights come yond?
Those are the raised Father, and his Friends:
You were best go in.
Not I: I must be found.
My Parts, my Title, and my perfect Soul
Shall manifest me rightly. Is it they?
By Ianus, I think no.
The Servants of the Dukes?
And my Lieutenant?
The goodness of the Night upon you (Friends)
What is the News?
The Duke do's greet you (General)
And he requires your haste, Post-haste appearance,
Anon on the instant.
What is the matter, think you?
Something from Cyprus, as I may divine:
It is a business of some heate. The Galleys
Have sent a dozen sequent Messengers
This very night, at one another heals:
And many of the Consuls, raised and met,
Are at the Dukes already. You have bin hotly called for,
When being not at your Lodging to be found,
The Senate hath sent about three several Quests,
To search you out.
It is well I am found by you:
I will but spend a word here in the house,
And go with you.
Ancient, what makes he here?
Faith, he to night hath boarded a Land Caressed,
If it prove lawful prize, have made for ever.
I do not understand.
He's married.
To who?
Marry to  Come Captain, will you go?
Have with you.
Here comes another Troop to seek for you.
It is Brabantio: General be advised,
He comes to bad intent.
Holla, stand there.
Signior, it is the Moore.
Down with him, Thief.
You, Rodorigoc? Cm Sir, I am for you.
Keep up your bright Swords, for the dew will rust them. Good Signior, you shall more command with years, then with your Weapons.
Oh thou foul Thief,
Where hast thou stowed my Daughter?
Damned as thou art, thou hast enchanted her
For Isle refer me to all things of sense,
(If she in Chains of Magic were not bound)
Whether a Maid, so tender, Fair, and Happy,
So opposite to Marriage, that she shunned
The wealthy curled Deareling of our Nation,
Would ever have (t'encurre a general mock)
Run from her Guard age to the sooty bosom,
Of such a thing as thou: to fear, not to delight?
Judge me the world, if it is not gross in sense,
That thou hast practised on her with foul Charms,
Abused her delicate Youth, with Drugs or Minerals,
That weakens Motion. Isle have it disputed on,
It is probable, and palpable to thinking;
I therefore apprehend and do attach thee,
For an abuser of the World, a practiser
Of Arts inhibited, and out of warrant;
Lay hold upon him, if he do resist
Subdue him, at his peril.
Hold your hands
Both you of my inclining, and the rest.
Were it my Cue to fight, I should have known it
Without a Prompter. Whether will you that I go
To answer this your charge?
To Prison, till fit time
Of Law, and course of direct Session
Call thee to answer.
What if do obey?
How may the Duke be therewith satisfied,
Whose Messengers are here about my side,
Upon some present business of the State,
To bring me to him.
It is true most worthy Signior,
The Dukes in Counsel, and your Noble self,
I am sure is sent for.
How? The Duke in Counsel?
In this time of the night? Bring him away;
Mine's not an idle Cause. The Duke himself,
Or any of my Brothers of the State,
Cannot but feel this wrong, as it were their own:
For if such Actions may have passage free,
Bond slaves, and Pagans shall our Statesmen be.
There's no composition in this News,
That gives them Credit.
Indeed, they are disproportioned;
My Letters say, a Hundred and seven Galleys.
And mine a Hundred forty.
And mine two Hundred:
But though they jump not on a just account,
(As in these Cases where the aim reports,
It is oft with difference) yet do they all confirm
A Turkish Fleet, and bearing up to Cyprus.
Nay, it is possible enough to judgment:
I do not so secure me in the Error,
But the maine Article I do approve
In fearful sense.
What hoe, what hoe, what hoe.
A Messenger from the Galleys.
Now? What's the business?
The Turkish Preparation makes for Rhodes,
So was I bid report here to the State,
By Signior Angelo.
How say you by this change?
This cannot be
By no assay of reason. It is a Pageant
To keep vs in false gaze, when we consider
The importance of Cyprus to the Turk;
And let our selves again but understand,
That as it more concerns the Turk then Rhodes,
So may he, with more facile question bear it,
For that it stands not in such Warrelike brace,
But altogether lacks the abilities
The Rhodes is dressed in. If we make thought of this,
We must not think the Turk is so vnskillfull,
To leave that latest, which concerns him first,
Neglecting an attempt of ease, and gain
To wake, and wage a danger profitlesse.
Nay, in all confidence he's not for Rhodes.
Here is more News.
The Ottamites, Reueren'd, and Gracious,
Steering with due course toward the Isle of Rhodes,
Have there inioynted them with an after Fleet.
I, so I thought: how many, as you guess?
Of thirty Sail: and now they do re-stem
Their backward course, bearing with frank appearance
Their purposes toward Cyprus. Signior Montano,
Your trusty and most Valiant Servitor,
With his free duty, recommends you thus,
And prays you to believe him.
It is certain then for Cyprus:
Marcus Luccicos, is not he in Town?
He's now in Florence.
Write from vs,
To him, Post, Post-haste, dispatch.
Here comes Brabantio, and the Valiant Moore.
Valiant Othello, we must straight employ you,
Against the general Enemy Ottoman.
I did not see you: welcome gentle Signior,
We lack't your Counsel, and your help to night.
So did I yours: Good your Grace pardon me.
Neither my place, whore ought I heard of business
Hath raised me from my bed; nor doth the general care
Take hold on me. For my particular grief
Is of so flood-gate, and ore-bearing Nature,
That it engluts, and swallows other sorrows,
And it is still it self.
Why? What's the matter?
My Daughter: oh my Daughter!
Dead?
I, to me.
She is abused, stolen from me, and corrupted
By Spells, and Medicines, bought of Mountebanks;
For Nature, so prepostrously to err,
(Being not deficient, blind, or lame of sense,)
Sans witch-craft could not.
Who ere he be, that in this foul proceeding
Hath thus beguiled your Daughter of her self,
And you of her; the bloody Book of Law,
You shall your self read, in the bitter letter,
After your own sense: yea, though our proper Son
Stood in your Action.
Humbly I thank your Grace,
Here is the man; this Moore, whom now it seems
Your special Mandate, for the State affairs
Hath hither brought.
We are very sorry for it.
What in your own part, can you say to this?
Nothing, but this is so.
Most Potent, Grave, and Reueren'd Signiors,
My very Noble, and approved good Masters;
That I have tan away this old mans Daughter,
It is most true: true I have married her;
The very head, and front of my offending,
Hath this extent; no more. Rude am I, in my speech,
And little blessed with the soft phrase of Peace;
For since these Arms of mine, had seven years pith,
Till now, some nine Moons wasted, they have used
Their dearest action, in the Tented Field:
And little of this great world can I speak,
More then pertains to Feats of Broils, and Battle,
And therefore little shall I grace my cause,
In speaking for my self. Yet, (by your gracious patience)
I will a round vn-varnish'd  Tale deliver,
Of my whole course of Love.
What Drugs, what Charms,
What Conjuration, and what mighty Magic,
(For such proceeding I am charged withal)
I won his Daughter.
A Maiden, never bold:
Of Spirit so still, and quiet, that her Motion
Blushed at her self, and she, in spite of Nature,
Of Years, of Country, Credit, every thing
To fall in Love, with what she feared to look on;
It is a judgment main'd, and most imperfect.
That will confess Perfection so could err
Against all rules of Nature, and must be driven
To find out practises of cunning hell
Why this should be. I therefore vouch again,
That with some Mixtures, powerful o'er the blood,
Or with some Dram, (conjured to this effect)
He wtought up on her.
To vouch this, is no proof,
Without more wider, and more over Test
Then these thin habits, and poor likely-hoods
Of modern seeming, do prefer against him.
But Othello, speak,
Did you, by indirect, and forced courses
Subdue, and poison this young Maids affections?
Or came it by request, and such fair question
As soul, to soul affords?
I do beseech you,
Send for the Lady to the Sagitary.
And let her speak of me before her Father;
If you do find me foul, in her report,
The Trust, the Office, I do hold of you,
Not only take away, but let your Sentence
Even fall upon my life.
Fetch Desdemona hither.
Ancient, conduct them:
You best know the place.
And tell she come, as truly as to heaven,
I do confess the vices of my blood,
So justly to your Grave ears, Isle present
How I did thrive in this fair Ladies love,
And she in mine.
Say it Othello.
Her Father loved me, oft invited me:
Still questioned me the Story of my life,
From year to year: the Battle, Sieges, Fortune,
That I have past.
I ran it through, even from my boyish days,
To the very moment that he bad me tell it.
Wherein I spoke of most disastrous chances:
Of moving Accidents by Flood and Field,
Of haire-breadth scopes in the imminent deadly breach;
Of being taken by the Insolent Foe,
And sold to slavery. Of my redemption thence,
And portance in my Travellers history.
Wherein of Enters vast, and Deserts idle,
Rough Quarries, Rocks, Hills, whose head touch heaven,
It was my hint to speak. Such was my Process,
And of the Cannibals that each others eat,
The Antropophague, and men whose heads
Grew beneath their shoulders. These things to hear,
Would Desdemona seriously incline:
But still the house Affairs would draw her hence:
Which ever as she could with haste dispatch,
She'l'd come again, and with a greedy ear
Devour up my discourse. Which I observing,
Took once a pliant hour, and found good means
To draw from her a prayer of earnest heart,
That I would all my Pilgrimage dilate,
Whereof by parcels she had something heard,
But not instinctively: I did consent,
And often did beguile her of her tears,
When I did speak of some distressful stroke
That my youth suffered: My Story being done,
She gave me for my pains a world of kisses:
She swore in faith it was strange: it was passing strange,
It was pitiful: it was wondrous pitiful.
She wished she had not heard it, yet she wished
That Heaven had made her such a man. She thanked me,
And bad me, if I had a Friend that loved her,
I should but teach him how to tell my Story,
And that would woo her. Upon this hint I spake,
She loved me for the dangers I had past,
And I loved her, that she did pity them.
This only is the witch-craft I have used.
Here comes the Lady: Let her witness it.
I think this tale would win my Daughter too,
Good Brabantio, take up this mangled matter at the best:
Men do their broken Weapons rather use,
Then their bare hands.
I pray you hear her speak?
If she confess that she was half the wooer,
Destruction on my head, if my bad blame
Light on the man. Come hither gentle Mistress,
Do you perceive in all this Noble Company,
Where most you owe obedience?
My Noble Father,
I do perceive here a divided duty.
To you I am bound for life, and education:
My life and education both do learn me,
How to respect you. You are the Lord of duty,
I am hitherto your Daughter. But heere's my Husband;
And so much duty, as my Mother showed
To you, preferring you before her Father:
So much I challenge, that I may profess
Due to the Moore my Lord.
God be with you: I have done.
Please it your Grace, on to the State Affairs;
I had rather to adopt a Child, then get it.
Come hither Moore;
I here do give thee that with all my heart,
Which but thou hast already, with all my heart
I would keep from thee. For your sake (Jewel)
I am glad at soul, I have no other Child;
For thy escape would teach me Tirranie
To hang clogs on them. I have done my Lord.
Let me speak like your self:
And lay a Sentence,
Which as a greece, or step may help these Lovers.
When remedies are past, the griefs are ended
By seeing the worst, which late on hopes depended.
To morn a Mischief that is past and gon,
Is the next way to draw new mischief on.
What cannot be presern'd, when Fortune takes:
Patience, her Injury a mock'ry makes.
The robed that smiles, steals something from the Thief,
He robs himself, that spends a bootless grief.
So let the Turk of Cyprus vs beguile,
We loose it not so long as we can smile:
He bears the Sentence well, that nothing bears,
But the free comfort which from thence he hears.
But he bears both the Sentence, and the sorrow,
That to pay grief, must of poor Patience borrow.
These Sentences, to Sugar, or to Gall,
Being strong on both sides, are Equiuocall.
But words are words, I never yet did hear:
That the bruised heart was pierced through the ear.
I humbly beseech you proceed to the Affairs of State.
The Turk with a most mighty Preparation makes for Cyprus: Othello, the Fortitude of the place is best known to you. And though we have there a Substitute of most allowed sufficiency; yet opinion, a more sovereign Mistress of Effects, throws a more safer voice on you: you must therefore be content to slubber the gloss of your new Fortunes, with this more stubborne, and boisterous expedition.
The Tyrant Custom, most Grave Senators,
Hath made the flinty and Steel Coach of War
My thrice-driuen bed of Down. I do agonize
A Natural and prompt Alacartie,
I find in hardness: and do undertake
This present Wars against the Ottamites.
Most humbly therefore bending to your State,
I crave fit disposition for my Wife,
Due reference of Place, and Exhibition,
With such Accommodation and besort
As levels with her breeding.
Why at her Fathers?
I will not have it so.
Nor I.
Nor would I there recide,
To put my Father in impatient thoughts
By being in his eye. Most Grcaious Duke,
To my unfolding, lend your prosperous ear,
And let me find a Charter in your voice
T'assist my simpleness.
What would you Desdemona?
That I love the Moore, to live with him,
My downright violence, and storm of Fortunes,
May trumpet to the world. My heart's subdued
Even to the very quality of my Lord;
I saw Othello's visage in his mind,
And to his Honours and his valiant parts,
Did I my soul and Fortunes consecrate
So that (dear Lords) if I be left behind
A Moth of Peace, and he go to the War,
The Rites for why I love him, are bereft me:
And I a heavy interim shall support
By his dear absence. Let me go with him.
Let her have your voice.
Vouch with me Heaven, I therefore beg it not
To please the palate of my Appetite:
Nor to comply with heat the young affects
In my defunct, and proper satisfaction.
But to be free, and bounteous to her mind:
And Heaven defend your good souls, that you think
I will your serious and great business scant
When she is with me. No, when light winged Toys
Of feathered Cupped, seele with wanton dullness
My speculative, and offic'd Instrument:
That my Disports corrupt, and taint my business:
Let House-wiues make a Skillet of my Helm,
And all indign, and base adversities,
Make head against my Estimation.
Be it as you shall privately determine,
Either for her stay, or going: the Affair cries hast:
And speed must answer it.
You must away to night.
With all my heart.
At nine in the morning, here we'll meet again.
Othello, leave some Officer behind
And he shall our Commission bring to you:
And such things else of quality and respect
As doth import you.
So please your Grace, my Ancient,
A man he is of honesty and trust:
To his conveyance I assign my wife,
With what else needful, your good Grace shall think
To be sent after me.
Let it be so:
Good night to every one. And Noble Signior,
If Virtue no delighted Beauty lack,
Your Son-in-law is far more Fair then Black.
Adieu brave Moore, use Desdemona well.
Look to her (Moore) if thou hast eyes to see:
She he's deceived her Father, and may thee.
My life upon her faith. Honest Iago,
My Desdemona must I leave to thee:
I prithee let thy wife attend on her,
And bring them after in the best advantage.
Come Desdemona, I have but an hour
Of Love, of wordly matter, and direction
To spend with thee. We must obey the the time.
Iago.
What say thou Noble heart?
What will I do, think thou?
Why go to bed and sleep.
I will incontinently drown my self.
If thou dost, I shall never love thee after. Why thou silly Gentleman?
It is sillyness to live, when to live is torment: and then have we a prescription to dye, when death is our Physician.
Oh villainous: I have looked upon the world for four times seven years, and since I could distinguish betwixt a Benefit, and an Injury: I never found man that knew how to love himself. Ere I would say, I would drown my self for the love of a Gynney Hen, I would change my Humanity with a Baboon.
What should I do? I confess it is my shame to be so fond, but it is not in my virtue to amend it.
Virtue? A fig, it is in our selves that we are thus, or thus. Our Bodies are our Gardens, to the which, our Wills are Gardeners. So that if we will plant Nettells, or sow Lattice: Set Hisope, and weed up Time Supply it with one gender of Herbs, or distract it with many: either to have it sterrill with idleness, or menured with Industry, why the power, and Corrigible authoritie of this lies in our Wills. If the brain of our lives had not one Scale of Reason, to poise another of Sensualitie, the blood, and baseness of our Natures would conduct vs to most prepostrous Conclusions. But we have Reason to cool our raging Motions, our carnal Stings, or vnbitted Lusts: whereof I take this, that you call Love, to be a Sect, or Seyen.
It cannot be.
It is merely a Lust of the blood, and a permission of the will. Come, be a man: drown thy self? Drown Cats, and blind Puppies. I have professed me thy Friend, and I confess me knit to thy deserving, with Cables of perdurable toughness. I could never better steed thee then now. Put Money in thy purse: follow thou the Wars, defeat thy favour, with an usurped Beard. I say put Money in thy purse. It cannot be long that Desdemona should continue her love to the Moore. Put Money in thy purse: nor he his to her. It was a violent Commencemeant in her, and thou shalt see an answerable Sequestration, put but Money in thy purse. These Moors are changeable in their wills: fill thy purse with Money. The Food that to him now is as lushious as Locusts, shall be to him shortly, as bitter as Coloquintida. She must change for youth: when she is sated with his body she will find the errors of her choice. Therefore, put Money in thy purse. If thou wilt needs damn thy self, do it a more delicate way then drowning. Make all the Money thou can: If Sanctimony, and a frail vow, betwixt an erring Barbarian, and super-subtle Venetian be not too hard for my wits, and all the Tribe of hell, thou shalt enjoy her: therefore make Money: a pox of drowning thy self, it is clean out of the way. Seek thou rathere to be hanged in Compassing thy joy, then to be drowned, and go without her.
Wilt thou be fast to my hopes, if I depend on the issue?
Thou art sure of me: Go make Money: I have told thee often, and I re-tell thee again, and again, I hate the Moore. My cause is hearted; thine hath no less reason. Let vs be conjunctive in our revenge, against him. If thou can Cuckold him, thou dost thy self a pleasure, me a sport. There are many Events in the Womb of Time, which will be delivered. Traverse, go, provide thy Money. We will have more of this to morerow. Adieu.
Where shall we meet in the morning?
At my Lodging.
Isle be with thee betimes.
Go too, farewell. Do you hear Rodorigo?
Isle sell all my Land.
Thus do I ever make my Fool, my purse:
For I mine own gained knowledge should profane
If I would time expend with such Snpe,
But for my Sport, and Profit: I hate the Moore,
And it is thought abroad, that twixt my sheets
She he's done my Office. I know not if it be true,
But I, for mere suspicion in that kind,
Will do, as if for Surety. He holds me well,
The better shall my purpose work on him:
Cassio's a proper man: Let me see now,
To get his Place, and to plume up my will
In double Knavery. How? How? Let's see.
After some time, to abuse Othello's ears,
That he is too familiar with his wife:
He hath a person, and a smooth dispose
To be suspected: framed to make women false.
The Moore is of a free, and open Nature,
That thinks men honest, that but seem to be so,
And will as tenderly be lead by' the Nose
As Asses are:
I have it: it is engendered: Hell, and Night,
Must bring this monstrous Birth, to the worlds light.
What from the Cape, can you discern at Sea?
Nothing at all, it is a high wrought Flood:
I cannot twixt the Heaven, and the Maine,
Descry a Sail.
Me thinks, the wind hath spoke aloud at Land,
A fuller blast ne'er shook our Battlements:
If it hath ruffiand so upon the Sea,
What ribs of Oak, when Mountains melt on them,
Can hold the Morties. What shall we hear of this?
A Segregation of the Turkish Fleet:
For do but stand upon the Foaming Shore,
The chidden Billow seems to pelt the Clouds,
The winde-shak'd-Surge, with high &amp; monstrous Maine
Seems to cast water on the burning Bear,
And quench the Guards of the euer-fixed Pole:
I never did like molestation view
On the enchafed Flood.
If that the Turkish Fleet
Be not enshelter'd, and embayed, they are drowned,
It is impossible to bear it out.
News Lads: our wars are done:
The desperate Tempest hath so banged the Turks,
That their designement halts. A Noble ship of Venice,
Hath seen a grievous wrack and sufferance
On most part of their Fleet.
How? Is this true?
The Ship is here put in: A Verennessa, Michael Cassio
Lieutenant to the warlike Moore, Othello,
Is come on Shore the Moore himself at Sea,
And is in full Commission here for Cyprus.
I am glad on it:
It is a worthy Governor.
But this same Cassio, though he speak of comfort,
Touching the Turkish loss, yet he looks sadly,
And pray the Moore be safe; for they were ted
With foul and violent Tempest.
Pray Heavens he be:
For I have served him, and the man commands
Like a full Soldier. Let's to the Sea-side (hoe)
As well to see the Vessel that's come in,
As to throw-out our eyes for brave Othello,
Even till we make the Maine, and the Eriall blew,
An indistinct regard.
Come, let's do so;
For every Minute is expectancy
Of more Arrivance.
Thanks you, the valiant of the warlike Isle,
That so approve the Moore: Oh let the Heavens
Give him defence against the Elements,
For I have lost him on a dangerous Sea.
Is he well shipped?
His Bark is stoutly Timbered, and his Pilot
Of very expert, and approved Allowance;
Therefore my hope's (not surfeited to death)
Stand in bold Cure.
A Sail, a Sail, a Sail.
What noise?
The Town is empty; on the brow of the Sea
Stand ranks of People, and they cry, a Sail.
My hopes do shape him for the Governor.
They do discharge their Shot of Curtsy,
Our Friends, at least.
I pray you Sir, go forth,
And give vs truth who it is that is arrived.
I shall.
But good Lieutenant, is your General wived?
Most fortunately: he hath achieved a Maid
That paragons description, and wilde Fame:
One that excels the quirks of Blazoning pens,
And in the essential Vesture of Creation,
Do's tyre the Ingeniuer.
How now? Who he's put in?
It is one Iago, Ancient to the General.
He's had most favourable, and happy speed:
Tempests themselves, high Seas, and howling winds,
The gutter'd-Rockes, and Congregated Sands,
Traitors ensteep'd, to enclogge the guiltless Keel,
As having sense of Beauty, do omit
Their mortal Natures, letting go safely by
The Divine Desdemona.
What is she?
She that I spake of:
Our great Captains Captain,
Left in the conduct of the bold Iago,
Whose footing here anticipates our thoughts,
A Senights speed. Great Jove, Othello guard,
And swell his Sail with thine own powerful breath,
That he may bless this Bay with his tall Ship,
Make loves quick pants in Desdemonaes Arms,
Give renewed fire to our extincted Spirits.
Oh behold,
The Riches of the Ship is come on shore:
You men of Cyprus, let her have your knees.
Hail to thee Lady: and the grace of Heaven,
Before, behind thee, and on every hand
Enwheele thee round.
I thank you, Valiant Cassio,
What tidings can you tell of my Lord?
He is not yet arrived, nor know I ought
But that he's well, and will be shortly here.
Oh, but I fear:
How lost you company?
The great Contention of Sea, and Skies
Parted our fellowship. But hark, a Sail.
A Sail, a Sail.
They give this greeting to the Citadel:
This likewise is a Friend.
See for the News:
Good Ancient, you are welcome. Welcome Mistress:
Let it not gaul your patience (good Iago)
That I extend my Manners. It is my breeding,
That gives me this bold show of Courtesy.
Sir, would she give you so much of her lips,
As of her tongue she oft bestows on me,
You would have enough.
Alas: she he's no speech.
Infaith too much:
I find it still, when I have leave to sleep.
Marry before your Ladyship, I grant,
She puts het tongue a little in her heart,
And chides with thinking.
You have little cause to say so.
Come on, come on: you are Pictures out of door: Bells in your Parlours: Wilde-Cats in your Kitchens: Saints in your Injuries: Devils being offended: Players in your Housewifery, and Housewives in your Beds.
Oh, fie upon thee, Slanderer.
Nay, it is true: or else I am a Turk,
You rise to play, and go to bed to work.
You shall not write my praise.
No, let me not.
What would write of me, if thou should praise me?
Oh, gentle Lady, do not put me too't,
For I am nothing, if not Critical.
Come on, assay.
There's one gone to the Harbour?
I Madam.
I am not merry: but I do beguile
The thing I am, by seeming otherwise.
Come, how would thou praise me?
I am about it, but indeed my invention comes from my pate, as Birdlime do's from Freeze, it plucks out Brains and all. But my Muse labours, and thus she is delivered.
If she be fair, and wise: fairness, and wit,
The ones for use, the other uses it.
Well praised:
How if she be Black and Witty?
If she be black, and thereto have a wit,
She'll find a white, that shall her blackness fit.
Worse, and worse.
How if Fair, and Foolish?
She never yet was foolish that was fair,
For even her folly helped her to an heir.
These are old fond Paradoxes, to make Fools laugh in the Alehouse. What miserable praise hast thou for her that's Foul, and Foolish.
There's none so foul and foolish thereunto,
But do's foul pranks, which fair, and wise-ones do.
Oh heavy ignorance: thou praise the worst best. But what praise coldest thou bestow on a deseruing woman indeed? One, that in the authority of her merit, did justly put on the vouch of very malice it self.
She that was ever fair, and never proud,
Had Tongue at will, and yet was never loud:
Never lacked Gold, and yet went never gay,
Fled from her wish, and yet said now I may.
She that being angered, her revenge being no,
Bad her wrong stay, and her displeasure fly:
She that in wisdom never was so frail,
To change the Cods-head for the Salmons tail:
She that could think, and neu'r disclose her mind,
See Suitors following, and not look behind:
She was a wight, (if ever such wights were)
To do what?
To suckle Fools, and chronicle small Beer.
Oh most lame and impotent conclusion. Do not learn of him Aemillia, though he be thy husband. How say you (Cassio) is he not a most profane, and libarrel Counsailor?
He speaks home (Madam) you may relish him more in the Soldier, then in the Scholar.
He takes her by the palm: I, well said, whichper. With as little a web as this, will I ensnare as great a Fly as Cassio. I smile upon her, do: I will give thee in thine own Courtship. You say true, it is so indeed. If such tricks as these strip you out of your Lieutenantry, it had been better you had not kissed your three fingers so oft, which now again you are most apt to play the Sir, in. Very good: well kissed, and excellent Curtsie: it is so indeed. Yet again, your fingers to your lips? Would they were Cluster-pipes for your sake.
The Moore I know his Trumpet.
It is truly so.
Let's meet him, and receive him.
Lo, where he comes.
O, my fair Warrior.
My dear Othello.
It gives me wonder great, as my content
To see you here before me.
Oh my Souls Joy:
If after every Tempest, come such Calms,
May the winds blow, till they have wakened death:
And let the labouring Bark climb hills of Seas
Olympus high: and duck again as low.
As hell's from Heaven. If it were now to dye,
It were now to be most happy. For I fear,
My Soul hath her content so absolute,
That not another comfort like to this,
Succeeds in unknown Fate.
The Heauen's forbid
But that our Loves
And Comforts should increase
Even as our days do grow.
Amen to rat (sweet Powers)
I cannot speak enough of this content,
It stoppes me here: it is too much of joy.
And this, and this the greatest discords be
That ere our hearts shall make.
Oh you are well tuned now: But Isle set down the pigs that make this Music, as honest as I am.
Come: let vs to the Castle.
News (Friends) our Wars are done:
The Turks are drowned.
How do's my old Acquaintance of this Isle?
(Honey) you shall be well desired in Cyprus,
I have round great love amongst them. Oh my Sweet,
I prattle out of fashion, and I do ate
In mine own comforts. I prithee, good Iago,
Go to the Bay, and disembark my Coffers:
Bring thou the Master to the Citadel,
He is a good one, and his worthiness
Do's challenge much respect. Come Desdemona,
Once more well met at Cyprus.
Do thou meet me presently at the Harbour. Come thither, if thou be Valiant, (as they say base men being in Love, have then a Nobility in their Natures, more then is native to them) lift-me; the Lieutenant to night watches on the Court of Guard. First, I must tell thee this: Desdemona, is directly in love with him.
With him? Why, it is not possible.
Lay thy finger thus: and let thy soul be instructed. Mark me with what violence she first loved the Moore, but for bragging, and telling her fantastical lies. To love him still for prating, let not thy discreet heart think it. Her eye must be fed. And what delight shall she have to look on the devil? When the Blood is made dull with the Act of Sport, there should be a game to inflame it, and to give Satiety a fresh appetite. Loveliness in favour, sympathy in years, Manners, and Beauties: all which the Moore is defective in. Now for want of these required Conveniences, her delicate tenderness will find it self abused, begin to heave the, gorge, disrellish and abhor the Moore, very Nature will instruct her in it, and compel her to some second choice. Now Sir, this granted (as it is a most pregnant and unforced position) who stands so eminent in the degree of this Forune, as Cassio do's: a knave very voluble: no further conscionable, then in putting on the mere form of Civil, and Human seeming, for the better compass of his salt, and most hidden loose Affection? Why none, why none: A slipper, and subtle knave, a finder of occazion: that he's an eye can stamp, and counterfeit Aduantages, though true Advantage never present it self. A devilish knave: besides, the knave is handsome, young: and hath all those requisites in him, that folly and greene minds look after. A pestilent complete knave, and the woman hath found him already.
I cannot believe that in her, she's full of most blessed condition.
Blessed figges-end. The Wine she drinks is made of grapes. If she had been blessed, she would never have loved the Moore: Blessed pudding. Did thou not see her paddle with the palm of his hand? Did not mark that?
Yes, that I did: but that was but courtesy.
Lechery by this hand: an Index, and obscure prologue to the History of Lust and foul Thoughts. They met so near with their lips, that their breathes embraced together. Villainous thoughts Rodorigo, when these mutabilities so marshall the way, hard at hand comes the Master, and maine exercise, the incorporate conclusion: Pish. But Sir, be you ruled by me. I have brought you from Venice. Watch you to night: for the Command, Isle lay it upon you. Cassio knows you not: Isle not be far from you. Do you find some occession to anger Cassio, either by speaking too loud, or tainting his discipline, or from what other course you please, which the time shall more favourably minister.
Well.
Sir, he's rash, and very sudden in Choler: and happily may strike at you, provoke him that he may: for even out of that will I cause these of Cyprus to Mutiny. Whose qualification shall come into no true taste again, but by the displanng of Cassio. So shall you have a shorter journey to your desires, by the means I shall then have to prefer them. And the impediment most profitably removed, without the which there were no expectation of our prosperity.
I will do this, if you can bring it to any opportunity.
I warrant thee. Meet me by and by at the Citadel. I must fetch his Necessaries a Shore. Farewell.
Adieu.
That Cassio loves her, I do well believe:
That she loves him, it is apt, and of great Credit.
The Moore (how beit that I endure him not)
Is of a constant, loving Noble Nature,
And I dare think, he'll prove to Desdemona
A most dear husband. Now I do love her too,
Not out of absolute Lust, (though peradventure
I stand accountant for as great a sin)
But partly led to diet my Revenge,
For that I do suspect the lusty Moore
Hath leaped into my Seat. The thought whereof,
Doth (like a poisonous Mineral) gnaw my Inwards:
And nothing can, or shall content my Soul
Till I am eeuen'd with him, wife, for weft.
Or failing so, yet that I put the Moore,
At least into a Jealousy so strong
That judgment cannot cure. Which thing to do,
If this poor Trash of Venice, whom I trace
For his quick hunting, stand the putting on,
Isle have our Michael Cassio on the hip,
Abuse him to the Moore, in the right garb
(For I fear Cassio with my Night-Cape too)
Make the Moore thank me, love me, and reward me,
Foe making him egregiously an Ass,
And practising upon his peace, and quiet,
Even to madness. It is here: but yet confused,
Knaveries plain face, is never seen, till used.
It is Othello's pleasure, our Noble and Valiant General. That upon certain tidings now arrived, importing the mere perdition of the Turkish Fleet: every man put himself into Triumph. Some to dance, some to make Bonfires, each man, to what Sport and Revels his addition leads him. For besides these beenficiall News, it is the Celebration of his Nuptial. So much was his pleasure should be proclaimed. All offces are open, &amp; there is full liberty of Feasting from this
present hour of five, till the Bell have told eleven. Bless the Isle of Cyprus, and our Noble General Othello.
Good Michael, look you to the guard to night.
Let's teach our selves that Honourable stop,
Not to out-sport discretion.
Iago, hath direction what to do.
But notwithstanding with my personal eye
Will I look to it.
Iago, is most honest:
Michael, goodnight. To morrow with your earliest,
Let me have speech with you. Come my dear Love,
The purchase made, the fruits are to ensue,
That profit's yet to come 'tweene me, and you.
Goodnight.
Welcome Iago: we must to the Watch.
Not this hour Lieutenant: it is not yet ten of the clock. Our General cast vs thus early for the love of his Desdemona: Who, let vs not therefore blame; he hath not yet made wanton the night with her: and she is sport for Jove.
She's a most exquisite Lady.
And Isle warrant her, full of Game.
Indeed shes a most fresh and delicate creature.
What an eye she he's?
Methinkes it sounds a parley to provocation.
An inviting eye:
And yet me thinks right modest.
And when she speaks,
Is it not an Alarm to Love?
She is indeed perfection.
Well: happiness to their Sheets. Come Lieutenant, I have a stope of Wine, and here without are a brace of Cyprus Gallants, that would fine have a measure to the health of black Othello.
Not to night, good Iago, I have very poor, and unhappy Brains for drinking. I could well wish Courtesy would invent some other Custom of entertainment.
Oh, they are our Friends: but one Cup, Isle drink for you.
I have drunk but one Cup to night, and that was craftily qualified too: and behold what inouation it makes here. I am unfortunate in the infirmity, and dare not task my weakness with any more.
What man? It is a night of Revels, the Gallants desire it.
Where are they?
Here, at the door: I pray you call them in.
Isle do it, but it dislikes me.
If I can fasten but one Cup upon him
With that which he hath drunk to night already,
He'll be as full of Quarrel, and offence
As my young Mistress dog.
Now my sick Fool Rodorigo,
Whom Love hath turned almost the wrong side out,
To Desdemona hath to night Caroused.
Potations, pottle-deepe; and he's to watch.
Three else of Cyprus, Noble swelling Spirits,
(That hold their Honours in a wary distance,
The very Elements of this Warrelike Isle)
Have I to night flustered with flowing Cups,
And they Watch too.
Now amongst this Flock of drunkards
Am I put to our Cassio in some Action
That may offend the Isle. But here they come.
If Consequence do but approve my dream,
My Boat sails freely, both with wind and Stream.
Before heaven, they have given me a rouse already.
Good-faith a little one: not past a pint, as I am a Soldier.
Some Wine hoe.
And let me the Cannakin clink, clink:
And let me the Cannakin clink.
A Soldiers a man: Oh, mans life's but a span,
Why then let a Soldier drink.
Some Wine Boys.
Before Heaven: an excellent Song.
I learned it in England: where indeed they are most potent in Potting. Your Dane, your Germaine, and your swag-belly'd Hollander, (drink hoe) are nothing to your English.
Is your Englishmen so exquisite in his drinking?
Why, he drinks you with facility, your Dane dead drunk. He sweates not to overthrow your Almaine. He gives your Hollander a vomit, ere the next Pottle can be filled.
To the health of our General.
I am for it Lieutenant: and Isle do you Justice.
Oh sweet England.
King Stephen was and a worthy Peer,
His Breeches cost him but a Crown,
He held them Six pence all to dear,
With that he called the Tailor Lowne:
He was a wight of high Renown,
And thou art but of low degree:
It is Pride that pulls the Country down,
And take thy awl'd Cloak about thee.
Some Wine hoe.
Why this is a more exquisite Song then the othere.
Will you heare't again?
No: for I hold him to be unworthy of his Place, that do's those things. Well: heavens aboue all: and there be souls must be saved, and there be souls must not be saved.
It's true, good Lieutenant.
For mine own part, no offence to the General, nor any man of quality: I hope to be saved.
And so do I too Lieutenant.
I: (but by your leave) not before me. The Lieutenant is to be saved before the Ancient. Let's have no more of this: let's to our Affairs. Forgive vs our sins: Gentlemen let's look to our business. Do not think Gentlemen, I am drunk: this is my Ancient, this is my right hand, and this is my left. I am not drunk now: I can stand well enough, and I speak well enough.
Excellent well.
Why very well then: you must not think then, that I am drunk.
To the Platform (Masters) come, let's set the Watch.
You see this Fellow, that is gone before,
He's a Soldier, fit to stand by Caesar,
And give direction. And do but see his vice,
It is to his virtue, a just Equinox,
The one as long as the other. It is pity of him:
I fear the trust Othello puts him in,
On some odd time of his infirmity
Will shake this Island.
But is he often thus?
It is evermore his prologue to his sleep,
He'll watch the Horologe a double Set,
If Drink rock not his Cradle.
It were well
The General were put in mind of it:
Perhaps he sees it not, or his good nature
Prizes the virtue that appears in Cassio,
And looks not on his evils: is not this true?
How now Rodorigo?
I pray you after the Lieutenant, go.
And it is great pity, that the Noble Moore
Should hazard such a Place, as his own Second
With one of an engraft Infirmity,
It were an honest Action, to say so
To the Moore.
Not I, for this fair Island,
I do love Cassio well: and would do much
To cure him of this evil, But hark, what noise?
You Rogue: you Rascal.
What's the matter Lieutenant?
A Knave teach me my duty? Isle beat the
Knave into a Twiggen-Bottle.
Beat me?
Dost thou prate, Rogue?
Nay, good Lieutenant:
I pray you Sir, hold your hand.
Let me go (Sir)
Or Isle knock you o'er the Mozart.
Come, come: you're drunk.
Drunk?
Away I say: go out and cry a Mutiny.
Nay good Lieutenant. Alas Gentlemen:
Help hoe. Lieutenant. Sir Montano:
Help Masters. Heere's a goodly Watch indeed.
Who's that which rings the Bell: Diablo, hoe:
The Town will rise. Fie, fie Lieutenant,
You'll be ashamed for ever.
What is the matter here?
I bleed still, I am hurt to the death. He dies.
Hold for your lives.
Hold hoe: Lieutenant, Sir Montano, Gentlemen:
Have you forgot all place of sense and duty?
Hold. The General speaks to you: hold for shame.
Why how now hoe? From whence arises this?
Are we turned Turks? and to our selves do that
Which Heaven hath forbid the Ottamittes.
For Christian shame, put by this barbarous Brawl:
He that stirs next, to carve for his own rage,
Holds his soul light: He dies upon his Motion.
Silence that dreadful Bell, it frights the Isle,
From her propriety. What is the matter, Masters?
Honest Iago that looks dead with grieving,
Speak: who began this? On thy love I charge thee?
I do not know: Friends all, but now, even now.
In Quarter, and in terms like Bride, and Groom
Deuesting them for Bed: and then, but now:
(As if some Planet had vnwitted men)
Swords out, and tilting one at others breasts,
In opposition bloody. I cannot speak
Any beginning to this peevish odds.
And would, in Action glorious, I had lost
Those legs, that brought me to a part of it.
How comes it (Michael) you are thus forgot?
I pray you pardon me, I cannot speak.
Worthy Montano, you were wont to be civil:
The gravity, and stillness of your youth
The world hath noted. And your name is great
In mouths of wisest Censure. What's the matter
That you unlace your reputation thus,
And spend your rich opinion, for the name
Of a night-brawler? Give me answer to it.
Worthy Othello, I am hurt to danger,
Your Officer Iago, can inform you,
While I spare speech which something now offends me.
Of all that I do know, nor know I ought
By me, that's said, or done amiss this night,
Unless selfe-charitie be sometimes a vice,
And to defend our selves, it be a sin
When violence assails vs.
Now by Heaven,
My blood begins my safer Guides to rule,
And passion (having my best judgment collied)
Assays to lead the way. If I once stir,
Or do but lift this Arm, the best of you
Shall sink in my rebuke. Give me to know
How this foul Rout began: Who set it on,
And he that is approved in this offence,
Though he had twinn'd with me, both at a birth,
Shall loose me. What in a Town of war,
Yet wilde, the peoples hearts brim-full of fear,
To Manage private, and domestic Quarrel?
In night, and on the Court and Guard of safety?
It is monstrous: Iago, who began't?
If partially Affin'd, or league in office,
Thou dost deliver more, or less then Truth.
Thou art no Soldier.
Touch me not so near,
I had rather have this tongue cut from my mouth,
Then it should do offence to Michael Cassio.
Yet I persuade my self, to speak the truth
Shall nothing wrong him. This it is General:
Montano and my self being in speech,
There comes a Fellow crying out for help,
And Cassio following him with determined Sword
To execute upon him. Sir, this Gentleman,
Steppes in to Cassio, and entreats his pause:
My self, the crying Fellow did pursue,
Least by his clamour (as it so fell out)
The Town might fall in fright. He, (swift of foot)
Out-ran my purpose: and I returned then rather
For that I heard the clink and fall of Swords,
And Cassio high in oath: Which till to night
I ne'er might say before. When I came back
(For this was brief) I found them close together
At blow, and thrust, even as again they were
When you your self did part them.
More of this matter cannot I report.
But Men are Men: The best sometimes forget,
Though Cassio did some little wrong to him,
As men in rage strike those that wish them best,
Yet surely Cassio. I believe received
From him that fled, some strange Indignity,
Which patience could not pass.
I know Iago
Thy honesty, and love doth mince this matter,
Making it light to Cassio: Cassio, I love thee,
But never more be Officer of mine.
Look if my gentle Love be not raised up:
Isle make thee an example.
What is the matter (Dear?)
Ell's well, Sweating:
Come away to bed. Sir for your hurts,
My self will be your Surgeon. Lead him off:
Iago, look with care about the Town,
And silence those whom this vil'd brawl distracted.
Come Desdemona, it is the Soldiers life,
To have their Balmy slumbers waked with strife.
What are you hurt Lieutenant?
I, past all Surgery.
Marry Heaven forbid.
Reputation, Reputation, Reputation: Oh I have lost my Reputation. I have lost the immortal part of myself, and what remains is bestial. My Reputation, Iago, my Reputation.
As I am an honest man I had thought you had received some bodily wound; there is more sense in that then in Reputation. Reputation is an idle, and most false imposition; oft got without merit, and lost without deserving. You have lost no Reputation at all, unless you repute your self such a looser. What man, there are more ways to recover the General again. You are but now cast in his mood, (a punishment more in policie, then in malice) even so as one would beat his offencelesse dog, to affright an Imperious Lyon. Sue to him again, and he's yours.
I will rather sue to be despised, then to deceive so good a Commander, with so slight, so drunken, and so indiscreet an Officer. Drunk? And speak Parrot? And squabble? Swagger? Swear? And discourse Fustian with ones own shadow? Oh thou invisible spirit of Wine, if thou hast no name to be known by, let vs call thee Devil.
What was he that you followed with your Sword? What had he done to you?
I know not.
Is it possible?
I remember a mass of things, but nothing distinctly: a Quarrel, but nothing wherefore. Oh, that men should put an Enemy in their mouths, to steal away their Brains? that we should with joy, pleasance, revel and applause, transform our selves into Beasts.
Why? But you are now well enough: how came you thus recovered?
It hath pleased the devil drunkenness, to give place to the devil wrath, one vnpefastness, shows me another to make me frankly despise my self.
Come, you are too severe a Moraller. As the Time, the Place, &amp; the Condition of this Country stands I could heartily wish this had not befallen: but since it is, as it is, mend it for your own good.
I will ask him for my Place again, he shall tell me, I am a drunkard: had I as many mouths as Hydra, such an answer would stop them all. To be now a sensible man, by and by a Fool, an presently a Beast. Oh strange! Every inordinate cup is unblessed, and the Ingredient is a devil.
Come, come: good wine, is a good familiar Creature, if it be well used: exclaim no more against it. And good Lieutenant, I think, you think I love you.
I have well approved it, Sir. I drunk?
You, or any man living, may be drunk at a time man. I tell you what you shall do: Our General's Wife, is now the General. I may say so, in this respect, for that he hath devoted, and given up himself to the Contemplation, mark: and devotement of her parts and Graces. Confess your self freely to her: Importune her help to put you in your place again. She is of so free, so kind, so apt, so blessed a disposition, she holds it a vice in her goodness, not to do more then she is requested. This broken joint between you, and her husband, entreat her to splinter. And my Fortunes against any lay worth naming, this crack of your Love, shall grow stronger, then it was before.
You advise me well.
I protest in the sincerity of Love, and honest kindness.
I think it freely: and betimes in the morening, I will beseech the virtuous Desdemona to undertake for me: I am desperate of my Fortunes if they check me.
You are in the right: good night Lieutenant, I must to the Watch.
Good night, honest Iago.
And what's he then,
That says I play the Villain?
When this advise is free I give, and honest,
Proball to thinking, and indeed the course
To win the Moore again.
For it is most easy
The inclining Desdemona to subdue
In any honest Suite. She's framed as fruitful
As the free Elements. And then for her
To win the Moore, were to renownce his Baptism,
All Seals, and Symbols of redeemed sin:
His Soul is so enfetter'd to her Love,
That she may make, vnmake, do what she list,
Even as her Appetite shall play the God,
With his weak Function. How am I then a Villain,
To Counsel Cassio to this parallel course,
Directly to his good? Divinity of hell,
When devils will the blackest sins put on,
They do suggest at first with heavenly shows,
As I do now. For whiles this honest Fool
Plies Desdemona, to repair his Fortune,
And she for him, pleads strongly to the Moore,
Isle power this pestilence into his ear:
That she repeales him, for her bodies Lust.
And by how much she strives to do him good,
She shall undo her Credit with the Moore.
So will I turn her virtue into pitch,
And out of her own goodness make the Net,
That shall en-mash them all.
How now Rodorigo?
I do follow here in the Chase, not like a Hound that hunts, but one that filles up the Cry. My Money is almost spent; I have bin to night exceedingly well Cudgell'd: And I think the issue
will bee, I shall have so much experience for my pains; And so, with no money at all, and a little more Wit, return again to Venice.
How poor are they that have not Patience?
What wound did ever heal but by degrees?
Thou know we work by Wit, and not by Witchcraft
And Wit depends on dilatory time:
Dos't not go well? Cassio hath beaten thee,
And thou by that small hurt hath cashiered Cassio:
Though other things grow fair against the Sun,
Yet Fruits that blossom first, will first be ripe:
Content thy self, awhile. In truth it is Morning;
Pleasure, and Action, make the hours seem short.
Retire thee, go where thou art Billeted:
A way, I say, thou shalt know more hereafter:
Nay get thee gone.
Two things are to be done:
My Wife must move for Cassio to her Mistress:
Isle set her on my self, a while, to draw the Moor apart,
And bring him jump, when he may Cassio find
Soliciting his wife: I, that's the way:
Dull not Device, by coldness, and delay.
Masters, play here, I will content your pains,
Something that's brief: and bid, goodmorrow General.
Why Masters, have your Instruments bin in Naples, that they speak in the Nose thus?
How Sir? how?
Are these I pray you, wind Instruments?
I marry are they sir.
Oh, thereby hangs a tale.
Whereby hangs a tale, sir?
Marry sir, by many a wind Instrument that I know. But Masters, heere's money for you: and the Generall so likes your Music, that he desires you for loves sake to make no more noise with it.
Well Sir, we will not.
If you have any Music that may not be heard, too't again. But (as they say) to hear Music, the Generall do's not greatly care.
We have none such, sir.
Then put up your Pipes in your bag, for Isle away. Go, vanish into ayre, away.
Dost thou hear me, mine honest Friend?
No, I hear not your honest Friend:
I hear you.
Prithee keep up thy Quillets, ther's a poor piece of Gold for thee: if the Gentlewoman that attends the General be stirring, tell her, there's one Cassio entreats her a little favour of Speech. Wilt thou do this?
She is stirring sir: if she will stir hither, I shall seem to notify unto her.
In happy time, Iago.
You have not bin a-bed then?
Why no: the day had broke before we parted.
I have made bold (Iago) to send in to your wife:
My suite to her is, that she will to virtuous Desdemona
Procure me some access.
Isle send her to you presently:
And Isle devise a mean to draw the Moore
Out of the way, that your converse and business
May be more free.
I humbly thank you for it. I never knew
A Floentine more kind, and honest.
Goodmorrow (good Lieutenant) I am sorry
For your displeasure: but all will sure be well.
The General and his wife are talking of it,
And she speaks for you stoutly. The Moore replies,
That he you hurt is of great Fame in Cyprus,
And great Affinity: and that in wholesome Wisdom
He might not but refuse you. But he protests he loves you
And needs no other Suitor, but his likings
To bring you in again.
Yet I beseech you,
If you think fit, or that it may be done,
Give me advantage of some brief Discourse
With Desdemon alone.
Pray you come in:
I will bestow you where you shall have time
To speak your bosom freely.
I am much bound to you.
These Letters give (Iago) to the Pilot,
And by him do my duties to the Senate:
That done, I will be walking on the Works,
Repair there to me.
Well, my good Lord, Isle do it.
This Fortification (Gentlemen) shall we see it?
Well waite upon your Lordship.
Be thou assured (good Cassio) I will do
All my abilities in thy behalf.
Good Madam do:
I warrant it grieves my Husband,
As if the cause were his.
Oh that's an honest Fellow, Do not doubt Cassio
But I will have my Lord, and you again
As friendly as you were.
Bounteous Madam,
What ever shall become of Michael Cassio,
He's never any thing but your true Servant.
I know it: I thank you: you do love my Lord:
You have known him long, and be you well assured
He shall in strangeness stand no farther off,
Then in a politic distance.
I, but Lady,
That policy may either last so long,
Or feed upon such nice and waterish diet,
Or breed it self so out of Circumstances,
That I being absent, and my place supplied,
My General will forget my Love, and Service.
Do not doubt hat: before Aemilia here,
I give thee warrant of thy place. Assure thee,
If I do vow a friendship, Isle perform it
To the last Article. My Lord shall never rest,
Isle watch him tame, and talk him out of patience;
His Bed shall seem a School, his Board a Shrift,
Isle intermingle every thing he do's
With Cassio's suite: Therefore be merry Cassio,
For thy Solicitor shall rather dye,
Then give thy cause away.
Madam, here comes my Lord.
Madam, Isle take my leave.
Why stay, and hear me speak.
Madam, not now: I am very ill at ease,
Unfit for mine own purposes.
Well, do your discretion.
Ho? I like not that,
What dost thou say?
Nothing my Lord; or ifI know not what.
Was not that Cassio parted from my wife?
Cassio my Lord? No sure, I cannot think it
That he would steal away so guilty-like,
Seeing your coming.
I do believe it was he.
How now my Lord?
I have bin talking with a Suitor here,
A man that languishes in your displeasure.
Who is it you mean?
Why your Lieutenant Cassio: Good my Lord,
If I have any grace, or power to move you,
His present reconciliation take.
For if he be not one, that truly loves you,
That erres in Ignorance, and not in Cunning,
I have no judgment in an honest face.
I prithee call him back.
Went he hence now?
I sooth; so humbled,
That he hath left part of his grief with me
To suffer with him. Good Love, call him back.
Not now (sweet Desdemon) some other time.
But shall it be shortly?
The sooner (Sweet) for you.
Shall it be to night, at Supper?
No, not to night.
To morrow Dinner then?
I shall not dine at home:
I meet the Captains at the Citadel.
Why then to morrow night, on Tuesday morn,
On Tuesday noon, or night; on Wensday Morn.
I prithee name the time, but let it not
Exceed three days. Infaith hoe's penitent:
And yet his Trespass, in our common reason
(Save that they say the wars must make example)
Out of her best, is not almost a fault
To encurre a private check. When shall he come?
Tell me Othello. I wonder in my Soul
What you would ask me, that I should deny.
Or stand so mam'ring on? What? Michael Cassio,
That came a wooing with you? and so many a time
(When I have spoke of you dispraisingly)
Hath tan your part, to have so much to do
To bring him in? Trust me, I could do much.
Prithee no more: Let him come when he will:
I will deny thee nothing.
Why, this is not a Boon:
It is as I should entreat you wear your Gloves,
Or feed on nourishing dishes, or keep you warm,
Or sue to you, to do a peculiar profit
To your own person. Nay, when I have a suite
Wherein I mean to touch your Love indeed,
It shall be full of poise, and difficult weight,
And fearful to be granted.
I will deny thee nothing.
Whereon, I do beseech thee, grant me this,
To leave me but a little to my self.
Shall I deny you? No: farewell my Lord.
Farewell my Desdemona, Isle come to thee strait.
Aemilia come; be as your Fancies teach you:
What ere you be, I am obedient.
Excellent wretch: Perdition catch my Soul
But I do love thee: and when I love thee not,
Chaos is come again.
My Noble Lord.
What dost thou say, Iago?
Did Michael Cassio
When he wooed my Lady, know of your love?
He did, from first to last:
Why dost thou ask?
But for a satisfaction of my Thought,
No further harm.
Why of thy thought, Iago?
I did not think he had bin acquainted with his.
O yes, and went between vs very oft.
Indeed?
Indeed? I indeed. Discern thou ought in that?
Is he not honest?
Honest, my Lord?
Honest? I, Honest.
My Lord, for ought I know.
What dost thou think?
Think, my Lord?
Think, my Lord? Alas, thou ecchos't me;
As if there were some Monster in thy thought
Too hideous to be shown. Thou dost mean something:
I heard thee say even now, thou lik'st not that,
When Cassio left my wife. What did not like?
And when I told thee, he was of my Counsel,
Of my whole course of wooing; thou cried, Indeed?
And did contract, and purse thy brow together,
As if thou then hadd'st shut up in thy Brain
Some horrible Conceit. If thou dost love me,
Show me thy thought.
My Lord, you know I love you.
I think thou dost:
And for I know you're full of Love, and Honesty,
And weigh thy words before thou giu'st them breath,
Therefore these stops of thine, fright me the more:
For such things in a false disloyal Knave
Are tricks of Custom: but in a man that's just,
They're close deletions, working from the heart,
That Passion cannot rule.
For Michael Cassio,
I dare be sworn, I think that he is honest.
I think so too.
Men should be what they seem,
Or those that be not, would they might seem none.
Certain, men should be what they seem.
Why then I think Cassio's an honest man.
Nay, yet there's more in this?
I prithee speak to me, as to thy thinkings,
As thou dost ruminate, and give thy worst of thoughts
The worst of words.
Good my Lord pardon me,
Though I am bound to every Act of duty,
I am not bound to that: All Slaves are free:
Utter my Thoughts? Why say, they are wild, and false?
As whore's that Palace, whereinto foul things
Sometimes intrude not? Who he's that breast so pure,
Wherein vncleanly Apprehensions
Keep Loots, and Law-dayes, and in Sessions sit
With meditations lawful?
Thou dost conspire against thy Friend (Iago)
If thou but think him wronged, and make his ear
A stranger to thy Thoughts.
I do beseech you,
Though I perchance am vicious in my guess
(As I confess it is my Natures plague
To spy into Abuses, and of my jealousy
Shapes faults that are not) that your wisdom
From one, that so imperfectly conceits,
Would take no notice, nor build your self a trouble
Out of his scattering, and unsure observance:
It were not for your quiet, nor your good,
Nor for my Manhood, Honesty, and Wisdom,
To let you know my thoughts.
What dost thou mean?
Good name in Man, &amp; woman (dear my Lord)
Is the immediate Jewel of their Souls;
Who steals my purse, steals trash:
It is something, nothing;
It was mine, it is his, and has bin slave to thousands:
But he that filches from me my good Name,
Robs me of that, which not enriches him,
And makes me poor indeed.
Isle know thy Thoughts.
You cannot, if my heart were in your hand,
Nor shall not, whilst it is in my custody.
Ha?
Oh, beware my Lord, of jealousy,
It is the greene-ey'd Monster, which doth mock
The meat it feeds on. That Cuckold lives in bliss,
Who certain of his Fate, loves not his wronger:
But oh, what damned minutes else he ore,
Who dotes, yet doubts: Suspects, yet soundly loves?
O misery.
Poor, and Content, is rich, and rich enough,
But Riches finelesse, is as poor as Winter,
To him that ever fears he shall be poor:
Good Heaven, the Souls of all my Tribe defend
From Jealousy.
Why? why is this?
Think thou, I'd make a Life of Jealousy;
To follow still the changes of the Moon
With fresh suspicions? No: to be once in doubt,
Is to be resolved: Exchange me for a Goat,
When I shall turn the business of my Soul
To such exufflicate, and blowed Surmises,
Matching thy inference. Tic not to make me Jealous,
To say my wife is fair, feeds well, loves company,
Is free of Speech, Sings, Plays, and Dances:
Where Virtue is, these are more virtuous.
Nor from mine own weak merits, will I draw
The smallest fear, or doubt of her revolt,
For she had eyes, and chose me. No Iago,
Isle see before I doubt; when I doubt, prove;
And on the proof, there is no more but this,
Away at once with Love, or Jealousy.
I am glad of this: For now I shall have reason
To show the Love and Duty that I bear you
With franker spirit. Therefore (as I am bound)
Receive it from me. I speak not yet of proof:
Look to your wife, observe her well with Cassio,
Wear your eyes, thus: not Jealous, nor Secure:
I would not have your free, and Noble Nature,
Out of selfe-Bounty, be abused: Look too't:
I know our Country disposition well:
In Venice, they do let Heaven see the pranks
They dare not show their Husbands.
Their best Conscience,
Is not to leaue't undone, but kept unknown.
Dost thou say so?
She did deceive her Father, marrying you,
And when she seemed to shake, and fear your looks,
She loved them most.
And so she did.
Why go too then:
She that so young could give out such a Seeming
To seele her Fathers eyes up, close as Oak,
He thought it was Witchcraft.
But I am much too blame:
I humbly do beseech you of your pardon
For too much loving you.
I am bound to thee for ever.
I see this hath a little dashed your Spirits:
Not a jot, not a jot.
Trust me, I fear it has:
I hope you will consider what is spoke
Comes from your Love.
But I do see you're moved:
I am to pray you, not to strain my speech
To grosser issues, nor to larger reach,
Then to Suspicion.
I will not.
Should you do so (my Lord)
My speech should fall into such wild success,
Which my Thoughts aimed not.
Cassio's my worthy Friend:
My Lord, I see you're moved.
No, not much moved:
I do not think but Desdemona's honest.
Long live she so;
And long live you to think so.
And yet how Nature erring from it self.
I, there's the point:
As (to be bold with you)
Not to affect many proposed Matches
Of her own Clime, Complexion, and Degree,
Whereto we see in all things, Nature tends:
Foh, one may smell in such, a will most rank,
Foul disproportions, Thoughts unnatural.
But (pardon me) I do not in position
Distinctly speak of her, though I may fear
Her will, recoiling to her better judgment,
May fall to match you with her Country forms,
And happily repent.
Farewell, farewell:
If more thou dost perceive, let me know more:
Set on thy wife to observe.
Leave me Iago.
My Lord, I take my leave.
Why did I marry?
This honest Creature (doubtless)
Sees, and knows more, much more then he unfolds.
My Lord, I would I might entreat your Honour
To scan this thing no farther: Leave it to time,
Although it is fit that Cassio have his Place;
For sure he filles it up with great Ability;
Yet if you please, to him off awhile:
You shall by that perceive him, and his means:
Note if your Lady strain his Entertainment
With any strong, or vehement importunity,
Much will be seen in that: In the mean time,
Let me be thought too busy in my fears,
(As worthy cause I have to fear I am)
And hold her free, I do beseech your Honour.
Fear not my government.
I once more take my leave.
This Fellow's of exceeding honesty,
And knows all Quantities with a learned Spirit
Of humane dealings. If I do prove her Haggard,
Though that her lesses were my dear heart-strings,
I'd whistle her off, and let her down the wind
To prey at Fortune. Happily, for I am black,
And have not those soft parts of Conversation
That Chamberers have: Or for I am declined
Into the vale of years (yet that's not much)
Shoe's gone. I am abused, and my relief
Must be to loath her. Oh Curse of Marriage!
That we can call these delicate Creatures ours,
And not their Appetites? I had rather be a Toad,
And live upon the vapour of a Dungeon,
Then keep a corner in the thing I love
For others uses. Yet it is the plague to Great-ones,
Prerogatiu'd are they less then the Base,
It is destiny vnshunnable, like death:
Even then, this forked plague is Fated to vs,
When we do quicken. Look where she comes:
If she be false, Heaven mocked it self:
Isle not believe it.
How now, my dear Othello?
Your dinner, and the generous Islanders
By you invited, do attend your presence.
I am too blame.
Why do you speak so faintly?
Are you not well?
I have a pain upon my Forehead, here.
Why that's with watching, twill away again.
Let me but bind it hard, within this hour
It will be well.
Your Napkin is too little:
Let it alone: Come, Isle go in with you.
I am very sorry that you are not well.
I am glad I have found this Napkin:
This was her first remembrance from the Moore,
My wayward Husband hath a hundred times
Wooed me to steal it. But she so loves the Token,
(For he conjured her, she should ever keep it)
That she reserues it evermore about her,
To kiss, and talk too. Isle have the work tan out,
And gived Iago: what he will do with it
Heaven knows, not I:
I nothing, but to please his Fantasy.
How now? What do you here alone?
Do not you chide: I have a thing for you.
You have a thing for me?
It is a common thing 
Ho?
To have a foolish wife.
Oh, is that all? What will you give me now
For that same Handkerchief.
What Handkerchief?
What Handkerchief?
Why that the Moore first gave to Desdemona,
That which so often you did bid me steal.
Hast stolen it from her?
No: but she let it drop by negligence,
And to the advantage, I being here, took't up:
Look, here it is.
A good wench, give it me.
What will you do with it, that you have been so earnest to have me filch it?
Why, what is that to you?
If it be not for some purpose of import,
Gived me again. Poor Lady, she'll run mad
When she shall lack it.
Be not acknown on it:
I have use for it. Go, leave me.
I will in Cassio's Lodging loose this Napkin,
And let him find it. Trifles light as ayre,
Are to the jealous, confirmations strong,
As proofs of holy Writ. This may do something.
The Moore already changes with my poison:
Dangerous conceits, are in their Natures poisons,
Which at the first are scarce found to distaste:
But with a little act upon the blood,
Burn like the Mines of Sulphur. I did say so.
Look where he comes: Not Poppy, nor Mandragora,
Nor all the drowsy Syrrups of the world
Shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleep
Which thou owd'st yesterday.
Ha, Ha, false to me?
Why how now General? No more of that.
Avaunt, be gone: Thou hast set me on the Rack:
I swear it is better to be much abused,
Then but to know it a little.
How now, my Lord?
What sense had I, in her stolen hours of Lust?
I saw't not, thought it not: it harmed not me:
I slept the next night well, fed well, was free, and merry.
I found not Cassio's kisses on her Lips:
He that is robbed, not wanting what is stolen,
Let him not know it, and he's not robbed at all.
I am sorry to hear this?
I had been happy, if the general Camp,
Pyoners and all, had tasted her sweet Body,
So I had nothing known. Oh now, for ever
Farewell the Tranquil mind; farewell Content;
Farewell the plumed Troops, and the big Wars,
That makes Ambition, Virtue! Oh farewell;
Farewell the neighing Steed, and the shrill Trump,
The Spirit-stirring Drum, the Eare-piercing Fife,
The Royal Banner, and all Quality,
Pride, Pomp, and Circumstance of glorious War:
And O you mortal Engines, whose rude throats
The immortal Ioues dread Clamours, counterfeit,
Farewell: Othello's Occupation's gone.
Is it possible my Lord?
Villain, be sure thou prove my Love a Whore;
Be sure of it: Give me the Occular proof,
Or by the worth of mine eternal Soul,
Thou had bin better have bin borne a Dog
Then answer my waked wrath.
Is it come to this?
Make me to see it: or (at the least) so prove it,
That the probation bear no Hindge, nor Loop,
To hang a doubt on: Or woe upon thy life.
My Noble Lord.
If thou dost slander her, and torture me,
Never pray more: Abandon all remorse
On Horrors head, Horrors accumulate:
Do deeds to make Heaven weep, all Earth amazed;
For nothing can thou to damnation add,
Greater then that.
O Grace! O Heaven forgive me!
Are you a Man? Have you a Soul? or Sense?
God buy you: take mine Office. Oh wretched Fool,
That love to make thine Honesty, a Vice!
Oh monstrous world! Take note, take note (O World)
To be direct and honest, is not safe.
I thank you for this profit, and from hence
Isle love no Friend, sith Love breeds such offence.
Nay stay: thou should be honest.
I should be wise; for Honestie's a Fool,
And looses that it works for.
By the World,
I think my Wife be honest, and think she is not:
I think that thou art just, and think thou art not:
Isle have some proof. My name that was as fresh
As Deans Visage, is now begrimed and black
As mine own face. If there be Cords, or Knives,
Poison, or Fire, or suffocating streams,
Isle not endure it. Would I were satisfied.
I see you are eaten up with Passion:
I do repent me, that I put it to you.
You would be satisfied?
Would? Nay, and I will.
And may: but how? How satisfied, my Lord?
Would you the super-vision grossly gape on?
Behold her topped?
Death, and damnation. Oh!
It were a tedious difficulty, I think,
To bring them to that Prospect: Damn them then,
If ever mortal eyes do see them bolster
More then their own. What then? How then?
What shall I say? Whore's Satisfaction?
It is impossible you should see this,
Were they as prime as Goats, as hot as Monkeys,
As salt as Wolves in pride, and Fools as gross
As Ignorance, made drunk. But yet, I say,
If imputation, and strong circumstances,
Which lead directly to the door of Truth,
Will give you satisfaction, you might have it.
Give me a living reason she's disloyal.
I do not like the Office.
But sith I am entered in this cause so far
(Pricked too't by foolish Honesty, and Love)
I will go on. I lay with Cassio lately,
And being troubled with a raging tooth,
I could not sleep. There are a kind of men,
So loose of Soul, that in their sleeps will mutter
Their Affairs: one of this kind is Cassio:
In sleep I heard him say, sweet Desdemona,
Let vs be wary, let vs hide our Loves,
And then (Sir) would he gripe, and wring my hand:
Cry, oh sweet Creature: then kiss me hard,
As if he plucked up kisses by the roots,
That grew upon my lips, laid his Leg ore my Thigh,
And sigh, and kiss, and then cry cursed Fate,
That gave thee to the Moore.
O monstrous! monstrous!
Nay, this was but his Dream.
But this denoted a fore-gone conclusion,
It is a shrewed doubt, though it be but a Dream.
And this may help to thicken other proofs,
That do demonstrate thinly.
Isle tear her all to pieces.
Nay yet be wise; yet we see nothing done,
She may be honest yet: Tell me but this,
Have you not sometimes seen a Handkerchief
Spotted with Strawberries, in your wives hand?
I gave her such a one: it was my first gift.
I know not that: but such a Handkerchief
(I am sure it was your wives) did I to day
See Cassio wipe his Beard with.
If it be that.
If it be that, or any, it was hers.
It speaks against her with the other proofs.
O that the Slave had forty thousand lives:
One is too poor, too weak for my revenge.
Now do I see it is true. Look here Iago,
All my fond love thus do I blow to Heaven. It is gone,
Arise black vengeance, from the hollow hell,
Yield up (O Love) thy Crown, and hearted Throne
To tyrannous Hate. Swell bosom with thy fraught,
For it is of Aspickes tongues.
Yet be content.
Oh blood, blood, blood.
Patience I say: your mind may change.
Never Iago. Like to the Ponticke Sea,
Whose Icy Current, and compulsive course,
Neu'r keeps retiring ebb, but keeps due on
To the Proponticke, and the Hellespont:
Even so my bloody thoughts, with violent pace
Shall neu'r look back, neu'r ebb to humble Love,
Till that a capable, and wide Revenge
Swallow them up. Now by yond Marble Heaven,
In the due reverence of a Sacred vow,
I here engage my words.
Do not rise yet:
Witness you euer-burning Lights aboue,
You Elements, that clip vs round about,
Witness that here Iago doth give up
The execution of his wit, hands, heart,
To wronged Othello's Service. Let him command,
And to obey shall be in me remorse,
What bloody business ever.
I greet thy love,
Not with vain thanks, but with acceptance bounteous,
And will upon the instant put thee too't.
Within these three days let me hear thee say,
That Cassio's not alive.
My Friend is dead:
It is done at your Request.
But let her live.
Damn her lewd Minx:
O damn her, damn her.
Come go with me apart, I will withdraw
To furnish me with some swift means of death
For the fair Devil.
Now art thou my Lieutenant.
I am your own for ever.
Do you know Sirrah, where Lieutenant Cassio lies?
I dare not say he lies any where.
Why man?
He's a Soldier, and for me to say a Soldier lies, it is stabbing.
Go too: where lodges he?
To tell you where he lodges, is to tel you where I lye.
Can any thing be made of this?
I know not where he lodges, and for me to deuise a lodging, and say he lies here, or he lies there, were to lye in mine own throat.
Can you enquire him out? and be edified by report?
I will Catechise the world for him, that is, make Questions, and by them answer.
Seek him, bid him come hither: tell him, I have moved my Lord on his behalf, and hope all will be well.
To do this, is within the compass of mans Wit, and therefore I will attempt the doing it.
Where should I loose the Handkerchief, Aemilia?
I know not Madam.
Believe me, I had rather have lost my purse
Full of Cruzadoes. And but my Noble Moore
Is true of mind, and made of no such baseness,
As jealous Creatures are, it were enough
To put him to ill-thinking.
Is he not jealous?
Who, he? I think the Sun where he was borne,
Drew all such humours from him.
Look where he comes.
I will not leave him now, till Cassio be
Called to him. How is it with you, my Lord?
Well my good Lady. Oh hardness to dissemble!
How do you, Desdemona?
Well, my good Lord.
Give me your hand.
This hand is moist my Lady.
It hath felt no age, nor known no sorrow.
This argues fruitfulness, and liberal heart:
Hot, hot, and moist. This hand of yours requires
A sequester from Liberty: Fasting, and Prayer,
Much Castigation, Exercise devout,
For heere's a young, and sweating Devil here
That commonly rebels: It is a good hand,
A frank one.
You may (indeed) say so:
For it was that hand that gave away my heart.
A liberal hand. The hearts of old, gave hands:
But our new Heraldry is hands, not hearts.
I cannot speak of this:
Come, now your promise.
What promise, Chuck?
I have sent to bid Cassio come speak with you.
I have a salt and sorry Rheum offends me:
Lend me thy Handkerchief.
Here my Lord.
That which I gave you.
I have it not about me.
Not?
No indeed, my Lord.
That's a fault: That Handkerchief
Did an Egyptian to my Mother give:
She was a Charmer, and could almost read
The thoughts of people. She told her, while she kept it,
'T would make her Amiable, and subdue my Father
Entirely to her love: But if she lost it,
Or made a Gift of it, my Fathers eye
Should hold her loathed, and his Spirits should hunt
After new Fancies. She dying, gave it me,
And bid me (when my Fate would have me Wu'd)
To give it her. I did to; and take heed on it,
Make it a Darling, like your precious eye:
To loose't, or giue't away, were such perdition,
As nothing else could match.
Is it possible?
It is true: There's Magic in the web of it:
A Sybill that had numbered in the world
The Sun to course, two hundred compasses,
In her Prophetic fury sowed the Work:
The Worms were hallowed, that did breed the Silk,
And it was died in Mummy, which the Skilful
Conseru'd of Maidens hearts.
Indeed? Is it true?
Most veritable, therefore look too't well.
Then would to Heaven, that I had never seene't?
Ha? wherefore?
Why do you speak so startingly and rash?
Is it lost? Is it gon? Speak, is it out of the way?
Bless vs.
Say you?
It is not lost: but what and if it were?
How?
I say it is not lost.
Fetched, let me see it.
Why so I can: but I will not now:
This is a trick to put me from my suite,
Pray you let Cassio be received again.
Fetch me the Handkerchief,
My mind mis-giues.
Come, come: you'll never meet a more sufficeent man.
The Handkerchief.
A man that all his time
Hath founded his good Fortunes on your love;
Shared dangers with you.
The Handkerchief.
Insooth, you are too blame.
Away.
Is not this man jealous?
I neu'r saw this before.
Sure, there's some wonder in this Handkerchikfe,
I am most unhappy in the loss of it.
It is not a year or two shows vs a man:
They are all but Stomachs, and we all but Food,
They eat vs hungerly, and when they are full
They belch vs.
Look you, Cassio and my Husband.
There is no other way: it is she must do it:
And lo the happiness: go, and importune her.
How now (good Cassio) what's the news with you?
Madam, my former suite. I do beseech you,
That by your virtuous means, I may again
Exist, and be a member of his love,
Whom I, with all the Office of my heart
Entirely honour, I would not be delayed.
If my offence, be of such mortal kind,
That nor my Service past, nor present Sorrows,
Nor purposed merit in futurity,
Can ransom me into his love again,
But to know so, must be my benefit:
So shall I cloth me in a forced content,
And shut my self up in some other course
To Fortunes Alms.
Alas (thrice-gentle Cassio)
My Advocation is not now in Tune;
My Lord, is not my Lord; nor should I know him,
Were he in Favour, as in Humour altered.
So help me every spirit sanctified,
As I have spoken for you all my best,
And stood within the blank of his displeasure
For my free speech. You must awhile be patient:
What I can do, I will: and more I will
Then for my self, I dare. Let that suffice you.
Is my Lord angry?
He went hence but now:
And certainly in strange unquietness.
Can he be angry? I have seen the Cannon
When it hath blown his Ranks into the Ayre,
And like the Devil from his very Arm
Puff't his own Brother: And is he angry?
Something of moment then: I will go meet him,
There's matter in it indeed, if he be angry.
I prithee do so. Something sure of State,
Either from Venice, or some vnhatch'd practise
Made demonstrable here in Cyprus, to him,
Hath puddled his clear Spirit: and in such cases,
Men's Natures wrangle with inferior things,
Though great ones are their object. It is even so.
For let our finger ache, and it endues
Our other healthful members, even to a sense
Of pain. Nay, we must think men are not Gods,
Nor of them look for such observance
As fits the Bridal. Beshrew me much, Aemilia,
I was (unhandsome Warrior, as I am)
Arraigning his unkindness with my soul:
But now I find, I had suborned the Witness,
And he's Indicted falsely.
Pray heaven it bee
State matters, as you think, and no Conception,
Nor no Jealous Toy, concerning you.
Alas the day, I never gave him cause.
But Jealous souls will not be answered so;
They are not ever jealous for the cause,
But jealous, for they're jealous. It is a Monster
Begot upon it self, borne on it self.
Heaven keep the Monster from Othello's mind.
Lady, Amen.
I will go seek him. Cassio, walk here about:
If I doe find him fit, Isle move your suite,
And seek to effect it to my uttermost.
I humbly thank your Ladyship.
'Saue you (Friend Cassio.)
What make you from home?
How is it with you, my most fair Bianca?
Indeed (sweet Love) I was coming to your house.
And I was going to your Lodging, Cassio.
What? keep a week away? Seven days, and Nights?
Eight score eight hours? And Lovers absent hours
More tedious then the Dial, eight score times?
Oh weary reck'ning.
Pardon me, Bianca:
I have this while with leaden thoughts been pressed,
But I shall in a more continuate time
Strike off this score of absence. Sweet Bianca
Take me this work out.
Oh Cassio, whence came this?
This is some Token from a newer Friend,
To the felt-Absence: now I feel a Cause:
Is it come to this? Well, well.
Go too, woman:
Throw your wild gases in the Devils teeth,
From whence you have them. You are jealous now,
That this is from some Mistress, some remembrance;
No, in good troth Bianca.
Why, who's is it?
I know not neither:
I found it in my Chamber,
I like the work well; Ere it be demanded
(As like enough it will) I would have it copied:
Take it, and do it, and leave me for this time.
Leave you? Wherefore?
I do attend here on the General,
And think it no addition nor my wish
To have him see me womaned.
Why, I ptay you?
Not that I love you not.
But that you do not love me.
I pray you bring me on the way a little,
And say, if I shall see you soon at night?
It is but a little way that I can bring you,
For I attend here: But Isle see you soon.
It is very good: I must be circumstanced.
Will you think so?
Think so, Iago?
What, to kiss in private?
An vnauthoriz'd kiss?
Or to be naked with her Friend in bed,
An hour, or more, not meaning any harm?
Naked in bed (Iago) and not mean harm?
It is hypocrisy against the Devil:
They that mean virtuously, and yet do so,
The Devil their virtue tempts, and they tempt Heaven.
If they do nothing, it is a Venial slip:
But if I give my wife a Handkerchief.
What then?
Why then it is hers (my Lord) and being hers,
She may (I think) bestow it on any man.
She is Protectress of her honour too:
May she give that?
Her honour is an Essence that's not seen,
They have it very oft, that have it not.
But for the Handkerchief.
By heaven, I would most gladly have forgot it:
Thou said (oh, it comes ore my memory,
As doth the Raven o'er the infectious house:
Boding to all) he had my Handkerchief.
I: what of that?
That's not so good now.
What if I had said, I had seen him do you wrong?
Or heard him say (as Knaves be such abroad,
Who having by their own importunate suit,
Or voluntary dotage of some Mistress,
Convinced or supplied them cannot choose
But they must blab.)
Hath he said any thing?
He hath (my Lord) but be you well assured,
No more then he'll vn-sweare.
What hath he said?
Why, that he did: I know not what he did.
What? What?
Lye.
With her?
With her? On her: what you will.
Lye with her? lye on her? We say lye on her, when they be-lye-her. Lye with her: that's fulsome: Handkerchief: Confessions: Handkerchief. To confesse, and be hanged for his labour. First, to be hanged, and then to confess: I tremble at it. Nature would not invest her self in such shadowing passion, without some Instruction. It is not words that shakes me thus, (pish) Noses, Ears, and Lips: is it possible. Confess? Handkerchief? O devil.
Work on,
My Medicine works. Thus credulous Fools are caught,
And many worthy, and chaste Dames even thus,
(All guiltless) meet reproach: what hoe? My Lord?
My Lord, I say: Othello.
How now Cassio?
What's the matter?
My Lord is fallen into an Epilepsy,
This is his second Fit: he had one yesterday.
Rub him about the Temples.
The Lethargy must have his quiet course:
If not, he foams at mouth: and by and by
Breaks out to savage madness. Look, he stirs:
Do you withdraw your self a little while,
He will recover straight: when he is gone,
I would on great occasion, speak with you.
How is it General? Have you not hurt your head?
Dost thou mock me?
I mock you not, by Heaven:
Would you would bear your Fortune like a Man.
A Horned man's a Monster, and a Beast.
Ther's many a Beast then in a populous City,
And many a civil Monster.
Did he confess it?
Good Sir, be a man:
Think every bearded fellow that's but yoked
May draw with you. There's Millions now alive,
That nightly lye in those vnproper beds,
Which they dare swear peculiar. Your case is better.
Oh, it is the spite of hell, the Fiends Arch-mock,
To lip a wanton in a secure Couch;
And to suppose her chaste. No, let me know,
And knowing what I am, I know what she shall be.
Oh, thou art wise: it is certain.
Stand you a while apart,
Confine your self but in a patient Lis,
Whilst you were here, o're-whelmed with your grief
(A passion most resulting such a man)
Cassio came hither. I shifted him away,
And laid good scuses upon your Ecstasy,
Bad him anon return: and here speak with me,
The which he promised. Do but encaue your self,
And mark the Fleeres, the Gybes, and notable Scorns
That dwell in every Region of his face.
For I will make him tell the Tale anew;
Where, how, how oft, how long ago, and when
He hath, and is again to cope your wife.
I say, but mark his gesture: marry Patience,
Or I shall say y' are all in all in Spleen,
And nothing of a man.
Dost thou hear, Iago,
I will be found most cunning in my Patience:
But (dost thou hear) most bloody.
That's not amiss,
But yet keep time in all: will you withdraw?
Now will I question Cassio of Bianca,
A Huswife, that by selling her desires
Buys her self Bread, and Cloth. It is a Creature
That dotes on Cassio, (as it is the Strumpets plague
To be-guile many, and be be-guil'd by one)
He, when he hears of her, cannot restrain
From the excess of Laughter. Here he comes.
As he shall smile, Othells shall go mad:
And his vnbookish Jealousy must conserve
Poor Cassio's smiles, gestures, and light behaviours
Quite in the wrong. How do you Lieutenant?
The worser, that you give me the addition,
Whose want even kills me.
Ply Desdemona well, and you are sure on it:
Now, if this Suit lay in Bianca's dowre,
How quickly should you speed?
Alas poor Caitiff.
Look how he laughs already.
I never knew woman love man so.
Alas poor Rogue, I think indeed she loves me.
Now he denies it faintly: and laughs it out.
Do you hear Cassio?
Now he importunes him
To tell it o'er: go too, well said, well said.
She gives it out, that you shall marry her.
Do you intend it?
Ha, ha, ha.
Do ye triumph, Romaine? do you triumph?
I marry. What? A customer; prithee bear
Some Charity to my wit, do not think it
So unwholesome. Ha, ha, ha.
So, so, so, so: they laugh, that wins.
Why the cry goes, that you marry her.
Prithee say true.
I am a very Villain else.
Have you scoar'd me? Well.
This is the Monkeys own giving out:
She is persuaded I will marry her
Out of her own love &amp; flattery, not out of my promise.
Iago becomes me: now he begins the story.
She was here even now: she haunts me in every place. I was the other day talking on the Sea-banke with certain Venetians, and thither comes the Bauble, and falls me thus about my neck.
Crying oh dear Cassio, as it were: his gesture imports it.
So hangs, and lolls, and weeps upon me:
So shakes, and pulls me. Ha, ha, ha.
Now he tells how she plucked him to my Chamber: oh, I see that nose of yours, but not that dog, I shall throw it to.
Well, I must leave her company.
Before me: look where she comes.
It is such another Fitchew: marry a perfumed one?
What do you mean by this haunting of me?
Let the devil, and his dam haunt you: what did you mean by that same Handkerchief, you gave me even now? I was a fine Fool to take it: I must take out the work? A likely piece of work, that you should find it in your Chamber, and know not who left it there. This is some Minxes token, &amp; I must take out the work? There, give it your Hobbey-horse, wheresoever you had it, Isle take out no work on it.
How now, my sweet Bianca?
How now? How now?
By Heaven, that should be my Handkerchief.
If you'll come to supper to night you may, if you will not, come when you are next prepared for.
After her: after her.
I must, she'll rail in the streets else.
Will you sup there?
Yes, I intend so.
Well, I may chance to see you: for I would verye fame speak with you.
Prithee come: will you?
Go too: say no more.
How shall I murder him, Iago.
Did you perceive how he laughed at his vice?
Oh, Iago.
And did you see the Handkerchief?
Was that mine?
Yours by this hand: and to see how he prizes the foolish woman your wife: she gave it him, and he hath given it his whore.
I would have him nine years a killing:
A fine woman, a fair woman, a sweet woman?
Nay, you must forget that.
I, let her ot and perish, and be damned to night, for she shall not live. No, my heart is turned to stone: I strike it, and it hurts my hand. Oh, the world hath not a sweeter Creature: she might lye by an Emperours side, and command him Tasks.
Nay, that's not your way.
Hang her, I do but say what she is: so delicate with her Needle: an admirable Musician. Oh she will sing the Savageness out of a Bear: of so high and plenteous wit, and invention?
She's the worse for all this.
Oh, a thousand, a thousand times:
And the of so gentle a condition?
I too gentle.
Nay that's certain:
But yet the pity of it, Iago: oh Iago, the pity of it Iago.
If you are so fond over her iniquity: give her patent to offend, for if it touch not you, it comes near no body.
I will chop her into Messes: Cuckold me?
Oh, it is foul in her.
With mine Officer?
That's fouler.
Get me some poison, Iago, this night. Isle not expostulate with her: least her body and beauty vnprouide my mind again: this night Iago.
Do it not with poison, strangle her in her bed,
Even the bed she hath contaminated.
Good, good:
The Justice of it pleases: very good.
And for Cassio, let me be his vndertaker:
You shall hear more by midnight.
Excellent good: What Trumpet is that same?
I warrant something from Venice,
It is Lodouico, this, comes from the Duke.
See, your wife's with him.
Save you worthy General.
With all my heart Sir.
The Duke, and the Senators of Venice greet you.
I kiss the Instrument of their pleasures.
And what's the news, good cozen Lodouico?
I am very glad to see you Signior:
Welcome to Cyprus.
I thank you: how do's Lieutenant Cassio?
Lives Sir,
Cozen, there's fallen between him, &amp; my Lord,
An unkind breach: but you shall make all well.
Are you sure of that?
My Lord?
This fail you not to do, as you will 
He did not call: he's busy in the paper,
Is there division twixt my Lord, and Cassio?
A most unhappy one: I would do much
To atone them, for the love I bear to Cassio.
Fire, and brimstone.
My Lord.
Are you wise?
What is he angry?
May be th Letter moved him.
For as I think, they do command him home,
Deputing Cassio in his Government.
Trust me, I am glad on it.
Indeed?
My Lord?
I am glad to see you mad.
Why, sweet Othello?
Devil.
I have not deserved this.
My Lord, this would not be believed in Venice,
Though I should swear I saw't. It is very much,
Make her amends: she weeps.
Oh devil, devil:
If that the Earth could teem with women's tears,
Each drop she falls, would prove a Crocodile:
Out of my sight.
I will not stay to offend you.
Truly obedient Lady:
I do beseech your Lordship call her back.
Mistress.
My Lord.
What would you with her, Sir?
Who I, my Lord?
I, you did wish, that I would make her turn:
Sir, she can turn, and turn: and yet go on
And turn again. And she can weep, Sir, weep.
And she's obedient: as you say obedient.
Very obedient: proceed you in your tears.
Concerning this Sir, (oh well-painted passion)
I am commanded home: get you away:
Isle send for you anon. Sir I obey the Mandate,
And will return to Venice. Hence, avaunt:
Cassio shall have my Place. And Sir, to night
I do entreat, that we may sup together.
You are welcome Sir to Cyprus.
Goats, and Monkeys.
Is this the Noble Moore, whom our full Senate
Call all in all sufficient? Is this the Nature
Whom Passion could not shake? Whose solid virtue
The shot of Accident, nor dart of Chance
Could neither graze, nor pierce?
He is much changed.
Are his wits safe? Is he not light of Brain?
He's that he is: I may not breath my censure.
What he might be: if what he might, he is not,
I would to heaven he were.
What? Strike his wife?
Faith that was not so well: yet would I knew
That stroke would prove the worst.
Is it his use?
Or did the Letters, work upon his blood,
And new create his fault?
Alas, alas:
It is not honesty in me to speak
What I have seen, and known. You shall observe him,
And his own courses will deonte him so,
That I may save my speech: do but go after
And mark how he continues.
I am sorry that I am deceived in him.
You have seen nothing then?
Nor ever heard: nor ever did suspect.
Yes; you have seen Cassio, and she together.
But then I saw no harm: and then I heard,
Each syllable that breath made up between them.
What? Did they never whisper?
Never my Lord.
Nor send you out of the way?
Never.
To fetch her Fan, her Gloves, her Mask, nor nothing?
Never my Lord.
That's strange.
I durst (my Lord) to wager, she is honest:
Lay down my Soul at stake: If you think other,
Remove your thought. It doth abuse your bosom:
If any wretch have put this in your head,
Let Heaven requite it with the Serpents curse,
For if she be not honest, chaste, and true,
There's no man happy. The purest of their Wives
Is foul as Slander.
Bid her come hither: go.
She says enough: yet she's a simple Baud
That cannot say as much. This is a subtle Whore:
A Closet Locke and Key of Villainous Secrets,
And yet she'll kneel, and pray: I have seen her do it.
My Lord, what is your will?
Pray you Chuck come hither.
What is your pleasure?
Let me see your eyes: look in my face.
What horrible Fancie's this?
Some of your Function Mistress:
Leave Procreants alone, and shut the door:
Cough, or cry hem; if any body come:
Your Mystery, your Mystery: May dispatch.
Upon my knee, what doth your speech import
I understand a Fury in your words.
Why? What art thou?
Your wife my Lord: your true and loyal wife.
Come swear it: damn thy self, least being like one of Heaven, the devils themselves should fear to cease thee. Therefore be double damned: swear thou art honest.
Heaven doth truly know it.
Heaven truly knows, that thou art false as hell.
To whom my Lord?
With whom? How am I false?
Ah Desdemon, away, away, away.
Alas the heavy day: why do you weep?
Am I the motive of these tears my Lord?
If happily you my Father do suspect,
An Instrument of this your calling back,
Lay not your blame on me: if you have lost him,
I have lost him too.
Hadt pleased Heaven,
To try me with Affliction, had they rained
All kind of Sores, and Shames on my bare-head:
Steeped me in poverty to the very lips,
Given to Captivity, me, and my utmost hopes,
I should have found in some place of my Soul
A drop of patience. But alas, to make me
The fixed Figure for the time of Scorn,
To point his slow, and moving finger at.
Yet could I bear that too, well, very well:
But there where I have garnerd up my heart,
Where either I must live, or bear no life,
The Fountain from the which my currant runs,
Or else dries up: to be discarded thence,
Or keep it as a Cistern, for foul Toads
To knot and gender in. Turn thy complexion there:
Patience, thou young and Rose-lip'd Cherubin,
I here look grim as hell.
I hope my Noble Lord esteems me honest.
Oh I, as Summer Flies are in the Shambles,
That quicken even with blowing. Oh thou weed:
Who art so lovely fair, and smell so sweet,
That the Sense aches at thee,
Would thou had never bin borne.
Alas, what ignorant sin have I committed?
Was this fair Paper? This most goodly Book
Made to write Whore upon? What committed,
Committed? Oh, thou public Commoner,
I should make very Forges of my cheeks,
That would to Cinders burn up Modesty,
Did I but speak thy deeds. What committed?
Heaven stoppes the Nose at it, and the Moon winks:
The bawdy wind that kisses all it meets,
Is hushed within the hollow Mine of Earth
And will not hear't. What committed?
By Heaven you do me wrong.
Are not you a Strumpet?
No, as I am a Christian.
If to preserve this vessel for my Lord,
From any other foul unlawful touch
Be not to be a Strumpet, I am none.
What, not a Whore?
No, as I shall be saved.
Is it possible?
Oh Heaven forgive vs.
I cry you mercy then.
I took you for that cunning Whore of Venice,
That married with Othello. You Mistress,
That have the office opposite to Saint Peter,
And keeps the gate of hell. You, you: I you.
We have done our course: there's money for your pains:
I pray you turn the key, and keep our counsel.
Alas, what do' this Gentleman conceive?
How do you Madam? how do you my good Lady?
Faith, half a sleep.
Good Madam,
What's the matter with my Lord?
With who?
Why, with my Lord, Madam?
Who is thy Lord?
He that is yours, sweet Lady.
I have none: do not talk to me, Aemilia,
I cannot weep: nor answers have I none,
But what should go by water. Prithee to night,
Lay on my bed my wedding sheets, remember,
And call thy husband hither.
Heere's a change indeed.
It is meet I should be used so: very meet.
How have I bin behau'd, that he might stick
The smallest opinion on my least misvse?
What is your pleasure Madam?
How is it with you?
I cannot tell: those that do teach young Babes
Do it with gentle means, and easy tasks.
He might have chid me so: for in good faith
I am a Child to chiding.
What is the matter Lady?
Alas (Iago) my Lord hath so bewhor'd her,
Thrown such despite, and heavy terms upon her
That true hears cannot bear it.
Am I that name, Iago?
What name (fair Lady?)
Such as she said my Lord did say I was.
He called her whore: a Beggar in his drink:
Could not have laid such terms upon his Callet.
Why did he so?
I do not know: I am sure I am none such.
Do not weep, do not weep: alas the day.
Hath she forsook so many Noble Matches?
Her Father? And her Country? And her Friends?
To be called Whore? Would it not make one weep?
It is my wretched Fortune.
Beshrew him for it:
How comes this Trick upon him?
Nay, Heaven doth know.
I will be hanged, if some eternal Villain,
Some busy and insinuating Rogue,
Some cogging, cozening Slave, to get some Office,
Have not deuis'd this Slander: I will be hanged else.
Fie, there is no such man: it is impossible.
If any such there be, Heaven pardon him.
A halter pardon him:
And hell gnaw his bones.
Why should he call her Whore?
Who keeps her company?
What Place? What Time?
What Form? What liklyhood?
The Moore's abused by some most villainous Knave,
Some base notorious Knave, some scurvy Fellow.
Oh Heavens, that such companions thou'd'st unfold,
And put in every honest hand a whip
To lash the Rascals naked through the world,
Even from the East to the West.
Speak within door.
Oh fie upon them: some such Squire he was
That turned your wit, the seamy-side without,
And made you to suspect me with the Moore.
You are a Fool: go too.
Alas Iago,
What shall I do to win my Lord again?
Good Friend, go to him: for by this light of Heaven,
I know not how I lost him. Here I kneel:
If ere my will did trespass against his Love,
Either in discourse of thought, or actual deed,
Or that mine Eyes, mine Ears, or any Sense
Delighted them: or any other Form.
Or that I do not yet, and ever did,
And ever will, (though he do shake me off
To beggarly divorcement) Love him dearly,
Comfort forswear me. Unkindness may do much,
And his unkindness may defeat my life,
But never taint my Love. I cannot say Whore,
It do's abhor me now I speak the word,
To do the Act, that might the addition earn,
Not the worlds Mass of vanity could make me.
I pray you be content: it is but his humour:
The business of the State do's him offence.
If it were no other.
It is but so, I warrant,
Hark how these Instruments summon to supper:
The Messengers of Venice stays the meat,
Go in, and weep not: all things shall be well.
How now Rodorigo?
I do not find
That thou deal justly with me.
What in the contrary?
Every day thou dafts me with some devise Iago, and rather, as it seems to me now, keep from me all convenience, then supply me with the least aduantage of hope: I will indeed no longer endure it. Nor am I yet persuaded to put up in peace, what already I have foolishly suffered.
Will you hear me Rodorigo?
I have heard too much: and your words and Performances are no kin together.
You charge me most unjustly.
With nought but truth: I have wasted my self out of my means. The Jewels you have had from me to deliver Desdemona, would half have corrupted a Votarist. You have told me she hath received them, and returned me expectations and comforts of sudden respect, and acquaintance, but I find none.
Well, go too: very well.
Very well go too: I cannot go too, (man) nor tic not very well. Nay I think it is scurvy: and begin to find my self fopped in it.
Very well.
I tell you, it is not very well: I will make my self known to Desdemona. If she will return me my Jewels, I will give over my Suit, and repent my vnlawfull solicitation. If not, assure your self, I will seek satisfaction of you.
You have said now.
I: and said nothing but what I protest intendmeant of doing.
Why, now I see there's mettle in thee: and even from this instant do build on thee a better opinion then ever before: give me thy and Rodorigo. Thou hast taken against me a most just excepton: but yet I protest I have dealt most directly in thy Affair.
It hath not appeared.
I grant indeed it hath not appeared: and your suspicion is not without wit and judgment. But Rodorigo, if thou hast that in thee indeed, which I have greater reason to believe now then ever (I mean purpose, Courage, and Valour) this night show it. If thou the next night following enjoy not Desdemona, take me from this world with Treacherye, and devise Engines for my life.
Well: what is it? Is it within, reason and compass?
Sir, there is especial Commission come from Venice to depute Cassio in Othello's place.
Is that true? Why then Othello and Desdemona return again to Venice.
Oh no: he goes into Mauritania and takes away with him the fair Desdemona, unless his abode be lingered here by some accident. Wherein none can be so determinate, as the removing of Cassio.
How do you mean removing him?
Why, by making him incapable of Othello's place: knocking out his brains.
And that you would have me to do.
I: if you dare do your self a profit, and a right. He sups to night with a Harlotry: and thither will I go to him. He knows not yet of his Honourable Fortune, if you will watch his going thence (which I will fashion to fall out between twelve and one) you may take him at your pleasure. I will be near to second your Attempt, and he shall fall between vs. Come, stand not amazed at it, but go along with me: I will show you such a necessity in his death, that you shall think your self bound to put it on him. It is now high supper time: and the night grows to wast. About it.
I will hear further reason for this.
And you shall be satisfied.
I do beseech you Sir, trouble your self no further.
Oh pardon me: twill do me good to walk.
Madam, good night: I humbly thank your Ladyship.
Your Honour is most welcome.
Will you walk Sir? Oh Desdemona.
My Lord.
Get you to bed on the instant, I will be returned forth with: dismiss your Attendant there: looked be done.
I will my Lord.
How goes it now? He looks gentler then he did.
He says he will return incontinent,
And hath commanded me to go to bed,
And bid me to dismiss you.
Dismiss me?
It was his bidding: therefore good Aemilia,
Give me my nightly wearing and adieu.
We must not now displease him.
I, would you had never seen him.
So would not I: my love doth so approve him,
That even his stubbornness, his checks, his frowns,
(Prithee vn-pin me) have grace and favour.
I have laid those Sheets you bad me on the bed.
Ell's one: good Father, how foolish are our minds?
If I do die before, prithee shrow'd me
In one of these same Sheets.
Come, come: you talk.
My Mother had a Maid called Barbary,
She was in love: and he she loved proved mad,
And did forsake her. She had a Song of Willough,
An old thing it was: but it expressed her Fortune,
And she died singing it. That Song to night,
Will not go from my mind: I have much to do,
But to go hang my head all at one side
And sing it like poor Brabarie: prithee dispatch.
Shall I go fetch your Night-gowne?
No va-pin me here,
This Lodouico is a proper man.
A very handsome man.
He speaks well.
I know a Lady in Venice would have walked barefoot to Palestine for a touch of his nether lip.
The poor Soul sat singing, by a Sicamour tree.
Sing all a greene Willough:
Her hand on her bosom her head on her knee,
Sing Willough, Willough, Willough.
The fresh Streams ran by her, and murmured her moans
Sing Willough, &amp;c.
Her salt tears fell from her, and softened the stones,
Sing Willough, &amp;c. (Lay by these)
Willough, Willough. (Prithee high thee: he'll come anon)
Sing all a greene Willough must be my Garland.
Let no body blame him, his scorn I approve.
(Nay that's not next. Hark, who is it that knocks?
It's the wind.
I called my Love false Love: but what said he then?
Sing Willough, &amp;c.
If I court mo women, you'll couch with mo men.
So get thee gone, good night: mine eyes do itch:
Doth that boade weeping?
It is neither here, nor there.
I have heard it said so. O these Men, these men!
Dost thou in conscience think (tell me Aemilia)
That there be women do abuse their husbands
In such gross kind?
There be some such, no question.
Would thou do such a deed for all the world?
Why, would not you?
No, by this Heavenly light.
Nor I neither, by this Heavenly light:
I might do it as well in the dark.
Would thou do such a deed for al the world?
The world's a huge thing:
It is a great price, for a small vice.
In truth, I think thou would not.
In truth I think I should, and vndoo't when I had done. Marry, I would not doe such a thing for a joint Ring, nor for measures of Lawn, nor for Gowns, Petticoats, nor Caps, nor any petty exhibition. But for all the whole world: why, who would not make her husband a Cuckold, to make him a Monarch? I should venture Purgatory for it.
Beshrew me, if I would do such a wrong
For the whole world.
Why, the wrong is but a wrong in the world; and having the world for your labour, it is a wrong in your own world, and you might quickly make it right.
I do not think there is any such woman.
Yes, a dozen: and as many to the vantage, as would store the world they plaid for.
But I do think it is their Husbands faults
If Wives do fall: (Say, that they slack their duties,
And power our Treasures into foreign laps;
Or else break out in peevish Jealousies,
Throwing restraint upon vs: Or say they strike vs,
Or scant our former having in despite)
Why we have galls: and though we have some Grace,
Yet have we some Revenge. Let Husbands know,
Their wives have sense like them: They see, and smell,
And have their Palats both for sweet, and sour,
As Husbands have. What is it that they do,
When they change vs for others? Is it Sport?
I think it is: and doth Affection breed it?
I think it doth. Is it Frailty that thus erres?
It is so too. And have not we Affections?
Desires for Sport? and Frailty, as men have?
Then let them use vs well: else let them know,
The ills we do, their ills instruct vs so.
Good night, good night:
Heaven me such uses send,
Not to pick bad, from bad; but by bad, mend.
Here, stand behind this Bark,
Straight will he come:
Wear thy good Rapier bare, and put it home:
Quick, quick, fear nothing; Isle be at thy Elbow,
It makes vs, or it mars vs, think on that,
And fix most firm thy Resolution.
Be near at hand, I may miscarry in it.
Here, at thy hand: Be bold, &amp; take thy stand.
I have no great devotion to the deed,
And yet he hath given me satisfying Reasons:
It is but a man gone. Forth my Sword: he dies.
I have rubbed this young Qat almost to the sense,
And he grows angry. Now, whether he kill Cassio,
Or Cassio him, or each do kill the other,
Every way makes my gain. Live Rodorigo,
He calls me to a restitution large
Of Gold, and Jewels, that I bobbed from him,
As Gifts to Desdemona.
It must not be: If Cassio do remain,
He hath a daily beauty in his life,
That makes me ugly: and besides, the Moore
May unfold me to him: there stand I in much peril:
No, he must dye. But so, I heard him coming.
I know his gate, it is he: Villain thou die.
That thrust had been mine enemy indeed,
But that my Coat is better then thou know:
I will make proof of thine.
Oh, I am slain.
I am maimed for ever:
Help hoe: Murder, murder.
The voice of Cassio Iago keeps his word.
O Villain that I am.
It is even so.
Oh help hoe: Light, a Surgeon.
It is he: O brave Iago, honest, and just,
That hast such Noble sense of thy Friends wrong,
Thou teach me. Minion, your dear lies dead,
And your unblessed Fate highs: Strumpet I come:
For of my heart, those Charms thine Eyes, are blotted.
Thy Bed lust-stain'd, shall with Lusts blood bee spotted.
What hoe? no Watch? No passage?
Murder, Murder.
It is some mischance, the voice is very direful.
Oh help.
Hark.
Oh wretched Villain.
Two or three groan. It is heavy night;
These may be counterfeits: Let's think it unsafe
To come into the cry, without more help.
Nobody come: then shall I bleed to death.
Hark.
Here's one comes in his shirt, with Light, and Weapons.
Who's there?
Who's noise is this that cries on murder?
We do not know.
Do not you hear a cry?
Here, here: for heaven sake help me.
What's the matter?
This is Othello's Ancient, as I take it.
The same indeed, a very valiant Fellow.
What are you here, that cry so grievously?
Iago? Oh I am spoiled, undone by Villains:
Give me some help.
O me, Lieutenant!
What Villains have done this?
I think that one of them is heereabout
And cannot make away.
Oh treacherous Villains:
What are you there? Come in, and give some help.
O help me there.
That's one of them.
Oh murderous Slave! O Villain!
O damned Iago! O inhumane Dog
Kill men in the dark?
Where be these bloody Thieves?
How silent is this Town? Hoe, murder, murder.
What may you be? Are you of good, or evil?
As you shall prove vs, praise vs.
Signior Lodouico?
He Sir.
I cry you mercy: here's Cassio hurt by Villains.
Cassio?
How is it Brother?
My Leg is cut in two.
Marry heaven forbid:
Light Gentlemen, Isle bind it with my shirt.
What is the matter hoe? Who is it that cried?
Who is it that cried?
Oh my dear Cassio,
My sweet Cassio: Oh Cassio, Cassio, Cassio.
O notable Strumpet. Cassio, may you suspect
Who they should be, that have thus mangled you?
No.
I am sorry to find you thus;
I have been to seek you.
Lend me a Garter. So:Oh for a Chair
To bear him easily hence.
Alas he faints. Oh Cassio, Cassio, Cassio.
Gentlemen all, I do suspect this Trash
To be a party in this Injury.
Patience a while, good Cassio. Come, come;
Lend me a Light: know we this face, or no?
Alas my Friend, and my dear Countryman
Rodorigo? No: Yes sure: Yes, it is Rodorigo.
What, of Venice?
Even he Sir: Did you know him?
Know him? I.
Signior Gratiano? I cry your gentle pardon:
These bloody accidents must excuse my Manners,
That so neglected you.
I am glad to see you.
How do you Cassio? Oh a Chair, a Chair.
Rodorigo?
He, he, it is he:
Oh that's well said, the Chair.
Some good man bear him carefully from hence,
Isle fetch the Generall's Surgeon. For you Mistress,
Save you your labour. He that lies slain here (Cassio)
Was my dear friend. What malice was between you?
None in the world: nor do I know the man?
What? look you pale? Oh bear him of the Ayre.
Stay you good Gentlemen. Look you pale, Mistress?
Do you perceive the gastnesse of her eye?
Nay, if you stare, we shall hear more anon.
Behold her well: I pray you look upon her:
Do you see Gentlemen? Nay, guiltiness will speak
Though tongues were out of use.
Alas, what is the matter?
What is the matter, Husband?
Cassio hath here bin set on in the dark
By Rodorigo, and Fellows that are escaped:
He's almost slain, and Rodorigo quite dead.
Alas good Gentleman: alas good Cassio.
This is the fruits of whoring. Prythe Aemilia,
Go know of Cassio where he supped to night.
What, do you shake at that?
He supped at my house, but I therefore shake not.
O did he so? I charge you go with me.
Oh fie upon thee Strumpet.
I am no Strumpet, but of life as honest,
As you that thus abuse me.
As I? Fie upon thee.
Kind Gentlemen:
Let's go see poor Cassio dressed.
Come Mistress, you must teal's another Tale.
Aemilia, run you to the Citadel,
And tell my Lord and Lady, what hath happ'd:
Will you go on before? This is the night
That either makes me, or foredoes me quite.
It is the Cause, it is the Cause (my Soul)
Let me not name it to you, you chaste Stars,
It is the Cause. Yet Isle not shed her blood,
Nor scarre that whiter skin of hers, then Snow
And smooth as Monumental Alabaster:
Yet she must dye, else she'll betray more men:
Put out the Light, and then put out the Light:
If I quench thee, thou flaming Minister,
I can again thy former light restore,
Should I repent me. But once put out thy Light,
Thou cunningest Pattern of excelling Nature,
I know not where is that Promethae heate
That can thy Light re-Lume.
When I have plucked thy Rose,
I cannot give it vital growth again,
It needs must wither. Isle smell thee on the Tree.
Oh Balmy breath, that dost almost persuade
Justice to break her Sword. One more, one more:
Be thus when thou art dead, and I will kill thee,
And love thee after. One more, and that's the last.
So sweet, was ne'er so fatal. I must weep,
But they are cruel Tears: This sorrow's heavenly,
It strikes, where it doth love. She wakes.
Who's there? Othello?
I Desdemona.
Will you come to bed, my Lord?
Have you prayed to night, Desdemon?
I my Lord.
If you bethink your self of any Crime
Vnreconcil'd as yet to Heaven, and Grace,
Solicit for it straight.
Alack, my Lord,
What may you mean by that?
Well, do it, and be brief, I will walk by:
I would not kill thy unprepared Spirit,
No, Heavens fore-fend) I would not kill thy Soul.
Talk you of killing?
I, I do.
Then Heaven have mercy on me.
Amen, with all my heart.
If you say, I hope you will not kill me.
Humh.
And yet I fear you: for you're fatal then
When your eyes roll so.
Why I should fear, I know not,
Since guiltiness I know not: But yet I feel I fear.
Think on thy sins.
They are Love I bear to you.
I, and for that thou dy'st.
That death's unnatural, that kills for loving.
Alas, why gnaw you so your nether-lip?
Some bloody passion shakes your very Frame:
These are portent: but yet I hope, I hope,
They do not point on me.
Peace, and be still.
I will so: What's the matter?
That Handkerchief
Which I so loved, and gave thee, thou gau'st to Cassio.
No by my Life, and Soul: send for the man,
And ask him.
Sweet Soul, take heed, take heed of Perjury,
Thou art on thy death-bed.
I, but not yet to dye.
Presently.
Therefore confess thee freely of thy sin:
For to deny each Article with Oath,
Cannot remove, nor choke the strong Conception
That I do groan withal. Thou art to dye.
O Heaven have mercy on me.
I say, Amen.
And have you mercy too. I never did
Offend you in my life: never loved Cassio,
But with such general warranty of Heaven,
As I might love. I never gave him Token.
By Heaven I saw my Handkerchief in's hand.
O perjured woman, thou dost stone my heart,
And makes me call, what I intend to do,
A Murder, which I thought a Sacrifice.
I saw the Handkerchief.
He found it then:
I never gave it him: Send, for him hither:
Let him confess a truth.
He hath confessed.
What, my Lord?
That he hath used thee.
How? unlawfully?
I.
He will not say so.
No: his mouth is stopped:
Honest Iago hath 'tane order for it.
Oh, my fear interprets. What is he dead?
Had all his hairs bin lives, my great Revenge
Had stomach for them all.
Alas, he is betrayed, and I undone.
Out Strumpet: weep thou for him to my face?
O banish me, my Lord, but kill me not.
Down Strumpet.
Kill me to morrow, let me live to night.
Nay, if you strive.
But half an hour.
Being done, there is no pause.
But while I say one prayer.
It is too late.
My Lord, my Lord? What hoe?
My Lord, my Lord.
What noise is this? Not dead? not yet quite dead?
I that am cruel, am yet merciful,
I would not have thee linger in thy pain?
So, so.
What hoe? my Lord, my Lord?
Who's there?
Oh good my Lord, I would speak a word with you.
Yes: It is Aemilia: by and by. Shoe's dead.
It is like she comes to speak of Cassio's death:
The noise was high. Ho, no more mooing?
Still as the Grave. Shall he come in? Were it good?
I think she stirs again. No, what's best to do?
If she come in, she'll sure speak to my wife:
My wife, my wife: what wife? I have no wife.
Oh insupportable! Oh heavy hour!
Me thinks, it should be now a huge Eclipse
Of Sun, and Moon; and that the affrighted Globe
Did yawn at Alteration.
I do beseech you
That I may speak with you. Oh good my Lord.
I had forgot thee: oh come in Aemilia.
Soft, by and by, let me the Curtains draw.
Where art thou? What's the matter with thee now?
Oh my good Lord, yonders foul Murders done.
What? now?
But now, my Lord.
It is the very error of the Moon,
She comes more nearer Earth then she was wont,
And makes men mad.
Cassio, my Lord, hath killed
A young Venetian, called Rodorigo.
Rodorigo killed? and Cassio killed?
No Cassio is not killed.
Not Cassio killed? Then Murder's out of tune,
And sweet Revenge grows harsh.
O falsely, falsely murdered.
Alas! what cry is that?
That? What?
Out, and alas, that was my Ladies voice.
Help, help hoe, help. Oh Lady speak again,
Sweet Desdemona, oh sweet Mistress, speak.
A guiltless death, I dye.
Oh who hath done this deed?
No body: I my self, farewell:
Commend me to my kind Lord: oh farewell.
Why, how should she be murdered?
Alas: who knows?
You hear her say her self, it was not I.
She said so: I must needs report the truth.
She's like a Liar gone to burning hell,
It was I that killed her.
Oh the more Angel she, and you the blacker Devil.
She turned to folly: and she was a whore.
Thou dost belly her, and thou art a devil.
She wa false as water.
Thou at rash as fire, to say
That she was false. Oh she was heavenly true.
Cassio did top her: Ask thy husband else.
O, I were damned beneath all depth in hell:
But that I did proceed upon just grounds
To this extremity. Thy Husband knew it all.
My Husband?
Thy Husband.
That she was false to Wedlock?
I, with Cassio: had she bin true,
If Heaven would make me such another world,
Of one entire and perfect Chrysolite,
I'd not have sold her for it.
My Husband?
I, it was he that told me on her first,
An honest man he is, and hates the slime
That sticks on filthy deeds.
My Husband?
What needs this itterance, Woman?
I say, thy Husband.
Oh Mistress,
Villainy hath made mocks with love:
My Husband say she was false?
He, Woman;
I say thy Husband: Dost understand the word?
My Friend, thy Husband; honest, honest Iago.
If he say so, may his pernicious Soul
Rot half a grain a day: he lies to the heart,
She was too fond of her most filthy Bargain.
Ho?
Do thy worst:
This deed of thine is no more worthy Heaven,
Then thou was it worthy her.
Peace, you were best.
Thou hast not half that power to do me harm,
As I have to be hurt. Oh Gull, oh dolt,
As ignorant as dirt: thou hast done a deed
(I care not for thy Sword) Isle make thee known,
Though I lost twenty lives. Help, help, hoe, help:
The Moore hath killed my Mistress. Murder, murder.
What is the matter? How now General?
Oh, are you come, Iago: you have done well,
That men must lay their Murders on your neck.
What is the matter?
Disprove this Villain, if thou be a man:
He says, thou told him that his wife was false:
I know thou did not: you're not such a Villain.
Speak, for my heart is full.
I told him what I thought,
And told no more
Then what he found himself was apt, and true.
But did you ever tell him,
She was false?
I did.
You old a Lye an odious damned Lye:
Upon my Soul, a Lye; a wicked Lye.
She false with Cassio?
Did you say with Cassio?
With Cassio, Mistress?
Go too, charm your tongue.
I will not charm my Tongue;
I am bound to speak,
My Mistress here lies murdered in her bed.
Oh Heavens, foresend.
And your reports have set the Murder on.
Nay stare not Masters,
It is true indeed.
It is a strange Truth.
O monstrous Act.
Villainy, villainy, villainy:
I think upon it, I think: I smell it: O Villainy:
I thought so then: Isle kill my self for grief.
O villainy! villainy!
What, are you mad?
I charge you get you home.
Good Gentlemen, let me have leave to speak:
It is proper I obey him; but not now:
Perchance Iago, I will ne'er go home.
Oh, oh, oh.
Nay, lay thee down, and roar:
For thou hast killed the sweetest innocent,
That ere did lift up eye.
Oh she was foul!
I scarce did know you Uncle, there lies your Niece,
Whose breath (indeed) these hands have newly stopped:
I know this act shows horrible and grim.
Poor Desdemon:
I am glad thy Father's dead,
Thy Match was mortal to him: and pure grief
Shore his old thread in twain. Did he live now,
This sight would make him do a desperate turn:
Yea, curse his better Angel from his side,
And fall to Reprobance.
It is pitiful: but yet Iago knows
That she with Cassio, hath the Act of shame
A thousand times committed. Cassio confessed it,
And she did gratify his amorous works
With that Recognisance and pledge of Love
Which I first gave her: I saw it in his hand:
It was a Handkerchief, an Antique Token
My Father gave my Mother.
Oh Heaven! oh heavenly Powers!
Come, hold your peace.
Twill out, twill out I peace?
No, I will speak as liberal as the North;
Let Heaven, and Men, and Devils, let them all,
All, all, cry shame against me, yet Isle speak.
Be wise, and get you home.
I will not.
Fie, your Sword upon a Woman.
Oh thou dull Moore,
That Handkerchief thou speak of
I found by Fortune, and did give my Husband:
For often, with a solemn earnestness,
(More then indeed belonged to such a Trifle)
He begged of me, to steale't.
Villainous Whore.
She give it Cassio? No, alas I found it,
And I did gived my Husband.
Filth, thou lie.
By Heaven I do not, I do not Gentlemen:
Oh murderous Coxcomb, what should such a Fool
Do with so good a wife?
Are there no stones in Heaven,
But what serves for the Thunder?
Precious Villain.
The woman falls:
Sure he hath killed his Wife.
I, I: oh lay me by my Mistress side.
Hoe's gone, but his wife's killed.
It is a notorious Villain: take you this weapon
Which I have recovered from the Moore:
Come guard the door without, let him not pass,
But kill him rather. Isle after that same villain,
For it is a damned Slave.
I am not valiant neither:
But every Puny whipster gets my Sword.
But why should Honour out-liue Honesty?
Let it go all.
What did thy Song boad Lady?
Hark, can thou hear me? I will play the Swan,
And dye in Music: Willough, Willough, Willough.
Moore, she was chaste: She loved thee, cruel Moore,
So come my Soul to bliss, as I speak true:
So speaking as I think, alas, I dye.
I have another weapon in this Chamber,
It was a Sword of Spain, the Ice brookes temper:
Oh here it is: Uncle I must come forth.
If thou attempt it, it will cost thee dear;
Thou hast no weapon, and perforce must suffer.
Look in upon me then, and speak with me,
Or naked as I am I will assault thee.
What is the matter?
Behold, I have a weapon:
A better never did it self sustain
Upon a Soldiers Thigh. I have seen the day,
That with this little Arm, and this good Sword,
I have made my way through more impediments
Then twenty times your stop. But (oh vain boast)
Who can control his Fate? It is not so now.
Be not afraid, though you do see me weapon'd:
Here is my journeys end, here is my butt
And very Sea-marke of my utmost Sail.
Do you go back dismayed? It is a lost fear:
Man but a Rush against Othello's breast,
And he retires. Where should Othello go?
Now: how dost thou look now? Oh ill-Starr'd wench,
Pale as thy Smock: when we shall meet at count,
This look of thine will hurl my Soul from Heaven,
And Fiends will snatch at it. Cold, cold, my Girl?
Even like thy Chastity. O cursed, cursed Slave!
Whip me ye Devils,
From the possession of this Heavenly sight:
Blow me about in winds, roast me in Sulphur,
Wash me in steepe-downe gulfs of Liquid fire.
Oh Desdemon! dead Desdemon: dead. Oh, oh!
Where is this rash, and most unfortunate man?
That's he that was Othello: here I am.
Where is that Viper?
Bring the Villain forth.
I look down towards his feet; but that's a Fable,
If that thou be a Devil, I cannot kill thee.
Wrench his Sword from him.
I bleed Sir, but not killed.
I am not sorry neither, Il'd have thee live:
For in my sense, it is happiness to die.
Oh thou Othello, that was once so good,
Fallen in the practise of a cursed Slave,
What shall be said to thee.
Why any thing:
An honourable Murderer, if you will:
For nought I did in hate, but all in Honour.
This wretch hath part confessed his Villainy:
Did you and he consent in Cassio's death.
I.
Dear General, I never gave you cause.
I do believe it, and I ask your pardon:
Will you, I pray, demand that demi-devil,
Why he hath thus ensnared my Soul and Body.
Demand me nothing: what you know, you know:
From this time forth, I never will speak word.
What? not to pray?
Torments will op your lips.
Well, thou dost best.
Sir,
You shall understand what hath befallen,
(Which, as I think, you know not) here is a Letter
Found in the pocket of the slain Rodorigo,
And here another, the one of them imports
The death of Cassio, to be undertook
By Rodorigo.
O Villain!
Most Heathenish, and most gross.
Now, heere's another discontented paper
Found in his pocket too: and this it seems
Rodorigo meant to have sent this damned villain:
But that (belike) Iago in the interim
Came in, and satisfied him.
Oh thou pernicious Caitiff;
How came you (Cassio) by that Handkerchief
That was my wives?
I found it in my Chamber:
And he himself confessed it but even now,
That there he dropped it for a special purpose,
Which wrought to his desire.
O Fool, fool, fool!
There is besides, in Rodorigo's Letter,
How he upbraids Iago, that he made him
Brave me upon the Watch: whereon it came
That I was cast: and even but now he spake
(After long seeming dead) Iago hurt him,
Iago set him on.
You must forsake this room, and go with vs:
Your Power, and your Command is taken off,
And Cassio rules in Cyprus. For this Slave,
If there be any cunning Cruelty,
That can torment him much, and hold him long,
It shall be his. You shall close Prisoner rest,
Till that the Nature of your fault be known
To the Venetian State. Come, bring away.
Soft you; a word or two before you go:
I have done the State some service, and they know it:
No more of that. I pray you in your Letters,
When you shall these unlucky deeds relate,
Speak of me, as I am. Nothing extenuate,
Nor set down ought in malice.
Then must you speak,
Of one that loved not wisely, but too well:
Of one, not easily Jealous, but being wrought,
Perplexed in the extreme: Of one, whose hand
(Like the base Iudean) threw a Pearl away
Richer then all his Tribe: Of one, whose subdued Eyes,
Albeit vn-vsed to the melting mood,
Drops tears as fast as the Arabian Trees
Their Medicinable gum. Set you down this:
And say besides, that in Aleppo once,
Where a malignant, and a Turbond-Turke
Beat a Venetian, and traduced the State,
I took by the throat the circumcised Dog,
And smote him, thus.
Oh bloody period.
All that is spoke, is marred.
I kissed thee, ere I killed thee: No way but this,
Killing my self, to dye upon a kiss.
This did I fear, but thought he had no weapon:
For he was great of heart.
Oh Sparton Dog:
More fell then Anguish, Hunger, or the Sea:
Look on the Tragic Loading of this bed:
This is thy work:
The Object poisons Sight,
Let it be hid. Gratiano, keep the house,
And seize upon the Fortunes of the Moore,
For they succeed on you. To you, Lord Governor,
Remains the Censure of this hellish villain:
The Time, the Place, the Torture, oh enforce it:
My self will straight aboard, and to the State,
This heavy Act, with heavy heart relate.

NOw such a murmuring to rise upon so trifling a thing,
In all my life never saw I before:
And yet I have been Officer this seven year and more
The Tyler and his wife are in a great rage,
Affirming their Daughter to be under age.
Art thou the Collector of the Kings task?
I am Tyler why dost thou ask?
Because thou goosed beyond the Commission of the King,
We grant to his Highness pleasure in every thing:
Thou hast thy task money for all that be here,
My Daughter is not fourteen years old, therefore she
goes clear.
And because thou say so, I should believe thee.
Choose whether thou wilt or no, thou get no more of
me.
For I am sure thy Office doth not arm thee with such authoritie.
Thus to abuse the poor people of the Country.
But chiefest of all wild villain as thou art,
To play so unmanly and beastly a part,
As to search my daughter thus in my presence.
Why base villain, wilt thou teach me what to do?
Wilt thou prescribe me mine office, and what belonges
thereto?
What villain, dost strike me? I swear by the rood,
As I am Jack Straw, thou shalt buy it with thy blood.
There lie and be well paid for thy pain.
O help, help, the kings officer is slain.
How now Jack Straw, doth any body abuse thee?
Alas Wat, I have kilt the kings officer in striking rashly.
A small matter to recover a man that is slain,
Blow wind in his tail, and fetch him again.
Content thee, tic no matter, and Jack Straw god a mercy,
Herein thou hast done good service to thy country:
Were all inhumaine slaves so served as he,
England would be civil, and from all such dealings free.
By gogs blood my masters, we will not put up this so queenetly,
We owe God a death, and we can but die:
And though the fairest end of a Rebel is the gallows.
Yet if you will be ruled by me,
VVele so deal of ourselves as wele revenge this villainy,
The king God wot knows not whats done by such poor
men as we,
But wele make him know it, if you will be ruled by me:
Her's Parson Ball an honest Priest, and tells vs that in
charity,
We may stick together in such quarrels honestly.
What is he an honest man? the devil he is, he is the
Parson of the Town,
You think ther's no knavery hid under a black gown,
Find him in a pulpit but twice in the year,
And Isle find him forty times in the ale-house tasting
strong bear.
Neighbours, neighbours, the weakest now a days goes to
the wall,
But mark my words, and follow the counsel of Iohn Ball.
England is grown to such a pass of late,
That rich men triumph to see the poor beg at their gate.
But I am able by good scripture before you to prove,
That God doth not this dealing allow nor love.
But when Adam delved, and Eve span,
Who was then a Gentleman.
Brethren, brethren, it were better to have this communight,
Then to have this difference in degrees:
The landlord his rent, the lawyer his fees.
So quickly the poor mans substance is spent,
But merrily with the world it went,
When men eat berries of the hauthorne tree,
And thou help me, Isle help thee,
There was no place for surgery,
And old men knew not usury:
Now tic come to a woeful pass,
The Widow that hath but a pan of brass,
And scarce a house to hide her head,
Sometimes no penny to buy her bread,
Must pay her Landlord many a great,
Or twil be pulled out of her throat:
Brethren mine so might I thrive,
As I wish not to be alive,
To see such dealings with extremity,
The Rich have all, the poor live in misery:
But follow the counsel of Iohn Ball,
I promise you I love ye all:
And make division equally,
Of each mans goods indifferently,
And rightly may you follow Arms,
To rid you from these civil harms.
Well said Parson so may it bee,
As wee purpose to prefer thee:
Wee will have all the Rich men displaste
And all the bravery of them defect,
And as rightly as I am Jack Straw,
In spite of all the men of Law,
Make thee Archbishop of Caunterberie,
And Chancellor of England or Isle die.
How say thou Wat, shall it bee so?
I Jack Straw, or else Isle bide many a foul blow.
It shall bee no other but hee,
That thus favours the Communaltie,
Stay wee no longer prating here,
But let vs roundly to this gear,
Tic more than time that we were gone,
VVele be Lords my Masters every one.
And I my Masters will make one,
To fight when all our foes be gone,
Well shall they see before wele lack,
VVele stuff the Gallows till it crack.
I hope we shall have men enough,
To aide vs herein Wat, how think thou?
Tag and rag thou need not doubt.
But who shall be Captain of the Rowt.
That shall you two for all our Kentish men.
Fellow Captain welcome lets about it.
A greed fellow Captains to London.
Here is even work towards for the Hangman, did you ever
see such a crew,
After so bad a beginning, whats like to ensue?
Faith even the common reward for Rebels, Swingledome
swangledome, you know as well as I,
But what care they, ye hear them say they owe God a
death, and they can but die:
Tic dishonour for such as they to dye in their bed,
And credit to cape: under the Gallows all save the head:
And yet by my say the beginning of this Riot,
May chance cost many a mans life before all be at quiet:
And I faith Isle be amongst them as forward as the best.
And if ought fall out but well, I shall shift amongst the rest,
And being bu a boy, may hide me in the throng,
Tyborn stand fast, I fear you will be laden ere it be long.
And yet Lord Archbishop your Grace doth know,
That since the latest time of Parliament,
Wherein this task was granted to the King,
By general consent of either house,
To help his wars which hee intends to France,
For wreak and just recovery of his right,
How slow their payment is in every place,
That better a King not to command at all,
Than be beholding to ungrateful minds.
Lord Treasurer it seems strange to me,
That being won with reason and regard,
Of true succeeding Prince, the common sort,
Should be so slack to give or grudge the gift,
That is to be employed for their behoof,
Hard and unnatural be the thoughts of theirs,
That suck the milk, and will not help the Well,
The King himself being now but young of age:
If things should fall out otherwise than well,
The blame doth fall upon the Counsellor,
And if I take my aim not all awry,
The Multitude a Beast of many heads,
Of misconceiuing and misconstruing minds,
Reputes this last benevolence to the King,
Given at high Court of Parliament,
A matter more required for private good,
Than help or benefit of common weal,
Wherein how much they wrong the better sort,
My conscience bears witness in the cause.
My Lords, because your words not worthless are,
Because they stand on reasons surest ground,
And tend unto the profit of the King,
Whose profit is the profit of the Land,
Yet give me leave in reverence of the cause,
To speak my mind touching this question:
When such as wee doo see the peoples harts,
Expressed as far as time will give them leave,
With hartines of their benevolence,
My thinks it were for others happiness,
That harts and purses should together go:
Misdeem not good my Lords of this my speech,
Sith well I wot the Noble and the slave,
And all doo live but for a Common weal,
Which Common weal in other terms, is the Kings.
The Justices and Sheriffs of Kent, sends greetings to
your Honours here by me.
My Lords, this brief doth openly unfold,
A dangerous task to vs and all our trains,
With speed let vs impart the news unto my Lord the
King,
The fearful news that whilst the flame doth but begin,
Sad policy may serve to quench the fire:
The Commons now are up in Kent, let vs not suffer this
first attempt too far.
My friend what power have they assembled in the field.
My Lord a twenty thousand men or there about.
See here the peril that was ate foreseen,
Ready to fall on this unhappy Land:
What barbarous minds for grievance more than needs,
Unnaturally seeks wreak upon their Lord,
Their true anointed Prince, their lawful king:
So dare this blind unshamefast multitude,
Lay violent hands they wot not why nor where:
But be thou still as best becomes thee,
To stand in quarrel with thy natural Liege,
The Sun may sometime be eclipsed with Clouds,
But hardly may the twinkling stars obscure,
Or put him out of whom they borrow light.
I marry Wat this is another matter, me thinks the world
is changed of late,
Who would live like a beggar, and may be in this estate.
VVee are here four Captains just, Jack Straw, Wat
Tyler, Hob Carter, and Tom Miller:
Search me all England and find four such Captains, and
by gogs blood Isle be hanged.
So you will be nevertheless I stand in great doubt.
Captain Straw, and Captain Tyler, I think I have
brought a company of Essex men for my train,
That will never yield, but kill or else be slain.
And for a little Captain I have the vantage of you all,
For while you are a fighting, I can creep into a quart po
I am so small.
But Masters what answer made Sir Iohn Morton at Tochester,
I heard say hee would keep the Castle still, for the Kings
use.
So he did till I fetched him out by force, and I have his wife
and children pledges, for his speedy return from the
King, to whom he is gone with our message.
Let him take heed hee bring a wise answer to our worcesterships,
or else his pledges goes to the pot.
Captain Straw, how many men have we in the field,
Marry Captain Carter, about fifty thousand men.
Where shall we pitch our tents to lie in safety.
Marry Hob upon Blockhead beside Greenwich, there
wele lie,
And if the King will come thither to know our pleasures
so it is: if not, I know what wele doo.
Gogs blood Jack, have we the cards in our hands?
Lets take it upon vs while we have it.
I marry, for you know not how long you shall hold it.
Fifty thousand men they have already in Arms that will
draw together,
If wee hang together as fast, some of vs shall repent it.
This strange unwelcome and unhappy news,
Of these unnatural Rebels and unjust,
That threaten wrack unto this wretched Land,
Aye me affrights my women's missed mind,
Burdens my heart, and interrupts my sleep,
That now unless some better tidings come,
Unto my son their true anointed King.
My heavy hart I fear will break in twain,
Surcharged with a heavy load of thoughts.
Madam, your Graces care in this, I much commend,
For though your son my Lord the King be young,
Yet he will see so well unto him self,
That he will make the proudest Rebel know,
What tic to move or to displease a King,
And though his looks bewray such lenity,
Yet at advantage hee can use extremity:
Your Grace may call to mind that being a king,
He will not put up any injury,
Especially of base and common men,
Which are not worthy but with reverence,
To look into the Princely state of Kings,
A King sometimes will make a show of courtesy,
Only to fit a following policy:
And it may be the King determines so,
That hee will try before he trust a foe.
True Madam, for your Graces son the King,
Is so well ruled by divers of his Pieres,
As that I think the proudest foe hee hath,
Shall find more work than hee will take in hand,
That seeks the downfall of his Majesty:
I hope the Council are too wise for that,
To suffer Rebels in aspiring pride,
That purpose treason to the Prince and state.
In good time, see where my Lord the King,
Doth come accompanied with the Bishop and Lord
Treasurer.
I marvel much my Lords what rage it is,
That moves my people whom I love so dear,
Under a show of quarrel good and just,
To rise against vs thus in mutinies,
With threatening force against our state and vs:
But if it bee as we are given to know,
By Letters and by credible report,
A little spark hath kindled all this fire,
Which must be quenched with circumspect regard,
Before we feel the violence of the flame:
Mean while, sweet Lady Mother be content,
And think their malice shall not injure you,
For wee have tools to crop and cut them off,
Ere they presume to touch our Royal self,
And thus resolve, that you secure shall bee,
What hard mishap soever fall to me.
Health and good hap befall your Majesty.
My Lord here is a messenger from Kent,
That craves access unto your Majesty.
Admit him near, for wee will hear him speak,
Tic hard when twixt the people and the King,
Such terms of threats and parleys must be had,
Would any Gentleman or man of worth,
Be seen in such a cause without offence,
Both to his God, his Country, and his Prince,
Except he were enforced thereunto?
I cannot think so good a Gentleman,
As is that Knight Sir Iohn Morton I mean,
Would entertain so base and wild a thought:
Nor can it sink into my women's head,
That were it not for fear or policy,
So true a bird would file so fair a nest,
But here hee comes, O so my longing mind,
Desires to know the tidings hee doth bring.
The Commons of Kent salute your Majesty,
And I am made their unhappy messenger:
My Lord, a crew of Rebels are in field,
And they have made commotions late in Kent,
And drawn your people to a mutiny:
And if your Grace see not to it in time,
Your Land will come to ruin by their means,
Yet may your Grace find remedy in time,
To qualify their pride that thus presume.
Who are the Captains of this Rebel rowt,
That thus doo rise against their anointed King?
What bee they men of any worth or no?
If men of worth, I cannot choose but pity them.
No my good Lord, they bee men of no great account,
For they bee none but Tylers, Thatchers, Millers, and
such like.
That in their lives did never come in field,
Before this mutiny did call them sorth:
And for security of my back return,
Upon this message which I shout the King,
They keep my wife and children for a pledge,
And hald me out from forth my Castle at Rochester,
And swore me there to come unto your Majesty,
And having told you their minds,
I hope your Grace will pardon me for all:
In that I am enforced thereunto.
How many men have they assembled in the field?
I think my Lord about twenty thousand men,
But if your Grace would follow my advice,
Thus would I deal with these Rebellious men,
I would find time to parley with some of them,
And know what in their minds they doo intend,
For being armed with such treacherous thoughts,
They may perform more than your Grace expects.
With speed return to those unnatural men,
And see Sir Iohn you greet them thus from vs,
Tell them that wee our self will come to them,
To understand their meaning and their minds:
And tell them if they have any evil sustained,
Our self will see sufficient recompense:
Go good Sir Iohn, and tell them upon the Thames,
Our self will meet with them,
There to confer concerning their avail,
Doe so Sir Iohn and kindly recommend vs to them all.
We shall fulfil your graces mind in this,
And thus I take my Conge of your Majesty,
Wishing your Grace thrice Nestors years to reign,
To keep your Land, and guard your Royal Train,
Farewell good Knight and as thou dare remember them
though they forget themselves.
Your grace herein is very well advised,
With resolution fitting your degree,
Your Grace must show your self to be a King,
And rule like Gods visgerent here on earth,
The looks of Kings doe lend both life and death,
And when a King doth set down his decree,
His sentence should be irrevocable,
Your grace herein hath shown your Princely mind,
In that you hate to pray on carren flesh,
Such prays befits not Kings to pray upon,
That may command and countermand their own.
I hope my Lord this message so will prove,
That public hate will turn to private love.
And therefore I say my Lord you have answered well,
The task was given your Grace by Act of Parliament,
And you have reason to demand your dew.
My Lords I hope we shall not need to fear,
To meet those men that thus doe threaten vs.
We will my Lords to morrow meet with them,
And hear my Lords what tic that they demand.
Mother your Grace shall need to take no care,
For you shall in our Tower of London stay,
Till we return from Kent to you again.
My Lord see every thing prepared for vs:
And Mother thus I leave your Majesty,
You to the Tower, and I must hence to Kent,
My Lord if so you please take my advise herein,
That speaks in love and duty to your grace:
I shall in every matter privilege your Majesty and all
your Lordly train.
I mean against your Manor of Greenewich town,
And so amidst the stream may hover safe,
Mean while they send some few and chosen men,
To give your Grace to understand their minds,
And thus my Lord I have adventured,
To show your Majesty my mind herein.
IT is good to make provision, for peradventure wee shall
lack victuals and wee lie in camp on Black Heath
long.
And in faith as long as this Goose lasts wele not starve:
And as many good fellows as will come to the eating of
her, come and welcome.
For in faith I came lightly by her,
And lightly come lightly gone,
We Captains are Lords within our selves,
And if the world hold out we shall be Kings shortly.
The rest of my fellow Captains are gone before to
Grenewich to meet the King:
That comes to know our minds,
And while they be about it:
Isle make good cheer, with my Goose here,
Whats the Goose flown away without her head.
Here is a stir more than needs,
What means the King thus to abuse vs?
And makes vs run about his pleasure, and to no end.
He promised vs to meet vs on the water,
And by Lady as soon as we came at the water side,
Hee fair and flat turns his Barge and away hee goes to
London.
I tell thee Wat we will not put up this abuse.
By gogs blood Captain Straw, wee will remove our
camp, and away to London roundly,
And there wele speak with him, or were know why wee
shall not.
God amarcie Wat and ere we have done,
We will be Lords every one.
Gentle Jack Straw, in one line let vs draw,
And wele not leave a man of law.
Nor a paper worth a haw,
And make him worse than a dawe,
That shall stand against Jack Straw.
Me thinks you might doe well to answer the King,
In the name of the whole company:
Some dozen or twenty men for the nonce, that may delifor
the minds of you all in few words.
Sir Iohn Morton you are an Ass, to tell vs what wee have
to doe,
Hold your prating you were best.
I tell thee Sir Iohn thou abuse vs
But lets to London as fast as we can.
My Lords if all our men are come unto the shore,
Let vs return again into the Town
These people are not to be talked withal,
Much less with reason to be ordered.
That so unorderly with shrikes and cries,
Make show as though they would invade vs all.
I have not heard nor read of any King
So gently o his people entertained.
Sir Iohn what was the cause the King returned so soon,
And with such  so quickly took the shore.
Bargeman the King had reason for the same,
warrant thee he was not ll advised.
I think he meant to have commenced some talk with that

He meant so indeed Spencer but you heard how it fell out
Not well I held my stern so hard.
It was thus, the King and all his company,
Being rowed with Ores so far as Greenewich Town,
It was a world to see what Troupes of men,
Like Bees that swarm about the honey hive.
Began strew the grauill ground and sandy plain,
That filled the Air with cries and fearful noise.
And from the water did an echo rise:
That appears the years of our renowned King,
Affrighting so his heart with strong conceit,
Of some unhappy grievous stratigene;
That trust me with my ears I heard him say,
He thought they would have all like Spaniels,
Tan water despretly and  him.
So did they all yfare like  men,
That time he thought to speed away apace,
And take the best advantage of the place.
Indeed I could not greatly blame his Majesty,
My self was not so scared this seven year:
My thought there was sufficient mouths enough,
At highest tide to have drawn the Thames dry.
Spencer ere it flow thrice at London bridge,
London I fear wil hear of worser news.
Neighbours you that keep the gates, let the Kings liege
people in, or we  bee fine to aide them with balls of
wild fire or some other devise, for they have spoiled all
Southwark let out all the prisoners, broke up the Marshalsea
and the Kings bench, and made great havoc in
the Burrow here,
Therefore I pray you let them in.
Porter open the gate, if thou love thy self, or thine own
life, open the gate.
You have a certain spare Goose came in to bee roasted,
She is enough by this.
What means these wretched miscreants,
To make a spoil of their own country men:
Unnatural Rebels what so ere,
By foreign foes may seem no whit so strange.
As Englishmen to trouble England thns
Well may I term it insist to the Land.
Like that foul lawless force and violence,
Which Cyneris did offer to his child.
O happy time from all such troubles free,
What now alas is like to be the end of this attempt,
But that so long as they are glutted all with blood, they
bath therein.
Sir here it is set down by our Captains that as many
of you as cannot say bread and cheese, in good and perfect
English, ye die for it, &amp; that was the cause so many strangers
did die in Smithfield.
Let me hear you say bread and cheese.
Broke and Keys.
SIr Newton, &amp; Lord Mayor, this wrong that I am offered,
This open and unnatural injury,
A King to be thus hardly handled,
Of his own people and no other foes,
But such as have bin brought up and bred in his own bysome,
Nourished with his tender care,
To be thus robbed of Honour and of friends,
Thus daunted with continual frights and fears,
Haled on to what mishap I cannot tell:
More heard mishap than had of like bin mine,
Had I not marked bin to be a King.
It shall become your Grace most Gracious Lord,
To bear the mind in this aflicted time,
As other Kings and Lords hath done before,
Armed with sufferance and magnanimity,
The one to make you resolute for chance,
The other forward in your resolution:
The greatest wrong this rowt hath done your Grace,
Amongst a many other wicked parts,
Is in frighting your worthy Lady Mother,
Making foul slaughter of your Noble men,
Burning up Books and  of records,
Dcing houses of ,
Saint Ies in Smithfied, the Sauoy and such like,
And beating down like wolves, the better sort,
The greatest wrong in my opinion is,
That in Honour doth your person touch,
I mean they call your Majesty to Parley,
And over bear you with a multitude,
As if you were a vassal not a King:
O wretched minds of wild and barbarous men,
For whom the heavens have secret wreak in store:
But my Lord with reverence and with pardon too,
Why comes your Grace into Smithfield near the crew,
Unarmed and guarded with so small a traie.
If clemency may win their raging minds,
To civil order, Isle approve it first.
They shall perceive I come in quiet wise,
Accompanied with the Lord Mayor here alone,
Besides our Guard that doth attend on vs.
May it please your Grace that I shall raise the streets,
To Guard your Majesty through Smithfield as you walk.
No Lord Mayor, twill make them more outrageous,
And be a mean to shed a world of blood:
I more account the blood of Englishmen than so,
But this is the place I have appointed them
To hear them speak and have adventured,
To come among this foul varulie crew:
And lo my Lords, see where the people comes.
My Masters this is the King, come away,
Tic hee that we would speak with all.
Newton, desire that one may speak for all;
To tell the sum of their demand at full.
My Masters you that are the especial men,
His Majesty requires you all by me,
That one may speak and tell him your demand,
And gently here he lets you know by me,
He is resolved to hear him all at large.
I good my friends, I pray you heartily,
Tell vs your minds as mildly as you can:
And we will answer you so well to all,
As you shall not mislike in anything.
We come to revenge your Officers ill demeanour,
And though we have kilt him for his knavery,
Now we be gotten together, we will have wealth and
liberty
It is enough, believe me if you will,
For as I am your true succeeding Prince,
I swear by all the Honour of my Crown,
You shall have liberty and pardon all,
As God hath given it and your lawful King.
Ere wele be pinched with poverty,
To dig our meat and vitals from the ground,
That are as worthy of good maintenance,
As any Gentleman your Grace doth keep,
We will be Kings and Lords within our selves.
And not abide the pride of tyranny.
I pray thee fellow what countryman art thou?
It skils not much, I am an Englishman.
Marry Sir he is a Kentishman, and hath bin my scholar
ere now.
Little good manner hath the villain learned,
To use his Lord and King so barbarously.
Well people ask you any more,
Than to be free and have your liberty.
Then take my word I promise it to you all,
And eke my general pardon now forth with,
Under seal and Letters patents to perform the same.
Let every man betake him to his home,
And with what speed our Clerks can make dispatch,
Your pardons and your Letters patents,
Shall be forth with sent down in every shire.
Marry I thank your Grace, Hob Carter and the Essex
men will home again, and we take your word.
We believe you all, and thank you all,
And presently we will commandment give,
That all this business may be quickly ready.
I tell thee Wat, this is not that that I would have,
I come for more than to be answered thus,
And if the Essex men will needs be gone,
Content, let them go suck their Moms at home,
I came for spoil and spoil Isle have.
Doe what thou wilt Jack, I will follow thee.
How and if it be to the Gallows.
Why that is the worst.
And I faith that is sure, but if you will be ruled by me,
Trust not to his pardon for you die every Mothers son.
But Captains, go forward as we have be gone.
My Masters the boy speaks wisely,
I have red this in Cato, ad cum silium antiquam voceris.
Take good counsel while it is given.
Content boy we will be ruled by thee.
Why how now Captain Miller, I perceive you take
no care which way the world goes.
I faith Nobs I have made a bonfire here of a great many of
Bonds and Indentures and Obligations, faith I have bin
amongst the ends of the Court, &amp; among the Records, &amp;
al that I saw either in the Guild-Hall or in any other place,
I have set fire on them, but where hast thou bin?
I have bin with our Captains, Straw and Tiler, at Saint
Iones in smithfield, but Sir: I can tell you news, Captaine
Carter is gone home, and all our Essex men, and I
fear we shall all be hanged, therefore look you to your
self, for I will look to my self.
Well if wee shall be hanged it is but a folly to be sorry,
But go to it with a good stomach.
Riddle me a riddle, whats this,
I shall be hanged, I shall not be hanged.
What doth that fellow?
It seems Madam, he disputes with himself,
Whether he shall be hanged or no.
Alas poor soul, simple enough God wot,
And yet not so simple as a great many of his company.
If it be as we are let to understand,
My Lord the King hath given them general pardon.
So he hath, &amp; they like honest men are gone homwards,
or at least the most part of them, but worse in mine opineon
is their haps that tarry longest.
But peace here is the Kings Mother, she can do much
with the King, Isle treat her to beg my pardon of the King
wisely, Isle go to her, humbly unto your worships, a pore
Captain Thomas Miller, requesting your favourable bequest,
touching the permission of destroy, towards the said
Captain Miller, which in blunt and flat terms is nominated,
Sursum cordum, alias dictus hangum meum, from
which place of torment God vs all deliver, and grant vs
to be merciful while wee live here together: Now Sir, understanding
your worship is the Kings Mother, lamentbly
in the behalf before spoken, to stand between me
and the Gallows or to beg my pardon, in which you shall
not only save a proper handsome tall fellow and a stout
Captain, but also you shall purchase the prayers of all the
ale wives in the town, for saving a mault-worme and a customer
to help away their strong ale.
What means the fellow by all this eloquence?
It seems he fears he shall be hanged,
And therefore craves your Graces favour in his behalf.
Alas poor fellow, he seems to be a stark nidiot.
Good fellow if thou wilt go beg thy pardon of the King,
I will speak for thee.
Will you in faith, and I will give you a tawdry lace.
Madam here comes an unruly crew lets be gone.
The King &amp; his Nobles think they may sleep in quiet,
Now they have given vs a little holy water at the Court,
But theirs no such matter, we be no such fools
To be bobbed out with words and after come to hanging:
Wat doe the thing thou come for,
If thou wilt be ruled by me, wele not leave it so.
Ran tara have at all my boys.
Says thou so my hart, then farewell my pardon:
For Isle doe as ye doe, hang together for company.
Neighbours and friends never yield,
But fight it lustily in the field:
For God will give you strength and might,
And put your enemies to flight:
To stand against them day and night,
For of mine honesty your quarrels right.
O Parson Ball, before you all,
If all fall out not well, by following thy counsel,
And that by listening to thy talk,
To the Gallows we doe walk:
Parson Ball I will tell thee.
And swear it of mine honesty,
Thou shalt be hanged as well as we.
Peace here comes the King I trow.
What company be those Newton we doe see?
Be them of those that promised vs to part?
Even part of those my good and Gracious Lord,
That promised your highness to depart.
Why then I see they stand not to their words,
And sure they should not break it so with me,
That have so carefully remembered them:
This is a part of great ingratitude.
And it like your Majesty the Essex men,
With far more better minds have parted company,
And every man be tan him to his home.
The chiefest of these Rebels be of Kent,
Of base degree and worse conditions all,
And vowed as I am given to understand,
To nothing but to havoc and to spoil.
Lord Mayor, if it be so I wot,
It is a dangerous and unnatural resolution.
I pray thee Newton go and speak with them,
Ask them what more it is that they require.
My Masters, you that be the chiefest of the rout,
The King entreats you kindly here by me,
To come and speak with him a word or two.
Sir, if the King would any thing with vs,
Tell him the way is indifferent to meet vs.
You are too many to be talked with all,
Besides you owe a duty to your Prince.
Sir, give me the sword thou wear there,
Becomes it thee to be armed in my presence.
Sir I wear my weapon for mine own defence,
And by your leave will wear it yet a while.
What wilt thou villain, give me it I say.
Newton give it him if that be all the matter,
Here take it and much good doe it thee.
Villain I say, give me the sword thou bear up,
For thats the thing I tell thee I assist.
This sword belongs unto my Lord the King,
Tic none of mine, nor shalt thou have the same:
Proud Rebel were but thou and I alone,
Thou durst not ask it thus boldly, at my hands,
For all the wealth this Smithfield doth contain.
By him that did for me, I will not dine,
Till I have seen thee hanged or made away.
Alas Lord Mayor, Newton is in great danger,
And force cannot prevail amongst the rowt.
Old Rome I can remember I have read,
When thou did flourish for virtue, and for arms,
What magnanimity did abide in thee:
Then Walworth as it may become thee well,
Deserve some honour at thy Princes hand,
And butifie this dignity of thine,
With some or other Act of consequence:
Villain I say whence comes this rage of thine,
How dare thou a dunghill bastard borne,
To brave thy Sovereign and his Nobles thus.
Villain I doe arrest thee in my Princes name,
Proud Rebel as thou art take that withal;
Learn thou and all posterity after thee,
What tic a servile slave, to brave a King.
Pardon my Gracious Lord for this my fact,
Is service done to God, and to your self.
Lord Mayor for thy valiant Act in this,
And Noble courage in the Kings behalf,
Thou shalt perceive vs not to be ungrateful.
Our Captain is slain, our Captain is slain.
Fear you not people for I am your King,
And I will be your Captain and your friend.
Pleases your Grace for to with draw your self.
These Rebels then will soon be put to foil.
Soldiers take hart to you and follow me,
1 page duplicate
1 page duplicate
It is our God that gives the victory:
Drag this accursed villain through the streets.
To strike a terror to the Rebels hearts,
London will give you power and arms,
And God will strengthen you and daunt your foes:
Fill Smithfield full of noise and joyful cries,
And say aloud God save our Noble Prince.
LOrd Mayor and well beloved friends,
Whose readiness in aide of vs and ours,
Hath given just trial of your loyalty,
And love you bear to vs and to our land:
Sith by the help and mighty hand of God,
These foul unnatural broils are quieted,
And this unhappy tumult well appeasd:
Having as law and duty binds vs too,
Given both dew praise and sacrifice of thanks,
Unto our God from whom this goodness comes:
Let me now to your counsel recommend,
And to your sad opinions generally,
The end of all these great and high affairs,
This mighty business that we have in hand
And that I may in brief unfold my mind,
My Lords I would not yet, but mercy should,
Against the law in this hard case prevail:
And as I gave my word unto you all,
That if they then had left their mutiny,
Or rather had let fall their wrongful Arms,
Their pardon then should have bin general,
So will I not; yet God forbid I should,
(Though law I know exact it at my hands)
Behold so many of my country men,
All done to death and strangled in one day,
The end is this, that of that careless rout,
That hath so far unnaturally rebeld,
The chief offenders may be punished:
And thus you know my mind, and so my Lords proceed,
I pray you and no otherwise.
Sith mercy in a Prince resembles right,
The gladsome sunne-shine in a winters day,
Pleases your Grace to pardon me to speak:
When all the hope of life and breathing here,
Be tan from all this rowt in general,
If then at instant of the dying howe,
Your Graces Honourable pardon come,
To men half dead, kilt wholly in conceit,
Then think I, it will be more Gracious,
Than if it offered were so hastily:
When third of life is almost ret in twain,
To give it strength breeds thanks, and wonders too.
So many as are tan within the City,
Are fast in hold to know your Graces will,
There is but one or two in al the rowt,
Whom we would have to die for this offence,
Especially that by name are noted men:
One is a naughty and seditious Priest,
They call him Ball, as we are let to know,
A person more notorious than the rest,
But this I doe refer to your dispose.
Pleases your Grace they have bin rid apace,
Such special men as we could possibly find,
And many of the common rowt among:
And yet survives this Ball that cursed Priest,
And one Wat Tiler, leader of the rest:
Whose villainies and outrageous cruelties,
Have bin so barbourously executed:
The one with malice of his traitorous taunts,
The other with the violence of his hands,
That gentle ruth nor mercy hath no ears,
To hear them speak, much less to pardon them.
It is enough, I understand your minds,
And well I wot in causes such as these,
Kings may be found too full of clemency:
But who are those that enter in this place.
Pleases it your Grace, these be the men,
Whom Law hath worthily condemned to die,
Going to the place of execution:
The foremost is that Ball, and next to him,
What Tyler, obstinate Rebels both,
For all the rest are of a better mould,
Whose minds are softer than the foremost twain:
For being common soldiers in the camp,
Were rather led with counsel of the rest,
Deserving better to be pitied.
Morton to those condemned men wee see,
 this a Pardon to them all:
Exceptg namely those two frmost men.
I mean the Priest and him they call What Tillr.
To all the rest free Pardon we doe send,
And give the same to understand from vs.
MY friends and unhappy Countrymen, whom
the laws of England, have worthily condamned
unto death for your open and vnnaturall
Rebellion against your lawful Somereign
and anointed Prince. I am sent unto
you from the Kings most excellent Majesty to give you to
understand, that notwithstanding this violence which you
have offred to your selves, in running furiously into the
danger of the law, as mad and frantickemen upon an edgeneral
sword: yet notwithstanding I say, that you have gathered
rods to scourge your own selves, following desperatelie
your lewd and misgoverned heads, which have hale you
on to this wretched and shameful end which is now imminent
over you all, that must in strangling cords die like
dogs, ad finish your lives in this miserable reprochful sort,
because you would not live like men: But far vlike your
selves unlike Englishmen, degenerate from your natural
obedience, &amp; nature of your country, that by kind brings
forth none such, or at least brooked none such, but spits the
out for bastards and recreants: notwithstanding I say, (this
torment wherein you now live looking every hour to
suffer such a shameful and most detestable death, as doth
commonly, belong to such horrible ffnders) yet it hath
pleased the King of his accustomed goodness to give you
your lives, and freely to forgive you your faults sending
by me general Pardon to you all, excepting one only
accursed and seditious Priest, that so far sweared from the
truth, and his allegiance to his Prince, and one Wat Tiler,
whose outrage hath bin noted so outrageous in al his actions
as for ensample to all Englishmen hereafter, his Majesty
hath thought good to account him &amp; this Parson, (first stirrears
in this tumult, and unnatural rebelling) the greatest
offenders that now live to grieve his Majesty: and thus I
have delivered the message of the King, which is in effect,
general pardon to you all, and a sentence of death unto the
two Archrebels, Iohn Ball, and Wat Tyler: For which great
Grace, if you think your selves any thing bound to his
highness (as infinitely you are) let it appear as far forth
hereafter as you may, either by outward signs of duty, or
inward loyalty of harts expressed, and to begin the same,
in sign of your thankfulness, say all God save the King.
Well then we know the worst,
He can but hang vs, and that is all,
Were Jack Straw a live again,
And I in as good possibility as ever I was,
I would lay a surer trump,
Ere I would lose so fair a trick.
And what I said in time of our business I repent not,
And if it were to speak again,
Every word should be a whole sermon,
So much I repent me.
Away with the Rebels suffer them not to speak,
His words are poison in the ears of the people,
Away villain, stain to thy country and thy calling.
Why Morton are you so lusty with a pox,
I pulled you out of Rochester Castle by the powle.
And in recompense I will help to set your head on a pole.
Pray you lets be powlde first.
Away with the Rebels.
As gave your Grace in charge I have delivered,
Your highness pleasure amongst the prisoners,
And have proclaimed your Graces pardon amongst the all
Save only those two unnatural Englishmen,
O might I say no English nor men,
That Ball and Tyler cursed Rebels both,
Whom I commanded to be executed:
And in your highness name have freed all the rest,
Whose thankful harts I find as full replete,
With signs of joy and duty to your Grace,
As those unnatural Rebels hateful mouths
Are full of foul speeches, and dishonourable.
It is no matter Morton let them bark,
I trow they cannot bite when they be dead.
And Lord Mayor for your valiant act,
And dangerous attempt in our behalf,
To free your country and your King from ill:
In our behalf and in our common weal,
We will accept it as the deed deserves,
And thank you for this honourable attempt.
What subjects harts could brooke the rage of theirs,
To vaunt in presence of their Sovereign Lord,
To brave him to his face before his Pieres,
But would by policy or force attempt,
To quell the raging of such furious foes?
My Sovereign Lord, it was but my duty done,
First unto God, next to my lawful King,
Proceeding from a true and loyal hart,
And so I hope your Grace esteems thereof.
To the end this deed shall rest in memory,
Which shall continue for ever to the end:
Lord Mayor Isle adjoin to thy degree,
Another Title of a lasting fame.
Kneel down William Walworth and receive,
By mine own hand the order of Knighthood:
Stand up Sir William first Knight of thy degree,
But hence forth all which shall succeed thy place,
Shall have like honour for thy Noble deed.
Besides that Time, shall ne'er abridge thy fame,
The City arms shall bear for memory,
The bloody dagger the more for Walworths honour:
Call forth your Harold and receive your due.
My Gracious Lord this honourable Grace
So  desert, sith what I did
My due ad alleagaunce bad me doe,
Binds me and my successors evermore,
With sweet encouragement to the like attempt.
 Majesty and all, our Royal Pieres,
Shall find your London such a store  still,
As not  command our wealth,
But loyal hats the treaur of a Prince,
Shall grow like grains sown in  oil,
And God I praise that with his holy 
Hath given me hart to free my Prince and nd.
Then sith these dangerous broils are over past,
With shedding of so little English blood.
Tic for the fame and honour of a Prince,
Well to reward the Actors of the same,
So many of thy brethren as accompanied thee,
In Smithfield here about this bold attempt,
When time shall serve Isle Knight them as thou art
And so Lord Mayor, Newton, Morton and the rest,
Accompany vs to guard vs to the Tower,
Where wele repose and rest our selves all night.

YOu whoreson droonken slave, you had best be gone,
And empty your droonken paunch some where else
For in this house thou shalt not rest to night.
Telly valley, by crisee Tipster Isle fese you anon.
Fills the tother pot and alls paid for, look you
I doo drink it of mine own Instigation,
Here Isle lie a while, why Tipster I say,
Fills a fresh cushen here.
Heigh ho, heers good warm lying.
Now that the gloomy shadow of the night,
Longing to view Orions drisling looks,
Leaps from th'antarticke World unto the sky
And dims the Welkin with her pitchy breath,
And darksome night oreshades the crystal heavens,
Here break we off our hunting for to night,
Couple up the hounds and let vs hie vs home,
And bid the huntsman see them meated well,
For they have all deserved it well to day,
But soft, what sleepy fellow is this lies here?
Or is he dead, see one what he doth lack?
My lord, tic nothing but a drunken sleep,
His head is too heavy for his body,
And he hath drunk so much that he can go no further.
Fie, how the slavish villain stinks of drink.
Ho, sirha arise. What so sound asleep?
Go take him up and bear him to my house,
And bear him easily for fear he wake,
And in my fairest chamber make a fire,
And set a sumptuous banquet on the board,
And put my richest garments on his back,
Then set him at the Table in a chair:
When that is done against he shall awake,
Let heavenly music play about him still,
Go two of you away and bear him hence,
And then Isle tell you what I have devised,
But see in any case you wake him not.
Now take my cloak and give me one of yours,
Al fellows now, and see you take me so,
For we will waite upon this droonken man,
To see his countnance when he doth awake
And find himself clothed in such attire,
With heavenly music sounding in his ears,
And such a banquet set before his eyes,
The fellow sure will think he is in heaven,
But we will be about him when he wakes,
And see you call him Lord, at every word,
And offer thou him his horse to ride abroad,
And thou his hawks and hounds to hunt the dear,
And I will ask what suits he means to wear,
And what so ere he saith, see you doo not laugh,
But still persuade him that he is a Lord.
And it please your honour your players be com
And doo attend your honours pleasure here.
The fittest time they could have chosen out,
Bid one or two of them come hither straight,
Now will I fit my self accordingly,
For they shall play to him when he awakes.
Now sirs, what store of plays have you?
Marry my lord you may have a Tragical
Or a commodity, or what you will.
A Comedy thou should say, souns thought shame vs all.
And whats the name of your Comedy?
Marry my lord tic called The taming of a shrew:
Tic a good lesson for vs my lord, for vs y are married men
The taming of a shrew, thats excellent sure,
Go see that you make you ready straight,
For you must play before a lord to night,
Say you are his men and I your fellow,
Hes something foolish, but what so ere he says,
See that you be not dashed out of countenance.
And sirha go you make you ready straight,
And dress your self like some lovely lady,
And when I call see that you come to me,
For I will say to him thou art his wife,
Dally with him and hug him in thine arms,
And if he desire to go to bed with thee,
Then fine some scuse and say thou wilt anon.
Be gone I say, and see thou dost it well.
Fear not my Lord, Isle dandell him well enough
And make him think I love him mightily.
Now sirs go you and make you ready to,
For you must play as soon as he doth wake.
O brave, sirha Tom, we must play before
A foolish Lord, come lets go make vs ready,
Go get a dishclout to make clean your shoes,
And Isle speak for the properties, My Lord, we must
Have a shoulder of mutton for a property,
And a little vinegre to make our Devil roar.
Very well: sirha see that they want nothing.
So: sirha now go call my Lord,
And tel him that all things is ready as he wild it.
Another. Set thou some wine upon the board
And then Isle go fetch my Lord presently.
How now, what is all things ready?
I my Lord.
Then sound the music, and Isle wake him straight,
And see you doo as erst I gave in charge.
My lord, My lord, he sleeps soundly: My lord.
Tipster, gis a little small ale. Heigh ho,
Heers wine my lord, the purest of the grape.
For which Lord?
For your honour my Lord.
Who I, am I a Lord? Iesus what fine apparel have I got.
More richer far your honour hath to wear,
And if it please you I will fetch them straight.
And if your honour please to ride abroad,
Isle fetch you lusty steeds more swift of pace
Then winged Pegasus in all his pride,
That ran so swiftly over the Persian plains.
And if your honour please to hunt the dear,
Your hounds stands ready cuppeld at the door,
Who in running will oretake the Row,
And make the long breathed Tiger broken winded.
By the mass I think I am a Lord indeed,
Whats thy name?
Simon and it please your honour.
Simon, thats as much to say Simion or Simon
Put forth thy hand and fill the pot.
Give me thy hand, Simon. am I a lord indeed?
I my gracious Lord, and your lovely lady
Long time hath moorned for your absence here,
And now with joy behold where she doth come
To gratulate your honours safe return.
Simon. Is this she?
I my Lord.
Mass tic a pretty wench, whats her name?
Oh that my lovely Lord would once vouchsafe
To look on me, and leave these frantic fits,
Or were I now but half so eloquent,
To paint in words what isle perform in deeds,
I know your honour then would pity me.
Hark you mistress, will you eat a piece of bread,
Come sit down on my knee, Simon drink to his Simon,
For she and I will go to bed anon.
May it please you, your honours players be come
To offer your honour a play.
A play Simon, O brave, be they my players?
I my Lord.
Is there not a fool in the play?
Yes my lord.
When will they play Simon?
Even when it please your honour, they be ready.
My lord Isle go bid them begin their play.
Doo, but look that you come again.
I warrant you my lord, I will not leave you thus.
Come Simon, where be the players? Simon stand by
Me and weal flout the players out of their cotes.
Isle cal them my lord. Hoe where are you there?
Welcome to Athens my beloved friend,
To Platoes schools and Aristotles walks,
Welcome from Cactus famous for the love
Of good Lender and his Tragedy,
For whom the Helespont weeps brinish tears,
The greatest grief is I cannot as I would
Give entertainment to my dearest friend.
Thanks noble Polidor my second self,
The faithful love which I have found in thee
Hath made me leave my fathers princely court,
The Duke of Cactus thrice renowned seat,
To come to Athens thus to find thee out,
Which since I have so happily attained,
My fortune now I doo account as great
As erst did Caesar when he conquered most,
But tell me noble friend where shall we lodge,
For I am unacquainted in this place.
My Lord if you vouchsafe of scholars fare,
My house, my self, and all is yours to use,
You and your men shall stay and lodge with me.
With all my hart, I will requite thy love,
But stay; what dames are these so bright of hew
Whose eyes are brighter then the lamps of heaven,
Fairer then rocks of pearl and precious stone,
More lovely far then is the morning sun,
When first she ops his oriental gates.
Daughters be gone, and hie you to ye church,
And I will hie me down unto the key,
To see what Merchandise is come a shore.
Why how now my Lord, what in a dump,
To see these damsels pass away so soon?
Trust me my friend I must confess to thee,
I took so much delight in these fair dames,
As I doo wish they had not gone so soon,
But if thou can, resolve me what they be,
And what old man it was that went with them,
For I doo long to see them once again.
I cannot blame your honour good my lord,
For they are both lovely, wise, fair and young,
And one of them the youngest of the three
I long have loved (sweet friend) and she loved me,
But never yet we could not find a means
How we might compass our desired joys.
Why, is not her father willing to the match?
Yes trust me, but he hath solemnly sworn,
His eldest daughter first shall be espowsde,
Before he grants his youngest leave to love,
And therefore he that means to get their loves,
Must first provide for her if he will speed,
And he that hath her shall be fettered so,
As good be wedded to the devil himself,
For such a scold as she did never live,
And till that she be sped none else can speed,
Which makes me think that all my labours lost,
And whosoere can get his firm good will,
A large dowry he shall be sure to have,
For her father is a man of mighty wealth,
And an ancient Citizen of the town,
And that was he that went along with them.
But he shall keep his still by my advise,
And yet I needs must love his second daughter
The image of honour and Nobility,
In whose sweet person is comprisde the sum
Of natures skill and heavenly majesty.
I like your choice, and glad you chose not mine,
Then if you like to follow on your love,
We must devise a means and find some one
That will attempt to wed this devilish scold,
And I doo know the man. Come hither boy,
Go your ways sirha to Ferandoes house,
Desire him take the pains to come to me,
For I must speak with him immediately.
I will sir, and fetch him presently.
A man I think will fit his humour right,
As blunt in speech as she is sharpe of tongue,
And he I think will match his every way,
And yet he is a man of wealth sufficient,
And for his person worth as good as she,
And if he compass his to be his wife,
Then may we freely visit both our loves.
O might I see the center of my soul
Whose sacred beauty hath enchanted me,
More fair then was the Grecian Helena
For whose sweet sake so many princes did,
That came with thousand ships to Tenedos,
But when we come unto his fathers house,
Tell him I am a Merchants son of Cactus,
That comes for traffike unto Athens here,
And here sirha I will change with you for once,
And now be thou the Duke of Cactus son,
Revel and spend as if thou were my self,
For I will court my love in this disguise.
My lord, how if the Duke your father should
By some means come to Athens for to see
How you doo profit in these public schools,
And find me clothed thus in your attire,
How would he take it then think you my lord?
Tush fear not Valerie let me alone,
But stay, here comes some other company.
Here comes the man that I did tel you of.
Good morrow gentlemen to all at once.
How now Polidor, what man still in love?
Ever wooing and can thou never speed,
God send me better luck when I shall woo.
I warrant you moister and you take my council.
Why sirha, are you so cunning?
Who I, it were better for you by five mark
And you could tel how to doo it as well as I.
I would thy moister once were in the vain,
To try himself how he could woe a wench.
Faith I am even now a going.
I faith sir, my masters going to this gear now.
Whither in faith Ferando, tell me true.
To bonie Kate, the patientst wench alive
The devil himself dares scarce venture to woo her,
Signior Alfonsos eldest daughter,
And he hath promised me six thousand crowns
If I can win her once to be my wife,
And she and I must woo with skoulding sure,
And I will hold his toot till she be weary,
Or else Isle make her yield to grant me love.
How like you this Aurelius, I think he knew
Our minds before we sent to him,
But tell me, when doo you mean to speak with her?
Faith presently, doo you but stand aside,
And I will make her father bring his hither,
And she, and I, and he, will talk alone.
With al our hearts, Come Aurelius
Let vs be gone and leave him here alone.
Ho Seignior Alfonso, whose within there?
Seignior Ferando your welcome heartily,
You are a stranger sir unto my house.
Hark you sir, look what I did promise you
Isle perform, if you get my daughters love.
Then when I have talked a word or two with his,
Doo you step in and give her hand to me,
And tell her when the marriage day shall be,
For I doo know she would be married fine,
And when our nuptial rites be once performed
Let me alone to tame his well enough,
Now call her forth that I may speak with his.
Ha Kate, Come hither wench &amp; list to me,
Use this gentleman friendly as thou can.
Twenty good morrows to my lovely Kate.
You jest I am sure, is she yours already?
I tell thee Kate I know thou love me well.
The devil you doo, who told you so?
My mind sweet Kate doth say I am the man,
Must wed, and bed, and marry bonnie Kate.
Was ever seen so gross an ass as this?
I, to stand so long and never get a kiss.
Hands off I say, and get you from this place;
Or I will set my ten commandments in your face.
I prethe doo kate; they say thou art a shrew,
And I like thee the better for I would have thee so.
Let go my hand, for fear it reach your ear.
No kate, this hand is mine and I thy love.
In faith sir no the woodcock wants his tail.
But yet his bil will serve, if the other fail.
How now Ferando, what says my daughter?
Shees willing sir and loves me as his life.
Tic for your skin then, but not to be your wife.
Come hither Kate and let me give thy hand
To him that I have chosen for thy love,
And thou to morrow shalt be wed to him.
Why father, what do you mean to do with me,
To give me thus unto this brainsick man,
That in his mood cares not to murder me?
She turns aside and speaks.
But yet I will consent and marry him,
For I methinkes have lived too long a maid,
And match him to, or else his manhoods good.
Give me thy hand Ferando loves thee well,
And will with wealth and ease maintain thy state.
Here Ferando take her for thy wife,
And sunday next shall be your wedding day.
Why so, did I not tell thee I should be the man
Father, I leave my lovely Kate with you,
Provide your selves against our marriage day,
For I must hie me to my country house
In hast, to see provision may be made,
To entertain my Kate when she doth come.
Doo so, come Kate, why dost thou look
So sad, be merry wench thy wedding days at hand.
Son fare you well, and see you keep your promise.
So, all thus far goes well. Ho Saunder.
Sander, I faith your a beast, I cry God heartily
Mercy, my harts ready to run out of my belly with
Laughing, I stood behind the door all this while,
And heard what you said to his.
Why did thou think that I did not speak well to his?
You spoke like an ass to her, Isle tel you what,
And I had been there to have wood his, and had this
Cloak on that you have, chud have had her before she
Had gone a foot further, and you talk of Woodcocks
with her, and I cannot tell you what.
Well sirha, &amp; yet thou see I have got her for all this.
I marry it was more by hap then any good cunning
I hope sheele make you one of the head men of the parish shortly.
Well sirha leave your jesting and go to Polidors house,
The young gentleman that was here with me,
And tell him the circumstance of all thou know,
Tell him on sunday next we must be married,
And if he ask thee whither I am gone,
Tell him into the country to my house,
And upon sundaie Isle be here again.
I warrant you Moister fear not me
For doing of my business.
Now hang him that has not a livery cote
To slash it out and swash it out amongst the proudest
On them. Why look you now Isle scarce put up
Plain Saunder now at any of their hands, for and any
Body have any thing to doo with my moister, straight
They come crouching upon me, I beseech you good M.
Saunder speak a good word for me, and then am I so
Stout and takes it upon me, &amp; stands upon my pantoflles
To them out of all cry, why I have a life like a giant
Now, but that my moister hath such a pestilent mind
To a woman now a late, and I have a pretty wench
To my sister, and I had thought to have preferred my
Moister to her, and that would have been a good
Deal in my way but that hes sped already.
Friend, well met.
Souns, friend well met. I hold my life he sees
Not my masters livery coat,
Plain friend hop of my thum, know you who we are.
Trust me sir it is the use where I was borne,
To salute men after this manner, yet notwithstanding
If you be angry with me for calling of you friend,
I am the more sorry for it, hoping the stile
Of a fool will make you amends for all.
The slave is sorry for his fault, now we cannot be
Angry, well whats the matter that you would do with vs.
Marry sir, I hear you pertain to signior Ferando.
I and thou be not blind thou moist see, Ass signum, here.
Shall I entreat you to doo me a message to your Moister?
I, it may be, &amp; you tel vs from whence you com.
Marry sir I serve young Polidor your masters friend.
Do you serve him, and whats your name?
My name sirha, I tell thee sirha is called Catapie.
Cake and pie, O my teeth waters to have a piece of thee.
Why slave would thou eat me?
Eat thee, who would not eat Cake and pie?
Why villain my name is Catapie,
But wilt thou tell me where thy moister is.
Nay thou must first tell me where thy moister is,
For I have good news for him, I can tell thee.
Why see where he comes.
Come sweet Aurelius my faithful friend,
Now will we go to see those lovely dames
Richer in beauty then the orient pearl,
Whiter then is the Alpine Crystal mould,
And far more lovely then the terean plant,
That blushing in the air turns to a stone.
What Sander, what news with you?
Marry sir my moister sends you word
That you must come to his wedding to morrow.
What, shall he be married then?
Faith I, you think he stands as long about it as you doo.
Whither is thy moister gone now?
Marry hes gone to our house in the Country,
To make all things in a readiness against my new
Mistress comes thither, but heel come again to morrow.
This is suddenly dispatcht belike,
Well, sirha boy, take Saunder in with you
And have him to the buttrie presently.
I will sir: come Saunder.
Valerie as erst we did devise,
Take thou thy lute and go to Alfonsos house,
And say that Polidor sent thee thither.
I Valerie for he spoke to me,
To help him to some cunning Musician,
To teach his eldest daughter on the lute,
And thou I know will fit his turn so well
As thou shalt get great favour at his hands,
Begone Valerie and say I sent thee to him.
I will sir and stay your coming at Alfonsos house.
Now sweet Aurelius by this devise
Shall we have leisure for to court our loves,
For whilst that she is learning on the lute,
His sisters may take time to steel abroad,
For otherwise shele keep them both within,
And make them work whilst she his self doth play,
But come lets go unto Alfonsos house,
And see how Valerie and Kate agrees,
I dout his Music scarce will please his scholar,
But stay here comes Alfonso.
What M. Polidor you are well met,
I thank you for the man you sent to me,
A good Musician I think he is,
I have set my daughter and him together,
But is this gentleman a friend of yours?
He is, I pray you sir bid him welcome,
He's a wealthy Merchants son of Cactus.
Your welcome sir and if my house aforde
You any thing that may content your mind,
I pray you sir make bold with me.
I thank you sir, and if what I have got,
By merchandise or travel on the seas,
Satins or lawns or azure coloured silk,
Or precious fiery pointed stones of Indie,
You shall command both them my self and all.
Thanks gentle sir, Polidor take him in,
And bid him welcome to unto my house,
For thou I think must be my second son,
Ferando, Polidor dost thou not know
Must marry Kate, and to morrow is the day.
Such news I heard, and I came now to know.
Polidor tic true, go let me alone,
For I must see against the bridegroom come,
That all things be according to his mind,
And so Isle leave you for an hour or two.
Come then Aurcleus come in with me,
And weal go sit a while and chat with them,
And after bring them forth to take the air.
Simon, when will the fool come again?
Heel come again my Lord anon.
Gis some more drink here, souns wheres
The Tipster, here Simon eat some of these things.
So I doo my Lord.
Here Simon, I drink to thee.
My Lord here comes the players again,
O brave, heers two fine gentlewomen.
The senseless trees by music have bin moved
And at the sound of pleasant tuned strings,
Have savage beasts hung down their listening heads,
As though they had been cast into a trance.
Then it may be that she whom nought can please,
With musickes sound in time may be surprised,
Come lovely mistress will you take your lute,
And play the lesson that I taught you last?
It is no matter whether I doo or no,
For trust me I take no great delight in it.
I would sweet mistress that it lay in me,
To help you to that thing thats your delight.
In you with a pestlence, are you so kind?
Then make a night cap of your fiddles case,
To warm your head, and hide your filthy face.
If that sweet mistress were your harts content,
You should command a greater thing then that,
Although it were ten times to my disgrace.
Your so kind it were pity you should be hanged,
And yet methinkes the fool doth look acquaint.
Why mistress doo you mock me?
No, but I mean to move thee.
Well, will you play a little?
I, give me the Lute.
That stop was false, play it again.
Then mend it thou, thou filthy ass.
What, doo you bid me kiss your arse?
How now jack sauce, your a jolly mate,
Your best be still least I cross your pate,
And make your music fly about your ears,
Isle make it and your foolish coxcomb meet.
She offers to strike him with the lute.
Hold mistress, souns will you break my lute?
I on thy head, and if thou speak to me,
There take it up and fiddle somewhere else,
She throws it down.
And see you come no more into this place,
Least that I clap your fiddle on your face.
Souns, teach his to play upon the lute?
The devil shall teach her first, I am glad shees gone,
For I was near so afraid in all my life,
But that my lute should fly about mine ears,
My moister shall teach her his self for me,
For Isle keep me far enough without his reach,
For he and Polydor sent me before
To be with her and teach her on the lute,
Whilst they did court the other gentlewomen,
And here methinkes they come together.
How now Valerie, whears your mistress?
At the vengeance I think and no where else.
Why Valerie, will she not learn apace?
Yes byr'lady she has learnt too much already,
And that I had felt had I not spoke his fair,
But she shall near be learnt for me again.
Well Valerie go to my chamber,
And bear him company that came to day
From Cactus, where our aged father dwells.
Come fair Emelia my lovely love,
Brighter then the burnished palace of the sun,
The eie-sight of the glorious firmament,
In whose bright looks sparkles the radiant fire,
Wily Prometheus silly stole from Jove,
Infusing breath, life, motion, soul,
To every object stricken by thine eyes.
Oh fair Emelia I pine for thee,
And either must enjoy thy love, or die.
Fie man, I know you will not die for love:
Ah Polidor thou need not to complain,
Eternal heaven sooner be dissolude,
And all that pearseth Phebus silver eye,
Before such hap befall to Polidor.
Thanks fair Emelia for these sweet words,
But what saith Phylena to his friend?
Why I am buying merchandise of him.
Mistress you shall not need to buy of me,
For when I crossed the bubbling Canibey,
And sailed along the Crystal Helispont,
I filed my confers of the wealthy mines,
Where I did cause Millions of labouring Moors
To undermine the caverns of the earth,
To seek for strange and new found precious stones,
And dive into the sea to gather pearl,
As fair as Iuno offered Priams son,
And you shall take your liberal choice of all.
I thank you sir and would Phylena might
In any courtesy requite you so,
As she with willing hart could well bestow.
How now daughters, is Ferando come?
Not yet father, I wonder he stays so long.
And wheres your sister that she is not here?
She is making of his ready father
To go to church and if that he were come.
I warrant you heel not be long away.
Go daughters get you in, and bid your
Sister provide her self against that we doo come,
And see you go to church along with vs.
I marvel that Ferando comes not away.
His Tailor it may be hath bin too slack,
In his apparel which he means to wear,
For no question but some fantastic suits
He is determined to wear to day,
And richly powdered with precious stones,
Spotted with liquid gold, thick set with pearl,
And such he means shall be his wedding suits.
I card not I what cost he did bestow,
In gold or silk, so he himself were here,
For I had rather lose a thousand crowns,
Then that he should deceive vs here to day,
But soft I think I see him come.
Godmorow father, Polidor well met,
You wonder I know that I have staid so long.
I marry son, we were almost persuaded,
That we should scarce have had our bridegroom here,
But say, why art thou thus basely attired?
Thus richly father you should have said,
For when my wife and I am married once,
Shees such a shrew, if we should once fall out,
Sheele pull my costly suits over mine ears,
And therefore am I thus attired awhile,
For many things I tell you's in my head,
And none must know thereof but Kate and I,
For we shall live like lammes and Lions sure,
Nor lammes to Lions never was so tame,
If once they lie within the Lions paws
As Kate to me if we were married once,
And therefore come let vs to church presently.
Fie Ferando not thus attired for shame,
Come to my Chamber and there suit thy self,
Of twenty suits that I did never were???
Tush Polidor I have as many suits
Fantastic made to fit my humour so
As any in Athens and as richly wrought
As was the Massy Robe that late adorned,
The stately legate of the Persian King,
And this from them have I made choice to wear.
I prithee Ferando let me entreat
Before thou goste unto the church with vs,
To put some other suit upon thy back.
Not for the world if I might gain it so,
And therefore take me thus or not at all,
But soft se where my Kate doth come,
I must salute his: how fares my lovely Kate?
What art thou ready? shall we go to church?
Not I with one so mad, so basely tired,
To marry such a filthy slavish groom,
That as it seems sometimes is from his wits,
Or else he would not thus have come to vs.
Tush Kate these words adds greater love in me
And makes me think thee fairer then before,
Sweet Kate the lovelier then Dianas purple robe,
Whiter then are the snowy Apenis,
Or icy hair that groes on Bores chin.
Father I swear by Ibis golden beak,
More fair and Radiente is my bonie Kate,
Then silver Zanthus when he doth embrace,
The ruddy Simies at Ides feet,
And care not thou sweet Kate how I be clad,
Thou shalt have garments wrought of Median silk,
Enchased with precious Jewels fished from far,
By Italian Merchants that with Russian stemes,
Plous up huge sorrows in the Terren Maine,
And better far my lovely Kate shall wear,
Then come sweet love and let vs to the church,
For this I swear shall be my wedding suit.
Come gentlemen go along with vs,
For thus doo what we can he will be wed.
Come hither sirha boy.
Boy; oh disgrace to my person, souns boy
Of your face, you have many boys with such
Pickadeuantes I am sure, souns would you
Not have a bloody nose for this?
Come, come, I did but jest, where is that
Same piece of pie that I gave thee to keep.
The pie? I you have more mind of your belly
Then to go see what your moister dooes.
Tush tic no matter man I prethe give it me,
I am very hungry I promise thee.
Why you may take it and the devil burst
You with it, one cannot save a bit after supper,
But you are always ready to munch it up.
Why come man, we shall have good cheer
Anon at the bridehouse, for your masters gone to
Church to be married already, and thears
Such cheer as passes.
O brave, I would I had eat no meat this week,
For I have never a corner left in my belly
To put a venson pastie in, I think I shall burst my self
With eating, for Isle so cram me down the tarts
And the marchpaines, out of all cry.
I, but how wilt thou doo now thy masters
Married, thy mistress is such a devil, as sheele make
Thee forget thy eating quickly, sheele beat thee so.
Let my moister alone with his for that, for
Heel make his tame well enough ere lunge I warrant thee
For he's such a churl waxen now of late that and he be
Never so little angry he thums me out of all cry,
But in my mind sir the youngest is a very
Pretty wench, and if I thought thy moister would
Not have his Id have a fling at his
My self, Isle see soon whether twill be a match
Or no: and it will not Isle set the matter
Hard for my self I warrant thee.
Sounes you slave will you be a Rival with
My moister in his love, speak but such
Another word and Isle cut off one of thy legs.
Oh, cruel judgment, nay then sir,
My tongue shall talk no more to you, marry my
Timber shall tell the trusty message of his moister,
Even on the very forehead on thee, thou abusious
Villain, therefore prepare thy self.
Come hither thou Imperfecksious slave in
Regard of thy beggary, hold thee theres
Twoshillings for thee? to pay for the
Healing of thy left leg which I mean
Furiously to invade or to maim at the least.
O supernodicall foul? well Isle take your
two shillings but Isle bar striking at legs.
Not I, for Isle strike any where.
Here here take your two shillings again
Isle see thee hanged ere Isle fight with thee,
I gat a broken shin the other day,
Tic not, whole yet and therefore Isle not fight
Come come why should we fall out?
Well sirray your fair words hath something
Allayed my Collar: I am content for this once
To put it up and be friends with thee,
But soft see where they come all from church,
Belike they be Married already.
Father farewell, my Kate and I must home,
Sir go make ready my horse presently.
Your horse! what son I hope you doo but jest,
I am sure you will not go so suddenly.
Let him go or tarry I am resolved to stay,
And not to travel on my wedding day.
Tut Kate I tell thee we must needs go home,
Villain hast thou saddled my horse?
Which horse, your curtal?
Sounes you slave stand you prating here?
Saddell the bay gelding for your Mistress.
Not for me: for Isle not go.
The ostler will not let me have him, you owe ten pence???
For his meat, and 6 pence for stuffing my mistress saddle.
Here villain go pay him straight.
Shall I give them another peck of lavender.
Out slave and bring them presently to the door
Why son I hope at least you'll dine with vs.
I pray you moister lets stay till dinner be don.
Sounes villain art thou here yet?
Come Kate our dinner is provided at home.
But not for me, for here I mean to dine.
Isle have my will in this as well as you,
Though you in matting mood would leave your friends
Despite of you Isle tarry with them still.
I Kate so thou shalt but at some other time,
When as thy sisters here shall be espousd,
Then thou and I will keep our wedding day,
In better sort then now we can provide,
For here I promise thee before them all,
We will ere long return to them again,
Come Kate stand not on terms we will away,
This is my day, to morrow thou shalt rule,
And I will doo what ever thou commands.
Gentlemen farewell, wele take our leues,
It will be late before that we come home.
Farewell Ferando since you will be gone.
So mad a couple did I never see.
They're even as well mashed as I would wish.
And yet I hardly think that he can tame her.
For when he has don she will do what she list.
Her manhood then is good I do believe.
Aurelius or else I miss my mark,
Her tongue will walk if she doth hold her hands,
I am in dout ere half a month be past
Heal curse the priest that married him so soon,
And yet it may be she will be reclaimde,
For she is very patient groan of late.
God hold it that it may continue still,
I would be loath that they should disagree,
But he I hope will hold her in a while.
Within this two days I will ride to him,
And see how lovingly they do agree.
Now Aurelius what say you to this,
What have you sent to Cactus as you said,
To certify your father of your love,
For I would gladly he would like of it,
And if he be the man you tell to me,
I guess he is a Merchant of great wealth.
And I have seen him oft at Athens here,
And for his sake assure thee thou art welcome.
And so to me whilst Polidor doth live.
I find it so right worthy gentlemen,
And of what worth your friendship I esteem,
I leave censure of your several thoughts,
But for requital of your favours past,
Rests yet behind, which when occasion serves
I vow shall be remembered to the full,
And for my fathers coming to this place,
I do expect within this week at most.
Enough Aurelieus? but we forget
Our Marriage dinner now the bride is gon,
Come let vs se what there they left behind.
Come sirs provide all things as fast as you can,
For my Masters hard at hand and my new Mistress
And all, and he sent me before to see all things ready.
Welcome home Sander sir how looks our
New Mistress they say she's a plagie shrew.
I and that thou shalt find I can tell thee and thou
Dost not please her well, why my Moister
Has such a doo with his as it passes and he's even
like a madman.
Why Sander what dos he say.
Why Isle tell you what: when they should
Go to church to be married he puts on an old
Jerkin and a pair of canvas breeches down to the
Small of his leg and a red cap on his head and he
Looks as thou wilt burst thy self with laffing
When thou see him: he's en as good as a
Fool for me: and then when they should go to dinner
He made me Saddle the horse and away he came.
And ne'er tarried for dinner and therefore you had best
Get supper reddy against they come, for
They be hard at hand I am sure by this time.
Sounes see where they be all ready.
Now welcome Kate: wher'es these villains
Here, what? not supper yet upon the board:
Nor table spread nor nothing don at all,
Wheres that villain that I sent before.
Now, adsum, sir.
Come hither you villain Isle cut your nose,
You Rogue: help me of with my boots: wilt please
You to lay the cloth? sounes the villain
Hurts my foot? pull easily I say; yet again.
Sounes? burnt and scorched who dressed this meat?
Forsooth Iohn cooke.
He throws down the table and meat
and all, and beats them.
Go you villains bring you me such meat,
Out of my sight I say and bear it hence,
Come Kate wele have other meat provided,
Is there a fire in my chamber sir?
I forsooth.
Sounes? I think of my conscience my Masters
Mad since he was married.
I laft what a box he gave Sander
For pulling of his boots.
I hurt his foot for the nonce man.
Did you so you damned villain.
This humour must I hold me to a while,
To bridle and hold back my headstrong wife,
With curbs of hunger: ease: and want of sleep,
Nor sleep nor meat shall she enjoy to night,
Isle mew her up as men do mew their hawks,
And make her gently come unto the lure,
Were she as stuborne or as full of strength
As were the Thracian horse Alcides tamed,
That King Egeus fed with flesh of men,
Yet would I pull her down and make her come
As hungry hawks do fly unto there lure.
Valerie attend: I have a lovely love,
As bright as is the heaven cristalline,
As fair as is the milk white way of Jove,
As chaste as Phoebe in her summer sports,
As soft and tender as the asure down,
That circles Cithereas silver doves.
Her do I mean to make my lovely bride,
And in her bed to breath the sweet content,
That I thou know long time have aimed at.
Now Valerie it rests in thee to help
To compass this, that I might gain my love,
Which easily thou moist perform at will,
If that the merchant which thou toldst me of,
Will as he said go to Alfonsos house,
And say he is my father, and there with all
Pas over certain deeds of land to me,
That I thereby may gain my hearts desire,
And he is promised reward of me.
Fear not my Lord Isle fetch him straight to you,
For heal do any thing that you command,
But tell me my Lord, is Ferando married then?
He is: and Polidor shortly shall be wed,
And he means to tame his wife erelong.
He says so.
Faith he's gon unto the taming school.
The taming school??? why is there such a place?
I: and Ferando is the Moister of the school.
Thats rare: but what decorum dos he use?
Faith I know not: but by some odd devise
Or other, but come Valerie I long to see the man,
By whom we must comprise our plotted drift,
That I may tell him what we have to doo.
Then come my Lord and I will bring you to him straight.
Agreed, then lets go.
Come Mistress.
Sander I prethe help me to some meat,
I am so faint that I can scarcely stand.
I marry mistress but you know my moister
Has given me a charge that you must eat nothing,
But that which he himself gives you.
Why man thy Moister needs never know it.
You say true indeed: why look you Mistress,
What say you to a peese of beeffe and mustard now?
Why I say tic excellent meat, can thou help me to some?
I, I could help you to some but that
I doubt the mustard is too choleric for you,
But what say you to a sheep head and garlic?
Why any thing, I care not what it be.
I but the garlic I doubt will make your breath
stink, and then my Moister will course me for letting
You eat it: But what say you to a fat Capon?
Thats meat for a King sweet Sander help
Me to some of it.
Nay byr'lady then tic too dear for vs, we must
Not meddle with the Kings meat.
Out villain dost thou mock me,
Take that for thy sauciness.
Sounes are you so light fingered with a murrin,
Isle keep you fasting for it this two days.
I tell thee villain Isle tear the flesh of
Thy face and eat it and thou prates to me thus.
Here comes my Moister now heal course you.
Se here Kate I have provided meat for thee,
Here take it: what first not worthy thanks,
Go sir? take it away again you shall be
Thankful for the next you have.
Why I thank you for it.
Nay now tic not worth a pin go sirray and take
It hence I say.
Yes sir Isle Carry it hence: Moister let her
Have none for she can fight as hungry as she is.
I pray you sir let it stand, for Isle eat
Some with her my self.
Well sir set it down again.
Nay nay I pray you let him take it hence,
And keep it for your own diet for Isle none,
Isle ne'er be beholding to you for your Meat,
I tell thee flatly here unto the thy teethe
Thou shalt not keep me nor feed me as thou list,
For I will home again unto my fathers house.
I, when you're meek and gentell but not
Before, I know your stomach is not yet come down,
Therefore no marvel thou can not eat,
And I will go unto your Fathers house,
Come Polidor let vs go in again,
And Kate come in with vs I know ere lunge,
That thou and I shall lovingly agree.
Now Senior Phylotus, we will go
Unto Alfonsos house, and be sure you say
As I did tell you, concerning the man
That dwells in Cactus, whose son I said I was,
For you doo very much resemble him,
And fear not: you may be bold to speak your mind.
I warrant you sir take you no care,
Isle use my self so cunning in the cause,
As you shall soon enjoy your harts delight.
Thanks sweet Phylotus, then stay you here,
And I will go and fetch him hither straight.
Ho, Senior Alfonso: a word with you.
Whose there? what Aurelius whats the matter
That you stand so like a stranger at the door?
My father sir is newly come to town,
And I have brought him here to speak with you,
Concerning those matters that I told you of,
And he can certify you of the truth.
Is this your father? you are welcome sir.
Thanks Alfonso, for thats your name I guess,
I understand my son hath set his mind
And bent his liking to your daughters love,
And for because he is my only son,
And I would gladly that he should doo well,
I tell you sir, I not mislike his choice,
If you agree to give him your consent,
He shall have living to maintain his state,
Three hundred pounds a year I will assure
To him and to his heirs, and if they do join,
And knit themselves in holy wedlock band,
A thousand massy in gots of pure gold,
And twice as many bares of silver plate,
I freely give him, and in writing straight,
I will confirm what I have said in words.
Trust me I must commend your liberal mind,
And loving care you bear unto your son,
And here I give him freely my consent,
As for my daughter I think he knows her mind,
And I will in large her dowry for your sake.
And solemnise with joy your nuptial rites,
But is this gentleman of Cactus too?
He is the Duke of Cactus thrice renowned son,
Who for the love his honour bears to me:
Hath thus accompanied me to this place.
You wear to blame you told me not before,
Pardon me my Lord, for if I had known
Your honour had bin here in place with me,
I would have donne my duty to your honour.
Thanks good Alfonso: but I did come to see
When as these marriage rites should be performed,
And if in these nuptials you vouchsafe,
To honour thus the prince of Cactus friend,
In celebration of his spousal rites,
He shall remain a lasting friend to you,
What says Aurelius father.
I humbly thank your honour good my Lord,
And ere we part before your honour here:
Shall articles of such content be drawn,
As twixt our houses and post???ities,
Eternally this league of peace shall last,
Inviolate and pure on either part:
With all my heart, and if your honour please,
To walk along with vs unto my house,
We will confirm these leagues of lasting love.
Come then Aurelius I will go with you.
Master the haberdasher has brought my
Mistress home her cap here.
Come hither sir: what have you there?
A velvet cap sir and it please you.
Who spoke for it? did thou Kate?
What if I did, come hither sir, give me
The cap, Isle see if it will fit me.
O monstrous: why it becomes thee not,
Let me see it Kate: here sir take it hence,
This cap is out of fashion quite.
The fashion is good enough: belike you,
Mean to make a fool of me.
Why true he means to make a fool of thee,
To have thee put on such a curtald cap,
sir begone with it.
Here is the Taylor too with my Mistress gown.
Let me see it Taylor: what with cuts and iagges?
Sounes you villain, thou hast spoiled the gown.
Why sir I made it as your man gave me direc???tion,
You may read the note here.
Come hither sir: Taylor read the note.
Item a fair round compassed cape.
I thats true.
And a large trunk sleeve.
Thats a lie moister, I said two trunk sleeves.
Well sir go forward.
Item a loose bodied gown.
Moister if ever I said loose bodies gown,
Sew me in a seam and beat me to death,
With a bottom of browne thread.
I made it as the note bad me.
I say the note lies in his throat and thou too,
And thou say it.
Nay nay ne'er be so hot sir, for I fear you not.
Dost thou hear Taylor, thou hast braved
Many men: brave not me.
Thou'st fast many men.
Well sir.
Face not me Isle nether be fast nor braved
At thy hands I can tell thee.
Come come I like the fashion of it well enough,
Here is more a do then needs Isle have it,
And if you do not like it hide your eyes,
I think I shall have nothing by your will.
Go I say and take it up for your masters use.
Souns: villain not for thy life touch it not,
Souns, take up my mistress gown to his
Masters use?
Well sir: whats your conceit of it.
I have a deeper conceit in it then you
think for, take up my Mistress gown
To his masters use?
Tailor come hither: for this time take it
Hence again, and Isle content thee for thy pains.
I thank you sir.
Come Kate we now will go see thy fathers house
Even in these honest mean habiliments,
Our purses shall be rich, our garments plain,
To shroud our bodies from the winter rage,
And thats enough, what should we care for more.
Thy sisters Kate to morrow must be wed,
And I have promised them thou should be there
The morning is well up lets hast away,
It will be nine a clock ere we come there.
Nine a clock, why tic already past two
In the after noon by all the clocks in the town.
I say tic but nine a clock in the morning.
I say tic tow a clock in the after noon.
It shall be nine then ere we go to your fathers,
Come back again, we will not go to day.
Nothing but crossing of me still,
Isle have you say as I doo ere you go.
Fair Emelia summers sun bright Queen,
Brighter of hew then is the burning clime,
Where Phoebus in his bright equator sits,
Creating gold and pressious minerals,
What would Emelia doo? if I were forced
To leave fair Athens and to range the world.
Should thou assay to scale the seat of love,
Mounting the subtle airy regions
Or be snatched up as erst was Ganimed,
Love should give wings unto my swift desires,
And prune my thoughts that I would follow thee,
Or fall and perish as did Icarus.
Sweetly resolved fair Emelia,
But would Phylema say as much to me,
If I should ask a question now of thee,
What if the duke of Cactus only son,
Which came with me unto your fathers house,
Should seek to git Phylemas love from me,
And make thee Duchess of that stately town,
Would thou not then forsake me for his love?
Not for great Neptune, no nor Jove himself,
Will Phylema leave Aurelius love,
Could he install me Empres of the world,
Or make me Queen and guidres of the heavens,
Yet would I not exchange thy love for his,
Thy company is poor Philemas heaven,
And without thee, heaven were hell to me.
And should my love as erst did Hercules
Attempt to pass the burning volts of hell,
I would with piteous looks and pleasing words,
As once did Orpheus with his harmony,
And ravishing sound of his melodious harp,
Entreat grim Pluto and of him obtain,
That thou might go and safe return again.
And should my love as erst Lender did,
Attempt to swim the boiling helispont
For Heroes love: no towers of brass should hold
But I would follow thee through those raging floods,
With lockes disheuered and my breast all bare,
With bended knees upon Abides sure,
I would with smoky sighs and brinish tears,
Importune Neptune and the watery Gods,
To send a guard of silver scaled Dolphins,
With sounding Tritons to be our convoy,
And to transport vs safe unto the shore,
Whilst I would hang about thy lovely neck,
Redoubling kiss on kiss upon thy cheeks,
And with our pastime still the swelling waives.
Should Polidor as great Achilles did,
Only employ himself to follow arms,
Like to the warlike Amazonian Queen,
Pentheselea Hectors paramore,
Who foiled the bloody Pirrhus murderous greek,
Isle thrust my self amongst the thickest throngs,
And with my utmost force assist my love.
Let Eole storm: be mild and quiet thou,
Let Neptune swell, be Aurelius calm and pleased,
I care not I, betide what may betide,
Let fates and fortune doo the worst they can,
I reck them not: they not discord with me,
Whilst that my love and I do well agree???
Sweet Phylema beauties mineral,
From whence the sun exhales his glorious shine,
And clad the heaven in thy reflected rays,
And now my liefest love, the time draws no,
That Himen mounted in his saffron robe,
Must with his torches weight upon thy train,
As Hellens brothers on the horned Moon,
Now Iuno to thy number shall I add,
The fairest bride that ever Merchant had.
Come fair Emelia the priest is gon,
And at the church your father and the rest,
Do stay to see our marriage rites performed,
And knit in sight of heaven this Gordian knot.
That teeth of fretting time may ne'er vntwist,
Then come fair love and gratulate with me,
This days content and sweet solemnity.
Simon must they be married now?
I my Lord.
Look Simon the fool is come again now.
Sir go fetch our horses forth, and bring
Them to the back gate presentile.
I will sir I warrant you,
Come Kate the Moon shines clear to night methinkes.
The moon? why husband you are deceiud
It is the sun.
Yet again: come back again it shall be
The moon ere we come at your fathers.
Why Isle say as you say it is the moon.
Iesus save the glorious moon.
Iesus save the glorious moon.
I am glad Kate your stomach is come down,
I know it well thou know it is the sun,
But I did try to see if thou would speak,
And cross me now as thou hast donne before,
And trust me kate had thou not named the moon,
We had gon back again as sure as death,
But soft whose this thats coming here.
Thus all alone from Cactus am I come,
And left my princely court and noble train,
To come to Athens, and in this disguise,
To see what course my son Aurelius takes,
But stay, here is some it may be Travels thither,
Good sir can you derect me the way to Athens?
Fair lovely maid young and affable,
More clear of hew and far more beautiful,
Then precious Sardonix or purple rocks,
Of Amithests or glistening Hiasinthe,
More amiable far then is the plain,
Where glistering Cepherus in silver boures,
Gaseth upon the Giant Andromede,
Sweet Kate entertain this lovely woman.
I think the man is mad he calls me a woman.
Fair lovely lady, bright and Crystalline,
Beauteous and stately as the eie-traind bird,
As glorious as the morning washed with dew,
Within whose eyes she takes her dawning beams,
And golden summer sleeps upon thy cheeks,
Wrap up thy radiations in some cloud,
Least that thy beauty make this stately town,
Inhabitable like the burning Zone,
With sweet reflections of thy lovely face.
What is she mad to? or is my shape transformed???
That both of them persuade me I am a woman,
But they are mad sure, and therefore Isle begone,
And leave their companies for fear of harm,
And unto Athens hast to seek my son.
Why so Kate this was friendly done of thee,
And kindly too: why thus must we two live,
One mind, one heart, and one content for both,
This good old man dos think that we are mad,
And glad he is I am sure, that he is gone,
But come sweet Kate for we will after him,
And now persuade him to his shape again.
Come lovely sons your marriage rites performed,
Lets hie vs home to see what cheer we have,
I wonder that Ferando and his wife
Comes not to see this great solemnity.
No marvel if Ferando be away,
His wife I think hath troubled so his wits,
That he remains at home to keep them warm,
For forward wedlock as the prouer be says,
Hath brought him to his night cap long ago.
But Polidor let my son and you take heed,
That Ferando say not ere long as much to you,
And now Alfonso more to show my love,
If unto Cactus you do send your ships,
My self will fraught them with Arabian silks,
Rich africa spices Arras counter poines,
Musk Cassia: sweet smelling Ambergreece,
Pearl, curroll??? crystal, jet, and ivory,
To gratulate the favours of my son,
And friendly love that you have shone to him.
And for to honour him and this fair bride,
Isle yearly send you from my fathers court,
Chests of refined sugar severally,
Ten tun of tunis wine, sucket sweet drugs,
To celibrate and solemnise this day,
And custom free your merchants shall converse:
And interchange the profits of your land,
Sending you gold for brass, silver for lead,
Casses of silk for packs of woll and cloth,
To bind this friendship and confirm this league.
I am glad sir that you would be so frank,
Are you become the Duke of Cactus son,
And revels with my treasure in the town,
Base villain that thus dishonorest me.
Sounes it is the Duke what shall I doo,
Dishonour thee why, know thou what thou say?
Her's no villain: he will not know me now,
But what say you? have you forgot me too?
Why sir, are you acquainted with my son?
With thyson? no trust me if he be thine,
I pray you sir who am I?
Pardon me father: humbly on my knees,
I do entreat your grace to hear me speak.
Peace villain: lay hands on them,
And send them to prison straight.
I say wele have no sending to prison.
My Lord this is but the play, their but in jest.
I tell thee Simon wele have no sending,
To prison thats flat: why Simon am not I Don Christo Vary?
Therefore I say they shall not go to prison.
No more they shall not my Lord,
They be run away.
Are they run away Simon? thats well,
Then gis some more drink, and let them play again.
Here my Lord.
Ah treacherous boy that durst presume,
To wed thy self without thy fathers leave,
I swear by fair Cintheas burning rays,
By Merops head and by seven mouthed Nile,
Had I but known ere thou had wedded her,
Were in thy breast the worlds immortal soul,
This angry sword should rip thy hateful chest,
And hewd thee smaller then the Lybian sands,
Turn hence thy face: oh cruel impious boy,
Alfonso I did not think you would presume,
To match your daughter with my princely house,
And ne'er make me acquainted with the cause???
My Lord by heavens I swear unto your grace,
I knew none other but Valerie your man,
Had bin the Duke of Cactus nobleson,
Nor did my daughter I dare swear for her.
That damned villain that hath deluded me???
Whom I did send guide unto my son,
Oh that my furious force could cleave the earth,
That I might muster bands of hellish fiends,
To rack his heart and tear his impious soul.
The ceaseless turning of celestial orbs,
Kindles not greater flames in flitting air,
Then passionate anguish of my raging breast,
Then let my death sweet father end your grief,
For I it is that thus have wrought your woes,
Then be revenged on me for here I swear,
That they are innocent of what I did,
Oh had I charge to cut of Hydras head,
To make the topless Alps a champion field,
To kill untamed monsters with my sword,
To travel daily in the hottest sun,
And watch in winter when the nights be cold,
I would with gladness undertake them all,
And think the pain but pleasure that I felt,
So that my noble father at my return,
Would but forget and pardon my offence,
Let me entreat your grace upon my knees,
To pardon him and let my death discharge
The heavy wrath your grace hath vowed against him.
And good my Lord let vs entreat your grace,
To purge your stomach of this Melancholy,
Taint not your princely mind with grief my Lord,
But pardon and forgive these lovers faults,
That kneeling crave your gracious favour here.
Great prince of Cactus, let a women's words,
Entreat a pardon in your lordly breast,
Both for your princely son, and vs my Lord.
Aurelius stand up I pardon thee,
I see that virtue will have enemies,
And fortune will be thwarting honour still,
And you fair virgin too I am content,
To accept you for my daughter since tic don,
And see you princely used in Cactus court.
Thanks good my Lord and I no longer live,
Then I obey and honour you in all:
Let me give thanks unto your royal grace,
For this great honour don to me and mine,
And if your grace will walk unto my house,
I will in humblest manner I can, show
The eternal service I doo owe your grace.
Thanks good Alfonso: but I came alone,
And not as did beseem the Cestian Duke,
Nor would I have it known within the town,
That I was here and thus without my train,
But as I came alone so will I go,
And leave my son to solemnise his feast,
And ere't belong Isle come again to you,
And do him honour as beseems the son
Of mighty Ierobell the Cestian Duke,
Till when Isle leave you, Farewell Aurelius.
Not yet my Lord, Isle bring you to your ship.
Whose within there? come hither sirs my Lords
A sleep again: go take him easily up,
And put him in his one apparel again,
And lay him in the place where we did find him,
Just underneath the alehouse side below,
But see you wake him not in any case.
It shall be don my Lord come help to bear him hence,
Come gentlemen now that suppers donne,
How shall we spend the time till we go to bed?
Faith if you will in trial of our wives,
Who will come sownest at their husbands call.
Nay then Ferando he must needs sit out,
For he may call I think till he be weary,
Before his wife will come before she list.
Tic well for you that have such gentle wives,
Yet in this trial will I not sit out,
It may be Kate will come as soon as yours.
My wife comes soonest for a hundred pound.
I take it: Isle lay as much to yours,
That my wife comes as soon as I do send.
How now Ferando you dare not lay belike.
Why true I dare not lay indeed;
But how, so little money on so sure a thing,
A hundred pound: why I have laid as much
Upon my dog, in running at a Dear,
She shall not come so far for such a trifle,
But will you lay five hundred marks with me,
And whose wife soonest comes when he doth call,
And shows her self most loving unto him,
Let him enjoy the wager I have laid,
Now what say you? dare you adventure thus?
I wear it a thousand pounds I durst presume
On my wives love: and I will lay with thee.
How now sons what in conference so hard,
May I without offence, know where abouts.
Faith father a weighty cause about our wives
Five hundred marks already we have laid,
And he whose wife doth show most love to him,
He must enjoy the wager to himself.
Why then Ferando he is sure to lose,
I promise thee son thy wife will hardly come,
And therefore I would not wish thee lay so much.
Tush father were it ten times more,
I durst adventure on my lovely Kate,
But if I lose Isle pay, and so shall you.
Upon mine honour if I loose Isle pay.
And so will I upon my faith I vow.
Then sit we down and let vs send for them.
I promise thee Ferando I am afraid thou wilt lose
Isle send for my wife first, Valerie
Go bid your Mistress come to me.
I will my Lord.
Now for my hundred pound.
Would any lay ten hundred more with me,
I know I should obtain it by her love.
I pray God you have not laid too much already.
Trust me Ferando I am sure you have,
For you I dare presume have lost it all.
Now sir what says your mistress?
She is something busy but shele come anon.
Why so, did not I tell you this before,
She is busy and cannot come.
I pray God your wife send you so good an an???swear
She may be busy yet she says shele come.
Well well: Polidor send you for your wife.
Agreed Boy desire your mistress to come hither.
I will sir
I so so he dossiers her to come.
Polidor I dare presume for thee,
I think thy wife will not deny to come.
And I do marvel much Aurelius,
That your wife came not when you sent for her.
Now wheres your Mistress?
She bad me tell you that she will not come,
And you have any business, you must come to her.
Oh monstrous intolerable presumption,
Worse then a blazing star, or snow at midsommer,
Earthquakes or any thing unseasonable,
She will not come: but he must come to her.
Well sir I pray you lets here what
Answer your wife will make.
Sir, command your Mistress to come
To me presently.
I think my wife for all she did not come,
Will prove most kind for now I have no fear,
For I am sure Ferandos wife, she will not come.
The mores the pity: then I must lose.
But I have won for see where Kate doth come.
Sweet husband did you send for me?
I did my love I sent for thee to come,
Come hither Kate, whats that upon thy head
Nothing husband but my cap I think.
Pull it of and tread it under thy feet,
Tic foolish I will not have thee wear it.
Oh wonderful metamorphosis.
This is a wonder: almost past belief.
This is a token of her true love to me,
And yet Isle try her further you shall see,
Come hither Kate where are thy sisters.
They be sitting in the bridal chamber.
Fetch them hither and if they will not come,
Bring them perforce and make them come with thee.
I will.
I promise thee Ferando I would have sworn,
Thy wife would ne'er have donne so much for thee.
But you shall see she will do more then this,
For see where she brings her sisters forth by force.
See husband I have brought them both.
Tic well don Kate.
I sure and like a loving piece, your worthy
To have great praise for this attempt.
I for making a fool of her self and vs.
Beshrew thee Phylema, thou hast
Lost me a hundred pound to night.
For I did lay that thou would first have come.
But thou Emelia hast lost me a great deal more.
You might have kept it better then,
Who bad you lay?
Now lovely Kate before there husbands here,
I prethe tell unto these headstrong women,
What duty wives doo owe unto their husbands.
Then you that live thus by your pompered wills,
Now list to me and mark what I shall say,
Theternall power that with his only breath,
Shall cause this end and this beginning frame,
Not in time, nor before time, but with time, confused,
For all the course of years, of ages, months,
Of seasons temperate, of days and hours,
Are tund and stopped, by measure of his hand,
The first world was, a form, without a form,
A heap confused a mixture all deformd,
A gulf of gulfs, a body bodiless,
Where all the elements were orderles,
Before the great commander of the world???
The King of Kings the glorious God of heaven???
Who in six days did frame his heavenly work,
And made all things to stand in perfect course.
Then to his image he did make a man.
Old Adam and from his side a sleep,
A rib was taken, of which the Lord did make,
The woe of man so termed by Adam then,
Woman for that, by her came sin to vs,
And for her sin was Adam doomed to die,
As Sara to her husband, so should we,
Obey them, love them, keep, and nourish them,
If they by any means doo want our helps,
Laying our hands under their feet to tread,
If that by that we, might procure there ease,
And for a president Isle first begin,
And lay my hand under my husbands feet
Enough sweet, the wager thou hast won,
And they I am sure cannot deny the same.
I Ferando the wager thou hast won,
And for to show thee how I am pleased in this,
A hundred pounds I freely give thee more,
Another dowry for another daughter,
For she is not the same she was before.
Thanks sweet father, gentlemen godnight
For Kate and I will leave you forto night,
Tic Kate and I am wed, and you are sped.
And so farewell for we will to our beds.
Now Aurelius what say you to this?
Believe me father I rejoice to see,
Ferando and his wife so lovingly agree.
How now Polidor in a dump, what say thou man?
I say thou art a shrew.
Thats better then a sheep.
Well since tic don let it go, come lets in.
Now that the darksome night is overpassed,
And dawning day appears in crystal sky,
Now must I hast abroad: but soft whose this?
What Sly oh wondrous hath he lain here allnight,
Isle wake him, I think he's starved by this,
But that his belly was so stuffed with ale,
What how Sly, Awake for shame.
Simon gis some more wine: whats all the
Players gon: am not I a Lord?
A Lord with a murrin: come art thou drunken still?
Whose this? Tipster, oh Lord sir, I have had
The bravest dream to night, that ever thou
Hardest in all thy life.
I marry but you had best get you home,
For your wife will course you for dreaming here to night,
Will she? I know now how to tame a shrew,
I dreamt upon it all this night till now,
And thou hast waked me out of the best dream
That ever I had in my life, but Isle to my
Wife presently and tame her too
And if she anger me.
Nay tarry Sly for Isle go home with thee,
And hear the rest that thou hast dreamt to night.

I Have in vain past through each stately street,
And blinde-fold turning of this happy town,
For wealh, for peace, and goodly government,
Yet can I not find out a mind, a heart
For blood and causeless death to harbour in;
They all are bent with virtuous gainful trade,
To get their needmentes for this mortal life,
And will not soil their well addicted harts:
With rape, extortion, murder, or the death,
Of friend or foe, to gain an Empery.
I cannot glut my blood delighted eye;
With mangled bodies which do gasp and groan,
Ready to pass to fair Elizium,
Nor bath my greedy hands in reeking blood,
Of fathers by their children murdered:
When all men else do weep, lament and wail,
The sad exploits of fearful tragedies,
It glads me so, that it delights my heart,
To ad new torments to their bleeding smarts.
But here comes Avarice, as if he sought,
Some busy work for his pernicious thought:
Whether so fast all griping Avarice?
Why what arst thou, I seeeke for one I miss.
I may supply the man you wish to have.
Thou seems to be a bold audatious knave,
I doe not like intruding company,
That seek to undermine my secrecy.
Mistrust me not I am thy faithful friend.
Many say so, that prove false in the end.
But turn about and thou wilt know my face,
It may be so, and know thy want of grace,
What Homicide thou art the man I seek:
I reconcile me thus upon thy cheek.
Had thou named blood and damned iniquity,
I had for borne to bight so bitterly.
Know thou a hart wide open to receive,
A plot of horrid desolation,
Tell me of this, thou art my chiefest good,
And I will quaff thy health in bowls of blood.
I know two men, that seem two innocents,
Whose looks surveyed with iuditiall eyes:
Would seem to bear the marks of honesty,
But snakes find harbour amongst the fairest flowers,
Then never credit outward semblances:
I know their harts relentless merciless,
And will perform through hope of benefit:
More dreadful things then can be thought upon.
If gain will draw, I prethy then allure,
Their hungry harts with hope of recompense,
But tie despair unto those mooing hopes,
Vnleast a deed of murder farther it,
Then blood on blood, shall overtake them all,
And we will make a bloody festival.
The plots are laid, the keys of golden coin,
Hath op'd the secret closets of their harts,
Inter, insult, make captive at thy will,
Themselves, and friends, with deeds of damned ill:
Yonder is truth, she comes to bewail,
The times and parties that we work upon.
Why let her weep, lament, and morn for me,
We are right bred of damned iniquity,
And will go make a two-folde Tragedy.
Go you disturbers of a quiet soul,
Sad, greedy, gaping, hungry Cannibals,
That joy to practise others miseries:
Gentles, prepare your tear bedecked eyes,
To see two shows of lamentation,
Besprinkled every where with guiltless blood,
Of harmless youth, and pretty innocents,
Our Stage doth wear habiliments of woe,
Truth rues to tell the truth of these laments:
The one was done in famous London late,
Within that street whose side the river Thames
Doth strive to wash from all impurity:
But yet that silver stream can never wash,
The sad remembrance of that cursed deed,
Performed by cruel Merry on just Beech,
And his true boy poor Thomas Winchester,
The most here present, know this to be true:
Would truth were false, so this were but a tale,
The other further off, but yet too near,
To those that felt and did the cruelty:
Near Padua this wicked deed was done,
By a false Uncle, on his brothers son,
Left to his careful education,
By dying Parents, with as strict a charge,
As ever yet death-breathing brother gave:
Look for no mirth, unless you take delight,
In mangled bodies, and in gaping wounds,
Bloodily made by mercy wanting hands,
Truth will not fine, but yet doth grieve to show,
This deed of ruth and miserable woe.
I live in mean and discontented state,
But wherefore should I think of discontent:
I am beloved, I have a pretty house,
A loving sister, and a careful man,
That doe not think their days work well at end,
Except it bring me in some benefit:
And well frequented is my little house,
With many guests and honest passengers,
Which may in time advance my humble state,
To greater wealth and reputation.
And here comes friends to drink some bear or ale,
They are my neighbours, they shall have the best,
No. Come neighbor Beech lets have our mornings draught
And wele go drink it at young Merries house:
They say he hath the best in all this town,
Besides they say he is an honest man,
And keeps good rule and orders in his house.
He's so indeed, his conversation,
Is full of honest harmless courtesy:
I dare presume, if that he be within,
Heal serve vs well, and keep vs company,
See where he is, go in, isle follow you.
Nay strain no courtesy you shall go before.
Your welcome neighbour, you are welcome sir,
I pray sit down, your very welcome both:
We thank you for it, and we think no less,
Now fill two cans of your old strongest bear:
That make so many loose their little wits,
And make indentures as they go along.
Hoe sister Rachel:
I come presently.
Go draw these gentlemen two Cans of bear,
Your negligence that cannot tend the shop,
Will make our customers forsake the house.
Wheres Harry Williams that he stays not here.
My self was busy dressing up the house,
As for your man he is not very well:
But sits sleeping by the kitchen fire.
If you are busy get you up again,
Isle draw my neighbours then their drink my self,
Isle warrant you as good as any mans,
And yet no better, many have the like.
This shows him for a plain and honest man,
That will not flatter with too many words:
Some shriltong'd fellows would have cogd and faind,
Saying isle draw the best in Christendom.
Hes none of those, but bears an honest mind,
And shames to utter what he cannot prove.
But here he comes, is that the best you have,
It is the best upon mine honest word.
Then drink to vs.
I drink unto you both.
We pledge you both, and thank you heartily.
Here is to you sir.
I thank you,
Tic good indeed and I had rather drink,
Such bear as this as any Gascoine wine:
But tic our English manner to affect
Strange things, and price them at a greater rate,
Then home-bred things of better consequence.
Tic true indeed, if all were of your mind,
My poor estate would sooner be advanced:
And our French Merchants seek some other trade.
Your poor estate, nay neighbour say not so,
For God be thanked you are well to live.
Not so good neighbour, but a poor young man,
That would live better if I had the means:
But as I am, I can content my self,
Till God amend my poor ability.
In time no doubt, why man you are but young,
And God assure your self hath wealth in store,
If you awaight his will with patience.
Thanks be to God I live contentedly,
And yet I cannot boast of mighty wealth:
But yet Gods blessings have been infinite,
And far beyond my expectations,
My shop is stored, I am not much in debt;
And here I speak it where I may be bold,
I have a score of pounds to help my need,
If God should stretch his hand to visit me,
With sickness, or such like adversity.
Enough for this, now neighbour whats to pay,
Two pence good sir.
Nay pray sir forbear,
Isle pay this reckoning for it is but small.
I will not strive since ye will have it so.
Neighbour farewell.
Farewell unto you both.
His shop is stored he is not much indebt.
He hath a score of pounds to help his need,
I and a score too if the truth were known:
I would I had a shop so stored with wares,
And forty pounds to buy a bargain with,
When as occasion should be offered me,
Id live as merry as the wealthiest man;
That hath his being within London walls,
I cannot buy my bear, my bread, my meat:
My faggots, coals, and such like necessaries,
At the best hand, because I want the coin,
That many misers coffer up in bags,
Having enough to serve their turns besides:
Ah for a trick to make this Beeches trash,
Forsake his cofer and to rest in mine,
I marry sir, how may that trick be done:
Marry with ease and great facility,
I will invent some new-found stratagem,
To bring his coin to my possession;
What though his death relieve my poverty,
Gain waits on courage, loss on cowardice.
Brother and sister, pray you both draw near,
And here my will, which you have promised
Shall be performed with wished providence,
This little Orphaned I must leave behind,
By your direction to be governed.
As for my wife and I, we do await,
The blessed hour when it shall please the Lord,
To take vs to the just Jerusalem.
Our chiefest care is for that tender boy,
Which we should leave discomfortlesse behind,
But that we do assure vs of your love,
And care to guide his weak vnhable youth,
In paths of knowledge grace and godliness:
As for the riches of this mortal life,
We leave enough four hundredth pounds a year,
Besides two thousand pounds to make a stock,
In money, Jewels, Plate, and household stuff,
Which yearly rents and goods we leave to you,
To be surrendered into his hands,
When he attains to years of discretion.
My Will imports thus much, which you shall hear,
And you shall be my sole Executor.
Brother and sister how my hart laments,
To see your weak and sick afflicted limbs,
Near overcome with direful maladies,
The God of heaven can truly testify,
Which to speak plain, is ne'er a whit at all.
Which knows the secret corners of my heart,
But for the care you do impose on me,
For the tuion of your little son,
Think my kind brother, I will meditate,
Both day and night, how I may best fulfil,
The care and trust, reposed in your Will,
And see him posted quickly after you.
Enough kind brother, we assure vs so,
Else would we seek another friend abroad,
To do our wills and dying Testament,
Nature and love will have a double care,
To bring him up with careful diligence,
As best beseems one of such parentage.
Assure your self the safest course I can,
Shall be provided for your little son,
He shall be sent unto the King of heaven.
Fear not good brother, and my loving sister,
But we will have as tender care of him,
As if he were our own ten thousand times:
God will be father of the fatherless,
And keep him from all care and wretchedness.
Uncle and Aunt take comfort, I will see,
My little cousin have no injury.
We thank you all, come let the Will be read.
If it were sealed, I would you both were dead.
Then give attention, I will read the Will.
Thus if my son miscarry, my dear brother,
You and your son shall then enjoy the land,
And all the goods which he should have possessed,
If he miscarry, brother God forbid,
God bless mine Nephew, that thine eyes may see,
Thy childrens children with prosperity:
I had rather see the little vrchin hanged,
Then he should live, and I forgo the land.
Thanks gentle brother, husband feale the Will.
Give me a Pen and Ink, first to subscribe,
I write so ill through very feebleness,
That I can scarcely know this hand for mine,
But that you all can witness that it is.
Give me the seal: I pray sir take it of,
This you deliver for your latest Will,
And do confirm it for your Testament.
With all my hart: here brother keep my Will,
And I refer me to the will of God,
Praying him deal as well with you and yours,
As you no doubt will deal with my poor child:
Come my Pertillo, let me bless thee boy,
And lay my half dead hand upon thy head,
God grant those days that are cut off in me,
With joy and peace may multiply in thee:
Be slow to wrath, obey thy Uncle still,
Submit thy self unto Gods holy will,
In deed and word, see thou be ever true,
So brother, child, and kinsfolks all adieu.
Ah my dear mother, is my father dead?
I my sweet Boy, his soul to heaven is fled,
But I shall after him immediately,
Then take my latest blessing ere I dye,
Come let me kiss thy little tender lips,
Cold death hath tan possession of thy mother.
Let me embrace thee in my dying arms,
And pray the lord protect thee from al harms:
Brother, I fear, this child when I am gone,
Will have great cause of grief &amp; hideous fear:
You will protect him, but I prophecy,
His share will be of woe and misery:
But mothers fears do make these cares arise,
Come boy and close thy mothers dying eyes.
Brother and sister, here the latest words,
That your dead sister leaves for memory:
If you deal ill with this distressed boy,
God will revenge poor orphants injuries,
If you deal well, as I do hope you will,
God will defend both you and yours from ill.
Farewell, farewell, now let me breath my last,
Into his dearest mouth, that wants breath,
And as we loved in life embrace in death
Peace conscience, peace, thou art too scripulous,
Gain doth attended this resolution,
Hence dastard fear, I must, I can, I will,
Kill my best friend to get a bag of gold:
They shall dye both, had they a thousand lives,
And therefore I will place this hammer here,
And take it as I follow Beech up stairs,
That suddenly before he is aware,
I may with blows dash out his hateful brains,
Ho Rachel, bring my cloak, look to the house,
I will return again immediately.
Here it is brother, I pray you stay not long,
Guess will come in, it is almost supper time.
Let others sup, isle make a bloudier feast,
Then ever yet was dressed in Marries house,
Be like thy self, then have a merry hart,
Thou shalt have gold to mend thy poverty,
And after this, live ever wealthilie.
What neighbour Beech, so godly occupied?
I moister Merry it were better read,
Then meditate on idle fantasies.
You speak the truth: there is a friend or two
Of yours, making merry in my house,
And would desire to have your company.
Know you their names?
No truly nor the men.
I never stood to question them of that,
But they desire your presence earnestly.
I pray you tell them that I cannot come,
Tic supper time, and many will resort,
For ware at this time, aboue all other times;
Tic Friday night besides, and Bartholomew eve,
Therefore good neighbour make my just excuse.
In truth they told me that you should not stay,
Go but to drink, you may come quick again,
But not and if my hand and hammer hold.
I am unwilling, but I do not care,
And if I go to see te company.
Come quickly then, they think we stay too long
Isle cut a piece of Cheese to drink withal.
I take the farewell of your cutting knife,
Here is a hand shall help to cut your throat:
And give my self a fairing from your chest:
What are you ready wil you go along?
I now I am, boy look you tend the shop,
If any ask, come for me to the Bull:
I wonder who they are that ask for me.
I know not that, you shall see presently,
Go up those stairs, your friends do stay aboue,
Here is that friend shall shake you by the head,
And make you stagger ere he speak to you.
Now you are safe, I would the boy were so,
But wherefore wish I, for he shall not live,
For if he doe, I shall not live my self.
Lets see what money he hath in his purse,
Mass here is ten goats, here is something for my pain,
But I must be rewarded better yet.
Who was it Rachel that went up the stairs?
It was my brother, and a little man
Of black complexion, but I know him not.
Why do you not then carry up a light,
But suffer them to tarry in the dark.
I had forgot, but I will bear one up.
Do so I prithee, he will chide anon.
Oh brother, brother, what have you done?
Why murdered one that would have murdered me.
The world doth know thy brother but resigned,
The lands and goods, until his son attained,
To riper years to weld and govern them,
Then openly thou can not do him wrong,
He living: there's the burden of the song.
Call it a burden, for it seems so great
And heavy burden, that the boy should live,
And thrust me from this height of happiness:
That I will not endure so heavy weight,
But shake it off, and live at liberty,
Free from the yoke of such subjection,
The boy shall dye, were he my fathers son,
Before Isle part with my possession.
Isle call my son, and ask his good advice,
How I may best dispatch this serious cause:
Hoe sir Allens?
Father.
Hearken son,
I must entreat your furtherance and advise,
About a thing that doth concern vs near,
First tell me how thou dost affect in heart,
Little Pertillo, thy dead Uncles son.
So well good father, that I cannot tell,
Whether I love him dearer then my self:
And yet if that my heart were called to count,
I think it would surrender me to death,
Ere young Pertillo should sustain a wrong.
How got his safety such a deep regard
Within your heart, that you affect it so?
Nature gave root, love, and the dying charge,
Of his dead father, gives such store of sap,
Unto this tree of my affection,
That it will never wither till I dye.
But nature, love, and reason, tells thee thus,
Thy self must yet be nearest to thy self.
His love doth not estrange me from my self,
But doth confirm my strength with multitudes,
Of benefits, his love will yield to me.
Beware to foster such pernicious snakes,
Within thy bosom, which will poison thee.
He is a Dove, a child, an innocent,
And cannot poison, father though he would.
I will be plainer, know Pertills life,
Which thou dost call, a Dove, an innocent:
A harmless child, and, and I know not what,
Will harm thee more, then any Serpent can,
I, then the very sight of Basilisks.
Father, you tell me of a strange discourse,
How can his life produce such detriment,
As Basilisks, whose only sight is death?
Harken to me, and I will tell thee how:
Thou know his fathers goods, his houses, lands,
Have much aduaunc'd our reputation,
In having but their usage for a time,
If the boy live, then like to senseless beasts,
Like logd eard Asses, and rich laden Mules,
We must resign these treasures to a boy,
And we like Asses feed on simple Hay:
Make him away, they shall continue ours,
By virtue of his fathers Testament,
The Jewels, castles, meadows, houses, lands,
Which thy small cozen, should defeat thee of,
Be still thine own, and thou advance thy self,
Aboue the height of all thine Ancestors.
But if I mount by murder and deceit,
Justice will thrust aspiring thoughts below,
And make me caper for to break my neck:
After some woeful lamentation,
Of my obedience to unlawfulness:
I tell you plain, I would not have him dye,
Might I enjoy the Soldans Empery.
What wilt thou bar thy self of happiness,
Stop the large stream of pleasures which would fowe,
And still attend on thee like Serving-men:
Prefer the life of him that loves thee not,
Before thine own, and my felicity.
Id rather choose to feed on carefulness
To ditch, to delve, and labour for my bread,
Ny rather choose to beg from door to door,
Then condescend to offer violence,
To young Pertillo in his innocence,
I know you speak, to sound what mighty share,
Pertil hath in my affection.
In faith I do not, therefore prithee say,
Will thou consent to have him made away.
Why then in faith, I am ashamed to think,
I had my being from so foul a lump
Of adulaion and unthankfulness,
Ah, had their dying prayers no avail
Within your hart? no, damned extortion,
Hath left no room for grace to harbour in,
Audacious sin, how can thou make him say,
Consent to make my brothers son away.
Nay if you gin to brawl, withdraw your self,
But utter not the motion that I made,
As you love me, or do regard your life.
And as you love my saftie, and your soul
Let grace, and fear of God, such thoughts control
Still prattling, let your grace and fear alone,
And leave me quickly to my private thoughts,
Or with my sword le open wide a gate,
For wrath and bloody death to enter in.
Better you gave me death and burial,
Then such foul deeds should overthrow v all.
Still are you wagging that rebellious tongue,
Isle dig it out for Crows to feed upon,
If thou continue longer in my sight.
He loves him better then he loves his life,
Here is repetition of my brothers care,
Of sisters chardge, of grace, and fear of God,
Fear dastards, cowards, faned hart run-awayes,
Isle fear no colours to obtain my will,
Though all the fiends in hell were opposite
Id rather loose mine eye, my hand, my foot,
Be blind, want senses, and be ever lame,
Then be tormented with such discontent,
This resignation would afflict me with,
Be blithe my boy, thy life shall sure be done,
Before the setting of the morrow sun.
Make hast, run headlong to destruction,
I like thy temper, that can change a heart,
From yielding flesh, to Flint and Adamant,
Thou hitst it home, where thou dost fasten hold,
Nothing can separate the love of gold.
Fear no relenting, I dare pawn my soul,
(And thats no gadge, it is the devils due)
He shall imbrew his greede griping hands,
In the dead bosom of the bloody boy,
And wind himself, his son, and harmless wife,
In endless folds of sure destruction.
Now Homicide, thy looks are like thy self,
For blood, and death, are thy companions,
Let my confounding plots but go before,
And thou shalt wade up to the chin in gore.
I find it true, for where thou art let in,
There is no scruple made of any sin,
The world may see thou art the root of ill,
For but for thee, poor Beech had lived still.
Oh my dear brother, what a heap of woe,
Your rashness hath poured down upon your head:
Where shall we hide this trumpet of your shame,
This timeless ugly map of cruelty?
Brother, if VVilliams do reveal the truth,
Then brother, then, begins our scene of ruth.
I fear not VVilliams but I fear the boy,
Who knew I fetched his moister to my house.
What doth the boy know wherabouts you dwell?
I that torments me worse then pangs of hell,
He must be slain to, else heal utter all.
Hark brother, hake, me thinks I here on call.
Go down and see, pray God my man keep close:
If he prove long-tongd then my days are done,
The boy must die, there is no help at all:
For on his life, my very life depends,
Besides I cannot compass what I would,
Unless the boy be quickly made away,
This that abridgde his haplesse masters days,
Shall leave such sound memorials one his head,
That he shall quite forget who did him harm,
Or trained his moister to this bloody feast:
Why how now Rachel? who did call below?
A maid that came to have a penny loaf.
I would a penny loaf cost me a pound,
Provided Beeches boy had eat his last.
Perchance the boy doth not remember you.
It may be so, but isle remember him.
And send him quickly with a bloody scroll,
To greet his moister in another world.
Isle go to Beeches on a faind excuse,
To see if he will ask me for his moister.
No, get you up, you shall not stir abroad,
And when I call, come quickly to the door.
Brother, or that, or any thing beside,
To please your mind, or ease your misery.
I am knee deep, isle wade up to the wast,
To end my hart of fear, and to attain,
The hoped end of my intention?
But I may see, if I have eyes to see,
And if my understanding be not blind,
How many dangers do already weight,
Upon my steppes of bold security,
Williams is fled, perchance to utter all,
Thats but perchance, nay rather flatly no,
But should he tell, I can but die a death,
Should he conceal, the boy would utter it,
The boy must de, there is no remedy
I wonder that my moister stays so long,
He had not wont to be abroad so late
Yonder comes one, I think that same is he.
I see the boy sits at his masters door,
Or now, or never, Merry stir thy self,
And rid thy hart from fear and jealousy:
Thomas Winchester go quickly to your shop,
What sit you still your moister is at hand.
Oh God I think theres thieves in Beeches shop.
What cruel hand hath done so foul a dede,
Thus to be mangle a distressed youth:
Without all pity or a due remorse,
See how the hammer sticks in his head,
Wherewith this honest youth is done to death,
Speak honest Thomas, if any speech remain,
What cruel hand hath done this villainy:
He cannot speak, his senses are bereft,
Hoe neighbour Loney, pray come down with speed,
Your tenant Beeches man is murdered.
What would you have some Mustard?
Your tenant Beeches man, is murdered.
Whose smothered, I think you lack your wit,
What neighbor? what make you here so late?
I was affrighted by a sudden cry,
And coming down found moister Beeches man,
Thus with a hammer sticking in his head.
Ah wo is me for Thomas Winchester,
The truest soul that ever moister had,
Wheres moister Bch?
Nay, no body can tell:
Did you see any running from the door,
When you looked out and heard the young man cry,
Yes I saw two truly to my thinking, but they
Ran away as fast as their hands could bear them:
By my troth it was so dark I could see no body,
Pray God moister Beech hath not hurt his boy in his patience
And if he have he must be hanged in his choler.
I dare be sworn he would not strike him thus,
Pray God his moister be no slain himself.
The night grows late, and we will have this course
Be watched all night, to morrow we shall see,
Whence sprang this strange uncivil cruelty.
Neighbour good night.
Neighbours all good night.
Pray God I never see so sad a sight.
Oh sister, sister, now I am pursued,
The mighty clamour that the boy did make,
Hath raised the neighbours round about the street:
So that I know not where to hide my self.
What brother, have you kilt Beeches boy?
No, no, not I, but yet another hath,
Come, come to bed, for fear we be descried:
The fearefullest night that ever Merry knew.
Seem it not strange resolved gentlemenn,
That I thus privately have severed you,
To open secret sorrows of my hart:
Think not I do intend to undermine,
Your passed lives, although you know I am,
A man to whom the true unpartial sword,
Of equal justice is delivered,
Therefore swear both, as you respect your souls,
At the last dreadful sessions hold in heaven,
First to conceal, and next to execute,
What I reveal, and shall enjoin you to.
So you reward vs, whatsoever it be,
We vow performance, and true secrecy.
There go aside, ye seeming semblances,
Of equal justice, and true piety,
And lay my hearts corrupted Citadel,
Wide open to your thoughts to look into.
Know I am named Fallerio, to deceive
The world with show of truth and honesty,
But yet nor truth, nor honesty abides,
Within my thoughts, but falsehood, cruelty,
Blood sucking Avarice, and all the sins,
That hale men on to bloody stratagems,
Like to your selves, which care not how you gain,
By blood, extortion, falsehood, perjury,
So you may have a pleasing recompense:
Start not aside, depart not from your selves,
I know your composition is as mine,
Of blood, extortion, falsehood, perjury,
True branded with the mark of wickedness.
Be not so bitter, we are they indeed,
That would deprive our fathers of their lives,
So we were sure to have a benefit:
I way no more the murdering of a child,
Dragged from the sucking bosom of his mother,
Then I respect to quaff a boule of wine,
Unto his health, that dearly loves me.
Where gold rewards, were apparent death
Before mine eyes, bold, hearty, visible,
Id wrestle with him for a deadly fall,
Or I would loose my guerdon promised:
Id hang my brother for to wear his coat,
That all that saw me might have cause to say,
There is a hart more firm then Adamant,
To practise execrable butcheries.
I know that well for were I not assured,
Of your performance in this enterprise,
I would not op the closet of my breast,
To let you know my close intention,
There is a little boy, an vrchin lad,
That stands between me and the glorious rays,
Of my soule-wishing sun of happiness:
There is a thicket ten miles from this place,
Whose secret ambush, and unused ways,
Doth seem to join with our conspiracy,
There murder him, and when the deed is done,
Cast his dead body in some dirty ditch,
And leave him for the Fowls to feed upon:
Do this, here is two hundredth marks in gold,
To horton on your resolution:
Two hundredth more, after the deed is done,
Isle pay you more for satisfaction.
Swones her's rewards would make one kill himself,
To leave his progeny so rich a prize,
Were twenty lives engadged for this coin,
Id end them all, to have the money mine,
Who would not hazard life, nay soul and all,
For such a frank and bounteous pay-maister,
Sblood, what labour is it to kill a boy,
It is but thus, and then the task is done,
It grieves me most, that when this task is past,
I have no more to occupy my self,
Two hundredth marks to give a paltry stab,
I am impatient till I see the brat.
That must be done with cunning secrecy,
I have devised to send the boy abroad,
With this excuse, to have him fostered,
In better manners then this place affords,
My wife, though loath indeed to part with him,
Yet for his good, she will forgo her joy,
With hope in time to have more firm delights,
Which she expects from young Pertillos life.
Call you him Pertllo, faith leue out the T.
Why so?
Because Peril will remain,
For he shall surely perish if I live:
What do you call the father of the child?
Why man, he hath no father left alive.
Yes such a father, that doth see and know,
How we do plot this little infants woe.
Why then his little son is much to blame,
That doth not keep his father company.
When shall we have delivery of the boy?
To morrow morning by the break of day,
And you must swear you'll see him safely brought,
Unto the place that I do send him to.
That may we safely, for you mean to send
Him to the wood, and there his journey ends:
Both soul and limbs shall have a place to rest,
In earth the last, the first in Abrams breast.
Come gentlemen, this night go rest with me,
To morrow end Pertillos tragedy.
Sister, now all my gold expected hopes,
Of future good, is plainly vanished,
And in her stead, grim visadged despair,
Hath tan possession of my guilty heart,
Desire to gain, began this desperate act,
Now plain appearance of destruction,
Of soul and body, weights upon my sin,
Although we hide our sins from mortal men,
Whose glass of knowledge is the face of man,
The eye of heaven beholds our wickedness,
And will no doubt revenge the innocent.
Ah, do not so disconsolate your self,
Nor add new streams of sorrow to your grief,
Which like a spring tide ouer-swels the banks,
Least you do make an inundation,
And so be borne away with swiftest tides,
Of all my friends Allenso loves me best.
I think thou art inspired with prophecy,
He loves thee better then I would he did:
Why wherefore think you so my pretty Nephew?
Because he taught me how to say my prayers,
To ride a horse, to start the fearful Hare,
He gave this dagger to me yester night,
This little Ring, and many pretty things:
For which, kind cousin, I rest your true debtor,
And one day I will make you recompense.
I, with thy lands and goods thou leave behind.
Pray father let me go along with him:
Now by the saviour of my sinful soul,
I do not like those fellows countenance.
Son be content, weal go a seven-night hence,
And see him in his university weeds:
These will conduct him safely to the place,
Be well assured they'll have a care of him,
That you shall never see Pertillo more.
Father, I pray you to withdraw your self,
Id have a word or two in secrecy.
Come living image of thy dead mouth,
And take my loving farewell, ere we part,
I love thee dearly for thy fathers sake,
But for thy mothers, dote with jealousy,
Oh I do fear, before I see thy face,
Or thou, or I, shall taste of bitterness:
Kiss me sweet boy, and kissing fold thine Aunt,
Within the circle of thy little arms,
I need not fear, death cannot offer wrong,
The majesty of thy presaging face,
Would vanquish him though ne'er so trrible,
The angry Lioness that is bereaved,
Of her imperious crew of forest kings,
Would leave her fury and defend thee safe,
From Wolves, from Panthers, Leopards, and she Bears,
That live by rapine, stealth, and cruelty,
Therefore to God I do commend thy state,
Who will be sure to guard thee tenderly.
And now to you, that carry hence this wealth,
This precious jewel, this vnprized good,
Have a regard to use him carefully,
When he is parted from that serious care,
Which was employed for his security:
I urge it not, that I misdoubt your truth,
I hope his Uncle doth persuade himself,
You will be courteous, kind and affable,
Ther's some reward for hoped carefulness.
Now by my soul I do suspect the men,
Especially the lower of the two:
See what a hollow discontented look
He casts, which brings apparent cause of fear,
The other, though he seem more courteous,
Yet doth his looks presadge this thought in me,
As if he scorned to think on curtsy.
Upon my life, my son you are to blame,
The gentlemen are honest, virtuous,
And will protect Pertillo happily:
These thoughts proceed out of abundant love,
Because you grieve to leave his company:
If ought betide him otherwise then well,
Let God require due vengeance on my head,
And cut my hopes from all prosperity.
A heavy sentence, full of wondrous fear,
I cannot choose but credit such a vow,
Come hither then, my joy, my chiefest hopes.
My second self, my earthly happiness,
Lend me thy little pretty cherry lip,
To kiss me cozen, lay thy little hand
Upon my cheek, and hug me tenderly,
Would the clear rays of thy two glorious suns,
Could penetrate the corners of my heart,
That thou might see, how much I tender thee.
My friends behold within this little bulk,
Two perfect bodies are incorporate,
His life holds mine, his heart contains my hart,
His every limb, contains my every part:
Without his being, I can never be,
He being dead, prepare to bury me.
Oh thou immortal mover of the spheres,
Within their circled reuolusions,
Whose glorious image this small orphaned bears,
Wrought by thy all sufficient Majesty,
Oh never suffer any wicked hand,
To harm this heavenly workmanship of thine,
But let him live, great God to honour thee,
With virtuous life, and spotless piety.
Cease my kind cousin, I cannot choose but weep,
To see your care of my security.
Knew thou my reason, that persuades my hart,
Thou would not wonder, why I grieve to part:
But yet I would suspect my fathers vow,
Did any other make it by your leave.
What have you done, this lothnesse to depart,
Seems you were trained up in tediousness,
That know not when and where to make an end:
Take him my friends, I know you will discharge,
The hope and trust that I repose in you.
Assure your self, in every circumstance.
Then to your horses, quickly, speedily,
Else we shall put our fingers in the eye,
And weep for kindness till to morrow morn.
Farewell good Uncle, Aunt, and loving cousin.
Farewell, I fear me everlastingly.
You mean not now to have him murdered?
Not murdered, what else? kill him I say,
But wherefore make thou question of my will?
Because you wished that God should be revenged
If any ill bede the innocent.
Oh that was nothing but to blind the eyes,
Of my fond son, which loves him too too well.
It is enough, it shall be surely done.
What hast thou sped? have you bought the bag?
I brother, here it is, what is it to do?
To beat hence Beeches body in the night.
You cannot bear so great a weight your self,
And it is no trueng of another man.
Yes wl enough, as I will order it,
Isle cut him peece-meale, fist his head and legs
Will be one burden, then the mangled rest,
Will be another, which I will transport,
Beyond the water in a Ferry boat,
And throw it into Pris-gardn ditch.
Fetch me the chopping-knife, and in the mean
Isle move the Faggots that do cover him.
Oh can you find in hart to cut and carve,
His stone cold flesh, and rob the greedy grave,
Of his dissevered blood besprinkled limbs?
I mary can I fetch the chopping knife.
This deed is worse, the whe you took his life.
But worse, or bela, now it must be so,
Better do thus, then feel a greater woe.
Here is the knife, I cannot stay to see,
This barbarous deed of inhumanity.
Ye glorious beams of that bright-shining lamp,
That lights the star bespangled firmament,
And dimness the glimmering shadows of the night,
Why dost thou lend assistance to this wretch,
To shamble forth with bold audacity,
His limbs, that bears thy makers semblance.
All you the sad spectators of this Act,
Whose harts do taste a feeling pensiveness,
Of this unheard of savage Massacre:
Oh be far of, to harbour such a thought,
As this audacious murderer put in ur,
I see your sorrows flow up to the brim,
And overflow your cheeks with brinish tears,
But though this sight bring surfeit to the eye,
Delight your ears with pleasing harmony,
That ears may countercheck your eyes, and say,
Why shed you tears, this deed is but a play:
His work is done, he seeks to hide his sin,
Isle wail his woe, before his woe begin.
Now will I high me to the water side,
And fling this heavy burden in a ditch,
Whereof my soul doth feel so great a weight,
That it doth almost press me down with fear,
Hark Rachl:
I will cross the water straight,
And fling this middle mention of a man,
Into some ditch, then high me home again,
To rid my house of that is left behind.
Where have you laid the legs &amp; battered head?
Under the faggots, where it lay before,
Help me to put this trunk into the bag.
My heart will not endure to handle it,
The sight hereof doth make me quake for fear.
Isle do it my self, only dry up the blood,
And burn the clothes as you have done before.
I fear thy soul will bure in flames of hell,
Unless repentance wash away thy sin,
With cleansing tears of true contrition:
Ah did not nature oversway my will,
The world should know this plot of damned ill.
I am so weary in this combrous wood,
That I must needs go sit me down and rest
What were we best to kill him unawares,
Or give him notice what we doe intend?
Why then belike you mean to do your charge
And feel no taste of pity in your hart.
Of pity man, that never enters here,
And if it should, Id threat my craven hart,
To stab it home, for harbouring such a thought,
I see no reason why I should relent:
It is a charitable virtuous deed,
To end this princkocke from this sinful world.
Such charity will never have reward,
Unless it be with sting of conscience:
And that's a torment worse then Sisipus,
That rolls a restless stone against the hill.
My conscience is not pricked with such conceit.
That shows thee further off from hoped grace.
Grace me no graces, I respect no grace,
But with a grace, to give a graceless stab,
To chop folks legs and arms off by the stumps,
To see what shift theile make to scramble home:
Pick out men's eyes, and tell them thats the sport,
Of hood-man-blinde, without all sportiuenesse,
If with a grace I can perform such pranks,
My hart will give mine agents many thanks.
Then God forbid I should consort my self,
With one so far from grace and piety:
Least being found within thy company,
I should be partner of thy punishment.
When wee have done what we have vowed to do,
My hart desires to have no fellowship,
With those that talk of grace or godliness:
I named not God vnleast it were with an other,
Sense the first hour that I could walk alone,
(And you that make so much of conscience,
By heaven thou art a damned hipocrite:
For thou hast vowed to kill that sleeping boy,
And all to gain two hundredth marks in gold,
I know this pureness comes of pure deceit,
To draw me from the murdering of the child,
That you alone might have the benefit,
You are too shallow, if you gull me so,
Chop of my head to make a Sowsing-tub,
And fill it full of tripes and chitterlings.
That thou shalt see my hart is far from fraud,
Or vain illusion in this enterprise,
Which doth import the safety of our souls,
There take my earnest of impiety.
Only forbear to lay thy udder hands,
Upon the poor mistrustlesse tender child,
As for our vows, fear not their violence,
God will forgive on hearty penitence.
Thou Eunuch, Capon, dastard, fast and loose,
Thou weathercock of mutability,
White liuered Poisoned, wilt thou vow and swear,
Face and make semblance with thy bagpipe oaths,
Of that thou never meanst to execute?
Pure cowardice for fear to crack thy neck,
With the huge Caos of thy bodies weight,
Hath sure begot this true contrition,
Then fast and pray, and see if thou can win,
A goodly pardon for thy heinous sin,
As for the boy, this fatal instrument,
Was marked by heaven to cut his line of life,
And must supply the knife of Atropos,
And if it doe not, let this moister piece,
(Which nature lent the world to wonder at)
Be slit in Carbonadoes for the jaws,
Of some men-eating hungry Cannibal:
By heaven isle kill him only for this cause,
For that he came of virtuous Ancestors,
But by that God, which made that wondrous globe,
Wherein is seen his powerful deity,
Thou shalt not kill him maugre all thy spite:
Swear, and forswear thy self ten thousand times,
Awake Pertillo, for thou art betrayed,
This bloody slave intends to murder thee.
Both him, and all, that dare to rescue him.
Wherefore? because I slept without your leave?
Forgive my fault, Isle never sleep again.
No child, thy wicked Uncle hath suborned,
Both him and me to take thy life away:
Which I would save, but that this hellish imp,
Will not consent to spare thy guiltless blood.
Why should Falleria seek to have my life.
The lands and goods, thy father left his son,
Do hale thee on to thy destruction.
Oh needy treasure, harm begetting good,
That safely should procure the loss of blood.
Those lands and goods, thy father got with pain,
Are swords where with his little son is slain.
Then let our swords let out his guitlesse life.
Sweet, sour, kind, cruel, hold thy murdering knife,
And here me speak, before you murder me.
Fear not sweet child, he shall not murder thee.
No, but my sword shall let his puddings forth.
First here me speak, thou map of Butchery,
Tic but my goods and lands my Uncle seeks,
Having that safely, he desires no more,
I do protest by my dead parents souls,
By the dear love of false Fallerios son,
Whose heart, my heart assures me, will be grieved,
To hear his fathers inhumanity:
I will forsake my country, goods, and lands,
I and my self, will even change my self,
In name, in life, in habit, and in all,
And live in some far moved continent,
So you will spare my weak and tender youth,
Which cannot entertain the stroke of deat
In budding years, and very spring of life.
Leave of these bootless protestations,
And use no ruth enticing arguments,
For if you doe, isle lop you limb by limb,
And torture you for childish eloquence.
Thou shalt not make his little finger ache.
Yes every pat, and this sha prove it true.
Oh I am slain, the Lord forgive thy fact,
And give thee grace to dye with penitence.
A treacherous villain, full of cowardice,
Isle make thee know that thou hast done amiss.
Teach me that knowledge when you will or dare.
Swoons I am peppered, I had need have salt,
Or else to morrow I shall yield a stink,
Worse then a heap of dirty excrements:
Now by this Hilt, this gold was earned too dear:
Ah, how now death, wilt thou be conqueror?
Then vengeance light on them that made me so,
And ther's another farewell ere I go.
Enough, enough, I had my death before.
How now my Lords, was it not a gallant course,
Believe me sirs, I never saw a wretch,
Make better shift to save her little life:
The thickets full of busks and scratching briars,
A mighty dew, a many deep mouthed hounds,
Let loose in every place to cross their course,
And yet the Hare got cleanly from them all:
I would not for a hundred pound in feet
But that she had escaped with her life,
For we will wind a merry hunters horn,
And tart her once again to morrow morn.
In troth my Lord, the little locked hound,
That had but three good legs to further him,
It was foremost still, and surer of his ent,
Then any one in all the cry besides
But yet Penragon gave the Hare more turns.
That was because he was more politic,
And eyed her closely in her coverts still:
They all did well, and once more we will try,
The subtle creature with a greater cry
But say, what well accomplished Gentleman,
Is this that comes into our company?
I know him well, it is Fallrios son,
Pandynos brother (a kind Gentleman)
That dyed, and left his little pretty son,
Unto his fathers good direction.
Stand close awhile, and over hear his words,
He seems much ouer-gone with passion.
Ye timorous thoughts that guide my giddy steps,
In unknown paths of dreadful wilderness,
Why traitor-like do you conspire to hold,
My pained heart, twixt fear and jealousy,
My too much care hath brought me carelessly,
Into this woody savage labyrinth,
And I can find no way to issue out,
Fear hath so dazzled all my better part,
That reason hh forgot discreations art:
But in good time, see where is company.
Kind Gentlemen, if you unlike my self,
Are not encumbered with the circling ways,
Of this erroneous winding wilderness,
I pray you to direct e forth this wood,
And show he path that leads to Pdu.
We all are Padu, and we all intend,
To pass forthwith, wth speed to Padua.
I will attend upon you presently.
Come then away, but gentlemen behold,
A bloody ight, and murderous spectacle.
Oh God forgive me all my wickedness,
And take me to eternal happiness.
Hark one of them hath some small spark of life,
To kindle knowledge of their sad mhaps.
Ah gracious Lord, I know this wretched child,
And these two men that here lye murdered.
Do you Alenso?
I my gracious Lord
It was Pertillo my dead Vnees son
Now have my fears brought oth his fearful child,
Of endless care, and everlasting grief.
Lay hands upon Alenso Gentlemen,
Your presence doth confirm you had a share,
In the performance of this cuelte.
I do confess I have so grat a share,
In this mishap, that I will give him thanks,
That will let foo my sorrow wounded soul,
From out this goal of lamentation.
Tic now too late to wish for hadwis,
Had you withheld you hand fom this attempt,
Sorrow had never so imponed you.
Oh my good Lord, you do mist my se,
And yet my grief is sure infallible,
The Lord of heaven can witness with my soul,
That I am guiltless of your wrong suspect,
But yet not griefelsse tha the deed i done.
Nay if you stand to justify your self,
This Gentleman whose life dooh see me to stay,
Within his body tell he tell your shame,
Shall testify of your integrity:
Speak then thou sad Antomy of death,
Who were the agents of your woefulness.
O be not blinded with a false urmise,
For least my tongue should fail to end the al.
Of our untimely fe appointed death:
Know young Allenso is as innocent,
As is Faller guilty of the crime.
He, he it was, that with four hundredth marks,
Whereof two hundred he paid presently,
Did hire this damned villain and my self,
To massacre this harmless innocent:
But yet my conscience touched with some remorse,
Would fine have saved the young Prtillos life,
But he remorseless would not let him live,
But unawares thrust in his harmless breast,
That life bereaving fatal instrument:
Which cruel deed I seeking to revenge,
Have lost my life, and paid the slave his due
Reward, for spilling blood of Innocents:
Surprise Fallerio author of this ill,
Save young Allenso, he is guiltless still.
Oh sweetest honey mixed with bitter gall,
Oh Nightingale combined with Ravens notes,
Thy speech is like a woodward that should say
Let the tree live, but take the root away.
As though my life were ought but misery,
Having my father slain for infamy.
What should incite Fallerio to devise,
The overthrow of this unhappy boy.
That may be easily guest my gracious Lord
To be the lands Pandino left his son,
Which after that the boy were murdered,
Descend to him by due inheritance.
You deem aright, see gentlemen the fruits
Of coveting to have another right,
Oh wicked thought of greedy couetice
Could neither nature, fear of punishment,
Scandal to wife and children, nor the fear,
Of Gods confounding strict severity,
Allay the head-strong fury of thy will,
Beware my friends to wish unlawful gain,
It will beget strange actions full of fear,
And overthrow the actor unawares,
For first Fallerios life must satisfy,
The large effusion of their guiltless bloods,
Trained on by him to these extremities,
Next, wife and children must be dispose,
Of lands and goods, and turned to beggary,
But most of all, his great and heinous sin,
Will be an eye sore to his guiltless kin.
Bear hence away these models of his shame,
And let vs prosecute the murderer,
With all the care and diligence we can.
Forbear a while, to bear away my joy,
Which now is vanished, since his life is fled,
And give me leave to wash his deadly wound,
With hearty tears, out-flowing from those eyes,
Which loved his ight, more then the sight of heaven:
Forgive me God for this idolatry.
Thou ugly monster, grim imperious death,
Thou raw-bonde lump of whole deformity.
Reguardlesse instrument of cruel ate,
Vnparciall Sergeant, full of treachery,
Why did thou flatter my ill boding thoughts,
And flesh my hopes with vain illusions:
Why did thou say, Pertillo should not dye,
And yet, oh yet, hast done it cruelly:
Oh but behold, with what a smiling cheer,
He entertained thy bloody harbinger:
See thou transformer of a heavenly face,
To Ashy paleness and unpleasing looks,
That his fair countenance still retains grace,
Of perfect beauty in the very grave,
The world would say such beauty should not dye,
Yet like a thief thou did it cruelly:
Ah, had thy eyes deep sunk into thy head,
Been able to perceive his virtuous mind,
Where virtue sate enthroned in a chair,
With awful grace, and pleasing majesty:
Thou would not then have let Pertillo die,
Nor like a thief have slain him cruelly.
Inevitable fates, could you devise,
No means to bring me to this pilgrimage,
Full of great woes and sad calamities,
But that the father should be principal,
To plot the present downfall of the son:
Come then kind death and give me leave to die,
Since thou hast slain Pertillo cruelly.
Forbear Allenso harken to my doom,
Which doth concern thy fathers apprehension,
First we enjoin thee upon pain of death,
To give no succour to thy wicked sire,
But let him perrish in his damned sin,
And pay the price of such a treachery:
See that with speed the monster be attached,
And bring him safe to suffer punishment,
Prevent it not, nor seek not to delude,
The officers to whom this charge is given,
For if thou doe, as sure as God doth live:
Thy self shall satisfy the laws contempt,
Therefore forward about this punishment.
Thanks gracious God that thou hast lft the means
To end my soul from this perplexity,
Not succour him on pain of present death:
That is no pain, death is a welcome guest,
To those whose harts are overwhelmed with grief,
My woes are done, I having leave to die,
And after death live ever joyfully.
Now Avarice I have well satisfied,
My hungry thoughts with blood and creltie:
Now all my melancholy discontent,
Is shaken of, and I am thoroughly pleased,
With what thy policy hath brought to pass,
Yet am I not so thoroughly satisfied:
Until I bring the purple actors forth,
And cause them quasfe a bowl of bitterness,
That father, son, and sister brother may,
Bring to their deaths with most assured decay.
That will be done without all question,
For thou hast slain Allenso with the boy:
And Racell doth not wish to ouerliue,
The sad remembrance of her brothers sin,
Leave faithful love, to teach them how to dye,
That they may share their kinsfolks misery.
I have bestowed a watery funeral,
On the half body of my butchered friend,
The head and legs Isle leave in some dark place,
I care not if they find them yea or no.
Where do you mean to leave the head and legs,
In some dark place ne'er to Bainardes castle,
But doe it closely that you be not seen,
For all this while you are without suspect.
Take you no thought, isle have a care of that,
Only take heed you have a special care,
To make no show of any discontent,
Nor use too many words to any one.
I will return when I have left my load,
Be merry Rachel half the fear is past.
But I shall never think my self secure,
This deed would trouble any quiet soul,
To think thereof, much more to see it done,
Such cruel deeds can never long be hid,
Although we practice ne'er so cunningly,
Let others open what I doe conceal,
Lo he is my brother, I will cover it,
And rather dye then have it spoken rife,
Lo where she goes, betrayed her brothers life.
Why how now Harry what should be the cause,
That you are grown so discontent of late:
Your sighs do show some inward heaviness,
Your heavy looks, your eyes brimful of tears,
Bears testimony of some secret grief,
Reveal it Harry, I will be thy friend,
And help thee to my poor hability.
If I am heavy, if I often sigh,
And if my eyes bear records of my woe,
Condemn me not, for I have mighty cause,
More then I will impart to any one.
Do you misdoubt me, that you dare not tell
That woe to me, that moves your discontent.
Good moister Cowley you were ever kind,
But pardon me, I will not utter it,
To any one, for I have past my word,
And therefore urge me not to tell my grief.
But those that smother grief too secretly,
May wast themselves in silent anguishment,
And bring their bodies to so low an ebb,
That all the world can never make is flow,
Unto the hppy hight of former health:
Then be not iniuious to thy self,
To wast thy strength in lamentation,
But tell thy case, wele seek some remedy.
My cause of grief is now remediless,
And all the world can never lessen it,
Then since no means can make my sorrows less,
Suffer me wail a woe which wants redress.
Yet let me bear a part in thy laments,
I love thee not so ill, but I will moan,
Thy heavy haps, thou shalt not sigh alone.
Nay, if you are so curious to intrude,
Your self to sorrow, where you have no share,
I will frequent some unfrequented place,
Where none shall here nor see my lamentations.
And I will follow where soever thou go,
I will be partner of thy helpless woe.
Will first not time we should go to our boats,
And give attendance for this Bartlemew tide:
Folks will be stirring early in the morning.
By my troth I am indifferent whether I go or no.
If a fare come why so, if not, why so, if I have not their money, they shall have none of my labour.
But we that live by our labours, must give attendance,
But where lies thy Boat?
At Baynard castle stairs.
So do's mine, then lets go together.
Come, I am indifferent, I care not so much for going,
But if I go with you, why so: if not, why so.
Sblood what rascal hath laid this in my way?
A was not very indifferent that did so, but you are so permentorie, to say, why so, and why so, that every one is glad to do you injury, but lets see, what is it?
Good Lord deliver vs, a mans legs, and a head with mano wounds.
Whats that so much, I am indifferent, yet for mine own part, I understand the misery of it, if you doe, why so, if not, why so.
By my troth I understand no other mystery but thy,
It is a strange and very rueful sight,
But prithee what dost thou conceit of it.
In troth I am indifferent, for if I tell you, why so, if not
why so.
If thou tell me, Isle thank thee, therefore I prithee tell me.
I tell you I am indifferent, but to be plain with you,
I am grieved to stumble at the hangmans budget.
At the hangmans budget, why this is a sack.
And to speak indifferently, it is the hang-mans Budget, and because he thought too much of his labour to set this head upon the bridge, and the legs upon the gates, he flings them in the street for men to stumble at, but if I get him in my boat, Isle so belabour him in a stretcher, that he had better be stretched in one of his own halfepeny halters: if this be a good conceit, why so, if not, why so.
Thou art deceived, this head hath many wounds,
And hoase and shoes remaining on the legs,
Bull always strips all quartered traitors quite.
I am indifferent whether you believe me or no, these were not worth taking off, and therefore he left them on, if this be likely why so, if not, why so.
Nay then I see you grow from worse to worse,
I heard last night, that one near Lambert hill
Was missing, and his boy was murdered,
It may be this is a part of that same man:
What ere it be, Isle bear it to that place.
Mass I am indifferent, Isle go along with you,
If it be so, why so, if not why so.
Hoe moister Loney, here you any news,
What is become of your Tenant Beech?
No truly sir, not any news at all.
What hath the boy recovered any speech,
To give vs light of these suggestions,
That do arise upon this accident.
There is no hope he should recover speech,
The wives do say, he's ready now to leave
This grievous world full fraught with treachery,
Me thinks if Beech himself be innocent,
That then the murderer should not dwell far off,
Te hammer that is sticking in his head,
Was borrowed of a Cutler dwelling by,
But he remembers not, who borrowed it:
He is committed that did owe the hammer,
But yet he stands upon his innocence,
And Beeches absence causes great suspicion.
If Beech be faulty, as I do not think,
I never was so much deceived before,
Oh had you known his conversation,
You would not have him in suspicion.
Devils seem Saints, and in this hateful times,
Deceit can bear apparent signs of truth,
And vice bear show of virtues excellence.
I pray is this moister Beeches house?
My friend this same was moister Beeches shop,
We cannot tell whether he live or no.
Know you his head and if I show it you,
Or can you tell what hose or shoes he ware,
At that same time when he forsook the shop.
What have you head, and hose, and shoes to show,
And want the body that should use the same.
Behold this head, these legs, these hose and shoes,
And see if they were Beeches yea or no.
They are the same, alas what is become,
Of the remainder of this wretched man.
Nay that I know not, only these we found,
As we were coming up a narow lane,
Near Baynard Castle, where we two did dwell,
And hearing that a man was missing hence,
We thought it good to bring these to this place,
Thanks my good friends, ther's some thing for your pains,
We are indifferet, whether you give vs any thing or nothing, and if you had not, why so, but since you have, wh so.
Leave your ripening sir we thank you heartily.
Farewell good fellows, neighbour now be bold,
They dwell not far that did this bloody deed,
As God no boubt will at the last reveal:
Though they conceal it ne'er so cunningly,
All houses, gutters, sincks and creuices,
Have carefully been sought for, for the blood.
Yet theres no instance found in any place.
But who is that, that brings a heavy load,
Behind him on a painful porters back.
Pray gentlemen which call you Beeches shop?
This is the place, what wold you with the man?
Nothing with him, I hear the man is dead,
And if he be not, I have lost my pains.
Hes dead indeed, but yet we cannot find,
What is become of half his hopeless body,
His head and legs are found but for the rest,
No man can tell what is become of it.
Then I doe think I can resolve your doubt,
And bring you certain tidings of the rest,
And if you know his doublet and his shirt:
As for the body it is so abused.
That no man can take notice whose it was,
Set down this burden of another shame,
What do you know the doublet and the shirt.
This is the doublet, these the severed limbs,
Which late were joined to that mangled trunk:
Lay them together see if they can make,
Among them all a sound and solid man.
They all agree, but yet they cannot make,
That sound and whole, which a remorseless hand
Hath severed with a knife of cruelty:
But ay good sir, where did you find this out?
Walking betime by Paris-garden ditch,
Having my Waer Spaniel by my side,
When we approached unto that haplesse place,
Where this same trunk lay drowned in a ditch,
My Spaniel began to sent, to bark, to plunge,
Into the water, and came forth again,
And fawnd on me, as if a man should say,
Help out a man that here lies murdered.
At first I took delight to see the dog,
Thinking in vain some game did there lye hid,
Amongst the Nettles growing near the bank:
But when no game, nor any thing appeared,
That might produce the Spaniel to this sport,
I began to rate and beat the harmless Cur,
Thinking to make him leave to follow me,
But words, nor blows, could move the dog away,
But still he plunged, he dived, he barked, he ran
Still to my side, as if it were for help:
I seeing this, did make the ditch be dragd,
Where then was found this body as you see,
With great amazement to the lookers on.
Behold the mighty miracles of God,
That senseless things should propagate their sin,
That are more bestial far then beastliness,
Of any creature most insensible.
Cease we to wonder at Gods wondrous works,
And let vs labour for to bring to light,
Those masked fiends that thus dishonour him:
This sack is new, and lo behold his mark
Remains upon it, which did sell the bag,
Amongst the Salters we shall find it out,
When, and to whom, this bloody bag was sold.
Tic very likely, let no pains be spared,
To bring it out, if it be possible,
It were pity such a murder should remain
Unpunished, amongst Turks and Infidels.
Sirs, I do know the man that sold this bag,
And if you please, Isle fetch him presently?
With all our harts, how say you Gentlemen?
Perchance the murter thus may come to light.
I pray you do it, we will tarry here:
And let the eyes of every passenger
Be satisfied, which may example be,
How they commit so dreadful wickedness.
And please your maisterships the boy is dead.
Tic very strange, that having many wounds,
So terrible, so ghastly, which is more,
Having the hammer sticking in his head,
That he should live and stir from Friday night,
To Sunday morning, and even then depart,
When that his Masters mangled course were found,
Bring him forth too, perchance the murderers
May have their hearts touched with due remorse,
Viewing their deeds of damned wickedness.
Here is the Salters man that sold the bag,
My friend, how long since did you sell that bag?
And unto whom, if you remember i?
I sold he bag good ir but yesterday,
Unto a maid, I do not know her name.
Nor where she dwells.
No certainly.
But what apparel had she on her back?
I do not well remember what she wore,
But if I saw her I should know her sure.
Go round about to every neighbours house,
And will them show their maids immediately:
God grant we may find out the murderers.
Bring forth such maids as are within your house.
I have but one, isle send her down to you.
Is this the maid.
No sir, this is not she.
How many maids do dwell within this house?
Her's ne'er a woman here, except my wife.
Whose house is this?
An honest civil mans, called Moister Merry,
Who I dare be sworn, would never do so great a murder
But you may ask here to for fashion sake.
How now fair maid, dwells any here but you?
Thou hast too true a face for such a deed.
No genle sir, my brother keeps no more.
This is not she?
No truly gentlema.
This will not serve, we cannot find her out,
Bring in those bodies, it grows towards night,
God bring these damned murderers at length to light.
Why go the neighbours round about the street
To every house? what hast thou heard the cause?
They go about with that same Salters man,
Of whom I bought the bag but yesterday,
To see if he can know the maid again
Which bought it, this I think the very cause.
How were my senses overcome with fear,
That I could not foresee this jeopardy:
For had I brought the bag away with me,
They had not had this menes to find it out.
Hide thee aboue least hat the Salters man,
Take notice of thee that thou art the maid,
And by that knowledge we be all undone.
That fear is past, I saw, I spake with him,
Yet he denies that I did buy the bag:
Besides, the neighbours have no doubt of you,
Saying you are an honest harmless man,
And made enquiry here for fashion sake.
My former life, deserves their good conceits,
Were it not blemished with this treachery.
My heart is merrier then it was before,
For now I hope the greatest fear is past,
The hammer is denied, the bag unknown,
Now there is left no means to bring it out,
Unless our selves prove Traitors to our selves.
When saw you Harry Wiliams?
Why to day
I met him coming home from owls Cross,
Where he had been to hear a Sermon.
Why brought you not the man along with you
To come to dinner, that we might persuade
Him to continue in his secrecy.
I did entreat him, but he would not come,
But vowed to be as secret as my self.
What, did he swear?
What need you ask me that?
You know we never heard him swear an other.
But since he hath concealed the thing thus long,
I hope in God he will conceal it still.
Pray God he do, and then I have no doubt,
But God will overpass this grievous sin,
If you lament with true unfeigned tears,
And seek to live the remnant of your years,
In Gods true fear with upright conscience.
If it would please him pardon this amiss,
And rid my body from the open shame,
That doth attend this deed, being brought to light,
I would endeavour all my coming days,
To please my maker, and exl his praise:
But it grows late,  bring  to my bed,
That I may rest my sorrow charged head.
Rest still in calm secure tranquillity,
And ouer-blowe this storm of mighty fear,
With pleasant gal of hoped nsse,
Go when you will, I will ttend, and pray,
To send this woeful night a cheerfull day.
Pass  these rugged urrowes of laments,
And come to plainer paths of cheerfulness,
Cease thy continual showers of thy woe,
And let my pleasing words of comfort chase,
This dusky clouds of thy unjust despair,
Far from thy hart, and let a pleasing hope,
Of young Pertillos happy safe return,
Establish all your ill divining thoughts,
So shall you make me cheerful that am sad,
And feed your hopes with fond illusions.
I could be so, but my divided soul,
Twixt fear and hope of young Pertillos life,
Cannot arrive at the desired port,
Of irme belief, until mine eyes do see,
Him that I sent to know the certainty.
To know the certainty, of whom, of what,
Whom, whether when, or whereabout I pray,
Have you dispatcht a frustrate messenger,
By heaven, and earth, my heart misguiseth me,
They will prevent my cunning policy.
Why speak you not what winged Pageus,
Is posted for your satisfaction.
Me thinks my speech reveals a hidden fear,
And that fear tells me, that the child is dead.
By sweet S. Andrew and my fathers soul,
I think the peevish boy be too too well:
But speak, who was your passions harbinger.
One that did kindle y misdoubting thoughts,
With the large flame of his timiddity.
Oh then I know the tinder of your fere,
Was young Allenso your white honey son:
Confusion light upon his timorous head,
For broching this large stream of feaefulnesse,
And all the plagues that damned fies feel,
For their forepassed bold iniquities:
Afflict you both for thus preventing me.
Preventing you, of what, Fallerio speak,
For if you doe not, my poor hart will break.
Why of the good hat I had purposed,
To young Pertillo, which I would conceal,
From you, and him, until the deed were done.
If it were good, then we affect him dear,
And would add furtherance to your enterprise.
I say your close ease-dropping policies,
Have hindered him of greater benefits,
Then I can ever do him after this:
If he live long, and grow to riper sin,
Heel curse you both, that thus have hindered
His freedom from this goal of sinful flesh:
But let that pass, when went your harebrainde son,
That Cuckoo vertue-singing, hateful bird,
To guard the safety of his better part,
Which he hath pend within the childish coop,
Of young Pertillos sweet security.
That lovely son, that comfort of my life,
That root of virtuous magnanimity,
That doth affect with an unfeigned love,
That tender boy, which under heavens bright eye,
Deserves most to be affected dear,
Went some two hours after the little boy
Was sent away, to keep at Padua.
What is a lovely? he's a loathsome toad,
A one eyed Cyclops, a stigmaticke brat,
That durst attempt to contradict my will,
And pry into my close intendements.
Mas here a comes, his downcast sullen look,
Is over weighed with mighty discontent,
I hope the brat is posted to his sire,
That he is grown so lazy of his pace:
Forgetful of his duty, and his tongue,
Is even fast tide with strings of heaviness.
Come hither boy, saw thou my obstacle,
That little Dromus that crept into my son,
With friendly hand, removed and thrust away,
Say I, and please me with the sueest note,
That ever relist in a mortals mouth.
I am a Swan that singe before I dye,
Your note of shame and coming misery.
Speak softly son, let not thy mother hear,
She was almost dead before for very fear.
Would I could roar as instruments of war,
Wall battring Cannons, when the Gun-powder
Is touched with part of Etnas Element,
Would I could bellow like enraged Bulls,
Whose harts are full of indignation,
To be captived by human policy:
Would I could thunder like Almighty Jove,
That sends his far heard voice to terrific,
The wicked hearts of earthly citizens:
Then roaring, bellowing, thundering, I would say,
Mother lament, Pertillos made away.
What is he dead, God give me leave to die,
And him repentance for his treachery.
Never the like impiety was done,
A mother slain, with terror of the son:
Help to repair the damadge thou hast made,
And seek to call back life with diligence.
Call back a happy creature to more woe,
That were a sin, good Father let her go:
O happy I, if my tormenting smart,
Could rend like her's, my grief afflicted heart,
Would your hard hart extend unto your wife,
To make her live an euerdying life.
What is she dead? oh then thrice happy she,
Whose eyes are bard from our calamity.
I all too soon, thou viper, parricide,
But for thy tongue thy mother had not died,
That belching voice, that harsh night-rauen sound,
Untimely sent thy mother to the ground,
Upbraid my fault, I did deceive my brother,
Cut out thy tongue, that slue thy careful mother.
God love my soul, as I in heart rejoice,
To have such power in my death bringing voice,
See how in stead of tears and hearty sighs:
Of folded arms and sorrow speaking looks,
I doe behold with cheerful countenance,
The lifeless root of my nativity:
And thank her hasty soul that thence did go,
To keep her from her son and husbands woe.
Now father give attention to my tale:
I will not dip my grief deciphering tongue,
In bitter words of reprehension,
Your deeds have thrown more mischiefs on your head
Then wit or reason can remove again
For to be brief, Pertillo, oh that name
Cannot be named without a hearty sgh,
Is murdered, and,
What and, this news is good.
The men which you suborned to murder him.
Better and better, then it cannot out,
Unless your love will be so scripulous,
That it will overthrow your self and me.
The best is last, and yet you hinder me,
The Duke of Padua hunting in the wood:
Accompanied with Lords and gentlemen,
Swones what of that? what good can come of that?
Was made acquainted by the one of them,
(That had some little remnant of his life:)
With all your practice and conspiracy?
I would that remnant had fled quick to hell,
To fetch fierce finds to rend their carcases,
Rather then bring my life in jeopardy:
Is this the best, swones doe you mock me son,
And make a est at my calamity
Not I good father, I will as your woe,
If you but yield unto my policy.
Declare it then, my wits are now to seek,
That piece of life hath so confounded me,
That I am wholly overcome with fear.
The duke hath vowed to prosecute your life,
With all the strict severity he can,
But I will cross his resolution:
And keep you from his fury well enough,
Isle wear your habit, I will seem the man,
That did suborn the bloody murderers,
I will not stir from out this house of woe,
But weight the coming of the officers,
And answer for you fore the angry Duke,
And if need be suffer your punishment.
Isle none of that, I do not like the last,
I love thee dearer then I doe my life,
And all I did, was to advance thy state,
To sun bright beams of shining happiness.
Doubt not my life, for when I doe appear
Before the duke, I being not the man,
He can inflict no punishment on me.
Mas thou says true, a cannot punish thee,
Thou were no actor of their Tragaedie:
But for my beard thou can not counterfeit,
And bring gray hairs upon thy downy chin,
White frosts are never seen in summers spring.
I bought a beard this day at Padua,
Such as our common actors use to wear:
When youth would put on ages countenance,
So like in shape, in colour, and in all,
To that which grows upon your aged face,
That were I dressed in your habiliments,
Your self would scarcely know me from your self.
That's excellent, what shape hast thou deuis'd,
To be my vizard to delude the world.
Why thus, isle presently shave off your hair,
And dress you in a lowly shepherds weed,
Then you will seem to have the careful charge,
Of some wealth bringing rich and fleecy floeke,
And so pass currant from suspicion.
This care of thine my son doth testify,
Nature in thee hath firm predominance,
That neither loss of friend, nor vile reproach,
Can shake thee with their strongest violence:
In this disguise, isle see the end of thee,
That thou acquitted, then moist succour me.
I am assured to be exempt from woe.
This plot will work my certain overthrow.
I will bear hence thy mother, and my wife,
Untimely murdered with true sorrows knife.
Untimely murdered, happy was that grief,
Which hath abridged whole numbers, numberless:
Of hart surcharging deplorations.
She shall have due and christian funeral,
And rest in peace amongst her ancestors,
As for our bodies, they shall be interred,
In ravening mawes, of Ravens, Puttockes, Crows,
Of tatlin Magpies, and deaths harbingers,
That will be glutted with wind shaken limbs,
Of blood delighting hateful murderers:
And yet these many winged sepulchers,
Shall turn to earth so I, and father shall,
At last ataine to earth by funeral,
Well I will prosecute my policy,
That wished death may end my miseries.
Still in your dumps, good Harry yet at last,
Utter your motive of this heaviness:
Why go you not unto your masters house?
What are you parted? if that be the cause,
I will provide you of a better place.
Who roves all day, at length may hit the mark,
That is the cause, because I cannot stay,
With him whose love, is dearer then my life.
Why fell you out? why did you part so soon?
We fell not out, but fear hath parted vs.
What did he fear your truth or honest life?
No, no, your vndestanding is but dim,
That far removed, cannot judge the fear,
We both were fearful, and we both did part,
Because indeed we both were timorous.
What accident begot your mutual fear?
That which my hart hath promised to conceal.
Why now you fall into your ancient vain.
Tic vain to urge me from this silent vain,
I will conceal it, though it breed my pain.
It seems to be a thing of consequence,
And therefore prithee Harry for my love,
Open this close fast clasped mystery.
Were I assured my heart should have release,
Of secret torment, and distemperature,
I would reveal it to you specially,
Whom I have found my faithful favourite.
Good Harry VVilliams make no doubt of that,
Besides, your grief reueald may have relief,
Beyond your present expectation:
Then tell it Harry, what soar it be,
And ease your hart of horror, me of doubt.
What have you heard of Beech of Lambert hill?
And of his boy which late were murdered.
I heard, and saw, their mangled circaes.
But have you heard of them that murdered them?
No, would I had, for then Id blase their shame,
And make them pay due penance for their sin.
This I misdoubted, therefore will forbear,
To utter what I thought to have reueald.
Know thou the actors of this murthrous deed,
And wilt conceal it now the deed is done?
Alas poor man, thou know not what thou dost,
Thou hast incurred the danger of the law,
And thou amongst them must suffer punishment,
Unless thou do confess it presently.
What? shall I then betray my masters life?
Better thn hazard both thy life and soul,
To bolster out such barbarous villainy.
Why then belike your moister did the deed.
My moister unawares escaped my mouth,
But what the Lord doth please shall come to light,
Cannot be hid by human policy:
His haplesse hand hath wrought the fatal end,
Of Robrt Beech and Thomas VVinchester.
Could he alone do both those men to death?
Had thou no share in execution?
Nor knew not of it, till the deed was done.
If this be true, thou moist escape with life
Confess the truth unto the officers,
And thou shalt find the favour of the law.
If I offended, it was my Masters love,
That made me hide his great transgressions:
But I will be directed as you please,
So save me God, as I am innocent.
Part of my self, now seem thou wholly me,
And I seem neither like my self, nor thee:
Thanks to thy care, and this unknown disguise.
I like a shepherd now must learn to know,
When to lead forth my little bleating flock,
To pleasing pastures, and well fatting walks,
In stormy time to drive them to the lee,
To cheer the pretty Lambs, whose bleating voice,
Doth crave the wished comfort of their dams,
To sound my merry Bag-pipe on the downs,
In shearing times poor shepherds festivals,
And lastly, how to drive the Wolf away,
That seek to make the little Lambs their pray.
Ah have you care to drive the Wolf away,
From silly creatures wanting intellect,
And yet would suffer your devouring thoughts,
To suck the blood of your dead brothers son,
As pure and innocent as any lamb,
Pertillo was, which you have fed upon,
But things past help may better be bewaild
With careful tears, then find a remedy,
Therefore for fear our practise be espied,
Let vs to question of our husbandry,
How many Lambs fell from the middle flock,
Since I my self did take the latter view.
Some viue and twenty, whereof two are dead,
But three and twenty sud about the fields,
That glads my hart to ze their jollity.
This is the man, conferring of his Lambs,
That slew a Lamb worth all his flock besides.
When is the time to let the Weathers blood,
The forward spring, that had such store of grass,
Hath filled them full of rank unwholesome blood,
Which must be purged, else when the winter comes,
The rot will leave me nothing but their skins.
I will let om blood, but yet it is no time,
Until the zygne be gone below the hart.
Forbear a while this idle business,
And talk of matters of more consequence.
Che tell you plain, you are no honest man,
To call a shepherds care an idle toy,
What though we have a little merry sport,
With flowery gyrlonds, and an Oaten pipe,
And jolly friskins on a holly-day,
Yet is a shepherds cure, a greater cark,
Then sweating Plough-men with their busy work.
Hence leave your sheepish ceremonial,
And now Fallerio, in the Princes name,
I do arrest you, for the cruel murder
Of young Pertillo left unto your charge,
Which you discharged with a bloody writ,
Signed by the hands of those you did suborn:
Nay look not strange, we have such evidence,
To ratify your Stigian cruelty,
That cannot be deluded any way:
Alas my Lords, I know not what you say,
As for my Nephew, he I hope is well,
I sent him yesterday to Padua.
I, he is well, in such a vengers hands,
As will not wink at your iniquity.
By heaven and earth my soul is innocent,
Say what you will, I know my conscience.
To be afflicted with a scourge of care,
Which my ore weaning rashness did inflict.
Come bear him hence, expostulate no more,
That heart that could invent such treachery,
Can teach his face to brave it cunningly.
I do defy your accusations,
Let me have justice I will answer it.
So bear him hence, I mean to stay behind,
To take possession of his goods and lands:
For the Dukes use, it is too manifest.
I hope you'll answer any thing you doe,
My Lord Vesuuio you shall answer it:
And all the rest that use extremities.
I to the Dukes Exchecker not to you.
Thus shades are caught when substances are fled,
Indeed they have my garments, but my self,
Am close enough from their discovery,
But not so close but that my very soul,
Is ract with torments for Pertillos death;
I am Actn, I doe bear about
My horns of shame and inhumanity,
My thoughts, like hounds which late did flatter me:
With hope of great succeeding benefits.
Now gin to tear my care-tormented heart,
With fear of death and tortring punishment,
These are the stings when as our consciences,
Are stufd and clogd with close concealed crimes,
Well I must smoother all these discontents,
And strive to bear a smoother countenance:
Then rugged care would willingly permit,
Isle to the Court to see Alenso free,
That he may then relieve my poverty.
Who would have thought of all the men alive,
That Thomas Merry would have done this deed:
So full of ruth and monstrous wickedness.
Of all the men that live in London walls.
I would have thought that Merry had bin free,
Is this the fruits of Saint-like Puritans,
I never like such damned hypocrisy.
He would not loase a sermon for a pound,
An oath he thought would rend his jaws in twain,
An idle word did whet Gods vengeance on:
And yet two murders were not scripulous,
Such close illusions God will bring to light,
And overthrow the workers with his might.
This is the house, come let vs knock at door,
I see a light they are not all in bed:
How now fair maid, is your brother up?
He's not within sir, would you speak with him?
You doe but lest, I know he is within,
And I must needs go up and speak with him.
In deed good sir, he is in bed a sleep,
And I was loath to trouble him to night.
Well sister, I am sorry for your sake,
But for your brother, he is known to be
A damned villain and an hipocrite,
Rachel, I charge thee in her highness name,
To go with vs to prison presently.
To prison sir, alas what have I done?
You know that best, but every one doe know,
You and your brother murdered moister Bech,
And his poor boy that dwelt at Lambert hill.
I murdered, my brother knows that I
Did not consent to either of their deaths.
That must be tried, where doth your brother lye?
Here in his bed, me thinks he's not a sleep.
Now moister Merry, are you in a sweat.
No verily, I am not in a sweat.
Some sudden fear affrights you, whats the cause?
Nothing but that you waked me unawares.
In the Queens name I doe command you rise,
And presently to go along with vs.
With all my hart, what doe you know the cause?
We partly doe, when saw you moister Beech?
I doe not well remember who you mean.
Not Beech the chandler upon Lambert hill.
I know the man, but saw him not this fortnight.
I would you had not, for your sisters sake,
For yours, for his, and for his harmless boy,
Be not obdurate in your wickedness,
Confession draws repentance after it.
Well moister Constable I doe confess,
I was the man that did them both to death:
As for my sister and my harmless man,
I doe protest they both are innocent.
Your man is fast in hold, and hath confessed,
The manner how, and where, the deed was done:
Therefore it were vain to colour any thing,
Bring them away.
Ah brother woe is me,
I comfortless will help to comfort thee.
Weep, weep poor souls, &amp; interchange your woes,
Now Merry change thy name and countenance:
Smile not, thou wretched creature, least in scorn,
Thou smile to think on thy extremities,
Thy woes were countless for thy wicked deeds,
Thy sisters death need not increase the count,
For thou could never number them before:
Gentles help out with this suppose I pray,
And think it truth for Truth doth tell the tale.
Merye by law convict, as principal,
Receives his doom, to hang till he be dead,
And afterwards for to be hanged in chains:
Williams and Rachel likewise are convict
For their concealment, VVilliams craves his book,
And so receives a brond of infamy.
But wretched Rachels sex denies that grace,
And therefore doth receive a doom of death,
To dye with him, whose sins she did conceal.
Your eyes shall witness of their shaded tips,
Which many here did see performed indeed:
As for Fallerio, not his homely weeds,
His beardless face, nor counterfeited speech,
Can shield him from deserved punishment:
But what he thinks shall rid him from suspect,
Shall drench him in more waes of wretchedness,
Pulling his son into relentless jaws,
Of hungry death, on tree of infamy:
Here comes the Duke that dooms them both to die,
Next Merries death shall end this Tragedy.
Where is that Siren, that incarnate fiend,
Monster of Nature, spectacle of shame,
Blot and confusion of his family,
False seeming semblance of true-dealing trust,
I mean Fallerio bloody murderer:
Hath he confessed his cursed treachery,
Or will he stand to prove his innocence.
We have attached Fallerio gracious Lord,
And did accuse him with Pertillos death:
But he remote, will not confess himself,
Neither the means, nor author of the same,
His mighty vows and protestations,
Do almost seem to plead integrity,
But that we all do know the contrary.
I know your error strikes your knowledge blind,
His seeming me, doth so delude your mind.
Then bring him forth, to anwere for himself,
Since he stands stoutly to deny the deed:
His son can witness, that the dying man,
Accused Fallerio for his treachery.
Stand forth thou close disguised hipocrite,
And speak directly to these articles,
First, did thou hire two bloody murderers
To massacre Pertillo in a wood?
I never did suborn such murderers,
But ever loved Pertillo as my life.
Thy son can witness to the contrary.
I have no son to testify so much.
No, for his gravity is counterfeit,
Pluck of his beard, and you will swear it so.
Have you no son? doth not Alenso live?
Alenso lives, but is no son of mine.
Indeed his better part had no his source,
From thy corrupted vice affecting hart,
For virtue is the mark he aims at.
I dare be sworn that Sostrata would blush,
Should thou deny Alenso for thy son.
Nay did she live, she would not challenge me,
To be the father of that haplesse son.
Nay, then anon you will deny your self,
To be your self, unjust Fallerio.
I do confess my self, to be my self,
But will not answer to Fallrio.
Not to Fallerio, this is excellent,
You are the man was called Fallerio.
He never breathed yet that called me so,
Except he were deceived as you are now.
This impudence shall not excuse your fault,
You are well known to be Fallerio,
The wicked husband of dead Sostrata,
And father to the virtuous Alenso,
And even as sure as all these certainties,
Thou did contrive thy little Nephews death.
True, for I am nor false Fallerio,
Husband, nor father, as you do suggest,
And therefore did not hire the murderers:
Which to be true acknowledge with your eyes.
How now my Lords, this is a miracle,
To shake off thirty years so suddenly,
And turn from feeble age to flourishing youth.
But he my Lord that wrought this miracle,
Is not of power to free himself from death,
Through the performance of this sudden change.
No, were he the chiefest hope of Christendom,
He should not live for this presumption:
Use no excuse, Alenso for thy life,
My doom of death shall be irrevocable.
Ill fare his soul, that would extenuate
The rigour of your life confounding doom:
I am prepared with all my hart to die,
For thats th'end of human misery.
Then thus, you shall be hanged immediately,
For your illusion of the Magistrates,
With borrowed shapes of false antiquity.
Thrice happy sentence, which I do embrace,
With a more fervent and unfeigned zeal,
Then an ambitious rule desiring man,
Would do a Gem bedecked Diadem,
Which brings more watchful cares and discontent,
Then pomp, or honour, can remunerate:
When I am dead, let it be said of me,
Alnso died to set his father free.
That were a freedom worse then servitude,
To cruel Turk, or damned Infdell:
Most righteous Judge, I do appeal for Justice,
Justice on him that hath deserved death,
Not on Alenso, he is innocent.
But I am guilty of abbetting him,
Contrary to his Majesties Edict,
And therefore death is meritorious.
I am the wretch that did suborn the slaves,
To murder poor Pertillo in the wood,
Spare, spare Alenso, he is innocent.
What strange appeal is this, we know thee no,
None but Fallio is accused hereof.
Then father get you hence, depart in time,
Least being known you suffer for the crime.
Depart, and leave thee clad in horrors cloak,
And suffer death for true affection:
Although my soul be guilty of more sin,
Then ever sinful soul were guilty of:
Yet fiends of hell would never suffer this,
I am thy father, though unworthy so:
Oh still I see these weeds do sear your eyes:
I am Fallerio, make no doubt of me.
Though thus disguised, in habit, countenance,
Only to scope the terror of the law.
And I Alenso that did succour him,
Against your commandment, mighty Sovereign:
Ponder your oath, your vow, as God did live,
I should not live, if I did rescue him:
I did, God lives, and will revenge it home,
If you defer my condign punishment.
Assure your selves you both shall suffer death:
But for Fallerio, he shall hang in chains,
After he's dead, for he was principal.
Unsavoury Woorme wood, Hemlock, bitter gall,
Brings no such bad, vnrelisht, sower taste,
Vo the tongue, as this death boding voice,
Brings to the ears of poor Fallerio.
Not for my self but for Allensoes sake,
Whom I have murdered by my treachery:
Ah my dread Lord, if any little spark,
Of melting pity doth remain alive,
And not extinguished by my impious deeds,
Oh kindle it unto a happy flame,
To light Allenso from this misery;
Which through dim death he's like to fall into.
That were to overthrow my soul and all,
Should you reverse this sentence of my death:
My self would play the death man on my self,
And overtake your swift and winged whole,
Ere churlish Caron had transported you,
Unto the fields of sad Proserpina.
Cease, cease Fallerio, in thy bootless prayers,
I am resolved, I am inexorable,
Vesuuio, see their judgment be performed,
And use Alnso with all clemency:
Provided that the law be satisfied.
It shall be done with all respectiuenesse,
Have you no donbt of that my gracious Lord.
Here is a mercy mixed with equity,
To show him favour, but cut off his head.
My reverend father, pacify your self,
I can, and will, endure the stroke of death,
Were his appearance ne'er so horrible,
To meet Pertillo in another world.
Thou should have tarried until natures course
Had been extinct, that thou ore grown with age,
Might die the death of thy progenitors,
It was not thy means he died so suddenly,
But mine, that causing his, have murdered thee.
But yet I slew my mother, did I not?
I, with reporting of my villainy,
The very audit of my wickedness,
Had force enough to give a sudden death:
Ah sister, sister, now I call to mind,
Thy dying words now proved a prophecy,
If you deal ill with this distressed child:
God will no doubt revenge the innocent,
I have dealt ill, and God hath tan revenge.
Now let vs leave remembrance of past deeds
And think on that which more concerns vs.
With all my hart thou ever were the spur,
Which prict me on to any godliness:
And now thou doest endeavour to incite,
Me make my parting peace with God and men:
I doe confess even from my very soul,
My heinous sin and grievous wickedness,
Against my maker many thousand ways:
Ab imo cords I repent my self,
Of all my sins against his majesty:
And heavenly father lay not to my charge,
The death of poor Pertillo and those men,
Which I suborned to be his murderers,
When I appear before thy heavenly throne,
To have my sentence, or of life or death.
Amen, amen, and God continue still,
These mercy moving meditations.
And thou great God which art omnipotent,
Powerful enough for to redeem our souls:
Even from the very gates of gaping hell,
Forgive our sins, and wash away our faults;
In the sweet river of that precious blood,
Which thy dear son did shed in Galgotha,
For the remission of all contrite souls.
Forgive thy death my thrice beloved son.
I doe, and father pardon my misdeeds,
Of disobedience and unthankfulness.
Thou never yet were disobedient,
Unless I did command unlawfulness,
Ungratefulness did never trouble thee,
Thou art too bounteous thus to guerdon me.
Come let vs kiss and thus embrace in death,
Even when you will come bring vs to the place:
Where we may consummate our wretchedness,
And change it for eternal happiness.
Now sister Rachel is the hour come,
Wherein we both must satisfy the law,
For Beeches death and harmless Winchester:
Weep not sweet sister, for that cannot help,
I doe confess fore all this company,
That thou were never privy to their deaths,
But only helpest me when the deed was done,
To wipe the blood and hide away my sin,
And since this fault hath brought thee to this shame,
I doe entreat thee on my bended knee,
To pardon me for thus offending thee.
I doe forgive you from my very soul,
And think not that I shed these store of tears,
For that I price my life, or fear to dye,
Though I confess the manner of my death,
Is much more grieueuous then my death it self;
But I lament for that it hath been said,
I was the author of this cruelty,
And did produce you to this wicked deed,
Whereof God knows that I am innocent.
Indeed thou art, thy conscience is at peace,
And feels no terror for such wickedness,
Mine hath been vexed but is now at rest,
For that I am assured my heinous sin:
Shall never rise in judgment against my soul,
But that the blood of Iesus Christ hath power,
To make my purple sin as white as Snow.
One thing good people, witness here with me,
That I do dye in perfect charity,
And do forgive, as I would be forgiven,
First of my God, and then of all the world:
Cease publishing that I have been a man,
Trained up in murder, or in cruelty,
For fore this time, this time is all too soon,
I never slue or did consent to kill,
So help me God as this I speak is true:
I could say something of my innocence,
In fornication and adultery,
But I confess the justest man alive
That bears about the frailty of a man,
Cannot excuse himself from daily sin,
In thought, in word, and deed, such was my life,
I never hated Beech in all my life,
Only desire of money which he had,
And the inciting of that foe of man,
That greedy gulf, that great Lauiathan,
Did halle me on to these calamities,
For which, even now my very soul doth bleed:
God strengthen me with patience to endure,
This chastisement, which I confess too small
A punishment for this my heinous sin:
Oh be courageous sister, fight it well,
We shall be crowned with immortality.
I will not faint, but combat manfully,
Christ is of power to help and strengthen me.
I pray make hast, the hour is almost past.
I am prepared, oh God receive my soul,
Forgive my sins, for they are numberless,
Receive me God, for now I come to thee.
Nay shrink not woman, have a cheerful hart.
I, so I do, and yet this sinful flesh,
Will be rebellious against my willing spirit.
Come let me clime these steps that lead to heaven,
Although they seem the stairs of infamy
Let me be mirror to ensuing times,
And teach all sisters how they do conceal,
The wicked deeds, of brethren, or of friends,
I not repent me of my love to him,
But that thereby I have provoked God,
To heavy wrath and indignation,
Which turn away great God, for Christ's sake.
Ah Harry Williams, thou were chiefest cause,
That I do drink of this most bitter cup,
For had thou opened Beeches death at first,
The boy had lived, and thou had saved my life:
But thou art bronded with a mark of shame,
And I forgive thee from my very soul,
Let him and me, learn all that hear of this,
To utter brothers or their masters miss,
Conceal no murder, least it do beget,
More bloody deeds of like deformity.
Thus God forgive my sins, receive my soul,
And though my dinner be of bitter death,
I hope my soul shall sup with Iesus Christ,
And see his presence everlastingly.
The Lord of heaven have mercy on her soul,
And teach all other by this spectacle,
To shun such dangers as she ran into,
By her misguided taciturnity:
Cut down their bodies, give hers funeral,
But let his body be conueyed hence,
To Mile-end greene, and there be hanged in chains.
See here the end of lucre and desire
Of riches, gotten by unlawful means,
What monstrous evils this hath brought to pass,
Your scarce dry eyes give testimonial,
The father, son; the sister, brother brings,
To open scandal, and contemptuous death.
But here come they that wrought these deeds of ruth,
As if they meant to plot new wickedness:
Whether so fast, you damned miscreants?
Ye vain deluders of the credulous,
That seek to train men to destruction.
Why we will on, to set more harms a flote,
That I may swim in rivers of warm blood,
Out-flowing from the sides of Innocents.
I will entice the greedy minded soul,
To pull the fruit from the forbidden tree:
Yet Tantall like, he shall but glut his eye,
Nor feed his body with salubrious fruit,
Hence Stigmaticks, you shall not harbour hear,
To practice execrable butcheries:
My self will bring your close designs to light,
And overthrow your wild conspiracies,
No hart shall entertain a murthrous thought,
Within the sea embracing continent,
Where fair Eliza Prince of piety,
Doth wear the peace adorned Diadem.
Maugre the worst, I will have many harts,
That shall affect my secret whisperings,
The chinck of gold is such a pleasing cry,
That all men wish to hear such harmony,
And I will place sterne murder by my side,
That we may do more harms then haughty pride.
Truth, now farewell, hereafter thou shalt see,
Il vex thee more with many tragedies.
The more the pity, would the hart of man,
Were not so open wide to entertain,
The harmful baits, of self devouring sin,
But from the first unto the latter times,
It hath and will be so eternally,
Now it remains to have your good advice,
Unto a motion of some consequence,
There is a Bark thats newly rigd for sea,
Vnmand, unfurnish with munition:
She must encounter with a greater foe,
Then great Alcydes slue in Lerna Lake,
Would you be pleased to man this willing bark,
With good conceits of her intention,
To store her with the thundering furniture,
Of smoothest smiles, and pleasing plaudiats,
She shall be able to endure the shock,
Of snarling Zoylus, and his cursed crew,
That seeks to sink her in reproaches waives,
And may perchance obtain a victory,
Against curious carpes, and fawning Parasites:
But if you suffer her for want of aid,
To be orewhelmd by her insulting foes,
Oh then she sinckes, that meant to pass the flood,
With stronger force to do her country good:
It rests thus, whether she live or dye,
She is your Beades-man everlastingly.

YE Persians, Medians, and Hircanians,
Trusty assistance, assisters in this happy war,
Ye see the banded power of Asia,
Whose number overspread the Assyrian fields
And in their passage drank maine rivers dry,
By favour of the gods, and our deuoire,
Are overthrown and scattred through the plains,
Like Autumn leaves before a Northern wind.
Crocus is foiled, and fled to Lydia,
The Arabian prince is whelmed amidst the sands,
And last, the old Assyrian king is slain.
Now triumph in the fortune of your hands,
Whose fame hath directed these affairs.
O Cirrus when I saw the Lydian king
Crocus that dastard and reproach of Asia,
Shining in armour forgde of Indian gold.
Brave mounted on a prancer of Eperus,
So shamefully to forsake the field and fly,
I envied that so cowardly a king,
Should use so good an armour and a horse.
Chrisandas, like to Crocus be our foes,
Glorious in show, but cowardly in mind.
Cirrus those arms which dastard Crocus were,
And horse of pride and courage past compare,
What heart so base that would deem to fight,
Might I but live to back so brave a steed.
Crocus is gone, and gone with him his steed,
This wish of yours Chrisantas is in vain,
But of two hundred horses of mine own,
Of gallant rase and courage singular,
Take you the choice and furniture withal,
The bridles bit of massy silver wrought,
The bosses gold, the reins of Persian silk,
The saddles all embroidered purple work,
Armed through with plates, with fine engraven gold,
And golden trappers dangling to the ground.
So live my Lord and flourish still,
As I regard this honourable gift.
Now Lords we have gotten the honour of the day
And with our feet trod down the Thrasian pride,
While I doe sacrifie for victory,
and chose the holy aultars of the gods,
Doe you betwixt the armies part the spoils,
and glad our men with fruits of our conquest.
What portion of the gold shall we reserve
To be employed in your highness use?
Araspas none for me, divide it all,
It pleases me to see my soldiers rich. 
The Persian horsemen that did give the charge
Shall have five hundred talents for their share.
The Medians that did enforce the fight,
and seconded the Persian men at arms,
Allot to them six hundred arming coats.
The archers of Hercania served so well,
as not to give them payment with the rest,
Were open wrong to their approude deserts.
You know that in the sacking of Assyrians tents
we found three thousand Scithians bows in store,
finished with quivers ready to the field,
Let them be lotted to the Hercanians part.
And truth Chrisantas you know well,
That bows and quivers gre with archers best,
Cirrus himself you see refuses gold,
And only seeks to make his fellows rich,
what rests amidst the conquered spoils,
wherein his highness may be gratified?
Histaspis there is a proud Assyrian tent,
Wherein the king was wont to sleep and banquet in,
I think if that were offered to his hands,
Cirrus would take it in most gracious part.
But is the pride and bravery thereof,
worthy to be presented to our Lord?
Asia hath not seen a richer prise,
The covering is of blew Sydoman silk,
Embroidered all with pearl and precious stones,
They glimmer brighter than the Sun it self,
On every point of the pavilion,
There stands a princely top of Phoenix plumes,
which tricked with spangles and with silver belies,
And every gentle murmur of the wind,
delights the day with every harmony.
The stakes wherewith it is fastened to the ground,
are massy silver of the purest proof,
The ropes are all of chrimson silk and gold,
Hung from the top with wrests of Ivory,
Under a Vine where Bacchus bruised grapes,
and twenty cubits hover in the leaves,
Believe me Lords, when I behold the thing,
The work appeared so glorious to the eye.
Araspas you describe a princely thing
Worthy to be presented to a king.
And here is a tent, though far from such a tent,
This shall be mine, the owner's fled or slain,
O beauty rare and more than mortal shape,
What goddess owes this earthly tabernacle.
Nicasia sings while Panthra sits and sighs.
But singing sings of Panthras wretchedness.
What are ye Lady?
What I would not be.
Fair you are, what would ye more?
I would be free.
Ye Persian Lords I am a woeful dame.
Exposed to wretchedness and fortunes wrath,
And thus I have resolude you what I am
Lady, the graces that adorn your presence,
Deserves a fortune mild as it your face.
But howsoever Fortune envies you,
Yet we will use you honourable still.
You use me then but as you ought to doe.
Nay Lady we may use you otherwise,
For voluntary favours be no debt.
But Lords what ere you ought is debt,
you ought to use me well, and therefore debt.
Madam, you are a captive in our hands,
And captives are not to command the conquerors.
No Lords if captives might command the conquerors,
I would command you to release me hence.
But captive as I am honour commands,
That you entreat and use me honourably.
Such honour as to captives doth belong,
Such honour Lady we intend to you.
My sex requires more then common grace.
And eke so doth that lively face.
Let be my usage as shall please my conqueror,
And now Isle learn to crave with servile terms.
My lords, though captive, yet I am a Queen,
And wife unto the absent Susan king.
My lord and hear Assyrian Abradate,
And noble prince and mighty man at arms.
Upon embassage of the king of Battery.
But madam what persuasion moved your mind,
To thrust your self unto the Assyrian camp.
Weighing the double fortune of the wars,
And in my thoughts foredreading these mishaps,
What likelier rescue to prevent my harms,
Then to be guarded with a mighty camp,
Since that an army of united hearts,
Is stronger then a fort af brazen walls.
Madam, your fa l is great and lamentable,
Thus of a Queen a captive to become,
This rests to show your princely fortitude,
In bearing these mishaps with patient mind
Philosophy hath taught me to embrace,
A mean and moderation in mishaps,
Long since I learned to master all affects,
And perturbations that assail the mind,
Only I have not learned to master chance,
yet have I learned to scorn the utmost spite
Only the pangue that most torments my thought,
Is absence of my best beloved lord.
Learn henceforth to forget your lord,
There lives an other lord to enjoy your love,
Victorious Cirrus he shall be your lord.
Victorious Cirrus though I be his thrall,
Shall know my honour is invincible.
But they that once in state of bondage bee.
Must yield to hest of others that be free.
Lords dream of me or Cirrus as you please
Only this outward person is his thrall,
My mind and honour free and ever shall.
For that agree with Cirrus as you may,
Till then Araspas take her to your tent.
Come Lady, you must walk apart with me,
So fortune and my destinies agree.
Persians conduct me to your general.
What art thou that thus armed with sword and spear,
Dares crave access unto our general
I come to yield, bring me to Cirrus tent.
Thy habit shows thou art an enemy,
And we may suspect thou meanest but ill,
Therefore if thou wilt yield unarm thy self,
And we will bring thee unto Cirrus tent.
The Assyrian king whom ye have put to death,
Making me leader of a thousand horse,
Buckled the armour with his gracious hands,
Nor shall it be unloosed but by asking.
How haughty minded is this conquered man,
Cirrus shall know upon what terms he stands.
Assyrian captain as thou love thy life,
Stand not upon thy guard, but yield to vs.
Small guard have I to shield me from your swords,
Most of my region is slain in fight,
And of a thousand only these are left,
Whose wounds yet bleeding proves the faint &amp; weak,
Yet rather will we run upon your spears,
Then with dishonour yield our weapons,
These if ye injure vs must be our friends,
And either make vs live or die like men.
Of whence art thou that craves access to vs?
By birth great Cyru: an Assyrian,
And of the noblest house in Babylon.
Sometime commander of a thousand horse,
But those thy men have slaughtered and surprised,
And therefore I have lost the ample shle,
yet I am mighty Gobrias, rich in revenues, strong in fortresses
That can command a camp of fighting men,
As resolute (be it said without offence)
As those that had theglorie of the day
All which with me the governor of all,
I yield unto your mighty patronage.
This stout Assyrian hath a liberal look,
And of my soul is fart from treachery,
Albeit Gobrias I mistrust thee not,
yet tell me being so wealthy and so strong,
Why rather yeeldst thou to thy enemy,
Then live with freedom in Assyria,
O know my lord, whilst the Assyrian king,
Which in this war was slain, enjoyed the crown,
Being highly favoured of his majesty,
He sent unto me for mine only son,
Meaning to grace me with the nuptial,
Of his fair daughter lovely Carmela.
I glad to have alliance with the king,
Sent him my son. Who coming to the court,
Was fair entreated, gently entertained,
And well was he that might he his copere,
For fair he was and full of sweet demeanour.
Pleasant, sharpe, wise and liberal,
And were he not my son, I would say more,
Though his remembrance makes me weep outright.
Noble Assyrian either leave to weep,
Or speak no more Cirrus is full of ruth,
And when a man of thy estate laments,
He cannot choose but weep for company,
Dry up these tears and tell the rest.
Began to grow familiar with my son,
And with him rode a hunting in the woods,
where first the hounds put up a russet bear,
At which the king flung soon his hunting dart,
And missed But mine threw and pierced his heart.
Then suddenly a Lion did arise,
At whom likewise he let his Javelin fly,
And hit him not: which when my son perceyude,
He overthrew the Lion as the bear.
which done, said he, twice have I thrown and sped,
whereat the prince snatched from his page a spear,
And in a rage murdered my guiltless son.
And that (which grieves me more) when he was dead,
Albeit the old king wept m oct bitterly,
He neither did repent nor shed a tear,
Nor would consent to give him burial,
but left him in the field until I came,
And took his body in these aged arms,
which eke for grief made me to let him fall,
And then a fresh made him to bleed again,
And me to weep upon his hiked breast,
Oh judge my lord, if you have had a son,
How heavily I brooke his timeless death.
Oh judge my lord, whether that I have cause
To offer service to that murderer,
On whom I cannot look, but in his face
as in a glass I see my slaughtered son.
Gobrius thou hast just cause to revolt,
And we to trust thy welcome unto vs,
And for the thousand horse which thou hast lost,
we will requite them with a greater gift,
be thou lieutenant of the Archaniaus.
I humbly thank your royal majesty,
And here in presence of the Persian lords,
adopt you heir of all my provinces,
My holds and castles, villages and towns,
Conditionally that I may be revenged,
On this archtyrant murderer of my son.
Saving one daughter I have never a child,
And she endued with jewels, plate and gold,
shall be bestowed as you my lord think best.
Assyrian I have captains worthy here,
She shall be matched as beseems a princes borne,
And for revenge upon the Assyrian king,
We will girt in Babylon with our high host,
Or either starve them with a lingering siege,
Or rip his bowels with our Persian swords,
But in the mean time srolicke in our tent,
Histaspis lead the Assyrian to our camp.
And entertain him as beseems a prince,
Armuchus and Chrisantus follow him.
Araspas, as I lately gave in charge
Is all the spoil divided equally?
It is my Lord, and every soldier pleased,
Where is enclosed a jewel of such worth,
As Asia hardly can afford the like
The Susian king stout Abradates Queen,
A woman so richly embellished
with beauty and perfection of the mind,
As never any mortal creature was.
Her hair as radiant as is Tagis sand,
And softer than the stream on which it runs.
Her lilly cheeks all died with ruddy blush,
Castes such reflection to the standers by,
As doth the union of ten thousand suns.
Through her transparent neck the air doth play,
And makes it fairer then a Crystal glass,
And from her eyes it seems nature herself,
Bids every star receive his proper light.
For with her glance she casts such a brightness,
As makes the night more brighter than the day.
And day more fairer than is Eliziur.
But when she talks so pleasant is her voice,
As were she blacker then the pitchy night,
She would entice the hardest massagite.
Or wildest Scythian in your highness camp.
And when she looks upon you, were she dumb
Her beauty were in stead of eloquence.
And had she neither loveliness nor wit,
The harmony she makes would ravish you,
She weeps and plays while both her handmaids sing.
And sighs at every strain using that note,
Which Orpheus sings for Eruditus.
with wrung hands her waiting maids keep time,
Upon their mournful breasts, as were we flint,
we could not choose but melt to hear their songs,
wherefore my lord comfort this captive dame.
And with your presence comfort her distress.
Araspas would thou have me visit her,
when by her beauty I may be enthralled?
Your Grace may look on her, and yet not love.
Dost thou not think that love is violent?
Nay rather voluntary my gracious lord,
you know that women's beauty is like fire,
And fire doth always burn each thing alike,
Therefore if nature were of such great power,
Should every man by beauty be inflamed?
But beauteous things are not in equal powers,
For some love that which others do abstain.
Either for fear or love, to prove this true,
The sister of the brother is not loved,
The daughter of the father not desired,
And yet some one loves any of them both.
If love be voluntary as thou says,
why cannot lovers leave it when they will?
They may.
Have you not seen them weep and wail for death?
Empty their purse of coin, their brain of wit,
Sending both gifts and letters to their loves?
They yield too much unto affections.
It is folly and not beauty makes them die.
Men are in folly when they are in love,
Urge me no more, I will not visit her.
For by the eye love slips into the heart,
Making men idle, negligent.
Nothing can more dishonour warriors,
Then to be conquered with a women's look.
Araspas I resign my part to thee,
Thou shalt be keeper of that Susan Queen,
Use her as fits a woman of such birth
Excuse me for not coming to her tent,
Bid her be merry with her singing maids,
And say that Cirrus will entreat her fair. 
Antiochus king of Assiria,
So Lord of Euphrates and Babylon,
How long wilt thou lament thy fathers death?
Cast off those mourning weeds.
How long will I lament my fathers death?
Until proud Persia weep for Cirrus death.
Oh that will never be, Cirrus is strong,
So strong my Lord, that were not Babylon,
Fortified with vittailes for twenty years,
Guarded with soldiers that will never yield.
Sooner would he expel you from your seat,
Then you with open arms could anger him.
What is revenge but open wars,
As were Antiochus a private man,
And one of you king of Assyria,
I would not fail to work his overthrow,
But you that are not touched with inward grief,
will not in that attempt be resolute.
Vouchsafe O Lord to tell me what it is,
If I attempt it not then let me die.
Why this it is, feign I have iniurde thee,
And offer service to the Persian king.
Then being received as late Gobrias was,
How easy moist thou slay him and escape.
For in the night he walks about his camp,
Without a guard even as a common man.
Yet he that kills him suer is to die.
I thought the fear of death would daunt him quite
A thousand talents would I freely give,
To him that undertakes this enterprise.
My Lord I am resolude, give me the gold.
And I will venture life in this exploit.
My treasurer at arms shall give it thee,
And Ctisifon when I receive his head,
Beside this sum thou shalt have annual pay,
As much as thy revenues mount unto,
And where thou art by calling but a knight,
Isle make thee Lord of many provinces.
As for the gold keep it till I return,
and if I die deliver it to my friend.
Well Ctesiphon manage this glorious act,
Let me embrace him ere I take my leave.
Fare well my lord Now you Assyrian gods,
To whom we sacrifice our so-mens blood,
Give favour to my looks, faith to my speech,
That being gracious with the Persian Lord,
By me Assyria may be free from bands,
And both the king and subjects death revenged.
Fare well brave minded Ctesiphon.
While this is doing we will march from hence,
Unto the country where Gobrias dwelt,
He hath a castle well replenished,
with vittailes, men and furniture,
And as our spies gives vs to understand,
His only daughter stays within the hold,
Not knowing of her fathers late revolt,
Therefore will we surprise her unawares,
and thou shalt be lieutenant in his stead,
when we have made his soldiers yield the fort.
Must I confess that love is violent.
By doting on my captive Panthea,
I will not love, Isle bridle those affects.
It cannot be resisted, I must yield,
Oh what a tyrant is this cruel love,
That drinks my blood, and makes me pale and wan,
That sucks my spirits, and makes me weak and faint,
That tears my heart, and makes me almost dead.
That revels in my brains and makes me mad.
I am a soldier, and will conquer love,
Isle mount me straight give me a hors-mans staff,
Proud love, sit fast, for now Araspas runs,
Run, and scarcely stand: O Panthea,
Thou sets my idle fantasy thus a work,
and makes me speak and think I know not what.
I would I might forget fair Panthea,
I cannot name her but I must say fair,
And that word fair makes me remember her.
Panthea is ugly, black, ill favoured, foul,
And who is so beautiful as she?
And I must weep for this misterming her,
Why should I weep? ask I the reason why?
I have abused my love, weep not but die.
Die not but live and enjoy thy love.
What contrariety consists in my words.
O reconcile them, lovely Panthea.
Thy looks hath made me lunatike.
I have intelligence that our Lord is sick,
we come to comfort him as captives may.
Oh welcome Panthea, shall I tell my grief?
Sit still my Lord,
why change you colour thus, what troubles you?
Something stands by and whispers in my ear,
A kiss of Panthea will recover me.
O leave these idle words, they make you worse
Nay they recover me, I am half well.
So say they that are going from the world.
Panthea sit down, but sit so Panthea,
As I may view thy face, or else I die.
Nicasia command the music play,
It may be music will allay the sit.
Nicasia cause the music cease, 
For it is harsh and mars the harmony,
Come Panthea sit down by me, and let vs talk.
Talk is nought, turn ye about and sleep.
Oh love?
How now my Lord, a soldier and loue-sicke?
I cannot keep it in, it brusts my heart,
For thee sweet Panthea is Araspas sick.
For me, my Lord.
Fling not away, celestial Panthea,
Though I were half dead I should follow thee.
The air will hurt thee, whither wilt thou go.
Where Panthea goes, oh frown not my fair love.
Then love me not, else I will more then frown.
What will a captive woman threat her love.
Oh give poor Panthea leave to thret her self.
I mean my Tragedy shall end the love.
No lovely Queen Isle rather end my love
Then anger Panthea, much less leather die,
And yet God knows my love can never end,
Being infinite in measure and in time.
What words bee these that cut my ears with grief,
Oh Abradates little dost thou know,
What misery poor Panthea doth sustain,
wicked Araspas perish in thy love. 
Cannot I win her, O unhappy man?
Araspas thou want eloquence to woo,
Against chastity no eloquence prevails,
It was because I offered her no gift,
She is a Queen what gifts can compass her,
I should have courted her with better words,
But here doth love and threatening disagree,
Nothing but Magic can obtain her love,
If Magic will, then Panthea shall be mine.
Chrisantas, when I look into the life,
The manners deeds, and qualities of mind,
The grauenesse power, and imperial parts,
wherewith young Cirrus is so full adorned,
My thoughts foresee that he is ordained of God,
To enlarge the limits of the Persian reign.
Histaspis, rare it is to see those years,
So furnished with such rare experience,
As is not common in the greyest hairs.
Besides his body hath of these rare gifts,
Used to labour, hunger, thirst and cold,
Gives true foretokens that the prince will prove,
A famous warrior and a conqueror.
And of the sundry virtues that abounds
Daily increasing in her princely breast,
Religion to the gods exceeds them all.
And reason good for of all humane works.
The care of them should chiefly be preferred.
Is this Assyrian friend or foe to vs?
That dares approach so near the Persian camp.
In bending of my spear to Babylon,
And breaking it against the Assyrian ground,
I came a friend, not foe to Cirrus camp.
What reason moves thee an Assyrian borne.
To bear such rancour to thy country soil.
That secret I reserve for Cirrus ears,
Unto whose secret favour, I submit
My person, honour, fortune, fame and life,
Inform the king certainly I will,
O Persians truly fortunate are you,
Under subjection of so sweet a prince,
That measures all the actions of his life,
By mercy, justice, and respect of right.
It seems the Assyrian prince hath injured this man,
with some notorious great indignity.
Man of Assyria, what would thou with me?
O gracious Lord great and invincible,
Receive into protection of your grace,
A wretched man undone by tyranny,
And lawless rigour of a cruel prince,
What prince is he that thou accusest thus?
The new Assyrian king, a man distained
With endless marks of villainy and blood.
Descend unto the purpose of thy tale,
And make thy state and fortune plain ance
I am, (I am said I) I was a man,
Erst noble, now banished reprobate,
Highly in favour with the Assyrian prince,
Till sensual rage of his unbridled lust,
Did lay my state and honour in the dust,
And thus great Lord begun my Tragedy,
One only virgin daughter had your thrall,
Of years inclining now to marriage state,
Her face and beauty (if I seem not vain)
were equal to the best Assyrian dames,
And she supposed the flower of Babylon.
The bruit of which her rare perfections ran,
Swifter than Fame through all the Assyrian land,
And lastly rested in the princes ears,
Who wounded with report of beauties pride,
Unable to restrain his derne desire,
A trended by a band of armed men,
Invades my castle when I was at rest,
And bare my daughter thence with violate hands,
Unto his palace where she doth remain,
As concubine allotted to his bed.
Striving her desperate honour to preserve,
I came in frantic sort to Babylon,
Exclaiming on this villainous despite,
Banding the prince with many a bitter view,
My just complaints when once he understood,
He sorts me out a damned bloody crew,
Of rustians, swearers, murderers, and thieves,
Professed men for gain and lucre sake,
To make no conscience whom they slay and kill,
Those men by solemn other had vowed my life,
A sacrifice unto their cursed swords,
And hour by hour they sought to reeve my soul,
Living in hazard of continual death,
I knew no hoe for me at Babylon,
Other then my grave and dumlesse sepulchre,
And so for refuge to my wretched life,
I hue abandoned country, friends and all,
And prostrate my estate at Cirrus feet,
O puissant Lord whose great and conquering sword,
was forgde by Mars and made for victory,
Protect the life of thy unhappy thrall,
And make him follower of the Persianarmes,
That in the fortune of thy mighty hand,
The fall of Ctesiphon may be revenged.
O Ctesiphon this tale of thine revives
The woeful memory of my dearest son,
Slaughtered by that most barbarous tyrant hand.
Gobrias ye have heard the Assyrian tale.
What great complaints he makes against the prince,
And those not causeless if his words be true,
Now Cirrus is not rashly credulous,
Nor binds his faith on every strangers vows.
Tell me Gobrias, dost thou simply think,
That this discourse is nought but naked truth,
Or else some forged or dissembled gloss,
To sound our secrets, and bewray our drifts.
Cirrus the disposition of this prince
Sold up and sworn to endless villainies,
May prove the griefs of Ctesiphon unfeigned,
Upon my conscience Cirrus trust the man,
No doubt his sorrow and complaints are true.
O Cirrus so it pleased the immortal Gods,
How happy were thy servant, if his words
proceeded from a vain dissembling tongue,
So were my daughters honour undefiled,
And Ctesiphon her father not exiled.
Be valiant Ctesiphon and follow me,
Follow the fortune of a haphie camp,
Not doubt thou, but thou shalt see the end,
Shall rue the ininries of his barbarous life,
Among the damned souls in darkest hell.
Then should my ghost with seaselesse words oppressed.
Pass and descend into the grave in rest.
We gentle gentlemen devise of late,
To shun the vulgar and the virtuous,
Present to you worthy to judge of vs,
Our works of worth and valiantness at once.
What wants in vs imagine in the works,
What in the works condemn the writer of,
But if the work and writing please you both,
That Zenophon from whence we borrow write,
Being both a soldier and philosopher,
Warrants what we record of Panthea,
It is writ in sad and tragic terms,
May move you tears then you content, our muse
That seems to trouble you again with toys
Or needless antiques imitations,
Or shows, or new devises sprung a late,
we have exiled them from our I ragicke stage,
As trash of their tradition, that can bring
nor instance, nor excuse. For what they do
In stead of mournful plaints our Chorus sings,
Although it be against the up start guise,
Yet warranted by grave antiquity
we will revive the which hath long been done.
Madame you see your page doth undertake,
A costly piece of service for your sake,
For well that service costly may be called,
The end whereof of force must cost my life,
For when the Assyrian king shall understand
My forged habit, and dissembling sex,
And in these female weeds shall find Libanio,
And Alexandra freely escaped his hands,
What hope but certain death remains for me,
And that with torments rare and exquisite.
Yet madame for the reverence to my Lord,
And duty that doth bind me to your self,
I will be Alexandra for this once,
and die to save your honour and your life.
O trusty servant, servant of surmounting faith,
Worthy to attend the person of a god,
Rather then daughter of poor Gobrias,
This sacred service to a sillle dame,
Shall be engraven in tables of my heart,
with letters and characters so performed
That when this body is bestowed in grave,
No time nor yet corruption shall deface,
The print thereof from Alexandras breast.
Thanks Lady, And for your further mead,
Suffices me the honour of the deed.
Me thinks I see the Assyrian stout at hand,
Now madame carry a courageous heart,
And trust your page for Alexandras part.
A Tragical part I fear Libanio.
Bird of a traitor I presumde at last,
Your lot would be to light into my hands,
Although of cankered heart you would not yield,
Until your castle shaked about your ears.
O sovereign Lord stand gracious to this dame,
That never trespassed in offence to you.
Thy fathers treason in revolting back,
From due allegiance to th Assyrian crown,
I will revenge upon his daughters life.
What honour in a silly virgins death?
That ne'er had power or will to harm your grace.
Because the plants of such corrupted stocks,
will fructify according to the root,
And for Gobrias treason to his prince,
I will prevent like mischiefs in his rase.
Admit Gobrias might be reclaimed,
Unto his first allegiance to my Lord,
Would you remit the offence of his revolt,
And take him to your former grace again?
So let the gods stand gracious to my soul,
If he forsake those hateful Persian arms,
And firm his faith and loyalty to me.
Then prince before you wreak revenge on me,
Grand passeport and safe conduit to my page,
That he may go and signify to him,
The desperate state wherein his daughter stands,
When once my father shall perceive my plight,
And that my life must pay for his revolt,
I know that instant hour he will return,
And yield himself to mercy of my Lord.
Scribe give her page safe conduct through my camp,
And boy when you arrive before Gobrias,
Tell if he return I pardon him,
If other wise, off goes his daughters head.
I will dread Lord: O madam grant the gods
These eyes once more may see your liberty.
As pleases their deities Libanio.
Dinon take you this damsel to your charge,
And use her nobly though she be a thrall.
To use her worse the honour were but small.
I murder Cirrus, far be such a thought,
Much more the execution of the deed,
Like as the Sun beams to the gazers eye,
So is his view to daunted Ctesiphon,
During the rancor of my wicked mind,
And melting all in thoughts of sweet remorse,
How wise and gracious is this Persian king,
Who by his wisdom wins his followers hearts,
Letting them march in armour wrought with gold,
And he girt in a coat of complete steel.
O Cirrus politic and liberal,
How honourable and magnanimous?
Rewarding virtue, and revenging wrongs,
How full of temperance and fortitude,
Daring to menace Fortune with his sword,
Yet merciful in all his victories, 
See where he comes, Isle fall upon the ground,
And ask for pardon at his highness feet.
Rise up Assyrian, Cirrus is no God.
O Cirrus, know Antiochus my Lord,
My Lord, said I, no I will renounce him quite,
Subornd me wretch with his persuasious words,
To doe a deed of such impiety,
As I God knows suborn to think upon,
It was thy death victorious Cirrus,
But mighty Lord your virtues conquered me,
And or an enemy false and treacherous,
Am I become a vowed friend to Cirrus health,
And in that resolution pressed to die.
Live long to wail for thy pretended ill,
As free from punishment as for reward,
The lives of kings are guarded by the gods,
Nor are they in the hands of mortal men,
Assyrian, though thy sword were at my breast,
The gealous angel that attends on vs,
Would snatch it from thy hands, and fling it down.
And therefore muse not at this accident.
Seeing knightly Cirrus is thus merciful,
Vouchsafe this service at thy vassals hands,
Give me but letters from your Majesty,
To signify how fine you would have peace,
And draw your legions from Assyria,
And bearing them unto Antiochus,
In the delivery I will murder him.
So highly do I honour Cirrus name,
So wildly think on base Antiochus.
Thou shalt have letters to the Assyrian king,
Free liberty to pass from this our camp,
And conduit money from our Treasury.
Attend our leisure, I will send thee straight.
What virgin is it that Gobrias leads?
My daughter mighty Cirrus, and your child,
For I commit her to your patronage.
Then princely virgin welcome to our camp.
But why sigh you, why hang you down the head?
And in your pale looks bury beauties pride,
It is pity these looks should be stained with tears.
Even as a dove late refiled by the Eagle,
Whose breast is tainted with his forked talents,
So stands poor Alexandra terrified.
And almost dead to think of her escape,
If thou be Cirrus of whom Asia rings,
Rescue, O rescue poor Libanio.
From whom fair madame should I rescue him,
O from Antiochus that bloody king.
Who when he heard my father served your grace,
Besiegde his fortress with his men at arms,
Where only I and that Libanio staide.
By whom I live For when the hold was lost,
He being bondsman and of a baser birth,
would needs constrain me to put on his weeds,
And he disguised as I was wont to go,
would be Gobrias daughter in my stead,
And so was thought of king Antiochus.
and all the nobles of his warlike camp,
But I abondman and at his request,
whose care was only to preserve my life,
Sent hither as a messenger from him,
To will my father whom they thought my Lord,
To leave your camp, and come to Babylon,
Or else Libanio his beloved child
should die for his so traitorlike revolt,
And die he must, least Gyrus give him life.
The deed was full of honour and deceit,
If gold will pay his ransom, he shall live,
And therefore Alexandra be not sad.
So shall Gobrias beat Cirrus beck,
And for his sake make lavish of his blood.
And when they know how he deluded them,
I fear theyle rate his ransom at his head.
Then blood and death Bellonas waiting maid,
shall ghastly marchin Babylons waste streets,
And never was a bondmans death revenged,
as Cirrus means for this Libanio.
Give me the charm, for now doth Panthea sleep
If it prevail this jewel shall be thine,
Doubt not the operation of this charm,
For I have tried it on Dianas nymph,
And made her wanton and lascivious,
If Panthea be a Goddess she must yield.
But tell me first, how must it be applied?
And in what time will it begin to work?
Lay it under the pillow of her bed,
and in an hour it will make her wake and yield.
I will. Now favour me infernal Jove.
So, wake her not till she begins to smile,
Now love begins to seat him in her brain.
A way I will not, you are impudent.
Tell me Magician, what imports this speech?
Why now she thinks some solicits her.
You are deceiude, I am not beautiful.
O give me leave to court her in her sleep,
It may be when she wakes she will not love?
Softly Araspas, if you talk, she wakes.
O let her wake, I long to talk with her.
Now gins her eyes to open, and she stirs.
Stand thou aside until I call for thee.
What dreams and fond illusions have I had?
How comes this word Love, in Pantheas mind?
I love, nay rather will I die then love,
and yet against my will I think on love,
O Panthea think upon thy funeral,
For thou art withered with excessive grief,
Love and deformity cannot agree.
If Panthea be fair and beautiful,
Then love and Panthea doe well agree.
Araspas, Panthea and her self will jar,
when she shall yield to love. Or what is love
But gall and aloes to my martyred soul,
Now Abradates is not in my sight.
Here is Araspas lovely Panthea,
For thee Isle leave the field, then leave thou him,
For thee Isle leave the world, then love thou me.
Let Cirrus joy in pomp and empery,
Suffices me to conquer fair Panthea.
Let others glory in their ground and gold,
Panthea to me is twenty thousand worlds.
And without Panthea all the world is trash,
For thee Araspas will I curse my stars,
That suffers thee so to solicit me,
For thee I will count the world as hell,
Except thou leave thus to solicit me.
How figurative is Panthea in her speech?
Resembling cunning Rethoritians,
who in the person of some one deceased,
Persuades their auditors to what they please,
I cannot think that these be Pantheas words,
She is so fair to give so sharpe reply.
But if these be the words of Panthea,
Then must she change her face, and seemelesse fair,
For know that beauty is loves harbinger,
Then being beauteous, Panthea needs must love.
Would I were changed into some other shape,
That I might fright thee with my hideous looks,
I in the person of my self deceased.
Protest this heart shall never harbour love,
But if my looks be this preparative,
Isle beat my face against the haplesse earth,
Or deeply harrow it with these my trembling hands,
which I hold up to heaven to change thy mind,
Or hasten death to rid me from this suit.
Nay then if amorous courting will not serve,
Know whether thou wilt or no Isle make thee yield,
Though fortune make me captive, yet know thou
That Pantheas will can never be constrained.
But torments can enforce a women's will.
Then should thy importunity enforce,
The sight of thee Araspas should constrain,
For I protest before the gods of heaven,
No torment can be greater in my thought.
I, say so till ye feel them Panthea.
I feel more torments then thou can invent,
who add the more shall ease that I sustain,
All torments be they never so exquisite,
Are but ascending steps unto my end,
And death tu Panthea is a benesite,
what are thy threats but sugared promises.
Then shalt thou live and Isle importune thee.
I, now is Panthea menaced to the proof.
Yet every word thou speaks shall wound my heart,
And in despite of thee Isle die at last,
The earnester thou art the sooner too,
But to prevent it thus I will fly from thee,
Cirrus shall know Araspus villainy.
Thus therefore shall I pine, abandou love,
O it is inherent to Araspas soul.
And thereby claims an immortality.
So it shall ne'er begin, nor never end,
A cursed Magician, are these thy wicked spells?
O pardon me my honourable Lord,
For Pantheas virtues frustrated all my art.
Must Magic yield to virtue? wherefore then
Did thou assure me she should be in love;
So was she being a sleep, as did appear.
And why not being wake, speak villain speak
Reason my Lord was the predominant,
Her intellectual part strived against love,
and Magic cannot command the soul,
while appetite and common sense remained,
You saw I made her smile, embrace the air,
and show the affects of amorous conceits,
Few women use to skirmish with such thoughts,
and had this Panthea been at liberty,
she would have yielded to your honours suit.
But in captivity is nought but grief,
and love with grief will keep no residence.
Smooth are thy words, but rough and harsh thy sense,
For they import Panthea cannot be forced.
Can thou with inchauntations make her die?
That she being gone my love may follow her.
Life is adjunct unto our hamane form,
Exempt from Magic and Magicians,
And thats the cause we sooner hurt brute beasts,
Then such as have the semblance of our selves.
Deceitful Artisan thy words are sleights,
Thy words deceitful and full of guile,
Wit is a witch, sweet words must conquer her,
Out of my sight, yet conceal this attempt,
If thou bewray it, maugre all thy skill,
This sword shall send thee to eternal hell.
Now are we at the banks of Euphrates,
Far from the camp where soul diers haunt,
and here may we under this poplar shade,
Discourse upon the sweetness of our love.
You know my Lord I am too young to love,
Fair Alexandra, if thou love not me.
Thou art compact of adamant and iron,
Thy years are fit for love, so are thy looks,
How fit so ere my years be and my looks
I Alexandra am unfit to love.
Is not my father with the Persian king,
And I Alexandra as captive in his stead,
And give me leave to wail my hard estate.
and make a river with my flowing tears,
That mingled with the stream of Euphrates,
May swiftly run unto my fathers seat,
And make him hast to great Antiochus.
Nay rather sit upon this ledge banks,
That I seeing thy shadow in the stream,
May feed my fancy with thy pleasant view,
If not enjoy the sweetness I desire,
and leap into the waives and drown my self,
That thou moist pity Dinon being dead.
O I could pity Dinon being alive,
But that I fear my father will not come,
and then shall Alexandra suffer death.
and being dead Dinon may pity me.
Love, may I call thee love, lo she doth not frown,
Her looks gives warrant for that Appetite,
For thee Isle kneel before Antiochus,
and rather then thou shalt be touched by him,
Isle bear thee hence as far as Tanais,
Or keep thee close in these Assyrian woods,
No place is secrete to Antiochus,
Dost thou not know that kings hath reaching hands?
I do yet know my sword is sharpe and keen
which when I draw and brandish in the air,
all Babylon will fight in my avail,
who hononr me more than Antiochus.
I will not say how great thy dowre shall be,
Nor boast what cities I command,
Let this, though not a king in name,
In wealth and friends I am an Emperor.
If I should yield your honour might suppose,
That dignity and wealth should conquer me,
Therefore I blush to say I love my Lord.
And when thou blushes Dinons heart is fired,
Therefore to quench it give a gentle grant.
My honour being preserved, my grant is given.
Thereof am I as chair as thy self,
And of thy love as of my proper life,
O Alexandra thy words ravishes me,
Lull me a sleep with sweetness of thy voice.
Then shall my song be of my Dinons praise,
Sleep Dinon, then Libanio draw thy sword,
And manly thrust it in his slumbering heart.
There is no way to save thy life but this.
And therefore fear not, shall I slaughter him
That entertained me with such amorous words,
Such bounteous gifts and golden promises
When he shall know I am Libanio,
And go I cannot but I shall be taine,
Unless I slay him in his haplesse sleep,
For he will quickly wake and follow me,
Now Dinon dies, alas I cannot strike,
This habit makes me over pitiful.
Remember that thou art Libanio. 
No woman but a bondsman, strike and fly.
Now that Gobrias fortress is our own,
His daughter prisoner, and his Country burnt,
Lets march from hence to wealthy Babylon.
And muster those resolved Citizens,
To meet the Persian in the open field,
Twice hath he led his forces by our gates,
Yet never durst to mount his battring Ram,
Or warlike engine against the rampred walls,
Therefore we he no more in garrison,
But bussell out and fight for liberty,
My Lord behold where Dinon slaughtered lies
Dinon, thou art deceyde it is not he,
It is my Lord I know him by his scars.
These scars were given him in my fathers days,
And now he is dead, ere I could guerdon him
The greatest honour I can doe thee now,
Is to lament and kiss thy lifeless cheeks,
And that will I perform for Dinons sake,
O that I could revive thee with this kiss,
Doubtless Gobrias daughter murdered him
I saw them in the morning walk abroad,
And since they ne'er returned into the camp,
Then she hath done this execrable fact,
And so is fled unto her traitorous sire,
O that a silly Maid should slaughter him,
Which not a world of Persians could subdue,
Is there no end of my calamity?
My father done to death by Cirrus sword,
Wicked Gobrias and his daughter fled,
False Ctesiphon resolude to murder me,
And now Dinon my chiefest captain slain,
Why run we not upon these Persians,
which are the authors of these miseries?
Come soldiers take him up and march away,
Weal empty Babylon to meet our foes,
And be revenged unto the ninth degree,
Both of Gobrias and his family. 
O Cirrus if the fortune of thy hand,
Have turned my freedom to captivity,
And of a Queen made me a captive dame,
Yet think that virtue is not thrall to chance,
Nor honour subject to unhappy time,
But like a gallant consecrated ship,
That in extremest wrath and storms of seas,
Vaunts all her sails and fights the battle out.
Madame the reason of these vehement terms,
Cirrus doth neither know, nor can coniect,
It since the time of your captivity,
You have not been entreated as you ought,
The gods can tell it is far against my thought.
Then know my great Lord, the man that took the charge
To guard my honour, and my person free,
Long since doted on my person so,
That doting he hath sought my bonors wreak,
A tedious siege (God knows) I have endured,
More hideous unto me then hasty arms,
While wild Araspas with his lewd desires,
Ceaseless solicited my unlawful bed,
without repulses I have quailed his hope,
which he renewed with charge of fresh assaults.
But my denials made his purpose vain,
In fine, when no entreaty could prevail,
To frame my fancy to his wicked will,
He falls to threatenings from persuasious terms,
And vows to purchase his desires by force,
And therefore Cirrus (as thou art a king)
Protect a Ladies honour from the spoil,
And let thy bondmaid live and die unstained,
And if there rest no other hope for me,
But havoc wrake and ruin of my fame,
O Cirrus on thy sword let Panthea die,
And so prevent the danger of my shame,
Lady, how far your usage disagrees,
From Cirrus meaning, records be the gods,
As for my self (not vainly be it said)
I hold my eyes in bondage to my will,
And keep my thoughts in yoke to reason love,
My sight on beauty never surfeited,
And where her beams were likely to infect,
My judgment was a veil before mine eyes
To bear such piercing fancies from my heart,
Such as I am, such must my followers be,
Else let them pack they shall not follow me.
The man that offered to dishonour you,
shall be so thoroughly chastised for his fault,
As you shall rest sufficiently revenged,
and knowledge me a gracious conqueror,
Histaspis carry her to your pavilion.
So stand the gods assistant to your arms,
as you stand pitiful to my mishaps.
My Lord, the gods and fate reserues your page,
To doe you further service ere he dies.
Gobrias goes your page in that attire?
My Lord, she is no page of mine.
Some shameless strumpet and lascioious trull.
And hath my Lord forgot his servant then?
First must I know before I can forget,
Thee have I neither seen nor known till now.
O say not so my Lord, for oft ere this
I have been seen and thoroughly known to you,
And you I know to be my gracious Lord.
Gobrias that renowmde Assyrian.
Fond girl it seems thy wits be not thine own.
What hath my Lord forgot Libanio?
I know thee now thou art my sweet Libanio,
Thy borrowed habit made me to mistake,
I know thee now thou art my sweea Libanio,
A virtuous boy and of a noble spirit,
To whose deserts and courage I ascribe,
The rescue of my daughters liberty,
O Cirrus this is he that to preserve
My daughters freedom from the Assyrian king,
Chose to disguise himself in her array,
In fearful doubt and hazard of his life,
To save her honour from the tyrants wrath.
My boy, what ere thy birth and fortune be,
Great doth this mind and thoughts of honour taste,
Expressing marks of true Nobility,
And to excite thee to commended works,
which are the paths that to advancement leads,
Receive this chain of gold from Cirrus neck.
And wear it in the face of all the world,
Not as a favour to thy person given,
But as in honour to thy virtuous mind,
Great and surpassing is the kingly grace.
Yea far beyond the compass of my hope,
Gods grant me life and fortune to deserve,
This part of bounty at your royal hands.
Libanio then I have not prayed in vain,
Nor called upon the gods with frustrate vows,
If thou once more be rendered to my sight,
The tears of whose supposed funerals,
Did hour by hour bedew my blubbered face.
Madame, the blessing of my strange escape
I attribute alone unto the gods,
If past so far the reach of humane sense.
And for thy sake their aultars I will smoke.
with sweet perfume of thankful sacrifice.
But boy express in brief what means thou made
To scope so safely from the Assyrian camp
This mean I found and please my Lord &amp; king,
upon suppose of Alexandra self,
I was committed to a noble man.
Hight Dinon, to be guarded in his tent.
The glory of my counterfeit attire,
And manners framed according thereunto,
Did so inflame Dinon that with my love,
That waking sleeping, or what ever else,
He felt a restless combat in his thoughts,
In fine, more safely to commence his love,
He led me quite beyond the Assyrian camp,
And brought me to the banks of Euphrates,
There sate we down and he with amorous plea,
Not only filled, but cloyed my weary ears,
so far that what with long continued talk,
And heate of sun reflecting on the banks,
Or happily with the rattling harmony,
which Euphrates his gliding streams did keep,
Which seeing I imagined that the gods
Had offred this occasion to my hands,
For sweet recovery of my freedom.
Short tale to make, withdreadfull hand I drew,
The sword that hanged loose dangling by his side.
And with the full of my extended force,
I shed it home amidst the owners ribs,
He wounded fet an inward groan or two,
Then turning on his face breathes forth his life,
The deed dispatcht I hied me thence a maine,
And scoping clean without impeach or stay.
Now stand before the Persian king this day.
President of manly fortitude,
Exceeding far the opinion of thy years,
Gobrias have an honourable care,
Libanio now leave Alexandras weeds,
That partisplaid and be your self again,
That part poor boy with danger thou hast plaid.
Madame, no danger can be so great,
That Isle refuse for Alexandras sake,
Gobrias say, is Alexandra she,
For whom your page these hazards hath sustained?
It is my Lord. Cy. Then let vs to your wished for place.
That place O Cirrus I desire to see,
This is the place the men that follow me.
Then wimple both my eyes that with this turf,
I may be sure to hit a virtuous man.
Shall she be his on whom this turf shall light?
So that the man be good and virtuous,
Then throw at random when you please Gobrias,
You cannot miss a good and virtuous man.
Then Alexandra at thy husbands head.
Histaspis you are hit. Hist. I am my Lord,
Then Alexandra if you please is yours.
Happy were I if Alexandra please.
My Lord the fortune of my fathers hand,
Becomes not his daughter to withstand.
To please my Lord and father I am yours.
Your fathers pleased, Histaspis she is yours.
Histaspis take your love at Cirrus hand,
this is our guise, and this the Persians do,
they woo and wed within a word or two. 
No Ctesiphon unsheathe thy bloody sword,
And show it stained and cankered with the gore,
that issued from that vaunting Persians heart.
What draw man, and show thy just conceal.
thy pay is pressed in ready numbered gold,
My Lord and king I bear no bloody sword,
Nor stained with gore of Persians Cirrus heart,
A prince he is far from delete in blood,
Mild, lovely, virtuous, wise and bountiful,
Able to reconcile his greatest foes,
And make great princes of his meanest friends.
Thy going was to compass Cirrus death.
How haps thy purpose ends without effect?
The Persian prince inclines to terms of truce
and craves the friendship of Antiochus,
So please my Lord the king to firm a peace,
For brief whereof his letters I present,
Signed and delivered with his royal hand,
Sincerely tending to the same effect,
Whereto if once your highness condescend,
He will withdraw his armies from Assyria,
And on the covenants sealed dissolve his camp.
In case the Persian prince be so inclined,
thy answer shall less offend my mind.
This bearer coming to my camp armed with resolution to kill me, and entreated more honourably then either his treachery or thine could deserve. 
What reads my Lord aright, or doth he fine?
That you shall know before you start again.
Upon the instant purpose of his enterprise, it pleased God to confound him with such horror of conscience, that vncostraind he cofest the treason, &amp; entreated pardon, vowing himself so far forth friend to Cirrus, that for his sake he would kill Antiochus. I was content to sooth the man in his villainy, because I would have thee know the difference twixt an open so &amp; a dissembling friend, I give thee this notice, not because I love thee, or regard thy life but because a villain shall not triumph in the murder of him whom I account an honourable conquest of my self Reward him according to his merits, &amp; prepare to fight with me for thy own honour. Farewell.
Their thankless Persian whom I spared from death,
Bequites me with the betraying of my life,
What answer makes traitorous Ctesiphon?
O prince my guilt is plain before my face,
And witnessed with a princes seal,
To slande upon denial were but vain,
where open proof conuicts me of offence,
I say no more, but prostrate at your feet,
Submit my self to mercy of my Lord,
Such mercy as to traitors doth belong,
Such, and no better Ctesiphon shall find,
Disarm him of his martial habiliment.
Disgrade him of all titles of regard,
And then refer his attachment to your prince,
This cote of arms, the badge of honour wn,
Through praise and virtue of thy ancestors,
We rent it from that traitorous back of thine,
And as an honour stained with villainy,
In deep disdain we stamp it under foot,
This sword that once was girt unto thy side,
To be employed in service of thy prince,
Now vowed to gore the bowels of his grace,
we break it here upon thy traitorous head,
These squares of knighthood that present the pride,
and honour due, to chivalry and arms,
whose pricks should force the proud courageous steed
with thundering race to break the riders lance,
Thus doe we hew them from thy traitorous heals,
Thou art no man of honour nor of arms,
Thou hast no title of Gentility,
Nor stile of honour, left hereof to vaunt,
But art become inferior of regard.
Then is the basest bondsman of Assyria,
Or vilest slave that haunts the Lidian dames.
Dishonoured traitor, now prepare thy self,
To yield thy head unto the hangmans axe,
Not fate but my demerits makes me die,
O now I find Niltutum proditor. 
I fear the fury of the Persian prince
Histaspis, Cirrus fury I doe fear,
And wrath of princes, what is it but death?
Araspas on my honour make a proof,
And never shun the presence of our Lord,
A prince he is most mild and merciful,
Soon mollified with vows and penitence,
And though with great impacience he endure,
Your threatened violence to the Susan Queen,
Yet your submission and desire of grace,
Will pearce him with compassion of your suit,
And purchase pardon at his royal hands.
O spiteful beauty that bewitched my mind,
And led my fancy to such foul extremes,
I will assay the mercy of my Lord,
And yield my life to bazzard of his grace,
And doubt not but of Cirrus you shall find,
A pitiful and passing gracious prince.
Histaspis and the rest, with draw your selves,
Only Araspas stay behind with me.
My sovereign Lord in trembling fear I stay,
And prostrate fall before your highness feet,
The frail affects and errors of my youth,
Enforced through follies of a wanton will,
Hath cast my life in peril of your wrath,
Blinded with charms of beauty I have fallen,
And made my judgment subject to desire.
And in pursuit of loves unbridled rage,
I have transgressed the bounds of honours laws,
O gracious Lord impute my error past,
Unto the power of proud commanding love,
That led my mind and thought so far astray,
Forgive those frailties of my youth, O king,
And take your servant once again to grace,
with fear of your displeasure almost slain.
Force to a Queen, and she a captive too,
A Persian Lord so far misled with lust,
Intend dishonour to a silly dame,
Araspas they that would be conquerors,
Should chiefly learn to conquer their desire,
Least while they seek dominion over others,
They prove but slaves and bondsman to themselves.
Now where are those your big and brave disputes,
Wherein you pleaded love was voluntary,
And fancy left and entertained at will,
When you embrace it in such raging heate,
That where entreaties fail of your desires,
You fall from vows to violence with the dame,
Araspas for the excuse of this offence,
You find no president in Cirrus life
I know and grant my Lord, the prince abounds
with peerless gifts and graces of the mind,
wherewith the gods have filled his kingly breast,
There nought but virtuous motions takes root,
Nothing but honour harbours in that seat,
And holy thoughts direct his royal deeds.
That so his grace might every way be found,
worthy the glory of so hie a charge,
Yet since these frailties that disgrace your thrall,
are humane faults and incident to mind,
Where strong desires hold reason under yoke,
The wonted mercy of my Lord the prince,
So prone in favour to the penitent,
May mitigate the shame of this my fault.
With sweet compassion to his princes thrall.
Araspas I remit thee this amiss,
although blame worthy in the heist degree,
and for your tried deserts in martial praise,
I am content this folly to forget,
Yet would I have it seem unto the world,
That my displeasure made you fly from me,
And so revolted to the Assyrian arms,
There this suppose shall make you entertained,
and highly favoured of that graceless king,
By means whereoffull safely you may learn,
The garrison and strength of Babylon,
The utmost force and puissance of our foes,
With every purpose of Antiochns,
The time and place where he intents to fight,
Then having learned the full of every thing,
In secrete you may scope again to me.
With just relation of the Assyrian camp.
This service if you please to undertake,
You shall effect a singular good turn,
and reap mortal thanks at Cirrus hands.
No longer let Araspas live and breath,
Then with the utmost venture of his life,
He will perform what Cirrus shall command.
And sacred price for this extended grace,
Though in the compass of this hard affair,
I leave the Assyrian faction to maintain,
yet vow to bear a trusty Persian heart.
Then go with fortune, and return with health
and grant the gods this enterprise of thine,
May end and prosper with desired effect.
And grant the gods that Cirrus still may live,
happy in peace, and in arms victorious.
To pacify the angry Pantbeas mood,
I will persuade her of Araspas flight.
That he is revolted to the Assyrian king. 
Ready the humble handmaid of my Lord.
To calm the heate of your offended mind,
Thus have I lost as brave a warrior,
As ever trod upon the Persian fields.
What warrior means my Lord and conqueror?
Araspas, who in fear of my displeasure,
I fled from me unto the Assyrian camp,
And hath forsook the Persians colours quite,
Thus madame for your sake hath Cirrus done,
Even lost the worthiest soldier of his band.
Cirrus let not his loss perplex your mind,
If you will let me send a messenger,
Unto my Lord and husband Abradates,
I know for these your princely favours done,
To me his wife in this my captives plight,
He will attend your fortune in the wars.
With more sincere affection, love and zeal,
Then ever that ungracious person did.
Again, my Lord my husband is a knight,
As forward treads, and fortunate in arms,
As ever spread his colours in the field.
Is it likely Abradatus will forsake,
His native prince to follow for rain arms,
The father of this king by Cirrus slain,
was highly loved and honoured of my Lord,
This now that reigns affected Pantheas bed,
Sought to prucure a most unjust divorce,
Betwixt my best beloved Lord and me,
who therefore bears him an immortal hate,
The stars of which incurable despite,
Remain so deep inprinted in his thought,
That ten times blessed would he think himself,
To find a fit occasion for revenge.
Believe me Madam, if your Lord be armed,
With such sore grounded malice to the prince,
His help may greatly further my affairs,
And therefore if you can procure the man,
To stand assistant to the Persian arms,
You shall deserve great thanks at Cirrus hand,
Cirrus, I will presume to make my Lord
A trusty follower of the Persian arms,
And him your highness shall not fail to find,
A noble friend and valiant gentleman.
And Madam, he shall want at Cirrus hands,
No praise, nor honour due to good deserts. 
r Aaspas though thy birth and parentage,
Seem deadly to the Assyrian ears,
Being descend of our chiefest foes,
who purchased gentry by our overthrow,
And in their ensigns bear the Assyrian arms,
Yet seeing thou comes as confederate,
In token that I love and honour thee,
Receive this sword, and fight courageously.
Antiochus Isle wear it for thy sake,
And for the wrong that Cirrus offered me,
Unless my destnie prevent my drift,
Isle quickly hansell it with Cirrus blood.
Wherein hath Cirrus wronged thee Persian say.
In barring me of her whom I esteem,
Aboue the value of his Diadem.
Panthea my Lord.
What Panthea, Abradates wife?
I lovely Panthea Abradates wife,
Speak not of Panthea if thou love me,
For her remembrance wounds my heart afresh,
His grace is always passionate and sad,
If she be mentioned, therefore name her not.
Not that alone, but many injuries,
Incensed me to attempt his overthrow,
For in the field wherein your father fell,
I got rich armour, gold, and sumptuous tents,
all which he took unto his proper use,
and gave unto his special favourites,
Nor had I where withal at Cirrus hands,
To heal those wounds which I received in fight.
Then see thou make as deep wounds in his flesh,
And so cry quittance with the covetous king,
I give thee to this sword, armour and horse,
a horse as fierce as proud Bucephalus,
armour of trustier proof then Thetis found,
Therefore Araspas fight courageously.
Albeit I have not Alexanders skill,
To manage him, nor yet Achilles arms,
to charge as bravely, yet as good a heart,
as Alexander or Achilles ever had.
And when I shrink for fear out of the field,
Let me be torn in pieces with that horse,
Or hewed to death with this bright cortelaux,
Thy words Araspas tise me to the field,
and makes me think I shall be conqueror,
Come let vs march from wealthy Babylon,
and then towards Cirrus with our royal camp. 
My husband mighty Lord, from Bactria,
Where he lay legar for the Assyrian king,
Is come to serve under your highness flags,
and in your aide hath brought two thousand horse,
Backed by his friends Assyrian Gentlemen.
all which will die at conquering Cirrus feet.
Is Abradates come from Bactria,
Then will I leave to moan Araspas loss,
and think on conquest and sweet victory?
Gobrias go with lovely Panthea,
and bring him presently unto our tent,
With those brave horsemen of Assyria,
You warlike and victoriousmen,
Marshall your several bands in equipage,
That Abradates king of Susia,
May wonder at the hugeness of our camp,
and be the willinger to league with vs. 
Here he comes, and if by his aspect,
I may conjecture of his qualities,
He is valiant, wise, trusty and liberal,
I need not ask which is the Persian king,
The virtues shining in his glorious looks,
Say this is Cirrus, and in sign of love,
will Abradates thus salute his grace,
Sweet Abradates thou embracing me,
Hath stolen my heart, I love and honour thee,
Fair Lord was never captive gentler used,
Then Panthea of this gracious conqueror.
For Panthea, Cirrus I and this my train,
Of which the meanest Soulder may take charge,
and be commander of a camp of men,
So able, wise and venturous they are,
Doth rest for ever at your highness beck,
Our horses which are grazing on the plain,
In winter gallops, and in Isie seas,
and in the summer swims the deepest streams,
Swifter are they in pace then lightfoot Hart,
Surer they are then Camels dlodding on the ways,
Fiercer then Tigers, and as
Olephants with Castles on their backs,
And if they were compassed with arming pikes,
They knew which way to make their passage forth,
And when their sides is painted eke with blood,
they pull their reins, and looks down to the ground
As if they vaunted of their service done,
The rider being dismounted they stand still,
And kneel upon the ground to take him up,
But if he chance to die, they pine to death.
These are Cirrus and the riders too,
Soldiers as good as ever sun beheld,
These horses thou speak of makes me glory more,
Then Lydian Cressusin his heaps of gold,
And of them all doth Cirrus make account,
As of the strengths and sinews of the war,
We have intelligence the Assyrian king
Is come from Babylon to meet vs straight,
Therefore if Abradates favour vs,
Mount and away for we will assail them first.
For that comes Abradates, lets away.
But Abradates I will arm thee first,
See thou these pouldrons they are gold,
These vanbraces and currets massy gold,
The gorget and thy helmet beaten gold,
The belt embroidered gold, yet all to base,
For Abradate lovelier then the gold,
May never spear be broken on this breast,
But that the point thereof may soon return,
And strike him dead that durst to give that charge,
This helmet shun thee from the sling sand darts,
This kisle make thee turn with victory,
As for this garland made of lost palm,
Panthea reserues it for her conquering Lord,
Upon whose head will Panthea fasten it,
And hanging on hit neck like Hectors wife,
Inquire the manner of the battle past.
Fair be my fortune for my Panthea,
My Lord Araspas in the Assyrian arms,
Doth crave success unto your Majesty.
Araspas, let him come, he is our friend.
And brings vs tidings from our enemies. 
Health unto the person of my gracious lord.
Welcome Araspas, brings thou cheerful news?
Is Antiochus resolved to fight?
This day he means to encounter with your host.
What is the number of his fighting men?
In all two hundred thousand at the least,
And thus in order lies his noble camp.
The forestont is ten chariots,
Of purpose to disranke the approaching so.
Next them are fifty thousand horsemen placed,
To break in where the chariots break the way,
Next them five thousand staves being lightly
laden with spears, helmet, naked swords,
To go along to serve the horsmens use.
Then twenty thousand Scythians runagates,
with venomed darts, whose heads are tipped with steel,
And last the battle of the Assyrians,
Being hedged with lances, as a wood with Briers.
On whose heads the cross bows and the slings,
will shoot and throw bullets of massy iron,
Whose very fall would strike Aclipos down,
In midst whereof Antiochus will march,
Before whom doe a thousand bondsman draw
A brazen wall built upon turning wheles,
To guard him sure and his concubine,
All these upon my honour I a duer.
If every soldier had a wall of brass,
It could not daunt vs, we are resolute,
And vowed and sworn unto our swords,
which teaches vs to scorn a brazen wall.
Renowned Cirrus, honour me thus far,
To have the leading of your vauntgard forth.
Nay it belongs unto a Persian.
If to a Persian, it belongs to me.
I served Astiages your highness sire.
But if a stranger may deserve the place,
I hope my serving merits it my lord.
My husband is a king, Cirrus I hope
will therefore grant it, if not for desert,
Had I four to encounter with,
you all should lead the vauntgard of the field,
But only one must have the charge
Though all deserve it, therefore draw you all.
Content.
Crysantas make the lots.
Pardon me Cirrus though I do rapine,
why should we draw lots for our proper right?
Isle have it so, Histaspis be content.
The lots are ready.
Histaspis I command thee to begin,
Now Abradates and the rest.
Fortune hath favoured me, the lot is mine.
Then thou shalt lead the forefront, let vs match,
The enemy is near, make haste my Lord.
Here Abradates, Cirrus places thee,
Lead warily, and fight courageously.
As mine own life so tender I these men,
Now to the battle, Panthea Farewell. 
Farewell, and my good angel follow thee,
And every star that raignd when I was borne,
Whose influence hath kept me yet from harm,
Unfortunate be to make thee blessed
And misery cease on Nicasia,
So Abradates be kept from harm.
Ye Persian Deities for Cirrus sake,
Assyrian Gods for Abradates sake,
Give victory unto the Persians,
That I may see my husband wear this wreath.
Madam, Bellonas shrine is hear at hand,
O let vs go to offer sacrifice,
To make her more propitious to his grace,
For now he is amongst the Assyrian troupes.
Isle offer all my jewels on the shrine,
And make sweet fumes of Ambergreece and Myrrh,
Of Indian Cassia, Musk and Frankincense,
That Abradates may be conqueror,
First at her alter let vs jointly sing,
For Mnsicke is a sacrifice to her.
Great lords to whom the Assyrian sceptre yields
and Babylon through right of victory,
Lies open to those conquering swords of yours,
How fares my lord, my lord and loving fear,
My Abradates, lives he conqueror,
Or left by destnie numbered with the dead?
Fair Lady, virtuous, chaste, and amiable,
I trust your love among the living dwells,
and like a champion and a knight at arms,
will show himself or many hours expire,
His temples adorned with victorious palm.
When to the sight my lord addressed his bands
Devoutly entered I Belonas fame,
And there before the aultar of the Saint,
Perfumde the ayre with smoke of holy fire,
And breathed forth my plaints and eke my mons,
Thrice I me seemed the Goddess turned her face,
Offending-like frowning with angry brows,
Against my prayers and my holy vows,
O Cirrus, if my jealous thoughts divine,
Some dismal sequel to this fantasy,
Yet pardon me seeing women's wits are weak,
And loves abounds with superstitious fear.
Madam, I trust the presence of your Lord,
Returning back in triumph and renown,
Shall soon remove those thoughts out of your mind,
So grant the Gods my countries presidents,
What slaughtered body do you Persians bring?
Cirrus the body of the Susian king,
Stout Abradates by the Egyptians slain.
Now let my Lord the prince of Persia judge,
whether unhappy Panthea feared in vain,
O noble love whose manly heart deserved,
To joy the benefit of longer life,
And richer Trophes to enlarge the same.
But tell vs now after what sort he died?
Mounted aloft his chariot armed with sides,
Beating the strong Egyptians down,
A few of his familiar trusty friends,
With dreadful race insist his chariot Wheels,
While the other in the battle turning back,
Abandoned him among the Egyptian pikes,
Yet Abradates with the few remained,
By force and virtue of his puissant hand,
Sends thousand of the heathnish foes to hell,
Till at the last dismounted from his seat,
And round environed with his enemies,
After so many mortal wounds received,
He fell and yielded up his kingly ghost.
The Egyptians as their barbarous custom is,
when he was dead cut off his stout right hand,
And left it lying by the breathless corps.
But with a band of Persian men at arms,
we rescued him, and brought him to your grace,
Here to receive such worthy funerals,
As fits the honour of so great a Lord.
Now Euphrates whose sad and hollow banks,
Have sucked the sum of Abradates blood:
which from his wounds did issue with his life,
Now cease thy course of thy disdained tears,
And let thy courage turn against the tide,
Of mere remorse of wretched Pantheas plaints.
Is this the hand that plighted faith to me,
The hand, that aye hath managde kingly arms,
And brought whole troops of mighty warriors down,
Now sended from the body of my Lord,
Clean void of feeling, sense and vital breath,
So Gods and cruel destnies command,
Malignant of poor Pantheas happiness.
Live Cirrus. You Lords of Persia,
Command my honour to posterity,
That ages hence the world report may make,
That Panthea died for Abradates sake. 
Gone is my Lady pearlesse Panthea.
Slain with self grief for Abradates sake,
Nicasia loathes to live when she is gone,
The pride and Phoenix of Assyria,
Isle not presume to touch the fatal steel,
Wherein my Ladies sacred blood do smoke,
Receive me in thy bowels Euphrates,
And let thy bottom be Nicasias grave.
O Persians see if any breath remains.
Cirrus alas all sense of feeling is gone,
His senseless limbs with stiffenesse overgrown,
No rubbing warming, ought avails vs,
But pale death sits as conqueror over him.
Mirror of honour and true Nobility,
No age, no time shall ever race thy fame,
Whilst Euphrates doth keep his running stream.
What Abradates, and chaste Panthea too,
O Abradates worthy man at arms,
O Panthea chaste virtuous and amiable,
This office Cirrus to your wandering ghost,
Reserues in store to grace your funerals,
with monuments of fatal Elonie,
Of Cedar, Marble, let, and during brass,
That future worlds and infants yet unborn,
May kiss your tombs wherein your bodies lie,
And wonder at the virtues of your mind,
Assyrian Lord, such honour thou shalt have,
As never had Assyrian at his grave.
Six hundred head of cattle shall be slain,
And sacrificed upon the funerals day.
Twelve thousand horses being manned each one,
Trapt all in black shall go before thy hearse,
The towered battlements of Babylon,
Bend in contempt of heaven and earth, and men
Those marks of pride shall be abated down,
To make a show of mourning for thy death.
Such honour as you both receyude in life,
Such honour shall you both receive in death.

YET doe I live, and yet doth breath possess
This hateful prison of a loathsome soul:
Can no calamity, nor no distress
Break hart and all, and end a life so soul?
Can Cleopatra live, and with these eyes
Behold the dearest of her life bereft her?
Ah, can she entertain the least surmise
Of any hope, that hath but horror left her?
Why should I linger longer griefs to try?
These eyes that saw what honour earth could give me,
Doe now behold the worst of misery:
The greatest wrack where Fortune could drive me
Hee on whose shoulders all my rest relied,
On whom the burden of my ambition lay:
The Atlas and the Champion of my pride,
That did the world of my whole fortune sway;
Lies fallen, confounded, dead in shame and dolors,
Following th'vnlucky party of my love.
The Ensign of mine eyes, th'vnhappy colours,
That him to mischief, me to ruin drove.
And now the model made of misery,
Scorn to the world, borne but for Fortunes foil,
My lufts have framed a Tomb for me to lie,
Even in the ashes of my Countries spoil.
Ah, who would think that I were she who late,
Clad with the glory of the worlds chief retches,
Admired of all the earth, and wondered at,
Glittering in pomp that hart and eye bewitches:
Should thus distressed, cast down from of that height
Leuell'd with low disgraced calamity,
Under the weight of such affliction sigh,
Reduced unto th'extreamest misery.
Am I the woman, whose inventive pride,
(A dorn'd like Ices,) scorned mortality?
First I that left my sense so without guide,
That flattery would not let him know it was I?
Ah, now I see, they scarce tell truth, that praise vs,
Crowns are beguiled, prosperity betrays vs.
What is become of all that stately train,
Those troops that wont attend prosperity?
See what is left, what number doth remain,
A tomb, two maids, and miserable I.
And I to adorn their triumphs, am reserved
A captive kept to beautify their spoils:
Whom Caesar labours, so to have preserved,
And seeks to entertain my life with wiles.
No Caesar no, it is not thou can doe it.
Promise, flatter, threaten extremity,
Employ thy wits, and all thy force unto it,
I have both hands, and will, and I can die.
Though thou of Country, kingdom, &amp; my Crown,
Though thou of all my glory dost bereave me,
Though thou hast all my Egipt as thine own,
Yet hast thou left me that which will deceive thee.
That courage with my blood and birth innated,
Admired of all the earth, as thou art now:
Cannot by threats be vulgarly abated,
To be thy slave, that ruled as good as thou.
Consider Caesar that I am a Queen,
And scorn the baseness of a servile thought:
The world and thou, dost know what I have been,
And never think I can be so low brought,
The Rome should see my scepter-bearing hands,
Behind me bound, and glory in my tears.
That I should pass, whereas Octauia stands
To view my misery, that purchased hers.
No, I disdain that head that wore a Crown,
Should stoop to take up that which others give:
I must not be, unless I be mine own.
Tic sweet to die when we are forced to live.
Nor had I troubled now the world thus long,
And been indebted for this little breath,
But that I fear, Caesar would offer wrong
To my distressed seed after my death.
Tic that which doth my dearest blood control.
Tic that (alas) detains me from my Tomb,
Whilst Nature brings to contradict my soul,
The argument of mine unhappy womb.
O luckless issue of a woeful Mother,
The ungodly pledges of a wanton bed;
You Kings designed, must now be slaves to other,
Or else not bee (I fear) when I am dead.
It is for you I temporise with Caesar,
And live this while for to procure your safety.
For you I fain content, and soothe his pleasure,
Calamity herein hath made me crasty.
But tic not long, Isle see what may be done,
And come what will, this stands, I must die free.
Isle be my self, my thoughts doe rest thereon,
Blood, children, nature, all must pardon me.
My soul yields honour up the victory,
And I must bee a Queen, forget a mother:
Yet mother would I be, were I not I,
And Queen would I not now be, were I other.
But what know I, if th'heauens have decreed,
And that the sins of Egipt have deserved,
The Ptolomeyes should fail, and none succeed,
And that my weakness was thereto reserved.
That I should bring confusion to my state,
And fill the measure of iniquity:
Licentiousness in me should end her date,
Begun in ill-dispensed liberty.
If so it be, and that my heedles ways,
Have this so great a desolation raised,
Yet let a glorious end conclude my days,
Though life were bad, my death may yet be praised,
That I may write in letters of my blood,
A fit memorial for the times to come:
To be example to such Princes good
That please themselves, and care not what become.
And Anthony, because the world doth know,
That my mis-fortune hath procured thine,
And my improvidence brought thee follow,
To lose thy glory, and to ruin mine:
By grappling in the Ocean of our pride,
To sink each others greatness both together,
Both equal shipwreck of our states t'abide,
And like destruction to procure to either:
If I should now (our common fault) survive,
Then all the world must hate me if I doe it,
Sith both our errors did occasion give,
And both our faults have brought vs both unto it.
I being first enamoured with thy greatness,
Thou with my vanity bewitched wholly:
And both betrayed with th'outward pleasant sweetness,
The one ambition spoiled, the other folly.
For which, thou hast already duly paid,
The statute of thy errors dearest forfeit:
Whereby thy gotten credit was decayed,
Procured thee by thy wanton deadly surfeit.
And next is my turn, now to sacrifice
To Death, and thee, the life that doth reprove me,
Our like distress I feel doth sympathize,
And even affliction makes me truly love thee.
Which Anthony, (I must confess my fault,)
I never did sincerely until now;
Now I protest I doe, now am I taught,
In death to love, in life that knew not how.
For whilst my glory in that greatness stood,
And that I saw my state, and knew my beauty,
Saw how the world admired me, how they wood,
I then thought all men, must love me of duty,
And I love none: for my lascivious Court,
(Fertile in euer-fresh and new-choyce pleasure,)
Afforded me so bountiful disport,
That I to think on love had never leisure.
My vagabond desires no limits found,
For lust is endless, pleasure hath no bound.
Thou, coming from the strictness of thy City,
The wanton pomp of Courts yet never learned:
Inured to wairs, in women's wiles vnwittie,
Whilst others fayn'd, thou fell to love in earnest.
Not knowing women like them best that hover,
And make least reckoning of a doting Lover.
And yet thou earn'st but in my beauties wane,
When new-appearing wrinkles of declining,
Wrought with the hand of years, seemed to detain
My graces light, as now but dimly shining.
Even in the confines of mine age, when I
Failing of what I was, and was but thus:
When such as wee, doe deem in jealousy
That men love for them-selues, and not for vs.
Then, and but thus, thou did love most sincerely,
(O Anthony,) that best deseru'dst it better
This Antumne of my beauty bought so dearly,
For which (in more then death) I stand thy debtor.
Which I will pay thee with most faithful zeal,
And that ere long, no Caesar shall detain me;
My death, my love and courage shall reveal,
The which is all the world hath left t'vnstaine me.
And to the end I may deceive best, Caesar,
Who doth so eagerly my life importune,
I must prevail me of this little leisure,
Seeming to suit my mind unto my fortune.
Whereby I may the better me provide,
Of what my death and honour best shall fit:
A seeming base content, must wary hide
My last disseigne, till I accomplish it.
That hereby yet the world shall see that I,
Although unwise to live, had wit to die.
BEhold what Furtes still
Torment their tortured breast.
Who by their doing ill,
Have wrought the worlds unrest.
Which when being most distressed,
Yet more to vex their spirit,
The hideous face of sin,
(In forms they most detest)
Stands ever in their sight.
Their Conscience still within,
Theternall larum is,
That euer-barking dog that calls upon their miss.
No means at all to hide
Man from himself can find:
No way to start aside
Out from the hell of mind.
But in himself confined,
Hee still sees sin before:
And winged-footed pain,
That swiftly comes behind,
The which is ever more,
The sure and certaie gain
Impiety doth get,
And wanton loose respect, that doth it self forget.
And CLEOPATRA now,
Well sees the dangerous way
She took, and cared not bow,
Which led her to decay.
And likewise makes vs pay
For her disordered lust,
The interest of our blood:
Or live a servile pray,
Under a band unjust,
As others shall think good.
This hath her riot won.
And thus she hath her state, her self and vs vndunne.
Now every mouth can tell,
What close was muttered:
How that she did not well,
To take the course she did.
For now is nothing hid,
Of what fear did restrain.
No secrete closely done,
But now is uttered:
The text is made most plain
That flattry glossed upon,
The bed of sin reueal'd,
And all the luxury that shame would have concealed.
The scene is broken down,
And all vncou'red lies,
The purple Actors known
Scarce men, whom men despise.
The complots of the wise,
Prove imperfections smoke:
And all what wonder gave
To pleasure-gazing eyes,
Lies scattered, dashed, all broke.
Thus much beguiled have
Poor vnconsider at wights,
These momentary pleasures, fugitive delights.
KIngdoms I see we win, we conquer Climates,
Yet cannot vanquish harts, nor force obedience,
Affections kept in close-concealed limits,
Stand far without the reach of sword or violence.
Who forced doe pay vs duty, pay not love:
Free is the hart, the temple of the mind,
The Sanctuary sacred from aboue,
Where nature keeps the keys that loose and bind.
No mortal hand force open can that door,
So close shut up, and locked to all mankind:
I see men's bodies only ours, no more,
The rest, another right, that rules the mind.
Behold, my forces vanquished have this Land,
Subdued that strong Competitor of mine:
All Egipt yields to my all-conquering hand,
And all their treasure and themselves resign.
Only this Queen, that hath lost all this all,
To whom is nothing left except a mind:
Cannot into a thought of yielding fall,
To be disposed as chance hath her assigned.
But Proculei, what hope doth she now give,
Will she be brought to condescend to live?
My Lord, what time being sent from you to try,
To win her forth alive, (if that I might)
From out the Monument, where woefully
She lives enclosed in most afflicted plight;
No way I found, no means how to surprise her,
But through a Grate at th'entry of the place,
Standing to treat, I laboured to advise her,
To come to Caesar, and to sue for grace.
She said, she craved not life, but leave to die,
Yet for her children, prayed they might inherit,
That Caesar would vouchsafe (in clemency,)
To pity them, though she deserved no merit.
So leaving her for then; and since of late,
With Gallus sent to try another time,
The whilst hee entertains her at the grate,
I found the means up to the Tomb to climb.
Where in descending in the closest wise,
And silent manner as I could contrive:
Her woman me descried, and out she cries,
Poor Cleopatra, thou art tan alive.
With that the Queen roughed fro?? her side her knifed,
And even in act to slab her martred breast,
I stepped with speed, and held, and saved her life,
And forth her trembling hand the blade did wrest.
Ah Cleopatra, why should'is thou (said I,)
Both injury thy self and Caesar so?
Bar him the honour of his victory,
Who ever deals most mildly with his foe?
Live and rely on him, whose mercy will
To thy submission always ready be.
With that (as all amazed) she held her still,
Twixt majesty confused and misery.
Her proud grieved eyes, held sorrow and disdain,
State and distress warring within her soul:
Dying ambition dispossessed her reign,
So base affliction seemed to control.
Like as a burning Lamp, whose liquor spent
With intermitted flames, when dead you deem it,
Sends forth a dying flash, as discontent,
That so the matter fails that should redeem it.
So she (in spite) to see her low-brought state,
(When all her hopes were now consumed to nought,)
Scorns yet to make an abject league with Fate,
Or once descend into a servile thought.
Th'imperious tongue unused to beseech,
Authority confounds with prayers, so
Words of command conjoined wish humble speech,
Showed she would live, yet scorned to pray her foe.
Ah, what hath Caesar here to doe, said she,
In confines of the dead in darkness living?
Will hee not grant our Sepulchers be free,
But violate the privilege of dying?
What, must hee stretch forth his ambitious hand
Into the right of Death, and force vs here?
Hath misery no covert where to stand
Free from the storm of pride, first safe no where?
Cannot my land, my gold, my Crown suffice,
And all what I held dear, to him made common,
But that he must in this sort tirannize,
Th'afflicted body of an woeful woman?
Tell him, my frailty, and the Gods have given,
Sufficient glory, if hee could content him:
And let him now with his desires make even,
And leave me to this horror, to lamenting.
Now hee hath taken all away from me,
What must hee take me from my self by force?
Ah, let him yet (in mercy) leave me free
The kingdom of this poor distressed corse.
No other crown I seek, no other good.
Yet wish that Caesar would vouchsafe this grace,
To favour the poor of-spring of my blood.
Confused issue, yet of Roman race.
If blood and name be links of love in Princes,
Not spurs of hate; my poor Caesario may
Find favour notwithstanding mine offences,
And Caesars blood, may Caesars raging stay.
But if that with the torrent of my fall,
All must bee rapt with furious violence,
And no respect, nor no regard at all,
Can ought with nature or with blood dispense:
Then be it so, if needs it must be so.
There stays and shrinks in horror of her state.
When I began to mitigate her woe,
And thy great mercies unto her relate;
Wishing her not despair, but rather come
And sue for grace, and shake off all vain fears:
No doubt she should obtain as gentle doom
As she desired, both for herself and hers.
And so with much ado, (well pacifide
Seeming to bee,) she showed content to live,
Saying she was resolved thy doom t'abide,
And to accept what favour thou would give.
And heere-withall, craved also that she might
Perform her last rites to her lost beloved.
To sacrifice to him that wrought her plight:
And that she might not bee by force removed.
I granting from thy part this her request,
Left her for then, seeming in better rest.
But dost thou think she will remain so still?
I think, and doe assure my self she will.
Ah, private men found not the harts of Princes,
Whose actions oft bear contrary pretences.
Why, tic her safety for to yield to thee.
But tic more honour for her to die free.
She may thereby procure her childrens good.
Princes respect their honour more then blood.
Can Princes power dispense with nature than?
To be a Prince, is more then be a man.
There's none but have in time persuaded been.
And so might she too, were she not a Queen.
Divers respects will force her be reclaimed.
Princes (like Lyons) never will be tamed.
A private man may yield, and care not how,
But greater harts will break before they bow.
And sure I think sh'will never condescend,
To live to grace our spoils with her disgrace:
But yet let still a wary watch attend,
To guard her person, and to watch the place.
And look that none with her come to confer:
Shortly my self will go to visit her.
OPINION, howe dost thou molest
Th affected mind of restless man?
Who following thee, never can,
Nor ever shall attain to rest.
For getting what thou say is best,
Yet lo, that best hee finds far wide
Of what thou promised before:
For in the same hee looked for more,
Which proves but small when once tic tried.
Then something else thou find beside,
To draw him still from thought to thought:
When in the end all proves but nought.
Farther from rest hee finds him than,
Then at the first when he began.
O malcontent seducing guest,
Contriver of our greatest woes:
Which borne of wind, and fed with shows,
Dost nurse thy self in thine unrest.
Judging vngotten things the best,
Or what thou in conceit design'st.
And all things in the world dost deem,
Not as they are, but as they seem:
Which shows, their state thou ill defin'st:
And liu'st to come, in present pin'st.
For what thou hast, thou still dost lack:
O mindel tormentor, bodies wrack,
Vain promiser of that sweet rest,
Which never any yet possessed.
If wee unto ambition tend,
Then dost thou draw our weakness on,
With vain imagination
Of that which never hath an end.
Or if that lust we apprehend,
How doth that pleasant plague infest?
O what strange forms of luxury,
Thou straight dost cast t'intice vs by?
And tell vs that is ever best,
Which wee have never yet possessed.
And that more pleasure rests beside,
In something that we have not tried.
And when the same likewise is had,
Then all is one, and all is bad.
This Anthony can say is true,
And Cleopatra knows tic so,
By th'experience of their woe.
She can say, she never knew
But that just found pleasures new,
And was never satis-fide:
Hee can say by proof of toil,
Ambition is a Vulture vile,
That feeds upon the hart of pride:
And finds no rest when all is tried.
For worlds cannot confine the one,
The other, lists and bounds hath none.
And both subvert the mind, the state,
Procure destruction, envy, hate.
And now when all this is proved vain,
Yet Opinion leaves not here,
But sticks to Cleopatra near.
Persuading now, how she shall gain
Honour by death, and fame attain.
And what a shame it were to live,
Her kingdom lost, her Lover dead:
And so with this persuasion led,
Despair doth such a courage give,
That nought else can her mind relieve.
Nor yet divert her from that thought:
To this conclusion all is brought.
This is that rest this vain world lends,
To end in death that all thing ends.
HOW deeply Arius am I bound to thee,
That sau'dst fro?? death this wretched life of mine:
Obtaining Caesars gentle grace for me,
When I of all helps else despaired but thine?
Although I see in such a woeful state,
Life is not that which should be much desired:
Sith all out glories come to end their date,
Our Countries honour and our own expired.
Now that the hand of wrath hath ouer-gone vs,
Living (as'twere) in th'armes of our dead mother,
With blood under our feet ruin upon vs,
And in a Land most wretched of all other,
When yet we reckon life our dearest good.
And so we live, we care not how we live:
So deep we seele impressed in our blood,
That touch which nature with our breath did give.
And yet what blasts of words hath learning found,
To blow against the fear of death and dying?
What comforts vnsicke Eloquence can sound,
And yet all fails vs in the point of trying.
For whilst we reason with the breath of safety,
Without the compass of destruction living:
What precepts show wee then, what courage lofty
In taxing others fears in counsel giving?
When all this ayre of sweet-contriued words,
Proves but weak armour to defend the hart.
For when this life, pale fear and terror boards,
Where are our precepts then, where is our art?
O who is he that from himself can turn,
That bears about the body of a man?
Who doth not toil and labour to adiorne
The day of death, by any means he can?
All this I speak to th'end my self t'excuse,
For my base begging of a servile breath,
Wherein I grant my self much t'abuse,
So shamefully to seek t'auoyd my death.
Philostratus, that self same care to live,
Possesses all alike, and grieve not then
Nature doth vs no more then others give:
Though we speak more then men, we are but men.
And yet (in truth) these miseries to see,
Wherein we stand in most extreme distress:
Might to our selves sufficient motives be
To loathe this life, and weigh our death the less.
For never any age hath better taught,
What feeble footing pride and greatness hath.
How improvident prosperity is caught,
And clean confounded in the day of wrath.
See how dismayed Confusion keeps those streets,
That nought but mirth &amp; Musique late resounded,
How nothing with our eye but horror meets,
Our state, our wealth, our pride &amp; all confounded.
Yet what weak sight did not discern from far
This black-arysing tempest, all confounding?
Who did not see we should be what we are,
When pride and riot grew to such abounding.
When dissolute impiety possessed,
Th'vnrespectiue minds of such a people:
When insolent Security found rest
In wanton thoughts, with lust and ease made feeble.
Then when unwary peace with fat-fed pleasure,
New-fresh invented riots still detected,
Purchased with all the Ptolemies rich treasure,
Our laws, our Gods, our mysteries neglected.
Who saw not how this confluence of vice,
This innondation of disorders, must
At length of force pay back the bloody price
Of sad destruction, (a reward for lust.)
O thou and I have heard, and read, and known
Of like proud states, as woefully incombred,
And framed by them, examples for our own:
Which now among examples must be numbered.
For this decree a law from high is given,
An ancient Canon, of eternal date,
In Consistory of the stars of heaven,
Entered the book of vnauoyded Fate;
That no state can in height of happiness,
In th'exaltation of their glory stand:
But thither once arrived, declining less,
Ruin themselves, or fall by others hand.
Thus doth the euer-changing course of things,
Run a perpetual circle, ever turning:
And that same day that highest glory brings,
Brings vs unto the point of back-returning.
For senseless sensuality, doth ever
Accompany felicity and greatness.
A fatal witch, whose charms do leave vs never,
Till we leave all in sorrow for our sweetness;
When yet our selves must be the cause we fall,
Although the same be first decreed on hie:
Our errors still must bear the blame of all,
This must it be, earth ask not heaven why.
Yet mighty men with wary jealous hand,
Strive to cut off all obstacles of fear:
All whatsoever seems but to withstand
Their least conceit of quiet, held so dear;
And so entrench themselves with blood, with crimes,
With all injustice as their fears dispose:
Yet for all this wee see, how oftentimes
The means they work to keep, are means to lose.
And sure I cannot see, how this can stand
With great Augustus safety and his honour,
To cut off all succession from our land,
For her offence that pulled the wars upon her.
Why must her issue pay the price of that?
The price is life that they are rated at.
Caesario to, issued of Caesars blood?
Plurality of Caesars are not good.
Alas what hurt procures his feeble arm?
Not for it doth, but that it may doe harm.
Then when it offers hurt, repress the same,
Tic best to quench a spark before it flame.
Tic in humane, an innocent to kill.
Such innocents, seldom remain so still.
And sure his death may best procure our peace,
Competitors the subject dearly buys:
And so that our affliction may surcease,
Let geat men be the peoples sacrifice.
But see where Caesar comes himself, to try
And work the mind of our distressed Queen,
To apprehend some falsed hope: whereby
She might be drawn to have her fortune seen.
But yet I think, Rome will not see that face
(That qual her cha??peons,) blush in base disgrace.
WHat Cleopatra, dost thou doubt so much
Of Caesars mercy, that thou hid'st thy face?
Or dost thou think, thy' offences can be such,
That they surmount the measure of our grace?
O Caesar, not for that I fly thy fight
My soul this sad retire of sorrow chose:
But that my' oppressed thoughts ab horring light,
Like best in darkness, my disgrace t'inclose.
And here to these close limits of despair,
This solitary horror where I bide:
Caesar, I thought no Roman should repair,
More after him, who here oppressed died.
Yet now, here at thy conquering feet I lye,
Poor captive soul, that never thought to bow:
Whose happy foot of rule and majesty,
Stood late on yt same ground thou stand now.
Rise Queen, none but thy self is cause of all.
And yet, would all were but thine own alone:
That others ruin had not with thy fall
Brought Rome her sorrows, to my triumphs moan.
For breaking off the league of love and blood.
Thou make my winning joy a gain unpleasing:
Sith the eye of grief must look into our good,
Thorough the horror of our own blood-shedding.
And all, we must attribute unto thee.
To me? Caesar what should a woman doe
Oppressed with greatness? What was it for me
To contradict my Lord, being bent thereto?
I was by love, by fear, by weakness, made
An instrument to such designs as these.
For when the Lord of all the Orient bade,
Who but obeyed? who was not glad to please?
And how could I with-draw my succouring hand,
From him that had my hart, or what was mine?
Th'intrest of my faith in straightest band,
My love to his most firmly did combine.
Love? alas no, it was th'innated hatred
That thou and thine hast ever borne our people:
That made thee seek al means to have vs scattred,
To disvnite our strength, and makers feeble.
And therefore did that breast nurse our dissention,
With hope t'exalt thy self, t'augment thy state:
To pray upon the wrack of our contention,
And (with the rest our foes,) to joy thereat.
O Caesar, see how easy tic t'accuse
Whom fortune hath made faulty by their fall,
The wretched conquered may not refuse
The titles of reproach he's charged withal.
The conquering cause hath right, wherein you art,
The vanquished, still is judged the worser part.
Which part is mine, because I lost my part.
No lesser then the portion of a Crown.
Enough for me, alas what needed art
To gain by others, but to keep mine own?
But here let weaker powers note what it is,
To neighbour great Competitors too near,
If we take part, we oft doe perrish thus,
If neutral bide, both parties we must fear.
Alas, what shall the forced partakers doe,
When following none, yet must they perrish to?
But CAESAR. sith thy right and cause is such,
Bee not a heavy weight upon calamity:
Depress not the afflicted ouer-much,
The chiefest glory is the Victors lenity.
Th'inheritaunce of mercy from him take,
Of whom thou hast thy fortune and thy name:
Great Caesar me a Queen at first did make,
And let not Caesar now confound the same.
Read here these lines which still I keep with me,
The witness of his love and favours ever:
And God forbid this should be said of thee,
That Caesar wronged the favoured of Caesar.
For look what I have been to Anthony,
Think thou the same I might have been to thee.
And here I doe present thee with the note,
Of all the treasure, all the Jewels rare
That Egipt hath in many ages got;
And look what Cleopatra hath, is there.
Nay there's not all set down within that roll,
I know some things she hath reserved a part.
What vile vng greateful wretch, dare thou co??troule
Thy Queen &amp; sovereign? caitiue as thou art.
Hold, hold, a poor revenge can work so feeble
Ah Caesar, what a great indignity hands.
Is this, that here my vassale subject stands,
To accuse me to my Lord of treachery?
If I reserved some certain women's toys,
Alas it was not for my self (God knows,)
Poor miserable soul, that little joys
In trifling ornaments, in outward shows.
But what I kept, I kept to make my way
Unto thy Levy, and Octauias grace.
That thereby in compassion moved, they
Might mediate thy favour in my case.
Well Cleopatra, fear not, thou shalt find
What favour thou desire, or can expect:
For Caesar never yet was found but kind
To such as yield, and can themselves subject.
And therefore give thou comfort to thy mind;
Relieve thy soul thus overcharged with care,
How well I will entreat thee thou shalt find,
So soon as some affairs dispatched are.
Till when?? farewell. Cl. Thanks thrise-renowned Caesar,
Poor Cleopatra rests thine own for ever.
No marvel Caesar though our greatest sp'rits,
Have to the power of such a charming beauty,
Been brought to yield the honour of their merits:
Forgetting all respect of other duty.
Then whilst the glory of her youth remained
The wondering object to each wanton eye:
Before her full of sweet (with sorrow waned,)
Came to the period of this misery.
If still, even in the midst of death and horror,
Such beauty shines, thorough clouds of age &amp; sorrow,
If even those sweet decays seem to plead for her,
Which from affliction, moving graces borrow;
If in calamity she could thus move,
What could she do adorned with youth &amp; love?
What could she do then, when as spreading wide
The pomp of beauty, in her glory dight?
When armed with wonder, she could use beside,
The engines of her love, Hope and Delight?
Beauty daughter of Marvel, ?? see how
Thou can disgracing sorrows sweetly grace?
What power thou show in a distressed brow,
That make affliction fair, giu'st tears their grace.
What can vntressed locks, can torn rent hair,
A weeping eye, a wailing face be fair?
I see then, artless feature can content,
And that true beauty needs no ornament.
What in a passion Dolabella? what? take heed:
Let others fresh examples be thy warning;
What mischiefs these, so idle humours breed,
Whilst error keeps vs from a true discerning.
Indeed, I saw she laboured to impart
Her sweetest graces in her saddest cheer:
Presuming on the face that knew the art
To move with what aspect so eu'r it were.
But all in vain, she takes her aim amiss,
The ground and mark, her level much deceives;
Time now hath altered all, for neither is
She as she was, nor wee as she conceives.
And therefore now, it were best she left such badness,
Folly in youth is sin, in age, tic madness.
And for my part, I seek but t'entertaine
In her some feeding hope to draw her forth;
The greatest Trophy that my travails gain,
Is to bring home a prizall of such worth.
And now, sith that she seems so well content
To be disposed by vs, without more stay
She with her children shall to Rome be sent,
Whilst I by Syria thither take my way.
O Fearful frowning NEMESIS,
Daughter of IVSTICE, most severe,
That art the worlds great Arbitresse,
And Queen of causes reigning here.
Whose swift-sure hand is ever near
Eternill justice, righting wrong:
Who never yet-deserrest long
The prods decay, the weeks redress.
But through thy power every where,
Dost raze the great, and raise the less.
The less made great, dost ruin to,
To show the earth what heaven can doe.
Thou from dark-clos'd eternity,
From thy black cloudy hidden seat,
The worlds disorders dost descry:
Which when they swell so proudly great,
Reuersing th'order nature set,
Thou giu'st thy all-confounding doom,
Which none can know before it come.
The inevitable destiny,
Which neither wit nor strength can let,
Fast chained unto necessity,
In mortal things doth order so,
Th'alternate course of weal or wo.
O low the powers of heaven do play
With travailed mortality:
And doth their weakness still betray,
In their best prosperity.
When being listed up so hie,
They look beyond themselves so sarre,
That to themselves they take no care:
Whilst swift confusion down doth lay,
Their late proud mounting vanity:
Bringing their glory to decay.
And with the ruin of their fall,
Extinguish people, state and all.
But is it justice that all wee
Th'innocent poor multitude,
For great men's faults should punishs be,
And to destruction thus pursued.
O why should th'heauens vs include,
Within the compass of their sall,
Who of themselves procured all?
Or doe the Gods (in close) decree,
Occasion take how to extrude
Man from the earth with cruelty?
Ah no, the Gods are ever just,
Our faults excuse their rigour must.
This is the period Fate set down,
To Egipts fat prosperity:
Which now unto her greatest grown,
Must perrish thus, by course must die.
And some must be the causers why
This revolution must be wrought:
As borne to bring their state to nought.
To change the people and the crown,
And purge the worlds iniquity:
Which vice so far hath ouer-growne.
As wee, so they that treat vs thus,
Must one day perrish like to vs.
Never friend Rodon in a better hour,
Could I have met thee then eu'en now I do
Having affliction in the greatest power
Upon my soul, and none to tell it to.
For tic some ease our sorrows to reveal,
If they to whom wee shall impart our woes
Seem but to feel a part of what wee feel,
And meet vs with a sigh but at a close.
And never (friend Seleucus) found thou one,
That better could bear such a part with thee:
Who by his own, knows others cares to moan,
And can in like accord of grief agree.
And therefore tell th'oppression of thy hart,
Tell to an ear prepared and tuned to care:
And I will likewise unto thee impart
As sad a tale as what thou shalt declare.
So shall we both our mournful plaints combine,
Isle wail thy state, and thou shalt pity mine.
Well then, thou know how I have lived in grace
With Cleopatra, and esteemed in Court
As one of Counsel, and of chiefest place,
And ever held my credit in that sort.
Till now in this confusion of our state,
When thinking to have used a mean to climb,
And fled the wretched, slowne unto the great,
(Follow'ing the fortune of the present time,)
Am come to be cast down and ruined clean.
And in the course of mine own plot undone.
For having all the secretes of the Queen
Reueal'd to Caesar, to have savour won:
My treachery is quited with disgrace,
My falsehood loathed, and not without great reason
Though good for him, yet Princes in this case
Doe hate ye Traitor, though they love the treason.
For how could hee imagine I would be
Faithful to him, being false unto mine own?
And false to such a bounteous Queen as she,
That had me raised, and made mine honour known.
Hee saw it was not for zeal to him I bare,
But for base fear, or mine own state to settle.
Weakness is false, and faith in Cowards rare,
Fear finds out shifts, timidity is subtle.
And therefore scorned of him, scorned of mine own.
Hateful to all that look into my state:
Despised Seleucus now is only grown
The mark of infamy, that's pointed at.
Tic much thou say, and ?? too much to feel,
And I doe grieve and doe lament thy fall:
But yet all this which thou dost here reveal,
Co??par'd with mine, will make thine seem but small.
Although my fault be in the selfsame kind,
Yet in degree far greater, far more hateful;
Mine sprung of mischief, thine from feeble mind,
I stained with blood, thou only but'vngratefull.
For unto me did Cleopatra give
The best and dearest treasure of her blood.
Lovely Casario, whom she would should live
Free from the dangers wherein Egipt stood.
And unto me with him this charge she gave,
Here Rodon, take, convey from out this Coast,
This precious Gem, the chiefest that I have,
The jewel of my soul I value most.
Guide him to INDIA, lead him far from hence,
Safeguard him where secure he may remain,
Till better fortune call him back from thence,
And Egipts peace be reconciled again.
For this is hee that may our hopes bring back,
(The rising Sun of our declining state:)
These be the hands that may restore our wrack,
And raise the broken ruins made of late.
Hee may give limits to the boundless pride
Of fierce Octauius, and abate his might:
Great Iulius of-spring, hee may come to guide
The Empire of the world, as his by right.
O how hee seems the model of his Sire?
O how I gaze my Caesar in his face?
Such was his gate, so did his looks aspire;
Such was his threatening brow, such was his grace.
High shouldered, and his forehead even as hie.
And ??, (if hee had not been borne so late,)
He might have ruled the worlds great Monarchy,
And now have been the Champion of our state.
Then unto him, ?? my dear Son, (she says,)
Son of my youth, fly hence, ?? fly, be gone:
Reserve thy self, ordained for better days,
For much thou hast to ground thy hopes upon.
Leave me (thy woeful Mother) to endure,
The fury of this tempest here alone:
Who cares not for herself, so thou be sure,
Thou may revenge, when others can but moan.
Rodon will see thee safe, Rodon will guide
Thee and thy ways, thou shalt not need to fear.
Rodon (my faithful servant) will provide
What shall be best for thee, take thou no care.
And ?? good Rodon, look well to his youth,
The ways are long, and dangers every where.
I urge it not that I doe doubt thy truth,
Mothers will cast the worst, and always fear.
The absent danger greater still appears,
Less fears he, who is near the thing he fears.
And ??, I know not what presaging thought
My spirit suggests of luckless bad event:
But yet it may be tic but love doth dote,
Or idle shadows which my fears present.
But yet the memory of mine own fate,
Makes me fear his. And yet why should I fear?
His fortune may recover better state,
And hee may come in pomp to govern here.
But yet I doubt the Genius of our Race
By some malignant spirit comes ouer-throwne:
Our blood must be extinct, in my disgrace,
Egypt must have no more Kings of their own.
Then let him stay, and let vs fall together,
Sith it is fore-decreed that we must fall.
Yet who knows what may come? let him go thither,
What Merchant in one Vessel venters all?
Let vs divide our stars. Go, go my Son,
Let not the fate of Egypt find thee here:
Try if so be thy destiny can shun
The common wrack of vs, by being there.
But who is hee found ever yet defence
Against the heavens, or hyd him any where?
Then what need I to send thee so far hence
To seek thy death that may as well die here?
And here die with thy mother, die in rest,
Not travailing to what will come to thee.
Why should wee leave our blood unto the East,
When Egipt may a Tom be sufficient be?
O my divided soul, what shall I doe?
Whereon shall now my resolution rest?
What were I best resolve to yield unto
When both are bad, how shall I know the best?
Stay; I may hap so work with Caesar now,
That hee may yield him to restore thy right.
Go; Caesar never will consent that thou
So near in blood, shalt bee so great in might.
Then take him Roden, go my son fare-well.
But stay; ther's something else that I would say:
Yet nothing now, but ?? God speed thee well,
Least saying more, that more may make thee stay.
Yet let me speak: It may be tic the last
That ever I shall speak to thee my Son.
Doe Mothers use to part in such post-hast?
What, must I end when I have scarce begun?
Ah no (dear hart,) tic no such slender twine
VVhere-with the knot is tide twixt thee and me.
That blood within thy veins came out of mine,
Parting from thee, I part from part of me:
And therefore I must speak. Yet what? O son.
Here more she wold, when?? more she could not say.
Sorrow rebounding back whence it begun,
Filled up the passage, and quite stopped the way:
When sweet Caesario with a princely spirit,
(Though comfortless himself) did comfort give;
With mildest words, persuading her to bear it.
And as for him, she should not need to grieve.
And I (with protestations of my part,)
Swore by that faith, (which sworn I did deceive)
That I would use all care, all wit and art
To see him safe; And so we took our leave.
Scarce had wee travailed to our journeys end,
When Caesar having knowledge of our way,
His Agents after vs with speed doth send
To labour me, Caesario to betray.
VVho-with rewards, and promises so large.
Assailed me then, that I grew soon content;
And back to Rhodes did reconuay my charge,
Pretending that Octauius for him sent,
To make him King of Egipt presently.
And thither come, seeing himself betrayed,
And in the hands of death through treachery,
VVayling his state, thus to himself he said.
Lo here brought back by subtle train to death,
Betrayed by Tutors faith, or Traitors rather:
My fault my blood, and mine offence my birth,
For being son of such a mighty Father.
From INDIA, (whither sent by Mothers care,
To be reserved from Egypt common wrack,)
To Rhodes, (so long the arms of Tyrants are,)
I am by Caesars subtle reach brought back.
Here to be made the oblation for his fears, (him:
Who doubts the poor revenge these hands may doe
Respecting neither blood, nor youth, nor years,
Or how small safety can my death be to him.
And is this all the good of being borne great?
Then wretched greatness, proud rich misery,
Pompous distress, glittering calamity.
Is it for this th'ambitious Fathers sweat,
To purchase blood and death for them and theirs?
Is this the issue that their glories get,
To leave a sure destruction to their heirs?
O how far better had it been for me,
From low descent, derived of humble birth,
To'haue eat the sweet-sowre bread of poverty,
And drunk of Nilus stream in Nilus earth:
Under the cou'ring of some quiet Cottage,
Free from the wrath of heaven, secure in mind,
Untouched when sad events of Princes dotage,
Confounds what ever mighty it doth find.
And not t'haue stood in their way, whose condition,
Is to have all made dear, and all thing plain,
Between them and the mark of their ambition,
That nothing let the full sight of their reign.
Where nothing stands, that stands not in submission;
Where greatness must all in it self contain.
Kings will be alone, Competitors must down,
Near death he stands, that stands too near a Crown.
Such is my case, for Caesar will have all:
My blood must seal th'assurance of his state:
Yet ah weak state that blood assure him shall,
Whose wrongful shedding, Gods and men do hate.
Injustice never scopes unpunished still,
Though men revenge not, yet the heavens will.
And thou Augustus that with bloody hand,
Curt'st off succession from another race,
Moist find the heavens thy vows so to withstand.
That others may deprive thine in like case.
When rho moist see thy proud contentious bed
Yielding thee none of thine that may inherit:
Subvert thy blood, place others in their sted,
To pay this thy injustice her due merit.
If it be true, (as who can that deny
Which sacred Priests of Memphis doe fore-say,)
Some of the of-spring yet of Anthony,
Shall all the rule of this whole Empire sway.
And then Augustus, what is it thou gainest
By poor Antillus blood, or this of mine?
Nothing but this thy victory thou stainest,
And pull'st the wrath of heaven on thee and thine.
In vain doth man contend against the stars,
For what hee seeks to make, his wisdom mars.
Yet in the mean-time we whom Fates reserve,
The bloody sacrifices of ambition,
We feel the smart what ever they deserve,
And wee endure the present times condition.
The justice of the heavens revenging thus,
Doth only sacrifice it self, not vs.
Yet tic a pleasing comfort that doth ease
Affliction in so great extremity.
To think their like destruction shall appease
Our ghosts, who did procure our misery.
But dead we are, uncertain what shall bee,
And living, wee are sure to feel the wrong:
Our certain ruin wee our selves doe see.
They joy the while, and wee know not how long.
But yet Caesario, thou must die content,
For men will moan, &amp; God revenge th'innocent.
Thus he co??plain'd, &amp; thus thou hear my shame.
But how hath Caesar now rewarded thee?
As hee hath thee. And I expect the same
As fell to Theodor to fall to me:
For he (one of my coat) having betrayed
The young Antillus, son of Anthony,
And at his death from of his neck conveyed
A jewel: which be'ing asked, he did deny:
Caesar occasion took to hang him straight.
Such instruments with Princes live not long.
Although they need vs, (actors of deceit,)
Yet still our sight seems to upbraid their wrong;
And therefore we must needs this danger run,
And in the net of our own guile be caught:
Wee must not live to bray what we have done,
For what is done, must not appear their fault.
But here comes Cleopatra, woeful Queen,
And our shame will not that we should be seen.
WHat, hath my face yet power to win a Lover?
Can this torn remnant serve to grace me so,
That it can Caesars secrete plots discover
What he intends with me and mine to do?
Why then poor Beauty thou hast done thy last,
And best good service thou coldest doe unto me.
For now the time of death reueal'd thou hast,
Which in my life did serve but to undo me.
Here Dolabella far forsooth in love,
Writes, how that Caesar means forthwith, to send
Both me and mine, the ayre of Rome to prove:
There his Triumphant Chariot to attend.
I thank the man, both for his love and letter;
Th'one comes fit to warn me thus before,
But for the other, I must die his debtor,
For Cleopatra now can love no more.
But having leave, I must go take my leave
And last farewell of my dead Anthony:
Whose dearly honoured Tom be must here receive
This sacrifice, the last before I dye.
O sacred euer-memorable Stone,
That hast without my tears, within my flame,
Receive th'oblation of the woefullest moan
That ever yet from sad affliction came.
And you dear relics of my Lord and Love,
(The sweetest parcels of the faithfull'st liver,)
O let no impious hand dare to remove
You out from hence, but rest you here for ever.
Let Egypt now give peace unto you dead,
That living, gave you trouble and turmoil:
Sleep quiet in this euer-lasting bed,
In foreign land preferred before your soil.
And ??, if that the sp'rits of men remain
After their bodies, and doe never die,
Then hear thy Ghost thy captive Spouse complain,
And be attentive to her misery.
But if that laborsome mortality,
Found this sweet error, only to confine
The curious search of idle vanity,
That would the depth of darkness undermine:
Or rather, to give rest unto the thought
Of wretched man, with th'after-comming joy
Of those conceived fields whereon we dote,
To pacify the present worlds annoy.
If it be so, why speak I then to the air?
But tic not so, my Anthony doth hear:
His euer-liuing ghost attends my prayer,
And I doe know his hovering spirit is near.
And I will speak, and pray, and morn to thee,
O pure immortal love that daign'st to hear:
I feel thou answer my credulity
With touch of comfort, finding none elsewhere.
Thou know these hands entombed thee heer of late,
Free and unforced, which now must servile be,
Reserved for bands to grace proud Caesars state,
Who seeks in me to triumph over thee.
O if in life we could not severed be,
Shall Death divide our bodies now a sunder?
Must thine in Egypt, mine in Italy,
Be kept the Monuments of Fortunes wonder?
If any powers be there where as thou art,
(Sith our own Country Gods betray our case,)
O work they may their gracious help impart,
To save thy woeful wife from such disgrace.
Doe not permit she should in triumph show
The blush of her reproach, joined with thy shame:
But (rather) let that hateful Tyrant know,
That thou and I had power t'auoyde the same.
But what doe I spend breath and idle wind,
In vain invoking a conceived aid?
Why doe I not my self occasion find
To break the bounds wherein my self am stayed?
Words are for them that can complain and live,
Whose melting harts composed of baser frame,
Can to their sorrows time and leisure give,
But Cleopatra may not doe the same.
No Anthony, thy love requires more.
A lingering death, with thee deserves no merit,
I must my self force open wide a door
To let out life, and so vnhouse my spirit.
These hands must break the prison of my soul
To come to thee, there to enjoy like state,
As doth the long-pent solitary Foul,
That hath escaped her cage, and found her mate.
This Sacrifice to sacrifice my life,
Is that true incense that doth best beseem:
These rites may serve a life-desiring wife,
Who doing them, t'haue done enough doth deem.
My hart blood should the purple flowers have been,
Which here upon thy Tomb to thee are offred,
No smoke but dying breath should here been seen,
And this it had been to, had I been suffered.
But what have I save these bare hands to doe it?
And these weak fingers are not yron-poynted:
They cannot pierce the flesh be'ing put unto it,
And I of all means else am disappointed.
But yet I must a way and means seek, how
To come unto thee, what so ere I doo.
O Death, art thou so hard to come by now,
That wee must pray, entreat, and seek thee too?
But I will find thee where so ere thou lye,
For who can stay a mind resolved to die?
And now I go to work th'effect in deed,
Isle never send more words or sighs to thee:
Isle bring my soul my self, and that with speed,
My self will bring my soul to Anthony.
Come go my Maids, my fortunes sole attenders,
That minister to misery and sorrow:
Your Mistress you unto your freedom renders,
And quits you from all charge yet ere to morrow.
And now by this, I think the man I sent,
Is near returned that brings me my dispatch.
God grant his cunning sort to good event,
And that his skill may well beguile my watch.
So shall I shun disgrace, leave to be sorry,
Fly to my love, scope my foe, free my soul;
So shall I act the last act of my glory,
Dye like a Queen, and rest without control.
Exit.
Mysterious Egipt, wonder breeder, strict religions strange observer,
State-ordrer Zeal, the best rule-keeper, fostring still in temprate fervor:
O how came thou to lose so wholly all religion, law and order?
And thus become the most unholy of all Lands that Nylus border?
How could confused Disorder enter where sterne Law sate so severely?
How durst weak lust and riot venture the eye of Justice looking nearly?
Could not those means that made thee great, Be still the means to keep thy state?
Ah no, the course of things requires change and alteration ever:
That same continuance man desires,
th inconstant world yields never.
Wee in our counsels must be blinded, and not see what doth import vs:
And often-times the thing least minded, is the thing that most must hurt vs.
Yet they that have the stern in guiding, tic their fault that should prevent it,
For oft they seeing their Country sliding, take their ease, as though contented.
Wee imitate the greater powers,
The Princes manners fashion ours.
Th'example of their light regarding, vulgar looseness much incenses:
Vice uncontrolled, grows wide enlarging,
Kings small faults, be great offences.
And this hath set the window open unto license, lust and riot:
This way Confusion first found broken, whereby entered our disquiet.
Those laws that Zoroaster founded, and the Ptolemies observed,
Hereby first came to be confounded, which our state so long preserved.
The wanton luxury of Court,
Did form the people of like sort.
For all (respecting private pleasure,) universally consenting
To abuse their time, their treasure, in their own delights contenting:
And future dangers nought respecting, whereby, (O howe easy matter
Made this so general neglecting,
Confused weakness to diseater?)
Caesar found the effect true tried, in his easy entrance making:
Who at the sight of arms, descried all our people, all forsaking.
For riot (worse then war,) so sore
Had wasted all our strength before.
And thus is Egipt servile rendered, to the insolent destroyer:
And all their sumptuous treasure tendered, all her wealth that did betray her.
Which poison (O if heavens be rightful,) may so far infect their senses,
That Egipts pleasures so delightful, may breed them the like offences.
And Romans learn our way of weakness, be instructed in our vices:
That our spoils may spoil your greatness, overcome with our devises.
Fill full your hands, and carry home Enough from vs to ruin Rome.
COme tell me Titius every circumstance
How Cleopatra did receive my news:
Tell every look, each gesture, countenance,
That she did in my Letters reading use.
I shall my Lord so far as I could note,
Or my conceit observe in any wise.
It was the time when as she having got
Leave to her Dearest dead to sacrifice;
And now was issuing out the Monument,
With Odors, Incense, Garlands in her hand,
When I approached (as one from Caesar sent,)
And did her close thy message t'vnderstand.
She turns her back, and with her takes me in,
Reads in thy lines thy strange unlooked for tale:
And reads, and smiles, and stays, and doth begin
Again to read, then blushed, and then was pale.
And having ended with a sigh, refoldes
Thy Letter up: and with a fixed eye,
(Which steadfast her imagination holds)
She mused a while, standing confusedly.
At length. Ah friend, (saith she,) tell thy good Lord,
How dear I hold his pitying of my case:
That out of his sweet nature can afford,
A miserable woman so much grace.
Tell him how much my heavy soul doth grieve
Merciless Caesar should so deal with me:
Pray him that he would all the counsel give,
That might divert him from such cruelty.
As for my love, say Anthony hath all,
Say that my hart is gone into the grave
With him, in whom it rests and ever shall:
I have it not my self, nor cannot have.
Yet tell him, he shall more command of me
Then any, whosoever living, can.
Hee that so friendly shows himself to be
A right kind Roman, and a Gentleman.
Although his Nation (fatal unto me,)
Have had mine age a spoil, my youth a pray,
Yet his affection must accepted be,
That favours one distressed in such decay.
Ah, hee was worthy then to have been loved,
Of Cleopatra whiles her glory lasted;
Before she had declining fortune proved,
Or scene her honour wrecked, her flower blasted.
Now there is nothing left her but disgrace,
Nothing but her affliction that can move:
Tell Dolabella, one that's in her case,
(Poor soul,) needs rather pity now then love.
But shortly shall thy Lord hear more of me.
And ending so her speech, no longer stayed,
But hasted to the Tomb of Anthony.
And this was all she did, and all she said.
Ah sweet distressed Lady. What hard hart
Could choose but pity thee, and love thee too?
Thy worthiness, the state wherein thou art
Requires both, and both I vow to doo.
Although ambition lets not Caesar see
The wrong hee doth thy Majesty and sweetness,
Which makes him now exact so much of thee,
To add unto his pride, to grace his greatness.
Hee knows thou can no hurt procure vs now,
Sith all thy strength is ceased into our hands:
Nor fears hee that, but rather labours how
Hee might show Rome so great a Queen in bands.
That our great Ladies (envying thee so much
That stained the?? all, &amp; hell'd them in such wonder,)
Might joy to see thee, and thy fortune such,
Thereby extolling him that brought thee under.
But I will seek to stay it what I may;
I am but one, yet one that Caesar loves,
And ?? if now I could doe more then pray,
Then should you know how far affection moves.
But what my power and prayer may prevail,
Isle join them both, to hinder thy disgrace:
And even this present day I will not fail
To doe my best with Caesar in this case.
And Sir, even now her self hath Letters sent,
I met her messenger as I came hither,
With a dispatch as hee to Caesar went,
But knows not what imports her sending thither.
Yet this hee told, how Cleopatra late
Was come from sacrifice. How ritchly clad
Was served to dinner in most sumptuous state,
With all the bravest ornaments she had.
How having dyn'd, she writes, and sends away
Him straight to Caesar, and commanded than
All should depart the Tomb, and none to stay
But her two maids, and one poor Countryman.
Why then I know, she sends t'haue audience now,
And means t'experience what her state can doe:
To see if Majesty will make him bow
To what affliction could not move him to.
And ??, if now she could but bring a view
Of that fresh beauty she in youth possessed,
(The argument where-with she ouer-threw
The wit of Iulius Caesar, and the rest,)
Then happily Augustus might relent,
Whilst powerful Love, (far stronger the?? ambition)
Might work in him, a mind to be content
To grant her asking, in the best condition.
But being as she is, yet doth she merit
To be respected, for what she hath been:
The wonder of her kind, of rarest spirit,
A glorious Lady, and a mighty Queen.
And now, but by a little weakness falling
To doe that which perhaps sh'was forced to doe:
Alas, an error past, is past recalling,
Take away weakness, and take women too.
But now I go to be thy Advocate,
Sweet Cleopatra, now Isle use mine art.
Thy presence will me greatly animate,
Thy face will teach my tongue, thy love my hart.
AM I ordained the careful Messenger,
And sad newes-bringer of the strangest death,
Which self hand did upon it self infer,
To free a captive soul from servile breath?
Must I the lamentable wonder show,
Which all the world must grieve and marvel at?
The rarest form of death in earth below,
That ever pity, glory, wonder gat.
What news bring you, can Egipt yet yield more
Of sorrow then it hath? what can it add
To th'already ouer-flowing store
Of sad affliction, matter yet more sad?
Have wee not seen the worst of our calamity?
Is there behind yet something of distress
Unseen, unknown? Tell if that greater misery
There be, that we wail not that which is less.
Tell vs what so it be, and tell at first,
For sorrow ever longs to hear her worst.
Well then, the strangest thing relate I will,
That ever eye of mortal man hath seen.
I (as you know) even from my youth, have still
Attended on the person of the Queen.
And ever in all fortunes good or ill,
With her as one of chiefest trust have been.
And now in these so great extremities,
That ever could to Majesty befall,
I did my best in what I could devise,
And left her not, till now she left vs all.
What is she gone. Hath Caesar forced her so?
Yea, she is gone, and hath deceived him to.
What, fled to INDIA, to go find her son?
No, not to INDIA, but to find her son.
Why the?? there's hope she may her state recover.
Her state? nay rather honour, and her Lover.
Her Lover? him she cannot have again.
Well, him she hath, w him she doth remain.
Why the?? she's dead. First so? why speak not thou?
You guess aright, and I will tell you how.
When?? she perceived al hope was clean berest her,
That Caesar meant to send her straight away,
And saw no means of reconcilement left her,
Work what she could, she could not work to stay.
She calls me to her, and she thus began.
O thou whose trust hath ever been the same
And one in all my fortunes, faithful man,
Alone content t'attend disgrace and shame.
Thou, whom the fearful ruin of my fall,
Never deterrd to leave calamity:
As did those other smooth state-pleasers all,
Who followed but my fortune, and not me.
Tic thou must doe a service for thy Queen,
Wherein thy faith and skill must doe their best:
Thy honest care and duty shall be seen
Performing this, more then in all the rest.
For all what thou hast done, may die with thee,
Although tic pity that such faith should die.
But this shall euer-more remembered be,
A rare example to posterity.
And look how long as Cleopatra shall
In after ages live in memory,
So long shall thy clear fame endure withal,
And therefore thou must not my suit deny;
Nor contradict my will. For what I will
I am resolved: and this tic thou must doe me:
Go find me out with all thy art and skill
To Aspicqs, and convey them close unto me.
I have a work to doe with them in hand,
Enquire not what, for thou shalt soon see what,
If the heavens doe not my designs withstand,
But doe thy charge, and let me shift with that.
Being thus conjured, by her t'whom I'had vowed
My true perpetual service, forth I went,
Devising how my close attempt to shroud,
So that there might no art my art prevent.
And so disguised in habit as you see,
Having foe??nd out the thing for which I went,
I soon returned again, and brought with me
The Aspicqs, in a basket closely pent.
Which I had filled with figs, and leaves upon.
And coming to the Guard that kept the door,
What hast thou there? said they, and looked thereon.
Seeing the figgs, they deemed of nothing more,
But said, they were the fairest they had seen.
Taste some, said I, for they are good and pleasant.
No, no, said they, go bear them to thy Queen.
Thinking me some poor man yt brought a Present.
Well, in I went, where brighter then the Sun,
Glittering in all her pompous rich array,
Great Cleopatra sate; as if she'had won
Caesar and all the world beside this day.
Even as she was when on thy crystal streams,
O CYDNOS she did show what earth could show.
When Asia all amazed in wonder, deems
VENVS from heaven was come on earth below.
Even as she went at first to meet her Love,
So goes she now at last again to find him.
But that first, did her greatness only prove.
This last her love, that could not live behind him.
Yet as she sate, the doubt of my good speed,
Detracts much from the sweetness of her look:
Cheere-marrer Care, did then such passions breed,
That made her eye bewray the care she took.
But she no sooner sees me in the place,
But straight her sorrow-clowded brow she clears,
Lightning a smile from out a stormy face,
Which all her tempest-beaten senses cheers.
Look how a strayed perplexed travailer,
When chased by thieves, and even at point of taking,
Descrying suddenly some town not far,
Or some vnlookt-for aid to him-ward making;
Cheers up his tired sp'rits, thrusts forth his strength
To meet that good, that comes in so good hour:
Such was her joy, perceiving now at length,
Her honour was t'escape so proud a power.
Forth from her seat she hastes to meet the present,
And as one ouer-ioyd, she caught it straight.
And with a smiling cheer in action pleasant,
Looking among the figs, finds the deceit.
And seeing there the ugly venomous beast,
Nothing dismayed, she stays and views it well.
At length, th'extreamest of her passion ceased,
When she began with words her joy to tell.
O rarest Beast (saith she) that Africa breeds,
How dearly welcome art thou unto me?
The fairest creature that fair Nylus feeds
Me thinks I see, in now beholding thee.
What though the euer-erring world doth deem
That angered Nature framed thee but in spite:
Little they know what they so light esteem,
That never learned the wonder of thy might.
Better then Death, Deaths office thou dischargest,
That with one gentle touch can free our breath:
And in a pleasing sleep our soul enlarge,
Making our selves not privy to our death.
If Nature erred, ?? then how happy error,
Thinking to make thee worst, she made thee best:
Sith thou best freest vs from our lives worst terror,
In sweetly bringing souls to quiet rest.
When that inexorable Monster Death
That follows Fortune, flies the poor distressed,
Tortures our bodies ere hee takes our breath,
And loads with pains th'already weak oppressed.
How oft have I begged, prayed, entreated him
To take my life, and yet could never get him?
And when he comes, he comes so ugly grim,
That who is he (if he could choose) would let him?
Therefore come thou, of wonders wonder chief,
That open can with such an easy key
The door of life, come gentle cunning thief,
That from our selves so steal our selves away.
Well did our Priests discern something divine
Shadowed in thee, and therefore first they did
Offerings and worships due to thee assign,
In whom they found such mysteries were hid.
Comparing thy sweet motion to the Sun,
That mou'st without the instruments that move:
And never waxing old, but always one,
Dost sure thy strange divinity approve.
And therefore to, the rather unto thee
In zeal I make the offering of my blood,
Calamity confirming now in me
A sure belief that piety makes good.
Which happy men neglect, or hold ambiguous,
And only the afflicted are religious.
And here I sacrifice these arms to Death,
That Lust late dedicated to Delights:
Offling up for my last, this last of breath,
The complement of my loves dearest rites.
With that she bares her arm, and offer makes
To touch her death, yet at the touch withdraws,
And seeming more to speak, occasion takes,
Willing to die, and willing to to pause.
Look how a Mother at her sons departing
For some far voyage, bent to get him fame,
Doth entertain him with an idle parling.
And still doth speak, and still speaks but the same;
Now bids farewell, and now recalls him back,
Tells what was told, and bids again fare-well,
And yet again recalls; for still doth lack
Something that love would fine and cannot tell.
Pleased hee should go, yet cannot let him go.
So she, although she knew there was no way
But this, yet this she could not handle so
But she must show that life desired delay.
Fine would she entertain the time as now,
And now would fine yt Death would seize upon?? her.
Whilst I might see presented in her brow,
The doubtful combat tried twixt Life and Honour.
Life bringing Legions of fresh hopes with her,
Armed with the proofs of Time, which yields we say
Comfort and Help, to such as doe refer
All unto him, and can admit delay.
But Honour scorning Life, lo forth leads he
Bright Immortality in shining armour:
Thorough the rays of whose clear glory, she
Might see Lifes baseness, how much it might harm her.
Besides, she saw whole Armies of Reproaches,
And base Disgraces, Furies fearful sad,
Marching with Life, and Shame that still incroches
Upon her face, in bloody colours clad.
Which representments seeing worse then death
She deemed to yield to Life, and therefore chose
To render all to Honour, hart and breath;
And that with speed, least that her inward foes
False flesh and blood, joining with life and hope,
Should mutiny againsther resolution.
And to the end she would not give them scope,
She presently proceeds to th'execution.
And sharply blaming of her rebel powers,
False flesh, (saith she,) and what dost thou co??spire
With Caesar to, as thou were none of ours,
To work my shame, and hinder my desire?
Wilt thou retain in closure of thy veins,
That enemy Base life, to let my good?
No, know there is a greater power constrains
Then can be countercheckt with fearful blood.
For to the mind that's great, nothing seems great.
And seeing death to be the last of woes,
And life lasting disgrace, which I shall get,
What doe I lose, that have but life to lose?
This having said, strengthened in her own hart,
And union of her self senses in one
Charging together, she performs that part
That hath so great a part of glory won.
And so receives the deadly poysning touch.
That touch that tried the gold of her love pure,
And hath confirmed her honour to be such,
As must a wonder to all worlds endure.
Now not an yielding shrink or touch of fear.
Consented to bewray least sense of pain:
But still in one same sweet vnaltred cheer,
Her honour did her dying thoughts retain.
Well, now this work is done (saith she,) here ends
This act of life, that part of Fates assigned me:
What glory or disgrace here this world lends,
Both have I had, and both I leave behind me.
And now ?? Earth, the Theater where I
Have acted this, witness I dye unforced.
Witness my soul parts free to Anthony,
And now proud Tyrant Caesar doe thy worst.
This said, she stays, and makes a sudden pause,
As it were to feel whither the poison wrought:
Or rather else the working might be cause
That made her stay, as likewise may be thought.
For in that instant I might well perceive,
The drowsy humour in her falling brow:
And how each power, each part oppressed did leave
Their former office, and did senseless grow.
Look how a new-pluckt branch against the Sun,
Declines his fading leaves in feeble sort,
So her disjoined jointures as undone.
Let fall her weak dissolved limbs support.
Yet lo that face the wonder of her life,
Retains in death, a grace that graces death,
Couller so lively, cheer so lovely rife,
That none wold think such beauty could want breath.
And in that cheer, th'impression of a smile
Did seem to show she scorned Death and Caesar,
As glorying that she could them both beguile,
And telling death how much her death did please her.
Wonder it was to see how soon she went,
She went with such a will, and did so haste it,
That sure I think she did her pain prevent,
Fore-going pain, or staying not to taste it.
And senseless, in her sinking down she wries
The Diadem which on her head she wore,
Which Charmion (poor weak feeble maid) espies,
And hastes to right it as it was before.
For Eras now was dead, and Charmion too
Even at the point, for both would imitate
Their Mistress glory, striving like to doo.
But Charmion would in this exceed her mate,
For she would have this honour to be last,
That should adorn that head that must be seen
To wear a Crown in death, that life held fast,
That all the world might know she died a Queen.
And as she stood setting if fitly on,
Lo in rush Caesars Messengers in haste,
Thinking to have prevented what was done,
But yet they came too late, for all was past.
For there they found stretched on a bed of gold,
Dead Cleopatra, and that proudly dead,
In all the rich attire procure she could,
And dying Charmion trimming of her head.
And Eras at her feet, dead in like case.
Charmion, is this well done? said one of them.
Yea, well said she, and her that from the race
Of so great Kings discends, doth best become.
And with that word, yields too her faithful breath,
To pass th'assurance of her love with death.
But how knew Caesar of her close intent?
By Letters which before to him she sent.
For when she had procured this means to die,
She writes, and earnestly entreats, she might
Be buried in one Tomb with Anthony.
Whereby then Caesar gess'd all went not right.
And forth-with sends, yet ere the message came
She was dispatcht, he crossed in his intent,
Her providence had ordered so the same
That she was sure none should her plot prevent.
THen thus we have beheld
Th'accomplishment of woes,
The full of rutne, and
The worst of worst of ills.
And seen all hope expelled,
That ever sweet repose
Shall re-possess: the Land
That Desolations fills,
And where Ambition spills
With uncontrolled hand,
All th'issue of all those,
That so long rule have hell'd:
To make vs no more vs,
But clean confound vs thus.
And can O Nylus thou,
Father of floods endure,
That yellow Tyber should
With sandy streams rule thee?
Wilt thou be pleased to bow
To him those feet so pure,
Whose unknown head we hold
A power divine to bee?
Thou that did ever see
Thy free banks uncontrolled
Live under thine own care:
Ah wilt thou bear it now?
And now wilt yield thy streams
A pray to other Reames?
Draw back thy waters floe
To thy concealed head:
Rocks strangle up thy waives,
Stop Cataracts thy fall.
And turn thy courses so,
That sandy Deserts dead,
(The world of dust that craves
To swallow thee up all,)
May drink so much as shall
Revive from vast graves
A living greene, which spread
Far florshing, may gro
On that wide face of Death.
Where nothing now draws breath.
Fatten somepeople there,
Even as thou vs hast done,
With plenties wanton store,
And feeble luxury:
And them as vs prepare
Fit for the day of moan
Respected not before.
Leave leuell'd Egipt dry,
A barren pray to lye,
Wasted for euer-more.
Of plenties yielding none
To recompense the care
Of Victors greedy lust,
And bring forth nought but dust.
And so O leave to bee,
Sith thou art what thou art:
Let not our race possess
Th'inheritance of shame,
The see of sin, that wee
Have left them for their part:
The yoke of whose distress
Must still upbraid our blame,
Telling from whom it came.
Our weight of wantonness,
Lies heavy on their hart,
Who neuer-more shall see
The glory of that worth
They left who brought vs forth.
O thou all seeing light,
High President of heaven,
You Magistrates the stars
Of that eternal court
Of Providence and Right,
Are these the bounds you've given
Th'vntr anspassable bars,
That limit pride so short,
Is greatness of this sort,
That greatness greatness mars,
And wrecks it self, self driven
On Rocks of her own might?
Doth Order order so
Disorders ouer-thro?

BOy, give me the Master Key of all the doors.
To Bed again, and leave me to my self.
Is Richard come? have four Electors
sworn
To make him Kaiser in despite of me?
Why then Alphonsus it is time to wake.
No Englishman, thou art too hot at hand,
Too shallow brained to undermine my throne;
The Spanish Sun hath purified my wit,
And dried up all gross humours in my head,
That I am sighted as the King of Birds,
And can discern thy deepest Street gems.
I am the lawful German Emperor,
Chosen, enstall'd, by general consent;
And they may term me Tyrant as they please,
I will be King, and Tyrant if I please;
For what is Empire but a Tyranny?
And none but children use it otherwise.
Of seven Electors, four are fallen away,
The other three I dare not greatly trust;
My Wife is Sister to mine enemy,
And therefore wisely to be dealt withal;
But why do I except in special,
When this position must be general,
That no man living must be credited,
Further than tends unto thy proper good.
But to the purpose of my silent walk;
Within this Chamber lies my Secretary,
Lorenzo de Cypress, in whose learned brain
Is all the compass of the world contained;
And as the ignorant and simple age
Of our forefathers, blinded in their zeal,
Received dark answers from Appollo's shrine,
And honoured him as Patron of their bliss;
So I, not muffled in simplicity,
Zealous indeed of nothing but my good,
Hast to the Augur of my happiness,
To lay the ground of my ensuing Wars.
He learns his wisdom, not by flight of Birds,
By prying into sacrificed beasts,
By Hares that cross the way, by howling Wolves,
By gazing on the Starry Element,
Or vain imaginary calculations;
But from a settled wisdom in it self
Which teaches to be void of passion.
To be Religious as the ravenous Wolf,
Who loves the Lamb for hunger, and for prey;
To threaten our inferiors with our looks;
To flatter our Superiors at our need;
To be an outward Saint, an inward Devil;
These are the lectures that my Master reads.
This Key commands all Chambers in the Court;
Now on a sudden will I try his wit,
I know my coming is unlooked for.
Nay sleep, Lorenzo, I will walk a while.
As nature in the framing of the world,
Ordained there should be nihil vacuum;
Even so me thinks his wisdom should contrive,
That all his Study should be full of wit,
And every corner stuffed with sentences?
What's this? Plato? Aristotle? tush these are ordinary,
It seems this is a note but newly written.
Una arbusta non alit duos Erithicos; which being granted,
the Roman Empire will not sufice Alphonsus King of Castle,
and Richard Earl of Cornwall his competitor; thy wisdom teacheth
thee to cleave to the strongest; Alphonsus is in possession,
and therefore the strongest, but he is in hatred with the Eelctors,
and men rather honour the Sunrising than the Sun going
down. I marry this is argued like himself, and now me thinks
he wakes.
What are there thieves within the Emperor's Court?
Villain thou dy'st; what make thou in my Chamber?
How now Lorenzo, wilt thou slay thy Lord?
I do beseech your sacred Majesty to pardon me,
I did not know your grace.
Lie down Lorenzo, I will sit by thee,
 is sharp and pircing; tremble not,
Had it been any other but our self,
He must have been a villain and a thief.
Alas my Lord! what means your excellence,
To walk by night in these so dangerous times?
Have I not reason now to walk and watch,
When I am compassed with so many foes?
They war, they watch, they cast, and they conspire
To win confederate Princes to their aid,
And batter down the Eagle from my creast.
O, my Lorenzo, if thou help me not,
The Imperial Crown is shaken from my head,
And given from me unto an English Earl.
Thou know how all things stand as well as we,
Who are our enemies, and who our friends,
Who must be threatened, and who dallied with,
Who won by words, and who by force of arms;
For all the honour I have done to thee.
Now speak, and speak to purpose in the cause;
Nay rest thy body, labour with thy brain,
And of thy words my self will be the scribe.
Why then my Lord, take Paper, Pen and Ink
Write first this maxim, it shall do you good.
1. A Prince must be of the nature of the Lion and the
Fox; but not the one without the other.
The Fox is subtle, but he wants force;
The Lion strong but scorns policy;
I'll imitate Lysander in this point,
And where the Lion's hide is thin and scant,
I'll firmly patch it with the Foxes fell.
Let it suffice I can be both in one.
2. A Prince above all things must seem devou;
but there is nothing so dangerous to his state, as to regard
his promise or his oath.
Tush, fear not me, my promise; are sound,
But he that trusts them shall be sure to fail.
Nay my god Lord, but that I know your Majesty,
To be a ready uckwitted Scholar,
I would bestow a comment on the text.
3. Trust not a reconciled friend; for good turns cannot
blot out old grudges.
Then must I watch the Palatine of the Rhein,
I cause his Father to be put to death.
Your Highness hath as little cause to trust
The dangerous mighty Duke of Saxony;
You know, you sought to banish him the Land;
And as for Cullen, was not he the first
That sent for Richard into Germany?
What's thy opinion of the other four?
That Bohemie neither cares for one nor other,
But hopes this deadly strife btween you twain,
Will cast the Imperial Crown upon his head.
For Trier and Brandenberg, I think of them
As simple men that wish the common good;
And as for Mints I need not censure him,
Richard hath chained him in a golden bond,
And saved his life from ignominious death.
Let it suffice, Lorenzo, that I know,
When Churfurst Mints was taken Prisoner,
By young victorious Otho Duke of Brunschweige
That Richard Earl of Cornwall did disburse
The ransom of a King, a million,
To save his life, and rid him out of bands,
That su of gold did fill the Brunschweige bags;
But since my self have rained a golden shower.
Of right Hungeran  and Crewadoes,
Into te private Coffers of the Bishop,
The English Agel  thir  and ;
My crosses bess his Coffers and pead for me,
 Voice is mine, bought with ten un of Gold,
And at the meeting o the seven Eactors,
His Princely doube-dealing holiness
Will spoil the English Emperu of op.
But I rfer these matter to the sequel.
Proceed Lorenzo forward to the next.
I'm glad your grace hath dealt so cunningly,
With that victorious fckle mided Prelae; for in election
his voice is first but to the next.
4. It is more saftie for a Prince to be feared than loved.
Love is an humur pleases him that loves;
Let me be hated, so I please my sef.
Love is an humour mild and changeable;
But fear er graves a reverence in the heart.
5. To keep an usurped Crown, a Prince must
swear, forswear, poison, murder, and commit all kind of vilelanes,
provided it be cunningly kept from the eye of the
world.
But my Lorenzo that's the hardest point,
It is not for a Prince to excute,
Physicians and Apotecaries must know,
And servee fare or Counsel-reeking bribes,
Wl from a Peasant in an hour extort
Enough to overthrow a Monarchy.
Therefore my Lord set down this sixth and last
Article.
6. Be always jealous of him that knows your secrets,
And therefore it behooves you credit few;
And when yu grow into the least suspect.
With silent cunning must you cut them off.
As for example, Iulio Lentulus,
A most renowned Neapolitan,
Gave me this Box of poison, t'was not long
But therewithal I sent him to his grave.
And what's the special virtue of the same?
That it is twenty dis before it works.
But what is this?
This an infection that kills suddenly;
This but a toy to cat a man asleep.
How? binge drunk?
No, being smet unto.
Then smell Lorenzo, I did break thy sleep;
And for this time, this lecture shall suffice.
What have you done my Lord? you've made
me afe,
For stirring hence these four and twenty hours.
I see this charms his senses suddenly.
How now Lorenzo, half asleep already?
Aeneas Pilot by the God of dreams,
Was never lul'd into a sound trace;
And now Alphonsus over-read thy notes.
These are already at my fingers ends,
And lest the world should find this little Schedule,
Thus will I rend the text and after this,
On my behaviour set so fair a gloss,
That men shall take me for a Convertite;
But some may think, I should forget my part,
And have been over rash in renting it,
To pnt them out of doubt I study sure,
I'll make a backward repetition,
In being jealous of my Counsel keepers,
This is the poison that kills suddenly,
So did thou unto Iulius Lentulus,
And blood with blood must be requited thus.
Now am I afe, and no man knows my Counsels,
Churfurst of Mints, if now thou play thy part,
Ening thy gold with cunning workmanship,
Upon the Bemish Kings ambition,
Richard shall shamefully fail of his hope,
And I with triumph keep my Empery.
Churfursts and Princes of the Election,
Since by the adverse fortune of our age,
The sacred and Impetial Majesty
Hath been usurped by open Tyranny,
We the seven Pillars of the German Empire,
To whom successively it doth belong
To make election of our Emperors,
Are here assembled to unite a new
Unto her former strength and glorious type,
Our half declining Roman Monarchy,
And in that hope, I Henry King of Bohem,
Churfurst and Sewer to the Emperor,
Do take my seat next to the sacred throne.
Next seat belongs to Iulius Florius
Archbishop of Mints, Chancellor of Germany,
By birth the Duke of fruitful Pomerland.
The next place in election longs to me,
George Cassimirus Palsgrave of the Rhein,
His Highness Taster, and upon my knee
I vow a pure sincere innated zeal
Unto my Country, and no wrested hate,
Or private love shall blind mine intellect.
Brave Duke of Saxon, Dutchlands greatest hope,
Sir now or never, let the Spanish tyrant,
That hath dishonoured us, murdered our Friends,
And stained this seat with blood of innocents,
At last be chastised with the Saxon sword,
And may Albertus Archbishop of Collen,
Chancelore of Galley and the fourth Elector;
Be thought unworthy of his place and birth,
But he assist thee to his utmost power.
Wisdom not word, must be the sovereign salve,
To search and heal these grievous festered wounds,
And in that hope Augustus Duke of Saxon,
Arch-Marshall to the Emperor take my place.
The like doth Frederick Arch-Bishop of Trier,
Duke of Lorraine, Chancellor of Italy.
The seventh and last is Ioachim Carolus,
Marquess of Brandenburg, overworn with age,
Whose Office is to be the Treasurer;
But Wars have made the Coffers like the Chair.
Peace brings plenty, Wars bring poverty;
Grant Heyens, this meeting may be to effect,
Establish Peace, and cut off Tyranny.
Pardon my bold intrusion mighty Churursts,
And let my words pierce deeply in your hearts.
O! I beseech you on my beded Knees,
I the poor miserable Empress,
A stranger in this Land, unu'd to broils,
Wife to the one, and Sister to the other
That are Compettors for Sovereignty;
All that I pray, is, make a quiet end;
Make Peace btween my Hueband and my Brother.
O think how grief doth stand on either side,
If either party chance to be miss;
My Husband is my Husband; but my Brother,
My heart doth melt to think he should micarry.
My Brother is my Brother; but my Husband,
O how my jonts do shake feaing his wrong!
If both should dye in these uncertain broils.
O me, why do I live to think upon it!
Bear with my interrupted speeches Lords,
Tears stop my voice, your wisdoms know my meaning
Alas I know my Brother Richard's heart
Affects not Empire, he would rather choose
To make return again to Palestine,
And be a scourge unto the Infidels;
As for my Lord, he is impatient,
The more my grief, the lesser is my hope,
Yet Princes thus he sends you word by me,
He will submit himself to your award,
And labour to amend what is amiss.
All I hve said, or can device to say,
Is few words of great worth, Make unity
Madam, that we have suffe'd you to kneel so long,
Agrees not with your dignity nor ours;
Thus we excuse it, when we once are set,
In solemn Council of Election,
We may not rise till somewhat be concluded.
So much for that ouching your earnest sure,
Your Majesty doth know how it concern us,
Comfort your self, as we do hope the best;
But tell us, Madam, wher's your Husband now?
I left him at his prayers, good my Lord.
At prayers? Madam, that's a miracle.
Undoubtedly your Highness did mistake;
It was sure some Book of Conjuration;
I think he never said prayer in his life.
Ah me, my fear, I fear, will take effect;
Your ate to him, and love unto my Brother,
Will break my heart, and spoil the Imperial peace.
My Lord of Saxon, and Prince Pallatine,
This hard opinion yet is more than needs;
But, gracious Madam, leave us to our selves.
I go, and Heaven that holds the Hearts of Kings,
Direct your Counsels unto unity.
Now to the depth of that we have in hand;
This is the question, whether the King of Spain
Shall still continue in the Royal throne,
Or yield it up unto Plantagenet,
Or we proceed unto a third Eelection.
Ever such a viperous blood-thirsty Spaniard
Shall suck the hearts of our Nobility,
The Imperial Sword which Saxony doth bear,
Shall be unsheathed to War against the world.
My hate is more than words can testify,
Slave as he is he murdered my Father.
Prince Richard is the Champion of the world,
Learned, and mild, fit for the Government.
And what have we to do with Englishmen?
They are divided from our Continent.
But now that we may orderly proceed
To our high Office of Election,
To you my Lord of Mints it doth belong,
Having first voice in this Imperial Synod,
To name a worthy man for Emperor.
It may be thought, most grave and reverend Princes,
That in respect of divers sums of gold,
Which Richard of mere charitable love,
Not as a bribe, but as a deed of Alms,
Disbursed for me unto the Duke of Brunschweige,
That I dare name no other man but he,
Or should I nominate an other Prince,
Upon the contrary I may be thought
A most ungrateful wretch unto my Friend;
But private cause must yield to public good;
Therefore me thinks it were the fittest course,
To choose the worthiest upon this Bench.
We are all Germans, why should we be yoked
Either by Englishmen or Spaniards?
The Earl of Cornwall by a full consent
Was sent for out of England.
Though he were,
Our later thoughts are purer than our first,
And to conclude, I think this end were best,
Since we have once chosen him Emperor,
That some great Prince of wisdom and of power,
Whose countenance may overbear his pride,
Be joined in equal Government with Alphonsus.
Your Holiness hath soundly in few words
Set down a mean to quiet all these broils.
So may we hope for peace if he amend;
But shall Prince Richard then be joined with him?
Why should your Highness ask that question?
As if a Prince of so high Kingly Birth,
Would live in couples with so base a Cur?
Prince Pallatine, such words do ill become thee.
He said but right, and called Dog a Dog.
His Birth is Princely.
His manners villainous,
And virtuous Richard scorns so base a yoke.
My Lord of Saxon, give me leave to tell you
Ambition blinds your judgement in this case;
You hope, if by your means Richard be Emperor,
He, in requital of so great advancement,
Will make the long-desired Marriage up
Between the Prince of England and your Sister,
And to that end Edward the Prince of Wales,
Hath born his Uncle Company to Germany.
Why King of Bohem i'st unknown to thee,
How oft the Saxons Sons have married Queens,
And Daughters Kings, yea mightiest Emperors?
If Edward like her beauty and behaviour,
He'll make no question of her Princely Birth;
But let that pass, I say, as erst I said,
That virtuous Richard scorns so base a yoke.
If Richard scorn, some one upon this Bench,
Whose power may overbear Alphonsus pride,
Is to be named. What think you my Lords?
I think it was a mighty mass of Gold,
That made your grace of this opinion.
My Lord of Saxony, you wrong me much,
And know I highly scorn to take a bribe.
I think you scorn indeed to have it known:
But to the purpose, if it must be so,
Who is the fittest man to join with him?
First with an Ox to plough will I be yoked.
The fittest is your grace in mine opinion.
I am content, to stay these mutinies,
To take upon me what you do impose.
Why here's a tempest quickly overblown.
God give you joy my Lord of half the Empire;
For me I will not meddle in the matter,
But warn your Majesty to have a care,
And vigilant respect unto your person,
I'll hie me home to fortify my Towns,
Not to ofend, but to defend my self.
Have with you Cousin, and adieu my Lords,
I am afraid this sudden knitted Peace,
Will turn unto a tedious lasting War;
Only thus much we do request you all,
Deal honourably with the Earl of Cornwall,
And so adieu.
I like not this strange Farewell of the Dukes.
In all elections some are malcontent.
It doth concern us now with speed to know,
How the Competitors will like of this,
And therefore you my Lord Archbishop of Trier,
Impart this order of arbitrament
Unto the Emperor bid him be content,
To stand content with half, or lose the whole.
My Lord of Mints go you unto Prince Richard,
And tell him flatly here's no Crown, nor Empire
For English Islanders; tell him, it were his best,
To hie him home to help the King his Brother,
Against the Earl of Leicester and the Barons.
My Lord of Mints, sweet words will qualify,
When bitter terms will add unto his rage.
It is no small hope that hath deceived the Duke;
Therefore be mild; I know an Englishman,
Being flattered, is a Lamb, threatened, a Lion;
Tell him his charges what so ever they are
Shall be repaid with treble vantages;
Do this; we will expect their resolutions.
Brother of Collen, I entreat your grace
To take this charge upon you in my stead;
For why I shame to look him in the face.
Your Holiness shall pardon me in this,
Had I the profit I would take the pains;
With shame enough your Grace may bring the message.
Thus am I wronged, God knows, unguiltily.
Then arm your countenance with innocence,
And boldly do the message to the Prince;
For no man else will be the messenger.
Why then I must, since ther's no remedy.
If Heaven that guides the hearts of
mighty men
Do calm the Winds of these great Potentates,
And make them like of this Arbitrament,
Sweet Peace will triumph thorough Christendom,
And Germany shall bless this happy day.
O me most miserable O my dear Father!
What means this passionate accent? what art thou
That sounds these acclamations in our ears?
Pardon me Princes, I have lost a Father,
O me, the name of Father kills my heart.
O! I shall never see my Father more,
He has tan his leave of me for age and age.
What was thy Father?
Ah me I what was a not?
Noble, Rich, valiant, well-belov'd of all,
The glory and the wisdom of his age,
Chief Secretary to the Emperor.
Lorenzo de Toledo, is he dead?
Dead, ay me dead, ay me my life is dead,
Strangely this night bereft of breath and sense,
And I, poor I, am comforted in nothing,
But that the Emperor laments with me,
As I exclame, so he, he rings his hands,
And makes me mad to see his Majesty
Excruciate himself with endless sorrow.
The happiest news that ever I did hear;
Thy Father was a villain murderer,
Witty, not wise, loved like a Scorpion,
Grown rich by the impoverishing of others,
The chiefest cause of all these mutinies,
And Caesar's tutor to all villaie.
None but an open liar terms him so.
What Boy, so malapert?
Good Collen bear with him, it was his Father,
Dutch-land is blessed in Lorenzo's Death.
Did never live a viler minded man.
Nor King, nor Churfurst should be privileged
To call me Boy, and rayl upon my Father,
Were I wehrsafflig; but in Germany,
A man must be a Boy at 40. years,
And dares not draw his weapon at a Dog,
Till being soundly boxed about the ears,
His Lord and Master gird him with a sword;
The time will come I shall be made a man,
Till then I'll pine with thought of dire revenge,
And live in Hell until I take revenge.
Behold here come the Princes hand in hand,
Pleased highly with the sentence as it seems.
Princes and Pillars of the Monarchy,
We do admire your wisdoms in this cause,
And do accept the King of Bohemia,
As worthy partner in the Government.
Alas my Lords, I flatly now confess,
I was alone too weak to underprop
So great a burden as the Roman Empire,
And hope to make you all admire the course
That we intend in this conjunction.
That I was called from England with consent
Of all the seven Electors to this place,
Your selves best know, who wrote for me to come.
It was no ambition moved me to the journey,
But pity of your half declining State;
Which being likely now to be repaired,
By the united force of these two Kings,
I rest content to see you satisfied.
Brave Earl, wonder of Princely patience,
I hope your grace will not mis-think of me,
Who for your good, and for the Empires best,
Bethought this means to set the world at Peace.
No doubt this means might have been thought upon,
Although your Holiness had died in Prison.
Peace, peace young Prince, you want experience;
Your Uncle knows what cares accompany,
And wait upon the Crowns of mightiest Kings,
And glad he is that he hath shook it off.
Hark in your ear my Lord, hear me one word,
Although it were more than a million,
Which these two Kings bestowed upon your grace,
Mine Uncle Richards million saved your life.
Youwere best to say, your Uncle bribed me
then.
I do but say mine Uncle saved your life,
You know Count Mansfield your fellow Prisoner,
Was by the Duke of Brunschwig put to death.
You are a Child my Lord, your words are wind.
You are a Fox my Lord, and past a Child.
My Lord of Cornwall, your great forwardness,
Crossing the Seas with aid of Englishmen,
Is more than we can any way requite;
But this your admirable patience,
In being pleased with our election,
Deserves far more than thanks can satisfy,
In any thing command the Emperors,
Who live to honour Richard Earl of Cornwall.
Our deeds shall make our Protestations good,
Mean while, brave Princes, let us leave this place,
And solace us with joy of this accord.
To gratulate this unexpected Peace,
This glorious league confirmed against all hope,
Joyful Isabella doth present this show,
Of Fortunes triumph, as the custom is
At Coronation of our Emperors;
If therefore every party be well pleased,
And stand content with this arbitrament,
Then deign to do as your Progenitos,
And draw in sequence Lots for Offices.
This is an order here in Germany,
For Princes to disport themselves with all,
In sign their hearts so firmly are conjoined,
That they will bear all fortunes equally,
And that the world may know I scorn no state,
Or course of life to do the Empire good,
I take my chance: My Fortune is to be the Forester,
If we want Venson either red or fallow,
Wild bore or bear, you must be fined my Lord.
The Emperor's Taster I.
Your Majesty hath been tasted to so oft,
That you have need of small instructions.
I am the bower, Sister what is my charge?
Tired like a Carter, and a Clownish Bower,
To bring a load of Wood into the Kitchen.
Now for my self, Faith I am Chamber Maid,
I know my charge; proceed unto the next.
Prince Edward stands melancholy still,
Please it your Grace, my Lord, to draw your lot.
Nephew you must be solemn with the sad,
And given to mirth in sportful Company,
The German Princes when they will be lusty,
Shake of all cares, and Clowns and they are Fellows.
Sweet Aunt, I do not know the Country guise,
Yet would be glad to learn all fashions.
Since I am next, good Fortune be my guide.
A most ingenuous countenance hath this Prince,
Worthy to be the King of England's Heir.
Be it no disparagement to you my Lords,
I am your Emperor.
Sound trumpets, God save the Emperor.
The world could never worse have fitted me,
I am not old enough to be the Cook.
If you be Cook, there is no remedy
But you must dress one Mess of meat you self.
I am Physician.
I am Secretary.
I am the Jester.
O excellent! is your Holiness the Vice?
Fortune hath fitted you y'faith my Lord,
You'll play the Ambodexter cunningly.
Your Highness is to bitter in your Jests.
Come hither Alexander, to comfort thee,
After the death of thy beloved Father,
Whose life was deer unto his Emperor,
Thou shalt make one in this solemnity,
Yet ever thou draw, my self will honour thee,
And as the custom is make thee a man.
Stand stiff Sir Boy, now come thou to thy trial;
Take this, and that, and therewithal this Sword;
If while thou live, thou ever take the like,
Of me, or any man, I here pronounce
Thou art a schelm, otherwise a man.
Now draw thy lot, and Fortune be thy speed.
Uncle I pray why did be box the fellow?
Foul lubber as he is, to take such blows.
Thus do the Princes make their Pages men.
But that is strange to make a man with blows.
We say in England that he is a man,
That like a man dare meet his enemy,
And in my judgement it is the sounder trial.
Fortune hath made me Marshall of the triumphs.
Now what remains?
That Fortune draw her lot.
Sound trumpets, Fortune is your Empress.
This happens right: for Fortune will be Queen.
Now Emperor you must unmask her face,
And tell us how you like your Empress,
In my opinion England breeds no fairer.
Fair Hedewick the Duke of Saxons daughter,
Young Prince of England, you are bravely mach'd.
Tell me sweet Aunt, is that this Saxon Princess,
Whose beauties fame made Edward cross the Seas?
Nephew, it is; hath fame been prodigy,
Or over sparing in the Princess praie?
Fame I accuse thee, thou did niggardize,
And faintly sound my loves perfections.
Great Lady Fortune, and fair Empress,
Whom chance this day hath thrown into my arms,
More welcome than the Roman Empress.
See doth, dass first hier keen gebranch,
Mean Gt first dass dir Englisch manier, dass dich.
What means this? why chafes my Empress?
Now by my troth, I did expect this jest,
Prince Edward used his Country fashion.
I am an Englishman, why should I not?
Fie Nephew Edward, here in Germany
To kiss a Maid, a fault intolerable.
Why should not German Maids be kissed as well
as others?
Nephew, because you did not know the fashion,
And want the language to excuse you self,
I'll be your spokes-man to your Empress.
Excuse it thus: I like the first so well,
That tell her, she shall chide me twice as much
For such an other; nay tell her more than so,
I'll double kiss on kiss, and give her leave
To chide and brawl, and cry ten thousand dass dich,
And make her weary of her fretting humour,
Ever I be weary of my kissing vein,
Dass dich a Iungfraw angry for a kiss.
Nephew, she thinks you mock her in her mirth.
I think the Princes make a scorn of me.
If any do, I'll prove it with my Sword,
That English Courtship leaves it from the world.
The pleasant'st accident that I have seen.
Me thinks the Prince is chafed as well as she.
Gnediges rawlin.
Dass dich, mstich arm kindt n schanden 
warden.
Dass dich I have kissed as good as you,
Pray Uncle tell her; if she mislike the kiss,
I'll take it off again with such an other.
Ey Lirbes frawlin nim es all fur gut
Es first die Englisch manier Not gebrauche.
Ewer gnaden waists woll es first mir ein gross
schande.
Good Aunt teach me so much Dutch to ask her pardon.
Say so: Gnediges frawlin vergebet mirs, each wills
kermehr thuen,
Then kiss your hand three times psy Dutch.
Each wills  thuen, if I understand it, right,
That's as much to say, as I'll do so no more.
True Nephew.
Nay Aunt pardon me I pray, I hope to kiss her
many thousand times,
And shall I go to her like a great Boy, and say I'll do so no
more.
I pray Cousin say as I tell you.
Gnediges frawlin vergebet mirss each wills nimmermehr
thuen.
For wahr keen schandt.
Gnediger hochgeborner First vndt herr
Wan each konte so vile englisch sprechen each wolt ewer
Gnaden.
Fur wahr ein felts geben, each hoffe aber each soll emahl
So viel lernen dass Die mesh verstrhen soll.
What says she?
O excellent young Prince look to your self,
She swears she'll learn some English for your sake,
To make you understand her when she chides.
I'll teach her English, she shall teach me Dutch,
Gnediges frawlin, &amp;c.
It is great pity that the Duke of Saxon,
Is absent at this joyful accident,
I see no reason if his Grace were here,
But that the Marriage might be solemnised,
I think the Prince of Wales were well content.
I left sweet England to none other end;
And though the Prince her Father be not here,
This Royal presence knows his mind in this.
Since you do come so roundly to the purpose,
It is time for me to speak, the Maid is mine,
Given freely by her Father unto me,
And to the end these broils may have an end,
I give the Father's interest and mine own,
Unto my Nephew Edward Prince of Wales.
A Jewel of incomparable price,
Your Majesty hath here bestowed on me,
How shall I ask her if she be content?
Say thus, first ewer gnaden woll hiemit zufrieden.
First ewer Gnaden woll hiemit zufrieden.
Was ihr durleichtigkeit dass will dass will mean
vattter vndt
Was mean vatter will darmit muss each zufrieden sein.
It is enough, she doth confirm the match;
We will dispatch a Post unto her Father,
On Sunday shall the Revels and the Wedding,
Be both solemnised with mutual joy.
Sound trumpets, each one look unto his charge,
For preparation of the Festivals.
Come hither Alexander, thy Fathers joy.
If tears and sighs, and deep-fetcht deadly groans,
Could serve to evert inexorable fate,
Divine Lorenzo, whom in life my heart,
In death my soul and better part adores,
Had to thy comfort and his Prince's honour,
Survived, and drawn this day this breath of life.
Dread Caesar, prostrate on my bended Knee,
I thank your Majesty for all favours shown
To my deceased Father and my self.
I must confess, I spend but bootless tears,
Yet cannot bridle nature, I must weep,
Or heart wil break with burden of my thoughts,
Nor am I yet so young or fond withal,
Causeless to spend my gall, and fret my heart,
It is not that he is dead, for all must dye;
But that I live to hear his lives reproach.
O sacred Emperor, these ears have heard,
What no Sons ears can unrevenged hear,
The Princes all of them, but specially,
The Prince Elector Archbishop of Collen,
Reviled him by the names of murderer,
Arch villain, robber of the Empires fame,
And Caesars tutor in all wickedness,
And with a general voice applaus'd his death,
As for a special good to Christendom.
Have they not reason to appand the deed
Which they themselves have potted? ah my Boy,
Thou art too young to dive into their drifts.
Yet old enough I hope to be revenged.
What wilt thou do, or whither wilt thou run?
Headlong to bring them death, then dye my self.
First hear the reason why I do mistrust them.
They had no reason for my Father's death,
And I scorn reason till they all be dead.
Thou wilt not scorn my Counsel in revenge?
My rage admits no Counsel but revenge.
First let me tell thee whom I do mistrust.
Your Highness said you did mistrust them all.
Yea Alexander, all of them, and more than all,
 most especial nearest dearest friends.
All 's one to me, for know thou Emperor,
Were it thy Father, Brother, or thine Empress,
Yea were 't thy self, that did conspire his death,
This fatal hand should take away thy life.
Spoke like a Son, worthy so dear a Father.
Be still and hearken, I will tell thee all,
The Duke of Saxon
O, I thought no less.
Suppress thy choler, hearken to the rest.
Saxon I say so wrought with flattering Mints,
Mints with Bohemia, Trier, and Brandenburg,
For Collen and the Palsgrave of the Rhein
Were principals with Saxon in the Plot,
That in a general meeting to that purpose,
The seven selected Emperors electors,
Most heinously concluded of the murder;
The reason why they doomed him unto death,
Was his deep wisdom and sound policy;
Knowing while he did live my state was firm,
He being dead my hope must dye with him.
Now Alexander will we be revenged
Upon this wicked whore of Babylon,
This hideous monster with the seven-fold head:
We must with cunning level at the heart,
With pierced and perished all the body dyes:
Or strike we off her heads by one and one,
Behooveth us to use dexterity,
Lest she do trample us under her feet,
And triumph in our honours overthrow.
Mad and amalt to hear this tragicdoom,
I do subscribe unto your sound advice.
Then hear the rest; these even dave but  ten
A nearer hand put it in execution,
And but I loved Lorenzo as my life,
I never would beray my dearest Wife.
What? what the Empress accessory to?
What cannot kindred do? her Brother Richard,
Hoping thereby to be an Emperor,
Gave her a dram that sent him to his grave.
O my poor Father, were thou such an eye-sore,
That 9. the greatest Princes of the earth
Must be coniterate in thy tragedy?
But why do I respect their mightiness,
Who did not once respect my Fathers life?
Your Majesty may take it as you yleae,
I'll be revenged upon your Empress,
On English Richard, Saxon, and the Palsgrave,
On Bohem, Collen, Mints, Trier, and Brandenburg,
If that the Pope of Rome himself were one
In this confederacy, undaunted I.
Amidst the College of his Cardinals,
Would press, and stab him in St. Peters chair,
Though clad in all his Pontificalibus.
Why Alexander? dost thou speak to me
As if thou did mistrust my forwardness?
No, thou shalt know my love to him was such,
And in my heart I have prosrib'd them all,
That had to do in this conspiracy.
The bands of Wedlock shall not serve her turn,
Her fatal lot is cast among the rest,
And to conclude, my soul doth live in Hell
Till I have set my foot upon their necks,
That gave this spur of sorrow to my heart;
But with advice it must be managed,
Not with a head-long rage as thou intend,
Nor in a moment can it be performed,
This work requires long time, dissembling looks,
Comixed with undermining actions,
Watching advantages to execute.
Our foes are mighty, and their number great,
It therefore follows that our Strangems
Must branch forth into manifold deceits,
Endless devices, bottomless conclusions.
What by your Majesty is prescribed to me,
That will I execute or dye the death.
I am content to suck my sorrows up,
And with dull patience will attend the time,
Gaping for every opportunity
That may present the least occasion;
Although each minute multiply mine anguish,
And to my view present a thousand forms
Of senseless bodies in my Fathers shape,
Yelling with open throat for just revenge.
Content thy self, he shall not cry in vain,
I have already plotted Richards death.
That hath my Fathers sacred Ghost inspired,
O tell me, shall I stab him suddenly?
The time seems long, till I be set a work.
Thou know in griping at our lots to day,
It was Prince Richard's hap to be the bower;
So that his Office is to drive the Cart,
And bring a load of Wood into the Kitchen.
O excellent, your Grace being Forester,
As in the thicket he doth load the Cart,
May shoot him dead, as if he were a Deer.
No Alexander, that device were shallow,
Thus it must be, there are two very ours
Appointed for to help him in the Wood,
These must be bribed or cunningly seduced,
Instead of helping him to murder him.
Verbum satis sapient, it is enough,
Fortune hath made me Marshal of the sports
I hope to Marshal them to the Devils Feast.
Plot you the rest, this will I execute,
Dutch bowrs as towsandt schelms and gold to tempt them.
It is right, about it then, but cunningly.
Else let me lose that good opinion
Which by your Highness I desire to hold,
By Letters which I'll strew within the Wood,
I'll undermine the bowrs to murder him,
Nor shall they know who set them so a work,
Like a familiar will I fly about,
And nimbly haunt their Ghosts in every nook.
This one nayl helps to drive the other out,
I slew the Father, and bewitch the Son,
With power of words to be the instrument
To rid my foes with danger of his life.
How easily can subtle age entice,
Such credulous young novices to their death?
Huge wonders will Alphonsus bring to pass,
By the mad mind of this enraged Boy;
Even they which think themselves my greatest friends,
Shall fall by this deceit, yea my Arch-enemies
Shall turn to be my chief confederates.
My solitary walks may breed suspect,
I'll therefore give my self to Company,
As I intended nothing out these sports,
Yet hope to end most actors in this Pageant,
To Revel it with Rhadamant in Hell.
How far is Richard now unlike the man
The crossed the Seas to win an Empery?
But as I plod it like a plumper Bower,
To fetch in Fuel for the Kitchen fire,
So every one in his vocation,
Labours to make the pastimes plausible;
My Nephew Edward jets it through the Court,
With Princess Hedewick Empress of his Fortune,
The demi Caesar in his hunters suit,
Makes all the Court to Ring with Horns and Hounds,
Collen the Cook bestirs him in the Kitchen;
But that which joys me most in all these sports,
Is Mints, to see how he is made an Ass?
The common scorn and by-word of the Court;
And every one to be the same he seems,
Seems to forget to be the same he is.
Yet to my robes I cannot suit my mind,
Nor with my habit shake dishonour off
The seven Electors promised me the Empire,
The perjured Bishop Mints did swear no less,
Yet I have seen it shared before my face,
While my best friends do hide their heads for shame;
I bear a show of outward full content,
But grief thereof hath almost killed my heart.
Here rest thee Richard, think upon a mean,
To end thy life, or to repair thine honour,
And vow never to see fair Englands bounds,
Till thou in Aix be Crowned Emperor.
Holla, me thinks there comes Company,
The Bowrs I trow that come to hew the Wood,
Which I must carry to the Kitchen Fire,
I'll lye a while and listen to their talk.
Kom hier hans wore best dow, warumb best dow so
trawrck? bess frolic kahn well gilt verdienen, wir will ihn
bay pots tawsandt todt schlagen.
Lat mesh die brieffe sehen.
Me thinks they talk of murdering some body, I'll
listen more.
Hans vnd Ierick, mean liebe friend, each bit lassoed es bay
ouch bleiben in geheim, vnd schlaget den Engellander zu
todt.
What's that? Hans vnd Ierick my good friend, I
pray be secret and murder the Englishman.
Hear waiter, den er first keen bower nicht, er first ein Iuncker,
vnd hat viel gilt vnd kleinothen bay such.
For he is no Bower but a Gentleman, and hath store
of Gold and Jwels by him.
Nosh waiter: ihr solt solche gelegenheit nicht versahmen
vnd  ihr gethan habit, each will ouch sagen, was
each fur ein gutter Rarl bin der ouch raht gegeben habe.
Sip not this opportunity, and when you have done,
I will discover who gave you the Counsel.
Wat sagst dow wilt dow es thun?
Wat will each nich few gilt thun? see pots tausendt,
dar first er.
In, bay pots tausends slapperment, er ists, holla
gutter morgan, gluck zu Iuncker.
Iuncker, der devil he is ein bower!
Dow best ein schelm, weich von mir.
Holla, holla, best dow so hoffertick? Iuncker
bower, kompt hier, oder dieser vnd inner selleuch holen.
Each bien ein First, bried mesh nicht ihr schelms, ihr
verrahters.
Sla to, fla to, wir will you furstlick tractieren.
Richard having nothing in his hand but his whip, defends
himself a while, and then fall's down as if he were dead:
O Got, nimb meine seele in deign haude.
O excellent, hurtick he is todt, he is todt.
Lat uncle see wat he hat for gilt bay such, holla hier is all
enough all sat, dor is for dich, and dor is for mesh, vnd ditt
:
How so Hans Narhals, give mir die kette hier.
In ein dreck, dit kett stehet hupsch vmb mean halls,
ditt will each tragen.
Dat dich pots velten leiden, dat soltu nimmerr
thu dow schelm.
Wat solt dow mesh schelm heitn imb dat.
Dat each hundred tonnen devils, harr each will dich
.
Wiltud hawen oder stechen?
Each will redlich hawen;
Nun woollen, dor first mean rusk, sla to.
Nimb dow das, vnd dar hast mean rusk.
Nach amahl: O excellent, ligst dow dar, un ill
each alles haben, gilt vnd kett, vnd alle mit einander, O hertig,
frisch-vp lustig, nun bin each ein hurtig Iuncker.
N Hercules country duos, yet policy hath gone beyond
them both.
Du hudler schelm, mortar, ehre dich, feestu mesh? gebe
mir die kett vnd gilt weeder;
Wat bistu weeder labendig worden, so mus each
moron, wat wiltu stechen oder hawen?
So will each machine du schelm
Harr, harr, bistu ein redch kettle, so light redlich,
O each sterb, each sterb, lat mesh leben!
Sagt mir dan were hat die brieffe geschrieben?
Lie nicht sondern sagt die warheit:
O mean fromer, gutter, idler, gestrenger Icker,
dar first dat gilt vnd kett weeder, you soll alles haben, aber
were hat die brieffe geschrieben, dat wet each bay meine seel
nicht.
Leg dor still, still each sag.
The villain swears, and deeply doth protest
He knows not who incited them to this,
And as it seems the scroll imports no less.
So sterb du mir schelm.
O each sterb, awe, awe, awe dat dich der ivell
hole!
Fie dich an loser schelm, hastu dein gesellen todt
geschlagen?
Last vs den schelmen angreiffen.
Call you me shelme how dare you then
Being Princes offer to lay hands on me?
That is the Hangmans Office here in Dutch-land.
But this is strange, our Bours can speak no English,
What bistum more than a damned murderer?
That thou art so much we are winoses.
Can then this habit alter me so much,
That I am called a villain by my friends?
Or shall I dare once to suspect your graces,
That for you could not make me Emperor,
Pitying my sorrow through mine honour lost,
You set these slaves to rid me of my life,
Yet far be such a thought from Richard's heart.
How now? what do I hear Prince Richard speak?
The same: but wonder that he lives to speak.
And had not policy hept above strength,
These sturdy swains had rid me of my life.
Far be it from your Grace for to suspect vs.
Alas, I know not whom I should suspect;
But yet my heart cannot misdoubt your Graces?
How came your Highness into this apparel?
We as the manner is drew lots for Offices,
My hap was hardest to be made a Carter,
And by this letter which some villain wrote,
I was betrayed, here to be murdered;
But Heaven which doth defend the Innocent,
Armed me with strength and policy together,
That I escaped out of their treacherous snare.
Were it well sounded, I dare lay my life,
The Spanish tyrant knew of this conspiracy;
Therefore the better to dive into the depth
Of this most devilish murderous complot,
As also secretly to be beholders,
Of the long-wisht for wedding of your daughter,
We will disrobe these bowrs of their apparel,
Clapping their rustic cases on our backs,
And help your Highness for to drive the Cart.
To may be the traitor that did write these lines,
Mistaking us for them will show himself.
Prince Palatine this plot doth please me well,
I make no doubt if we deal cunningly,
But we shall find the writer of this seroul.
And in that hope I will disrobe this slave.
Come Princes in the neighbouring thicket here,
We may disguise our selves, and talk at pleasure;
Fie on him heavy lubber how he weighs.
The sin of murder hangs upon his soul,
It is no marvel then if he be heavy.
Princes and Princes Superiors, Lords and Lords
fellows, Gentlemen and Gentlemen's Masters, and all the rest
of the States here assembled, as well Masculine as Feminine,
be it known unto you by these presence, that I Alexander de
Toledo, Fortunes chief Marshal, do will and command you,
by the authority of my said Office, to take your places in
manner and form following, First the Emperor and the
Empress, then the Taster, the Secretary, the Forester, the
Physician, as for the Chambermaid and my self, we will take
our places at the neither end, the Jester is to wait up, and
live by the crumbs that fall from the Emperors trencher,
But now I have Marshaled you to the table, what remains?
Every fool can tell that, when men are set to
dinner they commonly expect meat.
That's the best Jst the fool made since he came
into his Office. Marshal walk into the Kitchen, and see how
the Churfurst of Collen bestirs himself.
Shall I go with him too? I love to be employed in
the Kitchen.
I prithee go, that we may be rid of thy wicked
Jests.
Have with thee Marshal, the fool rides thee?
Now by mine honour, my Lord of Mints plays
the fool the worst that ever I saw.
He do's all by contraries; for I am sure he played
the wiseman like a fool, and now he plays the fool wisely.
Princes and Churfursts let us folick now,
This is a joyful day to Christendom,
When Christian Princes join in amity,
Schinck bowls of Reinfal and the purest Wine,
We will spend this evening luie upie Duch,
In honour of this unexpected league.
Nay gentle Forester, there you range amiss,
His looks are fitly suited to his thoughts.
His gloious Empress makes his heart triumph,
And hearts triumphing makes his countenance stayed
In contemplation of his lives delight.
Good Aunt let me excuse my self in this,
I and an Emperor but for a day,
She Empress of my heart while life doth last;
Then give me leave to use Imperial looks.
Nay if I be an Emperor I'll take leave,
And here I do pronounce it openly,
What I have lately whispered in her ears,
I love mine Empress more than Empery,
I love her looks above my fortunes hope.
Saving your looks dread Emperor es gilt a bowl,
Unto the health of your fair Bride and Empress.
Sain Got es soll mi en liebe drunk sein, so
much Dutch have I learnt since I came into Germany.
When you have drunk a dozen of these bowls,
So can your Majesty with a full mouth,
Trowel out high Dutch, till then it sounds not right
Druff es gilt nosh ens thr Mayat.
Sain Got lass lauffen.
My Lord of Brandenburg spoken like a good
Dutch Brother;
But most unlike a good Physician,
You should consider what he has to do,
His Bride will give you little thanks to night.
Ha, ha my Lord, now give me leave to laugh,
He need not therefore shun one Beaker full.
In Saxon Land you know it is the use,
That the first night the Bridegroom spares the Bride.
It is true indeed, that had I quite forgotten.
How understand I that?
That the first night,
The Bride and Bridegroom never sleep together.
That may well be, perchance they wake together.
Nay without fallacy they have several Bed.
I in one Chamber, that is most Princely.
Not only several Beds, but several Chambers,
Locked soundly too, with Iron Bolts and Bars.
Believe me Nephew, that's the custom here.
O my good Aunt, the world is now grown new,
Old customs are but superstitions.
I 'm sure this day, this presence all can witness,
The high and mighty Prince the Archbishop of Collen,
Who now is busy in the skullery,
Joined us together in St. Peters Church,
Ad he that would disjoin us two to night,
Twixt jest and earnest be it proudly spoken,
Shal eat a piece of ill-digesting Iron.
Bride wilt dow dis nicht ben me schlapen.
Da behute mesh Got fur, Each hoffe Eure 
wills von mir mit, begeran.
What says she behuie mesh Gt fur?
She says God bless her from such a deed.
Tush Empress, clap thy hands upon thy head,
And God will bless thee, I have a Iacobs staff,
Shall take the Elevation of the Pole;
For I have heard it said, the Dutch North star,
Is a degree or two higher than ours.
Nay though we talk lets drink, and Emperor,
I'll tell you plainly what you must trust unto,
Can they deceive you of your Bride to night,
They'll surely do it, therefore look to your self.
If she deceive me not, let all do their worst.
Assure you Emperor she'll do her best.
I think the Maids in Germany are mad,
Ever they be married they will not kiss,
And being married will not go to Bed.
We drink about, let's talk no more of this,
Well warned half armed our English proverb say
Holla Marshal, what says the Cook?
Belike he thinks we have fed so well already,
That we disdain his simple Cookery.
Faith the Gook says so, that his Office was to dress a
mess of meat with that Wood which the English Prince should
bring in, but he hath neither seen Dutch Wood nor English
prince, therefore he desires you hold him excused.
I wonder where Prince Richard stays so long.
An't, please your Majesty, he's come at length,
And with him has he brought a crew of Bowrs,
A hipse bower maikins fresh as Flowers in May,
With whom they mean to dance a Saxon round,
In honour of the Bridegroom and his Bride.
So has he made amends for his long tarrying.
I prithee Marshall them into the presence.
Lives Richard then? I had thought the had
made him sure.
O, I could tear my flesh to think upon 't,
He lives and secretly hath brought with him,
The Palsgrave and the Duke of Saxonie,
Clad like two Bowrs, even in the same apparel
That Hans and Ierick wore when they went out to murder him,
It now behooves us to be circumspect.
It likes me not; Away Marshal bring them.
I long to see this sports conclusion.
I'st not a lovely sight to see this couple
Sit sweetly billing like two Turtle Doves.
I promise you it sets my Teeth an Edge,
That I must take mine Empress in mine arms.
Come hither Isabel, though thy robes be homely,
Thy face and countenance holds colour still.
Dead Emperor and Emperes for to day,
I Your appointed Cook until to morrow,
Have by the Marshal sent my just excuse,
And hope your Highness is therewith content,
Our Carter here for whom I now do speak,
Says that his Axle-tree broke by the way,
That is his answer, and for you shall not famish,
He and his fellow bowrs of the next dorp,
Have brought a schinkel of good raw Bacon,
And that's a common meat with us, unsod,
Desiring you, you would not scorn the fare,
'Twil make a cup of Wine taste ippitate.
Welcome good fellows, we thank you for your
present.
So spell fresh up and let us rommer dane.
Please it your Highness to dance with your Bride?
Alas I cannot dance your German dances.
I do beseech your Highness mock us not,
We Germans have no changes in our dances,
An Almain and an upspring that is all,
So dance the Princes, Burgers, and the Bowrs.
So danced our Ancestors for thousand years.
It is a sign the Dutch are not new fangled.
I'll follow in the measure; Marshal lead.
I think the Bower is amorous of my Empress.
Fort bower and leffel morgan, when thou come to house.
Now is your Graces time to steal away,
Look to it or else you'll lie alone to night.
(Drinks to the Palsgrave.) Skelt bower.
Sain Got.
Ey Iungfraw help mesh doch ein Iungfraw drunk
 fcenudt ein frolecken drink.
Sam Gt mean frundt each will gern bescheidt thun
Half this I drink unto your Highness health,
It is the first since we were joined in Office.
I thank your Majesty, I'll pledge you half.
Hold, hold, your Majesty, drink not too much.
What means your Highness.
Methinks that something grates between my teeth,
Pray God there be not poison in the bowl.
Marry God forbid.
So were I peppered.
I highly do mistrust this schelmish bower,
Lay hands on him I le make him drink the rest.
Whas first whas first wat will you nut me machine
Drink out, drink out oder der devil soll dich holen.
Ey geb you to frieden each will gain drink.
Drink not Prince Pallatine, throw it on the ground,
It is not good to trust his Spanish flies.
Saxon and Palsgrave, this cannot be good.
It was not for nought my mind misgave me so;
This hath Prince Richard done t'entrap our lives.
No Alphonsus, I disdain to be a traitor.
O sheath your swords, forbear these needless
broils.
Away, I do mistrust thee as the rest.
Lord's hear me speak, to pacify these broils;
For my part I feel no distemperature,
How do you feel your self?
I cannot tell, not ill, and yet methinks I am not
well.
Were it a poison it would begin to work.
Not so, all poisons do not work alike.
If there were poison in, which God forbid,
The Empress and my self and Alexander,
Have cause to fear as well as any other.
Why did thou throw the Wine upon the earth?
Had thou but drunk, thou had satified our .
I will not be enforced by Spanish hands.
If all be well with us that schuce shall serve,
If not, the Spaniards blood will be revenged.
Your Majesty is more afraid than hurt.
For me I do not fear my self a whit,
Let all be friends, and forward with our mirth.
Nephew, how now? is all well with you?
I lay my life the Prince has lost his bride.
I hope not so, she is but strayed a little.
Your Grace must not be angry though we laugh.
If it had happened by default of mine,
You might have worthily laughed me to scorn;
But to be so deceived, so over reached,
Even as I meant to clasp her in mine arms,
The grief is intolerable, not to be guest,
Or comprehended by the thought of any,
But by a man that hath been so deceived,
And that's by no man living but my self.
My Princely Son-in-Law God give you joy.
Of what my Princely Father?
Of my Daughter.
Your new beroathed Wife and Bed-fellow.
I thank you Father, indeed I must confess
She is my Wife, but not my Bed-fellow.
How so young Prince? I saw you steal her hence,
And as me thought she went full willingly.
It is true, I stole her finely from amongst you,
And by the Arch-Bishop of Collens help,
Got her alone into the Bride-Chamber,
Where having locked the Door, thought all was well.
I could not speak but pointed to the Bed,
She answered In and began for to unlace her;
I seeing that suspected no deceit,
But straight untrust my points, uncased my self,
And in a moment slipped between the Sheets;
There lying in deep contemplation,
The Princess of her self drew near to me,
Gave me her hand, spake prettily in Dutch
I know not what, and kissed me lovingly,
And as I shrank out of my luke warm place
To make her room, she clapped thrice with her feet,
And through a trap-door sunk out of my sight;
Knew I but her Confederates in the deed
I say no more.
Tush Cousin, be content;
So many Lands, so many fashions,
It is the German use, be not impatient,
She will be so much welcomer to morrow.
Come Nephew, we will be Bed-fellows to night.
Nay if I find her not, I'll lye alone,
I have good hope to ferret out her Bed,
And so good night sweet Princess all at once.
Godnight to all; Marshal discharge the train.
To Bed, to Bed the Marshal cries it is time.
Now Princes it is time that we advise,
Now we are all fast in the Fowlers gin,
Not to escape his subtle snares alive,
Unless by force we break the Nets asunder.
When he begins to cavil and pick quarrels,
I will not trust him in the least degree.
It may beseem me evil to mistrust
My Lord and Emperor of so foul a fat;
But love unto his honour and your lives,
Makes me with tears entreat your Excellencies
To fly with speed out of his dangerous reach,
His cloudy brow foretells a sudden storm
Of blood not natural but prodigious.
The Castle gates are shut, how should we fly;
But were they open, I would lose my life,
Ever I would leave my Nephew to the slaughter;
He and his Bride were sure to bea the brunt.
Could I get out of doors, I'd venture that,
And yet I hold their persons dear enough,
I would not doubt, but ever the morning Sun
Should half way run his course into the So
To compass and begirt him in his Fort,
With Saxon lansknights and brunt-bearing Switzers,
Who lye in Ambuscado not far hence,
That he should come to Composition,
And with safe conduct bring into our tents,
Both Bride and Bridegroom, and all other friends.
My Chamber Window stands upon the Wall,
And thence with ease you may ecape away.
Prince Richard, you will bear me Compan?
I will my Lord.
And you Prince Pallatine?
The Spanish Tyrant hath me in suspect
Of poisoning him, I'll therefore stay it out,
To fly upon it were to accuse my self.
If need require, I'll hide the Pallatine,
Until to morrow, if you stay no longer.
If God be with us, ever to morrow noon,
We'll be with Ensigns spread before the Walls,
We leave dear pledges of our quick return.
May the Heaven prosper your just intents.
This dangerous plot was happily overheard,
Here did thou listen in a blessed hour.
Alexander, where dost thou hide thy self?
I've sought thee in each Corner of the Court,
And now or never must thou play the man.
And now or never must your Highness stir,
Treason hath round encompassed your life.
I have no leisure now to hear thy talk.
See thou this Key?
Intends your Majesty that I should steal into the
Princes Chambers,
And sleeping stab them in their Beds to night?
That cannot be.
Wilt thou not hear me speak?
The Prince of England, Saxon, and of Collen,
Are in the Empress Chamber privily.
All this is nothing, they would murder me,
 not there to night; see thou this Key?
They mean to fly out at the Chamber Window,
And raise an Army to besiege your Grace
Now may your Highness take them with the deed.
The Prince of Wales I hope is none of them.
Him and his Bride by force they will recover.
What makes the cursed Palsgrave of the Rhein?
Him hath the Empress taken to her charge,
And in her Closet means to hide him safe.
To hide him in her Closet? of bold deeds,
The dearest charge that ever she undertook,
Well let them bring their Complots to an end,
I'll undermine to meet them in their works,
Will not your Grace surprise them ever they fly?
No, let them bring their purpose to effect,
I'll fall upon them at my best advantage,
See thou this Key? there take it Alexander;
Yet take it not unless thou be resolved
Tush I am fond to make a doubt of thee;
Take it I ay, it doth command all Doors,
And will make open way to dire revenge.
I know not what your Majsty doth mean
Hie thee with speed into the inner Chamber,
Next to the Chappe, and there shalt thou find
The danty trembling Bride coutcht in her Bed,
Having beguiled her Bridegroom of his hopes,
Taking her farewell of Virginity,
Which she to morrow night expects to lose,
By night all Cats are gray, and in the dark,
She will embrace thee for the Prince of Wales,
Thinking that he hath found her Chamber out,
Fall to thy business and make few words,
And having pleased thy senses with delight,
And filled thy beating veins with stealing joy,
Make thence again before the break of day,
What strange events will follow this device,
We need not study on, our foes shall find.
How now? how standst thou? hast thou not the heart?
Should I not have the heart to do this deed,
I were a Bastard villain and no man;
Her sweetness, and the sweetness of revenge,
Tickles my senses in a double sense,
And so I wish your Majesty good night.
God night, sweet Venus prosper thy attempt.
Sweet Venus and grim Ate I implore,
Stand both of you to me auspicious.
It had been pity of his Fathers life,
Whose death hath made him such a perfect villain.
What murder, wrack, and causeless enmity,
Twixt dearest friends that are my strongest foes,
Will follow suddenly upon this rape,
I hope to live to see, and laugh thereat,
And yet this piece of practice is not all.
The King of Bohem though he little feel it,
Because in twenty hours it will not work,
Hath from my Knives point sucked his deadly bane,
Whereof I will be least of all suspected;
For I will feign my self as sick as he,
And blind mine enemies eyes with deadly groans;
Upon the Palsgrave and mine Empress,
Heavy suspect shall light to bruise their bones;
Though Saxon would not suffer him to taste,
The deadly potion provided for him
He cannot save him from the Sword of Justice,
When all the world shall think that like a villain,
He hath poisoned two great Emperors with one draught;
That deed is done, and by this time I hope,
The other is a doing, Alexander
I doubt it not will do it thoroughly.
While these things are a brewing I'll not sleep,
But suddenly break op the Chamber doors,
And rush upon my Empress and the Palsgrave,
Holla wher's the Captain of the Guard?
What would your Majesty?
Take six travants well armed and follow,
Come forth thou damned Witch, adulteror
Whore,
Foul scandal to thy name, thy sex, thy blood.
O Emperor, gentle Husband, pity me.
Can thou deny thou were confederate,
With my arch enemies that sought my blood?
And like a Strumpet through thy Chamber Window,
Hast with thine own hands helped to let them down,
With an intent that they should gather arms,
Besiege my Court, and take away my life?
Ah my Alphonsus.
Thy Alphonsus Whore?
O pierce my heart, trail me not by my hair;
What I have done, I did it for the best.
So for the best advantage of thy lust,
Hast thou in secret Clytemnestra like,
Hid thy Aegestus thy adulterous love.
Heaven be the record twixt my Lord and me,
How pure and sacred I do hold thy Bed.
Art thou so impudent to belly the deed,
Is not the Palsgrave hidden in thy Chamber?
That I have hid the Palsgrave I confess;
But to no ill intent your conscience knows.
Thy treasons, murders, incests, sorceries,
Are all committed to a good intent;
Thou know he was my deadly enemy.
By this device I hoped to make your friends.
Then bring him forth, we will reconcile our selves.
Should I betray so great a Prince's life?
Thou holdst his life far dearer than thy Lords,
This very night hast thou betrayed my blood,
But thus, and thus, will I revenge my self,
And but thou speedily deliver him,
I'll trail thee through the Kennels of the Street,
And cut the Nose from thy bewitching face,
And into England send thee like a Strumpet.
Pull every hair from off my head,
Drag me at Horses yls, cut off my nose
My Princely tongue shall not betray a Prince.
That will I try.
O Heaven revenge my shame.
Is Caesar now become a torturer,
A Hangman of his Wife, turned murderer?
Here is the Pallatine, what would thou more?
Upon him Soldiers, strike him to the ground.
Ah Soldiers, spare the Princely Pallatine.
Down with the damned adulterous murderer,
Kill him I say, his blood be on my head.
Run to the Tower, and Ring the Larum Bell,
That fore the world I may excuse my self,
And tell the reason of this bloody deed.
How now? what means this sudden strange Alarm?
What wretched dame is this with blbbered cheeks,
And rent disheveled hair?
O my dear Nephew,
Fly, fly the Shambles, for thy turn is next.
What, my Imperial Aunt? then break my heart.
Brave Prince be still; as I am nobly born,
There is no ill intended to thy person.
Where is my Page? bring me my two hand Sword.
What is the matter? is the Court a fire
Whose that? the Emperor with his weapon drawn?
Though deadly sick yet am I forced to rise,
To know the reason of this hurly burly.
Princes be silent, I will tell the cause,
Though suddenly a grining at my heart
Forbids my tongue his wnted course of speech.
See you this Harlot, traitoress to my life,
See you this murderer, stain to mine honour,
These twain I found together in my Bed,
Shamefully committing lewd Adultery,
And heinously conspiring all your deaths,
I mean your deaths, that are not dead already;
As for the King of Boheme and my self,
We are not of this world, we have our transports
Given in the bowl by this adulterous Prince,
And least the poison work too strong with me,
Before that I have warned you of your harms,
I will be brief in the relation.
That he hath stained my Bed, these eyes have seen,
That he hath murdered two Imperial Kings,
Our speedy deaths will be too sudden proof;
That he and she have bought and sold your lives,
To Saxon, Collen, and the English Prince,
Their Ensigns spread before the Walls to morrow
Will all too suddenly bid you defiance.
Now tell me Princes have I not just cause,
To slay the murderer of so many souls?
And have not all cause to applaud the deed?
More would I utter, but the poisons force
Forbids my speech, you can conceive the rest.
Your Majesty reach me your dying hand,
With thousand thanks for this so just revenge.
O, how the poisons force begins to work!
The world may pity and applaud the deed.
Did never age bring forth such heinous acts.
My senses are confounded and amazed.
The God of Heaven knows my unguiltiness.
Arm, arm my Lords, we have descried a far,
An Army of ten thousand men at arms.
Some run unto the Walls, some draw up the ,
Some speedily let the Purculless down.
Now may we see the Emperors words are true.
To prison with the wicked murderous Whore.
My Lord of Cornwall, let us march before,
To speedy rescue of our dearest friends,
The rereward with the armed Legions,
Committed to the Prince of Colon's charge,
Cannot so lightly pass the mountain tops.
Let's summon suddenly unto a Parley,
I do not doubt but ever we need their helps,
Collen with all his forces will be here.
Your Holiness hath made good hast to day,
And like a beaten Soldier lead your troops.
In time of peace I am an Arch-Bishop,
And like a Church-man can both sing and say;
But when the innocent do suffer wrong,
I cast my rocket off upon the Altar,
And like a Prince betake my self to arms.
Great Prince of Saxonie, what mean these arms
Richard of Cornwall, what may this intend?
Brother of Collen no more Churchman now,
Instead of Meter, and a Crosier Staff,
Have you betane you to your Helm and Targe?
Were you so merry yesterday as friends,
Cloaking your treason in your Clowns attire?
Mints, we return the traitor in thy face.
To save our lives, and to release our friends,
Out of the Spaniards deadly trapping Snares,
Without intent of ill, this power is raised;
Therefore grave Prince Marquess of Brandenburg,
My loving Cousin, as indifferent Judge,
To you an aged Peace-maker we speak,
Deliver with safe conduct in our tents,
Prince Edward and his Bride, the Pallatine,
Wth every one of high or low degree,
That are suspicious of the King of Spain,
So shall you see that in the self same hour
We marched to the Walls with colours spread,
We will cashier our troops, and part good friends.
Alas my Lord, crave you the Pallatine?
If craving will not serve, we will command
Ah me, since your departure, good my Lords,
Strange accidents of blood and death are happened.
My mind misgave a massacre this night.
How do's Prince Edward then?
How do's my Daughter?
How goes it with the Palsgrave of the Rhein?
Prince Edward and his Bridle do live in health,
And shall be brought unto you when you please.
Let them be presently delivered?
Lives not the Palsgrave too?
In Heaven or Hell he lives, and reaps the merrit
of his deeds.
What damned hand hath butchered the Prince?
O that demand is needless, who but he,
That seeks to be the Butcher of us all;
But vengeance and revenge shall light on him.
Be patient noble Princes, hear the rest.
The two great Kings of Bohem and Castle,
God comfort them, lie now at point of death,
Both poisoned by the Palsgrave yesterday.
How is that possible? so must my Sister,
The Pallatine himself, and Alexander,
Who drunk out of the bowl, be poisoned too.
Nor is that heinous deed alone the cause,
Though cause enough to ruin Monarchies;
He hath defiled with lust the Imperial Bed,
And by the Emperor in the fact was slain.
O worthy guiltless Prince, O had he fled.
But say where is the Empress, whore's my Sister.
Not burnt to ashes yet, but shall be shortly.
I hope her Majesty will live to see
A hundred thousand flattering turncoat slaves,
Such as your Holiness, dye a shameful death.
She is in prison, and attends her trial.
O strange heart-breaking mischievous intents,
Give me my children if you love your lives,
No safety is in this enchanted Fort.
O see in happy hour there comes my Daughter,
And loving son, escaped from the Massacre.
My body lives, although my heart be slain,
O Princes this hath been the dismallest night,
That ever eye of sorrow did behold,
Here lay the Palsgrave weltering in his blood,
Dying Alphonsus standing over him,
Upon the other hand the King of Bohem,
Still looking when his poisoned bulk would break;
But that which pierced my soul with natures touch
Was my tormented Aunt with blubbered cheeks,
Torn bloody Garments, and disheveld' hair,
Waiting for death; deservedly or no,
That knows the searcher of all humane thoughts;
For these devices are beyond my reach.
Sast dorh lices doister, who wart dow dicselbirma.
is who who solt each sem each war in bett.
Were dow allrin so wart dow gar vorschrocken.
Each ha mist audes gememt dam das each wolt allrin
gest flaffne haben, abur vmb mitternaist kim mriner bridegroom,
bundt si flaffet bay mir, bis wir mit them getunnuel
erwacht warren.
What says she? came her Bridegroom to her at midnight?
Nephew, I see you were not over-reach'd;
Although she slipped out of your arms at first,
You ceiz'd her surely, ever you left the chase.
But left your Grace, your Bride alone in Bed?
Or did she run together in the Larum?
Alas my Lords, this is no time to jest;
I lay full sadly in my Bed alone,
Not able for my life to sleep a wink,
Till that the Larum Bell began to Ring,
And then I starred from my weary couch.
How now  this ems not with my daughters speech,
She says you found her Bed, and lay with her.
Not I, your Highness did mistake her words.
Deny it not Prince Edward, it is an honour.
My Lords I know no reason to deny it;
To have found her Bed, I would have given a million.
Hedswick der First sgt er tt mit be dir schlafin.
Es gefelt ihm also zum sagun aber each habes woll
gerfralet.
She soy's you are disposed to jest with her;
But yesternight she felt it in good earnest.
Uncle these jests are too unsavoury,
Ill suited to these times, and please me not,
Lab each bin you geshlapen yesternight.
I laugh, warum snlt ihrs fragen.
Edward, I tell thee it is no jesting matter,
Say plainly, wa'st thou by her I or no?
As I am Prince, true heir to Englands Crown,
I never touched her body in a Bed.
Das haste gethan order hole mesh der dvell.
Nephew, take heed, you hear the Princess words.
It is not she, nor you, nor all the world,
Shall make me say I did another deed.
Another deed? what think thou her a whore?
She may be Whore, and tho a villain too.
Struck me the Emperor I will strike again.
Content you Princes, buffet not like boys.
Hold you the one, and I will hold the other.
O her got, help, help, oich arms end.
Soldiers lay hands upon the Prince of Wales,
Convey him speedily unto a prison,
And load his Legs with grievous bolts of Iron;
Some bring the Whore my Daughter from my fight;
And thou smooth Englishman  thee I speak,
My hate extends to all thy Nation,
Pack thee out of my sight, and that with speed
Your English practises have all to long,
Muffled our German eyes, pack, pack I say.
Although your Grace have reason for your rage,
Yet be not like a madman to your friends.
My friends? I scorn the friendship of such mates,
That seek my Daughters spoil, and my dishonour;
But I will teach the Boy another lesson,
His head shall pay the ransom of his fault.
His head?
And thy head too, O how my heart doth swell!
Was there no other Prince to mock but me?
First woo, then marry her, then lye with her,
And having had the pleasure of her Bed,
Call her a Whore in open audience,
None but a villain and a slave would do it,
My Lords of Mints, of Tryer, and Brandenburg,
Make op the Gates, receive me as a friend,
I'll be a scourge unto the English Nation.
Your Grace shall be the welcom'st guest alive,
None but a madman would do such a deed.
Then Collen count me mad, for I will do it.
I'll set my life and Land upon the hazard,
But I will thoroughly found this deceit.
What will your Grace leave me or follow me?
No Saxon know I will not follow thee,
And leave Prince Richard in so great extremes.
Then I defy you both, and so farewell.
Yet Saxon hear me speak before thou go,
Look to the Princes life as to thine own,
Each perished hair that flleth from his head
By thy default, shall cost a Saxon City,
Henry of England will not lose his heir,
And so farewell and think upon my words.
Away, I do disdin to nswer thee
Pack thee with shame again into thy Country,
I'll have a Cock-boat at my proper charge,
And send the Imperial Crown which thou hast won,
To England by Prince Edward after thee.
Answer him not Prince Richard, he is mad,
Choler and grief have robed him of his senses.
Like accident to this was never heard.
Break heart and dye, fly hence my troubled spirit,
I am not able for to underbear
The weight of sorrow which doth bruise my soul,
O Edward, O sweet Edward, O my life.
O noble Collen last of all my hopes,
The only friend in my extremities,
If thou doest love me, as I know thou doest,
Unsheathe thy sword, and rid me of this sorrow.
Away with abject thoughts, fie Princely Richard,
Toze up thy self, and call thy senses home,
Shake of this base pusillanimity,
And cast about to remedy these wrongs.
Alas I see no means of remedy.
The hearken to my Counsel and advice,
We will Entrench our felves not far from hence,
With those small powers we have, and send for more,
If they do make assault, we will defend;
If violence be offered to the Prince,
We will rescue him with venture of our lives;
Let us with paience attend advantage,
Time may reveal the author of these treasons,
For why undoubtedly the sweet young Princess,
Foully beguiled by night with cunning show,
Hath to some villain lost her Maiden-head.
O that I knew the foul incestuous wretch,
Thus would I tear him with my teeth and nails.
Had Saxon sense he would conceive so much,
And not revenge on guiltless Edwards life.
Persuade your self he will be twice advised
Before he offer wrong unto the Prince.
In that good hope I will have patience.
Come gentle Prince whose pity to a stranger
Is rare and admirable, not to be spoken.
England cannot requite this gentleness.
Tush talk not of requital let us go,
To fortify our selves within our trench.
O most excessive pain, O raging Fire!
Is burning Cancer or the Sorpion,
Descended from the Heavenly Zodiac,
To parch mine Entrails with a quenchless flame?
Drink, drink I say, give drink or I shall dye.
Fill a thousand bowls of Wine, Water I say
Water from forth the cold Tartarian hills.
I feel the ascending flame lick up my blood,
Mine Entrails shrink together like a scroll
Of burning parchment, and my Marrow fries,
Bring huge Cakes of Ice, and Flakes of Snow,
That I may drink of them being dissolved.
We do beseech your Majesty have patience,
Had I but drunk an ordinary poison,
The sight of thee great Duke of Saxony,
My friend in death, in life my greatest foe,
Might both allay the venom and the torment;
But that adulterous Palsgrave and my Wife,
Upon whose life and soul I vengeance cry,
Gave me a mineral not to be digested,
Which burning eats, and eating burns my heart.
My Lord of Tryer, run to the King of Bohem,
Commend me to him, ask him how he fares,
None but my self can rightly pity him;
For none but we have sympathy of pains.
Tell him when he is dead, my time's not long,
And when I dye bid him prepare to follow.
Now, now it works a fresh; are you my friends?
Then throw me on the cold swift running Rhine,
And let me bath there for an hour or two,
I cannot bear this pain.
O would the unpartial fates afflict on me,
These deadly pains, and ease my Emperor,
How willing would I bear them for his sake.
O Mints, I would not wish unto a Dog,
The least of thousand torments that afflict me,
Much less unto your Princely holiness.
See, see my Lord of Mints, he points at you.
It is your  and nothing else;
But were death here, I would dispute with him,
And tell him to his teeth he doth unjustice,
To take your Majesty in the prime of youth;
Such withered rotten branches as my self,
Should first be lopped, had he not partial hands;
And here I do protest upon my Knee,
I would as willingly now leave my life,
To save my King and Emperor alive,
As erst my Mother brought me to the world.
My Lord of Mints, this flattery is too gross,
A Prince of your experience and calling,
Should not so fondly call the Heavens to witness.
Think you my Lord, I would not hold my word?
You know my Lord, death is a bitter guest.
To ease his pain and save my Emperor,
I sweetly would embrace that bitterness.
If I were death, I knew what I would do.
But see, his Majesty is fallen a sleep,
Ah me, I fear it is a dying slumber.
My Lord of Saxonie do you hear this jest.
What should I hear my Lord?
Do you not hear
How loudly death proclames it in mine ears,
Swearing by trophies, Tombs and deadens Graves,
If I have any friend so dear to me
That to excuse my life will lose his own,
I shall be presently restored to health.
I would he durst make good his promises.
My Lord of Tryer, how fares my fellow Emperour?
His Majesty is eased of all his pains.
O happy news, now have I hope of health.
My joyful heart doth spring within my body,
To hr those words,
Comfort your Majesty I will excuse you,
Or at the least will bear you Company.
My hope is vain, now, now my heart will break,
My Lord of Tryer you did but  me,
Tell me the truth, how fares his Majesty.
I told your Highness, eased of all his pain.
I understand thee now, he's eased by death,
And now I feel an alteration;
Farewell sweet Lords, farewell my Lord of Mints,
The truest friend that ever earth did bear,
Live long in happiness to revenge my death,
Upon my Wife and all the English brood.
My Lord of Saxonie your Grace hath cause.
I dare thee death to take away my life.
Some charitable hand that loves his Prince,
And hath the heart, draw forth his Sword and rid me of
my life.
I love my Prince, and have the heart to do it.
O stay a while.
Nay now it is to late.
Villain what hast thou done? the ast slain a Prince.
I did no more than he entreated me,
How now, what make I in my Couch so late?
Princes why stand you so gazing about me?
Or who is that lies slain before my face?
O I have wrong, my soul was half in Heaven,
His holiness did know the joys above,
And therefore is ascended in my stead.
Come Princes let us bear the body hence;
I'll spend a Million to embalm the same.
Let all the Bells within the Empire Ring,
Let Mass be said in every Church and Chapel,
And that I may perform my latest vow,
I will procure so much by Gold or friends,
That my sweet Mints shall be Canonised,
And numberred in the Bed-role of the Saints,
I hope the Pope will not deny it me,
I'll build a Church in honour of thy name,
Within the ancient famous City Mints,
Fairer than any one in Germany,
There shalt thou be entered with Kingly 
Over thy Tomb shall hang a sacred Lamp,
Which till the day of doom shall ever burn,
Yea after ages shall speak of thy renown,
And go a Pilgrimage to thy sacred Tomb.
Grief stops my voice, who loves his Emperor,
Lay to his helping hand and bear him hence,
Sweet Father and redeemer of my life.
Now is my Lord sole Emperor of Rome,
And three Conspirators of my Fathers death,
Are cunningly sent unto Heaven or Hell;
Like subtlety to this was never seen.
Alas poor Mints I pitying thy prayers,
Could do no less than lend a helping hand,
Thou were a famous flatterer in thy life,
And now hast reap the fruits thereof in death;
But thou shalt be rewarded like a Saint,
With Masses, Bells, dirges and burning Lamps;
It is good, I envy not thy happiness:
But ah the sweet remembrance of that night,
That night I mean of sweetness and of stealth,
When for a Prince, a Princess did embrace me,
Paying the first fruits of her Marriage Bed,
Makes me forget all other accidents.
O Saxon I would willingly forgive,
The deadly trespass of my Fathers death,
So I might have thy Daughter to my Wife,
And to be plain, I have best right unto her,
And love her best, and have deserved her best;
But thou art fond to think on such a match;
Thou must imagine nothing but revenge,
And if my computation fail me not
Ere long I shall be thoroughly revenged.
Come forth thou perfect map of misery,
Desolate Daughter and distressed Mother,
In whom the Father and the Son are cursed;
Thus once again we will assay the Prince.
'T may be the sight of his own flesh and blood
Will now at last pierce his obdurate heart.
Jailor how fares it with thy prisoner?
Let him appear upon the battlements.
O mean dear vatter, each habe in dis lang lang 30.
weaken, welche mesh duncket sein 40. iahr gewesen, ein ltte
Englisch gelernet, vnd each hope, he will me verstohn, vnd
show me a little pity.
Good morrow to your grace Edward of Wales,
Son and immediate Heir to Henry the third,
King of England and Lord of Ireland,
Thy Fathers comfort, and the peoples hope;
It is not in mockage nor at unawares,
That I am ceremonious to repeat
Thy high descent joined with thy Kingly might;
But therewithal to intimate unto thee
What God expected from the higher powers,
Justice, and mercy, truth, sobriety,
Relenting hearts, hands innocent of blood.
Princes are Gods chief substitutes on earth,
And should be Lamps unto the common sort.
But you will say I am become a Preacher,
No, Prince, I am an humble suppliant,
And to prepare thine ears make this exordium
To pierce thine eyes and heart, behold this spectacle,
Three Generations of the Saxon blood,
Descended lineally from forth my Loins,
Kneeling and crying to thy mightiness;
First look on me, and think what I have been,
For now I think my self of no account,
Next Caesar, greatest man in Germanie,
Nearly a lied, and ever friend to England;
But Women's sighs move more in manly hearts,
O see the hands she elevates to Heaven;
Behold those eyes that meanwhile were thy joys,
Uttering domb eloquence in Crystal tears;
If these exclames and sights be ordinary,
Then look with pity on thy other self,
This is thy flesh, and blood, bone of thy bone,
A goodly Boy the Image of his ire.
Turn thou away? O were thy Father here,
He would, as I do, take him in his arms,
And sweetly kiss his Grand-child in the face.
O Edward too young in experience,
That  not look into the grievou rack,
Ensuing this thy obstinate denial;
O Edward too young in experience,
That can not see into the future good,
Ensuing thy most just acknowledgement;
Hear me thy truest friend, I will repeat them;
For good thou hast an Heir indubitate,
Whose eyes aready sparckle Majesty,
Born in true Wedlock of a Princely Mother,
And all the German Princes to thy friends;
Where on the contrary thine eyes shall see,
The speedy Tragedy of thee and thine;
Like Athamas first will I ceize upon
Thy young unchristened and despised Son,
And with his guiltless brains bepain the Sones;
Then like Virginius will I kill my Child,
Unto thine eyes a pleasing spectacle;
Yet shall it be a momentary pleasure,
Henry of England shall mourn with me;
For thou thy self Edward shall make the third,
And be an actor in this bloody Scan.
Ah mine feet Edouart, mean herzkin, mine schrskin,
mean herziges, einiges herz, mean allerleivest husband
I preedee mean leefe see me friendlich one, good seete heart
tell de rut: and at lest to me, and dine allerleeest schild show
pity! dan each bin dine, vnd dow best mine, dow hast me geven
ein kindelein; O Edouat, seete, Edouart erbarmet
sein!
O Hedewick peace, thy speeches pierce my soul.
Hedewick doe you excellence hight me Hedewick
seete Edouart you weet each bin yowr allerlieueste wie.
The Priest I must confess made thee my Wife,
Cursed be the damned villainous adulterer,
That with so fowl a blot divorced our love.
O mean allerlevester, hieborne First vnd Her,
dinck dat unser Herr Got sitts in himmells ron, and sees
dat hart vnd will my cause woll reckon:
Edward hold me not up with long delays;
But quickly say, wilt thou confess the truth?
As true as I am born of Kingly Linage,
And am the best Plantagenet next my Father,
I never carnally did touch her body.
Edward this answer had we long ago,
See thou this brat? speak quickly or he dyes.
His death will be more piercing to thine eyes,
Than unto mine, he is not of my kin.
O Father, O mine Uatter spare mine kindt
O Edouart O Prince Edouart spreak now oder nimermehr
die kindt first mean, it soll nicht sterben:
Have I dishonoured my self so much,
To bow my Knee to thee, which never bowed
But to my God, and am I thus rewarded?
Is he not thine? speak murderous-minded Prince.
O Saxon, Saxon mitigate thy rage.
First thy exceeding great humility,
When to thy captive prisoner thou did kneel,
Had almost made my lying tongue confess,
The deed which I protest I never did;
But thy not causeless furious matting humour
Together with thy Daughters piteous cries,
Whom as my life and soul I dearly love,
Had thoroughly almost persuaded me,
To save her honour and belie my self,
And were I not a Prince of so high blood,
And Bastards have no scepter-bearing hands,
I would in silence smother up this blot,
And in compassion of thy Daughters wrong,
Be counted Father to an others Child;
For why my soul knows her unguiltiness.
Smooth words in bitter sense; is thine answer?
Ey vatter give m mean kindt, die kind first mean.
Das weis each woll er sagt assist nicht sein; therefore
it dyes.
O Got in seinem trone, O mean kindt mean kindt.
There murderer take his head, and breathless limbs,
Ther's flesh enough, bury it in thy bowels,
Eat that, or dye for hunger, I protest,
Thou get no other food till that be spent.
And now to thee lewd Whore, dishonoured strumpet,
Thy turn is next, therefore prepare to dye.
O mighty Duke of Saxon, spare thy Child.
She is thy Wife Edward and thou should spare her.
One Gracious word of thine will save her life.
I do confess Saxon she is mine own,
As I have married her, I will live with her,
Comfort thy self sweet Hedewick and sweet Wife.
Ach, ach vnd wehe, warumb sagt your Excellence
nicht so before, now first to late, vnser arm kindt first kilt.
Though thou be mine, and I do pity thee,
I would not Nurse a Bastard for a Son.
O Edouard now each mark your mening each sholdt
be your whore, mean Uatter each begehr upon meine knee, last
mesh lieber sterben, ade false Edouart, ls Prince, each begehrs
nicht.
Unprincely thoughts do hammer in thy head,
I'st not enough that thou hast shamed her once,
And seen the Bastard torn before thy face;
But thou would get more brats for Butchery?
No Hedewick thou shalt not live the day.
O Herr Got, nimb meine eel in deiner henden.
It is thy hand that gives this deadly stroke.
O Herr Sabote, das mean vnschuldt an tag kommen
mocht.
Her blood be on that wretched villains head,
That is the cause of all this misery.
Now murderous-minded Prince, hast thou beheld
Upon my Child, and Child's Child, thy desire,
Swear to thy self, that here I firmly swear,
That thou shall surely follow her to morrow.
In Company of thy adulterous Aunt,
Jailer convey him to his Dungeon,
If he be hungry, I have thrown him meat,
If thirsty let him suck the newly born limbs.
O Heavens and Heavenly powers, if you be just,
Reward the author of this wickedness.
To arms great Duke of Saxonie, to arms,
My Lord of Collen, and the Earl of Cornwall,
In rescue of Prince Edward and the Empress,
Have levied fresh supplies, and presently
Will bid you batail in the open Field.
They never could have come in fitter time;
Thirst they for blood? and they shall quench their thirst.
O piteous spectacle! poor Princess Hedewick.
Stand not to pity, lend a helping hand.
What slave hath murdered this guiltless Child?
What? dare thou call me slave unto my face?
I tell thee vilain, I have done this deed,
And seeing the Father and the Grandsires heart,
Can give consent and execute their own,
Wherefore should such a rascal as thy self
Presume to pity them, whom we have slain?
Pardon me, if it be presumption
To pity them, I will presume no more.
Then help, I long to be amidst my foes.
What means your Excellence to sound retreat?
This is the day of doom unto our Friends;
Before Sun set, my Sister, and my Nephew,
Unless we rescue them, must lose their lives;
The cause admits no dalliance nor delay.
He that so tyrant-like hath slain his own,
Will take no pity on a strangers blood.
At my entreaty ever we strike the battle,
Let's summon out our enemies to a parley.
Words spoken in time, have virtue, power, and price,
And mildness may prevail and take effect,
When dynt of Sword perhaps will aggravate.
Then sound a Parley to fulfil your mind,
Although I know no good can follow it.
Why how now Emperor that should have been,
Are these the English Generals bravado's?
Make you assault so hotly at the first,
And in the self same moment sound retreat?
To let you know, that neither War nor words,
Have power for to divert their fatal doom,
Thus are we both resolved; if we triumph,
And by the right and justice of our cause
Obtain the victory, as I doubt it not,
Then both of you shall bear them Company,
And ever Sun set we will perform our oaths,
With just effusion of their guilty bloods;
If you be Conquerors, and we overcome,
Carry not that conceit to rescue them,
My self will be the Executioner,
And with these Poniards frustrate all your hopes,
Making you triumph in a bloody Field.
To put you out of doubt that we intend it,
Please it your Majesty to take your Seat,
And make a demonstration of your meaning.
First on my right hand bind the English Whore,
That venomous Serpent nursed within my breast
To suck the vital blood out of my veins,
My Empress must have some pre-eminence,
Especially at such a bloody Banquet,
Her State, and love to me deserves no less.
That to Prince Edward I may show my love,
And do the latest honour to his State,
These hands of mine that never chained any,
Shall fasten him in fetters to the Chair.
Now Princes are you ready for the battle?
Now art thou right the picture of thy self,
Seated in height of all thy Tyranny;
But tell us what intends this spectacle.
To make the certainty of their deaths more plain
And Cancel all your hopes to save their lives,
While Saxon leads the troops into the Field,
Thus will I vex their souls, with sight of death,
Loudly exclaming in their half dead ears;
That if we win they shall have company,
Viz. The English Emperor,
And you my Lord Archbishop of Collen,
If we be vanquished, then they must expect
Speedy dispatch from these two Daggers points.
What can thou tyrant then expect but death?
Tush hear me out, that hand which shed their
blood,
Can do the like to rid me out of bonds.
But that's a damned resolution.
So must this desperate disease be cured.
O Saxon I'll yield my self and all my power,
To save my Nephew, though my Sister dye.
Thy Brothers Kingdom shall not save his life.
Uncle, you see these savage minded men
Will have no other ranome but my blood,
England hath Heirs, though I be never King,
And hearts and hands to scourge this tyranny,
And so farewell.
A thousand times farewell,
Sweet Brother Richard and brave Prince of Collen.
What Richard, hath this object pierced thy heart?
By this imagine how it went with me,
When yesterday I slew my Children.
O Saxon I entreat thee on my Knees.
Thou shl obtain like mercy with thy kneeling,
As lately I obeaind at Edward's hands.
Pity the tears I power before thy feet.
Pity those tears? why I shed bloody tears.
I'll do the like to save Prince Edwards life.
Then like a Warrior spill it in the Field,
My griefull anger cannot  appeased,
By sacrifice of any but himself,
Thou hast dishonoured me, and thou shalt dye;
Therefore alarm, alarm to the fight,
That thousands more may bear thee company.
Nephew and Sila now farewell for ever.
Heaven and the Right prevail, and let me die;
Uncle farewell.
Brother farewell until wee meet in Heaven.
Here's farewell Brother, Nephew, Uncle, Aunt,
As if in thousand years you should not meet;
Good Nephew, and good Aunt content your selves,
The Sword of Saxon and these Daggerpoints,
Before the Evening-Star doth show it self,
Will take sufficient order for your meeting.
But Alexander, my trusty Alexander,
Run to the Watch-Tow'r as I pointed thee,
And by thy life I charge thee look unto it
Thou be the first to bring me certain word
I we be Conquerors, or Conquered.
With careful speed I will perform this charge.
Now have I leisure yet to talk with you.
Fair Isabel, the Palsgrave's Paramour,
Wherein was he a better man than I?
Or wherefore should thy love to him, effect
Such deadly hate unto thy Emperor?
Yet welfare wenches that can love Good fellows,
And not mix Murder with Adultery.
Great Emperor, I dare not call you Husband,
Your Conscience knows my hearts unguiltiness.
Did thou not poison, or consent to poison us?
Should any but your Highness tell me so,
I should forget my patience at my death,
And call him Villain, Liar, Murderer.
She that doth so miscall me at her end,
Edward I prithee speak thy Conscience,
Think thou not that in her prosperity
Sh'hath vexed my Soul with bitter Words and Deeds?
O Prince of England I do count thee wise
That thou wilt not be encumbered with a wife,
When thou had stolen her dainty rose Corance,
And plucked the flower of her virginity.
Tyrant of Spain thou least in thy threat.
Good words, thou see thy life is in our hands.
I see thou art become a common Hangman,
An Office far nor fitting to thy mind
Than princely to the Imperial dignity.
I do not exercise on common persons,
Your Highness is a Prince, and she an Empress,
I therefore count not of a dignity.
Hark Edward how they labour all in vain,
With loss of many a valiant Soldiers life,
To rescue them whom Heaven and we have doomed;
Dost thou not tremble when thou think upon it?
Let guilty minds tremble at sight of Death,
My heart is of the nature of the Palm,
Not to be broken, till the highest Bud
Be bent and ti'd unto the lowest Root;
I rather wonder that thy Tyrants heart
Can give consent that those thy Butcherous hands
Should offer violence to thy Flesh and Blood.
See how her guiltless innocence doth plead
In silent Oratory of her chastest tears.
Those tears proceed from Fury and crst heart.
I know the stomach of your English Dames.
No Emperor, these tears proceed from grief.
Grief that thou can not be revenged of Vs.
Grief that your Highness is so ill advised,
To offer violence to my Nephew Edward;
Since then there must be sacrifice of Blood,
Let my heart-blood save both your bloods unspilt,
For of his death, thy Heart must pay the guilt.
No Aunt, I will not buy my life so dear:
Therefore Alphonso if thou be a man
Shed manly blood and let me end this strife.
Here's straining curtsie at a bitter Feast.
Content thee Empress for thou art my Wife,
Thou shalt obtain thy Boon and die the death,
And for it were unprinceby to deny
So slight request unto so great a Lord,
Edward shall bear thee company in Death.
But hark the heat of battle hath an end;
One side or other hath the victory,
And see where Alexander sweating comes;
Speak man, what news speak shall I die or live?
Shall I stab sure, or else prolong their lves
To grievous Torments? speak, am I Conqueror?
What, hath thy hast bereft thee of thy speech?
Hast thou not breath to speak one siliable?
O speak, thy dalliance kills me, won or lost?
Lost.
Ah me my Senses fail! my sight is gon.
Will not your Grace dispatch the Strumpet Queen?
Shall she then live, and we be doomed to death?
Is your Heart faint, or is your Hand too weak?
Shall servile fear break your so sacred Oaths?
Me thinks an Emperor should hold his word;
Give me the Weapons, I will soon dispatch them,
My Fathers yelling Ghost cries for revenge,
His Blood within my Veins boils for revenge;
O give me leave Caesar to take revenge.
Upon condition that thou wilt protest
To take revenge upon the Murderers,
Without respect of dignity, or State,
Afflicted, speedy, pitiless Revenge,
I will commit this Dagger to thy trust,
And give thee leave to execute thy Will.
What need I here reiterate the Deeds
Which deadly sorrow made me perpetrate?
How near did I entrap Prince Richard's life?
How sure set I the Knife to Mints his heart?
How cunningly was Palsgrave doomed to death?
How subtly was Bohem poisoned?
How silly did I satisfy my lust
Commixing dulcet Love with deadly Hate,
When Princess Hedwick lost her Maidenhead,
Sweetly embracing me for Englands Heir?
O execrable deeds!
O salvage mind!
Edward, I give thee leave to hear of this,
But will forbid the blabbing of your tongue.
Now gracious Lord and sacred Emperor,
Your highness knowing these and many more,
Which fearless pregnancy hath wrought in me,
You do me wrong to doubt that I will dive
Into their hearts that have not spared their betters,
Be therefore sudden lest we die our selves.
I know the Conqueror hastes to rescue them.
Thy Reasons are effectual, take this Dagger;
Yet pause a while.
Sweet Nephew now farewell.
They are most dear to me whom thou must kill.
Hark Aunt he now begins to pity you.
But they consented to my Fathers death.
More then consented, they did execute.
I will not make his Majesty a Liar,
I killed thy Father, therefore let me die,
But save the life of this unguilty Prince.
I killed thy Father, therefore let me die,
But save the life of this unguiltie Empress.
Hark thou to me, and think their words as wind.
I killed thy Father, therefore let me die,
And save the lives of these two guiltless Princes.
Art thou amazed to hear what I have said?
There, take the weapon, now revenge at full
Thy Fathers death, and those my dire deceits
That made thee murderer of so many Souls.
O Emperor, how cunningly would thou entrap
My simple youth to credit Fictions?
Thou kill my Father, no, no Emperor,
Caesar did love Lorentzo all to dearly:
Seeing thy Forces now are vanquished,
Frustrate thy hopes, thy Highness like to fall
Into the cruel and revengeful hands
Of merciless incensed Enemies,
Like Caius Cassius weary of thy life,
Now would thou make thy Page an instrument
By sudden stroke to rid thee of thy bonds.
Hast thou forgotten how that very night
Thy Father died, I took the Master-Key,
And with a lighted Torch walked through the Court.
I must remember that, for to my death.
I never shall forget the slightest deed,
Which on that dismal Night or Day I did.
Thou wast no sooner in thy restful Bed,
But I disturbd thy Father of his rest,
And to be short, not tha I hated him,
But for he knew my depest Secrets,
With cunning Poison I did end his life:
Art thou his Son? express it with a Stbb,
And make account if I had prospered,
Thy date was out, thou wast alredie doomed,
Thou knew too much of me to live with me.
What wonders do I hear great Emperor?
Not that I do steadfastie belive
That thou did murder my beloved Father
But in mere pity of thy vanquished state
I undertake this execution
Yet, for I fear the spakling Majesty.
Which issues from thy most Imperial, eyes
May strike relenting Passion to my heart,
And after wound received from fainting hand,
Thou fall half dead among thine Enemies,
I crave thy Highness leave to bind thee first.
Then bind me quickly, use me as thou please
O Villain, wilt thou kill thy Sovereign?
Your Highness sees that I am forced unto it.
Fair Empress. I shame to ask thee pardon,
Whom I have wronged so many thousand ways.
Dread Lord and Husband, leave these desperate thoughts,
Doubt not the Princes may be reconciled.
'T may be the Princes will be reconciled,
But what is that to me? all Potentates on Earth
Can never reconcile my grieved Soul.
Thou slew my Father, thou did make this hand
Mad with Revenge to murder Innocents,
Now hear, ow in the height of all thy pride
The rightful Gods hove powered their justfull wrath
Upon thy Tyrants head, Devil as thou art.
And saved by miracle these Princes lives;
For know, thy side hath got the Victory;
Saxon triumphs over his dearest friends;
Richard and Collen, both are Prisoners,
And every thing hath sorted to thy wish;
Only hath Heaven put it in my mind
(for he alone directed then my thoughts
Although my meaning was most mischievous)
To tell thee thou had lost, in certain hope
That suddenly thou would have stain them both,
For if the Princes came to talk about it,
I greatly feared their lives might be prolonged.
Art thou not mad to think on this deceit?
Isle make thee madder, with tormenting thee.
I tell thee Arch-Thief, Villain, Murderer,
Thy Forces have obtained the Victory,
Victory leads thy Foes in captive bands;
This Victory hath crowned hee Emperor,
Only my self have vanquished Victory,
And triumph in the Victors overthrow.
O Alexander spare thy Princes life.
Even now thou did entreat the contrary.
Think what I am that beg my life of thee.
Think what he was whom thou hast doomed to death.
But least the Princes do surprise us here
Before I have performed my strange revenge,
I will be sudden in the execution.
I will accept any condition.
Then in the presence of the Empress,
The captive Prince of England, and my self,
Forswear the joys of Heaven, the sight of God,
Thy Souls salvation, and thy Saviour Christ,
Damning thy Soul to endless pains of Hell.
Do this or die upon my Rapiers point.
Sweet Lord and Husband, spit in's face.
Die like a man, and live not like a Devil.
What? wilt thou save thy life, and damn thy Soul?
O hold thy hand, Alphonsus doth renounce.
Aunt stop your years, hear not this Blasphemy.
Sweet Husband think that Christ did die for thee.
Alphonsus doth renounce the joys of Heaven,
The sight of Angels and his Saviours blood,
And gives his Soul unto the Devils power.
Thus will I make delivery of the Deed,
Die and be damned, now am I satisfied.
O damned Miscreant, what hast thou done?
When I have leisure I will answer thee:
Mean while I'll take my heels and save my self.
If I be ever called in question,
I hope your Majesties will save my life,
You have so happily preserved yours;
Did I not think it, both of you should die.
Bring forth these daring Champions to the Block,
Comfort your selves you shall have company.
Great Emperor where is his Majesty?
What bloody spectacle do I behold?
Revenge, revenge, O Saxon, Brandenburg,
My Lord is slai,  is doomed to death.
Princes make haste, foelow the murderer.
Is Caesar slain?
Follow the Murderer.
Why stand you gazing on an other thu?
Follow the Murderer.
What Murderer?
The villain Alexander hath slain his Lord,
Make after him with speed, so shall you hear
Such villainy as you have never heard.
My Lord of Tryer, we both with our light Horse
Will scour the Coasts and quickly bring him in.
That can your Excellence alone perform,
Stay you my Lord, and guard the Prisoners,
While I, alas, unhappiest Pince alive,
Over his Trunk consume my self in Tears.
Hath Alexander done this damned deed
That cannot be why should he slay his Lord?
O cruel Fte O miserable me!
Me thinks I now present Mark Antony,
Folding dead Iulius Caesar in mine arms.
No, no, I rather will present Achilles,
And on Patroclus Tomb do sacrifice.
Let me be spurned and hated as a Dog,
But I perform more direful bloody Rites
Than Thetis Son for Menctiades.
Leave mourning for thy Foes, pity thy Friends.
Friends have I none, and that which grieves my Soul,
Is want of Foes to work my wreak upon;
But were you Traitors 4, four hundred thousand,
Then might I satisfy my self with Blood.
See Alexander where Caesar lies slain,
The guilt whereof the Traitors cast on thee;
Speak, can thou tell who slew thy Sovereign?
Why who but I? how should I curse my self
If any but my self had done this deed?
This happy hand, blessed be my hand therefore,
Revenged my Fathers death upon his Soul:
And Saxon thou hast cause to curse and bann
That he is dead, before thou did inflict
Torments on him that so hath torn thy heart.
What Mysteries are these?
Princes, can you inform us of the Truth?
The Deed's so heinous that my faltering tongue
Abhors the utterance. Yet I must tell it.
Your Highness shall not need to take the pains,
What you abhor to tell, I joy to tell,
Therefore be silent and give audience.
You mighty men, and Rulers of the Earth,
Prepare your Ears, to hear of Stratagems
Whose dire effects have gauled your princely hearts,
Confounded your conceits, muffled your eyes:
First to begin this villainous Fiend of Hell
Murdered my Father, sleeping in his Chair,
The reason why, because he only knew
All Plots, and complots of his villainy;
His death was made the Bass and the Ground
Of every mischief that hath troubled you.
If thou, thy Father and thy Progeny
Were hangd and burnt, and broken on the Wheel,
How could their deaths heap mischief on our heads?
And if you will not hear the Reason choose.
I tell thee I have slain an Emperor,
And thereby think my self as good a man
As thou, or any man in Christendom,
Thou shalt entreat me ere I tell thee more.
Proceed.
Not I.
I prethe now proceed.
Since you entreat me then, I will proceed
This murderous Devil having slain my Father,
Buz'd cunningly into my credulous ears,
That by a General Council of the States,
And as it were by Act of Palement,
The seven Electors had set down his death
And made the Empress Executioner,
Tranceerring all the guilt from him to you.
This I believed, and first did set upon
The life of Princely Richard, by the Boors,
But how my purpose failed in that, his Grace best knows;
Next, by a double intricate deceit,
Midst all his Mirth was Bohem poisoned,
And good old Mints to save Alphonso's life,
(Who at that instant was in perfect health)
Twixt jest and earnest was made a Sacrifice;
As for the Palatine, your Graces knew
His Highness and the Queens unguiltines;
But now my Lord of Saxon hark to me,
Father of Saxon should I rather call you,
It was I that made your Grace a Grandfather:
Prince Edward ploughed the ground, I sowed the Seed,
Poor Hedewick ore the most unhappy fruit,
Created in a most unlucky hour,
To a most violent and untimely death.
O loathsome Villain, O deacted deeds,
O guiltless Prince, O me most miserable.
But tell us who revealed to thee at last
This shameful guilt, and our unguiltiness?
Why that's the wonder Lords, and thus it was
When like   he had tan his eat,
And that the fury of the Fight began,
Upon the highest Watch-Tow' of the Fort,
It was my office to behold 
The Wars , and having seen the end,
I saw how Victory with equal wings
Hang hoveig  the Battles here and there,
Till at the last, the English Lyons fled,
And Saxon's side obtained the Victory;
Which seen, I posted from the turrets top,
More furiously than ere Laocoon ran,
When Trojan hands drew in Troy's overthrow
But yet as fatally as he or any.
The tyrant seeing me, stared in my face,
And suddenly demanded whats the news,
I, as the Fates would have it, hoping that he
Even in a twinkling would have slain 'em both,
For so he swore before the Fight began,
Cried bitterly that he had lost the day,
The sound whereof did kill his dastard heart,
And made the Villain desperately confess
The murder of my Father, praying me,
With die revenge, to rid him of his life
Short tale to make, I bynd him cunningly,
Told him of the deceit, triumphing over him,
And lastly with my Rapier slew him dead.
O Heavens! justly have you tan revenge
But thou, thou murderous adulterous slave,
What Bull of Phalaris, what strange device,
Shall we invent to take away thy life?
If Edward and the Empress, whom I ,
Will not requite it now, and save my life,
Then let me die, contentedly I die,
Having at last revenged my Fathers death
Villain, not all the world shall save thy life.
Had thou no been Author of my Hedewick death,
I would have certainly saved thee from death;
But if my Sentence now may take effect,
I would adjudge the Villain to be hanged
As here the Jewes are hanged in Germany.
Young Prince it shall be so; go drag the Slave
 the place of execution:
There let the Iudas, on a Jewish Gallows
Hang by the heels between two English Mastives,
There feed on Dogs, let Dogs there feed on thee,
And by all mean prolong his misery.
O might thy self and all these English Currs,
Instead of Mastive-Doggs hang by my side,
How sweetly would I tug upon your Flesh.
Away with him, suffer him not to speak.
And now my lords, Collen, Tryer, and Barndenburg,
Whose Hearts are bruised to think upon these woes,
Though no man hast such reason as my self,
We of the seven Electors that remain,
After so many bloody Massacres,
Kneeling pone our Knees humbly entreat
Your Excellence to be our Emperor.
The Royalties of the Coronation
Shall be, at Aix, shortly solemnised.
Brave Princely Richard now refuse it not,
Though the Election be made in Tears,
Joy shall attend thy Coronation.
It stands not with mine Honour to deny it,
Yet by mine Honou, fain I would refuse it.
Uncle, the weight of all these Miseries
Makes my heart as heavy as your own,
But an Imperial Crown would lighten it,
Let this one reason make you take the Crown.
What's that sweet nephew?
Sweet Uncle, this it is,
Was never Englishman yet Emperor,
Therefore to honour England and your self,
Let private sorrow yield to public Fame,
That once an Englishman bare Caesar's name.
Nephew, thou hast prevailed; Princes stand up,
We humbly do accept your sacred offer.
Then sound the Trumpets, and cry Vivat Caesar.
Vivat Caesar.
Richardus Dei gratia Romanorum Imperator, semper
Augustus, Comes .
Sweet Sister now let Caesar comfort you,
And all the rest that yet are comfortless;
Let them expect from English Caesar's hands
Peace, and abundance of all earthly Joy.

