VOuchsafe Immortals, and (aboue the rest)
Great Iupiter, our Cities sole Protector,
That if (provoked against vs by our evils,)
You needs will plague vs with your ceasles wroth,
At least to choose those forth that are in fault,
And save the rest in these tempestuous broils:
Else let the mischief that should them befall,
Be poured on me, that one may die for all.
Oft hath such sacrifice appeased your ires,
And oft ye have your heavy hands with-held
From this poor people, when (with one mans loss,)
Your pity hath preserved the rest vntucht:
But we disloiall to our own defence,
Faint-harted do those liberties enthral,
Which (to preserve unto our after good)
Our fathers hazarded their derest blood.
Yet Brutus Manlius, hardy Sceuola,
And stout Camillus, are returned fro Styx,
Desiring Arms to aid our Capitol.
Yea, come they are, and fiery as before,
Under a Tyrant see our bastard harts
Lye idly sighing, while our shameful souls
Endure a million of base controls.
Poisoned Ambition (rooted in high minds)
It is thou that train'st vs into all these errors:
Thy mortal couetize peruerts our laws,
And tears our freedom from our franchised harts.
Our Fathers found thee at their former walls;
And humbled to their of-spring left thee dying.
Yet thou reviving, foyl'dst our Infant Town,
With guiltless blood by brothers hands out-lanched.
And hongst (O Hell) upon a Forte half finished,
Thy monstrous murder for a thing to mark.
"But faith continues not where men command.
"Equals are ever bandying for the best:
"A state divided cannot firmly stand.
"Two Kings within one realm could never rest.
This day we see, the Father and the son,
Have fought like foes Pharsalias misery;
And with their blood made marsh the parched plains,
While th'earth that groaned to bear their carcasses,
Bewailed th'insatiat humours of them both;
That as much blood in wilful folly spent,
As were to tame the world sufficient.
Now Parthia fear no more, for Crassus death
That we will come thy borders to besiege:
Nor fear the darts of our courageous troops.
For those brave soldiers that were (sometime) wont
To terrify thee with their names, are dead.
And civil fury, fiercer then thine hosts,
Hath in a manner this great Town ore-turn'd;
That meanwhile was the terror of the world.
Of whom so many Nations stood in fear,
To whom so many Nations prostrate stooped,
Ore whom (save heaven) nought could signorize,
And whom (save heaven) nothing could affright.
Impregnable, immortal, and whose power,
Could never have been curbed, but by it self.
For neither could the flaxen-haird high Dutch,
(A martial people matting after Arms,)
Nor yet the fierce and fiery humoured French,
The More that travels to the Lybian sands,
The Greek, Th'Arabian, Macedons or Medes,
Once dare t'assault it, or attempt to lift
Their humbled heads, in presence of proud Rome.
But by our Laws from liberty restraynd,
Like Captives lived eternally enchained.
But Rome (alas) what helps it that thou ty'dst
The former World to thee in vassalage?
What helps thee now t'haue tamed both land and Sea?
What helps it thee that under thy control,
The Morn and Mid-day both by East and West,
And that the golden Sun where ere he drive
His glittering Chariot, finds our Ensigns spread?
Sith it contents not thy posterity;
But as a bait for pride (which spoils vs all,)
Embarks vs in so perilous a way,
As menaces our death, and thy decay.
For Rome thou now resembles a Ship,
At random wandering in a boisterous Sea,
When foaming billows feel the Northern blasts:
Thou toyl'st in peril, and the windy storm,
Doth topside-turuey toss thee as thou flotest.
Thy Mast is shivered, and thy maine-saile torn,
Thy sides sore beaten, and thy hatches broke.
Thou want thy tackling, and a Ship vnrig'd
Can make no shift to combat with the Sea.
See how the Rocks do heave their heads at thee,
Which if thou sholdst but touch, thou straight becomst
A spoil to Neptune, and a sportful pray
To the Glauc's and Tritons, pleased with thy decay.
Thou vaunt'st not of thine Ancestors in vain,
But vainly count'st thine own victorious deeds.
What helps vs the things that they did then,
Now we are hated both of Gods and men?
"Hatred accompanies prosperity,
"For one man grieves at another good,
"And so much more we think our misery,
"The more that Fortune hath with others stood:
"So that we silt are seen as wisdom would,
"To bridle time with reason as we should.
"For we are proud when Fortune favours vs,
"As if inconstant Chance were always one,
"Or standing now, she would continue thus.
"O fools look back and see the rolling stone,
"Whereon she blindly lighting sets her foot,
"And slightly sows that seldom takes root.
Heaven heretofore (inclined to do vs good,)
Did favour vs, with conquering our foes,
When jealous Italy (exasperate,
With our vp-rising) sought our Cities fall.
But we, soon tickled with such flattering hopes,
Waged further war with an insatiate hart,
And tyerd our neighbour Countries so with charge,
As with their loss, we did our bounds enlarge.
Carthage and Sicily we have subdued,
And almost yoked all the world beside:
And soly through desire of public rule,
Rome and the earth are waxen all as one:
Yet now we live despoild and robbed by one,
Of th'ancient freedom wherein we were borne.
And even that yoke that wont to tame all others,
Is heavily returned upon our selves.
"A note of Chance that may the proud control,
"And show Gods wrath against a cruel soul.
"For heaven delights not in vs, when we doe
"That to another, which our selves dysdaine:
"Judge others as thou would be judged again.
"And do but as thou would be done unto.
"For sooth to say (in reason) we deserve,
"To have the selfsame measure that we serve.
What right had our ambitious ancestors,
(Ignobly issued from the Carte and Plough,)
To enter Asia? What, were they the heirs
To Persia or the Medes, first Monarchies?
What interest had they to Afferique?
To Gaul or Spain? Or what did Neptune owe
vs
Within the bounds of further Brittany?
Are we not thieves and robbers of those Realms
That ought vs nothing but revenge for wrongs?
What touches vs the treasure or the hopes,
The lives or liberties of all those Nations,
Whom we by force have held in servitude?
Whose mournful cries and shrieks to heaven ascend,
Importuning both vengeance and defence
Against this City, rich of violence.
"It is not enough (alas) our power t'extend,
"Or ouer-runne the world from East to West,
"Or that our hands the Earth can comprehend,
"Or that we proudly doe what like vs best.
"He lives more quietly whose rest is made,
"And can with reason chasten his desire,
"Then he that blindly toils for a shade,
"And is with others Empire set on fire.
"Our bliss consists not in possessions,
"But in commanding our affections
"In virtues choice, and vices needful chase
"Far from our harts, for staining of our face.
Upon thy back (where misery doth sit)
O Rome, the heavens with their wrathful hand,
Revenge the crimes thy fathers did commit.
But if (their further fury to withstand,
Which ore thy walls thy wrack sets menacing)
Thou dost not seek to calm heavens ireful king,
A further plague will pester all the land.
"The wrath of heaven (though urged,) we see is
slow
"In punishing the evils we have done:
"For what the Father hath deserved, we know
"Is spared him, and punished in the son.
"But to forgive the apter that they be,
"They are the more displeased when they see,
"That we continue our offence begun.
"Then from her loathsome Cave doth Plague repair,
"That breaths her beauie poisons down to hell:
"Which with their noisome fall corrupt the ayre,
"Or maigre famine, which the weak foretell,
"Or bloody war, (of other woes the worst,)
"Which where it lights doth show the Land accursed,
"And ne'er did good where ever it befell.
War that hath sought Th'Ausonian fame to
rear,
In warlike Emonye, (now grown so great
With Soldiers bodies that were buried there,)
Which yet to sack vs toils in bloody sweat:
T'enlarge the bounds of conquering Thessalie,
Through murder, discord, wrath, and enmity,
Even to the peaceful Indians pearled seat.
Whose entrails fyerd with rancor, wrath and
rage,
The former petty combats did displace,
And Camp to Camp did endless baticites mage:
Which on the Mountain tops of worlike Thrice,
Made thundering Mars (Dissentions common
friend,)
Amongst the forward Soldiers first descend,
Armed with his blood-besmeard keen Coutelace.
Who first attempted to excite to Arms,
The troops enraged with the Trumpets sound,
Head-long to run and reck no after
harms,
Where in the flowered Meads dead men were found;
Falling as thick (through warlike cruelty,)
As ears of Corn for want of husbandry;
That (wasteful) shed their grain upon the ground.
Owarre, if thou were subject but to death,
And by desert mighst fall to Phlegiton,
The torment that Ixion suffered,
Or his whose soul the Vulter seizes on,
Were all too little to reward thy wrath:
Nor all the plagues, that fiery Pluto
hath
The most outrageous sinners laid upon.
Accursed Catiues, wretches that wee are,
Perceive we not that for the fatal dombe,
The Fates make bast enough: but we (by war)
Must seek in Hell to have a hapless room.
Or fast enough doe foolish men not die,
But they (by murder of themselves) must hie,
Hopeless to hide them in a hapless tomb?
All sad and desolate our City lies,
And (for fair Corne-ground are our fields
surcloid)
With worthless Gorse, that yearly fruitless dyes;
And chokes the good which else we had enjoyed.
Death dwells within vs, and if gentle
Peace
Descend not soon, our sorrows to
surcease,
Latium (already quaild) will be destroyed.
AND will ye needs bedew my dead-grown joys,
And nourish sorrow with eternal tears?
O eyes, and will ye (cause I cannot dry
Your ceaseless springs) not suffer me to die?
Then make the blood fro forth my branch-like veins,
Like weeping Rivers trickle by your vaults;
And sponge my bodies heate of moisture so,
As my displeased soul may shun my hart.
Heavens let me dye, and let the Destinies,
Admit me passage to the infernal Lake;
That my poor ghost, may rest where powerful fate,
In Deaths sad kingdom hath my husband lodged.
Fain would I die, but darksome ugly Death,
With-holds his dart, and in disdain doth fly me,
Maliciously knowing that hells horror,
Is milder then mine endless discontent.
And that if Death upon my life should seize,
The payne supposed would procure mine ease.
But ye sad Powers that rule the silent
deeps,
Of dead-sad Night, where sins doe mask unseen:
You that amongst the darksome mansions
Of pining ghosts, twixt sighs, and sobs and tears,
Do exercise your mirthless Empory.
Ye gods (at whose arbitrament all stand,)
Dislodge my soul, and keep it with your selves,
For I am more then half your prisoner.
My noble husbands (more then noble souls,)
Already wander under your commands.
O then shall wretched I, that am but one,
(Yet once both theirs,) survive now they are gone?
Alas thou should, thou should Cornelia,
Have broke the sacred thread that tide thee here,
When as thy husband Crassus (in his flower)
Did first bear Arms, and bare away my love.
And not (as thou hast done) go break the bands,
By calling Hymen once more back again.
Less hapless, and more worthily thou might,
Have made thine ancestors and thee renound:
If (like a royal Dame) with faith fast kept,
Thou with thy former husbands death had slept.
But partial Fortune, and the powerful Fates,
That at their pleasures wield our purposes,
Bewitched my life, and did beguile my love.
Pompey, the fame that ran of thy frail honours,
Made me thy wife, thy love, and (like a thief)
From my first husband stole my faithless grief.
But if (as some believe) in heaven or hell,
Be heavenly powers, or infernal spirits,
That care to be avenged of Lovers oaths;
(Oaths made in marriage, and after broke.)
Those powers, those spirits (moved with my light faith,)
Are now displeased with Pompey and my self.
And doe with civil discord (furthering it)
Untie the bands, that sacred Hymen knit.
Else only I, am cause of both their wraths,
And of the sin that ceeleth up thine eyes;
Thine eyes (O deplorable Pompey) I am she,
I am that plague, that sacks thy house and thee.
For it is not heaven, nor Crassus (cause hee
sees
That I am thine) in jealousy pursues vs.
No, it is a secrete cross, an unknown thing,
That I received, from heaven at my birth,
That I should heap misfortunes on their head,
Whom once I had received in marriage bed.
Then ye the noble Romulists that rest,
Hence-forth forbear to seek my murdering love,
And let their double loss that held me dear,
Bid you beware for fear you be beguiled.
Ye may be rich and great in Fortunes grace,
And all your hopes with hap may be effected,
But if ye once be wedded to my love:
Clouds of adversity will cover you.
So (pestilently) fraught with change of plagues,
Is mine infected bosom from my youth.
Like poison that (once lighting in the body)
No sooner tutcheth then it taints the blood;
One while the hart, another while the liver,
(According to th'encountring passages)
Nor spares it what purely feeds the hart,
More then the most infected filthiest part.
Pompey what help it thee, (say dearest life,)
Tell me what help thy warlike valiant mind
T'encounter with the least of my mishaps?
What help it thee that under thy command
Thou saw the trembling earth with horror missed?
Or (where the sun forsakes th'Ocean sea,)
Or (watered his Coursers in the West)
Thaue made thy name by far more famed and feared,
Then Summers thunder to the silly Heard?
What help it, that thou saw when thou were young,
Thy Helmet decked with coronets of Baize?
So many enemies in battle ranged
Beat back like flies before a stome of hail?
T'haue looked askance and see so many Kings
To lay their Crowns and Scepters at thy feet?
To embrace thy knees, and humbled by their fate,
T'attend thy mercy in this morneful state?
Alas and here-withall, what help it thee,
That even in all the corners of the earth,
Thy wandering glory, was so greatly known?
And that Rome saw thee while thou tryumph'dst thrice
O'er three parts of the world that thou had yoked?
That Neptune weltering on the windy plains,
Escaped not free fro thy victorious hands?
Since thy hard hap, since thy fierce destiny,
(Envious of all thine honours) gave thee me.
By whom the former course of thy fair deeds,
Might (with a biting bridle) bee restraind;
By whom the glory of thy conquests got,
Might die disgraced with mine unhappiness.
O hapless wife, thus ominous to all,
Worse then Megera, worse then any plague.
What foul infernal, or what stranger hell,
Hence-forth wilt thou inhabit, where thy hap,
None others hopes, with mischief may entrap.
What end (O race of Scipio,) will the Eats
Afford your tears? Will that day never come
That your disastrous griefs shall turn to joy,
And we have time to bury our annoy?
Ne'er shall I see that day, for Heaven and Time,
Have failed in power to calm my passion.
Nor can they (should they pity my complaints)
Once ease my life, but with the pangs of death.
"The wide worlds accidents are apt to change.
"And tickle Fortune stays not in a place.
"But (like the Clouds) continually doth range,
"Or like the Sun that hath the Night in chase.
"Then as the Heavens (by whom our hopes are guided)
"Doe coast the Earth with an eternal course,
"We must not think a misery betided,
"Will never cease, but still grow worse and worse.
"When Isie Winter's past, then comes the spring,
"Whom Summers pride (with sultry heate) pursues;
"To whom mild Autumn doth earths treasure bring,
"The sweetest season that the wise can choose.
"Heavens influence was ne'er so constant yet,
"In good or bad as to continue it.
When I was young, I saw against poor Sylla,
Proud Cynna, Marius, and Carbo fleshed,
So long, till they began tiranize the Town,
And spilt such store of blood in every street,
As there were none but dead-men to be seen.
Within a while, I saw how Fortune plaid,
And wound those Tyrants underneath her wheel,
Who lost their lives, and power at once by one,
That (to revenge himself) did (with his blade)
Commit more murder then Rome ever made.
Yet Sylla, shaking tyranny aside,
Returned due honours to our Common-wealth,
Which peaceably retained her ancient state,
Grown great without the strife of Citizens.
Till this ambitious Tyrants time, that toyld
To stoop the world, and Rome to his desires.
But flattering Chance that trained his first designs,
May change her looks, and give the Tyrant over,
Leaving our City, where so long ago,
Heavens did their favours lavishly bestow.
It is true, the Heavens (at least-wise if they please)
May give poor Rome her former liberty.
But (though they would,) I know they cannot give
A second life to Pompey, that is slain.
Morn not for Pompey, Pompey could not die
A better death, then for his Countries weal.
For oft he searched amongst the fierce alarms,
But (wishing) could not find so fair an end;
Till fraught with years, and honour both at once,
Hee gave his body (as a Barricade)
For Romes defence, by Tyrants ouer-laide.
Bravely he died, and (happily) takes it ill,
That (envious) we rapine at heavens will.
Alas, my sorrow would be so much less,
If he had died (his fauchin in his fist.)
Had hee amidst huge troops of Armed men
Been wounded, by another any way,
It would have calmed many of my sighs.
For why, t'haue seen his noble Roman blood
Mixed with his enemies, had done him good.
But hee is dead, (O heavens) not dead in fight,
With pike in hand upon a Forte besieged
Defending of a breach, but basely slain:
Slain traitorously, without assault in war.
Yea, slain he is, and bitter chance decreed
To have me there, to see this bloody deed.
I saw him, I was there, and in mine arms
He almost felt the poygnard when he fell.
Whereat, my blood stopped in my straggling veins,
Mine hair grew bristled, like a thorny grove:
My voice lay hid, half dead within my throat.
My frightful hart (stunt in my stone-cold breast)
Faintly redoubled every feeble stroke.
My spirit (chained with impatient rage,)
Did raving strive to break the prison op,
(Enlarged,) to drown the payne it did abide,
In solitary Lethes sleepy tide.
Thrice (to absent me from this hateful light,)
I would have plund'd my body in the Sea.
And thrice detained, with doleful shrieks and cries,
(With arms to heaven vprea'd) I began exclaim
And bellow forth against the Gods themselves,
A bedroll of outrageous blasphemies.
Till (grief to hear, and hell for me to speak,)
My woes waxed stronger, and my self grew weak.
Thus day and night I toil in discontent,
And sleeping wake, when sleep it self that rides
Upon the mists, scarce moistened mine eyes.
Sorrow consumes me, and in steed of rest,
With folded arms I sadly sit and weep.
And if I wink, it is for fear to see,
The fearful dreams effects that trouble me.
O heavens, what shall I doe? alas must I,
Must I my self, be murderer of my self?
Must I my self be forced to op the way,
Whereat my soul in wounds may sally forth?
Madam, you must not thus transpose your self.
We see your sorrow, but who sorrows not?
The grief is common. And I muse, besides
The servitude that causes all our cares,
Besides the baseness wherein we are yoked,
Besides the loss of good men dead and gone,
What one he is that in this broil hath bin
And mourns not for some man of his kin?
If all the world were in the like distress,
My sorrow yet would never seem the less.
"O, but men bear mis-fortunes with more ease,
"The more indifferently that they fall,
"And nothing more (in vprores) men can please,
"Then when they see their woes not worst of all.
"Our friends mis-fortune doth increase our own.
"But ours of others will not be acknown.
"Yet one mans sorrow will another tutch.
"I when himself will entertain none such.
"Another tears, draw tears fro forth our eyes.
"And choice of streams the greatest River dries.
When sand within a VVhirle-poole lies vnwet,
 My tears shall dry, and I my grief forget.
What boot your tears, or what avails your forrow
Against th'ineuitable dart of Death?
Think you to move with lamentable plaints
Persiphone, or Plutos gastlie spirits,
To make him live that's locked in his tomb,
And wanders in the Center of the earth?
"No, no, Cornelia, Caron takes not pain,
"To ferry those that must be fetched again.
Proserpina indeed neglects my plaints,
And hell it self is deaf to my laments;
Unprofitably should I waste my tears,
If over Pompey I should weep to death;
With hope to have him be revived by them.
Weeping avails not, therefore doe I weep.
Great losses, greatly are to be depror'd,
The loss is great that cannot be restored.
"Nought is immortal underneath the Sun,
"All things are subject to Deaths tyranny:
"Both Clowns &amp; Kings one selfsame course must
run,
"And whatsoever lives, is sure to die.
Then wherefore morn you for your husbands death,
Sith being a man, he was ordained to die?
Sith Ioues owns sons, retaining humane
shape,
No more then wretched we their death could scope.
Brave Scipio, your famous ancestor,
That Romes high worth to Affrique did extend;
And those two Scipios (that in person fought,
Before the fearful Carthaginian walls,)
Both brothers, and both wars fierce lightning fierce;
Are they not dead? Yes, and their death (our dearth)
Hath hid them both embowel'd in the earth.
And those great Cities, whose foundations reached
From deepest hell, and with their tops tushed heaven:
Whose lofty Towers, (like thorny-pointed spears)
Whose Temples, Palaces, and walls embossed,
In power and force, and fierceness, seemed to threat
The tyred world, that trembled with their weight;
In one days space (to our etornall mons)
Have we not seen them turned to heaps of stones?
Carthage can witness, and thou heavens hand-work
Fair Ilium, razed by the conquering Greeks;
Whose ancient beauty, worth and weapons, seemed
Sufficient t'haue tamed the Mermidons.
"But whatso'ere hath been begun, must end.
"Death (happily that our willingness doth see)
"With brandished dart, doth make the passage free;
"And timeless doth our souls to Pluto send.
Would Death had steeped his date in Lerna-s blood,
That I were drowned in the Tartarean deeps.
I am an offering fit for Acheron.
A match more equal never could be made,
Then I, and Pompey, in th'Elisian shade.
"Death's always ready, and our time is known
"To be at heavens dispose, and not our own.
Can wee be ouer-hastie to good hap?
What good expect wee in a fiery gap?
To scope the fears that follows Fortunes glances.
"A noble mind doth never fear mischances.
"A noble mind disdains servitude.
Can bondage true nobility exclude?
How if I doe, or suffer that I would not?
"True nobles never doth the thing it should not.
Then must I dye.
Yet dying think this still;
"No fear of death should force vs to doe ill.
If death be such, why is your fear so rife?
My works will show I never feared my life.
And yet you will not that (in our distress,)
We ask Deaths aid to end lifes wretchedness.
"We neither ought to urge nor ask a thing,
"Wherein we see so much assurance lies.
"But if perhaps some fierce offended King,
"(To fright vs) set pale death before our eyes,
"To force vs doe that goes against our hart;
"It were more then base in vs to dread his dart.
"But when for fear of an ensuing ill,
"We seek to shorten our appointed race,
"Then it is (for fear) that we our felues doe kill,
"So fond we are to fear the worlds disgrace.
It is not for frailty or faint cowardice,
That men (to shun mischances) seek for death.
But rather he that seeks it, shows
himself,
Of certain courage, against uncertain chance.
"He that retires not at the threats of death,
"Is not as are the vulgar, slightly feed.
"For heaven it self, nor hells infectious breath,
"The resolute at any time have stayed.
"And (sooth to say) why fear we when we see,
"The thing we fear, less then the fear to be.
Then let me die my liberty to save,
For it is a death to live a Tyrants slave.
Daughter, beware how you provoke the heavens,
Which in our bodies (as a tower of strength)
Have placed our souls, and fortefide the same;
As discreet Princes set their Garrisons,
In strongest places of their Provinces.
"Now, as it is not lawful for a man,
"At such a Kings departure or decease,
"To leave the place, and falsify his faith,
"So in this case, we ought not to surrender
"That dearer part, till heaven it self command it.
"For as they lent vs life to doe vs pleasure,
"So look they for return of such a treasure.
"WHat ever the massy Earth hath freight,
"Or on her nurse-like back sustains,
"Upon the will of Heaven doth waite,
"And doth no more then it ordains.
"All fortunes, all felicities,
"Upon their motion doe depend.
"And from the stars doth still arise,
"Both their beginning and their end.
"The Monarchies that cover all
"This earthly round with Majesty,
"Have both their rising and their fall,
"From heaven and heavens variety.
"Frail men, or mans more frail defence,
"Had never power, to practise stays
"Of this celestial influence,
"That governs and guides our days.
"No cloud but will be ouer-cast.
"And what now flourished, must fade.
"And that that fades, revive at last,
"To flourish as it first was made.
"The forms of things doe never die,
"because the matter that remains,
"Reforms another thing thereby,
"That still the former shape retains.
"The roundness of two boules
cross-cast,
"(so they with equal pace be aimed,)
"Shows their beginning by their last,
"which by old nature is new-fram'd,
"So peopled cities that of yore
"were desert fields where none would bide,
"Become forsaken as before,
"yet after are re-edified.
"Perceive we not a petty vain,
"cut from a spring by chance or art,
Engenders fountains, whence again,
those fountains doe to floods convert?
Those floods to waives, those waives to seas,
that oft exceed their wonted bounds:
And yet those seas (as heavens please)
return to springs by vnder-grounds.
Even so our city (in her prime)
prescribing Princes every thing,
Is now subdued by conquering Time:
and lives subject to a King.
And yet perhaps the sun-bright crown,
that now the Tyrants bead doth deck,
May turn to Rome with true renoune,
If fortune chance but once to check.
The stately walls that once were reared,
and by a shepherds hands erect,
(With hapless brothers blood
besmeared)
shall show by whom they were infect.
And once more unjust Tarquins frown,
(with arrogance and rage inflamed)
Shall keep the Romaine valor down;
and Rome it self a while be tamed.
And chastest Lucrece once again,
(because her name dishonoured stood)
Shall by herself be careless slain,
and make a river of her blood;
Scorning her soul a seat should build
within a body, basely seen.
By shameless rape to be defiled,
that erst was clear as heavens Queen.
But heavens as tyranny shall yoke
our bosterd harts, with servile thrall;
So grant your plagues (which they provoke,)
may light upon them once for all.
And let another Brutus rise,
bravely to fight in Romes defence,
To free our Town from tyranny,
and tyrannous proud insolence.
THE cheerful Cock (the sad nights comforter,)
Waiting upon the rising of the Sun,
Doth sing to see how Cynthia shrinks her horn,
While Clitie takes her progress to the East.
Where wringing wet with drops of silver dew,
Her wonted tears of love she doth renew.
The wandering Swallow with her broken song,
The Country-wench unto her work awakes;
While Citherea sighing walks to seek
Her murdered love, transformed into a Rose.
Whom (though she see) to crop she kindly fears;
But (kissing) sighs, and dews him with her tears.
Sweet tears of love, remembrancers to time.
Time past with me that am to tears converted,
Whose mournful passions, dull the mornings joys.
Whose sweeter sleeps, are turned to fearful dreams.
And whose first fortunes, (filled with all distress,)
Afford no hope of future happiness.
But what disastrous or hard accident,
Hath bathed your blubbered eyes in bitter tears?
That thus consort me in my misery.
Why doe you beat your breasts? why morn you so?
Say gentle sisters, tell me, and believe
It grieves me that I know not why you grieve.
O poor Cornelia, have not we good cause,
For former wrongs to furnish vs with tears?
O but I fear that Fortune seeks new flaws,
And still (vnsatisfide) more hatred bears.
Wherein can Fortune further injure vs,
Now we have lost our conquered liberty,
Our Common-wealth, our Empire, and our honours,
Under this cruel Tarquins tyranny?
Under his outrage now are all our goods,
Where scattered they run by Land and Sea
(Like exiled vs) from fertile Italy,
To proudest Spain, or poorest Getulie.
And will the heavens that have so oft defended
Our Romaine walls, from fury of fierce kings,
Not (once again) return our Senators,
That from the Lybique plains, and Spanish fields,
With fearless harts do guard our Romaine hopes?
Will they not once again encoumge them,
To fill our fields with blood of enemies.
And bring from Affrique to our Capitol,
Upon their helmes the Empire that is stole.
Then home-borne household gods, and ye good spirits,
To whom in doubtful things we seek access,
By whom our family, hath been adorned,
And graced with the name of African.
Doe ye vouchsafe that this victorious title,
Be not expired in Cornelias blood;
And that my Father now (in the Affrique wars)
The selfsame style by conquest may continue.
But wretched that I am, alas I fear.
What fear you Madam?
That the frowning heavens,
Oppose themselves against vs in their wrath.
Our loss (I hope) hath satis-fide their ire.
O no, our loss lists Caesars fortunes hyer.
Fortune is fickle.
But hath fayld him never.
The more unlike she should continue ever.
My fearful dreams doe my despairs redouble.
Why suffer you vain dreams your head to trouble?
Who is not troubled with strange visions?
That of our spirit are but illusions.
God grant these dreams, to good effect bee brought.
We dream by night what we by day have thought.
The silent Night that long had soiurned,
Now began to cast her sable mantle off,
And now the sleepy Waine-man softly drove,
His slow-pac'd Teem, that long had trailed.
When (like a slumber, if you term it so)
A dullness, that disposes vs to rest,
Began close the windows of my watchful eyes,
Already tyerd and laden with my tears.
And lo (me thought) came gliding by my bed,
The ghost of Pompey, with a ghastly look;
All pale and brawne-falne, not in triumph borne,
Amongst the conquering Romans as we used,
When he (enthroniz'd,) at his feet beheld
Great Emperors, fast bound in chains of
brass.
But all amazed, with fearful hollow eyes,
His hair and beard, deformed with blood and sweat,
Casting a thyn course lynsel ore his shoulders,
That (torn in pieces) trailed upon the ground.
And (gnashing of his teeth) unlocked his jaws,
Which (slightly covered with a scarce-seene skin,)
This solemn tale, he sadly did begin.
Sleep thou Cornelia? sleepst thou gentle
wife,
And see thy Fathers misery and mine?
Wake dearest sweet, and (ore our Sepulchers)
In pity show thy latest love to vs.
Such hap (as ours) attends on my sons,
The selfsame foe and fortune following them.
Send Sextus over to some foreign Nation,
Far from the common hazard of the wars;
That (being yet saved) he may attempt no more,
To avenge the valor that is tried before.
He said. And suddenly a trembling horror,
A chyl-cold shivering (settled in my veins)
Brake up my slumber; When I opt my lips
Three times to cry, but could nor cry, nor speak.
I moved mine head, and flonge abroad mine arms
To entertain him, but his airy spirit,
Beguiled mine embraces, and (unkind)
Left me embracing nothing but the wind.
O valiant soul, when shall this soul of
mine,
Come visit thee in the Elision shades?
O dearest life; or when shall sweetest death,
Dissolve the fatal trouble of my days,
And bless me with my Pompeys company?
But may my father (O extreme mishap)
And such a number of brave regiments,
Made of so many expert Soldiers,
That loved our liberty and followed him,
Be so discomfited? O would it were but an illusion.
Madam never fear.
Nor let a senseless Idol of the night,
Increase a more then needful fear in you.
My fear proceeds not of an idle dream,
For it is a truth that hath astonished me.
I saw great Pompey, and I heard him speak;
And thinking to embrace him, opt mine arms,
When drowsy sleep that waked me at unawares,
Did with his flight unclose my fearful eyes
So suddenly, that yet me thinks I see him.
Howbe-it I cannot tush him, for he slides
More swiftly from me then the Ocean glides.
"These are vain thoughts, or melancholy shows,
"That wont to haunt and trace by cloistred tombs:
"Which oath's appear in sad and strange
disguises.
"To pensive minds deceived, (with their shadows)
"They counterfeit the dead in voice and figure;
"Divining of our future miseries.
"For when our soul the body hath disgaged,
"It seeks the common passage of the dead,
"Down by the fearful gates of Acheron.
"Where when it is by Oecus adjudged,
"It either turns to the Stygian Lake,
"Or stays for ever in th'Elisian fields;
"And ne'er returns to the Corse entered;
"To walk by night, or make the wise afraid.
"None but inevitable conquering Death,
"Descends to hell, with hope to rise again;
"For ghosts of men are locked in fiery gates,
"Fast-guarded by a fell remorseless Monster.
"And therefore think not it was Pompeys spryte,
"But some false Daemon that beguiled your sight.
Then O worlds Queen, O town that did extend
Thy conquering arms beyond the Ocean,
And throngdst thy conquests from the Lybian shores
Down to the Scithian swift-foote fearless Porters,
Thou art embossed; and at this instant yielded
Thy proud neck to a miserable yoke.
Rome thou art tamed, &amp; th'earth dewd with thy blood,
Doth laugh to see how thou art signiorizd.
The force of heaven exceeds thy former strength.
For thou that wont'st to tame and conquer all,
Art conquered now with an eternal fall.
Now shalt thou march (thy hands fast bound behind thee)
Thy head hung down, thy cheeks with tears besprent,
Before the victor; While thy rebel son,
With crowned front triumphing follows thee.
Thy bravest Captains, whose coragious harts
(Joined with the right) did re-enforce our hopes,
Now murdered lye for Foul to feed upon.
Petreus, Cato,-and Scipio are slain,
And Iuba that amongst the Mores did reign.
Now you whom both the gods and Fortunes grace,
Hath saved from danger in these furious broils,
Forbear to tempt the enemy again,
For fear you feel a third calamity.
Caesar is like a brightly flaming blaze
That fiercely burns a house already fired;
And ceaseless launching out on every side,
Consumes the more, the more you seek to quench it,
Still darting sparkles, till it find a train
To seize upon, and then it flames amain.
The men, the Ships, wher-with poor Rome affronts him,
All powreles, give proud Caesars wrath free
passage.
Nought can resist him, all the power we raise,
Turns but to our misfortune, and his praise.
It is thou (O Rome) that nursed his insolence.
It is thou (O Rome) that gau'st him first the sword
Which murdrer-like against thy self he draws:
And violates both God and Natures laws.
Like moral Esops mysled Country swain,
That fownd a Serpent pining in the snow,
And full of foolish pity took it up,
And kindly laid it by his household fire,
Till (waxen warm) it nimbly began to stir,
And stung to death the fool that fostered her.
O gods that once had care of these our walls,
And fearless kept vs from th'assault of foes.
Great Iupiter, to whom our Capitol
So many Oxen yearly sacrificed.
Minerua, Stator, and stout Thracian Mars,
Father to good Quirinus our first founder.
To what intent have ye preserved our Town?
This stately Town so often hazarded,
Against the Samnites, Sabins, and fierce Latins?
Why from once footing in our Fortresses,
Have ye repeld the lusty warlike Gaules?
Why from Molossus and false Hanibal,
Have ye reserved the noble Romulists?
Or why from Catlins lewd conspiracies,
Preserved ye Rome by my prevention?
To cast so soon a state so long
defended,
Into the bondage where (enthrald) we pine?
To serve (no stranger, but amongst vs) one
That with blind frenzy builds up his throne?
But if in vs be any vigour resting,
If yet our harts retain one drop of blood,
Caesar thou shalt not vaunt thy conquest long,
Nor longer hold vs in this servitude.
Nor shalt thou bathe thee longer in our blood.
For I divine that thou must vomit it,
Like to a Cur that Carrion hath devoured,
And cannot rest until his maw be scoured.
Think thou to signiorize, or be the King
Of such a number, nobler then thy self?
Or think thou Romains bear such bastard harts,
To let thy tyranny be unrevenged?
No, for me thinks I see the shame, the grief,
The rage, the hatred that they have conceived:
And many a Romaine sword already drawn,
T'enlarge the liberty that thou vsurpst.
And thy dismembered body (stabbed and torn,)
Dragd through the streets, disdained to bee borne.
Amongst the rest of mine extreme mishaps,
I find my fortune not the least in this,
That I have kept my Moister company,
Both in his life and at his latest hour.
Pompey the great, whom I have honoured,
With true devotion both alive and dead.
One selfsame ship contained vs when I saw
The murdering Egiptians bereave his life;
And when the man that had affright the earth,
Did homage to it with his dearest blood.
O'er whom I shed full many a bitter tear,
And did perform his obsequies with sighs:
And on the strond upon the River side,
(Where to my sighs the waters seemed to turn)
I woaue a Coffin for his corse of Seggs,
That with the wind did wave like bannerets.
And laid his body to be burned thereon.
Which when it was consumed I kindly took,
And sadly closed within an earthen Urn
The ashy relics of his hapless bones.
Which having escaped the rage of wind and Sea,
I bring to fair Cornelia to inter
Within his Elders Tomb that honoured her.
Ayh-me, what see I?
Pompeys tender bones,
which (in extremes) an earthen Urn contains.
O sweet, dear, deplorable cinders,
O miserable woman, living dying.
O poor Cornelia, borne to be
distressed,
Why liu'st thou toiled, that (dead) might lye at rest?
O faithless hands that under cloak of love,
Did entertain him, to torment him so.
O barbarous, inhumaine, hateful traitors,
This your disloyal dealing hath defamed
Your King, and his inhospitable seat,
Of the extremest and most odious crime,
That against the heavens might bee imagined.
For ye have basely broke the Law of Arms,
And out-rag'd over an afflicted soul;
Murdered a man that did submit himself,
And injured him that ever used you kindly.
For which misdeed, be Egipt pestered,
With battle, famine, and perpetual plagues.
Let Espies, Serpents, Snakes, and Lybian Bears,
Tigers, and Lyons, breed with you for ever.
And let fair Nylus (wont to nurse your Corn)
Cover your Land with Toads and Crocadils,
That may infect, devour and murder you.
Else earth make way, and hell receive them quick.
A hateful race, amongst whom there doth abide
All treason, luxury, and homicide.
Cease these laments.
I doe but what I ought
to morn his death:
Alas that profits nought.
Will heaven let treason be unpunished?
Heavens will perform what they have promised.
I fear the heavens will not hear our prayer.
The plaints of men oppressed, doe pierce the ayre.
Yet Caesar lives still.
"Due punishment
"Succeeds not always after an offence.
"For oftentimes it is for our chastisement
"That heaven doth with wicked men dispense.
"That when they list, they may with usury,
"For all misdeeds pay home the penalty.
This is the hope that feeds my hapless days,
Else had my life been long ago expired.
I trust the gods that see our hourly wrongs,
Will fire his shameful body with their flames.
Except some man (resolved) shall conclude,
With Caesars death to end our servitude.
Else (god to fore) my self may live to see,
His tired corse lye toiling in his blood:
Gored with a thousand stabs, and round about,
The wronged people leap for inward joy.
And then come Murder, then come ugly Death,
Then Lethe open thine infernal Lake,
Isle down with joy: because before I died,
Mine eyes have seen what I in hart desired.
Pompey may not revive, (and Pompey dead)
Let me but see the murdrer murdered.
Caesar bewailed his death.
His death hee mournd,
whom while hee lived, to live like him hee scorn.
Hee punished his murdrers.
Who murdered him
but hee that followed Pompey with the sword?
He murdered Pompey that pursued his death,
And cast the plot to catch him in the trap.
He that of his departure took the spoil,
Whose fell ambition (founded first in blood)
By nought but Pompeys life could be with-stood.
Photis and false Achillas he beheadded.
That was, because that Pompey being their friend,
they had determined once of Caesars end.
What got he by his death?
Supremacy.
Yet Caesar speaks of Pompey
honourably.
Words are but wind, nor meant he what he spoke.
He will not let his statues be broke.
By which disguise (what ere he doth pretend)
His own from being broke he doth defend.
And by the trains where-with he vs allures,
His own estate more firmly he assures.
He took no pleasure in his death you see.
Because himself of life did not bereave him.
Nay, he was moved with former amity.
He never trusted him but to deceive him.
But, had he loved him with a love unfeigned,
Yet had it been a vain and trustless league;
"For there is nothing in the soul of man
"So firmly grounded, as can qualify,
"Th'inextinguible thirst of signiory.
"Not heavens fear, nor Countries sacred love,
"Not ancient laws, nor nuptial chaste desire,
"Respect of blood, or (that which most should move,)
"The inward zeal that Nature doth require:
"All these, nor any thing we can devise,
"Can stoop the hart resolved to tyrannise.
I fear your griefs increase with this discourse.
My griefs are such, as hardly can be worse.
"Time calmeth all things.
No time qualifies
my doleful spirits endless miseries.
My grief is like a Rock, whence (ceaseless) strain
Fresh springs of water at my weeping eyes:
Still fed by thoughts, like floods with winters rain.
For when to ease th'oppression of my hart,
I breathe an Autumn forth of fiery sighs,
Yet herewithal my passion neither dyes,
Nor dries the heate the moisture of mine eyes.
Can nothing then recur these endless tears?
Yes, news of Caesars death that medcyn bears.
Madam, beware, for should hee hear of this,
his wrath against you t'will exasperate.
I neither stand in fear of him nor his.
It is policy to fear a powerful hate.
What can he doe?
Madam what cannot men
that have the power to doe what pleases them?
He can doe me no mischief that I dread.
Yes, cause your death.
Thrice happy were I dead.
With rigorous torments.
Let him torture me.
Pull me in pieces, famish, fire me up,
Fling me alive into a Lyons denn:
There is no death so hard torments me so,
As his extreme triumphing in our woe.
But if he will torment me, let him then
Deprive me wholly of the hope of death;
For I had died before the fall of Rome,
And slept with Pompey in the peaceful deeps,
Save that I live in hope to see ere long,
That Caesars death shall satisfy his wrong.
"FOrtune in power imperious,
"Used ore the world and worldings thus
"to tirannize,
"When she hath hooped her gifts on
vs,
"away she flies.
"Her feet more swift then is the wind,
"Are more inconstant in their kind
"then Autumn blasts,
"A women's shape, a women's mind,
"that seldom lasts.
"One while she bends her angry brow,
"And of no labour will allow.
"Another while,
"She flares again, I know not how,
"still to beguile.
"Fickle in our adversities,
"And fickle when our fortunes rise,
"she scoffs at vs:
"That (blind herself) can blear our eyes,
"to trust her thus.
"The Sun that lends the earth his light,
"Beheld her never over night
"lye calmly down,
"But in the morrow following, might
"perceive her frown.
"She hath not only power and will,
"T'abuse the vulgar wanting skill,
"but when she list,
"To Kings and Clowns doth equal ill.
"without resist.
"Mischance that every man abhors,
"And cares for crowned Emperors
"she doth reserve,
"As for the poorest labourers
"that work or starve.
"The Merchant that for private gain,
"Doth send his Ships to pass the maine,
"upon the shore,
"In hope he shall his wish obtain,
"doth thee adore.
"Upon the sea, or on the Land,
"Where health or wealth, or vines doe stand,
"thou can doe much,
"And often helpst the helpless hand,
"thy power is such.
"And many times (disposed to jest)
"Against one whose power and cause is best,
"(thy power to try,)
"To him that ne'er put spear in rest
"giu'st victory.
"For so the Lybian Monarchy,
"That with Ausonian blood did die
"our warlike field,
"To one that ne'er got victory,
"was urged to yield.
"So noble Marius, Arpins
friend,
"That did the Latin state defend
"from Cymbrian rage,
"Did prove thy fury in the end
"which nought could swag.
"And Pompey whose days happily led,
"So long thou seem'dst t'haue favoured,
"in vain it is said
"When the Pharsalian field be led
"implored thine aid.
"Now Caesar swollen with honours heate,
"Sits signiorizing in her seat,
"and will not see,
"That Fortune can her hopes defeat
"what ever they be.
"From chance is nothing franchised.
"And till the time that they are dead,
"is no man blessed.
"He only that no death doth dread,
"doth live at rest.
ACcursed Rome, that arm'st against thy self
A Tyrants rage, and make a wretch thy King.
For one mans pleasure (O injurious Rome,)
Thy children against thy children thou hast armed;
And think not of the rivers of their blood,
That erst was shed to save thy liberty,
Because thou ever hated Monarchy.
Now o'er our bodies (tumbled up on heaps,
Like cocks of Hay when July shears the field)
Thou buildst thy kingdom, and thou set thy King.
And to be servile, (which torments me most,)
Employ our lives, and lauishest our blood.
O Rome, (accursed Rome) thou murdrest vs,
And massacrest thy self in yielding thus.
Yet are there Gods, yet is there heaven and earth,
That seem to fear a certain Thunderer,
No, no, there are no Gods, or if there be,
They leave to see into the worlds affairs;
They care not for vs, nor account of men,
For what we see is done, is done by chance.
It is Fortune rules, for equity and right,
Have neither help nor grace in heavens sight.
Scipio hath wrenched a sword into his
breast,
And launc'd his bleeding wound into the sea.
Undaunted Cato, tore his entrails out.
Affranius and Faustus murdered dyed.
Iuba-and Petreus fiercely combating,
Have each done other equal violence.
Our Army's broken, and the Lybian Bears
Devour the bodies of our Citizens.
The conquering Tyrant, high in Fortunes grace,
Doth ride triumphing o'er our Common-wealth.
And mournful we behold him bravely mounted
(With stern looks) in his Chariot, where he leads
The conquered honour of the people yok't.
So Rome to Caesar yields both power and pelf,
And o'er Rome Caesar reigns in Rome it self.
But Brutus shall wee dissolutely sit,
And see the tyrant live to tyrannize?
Or shall their ghosts that did to doe vs good,
Plain in their Tombs of our base cowardice?
Shall lamed Soldiers, and grave gray-haird men,
Point at vs in their bitter tears, and say,
See where they go that have their race forgot.
And rather choose (unarmed) to serve with shame,
Then (armed) to save their freedom and their fame.
I swear by heaven, th'Immortals highest throne,
Their Temples, Altars, and their Images,
To see (for one,) that Brutus suffer not
His ancient liberty to be repressed.
I freely marched with Caesar in his wars,
Not to be subject, but to aid his right.
But if (enuenom'd with ambitious thoughts)
He lift his hand imperiously o'er vs,
If he determine but to reign in Rome,
Or followed Pompey but to this effect:
Or if (these civil discords now dissolved)
He render not the Empire back to Rome,
Then shall he see, that Brutus this day bears,
The selfsame Arms to be avenged on him.
And that this hand (though Caesar blood abhor,)
Shall toil in his, which I am sorry for.
I love, I love him dearly. "But the love
"That men their Country and their birth-right bear,
"Exceeds all loves, and dearer is by far
"Our Countries love, then friends or children are.
If this brave care be nourished in your blood,
Or if so frank a will your soul possess,
Why hast we not even while these words are uttered,
To sheathe our new-ground swords in Caesars
throat?
Why spend we day-light, and why dies he not,
That by his death we wretches may revive?
We stay too-long, I burn till I be there
To see this massacre, and send his ghost
To theirs, whom (subtly) he for Monarchy,
Made fight to death with show of liberty.
Yet happily he (as Sylla meanwhile did,)
When he hath rooted civil war from Rome,
Will there-withall discharge the power he hath.
Caesar and Sylla, Brutus be not like.
Sylla (assaulted by the enemy)
Did arm himself (but in his own defence)
Against both Cynnas host and Marius.
Whom when he had discomfited and chased,
And of his safety thoroughly was assured,
He laid apart the power that he had got,
And gave up rule, for he desired it not.
Where Caesar that in silence might have slept,
Nor urged by ought but his ambition,
Did break into the hart of Italy.
And like rude Brennus brought his men to field,
Traversed the seas: And shortly after (backed
With wintered soldiers used to conquering,)
He aimed at vs, bent to exterminate,
Who ever sought to intercept his state.
Now, having got what he hath gaped for,
(Dear Brutus) think you Caesar such a
child,
Slightly to part with so great signiory.
Believe it not, he bought it dear you know,
And trailed too far to leave it so.
But Casius, Caesar is not yet a King.
No, but Dictator, in effect as much.
He doth what pleases him, (a princely thing,)
And wherein differ they whose power is such?
Hee is not bloody.
But by bloody jars
he hath unpeopled most part of the earth.
Both Gaul and Affrique perished by his wars.
Egypt, Emathia, Italy and Spain,
Are full of dead men's bones by Caesar slain.
Th'infectious plague, and Famins bitterness,
Or th'Ocean (whom no pity can assuage,)
Though they contain dead bodies numberless,
Are yet inferior to Caesars rage.
Who (monster-like) with his ambition,
Hath left more Tombs then ground to lay them on.
Soldiers with such reproach should not be blamed.
He with his soldiers hath himself defamed.
Why then you think there is no praise in war.
Yes, where the causes reasonable are.
He hath enriched the Empire with new states.
Which with ambition now he ruinates.
He hath revenged the Gaules old injury,
And made them subject to our Romaine Laws.
The restful Almaynes with his cruelty,
He rashly stirred against vs without cause.
And hazarded our City and our selves
Against a harmless Nation, kindly given,
To whom we should do well (for some amends,)
To render him, and reconcile old friends.
These Nations did he purposely provoke,
To make an Army for his after-ayde,
Against the Romains, whom in policy
He trained in war to steal their signiory.
"Like them that (striving at th'Olympian sports,
"To grace themselves with honour of the game)
"Anoint their sinews fit for wrestling,
"And (ere they enter) use some exercise.
The Gaules were but a fore-game fished about
For civil discord, wrought by Caesars
sleights,
Whom (to be King himself) he so one removed.
Teaching a people hating servitude,
To fight for that that did their deaths conclude.
The wars once ended, we shall quickly know,
Whether he will restore the state or no.
No Brutus, never look to see that day,
For Caesar holds signiory too dear.
But know, while Cassius hath one drop of blood,
To feed this worthless body that you see,
What reck I death to doe so many good,
In spite of Caesar, Cassius will be free.
A generous or true ennobled spirit,
Detests to learn what tastes of servitude.
Brutus I cannot serve nor see Rome yoked,
No, let me rather dye a thousand deaths.
"The stiftneckt horses champ not on the bit,
"Nor meekly bear the rider but by force:
"The sturdy Oxen toil not at the Plough,
"Nor yield unto the yoke but by constraint.
Shall we then that are men, and Romains borne,
Submit vs to vnvrged slavery?
Shall Rome that hath so many ouer-throwne,
Now make herself a subject to her own?
O base indignity. A beardless youth,
Whom King Nicomedes could ouer-reach,
Commands the world, and bridled all the earth,
And like a Prince controls the Romulists.
Brave Romaine Soldiers, sterne-borne sons of
Mars,
And none, not one, that dares to undertake
The intercepting of his tyranny.
O Brutus speak, O say Seruilius,
Why cry you aim, and see vs used thus?
But Brutus lives, and sees, and knows, and feels,
That there is one that curbs their Countries weal.
Yet (as he were the semblance, not the son,
Of noble Brutus, his great Grandfather,)
As if he wanted hands, sense, sight, or hart,
He doth, devises, sees nor dares ought,
That may exstirpe or raze these tyrannies.
Nor ought doth Brutus that to Brute belongs,
But still increases by his negligence,
His own disgrace, and Caesars violence.
The wrong is great, and ouer-long endured;
We should have practised, conspierd, conjured,
A thousand ways, and weapons to repress,
Or kill out-right this cause of our distress.
"WHo prodigally spends his blood,
"Bravely to doe his country good,
"And lives to no other end,
"But resolutely to attempt
"What may the innocent defend,
"And bloody Tyrants rage prevent;
"And he that in his soul assured,
"Hath waters force, and fire endured,
"And past the pikes of thousand hostess,
"To free the truth from tyranny,
"And fearless scowres in danger coasts,
"T'enlarge his countries liberty,
"Were all the world his foes before,
"Now shall they love him euer-more.
"His glory spread abroad by Fame,
"On wings of his posterity,
"From obscure death shall free his name,
"To live in endless memory.
"All after ages shall adore,
"And honour him with bymnes therefore.
"Yearly the youth for joy shall bring,
"The fairest flowers that grow in Rome.
"And yearly in the Summer sing,
"O'er his heroic kingly Tomb.
"For so the two Athenians,
"That from their fellow citizens,
"Did freely chase vile servitude,
"Shall live for valiant prowess blessed.
"No Sepulchre shall ere exclude,
"Their glory equal with the best.
"But when the vulgar, mad and rude,
"Repay good with ingratitude,
"Hardly then they them reward:
"That to free them fro the hands
"Of a Tyrant, ne'er regard
"In what plight their person stands.
"For high Jove that guides all,
"When he lets his just wrath fall,
"To revenge proud Diadems,
"With huge cares doth cross Kings lives,
"Raising treasons in their Realms,
"By their children, friends or wives.
"Therefore he whom all men fear,
"Fears all men every where.
"Fear that doth engender hate,
"(Hate enforcing them thereto)
"Makes many vnder-take,
"Many things they would not doe.
"O how many mighty Kings
"Live in fear of petty things.
"For when Kings have sought by wars,
"Stranger Towns to have o'rethrowne,
"They have caught deserved skarrs,
"Seeking that was not their own.
"For no Tyrant commonly,
"Living ill, can kindly die.
"But either traitorously surprised
"Doth coward poison quail their breath,
"Or their people have deuis'd,
"Or their guard to seek their death.
"He only lives most bappilie,
"That free and far from majesty,
"Can live content, although unknown:
"He fearing none, none fearing him.
"Meddling with nothing but his own,
"While gazing eyes at crowns grow dim.
O Rome that with thy pride dost ouer-peare,
The worthiest Cities of the conquered world.
Whose honour got by famous victories,
Hath filled heavens fiery vaults with frightful horror.
O lofty towers, O stately battlements,
O glorious temples, O proud Palaces,
And you brave walls, bright heavens masonry,
Graced with a thousand kingly diadems.
Are ye not stirred with a strange delight,
To see your Caesars matchless victories?
And how your Empire and your praise begins
Through fame, which hee of stranger Nations wins?
O beauteous Tyber, with thine easy streams,
That glide as smoothly as a Parthian shaft;
Turn not thy crispie tides like silver curl,
Back to thy grass-greene banks to welcome vs?
And with a gentle murmur hast to tell
The foaming Seas the honour of our fight?
Trudge not thy streams to Tritons Mariners
To bruit the praises of our conquests past?
And make their vaunts to old Oceanus,
That hence-forth Tyber shall salute the seas,
More famed then Tiger or fair Euphrates?
Now all the world (well-nigh) doth stoop to Rome.
The sea, the earth, and all is almost ours.
Be'it where the bright Sun with his neyghbor beams,
Doth early light the Pearled Indians.
Or where his Chariot stays to stop the day,
Till heaven unlock the darkness of the night.
Be'it where the Sea is wrapped in Crystal Ise,
Or where the Summer doth but warm the earth.
Or here, or there, where is not Rome renownd?
There lives no King, (how great so ever he be,)
But trembles if he once but hear of me.
Caesar is now earths fame, and Fortunes terror,
And Caesars worth hath stained old soldiers
praises.
Rome, speak no more of either Scipio,
Nor of the Fabij, or Fabritians,
Here let the Decij and their glory die.
Caesar hath tamed more Nations, tan more Towns,
And fought more battles then the best of them.
Caesar doth triumph over all the world,
And all they scarcely conquered a nook.
The Gaules that came to Tiber to carouse,
Did live to see my soldiers drink at Loyre;
And those brave Germains, true borne Martialists,
Beheld the swift Rheyn vnder-run mine Ensigns;
The Britains (locked within a watery Realm,
And wald by Neptune,) stooped to me at last.
The faithless Moore, the fierce Numidian,
Th'earth that the Euxine sea makes sometimes marsh,
The stony-harted people that inhabit
Where seau'nfold Nilus doth disgorge it self,
Have all been urged to yield to my command.
Yea, even this City that hath almost made
An universal conquest of the world.
And that brave warrior my brother in law,
That (ill advised) ripened at my glory.
Pompey that second Mars, whose haught
renown
And noble deeds, were greater then his fortunes.
Proved to his loss but even in one assault
My hand, my hap, my hart exceeded his;
When the Thessalian fields were purpled ore
With either Armies murdered soldiers go.
When hee (to conquering accustomed,)
Did (conquered) fly, his troops discomforted.
Now Scipio, that longed to show himself
Descent of African, (so famed for Arms)
He duist affront me and my warlike bands,
Upon the Coasts of Lybia, till he lost
His scattred Army: and to shun the scorn
Of being taken captive, kilt himself.
Now therefore let vs triumph Anthony.
And rendering thanks to heaven as we go
For brideling those that did malign our glory,
Lets to the Capitol.
Come on brave Caesar,
And crown thy head, and mount thy Chariot.
Th'impatient people run along the streets,
And in a route against thy gates they rush,
To see their Caesar after dangers past,
Made Conqueror and Emperor at last.
I call to witness heavens great Thunderer,
That against my will I have maintained this war,
Nor thirsted I for conquests bought with blood.
Iioy not in the death of Citizens.
But through my selfe-wild enemies despite,
And Romains wrong, was I constrained to fight.
They sought t'eclipse thy fame, but destiny
Reversed th'effect of their ambition.
And Caesars praise increased by their disgrace
That reckt not of his virtuous deeds: But thus
We see it fares with the envious.
I never had the thought to injure them.
Howbeit I never meant my greatness should,
By any others greatness be o're-ruld.
For as I am inferior to none,
So can I suffer no Superiors.
Well Caesar, now they are discomfited,
And Crows are feasted with their carcases.
And yet I fear you have too kindly saved
Those, that your kindness hardly will requite.
Why Anthony, what would you wish me doe?
Now shall you see that they will pack to Spain,
And (joined with the Exiles there encamped,)
Until the isle spirit that doth them defend,
Doe bring their treasons to a bloody end.
I fear not those that to their weapons fly,
And keep their state in Spain, in Spain to die.
Whom fear thou then Mark Anthony?
The hateful crew,
That wanting power in field to conquer you,
Have in their coward souls devised snares
To murder thee, and take thee at unawares.
Will those conspire my death that live by me?
In conquered foes what credit can there be?
Besides their lives, I did their goods restore.
O but their Countries good concerns them more.
What, think they me to be their Countries foe?
No, but that thou usurp the right they owe.
To Rome have I submitted mighty things.
Yet Rome endures not the command of Kings.
Who dares to contradict our Emporie?
Those whom thy rule hath robed of liberty.
I fear them not whose death is but deferd.
I fear my foe until he be entered.
A man may make his foe his friend you know.
A man may easier make his friend his foe.
Good deeds the cruellest hart to kindness bring,
But resolution is a deadly thing.
If Citizens my kindness have forgot, whom shall I then not
fear?
Those that are not.
What, shall I slay them all that I suspect?
Else cannot Caesars Emporie endure.
Rather I will my life and all neglect.
Nor labour I my vain life to assure.
But so to die, as dying I may live,
And leaving off this earthly Tomb of mine,
Ascend to heaven upon my winged deeds.
And shall I not have lived long enough
That in so short a time am so much famed?
Can I too-soone go taste Cocytus flood?
No Anthony, Death cannot injure vs,
"For he lives long that dyes victorious.
Thy praises show thy life is long enough,
But for thy friends and Country all too-short.
Should Caesar live as long as
Nestor did,
Yet Rome may wish his life eternized.
Heaven sets our time, with heaven may nought dispense.
But we may shorten time with negligence.
But Fortune and the heavens have care of vs.
Fortune is fickle, Heaven imperious.
What shall I then doe?
As befits your state,
Maintain a watchful guard about your gate.
What more assurance may our state defend
Then love of those that doe on vs attend?
There is no hatred more if it be moved,
Then theirs whom we offend, and once beloved.
Better it is to die then be suspicious.
It is wisdom yet not to be credulous.
The quiet life that carelessly is led,
Is not lonely happy in this world,
But Death it self doth sometime pleasure vs.
That death that comes unsent for or unseen,
And suddenly doth take vs at unwary,
Me thinks is sweetest; And if heaven were pleased,
I could desire that I might die so well.
The fear of evil doth afflict vs more,
Then th'euill it self, though it be ne'er so sore.
O Fair Sun that gently smiles,
From the Orient-pearled Isles,
Guilding these our gladsome days,
With the beauty of thy rays:
Free fro rage of civil strife,
Long preserve our Caesars life.
That from sable Affrique brings,
Conquests whereof Europe rings.
And fair Venus thou of whom
The Eneades are come,
Henceforth vary not thy grace,
From Iulus happy race.
Rather cause thy dearest son,
By his triumphs new begun,
To expel fro forth the Land,
Fierce wars quenchless fire-brand.
That of care acquitting vs,
(Who at last adore him thus)
He a peaceful star appear,
From our walls all woes to clear.
And so let his warlike brows,
Still be decked with Laurel boughs,
And his statues new set
With many a fresh-flowrd Coronet.
So, in every place let be,
Feasts, and Masks, and mirthful glee,
Strewing Roses in the street,
When their Emperor they meet.
He his foes hath conquered,
Never leaving till they fled,
And (abhorring blood,) at last
Pardoned all offences past.
"For high Jove the heavens among,
"(Their support that suffer wrong,)
"Doth oppose himself again
"Bloody minded cruel men.
"For he shortneth their days,
"Or prolongs them with dispraise:
"Or (his greater wrath to show,)
"Gives them over to their foe.
Caesar, a Citizen so wronged
Of the honour him belonged,
To defend himself from harms,
Was enforced to take up Arms.
For he saw that Envies dart,
(Pricking still their poisoned hart,
For his sudden glory got,)
Made his envious foe so hot.
Wicked Envy feeding still,
Foolish those that doe thy will.
For thy poisons in them pour
Sundry passions every hour.
And to choler doth convert,
Purest blood about the hart.
Which (ore-flowing of their breast)
Suffered nothing to digest.
"Other men's prosperity,
"Is their infelicity.
"And their choler then is raised
"When they hear another praised.
"Neither Phoebus fairest eye,
"Feasts, nor friendly company,
"Mirth, or what so ever it be,
"With their humour can agree.
"Day or night they never rest,
"Spiteful hate so pecks their breast.
"Pinching their perplexed lunges,
"With her fiery poisoned tongues.
"Fire-brands in their breasts they bear,
"As if Tesiphon were there.
"And their souls are pierced as sore
"As Prometheus ghost, and more.
"Wretches, they are wee-begone,
"For their wound is always one.
"Nor hath Chyron power or skill,
"To recur them of their ill.
Unhappy man, amongst so many wrecks
As I have suffered both by Land and Sea,
That scornful destiny denies my death.
Oft have I seen the ends of mightier men,
Whose coats of steel base Death hath stolen into.
And in this direful war before mine eyes,
Beheld their corses scattred on the plains,
And endless numbers falling by my side,
Nor those ignoble, but the noblest Lords.
Amongst whom aboue the rest that moves me most,
Scipio (my dearest Moister) is deceased.
And Death that sees the Nobles blood so rife,
Full-gorged triumphs, and disdains my life.
We are undone.
Scipio hath lost the day.
But hope the best, and harken to his news.
O cruel fortune.
These mis-fortues yet
must I report to sad Cornelia.
Whose ceaseless grief (which I am sorry for)
Will aggravate my former misery.
Wretch that I am, why leave I not the world?
Or wherefore am I not already dead?
O world, O wretch.
Is this th'vndaunted hart
that is required in extremities?
Be more confirmed. And Madam, let not grief
abuse your wisdom like a vulgar wit.
Happily the news is better then the noise,
Let's hear him speak.
O no, for all is lost.
Farewell dear Father.
Hee is saved perhaps.
Me thinks I hear my Masters daughter speak.
What sighs, what sobs, what plaints, what passions
have we endured Cornelia for your sake?
Where is thine Emperor?
Where our Captains are.
Where are our Legions? Where our men at Arms?
Or where so many of our Romaine souls?
The earth, the sea, the vultures and the Crows,
Lyons and Bears are their best Sepulchers.
O miserable.
Now I see the heavens,
are heaped with rage and horror against this house.
O earth, why op'st thou not?
Why wail you so?
Assure your self that Scipio bravely dyed,
And such a death excels a servile life.
Say Messenger,
The manner of his end
will happily comfort this your discontent.
Discourse the manner of his hard mishap,
And what disastrous accident did break,
So many people bent so much to fight.
Caesar, that wisely knew his soldiers harts,
And their desire to be approved in Arms,
Sought nothing more then to encounter vs.
And therefore (faintly skirmishing) in craft,
Lamely they fought, to draw vs further on.
Oft (to provoke our wary wel-taught troops)
He would attempt the entrance on our bars.
Nay, even our Trenches, to our great disgrace,
And call our soldiers cowards to their face.
But when he saw his wiles nor bitter words,
Could draw our Captains to endanger vs,
Coasting along and following by the foot,
He thought to tyre and weary vs fro thence.
And got his willing hosts to march by night,
With heavy Armour on their hardened backs,
Down to the Sea-side; Where before fair Tapsus,
He made his Pyoners (poor weary souls)
The selfsame day, to dig and cast new Trenches,
And plant strong Barricades. Where he (encamped)
Resolved by force to hold vs hard at work.
Scipio, no sooner heard of his designs,
But being afraid to loose so fit a place,
Marched on the sudden to the selfsame City.
Where few men might doe much, which made him see
Of what importance such a Town would be.
The fields are spread, and as a household Camp
Of creeping Emmets, in a Country Farm,
That come to forage when the cold begins:
Leaving their crannies to go search about,
Cover the earth so thick, as scarce we tread
But we shall see a thousand of them dead.
Even so our battles scattred on the sands,
Did scour the plains in pursuit of the foe.
One while at Tapsus we begin t'entrench,
To ease our Army if it should retire.
Another while we softly sally forth.
And wakeful Caesar that doth watch our being,
(When he perceives vs marching o'er the plain,)
Doth leap for gladness. And (to murder vowed)
Runs to the Tent for fear we should be gone,
And quickly claps his rusty Armour on.
For true it is, that Caesar brought at first,
An host of men to Affrique, meanly Armed,
But such as had brave spirits, and (combating)
Had power and wit to make a wretch a King.
Well, forth to field they marched all at once,
Except some few that stayed to guard the Trench.
Them Caesar soon and subt'ly sets in rank.
And every Regiment (warned with a word
Bravely to fight for honour of the day.)
He shows that ancient soldiers need not fear,
Them that they had so oft disordered.
Them that already dreamed of death or flight.
That tyer'd, would ne'er hold out, if once they see
That they o're-layd them in the first
assault.
Meane-while our Emperor (at all points armed)
Whose silver hairs and honourable front,
Were (warlike) locked within a plumed cask,
In one hand held his Targe of steel embossed,
And in the other grasped his Coutelas:
And with a cheerful look surueigh'd the Camp.
Exhorting them to charge, and fight like men,
And to endure what ere betided them.
For now (quoth he) is come that happy day,
Wherein our Country shall approve our love.
Brave Romains know, this is the day and hour,
That we must all live free, or friendly die.
For my part (being an ancient Senator,)
An Emperor and Consul, I disdain
The world should see me to become a slave.
I'll either conquer, or this sword you see,
(Which brightly shone) shall make an end of me.
We fight not we like thieves, for others wealth.
We fight not we t'enlarge our scant confines.
To purchase fame to our posterities,
By stuffing of our trophies in their houses.
But it is for public freedom that we fight,
For Rome we fight, and those that fled for fear.
Nay more, we fight for safety of our lives,
Our goods, our honours, and our ancient laws.
As for the Empire, and the Romaine state
(Due to the victor) thereon ruminate.
Think how this day the honourable Dames,
With blubbered eyes, and hands to heaven vprear'd,
Sit invocating for vs to the Gods,
That they will bless our holy purposes.
Me thinks I see poor Rome in horror clad,
And aged Senators in sad discourse,
Morn for our sorrows and their servitude.
Me thinks I see them (while lamenting thus)
Their harts and eyes lye hovering over vs.
On then brave men, my fellows and Romes friends,
To show vs worthy of our ancestors:
And let vs fight with courage and conceit,
That we may rest the Masters of the field:
That this brave Tyrant valiantly beset,
May perrish in the press before our faces.
And that his troops (as tushed with lightning flames)
May by our horse, in heaps be ouer-throwne,
And he (blood-thirsting) wallow in his own.
This said; His Army crying all at once,
With joyful tokens did applaud his speeches.
Whose swift shrill noise did pierce into the clouds,
Like Northern winds that beat the horned Alps.
The clattring Armour buckling as they paced,
Ronge through the Forests with a frightful noise,
And every Echo took the Trumpets clange.
When (like a tempest raised with whire-winds rage,)
They ran at euer-each other hand and foot.
Where-with the dust, as with a darksome cloud,
Arose, and ouer-shadowed horse and man.
The Darts and Arrows on their Armour glanced,
And with their fall the trembling earth was shaken.
The ayre (that thickened with their thundering cries,)
With pale wanne clouds discoloured the Sun.
The fire in sparks fro forth their Armour flew,
And with a duskish yellow, choked the heavens.
The battles locked, (with bristle-poynted spears)
Doe at the half pike freely charge each other,
And dash together like two lusty Bulls,
That (jealous of some Heifer in the Heard,)
Run head to head, and (sullen) will not yield,
Till dead or fled, the one forsake the field.
The shivered Lances (rattling in the ayre,)
Fly forth as thick as moates about the Sun:
When with their swords (fleshed with the former fight,)
They hew their Armour, and they cleave their casks,
Till streams of blood, like Rivers fill the Downs.
That being infected with the stench thereof
Surcloyes the ground, and of a Champant Land,
Makes it a Quagmire, where (kneedeepe) they stand.
Bloodthirsty Discord, with her snaky hair,
A fearful Hag, with fier-darting eyes,
Runs cross the Squadrons with a smoky brand:
And with her murdering whip encourages
The overforward hands, to blood and death.
Bellona fired with a quenchless rage,
Runs up and down, and in the thickest throng,
Cuts, casts the ground, and matting makes a poole,
Which in her rage, free passage doth afford,
That with our blood she may anoint her sword.
Now we of our side, urge them to retreat,
And now before them, we retire as fast.
As on the Alps the sharpe Nor-North-east wind,
Shaking a Pynetree with their greatest power,
One while the top doth almost touch the earth,
And then it rises with a counterbuffe.
So did the Armies press and charge each other,
With selfsame courage, worth and weapons to;
And prodigal of life for liberty,
With burning hate let each at other fly.
Thrice did the Cornets of the soldiers (cleared,)
Turn to the Standard to be new supplied;
And thrice the best of both was fine to breathe.
And thrice recomforted they bravely ran,
And fought as freshly as they first began.
Like two fierce Lyons fighting in a Desert,
To win the love of some fair Lioness,
When they have vomited their long-growne rage,
And proved each others force sufficient,
Peasant regardant softly they retire.
Their iawbones died with foaming froth and blood.
Their lungs like spunges, rammed within their sides,
Their tongues discovered, and their tails long trailing.
Till jealous rage (engendered with rest,)
Returns them sharper set then at the first;
And makes them couple when they see their prize,
With bristled backs, and fire-sparkling eyes,
Till tyer'd or conquered, one submits or flies.
Caesar, whose kinglike looks like day-bright
stars,
Both comfort and encourage his to fight,
Marched through the battle (laying still about him.)
And subt'ly marked whose hand was happiest.
Who nicely did but dyp his spear in blood,
And who more roughly smeared it to his fist.
Who (staggering) fell with every feeble wound,
And who (more strongly) paced it through the thickest,
Him he inflamed, and spurred, and filled with horror.
As when Alecto in the lowest hell,
Doth breathe new heate within Orestes breast,
Till out-ward rage with inward grief begins,
A fresh remembrance of our former sins.
For then (as if provoked with pricking goades,)
Their warlike Armies, (fast locked foot to foot,)
Stooping their heads low bent to toss their
staves,
They fiercely open both Battalions.
Cleave, break, and raging tempest-like o're-turne,
What ever makes head to meet them in this humour.
Our men at Arms (in brief) begin to fly.
And neither prayers, entreaty, nor example
Of any of their leaders left alive,
Had power to stay them in this strange carrier.
Straggling, as in the fair Calabrian fields,
When Wolves for hunger ranging fro the wood,
Make forth amongst the flock, that scattered flies
Before the Shepherd, that resistless lies.
O cruel fortune.
None resisting now,
the field was filled with all confusion,
of murder, death, and direful massacres.
The feeble bands that yet were left entire,
Had more desire to sleep then seek for spoil.
No place was free from sorrow, every where
Lay Armed men, ore-troden with their horses.
Dismembered bodies drowning in their blood,
And wretched heaps lie mourning of their maims.
Whose blood, as from a sponge, or bunch of Grapes
Crushed in a VVine-presse, gushes out so fast,
As with the sight doth make the sound aghast.
Some should you see that had their heads half
cloven,
And on the earth their brains lye trembling.
Here one new wounded, helps another dying.
Here lay an arm, and there a leg lay shivered.
Here horse and man (o're-turnd) for mercy cried,
With hands exstended to the merciless.
That stopped their ears, and would not hear a word,
But put them all (remorseless) to the sword.
He that had hap to scope, doth help a fresh,
To re-enforce the side whereon he served.
But seeing that there the murdering Enemy,
Pesle-mesle, pursued them like a storm of hail,
They began retire where Iuba was encamped;
But there had Caesar eftsoones tyrannised.
So that despairing to defend themselves,
They laid aside their Armour, and at last,
Offred to yield unto the enemy.
Whose stony hart, that ne'er did Romaine good,
Would melt with nothing but their dearest blood.
And Scipio my Father,
when he beheld
His people so discomfited and scorned.
When he perceived the labour profitles,
To seek by new encouraging his men,
To come upon them with a fresh alarm.
And when he saw the enemies pursuit,
To beat them down as fierce as thundering
flints,
And lay them level with the charged earth,
Like ears of Corn with rage of windy showers,
Their battles scattred, and their Ensigns taken.
And (to conclude) his men dismayed to see,
The passage choked with bodies of the dead;
(Incessantly lamenting th'extreame loss,
And souspirable death of so brave soldiers.)
He spurs his horse, and (breaking through the press)
Trots to the Haven, where his ships he finds,
And hopeless trusts to the trustless winds.
Now had he thought to have arrived in Spain,
To raise new forces, and return to field.
But as one mischief draws another on,
A sudden tempest takes him by the way,
And casts him up near to the Coasts of Hyppon.
Where th'aduerse Navy sent to scour the seas,
Did hourly keep their ordinary course;
Where seeing himself at anchor slightly shipped,
Besieged, betrayed by wind, by land, by sea,
(All raging mad to rig his better Vessels,
The little while this naual conflict lasted,)
Behold his own was fiercely set upon.
Which being sore beaten, till it brake again,
Ended the lives of his best fighting men,
There did the remnant of our Romaine nobles,
Before the foe, and in their Captains presence
Dye bravely, with their fauchins in their fists.
Then Scipio, (that saw his ships through-galled,
And by the foe fulfild with fire and blood,
His people put to sword, Sea, Earth and Hell,
And Heaven it self conjured to injure him,)
Stepts to the Poop, and with a princely visage
Looking upon his weapon did with blood,
Sighing he sets it to his breast, and said:
Since all our hopes are by the Gods beguiled,
What refuge now remains for my distress,
But thee my dearest nere-deceiuing sword?
Yea, thee my latest fortunes firmest hope.
By whom I am assured this hap to have,
That being free borne, I shall not die a slave.
Scarce had he said, but cruelly resolved,
He wrenched it to the pommel through his sides,
That fro the wound the smoky blood ran bubbling,
VVhere-with he staggred; And I stepped to him
To have embraced him. But he (being afraid
T'attend the mercy of his murdering foe,
That still pursued him and oppressed his ships,)
Crawld to the Deck, and life with death to ease,
Headlong he threw himself into the seas.
O cruel Gods, O heaven, O direful Fates,
O radiant Sun that slightly guildst our days,
O night stars, full of infelicities,
O triple titled Heccat Queen and Goddess,
Bereave my life, or living strangle me.
Confound me quick, or let me sink to hell.
Thrust me fro forth the world, that amongst the spirits
The infernal Lakes may ring with my laments.
O miserable, desolate, distressful wretch,
Worn with mishaps, yet in mishaps abounding.
What shall I doe, or whether shall I fly
To avenge this out-rage, or revenge my wrongs?
Come wrathful Furies with your Ebon locks,
And feed your selves with mine inflamed blood.
Ixions torment, Sysiph's rolling stone,
And th'Eagle tyering on Prometheus,
Be my eternal tasks; That th'extreame fire,
Within my hart, may from my hart retire.
I suffer more, more sorrows I endure,
Then all the Captives in the infernal Court.
O troubled Fate, O fatal misery,
That vnprouoked, deal so partially.
Say fretful heavens, what fault have I
committed,
Or wherein could mine innocence offend you,
When (being but young) I lost my first love
Crossus?
Or wherein did I merrite so much wrong,
To see my second husband Pompey slain?
But amongst the rest, what horrible offence,
What hateful thing (unthought of) have I done,
That in the midst of this my mournful state,
Nought but my Fathers death could expiate?
Thy death dear Scipio, Romes eternal loss,
Whose hopeful life preserved our happiness.
Whose silver hairs encouraged the weak.
Whose resolutions did confirm the rest.
Whose end, sith it hath ended all my joys,
O heavens at least permit, of all these plagues,
That I may finish the Catastrophe.
Sith in this widowhood, of all my hopes
I cannot look for further happiness.
For both my husbands and my Father gone,
What have I else to wreak your wrath upon.
Now as for happy thee, to whom sweet Death,
Hath given blessed rest for lifes bereaving,
O envious Iulia, in thy jealous hart
Avenge not thy wrong upon Cornelia.
But sacred ghost, appease thine ire, and see
My hard mishap in marrying after thee.
O see mine anguish; Happily seeing it,
T'will move compassion in thee of my pains:
And urge thee (if thy hart be not of flint,
Or drunk with rigour,) to repent thy self;
That thou enflam'dst so cruel a revenge
In Caesars hart, upon so slight a cause.
And made him raise so many mournful Tombs,
Because thy husband did revive the lights
Of thy forsaken bed; (Unworthily)
Opposing of thy fretful jealousy,
Against his mishap, as it my help had bin,
Or as if second marriage were a sin.
Was never City where calamity,
Hath soiour'd with such sorrow as in this.
Was never state wherein the people stood
So careless of their conquered liberty,
And careful of another tyranny.
O Gods, that erst of Carthage took some care,
Which by our Fathers (pitiless) was spoiled.
When thwarting Destiny, at Affrique walls
Did topside turuey turn their Common-wealth.
When forceful weapons fiercely took away,
Their soldiers (sent to nourish up those wars.)
When (feared) their golden Palaces fell down.
When through the slaughter th'Afrique seas were
did,
And sacred Temples quenchlesly inflamed.
Now is our hapless time of hopes expired.
Then satis-fie your selves with this revenge,
Content to count the ghosts of those great Captains,
Which (conquered) perished by the Romaine swords.
The Hannons, the Amilcars, Asdrubals,
Especially, that proudest Hanniball,
That made the fair Thrasymene so desert.
For even those fields that mored to bear their bodies,
Now (laden) groan to feel the Romaine corses.
Their earth we purple ore, and on their Tombs
We heap our bodies, equalling their ruin.
And as a Scipio did reverse their power,
They have a Scipio to revenge them on.
Weep therefore Roman Dames, and from henceforth,
Voling your Crystal eyes to your fair bosoms,
Rain showers of grief upon your Rose-like cheeks,
And dew your selves with springtides of your tears.
Weep Ladies weep, and with your reeking sighs,
Thicken the passage of the purest clouds,
And press the ayre with your continual plaints.
Beat at your Ivory breasts, and let your robes
(Defaced and rent) be witness of your sorrows.
And let your hair that wont be wreathed in tresses,
Now hang neglectly, dangling down your
sholders,
Careless of Art, or rich accoutrements.
That with the gold and pearl we used before,
Our mournful habits may be decked no more.
Alas what shall I doe? O dear companions,
Shall I, O shall I live in these laments?
Widowed of all my hopes, my haps, my husbands,
And last, not least, bereft of my best Father;
And of the joys mine ancestors enjoyed,
When they enjoyed their lives and liberty.
And must I live to see great Pompeys house,
(A house of honour and antiquity)
Usurped in wrong by lawless Anthony?
Shall I behold the sumptuous ornaments,
(Which both the world and Fortune heaped on him,)
Adorn and grace his graceless Enemy?
Or see the wealth that Pompey gained in war,
Sold at a pike, and borne away by strangers?
Dye, rather die Cornelia; And (to spare
Thy worthless life that yet must one day perrish,)
Let not those Captains vainly lie interred,
Or Caesar triumph in thine infamy,
That were the wife to th'one, and th'others daughter.
But if I die before I have entombed,
My drowned Father in some Sepulchre,
Who will perform that care in kindness for me?
Shall his poor wandering limbs lie still tormented,
Tossed with the salt waives of the wasteful Seas?
No lovely Father, and my dearest husband,
Cornelia must live, (though life she hates)
To make your Tombs, &amp; morn upon your hearses.
Where (languishing,) my famous faithful tears
May trickling bathe your generous sweet cinders.
And afterword (both wanting strength and moisture,
Fulfilling with my latest sighs and gasps,
The happy vessels that enclose your bones,)
I will surrender my surcharged life.
And (when my soul Earths prison shall forgo,)
Increase the number of the ghosts be-low.

A Mighty Lion ruler of the woods,
Of wondrous strength and great proportion,
With hideous noise scarring the trembling trees,
With yelling clamours shaking all the earth,
Traversed the groves, and chaste the wandering beasts.
Long did he range amid the shady trees,
And drove the silly beasts before his face,
When suddenly from out a thorny bush,
A dreadful Archer with his bow ybent,
Wounded the Lion with a dismal shaft,
So he him stroke that it drew forth the blood,
And filled his furious heart with fretting ire,
But all in vain he threatened teeth and paws,
And sparkled fire from forth his flaming eyes,
For the sharpe shaft gave him a mortal wound,
So valiant Brute the terror of the world,
Whose only looks did scarre his enemies,
The Archer death brought to his latest end.
Oh what may long abide aboue this ground,
In state of bliss and healthful happiness.
Most loyal Lords and faithful followers
That have with me unworthy General,
Passed the greedy gulf of Ocean,
Leaving the confines of fair Italy,
Behold our Brutus draws nigh his end,
And I must leave you though against my will,
My sinews shrunk, my numbed senses fail,
A chilling cold possesses all my bones,
Black ugly death with visage pale and wanne,
Presents himself before my dazzled eyes,
And with his dart prepared is to strike,
These arms my Lords, these never daunted arms,
That oft have quilt the courage of my foes,
And eke dismayed my neighbours arrogance,
Now yield to death, orelaid with crooked age,
Devoid of strength and of their proper force,
Even as the lusty cedar worn with years,
That far abroad her dainty odor throws,
Amongst all the daughters of proud Lebanon,
This heart my Lords, this near appalled heart,
That was a terror to the bordring lands,
A doleful scourge unto my neighbor Kings,
Now by the weapons of unpartial death,
Is clove asunder and bereft of life,
As when the sacred oak with thunderbolts,
Sent from the fiery circuit of the heavens,
Sliding along the aires celestial volts,
Is rent and cloven to the very roots.
In vain therefore I strangle with this foe,
Then welcome death, since God will have it so.
Alas my Lord, we sorrow at your case,
And grieve to see your person vexed thus,
But what so ere the fates determind have,
It lies not in vs to disanull,
And he that would annihilate his mind,
Soaring with Icarus too near the Sun,
May catch a fall with young Bellerophon,
For when the fatal sisters have decreed
To separate vs from this earthly mould,
No mortal force can countermand their minds:
Then worthy Lord since ther's no way but one,
Cease your laments, and leave your grievous moan.
Your highness knows how many victories
How many trophies I erected have,
Triumphantly in every place we came
The Grecian Monarch warlike Pandrassus,
And all the crew of the Molossians,
offarius the arm strong King of Gaules,
And all the borders of great Aquitane,
Have felt the force of our victorious arms,
And to their cost beheld our chivalry,
Where ere Encore handmaid of the Sun,
Where ere the Sun-bright gardiant of the day,
Where ere the joyful day with cheerful light,
Where ere the light illuminates the word,
The Troyans glory flies with golden wings,
Wings that do soar beyond fell envious flight,
The fame of Brutus and his followers
Pierces the skies, and with the skies the throne
Of mighty Jove Commander of the world,
Then worthy Brutus, leave these sad laments,
Comfort your self with this your great renown,
And fear not death though he seem terrible.
Nay Corinus you mistake my mind
In construing wrong the cause of my complaints,
I feared to yield my self to fatal death,
Cod knows it was the least of all my thought,
A greater care torments my very bones,
And makes me tremble at the thought of it,
And in you Lordings doth the substance lie.
Most noble Lord, if ought your loyal peers
Accomplish my, to as your lingering grief,
I in the name of all protest to you,
That we will boldly enterprise the same,
Were it to enter to black Tartarus,
Where triple Cerberus with his venomous throat,
Scarreth the ghoasts with high resounding noise,
Wele either rent the bowels of the earth,
Searching the entrails of the brutish earth,
Or with his Ixions overdaring soon,
Be bound in chains of ever during steel.
The harken to your sovereigns latest words,
In which I will unto you all unfold,
Our royal mind and resolute intent,
When golden Hebe daughter to great Jove,
Covered my manly cheeks with youthful down,
Th'vnhappie slaughter of my luckless sire,
Drove me and old Assarachus mine am,
As exiles from the bounds of Italy,
So that perforce we were constrained to fly
To Graecians Monarch noble Pandrassus,
There I alone did undertake your cause,
There I restored your antique liberty,
Though Grecia fround, and all Mollossia stormd,
Though brave Antigonus with martial band,
In pitched field encountered me and mine,
Though Pandrassus and his contributories,
With all the out of their confederates,
Sought to deface our glorious memory,
And wipe the name of Troians from the earth,
Him did I captivate with this mine arm,
And by compulsion forst him to agree
To certain artickles which there we did propound,
From Graecia through the boisterous Hellespont,
We came unto the fields of Lestrigon,
Whereas our brother Corineius was,
Which when we passed the Cicillian gulf,
And so transfretting the Illician sea,
Arrived on the coasts of Aquitane,
Where with an army of his barbarous Gaules
Goffarius and his brother Gathelus
Encountering with our host, sustained the foil,
And for your sakes my Turnus there I lost,
Turnus that slew six hundredth men at arms
All in an hour, with his sharpe battle-axe,
From thence upon the strons of Albion
To Corus haven happily we came,
And quilt the giants, comne of Albions race,
With Gogmagog son to Samotheus,
The cursed Captain of that damned crew,
And in that Isle at length I placed you.
Now let me see if my laborious toils,
If all my care, if all my grievous wounds,
If all my diligence were well employed.
When first I followed thee &amp; thine (brave king)
I hazarded my life and dearest blood,
To purchase favour at your princely hands,
And for the same in dangerous attempts
In sundry conflicts and in divers broils,
I showed the courage of my manly mind,
For this I combated with Gathelus,
The brother to Goffarius of Gaul,
For this I fought with furious Gogmagog,
A savage captain of a savage crew,
And for these deeds brave Cornwall I received,
A grateful gift given by a gracious King,
And for this gift, this life and dearest blood,
Will Corineus spend for Brutus good.
And what my friend brave prince hath would to you,
The same will Debon do unto his end.
Then loyal peers ince you are all agreed,
And resolute to follow Brutus hoists,
Favour my sons, favour these Orphans Lords,
And shield them from the dangers of their foes,
Locrine the column of my family,
And only pillar of my weakened age.
Locrine draw near, dawe near unto thy sire,
And take thy latest blessings at his hands,
And or thou art the eldest of my sons,
Be thou a captain to thy brethren,
And imitate thy aged fathers steps,
Which will conduct thee to true honours gate,
For if thou follow sacred vetues lore,
Thou shalt be crowned with a laurel branch,
And wear a wreath of sempiternall fame,
Sorted amongst the glorious happy ones.
If Locrine do not follow your advise,
And bear himself in all things like a prince
That seeks to amplify the great renown
Left unto him for an inheritage
By those that were his ancestors,
Let me be flung into the Ocean,
And swallowed in the bowels of the earth.
Or let the ruddy lightning of great Jove,
Descend upon this my deuolted head.
But for I see you all to be in doubt,
who shall be matched with our royal son,
Locrine receive this present at my hand,
A gift more rich then are the wealthy mines
Found in the bowels of America,
Thou shalt be spoused to fair Guendoline,
Love her, and take her, for she is thine own,
If so thy uncle and herself do please.
And herein how your highness honours me
It cannot be in my speech expressed,
For careful parents glory not so much
At their honour and promotion,
As for to see the issue of their blood
Seated in honour and prosperity.
And far be it from my maidens thoughts
To contradict her aged fathers will,
Therefore since he to whom I must obey
Hath given me now unto your royal self,
I will not stand aloof from off the lure,
Like crafty dames that most of all deny
That, which they most desire to possess.
Then now my soon thy part is on the stage,
For thou must bear the person of a King.
Locrine stand up, and wear the regal Crown,
And think upon the state of Majesty,
That thou with honour well moist wear the crown,
And if thou tendrest these my latest words,
As thou requirst my soul to be at rest,
As thou desire thine own security,
Cherish and love thy new betrothed wife.
No longer let me well enjoy the crown,
Then I do peerless Guendoline.
Cmer.
My Lord.
The glory of mine age.
And darling of thy mother Inoger,
Take thou the South for thy dominion,
From thee there shall proceed a royal race,
That shall maintain he honour of this land,
That sway the regal sceptre with their hands.
And Albanact thy fathers only joy,
Yoongst in years, but not the yoongst in mind,
A perfect pattern of all chivalry,
Take thou the North for thy dominion,
A country full of hills and ragged rocks,
Replenished with fearce untamed beasts,
As correspondent to thy martial thoughts,
Live long my sons with endless happiness,
And bear firm concordance amongst your selves,
Obey the counsels of these fathers grave,
That you may better bear out violence,
But suddenly through weakness of my age,
And the defect of youthful puissance,
My malady increases more and more,
And cruel death hastened his quickened pace,
To dispossess me of my earthly shape,
Mine eyes wax dim, overcast with clouds of age,
The pangs of death compass my crazed bones,
Thus to you all my blessings I bequeath,
And with my blessings, this my fleeting soul.
My glass is run, and all my miseries
Do end with life: death closes up mine eyes,
My soul is haste flies to the Elision fields.
Accursed stars, damned and accursed stars,
To abreuiate my noble fathers life,
Hard-harted gods, and too envious fates,
Thus to cut off my fathers fatal thread,
Brutus that was a glory to vs all,
Brutus that was a terror to his foes,
Alas too soon by Demagogons knife,
The martial Brutus is beart of life.
No sad complaints may move just Locus.
No dreadful threats can fear judge Rhodomanth,
Were thou as strong as mighty Hercules,
That tamed the huge monsters of the world,
Plaidst thou as sweet, on the sweet sounding lute,
As did the spouse of fair Euridies,
That did enchant the waters with his noise,
And made stones, birds, and beasts, to lead a dance,
Constrained the hilly trees to follow him,
Thou could not move the judge of Crebus,
Nor move compassion in grimm Plutos heart,
For fatal Morse expected all the world,
And every man must tread the way of death,
Brave Tantalus the valiant Pelops sire,
Guest to the gods, suffered untimely death,
And old Fleithonus husband to the morn,
And eke grim Minos whom just Iupiter
Deigned to admit unto his sacrifice,
The thundering trumpets of bloodthirsty Mars.
The fearful rage of fell Tisiphone.
The boisterous waives of humid Ocean,
Are instruments and tools of dismal death.
Then noble cousin cease to morn his chance,
Whose age &amp; years were signs that he should die.
It rests now that we inter his bones,
That was a terror to his enemies.
Take up the coarse, and princes hold him dead,
Who while he lived, upheld the Trojan state.
Sound drums and trumpets, march to Troinouant,
There to provide our chieftains funeral.
Either the four elements, the seven plynets and all the particular stars of the pole Antastick, are aduersatiue against me, or else I was begotten and borne in the wane of the Moon, when every thing is saith Lactantius in his fourth book of Constultations doth say, goes award. I mysters I, you may laugh, but I must weep; you may joy, but I must sorrow; shedding salt tears from the watery fountains of my most dainty fair eyes, along my comely and smooth cheeks, in as
great plenty as the water runs from the buskingtubbes, or red wine out of the hogs heads: for trust me gentlemen and my very good friends, and so forth: the little god, nay the desperate god Cuprit, with one of his vengible birdbolts, hath shot me unto the heel: so not only, but also, oh fine phrase, I burn, I burn, and I burn a, in love, in love, and in love a, ah Strumbo what has thou seen, not Dina with the Ass Tom? Yea with these eyes thou hast seen her, and therefore pull hem out: for they will work thy bale. Ah Strumbo hast thou heard, not the voice of the Nightingale, but a voice sweeter then hers, yea with these ears hast thou heard them, and therefore cut them off, for they have caused they sorrow. Nay Strumbo kill thy self, drown thy self, hang thy self, starve thy self. Oh but then I shall leave my sweet heart. Oh my heart, Now pate for thy moister, I will dite an aliquant loue-pistle to her, and then she hearing the grand verbosity of my scripture, will love me presently.
My pen is nought, gentlemen lend me a knife, I think the more haste the worst speed.
So it is mistress Dorothy, and the sole essence of my soul, that the little sparkles of affection kindled in me towards your sweet self, hath now increased to a great flame, and will ere it be long consume my poor heart, except you with the pleasant water of your secret fountain, quench the furious heate of the same. Alas I am a gentleman of good fame, and
name, majestic, in parrell comely, in gate portly. Let not therefore your gentle heart be so hard as to despise a proper tall young man of a handsome life, and by despising him, not only, but also to kill him. Thus expecting time and tide, I bid you farewell Your servant, Signior Strumbo.
Oh wit, Oh pate, O memory, O hand, O ink, O paper. Well now I will send it away. Trompart, Trompart, what a villain is this? Why sir, come when your moister calls you Trompart.
Anon sir.
Thou know my pretty boy what a good moister I have been to thee ever since I took thee into my service.
I sir.
And how I have cherished thee always, as if you had been the fruit of my loins, flesh of my flesh, and bone of my bone?
I sir.
Then show thy self herein a trusty seruant, and carry this letter to mistress Dorothy, and tell her.
Nay masters you shall see a marriage by and by. But here she comes. Now must I frame my amorous passions.
Signior Strumbo, well met, I received your letters by your man here, who told me a pitiful story of your anguish, and so understanding your
passions were so great, I came hither speedily.
Oh my sweet and pigsney, the fecundity of my ingenie is not so great, that may declare unto you the sorrowful sobs and broken sleeps, that I suffred for your sake; and therefore I desire you to receiue me into your familiarity.
For your love doth lie,
As near and as nigh:
Unto my heart within,
As mine eye to my nose,
My leg unto my hose,
And my flesh unto my skin.
Truly M. Strumbo, you speak too learnedlie for me to understand the drift of your mind, and therefore tell your tale in plain terms, and leave off your dark riddles.
Alas mistress Dorothy this is my luck, that when I most would, I cannot be understood: so that my great learning is an inconvenience unto me. But to speak in plain terms, I love you mistress Dorothy, if you like to accept me into your familiaritie.
If this be all I am content.
Say thou so sweet wench, let me lick thy toes. Farewell mistress. If any of you be in love, prouide ye a capas full of new coined words, and then shall you soon have the succado de libras, and something else.
Uncle and princes of brave Brittany,
Since that our noble father is entombed,
As best beseemd so brave a prince as he,
If so you please, this day my love and I,
Within the temple of Consortia,
Will solemnise our royal marriage.
Right noble Lord, your subjects every one,
Must needs obey your highness at command,
Especially in such a cause as this,
That much concerns your highness great content.
Then frolic lordings to fair Consorts walls,
Where we will pass the day in knightly sports,
The night in dancing and in figured masks,
And offer to God Risus all our sports.
Regit omnia numen.
When Perseus married fair Andromeda,
The only daughter of king Cepheus,
He thought he had established well his Crown,
And that his kingdom should for ay endure.
But lo proud Phineus with a band of men,
Contrived of sun-burnt Aethiopians:
By force of arms the bride he took from him,
And turned their joy into a flood of tears.
So fares it with young Locrine and his love,
He thinks this marriage tends to his weal,
But this foul day, this foul accursed day,
Is the beginning of his miseries.
Behold where Humber and his Scithians
Approaches nigh with all his warlike train,
I need not I, the sequel shall declare,
What tragic chances fall out in this war.
At length the snale doth clime the highest tops,
Assding up the stately castle walls,
At length the water with continual drops,
Doth penetrate the hardest marble stone,
At length we are arrived in Albion,
Nor could the barbarous Dacian sovereign,
Nor yet the ruler of brave Belgia
Stay vs from cutting over to this Isle,
Whereas I hear a troop of Phrigians
Under the conduct of Postumis son,
Have pitched up lordly pavilions,
And hope to prosper in this lovely Isle:
But I will frustrate all their foolish hope,
And teach them that the Scithian Emperor
Leads fortune tied in a chain of gold,
Constraining her to yield unto his will,
And grace him with their regal diadem:
Which I will have maugre their treble hoists,
And all the power their petty kings can make.
If she that rules fair Rhanis golden gate
Grant vs the honour of the victory,
As hitherto she always favoured vs,
Right noble father, we will rule the land,
Enthronized in seats of Topic stones,
That Locrine and his brethren all may know,
None must be king but Humber and his son.
Courage my son, fortune shall favour vs,
And yield to vs the coronet of bay,
That decks none but noble conquerors:
But what saith Estrild to these regions?
How likes she the temperature thereof,
Are they not pleasant in her gracious eyes?
The plains my Lord garnished with Floras wealth
And overspread with party coloured flowers,
Do yield sweet contentation to my mind,
The aerie hills enclosed with shady groves,
The groves replenished with sweet chirping birds,
The birds resounding heavenly melody,
Are equal to the groves of Thessaly,
Where Phoebus with the learned Ladies nine,
Delight themselves with music harmony,
And from the moisture of the mountain tops,
The silent springs dance down with murmuring streams,
And water al y ground with crystal waives,
The gentle blasts of Eurus modest wind,
Moving the petering leaves of Siluanes woods,
Do equal it with Tempes paradise,
And thus comforted all to one effect,
Do make me think these are the happy Isles,
Most fortunate, if Humber may them win.
Madam, where resolution leads the way,
And courage follows with emboldened pace,
Fortune can never use her tyranny,
For valiantness is like unto a rock
That stands in the waives of Ocean,
Which though the billows beat on every side,
And Borras fell with his tempestuous storms,
Blows upon it with a hideous clamour,
Yet it remains still unmovable.
Kingly resolved thou glory of thy sire,
But worthy Segar what uncouth novelties
Bring thou unto our royal majesty?
My Lord, the youngest of all Brutus sons,
Stout Albanct, with millions of men,
Approaches nigh, and means ere the morn,
To try your force by dint of atoll sword.
Tut let him come with millions of hostess,
He shall find entertainment good enough,
Yea fit for those that are our enemies:
For weell receive them at the lances points,
And massaker their bodies with our blades:
Yea though they were in number infinite,
More then the mighty Babylonian queen,
Semiramis the ruler of the West,
Brought against the Emperor of the Scithians,
Yet would we not start back one foot from them:
That they might know we are invincible.
Now by great Jove the supreme king of heyuen,
And the immortal gods that live therein,
When as the morning shows his cheerful face,
And Lucifer mounted upon his steed,
Brings in the chariot of the golden sun,
Isle meet young Albanact in the open field,
And crack my lance upon his burgane,
To try the valour of his boyish strength:
There will I show such ruthful spectacles
And cause so great effusion of blood,
That all his boys shall wonder at my strength:
As when the warlike queen of Amazon,
Penthisilea armed with her lance,
Girt with a corslet of bright shining steel,
Coupt up the fainthart Graecians in the camp.
Spoke like a warlike knight my noble son,
Nay like a prince that seeks his fathers joy,
Therefore to morrow ere fair Titan shine,
And bashful Eos messenger of light:
Expels the liquid sleep from out men's eyes,
Thou shalt conduct the right wing of the host,
The left wing shall be under Segars charge,
The reareward shall be under me my self,
And lovely Estrild fair and gracious,
If fortune favour me in mine attempts,
Thou shalt be queen of lovely Albion,
Fortune shall favour me in mine attempts,
And make the Queen of lovely Albion.
Come let vs in and muster up our train,
And furnish up our lusty soldiers,
That they may be a bulwark to our state,
And bring our wished joys to perfect end.
We Cobblers lead a merry life,
Dan, dan, dan, dan:
Void of all ennie and of strife:
Dan diddle dan.
Our ease is great, our labour small:
Dan, dan, dan, dan.
And yet our gains be much withal:
Dan diddle dan.
With this art so fine and fair:
Dan, dan, dan, dan.
No occupation may compare
Dan diddle dan:
For merry pastime and joyful glee:
Dan, dan, dan, dan.
Most happy men we Cobblers bee:
Dan diddle dan.
The can stands full of nappie ale,
Dan: dan: dan: dan:
In our shop still withouten fail:
Dan diddle dan.
This is our meat, this is our food:
Dan: dan: dan: dan:
This brings vs to a merry mood:
Dan didle dan.
This makes vs work for company:
Dan, dan, dan, dan:
To pull the tankards cheerfully:
Dan didle dan.
Drink to thy husband Dorothy,
Dan, dan, dan, dan:
Why then my Strumbo ther's to thee:
Dan didle dan:
Drink thou the rest Trumpart amain:
Dan, dan, dan, dan.
When that is gone weell filt again,
Dan didle dan.
The poorest state is farthest from annoy,
How merrily he sits on his stool:
But when he sees that needs he must be pressed,
Heel turn his note and sing another tune,
Ho, by your leave moister Cobbler:
You are welcome gentleman, what will you any old shoes or buskins, or will you have your shoes clouted, I will do them as well as any Cobbler in Cathues whatsoever?
O moister Cobbler you are far deceived in me, for don you see this? I come not to buy any shoes, but to buy your self; come sir you must be a souldier in the kings cause.
Why but hear you sir, has your king any commission to take any man against his will. I promise you I can scant believe it, or did hee give
you commission?
O sir, ye need not care for that, I need no commission: hold here, I command you in the name of our king Albanact, to appear to morrow in the towne-house of Gathnes.
King Nactabell, I cry God mercy, what have we to doo with him, or he with vs? but you sir master capotail, draw your pastebourd, or else I promise you, Isle give you a canuasado with a bastinano over your shoulders, and teach you to come hither with your implements.
I pray thee good fellow be content, I do the kings command.
Put me out of your book then.
I may not.
No will, come sir will your stomach serve you, by gogs blew hood and halidom, I will have about with you.
How now, what noise, what sudden clamours this?
How now, my captain and the cobbler so hard at it?
Sirs what is your quarrel?
Nothing sir, but that he will not take press money.
Here good fellow take it at my command,
Unless you mean to be stretched.
Truly master gentleman, I lack no money, if you please I will resign it to one of these poor
fellows.
No such matter,
Look you be at the common house to morrow.
O wife I have spun a fair thredde, if I had been quiet, I had not been pressed, and therefore well may I wayment; But come sirrha shut up, for we must to the wars.
Brave cauileres, princes of Albany,
Whose trenchant blades with our deceased sire,
Passing the frontiers of brave Graecia,
Were bathed in our enemies lukewarm blood,
Now is the time to manifest your wills,
Your haughty minds and resolutions,
Now opportunity is offred
To try your courage and your earnest zeal,
Which you always protest to Albanact,
For at this time, yea at this present time,
Stout fugitives come from the Scithians bounds
Have pestrd every place with mutinies:
But trust me Lordings I will never cease
To persecute the rascal runagates,
Till all the rivers stained with their blood,
Shall fully show their fatal overthrow.
So shall your highness merit great renown,
And imitate your aged fathers steppes.
But tell me cousin, came thou through the plains?
And saw thou there the faint heart fugitives
Mustering their weather-beaten soldiers,
What order keep they in their marshaling?
After we past the groves of Caledone,
Where murmuring rivers slide with silent streams
We did behold the straggling Scithians camp,
Replete with men, stored with munition;
There might we see the valiant minded knights
Fetching carriers along the spacious plains,
Humber and Hubba armed in azure blew,
Mounted upon their coursers white as snow,
Went to behold the pleasant flowering fields;
Hector and Troialus, Priamus lovely sons,
Chasing the Graecians over Simoeis,
Were not to be compared to these two knights.
Well hast thou painted out in eloquence
The portraiture of Humber and his son;
As fortunate as was Policrates,
Yet should they not escape our conquering swords,
Or boast of ought but of our clemency.
Wilde fire and pitch, wilde fire and pitch, &amp;c.
What sirs what mean you by these clamours made,
Those outcries raised in our stately court?
Wilde fire and pitch, wilde fire and pitch.
Villains I say, tell vs the cause hereof?
Wilde fire and pitch, &amp;c.
Tell me you villains, why you make this noise,
Or with my lance I will prick your bowels out.
Where are your houses, wher's your dwelling place?
Place, Ha, ha, ha, laugh, a month and a day at him; place, I cry God mercy, why doo you think that such poor honest me as we be, hold our habitacles in kings palaces: Ha? ha, ha. But because you seem to be an abominable chieftain, I will tel you our state.
From the top to the toe,
From the head to the shoe;
From the beginning to the ending,
From the building to the burning.
This honest fellow and I had our mansion cottage in the suburbs of this city, hard by the temple of Mercury. And by the common soldiers of the Shitens, the Scithians; what do you call them? with all the suburbs were burnt to the ground, and the ashes are left there, for the country wives to wash bucks withal. And that which grieves me most, my loving wife, O cruel strife; the wicked flames did roast.
And therefore captain crust,
We will continually cry,
Except you seek a remedy
Our houses to ratify
Which now are burnt to dust.
Well we must remedy these outrages,
And throw revenge upon their hateful heads,
And you good fellows for your houses burnt,
We will remunerate you store of gold,
And build your houses by our palace gate.
Gate, O petty treason to my person, no where else but by your backside; gate, oh how I am vexed in my collar; gate, I cry God mercy, doo you hear master king? If you mean to gratify such poor men as we bee, you must build our houses by the Tavern.
It shall be done sir.
Near the Tavern, I by lady sir it was spoken like a good fellow. Do you hear sir, when our house is builded, if you do chance to pass or repass that way, we will bestow a quart of the best wine upon you?
It grieves me lordings that my subjects goods
Should thus be spoiled by the Scithians,
Who as you see with lightfoote foragers
Depopulate the places where they come,
But cursed Humber thou shalt rue the day
That ere thou came unto Cathuesia.
Hubba, go take a coronet of our horse
As many launciers, and light armed knights
As may suffice for such an enterprise,
And place them in the grove of Caledon,
With these, when as the skirmish doth increase
Retire thou from the sheltiers of the wood,
And set upon the weakened Troians backs,
For policy joined with chivalry
Can never be put back from victory.
Thou base borne Hunne, how durst thou be so bold
As once to menace warlike Albanact?
The great commander of these regions,
But thou shalt buy thy rashness with thy death,
And rue too late thy over bold attempts,
For with this sword this instrument of death,
That hath been drenched in my foe-mens blood,
Isle separate thy body from thy head,
And set that coward blood of thine abroach.
Nay with this staff great Strumbos instrumeant,
Isle crack thy cocks come paltry Scithian.
Nor wreak I of thy threats thou princox boy,
Nor do I fear thy foolish insolence,
And but thou better use thy bragging blade,
Then thou doest rule thy overflowing tongue,
Superbious Britain, thou shalt know too soon
The force of Humber and his Scithians.
O horrible, terrible.
How bravely this young Britain Albanact
Darts abroad the thunderbolts of war,
Beating down millions with his furious mood;
And in his glory triumphs over all,
Moving the massy squadrants of the ground;
Heap hills on hills, to scale the starry sky,
When Briareus armed with an hundredth hands
Flung forth an hundredth mountains at great Jove,
And when the monstrous giant Monichus
Hurled mount Olimpus at great Mars his targe,
And shot huge caedars at Mineruas shield;
How doth he overlook with haughty front
My fleeting hostess, and lifts his lofty face
Against vs all that now do fear his force,
Like as we see the wrathful sea from far
In a great mountain heaped with hideous noise
With thousand billows beat against the ships
And toss them in the waives like tennis balls.
Ay me, I fear my Hubba is surprised.
Follow me soldiers, follow Albanact;
Pursue the Scithians flying through the field:
Let none of them escape with victory:
That they may know the Brittains force is more
Then al the power of the trembling Hunnes.
Forward brave soldiers, forward keep the chase,
He that takes captive Humber or his son,
Shall be rewarded with a crown of gold.
Injurious fortune hast thou crossed me thus?
Thus in the morning of my victories,
Thus in the prime of my felicity
To cut me off by such hard overthrow;
Hadt thou no time thy rancor to declare,
But in the spring of all my dignities?
Had thou no place to spit thy venom out
But on the person of young Albanact?
I that ere while did scare mine enemies,
And drove them almost to a shameful flight,
I that ere while full lion-like did fare
Amongst the dangers of the thick thronged pikes,
Must now depart most lamentably slain
By Humbers treacheries and fortunes spights:
Cursed be their charms, damned be her cursed charms
That doth delude the wayward harts of men,
Of men that trust unto her fickle wheel,
Which never leaves turning upside down.
O gods, O heavens, allot me but the place
Where I may find her hateful mansion,
Isle pass the Alps to watery Mere,
Where fiery hoebus in his chariot
The wheels whereof are dect with Emeralds,
Cat such a heate, yea such a scorching heate,
And spoils Flora of her chequered grass,
Isle overrun the mountain Cancusus,
Where fell Chimera in her triple shape
Rolls hot flames from out her monstrous paunch,
Scaring the beasts with issue of her gorge,
Isle pass the frozen Zone where ysie flakes
Stopping the passage of the fleeting ships
Do ie, like mountains in the congeald sea,
Where if I find that hateful house of hers,
Isle pull the fickle wheel from out her hnds,
And tie her self in everlasting bands:
But all in vain I breath these threatenings,
The day is lost, the Hunnes are conquerors,
Doon is slain, my men are done to death,
The currents swift, swim violently with blood
And last, O that this last night so long last,
My self with wounds past all recovery,
Must leave my crown for Humber to possess.
Lord have mercy upon vs; masters I think this is a holy day, every man lies sleeping in the fields, but God knows full sore against their wills.
Fly noble Albanact and save thy self,
The Scithians follow with great celerity,
And ther's no way but fight, or speedy death,
Fly noble Albanact and save thy self.
Nay let them fly that fear to die the death
That tremble at the name of fatal morse,
Neur shall proud Humber boast or brag himself
That he hath put young Albanact to flight,
And least he should triumph at my decay,
This sword shall reeve his moister of his life,
That oft hath saved his masters doubtful life:
But oh my brethren if you care for me,
Revenge my dath upon his traitorous head.
Et vos queis domus ect nigrantis regia ditis,
Queen regitis rigido stigios moder amin lucos:
Nox caeci rgina poli furialis Erinnis
Dique de aeque omnes Albanum olliteregem
Tollit flume vdis rigidaque palude
Nuns me fata vocat, hoc condam pectore forum.
O what hath he don, his nose bleeds? but oh I smell a fox,
Look where my moister lies, master, master.
Let me alone I tell thee, for I am dead.
Yet one, good, good, master.
I will not speak, for I am dead I tel thee.
And is my master dead?
O sticks and stones, brickbats and bones,
and is my master dead?
O you cocktries and you bablatrices,
that in the woods dwell:
You briers and brambles, you cooks shops and shambles,
come howl and yell.
With howling &amp; screeking, with wailing and weeping.
come you to lament.
O Colliers of Croydon, and rueticks of Royden,
and fishers of Ket.
For Struby the cobbler, the fine merry cobbler
of Cathnes town
At this same stoure, at this very hour
lies dead on the ground.
O moister, thieves, theeus, thieves.
Where be they? cox me unny, bobekin let me be rising, be gone, we shall be robbed by and by.
Thus from the dreadful shocks of furious Mars
Thundering alarms, and Rhamnusias drum
We are retired with joyful victory,
The slaughtered Troians squeltring in heir blood,
Infect the air with their carcasses,
And are a pray for every ravenous bird.
So perish they that are our enemies.
So perish they that love not Humbers weal.
And mighty Jove commander of th world,
Protect my love from all false treacheries.
Thanks lovely Estrild, solace to my soul.
But valiant Hubba for thy chivalry
Declared against the men of Albany,
Lo here a flowering garland wreathed of bay,
As a reward for thy forward mide.
This unexpected honour noble sir,
Will pec my courage unto braver deeds,
And cause me to attempt such hard exploits,
That all the world shall sound of Hubbies name.
And now brave soldiers for this good successe,
Carouse whole cups of Amazonian wine,
Sweeter then Nectar or Ambrosia,
And cast away the clods of cursed care,
With goblets crowned with Semeleius gifts,
Now let vs march to Ibis silver streams
That clearly glide along the Champane fields,
And moist the greie meads with humid drops.
Sound drums &amp; trumpets, sound up cheerfully,
Sith we return with joy and victory.
Scelera i authrem cadunt.
High on a bank by Nilus boisterous streams,
Fearfully sat the Egyptian Crocodile,
Dreadfully grinding in her sharpe long teethe,
The broken bowels of a silly fish,
His back was armed against the din of spear,
With shields of brass that shined like burnished gold
And as he stretched forth his cruel paws,
A subtle Adder creeping closely near
Thrusting his forked sting into his claws,
Privily shed his poison through his bones
Which made him swell that there his bowels burst,
That did so much in his own greatness trust.
So Humber having conquered Albaact,
Doth yield his glory unto Lcrines sword.
Mark what ensues and you may easily see,
That all our life is but a Tragedy.
And is this true, is Albanactus slain?
Hath cursed Humber with his straggling host
With that his army made of mongrel cures,
Brought our redoubted brother to his end.
O that I had the Thracian Orpheus harp
For to awake out of the infernal shade
Those ugly devils of black Arabs,
That might torment the damned traitors soul:
O that I had Amphions instrument
To quicken with his vital notes and tunes
The flinty joints of every stony rock,
By which the Scithians might be punished,
For by the lightening of almighty Jove
The Hunne shall die, had he ten thousand lives:
And would to God he had ten thousand lives,
That I might with the arme-strong Hercules
Crop off so vile an Hidras hissing heads,
But say me cousin, for I long to hear
How Albanact came by untimely death?
After the traitrous host of Scithians,
Entered the field with martial equipage
Young Albanact impatient of delay
Led forth his army against the straggling mates,
Whose multitude did daunt our soldiers minds,
Yet nothing could dismay the forward prince,
But with a courage most heroical
Like to a lion amongst a flock of lambs
Made havoc of the faint heart fugitives,
Hewing a passage through them with his sword,
Yea we had almost given them the repulse
When suddenly from out the silent wood
Hubba with twenty thousand soldiers
Cowardly came upon our weakened backs,
And murdered all with fatal massacre,
Amongst the which old Debn martial knight,
With many wounds was brought unto the death.
And Albanct oppressed with multitude
Whilst valiantly he field his enemies
Yielded his life and honour to the dust,
He being dead, the soldiers fled amain,
And I alone escaped them by flight,
To bring you tidings o these accidents.
Not aged Priam King of stately Troy,
Grand Emperor of barbarous Asia,
When he beheld his noble minded sons
Slain traitorously by all the Mermidons,
Lamented more then I for Albanact.
Not Hecba the queen of Ilium
When she beheld the town of Pergamus,
Her palace burnt, with all devouring flames,
Her fifty sons and daughters fresh of hue,
Murdered by wicked Pirrhus bloody sword,
Shed such sad tears as I for Albanact.
The grief of Niobe fair Athens queen,
For her seven sons magnanimous in filt,
For her seven daughters fairer then the fairest,
Is not to be compared with my laments.
In vain you sorrow for the slaughtered prince,
In vain you sorrow for his overthrow,
He loves not most hat doth lament the most,
But he that seeks to avenge the injury.
Think you to quell the enemies warlike train,
With childish sobs and womanish laments?
Unsheathe your swords, unsheathe your conquering sword,
And seek revenge, the comfort for this sore,
In Cornwall where I hold my regiment
Even just ten thousand valiant men at arms
Hath Corineus ready at command:
All these and more, if need shall more require,
Hath Corrineus ready at command.
And in the fields of martial Cambria,
Close by the boisterous Iscans silver streams,
Where lightfoote fairs skip from bank to bank,
Full twenty thousand brave courageous knights
Well exercised in feats of chivalry,
In manly manner most invincible,
Young Camber hath with gold and victual,
All these and more, if need shall more require,
I offer up to avenge my brothers death.
Thanks loving uncle and good brother too,
For this revenge, or this sweet word revenge
Must ease and cease thy wrongful injuries,
And by the sword of bloody Mars I swear,
Ne'er shall sweet quiet enter this my front,
Till I be venged on his traitorous head
That slew my noble brother Albanact.
Sound drums and trumpets, muster up the camp,
For we will straight march to Albany.
Thus are we come victorious conquerors
Unto the flowing currents silver streams
Which in memorial of our victory,
Shall be agnominated by our name,
And talked of by our posterity:
For sure I hope before the golden sun
Posts his horses to fair Thetis plains,
To see the waters turned into blood,
And change his bluish hue to rueful red,
By reason of the fatal massacre
Which shall be made upon the virent plains.
See how the traitor doth presage his harm,
See how he glories at his own decay,
See how he triumphs at his proper loss,
O fortune wild, unstable, fickle, frail.
Me thinks I see both armies in the field,
The broken lances clime the crystal skies,
Some headless lie, some breathless on the ground,
Anb every place is straw'd with carcasses,
Behold the grass hath lost his pleasant greene,
The sweetest sight that ever might be seen.
I traitorous Humber, thou shalt find it so,
Yea to thy cost thou shalt the same behold,
With anguish, sorrow, and with sad laments,
The grassy plains that now do please thine eyes,
Shall ere the night be coloured all with blood,
The shady groves which now enclose thy camp
And yield sweet savours to thy damned corps,
Shall ere the night figured all with blood,
The profound stream that passes by thy tents,
And with his moisture serves all thy camp,
Shall ere the night converted be to blood,
Yea with the blood of those thy straggling boys,
For now revenge shall ease my lingering grief,
And now revenge shall glut my longing soul.
Let come what will, I mean to bear it ou,
And either live with glorious victory,
Or die with am renowned for chivalry,
He is not worthy of the honey comb
That shuns the hives because the bees have stings,
That likes me best that is not got with ease,
Which thousand dangers do accompany,
For nothing can dismayour regal mind,
Which aims at nothing but a golden crown,
The only upshot of mine enterprises,
Were they enchanted in grimm Plutos court,
And kept for treasure amongst his hellish crew,
I would either quell the triple Cerberus
And all the army of his haefull hags,
Or roll the stone with wretched Sisiphon.
Right martial be hy thoughts my noble son,
And all thy words savour of chivalry,
But warlike Segar what strange accidents
Makes you to leave the warding of the camp.
To arms my Lord, to honourable arms,
Take helm and targe in hand the Britains come,
With greater multitde then erst the Greeks
Brought to the ports of Phrigian Tenidos.
But what saith Segar to these accidents?
What counsel gives he in extremities?
Why this my Lord experience teaches vs,
That resolution is a sole help at need.
And this my Lord our honour teaches vs,
That we be bold in every enterprise,
Then since there is no way but fight or die,
Be resolute my Lord for victory.
And resolute Segar I mean to be,
Perhaps some blifull star will favour vs,
And comort bring to our perplexed state:
Come let vs in and fortify our camp,
So to withstand their strong invasion.
Nay neighbour Oliuer, if you be so what, come prepare your self, you shall find two as stout fellows of vs, as any in all the North.
No by my dorth neighbor Strumbo, Each see dat you are a man of small zideration, dat will seek to injure your old vreendes, one of your vamiliar guests, and therefore seeing your pinion is to deal
withouten reason, iche and my zonne VVilliam will take dat course, dat shall be fardest vrom reason, how say you, will you have my daughter or no?
A very hard question neighbour, but I will solve it as I may; what reason have you to demaund it of me?
Marry sir, what reason had you when my sister was in the barn to rumble her upon the haie, and to fish her belly.
Mas thou say true, well, but would you have me marry her therefore? No I scorn her, and you, and you. I, I scorn you all.
You will not have her then?
No as I am a true gentleman.
Then will we school you, ere you and we part hence.
I you come in pudding time, or else I had dressed them.
You master sausebox, lobcock, cockscomb, you slopsauce, lickfingers, will you not hear?
Who speak you too, me?
I sir to you, Iohn lackhonestie, little wit, is it you that will have none of me?
No by my troth, mistressenicebice, how fine you ca nickname me, I think you were brought up in the university of bridewell, you have your rhetoric so ready at your toongs end, as if you were
never well warned when your were young.
Why then goodman cods-head, if you will have none of me, farewell.
If you be so plain mistress drigle dragle, fare you well.
Nay master Strumbo, ere you go from hence we must have more words, you will have none of me?
Oh my head, my head, leave, leave, leave, I will, I will, I will.
Upon that condition I let thee alone.
How now master Strumbo, hath my daughla taught you a new lesson?
I but hear you goodman Oliuer? it will not bee for my ease to have my head broken every day, therefore remedy this and we shall agree.
Well zonne well, for you are my zonne now, all shall be remedied, daughter be friends with him.
You are a sweet nut; the devil crack you. Masters I think it be my luck, my first wife was a loving quiet wench, but this I think would weary the devil. I would she might be burnt as my other wife was. If not, I must run to the halter for help. O codpeece thou hast done thy moister, this it is to be meddling with warm plackets.
Now am I guarded with an host of men,
Whose haughty courage is invincible,
Now am I hemmed with troupes of soldiers,
Such as might force Bellona to retire,
And make her tremble at their puissance,
Now sit I like the mighty god of war,
When armed with his coat of Adamant,
Mounted his chariot drawn with mighty bulls,
He drove the Argiues over Xanthus streams.
Now cursed Humber doth thy end draw no,
Down goes the glory of his victories,
And all his fame, and all his high renown
Shall in a moment yield to Locrines sword,
Thy bragging banners crossed with argent streams,
The ornaments of thy pavilions
Shall all be captivated with this hand,
And thou thy self at Albanactus tomb
Shalt offred be in satisfaction
Of all the wrongs thou did him when he lived.
But can thou tell me brave Thrasimachus,
How far we are distant from Humbers camp?
My Lord, within your foul accursed grove
That bears the tokens of our overthrow,
This Humber hath entrenched his damned camp.
March on my Lord, because I long to see
The treacherous Seithians squeltring in their gore.
Sweet fortune favour Locrine with a smile,
That I may avenge my noble brothers death,
And in the midst of stately Troinonant,
Isle build a temple to thy deity
Of perfect marble and of Iacinthe stones,
That it shall pass the high Pyramids
Which with their top surmount the firmament.
The armestrong offspring of the doubted knight,
Stout Hercules Alcmenas mighty son,
That tamed the monsters of the threefold world,
And rid the oppressed from the tyrants yokes,
Did never show such valiantness in fight,
As I will now for noble Albanact.
Full four score years hath Corineus lived,
Sometime in war, sometime in quiet peace,
And yet I feel my self to be as strong
As erst I was in summer of mine age,
Able to toss this great unwildy club
Which hath bin painted with my foemens brains,
And with this club isle break the strong array
Of Humber and his straggling soldiers,
Or loose my life amongst the thickest press,
And die with honour in my latest days,
Yet ere I die they all shall understand
What force lies in stout Corineus hand.
And if Thrasimachus detract the fight,
Either for weakness or for cowardice,
Let him not boast that Brutus was his am,
Or that brave Corineus was his sire.
Then courage soldiers, first for your safety,
Next for your peace, last for your victory.
Art thou that Humber prince of fugitives,
That by thy treason slewst young Albanact?
I am his son that slew young Albanact,
And if thou take not heed proud Phrigian,
Isle send thy soul unto the Stigian lake,
There to complain of Humbers injuries.
You triumph sir before the victory,
For Corineus is not so soon slain.
But cursed Scithians you shall rue the day
That ere you came into Albany.
So perish that they envy Britains wealth,
So let them die with endless infamy,
And he that seeks his sovereigns overthrow,
Would this my club might aggraute his woe.
Where may I find some desert wilderness,
Where I may breath out curses as I would,
And scare the earth with my condemning voice,
Where every echoes repercussion
May help me to bewail mine overthrow,
And aide me in my sorrowful laments?
Where may I find some hollow uncouth rock,
Where I may damn, condemn and ban my fill,
The heavens, the hell, the earth, the air, the fire,
And utter curses to the concave sky,
Which may infect the aerie regions,
And light upon the Britain Locrines head?
You ugly sprites that in Cocitus morn,
And gnash your teeth with dolorous laments,
Yea fearful dogs that in black Lathe howl,
And scare the ghoasts with your wide open throats,
You ugly ghoasts that flying from these dogs,
Do plunge your selves in Puryflegiton,
Come all of you, and with your shrieking notes
Accompaie the Britains conquering host.
Come fierce Erinnis horrible with snakes,
Come ugly Furies, armed with your whips,
You threefold judges of black Tartarus,
And all the army of you hellish fiends,
With new found tormets rack proud Locrins bones
O gods, and stars, damned be the gods &amp; stars
That did not drown me in fair Thetis plains.
Cursed be the sea that with outrageous waives
With surging billows did not rive my ships
Against the rocks of high Cerannia,
Or swallowed me into her watery gulf,
Would God we had arrived upon the shore
Where Poliphlemus and the Cyclops dwell,
Or where the bloody Anthropomphagie
With greedy jaws devours the wandering wights,
But why comes Albanacts bloody ghost,
To bring a cursive to our miseries?
First not enough to suffer shameful flight,
But we must be tormented now with ghoasts,
With apparitions fearful to behold.
Revenge, revenge for blood.
So nought will satisfy your wandering ghost
But dire revenge, nothing but Humbers fall,
Because he conquered you in Vlbany.
Now by my soul Humber would be condemned
To Tanelse hunger or Ixions wheel,
Or to the vulture of Prometheus,
Rather then that this murder were undone.
When as I die isle drag thy cursed ghost
Through all the rivers of foul Erebus,
Through burning sulphur of the Limbo-lake
To allay the burning fury of that heate
That rages in mine everlasting soul.
Quem non Argolici mandate severe Tyranny,
Non potuit Iuno vincere, visit amor.
Stout Hercules the mirror of the world,
Son to Almena and great Iupiter,
After so many conquests won in field,
After so many monsters quilt by force,
Yielded his valiant heart to Omphale,
A fearful woman void of manly strength,
She took the club, and ware the lions skin,
He took the wheel, and maidenly began spin.
So martial Locrine cheerd with victory,
Falls in love with Humbers concubine,
And so forgets peerless Guendoline.
His uncle Corinus storms at this,
And forces Locrine for his grace to sue,
Lo here the sum, the process doth ensue.
Thus from the fury of Bellonas broils,
With sound of drum and trumpets melody,
The Britain king returns triumphanly,
The Scithians slain with great occision,
Do aequalize the grass in multitude,
And with their bood have stained the streaming brookes,
Offering their bodies and their dearest blood
As sacrifice to Albanactus ghost,
Now cursed Humber hast thou paid thy due,
For thy deceits and crafty treacheries,
For all thy guises, and damned stratagems,
With loss of life, and ever during shame.
Where are thy horses trapt with burnished gold,
Thy trampling coursers ruled with foaming bits?
Where are thy soldiers strong and numberless,
Thy valiant captains and thy noble peers?
Even as the country clowns with sharpest sides
Do mow the withered grass from off the earth,
Or as the ploughman with his piercing share
Rents the bowels of the fertile fields,
And ripped up the roots with razors keen.
So Locrine with his mighty curtleaxe,
Hath cropped off the heads of all thy Hunnes,
So Locrines peers have daunted all thy peers,
And drove thine host unto confusion,
That thou moist suffer penance for thy fault,
And die for murdering valiant Albanact.
And thus, yea thus shall all the rest be served
That seek to enter Albion against our wills.
If the brave nation of the Troglodytes,
If all the coalblack Aethiopians,
If all the forces of the Amazons,
If all the hostess of the Barbarian lands,
Should dare to enter this our little world,
Soon should they rue their overbold attempts,
That after vs our progeny may say,
There lie the beasts that sought to usurp our land.
I they are beasts that seek to usurp our land,
And like to brutish beasts they shall be served.
For mighty love the supreme king of heaven,
That guides the concourse of the Meteors,
And rules the motion of the azure sky,
Fights always for the Britains safety.
But stay, me thinks I hear some shrieking noise,
That draws near to our pavilion.
What prince so ere adorned with golden
Doth sway the regal sceptler in his hand:
And thinks no chance can ever throw him down,
Or that his state shall everlasting stand,
Let him behold poor Estrild in this plight,
The perfect platform of a troubled wight.
Once was I guarded with manortiall bands,
Compassed with princes of the noble blood,
Now am I fallen into my foemens hands,
And with my death must pacify their mood.
O life the harbour of calamities,
O death the haven of all miseries,
I could compare my sorrows to thy woe,
Thou wretched queen of wretched Pergamus,
But that thou viewdst thy enemies overthrow.
Nigh to the rock of high Caphareus,
Thou saw their death, and then departed thence,
I must abide the victors insolence.
The gods that pitied thy continual grief,
Transformed thy corps, and with thy corps thy care,
Poor Estrild lives despairing of relief,
For friends in trouble are but few and rare.
What said I few? I few or none at all,
For cruel death made havoc of them all.
Thrice happy they whose fortune was so good,
To end their lives, and with their lives their woes,
Thrice haplesse I, whom fortune so withstood,
That cruelly she gave me to my foes.
Oh soldiers is there any misery,
To be compared to fortunes treachery.
Camer, this am should be the Scithia queen.
So may we judge by her lamenting words.
So fair a dame mine eyes did never see,
With floods of woes she seems orewhelmed to bee
O Locrine hath she not a cause for to be sad?
If she have cause to weep for Humbers death,
And shed salt tears for her overthrow,
Locrine may well bewail his proper grief,
Locrine may move his own peculiar woe,
He being conquered died a speedy death,
And felt not long his lamentable smart,
I being conqueror, live a lingering life,
And feel the force of Cupids sudden stroke.
I gave him cause to die a speedy death,
He left me cause to wish a speedy death.
Oh that sweet face painted with natures dye,
Those rosall checks mizt with a snowy white,
That decent neck surpassing ivory,
Those comely breasts which Venus well might spite,
Are like to snares which wily fowlers wrought
Wherein my yielding heart is prisoner caught.
The golden tresses of her dainty hair
Which shine like rubies glittering with the sun,
Have so entrapped poor Locrines lovesick heart,
That from the same no way it can be won.
How true is that which oft I heard declared,
One dram of joy, must have a pound of care.
Hard is their fall who from a golden crown
Are cast into a sea of wretchedness.
Hard is their thrall who by Cupids frown
Are wrapped in waives of endless carefulness.
Oh kingdom object to all miseries.
Oh love, the extreemst of all extremities.
Let him go into his chair.
My Lord, in ransacking the Scithian tents
I found this Lady, and to manifest
That earnest zeal I bear unto your grace,
I here present her to your majesty.
He lies my Lord, I found the Lady first,
And here present her to your majesty.
Presumptuous villain wilt thou take my prize?
Nay rather thou depriuest me of my right.
Resign thy title (catiue) unto me,
Or with my sword isle pearce thy cowards loins.
Soft words good sir, tic not inogh to speak
A barking dog doth seldom strangers bite.
Irreverent villains, strive you in our sight?
Take them hence Jailer to the dungeon,
There let them lie and try their quarrel out.
But thou fair princess be no whit dismayed,
But rather joy that Locrine favours thee.
How can he favour me that slew my spouse?
The chance of war (my love) took him fro thee
But Locrine was the causer of his death.
He was an enemy to Locrines state,
And slue my noble brother Albanact.
But he was linked to me in marriage bond,
And would you have me love his slaughterer?
Better to live, then not to live at all.
Better to die renownd for chastity,
Then live with shame and endless infamy.
What would the common sort report of me,
If I forget my love, and cleave to thee?
Kings need not fear the vulgar sentences.
But Ladies must regard their honest name.
Is it a shame to live in marriage bonds?
No, but to be a strumpet to a king.
If thou wilt yield to Locrines burning love,
Thou shalt be queen of fair Albany.
But Gendoline will undermine my state.
Upon mine honour thou shalt have no harm.
Then lo bre Locrine, Estrild yields to thee,
And by the gods whom thou doest invoke,
By the dead ghost of thy deceased sire,
By thy right hand and by thy burning love,
Take pity on poor Estrilds wretched thrall.
Hath Locrine then forgot his Guendoline,
That thus he courts the Scithians paramore?
What are the words of Brute so soon forgot?
Are my deserts so quickly out of mind?
Have I been faithful to thy ire now dead,
Have I protected thee from Humbers hands,
And doest thou quite me with ingratitude?
Is this the guerdon for my grievous wounds,
Is this the honour for my labours past?
Now by my sword, Locrine I swear to thee,
This injury of thine shall be repaid.
Uncle, scorn you your royal sovereign,
As if we stood for ciphers in the court?
Upbraid you me with those your benefits?
Why it was a subjects duty so to do.
What you have done for our deceased sire,
We know, and all know you have your reward.
Avaunt proud princoxe, brau'st thou me withal,
Assure thy self though thou be Emperor
Thou ne'er shalt carry this unpunished.
Pardon my brother noble Corineus,
Pardon this once and it shall be amended.
Cousin remember Brutus latest words,
How he desired you to cherish them,
Let not this fault so much incense your mind.
Which is not yet passed all remedy.
Then Locrine, lo I reconcile my self,
But as thou love thy life, so love thy wife:
But if thou violate those promises,
Blood and revenge shall light upon thy head.
Come let vs back to stately Troinouant,
Where all these matters shall be settled.
Millions of devils wait upon thy soul.
Legion of spirits vex thy impious ghost.
Ten thousand torments rack thy cursed bones.
Let every thing that hath the use of breath,
Be instruments and workers of thy death.
What basiliskt was hatched in this place,
Where every thing consumed is to nought?
What fearful Fury haunts these cursed groves
Where not a root is let for Humbers meat?
Hath fell Alecto with inuenomed blasts,
Breathed forth poison in these tender plains?
Hath triple Cerberus with contagious some,
Sowde Aconitum amongst these withered herbs?
Hath dreadful Fmes with her charming rods
Brought barreinnesse on every fruitful tree?
What not a root, no fruit, no beast, no bird,
To nourish Humber in this wilderness?
What would you more you fiends of Erebus,
My very entrails burn for want of drink,
My bowels cry, Humber give vs some meat,
But wretched Humber can give you no meat,
These foul accursed groves afford no meat.
This fruitless soil, this groud brings forth no mea
The gods, hard hearted gods, yield me no meat.
Then how can Humber give you any meat?
How do you masters, how do you? how have you scoped hanging this long time? in faith I have escaped many a scouring this year, but I thank God I have past them all with a good couragio, couragio, &amp; my wife &amp; I are in great love and charity now, I thank my manhood &amp; my strength, for I will tell you mysters, upon a certain day at night I came home, to say the very truth, with my stomach full of wine, and ran up into the chamber where my wife soberl sate
rocking my little baby, leaning her back against the bed, singing lullaby. Now when she saw me come with my nose foremost, thinking that I bin drunk, as I was indeed, snatched up a faggot stick in her hand, and came furiously marching towards me with a big face, s though she would have eaten me at a bit; thundering out these words unto me. Thou drunken knave where hast thou bin so long? I shall teach thee how to benight me an other time; and so she began to play knaves trumps. Now although I trembled fearing she would set her ten commandments in my face, ran within her, and taking her lustily by the middle, I carried her valiantly to the bed, and flinging her upon it, flung my self upon her, and there I delighted her so with the sport I made, that ever after she wold call me sweet husband, and so banished brawling for ever: and to see the good will of the wench, she bought with her portion a yard of land, and by that I am now become one of the richest me in our parish. Well masters whats a clock, it is now breakfast time, you shall see what meat I have here for my breakfast.
Was ever land so fruitless as this land?
Was ever grove so graceless as this grove?
Was ever soil so barren as this soil?
Oh no: the land where hungry Fems dwelt,
May no wise aequalize this cursed land,
No even the climate of the torrid zone
Brings forth more fruit then this accursed grove.
Ne'er came sweet Ceres, ne'er came Venus here,
Triptolemus the god of husbandmen,
Ne'er sowd his seed in this foul wilderness.
The hunger-bitten dogs of Acheron,
Chaste from the ninefold Puriflegiton,
Have set their footsteps in this damned ground.
The iron hearted Furies armed with snakes,
Scattered huge Hidras over all the plains,
which have cosum'd the grass, the herbs, the trees
which have drunk up the flowing water springs.
Thou great commander of the starry sky,
That guidest the life of every mortal wight
From the enclosures of the fleeting clouds,
Rain down some food, or else I faint and die.
Power down some drink, or else I faint and die.
O Iupiter hast thou sent Mercury
In clownish shape to minister some food?
Some meat, some meat, some meat.
O alas sir, ye are deceived, I am not Mercury, I am Strumbo.
Give me some meat vilain, give me some meat,
Or against this rock, Isle dash thy cursed brains,
And rent thy bowels with my bloody hands.
Give me some meat villain, give me some meat.
By the faith of my body good fellow, I had rather give an whole ox then that thou shuldst serve me in that sort. Dash out my brains? O whoreble,
terrible. I think I have a quarry of stones in my pocket.
Lo here the gift of fell ambition,
Of usurpation and of treachery.
Lo here the harms that wait upon all those
That do intrude themselves in others lands,
Which are not under their dominion.
Seven years hath aged Corineus lived
To Locrines grief, and fair Estrilds woe,
And seven years more he hops yet to live,
Oh supreme Jove, annihilate this thought.
Should he enjoy the aires fruition?
Should he enjoy the benefit of life?
Should he contemplate the radiant son,
That makes my life equal to dreadful death?
Venus convey this monster fro the earth,
That disobeieth thus thy sacred hests.
Cupped conuy this monster to dark hell,
That disanulls thy mothers fugred laws.
Mars with thy target all beset wiih flames,
With murdering blade bereave him of his life,
That hindered Locrine in his sweetest joys.
And yet for all his diligent aspect,
His wrathful eyes piercing like Lenses eyes,
Well have I overmatched his subtlety.
Nigh Deucolitum by the pleasant Lee,
where brackish Thamis slides with silver streams,
Making a breach into the grassy downs,
A curious arch of costly marble fraught,
Hath Locrine framed underneath the ground,
The walls whereof, garnish with diamonds,
With ophirs, rubies, glistening emeralds,
And interlaced with sun-bright carbuncles,
Lighten the room with artificial day,
And from the Lee with water-flowing pipes
The moisture is derived into this arch
Where I have placed fair Estrild secretly,
Thither eftsoones accompanied with my page,
I covertly visit my harts desire,
Without suspicion of the meanest eye,
For love abounds still with policy:
And thither still means Locrine to repair,
Till Atropos cut off mine uncles life.
O vita miserolonga, faelici braves,
Ehen malorem fems extremum malum.
Long have I lived in this desert cave,
With eating hawes and miserable roots,
Devouring leaves and beastly excrements.
Caves were my beds, and stones my pillow beaes,
Fear was my sleep, and horror was my dream,
For still me thought at every boisterous blast
Now Locrine comes, now Humber thou must die:
So that for fear and hunger, Humbers mind
Can never rest, but always trembling stands.
O what Danubius now may quench my thirst?
What Euphrates, what lightfoot Euripus,
May now allay the fury of that heat,
Which raging in my entrails eats me up?
You ghastly devils of the ninefold Sticks,
You damned ghoasts of ioylesse Acheron,
You mournful souls, vexed in Abissus vaults,
You coalblack devils of Auerns pond,
Come with your fleshhooks, rent my famished arms,
These arms that have sustained their masters life,
Come with your raisours, ippe my bowels up,
With your sharp fireforks crack my starved bones,
Use me as you will, so Humber may not live.
Accured gods that rule the starry poles,
Accursed Jove king of the cursed gods,
Cast down your lightning on poor Humbers head,
That I may leave this deathlike life of mine,
What hear you not, and shall not Humber die?
Nay I will die though all the gods say nay.
And gentle Aby take my troubled corps,
Take it and keep it from all moreall eyes,
That none may say when I have lost my breath,
The very floods conspired against Humbers death.
Encaedem sequitur, caedes in caede quieso.
Humber is dead, joy heavens, leap earth, dance trees
Now moist thou reach thy apples Tantalus,
And with them feed thy hunger-bitten limbs.
Now Sisiphus leave umbling of thy rock,
And rest thy restless bones upon the same.
Unbind Ixion cruel Rhadamanth,
And lay proud Humber on the whirling wheel.
Back will I post to hell mouth Taenarus
And pass Cocitu, to the Elision fields,
And tell my father Brutus of these news.
Nontm Tincriis excestnat Atna caueris
Laesae furtino quam cor mlieris amore.
Medea seeing Iason leave her love,
And choose the daughter of the Thebane king,
Went to her devilish charms to work revenge,
And raising up the triple Hecate,
With all the rout of the condemned fiends,
Framed a garland by her magic skill,
With which she wrought Iason and Croons ill.
So Guendoline seeing her self misused,
And Hmbers paramour possess her place,
Flies to the dukedom of Cornubia,
And with her brother stout Thrasimachus,
Gathering a power of Cornish soldiers,
Gives battle to her husband and his host,
Nigh to the river of great Mertia,
The chances of this dismal massacre,
That which ensues shortly will unfold.
But tell me cousin, died by brother so?
Now who is left to helpless Albion,
That as a pillar might uphold our state,
That might strike terror to our daring foes?
Now who is let to haplesse Brittany,
That might defend her from the barbarous hands
Of those that still desire her ruinous fall,
And seek to work her downfall and decay?
I uncle death is our common enemy,
And none but death can match our matchless power
Witness the fall of Albioneus crewe,
Witness the fall of Humber and his Hunnes,
And this foul death hath now increased our woe,
By taking Corineus from this life,
And in his room leaving vs worlds of care.
But none may more bewail his mournful hearse,
Then I that am the issue of his loins,
Now foul befall that cursed Humbers throat,
That was the causer of his lingering wound.
Tears cannot raise him from the dead again,
But wher's my Lady mistress Guendoline?
In Cornwall Locrine is my sister now,
Providing for my fathers unerall.
And let her there provide her mourning weeds
And morn for ever her own widowhood.
Ner shall she come within our palace gate,
To countercheck brave Locrine in his love.
Go boy to Deucolitum, down the Lee,
Unto the arch where lovely Estrild lies,
Bring her and Sabren strait unto the court,
She shall be queen in Gendolinas room.
Let others wail for Corineus death,
I mean not so to macerate my mind,
For him that bard me from my hearts desire.
Hath Locrine then forsook his Guendoline?
Is Corineus death so soon orgot?
If there be gods in heaven, as sure there be,
If there be fiends in hell, as needs there must,
They will revenge this thy notorious wrong,
And power their plagues upon thy cursed head.
What prat'st thou peasant to thy sovereign
Or art thou struck in some ecstasy?
Doest thou not tremble at our royal looks?
Dost thou not quake when mighty Locrine frowns?
Thou beardless boy, were not that Locrine scorns
To vex his mind with such a hartlesse child,
With the sharpe point of this my battale-axe,
I would send thy soul to Purilegiton.
Though I be young and of a tender age,
Yet will I cope with Locrine when he dares.
My noble father with his conquering sword,
Slew the two giants kings of Aquitaine.
Thrasimachus is not so degenerate
That he should fear and tremble at the looks
Or taunting words of a venerian squire.
Menacest thou thy royal sovereign,
Uncivil, not beseeming such as you.
Injurious traitor (for he is no less
That at defiance stands with his king)
Leave these thy taunts, leave these thy bragging words,
Unless thou mean to leave thy wretched life.
If princes stain their glorious dignity
With ugly spots of monstrous infamy,
They leese their former estimation,
And throw themselves into a hell of hate.
Wilt thou abuse my gentle patience,
As though thou did our high displeasure scorn?
Proud boy, y thou moist know thy prince is moved,
Yea greatly moved at this thy swelling pride,
We banish thee for ever from our court.
Then osell Locrine, look unto thy self,
Thrasimachus will avenge this injury.
Farewell proud boy, and learn to use thy tongue.
Alas my Lord, you should have called to mind
The latest words that Brutus spake to you,
How he desired you by the obedience
That children ought to bear unto their sire
To love and favour Lady Guendoline,
Consider this, that if the injury
Do move her mind, as certainly it will,
War and dissention follows speedily.
What though her power be not so great as yours,
Have you not seen a mighty elephant
Slain by the biting of a ely mouse?
Even so the chance of war inconstant is.
Peace uncle peace, and cease to talk hereof,
For he that seeks by whispering this or that,
To trouble Locrine in his sweetest life,
Let him persuade himself to die the death.
O say me Page, tell me where is the king,
Wherefore doth he send for me to the court,
Is it to die, is it to end my life,
Say me sweet boy, tell me and do not fine?
No trust me madame, if you will credit the little honesty that is yet let me, there is no such danger as you fear, but prepare your self, yonders the king.
Then Estrild lift thy dazzled spirits up,
And bless that blessed time, that day, that hour,
That warlike Locrine first did favour thee.
Peace to the king of Brittany my love,
Peace to all those that love and favour him.
Doth Estrild fall with such submission
Before her servant king of Albion?
Arise fair Lady, leave this lowly cheer,
Lift up those looks that cherish Lcrines heart,
That I may freely view that rosall face,
Which so entangled hath my lovesick breast,
Now to the court where we will court it out,
And pass the night and day in Venus sports.
Frolic brave peers, be joyful with your king.
You gentle winds that with your modest blasts,
Pass through the circuit of the heavenly vault,
Enter the clouds unto the throne of Jove,
And bear my prayers to his all hearing ears,
For Locrine hath forsaken Guendoline,
And learn to love proud Humbers concubine.
You happy sprites that in the concave sky
With pleasant joy, enjoy your sweetest love,
Shed forth those tears with me, which then you shed
Whe first you wood your ladies to your wills,
Those tears are fittest for my woeful case,
Since Locrine shuns my nothing pleasant face.
Blush heavens, blush sun, and hide thy shining beams,
Shadow thy radiat locks in gloomy clouds,
Deny thy cheerful light unto the world,
Where nothing reigns but falsehood and deceit.
What said I, falsehood? I that filthy crime,
For Locrine hath forsaken Guendoline.
Behold the heavens do wail for Guendoline.
The shining sun doth blush for Guendoline.
The liquid air doth weep for Guendoline.
The very ground doth groan for Guendoline.
I they are milder then the Britain king,
For he rejects luckless Guendoline.
Sister, complaints are botlesse in this cause,
This open wrong must have an open plague:
This plague must be repaid with grievous war,
This war must finish with Locrinus death,
His death will soon extinguish our complaints.
O no, his death will more augment my woes,
He was my husband brave Thrasimachus,
More dear to me then the apple of mine eye,
Nor can I find in heart to work his scathe.
Madame if not your proper injuries,
Nor my exile, can move you to revenge,
Think on our father Corineus words,
His words to vs stands always for a law,
Should Locrine live that cause my fathers death?
Should Locrine live that now diuorceth you?
The heavens, the earth, the air, the fire reclaims,
And then why should all we deny the same?
Then henceforth farewell womanish complaints,
All childish pity henceforth then farewell:
But cursed Locrine look unto thy self,
For Nemesis the mistress of revenge,
Sits armed at all points on our dismal blades,
And cursed Estrild that inflamed his heart,
Shall if I live, die a reproachful death.
Mother, though nature makes me to lameant,
My luckless fathers froward lechery,
Yet for he wrongs my Lady mother thus,
I if I could, my self would work his death.
See madame see, the desire of revenge
Is in the children of a tender age.
Forward brave soldiers into Mertia,
Where we shall brave the coward to his face.
Tell me Assarachus, are the Cornish chuffs
In such great number come to Mertia,
And have they pitched there their petty host,
So close unto our royal mansion.
They are my Lord, and mean incontinent
To bid defiance to your majesty.
It makes me laugh, to think that Guendoline
Should have the hart to come in arms against me.
Alas my Lord, the horse will run amain
When as the spur doth gall him to the bone,
Jealousy Locrine hath a wicked sting.
Say thou so Estrild, beauties paragon?
Well we will try her choler to the proof,
And make her know Locrine can brooke no braves.
March on Assarachus, thou must lead the way,
And bring vs to their proud pavilion.
Behold the circuit of the azure sky,
Throws forth sad throbs, and grievous suspirs,
Preiudicating Locrines overthrow,
The fire casts forth sharpe darts of flames,
The great foundation of the triple world,
Trembles and quakes with a mighty noise,
Presaging bloody massacres at hand.
The wandering birds that flutter in the dark,
When hellish night in cloudy chariot seaed,
Casts her mists on shady Tellus face,
With sable mantels covering all the earth,
Now flies abroad amid the cheerful day,
Foretelling some unwonted misery.
The snarling cures of darkened Tartarus,
Sent from Auernus ponds by Radamanth,
With howling ditties pester every wood,
The watery ladies and the light foot fawns,
And all the rabble of the wooddie Nymphs,
All trembling hide themselves in shady groves,
And shroud themselves in hideous hollow pitts.
The boisterous Bores thundered forth revenge.
The stony rocks cry out on sharpe revenge.
The thorny bush pronounces dire revenge.
Now Corineus stay and see revenge,
And feed thy soul with Locrines overthrow.
Behold they come, the trumpets call them forth.
The roaring drums summon the soldiers.
Lo where their army glistereh on the plains,
Throw forth thy lightning mighty Iupiter,
And power thy plagues on cursed Locrines head.
What is the tiger started from his cave?
Is Guendoline come from Cornubia,
That thus she braueth Locrine to the teeth?
And hast thou found thine armour pretty boy,
Accompanied with these thy straggling mates?
Believe me but this enterprise was bold,
And well deserves commendation.
I Locrine, traitorous Locrine we are come,
With full pretence to seek thine overthrow,
What have I don that thou should scorn me thus?
What have I said that thou should me reject?
Have I been disobedient to thy words?
Have I betrayed thy Arcane secrecy?
Have I dishonoured thy marriage bed
With filthy crimes, or with lascivious lusts?
Nay it is thou that hast dishonoured it,
Thy filthy mind overcome with filthy lusts,
Yields unto affections filthy darts.
Unkind, thou wrongst thy first and truest feer,
Unkind, thou wrongst thy best and dearest friend
Unkind, thou scornst all skilful Brutus laws,
Forgetting father, uncle, and thy self.
Believe me Locrine but the girl is wise,
And well would seem to make a vestal Nun,
How finely frames she her oration.
Locrin we came not here to fight with words
Words that can never win the victory,
But for you are so merry in your rumps,
Unsheathe your swords, and try it out by force,
That we may see who hath the better hand.
Think thou to dare me bold Thrasimachus?
Think thou to fear me with thy taunting braves,
Or do we seem too weak to cope with thee?
Soon shall I show thee my fine cutting blade,
And with my sword the messenger of death,
Seal thee an acquitace for thy bold attempts.
O fair Estrilda, we have lost the field,
Thrasimachus hath won the vicore,
And we are lest to be a laughing socke,
Scoft at by those that are ou enemies,
Ten thousand soldiers armed with sword &amp; shield,
Prevail against an hundredth thousand men,
Thrasimachus incensed with uming ire,
Rages amongst the faint heart soldiers
Like to grim Mars, when covered wih his arge
He fought with Diomedes in the field,
Close by the banks of silver Simois,
O lovely Estrild now the chase begins,
Ner shall we see the stately Traynouant
Mounted on the coursers garnished all with pearl
Ner shall we view the fair Consortia,
Unless as captives we be thither brought.
Shall Locrine then be taken prisoner,
By such a yoongling as Thrasimachus?
Shall Guendolina captivate my love?
Ner shall mine eyes behold that dismal hour,
Ner will I view that ruthful spectacle,
For with my sword this sharpe curtlaxe,
Isle cut in sunder my accursed heart.
But O you judges of the nineold Styx,
Which with incessant torments rack the ghoas
Within the bottomless Abissus pits,
You gods commanders of the heavenly spheres,
Whoe will and laws irrevocable stands,
Forgive, forgive, this soul accursed sin,
Forget O gods this foul condemned fault:
And now my sword that in so many fights kiss his sword.
Hast saved the life o Brutus and his son,
End now his life that wishes still for death,
Work now his death that wishes still for death,
Work now his death that hates still his life.
Farewell fair Estrild, beauties paragon,
Framed in the front of forlorn miseries,
Ner shall mine eyes behold thy sunshine eyes,
But when we meet in the Elision fields,
Thither I go before with hastenened pace.
Farewell vain world, and thy enticing snares.
Forwell whole sin, and thy enticing pleasures.
And welcome death the end of mortal smart,
Welcome to Locries overburdened hart.
Break hart with sobs and grievous suspirs,
Stream forth you tears from forth my watery eyes,
Help me to morn for warlike Locrines death,
Power down your tears you watery regions,
For mighty Locrine is bereft of life.
O ickle fortune, O unstable world,
What else are all things that this globe contains,
But a confused chaos of mishaps?
Wherein as in a glass we plainly see,
That all our life is but as a Tragedy.
Since mighty kings are subject to mishap
I mighty kings are subject to mishap,
Since martial Locrine is bereft of life,
Shall Estrild live then after Locrines death?
Shall love of life bar her from Locrines sword?
O no, this sword that hath bereft his life,
Shall now depiue me of my fleeting soul:
Strengthen these hands O mighty Iupiter,
That I may end my woeful misery.
Locrine I come, Locrine I follow thee.
What doleful sight, what ruthful spectacle
Hath fortune offred to my haplesse hart?
My father slain with such a fatal sword,
My mother murdered by a mortal wound?
What Thracian dog, what barbarous Mirmidon,
Would not relent at such a ruthful case?
What fierce Achilles, what hard stony flint,
Would not bemoan this mournful Tragedy?
Locrine the map of magnanimity,
Lies slaughtered in this foul accursed cave,
Estrild the perfect pattern of renown,
Natures sole wonder, in whose beauteous breasts
All heavenly grace and virtue was inshrinde,
Both massacred are dead within this cave,
And with them dies fair Pallas and sweet love.
Here lies a sword, and Sabren hath a heart,
This blessed sword shall cut my cursed heart,
And bring my soul unto my parents ghoasts,
That they that live and view our Tragedy,
May morn our case with mournful plaudities.
Ay me, my virgins hands are too too weak,
To penetrate the bulwark of my breast,
My fingers used to tune the amorous lute,
Are not of force to hold this steely glaine,
So I am liet to wail my parents death,
Not able for to work my proper death.
Ah Locrine honoured for thy nobleness.
Ah Estrild, famous for thy constancy.
Il may they fare that wrought your mortal ends.
Search soldiers search, find Locrin and his love,
Find the proud strumpet Humbers concubine,
That I may change those her so pleasing looks,
To pale and ignominious aspect.
Find me the issue of their cursed love,
Find me young Sabren, Locrines only joy,
That I may glut my mind with lukewarm blood,
Swiftly distilling from the bastards breast,
My fathers ghost still haunts me for revenge,
Crying, revenge my ouerhastened death,
My brothers exile, and mine own divorce,
Banish remorse clean from my brazen heart,
All mercy from mine adaminiue breasts.
Nor doth thy husband lovely Guendoline,
That wonted was to guide our steelse steps,
Enjoy this light; see where he murdered lies:
By luckless lot and froward frowning fate,
And by him lies his lovely paramour
Fair Estrild goared with a dismal sword,
And as it seems, both murdered by themselves,
Clasping each other in their feebled arms,
With loving zeal, as if for company
Their discontented corpse were yet content
To pass soul Styx in Chrns ferry-boat.
And hath proud Estrild then prevented me
Hath she escaped Guendlins wrath,
Violently by cutting off her life?
Would God she had the monstrous Hidrs lives,
That every hour she might have died a death
VVorse then the swing of old Ixions wheel,
And every hour revive to die again,
As Titius bound to housees Caucas,
Doth feed the substance of his own mishap,
And every day for want of food doth die,
And every night doth live again to die.
But stay, me thinks I hear some fainting voice,
Mournfully weeping for their luckless death.
You mountain nymphs which in these deserts reign,
Cease off your hatie chase of savage beasts,
Prepare to see a heart oppressed with care,
Address your ears to hear a mournful stile,
No humane trength, no work can work my weal,
Care in my hart so tyrant like doth deal.
You Driades and lightfooe Satire,
You gracious Faries which at evening tide,
Your closets leave with heavenly beauty stored,
And on your shoulders spread your golden locks,
You savage bears in caves and darkened dens,
Come wail with me, the martial Locrines death.
Come mourn with me, for beateous Estrilds det.
Ah loing parents little do you know,
what sorrow Sabren suffers for your thrall.
But may this be, and is it possible,
Lives Sabren yet to expiate my wrath?
Fortune I tink thee for this courtesy,
And let me never see one prosperous hour,
If Sabren die not a reproachful death.
Hard hearted death, that when the wretched call,
Art furthest off, and seldom heert at all.
But in the midst of fortunes good success,
Uncalled comes, and shears our life in twain:
When will that hour, that blessed hour draw no,
When poor distressed Sabren may be gone.
Sweet Atropos cut off my fatal thread,
What art thou death, shall not poor Sabren die?
Yes damsel yes, Sabren shall surely die,
Though all the world should seek to save her life,
And not a common death shall Sabren die,
But after strange and grievous punishments
Shortly inflicted upon thy bastards head,
Thou shalt be cast into the cursed streams,
And feed the fishes with thy tender flesh.
And thin thou then thou cruel homicide,
That these thy deeds shall be unpunished?
No traitor no, the gods will avenge these wrongs,
The fiends of hell will mark these injuries.
Never shall these blood-sucking mastie cures,
Bring wretched Sabren to her latest home.
For I my self inspire of thee and thine,
Mean to abridge my former destinies,
And that which Locrines sword could not perform,
This pleasant stream shall present bring to pass.
One mischief follows another noke,
Who would have thought so young a maid as she
With such a courage wold have sougt her death.
And for because his River was the plac
Where little Sbre resolutely died,
Sabren for ever shall this same be called.
And as for Locrine our deceased spouse,
Because he was th son of mighty Brute
To whom we owe our country, lius and goods,
He shall be buried in a stately ombe,
Close by his aged father Brtus bones,
With such great pomp and great solemnity
As well beseems so brave a prince as e
Let Estrild lie without the shllow 
Without the honour due unto the dead
Because she was the author of this war.
Retire brave followers unto Troyno
Where we will celebrate these exequies
And place young Locri in his fathers tomb.
Lo here the end of lawless treachery,
Of usurpation and ambitious pride,
And they that for their private amours dare
Turmoil ou land, and sheir brolles abroach,
Let them be warned by these premises,
And as a womenn was the only cause
That civil discord was then stirred up,
So let vs pray for that renowned ,
That eight and thirty years  wyd,
In quiet peace and sweet elicit,
And every wight that seeks her ges smart,
wold that this sword were piee in his hart.

NOw fair Hippolita, our nuptial hour
Draws on apace: four happy days bring in
Another Moon: but oh, me thinks, how slow
This old Moon wanes; She lingers my desires
Like to a Step-dame, or a Dowager,
Long withering out a young mans revenue.
Four days will quickly steep theselues in nights
Four nights will quickly dream away the time:
And then the Moon, like to a silver bow,
Now bent in heaven, shall behold the night
Of our solemnities.
Go Philostrate,
Stir up the Athenian youth to merriments,
Awake the pert and nimble spirit of mirth,
Turn melancholy forth to Funerals:
The pale companion is not for our pomp,
Hippolita, I wooed thee with my sword,
And won thy love, doing thee injuries:
But I will wed thee in another key,
With pomp, with triumph, and with revelling.
Happy be Theseus, our renowned Duke.
Thanks good Egeus: what's the news with thee?
Full of vexation, come I, with complaint
Against my child, my daughter Hermia.
My Noble Lord,
This man hath my consent to marry her.
And my gracious Duke,
This man hath bewitched the bosom of my child:
Thou, thou Lysander, thou hast given her rimes,
And interchanged loue-tokens with my child:
Thou hast by Moone-light at her window sung,
With faining voice, verses of faining love,
And stolen the impression of her fantasy,
With bracelets of thy hair, rings, gauds, conceits,
Knackes, trifles, Nose-gaies, sweet meats (messengers
Of strong preuailment in vnhardned youth)
With cunning hast thou filched my daughters heart,
Turned her obedience (which is due to me)
To stubborn harshness. And my gracious Duke,
Be it so she will not here before your Grace,
Consent to marry with Demetrius,
I beg the ancient privilege of Athens;
As she is mine, I may dispose of her;
Which shall be either to this Gentleman,
Or to her death, according to our Law,
Immediately provided in that case.
What say you Hermia? be advised fair Maid,
To you your Father should be as a God;
One that composed your beauties; yea and one
To whom you are but as a form in wax
By him imprinted: and within his power,
To leave the figure, or disfigure it:
Demetrius is a worthy Gentleman.
So is Lysander.
In himself he is.
But in this kind, wanting your fathers voice.
The other must be held the worthier.
I would my father looked but with my eyes.
Rather your eyes must with his judgment look.
I do entreat your Grace to pardon me.
I know not by what power I am made bold,
Nor how it may concern my modesty
In such a presence here to plead my thoughts:
But I beseech your Grace, that I may know
The worst that may befall me in this case,
If I refuse to wed Demetrius.
Either to dye the death, or to abjure
For ever the society of men.
Therefore fair Hermia question your desires,
Know of your youth, examine well your blood,
Whether (if you yield not to your fathers choice)
You can endure the livery of a Nun,
For aye to be in shady Cloister mewed,
To live a barren sister all your life,
Chanting faint hymns to the cold fruitless Moon,
Thrice blessed they that master so their blood,
To undergo such maiden pilgrimage,
But earthlier happy is the Rose distilled,
Then that which withering on the virgin thorne,
Grows, lives, and dies, in single blessedness.
So will I grow, so live, so die my Lord,
Ere I will yield my virgin Patent up
Unto his Lordship, whose unwished yoke,
My soul consents not to give sovereignty.
Take time to pause, and by the next new Moon
The sealing day betwixt my love and me,
For everlasting bond of fellowship:
Upon that day either prepare to dye,
For disobedience to your fathers will,
Or else to wed Demetrius as hee would,
Or on Dianaes Altar to protest
For ay, austerity, and single life.
Relent sweet Hermia, and Lysander, yield
Thy crazed title to my certain right.
You have her fathers love, Demetrius:
Let me have Hermiaes: do you marry him.
Scornful Lysander, true, he hath my Love;
And what is mine, my love shall render him.
And she is mine, and all my right of her,
I do estate unto Demetrius.
I am my Lord, as well derived as he,
As well possessed: my love is more then his:
My fortunes every way as fairly ranked
(If not with vantage) as Demetrius:
And (which is more then all these boasts can be)
I am beloved of beauteous Hermia.
Why should not I then prosecute my right?
Demetrius, Isle avouch it to his head,
Made love to Nadirs daughter, Helena,
And won her soul: and she (sweet Lady) dotes,
Devoutly dotes, dotes in Idolatry,
Upon this spotted and inconstant man.
I must confess, that I have heard so much,
And with Demetrius thought to have spoke thereof:
But being ouer-full of selfe-affaires,
My mind did lose it. But Demetrius come,
And come Egeus, you shall go with me,
I have some private schooling for you both.
For you fair Hermia, look you arm your self,
To fit your fancies to your Fathers will;
Or else the Law of Athens yields you up
(Which by no means we may extenuate)
To death, or to a vow of single life.
Come my Hippolita what cheer my love?
Demetrius and Egeus go along:
I must employ you in some business
Against our nuptial, and confer with you
Of something, nearly that concerns your selves.
With duty and desire we follow you.
How now my love? Why is your cheek so pale?
How chance the Roses there do fade so fast?
Belike for want of rain, which I could well
Beteeme them, from the tempest of mine eyes.
For ought that ever I could read,
Could ever hear by tale or history,
The course of true love never did run smooth,
But either it was different in blood.
O cross! too high to be enthral'd to love.
Or else misgraffed, in respect of years.
O spite! too old to be engaged to young.
Or else it stood upon the choice of merit.
O hell! to choose love by another eye.
Or if there were a sympathy in choice,
War, death, or sickness, did lay siege to it;
Making it momentary, as a sound:
Swift as a shadow, short as any dream,
Brief as the lightning in the collied night,
That (in a spleen) unfolds both heaven and earth;
And ere a man hath power to say, behold,
The jaws of darkness do devour it up:
So quick bright things come to confusion.
If then true Lovers have been ever crossed,
It stands as an edict in destiny:
Then let vs teach our trial patience,
Because it is a customary cross,
As due to love, as thoughts, and dreams, and sighs,
Wishes and tears; poor Fancies followers.
A good persuasion; therefore hear me Hermia,
I have a Widow Aunt, a dowager,
Of great revenue, and she hath o child,
From Athens is her house remove seven leagues,
And she respects me, as her only son:
There gentle Hermia, may I marry thee,
And to that place, the sharpe Athenian Law
Cannot pursue vs. If thou love me, then
Steal forth thy fathers house to morrow night:
And in the wood, a league without the town,
(Where I did meet thee once with Helena,
To do observance for a morn of May)
There will I stay for thee.
My good Lysander,
I swear to thee, by Cupids strongest bow,
By his best arrow with the golden head,
By the simplicity of Venus Doves,
By that which knitted souls, and prospers love,
And by that fire which burned the Carthage Queen,
When the false Trojan under sail was seen,
By all the vows that ever men have broke,
(In number more then ever women spoke)
In that same place thou hast appointed me,
To morrow truly will I meet with thee.
Keep promise love: look here comes Helena.
God speed fair Helena, whither away?
Cal you me fair? that fair again unsay,
Demetrius loves you fair: O happy fair!
Your eyes are loadstarres, and your tongues sweet ayre
More tuneable then Lark to shepherds ear,
When wheat is greene, when hauthorne buds appear,
Sickness is catching: O were favour so,
Your words I catch, fair Hermia ere I go,
My ear should catch your voice, my eye, your eye,
My tongue should catch your tongues sweet melody,
Were the world mine, Demetrius being bated,
The rest Isle give to be to you translated.
O teach me how you look, and with what art you sway the motion of Demetrius hart.
I frown upon him, yet he loves me still.
O that your frowns would teach my smiles such skill.
I give him curses, yet he gives me love.
O that my prayers could such affection move.
The more I hate, the more he follows me.
The more I love, the more he hates me.
His folly Helena is none of mine.
None but your beauty, wold that fault were mine
Take comfort: he no more shall see my face,
Lysander and my self will fly this place.
Before the time I did Lysander see,
Seemed Athens like a Paradise to me.
O then, what graces in my Love do dwell,
That he hath turned a heaven into hell.
Helen, to you our minds we will unfold,
To morrow night, when Phoebe doth behold
Her silver visage, in the watery glass,
Decking with liquid pearl, the bladed grass
(A time that Lovers flights doth still conceal)
Through Athens gates, have we deuis'd to steal.
And in the wood, where often you and I,
Upon faint Primrose beds, were wont to lye,
Emptying our bosoms, of their counsel swelled:
There my Lysander, and my self shall meet,
And thence from Athens turn away our eyes
To seek new friends and strange companions,
Farewell sweet play-fellow, pray thou for vs,
And good luck grant thee thy Demetrius.
Keep word Lysander we must starve our sight,
From lovers food, till morrow deep midnight.
I will my Hermia. Helena adieu,
As you on him, Demetrius dotes on you.
How happy some, ore other some can be?
Through Athens I am thought as fair as she.
But what of that? Demetrius thinks not so:
He will not know, what all, but he doth know,
And as hee erres, doting on Hermias eyes;
So I, admiring of his qualities:
Things base and wild, holding no quantity,
Love can transpose to form and dignity,
Love looks not with the eyes, but with the mind,
And therefore is winged Cupped painted blind.
Nor hath loves mind of any judgment taste:
Wings and no eyes, figure, vnheedy haste.
And therefore is Love said to be a child,
Because in choice he is often beguiled,
As waggish boys in game themselves forswear;
So the boy Love is perjured every where.
For ere Demetrius looked on Hermias eyne,
He hailed down oaths that he was only mine.
And when this Hail some heat from Hermia felt,
So he dissolved, and showers of oaths did melt,
I will go tell him of fair Hermias flight:
Then to the wood will he, to morrow night
Pursue her; and for his intelligence,
If I have thanks, it is a dear expense:
But herein mean I to enrich my pain,
To have his sight thither, and back again.
Is all our company here?
You were best to call them generally, man by man, according to the scrip.
Here is the scroll of every mans name, which is thought fit through all Athens, to play in our Enterlude before the Duke and the Duchess, on his wedding day at night.
First, good Peter Quince, say what the play treats on: then read the names of the Actors: and so grow on to a point.
Marry our play is the most lamentable Comedie, and most cruel death of Pyramus and Thisbie.
A very good piece of work I assure you, and a merry. Now good Peter Quince, call forth your Actors by the scroll. Masters spread your selves.
Answer as I call you. Nick Bottom the Weaver.
Ready; name what part I am for, and proceed.
You Nick Bottom are set down for Pieramus.
What is Pyramus, a lover, or a tyrant?
A Lover that kills himself most gallantly for love.
That will ask some tears in the true performing of it: if I do it, let the audience look to their eyes: I will move storms; I will condole in some measure. To the rest yet, my chief humour is for a tyrant. I could play Ercles rarely, or a part to tear a Cat in, to make all split the raging Rocks; and shivering shocks shall break the locks of prison gates, and Phibbus carre shall shine from far, and make and mar the foolish Fates. This was lofty. Now name the rest of the Players. This is Ercles vain, a tyrants vain: a lover is more condoling.
Francis Flute the Bellows mender:
Here Peter Quince.
You must take Thisbie on you.
What is Thisbie, a wandering Knight?
It is the Lady that Pyramus must love.
Nay faith, let not me play a woman, I have a beard coming.
That's all one, you shall play it in a Mask, and you may speak as small as you will.
And I may hide my face, let me play Thisbie too: Isle speak in a monstrous little voice; Thisne, Thisne, ah Pyramus my lover dear, thy Thisbie dear, and Lady dear.
No no, you must play Pyramus, and Flute, you Thuby.
Well, proceed.
Robin Starveling the Taylor.
Here Peter Quince.
Robin Starveling, you must play Thisbies mother?
the Tinker.
Here Peter Quince.
You, Pyramus father; my self, Thisbies father; Snug the Joiner, you the Lyons part: and I hope there is a play fitted.
Have you the Lions part written? pray you if be, give it me, for I am slow of study.
You may doe it extempore, for it is nothing but roaring.
Let me play the Lyon too, I will roar that I will doe any mans heart good to hear me. I will roar, that I will make the Duke say, Let him roar again, let him roar again.
If you should doe it too terribly, you would fright the Duchess and the Ladies, that they would shrike, and that were enough to hang vs all.
That would hang vs every mothers son.
I grant you friends, if that you should fright the Ladies out of their Wits, they would have no more discretion but to hang vs: but I will aggrauate my voice so, that I will roar you as gently as any sucking Dove; I will roar and it were any Nightingale.
You can play no part but Piramus, for Piramus
is a sweet-fac'd man, a proper man as one shall see in a summers day; a most lovely Gentleman-like man, therefore you must needs play Piramus.
Well, I will undertake it. What beard were I best to play it in?
Why, what you will.
I will discharge it, in either your straw-colour beard, your orange tawny beard, your purple in grain beard, or your French-crowne coloured beard, your perfact yellow.
Some of your French Crowns have no hair at all, and then you will play bare-fac'd. But masters here are your parts, and I am to entreat you, request you, and desire you, to con them by too morrow night: and meet me in the palace wood, a mile without the Town, by Moone-light, there we will rehearse: for if we meet in the City, we shall be dogged with company, and our deuises known. In the mean time, I will draw a bil of proparties, such as our play wants. I pray you fail me not.
We will meet, and there we may rehearse more obscenely and courageously. Take pains, be perfact, adieu.
At the Dukes oak we meet.
Enough, hold or cut bow-strings.
How now spirit, whether wander you?
Over hill, over dale, through bush, through brier,
Over park, over pale, through flood, through fire,
I do wander every where, swifter then ye Moons sphere;
And I serve the Fairy Queen, to dew her obs upon the green.
The Cowslips tall, her pensioners bee;
In their gold coats, spots you see,
Those be Rubies, Fairy savours,
In those freckles, live their savours,
I must go seek some dew drops here,
And hang a pearl in every cowslips ear.
Farewell thou Lob of spirits, Isle be gon,
Our Queen and all her Elves come here anon.
The King doth keep his Revels here to night,
Take heed the Queen come not within his sight,
For Oberon is passing fell and wrath,
Because that she, as her attendant, hath
A lovely boy stolen from an Indian King,
She never had so sweet a changeling,
And jealous Oberon would have the child
Knight of his train, to trace the Forests wilde.
But she (perforce) with-holds the loved boy,
Crowns him with flowers, and makes him all her joy.
And now they never meet in gove, or greene,
By fountain clear, or spangled star-light sheen,
But they do square, that all their Elves for fear
Creep into Acorn cups and hide them there.
Either I mistake your shape and making quite,
Or else you are that shrewed and knavish spirit
Called Robin Good-fellow. Are you not hee,
That frights the maidens of the Villagree,
Skim milk, and sometimes labour in the querne,
And bootless make the breathless huswife cherne,
And sometime make the drink to bear no barm,
Mislead night-wanderers, laughing at their harm,
Those that Hobgoblin call you, and sweet Puck,
You do their work, and they shall have good luck.
Are not you he?
Thou speak aright;
I am that merry wanderer of the night:
I jest to Oberon, and make him smile,
When I a fat and bean-fed horse beguile,
Neighing in likeness of a silly foal,
And sometime lurk I in a Gossips bole,
In very likeness of a roasted crab:
And when she drinks, against her lips I bob,
And on her withered dewlop pour the Ale.
The wisest Aunt telling the saddest tale,
Sometime for three-foot stool, mistakes me,
Then slip I from her bum, down topples she,
And tailor cries, and false into a coffe.
And then the whole quire hold their hips, and loffe,
And waxen in their mirth, and sneeze, and swear,
A merrier hour was never wasted there.
But room Fairy, here comes Oberon.
And here my Mistress:
Would that he were gone.
Ill met by Moone-light,
Proud Tytania.
What, jealous Oberon? Fairy skip hence.
I have forsworn his bed and company.
Tarry rash Wanton; am not I thy Lord?
Then I must be thy Lady: but I know
When thou wast stolen away from Fairy Land,
And in the shape of Corin, sate all day,
Playing on pipes of Corn, and versing love
To amorous Phillida. Why art thou here
Come from the farthest steep of India?
But that forsooth the bouncing Amazon
Your buskined Mistress, and your Warrior love,
To Theseus must be Wedded; and you come,
To give their bed joy and prosperity.
How can thou thus for shame Tytania,
Glance at my credit, with Hippolita?
Knowing I know thy love to Theseus?
Did thou not lead him through the glimmering night
From Peregenia, whom he ravished?
And make him with fair Eagles break his faith
With Ariadne, and Atiopa?
These are the forgeries of jealousy,
And never since the middle Summers spring
Met we on hill, in dale, forest, or mead,
By paved fountain, or by rushy brooke,
Or in the beached margent of the sea,
To dance our ringlets to the whistling Wind,
But with thy brawls thou hast disturbed our sport.
Therefore the Winds, piping to vs in vain,
As in revenge, have sucked up from the sea
Contagious fogs: Which falling in the Land,
Hath every petty River made so proud,
That they have ouer-borne their Continents.
The Ox hath therefore stretched his yoke in vain,
The Ploughman lost his sweat, and the greene Corn
Hath rotted, ere his youth attained a beard:
The fold stands empty in the drowned field,
And Crows are fatted with the murrion flock,
The nine men's Morris is filled up with mud,
And the quaint Mazes in the wanton greene,
For lack of tread are vndistinguishable.
The humane mortals want their winter here,
No night is now with hymn or carol blessed;
Therefore the Moon (the governess of floods)
Pale in her anger, washes all the air;
That Rheumatic diseases doe abound.
And through this distemperature, we see
The seasons alter; hoared headed frosts
Fall in the fresh lap of the crimson Rose,
And on old Hymns chin and Icy crown,
An odorous Chaplet of sweet Summer buds
Is as in mockry set. The Spring, the Summer,
The childing Autumn, angry Winter change
Their wonted Liveries, and the missed world,
By their increase, now knows not which is which;
And this same progeny of evils,
Comes from our debate, from our dissention,
We are their parents and original.
Do you amend it then, it lies in you,
Why should Titania cross her Oberon?
I do but beg a little changeling boy,
To be my Henchman.
Set your heart at rest,
The Fairy land buys not the child of me,
His mother was a Votaress of my Order,
And in the spiced Indian air, by night
Full often hath she gossipped by my side,
And sat with me on Neptunes yellow sands,
Marking the embarked traders on the flood,
When we have laughed to see the sails conceive,
And grow big bellied with the wanton wind:
Which she with pretty and with swimming gate,
Following (her womb then rich with my young squire)
Would imitate, and sail upon the Land,
To fetch me trifles, and return again,
As from a voyage, rich with merchandise.
But she being mortal, of that boy did die,
And for her sake I doe rear up her boy,
And for her sake I will not part with him.
How long within this wood intend you stay?
Perchance till after Theseus wedding day.
If you will patiently dance in our Round,
And see our Moone-light revels, go with vs;
If not, shun me and I will spare your haunts.
Give me that boy, and I will go with thee.
Not for thy Fairy Kingdom. Fairies away:
We shall chide down right, if I longer stay.
Well, go thy way: thou shalt not from this grove,
Till I torment thee for this injury.
My gentle Puck come hither; thou remember
Since once I sat upon a promontory,
And heard a Meare-maide on a Dolphins back,
Uttering such dulcet and harmonious breath,
That the rude sea grew civil at her song,
And certain stars shot madly from their Spheres,
To hear the Sea-maids music.
I remember.
That very time I say (but thou could not)
Flying between the cold Moon and the earth,
Cupped all armed; a certain aim he took
At a fair Vestal, throned by the West,
And loosed his loue-shaft smartly from his bow,
As it should pierce a hundred thousand hearts,
But I might see young Cupids fiery shaft
Quenched in the chaste beams of the watery Moon;
And the imperial Votaress passed on,
In maiden meditation, fancy free.
Yet marked I where the bolt of Cupped fell.
It fell upon a little western flower;
Before, milke-white; now purple with loves wound,
And maidens call it, Love in idleness.
Fetch me that flower; the herb I showed thee once,
The juice of it, on sleeping eye-lids laid,
Will make or man or woman madly dote
Upon the next live creature that it sees.
Fetch me this herb, and be thou here again,
Ere the Leuiathan can swim a league.
Isle put a girdle about the earth, in forty minuts.
Having once this juice,
Isle watch Titania, when she is asleep,
And drop the liquor of it in her eyes:
The next thing when she waking looks upon,
(Be it on Lyon, Bear, or Wolf, or Bull,
On meddling Monkey, or on busy Ape)
She shall pursue it, with the soul of love.
And ere I take this charm off from her sight,
(As I can take it with another herb)
Isle make her render up her Page to me.
But who comes here? I am invisible,
And I will ouer-heare their conference.
I love thee not, therefore pursue me not,
Where is Lysander, and fair Hermia?
The one Isle stay, the other stays me.
Thou toldst me they were stolen into this wood;
And here am I, and wood within this wood,
Because I cannot meet my Hermia.
Hence, get thee gone, and follow me no more.
You draw me, you hard-hearted Adamant,
But yet you draw not Iron, for my heart
Is true as steel. Leave you your power to draw,
And I shall have no power to follow you.
Do I entice you? do I speak you fair?
Or rather doe I not in plainest truth,
Tell you I doe not, nor I cannot love you?
And even for that doe I love thee the more;
I am your spaniel, and Demetrius,
The more you beat me, I will fawn on you.
Use me but as your spaniel; spurn me, strike me,
Neglect me, lose me; only give me leave
(Unworthy as I am) to follow you.
What worser place can I beg in your love,
(And yet a place of high respect with me)
Then to be used as you doe your dog.
Tempt not too much the hatred of my spirit,
For I am sick when I do look on thee.
And I am sick when I look not on you.
You doe impeach your modesty too much,
To leave the City, and commit your self
Into the hands of one that loves you not,
To trust the opportunity of night,
And the ill counsel of a desert place,
With the rich worth of your virginity.
Your virtue is my privilege: for that
It is not night when I doe see your face.
Therefore I think I am not in the night,
Nor doth this wood lack worlds of company,
For you in my respect are all the world.
Then how can it be said I am alone,
When all the world is here to look on me?
Isle run from thee, and hide me in the brakes,
And leave thee to the mercy of wilde beasts.
The wildest hath not such a heart as you;
Run when you will, the story shall be changed:
Apollo flies, and Daphne holds the chase;
The Dove pursues the Griffin, the mild Hind
Makes speed to catch the Tiger. Bootless speed,
When cowardice pursues, and valour flies.
I will not stay thy questions, let me go;
Or if thou follow me, doe not believe,
But I shall doe thee mischief in the wood.
I, in the Temple, in the Town, and Field
You doe me mischief. Fie Demetrius,
Your wrongs doe set a scandal on my sex:
We cannot fight for love, as men may doe;
We should be wooed, and were not made to woo.
I follow thee, and make a heaven of hell,
To die upon the hand I love so well.
Fare thee well Nymph, ere he do leave this grove,
Thou shalt fly him, and he shall seek thy love.
Hast thou the flower there? Welcome wanderer.
I, there it is.
I pray thee give it me.
I know a bank where the wilde time blows,
Where Oxslips and the nodding Violet grows,
Quite ouer-cannoped with luscious woodbine,
With sweet musk roses, and with Eglantine;
There sleeps Tytania, sometime of the night,
Lul'd in these flowers, with dances and delight:
And there the snake throws her enamelled skin,
Weed wide enough to rap a Fairy in.
And with the juice of this Isle streak her eyes,
And make her full of hateful fantasies.
Take thou some of it, and seek through this grove;
A sweet Athenian Lady is in love
With a disdainful youth: anoint his eyes,
But doe it when the next thing he espies,
May be the Lady. Thou shalt know the man,
By the Athenian garments he hath on.
Effect it with some care, that he may prove
More fond on her, then she upon her love;
And look thou meet me ere the first Cock crow.
Fear not my Lord, your servant shall do so.
Come, now a Roundel, and a Fairy song;
Then for the third part of a minute hence,
Some to kill Cankers in the musk rose buds,
Some war with Reremise, for their leathern wings,
To make my small Elves coats, and some keep back
The clamorous Owl that nightly hoots and wonders
At our quaint spirits: Sing me now asleep,
Then to your offices, and let me rest.
You spotted Snakes with double tongue,
Thorny Hedgehogges be not seen,
Newts and blind worms do no wrong,
Come not near our Fairy Queen.
Philomele with melody,
Sing in your sweet Lullaby
Lull, lull, lullaby, lull, lull, lullaby,
Never harm, nor spell, nor charm,
Come our lovely Lady ny,
So good night with Lullaby.
Weaving Spiders come not here,
Hence you long legged Spinners, hence:
Beetles black approach not near;
Worm nor Snail doe no offence.
Philomele with melody, &amp;c.
Hence away, now all is well;
One aloof, stand Sentinel.
What thou see when thou dost wake,
Doe it for thy true Love take:
Love and languish for his sake.
Be it Ounce, or Cat, or Bear,
Pard, or Boar with bristled hair,
In thy eye that shall appear,
When thou wake, it is thy dear,
Wake when some vile thing is near.
Fair love, you faint with wandering in ye woods,
And to speak troth I have forgot our way:
We'll rest vs Hermia, if you think it good,
And tarry for the comfort of the day.
Be it so Lysander; find you out a bed,
For I upon this bank will rest my head.
One turf shall serve as pillow for vs both,
One heart, one bed, two bosoms, and one troth.
Nay good Lysander, for my sake my dear
Lie further off yet, doe not lie so near.
O take the sense sweet, of my innocence,
Love takes the meaning, in loves conference,
I mean that my heart unto yours is knit,
So that but one heart can you make of it.
Two bosoms interchanged with an oath,
So then two bosoms, and a single troth.
Then by your side, no bedroom me deny,
For lying so, Hermia, I doe not lye.
Lysander riddles very prettily;
Now much beshrew my manners and my pride,
If Hermia meant to say, Lysander lied.
But gentle friend, for love and curtsy
Lie further off, in humane modesty,
Such separation, as may well be said,
Becomes a virtuous bachelor, and a maid,
So far be distant, and good night sweet friend;
Thy love ne'er alter, till thy sweet life end.
Amen, amen, to that fair prayer, say I,
And then end life, when I end loyalty:
Here is my bed, sleep give thee all his rest.
With half that wish, the wishers eyes be pressed.
Through the Forest have I gone,
But Athenian find I none,
One whose eyes I might approve
This flowers force in stirring love.
Night and silence: who is here?
Weeds of Athens he doth wear:
This is he (my master said)
Despised the Athenian maid:
And here the maiden sleeping sound,
On the dank and dirty ground.
Pretty soul, she durst not lye
Near this lacke-loue, this kill-curtesie.
Churl, upon thy eyes I throw
All the power this charm doth owe:
When thou wake, let love forbid
Sleep his seat on thy eye-lid.
So awake when I am gone:
For I must now to Oberon.
Stay, though thou kill me, sweet Demetrius.
I charge thee hence, and do not haunt me thus.
O wilt thou darkling leave me? do not so.
Stay on thy peril, I alone will go.
O I am out of breath, in this fond chase,
The more my prayer, the lesser is my grace,
Happy is Hermia, wheresoever she lies;
For she hath blessed and attractive eyes.
How came her eyes so bright? Not with salt tears.
If so, my eyes are oftner washed then hers.
No, no, I am as ugly as a Bear;
For beasts that meet me, run away for fear,
Therefore no marvel, though Demetrius
Doe as a monster, fly my presence thus.
What wicked and dissembling glass of mine,
Made me compare with Hermias sphery eyne?
But who is here? Lysander on the ground;
Dead or asleep? I see no blood, no wound,
Lysander, if you live, good sir awake.
And run through fire I will for thy sweet sake.
Transparent Helena, nature her shows art,
That through thy bosom makes me see thy heart.
Where is Demetrius? oh how fit a word
Is that vile name, to perish on my sword!
Do not say so Lysander, say not so:
What though he love your Hermia? Lord, what though?
Yet Hermia still loves you; then be content.
Content with Hermia? No, I do repent
The tedious minutes I with her have spent.
Not Hermia, but Helena now I love;
Who will not change a Raven for a Dove?
The will of man is by his reason swayed:
And reason says you are the worthier Maid.
Things growing are not ripe until their season;
So I being young, till now ripe not to reason,
And touching now the point of humane skill,
Reason becomes the Marshall to my will,
And leads me to your eyes, where I orelooke
Loves stories, written in Loves richest book.
Wherefore was I to this keen mockery borne?
When at your hands did I deserve this scorn?
First not enough, first not enough, young man,
That I did never, no nor never can,
Deserve a sweet look from Demetrius eye,
But you must flout my insufficiency?
Good troth you do me wrong (good-sooth you do)
In such disdainful manner, me to woo.
But fare you well; perforce I must confess,
I thought you Lord of more true gentleness.
Oh, that a Lady of one man refused,
Should of another therefore be abused.
She sees not Hermia: Hermia sleep thou there,
And never moist thou come Lysander near;
For as a surfeit of the sweetest things
The deepest loathing to the stomach brings:
Or as the heresies that men do leave,
Are hated most of those that did deceive:
So thou, my surfeit, and my heresy,
Of all be hated; but the most of me;
And all my powers address your love and might,
To honour Helen, and to be her Knight.
Help me Lysander, help me; do thy best
To pluck this crawling serpent from my breast.
Aye me, for pity; what a dream was here?
Lysander look, how I do quake with fear:
Me-thought a serpent eat my heart away,
And yet sat smiling at his cruel prey.
Lysander, what removed? Lysander, Lord,
What, out of hearing, gone? No sound, no word?
Alack where are you? speak and if you hear:
Speak of all loves; I sound almost with fear.
No, then I well perceive you are not ny,
Either death or you Isle find immediately.
Are we all met?
Pat, pat, and here's a marvelous convenient place for our rehearsal. This greene plot shall be our stage, this hauthorne brake our tyring house, and we will do it in action, as we will do it before the Duke.
Peter quince?
What say thou, bully Bottom?
There are things in this Comedy of Piramus and Thisby, that will never please. First, Piraemus must draw a sword to kill himself; which the Ladies cannot abide. How answer you that?
Berlaken, a parlous fear.
I believe we must leave the killing out, when all is done.
Not a whit, I have a device to make all well. Write me a Prologue, and set the Prologue seem to say, we will do no harm with our swords, and that Pyramus is not killed indeed: and for the more better assurance, tell them, that I Piramus am not Piramus, but Bottom the Weaver; this will put them out of fear.
Well, we will have such a Prologue, and it shall be written in eight and six.
No, make it two more, let it be written in eight and eight.
Will not the Ladies be afeared of the Lyon?
I fear it, I promise you.
Masters, you ought to consider with your selves, to bring in (God shield vs) a Lyon among Ladies, is a most dreadful thing. For there is not a more fearful wilde foul then your Lyon living: and wee ought to look to it.
Therefore another Prologue must tell he is not a Lyon.
Nay, you must name his name, and half his face must be seen through the Lyons neck; and he himself must speak through, saying thus, or to the same defect; Ladies, or fair Ladies, I would wish you, or I would
request you, or I would entreat you, not to fear, not to tremble: my life for yours. If you think I come hither as a Lyon, it were pity of my life. No, I am no such thing, I am a man as other men are; and there indeed let him name his name, and tell him plainly hee is Snug the joiner.
Well, it shall be so; but there is two hard things, that is, to bring the Moone-light into a chamber: for you know, Piramus and Thisby meet by Moone-light.
Doth the Moon shine that night wee play our play?
A Calender, a Calender, look in the Almanac, find out Moone-shine, find out Moone-shine.
Yes, it doth shine that night.
Why then may you leave a casement of the great chamber window (where we play) open, and the Moon may shine in at the casement.
I, or else one must come in with a bush of thorns and a lantern, and say he comes to disfigure, or to present the person of Moone-shine. Then there is another thing, we must have a wall in the great Chamber; for Piramus and Thisby (says the story) did talk through the chink of a wall.
You can never bring in a wall. What say you Bottom?
Some man or other must present wall, and let him have some Plaster, or some Loom, or some rough cast about him, to signify wall; or let him hold his fingers thus; and through that cranny, shall Piramus and Thisby whisper.
If that may be, then all is well. Come, sit down every mothers son, and rehearse your parts. Piramus, you begin; when you have spoken your speech, enter into that Brake, and so every one according to his cue.
What hempen home-spuns have we swaggering here,
So near the Cradle of the Faierie Queen?
What, a Play toward? Isle be an auditor,
An Actor too perhaps, if I see cause.
Speak Piramus: Thisby stand forth.
Thisby, the flowers of odious favours sweet.
Odours, odours.
Odours favours sweet,
So hath thy breath, my dearest Thisby dear.
But hark, a voice: stay thou but here a while,
And by and by I will to thee appear.
A stranger Piramus, then ere plaid here.
Must I speak now?
I marry must you. For you must understand he goes but to see a noise that he heard, and is to come again.
Most radiant Piramus, most Lily white of hue,
Of colour like the red rose on triumphant brier,
Most brisky Juvenal, and eke most lovely Jew,
As true as truest horse, that yet would never tyre,
Isle meet thee Piramus, at Ninnies tomb.
Ninus tomb man: why, you must not speak that yet; that you answer to Piramus: you speak all your part at once, cues and all. Piramus enter, your cue is past; it is never tyre.
O, as true as truest horse, that yet would never tyre:
If I were fair, Thisby I were only thine.
O monstrous. O strange. We are hinted; pray masters, fly masters, help.
Isle follow you, Isle lead you about a Round,
Through bog, through bush, through brake, through brier,
Sometime a horse Isle be, sometime a hound:
A hog, a headless bear, sometime a fire,
And neigh, and bark, and grunt, and roar, and burn,
Like horse, hound, hog, bear, fire, at every turn.
Why do they run away? This is a knavery of them to make me afraid.
O Bottom, thou art changed; What doe I see on thee?
What do you see? You see an Ass-head of your own, do you?
Bless thee Bottom, bless thee; thou art translated.
I see their knavery; this is to make an ass of me, to fright me if they could; but I will not stir from this place, do what they can. I will walk up and down here, and I will sing that they shall hear I am not aafraid.
The Woosell cock, so black of hew,
With Orenge-tawny bill.
The Throstle, with his note so true,
The Wren and little quill.
What Angel wakes me from my flowery bed?
The Finch, the Sparrow, and the Lark,
The plainsong Cuckoo gray;
Whose note full many a man doth mark,
And dares not answer, nay.
For indeed, who would set his wit to so foolish a bird?
Who would give a bird the lye, though he cry Cuckoo, never so?
I pray thee gentle mortal, sing again,
Mine ear is much enamoured of thy note;
On the first view to say, to swear I love thee.
So is mine eye enthralled to thy shape
And thy fair virtues force (perforce) doth move me.
Me-thinkes mistress, you should have little reason for that: and yet to say the truth, reason and love keep little company together, nowadays. The more the pity, that some honest neighbours will not make them friends. Nay, I can gleek upon occazion.
Thou art as wise, as thou art beautiful.
Not so neither: but if I had wit enough to get out of this wood, I have enough to serve mine own turn.
Out of this wood, do not desire to go,
Thou shalt remain here, whether thou wilt or no.
I am a spirit of no common rate:
The Summer still doth tend upon my state,
And I doe love thee; therefore go with me,
Isle give thee Fairies to attend on thee;
And they shall fetch thee Jewels from the deep,
And sing, while thou on pressed flowers dost sleep:
And I will purge thy mortal grossenesse so,
That thou shalt like an airy spirit go.
Ready; and I, and I, and I, Where shall we go?
Be kind and courteous to this Gentleman,
Hop in his walks, and gambol in his eyes,
Feed him with Apricots, and Dewberries,
With purple Grapes, greene Figs, and Mulberries,
The honie-bags steal from the humble Bees,
And for night-tapers crop their waxen thighs,
And light them at the fierie-Glow-wormes eyes,
To have my love to bed, and to arise:
And pluck the wings from painted Butterflies,
To fan the Moone-beames from his sleeping eyes.
Nod to him Elves, and doe him courtesies.
Hail mortal, hail.
Hail.
Hail.
I cry your worships mercy heartily; I beseech your worships name.
Cobweb.
I shall desire you of more acquaintance, good Master Cobweb: if I cut my finger, I shall make bold with you.
Your name honest Gentleman?
Peas blossom.
I pray you commend me to mistress Squash, your mother, and to master Peascod your father. Good master Pease-blossome, I shall desire of you more acquaintance to. Your name I beseech you sir?
Mustardseed.
Pease-blossome.
Good master Mustardseed, I know your patience well: that same cowardly gyant-like Ox beef hath devoured many a gentleman of your house. I promise you, your kindred hath made my eyes water ere now. I desire you more acquaintance, good Master Mustardseed.
Come waite upon him, lead him to my bower.
The Moon me-thinks, looks with a watery eye,
And when she weeps, weep every little flower,
Lamenting some enforced chastity.
Tie up my lovers tongue, bring him silently.
I wonder if Titania be awaked;
Then what it was that next came in her eye,
Which she must dote on, in extremity.
Here comes my messenger: how now mad spirit,
What night-rule now about this gaunted grove?
My Mistress with a monster is in love,
Near to her close and consecrated bower,
While she was in her dull and sleeping hour,
A crew of patches, rude Mcehanicals,
That work for bread upon Athenian stals,
Were met together to rehearse a Play,
Intended for great Theseus nuptial day:
The shallowest thick-skin of that barren sort,
Who Piramus presented, in their sport,
Forsook his Scene, and entered in a brake,
When I did him at this advantage take,
An Asses nole I fixed on his head.
Anon his Thisbie must be answered,
And forth my Mimmick comes: when they him spy,
As Wilde-geese, that the creeping Fowler eye,
Or russed-pated choughs, many in sort
(Rising and cawing at the guns report)
Sever themselves, and madly sweep the sky:
So at his sight, away his fellows fly,
And at our stamp, here ore and ore one false;
He murder cries, and help from Athens calls.
Their sense thus weak, lost with their fears thus strong,
Made senseless things begin to do them wrong.
For briers and thorns at their apparel snatch,
Some sleeves, some hats, from yeelders all things catch,
I led them on in this distracted fear,
And left sweet Piramus translated there:
When in that moment (so it came to pass)
Tytania waked, and straightway loved an Ass.
This false out better then I could devise:
But hast thou yet lashed the Athenians eyes,
With the love juice, as I did bid thee doe?
I took him sleeping (that is finished to)
And the Athenian woman by his side,
That when he waked, of force she must be eyed.
Stand close, this is the same Athenian.
This is the woman, but not this the man.
O why rebuke you him that loves you so?
Lay breath so bitter on your bitter foe.
Now I but chide, but I should use thee worse.
For thou (I fear) hast given me cause to curse,
If thou hast slain Lysander in his sleep,
Being ore shoes in blood, plunge in the deep, and kill me too:
The Sun was not so true unto the day,
As he to me. Would he have stolen away,
From sleeping Hermia? Isle believe as soon
This whole earth may be board, and that the Moon
May through the Center creep, and so displease
Her brothers noonetide, with the Antipodes.
It cannot be but thou hast murdered him,
So should a mutrherer look, so dead, so grim.
So should the murderer look, and so should I,
Pierced through the heart with your stern cruelty:
Yet you the murderer looks as bright as clear,
As yonder enus in her glimmering sphere.
What's this to my Lysander? where is he?
Ah good Demetrius, wilt thou give him me?
I'd rather give his carcass to my hounds.
Out dog, out cur, thou drive me past the bounds
Of maidens patience. Hast thou slain him then?
Henceforth be never numbered among men,
Oh, once tell true, even for my sake,
Durst thou a looked upon him, being awake?
And hast thou killed him sleeping? O brave tutch:
Could not a worm, an Adder do so much?
An Adder did it: for with doubler tongue
Then thine (thou serpent) never Adder stung.
You spend your passion on a mispri'sd mood,
I am not guilty of Lysanders blood:
Nor is he dead for ought that I can tell.
I pray thee tell me then that he is well.
And if I could, what should I get therefore?
A privilege, never to see me more;
And from thy hated presence part I: see me no more
Whether he be dead or no.
There is no following her in this fierce vain,
Here therefore for a while I will remain.
So sorrows heaviness doth heavier grow:
For debt that bankrupt slip doth sorrow owe,
Which now in some slight measure it will pay,
If for his tender here I make some stay.
What hast thou done? Thou hast mistaken quite
And laid the love juice on some true loves sight:
Of thy misprision, must perforce ensue
Some true love turned, and not a false turned true.
Then fate ore-rules, that one man holding troth,
A million fail, confounding oath on oath.
About the wood, go swifter then the wind,
And Helena of Athens look thou find.
All fancy sick she is, and pale of cheer,
With sighs of love, that costs the fresh blood dear.
By some illusion see thou bring her here,
Isle charm his eyes against she doth appear.
I go, I go, look how I go,
Swifter then arrow from the Tartars bow.
Flower of this purple die,
Hit with Cupids archery,
Sink in apple of his eye,
When his love he doth espy,
Let her shine as gloriously
As the Venus of the sky.
When thou wake if she be by,
Beg of her for remedy.
Captain of our Fairy band,
Helena is here at hand,
And the youth, mistook by me,
Pleading for a Lovers fee.
Shall we their fond Pageant see?
Lord, what fools these mortals be!
Stand aside: the noise they make,
Will cause Demetrius to awake.
Then will two at once woo one,
That must needs be sport alone:
And those things doe best please me,
That befall preposterously.
Why should you think yt I should woo in scorn?
Scorn and derision never comes in tears:
Look when I vow I weep; and vows so borne,
In their nativity all truth appears.
How can these things in me, seem scorn to you?
Bearing the badge of saith to prove them true.
You doe advance your cunning more &amp; more,
When truth kills truth, O devilish holy fay!
These vows are Hermias. Will you give her ore?
Weigh oath with oath, and you will nothing weigh.
Your vows to her, and me, (put in two scales)
Will even weigh, and both as light as tales.
I had no judgment, when to her I swore.
Nor none in my mind, now you give her ore.
Demetrius loves her, and he loves not you.
O Helen, goddess, nymph, perfect, divine,
To what my love, shall I compare thine eyne!
Crystal is muddy. O how ripe in show,
Thy lips, those kissing cherries, tempting grow!
That pure congealed white, high Taurus snow,
Fan'd with the Eastern wind, turns to a crow
When thou holdst up thy hand. O let me kiss
This Princess of pure white, this seal of bliss.
O spite! O hell! I see you are all bent
To set against me, for your merriment:
If you were civil, and knew courtesy,
You would not doe me thus much injury.
Can you not hate me, as I know you doe,
But you must join in souls to mock me to?
If you are men, as men you are in show,
You would not use a gentle Lady so;
To vow, and swear, and superpraise my parts,
When I am sure you hate me with your hearts.
You both are Rivals, and love Hermia;
And now both Ruals to mock Helena.
A trim exploit, a manly enterprise,
To conjure tears up in a poor maids eyes,
With your derision; none of noble sort,
Would so offend a Virgin, and extort
A poor souls patience, all to make you sport.
You are unkind Demetrius; be not so,
For you love Hermia; this you know I know;
And here with all good will, with all my heart,
In Hermias love I yield you up my part;
And yours of Helena, to me bequeath,
Whom I do love, and will do to my death.
Never did mockers wast more idle breath.
Lysander, keep thy Hermia, I will none:
If ere I loved her, all that love is gone.
My heart to her, but as guest-wise sojourned,
And now to Helen it is home returned,
There to remain.
It is not so.
Disparage not the faith thou dost not know,
Lest to thy peril thou abide it dear.
Look where thy Love comes, yonder is thy dear.
Dark night, that from the eye his function takes,
The ear more quick of apprehension makes,
Wherein it doth impair the seeing sense,
It pays the hearing double recompense.
Thou art not by mine eye, Lysander found,
Mine ear (I thank it) brought me to that sound.
But why unkindly did thou leave me so?
Why should hee stay whom Love doth press to go?
What love could press Lysander from my side?
Lysanders love (that would not let him bide)
Fair Helena; who more engilds the night,
Then all you fiery os, and eyes of light.
Why seek thou me? Could not this make thee know,
The hate I bare thee, made me leave thee so?
You speak not as you think; it cannot be.
Lo, she is one of this confederacy,
Now I perceive they have conjoined all three,
To fashion this false sport in spite of me.
Injurious Hermia, most ungrateful maid,
Have you conspired, have you with these contrived
To bait me, with this foul derision?
Is all the counsel that we two have shared,
The sisters vows, the hours that we have spent,
When wee have chid the hasty footed time,
For parting vs; O, is all forgot?
All schooledaies friendship, child-hood innocence?
We Hermia, like two Artificial gods,
Have with our needles, created both one flower,
Both on one sampler, sitting on one cushion,
Both warbling of one song, both in one key;
As if our hands, our sides, voices, and minds
Had been incorporate. So we grew together,
Like to a double cherry, seeming parted,
But yet a union in partition,
Two lovely berries molded on one stem,
So with two seeming bodies, but one heart,
Two of the first life coats in Heraldry,
Due but to one and crowned with one crest.
And will you rent our ancient love asunder;
To join with men in scorning your poor friend?
It is not friendly, it is not maidenly.
Our sex as well as I, may chide you for it,
Though I alone doe feel the injury.
I am amazed at your passionate words,
I scorn you not; It seems that you scorn me.
Have you not set Lysander, as in scorn
To follow me, and praise my eyes and face?
And made your other love, Demetrius
(Who even but now did spurn me with his foot)
To call me goddess, nymph, divine, and rare,
Precious, celestial? Wherefore speaks he this
To her he hates? And wherefore doth Lysander
Deny your love (so rich within his soul)
And tender me (forsooth) affection,
But by your setting on, by your consent?
What though I be not so in grace as you,
So hung upon with love, so fortunate?
(But miserable most, to love unloved)
This you should pity, rather then despise.
I understand not what you mean by this.
I, doe, persevere, counterfeit sad looks,
Make mouths upon me when I turn my back,
Wink each at other, hold the sweet jest up:
This sport well carried, shall be chronicled.
If you have any pity, grace, or manners,
You would not make me such an argument:
But fare ye well, it is partly mine own fault,
Which death or absence soon shall remedy.
Stay gentle Helena, hear my excuse,
My love, my life, my soul, fair Helena.
O excellent!
Sweet, do not scorn her so.
If she cannot entreat, I can compel.
Thou can compel, no more then she entreat.
Thy threats have no more strength then her weak praise.
Helen, I love thee, by my life I doe;
I swear by that which I will lose for thee,
To prove him false, tha says I love thee not.
I say, I love thee more then he can do.
If thou say so, with-draw and prove it too.
Quick, come.
Lysander, whereto tends all this?
Away, you Ethiope.
No, no, Sir, seem to break loose;
Take on as you would follow,
But yet come not: you are a tame man, go.
Hang off thou cat, thou but: vile thing let loose,
Or I will shake thee from me like a serpent.
Why are you grown so rude?
What change is this sweet Love?
Thy love? out tawny Tartar, out;
Out loathed medicine; O hated poison hence.
Do you not jest?
Yes sooth, and so do you.
Demetrius: I will keep my word with thee.
I would I had your bond for I perceive
A weak bond holds you; Isle not trust your word.
What, should I ht her, strike her, kill her dead
Although I hate her, Isle not harm her so.
What, can you do me greater harm then hate?
Hate me, wherefore? O me, what news my Love?
Am not I Hermia? Are not you Lysander?
I am as fair now, as I was ere while.
Since night you loved me; yet since night you left me.
Why then you left me (O the gods forbid
In earnest, shall I say?
I, by my life;
And never did desire to see thee more.
Therefore be out of hope, of question, of doubt;
Be certain, nothing truer: it is no jest,
That I doe hate thee, and love Helena.
O me, you juggler, you canker blossom,
You thief of love; What, have you come by night,
And stolen my loves heart from him?
Fine in faith:
Have you no modesty, no maiden shame,
No touch of bashfulness? What, will you tear
Impatient answers from my gentle tongue?
Fie, fie, you counterfeit, you puppet, you.
Puppet? why so? I, that way goes the game.
Now I perceive that she hath made compare
Between our statures, she hath urged her height,
And with her personage, her tall personage,
Her height (forsooth) she hath prevailed with him.
And are you grown so high in his esteem,
Because I am so dwarfish, and so low?
How low am I, thou painted May-pole? Speak,
How low am I? I am not yet so low,
But that my nails can reach unto thine eyes.
I pray you though you mock me, gentlemen,
Let her not hurt me; I was never cursed:
I have no gift at all in shrewishness;
I am a right maid for my cowardice;
Let her not strike me: you perhaps may think,
Because she is something lower then my self,
That I can match her.
Lower? hark again.
Good Hermia, do not be so bitter with me,
I evermore did love you Hermia,
Did ever keep your counsels, never wronged you,
Save that in love unto Demetrius,
I told him of your stealth unto this wood.
He followed you, for love I followed him,
But he hath chid me hence, and threatened me
To strike me, spurn me, nay to kill me too;
And now, so you will let me quiet go,
To Athens will I bear my folly back,
And follow you no further. Let me go.
You see how simple, and how fond I am.
Why get you gone: who first that hinders you?
A foolish heart, that I leave here behind.
What, with Lysander?
With Demetrius.
Be not afraid, she shall not harm thee Helena.
No sir, she shall not, though you take her part.
O when she's angry, she is keen and shrewd,
She was a vixen when she went to school,
And though she be but little, she is fierce.
Little again? Nothing but low and little?
Why will you suffer her to flout me thus?
Let me come to her.
Get you gone you dwarf,
You minimus, of hindering knot-grasse made,
You bead, you acorn.
You are too officious,
In her behalf that scorns your services.
Let her alone, speak not of Helena,
Take not her part. For if thou dost intend
Never so little show of love to her,
Thou shalt abide it.
Now she holds me not,
Now follow if thou dare, to try whose right,
Of thine or mine is most in Helena.
Follow? Nay, Isle go with thee cheek by jowl.
You Mistress, all this coil is long of you.
Nay, go not back.
I will not trust you I,
Nor longer stay in your cursed company.
Your hands then mine, are quicker for a fray,
My legs are longer though to run away.
This is thy negligence, still thou mistake,
Or else commit thy knaveries willingly.
Believe me, King of shadows, I mistook,
Did not you tell me, I should know the man,
By the Athenian garments he hath on?
And so far blameless proves my enterprise,
That I have nointed an Athenians eyes,
And so far am I glad, it so did sort,
As this their jangling I esteem a sport.
Thou see these Lovers seek a place to fight,
Hie therefore Robin, overcast the night,
The starry Welkin cover thou anon,
With drooping fog as black as Acheron,
And lead these testy Rivals so astray,
As one come not within another way.
Like to Lysander, sometime frame thy tongue,
Then stir Demetrius up with bitter wrong;
And sometime rail thou like Demetrius;
And from each other look thou lead them thus,
Till ore their brows, death-counterfeiting, sleep
With leaden legs, and Battie-wings doth creep;
Then crush this herb into Lysanders eye,
Whose liquor hath this virtuous property,
To take from thence all error, with his might,
And make his eie-bals role with wonted sight.
When they next wake, all this derision
Shall seem a dream, and fruitless vision,
And back to Athens shall the Lovers wend
With league, whose date till death shall never end.
Whiles I in this affair do thee imply,
Isle to my Queen, and beg her Indian Boy;
And then I will her charmed eye release
From monsters view, and all things shall be peace.
My Fairy Lord, this must be done with haste,
For night-swift Dragons cut the Clouds full fast,
And yonder shines Auroras harbinger;
At whose approach Ghosts wandering here and there,
Troop home to Church-yards; damned spirits all,
That in crosse-waies and floods have burial,
Already to their wormie beds are gone;
For fear least day should look their shames upon,
They wilfully themselves dxile from light,
And must for aye consort with black browd night.
But we are spirits of another sort:
I, with the mornings love have oft made sport,
And like a Forester, the groves may tread,
Even till the Eastern gate all fiery red,
Opening on Neptune, with fair blessed beams,
Turns into yellow gold, his salt greene streams.
But notwithstanding haste, make no delay:
We may effect this business, yet ere day.
Up and down, up and down, I will lead them up and down: I am seared in field and town. Goblin, lead them up and down: here comes one.
Where art thou, proud Demetrius?
Speak thou now.
Here villain, drawn &amp; ready. Where art thou?
I will be with thee straight.
Follow me then to plainer ground.
Lysander, speak again;
Thou runaway, thou coward, art thou fled?
Speak in some bush: Where dost thou hide thy head?
Thou coward, art thou bragging to the stars,
Telling the bushes that thou look for wars,
And wilt not come? Come recreant, come thou child,
Isle whip thee with a rod. He is defiled
That draws a sword on thee.
Yea, art thou there?
Follow my voice, we will try no manhood here.
He goes before me, and still dares me on,
When I come where he calls, then he's gone.
The villain is much lighter heeled then I:
I followed fast, but faster he did fly;
That fallen am I in dark uneven way,
And here will rest me. Come thou gentle day:
For if but once thou show me thy gray light,
Isle find Demetrius, and revenge this spite.
Ho, ho, ho; coward, why come thou not?
Abide me, if thou dare. For well I wot,
Thou runst before me, shifting every place,
And dare not stand, nor look me in the face.
Where art thou?
Come hither, I am here.
Nay then thou mock me; thou shalt buy this dear,
If ever I thy face by day-light see.
Now go thy way: faintness constrains me,
To measure out my length on this cold bed,
By days approach look to be visited.
O weary night, O long and tedious night,
Abate thy hours, shine comforts from the East,
That I may back to Athens by day-light,
From these that my poor company detest;
And sleep that sometime shuts up sorrows eye,
Steal me a while from mine own company.
Yet but three? Come one more,
Two of both kinds makes up four.
Here she comes, cursed and sad,
Cupped is a knavish lad,
Thus to make poor females mad.
Never so weary, never so in woe,
Bedabbled with the dew, and torn with briers,
I can no further crawl, no further go;
My legs can keep no pace with my desires.
Here will I rest me till the break of day,
Heavens shield Lysander, if they mean a fray.
On the ground sleep sound,
Isle apply your eye gentle lover, remedy.
When thou wake, thou take
True delight in the sight of thy former Ladies eye,
And the Country Proverb known,
That every man should take his own
In your waking shall be shown.
Jack shall have Eel, nolight shall go ill,
The man shall have his Mare again; and all shall bee well.
Come, sit thee down upon this flowery bed,
While I thy amiable cheeks doe coy,
And stick musk roses in thy sleek smooth head,
And kiss thy fair large ears, my gentle joy.
Whore's Peas blossom?
Ready.
Scratch my head, Pease-blossome. Wher's Mounsieuer Cobweb.
Ready.
Monsieur Cobweb, good Monsieur get your weapons in your hand, &amp; kill me a red hipped humble-Bee, on the top of a thistle; and good Monsieur bring me the honey bag. Doe not fret your self too much in the action, Monsieur; and good Monsieur have a care the honey bag break not, I would be loath to have you overflown with a hony-bag seignior. Whore's Monsieur Mustardseed?
Ready.
Give me your neafe, Monsieur Mustardseed.
Pray you leave your curtsy good Monsieur.
What's your will?
Nothing good Monsieur, but to help Caualery Cobweb to scratch. I must to the Barbers Monsieur, for me-thinkes I am marvelous hairy about the face. And I am such a tender ass, if my hair do but tickle me, I must scratch.
What, wilt thou hear some music, my sweet love.
I have a reasonable good ear in music. Let vs have the tongs and the bones.
Or say sweet Love, what thou desire to eat.
Truly a peck of Provender; I could munch your good dry Oats. Me-thinkes I have a great desire to a bottle of hay: good hay, sweet hay hath no felllow.
I have a venturous Fairy,
That shall seek the Squirrels hoard,
And fetch thee new Nuts.
I had rather have a handful or two of dried peas. But I pray you let none of your people stir me, I have an exposition of sleep come upon me.
Sleep thou, and I will wind thee in my arms,
Fairies be gone, and be always away.
So doth the woodbine, the sweet Honisuckle,
Gently entwist; the female Joy so
Enrings the barky fingers of the Elm.
O how I love thee! how I dote on thee!
Welcome good Robin:
See thou this sweet sight?
Her dotage now I doe begin to pity.
For meeting her of late behind the wood,
Seeking sweet savours for this hateful fool,
I did upbraid her, and fall out with her.
For she his hairy temples then had rounded,
With coronet of fresh and fragrant flowers.
And that same dew which sometime on the buds,
Was wont to swell like round and orient pearls;
Stood now within the pretty flouriets eyes,
Like tears that did their own disgrace bewail.
When I had at my pleasure taunted her,
And she in mild terms begged my patience,
I then did ask of her, her changeling child,
Which straight she gave me, and her Fairy sent
To bear him to my Bower in Fairy Land.
And now I have the Boy, I will undo
This hateful imperfection of her eyes.
And gentle Puck, take this transformed scalp,
From off the head of this Athenian swain;
That he awaking when the other doe,
May all to Athens back again repair,
And think no more of this nights accidents,
But as the fierce vexation of a dream.
But first I will release the Fairy Queen.
Be thou as thou wast wont to be;
See as thou wast wont to see.
Deans bud, or Cupids flower,
Hath such force and blessed power.
Now my Titania wake you my sweet Queen.
My Oberon, what visions have I seen!
Me-thought I was enamoured of an Ass.
There lies your love.
How came these things to pass?
Oh, how mine eyes doth loath this visage now!
Silence a while, Robin take off his head:
Titania, music call, and strike more dead
Then common sleep; of all these, fine the sense.
Music, he music, such as charmeth sleep.
When thou wake, with thine own fools eyes peep.
Sound music; come my Queen, take hands with me
And rock the ground whereon these sleepers be.
Now thou and I are new in amity,
And will to morrow midnight, solemnly
Dance in Duke Theseus house triumphantly,
And bless it to all fair posterity.
There shall the pairs of faithful Lovers be
Wedded, with Theseus, all in jollity.
Fair King attend, and mark,
I doe hear the morning Lark.
Then my Queen in silence sad,
Trip we after the nights shade;
We the Globe can compass soon,
Swifter then the wandering Moon.
Come my Lord, and in our flight,
Tell me how it came this night,
That I sleeping here was found,
With these mortals on the ground.
Go one of you, find out the Forester,
For now our observation is performed;
And since we have the vaward of the day,
My Love shall hear the music of my hounds.
Vncouple in the Western valley, let them go;
Dispatch I say, and find the Forester.
We will fair Queen, up to the Mountains top.
And mark the musical confusion
Of hounds and echo in conjunction.
I was with Hercules and Cadmus once,
When in a wood of Create they bayed the Bear
With hounds of Sparta; never did I hear
Such gallant chiding. For besides the groves,
The skies, the fountains, every region near,
Seem all one mutual cry. I never heard
So musical a discord, such sweet thunder.
My hounds are bred out of the Spartan kind,
So flew'd, so sanded, and their heads are hung
With ears that sweep away the morning dew,
Crook kneed, and dew-lapt, like Thessalian Bulls,
Slow in pursuit, but matched in mouth like bells,
Each under each. A cry more tuneable
Was never hallowed to, nor cheered with horn,
In Create, in Sparta, nor in Thessaly;
Judge when you hear. But soft, what nymphs are these?
My Lord, this is my daughter here asleep,
And this Lysander, this Demetrius is,
This Helena, old Nadirs Helena,
I wonder of this being here together.
No doubt they rose up early, to observe
The right of May; and hearing our intent,
Came here in grace of our solemnity.
But speak Egeus, is not this the day
That Hermia should give answer of her choice?
It is, my Lord.
Go bid the hunts-men wake them with their horns.
Good morrow friends: Saint alentine is past,
Begin these wood birds but to couple now?
Pardon my Lord.
I pray you all stand up.
I know you two are Rival enemies.
How comes this gentle concord in the world,
That hatred is is so far from jealousy,
To sleep by hate, and fear no enmity.
My Lord, I shall reply amazedly,
Half sleep, half waking. But as yet, I swear,
I cannot truly say how I came here.
But as I think (for truly would I speak)
And now I doe bethink me, so it is;
I came with Hermia hither. Our intent
Was to be gone from Athens, where we might be
Without the peril of the Athenian Law.
Enough, enough, my Lord: you have enough;
I beg the Law, the Law, upon his head:
They would have stolen away, they would Demetrius,
Thereby to have defeated you and me:
You of your wife, and me of my consent;
Of my consent, that she should be your wife.
My Lord, fair Helen told me of their stealth,
Of this their purpose hither, to this wood,
And I in fury hither followed them;
Fair Helena, in fancy followed me.
But my good Lord, I wot not by what power.
(But by some power it is) my l
To Hermia (melted as the snow)
Seems to me now as the remembrance of an idle gaude,
Which in my childhood I did dote upon:
And all the faith, the virtue of my heart,
The object and the pleasure of mine eye,
Is only Helena. To her, my Lord,
Was I betrothed, ere I see Hermia,
But like a sickness did I loath this food,
But as in health, come to my natural taste,
Now doe I wish it, love it, long for it,
And will for evermore be true to it.
Fair Lovers, you are fortunately met;
Of this discourse we shall hear more anon.
Egeus, I will ouer-beare your will;
For in the Temple, by and by with vs,
These couples shall eternally be knit.
And for the morning now is something worn,
Our purposed hunting shall be set aside.
Away, with vs to Athens; three and three,
We'll hold a feast in great solemnity.
Come Hippolitae.
These things seem small &amp; vndistinguishable,
Like far off mountains turned into Clouds.
Me-thinks I see these things with parted eye,
When every things seems double.
So me-thinkes:
And I have found Demetrius, like a jewel,
Mine own, and not mine own.
It seems to me,
That yet we sleep, we dream. Do not you think,
The Duke was here, and bid vs follow him?
Yea, and my Father.
And Hippolitae.
And he bid vs follow to the Temple.
Why then we are awake; lets follow him, and by the way let vs recount our dreams.
When my cue comes, call me, and I will answer. My next is, most fair Piramus. Hey ho. Peter Quince? Flute the bellows mender? Snout the tinker? Starveling? Gods my life! Stolen hence, and left me asleep: I have had a most rare vision. I had a dream, past the wit of man, to say, what dream it was. Man is but an Ass, if he go about to expound this dream. Me-thought I was, there is no man can tell what. Me-thought I was, and me-thought I had. But man is but a patched fool, if he will offer to say, what me-thought I had. The eye of man hath not heard, the ear of man hath not seen, mans hand is not able to taste, his tongue to conceive, nor his heart to report, what my dream was. I will get Peter Quince to write a ballet of this dream, it shall be called Bottoms Dream, because it hath no bottom; and I will sing it in the latter end of a play, before the Duke. Peradventure, to make it the more gracious, I shall sing it at her death.
Have you sent to Bottoms house? Is he come home yet?
He cannot be heard of. Out of doubt hee i transported.
If he come not, then the play is mared. It goes not forward, doth it?
It is not possible: you have not a man in all Athens, able to discharge Piramus but he.
No, hee hath simply the best wit of any handycraft man in Athens.
Yea, and the best person too, and hee is a very Paramour, for a sweet voice.
You must say, Paragon. A Paramour is (God bless vs) a thing of nought.
Masters, the Duke is coming from the Temple, and there is two or three Lords &amp; Ladies more married. If our sport had gone forward, we had all bin made men.
O sweet bully Bottom: thus hath he lost sixpence a day, during his life; he could not have scoped sixpence a day. And the Duke had not given him sixpence a day for playing, Piramus, Isle be hanged. He would have deserved it. Sixpence a day in Piramus, or nothing.
Where are these Lads? Where are these hearts?
Bottom,  most courageous day! O most happie hour!
Masters, I am to discourse wonders; but ask me not what. For if I tell you, I am no true Athenian. I will tell you every thing as it fell out.
Let vs hear, sweet Bottom.
Not a word of me: all that I will tell you, is, that the Duke hath dined. Get your apparel together, good strings to your beards, new ribbons to your pumps, meet presently at the Palace, every man look ore his part: for the short and the long is, our play is preferred: In any case let Thisby have clean linen: and let not him that plays the Lion, pair his nails, for they shall hang out for the Lions claws. And most dear Actors, eat no Onions, nor Garlic; for wee are to utter sweet breath, and I doe not doubt but to hear them say, it is a sweet Comedy. No more words: away, go away.
It is strange my Theseus, yt these lovers speak of.
More strange then true. I never may believe
These antique fables, nor these Fairy toys,
Lovers and mad men have such seething brains,
Such shaping fantasies, that apprehend more
Then cool reason ever comprehends.
The Lunatic, the Lover, and the Poet,
Are of imagination all compact.
One sees more devils then vast hell can hold;
That is the mad man. The Lover, all as frantic,
Sees Helens beauty in a brow of Egipt.
The Poets eye in a fine frenzy rolling, doth glance
From heaven to earth, from earth to heaven.
And as imagination bodies forth the forms of things
Unknown; the Poets pen turns them to shapes,
And gives to air nothing, a local habitation,
And a name. Such tricks hath strong imagination,
That if it would but apprehend some joy,
It comprehends some bringer of that joy.
Or in the night, imagining some fear,
How easy is a bush supposed a Bear?
But all the story of the night told over,
And all their minds transfigured so together,
More witnesses than fancies images,
And grows to something of great constancy;
But howsoever, strange, and admirable.
Here come the lovers, full of joy and mirth:
Joy, gentle friends, joy and fresh days
Of love accompany your hearts.
More then to vs, waite in your royal walks, your board, your bed.
Come now, what masks, what dances shall we have,
To wear away this long age of three hours,
Between our after supper, and bed-time?
Where is our usual manager of mirth?
What Revels are in hand? Is there no play,
To ease the anguish of a torturing hour?
Call Egeus.
Here mighty Theseus.
Say, what abridgement have you for this evening?
What mask? What music? How shall we beguile
The lazy time, if not with some delight?
There is a brief how many sports are rife:
Make choice of which your Highness will see first.
The battle with the Centaurs to be sung
By an Athenian Eunuch, to the Harp.
We'll none of that. That have I told my Love
In glory of my kinsman Hercules.
The riot of the tipsy Bachanals,
Tearing the Thracian singer, in their rage?
That is an old device, and it was plaid
When I from Thebes came last a Conqueror.
The thrice three Muses, mourning for the death of learning, late deceased in beggary.
That is some Satire keen and critical,
Not sorting with a nuptial ceremony.
A tedious brief Scene of young Piramus,
And his love Thisby; very tragical mirth.
Merry and tragical? Tedious, and brief? That is, hot ice, and wondrous strange snow. How shall wee find the concord of this discord?
A play there is, my Lord, some ten words long,
Which is as brief, as I have known a play;
But by ten words, my Lord, it is too long;
Which makes it tedious. For in all the play,
There is not one word apt, one Player fitted.
And tragical my noble Lord it is: for Piramus
Therein doth kill himself. Which when I saw
Rehearsed, I must confess, made mine eyes water:
But more metre tears, the passion of loud laughter
Never shed.
What are they that do play it?
Hard handed men, that work in Athens here,
Which never laboured in their minds till now;
And now have toiled their vnbreathed memories
With this same play, against your nuptial.
And we will hear it.
No, my noble Lord, it is not for you. I have heard
It over, and it is nothing, nothing in the world;
Unless you can find sport in their intents,
Extremely stretched, and cond with cruel pain,
To doe you service.
I will hear that play. For never any thing
Can be amiss, when simpleness and duty tender it.
Go bring them in, and take your places, Ladies.
I love not to see wretchedness orecharged;
And duty in his service perishing.
Why gentle sweet, you shall see no such thing.
He says, they can doe nothing in this kind.
The kinder we, to give them thanks for nothing
Our sport shall be, to take what they mistake;
And what poor duty cannot doe, noble respect
Takes it in might, not merit.
Where I have come, great Clerks have purposed
To greet me with premeditated welcomes;
Where I have seen them shiver and look pale,
Make periods in the midst of sentences,
Throttle their practised accent in their fears,
And in conclusion, dumbly have broke off,
Not paying me a welcome. Trust me sweet,
Out of this silence yet, I picked a welcome:
And in the modesty of fearful duty,
I read as much, as from the rattling tongue
Of saucy and audacious eloquence.
Love therefore, and tongue-tide simplicity,
In least, speak most, to my capacity.
So please your Grace, the Prologue is addressed.
Let him approach.
If we offend, it is with our good will.
That you should think, we come not to offend,
But with good will. To show our simple skill,
That is the true beginning of our end.
Consider then, we come but in despite.
We do not come, as minding to content you,
Our true intent is. All for your delight,
We are not here. That you should here repent you,
The Actors are at hand; and by their show,
You shall know all, that you are like to know.
This fellow doth not stand upon points.
He hath rid his Prologue, like a rough Colt: he knows not the stop. A good moral my Lord. It is not enough to speak, but to speak true.
Indeed hee hath plaid on his Prologue, like a child on a Recorder, a sound, but not in government.
His speech was like a tangled chain: nothing impaired, but all disordered. Who is next?
Gentles, perchance you wonder at this show,
But wonder on, till truth make all things plain.
This man is Piramus, if you would know;
This beauteous Lady, Thisby is certain.
This man, with lyme and rough-cast, doth present
Wall, that vile wall, which did these lovers sunder:
And through walls chink (poor souls) they are content
To whisper. At the which, let no man wonder.
This man, with Lantern, dog, and bush of thorne,
Presents moone-shine. For if you will know,
By moone-shine did these Lovers think no scorn
To meet at Ninus tomb, there, there to woo:
This grizy beast (which Lyon hight by name)
The trusty Thisby, coming first by night,
Did scarre away, or rather did affright:
And as she fled, her mantle she did fall;
Which Lyon vile with bloody mouth did stain.
Anon comes Piramus, sweet youth and tall,
And finds his Thisbies Mantle slain;
Whereat, with blade, with bloody blameful blade,
He bravely broached his boiling bloody breast,
And Thisby, tarrying in Mulberry shade,
His dagger drew, and died. For all the rest,
Let Lyon, Moone-shine, Wall, and Lovers twain,
At large discourse, while here they doe remain.
I wonder if the Lion be to speak.
No wonder, my Lord: one Lion may, when many Asses doe.
In this same Interlude, it doth befall,
That I, one Snout (by name) present a wall:
And such a wall, as I would have you think,
That had in it a crannied hole or chink:
Through which the Lovers, Piramus and Thisbie
Did whisper often, very secretly.
This loame, this rough-cast, and this stone doth show,
That I am that same Wall; the truth is so.
And this the cranny is, right and sinister,
Through which the fearful Lovers are to whisper.
Would you desire Lime and Hair to speak better?
It is the vvittiest partition, that ever I heard discourse, my Lord.
Pyramus draws near the Wall, silence.
O grim looked night,  night with hue so black,
O night, which ever art, when day is not:
O night,  night, alack, alack, alack,
I fear my Thisbies promise is forgot.
And thou  vvall, thou sweet and lovely vvall,
That stands between her fathers ground and mine,
Thou vvall,  vvall,  sweet and lovely vvall,
Show me thy chink, to blink through with mine eine.
Thanks courteous vvall. Jove shield thee well for this.
But what see I? No Thisbie doe I see.
O wicked vvall, through whom I see no bliss,
Cursed be thy stones for thus deceiving me.
The vvall me-thinkes being sensible, should curse again.
No in truth sir, he should not. Deceiving me,
Is Thisbies cue; she is to enter, and I am to spy
Her through the vvall. You shall see it will fall.
Pat as I told you; yonder she comes.
O vvall, full often hast thou heard my mons,
For parting my fair Piramus, and me.
My cherry lips have often kissed thy stones;
Thy stones with Lime and Hair knit up in thee.
I see a voice; now will I to the chink,
To spy and I can hear my Thisbies face. Thisbie?
My Love thou art, my Love I think.
Think what thou wilt, I am thy Lovers grace,
And like Limander am I trusty still.
And like Helen till the Fates me kill.
Not Shafalus to Procrus, was so true.
As Shafalus to Procrus, I to you.
O kiss me through the hole of this vile wall.
I kiss the walls hole, not your lips at all.
Wilt thou at Ninnies tomb meet me straight way?
Tide life, tide death, I come without delay.
Thus have I Wall, my part discharged so;
And being done, thus Wall away doth go.
Now is the moral down between the two Neighbours.
No remedy my Lord, when Walls are so willfull, to hear without vvarning.
This is the silliest stuff that ere I heard.
The best in this kind are but shadows, and the worst are no worse, if imagination amend them.
It must be your imagination then, &amp; not theirs.
If wee imagine no worse of them then they of themselves, they may pass for excellent men. Here com two noble beasts, in a man and a Lion.
You Ladies, you (whose gentle harts do fear
The smallest monstrous mouse that creeps on floor)
May now perchance, both quake and tremble here,
When Lion rough in wildest rage doth roar.
Then know that I, one Snug the Joiner am
A Lion fell, nor else no Lions dam:
For if I should as Lion come in strife
Into this place, it were pity of my life.
A very gentle beast, and of a good conscience.
The very best at a beast, my Lord, yt ere I saw.
This Lion is a very Fox for his valour.
True, and a Goose for his discretion.
Not so my Lord: for his valour cannot carry his discretion, and the Fox carries the Goose.
His discretion I am sure cannot carry his valour: for the Goose carries not the Fox. It is well; leave it to his discretion, and let vs hearken to the Moon.
This Lantern doth the horned Moon present.
He should have worn the horns on his head.
Hee is no crescent, and his horns are invisible, within the circumference.
This lantern doth the horned Moon present: My self, the man in th Moon doth seem to be.
This is the greatest error of all the rest; the man should be put into the Lantern. How is it else the man in th Moon?
He dares not come there for the candle.
For you see, it is already in snuff.
I am weary of this Moon; would he would change.
It appears by his small light of discretion, that he is in the wane: but yet in curtsy, in all reason, we must stay the time.
Proceed Moon.
All that I have to say, is to tell you, that the Lantern is the Moon; I, the man in the Moon; this thorne bush, my thorne bush; and this dog, my dog.
Why all these should be in the Lantern: for they are in the Moon. But silence, here comes Thisby.
This is old Ninnies tomb: where is my love?
Oh.
Well roared Lion.
Well run Thisby.
Well shone Moon.
Truly the Moon shines with a good grace.
Well moused Lion.
And then came Piramus.
And so the Lion vanished.
Sweet Moon, I thank thee for thy sunny beams,
I thank thee Moon, for shining now so bright:
For by thy gracious, golden, glittering beams,
I trust to taste of truest Thisbies sight.
But stay: O spite! but mark, poor Knight,
What dreadful dole is here?
Eyes do you see! How can it be!
O dainty Duck: O Dear!
Thy mantle good; what stained with blood!
Approach you Furies fell:
O Fates! come, come: Cut thread and thrum,
Quail, crush, conclude, and quell.
This passion, and the death of a dear friend,
Would go near to make a man look sad.
Beshrew my heart, but I pity the man.
O wherefore Nature, did thou Lions frame?
Since Lion wild hath here deflowered my dear:
Which is: no, no, which was the fairest Dame
That lived, that loved, that liked, that looked with cheer.
Come tears, confound: Out sword, and wound
The pap of Piramus:
I, that left pap, where heart doth hop;
Thus dye I, thus, thus, thus.
Now am I dead, now am I fled, my soul is in the sky,
Tongue lose thy light, Moon take thy flight,
Now dye, dye, dye, dye, dye.
No Die, but an ace for him; for he is but one.
Less then an ace man. For he is dead, he is nothing.
With the help of a Surgeon, he might yet reasonfor, and prove an Ass.
How chance Moone-shine is gone before?
Thisby comes back, and finds her Lover.
She will find him by starre-light.
Here she comes, and her passion ends the play.
Me thinks she should not use a long one for such a Piramus: I hope she will be brief.
A Moth will turn the balance, which Piramus which Thisby is the better.
She hath spied him already, with those sweet eyes.
And thus she means, videlicit.
Asleep my Love? What, dead my Dove?
O Piramus arise:
Speak. Speak. Quite dumb? Dead, dead? A tomb
Must cover thy sweet eyes.
These Lily Lips, this cherry nose,
These yellow Cowslip cheeks
Are gone, are gone: Lovers make moan:
His eyes were greene as Leekes.
O sisters three, come, come to me,
With hands as pale as Milk,
Lay them in gore, since you have shore
With shears, his thread of silk.
Tongue not a word: Come trusty sword:
Come blade, my breast imbrue:
And farewell friends, thus Thisbie ends;
Adieu, adieu, adieu.
Moon-shine &amp; Lion are left to bury the dead.
I, and Wall too.
No, I assure you, the wall is down, that parted their Fathers. Will it please you to see the Epilogue, or to hear a Bergomask dance, between two of our company?
No Epilogue, I pray you; for your play needs no excuse. Never excuse; for when the players are all dead, there need none to be blamed. Marry, if hee that writ it had plaid Piramus, and hung himself in Thisbies garter, it would have been a fine Tragedy: and so it is truly, and very notably discharged. But come, your Burgomaske; let your Epilogue alone.
The iron tongue of midnight hath told twelve.
Lovers to bed, it is almost Fairy time.
I fear we shall out-sleepe the coming morn,
As much as we this night have ouer-watcht.
This palpable gross play hath well beguiled
The heavy gate of night. Sweet friends to bed.
A fortnight hold we this solemnity.
In nightly Revels; and new jollity.
Now the hungry Lyons rores,
And the Wolf beholds the Moon:
Whilst the heavy ploughman snores,
All with weary task fore-done.
Now the wasted brands doe glow,
Whilst the scritch-owle, scratching loud,
Puts the wretch that lies in woe,
In remembrance of a shroud.
Now it is the time of night,
That the graves, all gaping wide,
Every one lets forth his spright,
In the Church-way paths to glide
And we Fairies, that do run,
By the triple Hecates team,
From the presence of the Sun,
Following darkness like a dream
Now are frolic; not a Mouse
Shall disturb this hallowed house
I am sent with broom before,
To sweep the dust behind the door.
Through the house give glimmering light,
By the dead and drowsy fire,
Every Elf and Fairy spright,
Hop as light as bird from brier,
And this Ditty after me, sing and dance it trippinglie.
First rehearse this song by rote,
To each word a warbling note.
Hand in hand, with Fairy grace,
Will we sing and bless this place.
Now until the break of day,
Through this house each Fairy stray.
To the best Bride-bed will we,
Which by vs shall blessed be:
And the issue there create,
Ever shall be fortunate:
So shall all the couples three,
Ever true in loving be:
And the blots of Natures hand,
Shall not in their issue stand.
Never mole, harelip, nor scarre,
Nor mark prodigious, such as are
Despised in Nativity,
Shall upon their children be.
With this field dew consecrate,
Every Fairy take his gate,
And each several chamber bless,
Through this Palace with sweet peace,
Ever shall in safety rest,
And the owner of it blessed.
Trip away, make no stay;
Meet me all by break of day.
If we shadows have offended,
Think but this (and all is mended)
That you have but slumbered here,
While these visions did appear.
And this weak and idle theme,
No more yielding but a dream,
Centles, doe not reprehend.
If you pardon, we will mend.
And as I am an honest Puck,
If we have vnearned luck,
Now to scope the Serpents tongue,
We will make amends ere long:
Else the Puck a liar call.
So good night unto you all.
Give me your hands, if we be friends,
And Robin shall restore amends.

AS by your high Imperial Majesty,
I had in charge at my depart for France,
As Procurator to your Excellence,
To marry Princes Margaret for your Grace;
So in the Famous Ancient City, Tours,
In presence of the Kings of France, and Sicill,
The Dukes of Orleans, Calaber, Britaigne, and Alanson,
Seven Earls, twelve Barons, &amp; twenty reverend Bishops
I have performed my Task, and was espoused,
And humbly now upon my bended knee,
In sight of England, and her Lordly Peers,
Deliver up my Title in the Queen
To your most gracious hands, that are the Substance
Of that great Shadow I did represent:
The happiest Gift, that ever Marquess gave,
The Fairest Queen, that ever King received.
Suffolk arise. Welcome Queen Margaret,
I can express no kinder sign of Love
Then this kind kiss: O Lord, that lends me life,
Lend me a heart replete with thankfulness:
For thou hast given me in this beauteous Face
A world of earthly blessings to my soul,
If Sympathy of Love unite our thoughts.
Great King of England, &amp; my gracious Lord,
The mutual conference that my mind hath had,
By day, by night; waking, and in my dreams,
In Courtly company, or at my Beads,
With you mine Alder liefest Sovereign,
Makes me the bolder to salute my King,
With ruder terms, such as my wit affords,
And over joy of heart doth minister.
Her sight did ravish, but her grace in Speech,
Her words yclad with wisdoms Majesty,
Makes me from Wondering, fall to Weeping joys,
Such is the Fullness of my hearts content.
Lords, with one cheerful voice, Welcome my Love.
Long live Qu. Margaret, Englands happiness.
We thank you all.
My Lord Protector, so it please your Grace,
Here are the Articles of contracted peace,
Between our Sovereign, and the French King Charles,
For eighteen months concluded by consent.
Inprimis, It is agreed between the French K. Charles, and William de la Pole Marquess of Suffolk, Ambassador for Henry King of England, That the said Henry shall espouse the Lady Margaret, daughter unto Reignier King of Naples, Sicillia, and Jerusalem, and Crown her Queen of England, ere the thirtieth of May next ensuing.
Item, That the Duchy of Aniou, and the County of Main, shall be released and delivered to the King her father.
Uncle, how now?
Pardon me gracious Lord,
Some sudden qualm hath struck me at the heart,
And dim'd mine eyes, that I can read no further.
Uncle of Winchester, I pray read on.
Item, It is further agreed between them, That the Duchess of Aniou and Maine, shall be released and delivered over to the King her Father, and she sent over of the King of Englands own proper Cost and Charges, without having any Dowry.
They please vs well. Lord Marks kneel down,
We here create thee the first Duke of Suffolk,
And girt thee with the Sword. Cousin of York,
We here discharge your Grace from being Regent
In th parts of France, till term of eighteen Months
Be full expired. Thanks Uncle Winchester,
Gloster, York, Buckingham, Somerset,
Salisbury, and Warwick.
We thank you all for this great favour done,
In entertainment to my Princely Queen.
Come, let vs in, and with all speed provide
To see her Coronation be performed.
Brave Peers of England, Pillars of the State,
To you Duke Humfrey must unload his grief:
Your grief, the common grief of all the Land.
What? did my brother Henry spend his youth,
His valour, coin, and people in the wars?
Did he so often lodge in open field:
In Winters cold, and Summers parching heate,
To conquer France, his true inheritance?
And did my brother Bedford toil his wits,
To keep by policy what Henrie got:
Have you your selves, Somerset, Buckingham,
Brave York, Salisbury, and victorious Warwick,
Received deep scars in France and Normandy:
Or hath mine Uncle Beauford, and my self,
With all the Learned Counsel of the Realm,
Studied so long, sat in the Council house,
Early and late, debating too and fro
How France and Frenchmen might be kept in awe,
And hath his Highness in his infancy,
Crowned in Paris in despite of foes,
And shall these Labours, and these Honours dye?
Shall Henries Conquest, Bedfords vigilance,
Your Deeds of War, and all our Counsel dye?
O Peers of England, shameful is this League,
Fatal this Marriage, cancelling your Fame,
Blotting your names from Books of memory,
Racing the Characters of your Renown,
Defacing Monuments of Conquered France,
Undoing all as all had never bin.
Nephew, what means this passionate discourse?
This preroration with such circumstance:
For France, it is ours; and we will keep it still.
I Uncle, we will keep it, if we can:
But now it is impossible we should.
Suffolk, the new made Duke that rules the roast,
Hath given the Duchy of Aniou and Mayne,
Unto the poor King Reignier, whose large style
Agrees not with the leanness of his purse.
Now by the death of him that dyed for all,
These Counties were the Keys of Normandy:
But wherefore weeps Warwick, my valiant son?
For grief that they are past recovery.
For were there hope to conquer them again,
My sword should shed hot blood, mine eyes no tears.
Aniou and Maine? My self did win them both:
Those Provinces, these Arms of mine did conquer,
And are the Cities that I got with wounds,
Delivered up again with peaceful words?
Mort Dieu.
For Suffolkes Duke, may he be suffocate,
That dims the Honour of this Warlike Isle:
France should have torn and rent my very hart,
Before I would have yielded to this League.
I never read but Englands Kings have had
Large sums of Gold, and Dowries with their wives,
And our King Henry gives away his own,
To match with her that brings no vantages.
A proper jest, and never heard before,
That Suffolk should demand a whole Fifteenth,
For Costs and Charges in transporting her:
She should have staid in France, and starved in France
Before
My Lord of Gloster, now ye grow too hot,
It was the pleasure of my Lord the King.
My Lord of Winchester I know your mind.
It is not my speeches that you do mislike:
But it is my presence that doth trouble ye,
Rancour will out, proud Prelate, in thy face
I see thy fury: If I longer stay,
We shall begin our ancient bickerings:
Lordings farewell, and say when I am gone,
I prophesied, France will be lost ere long.
So, there goes our Protector in a rage:
It is known to you he is mine enemy:
Nay more, an enemy unto you all,
And no great friend, I fear me to the King;
Consider Lords, he is the next of blood,
And heir apparent to the English Crown:
Had Henrie got an Empire by his marriage,
And all the wealthy Kingdoms of the West,
There's reason he should be displeased at it:
Look to it Lords, let not his smoothing words
Bewitch your hearts, be wise and circumspect.
What though the common people favour him,
Calling him, Humfrey the good Duke of Gloster,
Clapping their hands, and crying with loud voice,
Iesu maintain your Royal Excellence,
With God preserve the good Duke Humfrey:
I fear me Lords, for all this flattering gloss,
He will be found a dangerous Protector.
Why should he then protect our Sovereign?
He being of age to govern of himself.
Cousin of Somerset, join you with me,
And altogether with the Duke of Suffolk,
We'll quickly hoise Duke Humfrey from his seat.
This weighty business will not brooke delay,
Isle to the Duke of Suffolk presently.
Cousin of Buckingham, though Humfries pride
And greatness of his place be grief to vs,
Yet let vs watch the haughty Cardinal,
His insolence is more intolerable
Then all the Princes in the Land beside,
If Gloster be displaced, he will be Protector.
Or thou, or I Somerset will be Protectors,
Despite Duke Humfrey, or the Cardinal.
Pride went before, Ambition follows him.
While these do labour for their own preferment,
Behooves it vs to labour for the Realm.
I never saw but Humfrey Duke of Gloster,
Did bear him like a Noble Gentleman:
Oft have I seen the haughty Cardinal.
More like a Soldier then a man of the Church,
As stout and proud as he were Lord of all,
Swear like a Ruffian, and demean himself
Unlike the Ruler of a Commonwealth.
Warwick my son, the comfort of my age,
Thy deeds, thy plainness, and thy house-keeping,
Hath won the greatest favour of the Commons,
Excepting none but good Duke Humfrey.
And Brother York, thy Acts in Ireland,
In bringing them to civil Discipline:
Thy late exploits done in the heart of France,
When thou were Regent for our Sovereign,
Have made thee feared and honoured of the people,
Join we together for the public good,
In what we can, to bridle and suppress
The pride of Suffolk, and the Cardinal,
With Somersets and Buckinghams Ambition,
And as we may, cherish Duke Humfries deeds,
While they do tend the profit of the Land.
So God help Warwick, as he loves the Land,
And common profit of his Country.
And so says York,
For he hath greatest cause.
Then lets make hast away,
And look unto the maine.
Unto the maine?
Oh Father, Maine is lost,
That Maine, which by maine force Warwick did win,
And would have kept, so long as breath did last:
Main-chance father you meant, but I meant Maine,
Which I will win from France, or else be slain.
Aniou and Maine are given to the French,
Paris is lost, the state of Normandy
Stands on a tickle point, now they are gone:
Suffolk concluded on the Articles,
The Peers agreed, and Henry was well pleased,
To change two Dukedoms for a Dukes fair daughter.
I cannot blame them all, what is it to them?
It is thine they give away, and not their own.
Pirates may make cheap pennyworth of their pillage,
And purchase Friends, and give to Courtesans,
Still revelling like Lords till all be gone,
While as the silly Owner of the goods
Weeps over them, and wrings his haplesse hands,
And shakes his head, and trembling stands aloof,
While all is shared, and all is borne away,
Ready to starve, and dare not touch his own.
So York must sit and fret, and bite his tongue,
While his own Lands are bargained for, and sold:
Me thinks the Realms of England, France, &amp; Ireland,
Bear that proportion to my flesh and blood,
As did the fatal brand Althaea burnt,
Unto the Princes heart of Calidon:
Aniou and Maine both given unto the French?
Cold news for me: for I had hope of France,
Even as I have of fertile Englands soil.
A day will come, when York shall claim his own,
And therefore I will take the Novels parts,
And make a show of love to proud Duke Humfrey,
And when I spy advantage, claim the Crown,
For that's the Golden mark I seek to hit:
Nor shall proud Lancaster usurp my right,
Nor hold the Sceptre in his childish Fist,
Nor wear the Diadem upon his head,
Whose Church-like humours fits not for a Crown.
Then York be still awhile, till time do serve:
Watch thou, and wake when others be asleep,
To pry into the secrets of the State,
Till Henrie surfeiting in joys of love,
With his new Bride, &amp; Englands dear bought Queen,
And Humfrey with the Peers be fallen at jars:
Then will I raise aloft the Milke-white-Rose,
With whose sweet smell the Ayre shall be perfumed,
And in in my Standard bear the Arms of York,
To grapple with the house of Lancaster,
And force perforce Isle make him yield the Crown,
Whose bookish Rule, hath pulled fair England down.
Why droopes my Lord like ouer-ripen'd Corn,
Hanging the head at Ceres plenteous load?
Why doth the Great Duke Humfrey knit his brows,
As frowning at the Favours of the world?
Why are thine eyes fixed to the sullen earth,
Gazing on that which seems to dim thy sight?
What see thou there? King Henries Diadem,
Enchased with all the Honours of the world?
If so, Gaze on, and grovel on thy face,
Until thy head be circled with the same.
Put forth thy hand, reach at the glorious Gold.
What, is it too short? Isle lengthen it with mine,
And having both together heaved it up,
We'll both together lift our heads to heaven,
And never more abase our sight so low,
As to vouchsafe one glance unto the ground.
O Nil, sweet Nil, if thou dost love thy Lord,
Banish the Canker of ambitious thoughts:
And may that thought, when I imagine ill
Against my King and Nephew, virtuous Henry,
Be my last breathing in this mortal world.
My troublous dreams this night, doth make me sad.
What dreamed my Lord, tell me, and Isle requite it
With sweet rehearsal of my mornings dream?
Me thought this staff mine Office-badge in Court
Was broke in twain: by whom, I have forgot,
But as I think, it was by 'th Cardinal,
And on the pieces of the broken Wand
Were placed the heads of Edmond Duke of Somerset,
And William de la Pole first Duke of Suffolk.
This was my dream, what it doth bode God knows.
Tut, this was nothing but an argument,
That he that breaks a stick of Glosters grove,
Shall loose his head for his presumption.
But list to me my Humfrey, my sweet Duke:
Me thought I sate in Seat of Majesty,
In the Cathedral Church of Westminster,
And in that Chair where Kings &amp; Queens were crowned,
Where Henrie and Dame Margaret kneeled to me,
And on my head did set the Diadem.
Nay Elinor, then must I chide outright:
Presumptuous Dame, ill-nurter'd Eleanor,
Art thou not second Woman in the Realm?
And the Protectors wife beloved of him?
Hast thou not worldly pleasure at command,
Aboue the reach or compass of thy thought?
And wilt thou still be hammering Treachery,
To tumble down thy husband, and thy self,
From top of Honour, to Disgraces feet?
Away from me, and let me hear no more.
What, what, my Lord? Are you so choleric
With Eleanor, for telling but her dream?
Next time Isle keep my dreams unto my self,
And not be checked.
Nay be not angry, I am pleased again.
My Lord Protector, it is his Highness pleasure,
You do prepare to ride unto S. Albons,
Where as the King and Queen do mean to Hawk.
I go. Come Nel thou wilt ride with vs?
Yes my good Lord, Isle follow presently.
Follow I must, I cannot go before,
While Gloster bears this base and humble mind.
Were I a Man, a Duke, and next of blood,
I would remove these tedious stumbling blocks,
And smooth my way upon their headless necks.
And being a woman, I will not be slack
To play my part in Fortunes Pageant.
Where are you there? Sir Iohn; nay fear not man,
We are alone, here's none but thee, &amp; I.
Iesus preserve your Royal Majesty.
What say thou? Majesty: I am but Grace.
But by the grace of God, and Hums advice,
Your Graces Title shall be multiplied.
What say thou man? Hast thou as yet conferred
With Margerie Iordane the cunning Witch,
With Roger Bollingbrooke the Coniuter?
And will they undertake to do me good?
This they have promised to show your Highness
A Spirit raised from depth of under ground,
That shall make answer to such Questions,
As by your Grace shall be propounded him.
It is enough, Isle think upon the Questions:
When from Saint Albones we doe make return,
We'll see these things effected to the full.
Here Hume, take this reward, make merry man
With thy Confederates in this weighty cause.
Hume must make merry with the Duchess Gold:
Marry and shall: but how now, Sir Iohn Hume?
Seal up your Lips, and give no words but Mum,
The business asks silent secrecy.
Dame Eleanor gives Gold, to bring the Witch:
Gold cannot come amiss, were she a Devil.
Yet have I Gold flies from another Coast:
I dare not say, from the rich Cardinal,
And from the great and new-made Duke of Suffolk;
Yet I doe find it so: for to be plain,
They (knowing Dame Elianors aspiring humour)
Have hired me to vnder-mine the Duchess,
And buzz these Conjurations in her brain.
They say, A crafty Knave do's need no Broker,
Yet am I Suffolk and the Cardinals Broker.
Hume, if you take not heed, you shall go near
To call them both a pair of crafty Knaves.
Well, so it stands: and thus I fear at last,
Hums Knavery will be the Duchess Wrack,
And her Attainture, will be Humphrey fall:
Sort how it will, I shall have Gold for all.
My Masters, let's stand close, my Lord Protector will come this way by and by, and then wee may deliver our Supplications in the Quill.
Marry the Lord protect him, for hoe's a good man, Iesu bless him.
Here a comes me thinks, and the Queen with him: Isle be the first sure.
Come back fool, this is the Duke of Suffolk, and not my Lord Protector.
How now fellow: would any thing with me?
I pray my Lord pardon me, I took ye for my Lord Protector.
To my Lord Protector? Are your Supplications to his Lordship? Let me see them: what is thine?
Mine is, and't please your Grace, against Iohn Goodman, my Lord Cardinals Man, for keeping my House, and Lands, and Wife and all, from me.
Thy Wife too? that's some Wrong indeed. What's yours? What's here? Against the Duke of Suffolk, for enclosing the Commons of Melforde. How now, Sir Knave?
Alas Sir, I am but a poor Petitioner of our whole Towneship.
Against my Master Thomas Horner, for saying, That the Duke of York was rightful Heir to the Crown.
What say thou? Did the Duke of York say, hee was rightful Heir to the Crown?
That my Mistress was? No forsooth: my Master said, That he was, and that the King was an Usurper.
Who is there?
Take this fellow in, and send for his Master with a Purseuant presently: we'll hear more of your matter before the King.
And as for you that love to be protected
Under the Wings of our Protectors Grace,
Begin your Suites anew, and sue to him.
Away, base Cullions: Suffolk let them go.
Come, let's be gone.
My Lord of Suffolk, say, is this the guise?
Is this the Fashions in the Court of England?
Is this the Government of Britains Isle?
And this the Royalty of Albions King?
What, shall King Henry be a Pupil still,
Under the surly Glosters Governance?
Am I a Queen in Title and in Stile,
And must be made a Subject to a Duke?
I tell thee Poole, when in the City Tours
Thou ran atilt in honour of my Love,
And stol'st away the Ladies hearts of France;
I thought King Henry had resembled thee,
In Courage, Courtship, and Proportion:
But all his mind is bent to Holiness,
To number Aue-Maries on his Beads:
His Champions, are the Prophets and Apostles,
His Weapons, holy Saws of sacred Writ,
His Study is his Tilt-yard, and his Loves
Are brazen Images of Canonised Saints.
I would the College of the Cardinals
Would choose him Pope, and carry him to Rome,
And set the Triple Crown upon his Head;
That were a State fit for his Holiness.
Madame be patient: as I was cause
Your Highness came to England, so will I
In England work your Graces full content.
Beside the haughty Protector, have we Beauford
The imperious Churchman; Somerset, Buckingham,
And grumbling York: and not the least of these,
But can doe more in England then the King.
And he of these, that can doe most of all,
Cannot doe more in England then the Novels:
Salisbury and Warwick are no simple Peers.
Not all these Lords do vex me half so much,
As that proud Dame, the Lord Protectors Wife:
She sweeps it through the Court with troops of Ladies,
More like an Empress, then Duke Humphrey Wife:
Strangers in Court, doe take her for the Queen:
She bears a Dukes Revenues on her back,
And in her heart she scorns our Poverty:
Shall I not live to be avenged on her?
Contemptuous base-borne Callot as she is,
She vaunted amongst her Minions to other day,
The very train of her worst wearing Gown,
Was better worth then all my Fathers Lands,
Till Suffolk gave two Dukedoms for his Daughter.
Madame, my self have limed a Bush for her,
And placed a Queer of such enticing Birds,
That she will light to listen to the Lays,
And never mount to trouble you again.
So let her rest: and Madame list to me,
For I am bold to counsel you in this;
Although we fancy not the Cardinal,
Yet must we join with him and with the Lords,
Till we have brought Duke Humphrey in disgrace.
As for the Duke of York, this late Complaint
Will make but little for his benefit:
So one by one we'll weed them all at last,
And you your self shall steer the happy Helm.
For my part, Noble Lords, I care not which,
Or Somerset, or York, ell's one to me.
If York have ill demeaned himself in France,
Then let him be denied the Regent-ship.
If Somerset be unworthy of the Place,
Let York be Regent, I will yield to him.
Whether your Grace be worthy, yea or no,
Dispute not that, York is the worthier.
Ambitious Warwick, let thy betters speak.
The Cardinal's not my better in the field.
All in this presence are thy betters, Warwick.
Warwick may live to be the best of all.
Peace Son, and show some reason Buckingham
Why Somerset should be preferred in this?
Because the King forsooth will have it so.
Madame, the King is old enough himself
To give his Censure: These are no Women's matters.
If he be old enough, what needs your Grace
To be Protector of his Excellence?
Madame, I am Protector of the Realm,
And at his pleasure will resign my Place.
Resign it then, and leave thine insolence.
Since thou were King; as who is King, but thou?
The Common-wealth hath daily run to wrack,
The Dolphin hath prevailed beyond the Seas,
And all the Peers and Nobles of the Realm
Have been as Bond-men to thy Sovereignty.
The Commons hast thou racked, the Clergies Bags
Are lank and lean with thy Extortions.
Thy sumptuous Buildings, and thy Wives Attire
Have cost a mass of public Treasury.
Thy Cruelty in execution
Upon Offenders, hath exceeded Law,
And left thee to the mercy of the Law.
Thy sale of Offices and Towns in France,
If they were known, as the suspect is great,
Would make thee quickly hop without thy Head.
Give me my Fan: what, Minion, can ye not?
I cry you mercy, Madame: was it you?
Was it I? yea, I it was, proud French-woman:
Could I come near your Beauty with my Nails,
I could set my ten Commandments in your face.
Sweet Aunt be quiet, it was against her will.
Against her will, good King? look to it in time,
She'll hamper thee and dandle thee like a Baby:
Though in this place most Master wear no Breeches,
She shall not strike, Dame Eleanor unrevenged.
Lord Cardinal, I will follow Eleanor,
And listen after Humfrey, how he proceeds:
Shoe's tickled now, her Fume needs no spurs,
She'll gallop far enough to her destruction.
Now Lords, my Choler being ouer-blowne,
With walking once about the Quadrangle,
I come to talk of Common-wealth Affairs.
As for your spiteful false Objections,
Prove them, and I lye open to the Law:
But God in mercy so deal with my Soul,
As I in duty love my King and Country.
But to the matter that we have in hand:
I say, my Sovereign, York is meetest man
To be your Regent in the Realm of France.
Before we make election, give me leave
To show some reason, of no little force,
That York is most unmeet of any man.
Isle tell thee, Suffolk, why I am unmeet.
First, for I cannot flatter thee in Pride:
Next, if I be appointed for the Place,
My Lord of Somerset will keep me here,
Without Discharge, Money, or Furniture,
Till France be won into the Dolphins hands:
Last time I danced attendance on his will,
Till Paris was besieged, famished, and lost.
That can I witness, and a fouler fact
Did never Traitor in the Land commit.
Peace head-strong Warwick.
Image of Pride, why should I hold my peace?
Because here is a man accused of Treason,
Pray God the Duke of York excuse himself.
Doth any one accuse York for a Traitor?
What mean thou, Suffolk? tell me, what are these?
Please it your Majesty, this is the man
That doth accuse his Master of High Treason;
His words were these: That Richard, Duke of York,
Was rightful Heir unto the English Crown,
And that your Majesty was an Usurper.
Say man, were these thy words?
And't shall please your Majesty, I never said nor thought any such matter: God is my witness, I am falsely accused by the Villain.
By these ten bones, my Lords, hee did speak them to me in the Garret one Night, as wee were scowring my Lord of Yorkes Armour.
Base Dunghill Villain, and Mechanical,
Isle have thy Head for this thy Traitors speech:
I doe beseech your Royal Majesty,
Let him have all the rigour of the Law.
Alas, my Lord, hang me if ever I spake the words: my accuser is my Prentice, and when I did correct him for his fault the other day, he did vow upon his knees he would be even with me: I have good witness of this; therefore I beseech your Majesty, doe not cast away an honest man for a Villains accusation.
Uncle, what shall we say to this in law?
This doom, my Lord, if I may judge:
Let Somerset be Regent o'er the French,
Because in York this breeds suspicion;
And let these have a day appointed them
For single Combat, in convenient place,
For he hath witness of his servants malice:
This is the Law, and this Duke Humfreyes doom.
I humbly thank your Royal Majesty.
And I accept the Combat willingly.
Alas, my Lord, I cannot fight; for Gods sake pity my case: the spite of man prevails against me. O Lord have mercy upon me, I shall never be able to fight a blow: O Lord my heart.
Sirrha, or you must fight, or else be hanged.
Away with them to Prison: and the day of Combat, shall be the last of the next month. Come Somerset, we'll see thee sent away.
Come my Masters, the Duchess I tell you expects performance of your promises.
Master Hume, we are therefore provided: will her Ladyship behold and hear our Exorcisms?
I, what else? fear you not her courage.
I have heard her reported to be a Woman of an invincible spirit: but it shall be convenient, Master Hume, that you be by her aloft, while wee be busy below; and so I pray you go in Gods Name, and leave vs.
Mother Iordan, be you prostrate, and grovel on the Earth; Iohn Southwell read you, and let vs to our work.
Well said my Masters, and welcome all: To this gear, the sooner the better.
Patience, good Lady, Wizards know their times:
Deep Night, dark Night, the silent of the Night,
The time of Night when Troy was set on fire,
The time when Screech-owles cry, and Bandogs howl,
And Spirits walk, and Ghosts break up their Graves;
That time best fits the work we have in hand.
Madame, sit you, and fear not: whom wee raise,
Wee will make fast within a hallowed Verge.
Ad sum.
Asmath, by the eternal God,
Whose name and power thou tremble at,
Answer that I shall ask: for till thou speak,
Thou shalt not pass from hence.
Ask what thou wilt; that I had said, and done.
First of the King: What shall of him become?
The Duke yet lives, that Henry shall depose:
But him out-liue, and dye a violent death.
What fates await the Duke of Suffolk?
By Water shall he dye, and take his end.
What shall befall the Duke of Somerset?
Let him shun Castles,
Safer shall he be upon the sandy Plains,
Then where Castles mounted stand.
Have done, for more I hardly can endure.
Descend to Darkness, and the burning Lake:
False Fiend avoid.
Lay hands upon these Traitors, and their trash:
Beldam I think we watched you at an inch.
What Madame, are you there? the King &amp; Commonweal
Are deeply indebted for this piece of pains;
My Lord Protector will, I doubt it not,
See you well guerdon'd for these good deserts.
Not half so bad as thine to Englands King,
Injurious Duke, that threaten whore's no cause.
True Madame, none at all: what call you this?
Away with them, let them be clapped up close,
And kept asunder: you Madame shall with vs.
Stafford take her to thee.
We'll see your Trinkets here all forth-comming.
All away.
Lord Buckingham, me thinks you watched her well:
A pretty Plot, well chosen to build upon.
Now pray my Lord, let's see the Devils Writ.
What have we here?
The Duke yet lives, that Henry shall depose:
But him out-line, and dye a violent death.
Why this is just Aio Aeacida Romanos vincere posso.
Well, to the rest:
Tell me what fate awaits the Duke of Suffolk?
By Water shall he dye, and take his end.
What shall betide the Duke of Somerset?
Let him shun Castles,
Safer shall he be upon the sandy Plains,
Then where Castles mounted stand.
Come, come, my Lords,
These Oracles are hardly attained,
And hardly understood.
The King is now in progress towards Saint Albones,
With him, the Husband of this lovely Lady:
Thither goes these News,
As fast as Horse can carry them:
A sorry Breakfast for my Lord Protector.
Your Grace shall give me leave, my Lord of York,
To be the Post, in hope of his reward.
At your pleasure, my good Lord.
Who's within there, hoe?
Inuit my Lords of Salisbury and Warwick
To sup with me to morrow Night. Away.
Believe me Lords, for flying at the Brooke,
I saw not better sport these seven years day:
Yet by your leave, the Wind was very high,
And ten to one, old Join had not gone out.
But what a point, my Lord, your Falcon made,
And what a pitch she flew aboue the rest:
To see how God in all his Creatures works,
Yea Man and Birds are fain of climbing high.
No marvel, and it like your Majesty,
My Lord Protectors Hawks doe tower so well,
They know their Master loves to be aloft,
And bears his thoughts aboue his Falcons Pitch.
My Lord, it is but a base ignoble mind,
That mounts no higher then a Bird can sore:
I thought as much, hee would be aboue the Clouds.
I my Lord Cardinal, how think you by that?
Were it not good your Grace could fly to Heaven?
The Treasury of everlasting Joy.
Thy Heaven is on Earth, thine Eyes &amp; Thoughts
Beat on a Crown, the Treasure of thy Heart,
Pernicious Protector, dangerous Peer,
That smooth it so with King and Commonwealth.
What, Cardinal?
Is your Priest-hood grown peremptory?
Tantaene animis Coelestibus irae, Church-men so hot?
Good Uncle hide such malice:
With such Holiness can you doe it?
No malice Sir, no more then well becomes
So good a Quarrel, and so bad a Peer.
As who, my Lord?
Why, as you, my Lord,
An't like your Lordly Lords Protectorship.
Why Suffolk, England knows thine insolence.
And thy Ambition, Gloster.
I prithee peace, good Queen,
And whet not on these furious Peers,
For bl  the Peace-makers on Earth.
 me be blessed for the Peace I make
Against this proud Protector with my Sword.
Faith holy Uncle, would it were come to that.
Marry, when thou dare.
Make up no factious numbers for the matter,
In thine own person answer thy abuse.
I, where thou dare not peep:
And if thou dare, this Evening,
On the East side of the Grove.
How now, my Lords?
Believe me, Cousin Gloster,
Had not your man put up the Foul so suddenly,
We had had more sport.
Come with thy two-hand Sword.
True Uncle, are ye advised?
The East side of the Grove:
Cardinal, I am with you.
Why how now, Uncle Gloster?
Talking of Hawking; nothing else, my Lord.
Now by Gods Mother, Priest,
Isle shave your Crown for this,
Or all my Fence shall fail.
Medic tepsum, Protector see to it well, protect your self.
The Winds grow high,
So doe your Stomachs, Lords:
How irksome is this Music to my heart?
When such Strings jar, what hope of Harmony?
I pray my Lords let me compound this strife.
What means this noise?
Fellow, what Miracle dost thou proclaim?
A Miracle, a Miracle.
Come to the King, and tell him what Miracle.
Forsooth, a blind man at Saint Albones Shrine,
Within this half hour hath received his sight,
A man that ne'er saw in his life before.
Now God be praised, that to believing Souls
Gives Light in Darkness, Comfort in Despair.
Here comes the Townsmen, on Procession,
To present your Highness with the man.
Great is his comfort in this Earthly Vale,
Although by his sight his sin be multiplied.
Stand by, my Masters; bring him near the King,
His Highness pleasure is to talk with him.
Good-fellow, tell vs here the circumstance,
That we for thee may glorify the Lord.
What, hast thou been long blind, and now restored?
Borne blind, and't please your Grace.
I indeed was he.
What Woman is this?
His Wife, and't like your Worship.
Had thou been his Mother, thou coldest have better told.
Where were thou borne?
At Berwick in the North, and't like your Grace.
Poor Soul,
Gods goodness hath been great to thee:
Let never Day nor Night unhallowed pass,
But still remember what the Lord hath done.
Tell me, good-fellow,
Came thou here by Chance, or of Devotion,
To this holy Shrine?
God knows of pure Devotion,
Being called a hundred times, and oftner,
In my sleep, by good Saint Albon:
Who said; Symon, come; come offer at my Shrine,
And I will help thee.
Most true, forsooth:
And many time and oft my self have heard a Voice,
To call him so.
What, art thou lame?
I, God Almighty help me.
How came thou so?
A fall off of a Tree.
A Plum-tree, Master.
How long hast thou been blind?
O borne so, Master.
What, and would climb a Tree?
But that in all my life, when I was a youth.
Too true, and bought his climbing very dear.
'Masse, thou lou'dst Plummes well, that would venture so.
Alas, good Master, my Wife desired some Damsons, and made me climb, with danger of my Life.
A subtle Knave, but yet it shall not serve:
Let me see thine Eyes; wink now, now open them,
In my opinion, yet thou see not well.
Yes Master, clear as day, I thank God and Saint Albones.
Say thou me so: what Colour is this Cloak of?
Red Master, Red as Blood.
Why that's well said: What Colour is my Gown of?
Black forsooth, coal-black, as Jet.
Why then, thou know what Colour Jet is of?
And yet I think, Jet did he never see.
But Cloaks and Gowns, before this day, a many.
Never before this day, in all his life.
Tell me Sirrha, what's my Name?
Alas Master, I know not.
What's his Name?
I know not.
Nor his?
No indeed, Master.
What's thine own Name?
Saunder Simpcoxe, and if it please you, Master.
Then Saunder, sit there,
The lying'st Knave in Christendom.
If thou had been borne blind,
Thou might as well have known all our Names,
As thus to name the several Colours we doe wear.
Sight may distinguish of Colours:
But suddenly to nominate them all,
It is impossible.
My Lords, Saint Albone here hath done a Miracle:
And would ye not think it, Cunning to be great,
That could restore this Cripple to his Legs again.
O Master, that you could?
My Masters of Saint Albones,
Have you not Beadles in your Town,
And Things called Whips?
Yes, my Lord, if it please your Grace.
Then send for one presently.
Sirrha, go fetch the Beadle hither straight.
Now fetch me a Stool hither by and by.
Now Sirrha, if you mean to save your self from Whipping, leap me over this Stool, and run away.
Alas Master, I am not able to stand alone:
You go about to torture me in vain.
Well Sir, we must have you find your Legs.
Sirrha Beadle, whip him till he leap over that same Stool.
I will, my Lord.
Come on Sirrha, off with your Doublet, quickly.
Alas Master, what shall I doe? I am not able to stand.
O God, see thou this, and bear so long?
It made me laugh, to see the Villain run.
Follow the Knave, and take this Drab away.
Alas Sir, we did it for pure need.
Let the be whipped through every Market Town,
Till they come to Berwick, from whence they came.
Duke Humfrey he's done a Miracle to day.
True: made the Lame to leap and fly away.
But you have done more Miracles then I:
You made in a day, my Lord, whole Towns to fly.
What Tidings with our Cousin Buckingham?
Such as my heart doth tremble to unfold:
A sort of naughty persons, lewdly bent,
Under the Countenance and Confederacy
Of Lady Eleanor, the Protectors Wife,
The Ring-leader and Head of all this Rout,
Have practised dangerously against your State,
Dealing with Witches and with Conjurers,
Whom we have apprehended in the Fact,
Raising up wicked Spirits from under ground,
Demanding of King Henries Life and Death,
And other of your Highness Privy Council,
As more at large your Grace shall understand.
And so my Lord Protector, by this means
Your Lady is forth-comming, yet at London.
This News I think hath turned your Weapons edge;
It is like, my Lord, you will not keep your hour.
Ambitious Church-man, leave to afflict my heart:
Sorrow and grief have vanquished all my powers;
And vanquished as I am, I yield to thee,
Or to the meanest Groom.
O God, what mischiefs work the wicked ones?
Heaping confusion on their own heads thereby.
Gloster, see here the Taincture of thy Nest,
And look thy self be faultless, thou were best.
Madame, for my self, to Heaven I doe appease,
How I have loved my King, and Commonwealth:
And for my Wife, I know not how it stands,
Sorry I am to hear what I have heard.
Noble she is: but if she have forgot
Honour and Virtue, and conuers't with such,
As like to Pitch, defile Nobility;
I banish her my Bed, and Company,
And give her as a Prey to Law and Shame,
That hath dishonoured Glosters honest Name.
Well, for this Night we will repose vs here:
To morrow toward London, back again,
To look into this Business thoroughly,
And call these foul Offenders to their Answers;
And poise the Cause in Justice equal Scales,
Whose Beam stands sure, whose rightful cause prevails.
Now my good Lords of Salisbury &amp; Warwick,
Our simple Supper ended, give me leave,
In this close Walk, to satisfy my self,
In craving your opinion of my Title,
Which is infallible, to Englands Crown.
My Lord, I long to hear it at full.
Sweet York begin: and if thy claim be good,
The Neuills are thy Subjects to command.
Then thus:
Edward the third, my Lords, had seven Sons:
The first, Edward the Black-Prince, Prince of Wales;
The second, William of Hatfield; and the third,
Lionel, Duke of Clarence; next to whom,
Was Iohn of Gaunt, the Duke of Lancaster;
The fifth, was Edmond Langley, Duke of York;
The sixth, was Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloster;
William of Windsor was the seventh, and last.
Edward the Black-Prince dyed before his Father,
And left behind him Richard, his only Son,
Who after Edward the third's death, reigned as King,
Till Henry Bullingbrooke, Duke of Lancaster,
The eldest Son and Heir of Iohn of Gaunt,
Crowned by the Name of Henry the fourth,
Seized on the Realm, deposed the rightful King,
Sent his poor Queen to France, from whence she came,
And him to Pumfret; where, as all you know,
Harmless Richard was murdered traitorously.
Father, the Duke hath told the truth;
Thus got the House of Lancaster the Crown.
Which now they hold by force, and not by right:
For Richard, the first Sons Heir, being dead,
The Issue of the next Son should have reigned.
But William of Hatfield dyed without an Heir.
The third Son Duke of Clarence,
From whose Line I claim the Crown,
Had Issue Phillip, a Daughter,
Who married Edmond Mortimer, Earl of March:
Edmond had Issue, Roger, Earl of March;
Roger had Issue, Edmond, Anne, and Eleanor.
This Edmond, in the Reign of Bullingbrooke,
As I have read, laid claim unto the Crown,
And but for Owen Glendour, had been King;
Who kept him in Captivity, till he dyed.
But, to the rest.
His eldest Sister, Anne,
My Mother, being Heir unto the Crown,
Married Richard, Earl of Cambridge,
Who was to Edmond Langley,
Edward the thirds fifth Sons Son;
By her I claim the Kingdom:
She was Heir to Roger, Earl of March,
Who was the Son of Edmond Mortimer,
Who married Phillip, sole Daughter
Unto Lionel, Duke of Clarence.
So, if the Issue of the elder Son
Succeed before the younger, I am King.
What plain proceedings is more plain then this?
Henry doth claim the Crown from Iohn of Gaunt,
The fourth Son, York claims it from the third:
Till Lionels Issue fails, his should not reign.
It fails not yet, but flourishes in thee,
And in thy Sons, fair slips of such a Stock.
Then Father Salisbury, kneel we together,
And in this private Plot be we the first,
That shall salute our rightful Sovereign
With honour of his Birth-right to the Crown.
Long live our Sovereign Richard, Englands King.
We thank you Lords:
But I am not your King, till I be Crowned,
And that my Sword be stained
With heart-blood of the House of Lancaster:
And that's not suddenly to be performed,
But with advice and silent secrecy.
Doe you as I doe in these dangerous days,
Wink at the Duke of Saffolkes insolence,
At Beaufords Pride, at Somersets Ambition,
At Buckingham, and all the Crew of them,
Till they have snar'd the Shepherd of the Flock,
That virtuous Prince, the good Duke Humfrey:
It is that they seek; and they, in seeking that,
Shall find their deaths, if York an prophecy.
My Lord, break we off; we know your mind at full.
My heart assures me, that the Earl of Warwick
Shall one day make the Duke of York a King.
And Neuill, this I doe assure my self,
Richard shall live to make the Earl of Warwick
The greatest man in England, but the King.
Stand forth Dame Eleanor Cobham, Glosters Wife:
In sight of God, and vs, your guilt is great,
Receive the Sentence of the Law for sin,
Such as by Gods Book are adjudged to death.
You four from hence to Prison, back again;
From thence, unto the place of Execution:
The Witch in Smithfield shall be burnt to ashes,
And you three shall be strangled on the Gallows.
You Madame, for you are more Nobly-borne,
Despoiled of your Honour in your Life,
Shall, after three days open Penance done,
Live in your Country here, in Banishment,
With Sir Iohn Stanly, in the Isle of Man.
Welcome is Banishment, welcome were my Death.
Eleanor, the Law thou see hath judged thee,
I cannot justify whom the Law condemns:
Mine eyes are full of tears, my heart of grief.
Ah Humfrey, this dishonour in thine age,
Will bring thy head with sorrow to the ground.
I beseech your Majesty give me leave to go;
Sorrow would solace, and mine Age would ease.
Stay Humfrey, Duke of Gloster,
Ere thou go, give up thy Staff,
Henry will to himself Protector be,
And God shall be my hope, my stay, my guide,
And Lantern to my feet:
And go in peace, Humfrey, no less beloved,
Then when thou were Protector to thy King.
I see no reason, why a King of years
Should be to be protected like a Child,
God and King Henry govern Englands Realm:
Give up your Staff, Sir, and the King his Realm.
My Staff? Here, Noble Henry, is my Staff:
As willingly doe I the same resign,
As ere thy Father Henry made it mine;
And even as willingly at thy feet I leave it,
As others would ambitiously receive it.
Farewell good King: when I am dead, and gone,
May honourable Peace attend thy Throne.
Why now is Henry King, and Margaret Queen,
And Humfrey, Duke of Gloster, scarce himself,
That bears so shrewd a maim: two Pulls at once;
His Lady banished, and a Limb lopped off.
This Staff of Honour roughed, there let it stand,
Where it best fits to be, in Henries hand.
Thus droupes this lofty Pine, &amp; hangs his sprays,
Thus Elianors Pride dyes in her youngest days.
Lords, let him go. Please it your Majesty,
This is the day appointed for the Combat,
And ready are the Appellant and Defendant,
The Armourer and his Man, to enter the Lists,
So please your Highness to behold the fight.
I, good my Lord: for purposely therefore
Left I the Court, to see this Quarrel tried.
A Gods Name see the Lifts and all things fit,
Here let them end it, and God defend the right.
I never saw a fellow worse bestead,
Or more afraid to fight, then is the Appellant,
The servant of this Armourer, my Lords.
Here Neighbour Horner, I drink to you in a Cup of Sack; and fear not Neighbor, you shall doe well enough.
And here Neighbour, here's a Cup of Charneco.
And here's a Pot of good Double-Beere Neighbor: drink, and fear not your Man.
Let it come in faith, and Isle pledge you all, and a fig for Peter.
Here Peter, I drink to thee, and be not aafraid.
Be merry Peter, and fear not thy Master,
Fight for credit of the Prentices.
I thank you all: drink, and pray for me, I pray you, for I think I have taken my last Draught in this World. Here Robin, and if I dye, I give thee my Aporne; and Will, thou shalt have my Hammer: and here Tom, take all the Money that I have. O Lord bless me. I pray God, for I am never able to deal with my Master, hee hath learnt so much fence already.
Come, leave your drinking, and fall to blows.
Sirrha, what's thy Name?
Peter forsooth.
Peter? what more?
Thumpe.
Thumpe? Then see thou thumpe thy Master well.
Masters, I am come hither as it were upon my Mans instigation, to prove him a Knave, and my self an honest man: and touching the Duke of York, I will take my death, I never meant him any ill, nor the King, nor the Queen: and therefore Peter have at thee with a downright blow.
Dispatch, this Knaves tongue begins to double.
Sound Trumpets, Alarm to the Combatants.
Hold Peter, hold, I confess, I confess Treason.
Take away his Weapon: Fellow thank God, and the good Wine in thy Masters way.
O God, have I overcome mine Enemies in this presence? O Peter, thou hast prevailed in right.
Go, take hence that Traitor from our sight,
For by his death we doe perceive his guilt,
And God in Justice hath reueal'd to vs
The truth and innocence of this poor fellow,
Which he had thought to have murdered wrongfully.
Come fellow, follow vs for thy Reward.
Thus sometimes hath the brightest day a Cloud:
And after Summer, evermore succeeds
Barren Winter, with his wrathful nipping Cold;
So Cares and Joys abound, at Seasons fleet.
Sirs, what's a Clock?
Ten, my Lord.
Ten is the hour that was appointed me,
To watch the coming of my punished Duchess:
Vnneath may she endure the Flinty Streets,
To tread them with her tender-feeling feet.
Sweet Nil, ill can thy Noble Mind brook
The abject People, gazing on thy face,
With envious Looks laughing at thy shame,
That erst did follow thy proud Chariot-Wheeles,
When thou did ride in triumph through the streets.
But soft, I think she comes, and Isle prepare
My teare-stayn'd eyes, to see her Miseries.
So please your Grace, we'll take her from the Sheriff.
No, stir not for your lives, let her pass by.
Come you, my Lord, to see my open shame?
Now thou dost Penance too. Look how they gaze,
See how the giddy multitude doe point,
And nod their heads, and throw their eyes on thee.
Ah Gloster, hide thee from their hateful looks,
And in thy Closet pent up, rue my shame,
And ban thine Enemies, both mine and thine.
Be patient, gentle Nil, forget this grief.
Ah Gloster, teach me to forget my self:
For whilst I think I am thy married Wife,
And thou a Prince, Protector of this Land,
Me thinks I should not thus be led along,
Mayl'd up in shame, with Papers on my back,
And followed with a Rabble, that rejoice
To see my tears, and hear my deepe-fet groans.
The ruthless Flint doth cut my tender feet,
And when I start, the envious people laugh,
And bid me be advised how I tread.
Ah Humfrey, can I bear this shameful yoke?
Trow thou, that ere Isle look upon the World,
Or count them happy, that enjoys the Sun?
No: Dark shall be my Light, and Night my Day.
To think upon my Pomp, shall be my Hell.
Sometime Isle say, I am Duke Humfreyes Wife,
And he a Prince, and Ruler of the Land:
Yet so he ruled, and such a Prince he was,
As he stood by, whilst I, his forlorn Duchess,
Was made a wonder, and a pointing stock
To every idle Rascal follower.
But be thou mild, and blush not at my shame,
Nor stir at nothing, till the Axe of Death
Hang over thee, as sure it shortly will.
For Suffolk, he that can doe all in all
With her, that hates thee and hates vs all,
And York, and impious Beauford, that false Priest,
Have all limed Bushes to betray thy Wings,
And fly thou how thou can, they'll tangle thee.
But fear not thou, until thy foot be snar'd,
Nor never seek prevention of thy foes.
Ah Nil, forbear: thou aim all awry.
I must offend, before I be attainted:
And had I twenty times so many foes,
And each of them had twenty times their power,
All these could not procure me any scathe,
So long as I am loyal, true, and crimelesse.
Would have me rescue thee from this reproach?
Why yet thy scandal were not wiped away,
But I in danger for the breach of Law.
Thy greatest help is quiet, gentle Nil:
I pray thee sort thy heart to patience,
These few days wonder will be quickly worn:
I summon your Grace to his Majesties Parliament,
Holden at Bury, the first of this next Month.
And my consent ne'er asked herein before?
This is close dealing. Well, I will be there.
My Nil, I take my leave: and Master Sheriff,
Let not her Penance exceed the Kings Commission.
And't please your Grace, here my Commission stays:
And Sir Iohn Stanly is appointed now,
To take her with him to the Isle of Man.
Must you, Sir Iohn, protect my Lady here?
So am I given in charge, may it please your Grace.
Entreat her not the worse, in that I pray
You use her well: the World may laugh again,
And I may live to doe you kindness, if you doe it her.
And so Sir Iohn, farewell.
What, gone my Lord, and bid me not farewell?
Witness my tears, I cannot stay to speak.
Art thou gone to? all comfort go with thee,
For none abides with me: my Joy, is Death;
Death, at whose Name I oft have been afeared,
Because I wished this Worlds eternity.
Stanley, I prithee go, and take me hence,
I care not whither, for I beg no favour;
Only convey me where thou art commanded.
Why, Madame, that is to the Isle of Man,
There to be used according to your State.
That's bad enough, for I am but reproach:
And shall I then be used reproachfully?
Like to a Duchess, and Duke Humfreyes Lady,
According to that State you shall be used.
Sheriff farewell, and better then I fare,
Although thou hast been Conduct of my shame.
It is my Office, and Madame pardon me.
I, I, farewell, thy Office is discharged:
Come Stanley, shall we go?
Madame, your Penance done,
Throw off this Sheet,
And go we to attire you for our Journey.
My shame will not be shifted with my Sheet:
No, it will hang upon my richest Robes,
And show it self, attire me how I can.
Go, lead the way, I long to see my Prison.
I muse my Lord of Gloster is not come:
It is not his wont to be the hindmost man,
What ever occasion keeps him from vs now.
Can you not see? or will ye not observe
The strangeness of his altered Countenance?
With what a Majesty he bears himself,
How insolent of late he is become,
How proud, how peremptory, and unlike himself.
We know the time since he was mild and affable,
And if we did but glance a farre-off Look,
Immediately he was upon his Knee,
That all the Court admired him for submission.
But meet him now, and be it in the Morn,
When every one will give the time of day,
He knits bis Brow, and shows an angry Eye,
And passes by with stiff vnbowed Knee,
Disdaining duty that to vs belongs.
Small Cures are not regarded when they grynne,
But great men tremble when the Lyon rores,
And Humfrey is no little Man in England.
First note, that he is near you in descent,
And should you fall, he is the next will mount.
Me seems then, it is no Policy,
Respecting what a rancorous mind he bears,
And his advantage following your decease,
That he should come about your Royal Person,
Or be admitted to your Highness Council.
By flattery hath he won the Commons hearts:
And when he please to make Commotion,
It is to be feared they all will follow him.
Now it is the Spring, and Weeds are shallow-rooted,
Suffer them now, and they'll o're-grow the Garden,
And choke the Herbs for want of Husbandry.
The reverent care I bear unto my Lord,
Made me collect these dangers in the Duke.
If it be fond, call it a Women's fear:
Which fear, if better Reasons can supplant,
I will subscribe; and say I wronged the Duke.
My Lord of Suffolk, Buckingham, and York,
Reprove my allegation, if you can,
Or else conclude my words effectual.
Well hath your Highness seen into this Duke:
And had I first been put to speak my mind,
I think I should have told your Graces Tale.
The Duchess, by his subornation,
Upon my Life began her devilish practises:
Or if he were not privy to those Faults,
Yet by reputing of his high descent,
As next the King, he was successive Heir,
And such high vaunts of his Nobility,
Did instigate the Bedlam brainsick Duchess,
By wicked means to frame our Sovereigns fall.
Smooth runs the Water, where the Brooke is deep,
And in his simple show he harbours Treason.
The Fox barks not, when he would steal the Lamb.
No, no, my Sovereign, Glouster is a man
Vnsounded yet, and full of deep deceit.
Did he not, contrary to form of Law,
Devise strange deaths, for small offences done?
And did he not, in his Protectorship,
Levy great sums of Money through the Realm,
For Soldiers pay in France, and never sent it?
By means whereof, the Towns each day revolted.
Tut, these are petty faults to faults unknown,
Which time will bring to light in smooth Duke Humfrey.
My Lords at once: the care you have of vs,
To mow down Thorns that would annoy our Foot,
Is worthy praise: but shall I speak my conscience,
Our Kinsman Gloster is as innocent,
From meaning Treason to our Royal Person,
As is the sucking Lamb, or harmless Done:
The Duke is virtuous, mild, and too well given,
To dream on evil, or to work my downfall.
Ah what's more dangerous, then this fond affiance?
Seems he a Dove? his feathers are but borrowed,
For hoe's disposed as the hateful Raven.
Is he a Lamb? his Skin is surely lent him,
For hoe's inclined as is the ravenous Wolves.
Who cannot steal a shape, that means deceit?
Take heed, my Lord, the welfare of vs all,
Hangs on the cutting short that fraudful man.
All health unto my gracious Sovereign.
Welcome Lord Somerset: What News from France?
That all your Interest in those Territories,
Is utterly bereft you: all is lost.
Cold News, Lord Somerset: but Gods will be done.
Cold News for me: for I had hope of France,
As firmly as I hope for fertile England.
Thus are my Blossoms blasted in the Bud,
And Caterpillars eat my Leaves away:
But I will remedy this gear ere long,
Or sell my Title for a glorious Grave.
All happiness unto my Lord the King:
Pardon, my Liege, that I have stayed so long.
Nay Gloster, know that thou art come too soon,
Unless thou were more loyal then thou art:
I doe arrest thee of High Treason here.
Well Suffolk, thou shalt not see me blush,
Nor change my Countenance for this Arrest:
A Heart unspotted, is not easily daunted.
The purest Spring is not so free from mud,
As I am clear from Treason to my Sovereign.
Who can accuse me? wherein am I guilty?
It is thought, my Lord,
That you took Bribes of France,
And being Protector, stayed the Soldiers pay,
By means whereof, his Highness hath lost France.
Is it but thought so?
What are they that think it?
I never robed the Soldiers of their pay,
Nor ever had one penny Bribe from France.
So help me God, as I have watched the Night,
I, Night by Night, in studying good for England.
That Doyt that ere I wrested from the King,
Or any Great I hoarded to my use,
Be brought against me at my Trial day.
No: many a Pound of mine own proper store,
Because I would not tax the needy Commons,
Have I dis-pursed to the Garrisons,
And never asked for restitution.
It serves you well, my Lord, to say so much.
I say no more then truth, so help me God.
In your Protectorship, you did devise
Strange Tortures for Offenders, never heard of,
That England was defamed by Tyranny.
Why it is well known, that whiles I was Protector,
Pity was all the fault that was in me:
For I should melt at an Offenders tears,
And lowly words were Ransom for their fault:
Unless it were a bloody Murderer,
Or foul felonious Thief, that fleeced poor passengers,
I never gave them condign punishment.
Murder indeed, that bloody sin, I tortured
Aboue the Felon, or what Trespass else.
My Lord, these faults are easy, quickly answered:
But mightier Crimes are laid unto your charge,
Whereof you cannot easily purge your self.
I doe arrest you in his Highness Name,
And here commit you to my Lord Cardinal
To keep, until your further time of Trial.
My Lord of Gloster, it is my special hope,
That you will clear your self from all suspense,
My Conscience tells me you are innocent.
Ah gracious Lord, these days are dangerous:
Virtue is choked with foul Ambition,
And Charity chased hence by Rancours hand;
Foul Subornation is predominant,
And Equity exiled your Highness Land.
I know, their Complot is to have my Life:
And if my death might make this Island happy,
And prove the Period of their Tyranny,
I would expend it with all willingness,
But mine is made the Prologue to their Play:
For thousands more, that yet suspect no peril,
Will not conclude their plotted Tragedy.
Beaufords red sparkling eyes blab his hearts malice,
And Suffolks cloudy Brow his stormy hate;
Sharpe Buckingham vnburthens with his tongue,
The envious Load that lies upon his heart:
And dogged York, that reaches at the Moon,
Whose ouer-weening Arm I have pluckt-back,
By false accuse doth level at my Life.
And you, my Sovereign Lady, with the rest,
Causeless have laid disgraces on my head,
And with your best endeavour have stirred up
My liefest Liege to be mine Enemy:
I, all of you have laid your heads together,
My self had notice of your Conventicles,
And all to make away my guiltless Life.
I shall not want false Witness, to condemn me,
Nor store of Treasons, to augment my guilt:
The ancient Proverb will be well effected,
A Staff is quickly found to beat a Dog.
My Liege, his railing is intolerable.
If those that care to keep your Royal Person
From Treasons secret Knife, and Traitors Rage,
Be thus upbraided, chid, and rated at,
And the Offender granted scope of speech,
Twill make them cool in zeal unto your Grace.
Hath he not twit our Sovereign Lady here
With ignominious words, though Clarkely couched?
As if she had suborned some to swear
False allegations, to o'rethrow his state.
But I can give the loser leave to chide.
Far truer spoke then meant: I lose indeed,
Beshrew the winners, for they played me false,
And well such losers may have leave to speak.
He will wrest the sense, and hold vs here all day.
Lord Cardinal, he is your Prisoner.
Sirs, take away the Duke, and guard him sure.
Ah, thus King Henry throws away his Crutch,
Before his Legs be firm to bear his Body.
Thus is the Shepherd beaten from thy side,
And Wolves are gnarling, who shall gnaw thee first.
Ah that my fear were false, ah that it were;
For good King Henry, thy decay I fear.
My Lords, what to your wisdoms seems best,
Doe, or undo, as if our self were here.
What, will your Highness leave the Parleymeant?
I Margaret: my heart is drowned with grief,
Whose flood begins to flow within mine eyes;
My Body round engyrt with misery:
For what's more miserable then Discontent?
Ah Uncle Humfrey, in thy face I see
The Map of Honour, Truth, and Loyalty:
And yet, good Humfrey, is the hour to come,
That ere I proved thee false, or feared thy faith.
What lowering Star now envies thy estate?
That these great Lords, and Margaret our Queen,
Doe seek subversion of thy harmless Life.
Thou never did them wrong, nor no man wrong:
And as the Butcher takes away the Calfe,
And binds the Wretch, and beats it when it strays,
Bearing it to the bloody Slaughter-house;
Even so remorseless have they borne him hence:
And as the Damme runs lowing up and down,
Looking the way her harmless young one went,
And can doe nought but whale her Darlings loss;
Even so my self bewails good Glosters case
With sad vnhelpefull tears, and with dimn'd eyes;
Look after him, and cannot doe him good:
So mighty are his vowed Enemies.
His fortunes I will weep, and twixt each groan,
Say, who's a Traitor? Gloster he is none.
Free Lords:
Cold Snow melts with the Suns hot Beams:
Henry, my Lord, is cold in great Affairs,
Too full of foolish pity: and Glosters show
Beguiles him, as the mournful Crocodile
With sorrow snares relenting passengers;
Or as the Snake, rolled in a flowering Bank,
With shining checkered slough doth sting a Child,
That for the beauty thinks it excellent.
Believe me Lords, were none more wise then I,
And yet herein I judge mine own Wit good;
This Gloster should be quickly rid the World,
To rid vs from the fear we have of him.
That he should dye, is worthy policy,
But yet we want a Colour for his death:
It is meet he be condemned by course of Law.
But in my mind, that were no policy:
The King will labour still to save his Life,
The Commons happily rise, to save his Life;
And yet we have but trivial argument,
More then mistrust, that shows him worthy death.
So that by this, you would not have him dye.
Ah York, no man alive, so fine as I.
It is York that hath more reason for his death.
But my Lord Cardinal, and you my Lord of Suffolk,
Say as you think, and speak it from your Souls:
Were it not all one, an empty Eagle were set,
To guard the Chicken from a hungry Kite,
As place Duke Humfrey for the Kings Protector?
So the poor Chicken should be sure of death.
Madame it is true: and were it not madness then,
To make the Fox surveyor of the Fold?
Who being accused a crafty Murderer,
His guilt should be but idly posted over,
Because his purpose is not executed.
No: let him dye, in that he is a Fox,
By nature proved an Enemy to the Flock,
Before his Chaps be stained with Crimson blood,
As Humfrey proved by Reasons to my Liege.
And doe not stand on Quillets how to slay him:
Be it by Gins, by Snares, by Subtlety,
Sleeping, or Waking, it is no matter how,
So he be dead; for that is good deceit,
Which mates him first, that first intends deceit,
Thrice Noble Suffolk, it is resolutely spoke.
Not resolute, except so much were done,
For things are often spoke, and seldom meant,
But that my heart accords with my tongue,
Seeing the deed is meritorious,
And to preserve my Sovereign from his Foe,
Say but the word, and I will be his Priest.
But I would have him dead, my Lord of Suffolk,
Ere you can take due Orders for a Priest:
Say you consent, and censure well the deed,
And Isle provide his Executioner,
I tender so the safety of my Liege.
Here is my Hand, the deed is worthy doing.
And so say I.
And I: and now we three have spoke it,
It skills not greatly who impugns our doom.
Great Lords, from Ireland am I come amain,
To signify, that Rebels there are up,
And put the Englishmen unto the Sword.
Send Succours (Lords) and stop the Rage betime,
Before the Wound doe grow uncurable;
For being greene, there is great hope of help.
A Breach that craves a quick expedient stop.
What counsel give you in this weighty cause?
That Somerset be sent as Regent thither:
It is meet that lucky Ruler be employed,
Witness the fortune he hath had in France.
If York, with all his farre-fet policy,
Had been the Regent there, in stead of me,
He never would have stayed in France so long.
No, not to lose it all, as thou hast done,
I rather would have lost my Life betimes,
Then bring a burden of dis-honour home,
By staying there so long, till all were lost.
Show me one scar, character'd on thy Skin,
Men's flesh preserved so whole, doe seldom win.
Nay then, this spark will prove a raging fire,
If Wind and Fuel be brought, to feed it with:
No more, good York; sweet Somerset be still.
Thy fortune, York, had thou been Regent there,
Might happily have proved far worse then his.
What, worse then nought? nay, then a shame take all.
And in the number, thee, that wish shame.
My Lord of York, try what your fortune is:
The uncivil Kernes of Ireland are in Arms,
And temper Clay with blood of Englishmen.
To Ireland will you lead a Band of men,
Collected choicely, from each County some,
And try your hap against the Irishmen
I will, my Lord, so please his Majesty.
Why, our Authority is his consent,
And what we doe establish, he confirms:
Then, Noble York, take thou this Task in hand.
I am content: Provide me Soldiers, Lords,
Whiles I take order for mine own affairs.
A charge, Lord York, that I will see performed.
But now return we to the false Duke Humfrey.
No more of him: for I will deal with him,
That henceforth he shall trouble vs no more:
And so break off, the day is almost spent,
Lord Suffolk, you and I must talk of that event.
My Lord of Suffolk, within fourteen days
At Bristow I expect my Soldiers,
For there Isle ship them all for Ireland.
Isle see it truly done, my Lord of York.
Now York, or never, steel thy fearful thoughts,
And change misdoubt to resolution;
Be that thou hop'st to be, or what thou art;
Resign to death, it is not worth the enjoying:
Let pale-fac't fear keep with the meane-borne man,
And find no harbour in a Royal heart.
Faster the Spring-time showers, comes thought on thought,
And not a thought, but thinks on Dignity.
My Brain, more busy then the laboring Spider,
Weaues tedious Snares to trap mine Enemies.
Well Nobles, well: it is politically done,
To send me packing with an Host of men:
I fear me, you but warm the starved Snake,
Who cherished in your breasts, will sting your hearts.
It was men I lacked, and you will give them me;
I take it kindly: yet be well assured,
You put sharpe Weapons in a mad-mans hands.
Whiles I in Ireland nourish a mighty Band,
I will stir up in England some black Storm,
Shall blow ten thousand Souls to Heaven, or Hell:
And this fell Tempest shall not cease to rage,
Until the Golden Circuit on my Head,
Like to the glorious Suns transparent Beams,
Doe calm the fury of this mad-bred Flaw.
And for a minister of my intent,
I have seduced a head-strong Kentishman,
Iohn Cade of Ashford,
To make Commotion, as full well he can,
Under the Title of Iohn Mortimer.
In Ireland have I seen this stubborn Cade
Oppose himself against a Troupe of Kernes,
And fought so long, till that his thighs with Darts
Were almost like a sharpe-quill'd Porpentine:
And in the end being rescued, I have seen
Him copra upright, like a wilde Morisco,
Shaking the bloody Darts, as he his Bells.
Full often, like a shag-hayr'd crafty Kern,
Hath he conversed with the Enemy,
And undiscovered, come to me again,
And given me notice of their Villainies.
This Devil here shall be my substitute;
For that Iohn Mortimer, which now is dead,
In face, in gate, in speech he doth resemble.
By this, I shall perceive the Commons mind,
How they affect the House and Claye of York.
Say he be taken, racked, and tortured;
I know, no pain they can inflict upon him,
Will make him say, I moved him to those Arms.
Say that he thrive, as it is great like he will,
Why then from Ireland come I with my strength,
And reap the Harvest which that Rascal sowed.
For Humfrey; being dead, as he shall be,
And Henry put apart: the next for me.
Run to my Lord of Suffolk: let him know
We have dispatcht the Duke, as he commanded
Oh, that it were to doe: what have we done?
Did ever hear a man so penitent?
Here comes my Lord.
Now Sirs, have you dispatcht this thing?
I, my good Lord, hoe's dead.
Why that's well said. Go, get you to my House,
I will reward you for this venturous deed:
The King and all the Peers are here at hand.
Have you laid fair the Bed? Is all things well,
According as I gave directions?
It is, my good Lord.
Away, be gone.
Go call our Uncle to our presence straight:
Say, we intend to try his Grace to day,
If he be guilty, as it is published.
Isle call him presently, my Noble Lord.
Lords take your places: and I pray you all
Proceed no straiter against our Uncle Gloster,
Then from true evidence, of good esteem,
He be approved in practise culpable.
God forbid any Malice should prevail,
That faultless may condemn a Noble man:
Pray God he may acquit him of suspicion.
I thank thee Nil, these words content me much.
How now? why look thou pale? why tremble thou?
Where is our Uncle? what's the matter, Suffolk?
Dead in his Bed, my Lord: Gloster is dead.
Marry God forfend.
Gods secret Judgment: I did dream to Night,
The Duke was dumb, and could not speak a word.
How fares my Lord? Help Lords, the King is dead.
Rear up his Body, wring him by the Nose.
Run, go, help, help: Oh Henry op thine eyes.
He doth revive again, Madame be patient.
Oh Heavenly God.
How fares my gracious Lord?
Comfort my Sovereign, gracious Henry comfort.
What, doth my Lord of Suffolk comfort me?
Came he right now to sing a Ravens Note,
Whose dismal tune bereft my Vital powers:
And thinks he, that the chirping of a Wren,
By crying comfort from a hollow breast,
Can chase away the first-conceiued sound?
Hide not thy poison with such sugared words,
Lay not thy hands on me: forbear I say,
Their touch affrights me as a Serpents sting.
Thou baleful Messenger, out of my sight:
Upon thy eye-balls, murderous Tyranny
Sits in grim Majesty, to fright the World.
Look not upon me, for thine eyes are wounding;
Yet doe not go away: come Basilisk,
And kill the innocent gazer with thy sight:
For in the shade of death, I shall find joy;
In life, but double death, now Gloster's dead.
Why do you rate my Lord of Suffolk thus?
Although the Duke was enemy to him,
Yet he most Christian-like laments his death:
And for my self, Foe as he was to me,
Might liquid tears, or heart-offending groans,
Or blood-consuming sighs recall his Life;
I would be blind with weeping, sick with groans,
Look pale as Prim-rose with blood-drinking sighs,
And all to have the Noble Duke alive.
What know I how the world may deem of me?
For it is known we were but hollow Friends:
It may be judged I made the Duke away,
So shall my name with Slanders tongue be wounded,
And Princes Courts be filled with my reproach:
This get I by his death: Aye me unhappy,
To be a Queen, and Crowned with infamy.
Ah woe is me for Gloster, wretched man.
Be woe for me, more wretched then he is.
What, Dost thou turn away, and hide thy face?
I am no loathsome Leper, look on me.
What? Art thou like the Adder waxen deaf?
Be poisonous too, and kill thy forlorn Queen.
Is all thy comfort shut in Glosters Tomb?
Why then Dame Eleanor was near thy joy.
Erect his Statue, and worship it,
And make my Image but an Ale-house sign.
Was I for this ny wracked upon the Sea,
And twice by awkward wind from Englands bank
Drove back again unto my Native Clime.
What boaded this? but well fore-warning wind
Did seem to say, seek not a Scorpions Nest,
Nor set no footing on this unkind Shore.
What did I then? But cursed the gentle gusts,
And he that loosed them forth their Brazen Caves,
And bid them blow towards Englands blessed shore,
Or turn our Sterne upon a dreadful Rock:
Yet Aeolus would not be a murderer,
But left that hateful office unto thee.
The pretty vaulting Sea refused to drown me,
Knowing that thou would have me drowned on shore
With tears as salt as Sea, through thy unkindness.
The splitting Rocks cowr'd in the sinking sands,
And would not dash me with their ragged sides,
Because thy flinty heart more hard then they,
Might in thy Palace, perish Eleanor.
As far as I could ken thy Chalky Cliffs,
When from thy Shore, the Tempest beat vs back,
I stood upon the Hatches in the storm:
And when the dusky sky, began to rob
My earnest-gaping-sight of thy Lands view,
I took a costly Jewel from my neck,
A Hart it was bound in with Diamonds,
And threw it towards thy Land: The Sea received it,
And so I wished thy body might my Heart:
And even with this, I lost fair Englands view,
And bid mine eyes be packing with my Heart,
And called them blind and dusky Spectacles,
For loosing ken of Albions wished Coast.
How often have I tempted Suffolkes tongue
(The agent of thy foul inconstancy)
To sit and watch me as Ascanius did,
When he to matting Dido would unfold
His Fathers Acts, commenced in burning Troy.
Am I not witched like her? Or thou not false like him?
Aye me, I can no more: Dye Elinor,
For Henry weeps, that thou dost live so long.
It is reported, mighty Sovereign,
That good Duke Humfrey Traitorously is murdered
By Suffolk, and the Cardinal Beaufords means:
The Commons like an angry Hive of Bees
That want their Leader, scatter up and down,
And care not who they sting in his revenge.
My self have calmed their spleenfull mutiny,
Until they hear the order of his death.
That he is dead good Warwick, it is too true,
But how he dyed, God knows, not Henry:
Enter his Chamber, view his breathless Corpse,
And comment then upon his sudden death.
That shall I do my Liege; Stay Salsburie
With the rude multitude, till I return.
O thou that judge all things, stay my thoughts;
My thoughts, that labour to persuade my soul,
Some violent hands were laid on Humfries life:
If my suspect be false, forgive me God,
For judgment only doth belong to thee:
Fine would I go to chafe his paly lips,
With twenty thousand kisses, and to drain
Upon his face an Ocean of salt tears,
To tell my love unto his dumb deaf trunk,
And with my fingers feel his hand, unfeeling:
But all in vain are these mean Obsequies,
And to survey his dead and earthy Image:
What were it but to make my sorrow greater?
Come hither gracious Sovereign, view this body.
That is to see how deep my grave is made,
For with his soul fled all my worldly solace:
For seeing him, I see my life in death.
As surely as my soul intends to live
With that dread King that took our state upon him,
To free vs from his Fathers wrathful curse,
I do believe that violent hands were laid
Upon the life of this thrice-famed Duke.
A dreadful Oath, sworn with a solemn tongue:
What instance gives Lord Warwick for his vow.
See how the blood is settled in his face.
Oft have I seen a timely-parted Ghost,
Of ashy semblance, meager, pale, and bloodless,
Being all descended to the labouring heart,
Who in the Conflict that it holds with death,
Attracts the same for aydance against the enemy,
Which with the heart there cools, and ne'er returns,
To blush and beautify the Cheek again.
But see, his face is black, and full of blood:
His eye-balles further out, than when he lived,
Staring full ghastly, like a strangled man:
His hair up reared, his nostrils stretched with struggling:
His hands abroad displayed, as one that grasped
And tugged for Life, and was by strength subdued.
Look on the sheets his hair (you see) is sticking,
His well proportioned Beard, made ruff and rugged,
Like to the Summers Come by Tempest lodged:
It cannot be but he was murdered here,
The least of all these signs were probable.
Why Warwick, who should do the D. to death?
My self and Beauford had him in protection,
And we I hope sir, are no murderers.
But both of you were vowed D. Humfries foes,
And you (forsooth) had the good Duke to keep:
Tic like you would not feast him like a friend,
And it is well seen, he found an enemy.
Than you belike suspect these Noblemen,
As guilty of Duke Humfries timeless death.
Who finds the Heifer dead, and bleeding fresh,
And sees fast-by, a Butcher with an Axe,
But will suspect, it was he that made the slaughter?
Who finds the Partridge in the Puttocks Nest,
But may imagine how the Bird was dead,
Although the Kite soar with vnbloudied Beak?
Even so suspicious is this Tragedy.
Are you the Butcher, Suffolk? whore's your Knife?
Is Beauford termed a Kite? where are his Talons?
I wear no Knife, to slaughter sleeping men,
But here's a vengeful Sword, rusted with ease,
That shall be scoured in his rancorous heart,
That slanders me with Murders Crimson Badge.
Say, if thou dare, proud Lord of Warwickshire,
That I am faulty in Duke Humfreyes death.
What dares not Warwick, if false Suffolk dare him?
He dares not calm his contumelious Spirit,
Nor cease to be an arrogant Controller,
Though Suffolk dare him twenty thousand times.
Madame be still: with reverence may I say,
For every word you speak in his behalf,
Is slander to your Royal Dignity.
Blunt-witted Lord, ignoble in demeanour,
If ever Lady wronged her Lord so much,
Thy Mother took into her blameful Bed
Some sterne vntutur'd Churl; and Noble Stock
Was graft with Crab-tree slip, whose Fruit thou art,
And never of the Novels Noble Race.
But that the guilt of Murder bucklers thee,
And I should rob the Deaths-man of his Fee,
Quitting thee thereby of ten thousand shames,
And that my Sovereigns presence makes me mild,
I would, false murderous Coward, on thy Knee
Make thee beg pardon for thy passed speech,
And say, it was thy Mother that thou meant,
That thou thy self wast borne in Bastardy;
And after all this fearful Homage done,
Give thee thy hire, and send thy Soul to Hell,
Pernicious blood-sucker of sleeping men.
Thou shalt be waking, while I shed thy blood,
If from this presence thou dare go with me.
Away even now, or I will drag thee hence:
Unworthy though thou art, Isle cope with thee,
And doe some service to Duke Humfreyes Ghost.
What stronger Brest-plate then a heart untainted?
Thrice is he armed, that hath his Quarrel just;
And he but naked, though locked up in Steel,
Whose Conscience with Injustice is corrupted.
What noise is this?
Why how now Lords?
Your wrathful Weapons drawn,
Here in our presence? Dare you be so bold?
Why what tumultuous clamour have we here?
The trayt'rous Warwick, with the men of Bury,
Set all upon me, mighty Sovereign.
Sirs stand apart, the King shall know your mind.
Dread Lord, the Commons send you word by me,
Unless Lord Suffolk straight be done to death,
Or banished fair Englands Territories,
They will by violence tear him from your Palace,
And torture him with grievous lingering death.
They say, by him the good Duke Humfrey dyed:
They say, in him they fear your Highness death;
And mere instinct of Love and Loyalty,
Free from a stubborn opposite intent,
As being thought to contradict your liking,
Makes them thus forward in his Banishment.
They say, in care of your most Royal Person,
That if your Highness should intend to sleep,
And charge, that no man should disturb your rest,
In pain of your dislike, or pain of death;
Yet notwithstanding such a strait Edict,
Were there a Serpent seen, with forked Tongue,
That slyly glided towards your Majesty,
It were but necessary you were waked:
Least being suffered in that harmful slumber,
The mortal Worm might make the sleep eternal.
And therefore doe they cry, though you forbid,
That they will guard you, where you will, or no,
From such fell Serpents as false Suffolk is;
With whose inuenomed and fatal sting,
Your loving Uncle, twenty times his worth,
They say is shamefully bereft of life.
An answer from the King, my Lord of Salisbury.
It is like the Commons, rude unpolished Hinds,
Could send such Message to their Sovereign:
But you, my Lord, were glad to be employed,
To show how quaint an Orator you are.
But all the Honour Salisbury hath won,
Is, that he was the Lord Ambassador,
Sent from a sort of Tinkers to the King.
An answer from the King, or wee will all break in.
Go Salisbury and tell them all from me,
I thank them for their tender loving care;
And had I not been cited so by them,
Yet did I purpose as they doe entreat:
For sure, my thoughts doe hourly prophecy,
Mischance unto my State by Suffolkes means.
And therefore by his Majesty I swear,
Whose farre-vnworthie Deputy I am,
He shall not breathe infection in this ayre,
But three days longer, on the pain of death.
Oh Henry, let me plead for gentle Suffolk.
Ungentle Queen, to call him gentle Suffolk.
No more I say if thou dost plead for him,
Thou wilt but add increase unto my Wrath.
Had I but said, I would have kept my Word;
But when I swear, it is irrevocable:
If after three days space thou here be found,
On any ground that I am Ruler of,
The World shall not be Ransom for thy Life.
Come Warwick come good Warwick, go with me,
I have great matters to impart to thee.
Mischance and Sorrow go along with you,
Hearts Discontent, and sour Affliction,
Be play-fellowes to keep you company:
There's two of you, the Devil make a third,
And three-fold Vengeance tend upon your steps.
Cease, gentle Queen, these Execrations,
And let thy Suffolk take his heavy leave.
Fie Coward woman, and soft hared wretch,
Hast thou not spirit to curse thine enemy.
A plague upon them: wherefore should I curse them?
Would curses kill, as doth the Mandrakes groan,
I would invent as bitter searching terms,
As cursed, as harsh, and horrible to hear,
Delivered strongly through my fixed teeth,
With full as many fignes of deadly hate,
As leane-fac'd envy in her loathsome cave.
My tongue should stumble in mine earnest words,
Mine eyes should sparkle like the beaten Flint,
Mine hair be fixed an end, as one distract:
I, every joint should seem to curse and ban,
And even now my burdened heart would break
Should I not curse them. Poison be their drink.
Gall, worse then Gall, the daintiest that they taste:
Their sweetest shade, a grove of Cypress Trees:
Their chiefest Prospect, murd'ring Basilisks:
Their softest Touch, as smart as Lizards stings:
Their Music, frightful as the Serpents hiss,
And boding Screech-Owles, make the Consort full.
All the foul terrors in dark seated hell
Enough sweet Suffolk, thou torment thy self,
And these dread curses like the Sun against glass,
Or like an overcharged Gun, recoil,
And turns the force of them upon thy self.
You bad me ban, and will you bid me leave?
Now by the ground that I am banished from,
Well could I curse away a Winters night,
Though standing naked on a Mountain top,
Where biting cold would never let grass grow,
And think it but a minute spent in sport.
Oh, let me entreat thee cease, give me thy hand,
That I may dew it with my mournful teaes:
Nor let the rain of heaven wet this place,
To wash away my woeful Monuments.
Oh, could this kiss be printed in thy hand,
That thou might think upon these by the Seal,
Through whom a thousand sighs are breathed for thee.
So get thee gone, that I may know my grief,
It is but surmised, whiles thou art standing by,
As one that surfeits, thinking on a want:
I will repeal thee, or be well assured,
Adventure to be banished my self:
And banished I am, if but from thee.
Go, speak not to me; even now be gone.
Oh go not yet. Even thus, two Friends condemned,
Embrace, and kiss, and take ten thousand leaves,
Loather a hundred times to part then dye;
Yet now farewell, and farewell Life with thee.
Thus is poor Suffolk ten times banished,
Once by the King, and three times thrice by thee.
It is not the Land I care for, were it thou thence,
A Wilderness is populous enough,
So Suffolk had thy heavenly company:
For where thou art, there is the World it self,
With every several pleasure in the World:
And where thou art not, Desolation.
I can no more: Live thou to joy thy life;
My self no joy in nought, but that thou liu'st.
Whether goes Wax so fast? What news I prithee?
To signify unto his Majesty,
That Cardinal Beauford is at point of death:
For suddenly a grievous sickness took him,
That makes him gasp, and stare, and catch the air,
Blaspheming God, and cursing men on earth.
Sometime he talks, as if Duke Humfries Ghost
Were by his side: Sometime, he calls the King,
And whispers to his pillow, as to him,
The secrets of his overcharged soul,
And I am sent to tell his Majesty,
That even now he cries aloud for him.
Go tell this heavy Message to the King.
Aye me! What is this World? What news are these?
But wherefore grieve I at an hours poor loss,
Omitting Suffolkes exile, my souls Treasure?
Why only Suffolk morn I not for thee?
And with the Southern clouds, contend in tears?
Theirs for the earths increase, mine for my sorrows.
Now get thee hence, the King thou know is coming,
If thou be found by me, thou art but dead.
If I depart from thee, I cannot live,
And in thy sight to dye, what were it else,
But like a pleasant slumber in thy lap?
Here could I breath my soul into the ayre,
As mild and gentle as the Cradle-babe,
Dying with mothers dug between it's lips.
Where from thy sight, I should be raging mad,
And cry out for thee to close up mine eyes:
To have thee with thy lips to stop my mouth:
So should thou either turn my flying soul,
Or I should breathe it so into thy body,
And then it lived in sweet Elizium.
To dye by thee, were but to dye in jest,
From thee to dye, were torture more then death:
Oh let me stay, befall what may befall.
Away: Though parting be a fretful corrosive,
Ir is applied to a deathful wound.
To France sweet Suffolk: Let me hear from thee:
For wheresoever thou art in this worlds Globe,
Isle have an Iris that shall find thee out.
I go.
And take my heart with thee.
A Jewel locked into the woefullest Cask,
That ever did contain a thing of worth,
Even as a splitted Bark, so sunder we:
This way fall I to death.
This way for me.
How fare's my Lord? Speak Beauford to thy Sovereign.
If thou be death, Isle give thee Englands Treasure,
Enough to purchase such another Island,
So thou wilt let me live, and feel no pain.
Ah, what a sign it is of evil life,
Where death's approach is seen so terrible.
Beauford, it is thy Sovereign speaks to thee.
Bring me unto my Trial when you will.
Dyed he not in his bed? Where should he dye?
Can I make men live where they will or no?
Oh torture me no more, I will confess.
Alive again? Then show me where he is,
Isle give a thousand pound to look upon him.
He hath no eyes, the dust hath blinded them.
Comb down his hair; look, look, it stands upright,
Like Lime-twigs set to catch my winged soul:
Give me some drink, and bid the Apothecary
Bring the strong poison that I bought of him.
Oh thou eternal mover of the heavens,
Look with a gentle eye upon this Wretch,
Oh beat away the busy meddling Fiend,
That lays strong siege unto this wretches soul,
And from his bosom purge this black despair.
See how the pangs of death do make him grin.
Disturb him not, let him pass peaceably.
Peace to his soul, if Gods good pleasure be.
Lord Cardinal, if thou think on heavens bliss,
Hold up thy hand, make signal of thy hope.
He dies and makes no sign: Oh God forgive him.
So bad a death, argues a monstrous life.
Forbear to judge, for we are sinners all.
Close up his eyes, and draw the Curtain close,
And let vs all to Meditation.
The gaudy blabbing and remorseful day,
Is crept into the bosom of the Sea:
And now loud howling Wolves arouse the Jade
That drag the Tragic melancholy night:
Who with their drowsy, slow, and flagging wings
Cleape deadmen's graves, and from their misty Jaws,
Breath foul contagious darkness in the ayre:
Therefore bring forth the Soldiers of our prize,
For whilst our Pinnace Anchors in the Downs,
Here shall they make their ransom on the sand,
Or with their blood stain this discoloured shore.
Moister, this Prisoner freely give I thee,
And thou that art his Mate, make boot of this:
The other Walter Whitmore is thy share.
What is my ransom Master, let me know.
A thousand Crowns, or else lay down your head
And so much shall you give, or oft goes yours.
What think you much to pay 2000. Crowns,
And bear the name and port of Gentlemen?
Cut both the Villains throats, for die you shall:
The lives of those which we have lost in fight,
Be counter-poys'd with such a petty sum.
Isle give it sir, and therefore spare my life.
And so will I, and write home for it straight.
I lost mine eye in laying the prize aboard,
And therefore to revenge it, shalt thou dye,
And so should these, if I might have my will.
Be not so rash, take ransom, let him live.
Look on my George, I am a Gentleman,
Rate me at what thou wilt, thou shalt be payed.
And so am I: my name is Walter Whitmore.
How now? why starts thou? What doth death affright?
Thy name affrights me, in whose sound is death:
A cunning man did calculate my birth,
And told me that by Water I should dye:
Yet let not this make thee be bloody-minded,
Thy name is Guiltier, being rightly sounded.
Guiltier or Walter, which it is I care not,
Never yet did base dishonour blur our name,
But with our sword we wiped away the blot.
Therefore, when Merchant-like I sell revenge,
Broke be my sword, my Arms torn and defaced,
And I proclaimed a Coward through the world.
Stay Whitmore, for thy Prisoner is a Prince,
The Duke of Suffolk, William de la Pole.
The Duke of Suffolk, muffled up in rags?
I, but these rags are no part of the Duke.
But Jove was never slain as thou shalt be,
Obscure and lousy Swain, King Henries blood.
The honourable blood of Lancaster
Must not be shed by such a iaded Groom:
Hast thou not kissed thy hand, and held my stirrup?
Bare-headed plodded by my foot-cloth Mule,
And thought thee happy when I shook my head.
How often hast thou waited at my cup,
Fed from my Trencher, kneeled down at the board,
When I have feasted with Queen Margaret?
Remember it, and let it make thee Crestfallen,
I, and allay this thy abortive Pride:
How in our voiding Lobby hast thou stood,
And duly waited for my coming forth?
This hand of mine hath writ in thy behalf,
And therefore shall it charm thy riotous tongue.
Speak Captain, shall I stab the forlorn Swain.
First let my words stab him, as he hath me.
Base slave, thy words are blunt, and so art thou.
Convey him hence, and on our long boats side,
Strike off his head.
Thou dare not for thy own.
Poole, Sir Poole? Lord,
I kennel, puddle, sink, whose filth and dirt
Troubles the silver Spring, where England drinks:
Now will I dam up this thy yawning mouth,
For swallowing the Treasure of the Realm.
Thy lips that kissed the Queen, shall sweep the ground:
And thou that smil'dst at good Duke Humfries death,
Against the senseless winds shall grin in vain,
Who in contempt shall hiss at thee again.
And wedded be thou to the Hags of hell,
For daring to affy a mighty Lord
Unto the daughter of a worthless King,
Having neither Subject, Wealth, nor Diadem:
By devilish policy art thou grown great,
And like ambitious Sylla ouer-gorg'd,
With gobbets of thy Mother-bleeding heart.
By thee Aniou and Maine were sold to France.
The false revolting Normans thorough thee,
Disdain to call vs Lord, and Piccardie
Hath slain their Governors, surprised our Forts,
And sent the ragged Soldiers wounded home.
The Princely Warwick, and the Novels all,
Whose dreadful swords were never drawn in vain,
As hating thee, and rising up in arms:
And now the House of York thrust from the Crown,
By shameful murder of a guiltless King,
And lofty proud encroaching tyranny,
Burns with revenging fire, whose hopeful colours
Advance our halfe-fac'd Sun, striving to shine;
Under the which is writ, Invites nubibus.
The Commons here in Kent are up in arms,
And to conclude, Reproach and Beggary,
Is crept into the Palace of our King,
And all by thee: away, convey him hence.
O that I were a God, to shoot forth Thunder
Upon these paltry, servile, abject Drudges:
Small things make base men proud. This Villain here,
Being Captain of a Pinnace, threatens more
Then Bargulus the strong Illyrian Pirate.
Drones suck not Eagles blood, but rob Bee-hiues:
It is impossible that I should dye
By such a lowly Vassal as thy self.
Thy words move Rage, and not remorse in me:
I go of Message from the Queen to France:
I charge thee waft me safely cross the Channel.
Water: W. Come Suffolk, I must waft thee to thy death.
Pine gelidus timor occupied artus, it is thee I fear.
Thou shalt have cause to fear before I leave thee.
What, are ye daunted now? Now will ye stoop.
My gracious Lord entreat him, speak him fair.
Suffolkes Imperial tongue is sterne and rough:
Used to command, untaught to plead for favour.
Far be it, we should honour such as these
With humble suite: no, rather let my head
Stoop to the block, then these knees bow to any,
Save to the God of heaven, and to my King:
And sooner dance upon a bloody pole,
Then stand uncovered to the Vulgar Groom.
True Nobility, is exempt from fear:
More can I bear, then you dare execute.
Hale him away, and let him talk no more:
Come Soldiers, show what cruelty ye can.
That this my death may never be forgot.
Great men oft dye by wild Bezonions.
A Roman Sworder, and Bandetto slave
Murdered sweet Tully. Bruim Bastard hand
Stabbed Iulius Caesar. Savage Islanders
Pompey the Great, and Suffolk dyes by Pirates.
And as for these whose ransom we have set,
It is our pleasure one of them depart:
Therefore come you with vs, and let him go.
There let his head, and lifeless body lye,
Until the Queen his Mistress bury it.
O barbarous and bloody spectacle,
His body will I bear unto the King:
If he revenge it not, yet will his Friends,
So will the Queen, that living, held him dear.
Come and get thee a sword, though made of a Lath, they have been up these two days.
They have the more need to sleep now then.
I tell thee, Jack Cade the Cloathier, means to dress the Common-wealth and turn it, and set a new nap upon it.
So he had need, for it is thred-bare. Well, I say, it was never merry world in England, since Gentlemen came up.
O miserable Age: Virtue is not regarded in Handy-crafts men.
The Nobility think scorn to go in Leather Aprons.
Nay more, the Kings Council are no good Workmen.
True: and yet it is said, Labour in thy Vocation: which is as much to say, as let the Magistrates be laboring men, and therefore should we be Magistrates.
Thou hast hit it: for there's no better sign of a brave mind, then a hard hand.
I see them, I see them: There's Bests Son, the Tanner of Wingham.
Hee shall have the skins of our enemies, to make Dogs Leather of.
And Dicke the Butcher.
Then is sin struck down like an Ox, and iniquites throat cut like a Calfe.
And Smith the Weaver.
Ergo, their thread of life is spun.
Come, come, let's fall in with them.
Wee Iohn Cade, so termed of our supposed Fathere.
Or rather of stealing a Cade of Herrings.
For our enemies shall fail before vs, inspired with the spirit of putting down Kings and Princes. Command silence.
Silence.
My Father was a Mortimer.
He was an honest man, and a good Bricklayer.
My mother a Plantagenet.
I knew her well, she was a Midwife.
My wife descended of the Laces.
She was indeed a Peddlers daughter, &amp; sold many Laces.
But now of late, not able to travel with her furred Pack, she washes bucks here at home.
Therefore am I of an honourable house.
I by my faith, the field is honourable, and there was he borne, under a hedge: for his Father had never a house but the Cage.
Valiant I am.
A must needs, for beggary is valiant.
I am able to endure much.
No question of that: for I have seen him whipped three Market days together.
I fear neither sword, nor fire.
He need not fear the sword, for his Coat is of proof.
But me thinks he should stand in fear of fire, being burnt in th hand for stealing of Sheep.
Be brave then, for your Captain is Brave, and Vows Reformation. There shall be in England, seven half penny Loaves sold for a penny: the three hooped pot, shall have ten hoops, and I will make it Felony to drink small Beer. All the Realm shall be in Common, and in Cheapside shall my Palfrey go to grass: and when I am King, as King I will be.
God save your Majesty.
I thank you good people. There shall bee no money, all shall eat and drink on my score, and I will apparel them all in one Livery, that they may agree like Brothers, and worship me their Lord.
The first thing we do, let's kill all the Lawyers.
Nay, that I mean to do. Is not this a lamentble thing, that of the skin of an innocent Lamb should be made Parchment; that Parchment being scribeld ore, should undo a man. Some say the Bee stings, but I say, it is the Bees wax: for I did but seal once to a thing, and I was never mine own man since. How now? Who's there?
The Clerk of Chartam: hee can write and read, and cast account.
O monstrous.
We took him setting of boys Copies.
Here's a Villain.
He's a Book in his pocket with red Letters in it
Nay then he is a Conjurer.
Nay, he can make Obligations, and write Court hand.
I am sorry for it: The man is a proper man of mine Honour: unless I find him guilty, he shall not die. Come hither sirrah, I must examine thee: What is thy name?
Emanuell.
They use to writ it on the top of Letters: Twill go hard with you.
Let me alone: Dost thou use to write thy name? Or hast thou a mark to thy self, like a honest plain dealing man?
Sir I thank God, I have bin so well brought up, that I can write my name.
He hath confessed: away with him: he's a Villain and a Traitor.
Away with him I say: Hang him with his Pen and Inke-horne about his neck.
Whore's our General?
Here I am thou particular fellow.
Fly, fly, fly, Sir Humfrey Stafford and his brother are hard by, with the Kings Forces.
Stand villain, stand, or Isle fell thee down: he shall be encountered with a man as good as himself. He is but a Knight, is a?
No.
To equal him I will make my self a knight presently; Rise up Sir Iohn Mortimer. Now have at him.
Rebellious Hinds, the filth and scum of Kent,
Marked for the Gallows: Lay your Weapons down,
Home to your Cottages: forsake this Groom.
The King is merciful, if you revolt.
But angry, wrathful, and inclined to blood,
If you go forward: therefore yield, or dye.
As for these silken-coated slaves I pass not,
It is to you good people, that I speak,
Over whom (in time to come) I hope to reign:
For I am rightful heir unto the Crown.
Villain, thy Father was a Plasterer,
And thou thy self a Sheareman, art thou not?
And Adam was a Gardiner.
And what of that?
Marry, this Edmund Mortimer Earl of March, married the Duke of Clarence daughter, did he not?
I sir.
By her he had two children at one birth.
That's false.
I, there's the question; But I say, it is true:
The elder of them being put to nurse,
Was by a begger-woman stolen away,
And ignorant of his birth and parentage,
Became a Bricklayer, when he came to age.
His son am I, deny it if you can.
Nay, it is too true, therefore he shall be King.
Sir, he made a Chimney in my Fathers house, &amp; the brickes are alive at this day to testify it: therefore deny it not.
And will you credit this base Drudges Words, that speaks he knows not what.
I marry will we: therefore get ye gone.
Jack Cade, the D. of York hath taught you this.
He lies, for I invented it my self. Go too Sirrah, tell the King from me, that for his Fathers sake Henrye the fifth, (in whose time, boys went to Span-counter for French Crowns) I am content he shall reign, but Isle be Protector over him:
And furthermore, we'll have the Lord Says head, for selling the Dukedom of Maine.
And good reason: for thereby is England main'd And fine to go with a staff, but that my puissance holds it up. Fellow-Kings, I tell you, that that Lord Say hath gelded the Commonwealth, and made it an Eunuch: &amp; more then that, he can speak French, and therefore hee is a Traitor.
O gross and miserable ignorance.
Nay answer if you can: The Frenchmen are our enemies: go too then, I ask but this: Can he that speaks with the tongue of an enemy, be a good Councellor, or no?
No, no, and therefore we'll have his head.
Well, seeing gentle words will not prevail,
Assail them with the Army of the King.
Herald away, and throughout every Town,
Proclaim them Traitors that are up with Cade,
That those which fly before the battle ends,
May even in their Wives and Childrens sight,
Be hanged up for example at their doors:
And you that be the Kings Friends follow me.
And you that love the Commons, follow me:
Now show your selves men, it is for Liberty.
We will not leave one Lord, one Gentleman:
Spare none, but such as go in clouted shooen,
For they are thrifty honest men, and such
As would (but that they dare not) take our parts.
They are all in order, and march toward vs.
But then are we in order, when we are most out of order. Come, march forward.
Whore's Dicke, the Butcher of Ashford?
Here sir.
They fell before thee like Sheep and Oxen, &amp; thou behaued'st thy self, as if thou had been in thine own Slaughter-house: Therefore thus will I reward thee, the Lent shall bee as long again as it is, and thou shalt have a License to kill for a hundred lacking one.
I desire no more.
And to speak truth, thou deserve no less. This Monument of the victory will I bear, and the bydies shall be dragged at my horse heals, till I do come to London, where we will have the Majors sword born before vs.
If we mean to thrive, and do good, break open the Gaols, and let out the Prisoners.
Fear not that I warrant thee. Come, let's march towards London.
Oft have I heard that grief softens the mind,
And makes it fearful and degenerate,
Think therefore on revenge, and cease to weep.
But who can cease to weep, and look on this.
Here may his head lye on my throbbing breast:
But whore's the body that I should embrace?
What answer makes your Grace to the Rebels Supplication?
Isle send some holy Bishop to entreat:
For God forbid, so many simple souls
Should perish by the Sword. And I my self,
Rather then bloody War shall cut them short,
Will parley with Jack Cade their General.
But stay, Isle read it over once again.
Ah barbarous villains: Hath this lovely face,
Ruled like a wandering Planet over me,
And could it not enforce them to relent,
That were unworthy to behold the same.
Lord Say, Jack Cade hath sworn to hue thy head.
I, but I hope your Highness shall have his.
How now Madam?
Still lamenting and mourning for Suffolkes death?
I fear me (Love) if that I had been dead,
Thou would not have mourned so much for me.
No my Love, I should not morn, but dye for thee.
How now? What news? Why come thou in such haste?
The Rebels are in Southwark: Fly my Lord:
Jack Cade proclaims himself Lord Mortimer,
Descended from the Duke of Clarence house,
And calls your Grace Usurper, openly,
And vows to Crown himself in Westminster.
His Army is a ragged multitude
Of Hinds and Peasants, rude and merciless:
Sir Humfrey Stafford, and his Brothers death,
Hath given them heart and courage to proceed:
All Scholars, Lawyers, Courtiers, Gentlemen,
They call false Caterpillars, and intend their death.
Oh graceless men: they know not what they do.
My gracious Lord, retire to Killingworth,
Until a power be raised to put them down.
Ah were the Duke of Suffolk now alive,
These Kentish Rebels would be soon appeased.
Lord Say, the Traitors hates thee,
Therefore away with vs to Killingworth.
So might your Graces person be in danger:
The sight of me is odious in their eyes:
And therefore in this City will I stay,
And live alone as secret as I may.
Jack Cade hath gotten London-bridge.
The Citizens fly and forsake their houses:
The Rascal people, thirsting after prey,
Join with the Traitor, and they jointly swear
To spoil the City, and your Royal Court.
Then linger not my Lord, away, take horse.
Come Margaret, God our hope will succour vs.
My hope is gone, now Suffolk is deceased.
Farewell my Lord, trust not the Kentish Rebels
Trust no body for fear you betrayed.
The trust I have, is in mine innocence,
And therefore am I bold and resolute.
How now? Is Jack Cade slain?
No my Lord, nor likely to be slain:
For they have won the Bridge,
Killing all those that withstand them:
The L. Mayor craves aid of your Honour from the Tower
To defend the City from the Rebels.
Such aid as I can spare you shall command,
But I am troubled here with them my self,
The Rebels have assayed to win the Tower.
But get you to Smithfield, and gather head,
And thither I will send you Matthew Goffe.
Fight for your King, your Country, and your Lives,
And so farewell, for I must hence again.
Now is Mortimer Lord of this City,
And here sitting upon London Stone,
I charge and command, that of the Cities cost
The pissing Conduit run nothing but Claret Wine
This first year of our reign.
And now henceforward it shall be Treason for any,
That calls me other then Lord Mortimer.
Jack Cade, Jack Cade.
Knock him down there.
If this Fellow be wise, he will never call ye Jack Cade more, I think he hath a very fair warning.
My Lord, there's an Army gathered together in Smithfield.
Come, then let's go fight with them:
But first, go and set London Bridge on fire,
And if you can, burn down the Tower too.
Come, let's away.
So sirs: now go some and pull down the Sauoy:
Others to th Innes of Court, down with them all.
I have a suite unto your Lordship.
Bee it a Lordship, thou shalt have it for that word.
Only that the Laws of England may come out of your mouth.
Mass twill be sore Law then, for he was thrust in the mouth with a Spear, and it is not whole yet.
Nay Iohn, it will be stinking Law, for his breath stinks with eating toasted cheese.
I have thought upon it, it shall bee so. Away, burn all the Records of the Realm, my mouth shall be the Parliament of England.
Then we are like to have biting Statutes
Unless his teeth be pulled out.
And hence-forward all things shall be in Common.
My Lord, a prize, a prize, hears the Lord Say, which sold the Towns in France. He that made vs pay one and twenty Fifteens, and one shilling to the pound, the last Subsidy.
Well, hee shall be beheaded for it ten times: Ah thou Say, thou Surge, nay thou Buckram Lord, now art thou within point-blanke of our Jurisdiction Regal. What can thou answer to my Majesty, for giving up of Normandy unto Monsieur Basimecu, the Dolphin of France? Be it known unto thee by these presence, even the presence of Lord Mortimer, that I am the Beesome that must sweep the Court clean of such filth as thou art: Thou hast most traitorously corrupted the youth of the Realm, in erecting a Grammar School: and whereas before, our Fore-fathers had no other Books but the Score and the Tally, thou hast caused printing to be used, and contrary to the King, his Crown, and Dignity, thou hast built a Paper-Mill. It will be proved to thy Face, that thou hast men about thee, that usually talk of a Noun and a Verb, and such abominable words, as no Christian ear can endure to hear. Thou hast appointed Justices of Peace, to call poor men before them, about matters they were not able to answer. Moreover, thou hast put them in prison, and because they could not read, thou hast hanged them, when (indeed) only for that cause they have been most worthy to live. Thou dost ride in a foot-cloth, dost thou not?
What of that?
Marry, thou ought not to let thy horse wear a Cloak, when honester men then thou go in their Hose and Doublets.
And work in their shirt to, as my self for example, that am a butcher.
You men of Kent.
What say you of Kent.
Nothing but this: It is bone terra, mala gins.
Away with him, away with him, he speaks Latine.
Hear me but speak, and bear me wher'e you will:
Kent, in the Commentaries Caesar writ,
Is termed the ciuel'st place of all this Isle:
Sweet is the Coventry, because full of Riches,
The People Liberal, Valiant, Active, Wealthy,
Which makes me hope you are not void of pity.
I sold not Maine, I lost not Normandy,
Yet to recover them would loose my life:
Justice with favour have I always done,
Prayers and Tears have moved me, Gifts could never.
When have I ought exacted at your hands?
Kent to maintain, the King, the Realm and you,
Large gifts have I bestowed on learned Clerks,
Because my Book preferred me to the King.
And seeing Ignorance is the curse of God,
Knowledge the Wing wherewith we fly to heaven.
Unless you be possessed with devilish spirits,
You cannot but forbear to murder me:
This Tongue hath parleyed unto Foreign Kings
For your behoof.
Tut, when strike thou one blow in the field?
Great men have reaching hands: oft have I struck
Those that I never saw, and struck them dead.
O monstrous Coward! What, to come behind Folks?
These cheeks are pale for watching for your good
Give him a box of the ear, and that will make 'em red again.
Long sitting to determine poor men's causes,
Hath made me full of sickness and diseases.
Ye shall have a hempen Candle then, &amp; the help of hatchet.
Why dost thou quiver man?
The Palsy, and not fear provokes me.
Nay, he notts at vs, as who should say, Isle be even with you. Isle see if his head will stand steadier on a pole, or no: Take him away, and behead him.
Tell me: wherein have I offended most?
Have I affected wealth, or honour? Speak.
Are my Chests filled up with extorted Gold?
Is my Apparel sumptuous to behold?
Whom have I injured, that ye seek my death?
These hands are free from guiltless bloodshedding,
This breast from harbouring foul deceitful thoughts.
O let me live.
I feel remorse in my self with his words: but Isle bridle it: he shall dye, and it bee but for pleading so well for his life. Away with him, he he's a Familiar under his Tongue, he speaks not a Gods name. Go, take him away I say, and strike off his head presently, and then break into his Son in Laws house, Sir Iames Cromer, and strike off his head, and bring them both upon two poles hither.
It shall be done.
Ah Countrymen: If when you make your prair's,
God should be so obdurate as your selves:
How would it fare with your departed souls,
And therefore yet relent, and save my life.
Away with him, and do as I command ye: the proudest Peer in the Realm, shall not wear a head on his shoulders, unless he pay me tribute: there shall not a maid be married, but she shall pay to me her Mayden-head ere they have it: Men shall hold of me in Capite. And we charge and command, that their wives be as free as heart can wish, or tongue can tell.
My Lord,
When shall we go to Cheapside, and take up commodeties upon our bills?
Marry presently.
O brave.
But is not this braver:
Let them kiss one another: For they loved well
When they were alive. Now part them again,
Least they consult about the giving up
Of some more Towns in France. Soldiers,
Defer the spoil of the City until night:
For with these borne before vs, in steed of Maces,
Will we ride through the streets, &amp; at every Corner
Have them kiss. Away.
Up Fish-streete, down Saint Magnes corner, kill and knock down, throw them into Thames:
What noise is this I hear?
Dare any be so bold to sound Retreat or Parley
When I command them kill?
I here they be, that dare and will disturb thee:
Know Cade, we come Ambassadors from the King
Unto the Commons, whom thou hast misled,
And here pronounce free pardon to them all,
That will forsake thee, and go home in peace.
What say ye Countrymen, will ye relent
And yield to mercy, whilst it is offered you,
Or let a rabble lead you to your deaths.
Who loves the King, and will embrace his pardon,
Fling up his cap, and say, God save his Majesty.
Who hates him, and honours not his Father,
Henry the fifth, that made all France to quake,
Shake he his weapon at vs, and pass by.
God save the King, God save the King.
What Buckingham and Clifford are ye so brave? And you base Peasants, do ye believe him, will you needs be hanged with your Pardons about your necks? Hath my sword therefore broke through London gates, that you should leave me at the White-heart in Southwark. I thought ye would never have given out these Arms till you had recovered your ancient Freedom. But you are all Recreants and Dastards, and delight to live in slavery to the Nobility. Let them break your backs with burthens, take your houses over your heads, ravish your Wives and Daughters before your faces. For me, I will make shift for one, and so Gods Curse light upon you all.
We'll follow Cade,
We'll follow Cade.
Is Cade the son of Henry the fifth,
That thus you do exclaim you'll go with him.
Will he conduct you through the heart of France,
And make the meanest of you Earls and Dukes?
Alas, he hath no home, no place to fly too:
Nor knows he how to live, but by the spoil,
Unless by robbing of your Friends, and vs.
Were it not a shame, that whilst you live at jar,
The fearful French, whom you late vanquished
Should make a start ore-seas, and vanquish you?
Me thinks already in this civil broil,
I see them Lording it in London streets,
Crying illiago unto all they meet.
Better ten thousand base-borne Cades miscarry,
Then you should stoop unto a Frenchmans mercy.
To France, to France, and get what you have lost:
Spare England, for it is your Native Coast:
Henry hath money, you are strong and manly:
God on our side, doubt not of Victory.
A Clifford, a Clifford.
We'll follow the King, and Clifford.
Was ever Feather so lightly blown too &amp; fro, as this multitude? The name of Henry the fifth, hales them to an hundred mischiefs, and makes them leave me desolate. I see them lay their heads together to surprise me. My sword make way for me, for here is no staying: in despite of the devils and hell, have through the very midst of you, and heavens and honour be witness, that no want of resolution in me, but only my Followers base and ignominious treasons, makes me betake me to my heles.
What, is he fled? Go some and follow him,
And he that brings his head unto the King,
Shall have a thousand Crowns for his reward.
Follow me soldiers, we'll devise a mean,
To reconcile you all unto the King.
Was ever King that joyed an earthly Throne,
And could command no more content then I?
No sooner was I crept out of my Cradle,
But I was made a King, at nine months old.
Was never Subject longed to be a King,
As I do long and wish to be a Subject.
Health and glad tidings to your Majesty.
Why Buckingham, is the Traitor Cade surprised?
Or is he but retired to make him strong?
He is fled my Lord, and all his powers do yield,
And humbly thus with halters on their necks,
Expect your Highness doom of life, or death.
Then heaven set op thy everlasting gates,
To entertain my vows of thanks and praise.
Soldiers, this day have you redeemed your lives,
And showed how well you love your Prince &amp; Country:
Continue still in this so good a mind,
And Henry though he be unfortunate,
Assure your selves will never be unkind:
And so with thanks, and pardon to you all,
I do dismiss you to your several Countries.
God save the King, God save the King.
Please it your Grace to be advertised,
The Duke of York is newly come from Ireland,
And with a puissant and a mighty power
Of Gallow-glasses and stout Kernes,
Is marching hitherward in proud array,
And still proclaims as he comes along,
His Arms are only to remove from thee
The Duke of Somerset, whom he terms a Traitor.
Thus stands my state, twixt Cade and York distressed,
Like to a Ship, that having escaped a Tempest,
Is straight way calm, and boarded with a Pirate.
But now is Cade driven back, his men dispierc'd,
And now is York in Arms, to second him.
I pray thee Buckingham go and meet him,
And ask him what's the reason of these Arms:
Tell him, Isle send Duke Edmund to the Tower,
And Somerset we will commit thee thither,
Until his Army be dismissed from him.
My Lord,
Isle yield my self to prison willingly,
Or unto death, to do my Country good.
In any case, be not to rough in terms,
For he is fierce, and cannot brooke hard Language.
I will my Lord, and doubt not so to deal,
As all things shall redound unto your good.
Come wife, let's in, and learn to govern better,
For yet may England curse my wretched reign.
Fie on Ambitions: fie on my self, that have a sword, and yet am ready to famish. These five days have I hid me in these Woods, and durst not peep out, for all the Country is laid for me: but now am I so hungry, that if I might have a Lease of my life for a thousand years, I could stay no longer. Wherefore on a Brick wall have I climbed into this Garden, to see if I can eat Grass, or pick a Sallet another while, which is not amiss to cool a mans stomach this hot weather: and I think this word Sallet was borne to do me good: for many a time but for a Sallet, my braine-pan had been cleft with a brown Bill; and many a time when I have been dry, &amp; bravely marching, it hath served me instead of a quart pot to drink in: and now the word Sallet must serve me to feed on.
Lord, who would live turmoiled in the Court,
And may enjoy such quiet walks as these?
This small inheritance my Father left me,
Contents me, and worth a Monarchy.
I seek not to wax great by others warning,
Or gather wealth I care not with what envy:
Suffices, that I have maintains my state,
And sends the poor well pleased from my gate.
Heere's the Lord of the soil come to seize me for a stray, for entering his Fee-simple without leave. A Villain, thou wilt betray me, and get a 1000. Crowns of the King by carrying my head to him, but Isle make thee eat Iron like an Ostridge, and swallow my Sword like a great pin ere thou and I part.
Why rude Companion, whatsoere thou be,
I know thee not, why then should I betray thee?
Is it not enough to break into my Garden,
And like a Thief to come to rob my grounds:
Climbing my walls inspight of me the Owner,
But thou wilt brave me with these saucy terms?
Brave thee? I by the best blood that ever was broached, and beard thee to. Look on me well, I have eat no meat these five days, yet come thou and thy five men, and if I doe not leave you all as dead as a door nail, I pray God I may never eat grass more.
Nay, it shall ne'er be said, while England stands,
That Alexander Eden an Esquire of Kent,
Took odds to combat a poor famished man.
Oppose thy steadfast gazing eyes to mine,
See if thou can out-face me with thy looks:
Set limb to limb, and thou art far the lesser:
Thy hand is but a finger to my fist,
Thy leg a stick compared with this Truncheon,
My foot shall fight with all the strength thou hast,
And if mine arm be heaved in the Ayre,
Thy grave is dug already in the earth:
As for words, whose greatness answer's words,
Let this my sword report what speech forbears.
By my Valour: the most complete Champon that ever I heard. Steel, if thou turn the edge, or cut not out the burly boned Clown in chines of Beef, ere thou sleep in thy Sheath, I beseech Jove on my knees thou may be turned to Hobnails.
O I am slain, Famine and no other hath slain me, let ten thousand devils come against me, and give me but the ten meals I have lost, and I'd defy them all. Wither Garden, and be henceforth a burying place to all that do dwell in this house, because the unconquered soul of Cade is fled.
Is it Cade that I have slain, that monstrous traitor?
Sword, I will hallow thee for this thy deed,
And hang thee o'er my Tomb, when I am dead.
Ne'er shall this blood be wiped from thy point,
But thou shalt wear it as a Heralds coat,
To emblaze the Honour that thy Master got.
Eden farewell, and be proud of thy victory: Tell Kent from me, she hath lost her best man, and exhort all the World to be Cowards: For I that never feared any, am vanquished by Famine, not by Valour.
How much thou wrong'st me, heaven be my judge;
Die damned Wretch, the curse of her that bare thee:
And as I thrust thy body in with my sword,
So wish I, I might thrust thy soul to hell.
Hence will I drag thee headlong by the heals
Unto a dunghill, which shall be thy grave,
And there cut off thy most ungracious head,
Which I will bear in triumph to the King,
Leaving thy trunk for Crows to feed upon.
From Ireland thus comes York to claim his right,
And pluck the Crown from feeble Henries head.
Ring Belles aloud, burn Bonfires clear and bright
To entertain great Englands lawful King.
Ah Sancta Maiestas! who would not buy thee dear?
Let them obey, that knows not how to Rule.
This hand was made to handle nought but Gold.
I cannot give due action to my words,
Except a Sword or Sceptre balance it.
A Sceptre shall it have, have I a soul,
On which Isle toss the Fleure-de-Luce of France.
Whom have we here? Buckingham to disturb me?
The king hath sent him sure: I must dissemble.
York, if thou meanest well, I greet thee well.
Humfrey of Buckingham, I accept thy greeting.
Art thou a Messenger, or come of pleasure.
A Messenger from Henry, our dread Liege,
To know the reason of these Arms in peace.
Or why, thou being a Subject, as I am,
Against thy Oath, and true Allegiance sworn,
Should raise so great a power without his leave?
Or dare to bring thy Force so near the Court?
Scarce can I speak, my Choler is so great.
Oh I could hew up Rocks, and fight with Flint,
I am so angry at these abject terms.
And now like Aiax Telamonius,
On Sheep or Oxen could I spend my fury.
I am far better borne then is the king:
More like a King, more Kingly in my thoughts.
But I must make fair weather yet a while,
Till Henry be more weak, and I more strong.
Buckingham, I prithee pardon me,
That I have given no answer all this while:
My mind was troubled with deep Melancholy.
The cause why I have brought this Army hither,
Is to remove proud Somerset from the King,
Seditious to his Grace, and to the State.
That is too much presumption on thy part:
But if thy Arms be to no other end,
The King hath yielded unto thy demand:
The Duke of Somerset is in the Tower.
Upon thine Honour is he Prisoner?
Upon mine Honour he is Prisoner.
Then Buckingham I do dismiss my Powers.
Soldiers, I thank you all: disperse your selves:
Meet me to morrow in S. Georges Field,
You shall have pay, and every thing you wish.
And let my Sovereign, virtuous Henry,
Command my eldest son, nay all my sons,
As pledges of my Fealty and Love,
Isle send them all as willing as I live:
Lands, Goods, Horse, Armour, any thing I have
Is his to use, so Somerset may die.
York, I commend this kind submission,
We twain will go into his Highness Tent.
Buckingham, doth York intend no harm to vs
That thus he marches with thee arm in arm?
In all submission and humility,
York doth present himself unto your Highness.
Then what intends these Forces thou dost bring?
To heave the Traitor Somerset from hence,
And fight against that monstrous Rebel Cade,
Who since I heard to be discomfited.
If one so rude, and of so mean condition
May pass into the presence of a King:
Lo, I present your Grace a Traitors head,
The head of Cade, whom I in combat slew.
The head of Cade? Great God, how just art thou?
Oh let me view his Visage being dead,
That living wrought me such exceeding trouble.
Tell me my Friend, art thou the man that slew him?
I was, an't like your Majesty.
How art thou called? And what is thy degree?
Alexander Eden, that's my name,
A poor Esquire of Kent, that loves his King.
So please it you my Lord, it were not amiss
He were created Knight for his good service.
Eden, kneel down, rise up a Knight:
We give thee for reward a thousand Marks,
And will, that thou henceforth attend on vs.
May Eden live to merit such a bounty,
And never live but true unto his Liege.
See Buckingham, Somerset comes with the Queen,
Go bid her hide him quickly from the Duke.
For thousand Yorkes he shall not hide his head,
But boldly stand, and front him to his face.
How now? is Somerset at liberty?
Then York unloose thy long imprisoned thoughts,
And let thy tongue be equal with thy heart.
Shall I endure the sight of Somerset?
False King, why hast thou broken faith with me,
Knowing how hardly I can brooke abuse?
King did I call thee? No: thou art not King:
Not fit to govern and rule multitudes,
Which dare not, no nor can not rule a Traitor.
That Head of thine doth not become a Crown:
Thy Hand is made to grasp a Palmers staff,
And not to grace an awful Princely Sceptre.
That Gold, must round engirt these brows of mine,
Whose Smile and Frown, like to Achilles Spear
Is able with the change, to kill and cure.
Here is a hand to hold a Sceptre up,
And with the same to act controlling Laws:
Give place: by heaven thou shalt rule no more
O'er him, whom heaven created for thy Ruler.
O monstrous Traitor! I arrest thee York
Of Capital Treason against the King and Crown:
Obey audacious Traitor, kneel for Grace.
Wold'st have me kneel? First let me ask of thee,
If they can brooke I bow a knee to man:
Sirrah, call in my son to be my bale:
I know ere they will have me go to Ward,
They'll pawn their swords of my enfranchisement.
Call hither Clifford, bid him come amain,
To say, if that the Bastard boys of York
Shall be the Surety for their Traitor Father.
O blood-bespotted Neopolitan,
Out-cast of Naples, Englands bloody Scourge,
The sons of York, thy betters in their birth,
Shall be their Fathers bail, and bane to those
That for my Surety will refuse the Boys.
See where they come, Isle warrant they'll make it good.
And here comes Clifford to deny their bail.
Health, and all happiness to my Lord the King.
I thank thee Clifford: Say, what news with thee?
Nay, do not fright vs with an angry look:
We are thy Sovereign Clifford, kneel again;
For thy mistaking so, We pardon thee.
This is my King York, I do not mistake,
But thou mistakes me much to think I do,
To Bedlam with him, is the man grown mad.
I Clifford, a Bedlam and ambitious humour
Makes him oppose himself against his King.
He is a Traitor, let him to the Tower,
And chop away that factious pate of his.
He is atrested, but will not obey:
His sons (he says) shall give their words for him.
Will you not Sons?
I Noble Father, if our words will serve.
And if words will not, then our Weapons shall.
Why what a brood of Traitors have we here?
Look in a Glass, and call thy Image so.
I am thy King, and thou a false-heart Traitor:
Call hither to the stake my two brave Bears,
That with the very shaking of their Chains,
They may astonish these fell-lurking Cures,
Bid Salsbury and Warwick come to me.
Are these thy Bears? We'll bate thy Bears to death,
And manacle the Berard in their Chains,
If thou dare bring them to the baiting place.
Oft have I seen a hot ore-weening Cur,
Run back and bite, because he was with-held,
Who being suffered with the Bears fell paw,
Hath clapped his tail, between his legs and cried,
And such a piece of service will you do,
If you oppose your selves to match Lord Warwick.
Hence heap of wrath, foul indigested lump,
As crooked in thy manners, as thy shape.
Nay we shall heate you thoroughly anon.
Take heed least by your heate you burn your selves:
Why Warwick, hath thy knee forgot to bow?
Old Salsbury, shame to thy silver hair,
Thou mad misleader of thy brain-sicke son,
What wilt thou on thy death-bed play the Ruffian?
And seek for sorrow with thy Spectacles?
Oh where is Faith? Oh, where is Loyalty?
If it be banished from the frosty head,
Where shall it find a harbour in the earth?
Wilt thou go dig a grave to find out War,
And shame thine honourable Age with blood?
Why art thou old, and want experience?
Or wherefore doest abuse it, if thou hast it?
For shame in duty bend thy knee to me,
That bows unto the grave with mickle age.
My Lord, I have considered with my self
The Title of this most renowned Duke,
And in my conscience, do repute his grace
The rightful heir to Englands Royal seat.
Hast thou not sworn Allegiance unto me?
I have.
Can thou dispense with heaven for such an oath?
It is great sin, to swear unto a sin:
But greater sin to keep a sinful oath:
Who can be bound by any solemn Vow
To do a murderous deed, to rob a man,
To force a spotless Virgins Chastity,
To reeve the Orphan of his Patrimony,
To wring the Widow from her customed right,
And have no other reason for this wrong,
But that he was bound by a solemn Oath?
A subtle Traitor needs no Sophister.
Call Buckingham, and bid him arm himself.
Call Buckingham, and all the friends thou hast,
I am resolved for death and dignity.
The first I warrant thee, if dreams prove true
You were best to go to bed, and dream again,
To keep thee from the Tempest of the field.
I am resolved to bear a greater storm,
Then any thou can conjure up to day:
And that Isle write upon thy Burgonet,
Might I but know thee by thy housed Badge.
Now by my Fathers badge, old Novels Crest,
The rampant Bear chained to the ragged staff,
This day Isle wear aloft my Burgonet,
As on a Mountain top, the Cedar shows,
That keeps his leaves inspight of any storm,
Even io affright thee with the view thereof.
And from thy Burgonet Isle rend thy Bear,
And tread it under foot with all contempt,
Despite the Bearard, that protects the Bear.
And so to Arms victorious Father,
To quell the Rebels, and their Accomplices.
Fie, Charity for shame, speak not in spite,
For you shall sup with Iesu Christ to night.
Foul stygmaticke that's more then thou can tell.
If not in heaven, you'll surely sup in hell.
Clifford of Cumberland, it is Warwick calls:
And if thou dost not hide thee from the Bear,
Now when the angry Trumpet sounds alarm,
And dead men's cries do fill the empty ayre,
Clifford I say, come forth and fight with me,
Proud Northern Lord, Clifford of Cumberland,
Warwick is hoarse with calling thee to arms.
How now my Noble Lord? What all afoot.
The deadly handed Clifford slew my Steed:
But match to match I have encountered him,
And made a prey for Carrion Kites and Crows
Even of the bonnie beast he loved so well.
Of one or both of vs the time is come.
Hold Warwick: seek thee out some other chase
For I my self must hunt this Dear to death.
Then nobly York, it is for a Crown thou fightst:
As I intend Clifford to thrive to day,
It grieves my soul to leave thee unassailed.
What see thou in me York?
Why dost thou pause?
With thy brave bearing should I be in love,
But that thou art so fast mine enemy.
Nor should thy prowess want praise &amp; esteem,
But that it is shown ignobly, and in Treason.
So let it help me now against thy sword,
As I in justice, and true right express it.
My soul and body on the action both.
A dreadful lay, address thee instantly.
La fia Corona les eumenes.
Thus War hath given thee peace, for you art still,
Peace with his soul, heaven if it be thy will.
Shame and Confusion all is on the rout,
Fear frames disorder, and disorder wounds
Where it should guard. O War, thou son of hell,
Whom angry heavens do make their minister,
Throw in the frozen bosoms of our part,
Hot Coals of Vengeance. Let no Soldier fly.
He that is truly dedicate to War,
Hath no selfe-loue: nor he that loves himself,
Hath not essentially, but by circumstance
The name of Valour. O let the vile world end,
And the premised Flames of the Last day,
Knit earth and heaven together.
Now let the general Trumpet blow his blast,
Particularities, and petty sounds
To cease. Was it thou ordained (dear Father)
To loose thy youth in peace, and to achieve
The Silver Livery of advised Age,
And in thy Reverence, and thy Chaire-dayes, thus
To die in Ruffian battle? Even at this sight,
My heart is turned to stone: and while it is mine,
It shall be stony. York, not our old men spares:
No more will I their Babes, Tears Virginal,
Shall be to me, even as the Dew to Fire,
And Beauty, that the Tyrant oft reclaims,
Shall to my flaming wrath, be Oil and Flax:
Henceforth, I will not have to do with pity.
Meet I an infant of the house of York,
Into as many gobbits will I cut it
As wilde Medea young Absirtis did.
In cruelty, will I seek out my Fame.
Come thou new ruin of old Cliffords house:
As did Aeneas old Anchyses bear,
So bear I thee upon my manly shoulders:
But then, Aeneas bare a living load;
Nothing so heavy as these woes of mine.
So lye thou there:
For underneath an Ale-house paltry sign,
The Castle in S. Albons, Somerset
Hath made the Wizard famous in his death:
Sword, hold thy temper; Heart, be wrathful still:
Priests pray for enemies, but Princes kill.
Away my Lord, you are slow, for shame away.
Can we outrun the Heavens? Good Margaret stay.
What are you made of? You'll nor fight nor fly:
Now is it manhood, wisdom, and defence,
To give the enemy way, and to secure vs
By what we can, which can no more but fly.
If you be tan, we then should see the bottom
Of all our Fortunes: but if we happily scope,
(As well we may, if not through your neglect)
We shall to London get, where you are loved,
And where this breach now in our Fortunes made
May readily be stopped.
But that my hearts on future mischief set,
I would speak blasphemy ere bid you fly:
But fly you must: Vncureable discomfit
Reigns in the hearts of all our present parts.
Away for your relief, and we will live
To see their day, and them our Fortune give.
Away my Lord, away.
Of Salsbury, who can report of him,
That Winter Lyon, who in rage forgets
Aged contusions, and all brush of Time:
And like a Gallant, in the brow of youth,
Repairs him with Occasion. This happy day
Is not it self, nor have we won one foot,
If Salsbury be lost.
My Noble Father:
Three times to day I help him to his horse,
Three times bestride him: Thrice I led him off,
Persuaded him from any further act:
But still where danger was, still there I met him,
And like rich hangings in a homely house,
So was his Will, in his old feeble body,
But Noble as he is, look where he comes.
Now by my Sword, well hast thou fought to day:
By 'th 'Masse so did we all. I thank you Richard.
God knows how long it is I have to live:
And it hath pleased him that three times to day
You have defended me from imminent death.
Well Lords, we have not got that which we have,
It is not enough our foes are this time fled,
Being opposites of such repairing Nature.
I know our safety is to follow them,
For (as I hear) the King is fled to London,
To call a present Court of Parliament:
Let vs pursue him ere the Writs go forth.
What says Lord Warwick, shall we after them?
After them: nay before them if we can:
Now by my hand (Lords) it was a glorious day.
Saint Albons battle won by famous York,
Shall be eternized in all Age to come.
Sound Drum and Trumpets, and to London all,
And more such days as these, to vs befall.

NAy, but this dotage of our Generals
Ore-flowes the measure: those his goodly eyes
That o'er the Files and Musters of the War,
Have glowed like plated Mars:
Now bend, now turn
The Office and Devotion of their view
Upon a Tawny Front. His Captains heart,
Which in the scuffles of great Fights hath burst
The Buckles on his breast, reneges all temper,
And is become the Bellows and the Fan
To cool a Gypsies Lust.
Look where they come:
Take but good note, and you shall see in him
(The triple Pillar of the world) transformed
Into a Strumpets Fool. Behold and see.
If it be Love indeed, tell me how much.
There's beggary in the love that can be reckoned
Isle set a bourne how far to be beloved.
Then must thou needs find our new Heaven, new Earth.
News (my good Lord) from Rome.
Grates me, the sum.
Nay hear them Anthony.
Fuluia perchance is angry: Or who knows,
If the scarse-bearded Caesar have not sent
His powerful Mandate to you. Do this, or this;
Take in that Kingdom, and Enfranchise that:
Perform't, or else we damn thee.
How, my Love?
Perchance? Nay, and most like:
You must not stay here longer, your dismission
Is come from Caesar, therefore hear it Anthony.
Whore's Fuluias Process? (Caesars I would say) both?
Call in the Messengers: As I am Egypt Queen,
Thou blush Anthony, and that blood of thine
Is Caesars homager: else so thy cheek pays shame,
When shrill-tongu'd Fuluia scolds. The Messengers.
Let Rome in Tyber melt, and the wide Arch
Of the raing'd Empire fall: Here is my space,
Kingdoms are clay: Our dung earth alike
Feeds Beast as Man; the Nobleness of life
Is to do thus: when such a mutual pair,
And such a twain can do it in which I bind
One pain of punishment, the world to weet
We stand up Peerless.
Excellent falsehood:
Why did he marry Fuluia, and not love her?
Isle seem the Fool I am not. Anthony will be himself.
But stirred by Cleopatra.
Now for the love of Love, and her soft hours,
Let's not confound the time with Conference harsh;
There's not a minute of our lives should stretch
Without some pleasure now. What sport to night?
Hear the Ambassadors.
Fie wrangling Queen:
Whom every thing becomes, to chide, to laugh,
To weep: who every passion fully strives
To make it self (in Thee) fair, and admired.
No Messenger but thine, and all alone, to night
We'll wander through the streets, and note
The qualities of people. Come my Queen,
Last night you did desire it. Speak not to vs.
Is Caesar with Anthonius prized so slight?
Sir sometimes when he is not Anthony,
He comes too short of that great Property
Which still should go with Anthony.
I am full sorry, that hee approves the common Liar, who thus speaks of him at Rome; but I will hope of better deeds to morrow. Rest you happy.
L. Alexas, sweet Alexas, most any thing Alexas, almost most absolute Alexas, whore's the Soothsayer that you praised so to the Queen? Oh that I knew this Husband, which you say, must change his Horns with Garlands.
Soothsayer.
Your will?
Is this the Man? Is it you sir that know things?
In Natures infinite book of Secrecy, a little I can read.
Show him your hand.
Bring in the Banquet quickly: Wine enough,
Cleopatra's health to drink.
Good sir, give me good Fortune.
I make not, but foresee.
Pray then, foresee me one.
You shall be yet far fairer then you are.
He means in flesh.
No, you shall paint when you are old.
Wrinkles forbid.
Vex not his prescience, be attentive.
Hush.
You shall be more beloving, then beloved.
I had rather heate my Liver with drinking.
Nay, hear him.
Good now some excellent Fortune: Let me be married to three Kings in a forenoon, and Widow them all: Let me have a Child at fifty, to whom Herode of Iewry may do Homage. Find me to marry me with Octauius Caesar, and companion me with my Mistress.
You shall out-liue the Lady whom you serve.
Oh excellent, I love long life better then Figs.
You have seen and proved a fairer former fortune, then that which is to approach.
Then belike my Children shall have no names:
Prithee how many Boys and Wenches must I have.
If every of your wishes had a womb, &amp; foretell every wish, a Million.
Out Fool, I forgive thee for a Witch.
You think none but your sheets are privy to your wishes.
Nay come, tell Iras hers.
We'll know all our Fortunes.
Mine, and most of our Fortunes to night, shall be drunk to bed.
There's a Palm presages Chastity, if nothing else.
Even as the o're-flowing Nylus presages Famine.
Go you wilde Bedfellow, you cannot Soothsay.
Nay, if an oily Palm bee not a fruitful Prognostication, I cannot scratch mine ear. Prithee tel her but a worky day Fortune.
Your Fortunes are alike.
But how, but how, give me particulars.
I have said.
Am I not an inch of Fortune better then she?
Well, if you were but an inch of fortune better then I: where would you choose it.
Not in my Husbands nose.
Our worser thoughts Heavens mend.
Come, his Fortune, his Fortune. Oh let him mary a woman that cannot go, sweet Ices, I beseech thee, and let her dye too, and give him a worse, and let worse follow worse, till the worst of all follow him laughing to his grave, fifty-fold a Cuckold. Good Ices hear me this Prayer, though thou deny me a matter of more weight: good Ices I beseech thee.
Amen, dear Goddess, hear that prayer of the people. For, as it is a heart-breaking to see a handsome man loose-Wiu'd, so it is a deadly sorrow, to behold a foul Knave vncuckolded: Therefore dear Ices keep decorum, and Fortune him accordingly.
Amen.
Lo now, if it lay in their hands to make me a Cuckold, they would make themselves Whores, but they'ld do it.
Hush, here comes Anthony.
Not he, the Queen.
Save you, my Lord.
No Lady.
Was he not here?
No Madam.
He was disposed to mirth, but on the sudden
A Roman thought hath struck him.
Enobarbus?
Madam.
Seek him, and bring him hither: wher's Alexias?
Here at your service.
My Lord approaches.
We will not look upon him:
Go with vs.
Fuluia thy Wife,
First came into the Field.
Against my Brother Lucius?
I: but soon that War had end,
And the times state
Made friends of them, ioynting their force against Caesar,
Whose better issue in the war from Italy,
Upon the first encounter drove them.
Well, what worst.
The Nature of bad news infects the Teller.
When it concerns the Fool or Coward: On.
Things that are past, are done, with me. It is thus,
Who tells me true, though in his Tale lye death,
I hear him as he flattered.
Labienus (this is stiffe-newes)
Hath with his Parthian Force
Extended Asia: from Euphrates his conquering
Banner shook, from Syria to Lydia,
And to Ionia, whilst 
Anthony thou would say.
Oh my Lord.
Speak to me home,
Mince not the general tongue, name
Cleopatra as she is called in Rome:
Rail thou in Fuluia's phrase, and taunt my faults
With such full License, as both Truth and Malice
Have power to utter. Oh then we forth weeds,
When our quick winds lye still, and our ills told vs
Is as our earing: fare thee well awhlle.
At your Noble pleasure.
From Scicion how the news? Speak there.
The man from Scicion,
Is there such an one?
He stays upon your will.
Let him appear:
These strong Egyptian Fetters I must break,
Or loose my self in dotage.
What are you?
Fuluia thy wife is dead.
Where dyed she.
In Scicion, her length of sickness,
With what else more serious,
Imports thee to know, this bears.
Forbear me
There's a great Spirit gone, thus did I desire it:
What our contempts doth of ten hurl from vs,
We with it ours again. The present pleasure,
By revolution lowering, does become
The opposite of it self: she's good being gon,
The hand could pluck her back, that should her on.
I must from this enchanting Queen break off,
Ten thousand harms, more then the ills I know
My idleness doth hatch.
How now Enobarbus.
What's your pleasure, Sir?
I must with haste from hence.
Why then we kill all our Women. We see how mortal an unkindness is to them, if they suffer our departure death's the word.
I must be gone.
Under a compelling an occasion, let women die. It were pity to cast them away for nothing, though betweene them and a great cause, they should be esteemed nothing. Cleopatra catching but the least noise of this,  instantly: I have seen her dye twenty times upon fa orer moment: I do think there is mettle in death, which mitts some loving act upon her, she hath such a celerity in dying.
She is cunning past mans thought.
Alack Sir no, her passions are made of nothing but the finest part of pure Love. We cannot cal her winds and waters, sighs and tears: They are greater storms and Tempests then Almanacs can report. This cannot be cunning in her; if it be, she makes a shower of Rain as well as Jove.
Would I had never seen her.
Oh sir, you had then left unseen a wonderful piece of work, which not to have been blessed withal, would have discredited your Travail.
Fuluia is dead.
Sir.
Fuluia is dead.
Fuluia?
Dead.
Why sir, give the Gods a thankful Sacrifice: when it pleases their Deities to take the wife of a man from him, it shows to man the Tailors of the earth: comforting therein, that when old Robes are worn out, there are members to make new. If there were no more Women but Fuluia, then had you indeed a cut, and the case to be lamented: This grief is crowned with Consolotion, your old Smock brings forth a new Petticoat, and indeed the tears live in an Onion, that should water this sorrow.
The business she hath broached in the State,
Cannot endure my absence.
And the business you have broached here cannot be without you, especially that of Cleopatra's, which wholly depends on your abode.
No more light Answers:
Let our Officers
Have notice what we purpose. I shall break
The cause of our Expedience to the Queen,
And get her love to part. For not alone
The death of Fuluia, with more urgent touches
Do strongly speak to vs: but the Letters too
Of many our contriving Friends in Rome,
Petition vs at home. Sextus Pompeius
Have given the dare to Caesar, and commands
The Empire of the Sea. Our slippery people,
Whose Love is never linked to the deserver,
Till his deserts are past, begin to throw
Pompey the great, and all his Dignities
Upon his Son, who high in Name and Power,
Higher then both in Blood and Life, stands up
For the maine Soldier. Whose quality going on,
The sides of the world may danger. Much is breeding,
Which like the Coursers heir, hath yet but life,
And not a Serpents poison. Say our pleasure,
To such whose places under vs, require
Our quick remove from hence.
I shall do it.
Where is he?
I did not see him since.
See where he is,
Whose with him, what he does:
I did not send you. If you find him sad,
Say I am dancing: if in Mirth, report
That I am sudden sick. Quick, and return.
Madam, me thinks if you did love him dearly,
You do not hold the method, to enforce
The like from him.
What should I do, I do not?
In each thing give him way, cross him in nothing.
Thou teach like a fool: the way to lose him.
Tempt him not so too far. I wish forbear,
In time we hate that which we often fear.
But here comes Anthony.
I am sick, and sullen.
I am sorry to give breathing to my purpose.
Help me away dear Charmian, I shall fall,
It cannot be thus long, the sides of Nature
Will not sustain it.
Now my dearest Queen.
Pray you stand farther from me.
What's the matter?
I know by that same eye ther's some good news.
What says the married woman you may go?
Would she had never given you leave to come.
Let her not say it is I that keep you here,
I have no power upon you: Hers you are.
The Gods best know.
Oh never was there Queen
So mightily betrayed: yet at the first
I saw the Treasons planted.
Cleopatra.
Why should I think you can be mine, &amp; true,
(Though you in swearing shake the Throaned Gods)
Who have been false to Fuluia?
Riotous madness,
To be entangled with those mouth-made vows,
Which break themselves in swearing.
Most sweet Queen.
Nay pray you seek no colour for your going,
But bid farewell, and go:
When you sued staying,
Then was the time for words: No going then,
Eternity was in our Lips, and Eyes,
Bliss in our brows bent: none our parts so poor,
But was a race of Heaven. They are so still,
Or thou the greatest Soldier of the world,
Art turned the greatest Liar.
How now Lady?
I would I had thy inches, thou should know
There were a heart in Egypt.
Hear me Queen:
The strong necessity of Time, commands
Our Seruicles awhile: but my full heart
Remains in use with you. Our Italy,
Shines o'er with civil Swords; Sextus Pompeius
Makes his approaches to the Port of Rome,
Equality of two Domestic powers,
Breed scrupulous faction: The hated grown to strength
Are newly grown to Love: The condemned Pompey,
Rich in his Fathers Honour, creeps apace
Into the hearts of such, as have not thrived
Upon the present state, whose Numbers threaten,
And quietness grown sick of rest, would purge
By any desperate change: My more particular,
And that which most with you should safe my going,
Is Fuluias death.
Though age from folly could not give me freedom
It does from childishness. Can Fuluia dye?
She's dead my Queen.
Look here, and at thy Sovereign leisure read
The Garboils she awaked: at the last, best,
See when, and where she died.
O most false Love!
Where be the Sacred Violles thou should fill
With sorrowful water? Now I see, I see,
In Fuluias death, how mine received shall be.
Quarrel no more, but bee prepared to know
The purposes I bear: which are, or cease,
As you shall give the advice. By the fire
That quickens Nylus slime, I go from hence
Thy Soldier, Servant, making Peace or War,
As thou affects.
Cut my Lace, Charmian come,
But let it be, I am quickly ill, and well,
So Anthony loves.
My precious Queen forbear,
And give true evidence to his Love, which stands
An honourable Trial.
So Fuluia told me.
I prithee turn aside, and weep for her,
Then bid adieu to me, and say the tears
Belong to Egypt. Good now, play one Scene
Of excellent dissembling, and let it look
Like perfect Honour.
You'll heat my blood no more?
You can do better yet: but this is meetly.
Now by Sword.
And Target. Still he mends.
But this is not the best. Look prithee Charmian,
How this Herculean Roman do's become
The carriage of his chafe.
Isle leave you Lady.
Courteous Lord, one word:
Sir, you and I must part, but that's not it:
Sir, you and I have loved, but there's not it:
That you know well, something it is I would:
Oh, my Oblivion is a very Anthony,
And I am all forgotten.
But that your Royalty
Holds Idleness your subject, I should take you
For Idleness it self.
It is sweating Labour,
To bear such Idleness so near the heart
As Cleopatra this. But Sir, forgive me,
Since my becomings kill me, when they do not
Eye well to you. Your Honour calls you hence,
Therefore be deaf to my unpitied Folly,
And all the Gods go with you. Upon your Sword
Sit Laurel victory, and smooth success
Be strewed before your feet.
Let vs go.
Come: Our separation so abides and flies,
That thou reciding here, goes yet with me;
And I hence fleeting, here remain with thee.
Away.
You may see Lepidus, and henceforth know,
It is not Caesars Natural vice, to hate
One great Competitor. From Alexandria
This is the news: He fishes, drinks, and wastes
The Lamps of night in revel: Is not more manlike
Then Cleopatra: nor the Queen of Ptolomy
More Womanly then he. Hardly gave audience
Or vouchsafe to think he had Partners. You
Shall find there a man, who is the abstracts of all faults,
That all men follow.
I must not think
There are, evils enough to darken all his goodness:
His faults in him, seem as the Spots of Heaven,
More fiery by nights Blackness; Hereditary,
Rather then purchased: what he cannot change,
Then what he chooses.
You are too indulgent. Let's grant it is not
Amiss to tumble on the bed of Ptolomy,
To give a Kingdom for a Mirth, to sit
And keep the turn of Tippling with a Slave,
To reel the streets at noon, and stand the Buffet
With knaves that smells of sweat: Say this become him
(As his composure must be rare indeed,
Whom these things cannot blemish) yet must Anthony
No way excuse his foils, when we do bear
So great weight in his lightness. If he filled
His vacancy with his Voluptuousness,
Full surfeits, and the dryness of his bones,
Call on him for it. But to confound such time,
That drums him from his sport, and speaks as loud
As his own State, and ours, it is to be chid:
As we rate Boys, who being mature in knowledge,
Pawn their experience to their present pleasure,
And so rebel to judgment.
Heere's more news.
Thy biddings have been done, &amp; every hour
Most Noble Caesar, shalt thou have report
How it is abroad. Pompey is strong at Sea,
And it appears, he is beloved of those
That only have feared Caesar: to the Ports
The discontents repair, and men's reports
Give him much wronged.
I should have known no less,
It hath bin taught vs from the primal state
That he which is was wished, until he were:
And the ebbed man,
Ne'er loved, till ne'er worth love,
Comes feared, by being lacked. This common body,
Like to a Vagabond Flag upon the Stream,
Goes too, and back, lacking the varying tide
To rot it self with motion.
Caesar I bring thee word,
Menacrates and Menas famous Pirates
Makes the Sea serve them, which they ear and wound
With keels of every kind. Many hot inroads
They make in Italy, the Borders Maritime
Lack blood to think on it, and flush youth revolt,
No Vessel can peep forth: but it is as soon
Taken as seen: for Pompeyes name strikes more
Then could his War resisted.
Anthony,
Leave thy lascivious Vassailes. When thou once
Was beaten from Medena, where thou slew
Hirsius, and Pausa Consuls, at thy heel
Did Famine follow, whom thou fought against,
(Though daintily brought up) with patience more
Then Savages could suffer. Thou did drink
The stale of Horses, and the gilded Puddle
Which Beasts would cough at. Thy palate the did deign
The roughest Berry, on the rudest Hedge.
Yea, like the Stag, when Snow the Pasture sheets,
The barks of Trees thou browsed. On the Alps,
It is reported thou did eat strange flesh,
Which some did dye to look on: And all this
(It wounds thine Honour that I speak it now)
Was borne so like a Soldier, that thy cheek
So much as linked not.
It is pity of him.
Let his shames quickly
Drive him to Rome, it is time we twain
Did show our selves in the Field, and to that end
Assemble me immediate counsel, Pompey
Thrives in our Idleness.
To morrow Caesar,
I shall be furnished to inform you rightly
Both what by Sea and Land I can be able
To front this present time.
Till which encounter, it is my business too. Farewell.
Farewell my Lord, what you shall know mean time
Of stirs abroad, I shall beseech you Sir
To let me be partaker.
Doubt not sir, I knew it for my Bond.
Charmian.
Madam.
Ha, ha, give me to drink Mandragora.
Why Madam?
That I might sleep out this great gap of time:
My Anthony is away.
You think of him too much.
O it is Treason.
Madam, I trust not so.
Thou, Eunuch Martian?
What's your Highness pleasure?
Not now to hear thee sing. I take no pleasure
In ought an Eunuch he's: Tic well for thee,
That being vnseminar'd, thy freer thoughts
May not fly forth of Egypt. Hast thou Affections?
Yes gracious Madam.
Indeed?
Not in deed Madam, for I can do nothing
But what in deed is honest to be done:
Yet have I fierce Affections, and think
What Venus did with Mars.
Oh Charmion:
Where think thou he is now? Stands he, or sits he?
Or does he walk? Or is he on his Horse?
Oh happy horse to bear the weight of Anthony!
Do bravely Horse, for wot thou whom thou moou'st,
The demi Atlas of this Earth, the Arm
And Burganet of men. Hoe's speaking now,
Or murmuring, whore's my Serpent of old Nyle
(For so he calls me:) Now I feed my self
With most delicious poison. Think on me
That am with Phoebus amorous pinches black,
And wrinkled deep in time. Broad-fronted Caesar,
When thou was it here aboue the ground, I was
A morsel for a Monarch: and great Pompey
Would stand and make his eyes grow in my brow,
There would he anchor his Aspect, and dye
With looking on his life.
Sovereign of Egypt, hail.
How much unlike art thou Mark Anthony?
Yet coming from him, that great Med'cine hath
With his Tinct gilded thee.
How goes it with my brave Mark Anthony?
Last thing he did (dear Quen)
He kissed the last of many doubled kisses
This Orient Pearl. His speech sticks in my heart.
Mine ear must pluck it thence.
Good Friend, quoth he:
Say the firm Roman to great Egypt sends
This treasure of an Oyster: at whose foot
To mend the petty present, I will piece
Her opulent Throne, with Kingdoms. All the East,
(Say thou) shall call her Mistress. So he nodded,
And soberly did mount an Arme-gaunt Steed,
Who neighed so hye, that what I would have spoke,
Was beastly dumb by him.
What was he sad, or merry?
Like to the time of the year, between ye extremes
Of hot and cold, he was nor sad nor merry.
Oh well divided disposition: Note him,
Note him good Charmian, it is the man; but note him.
He was not sad, for he would shine on those
That make their looks by his. He was not merry,
Which seemed to tell them, his remembrance lay
In Egypt with his joy, but between both.
Oh heavenly mingle! Be thou sad, or merry,
The violence of either thee becomes,
So do's it no mans else. Met thou my Posts?
I Madam, twenty several Messengers.
Why do you send so thick?
Who's borne that day, when I forget to send to Anthony, shall dye a Beggar. Ink and paper Charmian. Welcome my good Alexas. Did I Charmian, efor love Caesar so?
Oh that brave Caesar!
Be choked with such another Emphasis,
Say the brave Anthony.
The valiant Caesar.
By Ices, I will give thee bloody teeth,
If thou with Caesar Parago nagaine:
My man of men.
By your most gracious pardon,
I sing but after you.
My Salad days,
When I was greene in judgment, cold in blood,
To say, as I said then. But come, away,
Get me Ink and Paper,
he shall have every day a several greeting, or Isle vnpeople Egypt.
If the great Gods be just, they shall assist
The deeds of justest men.
Know worthy Pompey, that what they do delay, they not deny.
Whiles we are suitors to their Throne, decays the thing we sue for.
We ignorant of our selves,
Beg often our own harms, which the wise Powers
Deny vs for our good: so find we profit
By loosing of our Prayers.
I shall do well:
The people love me, and the Sea is mine;
My powers are Crescent, and my Auguring hope
Says it will come to the full. Mark Anthony
In Egypt sits at dinner, and will make
No wars without doors. Caesar gets money where
He looses hearts: Lepidus flatters both,
Of both is flattered: but he neither loves,
Nor either cares for him.
Caesar and Lepidus are in the field,
A mighty strength they carry.
Where have you this? It is false.
From Siluius, Sir.
He dreams: I know they are in Rome together
Looking for Anthony: but all the charms of Love,
Salt Cleopatra soften thy wand lip,
Let Witchcraft join with Beauty, Lust with both,
Tie up the Libertine in a field of Feasts,
Keep his Brain fuming. Epicurean Cooks,
Sharpen with cloylesse sauce his Appetite,
That sleep and feeding may prorogue his Honour,
Even till a Lethied dullness
How now Varrius?
This is most certain, that I shall deliver:
Mark Anthony is every hour in Rome
Expected. Since he went from Egypt, it is
A space for farther Travail.
I could have given less matter
A better ear. Menas, I did not think
This amorous Surfetter would have donn'd his Helm
For such a petty War: His Souldiership
Is twice the other twain: But let vs rear
The higher our Opinion, that our stirring
Can from the lap of Egypt Widow, pluck
The near Lust-wearied Anthony.
I cannot hope,
Caesar and Anthony shall well greet together;
His Wife that's dead, did trespasses to Caesar,
His Brother wan'd upon him, although I think
Not moved by Anthony.
I know not Menas,
How lesser Enmities may give way to greater,
Were it not that we stand up against them all:
It were pregnant they should square between themselves,
For they have entertained cause enough
To draw their swords: but how the fear of vs
May Cement their divisions, and bind up
The petty difference, we yet not know:
Be it as our Gods will have it; it only stands
Our lives upon, to use our strongest hands
Come Menas.
Good Enobarbus, it is a worthy deed,
And shall become you well, to entreat your Captain
To soft and gentle speech.
I shall entreat him
To answer like himself: if Caesar move him,
Let Anthony look over Caesars head,
And speak as loud as Mars. By Iupiter,
Were I the wearer of Anthonio's Beard,
I would not shave it to day.
It is not a time for private stomaching.
Every time serves for the matter that is then borne in it.
But small to greater matters must give way.
Not if the small come first.
Your speech is passion: but pray you stir
No Embers up. Here comes the Noble Anthony.
And yonder Caesar.
If we compose well here, to Parthia:
Hark Ventidius.
I do not know Mecenas, ask Agrippa.
Noble Friends:
That which combined vs was most great, and let not
A leaner action rend vs. What's amiss,
May it be gently heard. When we debate
Our trivial difference loud, we do commit
Murder in healing wounds. Then Noble Partners,
The rather for I earnestly beseech,
Touch you the sourest points with sweetest terms,
Nor curstnee grow to the matter.
It is spoken well:
Were we before our Armies, and to fight,
I should do thus.
Welcome to Rome.
Thank you.
Sit.
Sit sir.
Nay then.
I learn, you take things ill, which are not so:
Or being, concern you not.
I must be laughed at, if or for nothing, or a little, I
Should say my self offended, and with you
Chiefly in the world. More laughed at, that I should
Once name you derogately: when to sound your name
It not concerned me.
My being in Egypt Caesar, what was it to you?
No more then my reciding here at Rome
Might be to you in Egypt: yet if you there
Did practise on my State, your being in Egypt
Might be my question.
How intend you, practised?
You may be pleased to catch at mine intent,
By what did here befall me. Your Wife and Brother
Made wars upon me, and their contestation
Was Theme for you, you were the word of war.
You do mistake your business, my Brother never
Did urge me in his Act: I did inquire it,
And have my Learning from some true reports
That drew their swords with you, did he not rather
Discredit my authority with yours,
And make the wars alike against my stomach,
Having alike your cause. Of this, my Letters
Before did satisfy you. If you'll patch a quarrel,
As matter whole you have to make it with,
It must not be with this.
You praise your self, by laying defects of judgemeant to me: but you patched up your excuses.
Not so, not so:
I know you could not lack, I am certain on it,
Very necessity of this thought, that I
Your Partner in the cause against which he fought,
Could not with graceful eyes attend those Wars
Which fronted mine own peace. As for my wife,
I would you had her spirit, in such another,
The third of the world is yours which with a Snaffle,
You may pace easy, but not such a wife.
Would we had all such wives, that the men might go to Wars with the women.
So much vncurbable, her Garboils (Caesar)
Made out of her impatience: which not wanted
Shrodenesse of policy to: I grieving grant,
Did you too much disquiet, for that you must,
But say I could not help it?
I wrote to you, when rioting in Alexandria you
Did pocket up my Letters: and with taunts
Did gibe my Misie out of audience.
Sir, he fell upon me, ere admitted, then:
Three Kings I had newly feasted, and did want
Of what I was in the morning: but next day
I told him of my self, which was as much
As to have asked him pardon. Let this Fellow
Be nothing of our strife: if we contend
Out of our question wipe him.
You have broken the Article of your oath, which you shall never have tongue to charge me with.
Soft Caesar.
No Lepidus, let him speak,
The Honour is Sacred which he talks on now,
Supposing that I lacked it: but on Caesar,
The Article of my oath.
To lend me Arms, and aide when I required them, the which you both denied.
Neglected rather:
And then when poisoned hours had bound me up
From mine own knowledge, as nearly as I may,
Isle play the penitent to you. But mine honesty,
Shall not make poor my greatness, nor my power
Work without it. Truth is, that Fuluia,
To have me out of Egypt, made Wars here,
For which my self, the ignorant motive, do
So far ake pardon, as befits mine Honour
To stoop in such a case.
It is Noble spoken.
If it might please you, to enforce no further
The griefs between ye: to forget them quite,
Were to remember: that the present need,
Speaks to atone you.
Worthily spoken Mecenas.
Or if you borrow one another Love for the instant, you may when you hear no more words of Pompey return it again: you shall have time to wrangle in, when you have nothing else to do.
Thou art a Soldier, only speak no more.
That truth should be silent, I had almost forgot.
You wrong this presence, therefore speak no more.
Go too then: your Considerate stone.
I do not much dislike the matter, but
The manner of his speech: for it cannot be,
We shall remain in friendship, our conditions
So differing in their acts. Yet if I knew,
What Hoop should hold vs staunch from edge to edge
A the world: I would pursue it.
Give me leave Caesar.
Speak Agrippa.
Thou hast a Sister by the Mothers side, admired
Octauia. Great Mark Anthony is now a widower.
Say not, say Agrippa; if Cleopater heard you, your proof were well deserved of rashness.
I am not married Caesar: let me here Agrippa further speak.
To hold you in perpetual amity,
To make you Brothers, and to knit your hearts
With an vn-slipping knot, take Anthony,
Octauia to his wife: whose beauty claims
No worse a husband then the best of men: whose
Virtue, and whose general graces, speak
That which none else can utter. By this marriage,
All little Jealousies which now seem great,
And all great fears, which now import their dangers,
Would then be nothing. Truth's would be tales,
Where now half tales be truth's: her love to both,
Would each to other, and all loves to both
Draw after her. Pardon what I have spoke,
For it is a studied not a present thought,
By duty ruminated.
Will Caesar speak?
Not till he hears how Anthony is touched,
With what is spoke already.
What power is in Agrippa,
If I would say Agrippa, be it so,
To make this good?
The power of Caesar,
And his power, unto Octauia.
May I never
(To this good purpose, that so fairly shows)
Dream of impediment: let me have thy hand
Further this act of Grace: and from this hour,
The heart of Brothers govern in our Loves,
And sway our great Designs.
There's my hand:
A Sister I bequeath you, whom no Brother
Did ever love so dearly. Let her live
To join our kingdoms, and our hearts, and never
Fly off our Loves again.
Happily, Amen.
I did not think to draw my Sword against Pompey,
For he hath laid strange courtesies, and great
Of late upon me. I must thank him only,
Least my remembrance, suffer ill report:
At heel of that, defy him.
Time calls vpon's,
Of vs must Pompey presently be sought,
Or else he seeks out vs.
Where lies he?
About the Mount-Mesena.
What is his strength by land?
Great, and increasing:
But by Sea he is an absolute Master.
So is the Fame,
Would we had spoke together. Hast we for it,
Yet ere we put our selves in Arms, dispatch we
The business we have talked of.
With most gladness,
And do inuit you to my Sisters view,
Whether straight Isle lead you.
Let vs Lepidus not lack your company.
Noble Anthony, not sickness should detain me.
Welcome from Egypt Sir.
Half the heart of Caesar, worthy Mecenas. My honourable Friend Agrippa.
Good Enobarbus.
We have cause to be glad, that matters are so well digested: you staid will by it in Egypt.
I Sir, we did sleep day out of countenance: and made the night light with drinking.
Eight Wilde-Boares roasted whole at a breakfast: and but twelve persons there. Is this true?
This was but as a Fly by an Eagle: we had much more monstrous matter of Feast, which worthily deserued noting.
She's a most triumphant Lady, if report be square to her.
When she first met Mark Anthony, she pursed up his heart upon the River of Sidnis.
There she appeared indeed: or my reporter deuis'd well for her.
I will tell you,
The Barge she sat in, like a burnished Throne
Burnt on the water: the Poop was beaten Gold,
Purple the Sails: and so perfumed that
The Winds were Loue-sicke.
With them the Owers were Silver,
Which to the tune of Flutes kept stroke, and made
The water which they beat, to follow faster;
As amorous of their strokes. For her own person,
It beggerd all description, she did lye
In her Pavilion, cloth of Gold, of Tissue,
O're-picturing that Vans, where we see
The fancy out-worke Nature. On each side her,
Stood pretty Dimpled Boys, like smiling Cupids,
With divers coloured Fans whose wind did seem,
To glove the delicate cheeks which they did cool,
And what they undid did.
Oh rare for Anthony.
Her Gentlewoman, like the Nereides,
So many Mer-maides tended her in the eyes,
And made their bends adornings. At the Helm.
A seeming Mer-maide steers: The Silken Tackle,
Swell with the touches of those Flower-soft hands,
That yearly frame the office. From the Barge
A strange invisible perfume hits the sense
Of the adjacent Wharfes. The City cast
Her people out upon her: and Anthony
Enthroned in the Market-place, did sit alone,
Whisling to the ayre: which but for vacancy,
Had gone to gaze on Cleopater too,
And made a gap in Nature.
Rare Egiptian.
Upon her landing, Anthony sent to her,
Invited her to Supper: she replied,
It should be better, he became her guest:
Which she entreated, our Courteous Anthony,
Whom ne'er the word of no woman hard speak,
Being barbered ten times o'er, goes to the Feast;
And for his ordinary, pays his heart,
For what his eyes eat only.
Royal Wench:
She made great Caesar lay his Sword to bed,
He ploughed her, and she cropped.
I saw her once
Hop forty Paces through the public street.
And having lost her breath, she spoke, and panted,
That she did make defect, perfection
And breathless power breath forth.
Now Anthony, must leave her utterly.
Never he will not:
Age cannot wither her, nor custom stale
Her infinite variety: other women cloy
The appetites they feed, but she makes hungry,
Where most she satisfies. For vildest things
Become themselves in her, that the holy Priests
Bless her, when she is Riggish.
If Beauty, Wisdom, Modesty, can settle
The heart of Anthony: Octauia is
A blessed Lottery to him.
Let vs go. Good Enobarbus, make your self my guest, whilst you abide here.
Humbly Sir I thank you.
The world, and my great office, will
Sometimes divide me from your bosom.
All which time, before the Gods my knee shall bow my ptayers to them for you.
Goodnight Sir. My Octauia
Read not my blemishes in the worlds report:
I have not kept my square, but that to come
Shall all be done by the Rule: good night dear Lady:
Good night Sir.
Goodnight.
Now sirrah: you do wish your self in Egypt?
Would I had never come from thence, nor you thither.
If you can, your reason?
I see it in my motion: have it not in my tongue,
But yet hie you to Egypt again.
Say to me, whose Fortunes shall rise higher Caesars or mine?
Caesars, Therefore (oh Anthony) stay not by his side
Thy Daemon that thy spirit which keeps thee, is
Noble, Courageous, high unmatchable,
Where Caesars is not. But near him, hy Angel
Becomes a fear: as being o're-powr'd, therefore
Make space enough between you.
Speak this no more.
To none but thee no more but: when to thee,
If thou dost play with him at any game,
Thou art sure to loose: And of that Natural luck
He beats thee against the odds. Thy Luster thickens,
When he shines by: I say again, thy spirit
Is all afraid to govern thee near him:
But he always it is Noble.
Get thee gone:
Say to Ventigius I would speak with him.
He shall to Parthia, be it Art or hap,
He hath spoken true. The very Dice obey him,
And in our sports my better cunning faints,
Under his chance, if we draw lots he speeds,
His Cocks do win the Battle, still of mine,
When it is all to nought: and his Quails ever
Beat mine (in hoop) at odd's. I will to Egypt:
And though I make this marriage for my peace,
In the East my pleasure lies. Oh come Ventigius.
You must to Parthia, your Commissions ready:
Follow me, and reciue't.
Trouble your selves no further: pray you hasten your Generals after.
Sir Mark Anthony, will even but kiss Octauia, and weal follow.
Till I shall see you in your Soldiers dress,
Which will become you both: Farewell.
We shall: as I conceive the journey, be at Mount before you Lepidus.
Your way is shorter, my purposes do draw me much about, you'll win two days upon me.
Sir good success.
Farewell.
Give me some Music: Music, moody food of vs that trade in Love.
The Music, hoe.
Let it alone, let's to Billards: come Charmian.
My arm is sore, best play with Martian.
As well a woman with an Eunuch plaide, as with a woman. Come you'll play with me Sir?
As well as I can Madam.
And when good will is showed,
Though't come to short
The Actor may plead pardon. Isle none now,
Give me mine Angle, weal to the River there
My Music playing far off. I will betray
Tawny fine fishes, my bended hook shall pierce
Their slimy jaws: and as I draw them up,
Isle think them every one an Anthony,
And say, ah ha; y' are caught.
It was merry when you wagered on your Angling, when your diver did hang a salt fish on his hook which he with fervency drew up.
That time? Oh times:
I laughed him out of patience: and that night
I laughed him into patience, and next morn,
Ere the ninth hour, I drunk him to his bed:
Then put my Tires and Mantles on him, whilst
I wore his Sword Phillippan. Oh from Italy,
Ram thou thy fruitful tidings in mine ears,
That long time have bin barren.
Madam, Madam.
Anthonyo's dead.
If thou say so Villain, thou kil'st thy Mistress:
But well and free, if thou so yield him.
There is Gold, and here
My blow veins to kiss: a hand that Kings
Have leapt, and trembled kissing.
First Madam, he is well.
Why there's more Gold.
But sirrah mark, we use
To say, the dead are well: bring it to that,
The Gold I give thee, will I melt and power
Down thy ill uttering throat.
Good Madam hear me.
Well, go too I will:
But there's no goodness in thy face if Anthony
Be free and healthful; so tart a favour
To trumpet such good tidings. If not well,
Thou should come like a Fury crowned with Snakes,
Not like a formal man.
Wilt please you hear me?
I have a mind to strike thee ere thou speak:
Yet if thou say Anthony lives, it is well,
Or friends with Caesar, or not Captive to him,
Isle set thee in a shower of Gold, and hail
Rich Pearls upon thee.
Madam, he's well.
Well said.
And Friends with Caesar.
The art an honest man.
Caesar, and he, are greater Friends then ever.
Make thee a Fortune from me.
But yet Madam.
I do not like but yet, it does allay
The good precedence, fie upon but yet,
Bur yet is as a Jailer to bring forth
Some monstrous Malefactor. Prithee Friend,
Power out the pack of matter to mine ear,
The good and bad together: he's friends with Caesar,
In state of health thou say, and thou say, free.
Free Madam, no: I made no such report,
He's bound unto Octauia.
For what good turn?
For the best turn in the bed.
I am pale Charmian.
Madam, he's married to Octauia.
The most infectious Pestilence upon thee.
Good Madam patience.
What say you?
Hence horrible Villain, o le spurn thine eyes
Like balls before me: Isle vnhaire thy head,
Thou shalt be whipped with Wire, and stewed in brine,
Smarting in lingering pickle.
Gracious Madam,
I that do bring the news, made not the match.
Say it is not so, a Province I will give thee,
And make thy Fortunes proud: the blow thou had
Shall make thy peace, for moving me to rage,
And I will boot thee with what gift beside
Thy modesty can beg.
He's married Madam.
Rogue, thou hast lived too long.
Nay then Isle run:
What mean you Madam, I have made no fault.
Good Madam keep your self within your self,
The man is innocent.
Some Innocents scope not the thunderbolt:
Melt Egypt into Nyle: and kindly creatures
Turn all to Serpents. Call the slave again,
Though I am mad, I will not byte him: Call?
He is afraid to come.
I will not hurt him,
These hands do lack Nobility, that they strike
A meaner then my self: since I my self
Have given my self the cause. Come hither Sir.
Though it be honest, it is never good
To bring bad news: give to a gracious Message
An host of tongues, but let ill tidings tell
Themselves, when they be felt.
I have done my duty.
Is he married?
I cannot hate thee worser then I do,
If thou again say yes.
He's married Madam.
The Gods confound thee,
Dost thou hold there still?
Should I lye Madame?
Oh, I would thou did:
So half my Egypt were submerged and made
A Cistern for scaled Snakes. Go get thee hence,
Had thou Narcissus in thy face to me,
Thou would appear most ugly: He is married?
I crave your Highness pardon.
He is married?
Take no offence, that I would not offend you,
To punish me for what you make me do
Seems much unequal, he's married to Octauia.
Oh that his fault should make a knave of thee,
That art not what the art sure of. Get thee hence,
The Merchandise which thou hast brought from Rome
Are all too dear for me:
Lye they upon thy hand, and be undone by em.
Good your Highness patience.
In praising Anthony, I have dispraised Caesar.
Many times Madam.
I am paid for it now: lead me from hence,
I faint, oh Iras, Charmian: it is no matter.
Go to the Fellow, good Alexas bid him
Report the feature of Octauia: her years,
Her inclination, let him not leave out
The colour of her hair. Bring me word quickly,
Let him for ever go, let him not Charmian,
Though he be painted one way like a Gorgon,
The other ways a Mars. Bid you Alexas
Bring me word, how tall she is: pity me Charmian,
But do not speak to me. Lead me to my Chamber.
Your Hostages I have, so have you mine:
And we shall talk before we fight.
Most meet that first we come to words,
And therefore have we
Our written purposes before vs sent,
Which if thou hast considered, let vs know,
If twill tie up thy discontented Sword,
And carry back to Cicely much tall youth,
That else must perish here.
To you all three,
The Senators alone of this great world,
Chief Factors for the Gods. I do not know,
Wherefore my Father should revengers want,
Having a Son and Friends, since Iulius Caesar,
Who at Philippe the good Brutus ghosted,
There saw you labouring for him. What was it
That moved pale Cassius to conspire? And what
Made all-honor'd, honest, Romaine Brutus,
With the armed rest, Courtiers of beauteous freedom,
To drench the Capitol, but that they would
Have one man but a man, and that his it
Hath made me rigge my Navy. At whose burden,
The angered Ocean fomes, with which I meant
To scourge the ingratitude, that despiteful Rome
Cast on my Noble Father.
Take your time.
Thou can not fear vs Pompey with thy sails.
Weal speak with thee at Sea. At land thou know
How much we do o're-count thee.
At Land indeed
Thou dost ore count me of my Fatherrs house:
But since the Cuckoo builds not for himself,
Remain in it as thou moist.
Be pleased to tell vs,
(For this is from the present now you take)
The offers we have sent you.
There's the point.
Which do not be entreated too,
But weigh what it is worth embraced
And what may follow to try a larger Fortune.
You have made me offer
Of Cicely, Sardinia: and I must
Rid all the Sea of Pirats. Then, to send
Measures of Wheat to Rome: this greed upon,
To part with vnhackt edges, and bear back
Our Targes vndinted.
That's our offer.
Know then I came before you here,
A man prepared
To take this offer. But Mark Anthony,
Put me to some impatience: though I loose
The praise of it by telling. You must know
When Caesar and your Brother were at blows,
Your Mother came to Cicely, and did find
Her welcome Friendly.
I have heard it Pompey.
And am well studied for a liberal thanks,
Which I do owe you.
Let me have your hand:
I did not think Sir, to have met you here,
The beds in the East are soft, and thanks to you,
That called me timelier then my purpose hither:
For I have gamed by it.
Since I saw you last, ther's a change upon you.
Well, I know not,
What counts harsh Fotune cost's upon my face,
But in my bosom shall she never come,
To make my heart her vassal.
Well met here.
I hope so Lepidus, thus we are agreed:
I crave our composion may be written
And sealed between vs,
That's the next to do.
Weal feast each other, ere we part, and let's
Draw lots who shall begin.
That will I Pompey.
No Anthony take the lot: but first or last, your fine Egyptian cookery shall have the same, I have heard that Iulius Caesar, grew fat with feasting there.
You have heard much.
I have fair meaning Sir.
And fair words to them.
Then so much have I heard,
And I have heard Appolodorus carried
No more that: he did so.
What I pray you?
A certain Queen to Caesar in a Matris.
I know thee now, how far'st thou Soldier?
Well, and well am like to do, for I perceive
Four Feasts are toward.
Let me shake thy hand,
I never hated thee: I have seen thee fight,
When I have envied thy behaviour.
Sir, I never loved you much, but I have praised ye,
When you have well deserved ten times as much,
As I have said you did.
Enjoy thy plainness,
It nothing ill becomes thee:
Aboard my Gally, I inuit you all.
Will you lead Lords?
Shew's the way, sir.
Come.
Thy Father Pompey would ne'er have made this Treaty. You, and I have known sir.
At Sea, I think.
We have Sir.
You have done well by water.
And you by Land.
I will praise any man that will praise me, though it cannot be denied what I have done by Land.
Nor what I have done by water.
Yes some-thing you can deny for your own safety: you have bin a great Thief by Sea.
And you by Land.
There I deny my Land service: but give me your hand Menas, if our eyes had authority, here they might take two Thieves kissing.
All men's faces are true, whatsomere their hands are.
But there is never a fair Woman, he's a true Face.
No slander, they steal hearts.
We came hither to fight with you.
For my part, I am sorry it is turned to a Drinking. Pompey doth this day laugh away his Fortune.
If he do, sure he cannot weep't back again.
Y' have said Sir, we looked not for Mark Anthony here, pray you, is he married to Cleopatra?
Caesars Sister is called Octauia.
True Sir, she was the wife of Caius Marcellus.
But she is now the wife of Marcus Anthonius.
Pray 'ye sir.
It is true.
Then is Caesar and he, for ever knit together.
If I were bound to Divine of this unity, I wold not Prophecy so.
I think the policy of that purpose, made more i the Marriage, then the love of the parties.
I think so too. But you shall find the band that seems to tie their friendship together, will bee the very strangler of their Amity: Octauia is of a holy, cold, and still conversation.
Who would not have his wife so?
Not he that himself is not so: which is Mark Anthony: he will to his Egyptian dish again: then shall the sighs of Octauia blow the fire up in Caesar, and (as I said before) that which is the strength of their Amity, shall prove the immediate Author of their variance. Anthony will use his affection where it is. Hee married but his occasion here.
And thus it may be, Come Sir, will you aboard?
I have a health for you.
I shall take it sir: we have used our Throats in Egypt.
Come, let's away.
Here they'll be man: some of the their Plants are ill rooted already, the least wind in the world will blow them down.
Lepidus is high Conlord.
They have made him drink Alms drink.
As they pinch one another by the disposition, hee cries out, no more; reconciles them to his entreaty, and himself to the drink.
But it raises the greatet war between him &amp; his discretion.
Why this it is to have a name in great men's Felllowship: I had as live have a Reed that will doe me no service, as a Partisan I could not heave.
To be called into a huge Sphere, and not to be seen to move in it, are the holes where eyes should bee, which pitifully disaster the cheeks.
Thus do they Sir: they take the flow of the Nyle
By certain scales in the Pyramid: they know
By 'th height, the lowness, or the mean: If dearth
Or Foizon follow. The higher Nilus swells,
The more it promises: as it ebbes, the Seedsman
Upon the slime and Ooze scatters his grain,
And shortly comes to Harvest.
Y' have strange Serpents there?
I Lepidus.
Your Serpent of Egypt, is bred now of your mud by the operation of your Sun: so is your Crocodile.
They are so.
Sit, and some Wine: A health to Lepidus.
I am not so well as I should be:
But Isle ne'er out.
Not till you have slept: I fear me you'll bee in till then.
Nay certainly, I have heard the Ptolemies Pyramisis are very goodly things: without contradiction I have heard that.
Pompey, a word.
Say in mine ear, what is it.
Forsake thy seat I do beseech thee Captain,
And hear me speak a word.
Forbear me till anon.
This Wine for Lepidus.
What manner of thing is your Crocodile?
It is shaped sir like it self, and it is as broad as it hath breadth; It is just so high as it is, and moos with it own organs. It lives by that which nourishes it, and the Elements once out of it, it Transmigrates.
What colour is it of?
Of it own colour too.
It is a strange Serpent.
It is so, and the tears of it are wet.
Will this description satisfy him?
With the Health that Pompey gives him, else he is a very Epicure.
Go hang sir, hang: tell me of that? Away:
Do as I bid you. Whore's this Cup I called for?
If for the sake of Merit thou wilt hear me,
Rise from thy stool.
I think the art mad: the matter?
I have ever held my cap off to thy Fortunes.
Thou hast served me with much faith: what's else to say? Be jolly Lords.
These Quicke-sands Lepidus,
Keep off, them for you sink.
Wilt thou be Lord of all the world?
What say thou?
Wilt thou be Lord of the whole world?
That's twice.
How should that be?
But entertain it, and though thou think me poor. I am the man will give thee all the world.
Hast thou drunk well.
No Pompey, I have kept me from the cup,
Thou art if thou dare be, the earthly Jove:
What ere the Ocean pales, or sky inclippes,
Is thine, if thou wilt have it.
Show me which way?
These three World-sharers, these Competitors
Are in thy vessel. Let me cut the Cable,
And when we are put off, fall to their throats:
All there is thine.
Ah, this thou should have done,
And not have spoke on it. In me it is villainy,
In thee, 't had bin good service: thou must know,
It is not my profit that does lead mine Honour:
Mine Honour it, Repent that ere thy tongue,
Hath so betrayed thine act. Being done unknown,
I should have found it afterwards well done,
But must condemn it now: desist, and drink.
For this, Isle never follow
Thy paled Fortunes more,
Who seeks and will not take, when once it is offered,
Shall never find it more.
This health to Lepidus.
Bear him ashore,
Isle pledge it for him Pompey.
Heere's to thee Menas.
Enobarbus, welcome.
Fill till the cup be hid.
There's a strong Fellow Menas.
Why?
A bears the third part of the world man: see not?
The third part, then he is drunk: would it were all, that it might go on wheels.
Drink thou: increase the Reels.
Come.
This is not yet an Alexandrian Feast.
It ripen's towards it: strike the Vessels hoe.
Heere's to Caesar.
I could well forbear't, it's monstrous labour when I wash my brain, and it grow fouler.
Be a Child of the time.
Possess it, Isle make answer: but I had rather fast from all, four days, then drink so much in one.
Ha my brave Emperor, shall we dance now the Egyptian Backenals, and celebrate our drink?
Let's have it good Soldier.
Come, let's all take hands,
Till that the conquering Wine hath stooped our sense,
In soft and delicate Lethe.
All take hands:
Make battery to our ears with the loud Music,
The while, Isle place you, then the Boy shall sing.
The holding every man shall beat as loud,
As his strong sides can volley.
Come thou Monarch of the Vine,
Plump Bacchus, with pink eyne:
In thy Fattes our Cares be drowned,
With thy Grapes our hairs be Crowned.
Cup vs till the world go round,
Cup vs till the world go round.
What would you more?
Pompey goodnight. Good Brother
Let me request you of our graver business
Frowns at this levity. Gentle Lords let's part,
You see we have burnt our cheeks. Strong Enobarbe
Is weaker then the Wine, and mine own tongue
Spleet's what it speaks: the wilde disguise hath almost
Anticked vs all. What needs more words? goodnight.
Good Anthony your hand.
Isle try you on the shore.
And shall Sir, gives your hand.
Oh Anthony, you have my Father house.
But what, we are Friends?
Come down into the Boat.
Take heed you fall not Menas: Isle not on shore,
No to my Cabin: these Drums,
These Trumpets, Flutes: what
Let Neptune hear, we bid aloud farewell
To these great Fellows. Sound and be hanged, sound out.
Hoo says a there's my Cap.
Hoe, Noble Captain, come.
Now darting Parthya art thou stroke, and now
Pleased Fortune does of Marcus Crassus death
Make me revenger. Bear the Kings Sons body,
Before our Army, thy Pacorus Orates,
Pays this for Marcus Crassus.
Noble entidius,
Whilst yet with Parthian blood thy Sword is warm,
The Fugitive Parthians follow. Spur through Media,
Mesapotamia, and the shelters, whether
The routed fly. So thy grand Captain Anthony
Shall set thee on triumphant Chariots, and
Put Garlands on thy head.
Oh Sillius, Sillius,
I have done enough. A lower place note well
May make too great an act. For learn this Sillius,
Better to leave undone, then by our deed
Acquire too high a Fame, when him we serves away.
Caesar and Anthony have ever won
More in their officer, then person. Sossius
One of my place in Syria, his Lieutenant,
For quick accumulation of renown,
Which he achieved by' the minute, lost his favour.
Who does in the Wars more then his Captain can,
Becomes his Captains Captain: and Ambition
(The Soldiers virtue) rather makes choice of loss
Then gain, which darkens him.
I could do more to do Anthonius good,
But it would offend him. And in his offence,
Should my performance perish.
Thou hast Ventidius that, without the which a Soldier and his Sword grants scarce distinction: thou wilt write to Anthony.
Isle humbly signify what in his name,
That magical word of War we have effected,
How with his Banners, and his well paid ranks,
The nere-yet beaten Horse of Parthia,
We have iaded out of the Field.
Where is he now?
He purposes to Athens, whither with what hast
The weight we must convey wed's, will permit:
We shall appear before him. On there, pass along.
What are the Brothers parted?
They have dispatcht with Pompey, he is gone,
The other three are Sealing. Octauia weeps
To part from Rome: Caesar is sad, and Lepidus
Since Pompey's feast, as Menas says, is troubled
With the Greene-Sicknesse.
It is a Noble Lepidus.
A very fine one: oh, how he loves Caesar.
Nay but how dearly he adores Mark Anthony.
Caesar? why he's the Iupiter of men.
What's Anthony, the God of Iupiter?
Spake you of Caesar? How, the nonpareil?
Oh Anthony, oh thou Arabian Bird!
Would you praise Caesar, say Caesar go no further.
Indeed he plied them both with excellent praises.
But he loves Caesar best, yet he loves Anthony:
Hoo, Hearts, Tongues, Figure,
Scribes, Bards, Poets, cannot
Think speak, cast, write, sing, number: hoo,
His love to Anthony. But as for Caesar,
Kneel down, kneel down, and wonder.
Both he loves.
They are his Shards, and he their Beetle, so:
This is to horse: Adieu, Noble Agrippa.
Good Fortune worthy Soldier, and farewell.
No further Sir.
You take from me a great part of my self:
Use me well in it. Sister, prove such a wife
As my thoughts make thee, and as my farthest Band
Shall pass on thy approof: most Noble Anthony,
Let not the piece of Virtue which is set
Betwixt vs, as the Cement of our love
To keep it builded, be the Ram to batter
The Fortress of it: for better might we
Have loved without this mean, if on both parts
This be not cherished.
Make me not offended, in your distrust.
I have said.
You shall not find,
Though you be therein curious, the lest cause
For what you seem to fear, so the Gods keep you,
And make the hearts of Romaines serve your ends:
We will here part.
Farewell my dearest Sister, fare thee well,
The Elements be kind to thee, and make
Thy spirits all of comfort: fare thee well.
My Noble Brother.
The April's in her eyes, it is Loves spring,
And these the showers to bring it on: be cheerful.
Sir look well to my Husbands house: and 
What Octauia?
Isle tell you in your ear.
Her tongue will not obey her heart, nor can
Her oared inform her tongue.
The Swans down feather
That stands upon the Swell at the full of Tide:
And neither way inclines.
Will Caesar weep?
He he's a cloud in's face.
He were the worse for that were he a Horse, so is he being aman.
Why Enobarbus:
When Anthony found Iulius Caesar dead,
He cried almost to roaring: And he wept,
When at Philippe he found Brutus slain.
That year indeed, he was troubled with a rheum,
What willingly he did confound, he wailed,
Believe till I weep too.
No sweet Octauia,
You shall hear from me still: the time shall not
Out-go my thinking on you.
Come Sir, come,
Isle wrestle with you in my strength of love,
Look here I have you, thus I let you go,
And give you to the Gods.
Adieu, be happy.
Let all the number of the Stars give light
To thy fair way.
Farewell, farewell.
Farewell.
Where is the Fellow?
Half afraid to come.
Go too, go too: Come hither Sir.
Good Majesty: Herod of Jury dare not look upon you, but when you are well pleased.
That Harrods head, Isle have: but how? When Anthony is gone, through whom I might command it: Come thou near.
Most gracious Majesty.
Did thou behold Octauia?
I dread Queen.
Where?
Madam in Rome, I looked her in the face: and saw her led between her Brother, and Mark Anthony.
Is she as tall as me?
She is not Madam.
Did hear her speak?
Is she shrill tongued or low?
Madam, I heard her speak, she is low voiced.
That's not so good: he cannot like her long.
Like her? Oh Ices: it is impossible.
I think so Charmian: dull of tongue, &amp; dwarfish
What Majesty is in her gate, remember
If ere thou look on Majesty.
She creeps: her motion, &amp; her station are as one.
She shows a body, rather then a life,
A Statue, then a Breather.
Is this certain?
Or I have no observance.
Three in Egypt cannot make better note.
He's very knowing, I do perceiu't,
There's nothing in her yet.
The Fellow he's good judgment.
Excellent.
Guess at her years, I prithee.
Madam, she was a widow.
Widow? Charmian, hark.
And I do think she's thirty.
Bear thou her face in mind? is it long or round?
Round, even to faultiness.
For the most part too, they are foolish that are so. Her hair what colour?
Browne Madam: and her forehead
As low as she would wish it.
There's Gold for thee,
Thou must not take my former sharpness ill,
I will employ thee back again: I find thee
Most fit for business. Go, make thee ready,
Our Letters are prepared.
A proper man.
Indeed he is so: I repent me much
That so I harried him. Why me think's by him,
This Creature's no such thing.
Nothing Madam.
The man hath seen some Majesty, and should know.
Hath he seen Majesty? Ices else defend: and serving you so long.
I have one thing more to ask him yet good Charmian: but it is no matter, thou shalt bring him to me where I will write; all may be well enough.
I warrant you Madam.
Nay, nay Octauia, not only that,
That were excusable, that and thousands more
Of semblably import, but he hath waged
New Wars against Pompey. Made his will, and read it,
To public ear, spoke scantly of me,
When perforce he could not
But pay me terms of Honour: cold and sickly
He vented then most narrow measure: lent me,
When the best hint was given him: he not looked,
Or did it from his teeth.
Oh my good Lord,
Believe not all, or if you must believe,
Stomach not all. A more unhappy Lady,
If this division chance, ne'er stood between
Praying for both parts:
The good Gods will mock me presently,
When I shall pray: Oh bless my Lord, and Husband,
Undo that prayer, by crying out as loud,
Oh bless my Brother. Husband win, win Brother,
Prays, and destroys the prayer, no midway
Twixt these extremes at all.
Gentle Octauia,
Let your best love draw to that point which seeks
Best to preserve it: if I loose mine Honour,
I loose my self: better I were not yours
Then your so branchless. But as you requested,
Your self shall go between's, the mean time Lady,
Isle raise the preparation of a War
Shall stain your Brother, make your soonest hast,
So your desires are yours.
Thanks to my Lord,
The Jove of power make me most weak, most weak,
You reconciler: Wars twixt you twain would be,
As if the world should cleave, and that slain men
Should soader up the Rift.
When it appears to you where this begins,
Turn your displeasure that way, for our faults
Can never be so equal, that your love
Can equally move with them. Provide your going,
Choose your own company, and command what cost
Your heart he's mind too.
How now Friend Eros?
Ther's strange News come Sir.
What man?
Caesar &amp; Lepidus have made wars upon Pompey.
This is old, what is the success?
Caesar having made use of him in the wars against Pompey: presently denied him riuality, would not let him partake in the glory of the action, and not resting here, accuses him of Letters he had formerly wrote to Pompey. Upon his own appeal seizes him, so the poor their is up, till death enlarge his Confine.
Then would thou had a pair of chaps no more, and throw between them all the food thou hast, they'll grind the other. Whore's Anthony?
He's walking in the garden thus, and spurns
The rush that lies before him. Cries Fool Lepidus,
And threats the throat of that his Officer,
That murdered Pompey.
Our great Navies rigged.
For Italy and Caesar, more Domitius,
My Lord desires you presently: my News
I might have told hereafter.
Twill be nought, but let it be: bring me to Anthony.
Come Sir,
Contemning Rome he he's done all this, &amp; more
In Alexandria: heere's the manner of't:
In the Market place on a Tribunal silvered,
Cleopatra and himself in Chairs of Gold
Were publicly enthroned: at the feet sat
Caesarian whom they call my Fathers Son,
And all the unlawful issue, that their Lust
Since then hath made between them. Unto her,
He gave the establishment of Egypt, made her
Of lower Syria, Cyprus, Lydia, absolute Queen.
This in the public eye?
In the common show place, where they exercise,
His Sons hither proclaimed the King of Kings,
Great Media, Parthia, and Armenia
He gave to Alexander. To Ptolomy he assigned,
Syria, Silicia, and Phoenetia: she
In the habiliments of the Goddess Ices
That day appeared, and oft before gave audience,
As it is reported so.
Let Rome be thus informed.
Who queasy with his insolence already,
Will their good thoughts call from him
The people knows it,
And have now received his accusations.
Who does he accuse?
Caesar, and that having in Cicilie
Sextus Pompeius spoiled, we had not rated him
His part of the Isle. Then does he say, he lent me
Some shipping vnrestor'd. Lastly, he frets
That Lepidus of the Triumpherate, should be deposed,
And being that, we detain all his Revenue.
Sir, this should be answered.
It is done already, and the Messenger gone:
I have told him Lepidus was grown too cruel,
That he his high Authority abused,
And did deserve his change: for what I have conquered,
I grant him part: but then in his Armenia,
And other of his conquered Kingdoms, I demand the like
He will never yield to that.
Nor must not then be yielded to in this.
Hail Caesar, and my L hail most dear Caesar.
That ever I should call thee Cast-away.
You have not called me so, nor have you cause.
Why have you stolen upon vs thus? you come not
Like Caesars Sister, The wife of Anthony
Should have an Army for an Usher, and
The neighs of Horse to tell of her approach,
Long ere she did appear. The trees by' the way
Should have borne men, and expectation fainted,
Longing for what it had not. Nay, the dust
Should have ascended to the Roof of Heaven,
Raised by your populous Troops: But you are come
A Market-maid to Rome, and have prevented
The ostentation of our love; which left vnshewne,
Is often left unloved: we should have met you
By Sea, and Land, supplying every Stage
With an augmented greeting.
Good my Lord,
To come thus was I not constrained, but did it
On my free-will. My Lord Mark Anthony,
Hearing that you prepared for War, acquainted
My grieved ear withal: whereon I begged
His pardon for return.
Which soon he granted,
Being an abstract 'tweene his Lust, and him.
Do not say so, my Lord.
I have eyes upon him,
And his affairs come to me on the wind: where is he now?
My Lord, in Athens.
No my most wronged Sister, Cleopatra
Hath nodded him to her. He hath given his Empire
Up to a Whore, who now are levying
The Kings of the earth for War. He hath assembled,
Bochus the King of Lybia, Archilaus
Of Cappadocia, Philadelphos King
Of Paplagonia: the Thracian King Adullas,
King Mauchus of Arabia, King of Pont,
Herod of Iewry Mithridates King
Of Comagear, Polemen and Amintas,
The Kings of Mede, and Licoania,
With a more larger List of Scepters.
Aye me most wretched,
That have my heart parted betwixt two Friends,
That does afflict each other.
Welcome hither: your Letters did withhold our breaking forth
Till we perceived both how you were wrong led,
And we in negligent danger: cheer your heart,
Be you not troubled with the time, which drives
O'er your content, these strong necessities,
But let determined things to destiny
Hold vnbewayl'd their way. Welcome to Rome,
Nothing more dear to me: You are abused
Beyond the mark of thought: and the high Gods
To do you Justice, makes his Ministers
Of vs, and those that love you. Best of comfort,
And ever welcome to vs.
Welcome Lady.
Welcome dear Madam,
Each heart in Rome does love and pity you,
Only the adulterous Anthony, most large
In his abominations, turns you off,
And gives his potent Regiment to a Trull
That noises it against vs
Is it so sir?
Most certain: Sister welcome: pray you
Be ever known to patience. My dearest Sister.
I will be even with thee, doubt it not.
But why, why, why?
Thou hast forespoke my being in these wars,
And say it it not fit.
Well: is it, is it.
If not, denounced against vs, why should not we be there in person.
Well, I could reply: if wee should serve with Horse and Mares together, the Horse were merely lost: the Mares would bear a Soldier and his Horse.
What is it you say?
Your presence needs must puzzle Anthony,
Take from his heart, take from his Brain, from his time,
What should not then be spared. He is already
Traduced for Levity, and it is said in Rome,
That Photinus an Eunuch, and your Maids
Manage this war.
Sink Rome, and their tongues rot
That speak against vs. A Charge we bear in the War,
And as the president of my Kingdom will
Appear there for a man. Speak not against it,
I will not stay behind.
Nay I have done, here comes the Emperor.
Is it not strange Camidius,
That from Tarrentum, and Brandusium,
He could so quickly cut the Ionian Sea,
And take in Troine. You have heard on it (Sweet?)
Celerity is never more admired,
Then by the negligent.
A good rebuke,
Which might have well becomed the best of men
To taunt at slackness. Camidius, wee
Will fight with him by Sea.
By Sea, what else?
Why will my Lord, do so?
For that he dares vs too't.
So hath my Lord, dared him to single fight.
I, and to wage this Battle at Pharsalia,
Where Caesar fought with Pompey. But these offers
Which serve not for his vantage, he shakes off,
And so should you.
Your Ships are not well manned,
Your Mariners are Militers, Reapers people
Ingroft by swift Impress. In Caesars Fleet,
Are those, that often have against Pompey fought,
Their ships are yare, yours heavy: no disgrace
Shall fall you for refusing him at Sea,
Being prepared for Land.
By Sea, by Sea.
Most worthy Sir, you therein throw away
The absolute Soldiership you have by Land,
Distract your Army, which doth most consist
Of Warre-markt-footmen, leave vnexecuted
Your own renowned knowledge, quite forgo
The way which promises assurance, and
Give up your self merely to chance and hazard,
From firm Security.
Isle fight at Sea.
I have sixty Sails, Caesar none better.
Our ouer-plus of shipping will we burn,
And with the rest full manned, from the head of Action
Beat the approaching Caesar. But if we fail,
We then can do it at Land.
Thy Business?
The News is true, my Lord, he is descried, Caesar he's taken Toryne.
Can he be there in person? It is impossible
Strange, that his power should be. Camidius,
Our nineteen Legions thou shalt hold by Land,
And our twelve thousand Horse. We'll to our Ship,
Away my Thetis.
How now worthy Soldier?
Oh Noble Emperor, do not fight by Sea,
Trust not to rotten planks: Do you misdoubt
This Sword, and these my Wounds; let the Egyptians
And the Phoenicians go a ducking: wee
Have used to conquer standing on the earth,
And fighting foot to foot.
Well, well, away.
By Hercules I think I am in the right.
Soldier thou art: but his whole action grows
Not in the power on it: so our Leaders lead,
And we are Women's men.
You keep by Land the Legions and the Horse whole, do you not?
Marcus Octauius, Marcus Iusteus,
Publicola, and Celius, are for Sea:
But we keep whole by Land. This speed of Caesars
Carries beyond belief.
While he was yet in Rome.
His power went out in such distractions,
As beguiled all Spies.
Who's his Lieutenant, hear you?
They say, one Towrus.
Well, I know the man.
The Emperor calls Camidius.
With News the times wit a Labour,
And throws forth each minute, some.
Towrus?
My Lord.
Strike not by Land,
Keep whole, provoke not Battle
Till we have done at Sea. Do not exceed
The Prescript of this Scroll: Our fortune lies
Upon this jump.
Set we our Squadrons on yond side of the Hill,
In eye of Caesars battle, from which place
We may the number of the Ships behold,
And so proceed accordingly.
Nought, nought, al nought, I can behold no longer:
Thantoniad, the Egyptian Admiral,
With all their sixty fly, and turn the Rudder:
To see it, mine eyes are blasted.
Gods, &amp; Goddesses, all the whole synod of them!
What's thy passion.
The greater Cantle of the world, is lost
With very ignorance, we have kissed away
Kingdoms, and Provinces.
How appears the Fight?
On our side, like the Token'd Pestilence,
Where death is sure. Yon ribaudred Nag of Egypt,
(Whom Leprosy o're-take) in the midst of the fight,
When vantage like a pair of Twins appeared
Both as the same, or rather outs the elder;
(The Breeze upon her) like a Cow in Inn,
Hoists Sails, and flies.
That I beheld:
Mine eyes did sicken at the sight, and could not.
Endure a further view.
She once being looft,
The Noble ruin of her Magic, Anthony,
Claps on his Sea-wing, and (like a doting Mallard)
Leaving the Fight in height, flies after her:
I never saw an Action of sch shame;
Experience, Man-hood, Honour, ne'er before,
Did violate so it self.
Alack, alack.
Our Fortune on the Sea is out of breath,
And sinks most lamentably. Had our General
Bin what he knew himself, it had gone well:
Oh his he's given example for our flight,
Most grossly by his own.
I, are you thereabouts? Why then goodnight indeed.
Toward Peloponnesus are they fled.
It is easy toot,
And there I will attend what further comes.
To Caesar will I render
My Legions and my Horse, six Kings already
Show me the way of yielding.
Isle yet follow
The wounded chance of Anthony, though my reason
Sits in the wind against me.
Hark, the Land bids me tread no more upon it,
It is ashamed to bear me. Friends, come hither,
I am so lated in the world, that I
Have lost my way for ever. I have a ship,
Laden with Gold, take that, divide it: fly,
And make your peace with Caesar.
Fly? Not wee.
I have fled my self, and have instructed cowards
To run, and show their shoulders. Friends be gone,
I have my self resolved upon a course,
Which has no need of you. Be gone,
My Treasure's in the Harbour. Take it: Oh,
I followed that I blush to look upon,
My very haites do mutiny: for the white
Reprove the browne for rashness, and they them
For fear, and doting. Friends be gone, you shall
Have Letters from me to some Friends, that will
Sweep your way for you. Pray you look not sad,
Nor make replies of loathnesse, take the hint
Which my despair proclaims. Let them be left
Which leaves it self, to the Sea-side straight way;
I will possess you of that ship and Treasure.
Leave me, I pray a little: pray you now,
Nay do so: for indeed I have lost command,
Therefore I pray you, Isle see you by and by.
Nay gentle Madam, to him, comfort him.
Do most dear Queen.
Do, why, what else?
Let me sit down: Oh Iuno.
No, no, no, no, no.
See you here, Sir?
Oh fie, fie, fie.
Madam.
Madam, oh good Empress.
Sir, sir.
Yes my Lord, yes; he at Philippe kept
His sword even like a dancer while I struck
The lean and wrinkled Cassius, and it was I
That the mad Brutus ended: he alone
Dealt on Lieutenantry, and no practise had
In the brave squares of War: yet now: no matter.
Ah stand by.
The Queen my Lord, the Queen.
Go to him, Madam, speak to him,
Hoe's vnqualited with very shame.
Well then, sustain me: Oh.
Most Noble Sir arise, the Queen approaches,
Her head's declined, and death will cease her, but
Your comfort makes the rescue.
I have offended Reputation,
A most unnoble sweruing.
Sir, the Queen.
Oh whether hast thou lead me Egypt, see
How I convey my shame, out of thine eyes,
By looking back what I have left behind
Stroy'd in dishonour.
Oh my Lord, my Lord.
Forgive my fearful sails, I little thought
You would have followed.
Egypt, thou knew too well,
My heart was to thy Rudder tied by' the strings,
And thou should stowe me after. O'er my spirit
The full supremacy thou knew, and that
Thy beck, might from the bidding of the Gods
Command me.
Oh my pardon.
Now I must
To the young man send humble Treaties, dodge
And palter in the shifts of lowness, who
With half the bulk of the world plaid as I pleased,
Making, and marring Fortunes. You did know
How much you were my Conqueror, and that
My Sword, made weak by my affection, would
Obey it on all cause.
Pardon, pardon.
Fall not a tear I say, one of them rates
All that is won and lost: Give me a kiss,
Even this repays me.
We sent our Schoolmaster, is a come back?
Love I am full of Lead: some Wine
Within there, and our Viands: Fortune knows,
We scorn her most, when most she offers blows.
Let him appear that's come from Anthony.
Know you him.
Caesar, it is his Schoolmaster,
An argument that he is plucked, when hither
He sends so poor a Pinion of his Wing,
Which had superfluous Kings for Messengers,
Not many Moons gone by.
Approach, and speak.
Such as I am, I come from Anthony:
I was of late as petty to his ends,
As is the Morndew on the Myrtle leaf
To his grand Sea.
Be it so, declare thine office.
Lord of his Fortunes he salutes thee, and
Requires to live in Egypt, which not granted
He Lessons his Requests, and to thee sues
To let him breath between the Heavens and Earth
A private man in Athens: this for him.
Next, Cleopatra does confess thy Greatness,
Submits her to thy might, and of thee craves
The Circle of the Ptolemies for her heirs,
Now hazarded to thy Grace.
For Anthony,
I have no ears to his request. The Queen,
Of Audience, nor Desire shall fail, so she
From Egypt drive her all-disgraced Friend,
Or take his life there. This if she perform,
She shall not sue unheard. So to them both.
Fortune pursue thee.
Bring him through the Bands:
To try thy Eloquence, now it is time, dispatch,
From Anthony win Cleopatra, promise
And in our Name, what she requires, add more
From thine invention, offers. Women are not
In their best Fortunes strong; but want will perjury
The ne'er touched Vestal. Try thy cunning Thidias,
Make thine own Edict for thy pains, which we
Will answer as a Law.
Caesar, I go.
Observe how Anthony becomes his flaw,
And what thou think his very action speaks
In every power that moos.
Caesar, I shall.
What shall we do, Enobarbus?
Think, and dye.
Is Anthony, or we in fault for this?
Anthony only, that would make his will
Lord of his Reason. What though you fled,
From that great face of War, whose several ranges
Frighted each other? Why should he follow?
The itch of his Affection should not then
Have nicked his Captain-ship, at such a point,
When half to half the world opposed, he being
The moored question? It was a shame no less
Then was his loss, to course your flying Flags,
And leave his Navy gazing.
Prithee peace.
Is that his answer?
I my Lord.
The Queen shall then have curtsy,
So she will yield vs up.
He says so.
Let her know it. To the Boy Caesar send this grizzled head, and he will fill thy wishes to the brim,
With Principalities.
That head my Lord?
To him again, tell him he wears the Rose
Of youth upon him: from which, the world should note
Something particular: His Coin, Ships, Legions,
May be a Cowards, whose Ministers would prevail
Under the service of a Child, as soon
As in the Command of Caesar. I dare him therefore
To lay his gay Comparisons apart,
And answer me declined Sword against Sword,
Our selves alone: Isle write it: Follow me.
Yes like enough: hye battel'd Caesar will
Vnstate his happiness, and be Staged to the show
Against a Sworder. I see men's Judgements are
A parcel of their Fortunes, and things outward
Do draw the inward quality after them
To suffer all alike, that he should dream,
Knowing all measures the full Caesar will
Answer his emptiness; Caesar thou hast subdued
His judgment too.
A Messenger from Caesar.
What no more Ceremony? See my Women,
Against the blown Rose may they stop their nose,
That kneeled unto the Buds. Admit him sir.
Mine honesty, and I, begin to square.
The Loyalty well held to Fools, does make
Our Faith mere folly: yet he that can endure
To follow with Allegiance a fallen Lord,
Does conquer him that did his Master conquer,
And earns a place in the Story.
Caesars will.
Hear it apart.
None but Friends: say boldly.
So happily are they Friends to Anthony.
He needs as many (Sir) as Caesar he's,
Or needs not vs. If Caesar please, our Master
Will leap to be his Friend: For vs you know,
Whose he is, we are, and that is Caesars.
So. Thus then thou most renowned, Caesar entreats,
Not to consider in what case thou stand
Further then he is Caesars.
Go on, right Royal.
He knows that you embrace not Anthony
As you did love, but as you feared him.
Oh.
The score's upon your Honour, therefore he
Does pity, as constrained blemishes,
Not as deserved.
He is a God,
And knows what is most right. Mine Honour
Was not yielded, but conquered merely.
To be sure of that, I will ask Anthony.
Sir, sir, thou art so leaky
That we must leave thee to thy sinking, for
Thy dearest quit thee.
Shall I say to Caesar,
What you require of him: for he partly begs
To be desired to give. It much would please him,
That of his Fortunes you should make a staff
To lean upon. But it would warm his spirits
To hear from me you had left Anthony,
And put your self under his shroud, the universal Landlord.
What's your name?
My name is Thidias.
Most kind Messenger,
Say to great Caesar this in disputation,
I kiss his conquering hand: Tell him, I am prompt
To lay my Crown it's feet, and there to kneel.
Tell him, from his all-obeying breath, I hear
The doom of Egypt.
It is your Noblest course:
Wisdom and Fortune combating together,
If that the former dare but what it can,
No chance may shake it. Give me grace to lay
My duty on your hand.
Your Caesars Father oft,
(When he hath mused of taking kingdoms in)
Bestowed his lips on that unworthy place,
As it rained kisses.
Favours? By Jove that thunders. What art thou Fellow?
One that but performs
The bidding of the fullest man, and worthiest
To have command obeyed.
You will be whipped.
Approach there: ah you Kite. Now Gods &amp; devils
Authority melts from me of late. When I cried hoe,
Like Boys unto a musse, Kings would start forth,
And cry, your will. Have you no ears?
I am Anthony yet. Take hence this Jack, and whip him.
It is better playing with a Lions whelp,
Then with an old one dying.
Moon and Stars,
Whip him: were it twenty of the greatest Tributaries
That do acknowledge Caesar, should I find them
So saucy with the hand of she here, what's her name
Since she was Cleopatra? Whip him Fellows,
Till like a Boy you see him cringe his face,
And whine aloud for mercy. Take him hence.
Mark Anthony.
Tug him away: being whipped
Bring him again, the Jack of Caesars shall
Bear vs an arrant to him.
You were half blasted ere I knew you: Ha?
Have I my pillow left vnprest in Rome,
Forborne the getting of a lawful Race,
And by a Gem of women, to be abused
By one that looks on Feeders?
Good my Lord.
You have been a boggeler ever,
But when we in our viciousness grow hard
(Oh misery on it) the wise Gods seele our eyes
In our own filth, drop our clear judgements, make vs
Adore our errors, laugh it's while we strut
To our confusion.
Oh, is it come to this?
I found you as a Morsel, cold upon
Dead Caesars Trencher: Nay, you were a Fragment
Of Gneius Pompeyes, besides what hotter hours
Vnregistred in vulgar Fame, you have
Luxuriously picked out. For I am sure,
Though you can guess what Temperance should be,
You know not what it is.
Wherefore is this?
To let a Fellow that will take rewards,
And say, God quit you, be familiar with
My play-fellow, your hand; this Kingly Seal,
And plighter of high hearts. O that I were
Upon the hill of Basan to out-roare
The horned Heard, for I have savage cause,
And to proclaim it civilly, were like
A haltered neck, which do's the Hangman thank,
For being yare about him. Is he whipped?
Soundly, my Lord.
Cried he? and begged a Pardon?
He did ask favour.
If that thy Father live, let him repent
Thou was it not made his daughter, and be thou sorry
To follow Caesar in his Triumph, since
Thou hast bin whipped. For following him, henceforth
The white hand of a Lady Fever thee,
Shake thou to look on it. Get thee back to Caesar,
Tell him thy entertainment: look thou say
He makes me angry with him. For he seems
Proud and disdainful, harping on what I am,
Not what he knew I was. He makes me angry,
And at this time most easy it is to do it:
When my good Stars, that were my former guides
Have empty left their Orbs, and shot their Fires
Into the Abisme of hell. If he mislike,
My speech, and what is done, tell him he has
Hiparchus, my enfranhead Bondsman, whom
He may at pleasure whip, or hang, or torture,
As he shall like to quit me. Urge it thou:
Hence with thy stripes, be gone.
Have you done yet?
Alack our Terrene Moon is now Eclipsed,
And it portends alone the fall of Anthony.
I must stay his time?
To flatter Caesar, would you mingle eyes
With one that ties his points.
Not know me yet?
Cold-hearted toward me?
Ah (Dear) if I be so,
From my cold heart let Heaven engender hail,
And poison it in the source, and the first stone
Drop in my neck: as it determines so
Dissolve my life, the next Caesarian smile,
Till by degrees the memory of my womb,
Together with my brave Egyptians all,
By the discandering of this pelleted storm,
Lye grauelesse, till the Flies and Gnats of Nyle
Have buried them for prey.
I am satisfied:
Caesar sets down in Alexandria, where
I will oppose his Fate. Our force by Land,
Hath Nobly held, our severed Navy too
Have knit again, and Fleet, threatening most Sea-like.
Where hast thou bin my heart? Dost thou hear Lady?
If from the Field I shall return once more
To kiss these Lips, I will appear in Blood,
I, and my Sword, will earn our Chronicle,
There's hope in it yet.
That's my brave Lord.
I will be trebble-sinewed, hearted, breathed,
And fight maliciously: for when mine hours
Were nice and lucky, men did ransom lives
Of me for jests: But now, Isle set my teeth,
And send to darkness all that stop me. Come,
Let's have one other gaudy night: Call to me
All my sad Captains, fill our Bowls once more:
Let's mock the midnight Bell.
It is my Birth-day,
I had thought to have held it poor. But since my Lord
Is Anthony again, I will be Cleopatra.
We will yet do well.
Call all his Noble Captains to my Lord.
Do so, we'll speak to them,
And to night Isle force
The Wine peep through their scars.
Come on (my Queen)
There's sap in it yet. The next time I do fight
Isle make death love me: for I will contend
Even with his pestilent Site.
Now he will out-stare the Lightning, to be furious
Is to be frighted out of fear, and in that mood
The Dove will peck the Ostrich; and I see still
A diminution in our Captains brain,
Restores his heart; when valour prays in reason,
It eats the Sword it fights with: I will seek
Some way to leave him.
He calls me Boy, and chides as he had power
To beat me out of Egypt. My Messenger
He hath whipped with Rods, dares me to personal Combat.
Caesar to Anthony: let the old Russian know,
I have many other ways to dye: mean time]
Laugh at his Challenge.
Caesar must think,
When one so great begins to rage, hoe's hunted
Even to falling. Give him no breath, but now
Make boot of his distraction: Never anger
Made good guard for it self.
Let our best heads know,
That to morrow, the last of many Battles
We mean to fight. Within our Files there are,
Of those that served Mark Anthony but late,
Enough to fetch him in. See it done,
And Feast the Army, we have store to do it,
And they have earned the waste. Poor Anthony.
He will not fight with me, Domitian?
No?
Why should he not?
He thinks, being twenty times of better fortune,
He is twenty men to one.
To morrow Soldier,
By Sea and Land Isle fight: or I will live,
Or bathe my dying Honour in the blood
Shall make it live again. Woo't thou fight well.
Isle strike, and cry, Take all.
Well said, come on:
Call forth my Household Servants, lets to night
Be bounteous at our Meal. Give me thy hand,
Thou hast bin rightly honest, so hast thou,
Thou, and thou, and thou: you have served me well,
And Kings have been your fellows.
What means this?
It is one of those odd tricks which sorrow shoots
Out of the mind.
And thou art honest too:
I wish I could be made so many men,
And all of you clapped up together, in
An Anthony: that I might do you service,
So good as you have done.
The Gods forbid.
Well, my good Fellows, wait on me to night:
Scant not my Cups, and make as much of me
As when mine Empire was your Fellow too,
And suffered my command.
What does he mean?
To make his Followers weep.
Tend me to night;
May be, it is the period of your duty,
Happily you shall not see me more, or if,
A mangled shadow. Perchance to morrow,
You'll serve another Master. I look on you,
As one that takes his leave. Mine honest Friends,
I turn you not away, but like a Master
Married to your good service, stay till death:
Tend me to night two hours, I ask no more,
And the Gods yield you for it.
What mean you (Sir)
To give them this discomfort? Look they weep,
And I an Ass, am Onyon-ey'd; for shame,
Transform vs not to women.
Ho, ho, ho:
Now the Witch take me, if I meant it thus.
Grace grow where those drops fall (my hearty Friends)
You take me in too dolorous a sense,
For I spake to you for your comfort, did desire you
To burn this night with Torches: Know (my hearts)
I hope well of to morrow, and will lead you,
Where rather Isle expect victorious life,
Then death, and Honour. Let's to Supper, come,
And drown consideration.
Brother, goodnight: to morrow is the day.
It will determine one way: Fare you well.
Heard you of nothing strange about the streets.
Nothing: what news?
Belike it is but a Rumour, good night to you.
Well sir, good night.
Soldiers, have careful Watch.
And you: Goodnight, goodnight.
Here we: and if to morrow
Our Navy thrive, I have an absolute hope
Our Landsman will stand up.
It is a brave Army, and full of purpose.
Peace, what noise?
List list.
Hark.
Music in the Ayre.
Under the earth.
It signs well, do's it not?
No.
Peace I say: What should this mean?
It is the God Hercules, whom Anthony loved,
Now leaves him.
Walk, let's see if other Watchmen
Do hear what we do?
How now Masters?
How now? how now do you hear this?
I, is it not strange?
Do you hear Masters? Do you hear?
Follow the noise so far as we have quarter.
Let's see how it will give off.
Content: It is strange.
Eros, mine Armour Eros.
Sleep a little.
No my Chuck. Eros, come mine Armour Eros.
Come good Fellow, put thine Iron on,
If Fortune be not ours to day, it is
Because we brave her. Come.
Nay, Isle help too, Anthony.
What's this for? Ah let be, let be, thou art
The Armourer of my heart: False, false: This, this,
Sooth-law Isle help: Thus it must bee.
Well, well, we shall thrive now.
See thou my good Fellow. Go, put on thy defences.
Briefly Sir.
Is not this buckled well?
Rarely, rarely:
He that unbuckle this, till we do please
To daft for our Repose, shall hear a storm.
Thou fumble Eros, and my Queens a Squire
More tight at this, then thou: Dispatch. O Love,
That thou could see my Wars to day and knew
The Royal Occupation, thou should see
A Workman in it.
Good morrow to thee, welcome,
Thou look like him that knows a warlike Charge:
To business that we love, we rise betime,
And go too't with delight.
A thousand Sir, early though't be, have on their
Riveted trim, and at the Port expect you.
The Morn is fair: Good morrow General.
Good morrow General.
It is well blown Lads.
This Morning, like the spirit of a youth
That means to be of note, begins betimes.
So, so: Come give me that, this way, well-sed.
Fare thee well Dame, what ere becomes of me,
This is a Soldiers kiss: rebukeable,
And worthy shameful check it were, to stand
On more Mechanic Complement, Isle leave thee.
Now like a man of Steel, you that will fight,
Follow me close, Isle bring you too't: Adieu.
Please you retire to your Chamber?
Lead me:
He goes forth gallantly: That he and Caesar might
Determine this great War in single fight;
Then Anthony; but now. Well on.
The Gods make this a happy day to Anthony.
Would thou, &amp; those thy scars had once prevailed
To make me fight at Land.
Hadst thou done so,
The Kings that have revolted, and the Soldier
That has this morning left thee, would have still
Followed thy heals.
Whose gone this morning?
Who? one ever near thee, call for Enobarbus,
He shall not hear thee, or from Caesars Camp,
Say I am none of thine.
What say thou?
Sir he is with Caesar.
Sir, his Chests and Treasure he has not with him.
Is he gone?
Most certain.
Go Eros, send his Treasure after, do it,
Detain no jot I charge thee: write to him,
(I will subscribe) gentle adieu's, and greetings;
Say, that I wish he never find more cause
To change a Master. Oh my Fortunes have
Corrupted honest men. Dispatch Enobarbus.
Go forth Agrippa, and begin the fight:
Our will is Anthony e took alive:
Make it so known.
Caesar, I shall.
The time of universal peace is near:
Prove this a prosperous day, the three ook'd world
Shall bear the Olive freely.
Anthony is come into the Field.
Go charge Agrippa,
Plant those that have revolted in the Vant,
That Anthony may seem to spend his Fury
Upon himself.
Alexas did revolt, and went to Iewrij on
Affairs of Anthony, there did dissuade
Great Herod to incline himself to Caesar,
And leave his Master Anthony. For this pains,
Caesar hath hanged him: Camindius and the rest
That fell away, have entertainment, but
No honourable trust: I have done ill,
Of which I do accuse my self so forely,
That I will joy no more.
Enobarbus, Anthony
Hath after thee sent all thy Treasure, with
His Bounty ouer-plus. The Messenger
Came on my guard, and at thy Tent is now
Unloading of his Mules.
I give it you.
Mock not Enobarbus,
I tell you true: Best you saf't the bringer
Out of the host, I must attend mine Office,
Or would have done it my self. Your Emperor
Continues still a Jove.
I am alone the Villain of the earth,
And feel I am so most. Oh Anthony,
Thou Mine of Bounty, how would thou have payed
My better service, when my turpitude
Thou dost so Crown with Gold. This blows my hart,
If swift thought break it not: a swifter mean
Shall out-strike thought, but thought will do it. I feel
I fight against thee: No I will go seek
Some Dith, wherein to dye: the foul'st best fits
My latter part of life.
Retire, we have engaged our selves too far:
Caesar himself he's work, and our oppression
Exceeds what we expected.
O my brave Emperor, this is fought indeed,
Had we done so at first, we had driven them home
With clouts about their heads.
Thou bleed apace.
I had a wound here that was like a T,
But now it is made an H.
They do retire.
We'll beat 'em into Bench-holes, I have yet
Room for six scotches more.
They are beaten Sir, and our advantage serves
For a fair victory.
Let vs score their backs,
And snatch 'em up, as we take Hares behind,
It is sport to maul a Runner.
I will reward thee
Once for thy sprightly comfort, and ten-fold
For thy good valour. Come thee on.
Isle halt after.
We have beat him to his Camp: Run one
Before, &amp; let the Queen know of our guests: to morrow
Before the Sun shall see's, we'll spill the blood
That he's to day escaped. I thank you all,
For doughty handed are you, and have fought
Not as you served the Cause, but is it had been
Each mans like mine: you have shown all Hectors.
Enter the City, clip your Wives, your Friends,
Tell them your feats, whilst they with joyful tears
Wash the congealment from your wounds, and kiss
The Honour'd-gashes whole.
Give me thy hand,
To this great Faiery, Isle commend thy acts,
Make her thanks bless thee. Oh thou day of the world,
Chain mine armed neck, leap thou, Attire and all
Through proof of Harness to my heart, and there
Ride on the pants triumphing.
Lord of Lords.
Oh infinite Virtue, come thou smiling from
The worlds great snare unsought.
Mine Nightingale,
We have beat them to their Beds.
What Girl, though gray
Do something mingle with our younger brown, yet ha we
A Brain that nourishes our Nerues, and can
Get gole for gole of youth. Behold this man,
Commend unto his Lips thy savouring hand,
Kiss it my Warrior: He hath fought to day,
As if a God in hate of Mankind, had
Destroyed in such a shape.
Isle give thee Friend
An Armour all of Gold: it was a Kings.
He has deserved it, were it Carbuncled
Like holy Phoebus Carre. Give me thy hand,
Through Alexandria make a jolly March,
Bear our backed Targets, like the men that owe them.
Had our great Palace the capacity
To Camp this host, we all would sup together,
And drink Carouses to the next days Fate
Which promises Royal peril, Trumpeters
With brazen din blast you the Cities ear,
Make mingle with our rattling Tabourines,
That heaven and earth may strike their sounds together,
Applauding our approach.
If we be not relieved within this hour,
We must return to the Court of Guard: the night
Is shiny, and they say, we shall embattaile
By 'th second hour in the Morn.
This last day was a shrewed one too's.
Oh bear me witness night.
What man is this?
Stand close, and list him.
Be witness to me (O thou blessed Moon)
When men revolted shall upon Record
Bear hateful memory: poor Enobarbus did
Before thy face repent.
Enobarbus?
Peace: Hark further.
Oh Sovereign Mistress of true Melancholy,
The poisonous damp of night dispunge upon me,
That Life, a very Rebel to my will,
May hang no longer on me. Throw my heart
Against the flint and hardness of my fault,
Which being dried with grief, will break to powder,
And finish all foul thoughts. Oh Anthony,
Nobler then my revolt is Infamous,
Forgive me in thine own particular,
But let the world rank me in Register
A Master leaver, and a fugitive:
Oh Anthony! Oh Anthony!
Let's speak to him.
Let's hear him, for the things he speaks
May concern Caesar.
Let's do so, but he sleeps.
Swoonds rather, for so bad a Prayer as his
Was never yet for sleep.
Go we to him.
Awake sir, awake, speak to vs.
Hear you sir?
The hand of death hath roughed him.
Hark the Drums demurely wake the sleepers:
Let vs bear him to the Court of Guard: he is of note:
Our hour is fully out.
Come on then, he may recover yet.
Their preparation is to day by Sea,
We please them not by Land.
For both, my Lord.
I would they'ld fight in the Fire, or in the Ayre,
Wee'ld fight there too. But this it is, our Foot
Upon the hills adjoining to the City
Shall stay with vs. Order for Sea is given,
They have put forth the Haven:
Where their appointment we may best discover,
And look on their endeavour.
But being charged, we will be still by Land,
Which as I tak't we shall, for his best force
Is forth to Man his Galleys. To the Vales,
And hold our best advantage.
Yet they are not joined:
Where yon'd Pine does stand, I shall discover all.
Isle bring thee word straight, how 'ris like to go.
Swallows have built
In Cleopatra's Sails their nests. The Auguries
Say, they know not, they cannot tell, look grimly
And dare not speak their knowledge. Anthony,
Is valiant, and dejected, and by starts
His fretted Fortunes give him hope and fear
Of what he has, and has not.
All is lost:
This foul Egyptian hath betrayed me:
My Fleet hath yielded to the Foe, and yonder
They cast their Caps up, and Carouse together
Like Friends long lost. Triple-turn'd Whore, it is thou
Hast sold me to this Novice, and my heart
Makes only Wars on thee. Bid them all fly:
For when I am revenged upon my Charm,
I have done all. Bid them all fly, be gone.
Oh Sun, thy uprise shall I see no more,
Fortune, and Anthony part here, even here
Do we shake hands? All come to this? The hearts
That panelled me at heals, to whom I gave
Their wishes, do dis-Candie, melt their sweets
On blossoming Caesar: And this Pine is barked,
That ouer-top'd them all. Betrayed I am.
Oh this false Soul of Egypt! this grave Charm,
Whose eye beck'd forth my Wars, &amp; called them home:
Whose Bosom was my Crownet, my chief end,
Like a right Gypsy, hath at fast and loose
Beguiled me, to the very heart of loss.
What Eros, Eros?
Ah, thou Spell! Avaunt.
Why is my Lord enraged against his Love?
Vanish, or I shall give thee thy deserving,
And blemish Caesars Triumph. Let him take thee,
And hoist thee up to the shouting Plebeians,
Follow his Chariot, like the greatest spot
Of all thy Sex. Most Monster-like be shown
For poor'st Diminutives, for Dolts, and let
Patient Octauia, plough thy visage up
With her prepared nails.
It is well the art gone,
If it be well to live. But better it were
Thou fell into my fury, for one death
Might have prevented many. Eros, hoe?
The shirt of Nessus is upon me, teach me
Alcides, thou mine Ancestor, thy rage.
Let me lodge Licas on the horns of the Moon,
And with those hands that grasped the heaviest Club,
Subdue my worthiest self: The Witch shall die,
To the young Roman Boy she hath sold me, and I fall
Under this plot: She dyes for it. Eros hoe?
Help me my women: Oh hoe's more mad
Then Telamon for his Shield, the Boar of Thessaly
Was never so embossed.
To the Monument, there locke your self,
And send him word you are dead:
The Soul and Body rive not more in parting,
Then greatness going off.
To the Monument:
Martian, go tell him I have slain my self:
Say, that the last I spoke was Anthony,
And word it (prithee) piteously. Hence Martian,
And bring me how he takes my deah to the Monument.
Eros, thou yet behold me?
I Noble Lord.
Sometime we see a cloud that's Dragonish,
A vapour sometime, like a Bear, or Lyon,
A toward Citadel, a pendant Rock,
A forked Mountain, or blew Promontory
Wh Trees upon it, that nod unto the world,
And mock our eyes with Ayre.
Thou hast seen these Signs,
They are black Vespers Pageants.
I my Lord.
That which is now a Horse, even with a thought the Rack dislimes, and makes it indistinct
As water is in water.
It does my Lord.
My good Knave Eros, now thy Captain is
Even such a body: Here I am Anthony,
Yet cannot hold this visible shape (my Knave)
I made these wars for Egypt, and the Queen,
Whose heart I thought I had, for she had mine:
Which whilst it was mine, had annexed vntoo't
A Million more, (now lost:) she Eros has
Packed Cards with Caesars, and false plaid my Glory
Unto an Enemies triumph.
Nay, weep not gentle Eros, there is left vs
Our selves to end our selves.
Oh thy wild Lady, she has robed me of my Sword.
No Anthony,
My Mistress loved thee, and her Fortunes mingled
With thine entirely.
Hence saucy Eunuch peace, she hath betrayed me,
And shall dye the death.
Death of one person, can be paid but once,
And that she he's discharged. What thou would do
Is done unto thy hand: the last she spake
Was Anthony, most Noble Anthony:
Then in the midst a tearing groan did break
The name of Anthony: it was divided
Between her heart, and lips: she rendered life
Thy name so buried in her.
Dead then?
Dead.
Unarm Eros, the long days task is done,
And we must sleep: That thou depart hence safe
Does pay thy labour richly: Go.
Off, pluck off,
The seven-fold shield of Aiax cannot keep
The battery from my heart. Oh cleave my sides.
Heart, once be stronger then thy Continent,
Crack thy frail Case. Apace Eros, apace;
No more a Soldier: bruised pieces go,
You have bin Nobly borne. From me awhile.
I will o're-take thee Cleopatra, and
Weep for my pardon. So it must be, for now
All length is Torture: since the Torch is out,
Lye down and stray no farther. Now all labour
Mars what it does: yea, very force entangles
It self with strength: Seal then and all is done.
Eros? I come my Queen. Eros? Stay for me,
Where Souls do couch on Flowers, we'll hand in hand,
And with our sprightly Port make the Ghosts gaze:
Dido, and her Aeneas shall want Troops,
And all the haunt be ours. Come Eros, Eros.
What would my Lord?
Since Cleopatra dyed,
I have lived in such dishonour, that the Gods
Detest my baseness. I, that with my Sword,
Quartered the World, and o'er greene Neptunes back
With Ships, made Cities; condemn my self, to lack
The Courage of a Woman, less Noble mind
Then she which by her death, our Caesar tells
I am Conqueror of my self. Thou art sworn Eros,
That when the exigent should come, which now
Is come indeed: When I should see behind me
The inevitable prosecution of disgrace and horror,
That on my command, thou then would kill me.
Do it, the time is come: Thou strik'st not me,
It is Caesar thou defeat. Put colour in thy Cheek.
The Gods with-hold me,
Shall I do that which all the Parthian Darts,
(Though Enemy) lost aim, and could not.
Eros,
Would thou be windowed in great Rome, and see
Thy Master thus with pleacht Arms, bending down
His corrigible neck, his face subdued
To penetratiue shame; whilst the wheeled seat
Of Fortunate Caesar drawn before him, branded
His Baseness that ensued.
I would not see it.
Come then: for with a wound I must be cured.
Draw that thy honest Sword, which thou hast worn
Most useful for thy Country.
Oh sir, pardon me.
When I did make thee free, swore you not then
To do this when I bad thee? Do it at once,
Or thy precedent Services are all
But accidents vnpurpos'd. Draw, and come.
Turn from me then that Noble countenance,
Wherein the worship of the whole world lies.
Lo thee.
My sword is drawn.
Then let it do at once
The thing why thou hast drawn it.
My dear Master,
My Captain, and my Emperor. Let me say
Before I strike this bloody stroke, Farewell.
It is said man, and farewell.
Farewell great Chief. Shall I strike now?
Now Eros.
Why there then:
Thus I do escape the sorrow of Anthonies death.
Thrice-Nobler then my self,
Thou teach me: Oh valiant Eros, what
I should, and thou coldest not, my Queen and Eros
Have by their brave instruction got upon me
A Nobleness in Record. But I will bee
A Bridegroom in my death, and run intoo't
As to a Lovers bed. Come then, and Eros,
Thy Master dies thy Scholar; to do thus
I learnt of thee. How, not dead? Not dead?
The Guard, how? Oh dispatch me.
What's the noise?
I have done my work ill Friends:
Oh make an end of what I have begun.
The Star is fallen.
And time is at his Period.
Alas, and woe.
Let him that loves me, strike me dead.
Not I.
Nor I.
Nor any one.
Thy death and fortunes bid thy folowers sly
This sword but shown to Caesar with this tidings
Shall enter me with him.
Whore's Anthony?
There Diomed there.
Lives he: wilt thou not answer man?
Art thou there Diomed?
Draw thy sword, and give me,
Sufficing strokes for death.
Most absolute Lord:
My Mistress Cleopatra sent me to thee.
When did she send thee?
Now my Lord.
Where is she?
Locked in her Monument she had a Prophesying fear
Of what hath come to pass: for when she saw
(Which never shall be found) you did suspect
She had disposed with Caesar, and that your rage
Would not be purged, she sent you word she was dead:
But fearing since how it might work, hath sent
Me to proclaim the truth, and I am come
I dread, too late.
Too late good Diomed: call my Guard I prithee.
What hoe: the Emperors Guard,
The Guard, what hoe? Come, your Lord calls.
Bear me good Friends where Cleopatra bides,
It is the last service that I shall command you.
Woe, woe are we sir, you may not live to wear
All your true Followers out.
Most heavy day.
Nay good my Fellows, do not please sharp fate
To grace it with your sorrows. Bid that welcome
Which comes to punish vs, and we punish it
Seeming to bear it lightly. Take me up,
I have led you oft, carry me now good Friends,
And have my thanks for all.
Oh Charmian, I will never go from hence.
Be comforted dear Madam.
No, I will not:
All strange and terrible events are welcome,
But comforts we despise; our size of sorrow
Proportioned to our cause, must be as great
As that which makes it.
How now? is he dead?
His death's upon him, but not dead.
Look out of th other side your Monument,
His Guard have brought him thither.
Oh Sun,
Burn the great Sphere thou mou'st in, darkling stand
The varying shore of the world. O Antony, Antony, Antony
Help Charmian, help Iras help: help Friends
Below, let's draw him hither.
Peace,
Not Caesars Valour hath o'er thrown Anthony,
But Anthonie's hath Triumphed on it self.
So it should be,
That none but Anthony should conquer Anthony,
But woe it is so.
I am dying Egypt, dying; only
I here importune death awhile, until
Of many thousand kisses, the poor last
I lay upon thy lips.
I dare not Dear,
Dear my Lord pardon: I dare not,
Least I be taken: not the Imperious show
Of the full-Fortun'd Caesar, ever shall
Be brooch'd with me, if Knife, Drugs, Serpents have
Edge, sting, or operation. I am safe:
Your Wife Octauia, with her modest eyes,
And still Conclusion, shall acquire no Honour
Demurring upon me but come, come Anthony,
Help me my women, we must draw the up
Assist good Friends.
Oh quick, or I am gone.
Heere's sport indeed:
How heavy weighs my Lord?
Our strength is all gone into heaviness,
That makes the weight. Had I great Iuno's power,
The strong winged Mercury should fetch thee up,
And set thee by Ioues side. Yet come a little,
Wishers were ever Fools. Oh come, come, come,
And welcome, welcome. Dye when thou hast lived,
Quicken with kissing: had my lips that power,
Thus would I wear them out.
A heavy sight.
I am dying Egypt, dying.
Give me some Wine, and let me speak a little.
No, let me speak, and let me rail so hye,
That the false Huswife Fortune, break her Wheel,
Provoked by my offence.
One word (sweet Queen)
Of Caesar seek your Honour, with your safety. Oh.
They do not go together.
Gentle hear me,
None about Caesar trust, but Proculeius.
My Resolution, and my hands, Isle trust,
None about Caesar.
The miserable change now at my end,
Lament nor sorrow at: but please your thoughts
In feeding them with those my former Fortunes
Wherein I lived. The greatest Prince of the world,
The Noblest: and do now not basely dye,
Not Cowardly put off my Helmet to
My Countryman. A Roman, by a Roman
Valiantly vanquished. Now my Spirit is going,
I can no more.
Noblest of men, woo't dye?
Hast thou no care of me, shall I abide
In this dull world, which in thy absence is
No better then a Sty? Oh see my women:
The Crown of the earth doth melt. My Lord?
Oh withered is the Garland of the War,
The Soldiers pole is fallen: young Boys and Girls
Are level now with men: The odds is gone,
And there is nothing left remarkable
Beneath the visiting Moon.
Oh quietness, Lady.
She's dead too, our Sovereign.
Lady.
Madam.
Oh Madam, Madam, Madam.
Royal Egypt: Empress.
Peace, peace, Iras.
No more but in a Woman, and commanded
By such poor passion, as the Maid that Milkes,
And doe's the meanest chaes. It were for me,
To throw my Sceptre at the injurious Gods,
To tell them that this World did equal theirs,
Till they had stolen our Jewel. Ell's but nought:
Patience is sottish, and impatience does
Become a Dog that's mad: Then is it sin,
To rush into the secret house of death,
Ere death dare come to vs. How do you Women?
What, what good cheer? Why how now Charmian?
My Noble Girls? Ah Women, women! Look
Our Lamp is spent, it's out. Good sirs, take heart,
We'll bury him: And then, what's brave, what's Noble,
Let's do it after the high Roman fashion,
And make death proud to take vs. Come, away,
This case of that huge Spirit now is cold.
Ah Women, Women! Come, we have no Friend
But Resolution, and the briefest end.
Go to him Dollabella, bid him yield,
Being so frustrate, tell him,
He mocks the pauses that he makes.
Caesar, I shall.
Wherefore is that? And what art thou that dare
Appear thus to vs?
I am called Decretas,
Mark Anthony I served, who best was worthy
Best to be served: whilst he stood up, and spoke
He was my Master, and I wore my life
To spend upon his haters. If thou please
To take me to thee as I was to him,
Isle be to Caesar: it you please not, I yield thee up my life.
What is it thou say?
I say (Oh Caesar) Anthony is dead.
The breaking of so great a thing, should make
A greater crack. The round World
Should have shook Lyons into civil streets,
And Citizens to their dens. The death of Anthony
Is not a single doom, in the name lay
A moity of the world.
He is dead Caesar,
Not by a public minister of Justice,
Nor by a hired Knife but that selfe-hand
Which writ his Honour in the Acts it did,
Hath with the Courage which the heart did lend it,
Splitted the heart. This is his Sword,
I robbed his wound of it: behold it stained
With his most Noble blood.
Look you sad Friends,
The Gods rebuke me, but it is Tidings
To wash the eyes of Kings.
And strange it is,
That Nature must compel vs to lament
Our most persisted deeds.
His taints and Honours, waged equal with him.
A Rarer spirit never
Did steer humanity: but you Gods will give vs
Some faults to make vs men, Caesar is touched.
When such a spacious Mirror's set before him,
He needs must see him self.
Oh Anthony,
I have followed thee to this, but we do launch
Diseases in our Bodies. I must perforce
Have shown to thee such a declining day,
Or look on thine: we could not stall together,
In the whole world. But yet let me lament
With tears as Sovereign as the blood of hearts,
That thou my Brother, my Competitor,
In top of all design; my Mate in Empire,
Friend and Companion in the front of War,
The Arm of mine own Body, and the Heart
Where mine his thoughts did kindle; that our Stars
Vnreconciliable, should divide our equalness to this.
Hear me good Friends,
But I will tell you at some meeter Season,
The business of this man looks out of him,
We'll hear him what he says.
Whence are you?
A poor Egyptian yet, the Queen my mistress
Confined in all, she has her Monument
Of thy intents, desires, instruction,
That she preparedly may frame her self
To the way shoe's forced too.
Bid her have good heart,
She soon shall know of vs, by some of ours,
How honourable, and how kindly Wee
Determine for her. For Caesar cannot leave to be ungentle
So the Gods preserve thee.
Come hither Proculeius. Go and say
We purpose her no shame: give her what comforts
The quality of her passion shall require;
Least in her greatness, by some mortal stroke
She do defeat vs. For her life in Rome,
Would be eternal in our Triumph: Go,
And with your speediest bring vs what she says,
And how you find of her.
Caesar I shall.
Gallus, go you along: whore's Dolabella, to second Proculeius?
Dolabella.
Let him alone: for I remember now
How hoe's employed: he shall in time be ready.
Go with me to my Tent, where you shall see
How hardly I was drawn into this War,
How calm and gentle I proceeded still
In all my Writings. Go with me, and see
What I can show in this.
My desolation does begin to make
A better life: Tic paltry to be Caesar:
Not being Fortune, hoe's but Fortunes knave,
A minister of her will: and it is great
To do that thing that ends all other deeds,
Which shackles accidents, and bolts up change;
Which sleeps, and never pallates more the dung,
The beggars Nurse, and Caesars.
Caesar sends greeting to the Queen of Egypt,
And bids thee study on what fair demands
Thou mean to have him grant thee.
What's thy name?
My name is Proculeius.
Anthony
Did ell me of you, bad me trust you, but
I do not greatly care to be deceived
That have no use for trusting. If your Master
Would have a Queece his beggar, you must tell him,
That Majesty to keep decorum, must
No less beg then a Kingdom: If he please
To give me conquered Egypt for my Son,
He gives me so much of mine own, as I
Will kneel to him with thanks.
Be of good cheer:
Y' are fallen into a Princely hand, fear nothing,
Make your full reference freely to my Lord,
Who is so full of Grace, that it flows over
On all that need. Let me report to him
Your sweet dependacie, and you shall find
A Conqueror that will pray in aid for kindness,
Where he for grace is kneeled too.
Pray you tell him,
I am his Fortunes Vassal, and I send him
The Greatness he has got. I hourly learn
A Doctrine of Obedience, and would gladly
Look him in the Face.
This Isle report (dear Lady)
Have comfort, for I know your plight is pitied
Of him that cause it.
You see how easily she may be surprised:
Guard her till Caesar come.
Royal Queen.
Oh Cleopatra, thou art taken Queen.
Quick, quick, good hands.
Hold worthy Lady, hold:
Doe not your self such wrong, who are in this
Relieved, but not betrayed.
What of death too that rids our dogs of languish
Cleopatra, do not abuse my Masters bounty, by
The undoing of your self: Let the World see
His Nobleness well acted, which your death
Will never let come forth.
Where art thou Death?
Come hither come; Come, come, and take a Queen
Worth many Babes and Beggars.
Oh temperance Lady.
Sir, I will eat no meat, Isle not drink sir,
If idle talk will once be necessary
Isle not sleep neither. This mortal house Isle ruin,
Do Caesar what he can. Know sir, that I
Will not waite pinioned at your Masters Court,
Nor once be chastised with the sober eye
Of dull Octauia. Shall they hoist me up,
And show me to the shouting Varlotarie
Of censuring Rome? Rather a ditch in Egypt.
Be gentle grave unto me, rather on Nylus mud
Lay me starke-nak'd, and let the water-Flies
Blow me into abhorting; rather make
My Countries high pyramids my Gibbet,
And hang me up in Chains.
You do extend
These thoughts of horror further then you shall
Find cause in Caesar.
Proculeius,
What thou hast done, thy Master Caesar knows,
And he hath sent for thee: for the Queen,
Isle take her to my Guard.
So Dolabella,
It shall content me best: Be gentle to her,
To Caesar I will speak, what you shall please,
If you'll employ me to him.
Say, I would dye.
Most Noble Empress, you have heard of me.
I cannot tell.
Assuredly you know me.
No matter sir, what I have heard or known:
You laugh when Boys or Women tell their Dreams,
Is it not your trick?
I understand not, Madam.
I dreamt there was an Emperor Anthony.
Oh such another sleep, that I might see
But such another man.
If it might please ye.
His face was as the Heavens, and therein stuck
A Sun and Moon, which kept their course, &amp; lighted
The little of the earth.
Most Sovereign Creature.
His legs bestride the Ocean, his reared arm
Crested the world: His voice was propertied
As all the tuned Spheres, and that to Friends:
But when he meant to quail, and shake the Orb,
He was as rattling Thunder. For his Bounty,
There was no winter in it. An Anthony it was,
That grew the more by reaping: His delights
Were Dolphin-like, they showed his back aboue
The Element they lived in: In his Livery
Walked Crowns and Crownets: Realms &amp; Islands were
As plates dropped from his pocket.
Cleopatra.
Think you there was, or might be such a man
As this I dreamt of?
Gentle Madam, no.
You Lye up to the hearing of the Gods:
But if there be, nor ever were one such
It's past the size of dreaming: Nature wants stuff
To vie strange forms with fancy, yet to imagine
An Anthony were Natures piece, against Fancy,
Condemning shadows quite.
Hear me, good Madam:
Your loss is as your self, great; and you bear it
As answering to the weight, would I might never
Ore-take pursued success: But I do feel
By the rebound of yours, a grief that suites
My very heart at root.
I thank you sir:
Know you what Caesar means to do with me?
I am loath to tell you what, I would you knew.
Nay pray you sir.
Though he be Honourable.
He will lead me then in Triumph.
Madam he will, I know it.
Make way there Caesar.
Which is the Queen of Egypt.
It is the Emperor Madam.
Arise, you shall not kneel:
I pray you rise, rise Egypt.
Sir, the Gods will have it thus,
My Master and my Lord I must obey,
Take to you no hard thoughts,
The Record of what injuries you did vs,
Though written in our flesh, we shall remember
As things but done by chance.
Sole Sir of the World,
I cannot project mine own cause so well
To make it clear, but do confess I have
Been laden with like frailties, which before
Have often shamed our Sex.
Cleopatra know,
We will extenuate rather then enforce:
If you apply your self to our intents,
Which towards you are most gentle, you shall find
A benefit in this change: but if you seek
To lay on me a Cruelty, by taking
Anthonies course, you shall bereave your self
Of my good purposes, and put your children
To that destruction which Isle guard them from,
If thereon you rely. Isle take my leave.
And may through all the world: tic yours, &amp; we your Scutcheons, and your signs of Conquest shall Hang in what place you please. Here my good Lord.
You shall advise me in all for Cleopatra.
This is the brief: of Money, Plate, &amp; Jewels
I am possessed of, it is exactly valued,
Not petty things admitted. Whore's Seleucus?
Here Madam.
This is my Treasurer, let him speak (my Lord)
Upon his peril, that I have reserved
To my self nothing. Speak the truth Seleucus.
Madam; I had rather seele my lips,
Then to my peril speak that which is not.
What have I kept back.
Enough to purchase what you have made known
Nay blush not Cleopatra, I approve
Your Wisdom in the deed.
See Caesar: Oh behold,
How pomp is followed: Mine will now be yours,
And should we shift estates, yours would be mine.
The ingratitude of this Seleucus, does
Even make me wilde. Oh Slave, of no more trust
Then love that's hyt'd? What goosed thou back, you shalt
Go back I warrant thee: but Isle catch thine eyes
Though they had wings. Slave, Soulless, Villain, Dog.
O rarely base!
Good Queen, let vs entreat you.
O Caesar, what a wounding shame is this,
That thou vouchsafing here to visit me,
Doing the Honour of thy Lordlinesse
To one so meek, that mine own Servant should
Parcel the sum of my disgraces, by
Addition of his Envy Say (good Caesar)
That I some Lady trifles hae reserved,
Immoment toys, things of such Dignity
As we greet modern Friends withal, and say
Some Nobler token I have kept apart
For Lii and Octauia, to induce
Their mediation, must I be unfolded
With one that I have bred: The Gods! it smites me
Beneath the fall I have. Prithee go hence,
Or I shall show the Cinders of my spirits
Through the Ashes of my chance: Were it thou a man,
Thou would have mercy on me.
Forbear Seleucus.
Be it known, that we the greatest are mis-thoght
For things that others do: and when we fall,
We answer others merits, in our name
Are therefore to be pitied.
Cleopatra,
Not what you have reserved, nor what acknowledged
Put we in the Roll of Conquest: still be it yours,
Bestow it at your pleasure, and believe
Caesars no Merchant, to make prize with you
Of things that Merchants sold. Therefore be cheered,
Make not your thoughts your prisons: No dear Queen,
For we intend so to dispose you, as
Your self shall give vs counsel: Feed, and sleep:
Our care and pity is so much upon you,
That we remain your Friend, and so adieu.
My Master, and my Lord.
Not so: Adieu.
He words me Girls, he words me,
That I should not be Noble to my self.
But hark thee Charmian.
Finish good Lady, the bright day is done,
And we are for the dark.
Hye the again,
I have spoke already, and it is provided,
Go put it to the haste.
Madam, I will.
Whore's the Queen?
Behold sir.
Dolabella.
Madam, as thereto sworn, by your command
(Which my love makes Religion to obey)
I tell you this: Caesar through Syria
Intends his journey, and within three days,
You with your Children will he send before,
Make your best use of this. I have performed
Your pleasure, and my promise.
Dolabella, I shall remain your debtor.
I your Servant:
Adieu good Queen, I must attend on Caesar.
Farewell, and thanks.
Now Iras, what think thou?
Thou, an Egyptian Puppet shall be shown
In Rome as well as I: Mechanic Slaves
With greazie Aprons, Rules, and Hammers shall
Vplift vs to the view. In their thick breathes,
Rank of gross diet, shall we be enclowded,
And forced to drink their vapour.
The Gods forbid.
Nay, it is most certain Iras: saucy Lictors
Will catch at vs like Strumpets, and scald Rimers
Ballads vs out a Tune. The quick Comedians
Extemporally will stage vs, and present
Our Alexandrian Revels: Anthony
Shall be brought drunken forth, and I shall see
Some squeaking Cleopatra Boy my greatness
In the posture of a Whore.
O the good Gods!
Nay that's certain.
Isle never see it? for I am sure mine Nails
Are stronger then mine eyes.
Why that's the way to fool their preparation,
And to conquer their most absurd intents.
Now Charmian.
Show me my Women like a Queen: Go fetch
My best Attires. I am again for Citrus,
To meet Mark Anthony. Sir Iras, go
(Now Noble Charmian, we'll dispatch indeed,)
And when thou hast done this chare, Isle give thee leave
To play till Doomsday: bring our Crown, and all.
Wherefore's this noise?
Here is a rural Fellow,
That will not be denied your Highness presence,
He brings you Figs.
Let him come in.
What poor an Instrument
May do a Noble deed: he brings me liberty:
My Resolution's placed, and I have nothing
Of woman in me: Now from head to foot
I am Marble constant: now the fleeting Moon
No Planet is of mine.
This is the man.
Avoid, and leave him.
Hast thou the pretty worm of Nylus there,
That kills and pains not?
Truly I have him: but I would not be the partie that should desire you to touch him, for his biting is immortal: those that doe dye of it, doe seldom or nofor recover.
Remember thou any that have dyed on it?
Very many, men and women too. I heard of one of them no longer then yesterday, a very honest woman, but something given to lye, as a woman should not do, but in the way of honesty, how she dyed of the byting of it, what pain she felt: Truly, she makes a very good report of the worm: but he that will believe all that they say, shall never be saved by half that they do: but this is most falliable, the Worme's an odd Worm.
Get thee hence, farewell.
I wish you all joy of the Worm.
Farewell.
You must think this (look you,) that the Worm will do his kind.
I, I, farewell.
Look you, the Worm is not to bee trusted, but in the keeping of wise people: for indeed, there is no goodness in the Worm.
Take thou no care, it shall be heeded.
Very good: give it nothing I pray you, for it is not worth the feeding.
Will it eat me?
You must not think I am so simple, but I know the devil himself will not eat a woman: I know, that a woman is a dish for the Gods, if the devil dress her not. But truly, these same whoreson devils doe the Gods great harm in their women: for in every ten that they make, the devils mar five.
Well, get thee gone, farewell.
Yes forsooth: I wish you joy of the worm.
Give me my Robe, put on my Crown, I have
Immortal longings in me. Now no more
The juice of Egypt Grape shall moist this lip.
Yare, yare, good Iras; quick: Me thinks I hear
Anthony call: I see him rouse himself
To praise my Noble Act. I hear him mock
The luck of Caesar, which the Gods give men
To excuse their after wrath. Husband, I come:
Now to that name, my Courage prove my Title.
I am Fire, and Ayre; my other Elements
I give to baser life. So, have you done?
Come then, and take the last warmth of my Lips.
Farewell kind Charmian, Iras, long farewell.
Have I the Aspic in my lips? Dost fall?
If thou, and Nature can so gently part,
The stroke of death is as a Lovers pinch,
Which hurts, and is desired. Dost thou lye still?
If thus thou vanish, thou tell the world,
It is not worth leaue-taking.
Dissolve thick cloud, &amp; Rain, that I may say
The Gods themselves do weep.
This proves me base:
If she first meet the Curled Anthony.
He will make demand of her, and spend that kiss
Which is my heaven to have. Come thou mortal wretch,
With thy sharpe teeth this knot intrinsicate,
Of life at once untie: Poor venomous Fool,
Be angry, and dispatch. Oh coldest thou speak,
That I might hear thee call great Caesar Ass, vnpolicied.
Oh Eastern Star.
Peace, peace:
Dost thou not see my Baby at my breast,
That sucks the Nurse asleep.
O break! O break!
As sweet as Balm, as soft as Ayre, as gentle.
O Anthony! Nay I will take thee too.
What should I stay
In this wilde World? So fare thee well:
Now boast thee Death, in thy possession lies
A Lass unparalleled. Downy Windows close,
And golden Phoebus, never be beheld
Of eyes again so Royal: your Crowns away,
Isle mend it, and then play 
Whore's the Queen?
Speak softly, wake her not.
Caesar hath sent
Too slow a Messenger.
Oh come apace, dispatch, I partly feel thee.
Approach hoe,
Ell's not well: Caesar's beguiled.
There's Dolabella sent from Caesar: call him.
What work is here Charmian?
Is this well done?
It is well done, and fitting for a Princess
Descended of so many Royal Kings.
Ah Soldier.
How goes it here?
All dead.
Caesar, thy thoughts
Touch their effects in this: Thy self art coming
To see performed the dreaded Act which thou
So sought to hinder.
A way there, a way for Caesar.
Oh sir, you are too sure an Augurer:
That you did fere, is done.
Bravest at the last,
She leuell'd at our purposes, and being Royal
Took her own way: the manner of their deaths,
I do not see them bleed.
Who was last with them?
A simple Countryman, that brought his Figs:
This was his Basket.
Poisoned then.
Oh Caesar:
This Charmian lived but now, she stood and spake:
I found her trimming up the Diadem;
On her dead Mistress tremblingly she stood,
And on the sudden dropped.
Oh Noble weakness:
If they had swallowed poison, it would appear
By external swelling: but she looks like sleep,
As she would catch another Anthony
In her strong toil of Grace.
Here on her breast,
There is a vent of Blood, and something blown,
The like is on her Arm.
This is an Aspickes trail,
And these Figge-leaues have slime upon them, such
As the Aspic leaves upon the Caves of Nyle.
Most probable
That so she dyed: for her Physician tells me
She hath pursued Conclusions infinite
Of easy ways to dye. Take up her bed,
And bear her Women from the Monument,
She shall be buried by her Anthony.
No Grave upon the earth shall clip in it
A pair so famous: high events as these
Strike those that make them: and their Story is
No less in pity, then his Glory which
Brought them to be lamented. Our Army shall
In solemn show, attend this Funeral,
And then to Rome. Come Dolabella, see
High Order, in this great Solmemnity.

FOr as much as we must talk of Prophecy,
We intend with pardon and supportation,
As learned men doth well define and testify,
Thereof to make a true and pure declaration:
To prophecy of things is a divine inspiration,
Telling things to come with unmovable verity:
A gift only proceeding from Gods high majesty.
A divine inspiration he calls prophecy,
That which doth all other Prophecies exclude:
Which are no prophecies, but things of men's fantasies,
Invented to deceive the ignorant and rude:
But Satan is ready unbelievers to delude,
Though his members who are proved to be liars,
Yet they shame not to call themselves true propheciers.
The falsehood and vanities of these prestigiators,
Saint Augustine in nine or ten books de ciuitate dei,
Confuteth and proves them no true Relators;
But blasphemers and very Atheists,
And therefore by the judgment of God murders:
Not worthy to live, by the sentence of Gods mouth,
For into Lies and Fables they have turned the truth.
Saint Hierom upon Micha do testify,
That the term or vocable divination,
Which the devils mancyples calieth prophecy,
Is often taken in an evil consideration,
As in the same place he makes a plain relation:
That the true Prophets, in scripture Prophets are named,
Diuinators, are reproved, condemned, and blamed.
To that pernicious science Divination,
Are added a number of dyabiluall vanities,
Whereof I am not able to make recitation,
Neither do I esteem such wicked faculties,
I wish them extinct in all communalties,
For where they were they were permitted:
There was the prince &amp; the people sore punished
And although I shall not rehearse them in order,
The first of all, he names Necromancy,
Phytonia some say, is of as high degree,
Peromansie, Heromansie, Hydromansie, Geomansie,
Phystonomy, Metapostopy, Spatulmansie, Gheromansie,
Then have you Homen, Agurium, Postyguum,
Aspicium, Magyam, Venesissimum, Sortilogullum,
There be a great many more then I can recite,
Whereof every one hath his right:
That is to say, every one hath his devilish superstition,
Contrary to Gods word, and Christs erudition,
Confounded be those children of perdition.
Moses confounded them, so did Iobe and Essay,
With all the Apostles, Prophets, and Doctors, utterly.
Of Gods Prophets, thus doth Lactantius write,
They did not only of things to come prophecy,
But they spake of one truth in one sprite,
Which was fulfilled in their times openly.
These were sent of God by precept verily,
To be messengers of his divine majesty,
And to be correctors of men's iniquity.
To deride these, our Author hath a Play compiled,
Which he calls the Peddlers Prophecy.
Out of the which all such lewdness shall be exiled,
And other things spoken of very merely:
We shall use the manner of a comely Comedy.
The property thereof, is honest mirth to make,
The which to do at this time, I do undertake.
And whereas we shall speak of certain travellers,
We desire all honest persons not to be offended,
For we mean none but bankerouts and usurers,
Which to undo, other hath intended:
Their abuse I wish heartily to be amended.
For the past shame bankrupt, borrows beyond his estate,
Then he flees, keeps his house, or takes Ludgate.
Unless our Preface should too far it self extend:
And engender tediousness unto our audience,
With a few words more I will make an end:
Beseeching you to hear the rest with patience.
So doing, of our mirth you shall have intelligence.
I take my leave of you, for yonder comes the Peddler,
Which will take upon him to be a great meddler.
O this pack, this pack, this heavy pack,
It is so heavy, it hath almost broke my back.
Weary, nay I was never so weary,
Since I passed Carouse Ferry:
Time it is to set it down,
Would to God I were near some good Town:
A penny for a pot of drink,
I shall die for thirst, truly I think.
A great way have I gone since I drank,
Fourteen mile beyond the Scottish bank.
Few Peddlers take such pain:
I am fine to buy all my ware in Spain.
And because I would have all my ware good,
Sometimes I pass unto Iasons wood.
Under the poole Antarctic there I was,
Whereas I spake with the mighty Atlas.
Of whom for money I had a passport,
That through Celum Emporium, I might resort.
From thence unto Primum Mobily,
There bought I a stone called Idake Toy,
In the which there is a spirit enclosed,
Whom truly when I am disposed,
I can tell what is said or done;
From under the Constellation of the Moon:
Unto the cantor of the earth indeed,
Whither I purpose to go with all speed.
To Celum aquinum, I came from thence,
And there bestowed I the most of my pence:
Yet to tell you the truth of the matter,
I was almost perished with water;
Time it was to call for a boat,
Three days in the water, I stood up to the throat;
Yet as hard as the world went there,
To fill up my pack I bought more gear.
There bought I a stone called Calbrates,
Oh haphie is he that hath such a stone:
I tell you that thousands cannot get one.
For this stone gives wisdom, honour and grace,
And defended from perils in every place.
If that with Dyostarydes you could speak,
Your mind unto him you might break.
Then came I to the firmament,
And to pass thence I had commandment.
Saturn was angry and very fears,
The causes why, I will not now rehearse:
Iupiter could not pacify the cause,
Then Mars eased them with stafford laws.
Soll engendered such a sort of flies:
So that they had almost bitten out mine eyes.
Then passed I by Venus, Mercury, &amp; the Moon,
From whence I came since yesterday at noon:
Yet as hard as the world was there,
To fill up my pack I bought more gear.
A stone I bought which Tenya they call,
This stone hath the best property of all:
For it will make him to speak that is dumb,
And be able to tell of things to come.
This stone I bear under my tongue always,
So that I can tell what they do or say.
Well up with my pack and get me hence,
There is no remedy I must trudge for small pence.
Conyskins maids, Conyskins maid,
Yonder comes one, I am well apaid.
Welcome Peddler, hast thou any fine needles here?
Or any stiff pins sharpe at the point I pray you.
I have indeed, but they be some what dear:
Such as will break before they will bow,
Not like unto maidens the truth for to speak,
Which before they will break they will bend.
Wisely spoken Iohn Hoddy-peake,
Your thrift and your wit, at the good ale you do spend:
If thou hast any, at once bring them forth:
I may not stand prattling all day with thee.
I tell you my needles and pins be more worth,
Than you are worthy for your fair looks to see:
You will not buy, I know so much of your mind,
Therefore at this time you shall not have your lust:
For if my needles or pins should take any wind,
They would canker by and by, and take rust.
Wilt thou have me buy the pig in the poake?
I may see for love, and buy for money.
Where fire is, a man may perceive by the smoke,
Think not but that I know a Cat from a Cony:
I am acquainted well enough with hopes lay,
Learned I have to know chafe from corn:
Before ought you have of me you shall pay,
You shall not beguile, and then laugh me to scorn.
By God, and I know chalk from cheese,
I can discern an honest man from a knave,
If nought I gain by thee, nought, nought, will I leese.
None of thy wares, none of my money thou shalt have.
Better then any thou hast I can buy,
But to perceive what thou art I do begin:
If thou hast either needles or pins there let me die,
You compass the country, some cheat by craft to win:
I never knew honest man of this occupation,
But either he was a dyser, a drunkard, or a maker of shift
A picker, a cutpurse, a raiser of simulation,
Or such a one as run away with another mans wife.
Maid I pray you, let me have a word or two in your ear,
By the same token there stands a fat.
God for his passion, when were you there?
I beshrew his heart, that told you that.
I thought you had not been a Peddler long:
You were one of those that stood on the pillory,
That you were not all hanged you had wrong,
For by the devil you wrought some sorcery.
So sure as you are a maid and virgin pure,
So sure I stood on the pillory.
And as sure as you are gentle and demure,
I never used enchantment or sorcery,
But maid a word or two in your ear again,
If it may be it shall be as you said:
The same day there fell a great tempest of rain;
Stay a while, as hitherto you have staide.
You are inspired with the holy Ghost newly,
But the devil is within you so God me save.
This was said and done, the eighth day of July,
You shall have that you had not, and lose that you have.
Did you never hear of a maid called Plays?
She had six sisters, and herself made up the seventh
These were the daughters of the mighty Atlas,
Who by his own power holds up the heaven.
But mark what I say, when Holy shall stop her light,
Then maids of England, weep, wail, and sorrow
For they that go maidens to bed over night,
I will not say I, what they shall do on the morrow.
I will keep counsel, I know not what ye mean,
You are too wise for me goodman Peddler.
I wish you to keep your raised work clean,
But in needle-worke I will be no meddler.
Whope, where with sorrow art thou so long?
Hast thou not bought thy needles yet?
You will have your scoperlets always among,
Get you home with sorrow I say, and lay to the spit:
When your father shall come to supper anon,
Then the meat to the fire shall scarcely be laid,
What, you look that I should do all thing alone.
Mother, of this Peddler take heed and beware,
For he can tell all things that I have said and done.
He may see what a good huswife ye are,
Your idleness I warrant, he may perceive soon.
By my troth mother you say the truth,
By the fruit a man may soon know the tree,
There was never seen such idleness in youth,
And that in high and low of every degree.
For young men to be idle it is intolerable,
But maidens to be idle and of any state:
Is a thing most pernicious and detestable.
For idleness unto all mischief is an open gate.
I could rehearse a sort of damsels by name,
Which through idleness, learned things not to be spoken,
But what was their end they came all to shame:
As she did which dance for Iohn Baptists head, by the same token.
As a lame man hath no profit by his saire legs,
So out of the mouth of him that is not honest,
A good sentence is not worth a couple of eggs,
But is as profitable as is snow in harvest,
Who may speak worse against an evil life,
Then Peddlers whose whole trade is idleness:
Dycers, drunkards, makers of strife,
Very sincks and sentences of all wickedness.
Hold thy peace with sorrow, by S. Iemy I say,
Get thee forth, and go about thy business,
It is a pretty hearing for amayd to scold always,
He may swear that thou art full of idleness,
But I pray you tell me, have you any good pepper?
I would have an ounce and if it be good.
Without doubt you never spent better,
As fine Ienuper as any is in Fangringosse wood,
But I pray you let me answer your daughter,
Of her I tell you, you may have very great joy,
She is yours, and you have dearly bought her,
But yet you must bid her beware of one evil toy.
Well maid I pray you let me see your hand,
I will keep counsel, I swear by mine honesty.
Say what thou wilt, thou shalt not see my hand,
For in thee is neither manners nor modesty.
He may see your hand perde so he may,
I cry you mercy, as angry as a thing of nought:
He shall see no hand of mine here to day
I am as I am, and as you have me up brought.
I can tell as much by your face and look,
As I can tell by looking the lines of your hand:
Now surely of late I red in a book,
That few maidens shall be left in the land.
But to my words I would have you be attendant,
The sin of maidens God hath already so punished,
That a man cannot get an honest maid servant,
Dead they are I wean, and clean extinguished:
But when the dog holds the bull with the golden horns,
Then thus it shall come to pass, I dare lay my head:
That for money we shall get no new Ale in corns,
For all English maids that year shall be dead.
When the Rambe pushes against the Serpent,
Then perish all Peddlers and peaking Proctors:
The day will come that the Lion will be fervent,
Then take heed all dreamers, and doting Doctors.
Passion of God, now am I put to my trump,
Mother, I perceive your daughter hath gone to school:
Marry there she paid me home again jump.
But mother, I pray you let me ask you one thing,
Can your daughter work at times void?
Yea forsooth, she works from morning to evening,
With the needle, and very well she can inbrayd.
Well, to housewifery let her apply her mind:
For within a while shall be one Eclipse of the Sun,
As by good learning, surely I do find,
That then shall be finished that now is begun.
Proud looks, stretched out necks, and wanton eyes,
Their frolic cheer, thkir fine walks, and tripping:
With all their pleasures which they now do devise,
Their feasting, disguising, their kissing and clipping,
Rich shows, strange funerals, precious habiliments,
Golden collers, spangs, bracelets, bonets, and hoods,
Painted and laid out hair, filides, and nether ornaments.
Their chains, &amp; sumptuous apparel, that cost great goods,
Earing jewels, iemmes, to set out their faces,
Change of garments, cassocks, vales, lanes fine,
Needles, glasses, partlets, fillets, and bungraces,
With colours curious to make the face shine.
After this your needle work will be nought worth,
Therefore some other occupation you must learn:
You that intend to set your children forth,
Must teach them to labour, their livings to earn.
A couple of good huswifes, the mother and the daughter,
To stand prating here all the day long:
What time of night shall we go to supper?
Every day I must be feine to sing one song.
By my troth husband you are like to have no roastmeat to night,
For I have had other business to day in hand:
Here is come such another wight,
As the like was never heard of in this land.
By by troth father, he is but a prattling Peddler,
And to say the truth hath nothing to sell:
But in soothsaying he would appear to be a meddler.
But believe you nothing that he doth tell.
A Peddler, marry the more naughty pack thou,
Hast thou nothing else to do but with a Peddler to prate:
Get thee home, thou ill favoured Sow,
It were well done to beat thee about the pate.
I beshrew thy knaves hart, thou hast angered my father,
If thou hast no needles, thou might tell me so than.
And it had pleased you, you might have gone away rather,
But hear you, declare what good you can:
Father why suffer you not your daughter to marry:
She is old enough to have an husband.
Nay alas poor wench, a while she may tarry,
For in faith she hath neither house nor land.
Friend, whereas you spake of my daughters marriage,
I am not of that mind that many an other man is,
Chastity with Gods help is a light carriage,
And therefore in this, I think I do not greatly amiss;
To marry my daughter I am half in doubt,
I will tell you other nations are so scattered about:
That marriages, that I do not greatly allow.
I and mine ancestors were English men borne,
And though I be but a simple man,
To marry my daughter to an Alien I think soorne,
And therefore I keep her from it, so long as I can.
Yea either they be Alians, or Aliant sons indeed,
Who through marriage of English women of late,
Hath altered the true English blood and seed,
And therewithal English plain manners and good state.
All the naughty fashions in the world at this day,
Are by some means brought into England.
If by some means they be not commanded away,
Within a while they will vs all withstand.
For here they do not only devour and spend;
As they be most deuourets truly:
But our commodities away they do send,
Rob and steal from English men daily.
Mother, there is a story of King Vertyger,
Whether it be true of say or no, I am not able:
Augustus plaid the part of a murderer;
But some men takes it but for a fable.
But this is true, out of the South East,
Caine comes before, and shall come again,
A strange, horrible, and monstrous beast,
By whom all old women shall be devoured plain.
Now mother, so God help me,
They that will believe him, is worse then mad.
The womanhood of your daughter here I do see.
I say no more, of mine honesty it is too bad.
By your honesty, a man may you as soon believe,
As I will do a dog when he swears by his christendom.
A stopping morsel anon to you I will give,
I will be even with you, I swear by my holy dome.
Is there such abeast as you speak off?
And will he devour none, but women that be old?
I promise you mother, I do not scoff,
Dreadful he is, and horrible to be hold.
An hugebeast, and of a marvelous strength,
From Dover to Weighed, head, tail, and mouth:
We esteem him to be larger in length,
And in breadth, from Donwish to Perchmouth,
He hath devoured all the old women in Africa,
And now he hastes into Drop with all speed:
Merchant men can tell you, that use there to traffic,
To talk any more of the matter, what shall it need.
A Peddler going about to sell lies:
I think of them you have more plenty, than you have ware,
Such fellows do nothing else but devise
Tales and Fables, and such Lemers as these are.
Father be these lies that I speak,
He shall snatch up the husband with the wife:
And because the old man Gods laws do break,
In a strange nation he shall end his life.
But when this shall come to pass,
As it shall come to pass be sure of that,
Then fathers and mothers shall cry alas,
For their own children shall be thrown down flat.
By Saint Anne, but those words make me afraid,
The man knows more then we perchance:
Now surely mother as I am true maid,
He knows no more then the Faukener of France.
True maid, fie for shame, why do ye swear?
I know more then the priest spake of on Sunday:
Remember you not what I said even now to you in your ear?
The matter was broken the six day of May.
But when angry Saturn shall have the regiment,
And rule again as he did first:
Then fair maids shall die through famishment,
And young springals shall perish for thirst.
I love none of this bible babble I, by this light,
Peddler hast thou any pure spectacles to sell?
I would have a pair that were of an old sight,
For I am aboue threescore and ten, to you I may tell.
He hath as many spectacles, needles, and pins,
He goes about the country under that pretence.
Much money for wares you may take in Innes,
And besides the same, your charges and expense.
Father I have a pair of spectacles in my pack,
That will cause you to see as well behind as before:
For in your house is plaid many a knack,
Which of my mind you shall know more.
Though my spectacles you intend to buy,
You shall perceive your own negligence,
You suffer your children to swear and lye,
And you laugh thereat and have patience,
Fathers and mothers, kinsfolks and friends,
So mordinately do their children love:
That they are parents of bodies, but poisoners of minds,
As my saying right well here shall prove.
But when Phoebus shall enter into the Lyon:
There shall be such a great burning heate:
That shall burn up your children every one.
And they that be left on live, strange gotches shall eat.
Parents and masters in this most mirth truly,
Shall be cant up with a sudden ravishment:
Look for this in the month of July,
Ramnasia will not delay her punishment.
Marry good Lord have mercy on vs all,
Husband, I pray you bid him home to our house.
He shall be welcome, but our cheer is but small,
But yet he shall be sure of bacon and a piece of sows.
The house is the worse where such Peddlers bee,
Good Lord father, do ye believe ought that he doth say?
I marvel what goodness in him you do see,
He shall not come in our house truly if I may.
I thank you surely with all my heart,
I will go home with you with a good will:
Of all that is in my pack you shall have part,
For of physic I tell you, I can good skill.
By God young man, come and welcome heartily,
And care not greatly what my daughter saith:
For though she speak to you somewhat angrily,
Yet I warrant you she means no very good faith.
No by my troth, I cannot bear anger long,
Mine anger is soon come, and soon gone:
Then I pray you let vs have a song,
In token that we be friends, and all as one.
Now by troth, because you speak of a song, wan I was young,
I past the Lark, and pleasant Nightingale:
Like an Angel I would have sung,
And specially when my throat had bin well washed with good Ale,
Then a song of the Peddler now let vs have,
You know your rests, and when you shall come in.
Then let vs sing the Peddler is a knave,
When you will Peddler, you may begin.
Woman, woman, get you home at once,
And see that we have good cheer to night.
You shall be sure to have good Ale, for that have no bones,
Without any chewing, it will go down right.
That do all Peddlers love as their lives,
And specially when one meets with another.
Then may you be one of their wives:
Get ye home and help your mother.
Goodman Peddler, if I wist you would not be angry,
To ask you a question I would be bold.
I can tell what is done at Alexaadry,
Say what you will, you shall find me cold.
I pray you tell me, are you a Peddler by your occupytion
I judge you rather to be a man of science.
There needs no further declaration,
For here your self have obsolued your own sentence.
What man think not I am altogether a fool,
I know what a man is by his sisnomie,
At little Within seven years I went to school:
And there learned I the science of Morosophie.
Wherein by your nose, by the red streamer,
Another is, you keep fast your faculties.
By my troth, there thou hitst the nail on the head.
Dream do you say? Lord how I dream every night:
Sometime I dream that I am dead,
And sometime that I am young, lusty, and light.
Father, many times you are in a strange taking,
And namely when you should be in quiet:
You dream sometimes being broad waking:
For the bright sunlight, is not for old men's diet.
But do you dream father, do you say?
Lord, Lord, that is a true prophecy:
As touching that there is one doth inveigh,
And saith that a boy of an hundred year old shall die.
A boy of an hundred year, marry sir, here is a toy:
By God Peddler, all that thou say is not true:
How can one of an hundredth year old be a boy,
That is all like as an old garment could be a new.
The eldest that be, were sometimes boys,
Wherein they followed their own sensual will:
If men of great age use the same toys,
What are they else but very boys still.
Age is right honourable, the Preacher doth say,
By God Peddler, you had not need to dispraise age:
There was never less reverence then is at this day,
For very children now presume against the sage.
Children borne of wicked parents saith he,
Shall be witness of their parents wickedness:
For how could the children so mischievous be,
Except their parents suffered their unhappiness,
But there is much evil seed sown and vpsprong,
For lack of moisture and pleasant dews,
They shall wither away while they be young,
A while they shall tarry here for pleasant shows.
But age you do say is right honourable,
Which age consists in many years and long time,
A mans wisdom is his age commendable,
And his age is a pure life without crime.
I marvel where you had all this gear,
You have a great deal of this other men lack.
About the Country with me I do it bear,
Store of such gear I tell you I have in my pack.
I will see some of your ware anon, by your leave,
Come, come, I pray you let vs go hence.
Behold how my pack to the ground doth cleave,
I would it were on my shoulder, as leefe as forty pence.
I am a Mariner by Science and Art,
And have used the seas a long space:
Whereas I have had troubles enough for my part,
Yet have I scoped all dangers, I thank God of his grace.
Few men alive I suppose at this day,
That have travelled further then I have done,
Therefore somewhat of my mind anon I will say,
As shall be declared more plainly soon.
Of two things in the mean season I will complain,
First is of the scarcity of good mariners,
And that those few, to learn do disdain,
Of such as are both cunning and good Artificers,
Whereupon some takes upon them to be masters,
Whereas yet they were never learners diligent,
Such of many men, are the way casters,
For will is their wisdom, and their knowledge is ire impatient
If that in any science it is needful to be expert,
In this requires great intelligence:
For some may on both lives and goods subvert,
Which guides without wit and experience,
Too much proof of this we have had of late,
Therefore with whom men doth venture, let them take heed
For though the Swallow be able much to prate,
Yet her notes are most unpleasant indeed.
God send me better luck in this voyage,
Then I have had this six or seven years,
For if I have no better fortune in this passage,
I may go learn to botch with a pair of shears,
I am glad to see you moister Mariner,
I would little have thought to have found you here.
I am glad to see you also moister Traveller,
Tell me how do you now a days, I pray you what cheer.
I thank God I have my health reasonably,
But we are so nipped in our customs these days,
That it pinches a great sort unreasonably,
And causes many one to find other delays.
Masters we know what belonged unto merchandise
But it behooves vs your counsels to keep,
You are wise enough to practise your enterprise,
You must wake, when other men doth sleep.
Is not twenty shillings well given to save twenty pound,
And if it be ten pound, I trow you will not greatly stick,
To save and get means, a new way may be found,
Before you be rubbed, see you do not kick.
By the mass it is not as you do think,
For Officers so diligently do waite:
That neither for love nor money they will wink,
Narrowly they look, and always lay bait.
Before the harm of the wound, see you do not complain,
For merchants were never so rich as now they be,
Th'whole substance of the Realm do conteme,
How they flow in possessions every man see.
You speak of such as are merchants indeed,
Which in all places have their Factors,
If this country help not, another doth speed,
Doubtless such men are rich, and notable actors.
But as for such as I am, young men Travellers,
Which are compelled to travel for their gain,
We are in worse case then any other Artificers,
But that I say, able to prove I can:
There was not so many bankrouts this 100 year,
In times past, the sea hath enriched many a man,
But what causes of late it doth appear.
In times past men were content with mediocrity,
They would no more borrow, then they thought to pay,
For they that will presume aboue their ability,
Must by divers means fall into decay:
But it is a common practise used now in this land,
Many one doth themselves bankrouts make:
When they have gotten other men's goods into their hand,
Then their houses they keep, or else Ludgate they take.
God speed you both masters heartily forsooth,
My coming hither is to talk with a Peddler,
He promised me here, this day to keep a booth,
For in many things he makes himself a great meddler.
I am no Peddler, but a poor Mariner I am,
Neither one nor other was here since I came,
Therefore of any Peddler I can nothing say.
I was at my neighbours house the last night,
And there was a Peddler selling many things,
Somewhat he had whereof we might have no sight:
But good store he had of points, pins, and rings.
I think surely that he is some Conjurer,
For I never laughed better in all my life,
My neighbours saith plainly that he is a sorcerer,
But Lord how he angered the old wife.
At the first she made him much of her counsel,
And showed him certain Images which she did keep,
I wise quoth she, I love these better then the new Gospel,
And for pure love unto them, she began to weep:
The false knave stood still and nought did say,
A pair of beads under her Apearne she had:
On these quoth she, I say our Ladies Salter every day,
And at them the Peddler railed as he had been mad.
Why Peddlers were wont to have beads to sell,
I marvel that they will rebuke superstition.
What he hath I cannot tell,
But thus he plaide on such condition.
Many Peddlers in my time have I known,
But one honest man of them I never knew,
They sell many times more than is their own,
And utter old baggage for that should be new.
I think he hath not been a Peddler long,
But he will go near to tell what you have done:
For any thing I can see, he will do no man wrong,
But he make good shift where he become.
What any man hath done, what doth he know,
I will gage with him an hundredth pound:
That any thing done secretly he shall not show,
Neither he nor any that lives on the ground.
Who told me that you were a Traveller?
And whom all the world could not satisfy?
In the devils name you are a merchant venturer,
Of your spoils the Barbarians can testify.
Conyskins maids, conyskins for old pastes,
What lack you? what buy you? any good pins,
Knit caps for children, biggens and wastes?
Come let vs bargain, bring forth your Conyskins.
Is this the Peddler that you spake off?
I judge him to be lunatic and out of his mind.
I would advise not over much with him to scoff,
For tame enough you are like him to find.
What care I for a thousand varlets,
By God I advise him not me to abuse.
What will you give for a pack of good scarlets,
Other will be glad of them ye refuse,
In faith I mock not, why look you big?
What man, I come hither to be merry,
In your life time you have not known a livelier twig,
I will say nothing that shall make you angry.
You are welcome hither friend, I dare undertake,
You spake of a pack of scarlets even now,
I tell you here are they that are able money to make,
Are you able to perform them, how say you?
I spake it, but I promised it not yet,
What will you give for a truss of cloth of Tissue?
This fellow doth appear to be out of his wit,
A runagate in whom is little virtue.
Friend, dispraise no further then you may dispraise,
For what he doth man, neither you nor I do know.
There be too many such runagates at these days,
All the whole world with such idle persons doth flow.
By my troth you say very truth,
The truth with your own mouth is verified,
The most of your sort are idle from their youth,
Yea, so I say, because they are never well occupied,
As touching that in a book of latin of late I did find,
Which doth the manner of Travellers publish,
The quick Mariner saith, that travellers in the East part of Iude,
Through seas and floods they work all the euish.
Worse and all this another Poet doth say,
That merchants, God and his Saints doth forswear,
So that advantage obtain thereby they may,
Worthy to be drowned in hell and to burn there.
He can rehearse all this in latin, &amp; a great deal more,
And will do it, if you do it of him gently require.
Think not but that I have such gear in store,
I will speak it in latin at your desire.
Pariuratta suo post ponet mittunt lucre mircatur,
Stigijs non nisi olignis aquis.
Besides this, there is written in the same book,
The shamefullest slanders that ever I did see:
When you will moister Traveller, thereon you may look,
The devil on the lie, and yet great slanders they bee.
It is pity that he is no better examined,
He goes about the country under this pretence:
To work some mischief he is determined,
We shall hear more I dare lay forty pence.
By my troth, if I should speak indifferently,
His talk is according to most men's report.
That unhappy writer, writes vnreuently,
All that I said, I spake but in sport.
Although perchance some hath offended,
Yet ye ought not the whole company to defame:
He runs far that cannot be amended,
For one mans faults, you may not all men blame.
Who would any sentence regard,
Spoken of such a runagate as this is,
But if such licentious things may be heard,
We shall say that all is amiss:
But as for the worshipful state of merchandise,
Is known to the public wealth to be necessary:
Therefore he that speak against that exercise,
To the Common-wealth is an utter adversary.
He is indeed sir, you will not say the contrary,
But he that writ the book somewhat hath seen,
He prays God, that some of you may soon miscarry,
For the whole decay of that you have been,
If English pure Coin in other countries,
Be but worth an half penny in a shilling more then it is here,
You will find means to deceive all degrees,
And convey the most part over in a year.
Much wind thou doest waste I tell thee in vain,
But if things be amiss as thou doest express:
As they are not, as to all men doth appear plain,
Yet are not we able any thing to redress.
Who should hold with the shoe but the sole?
The Mariner and the Traveller are all one:
In the realm alteadie you have a foul hole,
Whereof you shall know more of my mind anon.
I supposed that our fortunes thou could have told,
Such talk as this who would regard?
You are not like to live till you be old,
Your fortune is to die upward.
Surely thou wilt never die in thy bed,
For Sursumcorda belong to such idle Peddlers:
Ere it be long I will cause you to be sped,
And also with you, such slanderous meddlers.
Your state will continue but a while,
When Iuno shall be desorsed from Iupiter,
Then for pride, covetousness, excess, and guile,
Shall perish every venturing Traveller,
There shall not be left one merchant saith he,
And no man shall buy your merchandise any more,
That time will come that thus it shall be,
Therefore evil gotten goods do you again restore.
Thou speak to vs of Iupiter and Iuno,
But let vs know what thou meanest thereby:
Thou shalt declare thy sayings before thou go,
Or else thy words again recant and deny.
Iupiter over a far country, Creta was a King,
Iuno the daughter of Saturnus was his wife:
Unchaste was he, and wrought many an evil thing,
Therefore between them two, there was an evil life.
I love none of these lying Poets indeed,
I marvel what favour to them, men can have:
For they do nothing else, but men's minds with vanities feed,
And hinder our faith, which should our souls save.
Look what I have said, I will say, and say again,
That for pride, covetousness, and excess:
All the travellers from Armenia, or the highest mountain
In one hour shall lose their substance and riches.
Sephyrus with horrible blasts shall blow,
The hart of the sea shall ear up your treasure,
The huge waives shall all ships overthrow:
They shall be drowned and all their pleasures
I will tell you also when that shall come to pass,
When the daughter of Pluto shall reign over all:
Also when the daughter of Alkeron shall guide Midst,
Then by and by shall merchants have a great fall.
Such fellows going abroad the country,
Make many simple folks them to believe:
Yea and with a few lies bond and free,
He deceives, and are glad money to give:
By such shifts he utters much ware:
I have heard him say now, more then ever I heard him say.
Let him say what he will, I do not care,
I suppose here is none, that doth his saying greatly way.
Words way not, but are light, and fly in the wind,
But mark when words shall be turned into fire
Then words full heavy you are like to find,
For that shall fall upon you that did upon Tyre.
If such hard chances happen unto Travellers
To lose their lives and goods as thou doest prophecy
What shall happen to vs that be Mariners?
We are like to be consumed, and all our ships utterly.
When Bacchus was disposed to sail unto Naxion
The Mariners promised to bring him thither,
But they returned toward another nation,
Purposing of him to make a spoil together.
They thought to have sold Bacchus for money,
But he being a God, prophesied their treachery,
Turned into gall, that they had made bony,
And anon justly recompensed their injury.
Their Taklings and Cables, they turned into Serpents,
Their other Balassing into Tygars, and other beasts else,
He reued the Mariners, of their mischievous intents,
Threw them into the seas, and turned them into Makerels
Therefore the son of man, joins you together.
A garment they say, shall perish with the sleeves,
At such a time as you do not consider.
This man with the holy Ghost is inspired,
But the devil within him is no doubt:
I trust to see such cold prophets fired,
Before your false and prattling prophecies, be brought about.
If things amiss were by penance amended,
The plagues of God devised, he would wihhold:
The Peddler in my judgment hath not offended,
In that of plagues to come he hath vs told.
Hang him knave, hang him,
Who made him privy of Gods counsel?
Why you horizon villain,
What have we brought into the land?
Forty thousand enemies to the Crown,
The deadly poison of hell,
Mark what I have said, and hereto will I 
I leave to speak of that which a way ,
I mean coin, and by fraud, craft, and guile,
I will not speak of all, fear least I do vary,
But God will recompense it within a while
Jaws, Ruffians, Moors, Turks, and Tartarians.
With these you have mixed the virgins people,
Anabaptists, Libertines, Epicureans and Arians,
Infinite of these, your country to enfeeble,
The maidens, men, may go learn to pick a sallet:
Houses for money they can none get, 
Poor Crafts men are compelled to take bag and wallet
But for your great sins, Tyre shall shortly sink.
The devil of lye that is, such a number of Alians,
And that of all nations are come hi to dwell,
As he said, even Jaws and Barbarians,
So that the Realm is like to  another hell.
I speak not of this Realm, you take me amiss,
All my talk is of the noble Ciie of Tyre,
There shall not be left a man against the wall to peace,
And those that plagues consume not, shall be destroyed with fire,
I confess one God the blessed Trinity,
God the father, God the son, and God the holy Ghost,
This God intends shortly to make a triplicitie,
Whereby shall be consumed, from the least to the most,
But this I say to you moister Mariner,
You are skilled well you say in Astronomy,
Of the state of Charles Wane, you are not to learn,
When Artpholos hides his fisnomy
Then of the foresaid gear God doth you warn,
When Arthur shall be,
And go before the great e,
Then out of hand comes all this gear forward,
Which shortly will come to  I fear.
Lo here are bugs to make children afraid
I think the frantic Peddler be 
But what great things of him will be said
If any things according to his prattling doth hit.
Then where was such a Prophet as our Peddler was
To know of things never to be done:
I warrant you this gear will come to pass,
When our Lady hath a new son.
Surely I am afraid with the prophecy,
Which in holy scripture I have learned:
The threats of God, by Essay and Ieremy,
Hath all the whole world sufficiently warned,
But I marvel of one thing brother Peddler,
That in all your talk you allege no scripture,
For he that in prophecies will be a meddler,
By the word of God must his matters assure.
The days are come to pass spoken of before,
That such as can see, are yet still blind:
And they that of knowledge have great store,
Yet are they without understanding of the mind.
Artificer, artificer, you are an artificer,
That is, one living by an occupation,
God grant you be better than the Traveller,
And better then the conveyer of abomination.
I would gladly get my living by mine Art,
But Aliants chop up houses so in the City,
That we poor crafts men must needs depart,
And beg if they will, the more is the pity.
What say the most pestilent Leasemongers?
If that all the houses in London I were able to let,
I would let them all to Alians and strangers,
Before in any of them an Englishman I would set
For why a stranger will give me what I will require
And at his day he will keep touch and pay:
An English man in London cannot an house hire
Except he be undone for ever and a day.
Three parts in London are already Alians,
Other mongrels, Alians children, mischievously mixed,
And that with the most detestable Barbarians,
Which here for ever hath their dwellings fixed:
Still you Mariners bring them in daily,
So you may have pence,
You make your selves rich and go gaily,
I would you were as ready to carry them hence.
You would bring in the devil for pence and groats:
Ye shall see them one day play their parts gaily,
When we think least, they shall cut our throats.
They that will talk at their pleasure what they will,
Shall hear again, that shall them displease,
But what frantic fools say, it doth not greatly skill,
For your talk doth neither profit nor disprofit a peace:
But whereas thou laiest to the charge of Mariners,
That we have filled the land full of Alians,
Thou belie vs, we bring in none but Gospellers,
And such as we know to be very good Christians.
Oh holy Ghospell,  tidings of health most pure,
Thou art made a cloak to all abomination,
Vengeance hangs over your head be you sure,
For misusing the word of mans salvation,
What mischief and outrage hath been wrought,
And that under the pretence of the Gospel,
There is no heresy, no impiety, no sacrilege on sought,
And all painted out, with the colour of the Gospel.
Of the Gospel we do boast, and do it profess,
But more honest fidelity is among Turks,
O the boasting, the pride, and the fleshly excess,
Among vs is neither true faith, nor yet good works.
Speak of your self friend and of no man else,
You know no mans conscience but your own,
We are men of flesh and blood, and no Angels,
What every man is, to God it is known.
Will you have one word for all?
What is that?
Ye are nought all:
And so nought, that ye are past amendment,
Therefore the vengeance of God on you must fall,
And now approaches the time of aduengement,
Tyre with all her Travellers proud and gay,
With all her cunning Artificers in their Arts,
Shall be consumed in one day,
And this shall happen for the hardness of your hearts.
But as for Ilion, the tormentor of the slain,
Shall be ploughed up like a corn field:
After he that came, do come again,
In Ilion shall be found neither woman nor child.
Look that thou study for the true interpretation,
Of your fond and fantastical prophecy,
I will cause you to be had in examination,
And that within these few days, I promise you verily.
O that all bankrouts, pirates, and usurers,
Ingroses, filthy farmers, and sacrilegers,
Burglaries, lease mongers, promoters, false Mariners,
Might be examined, with counterfeit Artificers.
All things spoken here, I wish for my part
That they were trodden under the Table:
For he hath uttered nothing but the fancies of his hart,
Who can let a man merrily to fable.
Fable quoth he, by S. Mary sir, his fables touch the quick,
He mingles his fable with unhappy sentences:
By the faith of my body, he doth not my conscience a little pick:
He shall answer them, that hath more astriences.
Conyskins maids, Conyskins for old pastes,
What lack you, what buy you, any good pins,
Knit caps for children, biggens, and wastes,
Come let vs bargain, bring forth your Conyskins,
I pray you rid my pack you three,
I promise you, I will sell you very good cheap,
If upon the price we can agree,
Of wares for each of you, I have a very great heap.
Then open thy pack, let me see what thou hast here,
If thou hast any ware for me, some money thou shall
For merchant Travels I have such gear,
As no man in the world is able to make,
I have a stone in my pack whereon is a name,
Which stone if you please, here next your heart,
Shall defend you from peril and shame,
And keep you from pain, when you hence depart,
But I have a thing perchance you love better,
Although it be not so comely to behold.
A thing wherewith you may make a water.
Wherewith all things that you touch shall be turned to gold.
This wildbraine doth but only mock and scoff,
You shall be tied a little shorter one day.
If thou hast such gear as thou speak off
Let me know the price, and for it I will pay,
And thou wilt meet me anon at the sign of the Doe,
Thou and I will reason more of the matter.
And it will please you to help to sing a ballet before you go
I will teach you cunningly to make the water.
I know the Peddler can sing pleasantly,
Both upon the book, and also without.
I will sing, seeing he desires me so instantly,
But to sing by heart, to agree I stand in doubt.
Behold I have ballet books here,
Truly pricked, with your rests, and where you shall come in.
Then we sour will make an honest quere,
I will follow, if the Peddler will begin.
I have business, I must needs go hence,
Farewell Peddler, thou know my mind.
Against my coming, provide a purse of pence,
For I can sell you a prosperous and a good wind.
I have in my pack also another stone,
Used with another thing that I do know,
Will cause a rough wind soon to be calm anon,
And in what quarter you will the wind to blow.
All thy words here are enigmata, that are speeches dark,
Which I would have thee declare what they do mean:
For I had as leeue hear a band-dog bark,
As to hear thee talk, and all is not worth a bean.
Moister Mariner for you I have an Adamant,
I suppose there is no better in this world wide:
Although it be rough and unpleasant,
Yet you had never the like, your needle to guide.
Also for the moister of a ship I have a Card,
Compiled by A, the first Astronomer
If to the value thereof, you will give me reward,
You shall have it before another moister Mariner.
Then no more ado, but I pray thee go with me aboard,
Thou shalt be sure to have poor Mariners cheer:
Harm shalt thou have none, I promise thee at a word,
Thou shalt be sure to have bread, beef, and bear.
I will promise you to come the next tide,
If for money I can get a hoary boat:
If not, I will take my nag and ride,
I pass not a little for wetting of my coat.
You shall disappoint them both at this season,
You shall go home with me and take such as I have.
To break my promise it were against all reason,
Yet a thing for true Artificers I do save,
I have in my pack only one tool,
Which will serve for all kind of occupations
Euclides. the first of Geometrisians school
Invented it through marvelous inspirations.
Thereon you may make a Since the grass for to mow,
Also a Drappell to join ships together:
A Coulter or Share, to plough before they do sow,
The rest of the Tales you may now consider.
You have a marvelous meaning by the tool I am sure,
I would you should show me there of the signification
Such a tool it is, I as will endure,
Even unto the worlds consumation,
After I have performed my promise truly,
With the Mariner and also the Traveller,
I will return again this way duly,
And then you shall see my tool, moister Artificer.
This Peddler makes me marvelously to muse,
I think God hath revealed to him things to come,
To the ignorant, they appear marvelous news,
But of ancient sayings they appear to be a some.
Well I will tarry here till his return again,
I will hear how with the Mariner and the traveller he hath sped,
Although his counsels they do disdain,
Yet it is good by wisdom always to be led.
A sir, I have been at your house twice or thrice to day,
You know whereof you and I did reason,
Let me hear what to it you will say?
Liberty I granted you till this season,
I tell you I may have three pound for my good will
And double as much rent as you do give,
You shall know the party, and see his bill,
And that within these few days, if you will not me believe.
I beseech you landlord to show me some favour,
You know that of the house I have bestowed cost,
All this time you have known my behaviour,
Therefore I pray you let not all my labour be lost:
I and mine ancestors in the house long time have dwelt,
And I trust I have always paid my rent:
Both sweet and sower, joy and pain, there we have felt,
And always to deal honestly was our intent.
Will you not have me to do as all men do?
Shall I not make that I can of mine own?
You know my mind if you will not agree thereto,
What I will do within these few days with it, shall be known
You know that I have good evidence to show,
If any pity be in you, I pray you hear my boon:
If you put me out of my house, my days will be few,
And both I and my family quite undone;
Therefore I pray you tell me what you will require?
And I shall be contented my lease to renew.
No more then other will give I do desire,
And daily for the same to me they do sue.
Oh what a wretched world is this for poor men,
Oh unreasonable covetousness of Landlords at this day,
Of the house whereof I have years threescore and ten,
I must out, except beyond all reason I will pay.
O what wretches are at these days alive,
To their utter undoing other men's houses to take:
I am sure he shall never be able to thrive,
I know what he is able thereof to make.
All Landlords deal not so honestly as I deal,
I would you should have it before another:
You know what to you I did reveal,
I can do no more, if you were my brother.
Conyskins maids, conyskins for pins and laces,
Wot ye what sir, I have been at both places;
I can tell thee such news as thou never heard off,
Earnest matter, I will neither fable nor scoff,
The Mariner hath promised the Traveller
To carry him as far as the River Awroer,
In the which he shall find the stones whereof I told,
Wherewith all thing that they touch, shall be turned to gold.
They are like thereby to have little advantage,
For they are like to perish at the same voyage.
To pass through Marybosse Ferry they have chosen,
In the which sea, unto death they shall be frozen.
The Mariners shall be turned into Makerels,
And the Travellers into Pickerels.
Pikes they say in the salt water will not live,
Pity it were that Pikes in the water should thrive,
For all young Fry in the sea they would eat,
So that upon fasting days we should get no meat.
Therefore on the sea they shall be turned into Seals,
And their wives into Barganders and Teales,
Yet among the gods, for their wives was great dissention,
But I trust they will soon end their contention.
Some made reasons, &amp; would have the women to be Woodcocks,
Nay quoth the other, it were meeter they should be Peacocks.
To conclude, because they are so tender and nesh,
They are like to be made neither good fish nor good flesh.
You have broken promise, you said you would not fable,
But now I perceive you are very unstable.
Unstable, mary sir that is most sure:
He is so far out of his wits, that he is past cure.
You are a Landlord and have many Tenants,
A great mischance is happened among your servants.
My servants were well enough within this hour.
Now one of them doth another devour.
Sir it is a strange thing to see your house,
This year there is like to be good store of sows:
Your wife by the stroke of God is turned to a Cow,
And your youngest daughter, she is turned to a Sow
The rest of your children, a sort of pretty twigs,
Now are they altered, and turned to pigs.
You are a knave, I dare lay my life,
I will teach you to rail, on an honest mans wife.
To me you may say your pleasure and mind,
But as I have said, you are like it to find.
Your Oxen and cattle, are turned to Hedgehogs,
And your great multitude of sheep, are turned into Frogs.
The greatest wonder it is yet behind,
All your Tenants have left their humane kind.
Some are turned into Spaniels, and some into Greyhounds,
These make not a little ado upon your grounds.
That you are a Landlord I do understand,
Now to look to this gear, it stands you in hand.
Between game and earnest, I desire thee,
Tell me the troth, if any such things there be.
There is no such thing be your sure,
For all that he speaks is under a figure.
Did you never hear of one called Action?
Yes indeed, I heard of such a one.
You are like to play Actions part,
For you shall be turned to a wilde hart.
And the dogs which to keep you were wont,
With most cruel death shall you hunt.
What will your raised rents help?
When you shall be torn of every whelp.
Your unsatiable covetousness, your shameful simony,
Your sacrilege accursed, by Gods own testimony.
These and such other plagues on you shall light,
When Tyton like the Sun, shall shine at midnight.
Watch, for within these few it will bee,
They are alive that these plagues shall see.
Hear thou Peddler? come away I pray thee heartily,
For things are wrought against thee secretly.
A heinous complaint of thee, my Landlord have made,
And with other things they purpose thee to lade.
They say that with Necromancy thou art a meddler,
Wherefore by my counsel thou shalt be no longer a Peddler.
Why then how shall I sell my ware?
Tush, tush, for that take thou no care.
Of points in my pack I have an whole gross.
A straw for points, by them thou can have no loss.
But I suppose you cannot tell what points they bee:
When thou comes home to my house, then I will see.
I will come anon, but I am past care,
Sing and be merry, hob or nab, away the mare.
It begins, it springs, it flourishes,
Woe be unto them that such plants nourishes.
I dare lay as much as I am worth,
That strange monsters they shall bring forth.
Did you never hear of an Island called Thewle?
Near to the Orcardes compassed with the sea,
Near the same place there is a pleasant land,
Wherein is great wonders as I understand.
This land was sometime full of men,
Such, as one of them were as good as ten:
Now are they altered into beasts and fowls,
As into Lyons, Bears, Kites, Swine, and Owls.
God is able to take from them their beastly heart,
And into the shape of men again them convert.
Seven years to declare his pomp,
He punished the mighty king Nabuchodonozor,
If all men had seen these men, as I have seen,
And see them at these days, it would make them weep I wean.
Saint Clement saith, written unto saint Iames,
That he is a right interpreter of holy writ:
Which stands not upon words, Countries, and names,
But such one as expounded the meaning of the spirit.
An Interpretor thereof, I am called by name:
For of the tongues I am able to make translation,
My practise hath been long time in the same.
And of Mysteries I am able to make declaration:
It grieves me at the heart, God I take to record,
To see the variety, and chiefly in religion,
That it may be soon amended, I beseech Christ our Lord,
Or else let vs look shortly for a grievous destruction.
My coming hither truly at this season,
Is chiefly to hear the talk of a Peddler:
I will be glad by learning with him to reason,
For I hear say, that in high matters he is a meddler.
Where is this Peddler? where is this runagate?
What sir is he one of your scholars?
It is your pleasure all things well to interpret,
But they are not the best Judges, that were golden collers,
I heard of such a fellow indeed as you have done,
And hither am I come with him to dispute:
And if he were here you should perceive soon,
That by good learning I would his folly confute.
Dispute, nay I would not stand to dispute I trow,
But I wot, through the liberty of your preaching,
Much mischief among men begins to grow,
I tell you, many men like not your teaching.
Truth, indeed none that be of your condition,
To withstand Gods word you have set your face:
So drowned ye are in rusty superstition,
That Gods word in your heart, can the no place.
You are called in the Common-wealth to be a Justice,
Therefore all your words and acts ought to be right:
You have taken an oath justly to do your office,
And to defend the truth with all your might
But truly the verity you do not defend,
But you persecute it with all your power:
The upright and fatherless you do reprehend,
The malefactors you let pass, both day and hour.
Talk your pleasure, here are but we two,
Boast not too much of your innocence,
What, we know well enough what ye do,
All the world speaks of your insolence:
You may preach, teach, cry out and yell,
The hearing thereof, many men do give,
But whether you speak of heaven or hell,
Not one among a thousand do you believe.
I will lay twenty pound, I will do more with one word
Then you shall do with twenty Sermons truly:
For the people think you speak but in board,
Because you lead your lives so unruly.
No man will hear the Painter, but a popish priest.
Truth, for so saith God by the Prophet Essay,
All mischief shall happen upon thee in one day.
For the multitude of thy Enchanters verily
And for the hardness of hearts that will not obey.
And if you can tell vs where any such be,
Whether it be Nigromansor or sorcerer,
We shall do unto them, as it appertains ye shall see,
And they shall be handled like a thief or a murderer.
And it please you sir, I am none of those that love to be a meddler,
But I speak a few words and only for this cause:
It was my chance of late to talk with a Peddler,
Whose words me thought, agreed not with Gods laws.
He takes upon him fondly to prophecy,
And saith that a dead man shall kill many alive,
And the one unborn as yet in his mothers belly,
They that be dead, to life again shall revive:
I wot not what he meant by this gear,
But he tells many such things:
Such a fellow I suppose you did never hear,
He tells wonders of Emperors and Kings.
You are an Interpreter of dark sentences,
What say you to the Peddlers high prophecy:
He that is ignorant of all honest science,
Unto knowledge and virtue, is an utter enemy.
O most unhappy Hamlet, country shire,
Where such unjust Justice have the governance:
Neither for sin nor discord you do enquire,
But unto God and his word, you are an hindrance.
An Interpreter I am called indeed,
But of Gods word and the tongues ancient,
Peddlers dreams are good, old Papists to seed,
And such as despise the word of God omnipotent.
Talk your pleasure, you are not like to talk long,
Your time of prattling is almost at a point:
I trust shortly to hear you sing a new song,
Or else you are like to lose your bestioynt.
By my faith and troth, so do the Peddler prophecy,
The days are come saith he, that Bishops and Priests all,
Because they are the beginners of all controversy,
In one day they shall be consumed both great and small.
I trust brother that you are instructed so,
That to a prating Peddlers words you will give no credit,
Whether it be prating I cannot say or no,
But he hath given a most seemly verdict.
Right reverent Interpreter, learned and wise:
I suppose that you are of that judgment,
That he that utters another mans vice,
Is not therefore partaker of his lewd document:
I say no more, but God amend all that is amiss,
I thought here more to have said:
My words they be not, but they be his,
Which to utter truly, I am afraid.
Tarry Priest, tarry, I pray thee heartily,
To take them for thy words, no man is so unwise,
For speaking of them I promise thee verily,
No man shall hurt thee, as I am true Justice.
Nay sir, he hath not so much of the Clergy spoken,
But much more he railed upon Justices:
For Gods sake apprehend him, and cause him to open
The things he hath spoken of men in their offices.
The worshipful Justice, will take none advantage
Of any thing rehearsed of another mans saying:
And as for me, I intend to bring you into no bondage,
For a lewd foolish fellows prattling betraying.
Go to then, the Peddler saith that all preachers &amp; priests
Shall be turned into Swallows the next year,
And the new unlearned Ministers, into Robin Redbreasts,
They shall keep the wood, and sing no more in the quere.
He tells the cause why are never at a stay,
For look as in garments they do varry,
So do they in ministration day by day,
Therefore in the Church they are not like to tarry.
But like as the Swallow hath a new pleasant voice,
Yet the summer is near she doth signify,
So at their words certain men do rejoice,
For a truth to come they do testify:
But when that comes that indeed shall come,
That more for love then for lucre men shall teach,
The Swallows in holes, shall sleep as things dombe,
For Eunock and Ely in sackcloth shall preach.
These and other things he doth prophecy,
And namely against them that leave their vocation,
Intruding themselves as he saith, most unworthy,
Into that office of preaching and ministration.
If the Peddler hath no worse talk then this,
His words in my judgment are tolerable:
For all in the Church methinkes is amiss,
Nothing can I see much commendable.
Think you it doth not grieve vs at the harts?
To have a Tinker or a Cobbler to minister to vs:
Yea, and the lewdest fellows in all our parts,
Takes upon him matters of gravity to discus.
I will answer you particularly to your reason,
First, whereas you say his words be tolerable,
I will prove them fables, and clean out of season,
And against Gods words, blasphemy most damnable.
First both Christs Preachers, and his erudition,
Which erudition is the blessed word of verity,
Thy falling, Peddler, hath brought into suspicion,
Prophesying of a doctrine of more sincerity.
Secondly, whereas you say that all is amiss,
You mean because we have removed Idolatry,
Superstition, and hypocrisy, wherein your trust is:
And hath placed there Gods word, only necessary.
Thirdly, whereas you say it doth your hearts grieve,
That Tinkers and Cobblers should use ministration,
If Christ should come from heaven and preach, I believe
That you would despise both him and his predication,
Were not the Apostles Fishers for the most part all?
And into the whole world passed their sound,
Not one Justice to that office he did call,
Hard it is among you one faithful to be found.
But I beseech God once to open your eyes,
For of Gods word you let the true passage:
God hath given you over, to believe lies,
Rather then the Gospel, the heavenly fathers message.
By my troth, even so did the Peddler speak,
Too bad he railed against Justices,
It makes the heart in my body to break,
To hear his Invectives against all Officers.
I pray thee tell me what he said?
A prating knaves words, can no honest man offend.
To utter such lewd talk I am half afraid,
Would to God you would go about, him to apprehend.
I pray thee tell me as much as thou art able,
We will apprehend him well enough, no doubt.
Of Gentlemen he rehearsed a fond fable,
I wot not how the devil he brought it about:
Gentlemen quoth he, that be no Gentlemen borne,
But such as come up by spiritual spoil:
Shall be turned into horses, to eat haie and corn,
And among other beasts compelled to toil.
Think you that these words are meet abroad to be blown,
It appears that he rails thus on every state:
Time it is that such as he were known,
For else he and they will cause much hate.
The Justices quoth he, to hell quick shall sink,
For that they are not hinderers of the verity:
But because at other men's matters they do wink,
Living themselves like epicures, in all carnality.
Therefore the most of the saith he, shall be turned into moles,
Because they are covetous, and in heart blind:
Yet some of them shall be turned into black birds, called coals,
Them he mean, that be ever gentle and kind.
What manner of man is he, and of what nature?
I judge him to be lunatic or stark mad.
A little man sir, even of my stature,
And as touching age, in faith but a lad.
I would it might please you and other Magistrates,
Earnestly to look upon such makers of disturbance:
I would it might please you to remove these runnagates,
And to ease our minds of such encumbrance.
For as long as such be in place,
You shall never be had in reputation:
Yet I will not say but diverse men have grace,
But they be out of the peoples estimation.
As long as they be blameless in conversation,
And in doctrine sincere and sound approved:
They need not pass of the peoples estimation,
For both of God and the world, they cannot be loved.
God speed you my masters, forsooth all three,
And you worshipful moister Justice my friend:
It doth me good to see you so well agree,
Trusting in God that you be all of one mind.
You are as welcome hither, right honourable Judge,
God forbid among wise men, there should be discord:
For whereas there is division and grudge,
There follows desolation, as saith Christ our Lord.
Truly, your honour is welcome hither,
This reverent father and I, were commoning hard:
Of the prophecy of a runagate Peddler,
Whose saying in my judgment, no man will regard.
Yet sir, saving your advise,
Men ought to rail upon authority,
For Th'Apostle Paul both godly and wise,
Revoked his words spoken with severity:
Indeed I heard of such a one,
And there goes a great brute of his prophecy.
All his talk is not worth a hearing bone,
For of many of them I am able to testify,
Serving-men quoth he, that wear breeches like faggots,
Which in fleshly idleness consume their lives,
Shall be first converted into maggots,
And afterword turned to drones, and live in hives.
He means unhappily by this fable,
I would I had him in my keeping a while.
A fellow he is most inconstant and unstable,
And such a one as will you right soon beguile:
And told a tale of the Prophcie of Ieremy:
When God bad hide by the River Euphrates,
I wot not what he meant by that Prophecy,
For anon he was in hand with Socrates.
Doth the prophecy speak of any such matter?
Such things to be red, methinkes are base:
In no wise I wold have you to take it as vain clatter,
For a great mystery is meant in that place:
The very Text makes the meaning plain,
Which I will read and expound if you will:
No, no, we will not put you to that pain,
But we will hear the Peddlers prophecy still.
I pray you tell me, talks he not of the state of this region?
Of the Queens Majesty, and of the Council:
What saith he concerning religion?
How likes he by the Preachers of the Gospel?
Not one word talks he of this religion,
Neither of Queen, Council, Lord, Knight, nor Squire:
All his talk is of a land called Ilion,
And of a City far of, called Tyre.
Mary thus he saith, though Princes themselves be good,
Yet are they like at Gods hand to be punished:
For at their hands, God will require their subjects blood,
Which through their sufferance into sin hath perished.
Whereat is the Peddler so sore offended?
What is it that he mislikes most?
He saith the world is so ill it cannot be amended.
And that we sin daily against the holy Gost,
Marry one thing comes now to my remembrance,
He cries out upon suppressed lands:
The abuse of them cries to God for vengeance,
For most of them are come into wicked men's hands.
When the Peddler told this tale, truly he wept:
Alas, alas, quoth he, how are the poor Tenants handled?
They which through their labours good houses kept,
Now are they thrown out, their goods wasted &amp; mangled.
Of them to me he told a great process,
Wold to God quoth he, they had bin reserved to the crown,
They would have maintained the Princes with riches,
And have kept wealthy Tenants, in every Town.
As I have learned here by my brothers report,
He intermeddles with matters of religion:
With men of all states and of mighty sort,
Which will be an occasion, to move strife and sedition.
He medleth with Princes causes me think,
These words are not tolerable in a subject,
We had not need at such matters to wink,
It is more then time him to correct.
I pray thee amongst all his communication,
What would he of Judges say?
Now truly my Lord, I never liked his conversation,
Yet to know his mind, I held him up with yea and nay:
Nay my Lord, if I should speak all that he have said,
I might chance to get my self displeasure:
Your honour knows that words are not weighed,
Where the tongue uses no reasonable measure.
I pray you tell me as much as you can,
What he hath talked of any state?
And I promise you, as I am true man,
Of vs you shall have neither displeasure nor hate.
All Judges quoth he, love rewards, and follow gifts,
They pervert justice, and equal judgment:
To save malefactors, they make foul shifts,
And some receive money to condemn the innocent.
He cries out of strangers and free Denisons,
Which are devourers of this Realm:
Not only devour they like monstrous Chameleons,
But also steal, and send over by the stream.
He saith that for money they are made free,
And one of these panch-bellied Alians,
Devour more, then ten men of our country,
Worse then Dogs, Epicures, and Arrians.
Though certain of his words be true indeed,
Yet there is a mean in time to speak,
For his truth telling he shall have his meed,
We will provide an halter his neck to break.
Of all his talk thus he did conclude,
Since men upon the earth was first create,
Of Enchanters and Conjurers, there was never such a multitude,
Both of young and old, of every estate:
So many saith he, be in the said Ilion,
That all of whom we have spoken of here,
Shall be altered and changed by evil spirits delusion,
Into beasts, fowls, and fishes, within a year:
So that Ilion, and the populous City Tyre,
Shall be filled with monsters, fierce and hugious:
Insomuch that from heaven God shall send fire,
To destroy those wicked and religious.
By my conjecture, thus means the Peddler,
He saith men given to licentious life:
And that each one, of another state is a meddler,
Which will be an occasion of much strife.
He saith so much untruth and mutual hate,
And no man contented with his vocation
He saith men degenerate from humane state,
Therefore from kind, he feineth an alteration.
I confess many things to be out of frame,
Yet that to redress, we refer to authority:
The enterprise of base meddlers, we do greatly blame
Wishing them to be rebuked with all severity.
As for prattling of Peddlers we do not pass,
But for all things amiss, I wish amendment,
If ought be no worse then ever it was,
God give vs grace to obey his commandment.
For all things amiss, there would soon be redress
If every state would justly execute their office:
And if all men would their faults confess,
We should be the more meet to do God service.
I have business to do and must needs depart,
But because I have the Peddlers words here recited:
I ask pardon, with most lowly and penitent heart,
Beseeching your honours, that nothing be required.
Of necessity we must depart all,
And therefore it is meet that we go together:
But first upon our heavenly father let vs all call,
That mercifully he will all states consider.
First let vs pray for the Queens Majesty on this part,
Almighty God prosper and defend her Royal Majesty,
Amen say all those, that have a true English heart,
We have all cause to pray for her Graces prosperity.
Also her honourable Council God prosper &amp; save,
And that honourable T. N. &amp;c. of N. chiefly:
Whom as our good Lord and moister, found we have,
Good Lord we beseech thee, to be his guide daily.
O heavenly father, send workmen into thy harvest,
And preserve them that are already sent:
Suffer no wolves them to molest,
Let them accomplish that whereto they are bent.
Lord save thy people, and bless thine heritage,
Thy mercy good Lord, upon this Communaltie extend.
Thy Name be praised evermore from age to age
As it is now and ever shall be, world without end.
You shall know more of my mind anon
Whist, peace a while, till they be gone.
A sir, was not this a pretty cast of a Peddler?
I had none other way but this my matters to open:
Henceforth I intend to be no meddler,
But let them mark well what I have spoken.
See and foresee, look within, and look without:
Though it be far off, yet it will come:
See the third time and look about,
Not without, but within, see ye, see some.
And when you have seen that you shall see,
You will think upon the Peddler I wean:
He will be a Drone that now is a Bee,
I say no more, but God save our Queen.
Be ready at midday, and also at midnight,
Go forward apace, and also look back:
An heavy purse makes a mans heart light,
There is no remedy, I must again to my pack.

Hark how the Romaine drums sound blood &amp; death,
And Mars high mounted on his Thracian Steed:
Runs matting through Pharsalias purple fields.
The earth that's wont to be a Tomb for Men
It's now entombed with Carcasses of Men.
The Heaven appalled to see such hideous sights,
For fear pus out her ever burning lights.
The Gods amazed (as once in Titans war,)
Do doubt and fear, which boades this deadly jar.
The stars do tremble, and forsake their course,
The Bear doth hide her in forbidden Sea,
Fear makes Boots swiften her slow pace,
Pale is Orion, Atlas gins to quake,
And his vnwildy burden to forsake.
Caesars keen Falchion, through the Adverse ranks,
For his sterne Master hues a passage out,
Through troupes &amp; troonkes, &amp; steel, &amp; standing blood:
He whose proud Trophies meanwhile Asia field,
And conquered Pontus, singe his lasting praise.
Great Pompey; Great, while Fortune did him raise,
Now veils the glory of his venting plumes
And to the ground casts of his high hanged looks.
You gentle Heavens. O execute your wrath
On vile mortality, that hath scorned your powers.
You night borne Sisters to whose hairs are tied
In Adamantine Chains both Gods and Men
Wind on your web of mischief and of plagues,
And if, O stars you have an influence:
That may confound this high erected heap
Down power it; Vomit out your worst of ills
Let Rome, grown proud, with her unconquered strength,
Perish and conquered BE with her own strength:
And win all powers to disioyne and break,
Consume, confound, dissolve, and dissipate
What Laws, Arms and Pride hath raised up.
The day is lost our hope and honours lost,
The glory of the Romaine name is lost,
The liberty and common weal is lost,
The Gods that meanwhile heard the Romaine state,
And Quirinus, whose strong puissant arm,
Did shild the tops and turrets of proud Rome,
Do now conspire to wrack the gallant Ship,
Even in the harbour of her wished greatness.
And her gay streamers, and fair wavering sails,
With which the wanton wind was wont to play,
To drown with Billows of orewhelming woes.
The Foe prevails, Brutus, thou strive in vain.
Many a soul to day is sent to Hell,
And many a gallant have I don to death,
In Pharsalias bleeding Earth: the world can tell,
How little Brutus praised this puff of breath,
If loss of that my countries weal might gain,
But Heavens and the immortal Gods decreed:
That Rome in highest of her fortunes pich,
In top of sovereignty and imperial swaye.
By her own height should work her own decay.
Where may I fly into some desert place,
Some uncouth, unfrequented craggy rock,
Where as my name and state was never heard.
I fly the Batle because here I see,
My friends lye bleeding in Pharsalias earth.
Which do remember me what erst I was,
Who brought such troops of soldiers to the field,
And of so many thousand had command:
My flight a heavy memory doth renew,
Which tells me I was wont to stay and win.
But now a soldier of my scatred train:
Offered me service and did call me Lord,
O then I thought whom rising Sun saw high,
Descending he beheld my misery:
Fly to the hollow root of some steep rock,
And in that flinty habitation hide,
Thy woeful face: from face and view of men.
Yet that will tell me this, if nought beside:
Pompey was never wont his head to hide.
Fly where thou wilt, thou bear about thee smart,
Shame at thy heals and grief lies at thy heart.
But see Titinius where two warriors stand,
Casting their eyes down to the cheareles earth:
Alas to soon I know them for to bee
Pompey and Brutus, who like Aiax stand,
When as forsook of Fortune mong'st his foes,
Greece stopped his breath nor could he speak his woes,
Accursed Pompey, lo thou art descried.
But stay; they are thy friends that thou behold,
O rather had I now have met my foes:
Whose daggers points might straight have pierced my woes
Then thus to have my friends behold my shame.
Reproach is death to him that lived in Fame
Brutus Cast up thy discontented look:
And see two Princes thy two noble friends,
Who though it grieves me that I thus them see,
Yet joy I to bee seen they hung be.
Let not the change of this successes fight,
(O noble Lords,) dismay these daunteles minds,
Which the fair virtue not blind chance doth rule,
Caesar not vs subdued hath, but Rome,
And in that fight it was best be overthrown.
Think that the Conqueror hath won but small,
Whose victory is but his Countries fall,
O Noble Brutus, can I live and see,
My Soldiers dead, my friends lie slain in field,
My hopes cast down, mine Honours overthrown,
My Country subject to a Tyrants rule,
My foe triumphing and my self forlorn.
Oh had I perished in that prosperous war
Even in mine Honours height, that happy day,
When Mithridates fall did raise my fame:
Then had I gone with Honour to my grave.
But Pompey was by envious heavens reserved,
Captive to follow Caesars Chariot wheels
Riding in triumph to the Capitol:
And Rome oft graced with Trophies of my fame,
Shall now resound the blemish of my name.
Oh what disgrace can taunt this worthiness,
Of which remain such living monuments
Engraven in the eyes and hearts of men.
Although the oppression of distressed Rome
And our own overthrow, might well draw forth,
Distilling tears from fainting cowards eyes,
Yet should no weak effeminate passion seas
Upon that man, the greatness of whose mind
And not his Fortune made him termed the Great.
Oh I did never taste mine Honours sweet
Nor now can judge of this my sharpest sour.
Fifty eight years in Fortunes sweet soft lap
Have I been luld a sleep with pleasant joys,
Me hath she dandled in her folding Arms,
And fed my hopes with prosperous events:
She Crowned my Cradle with success and Honour,
And shall disgrace a waite my hapless Hearse?
Was I a youth with Palm and Laurel girt,
And now an old man shall I waite my fall?
Oh when I think but on my triumphs past,
The Consul-ships and Honours I have borne;
The fame and fear where in great Pompey lived,
Then doth my grieved Soul inform me this,
My fall augmented by my former bess.
Why do we use of virtues strength to vant,
If every cross a Noble mind can daunt,
Wee talk of courage, then, is courage known,
When with mishap our state is overthrown:
Never let him a Soldiers Title bear.
Wihch in the chiefest brunt doth shrink and fear,
Thy former haps did Men thy virtue show,
But now that fails them which thy virtue knew,
Nor think this conquest shall be Pompeys fall:
Or that Pharsalia shall thine honour bury,
Egipt shall be unpeopled for thine aid.
And Cole-black Libians, shall manure the ground
In thy defence with bleeding hearts of men.
O second hope of sad oppressed Rome,
In whom the ancient Brutus virtue shines,
That purchased first the Romaine liberty,
Let me embrace thee: live victorious youth,
When death and angry fates shall call me hence,
To free thy country from a Tyrants yoke.
My harder fortune, and more cruel stars.
Envied to me so great a happiness.
Do not prolong my life with vain false hopes,
To deep despair and sorrow I am vowed:
Do not remove me from that settled thought,
With hope of friends or aid of Ptolomey,
Egipt and Libia at choice I have.
But only which of them Isle make my grave.
Tic but discomfort which misgreeues thee this,
Grief by despair seems greater then it is.
Tic womannisn to whale and moan our grief.
By Industry do wise men seek relief,
If that our casting do fall out a miss,
Our cunning play must then correct the dice.
Well if it needs must bee then let me go,
Flying for aid unto my foreign friends,
And sue and bow, where erst I did command.
He that goes seeking of a Tyrant aide,
Though free he went, a servant then is made.
Take we our last farewell, then though with pain,
Here three do part that ne'er shall meet again.
Follow your chase, and let your light-foote steeds
Flying as swift as did that winged horse
That with strong fethered Pinions clove the Ayre,
Or'take the coward flight of your base foe.
Do not with-drawe thy mortal wondering blade,
But sheath it Caesar in my wounded heart:
Let not that heart that did thy Country wound
Fear to lay Brutus bleeding on the ground.
Thy fatal stroke of death shall more me glad,
Then all thy proud and Pompous victories;
My funeral Cypress, then thy Laurel Crown,
My mournful Beer shall win more Praise and Fame
Then thy triumphing Sun-bright Chariot.
Here in these fatal fields let Brutus die,
And bear so many Romaines company.
T'was not against thee this fatal blade was drawn
Which can no more pierce Brutus tender sides
Then mine own heart, or ought then heart more dear,
For all the wrongs thou did, or strokes thou gau'st
Caesar on thee will take no worse revenge,
Then bid thee still command him and his state:
True settled love can near bee turned to hate.
To what a pitch would this mans virtues sore,
Did not ambition clog his mounting fame,
Caesar thy sword hath all bliss from me taine
And gives me life where best were to be slain.
O thou hast robbed me of my chiefest joy,
And seek to please me with a babish toy.
Caesar Pharsalia doth thy conquest sound
Ioues welcome messenger fair Victory,
Hath Crowned thy temples with victorious bay.
And Io joyful, Io doth she sing
And through the world thy lasting praises ring.
But yet amidst thy grateful melody
I hear a hoarse, and heavy dolfull voice,
Of my dear Country crying, that to day
My Glorious triumphs work her own decay.
In which how many fatal strokes I gave,
So many wounds her tender breast received.
Here lies one that's boucher'd by his Sire
And here the Son was his old Fathers death,
Both slew unknowing, both unknown are slain,
O that ambition should such mischief work
Or mean Men die for great men's proud desire.
From sad Pharsalia blushing al with blood,
From deaths pale triumphs, Pompey overthrown,
Romains in foreign soils, brething their last,
Revenge, stange wars and dreadful stratagems,
Wee come to set the Laurel on thy head
And fill thy ears with triumphs and with joys.
As when that Hector from the Grecian camp
With spoils of slaughtered Argians returned,
The Trojan youths with crowns of conquering palm:
The Phrigian Virgins with fair flowery wrethes
Welcomed the hope, and pride of Ilium,
So for thy victory and conquering acts
Wee bring fair wreths of Honour &amp; renown,
Which shall internally thy head adorn.
Now hath thy sword made passage for thy self,
To wade in blood of them that sought thy death,
The ambitious rival of thine Honours high,
Whose mightiness erst made him to be feared
Now flies and is enforced to give thee place.
Whilst thou  the conquering Hercules
Triumphing in thy spoils and victories.
When Phoebus left fair Thetis watery couch,
And peeping forth from out the golden gate
Of his bright palace saw our battle ranked:
Oft did hee seek to turn his fiery steeds,
Oft hid his face, and shunt such tragic sights.
What stranger possessed ever by this cost
Thee this accursed soil distained with blood
Not Crystal rivers, are to quench thy thirst.
For goaring streams, their rivers clearness staines:
Here are no hills wherewith to feed thine eyes,
But heaped hills of mangled Carcasses,
Here are no birds to please thee with their notes:
But ravenous Vultures, and night Ravens horse.
What means great Caesar, droopes our general,
Or melts in womanish compassion:
To see Pharsalias fields to change their hew
And silver streams be turned to lakes of blood?
Why Caesar oft hath sacrificed in France,
Millions of Souls, to Plutoes grisly dames:
And made the changed coloured Rhine to blush,
To bear his bloody burden to the sea.
And when as thou in maiden Albion shore
The Romaine, Eagle bravely did advance,
No hand paid greater tribute unto death,
No heart with more courageous Noble fire
And hope, did burn with glorious great intent.
And now shall passion base that Noble mind,
And weak events that courage overcome?
Let Pompey proud, and Pompeys Accomplices
Die on our swords, that did envy our lives,
Let pale Tysiphone be cloyed with blood:
And snaky furies quench their longing thirst,
And Caesar live to glory in their end.
They say when as the younger African,
Beheld the mighty Carthage woeful fall:
And saw her stately Towers to smoke from far,
He wept, and princely tears ran down his cheeks.
Let pity then and true compassion,
Move vs to rue no traterous Carthage fall,
No barbarous periurd enemies decay,
But Rome our native Country, hapless Rome,
Whose bowe's to ungently we have pierced,
Fair pride of Europe, Mistress of the world,
Cradle of virtues, nurse of true renown,
Whom Jove hath placed in top of seven hills:
That thou the lower worlds seven climes might rule.
Thee the proud Parthian and the cole-black Moore,
The sterne Tartarian, borne to manage arms,
Doth fear and tremble at thy Majesty.
And yet I bred and fostered in thy lap,
Durst strive to overthrow thy Capitol:
And thy high Turrets lay as low as hell.
O Rome, and have the powers of Heaven decreed,
When as thy fame did reach unto the Sky,
And the wide Ocean was thy Empires bounds,
And thou enriched with spoils of all the world,
Was waxen proud with peace and sovereign reign:
That Civil wars should loose what Foreign won,
And peace his joys, be turned to luckless broils.
O Pompey, cursed cause of civil war,
Which of those hel-borne sterne Eumenides:
Inflamed thy mind with such ambitious fire,
As nought could quench it but thy Countries blood.
But this no while thy valour doth distain,
Which found unsought for cause of civil broils,
And fatal fuel which this fire inflamed.
Let then his death set period to this strife,
Which was begun by his ambitious life.
The flying Pompey to Larissa hastes,
And by Thessalian Temple shapes his course:
Where fair Peneus tumbles up his waives,
Him weal pursue as fast as he vs flies,
Nor he though guarded with Numidian horse,
Nor aided with the unresisted power:
The Meroe, or seven mouthed Nile can yield:
No not all Africa armed in his defence
Shall serve to shroud him from my fatal sword.
O where is banished liberty exiled,
To Africa deserts or to Scythia rocks,
Or whereas silver streaming Tanais is?
Happy is India and Arabia blessed,
And all the bordering regions upon Nile
That never knew the name of Liberty,
But we that boast of Brutes and Colatins,
And glory we expelled proud Tarquins name,
Do grieve to loose, that we so long have held.
Why reckon we our years by Consuls names:
And so long ruled in freedon, now to serve?
They lie that say in Heaven there is a power
That for to wrack the sins of guilty men,
Holds in his hand a fierce three-forked dart.
Why would he throw them down on Ota mount
Or wound the under ringing Rhodope,
And not rain showers of his dead-doing darts,
Furor in slame, and Sulphures smothering heate
Upon the wicked and accursed arms
That cruel Romains against their Country bear.
Rome ware thy fall: those prodigies foretold,
When angry heavens did power down showers of blood
And fatal Comets in the heavens did blase,
And all the Statues in the Temple blast,
Did weep the loss of Romaine liberty.
Then if the Gods have destined thine end,
Yet as a Mother having lost her Son,
Cato shall waite upon thy tragic hearse,
And never leave thy cold and bloodless corse.
Isle tune a sad and dol-full funeral song,
Still crying on lost liberties sweet name,
Thy sacred ashes will I wash with tears,
And thus lament my Countries obsequies.
O cruel Pompey whether wilt thou fly,
And leave thy poor Cornelia thus forlorn,
Is it our bad fortune or thy cruel will
That still it severs in extremity.
O let me go with thee, and die with thee,
Nothing shall thy Cornelia  think
That she endures for her sweet Pompeys sake.
Tic for thy weal and safety of thy life,
Whose safety I prefer before the world,
Because I love thee more then all the world,
That thou (sweet love) should here remain behind
Till proof assures Ptolemies doubted faith.
O dearest, what shall I my safety call,
That which is thrust in dangers harmful mouth?
Looks not the thing so bad with such a name,
Call it my death, my base, my wo my hell,
That which endangers my sweet Pompeys life.
It is no danger (gentle love) at all,
Tic but thy fear that doth it so miscall.
Left bee no danger let me go with thee,
And of thy safety a partaker bee,
Alas why would thou leave me thus alone:
Think thou I cannot follow thee by Land
That thus have followed thee over raging Seas,
Or do I vary in inconstant hopes:
O but think you my pleasure uckles is
And I have made the more unfortunate.
Tic I, tic I, have cause this overthrow,
Tic my accursed stars that boade this ill,
And those mis-fortunes to my princely love,
Revenge thee Pompey, on this wicked brat,
And end my woes by ending of my life,
What means my love to aggravate my grief,
And torture my enough tormented Soul,
With greater greuance then Pharsalian loss?
Thy rented hair doth rent my heart in twain.
And these fair Seas, that rain down showers of tears,
Do melt my soul in liquid streams of sorrow.
If that in Aegipt any danger bee,
Then let my death procure thy sweet lives safety,
Can I bee safe and Pompey in distress,
Or may Cornelia survive they death,
What danger ever happens to my Soul
What danger ke shall happen to my life,
Nor Libians quick-sands, nor the barking gulf,
Or gaping Scylla shall this Union part,
But still Isle chain thee in my twining arms,
And if I cannot live Isle die with thee.
O how thy love doth ease my grieved mind,
Which bears a but then heavier then the Heavens,
Under the which steele-shouldred Atlas groans.
But now thy love doth hurt thy self and me,
And thy to ardent strong affection,
Hinders my settled resolution.
Then by this love, and by these crystal eyes,
More bright then are the Lamps of Ioues high house,
Let me in this (I fear) my last request.
Not to endanger thy beloved ,
But in this ship remain, and here await,
How Fortune deals with our doubtful State,
Not so persuaded as coniurd sweet love,
By thy commanding meek petition.
I cannot say I yield, yet am constrained,
This never meeting parting to permit,
Then go dear love, yet stay a little while,
Some what I am sure, tic more I have to say,
Nay nothing now but Heavens guide thy steps.
Yet let me speak, why should we part so soon,
Why is my talk tedious? may be  the last.
Do women leave: their husbands in such hast,
More faithful, then that ire deflowered dame,
That sacrifizde her self to Chastity,
And far more loving then the Charian Queen,
That drank her Husbands never sundried heart.
If that I dye, get will it glad my soul,
Which then shall feed on those Elision joys,
That in the sacred Temple of thy breast.
My living memory shall shrined bee.
But if that envious fates should call thee hence,
And Death with pale and meager look usurp,
Upon those roseate lips, and Currall cheeks,
Then Ayre be turned, to poison to infect me,
Earth gape and swallow him that Heavens hate,
Consume me Fire with thy devouring flames
Or Water drown, who else would melt in tears.
But live, live happy still in safety live,
Who safety only to my life can give.
O he is gon, go hie thee after him,
My vow forbids, yet still my care is with thee,
My cries shall wake the silver Moon by night,
And with my tears I will salute the Mono.
No day shall pass with out my daily plaints,
No hour without my prayers for thy return.
My mind misgives me Pompey is betrayed.
O Egypt do not rob me of my love.
Why bears Ptolomy so sterne a look?
O do not stain thy childish years with blood:
Whilst Pompey flourished in his Fortunes pride,
Egypt and Ptolomy were fine to serve
And shu for grace to my distrssed Lord:
But little boots it, to record he was,
To be is only that which Men respect,
Go poor Cornelia wander by the shore
And see the waters raging Billows swell,
And beat with fury against the craggy rocks,
To that compare thy strong tempestuous grief.
Which fiercely rages in thy feeble heart,
Sorrow shuts up the passage of thy breath:
And dries the tears that pity fine would shed,
This only therefore this will I still cry,
Let Pompey live although Cornelia die.
Thy sad complaints fair Lady cannot choose
But move a heart though made of Adamant,
And draw to yield unto thy powerful plaint,
I will replant thee in the Egyptian Throne
And all thy wrongs shall Caesars valour right,
Isle pull thy crown from the usurpers head,
And make the Conquered Ptolomey to stoop,
And fear by force to wrong a maiden Queen.
Look as the Earth at her great loves approach.
When golden tressed fair Hipperions Son
With those life-lending beams salutes his Spouse,
Doth then cast of her moorning widows weeds,
And calls her handmaid, forth her flowery fair,
To cloth her in the beauty of the spring,
And of fair primroses, and sweet violets,
To make gay Garlonds for to crown her head.
So hath your presence, welcome and fair sight,
That glads the world, comforts poor Aegipts Queen,
Who begs for succour of that conquering hand,
That as Ioues Sceptre this our world doth sway.
Who would refuse to aid so fair a Queen.
Base bee the mind, that for so sweet a fair,
Would not adventure more then Perseus did,
When as he freed the fair Andromeda.
O how those lovely Tyranizing eyes,
The Graces beauteous habitation,
Where sweet desire, darts wondering shafts of love:
Consume my heart with inward burning heate,
Not only Aegipt but all Africa,
Will I subject to Cleopatras name.
Thy rule shall stretch from unknown Zanziber,
Unto those Sands where high erected posts.
Of great Alcides, do up hold his name,
The sun burnt Indians, from the cast shall bring:
Their precious store of pure refined gould,
The laboring worm shall weave the Africa twist,
And to exceed the pomp of Persian Queen,
The Sea shall pay the tribute of his pearls,
For to adorn thy golden yellow lockes,
Which in their curled knots, my thoughts do hold,
Thoughts captiud to thy beauties conquering power.
I marvel not at that which fables tell,
How ravished Helen moved the angry Greeks,
To undertake eleven years tedious siege,
To re-obtayne a beauty so divine,
When I beheld thy sweet composed face.
O only worthy for whose matchless sake,
Another siege, and new wars should arise,
Hector be dragde about the Grecian camp,
And Troy again consumed with Grecian fire.
Great Prince, what thanks can Cleopatra give,
Nought have poor Virgins to requite such good:
My simple self and service then vouchsafe,
And let the heavens, and he that althings sees.
With equal eyes such merits recompense,
I doe not seek ambitiously to rule,
And in proud Africa to monarchize.
I only crave that what my father gave,
Who in his last be-hest did dying, will,
That I should jointly with my brother reign:
How sweet those words drop from those honey lips
Which whilst she speaks they still each other kiss.
Reign, I, still reign in Caesars conquered thoughts,
There build thy palace, and thy sun-bright throne:
There sway thy Sceptre, and with it beat down,
Those traitorous thoughts (if any dare arise:)
That will not yield to thy perfection,
To chase thee flying Pompey have I cut,
The great Ionian, and Again seas:
And dredeles past the toiling Hellespont,
Famous for amorous Lenders death:
And now by gentle Fortunes so am blessed,
As to behold what missed thoughts admire:
Heavens wonder, Natures and Earths Ornament,
And gaze upon these fiery sun-bright eyes:
The Heavenly spheres which Love and Beauty move,
These Cheeks where Lilies and red-roses strive,
For sovereignty, yet both do equal reign:
The dangling tresses of thy curled hair,
Nets went to cach our frail and wandering thoughts:
Thy beauty shining like proud Phoebus face,
When Ganges glittered with his radiant beams
He on his golden trapped Palfreys rides,
That from their nostrils do the morning blow,
Through Heavens great path-way paved with shining (stars)
Thou art the fizzed pole of my Souls joy,
Bout which my resteles thoughts are over turned:
My Cynthia, whose glory never waynes,
Guiding the Tide of mine affections:
That with the change of thy imperious looks,
Dost make my doubtful joys to eb and slow.
Might all the deeds thy hands had ere achiu'd,
That make thy far extolled name to sound:
From sun-burnt East unto the Western Isles,
Which great Neptunus fouldeth in his arms,
It shall not be the least to seat a Maid,
And inthronize her in her native right.
What need you stand disputing on your right,
Or proving title to the Egyptian Crown:
Borne to be Queen and Empress of the world.
On thy perfection let me ever gaze,
And eyes now learn to tread a lovers maze,
Here may you surfeit with delicious store,
The more you see, desire to look the more:
Upon her face a garden of delete,
Exceeding far Atones feigned Bower,
Here stained white Lilies spread their branches fair,
Here lips send forth sweet Gilly-flowers smell.
And Damasck-rose in her fair cheeks do bud,
While beds of Violets still come between
With fresh variety to please the eye,
Nor need these flowers the heate of Phoebus beams,
They cherished are by virtue of her eyes.
O that I might but enter in this bower,
Or once attain the cropping of the flower.
Now wend we Lords to Alexandria,
Famous for those wide wondered Piramids.
Whose towering tops do seem to threat the sky,
And make it proud by presence of my love:
Then Paphian Temples and Cytherian hills,
And sacred Gnidas bonnet veil to it,
A fairer sain then erus there shall dwell.
Led with the lode-starre of her looks, I go
As crazed Bak is tosl'd in troubled Seas,
Uncertain to arrive in wished port.
Now Caesar hath thy flattering Fortune heaped
Those golden gifts and promised victories,
By fatal signs at Rubicon foretold:
Then triumph in thy glorious greatest pride,
And boast thou cast the lucky Die so well,
Now let the Triton that did sound alarm,
In his shrill trump resound the victory,
That Heaven and Earth may Ecco of thy fame:
Yet think in this thy Fortunes Jollity.
Though Caesar be as great as great may be,
Yet Pompey once was even as great as he,
And how he rode clad in Setorius spoils:
And the Sicilian Pirats overthrow.
Ruling like Nepoune in the mid-land Seas,
Who basely now by Land and Sea doth fly,
The heavenly Rectors prosecuting wrath,
Yet Sea nor Land can shroud him from this jar,
O how it joys my discord thirsting thoughts,
To see them weight, that meanwhile flowed in bliss.
To see like Banners, unlike quarrels have.
And Roman weapons shed in Roman blood,
For this I left the deep Infernal shades
And past the sad Auernus ugly jaws,
And in the world came I, being Discord hight,
Discord the daughter of the grisly night.
To make the world a hell of plauges and woes,
It was I that did the fatal Apple fling,
Betwixt the three Eden goddesses,
That so much blood of Greeks and Troians spilt,
It was I that caused the deadly Thebans war.
And made the brothers swell with endless hate.
And now O Rome, woe, woe, to thee I cry
Which to the world do bring al misery.
Here are we placed, by Ptolemies command,
To murder Pompey when he comes on shore,
Then brave Sempronius prepare they self.
To execute the charge thou hast in hand,
I am a Romaine, and have often served,
Under his colours, when in former state
Pompey hath bin the General of the field,
But cause I see that now the world is changed:
And like wise feel some of King Ptolemies gould.
Isle kill him were he twenty Generals,
And send him packing to his longest home
I marvel of what mettell was the French man made
Who when he should have stabbed Marius,
They say he was astonished with his looks.
Marius, had I been there, thou near had lived,
To brag thee of thy seven Consulships.
Bravely resolved, Noble Sempronius,
The damnedst villain that ere I heard speak:
But great men still must have such instruments,
To bring about their purpose, which once donne,
The deed they love, but do the doer hate:
Thou shalt no less (stout Romaine) be renowned,
For being Pompeys Deaths-man, then was he,
That fired the fair Egyptian Goddess Church.
Nay that's al one, report say what she list,
Tic for no shadows I adventure for:
Here are the Crowns, here are the wordly goods,
This between Princes doth contention bring:
Brothers this sets at odds, turns love to hate;
It makes the Son to wish his Father hanged
That he thereby might revel with his bags:
And did I know that in my Mothers womb,
There lurked a hidden vain of Sacred gould,
This hand this sword, should rape and rip it out.
Compassion would that greediness restrain.
I that's my fault, I am to compassionate,
Why man, art thou a soldier and dost talk
Of womanish pity and compassion?
Men's eyes must mil-stones drop, when fools shed tears,
But soft hears Pompey, Isle about my work
Trusting upon King Ptolomeys promised feyn,
And hoping succour, I am come to shore:
In Egipt here a while to make abode.
Faith longer Pompey then thou dost expect.
See now worlds Monarchs, whom your state makes (proud)
That think your Honours to be permanent,
Of Fortunes change see here a president,
Who meanwhile did command, now must entreat
And sue for that which to accept of late,
Unto the giver was thought fortunate.
I pray thee Pompey do not spend thy breath,
In reckoning up these rusty titles now,
Which thy ambition graced thee with before,
I must confess thou were my General,
But that cannot a veil to save thy life.
Talk of thy Fortune while thou list,
There is thy fortune Pompey in my fist.
O you that know what hight of honour means,
What tic for men that lulled in fortunes lap,
Have climbed the heighest top of sovereignty.
From all that pomp to be cast hed-long down,
You may conceive what Pompey doth sustain,
I was not wont to walk thus all alone,
But to be met with troops of Horse and Men.
With plays and pageants to be entertained,
A courtly train in royal rich array,
With spangled plumes, that danced in the ayre,
Mounted on steeds, with brave Caparisons decked,
That in their gates did seem to scorn the Earth.
Was wont my entertainment beautiefie,
But now thy coming is in meaner sort,
They by thy fortune will thy welcome rate.
What dost thou for such entertainment look,
Pompey how ere thy coming hither bee,
I have provided for thy going hence.
I will draw near, and with fair pleasing show,
Welcome great Pompey as the Siren doth
The wandering shipman with her charming song.
O how it grieves a noble haughty mind,
Framed up in honours uncontrolled school,
To serve and sue, who erst did rule and sway
What shall I go and stoop to Ptolomey,
Nought to a noble mind more grief can bring
Then be a beggar where thou were a King,
Welcome a shore most great and gracious prince
Welcome to Aegipt and to Ptolomey.
The King my Moister is at hand my Lord,
To gratulate your safe arrival here.
This is the King, and here is the Gentleman,
Which must thy coming gratulate a non,
Thanks worthy Lord unto your King and you,
It joys me much that in extremity,
I found so sure a friend as Ptolomey,
Now is the date of thy proud life expird,
To which my poniard must a full point put,
Pompey from Ptolomey I come to thee,
From whom a presant and a gift I bring,
This is the gift and this my message is
O Villain thou hast slain thy General,
And with thy base hand gored my royal heart.
Well I have lived till to that height I came,
That all the world did tremble at my name,
My greatness then by fortune being envied,
Stabbed by a murderous villains hand I died.
What is he dead, then straight cut of his head,
That meanwhile mounted with ambitions wings:
Caesar no doubt with praise and noble thanks,
Regarding well this well deserved deed,
Whom weal present with this most pleasing gift,
Lo you my masters, hee that kills but one,
Is straight a Villain and a murderer called,
But they that use to kill men by the great,
And thousands slay through their ambition,
They are brave champions, and stout warriors called,
Tic like that he that steals a rotten sheep
That in a dich would else have cast his hide,
He for his labour hath the halters hier.
But Kings and mighty Princes of the world,
By letter pattens rob both Sea and Land.
Do not then Pompey of thy murder plain,
Since thy ambition half the world hath slain.
O traterous villains, hold your murdering hands,
Or if that needs they must be washed in blood,
Imbrue them here, here in Cornelias breast.
Ay me as I stood looking from the Ship
(Accursed ship that did not sink and drown:
And so have saved me from so loathed a sight)
Thee to behold what did betide my Lord,
My Pompey dear (nor Pompey now nor Lord)
I saw those villains that but now were here:
Bucher my love and then with violence,
To draw his dear beloved Body hence;
What dost thou stand to play the Oratrix,
And tell a tale of thy dear husbands death?
Doth Pompey, doth thy love move thee no more?
Go cursed Cornelia rent thy wretched hair,
Drown blobred cheeks in seas of saltest tears.
And if, it be true that sorrows feeling power,
Could turn poor Niobe into a weeping stone
O let me weep a like, and like stone be,
And you poor lights, that saw this tragic sight,
Be blind and punished with eternal night,
Unhappy long to speak, bee near so bold
Since that thou this so heavy tale hast told.
These are but womanish exclamations
Light sorrow makes such lamentations,
Pompey no words my true grief can declare,
This for thy love shall be my best welfare.
There sterne Achillas and Fortunius lie,
Traitorous Sempronius and proud Ptolomey,
Go plead your cause fore the angry Rhadamant,
And tel him why you basely Pompey slew.
And let your guilty blood appease his Ghost,
That now sits wandering by the Stygian banks.
Unworthy sacrifice to quite his worth,
For Pompey though thou were mine enemy,
And vain ambition moved vs to this strife;
Yet now in death when strife and envy cease.
Thy princely virtues and thy noble mind,
Move me to rue thy undeserved death,
That found a greater danger then it fled;
Unhappy man to scope so many wars,
And to protract thy glorious day so long,
Here for to perish in a barbarous soil,
And end lives date stabbed by a Bastards hand,
But yet with honour shalt thou be Entombed,
I will enbalme thy body with my tears,
And put thy ashes in an Urn of gold,
And build with marble a deserved grave.
Whose worth indeed a Temple ought to have.
See how compassion draws forth Princely tears
And Virtue weeps her enemies funeral,
So sorrowed the mighty Alexander,
When Bessus hand cause Darius to die.
These grieved sorrowing Princes do with me.
Jointly agree in Contrariety,
Alack we morn, grieved is our mind alike,
Our gate is discontented, heavy our looks,
Our sorrows all a like, but dislike cause.
Their foe is their grifes causer which my friend,
It is the loss of one that makes them whale,
But I, that one there is a cruel one,
Do whale and grieve and unregarded moan.
Fair beams cast forth from these dismayfull eyes,
Chain my poor heart, in love and sorrows gives,
Forget sweet Prince these sad perlexed thoughts,
Withdraw thy mind in cloudy discontent,
And with Egyptian pleasures feed thine eyes,
Wilt thou be hold the Sepulchers of Kings,
And Monuments that speak the workman's praise?
Isle bring thee to Great Alexanders Tomb,
Where he, whom all the world could not suffice,
In bare six foot of Earth, entombed lies,
And show thee all the cost and curious art,
Which either Cleops or our Memphis boast:
Would you command a banquet in the Court,
Isle bring you to a Royal golden bower,
Fairer then that wherein great Jove doth sit,
And heaves up boles of Nectar to his Queen,
A stately Palace, whose fair doble gates:
Are wrought with garnished Carved Ivory,
And stately pillars of pure bullion framed.
With Orient Pearls and Indian stones embossed,
With golden Roofs that glister like the Sun,
Shall be prepared to entertain my Love:
Or wilt thou see our Academic Schools,
Or hear our Priests to reason of the stars,
Hence Plato fished his deep Philosophy:
And here in Heavenly knowledge they excel.
More then most fair, another Heaven to me,
The stars where on Isle gaze shall be thy face,
Thy moral deeds my sweet Philosophy,
enus the muse whose aid I must implore:
O let me profit in this study best,
For Beauties scholar I am now prefest.
See how this fair Egiptian Sorceress,
Enchants these Noble warriors man-like minds,
And melts their hearts in love and wantones.
Most glorious Queen, whose cheerful smiling (words)
Expel these clouds that over cast my mind.
Caesar will joy in Cleopatras joy,
And think his fame no whit disparaged,
To change his arms, and deadly sounding droms,
For loves sweet Lays, and Lydian harmony,
And now hang up these Idle instruments.
My warlike spear and uncontrolled crest:
My mortal wounding sword and silver shield,
And under thy sweet banners bear the brunt,
Of peaceful wars and amorous Alarms:
Why Mars himself his bloody rage allayed,
Dallying in Venus bed hath often played,
And great Alcides, when he did return:
From Iunos tasks, and Nemean victories,
From monsters fell, and Nomean toils:
Reposed himself in Deianiras arms.
Here will I pitch the pillars of my fame,
Here the non ultra of my labours write,
And with these Cheeks of Roses, lockes of Gold,
End my lives date, and travails manifold.
How many lets do hinder virtuous minds,
From the pursuit of honours due reward,
Besides Caribdis, and fell Scyllas spite:
More dangerous Circa and Calipsoes cup,
Then pleasant gardens of Alcionus:
And thousand lets voluptiousnesse doth offer.
I will regard no more these murderous spoils,
And bloody triumphs that I liked of late:
But in loves pleasures spend my wanton days,
Isle make thee garlondes of sweet smelling flowers,
And with fair rosall Chaplets crown thy head,
The purple Hyacinth of Phoebus Land:
Fresh Amarinthus that doth never die,
And fair Narcissus dear respondent shores,
And Violets of Daffodils so sweet,
Shall Beautify the Temples of my Love,
Whilst I will still gaze on thy beauteous eyes,
And with Ambrosean kisses bath thy Cheeks.
Come now fair Prince, and feast thee in our Courts
Where liberal Caeres, and Liaeus fat,
Shall power their plenty forth and fruitful store,
The sparkling liquor shall ore-flow his banks:
And Mero learn to bring forth pleasant wine,
Fruitful Arabia, and the furthest End,
Shall spend their treasuries of Spicery,
With Nardus Coronets weal guird our heads:
And al the while melodious warbling notes,
Passing the seven-fold harmony of Heaven:
Shall seem to ravish our enchanted thoughts,
Thus is the fear of unkind Ptolomey,
Changed by thee to feast in Jollity:
O how mine ears suck up her heavenly words,
The whilst mine eyes do prey upon her face:
Wind we then Anthony with this Royal Queen,
This day weal spend in mirth and banqueting.
Had I Queen, Iunoes heard-mans hundred eyes,
To gaze upon these two bright Suns of hers:
Yet would they all be blinded instantly.
What hath some Melancholy discontent,
Ore-come thy mind with troubled passions.
Yet being blinded with the Sunny beams,
Her beauties pleasing colours would restore,
Decayed sight with fresh variety.
Lord Anthony what means this troubled mind,
Caesar invites thee to the royal feast,
That fair Queen Cleopatra hath prepared.
Pardon me worthy Caesar and you Lords,
In not attending your most gracious speech
Thoughts of my Country, and return to Rome,
Somewhat distempered my busy head.
Let no such thoughts distemper now thy mind,
This day to Bacchus will wee consecrate,
And in deep goblets of the purest wine,
Drink healths unto our several friends at home.
It of my Country or of Rome I thought,
It was that I never meant for to come there,
But spend my life in this sweet paradise.
Most prudent heads, that with your councels wise,
The pillars of the mighty Rome sustain,
You see how civil broils have torn our state:
And private strife hath wrought a public wo,
Thessalia boasts that she hath seen our fall,
And Rome that meanwhile wont to Tiranize,
And in the necks of all the world hath ranged,
Loosing her rule, to serve is now constraynd,
Pompey the hope and stay of Commonwealth,
Whose virtues promised Rome security
Now flies distressed, disconsolate, forlorn,
Reproach of Fortune, and the victors scorn.
What now is left for wretched Rome to hope,
But in laments and bitter future woe,
To way the downfall of her former pride:
Again Porsenna brings in Tarquins names,
And Rome again doth smoke with furious flames.
In Pompeys fall wee all are overthrown,
And subject made to conqueror Tirany.
Most Noble Cicero and you Romaine Peers,
Pardon the author of unhappy news,
And then prepare to hear my tragic tale.
With that same look, that great Atrides stood,
At cruel alter stained with Daughters blood,
When Pompey fled pursuing Caesars sword,
And thought to shun his following destiny.
And then began to think on many a friend,
And many a one recalled hee to mind
Who in his Fortunes pride did leave their lives,
And vowed service at his princely feet,
From out the rest, the young Egiptian King,
Whose Father of an Exiled banished man
Hee seated had in throne of Majesty,
Him chose, to whom he did commit his life,
(But O, who doth remember good-turnes past)
The Rising Sun, not Setting, doth men please,
To ill committed was so great a trust,
Unto so base a Fortune favouring mind.
For he the Conquerors favour to obtain,
By Treason cause great Pompey to be slain:
O damned deed.
O Traitorous Ptolomey.
O most unworthy and ungrateful fact.
What plages may serve to expiate this act,
The rolling stone or overturning wheel,
The quenchless flames of fiery Phlegeton,
Or endless thirst of which the Poets talk,
Are all to gentle for so wild a deed.
Well did the Cibills unrespected verse.
Bid thee beware of Crocadilish Nile,
And art thou in a barbarous soil betrayed,
Defrauded Pompey of thy funeral rites,
There none could weep upon thy funeral hearse,
None could thy Consulshipes and triumphs tell,
And in thy death set fourth thy living praise,
None would erect to thee a sepulchre.
Or put thine ashes in a precious urn,
Peace Lords lament not noble Pompeys death,
Nor think him wretched, cause he wants a Tomb,
Heaven covers him whom Earth denies a grave:
Think you a heap of stones could him enclose,
Who in the Oceans circuit buried is,
And every place where Roman names are heard,
The world is his grave, where living fame doth blaze,
His funeral praise through his immortal trump,
And ore his tomb virtue and honour sits,
With rented hear and eyes bespent with tears,
And wail and weep their dear son Pompeys death,
But now my Lords for to augment this grief,
Caesar the Senates deadly enemy,
Aims eke to vs, and means to triumph here,
Upon poor conquered Rome and common wealth,
This was the end at which he always aymd,
Then end all hope of Romaines liberty,
Rise noble Romaine, rise from rotten Tombs,
And with your swords recover that again:
With your brave prowes won, our baseness lost,
Renowned Lords content your troubled minds,
Do not ad Fuel to the conquerors fire.
Which once inflamed will borne both Rome and vs.
Caesar although of high aspiring thoughts,
And uncontrolled ambitious Majesty,
Yet is of nature fair and courteous,
You see hee comes conqueror of the East,
Clad in the spoils of the Pharsalian fields,
Then wee unable to resist such power:
By gentle peace and meek submission,
Must seek to pacify the victors wrath.
My Son thou see howe all are overthrown,
That sought their Countries free-dome to maintain,
Egipt forsakes vs, Pompey found his grave,
Where hee most succour did expect to have:
Scipio is overthrown and with his hapless fall,
Africa to vs doth former aid deny,
O who will help men in adversity:
Yet let vs show in our declining state,
That strength of mind, that virtues constancy,
That erst we did in our felicity,
Though Fortune fails vs lets not fail our selves,
Remember boy thou art a Romaine borne,
And Catoes Son, of me do virtue learn;
Fortune of others, aboue althings see
Thou prize thy Countries love and liberty,
All blessings Fathers to their Sons can wish
Heavens power on thee, and now my son with-drawe
Thy self a while and leave me to my book.
What means my Father by this solemn leave?
First he remembered me of my Fortunes change,
And then more earnestly did me exhort
To Counrries love, and constancy of mind,
Then he was wont: som-whats the cause,
But what I know not, O I fear I fear,
His to courageous heart that cannot bear
The thrall of Rome and triumph of his foe,
By his own hand threats danger to his life,
How ere it be at hand I will abide,
VVayting the end of this that shall betide.
Plato that promised immortality,
Doth make my soul resolve it self to mount,
Unto the bower of those Celestial joys,
Where freed from loathed Prison of my soul,
In heavenly notes to Phoebus which shall sing:
And Pean Io, Pean loudely ring.
Then fail not hand to execute this deed,
Nor faint nor heart for to command my hand,
VVauer not mind to counsel this resolve,
But with a courage and thy lives last act,
Now do I give thee Rome my last farewell.
Who cause thou fairest ill do therefore die,
O talk not now of Cannas overthrow,
And raze out of thy lasting Calendars,
Those bloody songs of Hilias dismal sight:
And note with black, that black and cursed day,
When Caesar conquered in Pharsalia,
Yet will not I his conquest glorify:
My overthrow shall near his triumph grace,
For by my death to the world Isle make that known,
No hand could conquer Cato but his own.
O this it was my mind told me before,
What means my Father, why with naked blade,
Dost thou assault, that faithful princely hand:
And make the base Earth to drink thy Noble blood,
Bee not more sterne, and cruel against thy self,
Then thy most hateful enemies would be,
No Parthian, Gaul, Moore, no not Caesars self,
Would with such cruelty thy worth repay,
O stay thy hand, give me thy fatal blade:
Which turns his edge and waxes blunt to wound
A breast so fraught with virtue excellent.
Why dost thou let me of my firm resolve,
Unkind boy hinderer of thy Fathers joy,
Why dost thou slay me, or wilt thou betray
Thy Fathers life unto his foe-mens hands,
And yet I wrong thy faith, and love too much,
In thy souls kindness, tic thou art unkind.
If for your self you do this life reject,
Yet you your Sons and Countries: sake respect,
Rob not my young years of so sweet a stay,
Nor take from Rome the Pillor of her strength.
Although I die, yet do I leave behind,
My virtues favour to bee thy youths guide:
But for my Country, could my life it profit,
Isle not refuse to live that died for it,
Now doth but one small snuff of breath remain:
And that to keep, should I mine Honour stain?
Where you do strive to show your virtue most,
There more you do disgrace it Cowards use,
To shun the woes and trobles of this life:
Basely to fly to deaths safe sanctuary,
When constant virtues doth the hottest brunt's,
Of griefs assaults unto the end endure.
Thy words prevail, come lift me up my Son,
And call some help to bind my bleeding wounds.
Father I go with a more willing mind,
Then did Aeneas when from Trojan fire,
He bare his Father, and did so restore:
The greatest gift hee had received before.
Now have I freed me of that hurtful Love,
Which interrupted my resolved will,
Which all the world can never stay nor change:
Caesar whose rule commands both Sea and Land,
Is not of power to hinder this weak hand,
And time succeeding shall behold that I
Although not live, yet died courageously,
O hast thou thus to thine own harm deceived me
Well I perceive thy Noble dauntless heart:
Because it would not bear the Conquerors insolence,
Used on it self this cruel violence,
I know not whether I should more lament,
That by thine own hand thou thus slaughtered art,
Or Joy that thou so nobly did depart.
Now Caesar rides triumphantly through Rome,
And decks the Capitol with Pompeys spoil:
Ambition now doth virtues seat usurp,
Then thou Revengeful great Adastria Queen.
Awake with horror of thy dubbing Drum,
And call the snaky furies from below,
To dash the Joy of their triumphing pride,
Erinnis kindle now thy Stigian brands,
In discontented Brutus boiling breast,
Let Caesar die a bleeding sacrifice,
Unto the Soul of thy dead Country Rome.
Why sleep thou Cassius? wake thee from thy dream
And yet thou nought dost dream but blood and death.
For dreadful visions do affright thy sleep.
And howling Ghosts with ghastly horrors cry,
By Cassius hand must wicked Caesar die,
Now Rome cast of thy gaudy painted robes
And cloth thy self in sable coloured weeds,
Change thy vain triumphs into funeral pomps,
And Caesar cast thy Laurel crown apart,
And bind thy temples with sad Cypress tree.
Of wars thus peace ensues, of peace more harms,
Then erst was wrought by tragic wars alarms,
Hark how Caesarians with resounding shouts,
Tell heavens of their pomps and victories,
Caesar that long in pleasures idle lap,
And dalliance vain of his Proud Courtesan,
Had Iuld his sterne and bloody thoughts a sleep,
Now in Rome streets ore Romaines come to triumph,
And to the Romains shows those Trophies sad,
Which from the Romaines he with blood did get:
The Tyrant mounted in his golden chair,
Rides drawn with milk white palferies in like pride,
As Phoebus from his Oriental gate,
Mounted upon the fiery Phlegetons backs.
Comes prancing forth, shaking his dewy locks:
Caesar thou art in glories chiefest pride,
Thy son is mounted in the highest point:
Thou placed art in top of fortunes wheel,
Her wheel must turn, thy glory must eclipse,
Thy Sun descend and loose his radiant light,
And if none be, whose countries ardent love,
And loss of Roman liberty can move,
Isle be the man that shall this task perform.
Cassius hath vowed it to dead Pompeys soul,
Cassius hath vowed it to afflicted Rome,
Cassius hath vowed it, witness Heaven and Earth,
Now have I shaked of these womanish links,
In which my captiud thoughts were chained a fore,
By that fair charming Circes wounding look,
And now like that same ten years travailer,
Leaving be-hind me all my trobles past.
I come awaited with attending fame,
Who through her shrill triump doth my name resound,
And makes proud Tiber and Lygurian Poe,
(Yet a sad witner of the Sunne-Gods loss,)
Bear my names glory to the Ocean mayne,
Which to the worlds end shall it bound it again,
As from Phaegiean fields the King of Gods,
With conquering spoils and Tropheus proud returned,
When great Typheus fell by thundering darts,
And rod away with their Celestial troops,
In greatest pride through Heavens smooth paved way,
So shall the Pompeous glory of my train,
Dring to match old Saturns kingly Son,
Call down these golden lamps from the bright sky,
And leave Heaven blind, my greatness to admire.
This laurel garland in fair conquest made,
Shall stain the pride of Ariadnes crown,
Clad in the beauty of my glorious lamps,
Cassiopea leave thy starry chair,
And on my Sun-bright Chariot wheels attend,
Which in triumphing pomp doth Caesar bear.
To Earths astonishment, and amaze of Heaven
Now look proud Rome from thy seven-fold seat,
And see the world thy subject, at thy feet,
And Caesar ruling over all the world.
Now let vs cease to boast of Romulus,
First author of high Rome and Romaines name.
Nor talk of Scaurus, worthy Africans,
The scourge of Libia, and of Carthage pride,
Nor of unconquered Paulus dauntless mind,
Since Caesars glory them exceeds as far
As shining Phebe doth the dimmest star.
Like as the Ship-man that hath lost the star.
By which his doubtful ship he did direct,
Wanders in darkness, and in Cloudy night,
So having lost my starr, my Governess.
Which did direct me, with her Sonne-bright ray,
In grief I wander and in sad dismay:
And though of triumphs and of victories,
I do the out-ward signs and Trophies bear,
Yet see mine inward mind under that face,
Whose colours to these Triumphs is disgrace.
As when from vanquished Macedonia,
Triumphing ore King Persius overthrow,
Conquering Aemelius, in great glory came.
Showing the worlds spoils which he had bereft,
From the successors of great Alexander,
With such high pomp, yea greater victories,
Caesar triumphing coms into fair Rome,
In this one Champion all is comprehended,
Which ancient times in several men commended,
Alcides strength, Achilles dauntless heart,
Great Phillips Son by magnanimity.
Sterne Pyrhus valour, and great Hectors might,
And all the prowes, that ether Greece or Troy,
Brought forth in that same ten years Troians war.
Fair Rome great monument of Romulus.
Thou mighty seat of consuls and of Kings:
Ouer-victorious now Earths Conqueror,
Welcome thy valiant son that to thee brings,
Spoils of the world, and exquies of Kings.
The conquering Issue of immortal Jove.
Which in the Persian spoils first fetch his fame.
Then through Hydasspis, and the Caspian waives,
Unto the sea unknown his praise did propagate,
Must to my glory veil his conquering crest:
The Lybick Sands, and Africa Sirts hee past.
Bactrians and Zogdians, known but by their names,
Whereby his arms resistless, powers subdued,
And Ganges streams congeald with Indian blood,
Could not transeport his burden to the sea.
But these ne'er learned at Mars his games to play,
Nor tossed these bloody balls, of dread and death:
Arar and proud Saramna speaks my praise,
Rohdans shrill Tritons through their brazen trumps,
Ecco my fame against the Gallian Towers,
And Ices wept to see her daughter Thames.
Chainge her clear crystal, to vermilion sad,
The big bond German, and Heluetian stout,
Which well have learned to toss a tusked spear,
And well can curb a noble stomached horse,
Can Caesars valour witness to their grief
Iuba the mighty Africa Potentate,
That with his cole-black Negroes to the field,
Backed with Numidian and Getulian horse,
Hath felt the puissance of a Roman sword.
I entered Asia with my banners spread,
Displayed the Eagle on the Euxin sea:
By Iason first, and venturous Ergo cut,
And in the rough Cimerian Bosphorus
A heavy witness of Pharnaces flight,
And now am come to triumph here in Rome,
With greater glory then ere Romaine did.
Alas these triumphs move not me at all,
But only do renew remembrance sad,
Of her triumphing and imperious looks,
Which is the Saint and Idol of my thoughts:
First was I wounded by her piercing eye:
Next prisoner tan by her captiuing speech,
And now she triumphs ore my conquered heart,
In Cupids Chariot riding in her pride,
And leads me captive bound in Beauties bonds:
Caesars lip-loue, that never touched his heart,
By present triumph and the absent fire,
Is now waxed could; but mine that was more deep,
Engraven in the marble of my breast,
Nor time nor Fortune ere can raze it out.
Anthony, base female Anthony,
Thou women's soldier, fit for nights assaults,
Hast thou so soon forgot the discipline,
And welcome tasks thy youth was trained to,
Thy soft down Pillow, was a helm of steel:
The could damp earth, a bed to ease thy toil,
Afrigted slumbers were thy golden sleeps:
Hunger and thirst thy sweetest delicates,
Sterne horror, ghastly wounds, pale grisly death:
Thy wind depressing pleasures and delights,
And now so soon hath on enchanted face,
These manly labours luld in drowsy sleep:
The Gods (whose messenger I here do stand)
Will not then drown thy fame in Idleness:
Yet must Philippe see thy high exploits,
And all the world ring of thy Victories.
Say what thou art, that in this dreadful sort
Forbidd'st me of my Cleopatras love.
I am thy bonus Genius, Anthony,
Which to thy dull ears this do prophecy:
That fatal face which now doth so bewitch thee,
Like to that vain inconstant Greekish dame,
Which made the stately Ilian towers to smoke,
Shall thousand bleeding Romains lay one ground:
Hymen in sable not in saferon robes,
Instead of rounds shall doleful dirges singe.
For nuptial tapers, shall the furies bear,
Blew-burning torches to increase your fear:
The bride-grooms scull shall make the bridal bonds
And hel-borne hags shall dance an Antic round,
While Hecate Hymen (heu, heu) Hymen cries,
And now methinkes I see the seas blew face:
Hidden with ships, and now the trumpets sound,
And weak Canopus with the Eagle strives,
Neptune amazed at this dreadful sight:
Calls blew sea Gods for to behold the fight,
Glaucus and Panopea, Proteus old,
Who now for fear changes his wonted shape,
Thus your vain love which with delight begun:
In Idle sport shall end with blood and shame.
What wast my Genius that me threatened thus?
They say that from our birth he doth preserve:
And on me will he power these miseries?
What burning torches, what alarms of war,
What shames did he to my loves prophecy?
O no hee comes as winged Mercury,
From his great Father Jove, to Anchises son
To warn him leave the wanton dalliance,
And charming pleasures of the Tyrian Court,
Then wake the Anthony from this idle dream,
Cast of these base effeminate passions:
Which melt the courage of thy manlike mind,
And with thy sword receive thy sleeping praise.
How long in base ignoble patience,
Shall I behold my Countries woeful fall,
O you brave Romains, and amongst the rest
Most Noble Brutus, fair befall your souls:
Let Peace and Fame your Honoured graves await,
Who through such perils, and such tedious wars,
Won your great labours prise sweet liberty,
But wee that with our life did freedoms take,
And did no sooner Men, then free-men, breath:
To loose it now continuing so long,
And with such laws, such vows, such oaths confirmed
Can nothing but disgrace and shame expect:
But soft what see I written on my seat,
O vtinam Brute viueres.
What means this, thy courage dead,
But stay, read forward, Brute mortuus es.
I thou art dead indeed, thy courage dead
Thy care and love thy dearest Country dead,
Thy wonted spirit and Noble stomach dead.
The times draw near by gracious heavens assigned
When Philips Son must fall in Babilon,
In his triumphing proud presumption:
But see where melancholy Brutus walks,
Whose mind is hammering on no mean conceit:
Then sound him Cassius, see how hee is inclined,
How fares young Brutus in this tottering state
Even as an idle gazer, that beholds,
His Countries wrackes and cannot succour bring.
But will Brute always in this dream remain,
And not bee moved with his Countries moan.
O that I might in Lethes endless sleep,
And near awaking pleasant rest of death
Close up mine eyes, that I no more might see,
Poor Romes distress and Countries misery.
No Brutus live, and wake thy sleepy mind,
Stir up those dying sparks of honours fire,
Which in thy gentle breast wear wont to flame:
See how poor Rome oppressed with Countries wrongs,
Implores thine aid, that bred thee to that end,
Thy kins-mans soul from heaven commands thine aide:
That lastly must by thee receive his end,
Then purchase honour by a glorious death,
Or live renowned by ending Caesars life.
I can no longer bear the Tyrants pride.
I cannot hear my Country cry for aid,
And not bee moved with her piteous moan,
Brutus thy soul shall never more complain:
That from thy linage and most virtuous stock,
A bastard weak degenerate brahch is borne,
For to distain the honour of thy house.
No more shall now the Romains call me dead,
Isle live again and rowze my sleepy thoughts:
And with the Tyrants death begin this life.
Rome now I come to rear thy states decayed,
When or this hand shall cure thy fatal wound,
Or else this heart by bleeding on the ground.
Now heaven I see applauds this enterprise,
And Rhadamanth into the fatal Urn,
That lotheth death, hath thrust the Tyrants name,
Caesar the life that thou in blood hast led:
Shall heap a bloody vengeance on thine head.
Now servile Pharthia proud in Romaine spoil,
Shall pay her ransom unto Caesars Ghost:
Which unrevenged roves by the Stygian strond,
Exclaming on our sluggish negligence.
Leave to lament brave Romans, lo I come,
Like to the God of battle, mad with rage,
To die their rivers with vermilion red:
Isle fill Armenians plains and Medians hills,
With carcasses of bastard Scithian brood,
And there proud Princes will I bring to Rome,
Chained in fetters to my chariot wheels:
Desire of fame and hope of sweet revenge,
Which in my breast hath kindled such a flame,
As nor Euphrates, nor sweet Tybers stream,
Can quench or stack this fervent boiling heate:
These conquering soldiers that have followed me,
From vanquished France to sun-burnt Meroe,
Matching the best of Alexanders troops.
Shall with their looks put Parthian foes to flight,
And make them twice turn their deceitful looks,
The restless mind that harbors sorrowing thoughts,
And is with child of noble enterprise,
Doth never cease from honours toilsome task,
Till it brings forth Eternal glories brood.
So you fair branch of virtues great descent,
Now having finished Civil wars sad broils,
Intend by Parthian triumphs to enlarge,
Your contryes limits, and your own renown,
But cause in Sibilles civil writs we find,
None but a King that conquest can achieve,
Both for to crown your deeds with due reward,
And as auspicious signs of victory.
Wee here present you with this Diadem,
And even as kings were banished Romes high throne
Cause their base vice, her honour did distain,
So to your rule doth she submit her self,
That her renown there by might brighter shine,
Why think you Lords that tic ambitions spur.
That pricks Caesar to these high attempts,
Or hope of Crowns, or thought of Diadems,
That made me wade through honours perilous deep,
Virtue unto it self a sure reward,
My labours all shall have a pleasing doom,
If you but Judge I will deserve of Rome:
Did those old Romaines suffer so much ill?
Such tedious sieges, such enduring wars?
Tarquinius hates, and great Porsennas threats,
To banish proud imperious tyrants rule?
And shall my overdaring thoughts contend
To mar what they have brought to happy end:
Or think you cause my Fortune hath expelled,
My friends, come let vs march in jollity,
Isle triumph Monarke-like ore conquering Rome,
Or end my conquests with my countries spoils,
O noble Princely resolution.
These or not victories that we so call,
That only blood and murderous spoils can vaunt:
But this shall be thy victory brave Prince,
That thou hast conquered thy own climbing thoughts,
And with thy virtue beat ambition down,
And this no less inblazon shall thy fame.
Then those great deeds and chivalrous attempts,
That made thee conqueror in Thessalia.
This noble mind and Pincely modesty,
Which in contempt of honours brightness shines,
Makes vs to wish the more for such a Prince,
Whose virtue not ambition won that praise,
Nor shall we think it loss of liberty.
Or Romaine liberty any way impeached,
For to subject vs to his Princely rule,
Whose thoughts fair virtue and true honour guides:
Vouchsafe then to accept this golden crown,
A gift not equal to thy dignity.
Content you Lords for I will be no King,
An odious name unto the Romaine care,
Caesar I am, and will be Caesar still,
No other title shall my Fortunes grace:
Which I will make a name of higher state
Then Monarch, King or worlds great Potentate.
Of Jove in Heaven, shall ruled bee the sky,
The Earth of Caesar, with like Majesty.
This is the Sceptre that my crown shall bear,
And this the golden diadem Isle wear,
A far more rich and royal ornament,
Then all the Crowns that the proud Persian gave:
Forward my Lords let Trumpets sound our march,
And drums strike up Revenges sad alarms,
Parthia we come with like incensed heate,
As great Atrides with the angry Greeks,
Marching in fury to pale walls of Troy.
Brave Lords whose forward resolution,
Shows you descended from true Romaine line,
See how old Rome in winter of her age,
Rejoices in such Princely budding hopes,
No less then once she in Decius virtue did,
Or great Camillus bringing back of spoils.
On then brave Lords of this attempt begun,
The sacred Senate doth commend the deed:
Your Countries love incites you to the deed,
Virtue her self makes warrant of the deed,
Then Noble Romains as you have begun:
Never desist until this deed be done.
To thee Revenge doth Cassius kneel him down.
Thou that brings quiet to perplexed souls,
And borne in Hell, yet harborest heavens joys,
Whose favour slaughter is, and dandling death,
Bloud-thirsty pleasures and mis boding bliss:
Brought forth of Fury, nurse of cankered Hate,
To drown in woe the pleasures of the world.
Thou shalt no more in duskish Erebus:
And dark-some hell obscure thy Deity,
Instead of Jove thou shalt my Godesse bee,
To thee fair Temples Cassius will erect:
And on thine alter built of Parian stone
Whole Hecatombs will I offer up.
Laugh gentle Godesse on my bold attempt,
Yet in thy laughter let pale meager death:
Bee wrapped in wrinkels of thy murdering spoils.
An other Tarquin is to bee expelled,
An other Brutus lives to act the deed:
Tic not one nation that this Tarquin wrongs,
All Rome is stained with his unruled desires,
She whose imperial sceptre was invr'd:
To conquer Kings and to control the world,
Cannot abate the glory of her state,
To yield or bow to one mans proud desires:
Sweet Country Rome here Brutus vows to thee,
To loose his life or else to set thee free.
Shame bee his share that doth his life so prize,
That to Romes weal it would not sacrifice,
My Poniards point shall pearce his heart as deep,
As erst his sword Romes bleeding side did gore:
And change his garments to the purple die,
With which our blood had stained sad Thessaly.
Hee doth refuse the title of a King,
But wee do see hee doth usurp the thing.
Our ancient freedom hee empeacheth more,
Then ever King or Tyrant did before.
The Senators by him are quite disgraced,
Rome, Romans, City, Freedom, all defaced.
We come not Lords, as unresolved men,
For to show causes of the deed decreed,
This shall dispute for me and tell him why,
This heart, hand, mind, hath marked him out to die:
If it be true that furies quench-les thirst,
Is pleased with quaffing of ambitious blood,
Then all you devils whet my Poniards point,
And I will broach you a bloud-sucking heart:
Which full of blood, must blood store to you yield,
Were it a peerce to flint or marble stone:
Why so it is for Caesars heart's a stone,
Else would bee moved with my Countries moan.
They say you furies instigate men's minds,
And push their arms to finnish bloody deeds:
Prick then mine Elbo: goad my bloody hand,
That it may gore Caesars ambitious heart.
Why thinks my love to fright me with her dreams?
Shall bug-beares fear Caesars undaunted heart,
Whom Pompeys Fortune never could amaze,
Nor the French horse, nor Mauritanian bow,
And now shall vain illusions me affright:
Or shadows daunt, whom substance could not quell?
O dearest Caesar, hast thou seen thy self,
(As troubled dreams to me did fine thee seen:)
Torn, Wounded, Maimed, Blod-slaughtered, Slain,
O thou thy self, would then have dread thy self:
And feared to thrust thy life to dangers mouth.
There you bewray the folly of your dream,
For I am well, alive, unsought, untouched.
T'was in the Senate-house I saw thee so,
And yet thou dreadles thither needs will go.
The Senate is a place of peace, not death,
But these were but deluding visions.
O do not set so little by the heavens,
Dreams at divine, men say they come from Jove,
Beware betimes, and bee not wise to late:
Men's good endeavours change the wills of Fate.
Weep not fair love, let not thy woeful tears
Bode me, I know what thou would not have to hap
It will distain mine honour won in fight
To say a women's dream could me affright.
O Caesar no dishonour can thou get,
In seeking to prevent unlucky chance:
Foole-hardy men do run upon their death,
Bee thou in this persuaded by thy wife:
No valour bids thee cast away thy life.
Tic dastard cowardice and childish fear,
To dread those dangers that do not appear:
Thou must sad chance by fore-cast, wise resist,
Or being done say bootless had I wist.
But for to fear wher's no suspicion,
Will to my greatness be derision.
There lurks an adder in the greenest grass,
Dangers of purpose always hide their face:
Persuade no more Caesar's resolved to go.
The Heavens resolve that hee may safe return,
For if ought happen to my love but well:
His danger shall be doubled with my death.
I come they are, but yet they are not gon.
What hast thou sacrificed, as custom is,
Before wee enter in the Senat-house.
O stay those steeps that lead thee to thy death,
The angry heavens with threeatning dire aspect,
Boding mischance, and baleful massacers,
Menace the overthrow of Caesars power
Saturn sits frowning on the God of War,
Who in their sad conjunction do conspire,
Uniting both their bale full influences,
To heap mischance, and danger to thy life:
The Sacrificing beast is heart-les found:
Sad ghastly sights, and raised Ghosts appear,
Which fill the silent woods, with groaning cries:
The hoarse Night-rauen tunes the cheerless voice,
And calls the bale-full Owl, and howling Doge,
To make a consort. In whose sad song is this,
Near is the overthrow of Caesars bliss.
The world is set to fray me from my wits,
Heers harteles Sacrifice and visions,
Howling and cries, and ghastly groans of Ghosts,
Soft Caesar do not make a mockery,
Of these Prodigious signs sent from the Heavens,
Calphurnias Dream lumping which Augurs words,
Show (if thou markest it Caesar) cause to fear:
This day the Senate there shall be dissolved,
And Isle return to my Calphurnia home,
What hast thou hear that thou presents vs with,
A thing my Lord that doth concern your life.
Which love to you and hate of such a deed,
Makes me reveal unto your excellence.
Smile thou, or think thou it some eld toy,
Thought frown a non to read so many names.
That have conspired and sworn thy bloody death,
Now must I come, and with close subtle girds,
Deceive the prey that Isle devour anon,
My Lord the Sacred Senate doth expect,
Your royal presence in Pompeius court:
Cassius they tell me that some dangers nigh.
And death pretended in the Senate house.
What danger or what wrong can be,
Where harmless gravity and virtue sits,
Tic past all danger present death it is,
Nor is it wrong to render due desert.
To fear the Senators without a cause,
Will bee a cause why theile be to be feared,
The Senate stays for me in Pompeye court.
And Caesars here, and dares not go to them,
Pack hence all dread of danger and of death,
What must be must be; Caesars pressed for all,
Now have I sent him headlong to his end,
Vengeance and death awaiting at his heals,
Caesar thy life now hangs on a twine,
Which by my Poniard must bee cut in twain,
Thy chair of state now turned is to thy Beer,
Thy Princely robes to make thy winding sheet:
The Senators the Mourners ore the Hearse,
And Pompeys Court, thy dreadful grave shall be.
Hold down the Tyrant stab him to the death
Now doth the music play and this the song
That Cassius heart hath thirsted for so long:
And now my Poniard in this mazing sound,
Must strike that touch that must his life confound.
Stab on, stab on, thus should your Poniards play,
Aloud deep note upon this trembling Kay.
Bucolian sends thee this.
And Cumber this.
Take this fro Casca for to quite Romes wrongs.
Why murderous villains know you who you strike,
Tic Caesar, Caesar, whom your Poniards pierce:
Caesar whose name might well affright such slaves:
O Heavens that see and hate this heinous guilt,
And thou Immortal Jove that Idle hold
Deluding Thunder in thy fainting hand,
Why stay thy dreadful doom, and dost with-hold,
Thy three-fork'd engine to revenge my death:
But if my plaints the Heavens cannot move,
Then blackest hell and Pluto bee thou judge:
You grisly daughters of the cheereles night.
Whose hearts, nor prayer nor pity, ere could lend,
Leave the black dungeon of your Chaos deep:
Come and with flaming brands into the world,
Revenge, and death, bring seated in your eyes:
And plauge these villains for their treacheries.
I have held Anthony with a vain discourse,
The whilst the deed's in execution,
But lives hee still, yet doth the Tyrant breath?
Chalinging Heavens with his blasphemies,
Here Brutus makes a passage for thy Soul,
To plead thy cause for them whose aid thou craves,
What Brutus to? nay nay, then let me die,
Nothing wounds deeper then ingratitude,
I bloody Caesar, Caesar, Brutus too,
Doth geeue thee this, and this to quite Romes wrongs,
O had the Tyrant had as many lives.
As that fell Hydra borne in Lerna lake,
That hear I still might stab and stabing kill,
Till that more lives might bee extinquished,
Then his ambition, Romans Slaughtered.
How heavens have justly on the authors head,
Returned the guiltless blood which he hath shed,
And Pompey, he who caused thy Tragedy,
Here breathless lies before thy Noble Statue,
What cries of death resound within my eats,
Whom I doe see great Caesar buchered thus?
What said I great? I Caesar thou wast great,
But O that greatness was that brought thy death:
O unjust Heavens, (if Heavens at all there be,)
Since virtues wrongs makes question of your powers,
How could your starry eyes this shame behold,
How could the sun see this and not eclipse?
Fair bud of fame ill cropped before thy time:
What Hyrcan tygar, or wild savage bore,
(For he more heard then Bore or Tiger was,)
Durst do so vile and execrate a deed,
Could not those eyes so full of majesty,
Nor priesthood (o not thus to bee prophand)
Nor yet the reverence to this sacred place,
Nor flowing eloquence of thy golden tongue,
Nor name made famous through immortal merit,
Deter those murtherors from so wild a deed?
Sweet friend accept these obsequies of mine,
Which hear with tears I doe unto thy hearse,
And thou being placed among the shining stars.
Shalt down from Heaven behold what deep revenge,
I will inflict upon the murderers,
Brutus thou hast what long desire hath sought,
Caesar Lies weltering in his purple Gore,
Thou art the author of Romes liberty,
Proud in thy murdering hand and bloody knife.
Yet think Octauian and sterne Anthony.
Cannot let pass this murder unrevenged,
Thessalia once again must see your blood,
And Roman drommes must strike up new alaromes
Hark how Bellona shakes her angry lance:
And envy clothed in her crimson weed,
Me thinks I see the fiery shields to clash,
Eagle against Eagle, Rome against Rome to fight,
Phillipi, Caesar, quittance must thy wrongs,
Whereas that hand shall stab that traitorous heart.
That durst encourage it to work thy death,
Thus from thine ashes Caesar doth arise
As from Medeas hapless scattered teeth:
New flames of wars, and new outrageous broils,
Now smile Aemathia that even in thy top,
Romes victory and pride shall be entombed,
And those great conquerors of the vanquished earth,
Shall with their swords come there to dig their graves.
Morn gentle Heavens for you have lost your joy.
Morn grieved earth thy ornament is gon,
Morn Rome in great thy Father is deceased:
Morn thou Octauian, thou it is must morn,
Morn for thy Uncle who is dead and gon.
Morn for thy Father to ungently slain,
Morn for thy Friend whom thy mishap hath lost,
For Father, Vnkell, Friend, go make thy moan,
Who all did live, who all did die in one.
But here I vow these black and sable weeds,
The outward signs of inward heaviness,
Shall changed be ere long to crimson hew,
And this soft raiment to a coat of steel,
Caesar, no more I hear the mornefull songs.
The tragic pomp of his sad exequies,
And deadly burning torches are at hand,
I must accompany the mornefull troop:
And sacrifice my tears to the Gods below.
Set down the hearse and let Calphurnia weep,
Weep for her Lord and bath his Wounds in tears:
Fear of the world, and only hope of Rome,
Thou whilst thou lived was Calphurnias joy,
And being dead my joys are dead with thee:
Here doth my care and comfort resting lie:
Let them accompany thy mournful hearse.
This is the hearse of virtue and renown,
Here stroe red roses and sweet violets:
And laurel garlands for to crown his fame,
The Princely weed of mighty conquerors:
These worthless obsequies poor Rome bestows,
Upon thy sacred ashes and dear hearse.
And as a token of thy living praise,
And fame immortal take this laurel wreath,
Which witnesses thy name shall never die:
And with this take the Love and tears of Rome,
For on thy tomb shall still engraven be,
Thy loss, her grief, thy deaths, her pitying thee,
Unwilling do I come to pay this debt,
Though not unwilling for to crown desert,
O how much rather had I this bestowed,
On thee returning from foes overthrow,
When living virtue did require such mead,
Then for to crown thy virtue being dead,
Lord. Those wreaths that in thy life our conquests crowned
And our fair triumphs beauty glorified,
Now in thy death do serve thy hearse to adorn,
For Caesars living virtues to bee crowned,
Not to be wept as buried under ground,
Thou whilst thou lived wast fair virtues flower
Crowned with eternal honour and renown,
To thee being dead, Flora both crowns and flowers,
(The chiefest virtues of our mother earth,)
Doth give to gratulate thy noble hearse.
Let then they soul divine vouchsafe to take,
These worthless obsequies our love doth make.
All that I am is but despair and grief,
This all I give to Celebrate thy death,
What funeral pomp of riches and of pelf,
Do you expect? Calphurnia gives her self.
You that to Caesar justly did decree
Honours divine and sacred reverence:
And oft him graced with titles well deserved,
Of Countries Father, stay of Commonwealth.
And that which never any bare before,
Inviolate, Holy, Consecrate, Vntucht.
Doe see this friend of Rome, this Contryes Father,
This Son of lasting fame and endless praise,
And in a mortal trunk, immortal virtue
Slaughtered, profaned, and bucherd like a beast,
By traitorous hands, and damned Paracides:
Recount those deeds and see what he hath don,
Subdued those nations which three hundred years.
Remained unconquered; still afflicting Rome,
And recompensed the fiery Capitol,
With many Cities unto ashes burnt:
And this reward, these thanks you render him:
Here lies he dead to whom you owe your lives:
By you this slaughtered body bleeds again,
Which oft for you hath bled in fearful fight.
Sweet wounds in which I see distressed Rome,
From her pierced sides to power forth streams of blood,
Bee you a witness of my sad Souls grief:
And of my tears which wounded heart doth bleed,
Not such as use from womanish eyes proceed.
And were the deed most worthy and vnblamed.
Yet you unworthily did do the same:
Who being partakers with his enemies,
By Caesar all were saved from death and harm,
And for the punishment you should have had,
You were preferred to Princely dignities:
Rulers and Lords of Provinces were you made,
Thus thanke-les men hee did prefer of nought,
That by their hands his murder might be wrought.
Revenge, Revenge upon the murderers.
Brave Lords this worthy resolution shows,
Your dearest love, and great affection
Which to this slaughtered Prince you always bare,
And may like bloody chance befall my life:
If I be slack for to revenge his death.
Now on my Lords, this body lets inter:
Amongst the monuments of Roman Kings,
And build a Temple to his memory:
Honouring therein his sacred Deity.
Now Romains proud foe, worlds common enemy,
In his greatest hight and chiefest Jollity,
In the Sacred Senate-house is done to death:
Even as the Consecrated Ox which sounds,
At horny alters in his dying pride:
With flowery leaves and garlands all bedight,
Stands proudly waiting for the hasted stroke:
Till hee amazed with the dismal sound,
Falls to the Earth and staines the holy ground,
The spoils and riches of the conquered world,
Are now but idle Trophies of his tomb:
His laurel garlands do but Crown his chair,
His sling, his shilde, and fatal bloody spear,
Which hee in battle oft against Rome did bear,
Now serve for nought but rusty monuments.
So Romulus when proud ambition,
His former virtue and renown had stained:
Did by the Senators receive his end,
But soft what boades Titinnius hasting speed.
The frantic people and impatient,
By Anthonyes exhorting to revenge:
Run matting throw the bloody streets of Rome,
Crying Revenge, and murdering they go,
All those that caused Caesars overthrow.
The wavering people pytiyng Caesars death,
Do rage at vs, who fore to win their weal:
Spare not the danger of our dearest lives,
But since no safety Rome for vs affords:
Brutus weell hast vs to our Provinces,
I into Sire, thou into Maccedon,
Where wee will muster up such martial bands,
As shall affright our following enemies.
In Thessaly weal meet the Enemy,
And in that ground distained with Pompeys blood,
And fruitful made with Roman massaker,
VVeele either sacrifice our guilty foe,
To appease the furies of these howling Ghosts,
That wander restless through the shemy ground
Or else that Thessaly bee a common Tomb:
To bury those that fight to enfranchise Rome.
Bravely resolved, I see young Brutus mind,
Strengthened with force of virtues sacred rule:
Contemns death, and holds proud chance in scorn.
I that before feared not to do the deed,
Shall never now repent it being done,
No more I Fortuned, like the Roman Lord,
Whose faith brought death yet with immortal fame,
I kiss thee hand for doing such a deed:
And thank my heart for this so Noble thought,
And bless the Heavens for favouring my attempts:
For Noble Rome, and if thou be not free,
Yet I have done what ever lay in me:
And worthy friend as both our thoughts conspired,
And joined in union to perform this deed,
This acceptable deed to Heavens and Rome,
So lets continue in our high resolve:
And as wee have with honour thus begun,
So lets persist, until our lives bee done.
Then let vs go and with our warlike troops,
Collected from our several Provinces,
Make Asia subject to our Conquering arms,
Brutus thou hast commanded the Illirian bands:
The feared Celts and Lusitanian horse,
Parthenians proud, and Thrasians borne in war:
And Macedon yet proud with our old acts,
With all the flower of Lovely Thessaly,
Under my warlike colours there shall march:
New come from Syria and from Babilon,
The warlike Mede, and the Arabian Bow,
The Parthian fighting when hee seems to fly:
Those conquering Gals that built their seats in Greece,
And all the Costars on the Mirapont.
Out of the horror of those shady vaults,
Where Centaurs, Harpies, pains and furies fell:
And Gods and Ghosts and ugly Gorgons dwell,
My restless soul comes here to tell his wrongs.
Hail to thy walls, thou pride of all the world,
Thou art the place where meanwhile in my life.
My seat of mounting honour was erected,
And my proud throne that seemed to check the heavens.
But now my pomp and I are laid more lowe,
With these asosiates of my overthrow,
Here ancient Assure and proud Belus lies,
Ninus the first that sought a Monarchs name.
Atrides fierce with the Aeacides,
The Greek Heroes, and the Trojan flower,
Blood-thirsting Cirrus and the conquering youth:
That sought to fetch his pedigree from Heaven,
Sterne Romulus and proud Tarquinius,
The mighty Sirians and the Ponticke Kings,
Alcides and the stout, Carthagian Lord,
The fatal enemy to the Roman name.
Ambitious Sylla and fierce Marius,
And both the Pompeyes by me don to death,
I am the last not least of the same crew,
Look on my deeds and say what Caesar was,
Thessalia, Aegipt, Pontus, Africa,
Spain Britain, Almany and France,
Saw many a bloody trial of my worth.
But why doe I my glory thus restrain,
When all the world was but a Chariot,
Wherein I rode Triumphing in my pride?
But what avails this tale of what I was?
Since in my chefest hight Brutus base hand.
With three and twenty wounds my heart did gore,
Give me my sword and shild Isle be Revenged,
My mortal wounding spear and golden Crest.
I will dishorse my foemen in the field,
Alas poor Caesar thou a shadow art,
An aerie substance wanting force and might,
Then will I go and cry upon the world,
Exclame on Anthony and Octauian,
Which seek through discord and discentions broils,
Timbrue their weapons in each others blood,
And leave to execute my just revenge,
I hear the drums and bloody Trumpets sound,
O how this sight my grieved soul doth wound,
Now martial friends competitors in arms,
You that will follow Anthony to fight,
Whom stately Rome hath oft her Consul seen,
Graced with eternal trophes of renown,
With Lybian triumphs and liberian spoils,
Who scorns to have his honour now distained,
Or credit blemished by a Boys disgrace,
Prepare your dauntless stomachs to the fight,
Where without striking you shall over come.
Fellows in war-faire which have often served,
Under great Caesar my deceased sier,
And have returned the conquerors of the world,
Clad in the Spoils of all the Orient:
That will not brooke that any Roman Lord,
Should injure mighty Iulius Caesars son,
Recall your wonted valour and these hearts,
That never entertained Ignoble thoughts
And make my first warre-faire and fortunate:
Strike up drums, and let your banners fly,
Thus will we set upon the enemy.
Cease Drums to strike, and fouled your banners up,
Wake not Bellona with your trumpets Clange,
Nor call unwilling Mars unto the field:
See Romaines, see my wounds not yet closed up,
The bleeding monuments of Caesars wrongs.
Have you so soon for got my life and death?
My life wherein I reared your fortunes up.
My death wherein my reared fortune fell,
My life admired and wondered at of men?
My death which seemed unworthy to the Gods,
My life which heaped on you rewards and gifts,
My death now begs one gift; a just revenge.
A Chilly cowld possesses all my Joints,
And pale wan fear doth cease my fainting heart,
O see how terrible my Fathers looks?
My hair stands stiff to see his grisly hue:
Alas I dear not look him in the face,
And words do cleave to my benumbed Jaws.
For shame weak Anthony throw thy weapons down
Son sheath thy sword, not now for to be drawn,
Brutus must feel the heavy stroke thereof:
But if that needs you will into the field,
And that wars envy pricks your forward hate.
To slack your fury with each others blood,
Then forward on to your prepared deaths
Let sad Alecto sound her fearful trump.
Revenge a rise in loathsome fable weeds,
Light-shining Treasons and vnquenced Hates,
Horror and ugly Murder (nights black child,)
Let sterne Maegera on her thundering drum,
Play ghastly music to comfort your deaths.
Banner to banner, foot against foot opposed,
Sword against sword, shild against shild, and life to life,
Let death go raging through your armed ranks,
And load himself with heaps of murdered men,
And let Heavens justice send you all to Hell,
Shamst thou not Anthony to draw thy sword,
On Caesars Son, for rude rash youth full brawls,
And dost let pass their treason unrevenged,
That Caesars life and glory both did end,
Shame of my self, and this intended fight,
Doth make me fear to approach his dreadful sight:
Forgive my slackness to revenge thy wrongs,
Pardon my youth that rashly was mislead,
Through vain ambition for to doe this deed,
Then join your hands and hear let battle cease,
Change fear to Joy, and war to smooth-fac't Peace.
Then Father here in sight of Heaven and thee,
I give my hand and heart to Anthony,
Take likewise mine, the hand that once was vowd',
To bee imbrued in thy luke-warme blood,
Which now shall strike in young Octauians rights.
Now swear by all the Deities of Heaven,
All Gods and powers you do adore and serve:
For to return my murder on their cruel head,
Whose traitorous hands my guiltless blood have shed.
Then by the Gods that through the raging waives,
Brought thee brave Trojan to old Latium,
And great Quirinus placed now in Heaven:
By the Gradinus that with shield of Brass,
Defendest Rome, by the ouerburning flames
Of esta and Carpeian Towers of Jove.
Vows Anthony to quite thy worthy death,
Or in performance loose his vital breath.
The like Octauian vows to Heaven and thee.
Then go brave warriors with successful hap,
Fortune shall waite upon your rightful arms,
And courage sparkell, from your Princely eyes,
Darts of revenge to daunt your enemies.
Now with our armies both conjoined in one,
Weal meet the enemy in Macedon:
Aemathian fields shall change her flowery greene,
And die proud Flora in a sadder hew:
Silver Stremonia, whose fair Crystal waives,
Once sounded great Alcides echoing fame:
When as he slew that fruitful headed snake,
Which Lerna long-time fostered in her womb:
Shall in more tragic accentes and sad tunes,
Echo the terror of thy dismal fight,
Hemus shall fat his barren fields with blood:
And yellow Ceres spring from wounds of men,
The toiling husband-men in time to come,
Shall with his harrow strike on rusty helmes,
And find, and wonder, at our swords and spears,
And with his plow dig up brave Romans graves:
The baleful harvest of my joy, thy woe
Gins ripen Brutus, Heavens command it so.
Pale sad Auernus ops his yawning Jaws,
Seeking to swallow up thy murderous soul,
The furies have proclaimed a festival:
And mean to day to banquet with thy blood,
Now Heavens array you in your cloudy weeds:
Wrap up the beauty of your glorious lamp,
And dreadful Chaos, of sad dreary night,
Thou Sun that climest up to the eastern hill:
And in thy Chariot rides with swift steeds drawn,
In thy proud Jollity and radiant glory:
Go back again and hide thee in the sea,
Darkness to day shall cover all the world:
Let no light shine, but what your swords can strike,
From out their steely helmes, and fiery shildes:
Furies, and Ghosts, with your blue-burning lamps,
In mazing terror ride through Roman ranks:
With dread affrighting those stout Champions hearts,
All stygian fiends now leave whereas you dwell:
And come into the world and make it hell.
Thus far wee march with unresisted arms,
Subduing all that did our powers with-stand:
Laodicia whose high reared walls,
Fair Lies washes with her silver wave:
And that brave monument of Perseus fame,
With Tursos veiled to vs her venting pride,
Fair Rhodes, I weep to think upon thy fall:
Thou were to stubborn, else thou still had stood,
Inviolate of Cassius hurtles hand,
That was my nurse, where in my youth I drew
The flowing milk of Greekish eloquence:
Proud Capadocia saw her King captived,
(And Dolabella venting in the spoils.
Of slain Trebonius) fall as springing tree,
Seated in lovely Tempes pleasant shades:
Whom beauteous spring with blossoms brave hath decked,
And sweet Fauonia manteled all in greene,
By winters rage doth loose his flowery pride,
And hath each twig bared by northern winds.
Thus from the conquest of proud Palestine,
Hither in triumph have we marched along,
Making our force-commaunding rule to stretch,
From fair Euphrates crystal flowing waives
Unto the Sea which yet weeps Io's death,
Slain by great Hercules repenting hand,
Of all the places by my sword subdued,
Pity of thee poor Zanthus moves me most;
Thrice hast thou ben besieged by thy foe,
And thrice to save thy liberty hast felt
The fatal flames of thine own cruel hand.
First being besieged by Harpalus the Mede,
The sterne performer of proud Cirrus wrath:
Next when the Macedonian Phillips son,
Did raise his engines against thy battered walls,
Proud Zanthus that did scorn to bear the yoke,
That all the world was forced to sustain,
Last when that I my self did guirt thy walls,
With troops of high resolved Roman hearts,
Rather then thou would yield to Brutus sword,
Or stain the maiden honour of thy Town,
Did sadly fall as proud Numantia.
Scorning to yield to conquering Scipios power.
And now to thee Phillipi, are wee come,
Whose fields must twice feel Roman cruelty,
And flowing blood like to Darcean plains,
When proud Eteocles on his foaming steed,
Rides in his fury through the Argean troops,
Now making great Aerastus give him way,
Now beating back Tidaeus puissant might:
The ground not dried from sad Pharsalian blood,
Will now bee turned to a purple lake:
And bleeding heaps and mangled bodies slain,
Shall make such hills as shall surpass in height
The Snowy Alps and aerie Appenines,
A Scout brought word but now that he descried,
Warlike Anthonius and young Caesars troops,
Marching in fury over Thessalian plains.
As great Gradinus when in angry mood,
He drives his chariot down from heavens top,
And in his wheels whirleth revenge and death:
Here by Philippe they will pich their tents,
And in these fields (fatal to Roman lives)
Hazard the fortune of the doubtful fight,
O welcome thou this long expected day,
On which depends Roman liberty,
Now Rome thy freedom hangs in suspense,
And this the day that must assure thy hopes.
Great Jove, and thou Tryonion warlike Queen:
Armed with thy amazing deadly Gorgons head.
Strengthen our arms that fight for Roman wealth:
And thou sterne Mars, and Romulus thy Son,
Defend that City which your self begun.
All heavenly powers assist our rightful arms,
And send down silver winged victory,
To crown with Laurels our triumphant Crests.
My mind thats troubled in my vexed soul,
(Oppressed with sorrow and with sad dismay,)
Misgives me this will be a heavy day.
Why faint not now in these our last extremes,
This time craves courage not despairing fear,
Fie, twill distain thy former valiant acts.
To say thou faintest now in this last act,
My mind is heavy, and I know not why.
But cruel fate doth summon me to die,
Sweet Brute, let not thy words be ominous signs,
Of so mis-fortunate and sad event,
Heaven and our Valour shall vs conquerors make.
What Bastard fear hath taunted our dead hearts,
Or what vnglorious unwonted thought,
Hath changed the valour of our daunted minds.
What are our arms grown weaker then they were?
Cannot this hand that was proud Caesars death,
Send all Caesarians headlong that same path?
Look how our troops in Sun-bright arms do shine,
With vaunting plumes and dreadful bravery.
The wrathful steeds do check their iron bits,
And with a well graced terror strike the ground,
And keeping times in wars sad harmony.
And then hath Brutus any cause to fear,
My self like valiant Peleus worthy Son,
The Noblest wight that ever Troy beheld,
Shall of the adverse troops such havoc make,
As sad Phillipi shall in blood bewail,
The cruel massacre of Cassius sword,
And then hath Brutus any cause to fear?
No outward shows of puissance or of strength,
Can help a mind dismayed inwardly,
Leave me sweet Lords a while unto my self.
In the mean time take order for the fight,
Drums let your fearful mazing thunder play.
And with their sound pierce Heavens brazen Towers,
And all the earth fill with like fearful noise,
As when that Bores from his Iron cave.
With boisterous furies Striving in the waives,
Comes swelling forth to meet his blustering foe,
They both doe run with fierce tempestuous rage,
And heaves up mountains of the watery waives.
The God Oceanus trembles at the stroke,
What hateful furies vex my tortured mind?
What hideous sights appall my grieved soul,
As when Orestes after mother slain.
Not being yet at Scithians Alters purged,
Behold the grisly visages of fiends.
And ghastly furies which did haunt his steps,
Caesar vpbraues my sad ingratitude,
He saved my life in sad Pharsalian fields,
That I in Senate house might work his death.
O this remembrance now doth wound my soul,
More then my poniard did his bleeding heart,
Brutus, ungrateful Brutus see thou me:
Anon In field again thou shalt me see,
Stay what so ere thou art, or fiend below,
Raised from the deep by enchanters bloody call,
Or fury sent from Phlegitonticke flames,
Or from Cocytus for to end my life,
Be then Megera or Tysiphone,
Or of Eumenides ill boding crew.
Fly me not now, but end my wretched life,
Come grisly messenger of sad mishap,
Trample in blood of him that hates to live,
And end my life and sorrow all at once.
Accursed traitor damned Homicide,
Know thou not me, to whom for forty honours:
Thou three and twenty Ghastly wounds did give?
Now dare no more for to behold the Heavens,
For they to Day have destined thine end:
Nor lift thy eyes unto the rising sun,
That ne'er shall live for to behold it set,
Nor look not down unto the Hellish shades,
There stand the furies thursting for thy blood,
Fly to the field but if thou thither go,
There Anthonyes sword will pierce thy traitorous heart.
Brutus to day my blood shall be revenged,
And for my wrong and undeserved death,
Thy life to thee a torture shall become,
And thou shalt oft amongst the dying groans,
Of slaughtered men that bite the bleeding earth.
With that like baleful cheer might thee befall,
And seek for death that flies so wretched wight,
Until to  un the honour of the fight,
And dreadful vengeance of supernal ire.
Thine own right hand shall work my wished revenge,
And so Fare ill, hated of Heaven and Men.
Stay Caesar stay, protract my grief no longer,
Rip up my bowels glut thy thirsting throat,
With pleasing blood of Caesars guilty heart:
But see hoe's gon, and yonder Murder stands.
See how he points his knife unto my hart.
Althea raves for her murdered Son,
And weeps the deed that she her-selfe hath done:
And Meleager would thou lived again,
But death must expiate. Altheas come.
I, death the guerdon that my deeds deserve:
The drums do thunder forth dismay and fear,
And dismal triumphs sound my fatal knell,
Furies I come to meet you all in Hell,
Bloodless and faint; Cato yield up thy breath;
While strength and vigour in these arms remained,
And made me able for to wield my sword,
So long I fought; and sweet Rome for thy sake
Feared not effusion of my blood to make.
But now my strength and life doth fail at once,
My vigour leaves my could and feeble Joints,
And I my sad soul, must power forth in blood.
O virtue whom Philosophy extols.
Thou art no essence but a naked name,
Bond-slaue to Fortune, weak, and of no power.
To succour them which always honoured thee:
Witness my Fathers and mine own sad death,
Who for our country spent our latest breath:
But oh the chains of death do hold my tongue,
Mine eyes wax dim I faint, I faint, I die.
O Heavens help Rome in this extremity.
Where shall I go to tell the saddest tale,
That ere the Roman tongue was forced to speak,
Rome is overthrown, and all that for her fought:
This Sun that now hath seen so many deaths,
When from the Sea he heaved his cloudy head,
Then both the arms full of hope and fear,
Did waite the dreadful trumpets fatal sound,
And straight Revenge from Stygian bands let loose,
Possessed had all hearts and banished thence,
Fear of their children, wife and little home.
Countries remembrance, and had quite expelled,
With last departed care of life it self:
Anger did sparkell from our beauteous eyes,
Our trembling fear did make our helmes to shake,
The horse had now put on the riders wrath,
And with his hooves did strike the trembling earth,
When Echalarian sounds then both gin meet:
Both like enraged, and now the dust gins rise,
And Earth doth emulate the Heavens clouds,
Then yet beauteous was the face of cruel war:
And goodly terror it might seem to be,
Fair shields, gay swords, and golden crests did shine.
Their spangled plumes did dance for solity,
As nothing privy to their Masters fear,
But quickly rage and cruel Mars had stained,
This shining glory with a sadder hew,
A cloud of darts that darkened Heavens light,
Horror instead of beauty did succeed.
And her bright arms with dust and blood were foiled:
Now Lucius false, hear Drusus takes his end,
Here lies Hortensius, weltering in his gore.
Here, there, and every where men fall and die,
Yet Cassius show not that thy heart doth faint:
But to the last gasp for Romains freedom fight,
And when sad death shall be thy labours end,
Yet boast thy life thou did for Country spend.
Queen of Revenge imperious Nemesis
That in the wrinkels of thine angry brows,
Wrapst dreadful vengeance and pale fright-full death:
Rain down the bloody showers of thy revenge,
And make our swords the fatal instruments,
To execute thy furious bale-full Ire,
Let grim death seat her on my Lances point,
Which piercing the weak armour of my foes,
Shall lodge her there within there coward breasts,
Dread, horror, vengeance, death, and bloody hate:
In this sad fight my murdering sword await.
Where may I fly from this accursed soil,
Or shun the horror of this dismal day:
The Heavens are coloured in mourning sable weeds,
The Sun doth hide his face, and fears to see,
This bloody conflict; sad Catastrophe,
Nothing but groans of dying men are heard:
Nothing but blood and slaughter may bee seen
And death, the same in sundry shapes arrayed.
In vain, in vain, O Cassius all in vain,
Tic Heaven and destiny thou strive against.
What better hope or more accepted tidings,
First Noble Cassius from the Battle bring?
This hapless hope that fates decreed have,
Philippe field must bee our hapless grave.
And then must this accursed and fatal day,
End both our lives and Roman liberty:
Must now the name of freedom bee forgot,
And all Romes glory in Thessalia end?
As those that lost in boisterous troublous seas,
Beaten with rage of Billows stormy strife:
And without stars do sail against stars and wind.
In dreary darkness and in chereles night,
Without or hope or comfort endless are:
So are my thoughts dejected with dismay,
Which can nought look for but poor Romes decay.
But yet did Brutus live, did hee but breath?
Or lay not slumbering in eternal night,
His welfare might infuse some hope, or life:
Or at the least bring death with more content:
Wearied I am through labour of the fight:
Then sweet Titinnius, range thou through the field,
And either glad me with my friends success,
Or quickly tell me what my care doth fear:
How breathless hee upon the ground doth lie,
That at thy words, I may fall down and die.
Cassius, I go to seek thy Noble friend,
Heaven grant my goings have a prosperous end.
O go Titinnius, and till thy return,
Here will I sit disconsolate alone,
Romes sad mishap, and mine own woes to moon:
O ten times treble fortunate were you,
Which in Pharsalias bloody conflict dyed,
With those brave Lords, now laid in bed of fame:
Which near protected their most blessed days,
To see the horror of this dismal fight,
Why died I not in those Aemathian plains,
Where great Domitius fell by Caesars hand?
And swift Eurypus down his bloody stream
Bare shields and helmes and trains of slaughtered men,
But Heavens reserved me to this luckless day,
To see my Countries fall and friends decay.
But why doth not Titinnius yet return?
My trembling heart misgives me what's befallen,
Brutus is dead: I: herke how willingly
The Ecco iterates those deadly words,
The whisling winds with their mourning sound,
Do fill mine ears with noise of Brutus death,
The birds now chanting a more cheerless lay,
In doleful notes record my friends decay.
And Philomela now forgets old wrongs,
And only Brutus wayleth in her songs.
I hear some noise, O tic Titinnius,
No tic not hee, for hee doth fear to wound,
My grieved ears with that hearts-thrilling sound.
Why dost thou feed my thoughts with lingering hope?
Why dost thou then prolong my life in vain?
Tell me my sentence and so end my payne:
He comes not yet, nor yet, nor will at all,
Linger not Cassius for to hear reply,
What if he come and tells me hee is slain?
That only will increase my dying pain,
Brutus I come to company thy soul,
Which by Cocytus wanders all alone.
Brutus I come prepare to mere thy friend
Thy brothers fall procures this baleful end.
Brutus doth live and like a second Mars,
Rages in heate of fury mongest his foes,
Then cheer thee Cassius, lo I bring relief
And news of power to ease thy stormy grief,
But see where Cassius weltered in his blood,
Doth beat the Earth, and yet not fully dead.
O Cassius speak, O speak to me sweet friend,
Brutus doth live; open thy dying eyes,
And look on him that hope and comfort gs.
O no, hee will not look on me but cries,
That by my long delays he hapless dies:
Accursed villain murderer of thy friend,
Why hath thy lingering thus wrought Cassius end,
How cold thy care was to prevent this deed,
How slow thy love that made no greater speed,
Care winged is, and burning love can fly,
My care was fearless, love but flattery,
But since in my life my love was never shown,
Now in my death Isle make it to be known.
Accursed weapon that such blood could spell,
Nay cursed then the author of this deed,
Yet both offended, both shall punished be,
Isle take revenge of the knife, the knife of me,
It shall make a passage for my life to pass,
Cause through my life his master murdered was.
And I on it again will venged bee.
Cause it did work my Cassius tragedy.
Then this revenge shall be to end my life.
Mine to distain with baser blood the knife.
What doest thou still pursue me ugly fend,
Is this it that thou thirsted for so much?
Come with thy tearing claws and rend it out,
Would thy appeaseles rage be slacked with blood,
This sword to day hath crimson channels made,
But heare's the blood that thou woulds drink so fain,
Then take this parser, brooch this traitorous heart.
Or if thou think death to small a payne,
Drag down this body to proud Erebus,
Through black Cocytus and infernal Styx,
Lethean waives, and fierce of Phlegeton,
Boyle me or burn, tear my hateful flesh,
Devour, consume, pull, pinch, plague, pain this hart,
Hell craves her right, and here the furies stand,
And all the hell-hounds compass me a round
Each seeking for a part of this same prey,
Alas this body is lean, thin, pale and wan,
Nor can it all your hungery mouths suffice,
O tic the soul that they stand gaping for,
And endless matter for to prey upon.
Renewed still as Titius pricked heart.
Then clap your hands, let Hell with Joy resound?
Here it comes flying through this aerie round.
Hell take their hearts, that this ill deed have done
And vengeance follow till they be overcome:
Nor live to applaud the justice of this deed.
Murder by her own guilty hand doth bleed.
I, now my longing hopes have their desire,
The world is nothing but a massy heap:
Of bodies slain, The Sea a lake of blood,
The Furies that for slaughter only thirst,
Are with these Massakers and slaughters cloyed,
Tysiphones pale, and Megeras thin face,
Is now puffed up, and swollen with quaffing blood,
Caron that used but an old rotten boat
Must now a navy rigg for to transport,
The howling souls, unto the Stigian stronde.
Hell and Elisium must be digd in one,
And both will be to little to contain,
Numberless numbers of afflicted ghosts,
That I my self have tumbling thither sent.
Now nights pale daughter since thy bloody joys,
And my revengeful thirst fulfilled are,
Doe thou applaud what justly heavens have wrought,
While murder on the murderers head is brought.
Caesar I pitied not thy Tragic end:
Nor tyrants daggers sticking in thy heart,
Nor doe I that thy deaths with like repayd,
But that thy death so many deaths hath made:
Now cloyed with blood, Isle hye me down below,
And laugh to think I caused such endless woe.
Sith my revenge is full accomplished,
And my deaths causers by them selves are slain,
I will descend to mine eternal home,
Where everlastingly my quiet soul,
The sweet Elysium pleasure shall enjoy,
And walk those fragrant slowry fields at rest:
To which nor fair atones bower so rare,
Nor old Alcinous gardens may compare.
There that same gentle father of the spring,
Mild Zephirus doth Odours breath divine:
Clothing the earth in painted bravery,
The which nor winters rage, nor Scorching heate,
Or Summers sun can make it fall or fade,
There with the mighty champions of old time,
And great Heroes of the Golden age,
My dateless hours Isle spend in lasting joy.

