SOLIMAN. ROSSA.
Rossa! Th'e∣ternall wisdom doth not covet
Of man, his strength, or rea∣son, but his love.
And not in vain: Since love, of all the powers,
Is it which governs every thought of ours.
I speak by Mustapha: For as a Father,
How often deemed I those light-iudging praises
Of multitudes, whom my love taught to flatter,
Truths oracles; and Mustapha's true stories?
So dearly Nature beds our own be loved:
So ill a Judge is love of things beloved.
But is contempt the fruit of Parents care?
Doth kindness lessen Kings authority,
Teaching our Children pride, our Vassalls wit,
To subject vs, that subject are to it?
This frailty in my self I conquer must,
And stay the false untimely hopes it works,
Threatening the Fathers ruin in the Son:
Many with trust, with doubt few are undone.
Sent for he is: Nor shall the painted shows
Of fame, or kindness longer seele mine eyes?
For since he strives to undermine my Crown,
I will as firmly watch to keep him down.
Solyman my Lord! The knowledge who was Father
To Mustapha, made me (poor silly woman)
Think worth in blood had natural succession:
But now, I see, Ambitions mixtures may
The gold of Natures elements allay.
His Fame untimely borne: Strength strangely gathered,
Honour won with honouring, Greatness with humble∣ness,
(A Monarchs heir in courses popular,)
Make me divine some strange aspiring mind;
Yet doubtful; for it might be Art, or Kind.
But look into him by his outward ways:
Persia, our old imbrued enemy,
Treats of peace with the Son, without the Father:
A Course in all Estates to Princes nice;
But here much more; where he that Monarch is,
Must (like the Sun) have no light shine, but his.
The Offers; real Crowns, or hopes of Kingdoms.
What sudden knot hath bound up our divisions?
Made them that only feared our greater growing,
Offer such proiects for our greater growing?
" It is true, that private thoughts may easily change:
" But States, whose ways are Time; Occasion, Seat,
" Hane other ends, then Chance, in all they treat.
Yet be it, all the world would vs obey;
In Monarchies: which surfeit, more than pine;
The King should judge: Strength knows what strength can weld:
The best foundation, else may ouer-build.
No, no: upon the pitch of high attempts
I see him stand, sporting with Wrong, and Fear:
For Law, and Duty, both are captives there.
His hopes, the hopes of all; for all aspire:
His means, that proud, rebellious Discontent,
Which scorns both Governors, and Government.
Solyman! Fear is broke loose within me.
What will, or may, mee-thinkes already happens;
His power thus great, will fixed, occasion ready,
Shadows of ruin to my heart deliver.
Confused noise within my ears doth thunder
Of multitudes, that with obeying threaten.
Solyman! while fear, to lose thee, wishes death,
My fear again, to leave thee, wishes breath.
Rossa! I scorn there should be cause of fears
In one mans rage; for hard then were our state,
That reins of all the world desire to bear:
Yet thy disquiet shall increase my hate.
Thy wishes vain to thee yet never were:
For love, and Empire, both alike take pleasure,
Part of themselves upon deserts to measure.
And, but that all my joys have sorrows image,
I could say; I take pride in thine affection:
For Power may be feared; Empire adored;
Rewards may make knees bow; and selfe-loue humble:
But love is only that which Princes covet;
And for they have it least, they most doe love it.
Care therefore for thy self; I hold thee dear;
And as for me!
Though Fortune be of glass, and apt to break;
Kings life kept but in flesh, and easily pierced;
Kings Crowns no higher than private arms may reach;
Yet these all-daring spirits are rarely known,
That upon Princes graves dare raise a Throne.
Sir! few in number or Time presents children;
Where man ends, there ends discontentments empire;
Novelty in flesh hath always had a dwelling;
Then tell me Lord; what man would choose his room,
That must expect in wickedness a mean,
Or else be sure to feel a fatal doom?
Can that stay in the midst whose center's lowest?
Old age is Natures Poverty, and scorn;
Desires riches live in Princes children;
Their youths are Comets, within whose corruption
Men prophecy new hopes of better fortunes.
Ah Sir! Corrupt occasion still prefers
The wisdom, that for selfe-aduantage erreth.
Wisdom is not unto it self in debt,
That leaves nothing, but a God, aboue it.
Will he return from death unto the living?
No Sir! But much may hap before his death;
Who thinking nothing worse, and nothing after,
Knows thought of wrong is death, if Princes live;
Where dead, all heirs their own good doe forgive.
I sent, he comes; and come is in my power.
Before he comes, who knows your fatal hour?
The wicked wrestle both with Might, and Slight:
" While Princes live, each mans life guards theirs;
" When they are dead, men's loves go with their fear.
Slain by the way less grudge, more safety were.
Wrong is not Princely; and much less is fear.
These glorious hazards tempt, and hasten fate;
They well become a Man, but not a State.
This fear in women shows a kindness too;
And is for men to thank, but not to doe.
Is Providence of no more use to Power?
Than to preserve the Fame of Power entire,
Which often undermined is by fear.
I doe suspect, yet is there nothing done;
I lose my Fame, if I so kill my Son.
Though I yet know not he hath done amiss,
I doubt; and heavy Princes doubting is.
Though I resolve I will not kill him there;
It mortal is if Kings see cause to fear.
When Mustapha returns my jealous care
Will very hardly danger oversee:
Order alone holds States in Unity.
Beglerbie Nuntius, Solyman. Rossa.
Fond Man! distract with divers thoughts on foot,
That rack'st thy self, &amp; Natures peace dost break;
Iudgenot the Gods aboue: it doth not boot,
Nor doe thou see that which thou dare not speak.
Power hath great scope; she walks not in the ways
Of private truth: Virtues of common men
Are not the same which shine in Kings aboue,
And doe make fear bring forth the works of love.
Admit that Mustapha not guilty bee;
Who by his Prince will rise, his Prince must please;
And they that please judge with humility.
Yonder they are, whose charge must be discharged,
In Ross•'s  face behold desire speaks,
He keeps the laws, that all laws form breaks.
Is Mustapha in health, and coming?
My Lord! already come: For what can stay,
Where Lo•e, and Duty both teach to obey?
In what strange balance are mans humours peised?
Since each light change within vs, or without.
Turns fear to hope, and hope again to doubt.
If thus it work in Man, much more in Thrones,
Whose tender heights feel all thin aires that move,
And work that change below they use aboue.
For on the Axis of our humours turn
Church-rites, and Laws; Subjects desire, and wit;
Al• which, in all men come, and go with it.
Rossa! a King ought therefore to suspect
Fears, fearful counsels which incline to blood,
Wherein, but truths, no Influence is good.
Else will inferior practise ever cast
Such glasly shadows upon all our errors,
As he that sees not ruin, shall see terrors.
Power therefore should affect the Peoples stamp,
" Whose good, or ill thoughts, ever prove to Kings,
" Like air, which either health, or sickness brings.
Now Rossa! by these straight lines, if we sound
The hollow depths of Rostens mystery;
He will the canker of this State be found.
Long hath he wau'd betwixt my son, and me,
Making succession sacred, whilst he felt
Practise could not divide the bark, and tree:
His end being not to find, or cherish truth,
But rather vices, where his Art works ruth.
Long hath he weighed our humours with his ends,
To find which nature was the fittest mould
For him, to bring to pass in, what he would.
And though his power be on my old age built,
Yet that, as slow to ruin, he dislikes:
Guilt seeking shields for every blow it strikes.
Now in my Son though active powers he find,
Yet what he cannot govern, gives offence;
From birth, or worth, still fearing competence.
He grounds this work on jealousy of Kings,
" Where hopeful goodnesses oft in Successors
" Seem not strengths, as they bee, but strong oppressors.
And when this Art could not procure his fall,
Nor shape our humours like Procustes bed,
Where all that fit him not, are ruined:
Straight then he offers up unto my Son
My life, my Crown, and all that I have won.
Such slender props are Princes Favourites,
" Who like good fortunes children, love their mother;
" And never can be true to any other.
In these nets shall he then catch him, and me,
And so this high, and sovereign Scepter-power
Sink into slaves by my infirmity?
No, No: when Princes, by defect of mind,
A pronesse feel, to sink into their slaves;
Wherein they make their Creatures their graves:
By Nature have they not a Phenix-fire,
From their own ashes to revive again,
And in their childrens honour, live, and reign•
Then Rossa! judge: My love hath made vs one;
And who can judge these humorists, but we;
Since hope, and fear below lack eyes to see?
Mustapha is through misprision hither come,
Brought to the practise of this crafty slave,
Careless in which he make the others tomb:
His nets are laid; our thoughts for stales pitched down,
To catch our selves in, and in vs, the Crown.
But Natures laws have conquered Princes doubts;
And between King, and man, what was begone,
Concludes betwixt a Father and a Son.
Behold! these sandy hearts have no foundation;
Yet hence must I, with hazard, work my will,
That have to doe with thought, nor good, nor ill.
My Lord! your doubts from arguments did rise
Of wanton pride, ambitious seeking love:
" And can remissions be in Nature wise,
" While States upon the steep of danger move?
No: think what pregnant grounds of his ambition
Resolved you first, his Greatness was your danger:
And shall a Father wave a Kings suspicion?
Since Mischief, whilst her head shows in a cloud,
In Pluto's Kingdom doth her body shroud.
Suspicion may enquire, but not conclude;
Both hope, and fear; doe with excess delude.
Tell Beglerbie! how did he welcome thee?
In your access what found you; pomp, or pride?
Was he reserved; or else did he descend?
Appeared I as his Sovereign; or his friend?
His Court was great; and that which adds to you
Is that all Princes had their Agents there
Confessing, in the Son, the Fathers due:
And from them all the honour done him such,
As if none thought the World for him too much.
Yet I no sooner to his presence came,
But he paid all their homages to me,
The rest looked on, as when men wonders see.
What was his cheer? Did thou observe his eyes,
When thou declared'st my will to have him come?
First, at your name he bowed in humble wise;
The rest appeared to be a joyful doom.
Only the Persian spake (it seems) with care:
God make these favours good; for they be rare.
This is the glass which Father looks not in;
The Workman hides, the instruments discover:
See how it fits a King to be a lover?
Sir! mark these words: whence should their wonder grow?
His scorn, and grudge, he worshipps, and obeys:
In him, or for him, what strange works are these?
Tell me his manner. How, did he dispose
His followers, and affairs till his return?
The news of war against our Persian foes,
I am sure, made not his undertakers morn.
The Persian Agent some distraction showed;
All else their eyes to their Sun rising turn.
What's the discourse of Court? and what the face?
His carriage is it Royally severe,
Reserved, like vs, by attributes of place,
Or popular, as power in people were?
Shapes he his course to rule, or gain a State?
Is our course changed, or doth he imitate?
He winds not spirits up with Power, or Fear:
The ancient form he keeps, where it is good:
His proiects reformation every where:
His care to have diseases understood:
Reverend unto your Throne; more to your deeds:
It is no imitation which exceeds.
What doth he in our Church, or law reprove?
What error in our discipline of war?
With zeal he doth adore the Powers aboue;
With zeal inferior duties paid him are:
And, for his ends on public centers move,
His ends are served with every bodies love.
His Court, like yours, the image of a Camp:
In yours, your Power; in his, Himself the Lamp.
He sees (men say) but only what he shows,
I mean examples both of Power, and Love:
You see again what from within you grows,
Such humble fear, as fearful power moves.
His Camp, in rest and action both, content;
Assiduous order works this frame in either:
Your discipline now loose, now ouerbent;
Forced to use fear in both, contents in neither.
This freedom Sir! makes them you two compare,
Of whom, both he and they, but shadows are.
What be his troops? An army, or a Train?
Come they to dwell, or to go back again?
His will was to depart immediately,
With no train, but the Bash, Priest, and I.
Your honour only ministered debate;
Princes (some thought) stood fast by keeping state:
His Pomp gave lustre to your Power, some said,
For Princes should be gloriously obeyed.
At this gap entered Love, and Intercession,
The Multitude all liberties approved,
The Wise to give them way held it discretion,
Where it gave honour to your self aboue.
Thus to the Coast number and order come,
Where Mustapha leaves all to bide your doom.
Within the Port, or where doth he attend?
What's the aspect between his own, and ours?
Gains he, or wains he by approaching power?
His foot on land, straight to the Church he goes;
Applause, and wonder follow to that place,
Greater he, by your Influence, still grows,
Your Trophies upon him the people place.
Unto the State men prophecy progression,
And see your age, it is true, in your Succession.
Your Power, and Love both, in his Pomp appear;
For even the Bassha's next you I did meet
Hastening to honour him, whom you hold dear.
What greater Triumph to a glorious Father,
Than such a Son for age to lean unto,
Whence declination may more forces gather,
And impotence retain ability to doe?
Goodness exiling jealousy of State,
From him whose duty sets his power a rate.
Now by the way a paper up I took,
Spread by the Mufti, as it should appear,
Fore-telling with authority of book,
What those times wrapped in clouds, and these make clear.
Wherein these Prophet-spirits did foreshow
The progress of this Empire to the height;
Under what Princes humours it should grow,
Under whose weakness fall again by weight:
Inferring this; that where declining spirits
To govern mighty Scepters God ordains,
Order no Basis finds; Honour must fall:
Where man is nothing, Place cannot doe all.
Again where worth, and wisdom sovereign be,
And he that's King of Place, is King of Men,
Change, Chance, or Ruin cannot enter then.
And such a King must sit upon this Throne;
Imperfect times (they say) are fully run,
And this perfection present in your Son.
Change hath prepared her moulds for Innovation.
I see inferior wheels of practice move,
Yet they prevail not on the Powers aboue.
His worth rests constant, and yet works this motion,
They to him, for him, sacrifice at random
All which they have, and have not, in devotion.
He is the Glass, in which their light affections
Come to behold what image they shall take:
If liberty they find, then Anarchy they make.
On time, place, truth, these spirits never rest.
His worth, thus innocent, how can I fear?
Their thoughts, thus violent, can Power digest?
Then Government! thy hand must cut between
My fearful dangers, and his fearless praise.
In all States, Power, which oppresses spir••s,
Imprisons Nature, Empire disinherits.
This Throne grew not by delicate alliance,
Combining State with State, all States to Laws,
Of idle Princes, and base subjects cause.
We grew by curious improuing all;
Our selves to people, people unto vs;
Worth, through our selves, in them we planted thus.
And shall I help to make succession less,
Blasting the births of Nature and Example,
In narrow fears of selfe-vnworthinesse?
No, No: The art of Monarchy is more:
Princes must strength by such succession gather,
With future hopes all present smarts are eased;
Age hath a veyle, and Majesty is pleased.
Who makes, can mar. Honour, reward, and fear,
Are reins of Power: The ends inherent there.
Behold! I stand amazed: Sir! ease my heart.
A King less than a man! more than a God!
I know not where to stay, nor how to part.
God hath ordained that wickedness shall die:
Sir! who is guilty? Mustapha, or I?
He now is in the hands of Power, and Time.
His danger is to come, and ours is past;
Lets see into what moulds our own are cast.
Who will endure the sentence he may give,
Between you two? He must be King that lives.
Your grave prepared is among your own:
Neighbours, Church, People, Soldiers, made the Stage,
Where Hope, and Youth shall ruin Fear, and Age.
Most wretched I, raised to be overthrown.
If you will die, then am I lost in you;
And die you must, if you believe your own.
If he shall live; then am I proved untrue,
Hated by him, whom you have placed aboue,
Lost unto you, and ruined by my love.
" Ah Confidence! thou Glory of the ill!
" How safely dost thou blinded Power assail,
" That having all, yet knows not what it will?
Rossa! you move me; yet remove I not.
Man comprehends a man, but not a King.
I feel my self (it is true) and I feel you;
How to it self can Power then prove untrue?
Succession on the present never wins,
But by the death of body, or of spirit:
All heirs by our mortality run in.
Let not misprision wound me in thy love:
Great inequality of worth you yield
To them, you think can on my ruins build.
LIke as mixed Humours, drawn up from the ground,
Are unto many forms, and functions bound;
Partly out of their native Property,
Partly the Climes, through which their journeys be;
Some into Meteors, that amaze below;
Others to Comets, which fore-threaten woe;
Some into Hailestones, that afflict the earth;
Others to Rain, which hastens every birth;
Lightning, and Thunder only made of those,
Which the cold Regions double heats enclose:
So is frail Mankind, though in other fashion,
Raised, and let fall with his own earthly passion;
Formed, transformed, and made instruments
In many shapes, to serve Powers many bents:
Feeding Superiors, even as Vapors doe,
Which spending themselves, scourge their Parents too.
Some in mishapped Meteors, terrifying;
All constant spirits, under Tyrants lying;
Others like Winds, which AEolus makes blow,
To breathe themselves out, while they overthrow;
Some like sweet Dews, that nourish where they touch;
Like Exhalations, some inflame too much;
Bondage, and ruin, only wrought by those,
That Kings with servile Flattery enclose,
Hatching, in double heats of Power, and Will,
Thunder, and Lightning, to amaze, and kill.
Thus Tyrants deal with Peoples liberty,
The nether Region cannot long live free.
Thus Tyrants deal with vs of higher place,
As drawn up only to disperse disgrace.
Echoes of Power, that pleasingly resound
Those heavy Taxes, where with Princes wound.
Exhausters of frail Mankind by our place,
To make them poor, and consequently base.
With Colonies we eat the Native down,
And, to increase the Person, wane the Crown.
With idle visions trafficking men's minds
To humble moderation, in all kinds
Till under false stiles of Obedience,
We take from Mankind all, but suffering sense,
Yet even by these sails, which for Scepters move,
We forced are with modest breath to prove,
Which way these People-tides will pass with ease;
Crowns wounding deeply, when they strive to please.
Whence, as we dare not blow them up to rage;
So again, if we quit this People-stage,
Thrones know not where to act those fancie-playes,
Which catch the lookers on so many ways.
For we, like Dews, drawn to be clouds aboue,
Straight grow with that attracting Sun in love;
Which ever raises light things up to fall,
In crafty Power Creation natural.
Wrapped in which Crowne-mists, men cannot discern
How dearly they her glittering tinctures earn,
Till, thorough glassy Time, these Cage-birds see,
That Honour is the badge of Tyranny.
Laws the next pillars be, with which we deal,
As Sophistries of every Commonwealth;
Or rather Nets, which people doe ask leave,
That they, to catch their Freedoms in, may weave,
And still add more unto the Sultans power,
By making their own frames themselves devour.
These Lesbian rules, with show of real grounds,
Giving Right, narrow; Will, transcendent bounds.
The Mufti, and their spiritual jurisdictions,
By course succeed these other guilt-inflictions:
Conscience annexing to our Crescent star
All freedoms, that in Mans frail Nature are;
By making doctrines large, strict mild, severe;
As Power intends to stir, up hope, or fear:
Which heavenly shadow, with earth-centers fixed,
Rack men, by truth, and untruths, strangely mixed;
And prove to Thrones such a supporting cause,
As finely gives Law to all other Laws.
Thus like the Wood that yields helues for the Axe,
Upon it self to lay an heavy tax:
We silly Bassha's help Power to confound,
With our own strength exhausting our own ground.
An Art of Tyranny; which works with men,
To make them beasts, and high-rais'd Thrones their den,
Where they, that mischief others, may retire
Safe with their prey, as lifting Tyrants higher.
By which enthralling of our selves, with others,
Prove we not both Confusions heirs, and mothers?
Far unlike Adam, putting Civil names
Upon those errors, which the whole world blames.
For if Power ravine more than is her own;
People, we say, are Chequers to a Throne.
Again, if she to rise up, will pull down;
Creation, we say, still inheres the Crown.
If good men chance to interrupt this way;
Too much in virtue oft there is, we say:
Since each inferior limb must from the Head
Receive his Standard and be balanced.
If People grudge their freedom, thus made thrall;
Power is their body, they but shadows all.
If God himself by Law, or Influence,
Seems but to limit this Omnipotence;
Even as in Christian Courts of Chancery,
Though land, or Titles cannot settled be;
Yet where the Person dares to disobey,
Through him, his Title they imprison may:
So though with Tyrants God transcendent be,
Yet plague they his for too much piety.
And, by distinctions from the Pulpits doom,
Leave still for Crowne-impiety a room.
This is our office under Tyranny,
Where Power, and Passion only currant be.
But where the Better rules the Greater part,
And reason only is the Princes Art;
There, as in Margents of great volumed Books,
The little notes, whereon the Reader looks,
Oft aide his overpressed memory,
Unto the Authors sense where he would be:
So doe true Counsellors assist good Kings,
And help their Greatness on, with little things.
Honour, in chief, our Oath is to uphold,
That by no traffic it be bought, or sold.
Else look what brings that dainty Throne-worke down;
Adds not, but still takes something from a Crown.
Proffit, and her true Mine, Frugality,
Incident likewise to our Office be:
As husbanding the Scepters spreading right,
To stretch it self, yet not grow infinite;
Or with Prerogative to Tyrannise,
Whose works prove oft more absolute, than wise.
Not mastering Laws, which freedom interrupts;
Nor moulding Pulpits, which is to corrupt,
And help Change in; whose vanity still tends
To work immortal things to mortal ends.
But our part is to keep the Justice free,
As equal peising liberality;
Which both contents the People that receives,
And Princely giver more enabled leaves.
Likewise with foreign States we keep respect
By diligence, which seldom findesneglect.
In Treaties still concluding mutual good;
Since no one biased Contracteuer stood.
In Complements we strive to hold such measure,
That outward form consume not inward treasure.
For betwixt Man, and Man; twixt King and Kings;
Our place should offer well-digested things.
Else as those Crudities, which doe remain
Within the body, all Complexions stain:
So doth advantage between State, and State,
Though finely got, yet prove unfortunate:
And oft Disorder like in government,
Leave even those that prosper, discontent.
But is our great Lords Character like these?
Are disproportioned humours made to please?
Can Parricide, even unto Nature treason,
Draw any true line from, Mans Zenith, Reason?
Then how can Vice, in this confused estate,
Long scope the doom of neuer-sparing Fate?
For, as we see, when sickness deeply roots,
Meat, drink, and drugs alike doe little boot;
Because all what should either nurse, or cure,
As mastered by diseases, grow impure:
So when Excess (the malady of Might)
Hath (Dropsy-like) drowned all the stiles of right,
Then doth Obedience (else the food of Power)
Help on that dropsy Canker to devour.
In which crazed times, woe worth foreseeing wit,
Which mar it self may, cannot help with it.
For as those Kings that conquer neighbour Nations,
First by the sword make Chaos of Creations;
Then, Spider-like a curious netting spin,
Invisible, to catch Inferiors in:
So when the Art of powerful Tyranny
Hath undermined mans native liberty;
Then, like Lords absolute of words, and deeds,
They soon change weeds to herbs, and herbs to weeds.
Which ouer-winding while the People fear,
Can Tyrants hope of Sanctuary there?
O•• when this fear hath tied Men's minds together,
Proves this a storm, or constant Winter-weather?
Again, when Selfenesse hath men's hearts estranged,
Is not one Sovereign soon to many changed?
Lastly, where absolute seems only wise,
Is not one, envious there, in many eyes?
Disease thus grown, the Crisis, and the Doom,
Show Princes must be ours, or we their Tomb.
For as the Ocean, which is ever deep,
Under her smooth face, doth in secret keep
The vast content of deaths devouring womb,
Where those desires which venture find a tomb;
AEolus, with sweet breath, making all things fair,
Till he hath bound hope Prentice to his air;
Then adding more breath to that breath they spend,
Makes tide with tide, and wave with wave contend?
Enforcing men, for tax, to throw their goods
Into his merciless, enticing floods;
Where swallowing some in sight of those he spares,
Even they that prosper best must swarm with cares:
So doth vast Power, at first, spread out her slights
Of Grace, and Honour; smooth bewitching baits;
And when men's Lives, their Goods, and Liberty,
Are left in trust once with her Tyranny;
Then, Ocean-like, blown up with storms of passion,
Which, but excess, makes all seem out of fashion,
It takes aduange to devour the Just,
Because to Laws, that limit Thrones, they trust
Ruins the Wise, whose eye discerns too much,
And thereby brings Powers errors to the touch;
Discards the Learned, for the difference
They make between the truth, and Princes sense;
Staines the Religious, as if they withstood
Powers will, the stamp of all that's currant good:
Yet saves it some, that they may witness bear,
Where Power reigns, there Worth must live in fear.
Thus are we Soothers, as all shadows be,
Sworn to the bodies of Authority.
Thus doe Inferiors, caught with their own ends,
Pay double use for all the Sceptre lends;
Not seeing, while Man strives to stand by Grace,
He offers Natures freedom up to Place;
Whose true relation, between Men, and Might,
Assures vs, Thrones should not be infinite,
Lastly, thus doe we suffer God to wayne,
Under the Humours of a Sultans reign.
And in the fatal ruin of his Son,
Cut off our own lives, on a less thread spun.
Achmat solves.
WHo, standing in the shade of humble valleys,
Looks up, and wonders at the state of hills;
When he with toil of weary limbs ascends,
And feels his spirits melt with Phoebus glories,
Or sinews stark with AEolus bitter breathing,
Or thunder-blasts, which coming from the sky,
Doe fall most heavy on the places high:
Then knows (though farther seen, and farther seeing
From hills aboue, than from the humble valleys)
They multiply in woes, that add in glories.
Who weary is of Natures quiet Plains,
A mean estate, with poor, and chaste desires;
Whose Virtue longs for knees, Bliss for opinion;
Who judges pleasures Paradise in purple;
Let him see me: No Governor of Castle,
No petty Princes choice, whose weak dominions
Make weak, unnoble Counsels to be currant:
But Bash unto Solyman; whose sceptre,
Nay servants, have dominion over Princes:
Under whose feet, the four forgotten Monarchs,
The footstools lie of his eternal glory:
Even I thus raised, this Solymans beloved,
Thus carried up by fortune to be tempted,
Must, for my Princes sake, destroy Succession,
Or suffer ruin to preserve Succession.
Oh happy Men! that know not, or else fear
This second slippery place of Honours steep,
Which we with envy get, and danger keep.
Unhappy state of ours! wherein we live,
Where doubts give laws, which never can forgive:
Where Rage of Kings not only ruins be,
But where their very love works misery.
For Princes humours are not like the Glass,
Which in it shows what shapes without remain,
And with the body go, and come again:
But like the Wax, which first bears but his own,
Till it the seal in easy mould receive,
And by th'impression only then is known.
In this soft weakness Rossa prints her art,
And seeks to toss the Crown from hand to hand;
Kings are not safe whom any understand.
First, of her self, she durst send Rosten forth
To murder Mustapha, his dearest Son:
He found him only guarded with his worth,
Suspecting nothing, and yet nothing done.
Rosten is now returned: For wicked fear
Did even make him wickedness forbear.
A Beglerbie goes since to call him hither;
The Colour, war against the Persian King;
The Truth, to suffer force of Tyranny,
From his enforced Fathers Jealousy.
Who utters this, is to his Prince a Traitor:
Who keeps this, Guilty is; his life is ruth,
And dying lives, ever denying truth.
Thus hath the Fancy-law of Power ordained,
That who betrays it most, is most esteemed:
Who saith it is betrayed, is Traitor deemed.
I sworn am to my King, and to his Honour:
His Humours? No: which they, that follow most,
Wade in a Sea, wherein themselves are lost.
Yet Achmat stay! For who doth wrest Kings minds,
Wrestles his faith upon the stage of Chance;
Where virtue, to the world by fortune known,
Is oft misiudg'd, because shoe's overthrown.
Nay Achmat stay not! For who truth enuirons
With circumstances of Mans failing wit,
By fear, by hope, by love, by malice erreth;
Nature to natures banckrupts he engages:
And while none dare show Kings they go amiss,
Even base Obedience their Corruption is.
Then Fear! dwell with the ill; Truth is assured:
Opinion! be, and reign with Fortunes Princes.
Policy! go piece the faults of Mortal Kingdoms.
Death! threaten them that live to die for ever,
I first am Natures subject, then my Princes;
I will not serve to Innocencies ruin.
Whose Heaven is Earth, let them believe in Princes.
My God is not the God of subtle murder:
Solyman shall know the truth: I look no further.
Behold! he comes like Majesty confused;
Horror, Revenge, Rage lighten in his eyes.
All Laws give place where Power is joined with these;
And he must go beyond that will appease.
Solyman. Achmat.
Mercy, and Love! you Phrases popular,
Which undermine, and limit Princes Thrones,
Go, seek the regions of Equality.
Greatness must keep those Arts by which it grew,
And ever what it wills, or fears, make true.
My Lord! what moves these undermining words,
Which showing fear in you, stir fear in vs?
Cruelty, and Dissolution enter thus.
Doth Kings restraint of wrath appear like fear?
Shall our remissness suffer more than this?
Can horror only, adoration bear?
Behold, the World lays Homage at my feet,
To them by sword, and fire I am known:
Must Kings that change this likeness lose their own?
Two States I bear; his Father, and his King;
These two, being Relatives, have mutual bonds;
Neglect in either, all in question brings.
My Son climes up with wings of seeming Merit;
His course, Applause; and mine, the scale of Order;
By Dissolution, he builds up Content;
And I displease, by planting Government.
My Age spends on the stock of Honour won;
Flesh hath her buds, her flowers, her fruit, her fall;
Work hath his time, and Rest is natural:
His Youth hath hope for right; and Fame for end;
Time for a stage; for rival Expectation;
Ascending by the balance we descend.
Let Youth affect goodwill, praise, reputation,
Fashion it self to Times, or Times to it,
Grow strong, and rich in mans imagination:
But when her Fame reflects scorn upon Kings,
Her glory undermines, or else confounds
Of Place, Time, Nature, all the reverend bounds.
These crooked shadows no straight bodies have;
Practise, Ambition, Pride, are here disguised.
And shall Love be a chain, tied to my Crown,
Either to help him up, or pull me down?
No, No: This Father-language fits not Kings,
" Whose public, universal providence
" Of Things, not Persons, always must have sense.
With Justice I these misty doubts will clear.
And he that breaks divine, and humane Law,
Shall no protection out of either draw.
Sir! where corrupted limbs Art doth divide,
It hath no name of torment, but of cure:
Let many perish, so the State be sure.
Then Achmat! Bid the Eunuchs do their charge.
I wound my self in wounding of my Son;
A Kings estates hath of a Fathers won.
Advantageous Ambition! hast thou learned
That present Government still gives offences,
And long life in the best Kings discontented?
That discontentments hopes live in succession?
Well! False desires (which in false Glasses show
That Princes Thrones are like enchanted fires,
Mighty to see, and easy to pass over:)
By Mustapha's example, learn to know;
No private thoughts can sound Authority.
Achmat! I mean that Mustapha shall die.
My Lord! Good Fortune doth me witness bear,
That my hopes need not stand upon Succession,
Where life is poor in all, but woe, and fear:
Then Sir! doubt not my faith, though I withstand
This fearful Counsel, which you have in hand.
Resolved I am. The form alone I doubt.
Envy, and Murmur I desire to shun,
With which yet great Examples must be done.
The form of proof precedes the form of death;
Kings honours, and their safeties live in both:
Against these to give counsel I am loath.
Thought is with God an Act: Kings cannot see
Th'intents of mischief, but with Jealousy.
In what protection then lives Innocence?
Below the danger of Omnipotence.
Are thoughts, and deeds confounded any where?
In Princes lives, that may not suffer fear.
Where Place unequal equally is weighed,
There Power supreme is balanced, not obeyed.
This is the way to make Accusers proud,
And feed up starved Spite with guiltless blood.
A just advantage unto Kings allowed,
Whose safeties doe include a common good.
Sir! I confess, where one man rules all,
There fear, and care are secret ways of wit;
Where All may rise, and only One must fall,
There Pride aspires, and Power must master it:
For worlds rapine at those, whom Birth, or Chance,
Aboue all men, and yet but Men, advance.
I know when easy hopes doe nurse desire,
The Deadmen only of the Wise are trusted:
And though crooked Fear doe seldom rightly measure,
As thinking all things, but it self, dissembled:
Yet Solyman! let Fear awake Kings counsels.
But fear not Natures laws, which seldom alter,
Nor rare examples of iniquity,
Which, but with age, of time delivered be:
Fear false Stepmothers rage, Women's ambition,
Whereof each Age to other is a Glass;
Fear them that fear not, for desire, shame;
Selling their faiths to bring their ends to pass.
Establish Rose's children for your heirs;
Let Mustapha's hopes fall; translate his right:
And when her proud Ambitions glutted be,
Straight Envy dies; Fear will appear no more:
Nature takes on the shape it had before.
Shall Error scope by Art? And shall a bare
Stepmothers name, in her that speaks truth,
Disguise, and shadow Parricide from blame?
Intents are seeds, and actions they include.
Princes, whose Scepters must be feared of many,
Are never safe that live in fear of any
Tyrants they are that punish out of fear,
States wiser than the truth decline, and wear.
Thou art but one. The rest, in whom I trust,
Discern his fault, and urge me to be just.
Though Factions strength be great, her slight is more;
Her plots, and instruments inlay'd with Art:
Less care hath Truth than hath the evil part.
Traitor! Must I doubt all to credit thee?
No less is Truth, where Kings deceived will be.
The greater number holds the safest parts.
That one is but the least of Factions arts.
Thy counsel hazards all: Their course but one.
That painted hazard is but made the Gate,
For ruin of your Son to enter at.
Truth must the measure be to slave, and King.
Shall Power then lose her odds in any thing?
God, even to himself, hath made a law.
He doth for Fame, what Kings doe but for awe.
What, but Desert, makes those that praise accuse?
The Virtue they admire, and cannot use.
Dare ought, but Truth, assail a Princes child?
On Princes frailties Factions ever build.
Speak plain, and free my soul from this di∣seas,
That with the ruin of mine own would please.
That which you will not feel, how can you see?
For in your love these works were all inweau'd;
With which most worthy men are most deceived.
What King, or Man, loves fear, wrong, trea∣cherie?
These be the things that now in question be.
Sir! where Kings doubt, Wisdom, and Laws provide,
Due trial, and restraint of liberty,
And unto Caution their estate is tied:
But where Kings Rage becomes superlative,
There people doe forbear, but not forgive.
My Lord! then stay: Delays are wisdom, where
Time may more easy ways of safety show.
Selfe-murther is an ugly work of fear;
And little less is Childrens overthrow.
Mustapha is yours; more Sir! even he
Is not, for whom you Mustapha or'ethrow.
Suspicious common to Successions be;
Honour, and Fear together ever go.
Who must kill all they fear, fear all they see,
Nor Subjects, Sons, nor Neighbourhood can bear:
So infinite the limits be of Fear.
Well Achmat! Stay. I strive to rest my thoughts.
Words rather stir, than quiet fixed impressions.
Kings hearts must judge what Subjects hearts have wrought,
Not your calm heart vnthreat'ned, and upright.
Such Bees fetch home from the self same Flower,
Whence Spiders draw their deep enuenom'd power.
No, No: Experience wounded is the School,
Where man ••arnes piercing wisdom out of smart;
Innocence includes the serpent, not the fool.
The wager's great of being, or not being.
These Crudities let me within digest;
My Power shall take upon it all the rest.
Camena. Solyman. Achmat.
They that from youth doe suck at For∣tunes breast,
And nurse their empty hearts with seeking higher,
" Like Dropsie-fedde, their thirst doth never rest;
" For still, by getting, they beget desire:
" Till thoughts, like Wood, while they maintain the Flame
" O• high desires, grow Ashes in the same.
" But Virtue! Those that can behold thy beauties,
" Those that suck, from their youth, thy milk of Good∣ness,
" Their minds grow strong against the storms of fortune,
" And stand, like rocks, in Winter gusts unshaken;
" Not with the blindness of desire mistaken.
O Virtue therefore! whose thrall I think fortune,
Thou who despisest not the sex of Women,
Help me out of these Riddles of my fortune,
Wherein (meethinks) you with your self doe pose me:
Let Fates go on: sweet Virtue! doe not lose me.
My Mother, and my Husband have conspired,
For Brothers good, the ruin of my Brother:
My Father by my Mother is inspired,
For one child to seek ruin of another.
I that to help by Nature am required,
While I doe help, must needs still hurt a Brother.
While I see who conspire, I seem conspired
Against a Husband, Father, and a Mother,
Truth bids me run, by Truth I am retired;
Shame leads me both the one way, and the other.
In what a Labyrinth is Honour cast,
Drawn diverse ways with Sex, with Time, with State?
In all which, Errors course is infinite,
By hope, by fear, by spite, by love, and hate;
And but one only way unto the right.
A thorny way: where Pain must be the guide;
Danger the light; Offence of Power the praise:
Such are the golden hopes of Iron days.
Yet Virtue, I am thine, for thy sake grieved
(Since basest thoughts, for their ill-plac'd desires,
In shame, in danger, death, and torment glory)
That I cannot with more pains write thy story.
Chance therefore! if thou scornest those that scorn thee;
Fame! if thou hottest those that force thy Trumpet
To sound aloud, and yet despise thy sounding;
Laws! if you love not those that be examples
Of Natures laws, whence you are fallen corrupted;
Conspire that I, against you all conspired,
Joined with Tyrant Virtue, as you call her,
That I, by your revenges may be named,
For Virtue, to be ruined, and defamed,
My mother oft, and diversely I warned,
What Fortunes were upon such courses builded:
That fortune still must be with ill maintained,
Which at the first with any ill is gained.
I Rosten warned, that mans selfe-louing thought
Still creeps to the rude embracing might
Of Princes grace: a Lease of glories let,
Which shining burns; breeds Sirens when it is set.
And, by this creature of my mothers making,
This messenger, I Mustapha have warned,
That Innocence is not enough to save,
Where Good, and Greatness, Fear, and Envy have.
Till now, in reverence I have forborne
To ask, or to presume to guess, or know
My Fathers thoughts; where of he might think scorn:
For dreadful is that Power that all may doe;
Yet they, that all men fear, are fearful too.
Lo where he sits! Virtue! work thou in me,
That what thou seek may accomplished be.
Ah Death! Is not thy self sufficient anguish,
But thou must borrow Fear, that threatening Glass,
Which, while it goodness hides, and mischief shows,
Doth lighten Wit to honours overthrows?
But hushed: Meethinks away Camena steals:
Murder, belike, in me it self reveals.
Camena! Whither now? Why haste you from me?
Is it so strange a thing to be a Father?
Or is it I that am so strange a Father?
My Lord! Meethought, nay, sure I saw you bu∣sie:
Your Child presumes, uncalled, that comes unto you.
Who may presume with Fathers, but their own,
Whom Natures law hath ever in protection,
And guilds in good belief of dear affection?
Nay, Reverence, Sir! So Childrens worth doth hide,
As of the Fathers it is least espied.
I think its true: Who know their children least,
Have greatest reason to esteem them best.
How so my Lord? Since Love in Knowledge lives,
Which unto strangers therefore no man gives.
The life we gave them soon they doe forget,
While they think our lives doe their fortunes let.
The tenderness of life it is so great,
As any sign of death we hate too much
And unto Parents Sons, perchance, are such.
Yet Nature meant her strongest unity,
Twixt Sons, and Fathers; making Parents cause
Unto the Sons, of their humanity;
And Children pledge of their eternity.
Fathers should love this Image in their Sons.
But streams back to their springs doe never run.
Pardon my Lord! Doubt is Successions foe:
Let not her mists poor Children overthrow.
Though streams from springs doe see me to run away,
' Tic Nature leads them to their Mother Sea.
Doth Nature teach them, in Ambitions strife,
To seek his death, by whom they have their life?
Things easy, to desire impossible doe seem:
Why should fear make impossible seem easy?
Monsters yet be; and being are believed.
Incredible hath some inordinate progression:
Blood, Doctrine, Age, corrupting Liberty,
Doe all concur, where men such monsters be.
Pardon me Sir! if Duty doe seem angry:
Affection must breathe out afflicted breath,
Where imputation hath such easy faith.
Mustapha is he that hath defiled his nest;
The wrong the greater, for I Iou'd him best.
He hath devised that all at once should die,
Rosten, and Rossa, Zinger, thou, and I.
Fall none but Angels suddenly to hell?
Are Kind, and Order grown precipitate?
Did ever any other man, but he,
In instant lose the use of doing well?
Sir! these be mists of Greatness. Look again:
For Kings, that, in their fearful icy State,
Behold their children, as their winding sheet,
Doe easily doubt; and what they doubt, they hate.
Camena! Thy sweet Youth, that knows no ill,
Cannot believe thine Elders, when they say,
That good belief is great Estates decay.
Let it suffice, that I, and Rossa too,
Are privy what your Brother means to doe.
Sir! Pardon me: and nobly as a Father,
What I shall say, and say of holy Mother,
Know I shall say it, but to right a Brother.
My Mother is your Wife: Duty in her
Is love: She loves; which not well governed, bears
The evil Angel of misgiving Fears;
Whose many eyes, whilst but it self they see,
Still make the worst of possibility:
Out of this Fear she Mustapha accuses:
Unto this Fear, perchance, she joins the Love,
Which doth in Mothers, for their Children move.
Perchance, when Fear hath showed her yours must •all,
In Love she sees that hers must rise withal.
Sir! Fear a frailty is, and may have grace,
And ouer-care of you cannot be blamed;
Care of our own in Nature hath a place;
Passions are oft mistaken, and misnamed;
Things simply good grow evil with misplacing.
Though laws cut off, and doe not care to fashion,
Humanity of error hath compassion.
Yet God forbid, that either Fear, or Care,
Should ruin those that true, and faultless are,
Is it no fault, or fault I may forgive,
For Son to seek the Father should not live?
Is it a fault, or fault for you to know,
My Mother doubts a thing that is not so?
These ugly works of monstrous Parricide,
Mark from what hearts they rise, and where they bide.
Violent, despaired, where honour broken is;
Fear lord; Time Death; where Hope is Misery;
Doubt having stopped all honest ways to bliss,
And Custom shut the windows up of shame,
That Craft may take upon her Wisdoms name.
Compare now Mustapha with this despair:
Sweet Youth, sure Hopes, Honour, a Fathers love,
No infamy to move, or banish fear,
Honour to stay, hazard to hasten fate:
Can horrors work in such a Childes estate?
Besides, the Gods, whom Kings should imitate,
Have placed you high to rule, not overthrow;
For vs, not for your selves, is your Estate:
Mercy must hand in hand with Power go.
Your Sceptre should not strike with arms of fear,
Which fathoms all men's imbecility,
And Mischief doth, left it should mischief bear.
As reason deals within with frailty,
Which kills not passions that rebellious are,
But adds, substracts, keeps down ambitious spirits;
So must Power form, not ruin instruments:
For flesh and blood, the means twixt heaven, and hell,
Unto extremes extremely racked be;
Which Kings in Art of Government should see.
Else they, which circle in themselves with death,
Poison the air, wherein they draw their breath.
Pardon my Lord! Pity becomes my Sex:
Grace with delay grows weak, and fury wise.
Remember Theseus wish, and Neptunes haste.
Kilt Innocence, and left Succession waste.
If what were best for them that doe offend
Laws did inquire, the answer must be, Grace.
If Mercy be so large, whore's Justice place?
Where Love despairs, and where Gods promise ends.
For Mercy is the highest reach of wit,
A safety unto them that save with it:
Borne out of God, and unto humane eyes,
Like God, not seen, till fleshly passion dies.
God may forgive, whose being, and whose harms
Are far removed from reach of fleshly arms:
But if God Equals, or Successors had;
Even God, of safe revenges would be glad.
While he is yet alive, he may be slain;
But from the dead no flesh comes back again.
While he remains alive, I live in fear.
Though he were dead, that doubt still living were.
None hath the power to end what he begun.
The same occasion follows every Son.
Their Greatness, or their Worth is not so much.
And shall the best be slain, for being such?
Thy Mother, or thy Brother are amiss:
I am betrayed; and one of them it is.
My Mother, if she errres, erres virtuously;
And let her err, ere Mustapha should die.
Kings, for their safety, must not blame mistrust;
Nor, for surmises, sacrifice the just.
Well: dear Camena! keep this secretly:
I will be well advised before he die.
Come Achmat! to the Church: we will go pray
God, to unfold this probability,
Where Power, and Wit so much offend him may.
In this disease of spirits, the true Appeal
Is to that Judge that every spirit knows;
For we by Error else may honour lose.
His laws, the life, the Innocence, the State
Of Son, and Father now in balance stand.
Kings that have cause to fear, take leave to hate;
Sons, that aspire, as easly lift their hands.
If I fall now, I give that scope to face,
Our equal gage being only Natures bands.
Help comes alike to each of vs too late,
If ought between vs, and advantage stand.
Yet she, and you, a strife within me move,
And rest I will with counsel from aboue.
IF among Christians, even the best Divines
Conclude, their Church (though thrall to humane might)
Yet to be such a fair mould, as refines
And guides Kings power, else indefinite,
That it no Tyrant, or Profaner be;
Horrors too frequent in Authority:
May not our conquering true Church then assume,
By Grace, and Duty, to link God to Kings,
And Kings to Man? which what else could presume?
Since Might, and Number, rule all other things.
Then Crowns! what Honour to our Church is due,
That fashions it self thus, to fashion you?
Laws we had none, but what our Priests inspired;
Our right was less; for we had nought to claim:
To propagate it self the Truth deferred,
And to that end, at all mankind did aim:
So that while Souls we only sought to save,
They are with God, and we their Empires have.
Whole, a Prophet from our Church divided
In outward forms, not lines of inward life,
Like witty Schism, we lovingly decided,
With well-bent spirits in opinions strife.
Europe in chief our Prophets then withstood,
With her three-Mitred God of flesh, and blood.
Her lett'red Greece, that Lottery of Arts,
Since Mars forsook her subtle, never wise;
Proud of her new-made Gods in fleshly hearts,
As she of old was of her Heathen lies;
We undertook with unity of mind,
And what their Wits dispute, our Swords did bind.
So that ere her gross Sects could danger see,
Their Thrones, Schools, Meters, Idols were resigned
To vs, new Trophies of our Monarchy:
Thus are the Muses still by Mars refined:
And thus our Church, by pulling others down,
I fear or'ebuilt it self, perchance the Crown.
For, till of late, our Church and Prince were one,
No latitude left either to divide:
The Word, and Sword endeavoured not alone,
But were, like mutual Voice, and Echo, tide
With one desire jointly to move, speak, doe;
As if Fates Oracles, and Actors too.
Now while the Crown, and Priest-hood joined thus
In equal Ends, though Dignities distinct,
As mans soul to his body linked is:
Crowns, by this tincture of Divine instinct,
So aboue Nature raised the Laws of Might,
As made all errors of the world our right.
Vices, I grant, our Martial course then had;
For spoil, blood, lust, were therein left too free,
As raising strong Idea's in the Bad,
Brave instruments of Sovereignty.
Like Thieves, at home our Justice was severe;
In other Princes Realms our freedoms were.
Great the Seraglio was, I must confess,
Yet so, as kindle did, not quench our spirits:
Our pleasures never made our natures less;
Venus was joined with Mars, to stir up merits.
In right, or wrong our Course was not precise,
Nor is, in any State that multiplies.
Yet, to redeem this Discipline of Vice,
We added to the glory of our State;
Won honour by them, to the prejudice
Of Strangers, conquering more than we did hate:
Our Emulation was with Crowns, not Men;
Thus did our Vices spread our Empire then.
Where since, though we still spoil that Christian Sect,
Which, by division fatal to their kind,
Friends, duties, enemies, and right neglect,
To keep up some Selfe-humor in the wind;
Yet all we thus win, not by force, but slight,
Poised with our Martial Conquests, will lack weight.
For Force, not Right, our Crescents bear in Chief;
Camps, and not Courts, are Mappes of our Estate,
Where Church, Law, Will, all Discipline in brief,
Established are to make Worth fortunate:
We scorn those Arts of Peace, that Civil Tether,
Which, in one bond, tie Craft, and Force together.
Of Cell-bred Sciences we chew no cud;
Our Food and Garments ouerloade vs not;
When one Act withers, straight another buds;
Our Rest is doing; good success our Lot;
Our Beasts are no more delicate than we:
This odds have Turks of Christianity.
Yet by your traffike with this dreaming Nation,
Their Conquered Vice hath stain'dour Conquering State,
And brought thin Cobwebs into reputation
Of tender Subtlety; whose stepmother Fate
So inlays Courage with ill shaddowing Fear,
As makes it much more hard to doe, than bear.
And as in Circles, who breaks any part,
That perfect form doth utterly confound:
Or as amongst the feigned lines of Art,
One only Right is, all else Crooked found:
So from our Prophets Saws when Sultans stray,
In humane Wit Power finds perplexed way.
Hence, though we make no Idols, yet we fashion
God, as if from Powers Throne he took his being;
Our Alchoran as warrant unto passion;
Monarchs in all laws but their own will seeing.
Hee whom God chooses out of doubt doth well:
What they that choose their God do, who can tell?
Again, when Great States learn Civility
Of petty Kingdoms, learn they not to fall?
Nay Monarchies, when they declining be,
Brooke they those Virtues which they rose withal?
Had Mustapha been borne in Selims time,
What now is Fearful, then had been Sublime.
The Christian bondage is much more refined,
Though not in real Things, in real Names,
Laws, Doctrine, Discipline, being all assigned
To hold upright that witty Man-built frame;
Where every limb, though in themselves distinct,
Yet finely are unto the Sceptre linked.
An Art by which Man seems, but is not free;
Crowns keeping all their specious guiding reins,
Fast in the hand of strong Authority;
So to relax, or wind up Passions chains,
As before humble people know their grief,
Their states are used to look for no relief.
Yet if by parts we travail to compare,
What differences twixt these two Empires are:
We buildno Citadels, our Strengths are Men,
And hold Retreat to be the Losers den:
They, by their Forts, mow their own People down;
A way perchance to keep, not spread a Crown.
Of bondage we leave our Succession free;
Office, and Action, are our liberty.
They may inherit Land; we hope for Place:
They give the Wealthy; we the Active grace.
We hear the fault, and so demand that Head,
Which hath in Martial duties been mislead:
Their process is to answer, and appear;
But under Laws, which hold the Sceptre dear.
Our Law is Martial, sudden, and severe;
For Fact can rarely intricatenesse bear:
Their Laws take life from Sovereignty,
Thankless to which, Power will not let them be.
So that the Mussell-man sends home his head;
The Christian keeps his own, till he be dead.
Our trade is Tax, comprising Men, and Things:
And draw not they Mankindes wealth under Kings?
Soothing the Tyrant, till by his excess,
Want makes the Majesty of Thrones grow less,
By taxing Peoples Vice at such a rate,
As to fill up a Sieve, exhausts a State:
Lastly; so shuffling Trade, Law, Doctrine, Will,
As no soul shall find peace in good, or ill;
Both being Trips alike used, to entice
The weak, and humble into prejudice.
Our Sultans rule their charge by Prophets Saws,
And leave the Mufti Judge of all their Laws:
The Christians take, and change Faith with their Kings,
Which under Meters oft the Sceptre brings.
We make the Church our Sultans instrument:
They with their Kings will make their Church content.
They wrangle with themselves, and by dispute
In questions, think to make the one side mute:
If not, then sacrifice the weaker part;
As if, in Thrones, blood were Religions Art;
Forcing the will, which is to catch the wind,
As if mans Nature were more than his mind:
We in subduing Christians conquer both,
And to lose use of either part are loath.
So that we suffer their fond zeal to pray,
That it may well our conquering armies pay.
And where we are, there Christians fine would be,
If lack of Power were not their modesty.
Thus doe all Great States safely manage things,
Which danger seems to Thrones of petty Kings.
For though the Sick have sense of every breath,
And shun all what they feel, for fear of death:
Yet in strong States, those storms they feel give health,
And by their Purgings spoil Infections stealth;
A play of Sunne-motes, from mans small World come,
Upon the great World to work heavy doom.
For proof: Behold in Solyman that fear,
Which Torrid Zones of Tyranny must bear.
For who hath lost mans Nature in his passion,
Can never see the World in better fashion:
But credit gives to limitless Suspicion,
Which unto all vice gives one Condition,
Confusions Orb; where men may hate their own,
Nature, and Reason there being overthrown.
Hence go out Mandates of conspiracy
Against Mustapha, who must not guiltless be
In such a Father, and a Monarchs eyes,
As will see nothing, but destruction, wise.
Hence Mustapha, from like dreams of the heart,
Sees his destruction wrought by Tyrants Art,
And yet yields things to names; his right to passion;
Which misplaced duties help Power to disfashion.
Nay, hence Mankind, by crafty power oppressed,
Where it hath given part, still gives the rest;
And thinking Thrones in all their practise true,
Dare not of their own Creatures ask their due:
But rather, like mild Earth with Weeds or'egrowne,
Yields to be ploughed, manured, and overthrown.
Lastly, thus Scepters fall with their own weight,
When climbing Power, once risen to her height,
Descends to make distinction in her lust,
Which grants that absolute may be unjust;
And so subjects to censure what should reign;
Steppes to bring Power to People back again.
Whence I conclude: Mankind is both the Form,
And Matter, wherewith Tyrannies transform:
For Power can neither see, work, or devise,
Without the Peoples hands, hearts, wit, and eyes:
So that were Man not by himself oppressed,
Kings would not, Tyrants could not make him beast.
Rossa. Rosten.
O wearisome Obedience, Wax to Power!
Shall I in vain be Mustapha's accuser?
Shall any Justice equal him and me?
Is Love so open-ear'd; my power so weak,
As ought against me to my Lord dare speak?
" Sands shall be numbered first and Motion fixed,
" The Sea exchange her channel with the fire,
" Before my will, or reason stand in awe
" Of God, or Nature, common Peoples law.
Rossa! whence grows this strange unquiet mo∣tion?
Govern your thoughts. What want you to content you,
That have the King of Kings at your devotion?
Content? O poor estate of Women's Wit!
The latitude of Princes is Desire,
Which all, it hath enjoyed, still carries higher.
Say you the World is left to my devotion?
Who questioned am both in my State, and Fame,
Must lose my Will, and cannot lose my Shame:
For Mustapha, long since condemned to die,
Now lives again.
To boast of marriage then what ground have I?
Conclude not now: For Thoughts that be offended.
Are seldom with their present visions mended.
Rage sees too much; Security too little;
Affections are, like glassy metal brittle.
Ah servile Sex! must Yokes our honour be,
To make our own loves our captivity?
No Rossa, no: look not in Languished Wit,
For none can stand on Fortunes steep with it.
" Think Innocence harm; Virtue dishonour;
" Wound Truth; and overweigh the scale of Right:
Sexes have ways apart; States have their fashions:
The virtues of Authority are Passions.
Rossa! Take heed.
Your Honours, like Kings humours, brittle are,
Which broken once, repaired can hardly be;
And these once stained, what is Humanity?
Rossa! first judge your Ends, and then your Means.
You seek to undermine a Princes State,
Deep rooted in by Time, Power, Reverence;
Established on Succession fortunate
Of many Turks: from men that servile be,
Use having lost the use of Liberty.
I understand a Monarchs State too well,
To bid you purchase Peoples idle breath,
That have no power of Honour, Life, or Death:
These ways are wrong, uncertain, fearful too,
In absolutes, which all themselves will doe.
But turn your eyes up to the will of one;
Know you must work a Father from his Son.
This Parents dotage, as it weakness is,
So works it with the vigour of disease,
Still undermining with the things that please.
Upon this Quick-sand what can be begun?
Sons love with selfe-loue must be overthrown
By force of Natures law there's nothing won.
Strifes in the Fathers mind you must beget,
And him aboue his sweet affections bear,
To take impressions both of hope, and fear.
Those silly natures apt to louingnesse,
Which ever must in others power live,
With Doubt become more fond, with Wrong more thral:
Fear here wants eyes, Hate hath no sting at all.
All these false Strengths of native Confidence,
With their Excess, have their Inconstancy:
The laws of Kind, with Tyrants, nothing be.
Besides, dear Rossa! Ills have such alliance,
As in what subject any one is grown,
The seeds of all, even in that one, are sown.
This mass of Passions who can deal withal?
Too nice, and subtle is Inconstancy.
Shall Wrong faire-written still in Patience be?
Must my desire so many Cautions have,
And waite on those thoughts that have worshipped me?
I cannot bear this Mediocrity.
Rossa! Take heed. Extremes are not the means,
To change Estates, either in good, or ill.
Therefore yield not; since that makes Nature less:
Nor yet use Rage, which vainly drives on
The mind to working without instruments:
Besides, it doth make partial our intents,
Discredits Truth, condemns indifferent things.
But take upon you quiet Providence,
The Princes State, with his Authority;
Teach Power to doubt; for Doubt is her defence.
Degrees of Passions, as of Spirits there be;
Choose now for Use, and not for Dignity.
Love spreads the wit to play, but not to arm,
Hath many feet to walk an easy pace,
Slow to mistrust, and never apt to harm:
But fear of Credit is within the mind,
Strengthened by Nature with the strength of all;
In Men, and Tyrants states both, natural.
The Project of this fear must yet be made
The Princes safety, Honour of the State:
Such glorious Stiles may easily ouershade
The ways of Spite; for Treason is in hate.
Flattery straight speaks aloud in Powers right,
Carrying things under names, Truth under might.
" Who dare distinguish in a Tyranny,
" Where fraud it self hath Powers authority?
" Who shall correct Errors, made for the King,
" But Kings themselves; who Actors in their fears,
" Most honour those that most suspicion bring.
" Who there sees Right, or dare use Honours name,
" Where both are sure of death, and doubtful fame?
Then Rossa! plant you here; accuse the Son;
Although you fail his death, you need not doubt:
In Tyrants state never was man undone
By miscomplaints. Besides, what comes about
In earth, but it hath lets, and finds delays?
Yield not: but multiply malice in patience;
Honour is only form, form Tyrants ways.
Accuse his Friends, speak doubtful, charge, and praise.
Put Truth to silence: People dare not see
The pride of Power in formal Tyranny.
I know my time; the Bassha's how they bend;
Faction still wakes; and Competence hath spite;
It is fault enough that Achmat is his friend;
His lightness, and his power well understood.
Things may so pass as Mustapha may die,
Ere Counsel, or Remorse put Fury by.
But if Extremity chance to require
A more audacious Figure; then use Rage:
It give sometimes an Honour to desire;
It shows a Plainness, credible to Age:
While it is ruled, it may have time, and place;
But if it rule, in prophesies disgrace.
I feel my heart now rise; my spirits work;
Confused thoughts all words have overgrown,
When Mustapha is dead, what Star hath motion,
But Achmat; in whom Solyman yet trusts?
They who their Ends, by Change, strive to advance,
Must never doubt to go the way of Chance.
Achmat is wise, and Solymans beloved:
Even Tyrants covet to uphold their fame;
Not fearing evil Deeds, but evil Name.
When Childrens blood the Fathers forehead staines,
What privilege for Counsellors remains?
What arguments against him?
Use of killing;
Suspicion, the favourite of Tyrants;
Delight of Change; Favours past; and fear of Greatness,
Sharp'ned by Achmats harsh, and open dealing,
Which mighty Tyrants liberty would draw
Into the narrow scope of humane Law.
Let Mustapha be dead.
how dead while Ach∣mat reigns?
Down is the Idol, but the Workmanliues:
His favour, virtue, reputation, course,
To vs are still that Mustapha, or worse.
Then down he must, and shall. My chiefest End
Is, first to fix this World on my Succession;
Next so to alter, plant, remove, create,
That I, not he, may fashion this Estate.
Beglerbie. Rossa. Rosten.
Rossa, and Rosten! while you stand debating
The joys, or sorrows of your private Fortunes,
Some evil Angel doth traduce you both.
Achmat is called for: Wit, Art, Spite he hath;
And while for Sons with Fathers men entreat,
Affection makes each good appearance great.
Rosten! make haste: go hence, and carry with thee
My life, fame, malice, fortune, and desire:
For which, set all established things on fire.
You ugly Ange•ls of the infernal Kingdoms!
You who most bravely have maintained your beings
In equal power, like Rival, to the heavens!
Let me reign, while I live, in my desires;
Or dead, live with you in eternal fires.
Ross•! Not words, but deeds please Hell, or Heaven:
I fear to tell; I tremble to conceal;
Fortune, unto the death, is then displeased,
When remedies doe ruin the diseased.
Use not these Parables of coward Fear:
Fear hurts less when it strikes, than when it threatens.
If Mustapha shall die, his death miscarries
Part of thy end, thy Fame, thy Friends, thy Joy:
Who will, to hurt his foes, himself destroy?
My self? What is it else but my desire?
My Brother, Father, Mother, and my God,
Are but those steps which help me to aspire.
Mustapha had never truer friend than I,
That would not with him live, but with him die.
Yet tell: What is the worst?
Camena must, with him, a Traitor be;
Or Mustapha, for her sake, must be free.
O cruel Fates! that doe in Love plant Woe,
And in •alights make our Disasters grow.
But speak: What hath she done?
Undone thy doing.
Discovered unto Mustapha his danger:
And from these relikes, I doe more than doubt,
Her confidence brings Solyman about.
Nay, black Auernus! so I doe adore thee,
As I lament my Womb hath been so barren,
To yield but one to offer up before thee.
Who thinks the Daughters death can Mothers stay
From ends, whereon a Women's heart is fixed,
Weighs harmless Nature, without passion mixed.
Is Mother by the woman overthrown?
Rage knows no Kin: Power is aboue the Law,
And must not curious be of base Respect,
Which only they command that doe neglect.
Your Child's death angers him whom you must please.
My ends are great: Small things are wrought with ease.
This plants confusion in the Powers aboue.
My end is not to quiet, but to move.
God plagues Injustice in so great excess.
The doing minds feel not that idleness.
What if this Work prove not conspiracy,
But care, that with all duties may agree?
It is private Fortune that is built on Truth:
Justice is but of great Estates the youth.
Yet by the Love of Mothers to their Children,
By all the pains of travail, so well known,
Punish, but yet spare life; It is your own.
I doe protest no Terrors, no Desires,
Glories of fame, nor Rumours injuries,
Could, in a Mothers heart, have quenched the fire
Of loving kindness, to her children borne:
It conquered is with nothing, but with scorn.
I am resolved to move the wheels of Fate.
Her Triumph shall be pain; her Glory shame:
Horror is of excess a just reward:
The givers of example have regard.
TIME.
WHat mean these mortal children of mine own,
Ungratefully, against me to complain,
That all I build is by me overthrown?
Vices put under to rise up again?
That on my wheels both Good, and Ill doe move;
The one beneath, while the other is aboue?
Day, Night, Hours, Arts, All; God, or Men create,
The world doth charge me, that I restless change;
Suffer no being in a constant state:
Alas! Why are my revolutions strange
Unto these Natures, made to fall, or clime,
With that sweet Genius, euer-mouing Time?
What Weariness; what loathsome Desolations
Would plague these life and death-begetting Creatures?
Nay what absurdity in my Creations
Were it, if Time-borne had Eternal features;
This nether Orb, which is Corruptions Sphere,
Not being able long one shape to bear.
Could Pleasure live? Could Worth have reverence?
Laws, Arts, or Sects (mere probabilities)
Keep up their reputation in Mans sense,
If Novelty did not renew his eyes;
Or Time take mildly from him what he knew,
Making both me, and mine, to each still new?
Daughter of Heaven am I; but God, none greater;
Pure like my Parents; life, and death of Action;
Author of ill success to every creature;
Whose pride against my Periods makes a faction:
With me who go along, rise while they be;
Nothing of mine respects Eternity.
Kings! why do you then blame me, whom I choose,
As my Anointed, from the Potters oar;
And to advance you made the People lose,
While you to me acknowledged your power?
Be confident all Thrones subsist in me:
I am the measure of Felicity.
Mahomet in vain, one Trophy of my might,
Raised by my changed aspect to other Nations,
Strives to make his Succession infinite,
And rob my wheels of growth, state, declination.
But he, and all else, that would master Time,
In mortal Spheres, shall find my power sublime.
I bring the Truth to light; detect he Ill;
My Native greatness scorns bounded ways;
Untimely Power a few days ruin will;
Yea, Worth it self falls, till I list to raise.
The Earth is mine: of earthly things the care
I leave to Men, that like them, earthly are.
Ripe I yet am not to destroy Succession;
The Vice of other Kingdoms give him Time.
The Fates, without me, can make no progression;
By me alone, even Truth doth fall, or clime:
The Instant petty webs, without me spun,
Untimely ended be, as they begun.
Not Kings, but I, can Nemesis send forth,
The judgments of Revenge, and Wrong, are mine:
My Stamps alone doe warrant real Worth;
How doe untimely Virtues else decline?
For Son, or Father, to destroy each other,
Are bastard deeds, where Time is not the mother.
Such is the work this State hath undertaken,
And keeps in Clouds; with purpose to advance
False counsels; in their selfe-craft justly shaken,
As grounded on my slave, and shadow Chance.
Nay more; My child Occasion is not free
To bring forth good, or evil, without me.
And shall I for revealing this misdeed,
By tying Future to the Present ill,
Which keeps disorders ways from happy speed;
Be guilty made of Mans still-erring will?
Shall I, that in my self still golden am,
By their Gross metal, bear an Iron name?
No; Let Man draw, by his own cursed Square,
Such crooked lines, as his frail thoughts affect:
And, like things that of nothing framed are,
Decline unto that Centre of defect:
I will disclaim his downfall, and stand free,
As native rival to Eternity.
What means this New-borne child of Planets motion?
This finite Elf of Mans vain acts, and errors?
Whose changing wheels in all thoughts stir common∣tion?
And in her own face, only, bears the Mirror.
A Mirror in which, since Time took her fall,
Mankind sees Ill increase; no Good at all.
Because in your vast mouth you hold your Tail,
As coupling Hges past with times to come;
Doe you presume your Trophies shall not fail,
As both Creations Cradle, and her Tomb?
Or for beyond your self you cannot see,
By days, and hours; would you Eternal be?
Time is the weakest work of my Creation,
And, if not still repaired, must straight decay:
The Mortal take not my true constellation,
And so are daz'led, by her nimble sway,
To think her course long; which if measured right,
Is but a Minute of my Infinite.
A Minute which doth her subsistence tie;
Subsistencies which, in not being, be:
Shall is to come; and was is passed by;
Time present cements this Duplicity:
And if one must, of force, be like the other,
Of Nothing is not Nothing made the mother?
Why strives Time then to parallel with me?
What be her types of longest lasting glory?
Arts, Meters, Laws, Moments, Supremacy,
Of Natures erring Alchemy the story:
From Nothing sprang this point, and must, by course,
To that confusion turn again, or worse.
For she, and all her mortal off-springs, build
Upon the moving Base of selfe-conceipt;
Which constant form can neither take, nor yield;
But still change shapes, to multiply deceit:
Like playing Atom, in vain contending,
Though they beginning had, to have no ending.
I, that at once see Times distinct progression;
I, in whose bosom was, and Shall, still be;
I, that in Causes work th'Effects Succession,
Giving both Good, and Ill, their destiny;
Though I bind all, yet can receive no bound;
But see the finite still it self confound.
Time! therefore know thy limits, and strive not
To make thy self, or thy works Infinite,
Whose Essence only is to write, and blot:
Thy Changes prove thou hast no stablish't right.
Govern thy mortal Sphere, deal not with mine:
Time but the servant is of Power Divine.
Blame thou this present State, that will blame thee;
Brick-wall your errors from one, to another;
Both fail alike unto Eternity,
Goodness of no mixed course can be the mother.
Both you, and yours doe covet states Eternal;
Whence, though pride end, your pains yet be Infernal.
Ruin this Mass; work Change in all Estates,
Which, when they serve not me, are in your power:
Give unto their corruption dooms of Fate;
Let your vast womb your Cadmus-men devour.
The Vice yields scope enough for you, and hell,
To compass ill ends by not doing well.
Let Mustapha by your course be destroyed,
Let your wheels, made to wind up, and untwine,
Leave nothing constantly to be enjoyed:
For your Scythe mortal must to harm incline,
Which, as this World, your maker, doth grow old,
Dooms her, for your toys, to be bought, and sold.
Cross your own steps; hasten to make, and mar;
With your Vicissitudes please, displease your own:
Your three light wheels of sundry fashions are,
And each, by others motion, overthrown.
Doe what you can: Mine shall subsist by Me:
I am the measure of Felicity.
Solyman. Achmat.
Achmat! Go, charge the Bassha's to as∣semble:
God only is aboue me, and consulted.
Take freedom; not, as oft Kings servants doe,
To bind Church, State, and all Power under you.
Visions are these, or bodies which appeared?
Raised from within, or from aboue descending?
Did vows lift up my soul, or bring down these?
God's not pleased with vs, till our hearts find ease.
What horror's this? Safety, Right, and a Crown,
Thrones must neglect that will adore Gods light.
His will, our good: Suppose it pluck vs down;
Revenge is his. Against the ill what right?
What means that Glass borne on those glorious wings,
Whose piercing shadows on my self reflect
Staines, which my vows against my children bring?
My wrongs, and doubts, seem there despairs of Vice;
My Power a Turret; built against my Maker;
My danger, but disorders prejudice.
This Glass, true Mirror of the Infinite,
Shows all; yet can I nothing comprehend.
This Empire, nay the World, seems shadows there;
Which mysteries dissolve me into fear.
I that without feel no Superior power,
And feel within but what I will conceive,
Distract; know neither what to take, nor leave.
I, that was free before, am now captived;
This Sacrifice hath raised me from my Earth,
By that I should, from that I am deprived.
In my affections Man, in knowledge more,
Protected no where, far more disunited;
Still King of Men, but of my Self no more.
In my Sons death, it shows this Empires fall;
And in his life, my danger still included:
To die, or kill, alike unnatural.
My powers, and spirits, with prayer thus confused,
Nor judge, nor rest, nor yield, nor reign I can:
No God, no Devil, no constant King, nor Man.
The Earth draws one way, and the sky another.
If God work thus, Kings must look upwards still,
And from these Powers they know not, choose a will.
Or else believe themselves, their strength, occasion;
Make wisdom conscience; and the world their sky:
So have all Tyrants done; and so must I.
Beglerbie. Solyman.
Solyman! If Rossa you will see alive,
You must make haste: for her Despair is such,
As she thinks all things but her Rage, too much.
Fortune! hast thou not moulds enough of Sor∣row,
But thou must those of Love, and Kindness borrow?
Tell me: Out of what ground grows Rose's passion?
When hither I from Mustapha returned,
And had made you account of my Commission;
Rossa, whose heart in care for your health burned,
Curiously after Mustapha inquiring,
A token spies, which I from hence did bear,
For Mustapha by sweet Camena wrought;
Yet gave it not; for I began to fear,
And something in it more than kindness thought.
No sooner she espied this precious gift,
But, as enraged, hands on her self she lays;
From me, as one that from her self would shift,
She runs; nor till she found Camena stays.
I follow, and find both their voices high,
The one as doing, the other suffering pain:
But whether your Camena live, or die,
Or dead, if she by rage, or guilt be slain;
If she made Rossa mad, or Rossa mad
To hurt things dearest to her self be glad,
I know not. But ô Solyman! make haste;
For Mans despair is but occasion past.
Rossa. Solyman. Beglerbie.
What! Am I not mine own? Who dare usurp
To take this Kingdom of my self from me?
Nature hath lied. She saith, Life unto many
May be denied, but not death unto any.
O Solyman! I have at once transgressed
The laws of Nature, and thy laws of State:
I wretched am, and you unfortunate.
Declare what Storm is this? What Accident?
Thy selfe-accusing doth excuse intent.
Sir, odious is the fact on every side:
The remedy is more than you can bear;
And more must fall upon you than you fear.
What threatning's this? what horror? what des∣pit?
Kings thoughts to Jealousy are ouer-tender.
And any weakness many doth engender.
Rossa! what means this venom of thy breath?
Revenge, and Justice both require my death.
Then tell.
And lose the privilege of death.
Then tell, and die.
Nay tell, and live a worcester∣thy death.
Rippenot my wounds, dear Lord! silence is fit:
My life hath shame, and death must cover it.
What should be secret unto thoughts that love?
All imperfections that offence do move.
What guiltiness cannot Goodwill forgive?
These horrors which in stained souls doe live.
Are thy faults to thy self, or unto me?
To both alike. Remediless they be.
Yet show me trust: it proves your heart is pure,
To me, and all crimes else Kings can endure.
Imagine all the depths of wickedness:
My womb as hell; my soul the world of sin;
Confusion in my thoughts, fear merciless;
Without me Shame; Impenitence within.
These words are not of charge, but intercession,
As arguing not your Guilt, but your Oppression.
Yet least I fail, and error multiply,
Declare what's done? What moves this agony?
Thy Child is slain. These hands imbrued are,
Even in her bowels, whom I nursed with care.
So strange a death includes some odious crime.
She did conspire. Silence devours the rest.
Horror I apprehend, Danger, Despair:
All these lie hidden in this word, Conspire.
This Wretch conspired the ruin of this State.
Sir! ask no more: for Ills go in a blood;
You hear already more than doth you good.
But tell: what made Camena think this thought?
Or by whom could she think to have it wrought?
Mischief it self is cause of mischief done.
What should she fear; since with her is combined
Mustapha, this States Successor, and your Son?
Can this be true? Is humane Nature such,
As in the worst part none can think too much?
The ruins of my own may show my faith:
For I can see no comforts after you;
Yet to your Bassha's know I not what's true.
Discover how these Treasons came to light.
Call Achmat first: for Truth is but a blast,
Till it his censures Oracle hath past.
What scorns be these? how am I thus possessed?
Hath Achmat other Greatness than by me?
If greater by you than your self he be.
In Kings the secrets of Creation rest.
Sir! you created him: he all the rest.
I gave that to his Worth, Faith, Industry.
And so these gifts tied to your children be.
What can his Age expect by innovation?
Ambition gets by doing, Estimation.
His power hath no true Basis, but my Grace.
Sir? Strength, like Number, multiplies by place.
Decrepit slave, vile creature of mine;
Lies it in his base thoughts, and shaking hands,
To move the props whereon my Empire stands?
The name of Power is yours; the being his;
By whom Creation, Hope; Reward, and Fear
Spread, and disposed still are, every where.
Besides, there is no Age in mans desire,
Which still is active, young, and cannot rest:
For Achmat knows you will not what you can;
Since Crowns do change a State, but not the Man.
His Life, and Fortune stand upon my breath.
Contempt deposes Kings, as well as death.
But tell: How doth their Treachery appear?
Hath she confessed? Or who doth them accuse?
This Guidon, with her own hand wrought, and sent,
Bears perfect record what was their intent.
Expound: What is the meaning of this work,
Under whose Art the arts of Mischief lurk?
These Clouds, they be the house of Jealousy,
Which fire, and water both, within them bear,
Where Good shows less, Ills greater than they be.
Saturn here feeds on Children that be his.
His word;
A fatal winding sheet Succession is.
This precious Hill, where daintiness seems wast,
By Natures art, that all Art will exceed,
In careless finesse shows the sweet estate
Of Strength, and Providence together placed:
Two Intercessors reconciling hate,
And giving fear even of it self a taste.
Those Waives, which beat upon the cliffs, doe show
The cruel storms, which Envy hath below.
The Border round about in Characts hath
The mind of all; which in effect is this:
It is hard to know; as hard, and harder too,
When men doe know, to bring their hearts to doe.
What said she, when you showed her this work?
Like them that are descried, and fine would lurk.
For while she would have made her self seem clear,
She made her fault still more and more appear.
How brooked she that the wicked only fear?
Her death (I mean) with what heart did she bear?
She neither stubburne was, nor overthrown;
And, but for Mustapha, made no request:
As if his harms had only been her own.
Solyman! Take heed.
" Malice, like Clocks wound up to watch the Sun,
" Hasting a headlong course on many wheels,
" Have never done, until they be undone.
I slew my Child; my Child would have slain thee:
All bloody Fates in my blood written be.
I swear by Mahomet, my Son shall die.
Revenge is Justice, and no cruelty.
Beglerbie! attend. This glorious Phaëton here,
That would at once subvert this State, and Me,
Safe to the Eunuchs carried let him be.
These spirits of practise, that contend with fate,
Must, by their deaths, doe honour to a State.
Beglerbie. Priest. Mustapha.
Ah humorous Kings? how are you tos∣sed, like waives,
With breaths, that from the earth beneath you move;
" Observed, and betrayed; known and undone;
" By being nothing, unto all things won.
" Frail man! that mould'st misfortune in thy Wit,
" By giving thy made I doll leave to fashion
" Thy ends to his. For mark; what comes of it?
" Nature is lost, our being only Chance,
" Where Grace alone, not Merit, must advance.
The one my Image: Solymans the other:
He, with himself, is wrought to spoil his own:
I, with my self, am made the instrument,
That Courts should have no great hearts innocent.
But stay: why wander I thus from my ends?
New counsels must be had when Planets fall:
Change hath her periods, and is natural.
The Saint we worship is Authority,
Which lives in Kings, and cannot with them die.
True faith makes Martyrs unto God alone:
Misfortune hath no such odds in a Throne.
But see! This Foot-ball to the Stars is come,
Mustapha I mean, in Innocence secure,
Which, for it will not give Fate, must endure.
Heli distract, fixed, and aghast, I see,
And will go nearer to observe the rest,
That Wit may take occasion at the best.
For if they feel their State, and know their Strength,
How prone this Mass is for another head;
Did ever hazard find Occasion dead?
Whether he get the Crown, or lose his blood,
The one is ill to him; to me both good.
False Mahomet! Thy Laws Monarchal are,
Unjust, ambitious; full of spoil, and blood,
Having, not of the best, but greatest, Care.
Must life yield up it self to be put out,
Before this frame of Nature be decayed?
Must blood the tribute be of Tyrants doubt?
O wretched Flesh! in which must be obeyed
Gods law, that wills Impossibility;
And Princes wills, the gulfs of Tyranny.
We Priests, even with the mystery of words,
First bind our selves, and with our selves the rest
To servitude, the sheath of Tyrants sword;
Each worst unto himself, approving best.
People! Believe in God: we are untrue,
And spiritual forges under Tyrants might:
God only doth command what's good for you:
Where we doe preach your bodies to the War;
Your goods to Tax; your Freedom unto bands;
Duties, by which you owned of others are;
And Fear, which to your harms doth lend your hands.
Ah forlorn Wretch! with my hypocrisy,
I Mustapha have ruined, and this State.
I am the Evils friend, Hells Mediator,
A Fury unto man, a man to Furies.
Whence grows this sudden Rage thy gesture utters?
These Agonies, and furious Blasphemings?
Man then doth show his Reason is defaced,
When Rage thus shows it self with Reason graced.
If thou have felt the selfe-accusing War,
Where knowledge is the endless hell of thought,
The ruins of my Soul there figured are,
For where despair the Conscience doth fear
My wounds bleed out that Horror which they bear.
Horror, and Pride, in Nature opposite;
The one makes Error great, the other small:
Where rooted habits have no sense at all.
Heli! judge not thy self with troubled mind,
But show thy heart: when Passions steames breathforth,
Even woes we wondered at are nothing worth.
I have offended Nature, God, and Thee:
To each a sin, to all impiety.
The faults of man are finite, like his merits:
His Mercies infinite that judges spirits.
Tell me thy Errors, teach me to forgive,
Which he that cannot doe, knows not to live.
Can thou forgive? Rather avoid the cause
Which else makes Mercy more severe than Laws.
From man, to man duties are but respects,
The grounds where of are mere Humanity:
Can Justice other there than Mercy be?
Thought is an act. Who can forgive remorse,
Where Nature, by her own Law, suffers force?
What shall I doe? Tell Me. I doe not fear.
Preserve thy Father, with thy Self, and me:
Else guilty of each others death we be.
Tell how.
Thy Father purposes thy death:
I did advise: Thou offer up thy breath.
What have I to my Father done amiss?
That wicked Rossa thy step mother is.
Wherein have I of Rossa ill deserved.
In that the Empire is for thee reserved.
Is it a fault to be my Fathers son?
" Ah foul Ambition! which, like Water-flouds
" Not channell-bound, dost neighbours ouer-runne;
" And growest nothing when thy rage is done.
Must Rose's heirs out of my ashes rise?
Yet Zinger! I acquit thee of my blood;
For, I believe, thy heart hath no impression
To ruin Mustapha for his Succession.
But tell what Colours they against me use;
And how my Fathers love they first did wound.
Of treason towards him they thee accuse:
Thy Fame, and Greatness, gives their malice ground.
Good World, where it is danger to be good.
Yet grudge I not power of my self to Power:
This baseness only in Mankind I blame,
That Indignation should give laws to fame.
Show me the Truth. To what rules am I bound?
No man commanded is by God to die,
As long as he may Persecution fly.
To fly hath scorn; it argues Guiltiness,
Inherits Fear, weakly abandons Friends,
Gives Tyrants fame, takes Honour from distress.
Death! doe thy worst. Thy greatest pains have end.
Mischief is like the Cockatrices eyes;
Sees first, and kills; or is seen first; and dies.
Fly to thy strength, which makes misfortune vain•.
Rossa intends thy ruin: What is she?
Seek in her bowels for thy Father lost:
Who can redeem a King with viler cost?
O false, and wicked colours of Desire!
Eternal bondage, unto him that seeks
To be possessed of all things that he likes!
Shall I a Son, and Subject seem to dare,
For any Selfenesse, to set Realms on fire,
Which golden titles to rebellions are?
Heli! even you have told me, Wealth was given
The wicked, to corrupt themselves, and others:
Greatness, and health, to make flesh proud, and cruel.
Where, in the good, Sickness mowes down desire;
Death glorifies; Misfortune humbles.
Since therefore Life is but the throne of Woe,
Which sickness, pain, desire, and fear inherit,
Ever most worth to men of weakest spirit:
Shall we, to languish in this brittle Jail,
Seek, by ill deeds, to shun ill destiny?
And so, for toys, lose immortality?
Fatal Necessity is never known
Vntillit strike: and till that blow become,
Who false, is by false visions overthrown.
Blasphemous love! safe-conduct of the ill!
What power hath given mans wickedness such skill?
Ah servile Men! how are your thoughts be∣witched
With hopes, and fears, the price of your subjection,
That neither sense, nor time can make you see,
The art of Power will leave you nothing free?
Is it in vs to rule a Sultans will?
We made them first for good, and not for ill.
Our Gods they are, their God remains aboue.
To think against anointed Power is death.
To worship Tyrants is no work of faith.
It is rage of Folly that contends with Fate.
Yet hazard something to preserve the State.
Sedition wounds what should preserved be.
To wound Powers humours, keeps their honours free.
Admit this true. What sacrifice prevails?
Force the petition is that never fails.
Where then is Natures place for innocence?
Prosperity; that never makes offence.
Hath Destiny no wheels but mere Occasion?
Could East upon the West else make invasion?
Confusion follows where Obedience leaves.
The Tyrant only that event deceives.
And are the ways of Truth, and Honour such?
Weakness doth ever think it owes too much.
Hath Fame her glorious colours out of fear?
What is the world to him that is not there?
Tempt me no more. Goodwill is then a pain,
When her words beat the heart, and cannot enter.
I constant in my counsel doe remain,
And more lives, for my own life will not venture.
My fellows! rest. Our Alcoran doth bind,
That I alone should first my Father find.
Sir! by our Lords commandment, here I wait,
To guide you to his presence:
Where, like a King, and Father, he intends
To honour, and acquaint you with his ends.
Heli! Farewell. All Fates are from aboue
Chained unto humours that must rise, or fall.
Think what we will: Men doe but what they shall.
Are Men no more? Are Kings anointed blood
Profane to them, and sacred unto vs?
Plays Power with laws of God, and Nature thus?
Shall sorrow write this story of oppression
Only in idle tears, and not in blood?
Where is Mans zeal to God, his love to men?
Shall that false Labyrinth of humane fear
Keep Honour, and Revenge still captive there?
No: let the spirit of Wrong stir up affection,
By smart to make both men, and Tyrants know,
There is in each, of each, the overthrow.
Are hell, and heaven peopled out of vs?
Keep we the Keys of Conscience, and of Passion,
And can no just revenge in either fashion?
Was ever change unwelcome unto man?
Restless Mortality still hates the present:
No one Rule please the Universal can.
This Empires constitution Martial is,
Where hopes, and fears, must never be unbent:
Anarchy is called for here by discontent.
To Mustapha I know the worlds affection;
To Solyman fear only draws regard,
And men stir easily where the reyne is hard.
Then l•t them stir, and tear away this veyle
Of pride from Power; that our great Lord may see
Vnmiracled, his own Humanity.
People! Look up aboue this Diuans name;
This rent of Error; snare of Liberty;
Where punishment is Tyrants tax, and fame.
Abolish these false Oracles of might,
Courts subaltern, which bearing Tyrants seal,
Oppress the People, and make vain, Appeal.
Ruin these spetious masks of Tyranny,
These Crowne-payd Caddies of their makers fashion;
Which, Power-like, for Right distribute Passion.
Confound Degrees, the Artifice of Thrones
To bear down Nature; while they raise up Art
With gilded Titles, to deceive the heart.
The Church absolues you: Truth approves your work.
Craft, and oppression every where God hates.
Besides, where Order is not, Change is free,
And gives all rights to Popularity.
ANgels fell first from God, Man was the next that fell:
Both being made by him for Heaven, have for themselves made Hell.
Defection had, for ground, an essence which might fall,
Grown proud with glories of that God, like whom they would be all.
Hence each thing, but himself, these fallen Powers comprehend,
Nor can beyond depriuings ill their knowledge extend.
But in that darckned Orb, through mists which vice creates,
Ioylesse, enjoy a woeful glimpse of their once happy States.
And Serpent-like, with cursed eternity of evil,
Active in mischief many ways to add more to the Devil,
They take on every shape of vice that may delight,
Striving to make Creation less, Privation infinite.
Whence Man from goodness strayed, and wisdoms innocence,
Yea subject made to grave, and hell, by errors impotence,
Labours, with shadowed light of imbecility,
To raise more towers of Babel up, aboue the Truth to be.
Among which Phantasms mounts that roof of Tyrants power,
The outward Church, whose nature is her Founders to devour.
And, through an hollow charm of life-forsaken words,
Entangle real things, to reign on all the earth affords:
By irreligious rites, helping Religions name
To blemifh truth, with gilded lies
cast in Opinions frame.
Whence she that erst raised Kings, by pulling freedom down,
Now seeks to free inferior Powers, and only bind the Crown.
In which aspiring pride, where Wit encounters Wit,
The power of the Thrones unequal is, and turns the scale with it:
Mastering those greedy swarms of superstitious rites,
Which by the sinners fear, not faith, makes her scope infinite.
Hence grows it that our Priests, erst Oracles of State,
Against whose doom our Sultans durst trust nothing unto fate,
At once were censured all, in one house to the fire,
As guilty in their idle souls of Icarus desire.
So free, and easy is it to cast down again
The creatures pride, which his Creator covets to restrain:
Again, so easy is it to bring States to death,
By urging those Powers to oppose, whose union gave them breath.
Thus from the lives of Priests kings first their doctrine stain,
And then let Sect, Schism, Question in, to qualify their reign.
Nor can this swollen Excess be well reformed in either,
While both stand mixed of good, and ill, which join not well together.
Kings seeking from the Church the rights of deity;
The Church from Kings, not nursing help, but Gods supremacy.
A strife wherein they both find loss, in stead of gain;
Since neither State can stand alone, much less divided reign.
The strife, and peace of which; like Ocean ebbs, and floods;
Successively, doe here contract, and there disperse our goods.
And by this mutual spleen amongst these Sovereign parts
While each seeks gain by others loss, the Universal smarts.
For as souls, made to reign, when they let down their State
Into the bodies humours, straight those humours give them fate:
So, when the Church, and Crown (the souls of Empire) fall
Into Contempt, which humane Power cannot subsist withal,
They strive, turn, and descend, feel Errors destiny,
Which in a well-form'd Empire is, a Vagabond to be.
Thus, in Disorders chain, while each link wrested other,
Incestuous Error, to her own, is made both child, and mother.
So as their doing is vndoings still to breed,
And fatally entomb again each other, in each deed.
Hence Humane Laws appealed, as Moderators come,
Who, under show of compromise, take on them Sovereign doom;
Entering in at the first,
like Wisdom, with applause,
And though propounded from our faults, yet by, consent, made Laws;
Or rather scales, to weigh Opinion with the Truth,
Which, like Stepmothers, often bring the better side to ruth.
And as of active ill (from whence they took their root)
Guilty, and so not strong to stand upon a constant foot,
They wave, strive, and aspire, can bear no weight aboue,
But, as with Sovereign Power it self, and nothing else in love,
That rival spleen, which Equals still to Equals bear,
Forgotten, or asleep, as if desire had conquered fear,
They factiously a peace with their chief rival make,
And let in Wars, which, like a Flood, all Sea-banks ouer-rake.
In which one act Laws prove, though nature gave them ground,
That they both mould, and practise took from War, which hath no bound.
Because, like Mars his seed, they feed upon their own;
And by the spoil of Crowns, and Men, take glory to be known.
In which dear interchange between Church, Laws, and Might,
While all their counsels are allayed, by oueracting, Right;
They leave their supreme pitch to servile Craft impawn'd,
Descending each to traffike there, where he ought to command.
Till fondly thus engaged into a Civil War,
They casting off all public ends, doe only make to mar.
Yet keep a scope in show to counterpoise each other,
And save the health, and honour up of Monarchy their mother.
" But as in Man, whose frame is chiefly four Complexions,
" Really joined, dispersed, mixed with opposite connexions,
" When any of these fourefold, or distract too far,
" Diseases reign, which but Disorders native children are;
" From which contention stirred twixt Nature, and her Foes,
" While humour weaken humour doth, to health the Body grows:
" So in these diverse Powers, excess of Opposition,
" Oft, by begetting strange diseases, proves the States Physician.
Mauors, that monster, borne of many-headed Passion,
While it seems to destroy al moulds, to each mould giving fashion.
" Yet as these Elements, thus opposite in kind,
" While, balanced by superior ties, they live, as if combined
" To make their Discords base unto that harmony,
" In whose sweet union mildly linked all Powers concur to be;
" When any breaks too much that poise wherein they stood,
" To make his own subsistence firm,
with show of common good;
" By oueracting, straight it breaks that well-built frame,
" Wherein their being stood entire, although they lost their name:
" So in that Noble work of public Government,
" When Crowns, Church, Soldiers, or the Laws, doe overmuch dissent,
" That frame, wherein they lived, as fatally dissolved;
" And each in gulfs of selfe-Conceipt, as fatally, involved.
Thus reels our present State, and her foundation waives,
By making Trophies of times past, of present time the graves.
Laws strive to curb the Church, the Church wounds Laws again;
The Soldier would have Church, Throne, Laws kept low, that he might reign.
And as before, while they joined to make Empire large,
All unto greatness raised were, by doing well their charge:
So now, by pulling quills each from the others wings,
They jointly all are cried down, by letting fall their Kings.
A fate prepared to shake that Ottoman succession,
Which erst, removed from men's eyes, wrought reverend impression.
Where now, this Sultans line profaned when men shall see,
They soon will scorn Grace, Hope, and Fear; the Scepters mystery.
Nor will they more by Faith, or Zeal, in war be led
To sacrifice their lives to Power, for fame when they be dead.
Or, to shun Mortal pains, provoke the Infinite;
Wrong in Mans nature stirring sparks, that give both heat, and light,
To gather in again those strengths they gave away;
And so pluck down that Simpson's post, on which our Sultans stay.
Zinger solves.
Nourished in Court, where no Thoughts peace is now∣risht,
Used to behold the Tragedies of ruin,
Brought up with fears that follow Princes fortunes;
Yet am I like him that hath lost his knowledge,
Or never heard one story of Misfortune.
My heart doth fall away: fear falls upon me.
Tame Rumours, that have been mine old acquaintance
Are to me now (like Monsters) fear, or wonder.
My Love begins to plague me with Suspicions.
My Mothers promises of my advancement;
The name of Mustapha so often murmured,
With whose name ever I have been rejoiced,
Now makes my heart misgive, my spirits languish.
Man then is Augur of his own misfortune,
When his joy yields him arguments of anguish.
Achmat. Zinger.
Tyrants! Why swell you thus against your Makers?
Is raised Equality so soon grown wilde?
Dare you deprive your People of Succession,
Which Thrones, and Scepters, on their freedoms build?
Have fear, or love, in Greatness no impression?
Since people, who did raise you to the Crown,
Are ladders standing still to let you down.
Achmat! what strange Events beget these Pas∣sions?
" Nature is ruined; Humanity fallen a sunder;
" Our Alcoran profaned; Empire defaced;
" Ruin is broken loose; Truth dead; Hope banished.
My heart is full; my voice, and spirits tremble.
Yet tell the worst.
By Counsel, or Comparison things lessen.
No Counsel, or Comparison can lessen
The loss of Mustapha, so vilely murth'red.
How? dead? what Chance, or Malice hath pre∣uented
Mankindes good fortune?
Fathers unkindly doubts.
Tell, how?
when Solyman, by cunning spite
Of Rose's witchcrafts, from his heart had banished
Justice of Kings, and Louingnesse of Fathers,
To wage, and lodge such camps of heady passions,
As that sects cunning practices could gather;
Envy took hold of worth: doubt did misconstrue:
Renown was made a lie, and yet a terror:
Nothing could calm his Rage, or move Compassion:
Mustapha must die. To which end fetched he was,
Laden with hopes, and promises of Favour.
So vile a thing is Craft in every heart,
As it makes Power it self descend to Art.
While Mustapha, that neither hoped, nor feared,
Seeing the storms of Rage, and Danger coming,
Yet came; and came accompanied with power.
But neither Power, which warranted his safety;
Nor Safety, that makes Violence a Justice;
Could hold him from Obedience to this Throne:
A Gulf, which hath devoured many a one.
Alas! Could neither Truth appease his fury?
Nor his unlooked Humility of coming?
Nor any secret witnessing remorses?
Can Nature, from her self, make such diuorces?
Tell on; that all the World may rue, and wonder.
There is a place environed with Trees,
Upon whose shadowed center there is pitched
A large, embroidered, sumptuous Pavilion;
The stately Throne of Tyranny, and Murder.
Where Mighty men are slain, before they know
That they to other than to Honour go.
Mustapha no sooner to the Port did come,
But thither he is sent for, and conducted
By six slave Eunuchs, either taught to colour
Mischief with reverence, or forced, by Nature,
To reverence true Virtue in misfortune.
While Mustapha, whose heart was now resolved,
Not fearing Death, which he might have prevented;
Nor craving Life, which he might well have gotten,
If he would other duties have forgotten;
Yet glad to speak his last thoughts to his Father,
Desired the Eunuchs to entreat it for him.
They did; wept; they and kneeled to his Father.
But bloody Rage, that glories to be cruel;
And Jealousy, that fears she is not fearful;
Made Solyman refuse to hear, or pity.
He bids them haste their charge: and bloody-ey'd
Beholds his Son, whilst he obeying died.
How did that doing Heart endure to suffer? Tell on.
Quicken my Powers hardened, and dull to good,
Which, yet vnmou'd hear tell of brothers blood.
while these six Eunuchs to this charge appointed
(Whose hearts had never used their hands to Pity,
Whose hands, now only, trembled to do Murder)
With Reverence, and Fear, stood still, amazed;
Loath to cut off such Worth, afraid to save it:
Mustapha with thoughts resolved, and united,
Bids them fulfil their charge, and look no further.
Their hearts afraid to let their hands be doing,
The Cord, that hateful instrument of Murder,
They lifting up let fall, and falling lift it:
Each sought to help, and helping hindered other.
Till Mustapha, in haste to be an Angel,
With heavenly smiles, and quiet words, foreshowes
The joy and peace of those souls where he goes.
His last words were; O Father! Now forgive me;
Forgive them too, that wrought my overthrow:
Let my Grave never minister offences.
For, since my Father covets my death,
Behold, with joy, I offer him my breath.
The Eunuchs roar: Solyman his Rage is glutted:
His thoughts divine of Vengeance for this Murder:
Rumour flies up, and down: the People murmur:
Sorrow gives Laws before men know the truth;
Fear prophecies aloud, and threatens ruth.
Remiss, and languished are men's coward Spirits,
Where God forbids Revenge, and Patience too:
Yet to the dead Nature or daineth rites,
Which idle Love, I feel, hath power to doe.
I will go hence, and show to them that live,
That God Almighty cannot all forgive.
Rosten. Achmat.
Help Achmat! help: Furies runs over all.
Pity my state, that with the Empire fall.
What sound is this of Ruin, and Con∣fusion?
Terror afraid? Cruelty come for Pity?
Seditious Rosten, running from Sedition?
And Malice forced to enemies for succour?
Achmat! The mysteries of Empire are dissolved.
Fury hath made the People know their forces.
Majesty (as but a Mist,) they breed, and spread.
Nothing, but things impossible will please.
Mustapha must live again, or Rosten perish.
Oh wretchedness! which I cannot deny;
I am ashamed to live, and loath to die.
Tell on the dangers which concern the State:
For thee! thou Rod ordained unto the fire,
Thy other dooms let Acheron enquire.
When Mustapha was by the Eunuchs strangled,
Forthwith his Camp grew doubtful of his absence:
The guard of Solyman himself did murmur.
People began to search their Princes Counsels:
Fury gave Laws: the Laws of Duty vanished:
Kind Fear of him they loved Selfe-feare had banished.
The headlong spirits were the heads that guided:
He that most disobeyed, was most obeyed.
Fury so suddenly became united,
As while her forces nourished Confusion,
Confusion seemed with Discipline delighted.
Towards Solyman they run: and as the Waters,
" That meet with banks of Snow, make Snow grow Water:
So, even those Guards, that stood to interrupt them,
Give easy passage, and pass on amongst them.
Solyman, who saw this storm of Mischief coming,
Thinks absence his best argument unto them:
Retires himself, and sends me to demand,
What they demanded, or what meant their coming?
I spake: they cried: For Mustapha, and Achmat.
Some bid away; some kill; some save; some hearken.
Those that cried, Save, were those that sought to kill me.
Who cried, Hark, were those that first brake silence,
They held that bad me Go. Humility was guilty;
Words were reproach; Silence in me was scornful;
They answered ere they asked; assured, and doubted.
I fled; their Fury followed to destroy me;
Fury made haste; Haste multiplied their Fury;
Each would doe all; none would give place to other.
The hind most struck; and while the foremost listed
Their arms to strike, each Weapon hindered other:
Their running let their strokes, strokes let their running.
Desire, mortal enemy to desire,
Made them, that sought my life, give life unto me.
Now Achmat! Though Blood-thirst deserve no Pity;
Malice no love; though just Revenge be Mercy;
Yet save me. For, although my death be lawful,
The Judges, and the manner are unlawful.
If I die; what hath Solyman for warrant?
Mischief is still the Governess of Mischief.
If Solyman be slain; where will they stay,
That Thorough God, and Majesty make way?
Rosten! dare thou name Duty, Laws, or Mer∣cie?
Owe not thy self to him thou would destroy;
Make good thy love of Murder; die with Joy.
If Solyman who hath been thy best Fortune,
Safe thou wilt see, or safe his state preserve,
Make haste. The State did never ill deserve.
Occasion! when art thou more glorious,
Than even now; when thou requir'st of me,
To fall with States in common destiny?
States trespass not: Tyrants they be that swerve,
And bring upon all Empires age, or death.
By making Truth but only Princes breath.
This Monarchy first rose by Industry;
Honour held up by universal Fame,
Stirring men's minds to strange Audacity:
Great ends procured our Armies greater name:
To enemies no Injury had blame:
Worth was not proud: Authority was wise;
And did not on her own then tyrannise.
Now owned by humour of this dotard King
(Who, swollen with practise of long Government,
Doth stain the Public with ill managing)
Honour is laid asleep: Fame is unbent:
His Will, his End; and Powers right every where:
Now, what can this, but dissolution, bear?
Whether our choice, or Nature gave vs Kings,
The end of either was the good of all:
Where many strengths make this Omnipotence,
The good of many there is natural.
One draws from all: Can that be fortunate?
All leave this one: Can this be Injury?
And shall I help to stay the Peoples rage
From this Estate, thus ruined with Age?
No People, No. Question these Thrones of Tyrants;
Revive your old equalities of Nature;
Authority is more than that she makes.
Lend not your strengths to keep your own strengths un∣der.
Proceed in Fury: Fury hath Law, and Reason,
Where it doth plague the wickedness of Treason.
For when whole Kingdoms surfeit, and must fall,
Justice divides not there, but ruins all.
Besides of Duties twixt the earth, and sky,
He can observe no one that cannot die.
But stay! Shall Man the Damme, and Grave of Crowns,
With Mutiny, pull sacred Scepters down?
People of Wisdom void, with Passion filled,
While they keep names still press to ruin things:
Freedom dissolves them; Order they refuse:
Worth, Freedom, Power, and Right while they destroy;
Worth, Freedom, Power, and Right they would enjoy.
What soul then loving Nature, Duty, Order,
Would hold a life of such a stateless State,
As, made of Humours, must give Honour fate?
No Achmat! Rather, with thy hazard, strive
To save this high raised Sovereignty,
Under whose wings there was Prosperity.
I yield. But how?
Force is impossible; for that is theirs:
Counsel shows, like their enemy, Delay:
Order turns all desires into fears:
Their Art is violence: and Chance their end:
What, but Occasion, there can be my friend?
Behold where Rossa comes, in her looks varying,
Like rage, that with it self, still fears miscarrying.
Rossa. Achmat.
Who ever thinks by Virtue to aspire,
And Goodness dreams to be but Fortunes star;
Or who by Mischiefs wit seeks his desire,
And thinks, no Conscience, ways to Honour are:
He, Mustapha! here seeing thee, and me;
Sees no Mans good, or ill rules Destiny.
Then ah! woe worth them that with God contend,
And would exchange the course of Fate by Wit,
Which God makes work, to bring his works to end,
And with it self, even oft, doth ruin it.
Ah Tyrant Fate! to them that doe amiss:
For nothing left me, but my Error, is.
What Glories this that with it self is sad?
Good luck makes all hearts, but the guilty, glad.
Zinger, for whom even Mustapha was slain,
And unto whom Camena's blood was shed;
Zinger, for whom all Worlds on me complain,
Hath done that which nor Law, nor Truth could doe:
(Horror, and doubt in my desires breed)
Murdered himself, and overthrown me too.
Tell why? And how he so unthankful died?
In every Creatures heart there lives Desire,
Which men doe hallow as appearing good:
For Greatness they esteem it to aspire,
Although it weakness be, well understood.
This unbound, raging, infinite Thought-fire
I took; nay it took me, and placed my heart
On hopes to alter Empire, and Succession.
Chance was my faith, and Order my despair:
Sect, Innovation, Change of Princes right,
My studies were: I thought Hope had no end,
In her, that hath an Emperor to friend.
Whence like the Storms (that then like storms doe blow,
When all things, but themselves, they overthrow)
I ventured; first to make the Father fear,
Then hate, then kill, his most beloved Child.
My Daughter did discover him my way,
To Mustapha she opened mine intent:
For she had tried, but could not turn my heart.
Yet no hurt to me she in telling meant,
Though hurt she did me to disclose my Art.
I sought Revenge: Revenge it could not be;
For, I confess, she never wronged me.
Remorse, that hath a Faction in each heart,
Womanish Shame, which is Compassions friend,
Conspired with Truth to have restrained me;
Yet killed I her whom I did dearly love;
Furies of choice, what arguments can move?
I killed her: for I thought her death would prove
That Truth, not Hate, made Mustapha suspected:
The more it seemed, against a Mothers love,
The more it showed, I Solyman affected:
Thus, underneath severe, and upright dealing,
A mischievous Stepmothers malice stealing,
It took effect: For few mean ill in vain.
Which wicked Art although the Father knew,
Yet his Affection turned my ill to good:
Vice, but of hers, being only understood.
Fear grew discreet, and would not speak in vain;
Courage turned all the strengths of heart to bear;
Justice it self durst murmur, not complain:
So little care the Fates for vs below:
So little men fear God, they doe not know.
But ah! Woe worth each false preposterous way,
Which promises good luck to evil deeds:
Since Mustapha, whose death I made my Glory,
Hath left me no power now, but to be sorry.
For Zinger, when he saw his Brother dead,
Confusedly with diverse shapes distract,
Hee silent stood, with Horrors compassed:
His Duty mixed with woe; Kindness with rage;
Reverence, Revenge, both representing shame,
Equally against, and with a Mothers name.
But as these shadows vanished from his mind,
The Globes of his enraged eyes he threw
On me, like Nature justly made unkind:
And for this hateful fault my Love did make,
From Pity, Woe, and Anger, thus he spake:
" Mother! Is this the way of Women's heart?
" Have you no Law, or God; but Will, to friend?
" Can neither Power, nor Goodness scope your Art?
" Be these the Counsels by which you ascend?
" Is there no Hell? Or doe the Devils love fire?
" If neither God, Heaven, Hell, or Devil be;
" It is plague enough that I am borne of thee.
" Mother! O monstrous Name! shall it be said,
" That thou hast done this fact for Zingers sake?
" Honour, and Life, shall they to one upbraid,
" That, from thy Mischief, they their Honour take?
" O wretched Men! which under shame are laid,
" For faults which we, and which our Parents make.
" Yet Rossa! to be thine, in this I glory;
" That, being thine, gives power to make thee sorry.
He wounds his heart; and falling down with death
On Mustapha, who there for his sake died;
These words he spake:
" Ah base Ambition! mould of Cruelty,
" In thy vast narrow bosom ever breed
" These hideous Counsels, light-abhorring deeds.
" Yet you pure souls that Mahomet adore!
" Read in these wounds my horror of his death,
" And to the Christians cary thou it, Breath.
He dies. Woes me. When in my heart I look,
Horror I see: all there lost but despair:
My Love, and Joy become Afflictions book;
Eternity of Shame is printed there.
To think of God! Alas, that so I may:
Yet Power, and Goodness can but show me Fear:
Mercy I cannot crave, that cannot trust:
Nor die I will; for death concludes pains:
Nor languish in conceit; for then I must
Abhor my soul, in which all Mischiefs reign.
I will bear with me, in this Bodies dust,
What curse soever to the earth remains.
I will bear with me Envy, Rage, Desire,
To set all Hearts, all Times, all Worlds on fire.
You weak Souls! whose true Love hath made you base,
And fixed your Quiets upon others will:
You humble Hearts! which unto Power give place,
For conscience bearing yokes of Tyrants skill:
You poor Religious! who in hope of grace,
Bear many sore temptations of the ill,
Rejoice: Unkindness, Cruelty, Disgrace,
Vengeance, and Wrong bear hence with me I will.
Rather take heed: where can more Danger be,
Than where these Powers may be disposed by me?
VAst Superstition! Glorious stile of Weakness!
Sprung from the deep disquiet of Mans passion,
To desolation, and despair of Nature:
Thy Texts bring Princes Titles into question:
Thy Prophets set on work the sword of Tyrants:
They manacle sweet Truth with their distinctions:
Let Virtue blood: teach Cruelty for Gods sake;
Fashioning one God; yet him of many fashions,
Like many-headed Error, in their Passions.
Mankind! Trust not these Superstitious dreams,
Fears Idoles, Pleasures Relikes, Sorrows Pleasures.
They make the wilful hearts their holy Temples:
The Rebels unto Government their Martyrs,
No: Thou child of false miracles begotten!
False Miracles, which are but ignorance of Cause,
Lift up the hopes of thy objected Prophets:
Courage, and Worth abjure thy painted heavens.
Sickness, thy blessings are; Misery, thy trial;
Nothing, thy way unto eternal being;
Death, to salvation; and the Grave to Heaven.
So Blessed be they, so Angel'd, so Eternized
That tie their senses to thy senseless glories,
And die, to cloy the after-age with stories.
Man should make much of Life, as Natures table,
Wherein she writes the Cipher of her glory.
Forsake not Nature, nor misunderstand her:
Her mysteries are read without Faiths eye-sight:
She speaks in our flesh; and from our Senses,
Delivers down her wisdoms to our Reason.
If any man would break her laws to kill,
Nature doth, for defence, allow offences.
She neither taught the Father to destroy:
Nor promised any man, by dying, joy.
" OH wearisome Condition of Humanity!
" Borne under one Law, to another bound:
" Vainly begot, and yet forbidden vanity,
" Created sick, commanded to be sound:
What means Nature by these diverse Laws?
Passion and Reason, selfe-diuision cause:
Is it the mark, or Majesty of Power
To make offences that it may forgive?
Nature herself, doth her own self deflower,
To hate those errors she her self doth give.
For how should man think that, he may not doe
If Nature did not fail, and punish too?
Tyrant to others, to her self unjust,
Only commands things difficult and hard.
Forbids vs all things, which it knows is lust,
Makes easy pains, unpossible reward.
If Nature did not take delight in blood,
She would have made more easy ways to good.
We that are bound by vows, and by Promotion,
With pomp of holy Sacrifice and rites,
To teach belief in good and still devotion,
To preach of Heavens wonders, and delights:
Yet when each of vs, in his own heart looks,
He finds the God there, far unlike his Books.
This Tragedy called MVSTAPHA, may bee printed: Dated the three and twentieth Day of IVNE, in the year of our LORD GOD, one thousand, six hundred, thirty and two.

ROssa the Eternal Wisdom doth not covet
Of man his strength, or reason, but his Love:
And not in vain; for love of all the powers,
Is it which governs all things which are ours.
I speak by Mustapha, for as a father,
How often thought I those light judging praises
Of multitudes, (whom my love taught to flatter)
Truss oracles, and Mustaphaes true stories,
So dear are Echoes of our own thoughts voices;
So dearly nature bids her own beloved,
So ill a Judge is Love of her beloved.
But let vs see, if love should not be blind,
Forgetting selfe-respects to foster kind:
The praised Phoenix (never more then one)
Burns; it is true, that she her like may breed,
But never till she feel all life is gone,
Except the life that life hath in her seed;
Then death, which kindness is by estimation,
In her is but delight of Procreation.
But be it love, man hath another guide,
The Orb of his affection Reason is,
But his love Center's in his private breast,
And loving his, himself still loves best.
Since Mustapha will therefore die or kill;
I gave him life, and give him death I will.
Solyman my Lo: knowledge who was father
To Mustapha, made me poor silly woman
Think Nature could not her own nest defile:
But now I see Imposture passion may,
The gold of Natures — betray
And pardon Lo: if you were out of danger,
And all these storms blown up, to blow me over,
Fear first should fall, threats strike, life perish,
Fortune about her wheel, should turn my fortune,
Ere I would doubt the child, and know the father.
But you Sir, now that you are brought in question,
You, upon whom the worlds well-being rests,
Much better were it, I were in the Center,
A Ghost among the dead, Air never bodied,
Then my selfe-pitty womanish compassion,
My love unto the children, for the father
Should give the children leave to kill their father;
His fame untimely borne, strength strangely gathered,
Honour won with honouring, Greatness with humbleness
Fault-lessnesse with bearing faults, and want rewarding,
Liberty seeking Love, and danger praise,
A Monarchs Heir in courses popular,
Make me divine some strange aspiring mind,
Yet doubtful, for it may be Art or kind:
But judge him with himself, and that by fact;
Persia our old imbrued enemy,
Treats marriage with the son without the father;
A course in all Estates to Princes doubtful;
But here much more; where he that Monarch is,
Must (like the Sun) have no light shine but his,
The dowry what kingdoms, and hope of kingdoms.
What sudden knot hath bound up these designs?
Made them that only feared our greater growing,
Study devises for our greater growing.
A giddy thought may change a private heart,
But States whose loves and hearts by counsel grow,
Whose wisdoms are, Occasion, Time and Seat,
Have other ends then chance in all they treat:
Yet be it all the world will vs obey,
And under ours all Empires Empire lay;
All great Estates surfeit more oft then pine,
Because desires still multiply with might,
And parted power makes danger infinite.
No, no, upon the pitch of high Attempt
I see him stand, playing with wrong and fear,
For Love and Duty they be captives there:
His hopes, the hopes of all, for all aspire:
And as Kings ruling, must use payne and law,
So those that rise, must make the people see
With present bondage, future liberty.
Love therefore stand aside, and fare well Pity:
Mustapha be clear of fault, for Kingdoms wrong
Turns all the powers of Nature into fury,
Mercy joys to be cruel, Truth is a tyrant,
Love hates, Hate in revenge doth glory,
The fall of Angels made not Heaven sorry.
Solyman; fear is broke loose within my spirits;
What will or may be, seems already happens:
His power thus great, well fixed, occasion ready,
Shadows of ruin to my heart deliver.
Confused noise within my ears doth thunder,
Of multitudes, that with obeying threaten.
Solyman, fear of thee makes me wish for death,
And fear again to leave thee, fears death.
Rossa, I scorn there should because of fear
In one mans rage: for hard then were our State,
That reins of all the worlds desire bear:
But thy disquiet shall increase my hate;
Thy wishes, vain to thee yet never were,
Exempt thou art from laws of my Estate,
For Love and Empire both alike have pleasure,
Part of themselves upon desires to measure.
And but that all my joys bear sorrows Image,
My hopes resemble fear, my wit confusion,
Nature me thinks her-selfe, becomes a Monster,
And that even Mustapha makes all this Chaos.
I could say I took pride in thy affection,
For Power may be feared, Empire obeyed,
Good fortune wooed, and followed for ambition:
Reward makes knees to bow, makes selfe-loue humble:
Honour, whose throne is under Princes sceptre,
May make aspiring thoughts delight in danger;
But Love is only that which Princes covet,
And for they have it least, they most doe love it.
Care therefore for thy self, I hold thee dear;
And as for me,
Though Fortune be of glass and easily broken,
Yet, doubt not, my Armour is, against their spite:
And such all-dating spirits are seldom borne,
That upon Princes graves dare sow their corn.
Sir, few in number are Times present children,
Where man ends, there ends discontentments empire,
Novelty hath always had a fleshly dwelling.
Then tell me Lord, what man would choose his room,
That must expect in wickedness a mean,
Or else be sure to find a fatal doom?
Can that stay in the midst, whose center's lowest?
Old age is natures poverty, and scorn:
Desires riches lives in Princes children,
Their youths are Comets, within whose corruption,
Men prophecy new hope of better fortune.
Baiazeth shows no man turns from a Kingdom,
For humbleness to ask his fathers blessing:
Nature corrupted is; and wit prefers
The wisdom that for selfe-aduantage erreth.
Wisdom is not unto herself indebted,
That leaves nothing but a God aboue her.
Sir, wickedness is forced that modest is,
He flatters that allows her not be cruel.
Is there return from death unto the living?
No Sir, but much may hap before his death;
Who thinking nothing worse, and nothing after
Knows, thought of wrong is death, if Princes live,
Where dead, all heirs their own guilt doe forgive.
I sent, he com's, and come is in my power.
Before he comes, who knows your fatal hour,
The wicked wrestle both with power and slight,
While Princes live, each mans life gardeth theirs,
When they are dead, men's loves go with their fears;
Slain by the way, least grudge most safely were.
Wrong is not princely, and much less is fear.
Those glorious hazards tempt and hasten fate,
They well become a man but not a State.
This fear in women shows a kindness too,
And is for men to thank, but not to doe.
We call them great hearts, which God hartens so
That fear shall not fore-see their overthrow.
Those are weak hearts, that while their fears they see
Would ruin all men, lest they ruined be,
I do suspect, yet there is nothing done,
I loose my fame, if so I kill my son.
The Gods when they leave men to beasts a pray,
His reason with his pride they do betray.
Gods meddle not where power and will agree,
But when at once, men good and evil be,
Though I yet know not-he hath done amiss,
I doubt; and heavy Princes doubting is,
Though I resolve, I will not kill him there;
It mortal is, when Kings do say they fear.
Fond man distraught with divers thoughts on foot,
That rack'st thy self, and Natures peace dost break,
Judge not the Gods aboue; It doth not boot,
Nor do thou see, that which thou dare not speak.
Power hath great scope; not in the private ways
Of truth she walks; virtues of common men
Are not the same which shine in Kings aboue,
And do make fear bring forth the fruits of love.
Admit that Mustapha not guilty be;
Who by his Prince will rise, his Prince must please,
And they that please, judge with humility.
Knowledge a burden is, obedience case,
Who loves good name, is free to follow it,
Who seeks Kings loves, he must their humours fit,
When owners doe resolve to overthrow,
The stately ok for gain, or clearer sight,
Who loves the shadow, with the fall seeks wo;
When others gather wood, and go upright;
Like wheels of wood; or rather like dead loggs.
With other sinews drawn, and lead about,
Admit Kings be; yet all men see not all;
Who rocks with chains will move, from whence they sit,
Must spend their force to draw themselves to it.
Yonder they are, whose charge must be discharged
In Rossacs face; me thinks desire speaks,
He keeps the laws, that all laws form breaks.
Rossa, you now shall know fear is a coward,
Sworn to mistrust her self, to worship power;
Tyrant to man that should rule, and obeys,
And tyrant-like betrayed, or betrays.
Is Mustapha in health and coming?
My Lord already come: for what can stay,
Where love and duty both teach to obey.
Go rest, hereafter you shall know our pleasure.
Rossa; our Patriarch saw the heavens open,
And in their throne this wisdom there appeared,
A virgin, by Eternities hand sitting,
In beauties of the earth and heaven clothed,
Containing in her shape, all shapes and favours;
And in her life, the life of living creatures,
Still one, and never one, mortal and yet immortal:
A Chaos both of Reason, Sense and Passion,
Working in plants only to grow and fade,
To pleasure others both with fruit and shade;
In beasts both life and sense created she,
And but desire, to no law bound they be;
When man she made, and this same spark divine,
Reason infused in him, that only he
In time might divers from the Angels be.
Then least this spright, free-denizend on earth
Should of the world take pride, and so forget
That unto vs it but in lease is let:
She doth within the body where it lives
Place life and senses, drawn from beasts and plants,
To war with Reason, and show what it wants.
And if belief, the life of true Religion,
Could not give credit to this Revelation,
Even feeling, which gives life to good belief,
Within my self, makes my self an example.
Mustapha is come, and by his coming
Hath glutted my desire, and of his coming
Hath made me doubt, my doubts suspect my malice;
Nature against my jealousy arises:
Fear of ill doing, threatens fear of suffering:
Worth assures greatness, greatness brings worth in question;
Truth is (me thinks) both with him and against him;
And as for Reason, that should rule these passions,
I find her so effeminate a power,
As she bids kill, to save; bids save, and doubt not;
Keeping my love and fear in equal balance,
That I with Reason, may think Reason is
A glass to show, not help what Reason is.
Thus like the corn upon the weak stalk growing
I bow my head, with every breath of whether:
And Mustapha, that now I would have slain,
I now resolve to give him life again.
Sir, nature doth not disclaim her right in monsters,
Which are but errors in her expectation,
Nature with love doth steal the hearts of fathers;
Her end is to make all her makings perfect:
But Steel hath rust, Time change, and Nature error.
No marvel then, though Mustapha in Nature
Be found as well as Lucifer in Heaven.
Let not these childrens sticks gilt to the show,
Make you forget that worms in them may grow.
Remember, what true grounds of his Ambition,
Made you resolve, his greatness was your danger:
And shall selfe-fondnesse put out just suspicion?
Conceit must not be guide of Love or Anger;
For mischief while her head shows in the clouds,
In Plutoes Kingdom she her body shrouds:
Lay hands on him, your fear may work your woe,
From wrong there is no other way to go.
How should I think my Son doth seek my blood?
By being safe, doubt only is withstood.
Can Kings be safe from wrongs, that wrongs shall doe?
And wrong it is, in things not known, or done,
For any Father to destroy his Son.
Kings loose their Crowns that oft doe love or fear,
More then the Crowns, that they themselves doe wear.
What Kings doe think, another man may doe,
An other man may think, and doe it too.
Power headlong is, Kings wrath like thunder blasts
Doth fear the world, and that it hits, it wastes;
It cannot touch but it must overthrow.
Where Kings doe let their power rule their wit,
Better unmade, then doe a miss with it.
But he that with his wit can rule his wit,
Doth judge and measure where his power shall light.
Thunder, because it ruin's if it hit,
The Gods themselves have power over it.
So, for that Kings have power of all below,
Their wrath must not before their knowledge go.
Heaven may be slow where all at once is known,
In Man, where, till they fall, Faults may be found,
While doubt is curious, Help is overthrown.
They doe against themselves, that doubt and doe.
Who doubt against themselves, doe danger woo.
Arguments of doubt, accused him to me;
And Arguments of love doe set him free.
My Lord, your doubt from arguments did rise
Of wanton Greatness, Ambitious-seeking love:
Good Nature is not natured to be wise,
If doubt with cause, without cause it remove.
Suspicion is but only trials ground,
Fame is like breath breathed from the inward part.
Where it is death to think or to conspire,
There Kings may kill before they doe enquire.
Where Kings but only for themselves doe fear,
Both strength and honour is it to forbear;
I am no more, until more I doe hear.
O wearisome condition of humanity,
Borne under one law, to an other bound,
Vainly be got, and yet forbidden vanity,
Created sick, commanded to be sound:
What means Nature by these divers laws?
Passion and Reason. selfe-diuision cause:
It is the mark, or majesty of Power,
To make offences that it may forgive:
Nature her self, doth her own self deflower,
To hate those errors she her-selfe doth give.
For how should man think, that he may not doe,
If Nature did not fail and punish too?
Tyrant to others, to her self unjust,
Only commands things difficult and hard,
Forbids vs all things, which it knows is lust,
Makes easy pains, unpossible reward.
If Nature did not take delight in blood,
She would have made more easy ways to good.
We that are bound by vows, and by promotion,
With pomp of holy Sacrifice and rights,
To teach belief in good and still devotion,
To preach of Heavens wonders and delights:
Yet, when each of vs, in his own heart looks,
He finds the God there, far unlike his books.
They that from youth do suck at Fortunes breast,
And nurse their empty heart with seeking higher,
Like dropsy fed their thirst, do never rest,
For still begetting, they beget desire;
And thoughts like wood, while they maintain the flame
Of high desires, grow ashes in the same:
But Virtue, those that can behold thy beauties,
Those that suck from their youth the milk of goodness,
Their minds grow strong against the storms of fortune,
Like rocks in seas; which in the goodly weather,
Give rest to birds, that in their courses wander,
And in the storms stand fast, themselves unshaken,
Though ruins oft unto desire mistaken.
O virtue! whose thrall I think fortune,
Thou who despisest not the sex of women
Help, and out of the riddles of any fortune,
Whereon (me thinks) you with your self depose me;
Let Fate go on, sweet virtue doe not loose me,
My mother and my husband have conspired
For brothers good the ruin of my brother,
My father by my mother is inspired
For one child to seek the ruin of the other.
I that to help by nature am required,
While I do help must needs still hurt a brother,
While I see who conspires, I seem conspired
Against a husband, father and a mother.
Truth bids me run, by truth I am retired,
Shame leads me both the one way and the other:
With danger and dishonour I am hired
To doe against a husband and a mother:
In what a labyrinth is honour cast,
Drawn divers ways with Sex, with Time and State,
In all which, errors course is infinite,
By hope by fear, by spite, by love, by hate;
And but one only way unto the right:
A thorny way, where payne must be the guide,
Danger the light, offence of power, the praise;
Such are the golden hopes of Iron days.
Yet, honour, I am thine, forthy sake sorry,
Since base hearts, for their base ill-plac'd desires,
In shame, in danger, death and torments glory,
That I cannot with more pains write thy story.
And Fortune, if thou scorn those that scorn thee;
Shame if thou doe hate those, that force thy trumpet
To sound aloud, and yet despise thy sounding;
Laws, if you love not those that be examples
Of natures laws, whence you are fallen corrupted;
Conspire, that I against you all conspired,
Joined with tyrant virtue (as you call her.)
That I, by your revenges may be named
For virtue to be ruined and defamed.
My mother oft and diversely I warned
What fortunes were upon such courses builded,
That Fortune still might be with child with mischief,
Which is both borne and nourished out of mischief:
I told her, that even as the silly Dove
Sealed up with her own lids, to seek the light,
Still covets unto the heights aboue,
Till fallen, she feels, the lack was in her sight,
So man, benighted with his own selfe-loue,
Still creeps to the rude embracing night
Of Princes grace, a lease of glories let,
Which shining, burns, breeds Sirens, where it's set.
And by this creature of my mothers making,
This messenger, I Mustapha have warned,
That Innocence is not enough to save
Where good and greatness fear and envy have.
Till now, in reverence I have forborne
To ask, or to presume to guess or know
My fathers thoughts, whereof he might think scorn:
For dreadful is that State; which all may doe.
Yet they that alll men fear, are fearful too.
Lo where he comes, Virtue work thou in me,
That what thou seek, may accomplished be.
Wild death, is not thy self sufficient anguish,
But thou must borrow fear; the threatening glasle,
Which while it goodness hides, and mischief shows;
It lightens wit, to honours overthrow.
But hushed, me thinks away Camena steals;
Murder belike in me her self reveals,
Camena whither now? why haste you from me?
Is it so strange a thing to be a father?
My Lord, me thought; nay sure I saw you busy,
Your child vncald presumes, that comes to you.
Who may presume with fathers, but their own?
Whom Natures law hath ever in protection,
And guides in good belief of dear affection,
To make it greater, and the better known.
Nay, reverence childrens words do closest hide,
As of the Father it is least espied.
I think, who ever know their children least
Have greatest reason for to love them best.
How so my Lord? since love doth knowledge show,
And Babes their parents by their kindness know.
The life we gave them, they do soon forget,
While they think our lives do their fortunes let.
The Father sees his image in the son,
But streams back to their springs, do never run.
Pardon my Lord, doubt is successions shrove,
Let not her spite poor children overthrow;
Though streams from springs do seem to run away,
Ti's Nature leads them to their mother Sea.
Doth nature teach vs by the Fathers death
To seek his throne, by whom we have our breath?
Things easy, to desire, do seem impossible.
Why should fear make impossibles seem easy?
Monsters yet be, and being are believed.
Monsters not seen, are monstrously believed.
Pardon me Sir, if duty doe seem angry;
I am your child; these common blots of children,
Doe reach indeed, I do not know how near me,
Near thee indeed, for you had both one Father.
My gracious Lord, if you were not my Father;
Nature would much rapine at such a stain;
But Sir, by that you owe me as a father,
Think well of them, wherein your self remain;
Borrow not jealousy of Princes state,
To warrant you, that you may children hate.
Mustapha is even he, that thus hath stained
Nature with blood, and love with bloody malice;
He thought it long, that I thus long have reigned;
He that at once deuis'd, that all at once should die;
Rosten and Rossa, Zinger, thou and I.
Far be it off, that this should be found true,
Can hope of all the world be thus deceived?
Sweet Mustapha doth Nature lie in you?
Sir, these be Greatness mists; be not deceived;
For Kings hate in their fearful waining state,
And easily doubt, and what they doubt, they hate.
Then Parasites that haunt their Princes Grace
Know, deprivation hath a pleasing face.
Camena, thy soft youth that knows not ill,
Whose A prill thoughts yields showers of sweet good will,
Cannot believe the Elder, when they say,
That good belief, is greatest States decay:
Wisdom was never borne before her time,
Manswit and nature, youths Horizon are;
Perchance experience unto more may clime,
Let it suffice, that I and Rossa too,
Are privy what your brother means to doe;
O pardon me (dread Sir) and as a Father,
What I shall say, speaking it of a mother,
Know I do say it but to right a brother.
The evil Angel of good will is fear,
Whose many eyes whilst but itself they see,
Each one to other forms of ruin bee:
Out of this fear she Mustapha accused,
Unto this fear (perchance) she joins the love
Which doth in mothers for their children move.
Perhaps, when fear hath shown how yours must fall,
In love she sees, how hers must rise withal.
Sir, fear and frailty have, and may have grace,
And our care of your good may not be blamed,
Care of our own in Nature hath a place,
Passions have oft mistaken and misnamed,
Yet God forbid, that either fear or care,
Should ruin those that true and faithful are.
Is it no fault, or fault I may forgive?
For son to seek the father should not live.
Is it a fault, or fault for you to know!
My mother doubts a thing that is not so:
O strange unhappiness of highest room,
Which thinking opposition dero gates
From Majesty, they joy to overcome
The truth with selfe-loue, teaching flattery,
How to impostume power with proud access:
But pardon me my Lord, admit it so,
That Mustapha in wanton youths conceit,
Had wandered from the course he ought to go;
Yet think what frailty is, and what the bait,
For private men, which here below obey,
Beholding outward pomp of Majesty,
And unacquainted with Kings inward care,
Like Satyrs think the fire, as sweet as fair,
And burn with grasping their beloved air:
But Sir, the Gods whom Kings should imitate,
Have placed you high, to rule, not overthrow,
For as, not for your selves is your estate,
Mercy must hand in hand with power go.
Your sword should not strike with the arm offer,
Which fadoms all mensimbecilitie.
And mischief doth, least it should mischief bear,
As reason deals within with frailty,
Which kills not passions that rebellious are,
But adds, substracts: keep down ambitious spirits
With hard examples: no, with truth and care;
So must power warn, and threaten ere it light.
A point there is, whereat each heart must stay,
All men may covet all, few all can doe;
The worst and best, are both like heard, and care
For flesh and blood, the means twixt heaven and hell,
To thee extremes extremely packed are.
Martyrs few men can be, even for the good,
As few can seal their mischief with their blood.
The Princes wisdom, and his office this,
To see from whence, how far each one can move,
To What, what each mans God and Devil is,
Judging and handling frailty with love:
For ignorance begets cruelty,
Misthinking each man, every thing can be;
The best may fall, the worst that is may mend;
You hedge in time, and doe prescribe to God
Where safety, nor amendment you intend,
The last of all corrections, is the rod,
And Kings that circle in themselves with death,
Poison the air wherein they take their breath;
Pardon my Lord, pity becomes my sex,
And if I speak this from the common sense,
Ti's natures truth, it pleads her own defence.
If what were best for them that doe offend
Laws did enquire, the answer must be grace;
If mercy be so large, wher's Justice place?
Where love despairs, &amp; where Gods power hath end;
For mercy is the highest reach of wit,
A safety unto them, that save with it;
Borne out of God, and unto human eyes
Like God, not seen, till fleshly passion dies.
God may forgive, whose being, and whose harms
Are far removed from reach of fleshly arms,
But if God equals or successors had,
Even God of safe revenges would be glad.
Who knows if made a Lamb, what he would be,
Much less his flesh of heavenly councels free.
While he is yet alive he may be slame,
But from the dead no flesh comes back again,
While he remains alive, I live in fear.
Though he were dead that doubt still living were.
None hath the power to end what he begun.
The same occasion follows every Son.
Their greatness, or their worth is not so much.
And shall the best be slain for being such.
Thy mother, and thy brother be amisle,
I am betrayed, and one of them it is.
My Mother (if sheeerr's) err's virtuously,
And let her err, ever Mustapha should die
Kings for their safety must not blame mistrust,
Nor for surinise must Kings destroy the just.
Well dear Camena, keep this secretly,
I will be well advised before he die.
O werisome obedience, I despise thee;
Must I in vain be Mustaphas accuser?
Sands shall be numbered first, Time shall be constant,
The Sea shall yield his channel to the fire,
The Earth shall bear the Heaven within his Center,
Eternity shall die, Nature be Idle.
Ever my delights or will shall stand in awe
Of God or Nature, common peoples law.
Rossa, what means this unquiet motion?
Govern your thonghts: what want you to content you
That have the King of Kings at your devotion?
Content? poor wit and poor promotion,
The helm of princes greatness is their will,
Say you that I have all at my devotion,
That for my fear of Prince, and Princes ill,
Am brought in question both of state and fame,
Must loose my will, and cannot loose my shame?
What night? what clouds? what shades of souls condemned?
What darkness in the gulf of darkness?
So dark are fathers thoughts, with kindness blinded.
What lightnings flash from clouds with child with fire?
As thoughts possessed alike with fear and kindues:
Mustapha long since condemned to die,
Now lines again.
To boast of marriage, what true ground have I?
The streams are choked of Solymans affection,
Where Fortune did of old, make her election.
Think not too much, for thoughts that be offended
Are seldom with their present counsels mended.
From Heaven to earth I will leave nothing
Unthought, unsought for, or not undertaken:
Virtue, nor vice shall in themselves have nothing;
Auernus bottoms shall not be forsaken,
Rather then my Lords love shall grow to nothing:
Virtue is cold, not fit to be beloved,
That with the loss of Fortune is not moved.
Virtue leads not herself for hope or fear,
Unquiet rage doth misadventure fashion
Nothing at all, it weakness is to bear;
Passion shall multiply more cause of passion:
Rossa, take heed, Honour is very brittle,
And broken once, never to be repaired,
And honour lost, mankind hath lost his fashion;
Honour and shame are slaves to them that prosper,
One sign that human worth with power is raised,
Is, that Kings do to make their doings praised.
Who forces man, is feared, but not beloved,
Praises of fear are tyrannous dispraises.
Praises for fear do show that we are great,
Who seek for love and may command a fear,
Are sitter to clime up, then tarry there.
I whom most men have thought have ruled all,
And with my Lord, his ruin undertaken,
Now live in this life, to behold my fall:
Our credit with our Sovereign is our honour,
And erethou suffer that to have despite,
Think Innocence harm, virtue dishonour:
Wound truth, and overthrow the state of right.
Sexes have virtues apart, States have there fashions
The virtues of authority are passions,
But stay; look where our messenger returns.
Rossa and Rosten while you stand debating,
The joys are fortunes of your private fortune.
Rosten make haste, go hence, and carry with thee
My life, my fame, desire and my fortune.
You ugly Angels of infernal Kingdom,
You spirits resolute to dwell in darkness,
You who have virtuously maintained your being
In equal power, like rivals to the heavens:
If as they say (who say it for reproach)
You are at hand to those that on you call,
Refusing none but such as doe refuse you,
Revenge your selves of this false title, virtue:
This virtue which hath seldom been assailed
By you; but she hath still her servants failed:
My shame, my fear, my love I offer to you,
Let me reign while I live, in my desires,
Or dead, live with you in eternal fires.
Rossa, doing, not praying merits heaven or hell:
Mischiefs doe rise, and set themselves against thee,
Misfortune hath even now conspired thy ruin;
Entreat no enemies, for they forgive not,
But humblethou thy self unto the heavens.
I fear to tell, I tremble to conceal it,
Thy blood even with thy destiny is infected,
I would, yet would I not, I durst reveal it.
Fortune, unto the death is then displeased,
When remedies doe ruin her diseased.
Use not these parables of coward fear,
Fear hurts less when it strikes, then when it threatens,
If Mustapha shall live, all fear is fallen,
Danger lighted, desire lost, hope banished;
If Mustapha shall die, then fear from hope,
Loss from desire, danger and pain are vanished.
If Mustapha shall die, his death miscarries
Part of thy End, thy Fame, thy Friends, thy Joys,
No man to hurt his foes, his friends destroys.
Friends? who are they, but those that serve desire?
My Gods, my Friends, my Father and my Mother
Are but those steps, that help me to aspire.
Duty and love took knowledge of no other;
Let me and all the world with him be stain,
I will not wish to be alive again.
But tell what is the worst.
Ask not in rage, rage brings it self to woe.
Unless the wings whereon it flies be slow.
I charge you tell me, how I am fortune-bound,
That if I harm him, I my self confound.
Camana must with him a traitor be,
Or Mustapha for her sake must be free.
O cruel Fates, that doe in love plant woe,
And in delight make our despairs to grow:
But speak, what hath she done?
Undone thy doing:
Discovered unto Mustapha his danger,
Virtues sweet fame with love of mercy wooing;
And great suspicions from these relics grow,
That what she knows, both Son and Father know.
I that am yours, durst not make you a stranger,
And yet was loath with duty to offend,
In childrens faults, a mothers wisdom shows.
Loves perfect try all is in flame of anger;
Malice to Mustapha must be forgot,
That your beloved Camena perish not.
Nay, pale Auernus I doe so adore thee,
As I lament my womb hath bin so barren,
To yield but one to offer up before thee:
Who thinks the daughter harm, can mother stay
From end, whereon a mothers heart is set,
Knows not wisdom, wickedness beget:
Boldness in malice dazzles humane reason.
Camaena thy false blood shall doe me right.
Rossa, is rage so mad, as to imagine
It masters heaven?
Is rage so mad,
As it will stay revenge to hope for heaven?
Where ages are but hours.
Is wrath so cruel?
Are laws of love so soon forgotten?
Is mercy dead?
Would you have wrath so foolish
As it should stay until it be abused?
Is Nature under such fond laws be gotten,
As Love must give it self to be abused?
Yet by the Love of mothers to their children,
By all the pains of travel with your children,
Punish, but spare the life of faulty children.
Life may amend and well deceive an other,
Death doth but cut off one, to warn an other.
I doe protest before you spirits infernal,
That govern in your darkness vniform'd,
By all your plagues and miseries eternal,
By all your ugly shapes, and souls transformed,
Neither to have bin made a heavenly Angel,
Honoured alive, and after this life famous,
Would I love of my children have disclaimed:
But since by her my life is brought in question,
Since she is out of daughters duty gotten,
My mothers tender care shall be forgotten,
They still that have good will to kill, or perish,
And they do err that others erruor cherish;
Camena, then since thy desires would make
Thy mothers harm examples of thy glory,
Since thou dost leave me for a brothers sake,
Since thy heart feels not what makes others sorry,
Thy triumph shall bee death, thy glory shame,
For so die they that wrong a mothers name;
Thy treasures with thine own arts are discarded;
I will do something not to be forgotten,
The givers of examples are regarded.
Who standing in the shade of humble valley,
Looks up and wondèrs at the height of hills,
When he with toil of weary limbs ascends,
And feels his spirits melt with Phoebus glaies,
Or sinews stark with AEolus bitter breathing.
Or thunder blasts, which coming from the sky,
Do fall most heavy on the places high:
Then knows (though further seen, and further seeing,)
They multiply in woes that add in glories,
Who weary is of natures quiet valleys,
A mean estate with chaste and poor desires,
Whose virtue longs for knees (bliss for opinion)
Who judges pleasure, paradise in purple,
Let him seem no governor of Castle,
No, pity princes choice, whose weak dominions,
Make weak unnoble councels to be currant;
But Bash unto Solyman, whose sceptre,
Nay servants have dominion over Princes,
Under whose feet the four forgotten Monarcher,
The foote-stooles lie of his eternal glory
Even I thus raised: this Solymans beloved,
Thus carried up by fortune to be tempted,
Must for my Princes sake destroy succession,
Or suffer ruin to preserve succession.
O wretched state of ours wherein we live,
Where doubt gives loves, which nature can forgive.
Where rage of Kings, not only ruin be,
But where their very love brings misery.
Most happy men that know not, or else fear
The slippery second place of honours steppe,
Which we with envy get, and danger keep:
But Kings, whom strength of heart did first advance,
Be sure what raised you first, keeps you aboue;
Man subject made himself, it was not chance,
Love treats truth, and Ll. rule the world with fear &amp; love,
Justice not kindness reverence doth enhance,
For subjects to your selves when you descend,
To dote on Subjects Majesty hath end.
Here as in weakness, flattery prints her hart,
And private spite dare use a Princes hand,
He error enters, truth and right depart,
And Princes scorn the news from hand to hand.
As Rossa prints her self in our Lords love,
And with her mischief doth his malice move:
First of her self she durst send Rosten forth
To murder Solyman his dearest son,
He found him only guarded with his worth,
Suspecting nothing and yet nothing done.
Rosten is now returned; for wicked fear
Did even make him wickedness for bear.
A Beliarby dispatcht, is sent to call him hither,
With colour of a war against the Persian,
Indeed to suffer force of tyranny,
From his enforced Fathers jealousy.
Who utters this is to his Prince a traitor,
Who keeps this guilty is, his life is ruth,
And dying lives, ever denying truth.
Thus hath the fancy-law of Kings ordained,
That who betrays them most; is most esteemed,
Who saith they are betrayed is traitor deemed.
I sworn am to my king, and to his humour,
His humour? No; which they that follow most
Wade in the sea wherein themselves are lost.
But Acmat, stay; who wrests his princes mind
Presents his faith upon the stage of chance,
Where virtue to the world, fortune unknown
Is oft misiudg'd, because she is overthrown.
Nay Acmat stay not; who truth enuirons
With circumstance of mans failing wit,
For fear, for love, for hope, for malice erreth,
Nature to Natures bankrupts he engages.
And while none dare show kings they go amiss,
Even base obedience their corruption is:
Then fear, dwell with the I ll, Truth is assured,
Opinion be, and reign with Princes Fortunes;
Policy go peer the faults of mortal kingdoms:
Death, threaten them that doubt to dye for ever.
I first am natures subject, then my Princes,
I will not serve to innocencies ruin.
Whose heaven is earth, let them believe in princes,
My God is not the God of subtle murder,
Solyman shall know the worst; I look no further.
Acmat, foolish natural affection
Opens too late the wisdom of my fathers,
Who only in their deaths decreed succession:
If Mustapha had never been entitled
In my life, to the hope of my estate;
My life, more then my death had him availed,
Example might have been persuasion,
That high desires are borne out of occasion:
But kindness with her own kind folly beaten,
Like crooked sticks made straight with ouer-bending,
What she hath struck too much must ouer-threaten,
Hath kings love taught kings reigning give offences?
That long life in the best kings discontented,
And false desires within false glasses showed.
By Mustaphaes example learn to know,
Who hues aboue his head shall hurt his eye,
Acmat, give order, Mustapha shall die.
My fortune doth me witness bear,
That my hopes need not stand upon succession,
Where hopes want all but only woe and fear,
Then Lord doubt not my faith though I withstand,
The fearful counsel which you have in hand.
Sir I confess, where one man rules all,
There fear and care, are secretkeies of wit,
Where all may rise and one may only fall,
Their thoughts aspires, and power must master it.
For worlds rapine at those whom birth or chance
Aboue all men, and but a man advance,
I know where easy hopes, doe nurse desire,
The dead men only of the wise are trusted,
And though crooked fear do seldom rightly measure
As thinking all things, but it self dissembled,
Yet Solyman let fear direct kings counsels,
But fear not destinies which doe not altar.
Nor things impossible which cannot happen,
Fear false Stepmothers rage, woman ambition
Whereof each age to other is a glass,
Fear them that fear not for desire, to shame,
And loose their faiths, to bring their wills to pass,
Establish Bassaes, children for your heirs,
Let Mustaphaes hopes fail, translate his right,
Let their ambitious thirst once glutted be,
Straight envy dies: fear will appear no more,
For as ill men but in felicity,
(Where envy fears and freedom sleeps) seem good
So heirs to crowns, tenants to misery,
Their good is but in ill luck understood.
But Sir put of this charm of cunning spite,
Which makes you to yourself invisible:
Make it not known dear Lord, by your example
That only Envy, fuire and suspicion,
In every kind and state keep their condition;
If Mustapha have one fault but his mother
If else where then in her heart he be guilty,
Let those deaf heavens which punish and forgive not,
Let hells most plagues unto her best beloved,
Malice and rage, which without mischief lives not,
Thunder torment burn ruin and destroy me,
If Mustapha have one thought to annoy thee.
Malice is like the lightning of the summer,
Which when the skies are clearest, lights and burns,
Her end is to doe hurt and not to threaten,
Justice unjustly doth to loose occasion,
Hazards it self, to force and to persuasion.
Sir, hasty power is like the rage of thunder,
Whose violence is seldom well bestowed:
Danger not meant, needs not to be prevented,
Revenge still in your power is not repented.
Danger already come is past preventing,
Princes whose Scepters must be feared of many,
Are never safe that live in fear of any.
Titants they are that punish out of fear.
States wiser then the truth decline and wear,
Wisdom in man is but the print and doubt,
Whose ink is either blood, secrets of states,
Which safely walls with government about.
In princes dangers justice ever goes,
Before the fact, that all else overthrows.
Besides my Bassaes in whose faith I trust.
As stays to mine estate, with one consent,
Show my sons faulc and urge me to be just,
Thy self alone, per chance with good intent
Art cross, wisdom is not faiths Relauue:
For oftentimes faith grows for lack of wit
And sees no peril, till he feels of it.
Doubt wounds within.
For as in kings when fear to kill hath might,
Both wrong and danger must be infinite,
And Sir, we Bassaes, whom you Monarchs please
To hear, much further are from princely heans
Then ears; for favour grows the states disease,
When more then service it to vs imparts.
Base blood hath narrow thoughts, which set aboue
Sees more of greatness then it comprehends;
And for all is not to our partial ends,
We fail kings with themselves, we take their might,
And use to our revenge: make laws asnare,
To ruin all, but instruments our friends
Till kings even let in lease to two or three
Are made of vs the — to be hold their right.
Even fame of kings estate a misery,
We Bassaes that do distribute at will;
And for that we the best men's risiag fear
With bruit and tumor good desert we kill.
This fashion and not Mustapha's offence,
Hath had an ambush to entrap your love.
But Sir awake, a kings just favourite
Is truth.
All broken ways not borne of faith but will.
Do but hale danger while that multiplies.
Where there is cause of doubt, laws do provide
Restraint of liberty, where force of spite
Lies in the living, dead, till it be tried.
Where kings too oft use their prerogative
The people do forbear, but not forgive.
My Lord, the state delays are wisdom, where
Time may more easy ways to safety show.
Self murder is an ugly work of fear
And little less is childrens overthrows.
For truths sake spare your son, and pardon him,
Men's wit and duty oft have diverse ways,
Duty with truth which doth with strength agree
Duty of honour strives wit to please,
Who stands alone in Countels of estate,
Where kings themselves even with adulse see fears,
Stands on the headlong step of death and hate;
For good luck envy, ill luck hazard bears;
For fashions that affect to seem upright,
To hide their faults must overthrow the right.
Sir, Mustapha is yours, moreover he
Is not, for whom you Mustapha overthrow,
Suspicion common to successions be,
Honour and fear ever together go.
Who must kill all they fear, fear all they see:
Your subjects, sons, nor neighbourhood can bear,
So infinite the limits be of fear.
Acmat no more, mischance doth oft o'reshoote
All under kings desires without all fear,
Your Bassaes know, for mischief seeks the root,
Not boughs, which but the fruit of greatness bear.
Mercy and truth are wisdoms popular,
And like the rain which doth in rich the ground,
They spend the elouds of which they owned are.
Princes estates have this one misery,
That though the men and treasons both be plain,
They're unbelieved, while Princes are unslain.
If thy care be of me, enough is said,
Go waite my pleasure, which shall be obeyed.
If you will Rossa see alive
You must make hast.
Fortune, hast thou not molds enough of sorrow,
Must thou yet these of love and kindness borrow?
Yet tel me, whence grew Rossaes passion?
When hither I from Mustapha returned,
And had made you account of my Commission,
Rossa, whose heart in care of your health burned,
Curiously after Mustapha enquiring.
A token spies, which I from hence did bear
For Mustapha by sweet Camena wrought
(Yet gave it not, for I began to fear,
And something more then kindness in it thought:)
No sooner she beheld this precious gift,
But as enraged, hands on her self she laid
From me as one that from her self would shift
She runs, nor till she found Camena, stays.
I follow and hear, both their voices high,
The one as doing, the other as suffering pain,
But whether your Camena live or die,
Or dead, if she by rage or guilt be slain.
If she made Rossa mad, or Rossa mad
To hurt things dearest to her self be glad.
Or where the bounds of unbound rage will stay.
If one or both, or which is made away
I know not, but O Solyman make hast,
What am I not my own, who then dare let me
From doing with my self what my self lists?
Nature hath lied: she saith, life unto many
May be denied, but not death unto any.
Come death, art thou afraid of me, that bear
All wickedness, by which you caused were.
Soliman stand from me, I am not thy Rossa:
But one that death, the devil and hell do fly,
Yet unto death, the devil, and hell do hie.
What fury is the God of this strange spirit?
Rossa, how art thou lost, or how transformed?
Leave it to me, or take or leave thy breath,
And show thy fault, thy fault shall give thee death.
That were to loose the benefit of death.
Then live.
That is the cruelty of death.
Then tell and die.
Nay tell and live, a worthy death
To her that so had lost the good of death.
What should be council to the marriage bed,
All things, unworthy of the marriage bed.
Yet tell me for my love, I long to know.
For love, I keep what love would fear to know.
Ignorance is dangerous and over fears.
Ignorance is dangerous and cannot fear.
Yet tell me, I am Prince, I do command,
Kings long to hear, and hate what they have herad
Good sir, let it be lawful to say nothing.
And less of kings men can desire nothing.
Then live, and let this multiply thy anguish,
That all diseases of my mind and state,
Injuries of love, contempts and wounds of favours,
Treachery, aspiring, death, suspicious ruin,
Consulted are by thee to make me languish,
Thou guidest me and my fortune unto error.
O Soliman, of grace let me say nothing:
For if I speak, thy never falling justice,
Must force thee to take vengeance of offences.
In odious facts, the solemn form of death,
Melts humane powers: great states to get compassion,
For mankind when it sees man loose his breath,
Their harts, not unto truth, but pity, fashion.
And death well borne shall make a wicked spirit
Stir pity up to make the law seem might,
Let these wild hands, to this wild hart be cruel.
Self death, which gods abhor, is sit for treason,
Mercy, by ill success, seems lack of reason.
Yet speak, for one of mischiefs plagues isshame.
You Gods, that govern these star-bearing heavens,
Whose only motion rules the moiung Seas,
And thou still changing glory of the darkness,
Whose growing horns and ensigns, of his Empire,
Bear witness with me, neither truth nor kindness,
Shame, nor remorse, desire to doe things honest,
Delight of others good, nor seat of mischief,
Duty to God or man, but one i glome,
The badge which Evil gives, doth tel this story.
Your daughter, in whom you and I had bliss,
By these imbrued fingers 〈◊◊◊〉
What fault would not a mothers love forgive,
Rossa The fault she made was that she let me live,
For knowing she conspired her fathers death,
By whom I hold my honour, she 〈◊〉 breath,
How could she think I could her crime forgive?
What cause had she to think so vile a thought?
Or by whom could she think to have a wrought?
Mischief it self, is cause of mischief done,
Whom should she fear to win, when she had won
Unto this mischief Mustapha thy son.
Did she confess, or who did her accuse,
This Guidon with her own hand, wrought and sent,
Bears perfect record what was her intent.
Expound what was the meaning of this work
Under whose are, the acts of mischief lurk,
The clouds, they be the house of jealousy,
Which fire and water both within them bears.
Where good shows less, ills greater then they bee,
There Saturn feeds on children that be his.
A fatal winding sheet, succession is.
This pleasing horror of our turned delight
Doth figure forth the Tyranny of fear,
Where truth lies bound, and nature loses right,
Poor innocence, vainly spending breath
To plead, where nothing is of trost but death
Malice here aged lies in doubleness,
Blowing out rumour from her narrow breast,
To spread abroad with infinite success,
The visions and opinions of unrest:
Eating the hearts wherein they harboured bee,
Like worms in wood, whose holes men only see.
These precious hills where daintiness seems wast,
By natures art, that all art will exceed,
In careless fineness, shows the sweet estate,
Of strength and prudence both together placed,
Two intercessors reconciling hate,
And giving fear ever of itself a taste,
These waives that beat upon the cliftes doe show,
The cruel storms, which Envy hath below,
This border round about in Character hath
The mind of all: which in effect is this,
Tic hard to know, but hard and harder too,
When men doe know, to bring their hearts to doe.
What said she, when you showed her this work?
Like them which are descried, &amp; fine would lurk:
So while she would have made her self seem clear,
She made her faults still more and more appear.
How brooked she that, the wicked only fear?
Her death I mean, with what heart did she bear?
The wicked hearts are placed far from their voice.
As whē they morn, you would think they rejoice.
She neuet mourned, nor sighed, nor was afraid,
But this unto me, ere she died, she said.
Mother, I am your own, by mothers right
You may cut of my life, which you did give,
Might and a mothers name, will you acquit,
If in your own self, you your self forgive:
But Mustapha, his death will be his shame
To father, mother, and the Turkish race:
For reverence unto a fathers name,
Hath brought him, guiltless, to this guilty case.
He never sought, nor wished his fathers death,
And in that mind I lived, and leave my breath.
She neither stubborn was, nor yet depressed,
She, but for his life, never made request;
As though his wounds, had only been her own.
Such Lordship had false glory in her breast,
As she took joy to have her mischief known.
Yet had she this against mine own self done,
My self against my self she should have won,
Solyman take heed, despair hath bloody heals:
Malice, wound up like clocks to watch the Sun,
Hasting a headlong course with many wheels,
Hath never done, until it hath undone.
I slew my child, my child would have slain thee,
All bloody faults, in my blood written bee.
What hills hath nature raised aboue the fire?
What state beyond them is, that will conspire?
I swear by all the Saints, my son shall die,
Revenge is justice and no cruelty.
False Mahomet, thy laws Monarchal are,
Unjust, ambitious, full of spoil and blood,
Having not of the best but greatest care
To whom still thou dost sacrifice thy good.
Must life yield up it self to be put out,
Before this frame of nature be denied?
Must blood the tribute be of princes doubt?
O wretched flesh in which must be obaid,
Gods laws, that wills impossibilities:
And princes wills, which work in cruelty,
With faith (an art borne of false Prophets word)
Wee blind our selves, and with our selves the rest,
To humbleness, the sheath of tie rants sword,
Each, worst unto himself approving best.
People, believe in God, wee are untrue,
Spiritual forges unto princes might;
God doth require, what's only best for you;
But we doe preach, your bodies to the war,
Your goods to spoil, your freedom into bands,
(duties by which you aw'de of others are)
And fear which to your harms doth lead your hands:
Who preach, that God, who made all flesh alike,
Bids you lay down your necks for kings to strike.
I am the devils friend, Hells Mediator,
Truths spite, ruins hand, and sins occasion,
A fury unto man, a man to furies.
Oh virtue, if thou any where have essence
But in sweet Mustapha, whom I have ruined;
And you faire-orderly-confused Planets,
If you be more then ornaments in heaven,
And that you work in destinies of the mortal,
Show vs, that destinies be not confused,
Not evil to the good, good to the evil;
Confusion is the justice of the devil.
Save Mustapha, fates course well changed is,
Where constancy leads her to doe amiss:
Change or turn back your course, let Asia know,
That earth doth hatch her own ill destiny,
Which in aspects the stars but only show,
Lay forth the hateful wild conspiracy,
Wherein this tyrant means to overthrow
His son, the hope of all humanity,
In Mustapha with influence work so,
As he is full: and strength at once may see,
Whom, monster, I, have hither made to come,
Guiltless through guilty fear to take his doom,
Now hell and pain, if you else where be seated,
Then — absence and my presence.
Call me again in hast to come unto you,
If worse I be not with my self, then with you;
Whēce grows this sudden rage, thy gesture utters,
These agonies, and furious blaspheuies;
Is rage become the Lord of humane reason?
For rage doth show, that reason is defaced,
When rage thus shows it self with reason graced.
If thou hast felt thy self, accusing war,
Where knowledge is, the endless hell of thought,
Where hope and fear in equal balance are,
My state of mind is by the feeling taught:
For what despair the conscience doth fear,
My wounds bleed ever, for remorse they bear,
Remorse and pride in nature opposite,
The one makes error great, the other small,
But rooted ill brings no remorse with it,
Judge not thy self with troubled will at all:
But show thy harts when passions streams, break forth
Even woes we wondered at, prove nothing worth.
I have offended nature, God, and thee,
My hart and soul, the seats of mischief bee.
Of God, his mercy is the greatest power,
Nature is sweet, her wounds heal up again;
For me, tell how, and teach me to forgive,
Which, he that cannot doe, knows not to live.
Forgiveness is, to take away the cause,
It forces God to plague, or break his laws.
Forgiveness is, to put away the wrongs,
At least, so much as to my self belongs.
It is a praise to pardon, it is true,
But keep me rather from undoing you.
What should I doe? tell me, I doenot fear,
Preserve thy father with thy self and me,
Else guilty of each others death we be.
Tell how.
Thy father purposes thy death,
I did advise thou offredst up thy breath.
What have I to my father done amiss?
That wicked Rossae thy stepmother is.
Wherein of Rossae, have I ill deserved?
In that the Empire is for thee preserved.
I cannot choose but be my fathers son,
As bold ambition, which like water-flouds,
Not channell-bound, doth neighbours ouer-runne,
And growest nothing, when thy rage is done.
Is virtue bought and sold for love of good?
Must Zingers rising from my fall be won?
Poor Zinger I acquire thee of my blood:
For I believe thy hart-hath no impression.
To ruin Mustapha of his possession,
Yet tell what they against me use,
My fathers love which way first did they wound?
Of treason towards him they thee accuse,
Thy fame and greatness gives their malice ground.
Good world, where it is danger to be good,
Where guilty people shall live in good name,
The guiltless only, live and die in shame:
Show me the truth, to what laws am I bound:
No man commanded is by God to die,
As long as he may persecution fly.
To fly, were to condemn my self and friends
To honour those, that would dishonour me:
To ruin those, that should my succour be,
Death do thy worst, thy longest pains have end.
Besides, where can man hide those coward fears,
But fears and hopes of powers will them reveal?
For kings have many tongues and many ears.
Mischief is like the Cockatrices eyes;
Sees first and kills, or is seen first and dies.
He that himself defending, doth offend,
Breaks not the law, nor needs not be forgiven.
Duty doth end, when kings do go astray,
Misguided by their own or others will:
For disobedience is, when it doth light
To hurt, but duty, when used as a press,
It sets a princes crooked humours right.
Use not thy strength to shed thy fathers blood,
But use thy strength to do thy father good.
Rossa, while she attends to ruin thee,
Makes Soliman against his state to sin.
Take arms against her, do thy father free,
Translating heirs doth oct bring ruin in,
And since even vice; by good success, seems good,
Good fortune will make virtue understood,
O false and wicked colours of desire.
Eternal bondage unto him, that seeks
To be possessed of all things that he likes.
Shall I, a son and subject, seem to dare
For Princes sake to set the realm on fire?
Which golden titles to rebellion are,
It is not fear of death, which joys to dye,
They fear death, that from death to mischief fly.
If I be kilt, I do not ill, but suffer,
It is no pain to die, for children do it,
It is no grace to live, the wicked have it:
Let children cry, and slaves do ill for fear,
Death is not strange to men, why then rapine we?
Death is offorce to man, to what end strive we?
Obedience goes upright, the stubborn fall,
God burns his rods, but we must suffer all.
Even you have told me, wealth was given
The wicked, to corrupt themselves and others.
Greatness and health do make flesh proud and cruel,
Where with the good, sickness mowes down desire,
Death glorifies, misfortune humbles,
Sorrow seeks peace of God, sin yields repentance:
Since therefore life is but the throne of danger,
Where sickness, pain, desire, and fear inherit,
Soonest escaped from him, that holds it dearest,
Even of men the least worth, the most beloved,
A double death to them that hold it so,
And having nothing else must it forgo:
Should I, that know the destiny of life,
Do that, to live, that doth hishonor life?
My innocence bids me not to fear,
My love and duty for a father look:
Worthiness he shows, that can misfortune bear,
The heart doth judge of virtue, not the book:
I know my strength and in my strength resolve,
To do that, wicked men may think me weak,
And now that all the world knows I might live,
That power unto my father I freely give.
Wilt thou both kill thy self, and be the cause
Thy father may offend Gods holy laws:
The world knows cowards kill themselves for fear.
First let thy father know lie doth thee wrong,
They often bide death, that cannot danger bide,
And in these duties afterwards be strong.
Tempt me no more, good will is then a pain,
When her words beat the heart, and cannot enter,
I constant in my counsel doeremaine,
And more lives for my life will not aduenter.
Dear Rossa doe thou for my sake still live,
By thee my father may repent my fall,
When thy heart of my truth shall witness give:
Stay thou, till time and destiny doe call,
Warn Acmat and Camena they advise,
Least they like rage that doth her own self bear.
Seeking to help, or to prevent my fall,
Ruin themselves, while they for me entreat.
My life in your lives I shall think preserved,
When you know, I have worse then I deserved.
Come let vs go, for kindness doth betray,
The heart, that firmly on it self doth stay.
Religion, thou vain and glorious stile for weakness,
Sprung from the deep disquiet of mans passion,
To dissolution and despair of nature:
The text brings princes titles into question,
Thy prophets sat on work, the sword of Tyrants,
They manacle sweet truth with their substractions,
Let virtue blood, teach cruelty for Gods sake,
Fashioning one God, but him of many fashions,
Like many headed errors in their passions:
Mankind, trust not this dream, Religion,
Fears, Idols, pleasures, religues, sorrows, treasures,
She makes the wilful hearts her only pleasures,
The rebels unto government, her Martyrs temples.
No no, thou child of miracles begotten,
Miracles, that are but ignorance of causes.
Lift up the hopes of thy objected Prophets,
Religion, worth abiures thy painted heavens,
Sicknesthy blessings are, misery thy trial,
Nothing thy way unto eternal being,
Death to salvation, and the grave to heaven,
So blessed be they, so angel'd, so eternized,
That tie their senses to thy senseless glories,
And die, to cloy the after-age with stories.
Man should make much of life, as natures table,
Wherein she writ the cipher of her glory.
Forsake not Nature, nor mis-vnderstand her,
Her mysteries are read without faiths eye-sight,
She speaks in our flesh, and from our senses
Delluers down her wisedonie to our reason,
If any man would break her laws, to kill,
Nature doth for defence allow offence.
She neither taught the father to destroy,
Nor promised any man by dying joy.
Nourished in Courts, where no thoughts peace is nourished,
Used to behold the Tragedy of ruin,
Ruin, from whom all Monarchies have flourished,
Brought up with fears, with fellow Princes fortune;
Yet am I like him that hath lost his knowledge;
Or never heard one story, but of misfortune.
My heart doth fall away, fearful upon me.
Tame Rumour, that hath bin mine old acquaintance,
Is to me now like Monsters, feared and wondered,
My love begins to plague me with suspicion,
My first delights bear likeness of displeasure.
My mothers promises of my advancement,
Her doubtful speeches, her unquiet motions,
Makeme grow jealous of my own advancement.
The name of Mustapha so often murmured,
With whose name ever I have been rejoiced;
Now makes my heart misgive, my spirit languish;
Man then is Augur of his own misfortune,
When his joy yields him arguments of anguish.
O Kings, why swell you so against your maker?
Is raised equality so soon grown wilde?
Dare you deprive your people of succession,
Which kings and kingdoms on their heads did build?
Is fortune of forgetfulness with child?
Have fear or love, in greatness no impression,
Since people, who did raise you to the crown,
Are ladders, standing still to let you down?
O wretched state of man, in Tyrants favour,
Like men thrown upon sands in ebbing water:
Dead if they trust, and stay drowned if they venture:
Acmat, what strange events breed these strange passions?
Nature is ruined, humanity fallen asunder,
Our Alchoran profaned, Empire desac'd,
Hell's broken loose, truth dead, hope banished,
Dark fear and sorrow, doe both strike and threaten:
My heart is full my voice doth saint and tremble.
Yet tell the worst, for cowards death unarmed,
When need resolves vs to endure all terror:
And sorrows utter are like wines, which vented;
Both purge themselves, and doe not break the vessel;
By counsel and comparison things lessen.
No counsel or comparison can lessen
The loss of Mustapha, so wildly murdered.
How? dead? what chance or malice hath prevented
Mankinds good fortune?
Fathers unkindly malice.
Tell how.
When Solyman by Rostens cunning spite
And Rossaes witchcraft, from his heart had banished
Justice of Kings, and louingnes of fathers,
To wage and lodge such camps of heavy passions,
As cunning stepdames jealousy could gather;
Envy took hold of worth, doubt did misconstrue,
Renown was made a lie, and yet a terror;
Nothing could rage remove, or move compassion;
Mustapha must die; to which end fetched he was,
Laden with hopes and promises offauour:
But Mustapha neither hoped nor feared,
Per chance, foresaw the storms of danger coming;
Yet comes, and comes accompanied with power;
But neither power that warranted his hast,
Nor selfe-defence, that makes offences lawful,
Could hold him from obedience to his father.
So foolish to the world is honest Wisdom.
Alas, could neither truth appease his fury,
Nor his unlooked humility of coming,
Nor any secret witnessing remorses?
Can Nature from her self work such diuorces?
Tell on, that all the world may rue and wonder.
There is a place environed with trees,
Upon whose shadowed center, there is pitched
A large embroidered sumptuous Pavilion,
The stately throne oftyrany and murder;
Where mighty men (whom fearful murder fears)
With cruelty are slain before they know
That they to other then to honour go;
Mustapha unto the Camp no sooner came,
But thither he is sent for, and conducted
By six slow Eunuchs, either taught to colour
Mischief with revenge, or taught by nature
To reverence even virtue in misfortune,
But Mustapha, whose heart was now resolved,
Not fearing death, which he might have prevented,
If he to disobedience had consented:
Nor craving life, which he might well have gotten,
If he would other duties have forgotten;
But glad to speak his last thought to his father,
He willed the Eunuchs to entreat it for him;
They did, they wept, and kneeled unto his father:
But bloody rage, that glories to be cruel,
And jealousy, that fears she is not fearful,
Made Solyman refuse to hear or pity.
He bids them hast their charge; and bloody eyed,
Beheld his son while he obeying died.
How did that dying heart endure to suffer,
Tell on:
Quicken my spirits, hard and dull to good,
That yet — hear tell of brothers blood.
While these six Eunuchs to this charge appointed,
Whose hearts had never used their hands to pity,
Whose hands were only now afraid of murder,
With reverence and fear stood still amazed,
Loath to cut off such worth, afraid to save it:
Mustapha with thought resolved and united,
Assures their fear, and comfort their sorrow:
Bids them refuse their charge, and look no further;
Their hearts afraid to bid their hands, be doing,
Shaking and trembling, do refuse to offer,
The cord, the hateful instrument of murder:
They lifting up, let fall, and falling, lift it;
Each sought to help, and helping, hindered other,
Till Mustapha in haste to be an Angel,
Guided their hands, to his death directed:
Sweetly forgave their charge, and thank their love,
Which he saw in them, did compassion move;
With heavenly smiles, and quiet words, foreshewing
The joy and peace of those where he was going.
His last words were: O father now forgive me
Those things, which thou thy solfe doest think offenees:
O Mahomet my other sins forgive me,
Forgive them too, that work my overthrow:
Let my grave never minister offence,
For since my father joyeth in my death,
Behold, with joy I offer him my breath.
The Eunuchs cry, Solyman, he is glutted:
His thoughts divine of vengeance for his murder:
Rumour flies up and down, the people murmur;
Sorrow gives laws, before men know her story,
Fear prophesies in men, and makes them sorry.
Remiss and languish are men's coward spirits,
Where Gods forbid revenge and patience too;
Yet to the dead, Nature ordained rites,
Which idle love I feel hath power to doe.
I will go hence, and show to them that live,
The Gods cannot offences all forgive.
What ever craft of base false-hearted wit,
Long working on the worst of Princes thoughts,
May bring to pass, yonder to vs is brought,
— without shame the state corrupt with it.
Acmat, thy sorrow, whether unjust or just,
Boots not: duty and faith loves still them that live,
Noble example bring forth danger must,
The forces of Natolia do give
Tokens of mutiny unto the state,
Showing no reverence but unto thee:
Wherefore the great Lord wills you to repair
To him, for by you they must governed be.
I go, and care not, so I go from thee.
Let them that cannot hear desires travail,
Who dare not undertake for fear of danger;
Let them take children, fearing spirits,
Run and bear witness them, still their own amazement,
While they fly from themselves, and blame their fortune,
For fortune on thy wisdom complain,
But they in thee neither hope nor reign,
Rosten, where virtue ends, and reason fails,
When dangers threaten; fear makes sharpest war.
When fame with all her infamies assails,
Then fortunes favours showed most lively are:
She never helps, till help be overthrown,
For heavenly Powers by miracles are known.
Now Mustapha is dead, rage fleshed, and pity broken,
Rosten, there rests no more to interrupt vs
But Acmat, in whom Solyman yet trusts;
The thanks and sacrifices our God requires
For graces past, are not those idle prayers,
Which done to — on the stairs.
Goodlucke, the god of highly placed desires,
No other duty, but noble deeds requires.
Let Acmat the Fortune loves them that venture.
Acmat is wise, and Solyman beloved,
Even Tyrants covet to uphold their fame,
Not fearing evil deeds, but evil name.
For Princes skill, is, to make Greatness show
Rich in the good, where of it hath least part,
And to conceal that which within they know:
So that at once he will not shed the blood
Of Acmat, though he mean his overthrow:
Least men should think their favour but a net,
Where easy in, but hardly out they get.
Rosten, let Mustapha be thy example,
That Tragedies, are Gods and Princes plays.
Kings know new hopes, blot out the shame of books,
Desires eye on — hope only looks.
While childrens blood the fathers forehead stain,
What privilege for Councellors remain?
He that hath intent to ruin houses,
Plucks not the timber all at once away,
Least ruins ruin on himself he lay.
Fury will have a time to breathe, from killing,
Fury is a wheel, with ease kept going,
Where it with many hands at first was moved.
Fears shield of proof is tramped in others blood,
Good fortune seldom comes by doing good.
Fortune is often by presumption tempted
To turn the back.
Nay fortune harlot-sicke,
Who thinks good manner to be want of spirit,
Is dearest unto those, that use her rudely,
Only with humble bashfulness is tempted.
What argument against him?
Use of killing.
Suspicion, the favourite of Princes,
Delight of change, favours past, and fear of greatness,
Sharpened by Acmats harsh and open dealing,
With noble Princes liberty would draw
Into the narrow scope of common awe.
Power of mischance yields honour to adventure.
Mustapha is dead.
Not dead, while Acmat lives,
Small sparks from fire quenched to danger grows;
From him that fears to strike, fear never parts,
Let Acmat die, and danger is departed.
For Zinger I his brothers charge have gotten;
Yet least his death, not looked for, might amass him,
(For youth, and kindness, oft doe think it glory
At things, done for their profit, to rapine)
I will make haste, and give him from his father
Mustaphaes estate, his fortune and succession.
When reason fails, one passion rules another,
Hope and good fortune doe forget a brother.
Come Rosten, let vs doe, and then consider.
when will this life this spark put in our spright,
To give light to this lump of flesh and blood:
Leave to deny strong destiny her right,
Which it feels daily, cannot be withstood.
Man look not down; look up into the sky.
There live thou must, and mai'st be glad to die.
In what Dilemma of mischance stand I,
Used by the subtle Art of wicked government,
To serve a tyrants turn with faith and honesty.
Placed over men, whom unjust rage doth justly move.
I am either in heate of heady mutiny
To die; or scoping by respect, that safety may
Suspicion to my self and honour lay,
Destiny hath shot the shaft and it must light.
To stir or pain against the stream of fate,
Which moos from ill deserts, it is too late.
Innocence and faith from safe estates overthrow,
For floods of error from authority,
The multitude hath easily overthrown,
For when Kings states must — and must fall,
Justice divides not there, but ruins all.
But look where Rossa comes like April waters,
Both gusts and cleaves in stormy forehead carrying,
Like power, that with itself doth fear miscarrying.
Who ever thinks by virtue to aspire,
And goodness deems to be good fortunes star,
Or who by mischief will seek his desire,
And thinks no Conscience ways to honourare.
Mustapha, here seeing thee and me,
Sees no man, good or ill, rules destiny.
And would exchange the course of fates by wit,
Which Gods doe make to bring their works to end,
And with it self, even oft doth ruin it:
A Tyrant fate, to them that doe amiss,
For nothing left me but my error is.
What glory is this, that with it self is sad?
Good luck makes all men, but the guilty, glad.
Zinger; for whom Mustapha was slain:
Zinger; for whom Camanaes blood was shed:
Zinger; for whom all the world on me complained,
Hath done that, which no truth or law could doe,
Remorse and fears in my distress hath bred,
Murdered himself and overthrown me too.
In every creatures heart there lives desire,
Which men doe follow, as appearing good,
And Greatness, men doe think it to aspire,
Although it weakness be, well understood.
This unbound raging infinite thoughts fire
I took, nay it took me, and placed my heart
On hopes to alter Empires and Successions.
And as the sea, when his ambitious power
Hath ouer-run his neighbour element:
His pride, his rage, his glory to devour,
Nor can with any greatness be content,
Till all the Country that lay still before,
Rise up, and force him back unto the shore.
So when as I had won the marriage bed;
And Soliman with himself overcome,
To break and lay a sleep his Prophets law,
By being only of desire in awe;
Error, ofselfe harm ever brought a bed,
Made me this wheel of misfortune draw.
Danger was sport, mischief desires art;
Nothing seemed hard, but to leave this impression.
I Mustapha his fall did undertake,
And like the storms that — doe blow,
When all things, but themselves, they overthrow,
Hateful I did him to his father make,
But as desires on divers things are placed,
So; divers works.
For fowls, like senses; have a divers taste,
There be birds of the day, and of the night,
No laws can make one will to be embraced,
The daughters heart will make the mother spite;
Camenas thoughts were soft, her good was forth,
She but with others love, though nothing worth.
To Mustapha, she opens mine intent,
For she had tried, but could not turn my heart;
Yet she no hurt to me, in telling meant,
Yet hurt she did me, to disclose my art;
I sought revenge; revenge it could not be,
For I confess, she never wronged me.
But as the Christian, when she sees her child
Pulled by the great-Lords-men from mothers breast;
Though she do know, it will him honour yield;
Yet for her fathers sake, her soul cannot rest.
So though I know Camenas heart was good,
Yet I did earn to have my will withstood,
Remorse, which hath affection in each heart;
Since whose reason is, but what they see,
Womanish love and shame with fear took part,
They all conspired to have commanded me;
Humble patience void of fear and art,
Camenas only strength and weapons be;
I kilt her, yet confess I did her love;
Furies of choice what arguments can move,
I kilt her, for a thought her death would prove,
That truth, not hate made Mustapha suspected,
The more it seemed against a mothers love,
The more it showed I Solyman affected:
Thus underneath severe and upright dealing,
A mischievous step-mothers malice stealing,
It took effect; for few mean ill in vain;
He died infamous; though he guilties were;
High power hath truth tied under laws of fear;
I live selfe-guilty, and who durst complain,
So little care the Gods for mebelow,
So little men fear, God they do not know.
This Mustapha, whose death I made my glory,
Hath spoiled all my power, but power to be sorry.
For Zinger, when he saw his brother dead,
Confusedly with divers shapes distract,
He silent stood, horrors dark clouds possessed him,
Madness was mixed with woe, kindness with —
Rack, reverence, revenge, both representing shame,
Stood equally against, and with a mothers name:
But as these shadows from his heart withdrew,
That light became restored to his mind,
The globes of his enraged cares he threw
On me, like nature justly made unkind,
Virtue bare secret witness he was true,
Remorse did then make me my error find,
Find Lo. this hateful — love did make,
From pity woe — he spake.
Mother, is this — heart?
Is there nor Law — your desire?
Can neither power nor goodness scope your art?
Be these the Counsels, by which you aspire?
Doth mischief only, fear no overthwart?
Is there no Hell, nor doe the Devils love fire?
If neither God, Heaven, Hell, nor Devil bee,
It is plague enough that I am borne of thee.
Mother, (O monstrous name) shall it be said,
That thou hast done this fact for Zingers sake?
Honour and life shall they to me upbraid,
That from thy mischief they their glory take.
O wretched men that under shame are laid,
For sins that we, and sins our parents make.
Yet Rossa, to be thine in this I glory,
That being thine gives power to make thee sorry.
He wounds his heart and down with death he false
On Mustapha, who there for his sake died,
Fame with his breath he wills on him to call,
Forgetfulness he would should me betide.
— For the dead and mercy for vs all
And with these words, for mercy died.
Thy goodness I mis-vnderstood,
Shunningill, did worse to shed my blood,
He dies.
Woe is me when in my — look,
Horror I see all their lost but —
My love I joy become — book,
Eternity of shame is printed there.
Think of God, Alas that so I might
Madness only natures peace.
With thy self, though all else thou displease,
Made to give light spirits ease,
What shall I doe.
Desuntpauca.

LEt Fame, that all hunt after in their lives,
Live registered upon our brazen Tombs,
And then grace vs in the disgrace of death:
when spite of cormorant devouring Time,
The endeavour of this present breath may buy:
That honour which shall bate his sides keen edge,
And make vs heirs of all eternity:
Therefore brave Conquerors, for so you are,
That war against your own affections,
And the huge Army of the worlds desires.
Our late edict shall strongly stand in force,
Nauar shall be the wonder of the world.
Our Court shall be a little Academy,
Still and contemplative in living Art.
You three, Berowne, Dumaine, and Longauill,
Have sworn for three years term, to live with me:
My fellow Scholars, and to keep those statutes
That are recorded in this schedule here.
Your oaths are past, and now subscribe your names:
That his own hand may strike his honour down,
That violates the smallest branch herein:
If you are armed to doe, as sworn to do,
Subscribe to your deep oaths, and keep it to.
I am resolved, it is but a three years fast:
The mind shall banquet, though the body pine,
Fat paunches have lean pates: and dainty bits,
Make rich the ribs, but bankrupt the wits.
My loving Lord, Dumane is mortified,
The grosser manner of these worlds delights,
He throws upon the gross worlds baser slaves:
To love, to wealth, to pomp, I pine and die,
With all these living in Philosophy.
I can but say their protestation over,
So much, dear Liege, I have already sworn,
That is, to live and study here three years.
But there are other strict obseruances:
As not to see a woman in that term,
Which I hope well is not enrolled there.
And one day in a week to touch no food:
And but one meal on every day beside:
The which I hope is not enrolled there.
And then to sleep but three hours in the night,
And not be seen to wink of all the day.
When I was wont to think no harm all night,
And make a dark night too of half the day:
Which I hope well is not enrolled there.
O, these are barren tasks, too hard to keep,
Not to see Ladies, study, fast, not sleep.
Your oath is past, to pass away from these.
Let me say no my Liedge, and if you please,
I only swore to study with your grace,
And stay here in your Court for three years space.
You swore to that Berowne, and to the rest.
By yea and nay sir, than I swore in jest.
What is the end of study, let me know?
Why that to know which else wee should not know.
Things hid &amp; bard (you mean) frō cōmon sense.
I, that is studies god-like recompense.
Come on then, I will swear to study so,
To know the thing I am forbid to know:
As thus, to study where I well may dine,
When I to fast expressly am forbid.
Or study where to meet some Mistress fine,
When Mistresses from common sense are hid.
Or having sworn too hard a keeping oath,
Study to break it, and not break my troth.
If studies gain be thus, and this be so,
Study knows that which yet it doth not know,
Swear me to this, and I will ne'er say no.
These be the stops that hinder study quite,
And train our intellects to vain delight.
Why? all delights are vain, and that most vain
Which with pain purchased, doth inherit pain,
As painefully to poor upon a Book,
To seek the light of truth, while truth the while
Doth falsely blind the eye-sight of his look:
Light seeeking light, doth light of light beguile:
So ere you find where light in darkness lies,
Your light grows dark by losing of your eyes.
Study me how to please the eye indeed,
By fixing it upon a fairer eye,
Who dazzling so, that eye shall be his heed,
And give him light that it was blinded by.
Study is like the heavens glorious Sun,
That will not be deep searched with saucy looks:
Small have continual plodders ever won,
Save base authority from others Books.
These earthly Godfathers of heavens lights,
That give a name to every fixed Star,
Have no more profit of their shining nights,
Then those that walk and wot not what they are.
Too much to know, is to know nought but fame▪
And every Godfather can give a name.
How well hoe's read, to reason against reading.
Proceeded well, to stop all good proceeding.
Hee weeds the corn, and still lets grow the weeding.
The Spring is near when greene geesse are a breeding.
How follows that?
Fit in his place and time.
In reason nothing.
Something then in rime.
Berowne is like an envious snooping Frost,
That bites the first borne infants of the Spring.
Well, say I am, why should proud Summer boast,
Before the Birds have any cause to sing?
Why should I joy in any abortive birth?
At Christmas I no more desire a Rose,
Then wish a Snow in Mays new fangled shows:
But like of each thing that in season grows.
So you to study now it is too late,
That were to climb ore the house to unlock the gate.
Well, fit you out: go home Berowne: adieu.
No my good Lord, I have sworn to stay with you.
And though I have for barbarism spoke more,
Then for that Angel knowledge you can say,
Yet confident Isle keep what I have sworn,
And bide the penance of each three years day.
Give me the paper, let me read the same,
And to the strictest decrees Isle write my name.
How well this yielding rescues thee from shame.
Item. That no woman shall come within a mile of my Court.
Hath this bin proclaimed?
Four days ago.
Let's see the penalty.
On pain of loosing her tongue.
Who deuis'd this penalty?
Marry that did I.
Sweet Lord, and why?
To fright them hence with that dread penalty, A dangerous law against gentility. Item, If any man be seen to talk with a woman with∣in the term of three years, hee shall endure such public shame as the rest of the Court shall possibly devise.
This Article my Liedge your self must break,
For well you know here comes is Embassy
The French Kings daughter, with your self to speak:
A Maid of grace and complete majesty,
About surrender up of Aquitaine:
To her decrepit, sick, and bed-rid Father.
Therefore this Article is made in vain,
Or vainly comes the admired Princess hither.
What say you Lords?
Why, this was quite forgot.
So Study evermore is overshot,
While it doth study to have what it would,
It doth forget to doe the thing it should:
And when it hath the thing it hunts most,
It is won as towns with fire, so won, so lost.
We must of force dispense with this Decree,
She must lye here on mere necessity.
Necessity will make vs all forsworn
Three thousand times within this three years space:
For every man with his affects is borne,
Not by might mastered, but by special grace.
If I break faith, this word shall break for me,
I am forsworn on mere necessity.
So to the Laws at large I write my name,
And he that breaks them in the least degree,
Stands in attainder of eternal shame.
Suggestions are to others as to me:
But I believe although I seem so loath,
I am the last that will last keep his oath.
But is there no quick recreation granted?
I that there is, our Court you know is hinted
With a refined travailer of Spain,
A man in all the worlds new fashion planted,
That hath a mint of phrases in his brain:
One, who the music of his own vain tongue,
Doth ravish like enchanting harmony:
A man of complements whom right and wrong
Have chose as umpire of their mutiny.
This child of fancy that Armado hight,
For interim to our studies shall relate,
In high-borne words the worth of many a Knight:
From tawny Spain lost in the worlds debate.
How you delight my Lords, I know not I,
But I protest I love to hear him lie,
And I will use him for my Minstrelsy.
Armado is a most illustrious wight,
A man of fire, new words, fashions own Knight.
Costard the swain and he, shall be our sport,
And so to study, three years is but short.
Which is the Dukes own person.
This fellow, What would?
I my self reprehend his own person, for I am his graces Tharborough: But I would see his own person in flesh and blood.
This is he.
Signeor Arm, Arm commends you:
Ther's villainy abroad, this letter will tell you more.
Sir the Contempts thereof are as touching me.
A letter from the magnificent Armado.
How low soever the matter, I hope in God for high words.
A high hope for a low heaven, God grant vs pa∣tience.
To hear, or forbear hearing.
To hear meekly sir, and to laugh moderately, or to forbear both.
Well sir, be it as the stile shall give vs cause to clime in the merriness.
The matter is to me sir, as concerning Iaquenetta.
The manner of it is, I was taken with the manner.
In what manner?
In manner and form following sir all those three. I was seen with her in the Manor house, sitting with her upon the Form, and taken following her into the Park: which put to gether, is in manner and form following. Now sir for the manner; It is the manner of a man to speak to a woman, for the form in some form.
For the following sir.
As it shall follow in my correction, and God de∣fend the right.
Will you hear this Letter with attention?
As we would hear an Oracle.
Such is the simplicity of man to harken after the flesh.
GReat Deputy, the Walk•ns Vicegerent, and sole domi∣nator of Nauar, my souls earths God, and bodies foe∣string patron:
Not a word of Costard yet.
So it is.
It may be so: but if he say it is so, he is in telling true: but so.
Peace,
Be to me, and every man that dares not fight.
No words,
Of other men's secrets I beseech you.
So it is besieged with sable coloured melancholy, I did commend the black oppressing humour to the most whole∣some Physic of thy health-giuing ayre: And as I am a Gen∣tleman, betook my self to walk: the time When? about the sixth hour, When beasts most grase, birds best peck, and men sit down to that nourishment which is called supper: So much for the time When. Now for the ground Which? which I mean I walked upon, it is ycliped, Thy Park. Then for the place Where? where I mean I did encounter that obscene and most preposterous event that draws from my snow-white pen the ebon coloured Ink, which here thou view, behold, suruayest, or see. But to the place Where? It stands North North-east and by East from the West corner of thy curious knotted garden; There did I see that low spiri∣ted Swain, that base Minow of thy mirth, (Clown. Me?) that unlettered small knowing soul, (Clow Me?) that shallow vassal (Clow. Still me?) which as I remember, hight Co∣stard, (Clow. O me) sorted and consorted contrary to thy e∣stablished proclaimed Edict and Continet, Cannon: Which with, ô with, but with this I passion to say wherewith:
With a Wench.
With a child of our Grandmother E•e, a female; or for thy more sweet understanding a woman: him, I (as my ever esteemed duty pricks me on) have sent to thee, to receive the meed of punishment by thy sweet Graces Officer Anthony Dull, a man of good repute, carriage, bearing, &amp; estimation.
Me, an't shall please you? I am Anthony Dull.
For Iaquenetta (so is the weaker vessel called) which I apprehended with the aforesaid Swain, I keeper her as a vessel of thy Laws fury, and shall at the least of thy sweet notice, bring her to trial. Thine in all complements of devoted and heart-burning heat of duty.
Don Adriana de Armado.
This is not so well as I looked for, but the best that ever I heard.
I the best, for the worst. But sir, What say you to this?
Sir I confess the Wench.
Did you hear the Proclamation?
I doe confess much of the hearing it, but little of the marking of it.
It was proclaimed a years imprisonment to bee taken with a Wench.
I was taken with none sir, I was taken with a Damsel.
Well, it was proclaimed Damsel.
This was no Damsel neither sir, she was a Virgin.
It is so varied to, for it was proclaimed Virgin.
If it were, I deny her Virginity: I was taken with a Maid.
This Maid will not serve your turn sir.
This Maid will serve my turn sir.
Sir I will pronounce your sentence: You shall fast a Week with Bran and water.
I had rather pray a Month with Mutton and Porridge.
And Don Armado shall be your keeper.
My Lord Berowne, see him delivered ore,
And go we Lords to put in practice that,
Which each to other hath so strongly sworn.
Isle lay my head to any good mans hat,
These oaths and laws will prove an idle scorn.
Sir, come on.
I suffer for the truth sir: for true it is, I was ta∣ken with Iaquenetta, and Iaquenetta is a true girl, and therefore welcome the sour cup of prosperity, afflict∣on may one day smile again, and until then sit down sorrow.
Boy, What sign is it when a man of great spirit grows melancholy?
A great sign sir, that he will look sad.
Why? sadness is one and the selfsame thing dear imp.
No no, O Lord sir no.
How can thou part sadness and melancholy my tender Juvenal?
By a familiar demonstration of the working, my tough signeur.
Why tough signeur? Why tough signeur?
Why tender Juvenal? Why tender Juvenal?
I spoke it tender Juvenal, as a congruent ape∣thaton, appertaining to thy young days, which we may nominate tender.
And I tough signeur, as an appertinent title to your old time, which we may name tough.
Pretty and apt.
How mean you sir, I pretty, and my saying apt? or I apt, and my saying pretty?
Thou pretty because little.
Little pretty, because little: wherefore apt?
And therefore apt, because quick.
Speak you this in my praise Master?
In thy condign praise.
I will praise an Eel with the same praise.
What? that an Eel is ingenuous.
That an Eel is quick.
I doe say thou art quick in answers. Thou heat'st my blood.
I am answered sir.
I love not to be crossed.
He speaks the mere contrary, crosses love not him.
I have promised to study iij. years with the Duke.
You may doe it in an hour sir.
Impossible.
How many is one thrice told?
I am ill at reckoning, it fits the spirit of a Tipster.
You are a gentleman and a gamester fir.
I confess both, they are both the varnish of a complete man.
Then I am sure you know how much the gross sum of deus-ace amounts to.
It doth amount to one more then two.
Which the base vulgar call three.
True.
Why sir is this such a piece of study? Now here's three studied, ere you'll thrice wink, &amp; how easy it is to put years to the word three, and study three years in two words, the dancing horse will tell you.
A most fine Figure.
To prove you a Cipher.
I will hereupon confess I am in love: and as it is base for a Soldier to love; so am I in love with a base wench. If drawing my sword against the humour of affection, would deliver me from the reprobate thought of it, I would take Desire prison•, and ransom him to any French Courtier for a n• deuis'd curtsy. I think scorn to sigh, me thinks I should out-sweare Cupped. Comfort me Boy, What great men have been in love?
Hercules Master.
Most sweet Hercules: more authority dear Boy, name more; and sweet my child let them be men of good repute and carriage.
Simpson Master, he was a man of good carriage, great carriage: for hee carried the Towne-gates on his back like a Porter: and he was in love.
O well-knit Simpson, strong jointed Simpson; I doe excel thee in my rapier, as much as thou did me in carrying gates. I am in love too. Who was Simpson's love my dear Moth?
A Woman, Master.
Of what complexion?
Of all the four, or the three, or the two, or one of the four.
Tell me precisely of what complexion?
Of the sea-water Greene sir.
Is that one of the four complexions?
As I have read sir, and the best of them too.
Greene indeed is the colour of Lovers: but to have a Love of that colour, methinkes Simpson had small reason for it. He surely affected her for her wit.
It was so sir, for she had a greene wit.
My Love is most immaculate white and red.
Most immaculate thoughts Master, are masked under such colours.
Define, define, well educated infant.
My fathers wit, and my mothers tongue assist me.
Sweet invocation of a child, most pretty and pathetic.
If she be made of white and red,
Her faults will ne'er be known:
For blush-in cheeks by faults are bred,
And fears by pale white shown:
Then if she fear, or be to blame,
By this you shall not know,
For still her cheeks possess the same,
Which native she doth owe:
A dangerous rime master against the reason of white and red.
Is there not a ballet Boy, of the King and the Beggar?
The world was very guilty of such a Ballet some three ages since, but I think now it is not to be found: or if it were, it would neither serve for the writing, nor the tune.
I will have that subject newly writ ore, that I may example my digression by some mighty president. Boy, I doe love that Country girl that I took in the Park with the rational hind Costard: she deserves well.
To bee whipped: and yet a better love then my Master.
Sing Boy, my spirit grows heavy in jove.
And that's great marvel, loving a light wench.
I say sing.
Forbear till this company be past.
Sir, the Dukes pleasure, is that you keep Co∣stard safe, and you must let him take no delight, nor no penance, but hee must fast three days a week: for this Damsel, I must keep her at the Park, she is aloud for the Day-woman. Fare you well.
I do betray my self with blushing: Maid.
Man.
I will visit thee at the Lodge.
That's here by.
I know where it is situate.
Lord how wise you are!
I will tell thee wonders.
With what face?
I love thee.
So I heard you say.
And so farewell.
Fair weather after you.
Come Iaquenetta, away.
Villain, thou shalt fast for thy offences ere thou be pardoned.
Well sir, I hope when I doe it, I shall doe it on a full stomach.
Thou shalt be heavily punished.
I am more bound to you then your fellows, for they are but lightly rewarded.
Take away this villain, shut him up.
Come you transgressing slave, away.
Let me not bee pent up sir, I will fast being loose.
No sir, that were fast and loose: thou shalt to prison.
Well, if ever I do see the merry days of deso∣lotion that I have seen, some shall see.
What shall some see?
Nay nothing, Master Moth, but what they look upon. It is not for prisoners to be silent in then words, and therefore I will say nothing: I thank God, I have as little patience as another man, and therefore I can be quiet.
I doe affect the very ground (which is base) where her shoe (which is baser) guided by her foot (which is basest) doth tread. I shall be forsworn (which in a great argument of falsehood) if I love. And how can that be true love, which is falsely attempted? Love is a fa∣miliar, Love is a Devil. There is no evil Angel but Love, yet Simpson was so tempted, and he had an excel∣lent strength: Yet was Solomon so seduced, and hee had a very good wit. Cupids But shaft is too hard for Her∣cules Club, and therefore too much odds for a Spa∣niards Rapier: The first and second cause will not serve my turn: the Passado hee respects not, the Duello he regards not; his disgrace is to be called Boy, but his glory is to subdue men. Adieu Valour, rust Rapier, bee still Drum, for your manager is in love; yea hee loves. Assist me some extemporal god of Rime, for I am sure I shall turn Sonnet. Devise Wit, write Pen, for I am for whole volumes in folio.
Now Madam summon up your dearest spirits,
Consider who the King your father sends:
To whom he sends, and what's his Embassy.
Your self, held precious in the worlds esteem,
To parley with the sole inheritor
Of all perfections that a man may owe,
Matchless Navarre, the plea of no less weight
Then Aquitaine, a Dowry for a Queen.
Be now as prodigal of all dear grace,
As Nature was in making Graces dear,
When she did starve the general world beside,
And prodigally gave them all to you.
Good L. Boyet, my beauty though but mean,
Needs not the painted flourish of your praise:
Beauty is bought by judgment of the eye,
Not uttered by base sale of chapmens tongues:
I am less proud to hear you tell my worth,
Then you much wiling to be counted wise,
In spending your wit in the praise of mine.
But now to task the ticker, good Boyet,
You are not ignorant all-telling fame
Doth noise abroad Nauar hath made a vow,
Till painful study shall out-weare three years,
No woman may approach his silent Court:
Therefore to's seems it a needful course,
Before we enter his forbidden gates,
To know his pleasure, and in that behalf
Bold of your worthiness, we single you,
As our best moving fair solicitor:
Tell him, the daughter of the King of France,
On serious business craving quick dispatch,
Importunes personal conference with his grace.
Haste, signify so much while we attend,
Like humble visaged suitors his high will.
Proud of employment, willingly I go.
All pride is willing pride, and yours is so:
Who are the Votaries my loving Lords, that are vow-fellowes with this virtuous Duke?
Longauill is one.
Know you the man?
I know him Madame at a marriage feast,
Between L. Perigort and the beauteous heir
Of Iaques Fauconbridge solemnised.
In Normandy saw I this Longauill,
A man of sovereign parts he is esteemed:
Well fitted in Arts, glorious in Arms:
Nothing becomes him ill that he would well.
The only soil of his fair virtues gloss,
If virtues gloss will stain with any soil,
Is a sharp wit matched with too blunt a Will:
Whose edge hath power to cut whose will still wills,
It should none spare that come within his power.
Some merry mocking Lord belike, first so?
They say so most, that most his humours know.
Such short lived wits do wither as they grow.
Who are the rest?
The young Dumaine, a well accomplished youth,
Of all that Virtue love, for Virtue loved.
Most power to doe most harm, least knowing ill:
For he hath wit to make an ill shape good,
And shape to win grace though she had no wit.
I saw him at the Duke Alansoes once,
And much too little of that good I saw,
Is my report to his great worthiness.
Another of these Students at that time,
Was there with him, as I have heard a truth.
Berowne they call him, but a merrier man,
Within the limit of becoming mirth,
I never spent an hours talk withal.
His eye begets occasion for his wit,
For every object that the one doth catch,
The other turns to a mirth-mouing jest.
Which his fair tongue (conceits expositor)
Delivers in such apt and gracious words,
That aged ears play treuant at his tales,
And younger hearings are quite ravished.
So sweet and voluble is his discourse.
God bless my Ladies, are they all in love?
That every one her own hath garnished,
With such bedecking ornaments of praise.
Here comes Boyet.
Now, what admittance Lord?
Nauar had notice of your fair approach,
And he and his competitors in oath,
Were all addressed to meet you gentle Lady
Before I came: Marry thus much I have learnt,
He rather means to lodge you in the field,
Like one that comes here to besiege his Court,
Then seek a dispensation for his oath:
To let you enter his unpeopled house.
Here comes Nauar.
Fair Princess, welcome to the Court of Nauar.
Fair I give you back again, and welcome I have not yet: the roof of this Court is too high to bee yours, and welcome to the wide fields, too base to be mine.
You shall be welcome Madam to my Court.
I will be welcome then, Conduct me thither.
Hear me dear Lady, I have sworn an oath.
Our Lady help my Lord, he'll be forsworn.
Not for the world fair Madam, by my will.
Why, will shall break it will, and nothing else.
Your Ladyship is ignorant what it is.
Were my Lord so, his ignorance were wise,
Where now his knowledge must prove ignorance.
I hear your grace hath sworn out Houseekeeping:
It is deadly sin to keep that oath my Lord,
And sin to break it:
But pardon me, I am too sudden bold,
To teach a Teacher ill beseems me.
Vouchsafe to read the purpose of my coming,
And suddenly resolve me in my suite.
Madam, I will, if suddenly I may.
You will the sooner that I were away,
For you'll prove perjured if you make me stay.
Did not I dance with you in Brabant once?
Did not I dance with you in Brabant once?
I know you did.
How needless was it then to ask the question?
You must not be so quick.
It is long of you yt spur me with such questions.
Your wit's too hot, it speeds too fast, twill tire.
Not till it leave the Rider in the mire.
What time a day?
The hour that fools should ask.
Now fair befall your mask.
Fair fall the face it covers.
And send you many lovers.
Amen, so you be none.
Nay then will I be gone.
Madame, your father here doth intimate,
The payment of a hundred thousand Crowns,
Being but the one half, of an entire sum,
Disbursed by my father in his wars.
But say that he, or we, as neither have
Received that sum; yet there remains unpaid
A hundred thousand more: in surety of the which,
One part of Aquitaine is bound to vs,
Although not valued to the moneys worth.
If then the King your father will restore
But that one half which is unsatisfied,
We will give up our right in Aquitaine,
And hold fair friendship with his Majesty:
But that it seems he little purposes,
For here he doth demand to have repay,
An hundred thousand Crowns, and not demands
One payment of a hundred thousand Crowns,
To have his title live in Aquitaine.
Which we much rather had depart withal,
And have the money by our father lent,
Then Aquitane, so gilded as it is.
Dear Princess, were not his requests so far
From reasons yielding, your fair self should make
A yielding against some reason in my breast,
And go well satisfied to France again.
You doe the King my Father too much wrong,
And wrong the reputation of your name,
In so unseeming to confess receipt
Of that which hath so faithfully been paid.
I doe protest I never heard of it,
And if you prove it, Isle repay it back,
Or yield up Aquitaine.
We arrest your word:
Boyet, you can produce acquittances
For such a sum, from special Officers,
Of Charles his Father.
Satisfy me so.
So please your Grace, the packet is not come
Where that and other specialties are bound,
To morrow you shall have a sight of them.
It shall suffice me; at which interview,
All liberal reason would I yield unto:
Mean time, receive such welcome at my hand,
As Honour, without breach of Honour may
Make tender of, to thy true worthiness.
You may not come fair Princess in my gates,
But here without you shall be so received,
As you shall deem your self lodged in my heart,
Though so denied farther harbour in my house:
Your own good thoughts excuse me, and farewell,
To morrow we shall visit you again.
Sweet health &amp; fair desires consort your grace.
Thy own wish wish I thee, in every place.
Lady, I will commend you to my own heart.
Pray you doe my commendations,
I would be glad to see it.
I would you heard it groan.
Is the soul sick?.
Sick at the heart.
Alack, let it blood.
Would that doe it good?
My Physic says I.
Will you prick't with your eye.
No point, with my knife.
Now God save thy life.
And yours from long living.
I cannot stay thanks-giuing.
Sir, I pray you a word: What Lady is that same?
The heir of Alanson, Rosalin her name.
A gallant Lady, Monsieur fare you well.
I beseech you a word: what is she in the white?
A woman sometimes, if you saw her in the light.
Perchance light in the light: I desire her name.
She hath but one for her self,
To desire that were a shame.
Pray you sir, whose daughter?
Her Mothers, I have heard.
Gods blessing a your beard.
Good sir be not offended,
She is an heir of Faulconbridge.
Nay, my choler is ended:
She is a most sweet Lady.
Not unlike sir, that may be.
What's her name in the cap.
Katherine by good hap.
Is she wedded, or no.
To her will sir, or so.
You are welcome sir, adieu.
Fare well to me sir, and welcome to you.
That last is Beroune, the merry mad-cap Lord.
Not a word with him, but a jest.
And every jest but a word.
It was well done of you to take him at his word.
I was as willing to grapple, as he was to board.
Two hot Sheep marie:
And wherefore not Ships?
No Sheep (sweet Lamb) unless we feed on your lips.
You Sheep &amp; I pasture: shall that finish the jest?
So you grant pasture for me.
Not so gentle beast.
My lips are no Common, though several they be.
Belonging to whom?
To my fortunes and me.
Good wits will be jangling, but gentles agree.
This civil war of wits were much better used
On Nauar and his bookmen, for here it is abused.
If my observation (which very seldom lies
By the hearts still rhetoric, disclosed with eyes)
Deceive me not now, Nauar is infected.
With what?
With that which we Lovers entitle affected.
Your reason.
Why all his behaviours doe make their retire,
To the court of his eye, peeping thorough desire.
His hart like an Agot with your print impressed,
Proud with his form, in his eye pride expressed.
His tongue all impatient to speak and not see,
Did stumble with haste in his eie-sight to be,
All senses to that sense did make their repair,
To feel only looking on fairest of fair:
Me thought all his senses were locked in his eye,
As Jewels in Crystal for some Prince to buy.
Who tendering their own worth from whence they were glast,
Did point out to buy them along as you past.
His faces own margent did coat such amazes,
That all eyes saw his eyes enchanted with gazes.
Isle give you Aquitaine, and all that is his,
And you give him for my sake, but one loving Kiss.
Come to our Pavilion, Boyet is disposed.
But to speak that in words, which his eye hath dis∣closed.
I only have made a mouth of his eye,
By adding a tongue, which I know will not lie.
Thou art an old Loue-monger, and speak skilfully.
He is Cupids Grandfather, and learns news of him.
Then was Venus like her mother, for her fa∣there is but grim.
Do you hear my mad wenches?
No.
What then, do you see?
I, our way to be gone.
You are too hard for me.
Warble child, make passionate my sense of hey∣ring.
Concolinel.
Sweet Air, go tenderness of years: take this Key, give enlargement to the swain, bring him fe∣stinatly hither: I must employ him in a letter to my Love.
Will you win your love with a French brawl?
How meanest thou, brawling in French?
No my complete master, but to Jig off a tune at the tongues end, canary to it with the feet, humour it with turning up your eye: sigh a note and sing a note, sometime through the throat: if you swallowed love with singing, love sometime through: nose as if you snuffed up love by smelling love with your hat penthouse-like ore the shop of your eyes, with your arms crossed on your thinbellie doublet, like a Rabbit on a spit, or your hands in your pocket, like a man after the old painting, and keep not too long in one tune, but a snip and away: these are complements, these are humours, these betray nice wenches that would be betrayed without these, and make them men of note: do you note men that most are affected to these?
How hast thou purchased this experience?
By my pen of observation.
But O, but O.
The Hobbie-horse is forgot.
Call thou my love Hobbi-horse.
No Master, the Hobbie-horse is but a Colt, and and your Love perhaps, a Hacknie:
But have you forgot your Love?
Almost I had.
Negligent student, learn her by heart.
By heart, and in heart Boy.
And out of heart Master: all those three I will prove.
What wilt thou prove?
A man, if I live (and this) by, in, and without, up∣on the instant: by heart you love her, because your heart cannot come by her: in heart you love her, because your heart is in love with her: and out of heart you love her, being out of heart that you cannot enjoy her.
I am all these three.
And three times as much more, and yet nothing at all.
Fetch hither the Swain, he must carry me a letter.
A message well sympathised, a Horse to be em∣bassadour for an Ass.
Ha, ha, What says thou?
Marry sir, you must send the Ass upon the Horse for he is very slow gated: but I go.
The way is but short, away.
As swift as Lead sir.
Thy meaning pretty ingenious, is not Lead a mettle heavy, dull, and slow?
Minnime honest Master, or rather Master no.
I say Lead is slow.
You are too swift sir to say so.
Is that Lead slow which is fired from a Gun?
Sweet smoke of Rhetoric,
He reputes me a Cannon, and the Bullet that's he:
I shoot thee at the Swain.
Thump then, and I flee.
A most acute juvenal, voluble and free of grace,
By thy favour sweet Welkin, I must sigh in thy face.
Most rude melancholy, Valour gives thee place.
My Herald is returned.
A wonder Master, here's a Costard broken in a shin.
Some enigma, some riddle, come, thy Lenuoy begin.
No egma, no riddle, no lenuoy, no salve, in thee male sir. Or sir, Plantan, a plain Plantan: no lenuoy, no lenuoy, no Salve sir, but a Plantan.
By virtue thou enforce laughter, thy silly thought, my spleen, the heaving of my lunges provokes me to ridiculous smiling: O pardon me my stars, doth the inconsiderate take salve for lenuoy, and the word len∣uoy for a salve?
Doe the wise think them other, is not lenuoy a salve?
No Page, it is an epilogue or discourse to make plain,
Some obscure precedence that hath to fore bin fine.
Now will I begin your moral, and do you follow with my lenuoy.
The Fox, the Ape, and the Humble-Bee,
Were still at odds, being but three.
Until the Goose came out of door,
Staying the odds by adding four.
A good Lenuoy, ending in the Goose: would you desire more?
The Boy hath sold him a bargain, a Goose, that's flat
Sir, your penny-worth is good, and your Goose be fat▪
To sell a bargain well is as cunning as fast and loose:
Let me see a fat Lenuoy, I that's a fat Goose.
Come hither, come hither:
How did this argument begin?
By saying that a Costard was broken in a shin.
Then called you for the Lenuoy.
True, and I for a Plantan:
Thus came your argument in:
Then the Boys fat Lenuoy, the Goose that you bought,
And he ended the market.
But tell me: How was there a Costard broken in a shin?
I will tell you sensibly.
Thou hast no feeling of it Moth,
I will speak that Lenuoy.
I Costard running out, that was safely within,
Fell over the threshold, and broke my shin.
We will talk no more of this matter.
Till there be more matter in the shin.
Sir Costard, I will enfranchise thee.
O, marry me to one Francis, I smell some Len∣uoy, some Goose in this.
By my sweet soul, I mean, setting thee at li∣bertie. Enfreedoming thy person: thou were emured, restrained, captivated, bound.
True, true, and now you will be my purgation, and let me loose.
I give thee thy liberty, set thee from durance, and in lieu thereof, impose on thee nothing but this: Bear this significant to the country Maid Iaquenetta: there is remuneration, for the best ward of mine honours is rewarding my dependants. Moth, follow.
Like the sequel I.
Signeur Costard adieu.
My sweet ounce of mans flesh, my in-conie Jew: Now will I look to his remuneration. Remuneration, O, that's the Latin word for three-far∣things: Three-farthings remuneration, What's the price of this uncle? i.d. no, Isle give you a remuneration: Why? It carries it remuneration: Why? It is a fairer name then a French-Crowne. I will never buy and sell out of this word.
O my good knave Costard, exceedingly well met.
Pray you sir, How much Carnation Ribbon may a man buy for a remuneration?
What is a remuneration?
Marry sir, half penny farthing.
O, Why then three farthings worth of Silk.
I thank your worship, God be wy you.
O stay slave, I must employ thee:
As thou wilt win my favour, good my knave,
Doe one thing for me that I shall entreat.
When would you have it done sir?
O this afternoon.
Well, I will doe it sir: Fare you well.
O thou know not what it is.
I shall know sir, when I have done it.
Why villain thou must know first.
I will come to your worship to morrow morning.
It must be done this afternoon,
Hark slave, it is but this:
The Princess comes to hunt here in the Park,
And in her train there is a gentle Lady:
When tongues speak sweetly, then they name her name,
And Rosaline they call her, ask for her:
And to her white hand see thou do commend
This sealed up counsel. Ther's thy guerdon: go.
Gordon, O sweet gordon, better then remune∣ration, a leuenpence-farthing better: most sweet gar∣don. I will doe it sir in print: gordon, remuneration.
O, and I forsooth in love,
I that have been loves whip?
A very Beadle to a humorous sigh: A Critic,
Nay, a night-watch Constable.
A domineering pedant ore the Boy,
Then whom no mortal so magnificent.
This wimpled, whining, purblind wayward Boy,
This signior Iunios giant drawfe, don Cupped,
Regent of Loue-rimes, Lord of folded arms,
The anointed sovereign of sighs and groans:
Liedge of all loiterers and male contents:
Dread Prince of Placcats, King of Codpieces.
Sole Emperator and great general
Of trotting Parrators (O my little heart.)
And I to be a Corporal of his field,
And wear his colours like a Tumblers hoop.
What? I love, I sue, I seek a wife,
A woman that is like a Germane Cloak,
Still a repairing: ever out of frame,
And never going a right, being a Watch:
But being watched, that it may still go right.
Nay, to be periurde, which is worst of all:
And among three, to love the worst of all,
A whitly wanton, with a velvet brow.
With two pitch balls stuck in her face for eyes.
I, and by heaven, one that will doe the deed,
Though Argus were her Eunuch and her guard.
And I to sigh for her, to watch for her,
To pray for her, go to: it is a plague
That Cupped will impose for my neglect,
Of his almighty dreadful little might.
Well, I will love, write, sigh, pray, shu, groan,
Some men must love my Lady, and some lone.
Was that the King that spurt his horse so hard,
Against the steep uprising of the hill?
I know not, but I think it was not he.
Who ere a was, a showed a mounting mind:
Well Lords, to day we shall have our dispatch,
On Saturday we will return to France.
Then Forester my friend, Where is the Bush
That we must stand and play the murderer in?
Hereby upon the edge of yonder Coppice,
A Stand where you may make the fairest shoot.
I thank my beauty, I am fair that shoot,
And thereupon thou speak the fairest shoot.
Pardon me Madam, for I meant not so.
What, what? First praise me, &amp; then again say no.
O short lived pride. Not fair? alack for woe.
Yes Madam fair.
Nay, never paint me now,
Where fair is not, praise cannot mend the brow.
Here (good my glass) take this for telling true:
Fair payment for foul words, is more then due.
Nothing but fair is that which you inherit.
See, see, my beauty will be saved by merit.
O heresy in fair, fit for these days,
A giving hand, though foul, shall have fair praise.
But come, the Bow: Now Mercy goes to kill,
And shooting well, is then accounted ill:
Thus will I save my credit in the shoot,
Not wounding, pity would not let me do it:
If wounding, then it was to show my skill,
That more for praise, then purpose meant to kill.
And out of question, so it is sometimes:
Glory grows guilty of detested crimes,
When for Fems sake, for praise an outward part,
We bend to that, the working of the hart.
As I for praise alone now seek to spill
The poor Dears blood, that my heart means no ill.
Do not cursed wives hold that selfe-soueraigntie
Only for praise sake, when they strive to be
Lords ore their Lords?
Only for praise and praise we may afford,
To any Lady that subdewes a Lord.
Here comes a member of the common-wealth.
God dig-you-den all, pray you which is the head Lady?
Thou shalt know her fellow, by the rest that have no heads.
Which is the greatest Lady, the highest?
The thickest, and the tallest.
The thickest, &amp; the tallest: it is so, truth is truth.
And your waste Mistress, were as slender as my wit,
One a these Maids girdles for your waste should be fit.
Are not you the chief womā? You are the thickest here?
What's your will sir? What's your will?
I have a Letter from Monsier Berowne,
To one Lady Rosaline.
O thy letter, thy letter: He's a good friend of mine.
Stand a side good bearer.
Boyet, you can carve,
Break up this Capon.
I am bound to serve.
This Letter is mistook: it imports none here:
It is writ to Iaquenetta.
We will read it, I swear.
Break the neck of the Wax, and every one give ear.
BY heaven, that thou art fair, is most infallible: true that thou art beauteous, truth it self that thou art lovely: more fairer then fair, beautiful then beauteous, truer then truth it self: have commiseration on thy hero∣call Vassal. The magnanimous and most illustrate King Cophetua set eye upon the pernicious and indubitate Beg∣ger Zenelophon: and he it was that might rightly say, Ve∣no, vidi, vici: Which to annothanize in the vulgar, O base and obscure vulgar; videliset, He came, See, and o∣uercame: hee came one; see, two; couercame three: Who came? the King. Why did he come? to see. Why did he see? to overcome. To whom came he? to the Beggar. What saw he? the Beggar. Who overcame he? the Beggar. The conclusion is victory: On whose side? the King: the captive is enriched: On whose side? the Beggars. The catastrophe is a Nuptial: on whose side? the Kings: no, on both in one, or one in both. I am the King (for so stands the comparison) thou the Beg∣ger, for so witnesses thy lowliness. Shall I command thy love? I may. Shall I enforce thy love? I could. Shall I entreat thy love? I will. What, shalt thou ex∣change for rags, robes: for tittles titles, for thy self me. Thus expecting thy reply, I profane my lips on thy foot, my eyes on thy picture, and my heart on thy every part.
Thus dost thou hear the Nemean Lion roar,
Against thee thou Lamb, that stand as his pray:
Submissive fall his princely feet before,
And he from forage will incline to play.
But if thou strive (poor soul) what art thou then?
Food for his rage, repasture for his den.
What plume of feathers is hee that indicted this Letter? What vein? What Weathercock? Did you ever hear better?
I am much deceived, but I remember the stile.
Else your memory is bad, going ore it erewhile.
This Armando is a Spaniard that keeps here in court
A Phantasime, a Monarcho, and one that makes sport
To the Prince and his Booke-mates.
Thou fellow, a word.
Who gave thee this Letter?
I told you, my Lord.
To whom should thou give it?
From my Lord to my Lady.
From which Lord, to which Lady?
From my Lord Berowne, a good master of mine,
To a Lady of France, that he called Rosaline.
Thou hast mistaken his letter. Come Lords away.
Here sweet, put up this, twill be thine another day.
Who is the shooter? Who is the shooter?
Shall I teach you to know.
I my continent of beauty.
Why she that bears the Bow. Finely put off.
My Lady goes to kill horns, but if thou marry,
Hang me by the neck, if horns that year miscarry.
Finely put on.
Well then, I am the shooter.
And who is your Dear?
If we choose by the horns, your self come not near. Finely put on indeed.
You still wrangle with her Boyet, and she strikes at the brow.
But she her self is hit lower:
Have I hit her now.
Shall I come upon thee with an old saying, that was a man when King Pippin of France was a little boy, as touching the hit it.
So I may answer thee with one as old that was a woman when Queen Guinouer of Britain was a little wench, as touching the hit it.
Thou can not hit it, hit it, hit it,
Thou can not hit it my good man.
I cannot, cannot, cannot:
And I cannot, another can.
By my troth most pleasant, how both did fit it.
A mark marvelous well shot, for they both did hit.
A mark, O mark but that mark: a mark says my Lady.
Let the mark have a prick in it, to meat at, if it may be.
Wide a' th bow hand. in faith your hand is out.
Indeed a' must shoot nearer, or heel ne'er hit the clout.
And if my hand be out, then belike your hand is in.
Then will she get the vpshoot by cleaving the is in.
Come, come, you talk greasely, your lips grow foul,
She's too hard for you at pricks, sir challenge her to boule.
I fear too much rubbing: good night my good Whole.
By my soul a Swain, a most simple Clown.
Lord, Lord, how the Ladies and I have put him down.
O my troth most sweet jests, most inconie vulgar wit,
When it comes so smoothly off, so obscenely, as it were, so fit.
Armathor ath to the side, O a most dainty man.
To see him walk before a Lady, and to bear her Fan.
To see him kiss his hand, and how most sweetly a will swear:
And his Page at other side, that handful of wit,
Ah heavens, it is most pathetic nit.
Sowla, sowla.
Very reverent sport truly, and done in the testi∣money of a good conscience.
The Dear was (as you know) sanguis in blood, ripe as a Pomwater, who now hangs like a Jewel in the ear of Celo the sky; the welkin the heaven, and a∣non falls like a Crab on the face of Terra, the soil, the land, the earth.
Truly M. Holofernes, the epythithes are sweetly varied like a scholar at the least: but sir I assure ye, it was a Buck of the first head.
Sir Nathaniel, haud credo.
It was not a haud credo, it was a Pricket.
Most barbarous intimation: yet a kind of insi∣nuation, as it were in via, in way of explication facere: as it were replication, or rather ostentare, to show as it were his inclination after his undressed, unpolished, vneduca∣ted, vnpruned, vntrained, or rather unlettered, or rathe∣rest vnconfirmed fashion, to insert again my haud credo for a Dear.
I said the Dear was not a haud credo, it was a Pricket.
Twice sod simplicity, his coctus, O thou mon∣ster Ignorance, how deformed dost thou look.
Sir hee hath never fed of the dainties that are bred in a book.
He hath not eat paper as it were:
He hath not drunk ink.
His intellect is not replenished, hee is only an animal, only sensible in the duller parts: and such barren plants are set before vs, that we thankful should be: which we taste and feeling, are for those parts that doe fructify in vs more then he.
For as it would ill become me to be vain, indiscreet, or a fool;
So were there a patch set on Learning, to see him in a School.
But omne been say I, being of an old Fathers mind,
Many can brooke the weather, that love not the wind.
You two are book-men: Can you tell by your wit, What was a month old at Coins birth, that's not five weeks old as yet?
Dictisima goodman Dull, dictisima goodman Dull.
What is dictima?
A title to Phebe, to Luna, to the Moon.
The Moon was a month old when Adam was no more.
And wrought not to fiue-weekes when he came to five∣score.
The allusion holds in the Exchange.
It is true indeed, the Collusion holds in the Exchange.
God comfort thy capacity, I say the allusion holds in the Exchange.
And I say the polusion holds in the Exchange: for the Moon is never but a month old: and I say be∣side that, it was a Pricket that the Princess killed.
Sir Nathaniel, will you hear an extemporal Epitaph on the death of the Dear, and to humour the ignorant called the Dear, the Princess killed a Pricket.
Perge, good M. Holofernes, perge, so it shall please you to abrogate scurilitie.
I will something affect the letter, for it argues facility.
The prayfull Princess appears and pricked a pretty pleasing Pricket,
Some say a Sore, but not a sore, till now made sore with shooting.
The Dogs did yell, put ell to Sore, then Sorrel iumps from thicket:
Or Pricket-sore, or else Sorrel, the people fall a hooting.
If Sore be sore, then ell to Sore, makes fifty sores O sorrel:
Of one sore I an hundred make by adding but one more L.
A rare talent.
If a talent be a claw, look how he claws him with a talent.
This is a gift that I have simple: simple, a foo∣lish extravagant spirit, full of forms, figures, shapes, obe∣jests, Ideas, apprehensions, motions, revolutions. These are begot in the ventricle of memory, nourished in the womb of primater, and delivered upon the mellowing of occasion: but the gift is good in those in whom it is acute, and I am thankful for it.
Sir, I praise the Lord for you, and so may my parishioners, for their Sons are well tutored by you, and their Daughters profit very greatly under you: you are a good member of the common-wealth.
Mehercle, If their Sons be ingenuous, they
shall want no instruction: If their Daughters be capable, I will put it to them. But Fire sapis queen pauca loquitur, a soul Feminine salutes vs.
God give you good morrow M. Person.
Master Person, quasi Person? And if one should be perst, Which is the one?
Marry M. Schoolmaster, hee that is likest to a hogshead.
Of persing a Hogshead, a good luster of con∣ceit in a curph of Earth, Fire enough for a Flint, Pearl enough for a Swine: it is pretty, it is well.
Good Master Parson be so good as read me this Letter, it was given me by Costard, and sent me from Don Armatho: I beseech you read it.
Facile procor gellida, quando pecas omnia sub um∣braruminat, and so forth. Ah good old Mantuan, I may speak of thee as the travailer doth of Venice, vim∣chie, vencha, que non te vnde, que non te perreche. Old Man∣tuam, old Mantuan. Who understands thee not, vt re sol la mi fa: Under pardon sir, What are the contents? or rather as Horace says in his, What my soul verses.
I sir, and very learned.
Let me hear a staff, a stanza, a verse, Leg do∣mine.
If Love make me forsworn, how shall I swear to love?
Ah never faith could hold, if not to beauty vowed.
Though to my self forsworn, to thee Isle faithful prove.
Those thoughts to me were Oaks, to thee like Osiers bowed.
Study his bias leaves, and makes his book thine eyes.
Where all those pleasures live, that Art would compre∣hend.
If knowledge be the mark, to know thee shall suffice.
Well learned is that tongue, that well can thee cōmend.
All ignorant that soul, that sees thee without wonder.
Which is to me some praise, that I thy parts admire;
Thy eye Ioues lightning bears, thy voice his dreadful thunder.
Which not to anger bent, is musique, and sweet fire.
Celestial as thou art, Oh pardon love this wrong,
That sings heavens praise, with such an earthly tongue.
You find not the apostraphas, and so miss the accent. Let me superuise the cangenet.
Here are only numbers ratified, but for the elegance, facility, &amp; golden cadence of poesy caret: O∣uiddius Naso was the man. And why in deed Naso, but for smelling out the odoriferous flowers of fancy? the ierkes of invention imitarie is nothing: So doth the Hound his master, the Ape his keeper, the tyred Horse his rider: But Damosella virgin, Was this directed to you?
I sir from one monsieur Berowne, one of the strange Queens Lords.
I will ouerglance the superscript.
I will look again on the intellect of the Letter, for the nomination of the party written to the person writ∣ten unto.
Sir Holofernes, this Berowne is one of the Votaries with the King, and here he hath framed a Letter to a se∣quent of the stranger Queens: which accidentally, or by the way of progression, hath miscarried. Trip and go my sweet, deliver this Paper into the hand of the King, it may concern much: stay not thy complement, I forgive thy duty, adieu.
Good Costard go with me:
Sir God save your life.
Have with thee my girl.
Sir you have done this in the fear of God very religiously: and as a certain Father saith
Sir tell not me of the Father, I do fear colour∣ble colours. But to return to the Verses, Did they please you sir Nathaniel?
Marvelous well for the pen.
I do dine to day at the fathers of a certain Pu∣pill of mine, where if (being repast) it shall please you to gratify the table with a Grace, I will on my privilege I have with the parents of the foresaid Child or Pupil, undertake your bien vonuto, where I will prove those Verses to be very unlearned, neither savouring of Poetry, Wit, nor Invention. I beseech your So∣cietie.
And thank you to: for society (saith the text) is the happiness of life.
And certes the text most infallibly concludes it.
Sir I do inuit you too, you shall not say me nay: pauca verb.
Away, the gentles are at their game, and we will to our recreation.
The King he is hunting the Dear,
I am coursing my self.
They have pitched a Toil, I am toiling in a pitch, pitch that defiles; defile, a foul word: Well, set thee down sorrow; for so they say the fool said, and so say I, and I the fool: Well proved wit. By the Lord this Love is as mad as Aiax, it kills sheep, it kills me, I a sheep: Well proved again a my side. I will not love; if I do hang me: in faith I will not. O but her eye: by this light, but for her eye, I would not love her; yes, for her two eyes. Well, I doe nothing in the world but lye, and lye in my throat. By heaven I doe love, and it hath taught me to Rime, and to be mallicholie: and here is part of my Rime, and here my mallicholie. Well, she hath one a' my Sonnets already, the Clown bore it, the Fool sent it, and the Lady hath it: sweet Clown, sue∣la Fool, sweetest Lady. By the world, I would not care a pin, if the other three were in. Here comes one with a paper, God give him grace to groan.
Ay me!
Shot by heaven: proceed sweet Cupped, thou hast thumpt him with thy Birdbolt under the left pap: in faith secrets.
So sweet a kiss the golden Sun gives not,
To those fresh morning drops upon the Rose,
As thy eye beams, when their fresh raise have smote.
The night of dew that on my cheeks down flows.
Nor shines the silver Moon one half so bright,
Through the transparent bosom of the deep,
As doth thy face through tears of mine give light:
Thou shin'st in every tear that I doe weep,
No drop, but as a Coach doth carry thee:
So reddest thou triumphing in my woe.
Do but behold the tears that swell in me,
And they thy glory through my grief will show:
But doe not love thy self, then thou wilt keep
My tears for glasses, and still make me weep.
O Queen of Queens, how far dost thou excel,
No thought can think, nor tongue of mortal tell.
How shall she know my griefs? Isle drop the paper.
Sweet leaves shade folly. Who is he comes here?
What Longauill, and reading: listen ear.
Now in thy likeness, one more fool appear.
Ay me, I am forsworn.
Why he comes in like a perjury, wearing papers.
In love I hope, sweet fellowship in shame.
One drunkard loves another of the name.
Am I the first yt have been perjured so?
I could put thee in comfort, not by two that I know,
Thou make the triumphery, the corner cap of society,
The shape of Loves Tiburne, that hangs up simplicity.
I fear these stubborn lines lack power to move.
O sweet Maria, Empress of my Love,
These numbers will I tear, and write in prose.
O Rimes are guards on wanton Cupids hose,
Disfigure not his Shop.
This same shall go.
Did not the heavenly Rhetoric of thine eye,
Against whom the world cannot hold argument,
Persuade my heart to this false perjury?
Vows for thee broke deserve not punishment.
A woman I forswore, but I will prove,
Thou being a Goddess, I forswore not thee.
My Vow was earthly, thou a heavenly Love.
Thy grace being gained, cures all disgrace in me.
Vows are but breath; and breath a vapour is.
Then thou fair Sun, which on my earth doest shine,
Exhale this vapor-vow, in thee it is:
If broken then, it is no fault of mine:
If by me broke, What fool is not so wise,
To loose an oath, to win a Paradise?
This is the liver vein, which makes flesh a deity.
A greene Goose, a Goddess, pure pure Idolatry.
God amend vs, God amend, we are much out of the way.
By whom shall I send this (company?) Stay.
All hid, all hid, an old infant play,
Like a demi God, here sit I in the sky,
And wretched fools secrets heedfully ore-eye.
More Sacks to the mile. O heavens I have my wish,
Dumaine transformed, four Woodcocks in a dish.
O most divine Kate.
O most profane coxcomb.
By heaven the wonder of a mortal eye.
By earth she is not, corporal, there you lye.
Her Amber hairs for foul hath amber cotted.
An Amber coloured Raven was well noted.
As upright as the Cedar.
Stoop I say her shoulder is with-child.
As fair as day.
I as some days, but then no sun must shine.
O that I had my wish?
And I had mine.
And mine too good Lord.
Amen, so I had mine: Is not that a good word?
I would forget her, but a Fever she
Reigns in my blood, and will remembered be.
A Fever in your blood, why then incision
Would let her out in Saucers, sweet misprision.
Once more Isle read the Ode that I have writ.
Once more Isle mark how Love can varry Wit.
On a day, alack the day:
Love, whose Month is every May,
Spied a blossom passing fair,
Playing in the wanton ayre:
Through the Velvet, leaves the wind,
All unseen, can passage find.
That the Lover sick to death,
Wish himself the heavens breath.
Ayre (quoth he) thy cheeks may blow,
Ayre, would I might triumph so.
But alack my hand is sworn,
Ne'er to pluck thee from thy throne:
Vow alack for youth unmeet,
Youth so apt to pluck a sweet.
Doe not call it sin in me,
That I am forsworn for thee.
Thou for whom love would swear,
Iuno but an Aethiop were,
And deny himself for Jove.
Turning mortal for thy Love.
This will I send, and something else more plain.
That shall express my true-loues fasting pain.
O would the King, Berowne and Longauill,
Were Lovers too, ill to example ill,
Would from my forehead wipe a perjured note:
For none offend, where all alike doe dote.
Dumaine, thy Love is far from charity,
That in Loves grief desire society:
You may look pale, but I should blush I know,
To be ore-heard, and taken napping so.
Come sir, you blush: as his, your case is such,
You chide at him, offending twice as much.
You doe not love Maria? Longauile,
Did never Sonnet for her sake compile;
Nor never lay his wreathed arms athwart
His loving bosom, to keep down his heart.
I have been closely shrouded in this bush,
And marked you both, and for you both did blush.
I heard your guilty Rimes, observed your fashion:
Saw sighs reeke from you, noted well your passion.
Aye me, says one! O Jove, the other cries!
On her hairs were Gold, Crystal the others eyes.
You would for Paradise break Faith and troth,
And Jove for your Love would infringe an oath.
What will Berowne say when that he shall hear
Faith infringed, which such zeal did swear.
How will he scorn? how will he spend his wit?
How will he triumph, leap, and laugh at it?
For all the wealth that ever I did see,
I would not have him know so much by me.
Now step I forth to whip hypocrisy.
Ah good my Liedge, I pray thee pardon me.
Good heart, What grace hast thou thus to reprove
These worms for loving, that art most in love?
Your eyes doe make no couches in your tears.
There is no certain Princess that appears.
You'll not be perjured, it is a hateful thing:
Tush, none but Minstrels like of Sonnetting.
But are you not ashamed? nay, are you not
All three of you, to be thus much ore'shot?
You found his Moth, the King your Moth did see:
But I a Beam doe find in each of three.
O what a Scene of fool'ry have I seen.
Of sighs, of groans, of sorrow, and of teene:
O me, with what strict patience have I sat,
To see a King transformed to a Gnat?
To see great Hercules whipping a Gigge,
And profound Solomon tuning a Jig?
And Nestor play at push-pin with the boys,
And Critic Tymon laugh at idle toys.
Where lies thy grief? O tell me good Dumaine;
And gentle Longauill, where lies thy pain?
And where my Liedges? all about the breast:
A Candle hoe!
Too bitter is thy jest.
Are wee betrayed thus to thy ouer-view?
Not you by me, but I betrayed to you.
I that am honest, I that hold it sin
To break the vow I am engaged in.
I am betrayed by keeping company
With men, like men of inconstancy.
When shall you see me write a thing in rime?
Or groan for Join? or spend a minutes time,
In pruning me, when shall you hear that I will praise a hand, a foot, a face, an eye: a gate, a state, a brow, a breast, a waste, a leg, a limb.
Soft, Whither away so fast?
A true man, or a thief, that gallops so.
I post from Love, good Lover let me go.
God bless the King.
What Present hast thou there?
Some certain treason.
What makes treason here?
Nay it makes nothing sir.
If it mar nothing neither,
The treason and you go in peace away together.
I beseech your Grace let this Letter be read,
Our person mis-doubts it: it was treason he said.
Berowne, read it over.
Where had thou it?
Of Costard.
Where had thou it?
Of Dun Adramadio, Dun Adramadio.
How now, what is in you? why dost thou tear it?
A toy my Liedge, a toy: your grace needs not fear it.
It did move him to passion, and therefore let's hear it.
It is Berowns writing, and here is his name.
Ah you whoreson loggerhead, you were borne to doe me shame.
Guilty my Lord, guilty: I confess, I confess.
What?
That you three fools, lacked me fool, to make up the mess.
He, he, and you: and you my Liedge, and I,
Are picke-purses in Love, and we deserve to die.
O dismiss this audience, and I shall tell you more.
Now the number is even.
True true, we are four: will these Turtles be gone?
Hence sirs, away.
Walk aside the true folk, &amp; let the traitors stay.
Sweet Lords, sweet Lovers, O let vs embrace,
As true we are as flesh and blood can be,
The Sea will ebb and flow, heaven will show his face:
Young blood doth not obey an old decree.
We cannot cross the cause why we are borne:
Therefore of all hands must we be forsworn.
What, did these rent lines show some love of thine?
Did they, quoth you? Who sees the heavenly Rosaline,
That (like a rude and savage man of Inde.)
At the first opening of the gorgeous East,
Bows not his vassal head, and struck blind,
Kisses the base ground with obedient breast?
What peremptory Eagle-sighted eye
Dares look upon the heaven of her brow,
That is not blinded by her majesty?
What zeal, what fury, hath inspired thee now?
My Love (her Mistress) is a gracious Moon,
She (an attending Star) scarce seen a light.
My eyes are then no eyes, nor I Berowne.
O, but for my Love, day would turn to night,
Of all complexions the cul'd sovereignty,
Doe meet as at a fair in her fair cheek,
Where several Worthies make one dignity,
Where nothing wants, that want it self doth seek.
Lend me the flourish of all gentle tongues,
Fie painted Rhetoric, O she needs it not,
To things of sale, a sellers praise belongs:
She passes praise, then praise too short doth blot.
A withered Hermit, fiuescore winters worn,
Might shake off fifty, looking in her eye:
Beauty doth varnish Age, as if new borne,
And gives the Crutch the Cradles infancy.
O it is the Sun that makes all things shine.
By heaven, thy Love is black as Ebony.
Is Ebony like her? O word divine?
A wife of such wood were felicity.
O who can give an oath? Where is a book?
That I may swear Beauty doth beauty lack,
If that she learn not of her eye to look:
No face is fair that is not full so black.
O paradox, Black is the badge of hell,
The hue of dungeons, and the School of night:
And beauties crest becomes the heavens well.
Devils soonest tempt resembling spirits of light.
O if in black my Ladies brows be decked,
It mourns, that painting usurping hair
Should ravish doters with a false aspect:
And therefore is she borne to make black, fair.
Her favour turns the fashion of the days,
For native blood is counted painting now:
And therefore red that would avoid dispraise,
Paints it self black, to imitate her brow.
To look like her are Chimny-sweepers black.
And since her time, are Colliers counted bright.
And Aethiops of their sweet complexion croak.
Dark needs no Candles now, for dark is light.
Your mistresses dare never come in rain,
For fear their colours should be washed away.
It were good yours did: for sir to tell you plain,
Isle find a fairer face not washed to day.
Isle prove her fair, or talk till dooms-day here.
No Devil will fright thee then so much as she.
I never knew man hold vile stuff so dear.
Look, heir's thy love, my foot and her face see.
O if the streets were paved with thine eyes,
Her feet were much too dainty for such tread.
O vile, then as she goes what upward lies?
The street should see as she walked over head.
But what of this, are we not all in love?
O nothing so sure, and thereby all forsworn.
Then leave this chat, &amp; good Berown now prove
Our loving lawful, and our faith not torn.
I marie there, some flattery for this evil.
O some authority how to proceed,
Some tricks, some quillets, how to cheat the devil.
Some salve for perjury.
O it is more then need.
Have at you then affections men at arms,
Consider what you first did swear unto:
To fast, to study, and to see no woman:
Flat treason against the Kingly state of youth.
Say, Can you fast? your stomachs are too young:
And abstinence engenders maladies.
And where that you have vowed to study (Lords)
In that each of you have forsworn his Book
Can you still dream and pore, and thereon look.
For when would you my Lord, or you, or you,
Have found the ground of studies excellence,
Without the beauty of a women's face;
From women's eyes this doctrine I derive,
They are the Ground, the Books, the Achadems,
From whence doth spring the true Promethean fire.
Why, universal plodding poisons up
The nimble spirits in the arteries,
As motion and long during action tyres
The sinewy vigour of the travailer.
Now for not looking on a women's face,
You have in that forsworn the use of eyes:
And study too, the causer of your vow.
For where is any Author in the world,
Teaches such beauty as a women's eye:
Learning is but an adjunct to our self,
And where we are, our Learning likewise is.
Then when our selves we see in Ladies eyes,
With our selves.
Doe we not likewise see our learning there?
O we have made a Vow to study, Lords,
And in that vow we have forsworn our Books:
For when would you (my Liege) or you, or you?
In leaden contemplation have found out
Such fiery Numbers as the prompting eyes,
Of beauties tutors have enriched you with:
Other slow Arts entirely keep the brain:
And therefore finding barren practizers,
Scarce show a harvest of their heavy toil.
But Love first learned in a Ladies eyes,
Lives not alone emured in the brain:
But with the motion of all elements,
Courses as swift as thought in every power,
And gives to every power a double power,
Aboue their functions and their offices.
It adds a precious seeing to the eye:
A Lovers eyes will gaze an Eagle blind.
A Lovers ear will hear the lowest sound.
When the suspicious head of theft is stopped.
Loves feeling is more soft and sensible,
Then are the tender horns of Cockled Snails.
Loves tongue proves dainty, Bachus gross in taste,
For Valour, is not Love a Hercules?
Still climbing trees in the Hesporides.
Subtle as Sphinx, as sweet and musical,
As bright Apollo's Lute, strung with his hair.
And when Love speaks, the voice of all the Gods,
Make heaven drowsy with the harmony.
Never durst Poet touch a pen to write,
Until his Ink were tempered with Loves sighs:
O then his lines would ravish savage ears,
And plant in Tyrants mild humility.
From women's eyes this doctrine I derive.
They sparkle still the right promethean fire,
They are the Books, the Arts, the Academies,
That show, contain, and nourish all the world.
Else none at all in ought proves excellent.
Then fools you were these women to forswear:
Or keeping what is sworn, you will prove fools,
For Wisdoms sake, a word that all men love:
Or for Loves sake, a word that loves all men.
Or for Men's sake, the author of these Women:
Or Women's sake, by whom we men are Men.
Let's once loose our oaths to find our selves,
Or else we loose our selves, to keep our oaths▪
It is religion to be thus forsworn.
For Charity it self fulfils the Law:
And who can sever love from Charity.
Saint Cupped then, and Soldiers to the field.
Advance your standards, &amp; upon them Lords.
Pell, mell, down with them: but be first advised,
In conflict that you get the Sun of them.
Now to plain dealing, Lay these glozes by,
Shall we resolve to woe these girls of France?
And win them too, therefore let vs devise,
Some entertainment for them in their Tents.
First from the Park let vs conduct them thither,
Then homeward every man attach the hand
Of his fair Mistress, in the afternoon
We will with some strange pastime solace them:
Such as the shortness of the time can shape,
For Revels, Dances, Masks, and merry hours,
Fore-runne fair Love, strewing her way with flowers.
Away, away, no time shall be omitted,
That will be time, and may by vs be fitted.
Alone, alone sowed Cockell, reaped no Corn,
And Justice always whirls in equal measure:
Light Wenches may prove plagues to men forsworn,
If so, our Copper buys no better treasure.
Satis quid sufficit.
I praise God for you sir, your reasons at dinner have been sharpe &amp; sententious: pleasant without scur∣rillity, witty without affection, audacious without im∣pudency, learned without opinion, and strange without heresy: I did converse this quondam day with a comp∣neon of the Kings, who is entitled, nominated, or called, Don Adriano de Armatho.
No hominum tanquam te, His humour is lofty, his discourse peremptory: his tongue filed, his eye ambitious, his gate majestic, and his general behaui∣our vain, ridiculous, and thrasonicall. He is too picked, too spruce, too affected, too odd, as it were, too pere∣grinat, as I may call it.
A most singular and choice Epithet,
He draws out the thread of his verbosity, fi∣ner then the staple of his argument. I abhor such pha∣naticall phantasims, such insociable and point devise companions, such rockers of ortagriphie, as to speak dout fine, when he should say doubt; det, when he should pronounce debt; de•t, not det: he clepes a Calf, Cause: half, haufe: neighbour vocatur nebour; neigh abreuiated no: this is abominable, which he would call abhomi∣noble: it insinuates me of infamy: no inteligis domino, to make franti•ke, lunatic?
Laus deo, been intelligo.
Bome boon for boon prescian, a little scratched, 'twil serve.
Vides no quis venit?
Video, &amp; gaudio.
Chirra.
Quar• Chirra, not Sir?
Men of peace well encountered.
Most military sir salutation▪
They have been at a great feast of Languages, and stolen the scraps.
O they have lived long on the almes-basket of words. I marvel thy M. hath not eaten thee for a word, for thou art not so long by the head as honorificabilitu∣dinitatibus: Thou art easier swallowed then a flap dra∣gon.
Peace, the peal begins.
Monsieur, are you not lettred?
Yes, yes, he •eaches boys the Horne-booke:
What is Abspeld backward with the horn on his head?
Ba, puericia with a horn added.
Ba most seely Sheep, with a horn: you hear his learning.
Quis quis, thou Consonant?
The last of the five Vowels if You repeat them, or the fifth if I.
I will repeat them: a e I.
The She•pe, the other two concludes it o u.
Now by the salt wave of the mediteranium, a sweet tutch, a quick vene we of wit, snip snap, quick &amp; home, it rejoices my intellect, true wit.
Offered by a child to an old man: which is wit-old.
What is the figure? What is the figure?
Horns.
Thou disputes like an Infant: go whip thy Gigge.
Lend me your Horn to make one, and I will whip about your Infamy vnum cita a gigge of a Cock∣olds horn.
And I had but one penny in the world, thou should have it to buy Ginger bread: Hold, there is the very Remuneration I had of thy Moister, thou halfpenny purse of wit, thou Pidgeon-egge of discretion. O &amp; the heavens were so pleased, that thou were but my Bastard; What a joyful father would thou make me? Go to, thou hast it ad dunghill, at the fingers ends, as they say.
Oh I smell false Latin, dunghill for vnguem.
Arts-man preambulat, we will bee singled from the barbarous. Do you not educate youth at the Charge∣house on the top of the Mountain?
Or Mons the hill.
At your sweet pleasure, for the Mountain.
I doe sans question.
Sir, it is the Kings most sweet pleasure and af∣fection, to congratulate the Princess at her Pavilion, in the posteriors of this day, which the rude multitude call the afternoon.
The posterior of the day, most generous sir, is lia∣ble, congruent, and measurable for the afternoon: the word is well could, chose, sweet, and apt I doe assure you sir, I doe assure.
Sir, the King is a noble Gentleman, and my fa∣miliar, I doe assure ye very good friend: for what is in∣ward between vs, let it pass. I doe beseech thee re∣member thy courtesy. I beseech thee apparel thy head: and among other importunate &amp; most serious designs, and of great import indeed too: but let that pass, for I must tell thee it will please his Grace (by the world) sometime to lean upon my poor shoulder, and with his royal finger thus dally with my excrement, with my moustache: but sweet heart let that pass. By the world I recount no fable, some certain special honours it pleases his greatness to impart to Armado a Soldier, a man of travel, that hath seen the world: but let that pass; the very all of all is: but sweet heart, I do implore secrecy, that the King would have me present the Princess (sweet chuck) with some delightful ostenta∣tion, or show, or pageant, or antique, or fire-worke: Now, understanding that the Curate and your sweet self are good at such eruptions, and sudden breaking out of mirth •. i• were) I have acquainted you withal, to the end to crave your assistance.
Sir, you shall present before her the Nine Worcester∣this. Sir Holofernes, as concerning some entertainment of time, some show in the posterior of this day, to bee rendered by our assistants the Kings command: and this most gallant, illustrate and learned Gentleman, before the Princess: I say none so sit as to present the Nine Worthies.
Where will you find men worthy enough to present them?
Iosua, your self: my self, and this gallant gen∣tleman Iudas Machabeus; this Swain (because of his great limb or •oynt) shall pass Pompey the great, the Page Hercules.
Pardon sir, error: He is not quantity enough for that Worthies thumb, hee is not so big as the end of his Club.
Shall I have audience? he shall present Hercu∣les in minority: his enter and exit shall bee strangling a Snake; and I will have an Apology for that purpose.
An excellent device: so if any of the audience hiss, you may cry, Well done Hercules, now thou crew∣shest the Snake; that is the way to make an offence gre∣cious, though few have the grace to doe it.
For the rest of the Worthies?
I will play three my self.
Thrice worthy Gentleman.
Shall I tell you a thing?
We attend.
We will have, if this fadge not, an Antique. I beseech you follow.
Via good-man Dull, thou hast spoken no word all this while.
Nor understood none neither sir.
Alone, we will employ thee.
Isle make one in a dance, or so: or I will play
on the taber to the Worthies, &amp; let them dance the hey.
Most Dull, honest Dull, to our sport away.
Sweet hearts we shall be rich ere we depart,
If fairings come thus plentifully in.
A Lady wal'd about with Diamonds: Look you, what I have from the loving King.
Madam, came nothing else along with that?
Nothing but this yes as much love in Rime,
As would be crammed up in a sheet of paper
Writ on both sides the lease, margent and all,
That he was fine to seal on Cupids name.
That was the way to make his god-head wax:
For he hath been five thousand years a Boy.
I, and a shrewd unhappy gallows too.
You'll ne'er be friends with him, a kilt your sister.
He made her melancholy, sad, and heavy, and so she died: had she been Light like you, of such a mer∣rye nimble stirring spirit, she might a bin a Grandam ere she died. And so may you: For a light heart lives long.
What's your dark meaning mouse, of this light word?
A light condition in a beauty dark.
We need more light to find your meaning out.
You'll mar the light by taking it in snuff:
Therefore Isle darkly end the argument.
Look what you doe, you doe it still in th dark.
So do not you, for you are a light Wench.
Indeed I weigh not you, and therefore light.
You weigh me not, O that's you care not for me.
Great reason: for past care, is still past cure.
Well bandied both, a set of Wit well played.
But Rosaline, you have a Favour too?
Who sent it? and what is it?
I would you knew.
And if my face were but as fair as yours.
My Favour were as great, be witness this.
Nay, I have Verses too, I thank Berowne,
The numbers true, and were the numbering too,
I were the fairest goddess on the ground.
I am compared to twenty thousand fairs.
O he hath drawn my picture in his letter.
Any thing like?
Much in the letters, nothing in the praise.
Beauteous as Ink: a good conclusion.
Fair as a text B. in a Copy book.
Ware pencils. How? Let me not die your debtor,
My red Dominicall, my golden letter.
O that your face were full of Ocs.
A Pox of that jest, and I beshrew all Shrowes:
But Katherine, what was sent to you
From fair Dumaine?
Madame, this Glove.
Did he not send you twain?
Yes Madame: and moreover,
Some thousand Verses of a faithful Lover.
A huge translation of hypocrisy,
Wildly compiled, profound simplicity.
This, and these Pearls, to me sent Longauile.
The Letter is too long by half a mile.
I think no less: Dost thou wish in heart
The Chain were longer, and the Letter short.
I, or I would these hands might never part.
We are wise girls to mock our Lovers so.
They are worse fools to purchase mocking so.
That same Berowne isle torture ere I go.
O that I knew he were but in by the week,
How I would make him fawn, and beg, and seek,
And wait the season, and observe the times,
And spend his prodigal wits in bootless rimes.
And shape his service wholly to my device,
And make him proud to make me proud that jests.
So pertaunt like would I of resway his state,
That he should be my fool, and I his fate.
None are so surely caught▪ when they are caught,
As Wit turned fool, folly in Wisdom hatched:
Hath wisdoms warrant, and the help of School,
And Wits own grace to grace a learned Fool?
The blood of youth burns not with such excess,
As gravities revolt to wantons be.
Folly in Fools bears not so strong a note,
As fool'ry in the Wise, when Wit doth dote:
Since all the power thereof it doth apply,
To prove by Wit, worth in simplicity.
Here comes Boyet, and mirth in his face.
O I am stabbed with laughter, Wher's her Grace?
Thy news Boyet?
Prepare Madame, prepare.
Arm Wenches arm, encounters mounted are,
Against your Peace, Love doth approach, disguised:
Armed in arguments, you'll be surprised.
Muster your Wits, stand in your own defence,
Or hide your heads like Cowards, and fly hence.
Saint Dennis to S. Cupped: What are they,
That charge their breath against vs? Say scout say.
Under the cool shade of a Siccamore,
I thought to close mine eyes some half an hour:
When lo to interrupt my purposed rest,
Toward that shade I might behold addressed,
The King and his companions: warily
I stole into a neighbour thicket by,
And ouer-heard, what you shall ouer-heare:
That by and by disguised they will be here.
Their Herald is a pretty knavish Page:
That well by heart hath coned his embassage,
Action and accent did they teach him there.
Thus must thou speak, and thus thy body bear.
And ever and anon they made a doubt,
Presence majestic would put him out:
For quoth the King, an Angel shalt thou see:
Yet fear not thou, but speak audaciously.
The Boy replied, An Angel is not evil:
I should have feared her, had she been a devil▪
With that all laughed, and clapped him on the shoulder,
Making the bold wagg by their praises bolder.
One rubbed his elboe thus, and floored, and swore,
A better speech was never spoke before.
Another with his finger and his thumb,
Cried via, we will do it, come what will come.
The third he capered and cried, All goes well.
The fourth turned on the toe, and down he fell:
With that they all did tumble on the ground,
With such a zealous laughter so profound,
That in this spleen ridiculous appears,
To check their folly passions solemn tears.
But what, but what, come they to visit vs?
They do, they do; and are apparelled thus,
Like Muscouites, or Russians, as I guess.
Their purpose is to parley, to court, and dance,
And every one his Loue-feat will advance,
Unto his several Mistress: which they'll know
By favours several, which they did bestow.
And will they so? the Gallants shall be taskt:
For Ladies; we will every one be maskt,
And not a man of them shall have the grace
Despite of suit, to see a Ladies face.
Hold Rosaline, this Favour thou shalt wear,
And then the King will court thee for his Dear:
Hold, take thou this my sweet, and give me thine,
So shall Berowne take me for Rosaline.
And change your Favours too, so shall your Loves
Woo contrary, deceived by these removes.
Come on then, wear the favours most in sight.
But in this changing, What is your intent?
The effect of my intent is to cross theirs:
They doe it but in mocking merriment,
And mock for mock is only my intent.
Their several counsels they vnbosome shall,
To Loves mistook, and so be mocked withal.
Upon the next occasion that we meet,
With Visages displayed to talk and greet.
But shall we dance, if they desire vs too't?
No, to the death we will not move a foot,
Nor to their penned speech render we no grace:
But while it is spoke, each turn away his face.
Why that contempt will kill the keepers heart,
And quite divorce his memory from his part.
Therefore I doe it, and I make no doubt,
The rest will ere come in, if he be out.
Theres no such sport, as sport by sport orethrowne:
To make theirs ours, and ours none but our own.
So shall we stay mocking intended game,
And they well mocked, depart away with shame.
The Trumpet sounds, be maskt, the mockers come.
All hail, the richest Beauties on the earth.
Beauties no richer then rich Taffeta.
A holy parcel of the fairest dames that ever turned their backs to mortal views.
Their eyes villain, their eyes.
That ever turned their eyes to mortal views.
Out
True, out indeed.
Out of your favours heavenly spirits vouchsafe
Not to behold.
Once to behold, rogue.
Once to behold with your Sun beamed eyes,
With your Sun beamed eyes.
They will not answer to that Epithet,
You were best call it Daughter beamed eyes.
They do not mark me, and that brings me out.
Is this your perfectness? be gon you rogue.
What would these strangers?
Know their minds Boyet.
If they doe speak our language, it is our will
That some plain man recount their purposes.
Know what they would?
What would you with the Princes?
Nothing but peace, and gentle visitation.
What would they, say they?
Nothing but peace, and gentle visitation.
Why that they have, and bid them so be gon.
She says you have it, and you may be gon.
Say to her we have measured many miles,
To tread a Measure with you on the grass.
They say that they have measured many a mile,
To tread a Measure with you on this grass.
It is not so. Ask them how many inches
Is in one mile? If they have measured many,
The measure then of one is easlie told:
If to come hither, you have measured miles,
And many miles: the Princess bids you tell,
How many inches doth fill up one mile?
Tell her we measure them by weary steps.
She hears her self.
How many weary steps,
Of many weary miles you have ore-gone,
Are numbered in the travel of one mile?
We number nothing that we spend for you,
Our duty is so rich, so infinite,
That we may doe it still without account.
Vouchsafe to show the sunshine of your face,
That we (like savages) may worship it.
My face is but a Moon, and clouded too.
Blessed are clouds, to doe as such clouds do.
Vouchsafe bright Moon, and these thy stars to shine,
(Those clouds removed) upon our watery eyne.
O vain peticioner, beg a greater matter,
Thou now requests but Mooneshine in the water.
Then in our measure, vouchsafe but one change.
Thou bid me beg, this begging is not strange.
Play music then: nay you must doe it soon.
Not yet no dance: thus change I like the Moon.
Will you not dance? How come you thus e∣stringed?
You took the Moon at full, but now shoe's changed?
Yet still she is the Moon, and I the Man.
The music plays, vouchsafe some motion to it: Our ears vouchsafe it.
But your legs should doe it.
Since you are strangers, &amp; come here by chance,
We'll not be nice, take hands, we will not dance.
Why take you hands then?
Only to part friends.
Curtsy sweet hearts, and so the Measure ends.
More measure of this measure, be not nice.
We can afford no more at such a price.
Prise your selves: What buys your company?
Your absence only.
That can never be.
Then cannot we be bought: and so adieu,
Twice to your Visor, and half once to you.
If you deny to dance, let's hold more chat.
In private then.
I am best pleased with that.
White handed Mistress, one sweet word with thee.
Honey, and Milk, and Sugar: there is three.
Nay then two treyes, an if you grow so nice
Methegline, Wort, and Malmsey; well run dice:
There's half a dozen sweets.
Seventh sweet adieu, since you can cog,
Isle play no more with you.
One word in secret.
Let it not be sweet.
Thou greeu'st my gall.
Gall, bitter.
Therefore meet.
Will you vouchsafe with me to change a word?
Name it.
Fair Lady.
Say you so? Fair Lord:
Take you that for your fair Lady.
Please it you,
As much in private, and Isle bid adieu.
What, was your vizard made without a tong?
I know the reason Lady why you ask.
O for your reason, quickly sir, I long.
You have a double tongue within your mask.
And would afford my speechless vizard half.
Veale quoth the Dutch-man: is not Veale a Calfe?
A Calfe fair Lady?
No, a fair Lord Calfe.
Let's part the word.
No, Isle not be your half:
Take all and wean it, it may prove an Ox.
Look how you but your self in those sharpe mocks.
Will you give horns chaste Lady? Do not so.
Then die a Calfe before your horns do grow.
One word in private with you ere I die.
Bleat softly then, the Butcher hears you cry.
The tongues of mocking wenches are as keen
As is the Razors edge, invisible:
Cutting a smaller hair then may be seen,
Aboue the sense of sense so sensible:
Seems their conference, their conceits have wings,
Fleeter then arrows, bullets wind, thought, swifter things
Not one word more my maids, break off, break off.
By heaven, all dry beaten with pure scoff.
Farewell mad Wenches, you have simple wits.
Twenty adieus my frozen Muscouits.
Are these the breed of wits so wondered at?
Tapers they are, with your sweet breathes puffed out.
Wel-liking wits they have, gross, gross, fat, fat.
O poverty in wit, Kingly poor flout.
Will they not (think you) hang themselves to night?
Or ever but in vizards show their faces:
This pert Berowne was out of countenance quite.
They were all in lamentable cases.
The King was vveeping ripe for a good word.
Berowne did swear himself out of all suite.
Dumaine was at my service, and his sword:
No point (quoth I:) my servant straight was mute.
Lord Longauill said I came ore his hart:
And trow you what he called me?
Qualm perhaps.
Yes in good faith.
Go sickness as thou art.
Well, better wits have worn plain statute caps,
But will you hear; the King is my love sworn.
And quick Berowne hath plighted faith to me.
And Longauill was for my service borne.
Dumaine is mine as sure as bark on tree.
Madam, and pretty mistresses give care,
Immediately they will again be here
In their own shapes: for it can never be,
They will digest this harsh indignity.
Will they return?
They will they will, God knows,
And leap for joy, though they are lame with blows:
Therefore change Favours, and when they repair,
Blow like sweet Roses, in this summer air.
How blow? how blow? Speak to bee under∣stood.
Fair Ladies maskt, are Roses in their bud:
Dismaskt, their damask sweet commixture shown,
Are Angels veiling clouds, or Roses blown.
Avaunt perplexity: What shall we do,
If they return in their own shapes to wo?
Good Madam, if by me you'll be advised,
Let's mock them still as well known as disguised:
Let vs complain to them what fools were hear,
Disguised like Muscouites in shapeless gear:
And wonder what they were, and to what end
Their shallow shows, and Prologue vildely penned:
And their rough carriage so ridiculous,
Should be presented at our Tent to vs.
Ladies, withdraw: the gallants are at hand.
Whip to our Tents, as Roes runs ore Land.
Fair sir, God save you. Wher's the Princess?
Gone to her Tent.
Please it your Majesty command me any service to her?
That she vouchsafe me audience for one word.
I will, and so will she, I know my Lord.
This fellow pickes up wit as Pigeons peas,
And utters it again, when Jove doth please.
He is Wits Peddler, and retails his Wares,
At Wakes, and Wassels, Meetings, M•kits, Fairs.
And we that sell by gross, the Lord doth know,
Have not the grace to grace it with such show.
This Gallant pins the Wenches on his sleeve.
Had he bin Adam, he had tempted Eve.
He can carve too, and lisp: Why this is he,
That kissed away his hand in curtsy.
This is the Ape of Form, Monsieur the nice,
That when he plays at Tables, chides the Dice
In honourable terms: Nay he can sing
A mean most meanly, and in Ushering
Mend him who can: the Ladies call him sweet.
The stairs as he treads on them kiss his feet.
This is the flower that smiles on every one,
To show his teeth as white as Whales bone.
And consciences that will not die in debt,
Pay him the duty of honie-tongued Boyet.
A blister on his sweet tongue with my hart,
That put Armathoes Page out of his part.
See where it comes. Behaviour what were it thou,
Till this madman showed thee? And what art thou now?
All hail sweet Madame, and fair time of day.
Fair in all Hail is foul, as I conceive.
Construe my speeches better, if you may.
Then wish me better, I will give you leave.
We came to visit you, and purpose now
To lead you to our Court, vouchsafe it then.
This field shall hold me, and so hold your vow:
Nor God, nor I, delights in perjured men.
Rebuke me not for that which you provoke:
The virtue of your eye must break my oath.
You nickname virtue: vice you should have spoke:
For virtues office never breaks men troth.
Now by my maiden honour, yet as pure
As the vnsallied Lily, I protest,
A world of torments though I should endure,
I would not yield to be your houses guest:
So much I hate a breaking cause to be
Of heavenly oaths, vowed with integrity.
O you have lived in desolation here,
Unseen, unvisited, much to our shame.
Not so my Lord, it is not so I swear,
We have had pastimes here, and pleasant game,
A mess of Russians left vs but of late.
How Madam? Russians?
I in truth, my Lord.
Trim gallants, full of Courtship and of state.
Madam speak true. It is not so my Lord:
My Lady (to the manner of the days)
In courtesy gives undeserving praise.
We four indeed confronted were with four
In Russia habit: Here they stayed an hour,
And talked apace: and in that hour (my Lord)
They did not bless vs with one happy word.
I dare not call them fools; but this I think,
When they are thirsty, fools would fine have drink.
This jest is dry to me. Gentle sweet,
Your wits makes wise things foolish when we greet
With eyes best seeing, heavens fiery eye:
By light we loose light; your capacity
Is of that nature, that to your huge store,
Wise things seem foolish, and rich things but poor.
This proves you wise and rich: for in my eye
I am a fool, and full of poverty.
But that you take what doth to you belong,
It were a fault to snatch words from my tongue.
O, I am yours and all that I possess.
All the fool mine.
I cannot give you less.
Which of the Vizards what it that you wore?
Where? when? What Vizard?
Why demand you this?
There, then, that vizard, that superfluous case,
That hid the worse, and showed the better face.
We are descried,
They'll mock vs now downright.
Let vs confess, and turn it to a jest.
Amazed my Lord? Why looks your Highness sad?
Help hold his brows, he will sound: why look you pale?
Sea-sicke I think coming from Muscouie.
Thus pour the stars down plagues for perjury.
Can any face of brass hold longer out?
Here stand I Lady dart thy skill at me,
Bruise me with scorn, confound me with a flout.
Thrust thy sharpe wit quite through my ignorance.
Cut me to pieces with thy keen conceit:
And I will wish thee never more to dance,
Nor never more in Russian habit waite.
O! never will I trust to speeches penned,
Nor to the motion of a Schoole-boies tongue
Nor never come in vizard to my friend,
Nor woo in rime like a blind-harpers songue,
Taffeta phrases, silken terms precise,
Three-pil'd Hyperboles, spruce affection;
Figures pedantic, these summer flies,
Have blown me full of maggot ostentation.
I do forswear them, and I here protest,
By this white Glove (how white the hand God knows)
Henceforth my wooing mind shall be expressed
In russet yeas, and honest kersie noes.
And to begin Wench, so God help me law,
My love to thee is sound, sans crack or flaw.
Sans, sans, I pray you.
Yet I have a trick
Of the old rage: bear with me, I am sick.
Isle leave it by degrees: soft, let vs see,
Write Lord have mercy on vs, on those three,
They are infected, in their hearts it lies:
They have the plague, and caught it of your eyes:
These Lords are visited, you are not free:
For the Lords tokens on you do I see.
No, they are free that gave these tokens to vs.
Our states are forfeit, seek not to undo vs.
It is not so; for how can this be true,
That you stand forfeit, being those that sue.
Peace, for I will not have to do with you.
Nor shall not, if I do as I intend.
Speak for your selves, my wit is at an end.
Teach vs sweet Madame, for our rude trance∣gression, some fair excuse.
The fairest is confession.
Were you not here but even now, disguised?
Madam, I was.
And were you well advised?
I was fair Madam.
When you then were here,
What did you whisper in your Ladies ear?
That more then all the world I did respect her
When she shall challenge this, you will reject her.
Upon mine Honour no.
Peace, peace, forbear: your oath once broke, you force not to forswear.
Despise me when I break this oath of mine.
I will, and therefore keep it. Rosaline,
What did the Russian whisper in your ear?
Madam, he swore that he did hold me dear
As precious eye-sight, and did value me
Aboue this World: adding thereto moreover,
That he would Wed me, or else die my Lover.
God give thee joy of him: the Noble Lord Most honourably doth uphold his word.
What mean you Madame?
By my life, my troth,
I never swore this Lady such an oath.
By heaven you did; and to confirm it plain, you gave me this: But take it sir again.
My faith and this, the Princess I did give,
I knew her by this Jewel on her sleeve.
Pardon me sir, this Jewel did she wear,
And Lord Berowne (I thank him) is my dear.
What? Will you have me, or your Pearl again?
Neither of either, I remit both twain.
I see the trick on it: Here was a consent,
Knowing aforehand of our merriment,
To dash it like a Christmas Comedy.
Some carry-tale, some please-man, some slight Zany,
Some mumble-newes, some trencher-knight, some Dick
That smiles his cheek in years, and knows the trick
To make my Lady laugh, when she's disposed;
Told our intents before: which once disclosed,
The Ladies did change Favours, and then we
Following the signs, wooed but the sign of she.
Now to our perjury, to add more terror,
We are again forsworn in will and error.
Much upon this tic: and might not you
Forestall our sport, to make vs thus untrue?
Do not you know my Ladies foot by 'th squire?
And laugh upon the apple of her eye?
And stand between her back sir, and the fire,
Holding a trencher, jesting merrily?
You put our Page out: go, you are aloud.
Die when you will, a smock shall be your shroud.
You leer upon me, do you? There's an eye
Wounds like a Leaden sword.
Full merrily hath this brave manager, this car∣rear been run.
Lo, he is tilting straight. Peace, I have don.
Welcome pure wit, thou part'st a fair fray.
O Lord sir, they would know,
Whether the three worthies shall come in, or no.
What, are there but three?
No sir, but it is var• fine,
For every one pursents three.
And three times thrice is nine.
Not so sir, under correction sir, I hope it is not so. You cannot beg vs sir, I can assure you sir, we know what we know: I hope sir three times thrice sir.
Is not nine.
Under correction sir, wee know where-vntill it doth amount.
By Jove, I always took three threes for nine.
O Lord sir, it were pity you should get your living by reckoning sir.
How much is it?
O Lord sir, the parties themselves, the actors sir will show where-vntill it doth amount: for mine own part, I am (as they say, but to perfect one man in one poor man) Pompion the great sir.
Art thou one of the Worthies?
It pleased them to think me worthy of Pompey the great: for mine own part, I know not the degree of the Worthy, but I am to stand for him.
Go, bid them prepare.
We will turn it finely off sir, we will take some care.
Berowne, they will shame vs:
Let them not approach.
We are shame-proofe my Lord: and it is some policy, to have one show worse then the Kings and his company.
I say they shall not come.
Nay my good Lord, let me ore-rule you now;
That sport best pleases, that doth least know how.
Where Zeal strives to content, and the contents
Dies in the Zeal of that which it presents:
Their form confounded, makes most form in mirth,
When great things labouring perish in their birth.
A right description of our sport my Lord.
Anointed, I implore so much expense of thy royal sweet breath, as will utter a brace of words.
Doth this man serve God?
Why ask you?
He spook's not like a man of God's making.
That's all one my fair sweet honey Monarch: For I protest, the Schoolmaster is exceeding fantastical: Too too vain, too too vain. But we will put it (as they say) to Fortune delaguar, I wish you the peace of mind most royal cupplement.
Here is like to be a good presence of Worthies; He presents Hector of Troy, the Swain Pompey ye great, the Parish Curate Alexander, Armadoes Page Hercules, the Pedant Iudas Machabeus: And if these four Worcester∣this in their first show thrive, these four will change habits, and present the other five.
There is five in the first show.
You are deceived, tic not so.
The Pedant, the Braggart, the Hedge-Priest, the Fool, and the Boy,
Abate throw at Novum, and the whole world again,
Cannot prick out five such, take each one in's vain.
The ship is under sail, and here she coms amain.
I Pompey am.
You lie, you are not he.
I Pompey am.
With Libbards head on knee.
Well said old mocker,
I must needs be friends with thee.
I Pompey am, Pompey surnam'd the big.
The great.
It is great sir: Pompey surnam'd the great:
That oft in field, with Targe and Shield, did make my foe to sweat:
And travailing along this coast, I here am come by chance,
And lay my Arms before the legs of this sweet Lass of France.
If your Ladyship would say thanks Pompey, I had done.
Great thanks great Pompey.
Tic not so much worth: but I hope I was per∣fact. I made a little fault in great.
My hat to a halfe-penie, Pompey proves the best Worthy.
When in the world I lived, I was the worlds Com∣mander:
By East, West, North, &amp; South, I spread my conquering might
My Scutcheon plain declares that I am Alisander.
Your nose says no, you are not:
For it stands too right.
Your nose smells no, in this most tender smell∣ling Knight.
The Conqueror is dismayed:
Proceed good Alexander.
When in the world I lived, I was the worlds Com∣mander.
Most true, it is right: you were so Alisander.
Pompey the great.
your servant and Costard.
Take away the Conqueror, take away Alisander
O sir, you have overthrown Alisander the con∣queror: you will be scraped out of the painted cloth for
this: your Lion that holds his Pollax sitting on a close stool, will be given to Aiax. He will be the ninth worcester∣thie. A Conqueror, and afraid to speak? Run away for shame Alisander. There an't shall please you: a foo∣lish mild man, an honest man, look you, &amp; soon dashed. He is a marvelous good neighbour insooth, and a very good Bowler: but for Alisander, alas you see, how it is a little ore-parted. But there are Worthies a coming, will speak their mind in some other sort.
Stand aside good Pompey.
Great Hercules is presented by this Imp,
Whose Club killed Cerberus that three-headed Canus,
And when he was a babe, a child, a shrimp,
Thus did he strangle Serpents in his Manus:
La, he seems in minority,
Ergo, I come with this Apology.
Keep some state in thy exit, and vanish.
Iudas I am.
A Iudas?
Not Iscariot sir.
Iudas I am, ycliped Machabeus.
Iudas Machabeus clipped, is plain Iudas.
A kissing traitor. How art thou proved Iudas?
Iudas I am.
The more shame for you Iudas.
What mean you sir?
To make Iudas hang himself.
Begin sir, you are my elder.
Well followed, Iudas was hanged on an Elder.
I will not be put out of countenance.
Because thou hast no face.
What is this?
A Citterne head.
The head of a bodkin.
A deaths face in a ring.
The face of an old Roman coin, scarce seen.
The pummel of Caesars Falchion.
The carved bone face on a Flask.
S. Georges half cheek in a brooch.
I, and in a brooch of Lead.
I, and worn in the cap of a Tooth-drawer.
And now forward, for we have put thee in countenance
You have put me out of countenance.
False, we have given thee faces.
But you have out-fac'd them all.
And thou were it a Lion, we would do so.
Therefore as he is, an Ass, let him go:
And so adieu sweet Iude. Nay, why dost thou stay?
For the latter end of his name.
For the Ass to the Iude: give it him. Iud-as a∣way.
This is not generous, not gentle, not humble.
A light for monsieur Iudas, it grows dark, he may stumble.
Alas poor Machabeus, how hath hee been baited.
Hide thy head Achilles, here comes Hector in Arms.
Though my mocks come home by me, I will now be merry.
Hector was but a Trojan in respect of this.
But is this Hector?
I think Hector was not so •lean timbered.
His leg is too big for Hector.
More Calfe certain.
No, he is best endued in the small.
This cannot be Hector.
He's a God or a Painter, for he makes faces.
The Armipotent Mars, of Lances the almighty, gave Hector a gift.
A gilt Nutmegge.
A Lemon.
Stuck with Cloves.
No cloven.
The Armipotent Mars of Lances the almighty,
Gave Hector a gift, the heir of Illion;
A man so breathed, that certain he would fight: yea
From morn till night, out of his Pavilion.
I am that Flower.
That Mint.
That Cullambine.
Sweet Lord Longauill reine thy tongue.
I must rather give it the reine: for it runs a∣against Hector.
I, and Hector's a Grey-hound.
The sweet War-man is dead and rotten,
Sweet chuckes, beat not the bones of the buried:
But I will forward with my device;
Sweet Royalty bestow on me the sense of hearing.
Speak brave Hector, we are much delighted.
I do adore thy sweet Graces slipper.
Loves her by the foot.
He may not by the yard.
This Hector far surmounted Hanniball.
Fellow Hector, she is gone; she is two months on her way.
What meanest thou?
Faith unless you play the honest Trojan, the poor Wench is cast away: she's quick, the child brags in her belly already: tic yours.
Dost thou infamonize me among Potentates? Thou shalt die.
Then shall Hector be whipped for Iaquenetta that is quick by him, and hanged for Pompey, that is dead by him.
Most rare Pompey.
Renowned Pompey.
Greater then great, great, great, great Pompey: Pompey the huge.
Hector trembles.
Pompey is moved, more Atees more Atees stir them, or stir them on.
Hector will challenge him.
I, if a' have no more mans blood in's belly, then will sup a Flea.
By the North-pole I do challenge thee.
I will not fight with a pole like a Northern man; Isle flash, Isle do it by the sword: I pray you let me bore∣row my Arms again.
Room for the incensed Worthies.
Isle do it in my shirt.
Most resolute Pompey.
Master, let me take you a button hole lower:
Do you not see Pompey is uncasing for the combat: what
mean you? you will lose your reputation.
Gentlemen and Soldiers pardon me, I will not combat in my shirt.
You may not deny it, Pompey hath made the challenge.
Sweet bloods, I both may, and will.
What reason have you for it?
The naked truth of it is, I have no shirt,
I go woolward for penance.
True, and it was enjoined him in Rome for want of Linen: since when, Isle be sworn he wore none, but a dishclout of Iaquenettas, and that hee wears next his heart for a favour.
God save you Madame.
Welcome Marcade, but that thou interruptest our merriment.
I am sorry Madam, for the news I bring is heavy in my tongue. The King your father
Dead for my life.
Even so: My tale is told.
Worthies away, the Scene begins to cloud.
For mine own part, I breath free breath: I have seen the day of wrong, through the little hole of discretion, and I will right my self like a Soldier.
How fare's your Majesty?
Boyet prepare, I will away to night.
Madame not so, I do beseech you stay.
Prepare I say. I thank you gracious Lords
For all your fair endeavours and entreats:
Out of a new sad-soule, that you vouchsafe,
In your rich wisdom to excuse, or hide,
The liberal opposition of our spirits,
If overboldly we have borne our selves,
In the converse of breath (your gentleness
Was guilty of it.) Farewell worthy Lord:
A heavy heart bears not a humble tongue.
Excuse me so, coming so short of thanks,
For my great suite, so easily obtained.
The extreme parts of time, extremely forms
All causes to the purpose of his speed:
And often at his very loose-decides
That, which long process could not arbitrate.
And though the mourning brow of progeny
Forbid the smiling courtesy of Love:
The holy suite which fine it would convince,
Yet since loves argument was first on foot,
Let not the cloud of sorrow jostle it
From what it purposed: since to wail friends lost,
Is not by much so wholesome profitable,
As to rejoice at friends but newly found,
I understand you not, my griefs are double.
Honest plain words, best pierce the ears of grief
And by these badges understand the King,
For your fair sakes have we neglected time,
Plaid foul play with our oaths: your beauty Ladies
Hath much deformed vs, fashioning our humours
Even to the opposed end of our intents.
And what in vs hath seemed ridiculous:
As Love is full of unbefitting strains,
All wanton as a child, skipping and vain.
Formed by the eye, and therefore like the eye.
Full of straying shapes, of habits, and of forms
Varying in subjects as the eye doth roll,
To every varied object in his glance:
Which partie-coated presence of loose love
Put on by vs, if in your heavenly eyes,
Have misbecom'd our oaths and gravities.
Those heavenly eyes that look into these faults,
Suggested vs to make: therefore Ladies
Our love being yours, the error that Love makes
Is likewise yours. We to our selves prove false,
By being once false, for ever to be true
To those that make vs both, fair Ladies you.
And even that falsehood in it self a sin,
Thus purifies it self, and turns to grace.
We have received your Letters, full of Love:
Your Favours, the Ambassadors of Love.
And in our maiden counsel rated them,
At courtship, pleasantiest, and courtesy,
As bombast and as lining to the time:
But more devout then these are our respects
Have we not been, and therefore met your loves
In their own fashion, like a merriment.
Our letters Madam, showed much more then jest.
So did our looks.
We did not coat them so.
Now at the latest minute of the hour,
Grant vs your loves.
A time me thinks too short,
To make a world-without-end bargain in;
No, no my Lord, your Grace is perjured much,
Full of dear guiltiness, and therefore this:
If for my Love (as there is no such cause)
You will do ought, this shall you do for me.
Your oath I will not trust: but go with speed
To some forlorn and naked Hermitage,
Remote from all the pleasures of the world:
There stay, until the twelve Celestial Signs
Have brought about their annual reckoning.
If this austere insociable life,
Change not your offer made in heate of blood:
If frosts, and fasts, hard lodging, and thin weeds
Nip not the gaudie blossoms of your Love,
But that it bear this trial, and last love:
Then at the expiration of the year,
Come challenge me, challenge me by these deserts,
And by this Virgin palm, now kissing thine,
I will be thine: and till that instant shut
My woeful self up in a mourning house,
Raining the tears of lamentation,
For the remembrance of my Fathers death.
If this thou do deny, let our hands part,
Neither entitled in the others hart.
If this, or more then this, I would deny,
To flatter up these powers of mine with rest,
The sudden hand of death close up mine eye.
Hence ever then, my heart is in thy breast.
And what to me my Love? and what to me?
You must be purged too, your sins are racked.
You are attained with faults and perjury:
Therefore if you my favour mean to get,
A tweluemonth shall you spend, and never rest,
But seek the weary beds of people sick.
But what to me my love? but what to me?
A wife? a beard, fair health, and honesty,
With three-fold love, I wish you all these three.
O shall I say, I thank you gentle wife?
Not so my Lord, a tweluemonth and a day,
Isle mark no words that smoothfac'd wooers say.
Come when the King doth to my Lady come:
Then if I have much love, Isle give you some.
Isle serve thee true and faithfully till then.
Yet swear not, least ye be forsworn again▪
What says Maria?
At the tweluemonths end,
Isle change my black Gown, for a faithful friend.
Isle stay with patience: but the time is long.
The liker you, few taller are so young.
Studies my Lady? Mistress, look on me,
Behold the window of my heart, mine eye:
What humble suite attends thy answer there,
Impose some service on me for my love.
Oft have I heard of you my Lord Berowne,
Before I saw you: and the worlds large tongue
Proclaims you for a man replete with mocks,
Full of comparisons, and wounding flouts:
Which you on all estates will execute,
That lie within the mercy of your wit.
To weed this Wormwood from your fruitful brain,
And therewithal to win me, if you please,
Without the which I am not to be won:
You shall this tweluemonth term from day to day,
Visit the speechless sick, and still converse
With groaning wretches: and your task shall be,
With all the fierce endeavour of your wit,
To enforce the pained impotent to smile.
To move wilde laughter in the throat of death?
It cannot be, it is impossible.
Mirth cannot move a soul in agony.
Why that's the way to choke a gibing spirit,
Whose influence is begot of that loose grace,
Which shallow laughing hearers give to fools:
A jests prosperity, lies in the ear
Of him that hears it, never in the tongue
Of him that makes it: then, if sickly ears,
Deft with the clamours of their own dear groans,
Will hear your idle scorns; continue then,
And I will have you, and that fault withal.
But if they will not, throw away that spirit,
And I shall find you empty of that fault,
Right joyful of your reformation.
A tweluemonth? Well: befall what will befall,
Isle jest a tweluemonth in an Hospital.
I sweet my Lord, and so I take my leave.
No Madam, we will bring you on your way.
Our wooing doth not end like an old Play:
Jack hath not Gill: these Ladies curtsy
Might well have made our sport a Comedy.
Come sir, it wants a tweluemonth and a day,
And then 'twil end.
That's too long for a play.
Sweet Majesty vouchsafe me.
Was not that Hector?
The worthy Knight of Troy.
I will kiss thy royal finger, and take leave. I am a Votary, I have vowed to Iaquenetta to hold the Plough for her sweet love three years. But most estee∣med greatness, will you hear the Dialogue that the two Learned men have compiled, in praise of the Owl and the Cuckoo? It should have followed in the end of our show.
Call them forth quickly, we will do so.
Holla, Approach.
This side is Hiems, Winter.
This Ver, the Spring: the one maintained by the Owl,
The other by the Cuckoo.
Ver, begin.
When Daisies pied, and Violets blew,
And Cuckow-buds of yellow hew:
And Ladie-smockes all silver white,
Do paint the Meadows with delight.
The Cuckoo then on every tree,
Mocks married men, for thus sings he,
Cuckoo.
Cuckoo, Cuckoo: O word of fear,
Unpleasing to a married ear.
When Shepherds pipe on Oaten straws,
And merry Larks are Ploughmens clocks:
When Turtles tread, and Rooks and Daws,
And Maidens bleach their summer smocks:
The Cuckoo then on every tree
Mocks married men; for thus sings he,
Cuckoo.
Cuckoo, Cuckoo: O word of fear,
Unpleasing to a married ear.
When Icicles hang by the wall,
And Dicke the Shepherd blows his nail;
And Tom bears Logs into the hall,
And Milk comes frozen home in pail:
When blood is nipped, and ways be foul,
Then nightly sings the staring Owl
Tu-whit to-who.
A merry note,
While greasy Ione doth keel the pot.
When all aloud the wind doth blow,
And cossing drowns the Parsons saw:
And birds sit brooding in the snow,
And Marrians nose looks red and raw:
When roasted Crabs hiss in the bowl,
Then nightly sings the staring Owl,
Tu-whit to who:
A merry note,
While greasy Ione doth keel the pot.
The Words of Mercury,
Are harsh after the songs of Apollo:
You that way; we this way.

IN sooth I know not why I am so sad,
It wearies me: you say it wearies you;
But how I caught it, found it, or came by it,
What stuff it is made of, whereof it is borne,
I am to learn: and such a Want-wit sadness makes of me,
That I have much ado to know my self.
Your mind is tossing on the Ocean,
There where your Argosies with portly sail
Like Signiors and rich Burgers on the flood,
Or as it were the Pageants of the sea,
Do ouer-peere the petty Traffiquers
That curtsy to them, do them reverence
As they fly by them with their woven wings.
Believe me sir, had I such venture forth,
The better part of my affections, would
Be with my hopes abroad. I should be still
Plucking the grass to know where sits the wind,
Peering in Maps for ports, and peers, and rodes:
And every object that might make me fear
Misfortune to my ventures, out of doubt
Would make me sad.
My wind cooling my broth,
Would blow me to an Ague, when I thought
What harm a wind too great might doe at sea.
I should not see the sandy houre-glasse run,
But I should think of shallows, and of flats,
And see my wealthy Andrew docks in sand,
Veiling her high top lower then her ribs
To kiss her burial; should I go to Church
And see the holy edifice of stone,
And not bethink me straight of dangerous rocks,
Which touching but my gentle Vessels side
Would scatter all her spices on the stream,
Enrobe the roaring waters with my silks,
And in a word, but even now worth this,
And now worth nothing. Shall I have the thought
To think on this, and shall I lack the thought
That such a thing bechaunc'd would make me sad▪
But tell not me, I know Anthonio
Is sad to think upon his merchandise.
Believe me no, I thank my fortune for it,
My ventures are not in one bottom trufted,
Nor to one place; nor is my whole estate
Upon the fortune of this present year:
Therefore my merchandise makes me not sad.
Why then you are in love.
Fie, fie.
Not in love neither: then let vs say you are sad
Because you are not merry; and it were as easy
For you to laugh and leap, and say you are merry
Because you are not sad. Now by two-headed Ianus,
Nature hath framed strange fellows in her time:
Some that will evermore peep through their eyes,
And laugh like Parrots at a bag-piper.
And other of such vinegar aspect,
That they'll not show their teeth in way of smile,
Though Nestor swear the jest be laughable.
Here comes Bassanio,
Your most noble Kinsman,
Gratiano, and Lorenso. Faryewell,
We leave you now with better company.
I would have staid till I had made you merry,
If worthier friends had not prevented me.
Your worth is very dear in my regard.
I take it your own business calls on you,
And you embrace the occasion to depart.
Good morrow my good Lords.
Good signiors both, when shall we laugh? say, when?
You grow exceeding strange: must it be so?
We'll make our leisures to attend on yours.
My Lord Bassanio, since you have found Anthonio
We two will leave you, but at dinner time
I pray you have in mind where we must meet.
I will not fail you.
You look not well signior Anthonio,
You have too much respect upon the world:
They loose it that doe buy it with much care,
Believe me you are marvelously changed.
I hold the world but as the world Gratiano,
A stage, where every man must play a part,
And mine a sad one.
Let me play the fool,
With mirth and laughter let old wrinkles come,
And let my Liver rather heate with wine,
Then my heart cool with mortifying groans.
Why should a man whose blood is warm within,
Sit like his Grandsire, cut in Alabaster?
Sleep when he wakes? and creep into the Iaundies
By being peevish? I tell thee what Anthonio,
I love thee, and it is my love that speaks:
There are a sort of men, whose visages
Do cream and mantle like a standing pond,
And do a wilful stillness entertain,
With purpose to be dressed in an opinion
Of wisdom, gravity, profound conceit,
As who should say, I am sir an Oracle,
And when I op my lips, let no dog bark.
O my Anthonio, I do know of these
That therefore only are reputed wise,
For saying nothing; when I am very sure
If they should speak, would almost dam those ears
Which hearing them would call their brothers fools:
Isle tell thee more of this another time.
But fish not with this melancholy bait
For this fool Gudgin, this opinion:
Come good Lorenzo, faryewell a while,
Isle end my exhortation after dinner.
Well, we will leave you then till dinner time.
I must be one of these same dumb wise men,
For Gratiano never let's me speak.
Well, keep me company but two years mo,
Thou shalt not know the sound of thine own tongue.
Far you well, Isle grow a talker for this gear.
Thanks in faith, for silence is only commendable
In a nets tongue dri'd, and a maid not vendible.
It is that any thing now.
Gratiano speaks an infinite deal of nothing, more then any man in all Venice, his reasons are two grains of wheat hid in two bushels of chafe: you shall seek all day ere you find them, &amp; when you have them they are not worth the search.
Well: tel me now, what Lady is the same
To whom you swore a secret Pilgrimage
That you to day promised to tel me of?
Tic not unknown to you Anthonio
How much I have disabled mine estate,
By something showing a more swelling port
Then my faint means would grant continuance:
Nor do I now make moan to be abridged
From such a noble rate, but my chief care
Is to come fairly off from the great debts
Wherein my time something too prodigal
Hath left me gaged: to you Anthonio
I owe the most in money, and in love,
And from your love I have a warranty
To unburden all my plots and purposes,
How to get clear of all the debts I owe.
I pray you good Bassanio let me know it,
And if it stand as you your self still do,
Within the eye of honour, be assured
My purse, my person, my extremest means
Lye all unlocked to your occasions.
In my school days, when I had lost one shaft
I shot his fellow of the selfsame flight
The selfsame way, with more advised watch
To find the other forth, and by adventuring both,
I oft found both. I urge this child-hoode proof,
Because what follows is pure innocence.
I owe you much, and like a wilful youth,
That which I owe is lost: but if you please
To shoot another arrow that self way
Which you did shoot the first, I do not doubt,
As I will watch the aim: Or to find both,
Or bring your latter hazard back again,
And thankfully rest debtor for the first.
You know me well, and herein spend but time
To wind about my love with circumstance,
And out of doubt you doe more wrong
In making question of my uttermost
Then if you had made waste of all I have:
Then doe but say to me what I should doe
That in your knowledge may by me be done,
And I am pressed unto it: therefore speak.
In Belmont is a Lady richly left,
And she is fair, and fairer then that word,
Of wondrous virtues, sometimes from her eyes
I did receive fair speechless messages:
Her name is Portia, nothing vndervallewd
To Cato's daughter, Brutus Portia,
Nor is the wide world ignorant of her worth,
For the four winds blow in from every coast
Renowned suitors, and her sunny locks
Hang on her temples like a golden fleece,
Which makes her seat of Belmont Cholchos strond,
And many Iasons come in quest of her.
O my Anthonio, had I but the means
To hold a rival place with one of them,
I have a mind presages me such thrift,
That I should questionless be fortunate.
Thou know that all my fortunes are at sea,
Neither have I money, nor commodity
To raise a present sum, therefore go forth
Try what my credit can in Venice doe,
That shall be racked even to the uttermost,
To furnish thee to Belmont to fair Portia.
Go presently enquire, and so will I
Where money is, and I no question make
To have it of my trust, or for my sake.
By my troth Nerrissa, my little body is a wea∣rye of this great world.
You would be sweet Madam, if your miseries were in the same abundance as your good fortunes are: and yet for ought I see, they are as sick that surfeit with too much, as they that starve with nothing; it is no small happiness therefore to bee seated in the mean, super∣fluitie comes sooner by white hairs, but competencie lives longer.
Good sentences, and well pronounced.
They would be better if well followed.
If to doe were as easy as to know what were good to doe, Chapels had been Churches, and poor men's cottages Princes Pallaees: it is a good Divine that follows his own instructions; I can easier teach twen∣tie what were good to be done, then be one of the twen∣tie to follow mine own teaching: the brain may de∣uise laws for the blood, but a hot temper leaps ore a cold decree, such a hare is madness the youth, to skip ore the meshes of good counsel the cripple; but this reason is not in fashion to choose me a husband: O me, the word choose, I may neither choose whom I would, nor refuse whom I dislike, so is the will of a living daugh∣la curbed by the will of a dead father: it is not hard Ner∣rise, that I cannot choose one, nor refuse none.
Your father was ever virtuous, and holy men at their death have good inspirations, therefore the lot∣terie that hee hath devise• in these three chests of gold, silver, and lead, whereof who chooses his meaning,
chooses you, will no doubt never be chosen by any right∣lie, but one who you shall rightly love: but what warmth is there in your affection towards any of these Princely suitors that are already come?
I pray thee ouer-name them, and as thou name them, I will describe them, and according to my descrip∣tion level at my affection.
First there is the Neopolitane Prince.
I that's a colt indeed, for he doth nothing but talk of his horse, and hee makes it a great appropria∣tion to his own good parts that he can shoo him him∣self: I am much afraid my Lady his mother plaid false with a Smith.
Than is there the County Palentine.
He doth nothing but frown (as who should say, and you will not have me, choose: he hears merry tales and smiles not, I fear hee will prove the weeping Philosopher when he grows old, being so full of un∣mannerly sadness in his youth.) I had rather to be marri∣ed to a deaths head with a bone in his mouth, then to ei∣there of these: God defend me from these two.
How say you by the French Lord, Monsieur Le Boune?
God made him, and therefore let him pass for a man, in truth I know it is a sin to be a mocker, but he, why he hath a horse better then the Neopolitans, a bet∣la bad habit of frowning then the Count Palentine, he is every man in no man, if a Trassell sing, he false straight a capering, he will fence with his own shadow. If I should marry him, I should marry twenty husbands: if hee would despise me, I would forgive him, for if he love me to madness, I should never requite him.
What say you then to Fauconbridge, the young Baron of England?
You know I say nothing to him, for hee under∣stands not me, nor I him: he hath neither Latin, French, nor Italian, and you will come into the Court &amp; swear that I have a poor pennie-worth in the English: hee is a proper mans picture, but alas who can converse with a dumb show? how oddly he is suited, I think he bought his doublet in Italy, his round hose in France, his bonnet in Germanie, and his behaviour every where.
What think you of the other Lord his neigh∣bore?
That he hath a neighbourly charity in him, for he borrowed a box of the ear of the Englishman, and swore he would pay him again when hee was able: I think the Frenchman became his surety, and sealed under for another.
How like you the young Germaine, the Duke of Saxonies Nephew?
Very vildely in the morning when hee is sober, and most vildely in the afternoon when hee is drunk: when he is best, he is a little worse then a man, and when he is worst▪ he is little better then a beast: and the worst fall that ever fell, I hope I shall make shift to go with∣out him.
If he should offer to choose, and choose the right Casket, you should refuse to perform your Fathers will, if you should refuse to accept him.
Therefore for fear of the worst, I pray thee set a deep glass of Reinish-wine on the contrary Casket, for if the devil be within, and that temptation without, I know he will choose it. I will doe any thing Nerrissa ere I will be married to a sponge.
You need not fear Lady the having any of these Lords, they have acquainted me with their deter∣minations, which is indeed to return to their home, and to trouble you with no more suite, unless you may be won by some other sort then your Fathers impositi∣on, depending on the Caskets.
If I live to be as old as Sibilla, I will dye as chaste as Diana: unless I be obtained by the manner of my Fathers will: I am glad this parcel of wooers are so reasonable, for there is not one among them but I dote on his very absence: and I wish them a fair de∣parture.
Doe you not remember Lady in your Fa∣theirs time, a Venecian, a Scholar and a Soldier that came hither in company of the Marquess of Mount∣ferrat?
Yes, yes, it was Bassanio, as I think, so was hee called.
True Madam, hee of all the men that ever my foolish eyes looked upon, was the best deserving a fair Lady.
I remember him well, and I remember him worcester∣thy of thy praise.
The four Strangers seek you Madam to take their leave: and there is a fore-runner come from a fifth, the Prince of Moroco, who brings word the Prince his Moister will be here to night.
If I could bid the fifth welcome with so good heart as I can bid the other four farewell, I should be glad of his approach: if he have the condition of a Saint, and the complexion of a devil, I had rather hee should shrive me then wive me. Come Nerrissa, sir go before; whiles wee shut the gate upon one wooer, another knocks at the door.
Three thousand ducats, well.
I sir, for three months.
For three months, well.
For the which, as I told you,
Anthonio shall be bound.
Anthonio shall become bound, well.
May you sted me? Will you pleasure me?
Shall I know your answer.
Three thousand ducats for three months, and Anthonio bound.
Your answer to that.
Anthonio is a good man.
Have you heard any imputation to the con∣trary.
Ho no, no, no, no: my meaning in saying he is a good man, is to have you understand me that he is suffi∣ent, yet his means are in supposition: he hath an Ergo∣sie bound to Tripolis, another to the Indies, I under∣stand moreover upon the Ryalta, he hath a third at Mix∣co, a fourth for England, and other ventures hee hath squandered abroad, but ships are but boards, Sailors but men, there be land rats, and water rats, water thieves, and land thieves, I mean Pirates, and then there is the peril of waters, winds, and rocks: the man is notwith∣standing sufficient, three thousand ducats, I think I may take his bond.
Be assured you may.
I will be assured I may: and that I may be issue∣red, I will bethink me, may I speak with Antho∣nio?
If it please you to dine with vs.
Yes, to smell pork, to eat of the habitation which your Prophet the Nazarite conjured the devil into: I will buy with you, sell with you, talk with you, walk with you, and so following: but I will not eat with you, drink with you, nor pray with you. What news on the Ryalta, who is he comes here?
This is signior Anthonio.
How like a fawning publican he looks.
I hate him for he is a Christian:
But more, for that in low simplicity
He lends out money gratis, and brings down
The rate of usance here with vs in Venice.
If I can catch him once upon the hip,
I will feed fat the ancient grudge I bear him.
He hates our sacred Nation, and he rails
Even there where Merchants most doe congregate
On me, my bargains, and my well-worn thrift,
Which he calls interrest: Cursed be my Tribe
If I forgive him.
Shylock, doe you hear.
I am debating of my present store,
And by the near guess of my memory
I cannot instantly raise up the gross
Of full three thousand ducats: what of that?
Tuball a wealthy Hebrew of my Tribe
Will furnish me; but soft, how many months
Doe you desire? Rest you fair good signior,
Your worship was the last man in our mouths.
Shylocke, albeit I neither lend nor borrow
By taking, nor by giving of excess,
Yet to supply the ripe wants of my friend,
Isle break a custom: is he yet possessed
How much he would?
I, I, three thousand ducats
And for three months.
I had forgot, three months, you told me so.
Well then, your bond: and let me see, but hear you,
Me thoughts you said, you neither lend nor borrow
Upon advantage.
I doe never use it.
When Iacob grazed his Uncle Labans sheep,
This Iacob from our holy Abram was
(As his wife mother wrought in his behalf)
The third possessor; I, he was the third.
And what of him, did he take interrest?
No, not take interest, not as you would say
Directly interest, mark what Iacob did,
When Laban and himself were compremyz'd
That all the canelings which were streaked and pied
Should fall as Iacobs hier, the Ewes being rank,
In end of Autumn turned to the Rams,
And when the work of generation was
Between these woolly breeders in the act,
The skilful shepherd piled me certain wands,
And in the doing of the deed of kind,
He stuck them up before the fulsome Ewes,
Who then conceiving, did in eaning time
Fall party-colour'd lambs, and those were Iacobs.
This was a way to thrive, and he was blessed:
And thrift is blessing if men steal it not.
This was a venture sir that Iacob served for,
A thing not in his power to bring to pass,
But swayed and fashioned by the hand of heaven.
Was this inserted to make interrest good?
Or is your gold and silver Ewes and Rams?
I cannot tell, I make it breed as fast,
But note me signior.
Mark you this Bassanio,
The devil can cite Scripture for his purpose,
An evil soul producing holy witness,
Is like a villain with a smiling cheek,
A goodly apple rotten at the heart.
O what a goodly outside falsehood hath.
Three thousand ducats, it is a good round sum.
Three months from twelve, then let me see the rate.
Well Shylocke, shall we be beholding to you?
Signior Anthonio, many a time and oft
In the Ryalto you have rated me
About my monies and my vsances:
Still have I borne it with a patient shrug,
(For suffrance is the badge of all our Tribe.)
You call me misbeleeuer, cut-throat dog,
And spent upon my Jewish gabardine,
And all for use of that which is mine own.
Well then, it now appears you need my help:
Go to then, you come to me, and you say,
Shylocke, we would have monies, you say so:
You that did void your rum upon my beard,
And foot me as you spurn a stranger cur
Over your threshold, monies is your suite.
What should I say to you? Should I not say,
Hath a dog money? Is it possible
A cur should lend three thousand ducats? or
Shall I bend low, and in a bond-mans key
With bated breath, and whispring humbleness,
Say this: Fair sir, you spent on me on Wednesday last;
You spurned me such a day; another time
You called me dog: and for these courtesies
Isle lend you thus much monies.
I am as like to call thee so again,
To spent on thee again, to spurn thee too.
If thou wilt lend this money, lend it not
As to thy friends, for when did friendship take
A breed of barren mettle of his friend?
But lend it rather to thine enemy,
Who if he break, thou moist with better face
Exact the penalties.
Why look you how you storm,
I would be friends with you, and have your love,
Forget the shames that you have stained me with,
Supply your present wants, and take no doit
Of usance for my monies, and you'll not hear me,
This is kind I offer.
This were kindness.
This kindness will I show,
Go with me to a Notary, seal me there
Your single bond, and in a merry sport▪
If you repay me not on such a day,
In such a place, such sum or sums as are
Expressed in the condition, let the forfeit
Be nominated for an equal pound
Of your fair flesh, to be cut off and taken
In what part of your body it pleases me.
Content infaith, Isle seal to such a bond,
And say there is much kindness in the Jew.
You shall not seal to such a bond for me,
Isle rather dwell in my necessity.
Why fear not man, I will not forfeit it▪
Within these two months, that's a month before
This bond expires, I doe expect return
Of thrice three times the value of this bond.
O father Abram, what these Christians are,
Whose own hard dealings teaches them suspect
The thoughts of others: Pray you tell me this,
If he should break his day, what should I gain
By the exaction of the forfeiture?
A pound of mans flesh taken from a man,
Is not so estimable, profitable neither
As flesh of Muttons, Beefs, or Goats, I say
To buy his favour. I extend this friendship,
If he will take it, so: if not adieu,
And for my love I pray you wrong me not.
Yes Shylocke, I will seal unto this bond.
Then meet me forthwith at the Notaries,
Give him direction for this merry bond,
And I will go and purse the ducats strait.
See to my house left in the fearful guard
Of an unthrifty knave: and presently
Isle be with you.
Hie thee gentle Jew. This Hebrew will turn Christian, he grows kind.
I like not fair teames, and a villains mind.
Come on, in this there can be no dismay,
My Ships come home a month before the day.
Mislike me not for my complexion,
The shadowed livery of the burnished sun,
To whom I am a neighbour, and near bred.
Bring me the fairest creature North-ward borne,
Where Phoebus fire scarce thawes the ysicles,
And let vs make ineision for your love,
To prove whose blood is reddest, his or mine.
I tell thee Lady this aspect of mine
Hath feared the valiant, (by my love I swear)
The best regarded Virgins of our Climb
Have loved it to: I would not change this hue,
Except to steal your thoughts my gentle Queen.
In terms of choice I am not sole led
By nice direction of a maidens eyes:
Besides, the lottrie of my destiny
Bare me the right of voluntary choosing:
But if my Father had not scanted me,
And hedged me by his wit to yield my self
His wife, who wins me by that means I told you,
Your self (renowned Prince) than stood as fair
As any commer I have looked on yet
For my affection.
Even for that I thank you,
Therefore I pray you lead me to the Caskets
To try my fortune: By this Sy•tas•
That slew the Sophie, and a Persian Prince
That won three fields of Sultan-Solyman,
I would ore-stare the sternest eyes that look:
Outbrave the heart most daring on the earth:
Pluck the young sucking Cubs from the she Bear,
Yea, mock the Lion when he rores for pray
To win the Lady: But alas, the while
If Hercules and Lychas play at dice
Which is the better man, the greater throw
May turn by fortune from the weaker hand:
So is Alcides beaten by his rage,
And so may I, blind fortune leading me
Miss that which one vnworthier may attain,
And die with grieving.
You must take your chance,
And either not attempt to choose at all,
Or swear before you choose, if you choose wrong
Never to speak to Lady afterword
In way of marriage, therefore be advised.
Nor will not, come bring me unto my chance.
First forward to the temple, after dinner
Your hazard shall be made.
Good fortune then,
To make me blessed or cursed'st among men.
Certainly, my conscience will serve me to run from this Jew my Moister: the fiend is at mine elbow, and tempts me, saying to me, Iobbe, Launcelet Iobbe, good Launcelet, ongood Iobbe, or good Launcelet Iobbe, use your legs, take the start, run away: my conscience says no; take heed honest Launcelet, take heed honest Iobbe, or as aforesaid honest Launcelet Iobbe, doe not run, scorn running with thy heals; well, the most courage∣os fiend bids me pack, fia says the fiend, away says the fiend, for the heavens rouse up a brave mind says the fiend, and run; well, my conscience hanging about the neck of my heart, says very wisely to me: my ho∣nest friend Launcelet, being an honest mans soon, or ra∣there an honest women's son, for indeed my Father did something smack, something grow too; he had a kind of taste; well, my conscience says Lancelet bouge not, bouge says the siend, bouge not says my conscience, conscience say I you counsel well, fiend say I you counsel well, to be ruled by my conscience I should stay with the Jew my Moister, (who God bless the mark) is a kind of di∣uell; and to run away from the Jew I should be ruled by the fiend, who saving your reverence is the devil him∣self: certainly the Jew is the very devil incarnation, and in my conscience, my conscience is a kind of hard conscience, to offer to counsel me to stay with the Jew; the fiend gives the more friendly counsel: I will run fiend, my heals are at your commandment, I will run.
Moister young man, you I pray you, which is the way to Moister Jaws?
O heavens, this is my true begotten Father, who being more then sand-blinde, high gravel blind, knows me not, I will try confusions with him.
Moister young Gentleman, I pray you which is the way to Moister Jaws.
Turn upon your right hand at the next tur∣ning
but at the next turning of all on your left; marry at the very next turning, turn of no hand, but turn down indirectly to the Jaws house.
Be Gods sonties twill be a hard way to hit, can you tell me whether one Launcelet that dwells with him, dwell with him or no.
Talk you of young Master Launcelet, mark me now, now will I raise the waters; talk you of young Moister Launcelet?
No Moister sir, but a poor mans son, his Fa∣there though I say it is an honest exceeding poor man, and God be thanked well to live.
Well, let his Father be what a will, wee talk of young Moister Launcelet.
Your worships friend and Launcelet.
But I pray you ergo old man, ergo I beseech you, talk you of young Moister Launcelet.
Of Launcelet, ant please your maistership.
Ergo Moister Lancelet, talk not of moister Lance∣let Father, for the young gentleman according to fates and destinies, and such odd sayings, the sisters three, &amp; such branches of learning, is indeed deceased, or as you would say in plain terms, gone to heaven.
Marry God forbid, the boy was the very staff of my age, my very prop.
Do I look like a cudgel or a houell-post, a staff or a prop: doe you know me Father.
Alack the day, I know you not young Gentle∣man, but I pray you tell me, is my boy God rest his soul alive or dead.
Doe you not know me Father.
Alack sir I am sand blind, I know you not.
Nay, indeed if you had your eyes you might fail of the knowing me: it is a wise Father that knows his own child. Well, old man, I will tell you news of your son, give me your blessing, truth will come to light, murder cannot be hid long, a mans son may, but in the end truth will out.
Pray you sir stand up, I am sure you are not Lancelet my boy.
Pray you let's have no more fooling about it, but give me your blessing: I am Lancelet your boy that was, your son that is, your child that shall be.
I cannot think you are my son.
I know not what I shall think of that: but I am Lancelet the Jaws man, and I am sure Margerie your wife is my mother.
Her name is Margerie indeed, Isle be sworn if thou be Lancelet, thou art mine own flesh and blood: Lord worshipped might he be, what a beard hast thou got; thou hast got more hair on thy chin, then Dobbin my philhorse has on his tail.
It should seem then that Dobbins tail grows backward. I am sure he had more hair of his tail then I have of my face when I lost saw him.
Lord how art thou changed: how dost thou and thy Master agree, I have brought him a present; how gre you now?
Well, well, but for mine own part, as I have set up my rest to run away, so I will not rest till I have run some ground; my Maister's a very Jew, give him a pre∣sent, give him a halter, I am famished in his service. You may tell every finger I have with my ribs: Father I am glad you are come, give me your present to one Moister Bassanio, who indeed gives rare new Liuories, if I serve not him, I will run as far as God has any ground. O rare, fortune, here comes the man, to him Father, for I am a Jew if I serve the Jew any longer.
You may doe so, but let it be so hasted that supper be ready at the farthest by five of the clock: see these Letters delivered, put the Liveries to make∣ing, and desire Gratiano to come anon to my lodge∣ing.
To him Father.
God bless your worship.
Gramercy, would thou ought with me.
Here's my son sir, a poor boy.
Not a poor boy sir, but the rich Jaws man that would sir as my Father shall specify.
He hath a great infection sir, as one would say to serve.
Indeed the short and the long is, I serve the Jew, and have a desire as my Father shall specify.
His Moister and he (saving your worships reave∣rinse) are scarce caterconns.
To be brief, the very truth is, that the Jew having done me wrong, doth cause me as my Father be∣ing I hope an old man shall frutifie unto you.
I have here a dish of Doves that I would bestow upon your worship, and my suite is.
In very brief, the suite is impertinent to my self, as your worship shall know by this honest old man, and though I say it, though old man, yet poor man my Father.
One speak for both, what would you?
Serve you sir.
That is the very defect of the matter sir.
I know thee well, thou hast obtained thy suite,
Shylocke thy Moister spoke with me this day,
And hath preferred thee, if it be preferment
To leave a rich Jaws service, to become
The follower of so poor a Gentleman,
The old proverb is very well parted between my Moister Shylocke and you sir, you have the grace of God sir, and he hath enough.
Thou speak it well; go Father with thy Son,
Take leave of thy old Moister, and enquire
My lodging out, give him a Livery
More guarded then his fellows: see it done.
Father in, I cannot get a service, no, I have ne'er a tongue in my head, well: if any man in Italy have a fairer table which doth offer to swear upon a book, I shall have good fortune; go too, here's a simple line of life, here's a small trifle of wives, alas, fifteen wives is nothing, a leven widows and nine maids is a simon∣ple coming in for one man, and then to scope drow∣ning thrice, and to be in peril of my life with the edge of a featherbed, here are simple scopes: well, if Fortune be a woman, she's a good wench for this ger: Father come, Isle take my leave of the Jew in the twinkling.
I pray thee good Leonardo think on this,
These things being bought and orderly bestowed
Return in haste, for I doe feast to night
My best esteemed acquaintance, hie thee go.
My best endeavours shall be done herein.
Whore's your Moister.
Yonder sir he walks.
Signior Bassanio.
Gratiano.
I have a suit to you.
You have obtained it.
You must not deny me, I must go with you to Belmont.
Why then you must: but hear thee Gratiano,
Thou art to wilde, to rude, and bold of voice,
Parts that become thee happily enough,
And in such eyes as ours appear not faults;
But where they are not known, why there they show
Something too liberal, pray thee take pain
To allay with some cold drops of modesty
Thy skipping spirit, least through thy wilde behaviour
I be misconsterd in the place I go to,
And loose my hopes.
Signor Bassanio, hear me,
If I doe not put on a sober habit,
Talk with respect, and swear but now and than,
Wear prayer books in my pocket, look demurely,
Nay more, while grace is saying hood mine eyes
Thus with my hat, and sigh and say Amen:
Use all the observance of civility
Like one well studied in a sad ostent
To please his Grandam, never trust me more.
Well, we shall see your bearing.
Nay but I bar to night, you shall not gage me
By what we doe to night.
No that were pity,
I would entreat you rather to put on
Your boldest suite of mirth, for we have friends
That purpose merriment: but far you well,
I have some business.
And I must to Lorenso and the rest,
But we will visit you at supper time.
I am sorry thou wilt leave my Father so,
Our house is hell, and thou a merry devil
Did rob it of some taste of tediousness;
But far thee well, there is a ducat for thee,
And Lancelet, soon at supper shalt thou see
Lorenzo, who is thy new Masters guest,
Give him this Letter, doe it secretly,
And so farewell: I would not have my Father
See me talk with thee.
Adieu, tears exhibit my tongue, most beautiful Pagan, most sweet Jew, if a Christian doe not play the knave and get thee, I am much deceived; but adieu, these foolish drops doe somewhat drown my manly spirit: adieu.
Farewell good Lancelet.
Alack, what heinous sin is it in me
To be ashamed to be my Fathers child,
But though I am a daughter to his blood,
I am not to his manners: O Lorenzo,
If thou keep promise I shall end this strife,
Become a Christian, and thy loving wife.
Nay, we will slink away in supper time,
Disguise vs at my lodging, and return all in an hour.
We have not made good preparation.
We have not spoke vs yet of Torch-bearers.
It is vile unless it may be quaintly ordered,
And better in my mind not undertook.
It is now but four of clock, we have two hours
To furnish vs; friend Lancelet what's the news.
And it shall please you to break up this, shall it seem to signify.
I know the hand, in faith it is a fair hand
And whiter then the paper it writ on,
I the fair hand that writ.
Love news in faith:
By your leave sir.
Whither goosed thou?
Marry sir to bid my old Master the Jew to sup to night with my new Master the Christian.
Hold here, take this, tell gentle Iessica
I will not fail her, speak it privately:
Go Gentlemen, will you prepare you for this Mask to night,
I am provided of a Torch-bearer.
I marry, isle be gone about it strait.
And so will I.
Meet me and Gratiano at Gratianos lodging
Some hour hence.
It is good we do so.
Was not that Letter from fair Iessica?
I must needs tell thee all, she hath directed
How I shall take her from her Fathers house,
What gold and jewels she is furnished with,
What Pages suite she hath in readiness:
If ere the Jew her Father come to heaven,
It will be for his gentle daughters sake;
And never dare misfortune cross her foot,
Unless she doe it under this excuse,
That she is issue to a faithless Jew:
Come go with me, peruse this as thou goosed,
Fair Iessica shall be my Torch-bearer.
Well, thou shall see, thy eyes shall be thy judge,
The difference of old Shylocke and Bassanio;
What Iessica, thou shalt not gurmandize
As thou hast done with me: what Iessica?
And sleep, and snore, and rend apparel out.
Why Iessica I say.
Why Iessica.
Who bids thee call? I do not bid thee call.
Your worship was wont to tell me
I could doe nothing without bidding.
Call you? what is your will?
I am bid forth to supper Iessica,
There are my Keys: but wherefore should I go?
I am not bid for love, they flatttr me,
But yet Isle go in hate, to feed upon
The prodigal Christian. Iessica my girl,
Look to my house, I am right loath to go,
There is some ill a brewing towards my rest,
For I did dream of money bags to night.
I beseech you sir go, my young Master
Doth expect your reproach.
So doe I his.
And they have conspired together, I will not say you shall see a Mask, but if you doe, then it was not for nothing that my nose fell a bleeding on black monday
last, at six a clock ith morning, falling out that year on ash wednesday was four year in the afternoon.
What are their masks? hear you me Iessica,
Lock up my doors, and when you hear the drum
And the vile squealing of the wry-neckt Fife,
Clamber not you up to the casements then,
Nor thrust your head into the public street
To gaze on Christian fools with varnished faces:
But stop my houses ears, I mean my casements,
Let not the sound of shallow foppery enter
My sober house. By Iacobs staff I swear,
I have no mind of feasting forth to night:
But I will go: go you before me sir,
Say I will come.
I will go before sir.
Mistress look out at window for all this;
There will come a Christian by,
Will be worth a Jaws eye.
What says that fool of Hagars off-spring? ha.
His words were farewell mistress, nothing else.
The patch is kind enough, but a huge feeder:
Snaile-slow in profit, but he sleeps by day
More then the wilde-cat: drones hive not with me,
Therefore I part with him, and part with him
To one that I would have him help to waste
His borrowed purse. Well Iessica go in,
Perhaps I will return immediately;
Doe as I bid you, shut doors after you, fast bind, fast find,
A proverb never stale in thrifty mind.
Farewell, and if my fortune be not crossed,
I have a Father, you a daughter lost.
This is the penthouse under which Lorenzo
Desired vs to make a stand.
His hour is almost past.
And it is marvel he out-dwels his hour,
For lovers ever run before the clock.
O ten times faster Venus Pigeons fly
To steal loves bonds new made, then they are wont
To keep obliged faith vnforfaited.
That ever holds, who rises from a feast
With that keen appetite that he sits down?
Where is the horse that doth untried again
His tedious measures with the vnbated fire,
That he did pace them first: all things that are,
Are with more spirit chased then enjoyed.
How like a younger or a prodigal
The scarfed bark puts from her native bay,
Hudg'd and embraced by the strumpet wind:
How like a prodigal doth she return
With ouer-wither'd ribs and ragged sails,
Lean, rent, and beggared by the strumpet wind?
Here comes Lorenzo, more of this here∣after.
Sweet friends, your patience for my long a∣bode,
Not I, but my affairs have made you wait:
When you shall please to play the thieves for wives
Isle watch as long for you then: approach
Here dwells my father Jew. Hoe, who's within?
Who are you? tell me for more certainty,
Albeit Isle swear that I do know your tongue.
Lorenzo, and thy Love.
Lorenzo certain, and my love indeed,
For who love I so much? and now who knows
But you Lorenzo, whether I am yours?
Heaven and thy thoughts are witness that thou art.
Here, catch this casket, it is worth the pains,
I am glad it is night, you do not look on me,
For I am much ashamed of my exchange:
But love is blind, and lovers cannot see
The pretty follies that themselves commit,
For if they could, Cupped himself would blush
To see me thus transformed to a boy.
Descend, for you must be my torch-bearer.
What, must I hold a Candle to my shames?
They in themselves goodsooth are too too light.
Why, it is an office of discovery Love,
And I should be obscured.
So you are sweet,
Even in the lovely garnish of a boy: but come at once,
For the close night doth play the run-away,
And we are staid for at Bassanio's feast.
I will make fast the doors and guild my self
With some more ducats, and be with you straight.
Now by my hood, a gentle, and no Jew.
Beshrew me but I love her heartily.
For she is wise, if I can judge of her,
And fair she is, if that mine eyes be true,
And true she is, as she hath proved her self:
And therefore like her self, wise, fair, and true,
Shall she be placed in my constant soul.
What, art thou come? on gentlemen, away,
Our masking mates by this time for vs stay.
Who's there?
Signior Anthonio?
Fie, fie, Gratiano, where are all the rest?
It is nine a clock, our friends all stay for you,
No mask to night, the wind is come about,
Bassanio presently will go aboard,
I have sent twenty out to seek for you.
I am glad on it, I desire no more delight
Then to be under sail, and gone to night.
Go, draw aside the curtains, and discover
The several Caskets to this noble Prince:
Now make your choice.
The first of gold, who this inscription bears,
Who chooses me, shall gain what men desire.
The second silver, which this promise carries,
Who chooses me, shall get as much as he deserves.
This third, dull lead, with warning all as blunt,
Who chooses me, must give and hazard all he hath.
How shall I know if I doe choose the right?
How shall I know if I doe choose the right.
The one of them contains my picture Prince,
If you choose that, then I am yours withal.
Some God direct my judgment, let me see,
I will survey the inscriptions, back again:
What says this leaden casket?
Who chooses me, must give and hazard all he hath.
Must give, for what? for lead, hazard for-lead?
This casket threatens men that hazard all
Doe it in hope of fair advantages:
A golden mind stoops not to shows of dross,
Isle then nor give nor hazard ought for lead.
What says the Silver with her virgin hue?
Who chooses me, shall get as much as he deserves.
As much as he deserves; pause there Morocho,
And weigh thy value with an even hand,
If thou beestrated by thy estimation
Thou dost deserve enough, and yet enough
May not extend so far as to the Lady:
And yet to be afraid of my deserving,
Were but a weak disabling of my self.
As much as I deserve, why that's the Lady.
I doe in birth deserve her, and in fortunes,
In graces, and in qualities of breeding:
But more then these, in love I doe deserve.
What if I strayed no farther, but chose here?
Let's see once more this saying graved in gold.
Who chooses me shall gain what many men desire:
Why that's the Lady, all the world desires her:
From the four corners of the earth they come
To kiss this shrine, this mortal breathing Saint.
The Hircanion deserts, and the vast wildes
Of wide Arabia are as through fares now
For Princes to come view fair Portia.
The watery Kingdom, whose ambitious head
Spets in the face of heaven, is no bar
To stop the foreign spirits, but they come
As ore a brooke to see fair Portia.
One of these three contains her heavenly picture.
Is it like that Lead contains her? it were damnation
To think so base a thought, it were too gross
To rib her searecloath in the obscure grave:
Or shall I think in Silver she's immured
Being ten times undervalued to tried gold;
O sinful thought, never so rich a Gem
Was set in worse then gold! They have in England
A coin that bears the figure of an Angel
Stamped in gold, but that's insculpt upon:
But here an Angel in a golden bed
Lies all within. Deliver me the key:
Here doe I choose, and thrive I as I may.
There take it Prince, and if my form lye there
Then I am yours.
O hell! what have we here, a carrion death,
Within whose empty eye there is a written scroll;
Isle read the writing.
All that glisters is not gold,
Often have you heard that cold;
Many a man his life hath sold
But my outside to behold;
Gilded timber doe worms enfold:
Had you been as wise as bold,
Young in limbs, in judgment old,
Your answer had not been inscrold,
Fare you well, your suite is cold,
Cold indeed, and labour lost,
Then farewell heate, and welcome frost:
Portia adieu, I have too grieved a heart
To take a tedious leave: thus losers part.
A gentle riddance: draw the curtains, go:
Let all of his complexion choose me so.
Why man I saw Bassanio under sail,
With him is Gratiano gone along;
And in their ship I am sure Lorenzo is not.
The villain Jew with outcries raised the Duke.
Who went with him to search Bassanios ship.
He comes too late, the ship was vndersaile;
But there the Duke was given to understand
That in a Gondilo were seen together
Lorenzo and his amorous Iessica.
Besides, Anthonio certified the Duke
They were not with Bassanio in his ship.
I never heard a passion so confused,
So strange, outrageous, and so variable,
As the dog Jew did utter in the streets;
My daughter, O my ducats, O my daughter,
Fled with a Christian, O my Christian ducats!
Justice, the law, my ducats, and my daughter;
A sealed bag, two sealed bags of ducats,
Of double ducats, stolen from me by my daughter,
And jewels, two stones, two rich and precious stones,
Stolen by my daughter: justice, find the girl,
She hath the stones upon her, and the ducats.
Why all the boys in Venice follow him,
Crying his stones, his daughter, and his ducats.
Let good Anthonio look he keep his day
Or he shall pay for this.
Marry well remembered,
I reasoned with a Frenchman yesterday,
Who told me, in the narrow seas that part
The French and English, there miscarried
A vessel of our country richly fraught:
I thought upon Anthonio when he told me,
And wished in silence that it were not his.
Yo were best to tell Anthonio what you hear.
Yet doe not suddenly, for it may grieve him.
A kinder Gentleman treads not the earth,
I saw Bassanio and Anthonio part,
Bassanio told him he would make some speed
Of his return: he answered, doe not so,
Slubber not business for my sake Bassanio,
But stay the very riping of the time,
And for the Jaws bond which he hath of me,
Let it not enter in your mind of love:
Be merry, and employ your chiefest thoughts
To courtship, and such fair ostents of love
As shall conveniently become you there;
And even there his eye being big with tears,
Turning his face, he put his hand behind him,
And with affection wondrous sensible
He wrung Bassanios hand, and so they parted.
I think he only loves the world for him,
I pray thee let vs go and find him out
And quicken his embraced heaviness
With some delight or other.
Doe we so.
Quick, quick I pray thee, draw the curtain strait,
The Prince of Arragon hath tan his oath,
And comes to his election presently.
Behold, there stand the caskets noble Prince,
If you choose that wherein I am contained,
Straight shall our nuptial rights be solemnised:
But if thou fail, without more speech my Lord,
You must be gone from hence immediately.
I am enioynd by oath to observe three things;
First, never to unfold to any one
Which casket it was I chose; next, if I fail
Of the right casket, never in my life
To woo a maid in way of marriage:
Lastly, if I doe fail in fortune of my choice,
Immediately to leave you, and be gone.
To these injunctions every one doth swear
That comes to hazard for my worthless self.
And so have I addressed me, fortune now
To my hearts hope: gold, silver, and base lead.
Who chooses me must give and hazard all he hath.
You shall look fairer ere I give or hazard.
What says the golden chest, ha, let me see:
Who chooses me, shall gain what many men desire:
What many men desire, that many may be meant
By the fool multitude that choose by show,
Not learning more then the fond eye doth teach,
Which pries not to the interior, but like the Martlet
Builds in the weather on the outward wall,
Even in the force and rode of casualty.
I will not choose what many men desire,
Because I will not jump with common spirits,
And rank me with the barbarous multitudes.
Why then to thee thou Silver treasure house,
Tell me once more, what title thou dost bear;
Who chooses me shall get as much as he deserves:
And well said too; for who shall go about
To cousin Fortune, and be honourable
Without the stamp of merit, let none presume
To wear• an undeserved dignity:
O that estates, degrees, and offices,
Were not derive•d corruptly, and that clear honour
Were purchased by the merit of the wearer;
How many then should cover that stand bare?
How many be commanded that command?
How much low pleasantry would then be gleaned
From the true seed of honour? And how much honour
Picked from the chafe and ruin of the times,
To be new varnished: Well, but to my choice.
Who chooses me shall get as much as he deserves.
I will assume desert; give me a key for this,
And instantly unlock my fortunes here.
Too long a pause for that which you find there.
What's here, the portrait of a blinking idiot
Presenting me a schedule, I will read it:
How much unlike art thou to Portia?
How much unlike my hopes and my deservings?
Who chooses me, shall have as much as he deserves.
Did I deserve no more then a fools head,
Is that my prize, are my deserts no better?
To offend and judge are distinct offices,
And of opposed natures.
What is here?
The fire seven times tried this,
Seven times tried that iudement is,
That did never choose amiss,
Some there be that shadows kiss,
Such have but a shadows bliss:
There be fools alive Iwis
Silvered o'er, and so was this:
Take what wife you will to bed,
I will ever be your head:
So be gone, you are sped.
Still more fool I shall appear
By the time I linger here,
With one fools head I came to woo,
But I go away with two.
Sweet adieu, Isle keep my oath,
Patiently to bear my wroath.
Thus hath the candle singed the mouth:
O these deliberate fools when they doe choose,
They have the wisdom by their wit to loose.
The ancient saying is no heresy,
Hanging and wiving goes by destiny.
Come draw the curtain Nerrissa.
Where is my Lady?
Here, what would my Lord?
Madam, there is alighted at your gate
A young Venetian, one that comes before
To signify the approaching of his Lord,
From whom he brings sensible regreets;
To wit (besides commends and courteous breath)
Gifts of rich value; yet I have not seen
So likely an Ambassador of love.
A day in April never came so sweet
To show how costly Summer was at hand,
As this fore-spurrer comes before his Lord.
No more I pray thee, I am half afraid
Thou wilt say anon he is some kin to thee,
Thou spend such high-day wit in praising him:
Come, come Nerryssa, for I long to see
Quick Cupids Post, that comes so mannerly.
Bassanio Lord, love if thy will it be.
Now, what news on the Ryalto?
Why yet it lives there vncheckt, that Anthonio hath a ship of rich lading wrecked on the narrow Seas; the Goodwins I think they call the place, a very dangerous flat, and fatal, where the carcasses of many a tall ship, lye buried, as they say, if my gossips report be an honest wo∣man of her word.
I would she were as lying a gossip in that, as ever knapt Ginger, or made her neighbours believe she wept for the death of a third husband: but it is true, without any slips of prolixity, or crossing the plain high-way of talk, that the good Anthonio, the honest Anthonio; ô that I had a title good enough to keep his name company!
Come, the full stop.
Ha, what say thou, why the end is, he hath lost a ship.
I would it might prove the end of his losses.
Let me say Amen betimes, least the devil cross my prayer, for here he comes in the iikenes of a Jew. How now Shylocke, what news among the Merchants?
You knew none so well, none so well as you, of my daughters flight.
That's certain, I for my part knew the Tailor that made the wings she flew withal.
And Shylocke for his own part knew the bird was fledged, and then it is the complexion of them al to leave the dam.
She is damned for it.
That's certain, if the devil may be her Judge.
My own flesh and blood to rebel.
Out upon it old carrion, rebels it at these years.
I say my daughter is my flesh and blood.
There is more difference between thy flesh and hers, then between Jet and Ivory, more between your bloods, then there is between red wine and rhenish: but tell vs, doe you hear whether Anthonio have had any loss at sea or no?
There I have another bad match, a bankrupt, a prodigal, who dare scarce show his head on the Ryalto, a beggar that was used to come so smug upon the Mart: let him look to his bond, he was wont to call me Usurer, let him look to his bond, he was wont to lend money for a Christian curtsy, let him look to his bond.
Why I am sure if he forfeit, thou wilt not take his flesh, what's that good for?
To bait fish withal, if it will feed nothing else, it will feed my revenge; he hath disgraced me, and hindered me half a million, laughed at my losses, mocked at my gains, scorned my Nation, thwarted my bargains, cooled my friends, heated mine enemies, and what's the reason? I am a Iewe: Hath not a Jew eyes? hath not a Jew hands, organs, dementions, senses, affections, passi∣once, fed with the same food, hurt with the same wea∣pons, subject to the same diseases, healed by the same means, warmed and cooled by the same Winter and Sommmer as a Christian is: if you prick vs doe we not bleed? if you tickle vs, doe we not laugh? if you poison vs doe we not die? and if you wrong vs shall we not re∣avenge? if we are like you in the rest, we will resemble you in that. If a Jew wrong a Christian, what is his humility, revenge? If a Christian wrong a Jew, what should his suf∣ferance be by Christian example, why revenge? The vile∣lane you teach me I will execute, and it shall go hard but I will better the instruction.
Gentlemen, my moister Anthonio is at his house, and desires to speak with you both.
We have been up and down to seek him.
Here comes another of the Tribe, a third cannot be matched, unless the devil himself turn Jew.
How now Tuball, what news from Genowa? hast thou found my daughter?
I often came where I did hear ofster, but can∣not find her.
Why there, there, there, there, a diamond gone cost me two thousand ducats in Franckford, the curse no∣for fell upon our Nation till now, I never felt it till now, two thousand ducats in that, and other precious, price∣os jewels: I would my daughter were dead at my foot, and the jewels in her care: would she were hearst at my foot, and the ducats in her coffin: no news of them, why so? and I know not how much is spent in the search: why thou loss upon loss, the thief gone with so much, and so much to find the thief, and no satisfy∣ction, no revenge, nor no ill luck stirring but what lights a my shoulders, no sighs but a my breathing, no tears but a my shedding.
Yes, other men have ill luck too, Anthonio as I heard in Genowa?
What, what, what, ill luck, ill luck.
Hath an Argosy cast away coming from Tri∣polis.
I thank God, I thank God, is it true, is it true?
I spoke with some of the Sailors that escaped the wrack.
I thank thee good Tuball, good news, good news: ha, ha, here in Genowa.
Your daughter spent in Genowa, as I heard, one night fourscore ducats.
Thou stick a dagger in me, I shall never see my gold again, fourscore ducats at asitting, fourscore du∣cats.
There came divers of Anthonios creditors in my company to Venice, that swear hee cannot choose but break.
I am very glad of it, isle plague him, isle torture him, I am glad of it,
One of them showed me a ring that hee had of your daughter for a Monkey.
Out upon her, thou torture me Tuball, it was my Turkeys, I had it of Leah when I was a Bachelor: I would not have given it for a wilderness of Monkeys.
But Anthonio is certainly undone.
Nay, that's true, that's very true, go Tuball, fee me an Officer, bespeak him a fortnight before, I will have the heart of him if he forfeit, for were he out of Ve∣nice, I can make what merchandise I will: go Tuball, and meet me at our Synagogue, go good Tuball, at our Synagogue Tuball.
I pray you tarry, pause a day or two
Before you hazard, for in choosing wrong
I loose your company; therefore forbear a while,
There's something tells me (but it is not love)
I would not loose you, and you know your self,
Hate counsels not in such a quality;
But least you should not understand me well,
And yet a maiden hath no tongue, but thought,
I would detain you here some month or two
Before you venture for me. I could teach you
How to choose right, but then I am forsworn,
So will I never be, so may you miss me,
But if you doe, you'll make me wish a sin,
That I had been forsworn: Beshrow your eyes,
They have ore-lookt me and divided me,
One half of me is yours, the other half yours,
Mine own I would say: but of mine then yours,
And so all yours; O these naughty times
Puts bars between the owners and their rights.
And so though yours, not yours (prove it so)
Let Fortune go to hell for it, not I.
I speak too long, but it is to poise the time,
To each it, and to draw it out in length,
To stay you from election.
Let me choose,
For as I am, I live upon the rack.
Upon the rack Bassanio, then confess
What treason there is mingled with your love.
None but that ugly treason of mistrust.
Which makes me fear the enjoying of my love:
There may as well be amity and life,
'Tweene snow and fire, as treason and my love▪
I, but I fear you speak upon the rack,
Where men enforced doth speak any thing.
Promise me life, and isle confess the truth.
Well then, confess and live.
Confess and love
Had been the very sum of my confession:
O happy torment, when my torturer
Doth teach me answers for deliverance:
But let me to my fortune and the caskets.
Away then, I am locked in one of them,
If you doe love me, you will find me out.
Nerryssa and the rest, stand all aloose,
Let music sound while he doth make his choice,
Then if he loose he makes a Swan-like end,
Fading in musique. That the comparison
May stand more proper, my eye shall be the stream
And watery death-bed for him: he may win,
And what is musique than? Than musique is
Even as the flourish, when true subjects howe
To a new crowned Monarch: Such it is,
As are those dulcet sounds in break of day,
That creep into the dreaming bridegrooms ear,
And summon him to marriage. Now he goes
With no less presence, but with much more love
Then young Alcides, when he did redeem
The virgin tribute, paid by howling Troy
To the Sea-monster: I stand for sacrifice,
The rest aloof are the Dardanian wives:
With bleared visages come forth to view
The issue of the exploit: Go Hercules,
Live thou, I live with much more dismay
I view the fight, then thou that make the fray.
Tell me where is fancy bred,
Or in the heart, or in the head:
How begot, how nourished.
Reply, reply.
It is engendered in the eyes,
With gazing fed, and Fancy dies,
In the cradle where it lies:
Let vs all ring Fancies knell.
Isle begin it.
Ding, dong, bell.
Ding, dong, bell.
So may the outward shows be least themselves
The world is still deceived with ornament.
In Law, what Plea so tanted and corrupt,
But being seasoned with a gracious voice,
Obscures the show of evil? In Religion,
What damned error, but some sober brow
Will bless it, and approve it with a text,
Hiding the grosenesse with fair ornament:
There is no voice so simple, but assumes
Some mark of virtue on his outward parts;
How many cowards, whose hearts are all as false
As stairs of sand, wear yet upon their chins
The beards of Hercules and frowning Mars,
Who inward searched, have livers white as milk,
And these assume but valors excrement,
To render them redoubted. Look on beauty,
And you shall see it is purchased by the weight,
Which therein works a miracle in nature,
Making them lightest that wear most of it:
So are those crisped snaky golden locks
Which makes such wanton gambols with the wind
Upon supposed fairness, often known
To be the dowry of a second head,
The scull that bred them in the Sepulchre.
Thus ornament is but the guiled shore
To a most dangerous sea: the beauteous scarf
Veiling an Indian beauty; In a word,
The seeming truth which cunning times put on
To entrap the wisest. Therefore then thou gaudie gold,
Hard food for Midas, I will none of thee,
Nor none of thee thou pale and common drudge
'Tweene man and man: but thou, thou meager lead
Which rather threaten then dost promise ought,
Thy paleness moves me more then eloquence,
And here choose I, joy be the consequence.
How all the other passions fleet to ayre,
As doubtful thoughts, and rash embraced despair:
And shuddering fear, and greene-eyed jealousy.
O love be moderate, allay thy ecstasy,
In measure rain thy joy, scant this excess,
I feel too much thy blessing, make it less,
For fear I surfeit.
What find I here?
Fair Portias counterfeit. What demi God
Hath come so near creation? move these eyes?
Or whether riding on the balls of mine
Seem they in motion? Here are severed lips
Parted with sugar breath, so sweet a bar
Should sunder such sweet friends: here in her hairs
The Painter plays the Spider, and hath woven
A golden mesh to entrap the hearts of men
Faster then gnats in cobwebs: but her eyes,
How could he see to doe them? having made one,
Me thinks it should have power to steal both his
And leave it self vnfurnisht: Yet look how far
The substance of my praise doth wrong this shadow
In vnderprising it, so far this shadow
Doth limp behind the substance. Here's the scroll,
The continent, and summary of my fortune.
You that choose not by the view
Chance as fair, and choose as true:
Since this fortune false to you,
Be content, and seek no new.
If you be well pleased with this,
And hold your fortune for your bliss,
Turn you where your Lady is,
And claim her with a loving kiss.
A gentle scroll: Fair Lady, by your leave,
I come by note to give, and to receive,
Like one of two contending in a prize
That thinks he hath done well in peoples eyes:
Hearing applause and universal shout,
Giddy in spirit, still gazing in a doubt
Whether those peals of praise be his or no.
So thrice fair Lady stand I even so,
As doubtful whether what I see be true,
Until confirmed, signed, ratified by you.
You see my Lord Bassiano where I stand,
Such as I am; though for my self alone
I would not be ambitious in my wish,
To wish my self much better, yet for you,
I would be trebled twenty times my self,
A thousand times more fair, ten thousand times
More rich, that only to stand high in your account,
I might in virtues, beauties, livings, friends,
Exceed account: but the full sum of me
Is sum of nothing: which to term in gross,
Is an vnlessoned girl, vnschool'd, unpractised,
Happy in this, she is not yet so old
But she may learn: happier then this,
She is not bred so dull but she can learn;
Happiest of all, is that her gentle spirit
Commits it self to yours to be directed,
As from her Lord, her Governor, her King.
My self, and what is mine, to you and yours
Is now converted. But now I was the Lord
Of this fair mansion, master of my servants,
Queen ore my self: and even now, but now,
This house, these servants, and this same my self
Are yours, my Lord, I give them with this ring,
Which when you part from, loose, or give away,
Let it presage the ruin of your love,
And be my vantage to exclaim on you.
Madam, you have bereft me of all words,
Only my blood speaks to you in my veins,
And there is such confusion in my powers,
As after some oration fairly spoke
By a beloved Prince, there doth appear
Among the buzzing pleased multitude,
Where every something being blent together,
Turns to a wilde of nothing, save of joy
Expressed, and not expressed: but when this ring
Parts from this finger, then parts life from hence,
O then be bold to say Bassanio's dead.
My Lord and Lady, it is now our time
That have stood by and seen our wishes prosper,
To cry good joy, good joy my Lord and Lady.
My Lord Bassanio, and my gentle Lady,
I wish you all the joy that you can wish:
For I am sure you can wish none from me:
And when your Honours mean to solemnise
The bargain of your faith: I doe beseech you
Even at that time I may be married too.
With all my heart, so thou can get a wife.
I thank your Lordship, you gave got me one.
My eyes my Lord can look as swift as yours:
You saw the mistress, I beheld the maid:
You loved, I loved for intermission,
No more pertains to me my Lord then you;
Your fortune stood upon the caskets there,
And so did mine too, as the matter falls:
For wooing here until I fwet again,
And swearing till my very rough was dry
With oaths of love, at last, if promise last,
I got a promise of this fair one here
To have her love: provided that your fortune
Achieved her mistress.
Is this true Nerrissa?
Madam it is so, so you stand pleased withal.
And doe you Gratiano mean good faith?
Yes faith my Lord.
Our feast shall be much honoured in your mar∣riage.
Weal play with them the first boy for a thou∣sand ducats.
What and stake down?
No, we shall ne'er win at that sport, and stake down.
But who comes here? Lorenzo and his Infidel?
What and my old Venetian friend Salerio?
Lorenzo and Salerio, welcome hither,
If that the youth of my new interest here
Have power to bid you welcome: by your leave
I bid my very friends and Countrymen
Sweet Portia welcome.
So do I my Lord, they are entirely welcome.
I thank your honour; for my part my Lord,
My purpose was not to have seen you here,
But meeting with Salerio by the way,
He did entreat me past all saying nay
To come with him along.
I did my Lord,
And I have reason for it, Signior Anthonio
Commends him to you.
Ere I op his Letter
I pray you tell me how my good friend doth.
Not sick my Lord, unless it be in mind,
Nor well, unless in mind: his Letter there
Will show you his estate.
Nerrissa, cheer yond stranger, bid her welcome.
Your hand Salerio, what's the news from Venice?
How doth that royal Merchant good Anthonio;
I know he will be glad of our success,
We are the Iasons, we have won the fleece.
I would you had won the fleece that hee hath lost.
There are some shrewd contents in yond same Paper,
That steals the colour from Bassianos cheek,
Some dear friend dead, else nothing in the world
Could turn so much the constitution
Of any constant man. What, worse and worse?
With leave Bassanio I am half your self,
And I must freely have the half of any thing
That this same paper brings you.
O sweet Portia,
Here are a few of the vnpleasant'st words
That ever blotted paper. Gentle Lady
When I did first impart my love to you,
I freely told you all the wealth I had
Ran in my veins: I was a Gentleman,
And then I told you true: and yet dear Lady,
Rating my self at nothing, you shall see
How much I was a Braggart, when I told you
My state was nothing, I should then have told you
That I was worse then nothing: for indeed
I have engaged my self to a dear friend,
Engaged my friend to his mere enemy
To feed my means. Here is a Letter Lady,
The paper as the body of my friend,
And every word in it a gaping wound
Issuing life blood. But is it true Salerio,
Hath all his ventures failed, what not one hit,
From Tripolis, from Mexico and England,
From Lisbon, Barberry, and India,
And not one vessel scope the dreadful touch
Of Merchant-marring rocks?
Not one my Lord.
Besides, it should appear, that if he had
The present money to discharge the Jew,
He would not take it: never did I know
A creature that did bear the shape of man
So keen and greedy to confound a man.
He plies the Duke at morning and at night,
And doth impeach the freedom of the state
If they deny him justice. Twenty Merchants,
The Duke himself, and the Magnificoes
Of greatest port have all persuaded with him,
But none can drive him from the envious plea
Of forfeiture, of justice, and his bond.
When I was with him, I have heard him swear
To Tuball and to Choose, his Countrymen,
That he would rather have Anthonio's flesh,
Then twenty times the value of the sum
That he did owe him: and I know my Lord,
If law, authority, and power deny not,
It will go hard with poor Anthonio.
Is it your dear friend that is thus in trouble?
The dearest friend to me, the kindest man,
The best conditioned, and vnwearied spirit
In doing courtesies: and one in whom
The ancient Roman honour more appears
Then any that draws breath in Italy.
What sum owes he the Jew?
For me three thousand ducats.
What, no more?
Pay him six thousand, and deface the bond:
Double six thousand, and then treble that,
Before a friend of this description
Shall lose a hair through Bassano's fault.
First go with me to Church, and call me wife,
And then away to Venice to your friend:
For never shall you lie by Portias side
With an unquiet soul. You shall have gold
To pay the petty debt twenty times over.
When it is paid, bring your true friend along,
My maid Nerrissa, and my self mean time
Will live as maids and widows; come away,
For you shall hence upon your wedding day:
Bid your friends welcome, show a merry cheer,
Since you are dear bought, I will love you dear.
But let me hear the letter of your friend.
O love! dispatch all business and be gone.
Since I have your good leave to go away,
I will make hast; but till I come again,
No bed shall ere be guilty of my stay,
Nor rest be interpose•r twixt vs twain.
Jailer, look to him, tell not me of mercy,
This is the fool that lends out money gratis.
Jailer, look to him.
Hear me yet good Shylok.
Isle have my bond, speak not against my bond,
I have sworn an oath that I will have my bond:
Thou called me dog before thou had a cause,
But since I am a dog, beware my fangs,
The Duke shall grant me justice, I do wonder
Thou naughty Jailer, that thou art so fond
To come abroad with him at his request.
I pray thee hear me speak.
Isle have my bond, I will not hear thee speak,
Isle have my bond, and therefore speak no more.
Isle not be made a soft and dull eyed fool,
To shake the head, relent, and sigh, and yield
To Christian intercessors: follow not,
Isle have no speaking, I will have my bond.
It is the most impenetrable cur
That ever kept with men.
Let him alone,
Isle follow him no more with bootless prayers:
He seeks my life, his reason well I know;
I oft delivered from his forfeitures
Many that have at times made moan to me,
Therefore he hates me.
I am sure the Duke will never grant this forfeiture to hold.
The Duke cannot deny the course of law:
For the commodity that strangers have
With vs in Venice, if it be denied,
Will much impeach the justice of the State,
Since that the trade and profit of the city
Consists of all Nations. Therefore go,
These griefs and losses have so bated me,
That I shall hardly spare a pound of flesh
To morrow, to my bloody Creditor.
Well Jailer, on, pray God Bassanio come
To see me pay his debt, and then I care not.
Madam, although I speak it in your presence,
You have a noble and a true conceit
Of god-like amity, which appears most strongly
In bearing thus the absence of your Lord.
But if you knew to whom you show this honour,
How true a Gentleman you send relief,
How dear a lover of my Lord your husband,
I know you would be prouder of the work
Then customary bounty can enforce you.
I never did repent for doing good,
Nor shall not now: for in companions
That do converse and waste the time together,
Whose souls doe bear an egal yoke of love,
There must be needs a like proportion
Of lineaments, of manners, and of spirit;
Which makes me think that this Anthonio
Being the bosom lover of my Lord,
Must needs be like my Lord. If it be so,
How little is the cost I have bestowed
In purchasing the semblance of my soul;
From out the state of hellish cruelty,
This comes too near the praising of my self,
Therefore no more of it: here other things
Lorenso I commit into your hands,
The husbandry and manage of my house,
Until my Lords return; for mine own part
I have toward heaven breathed a secret vow,
To live in prayer and contemplation,
Only attended by Nerrissa here,
Until her husband and my Lords return:
There is a monastery too miles oft,
And there we will abide. I doe desire you
Not to deny this imposition,
The which my love and some necessity
Now lays upon you.
Madame, with all my heart,
I shall obey you in all fair commands.
My people doe already know my mind,
And will acknowledge you and Iessica
In place of Lord Bassanio and my self.
So far you well till we shall meet again.
Fair thoughts &amp; happy hours attend on you.
I wish your Ladyship all hearts content.
I thank you for your wish, and am well pleased
To wish it back on you: faryouwell Iessica.
Now Balthazar, as I have ever found thee honest true,
So let me find thee still: take this same letter,
And use thou all the endeavour of a man,
In speed to Mantua, see thou render this
Into my cousins hand, Doctor Belari•,
And look what notes and garments he doth give thee,
Bring them I pray thee with imagined speed
Unto the Tranect, to the common Ferry
Which trades to Venice; waste no time in words,
But get thee gone, I shall be there before thee.
Madam, I go with all convenient speed.
Come on Nerissa, I have work in hand
That you yet know not of; we'll see our husbands
Before they think of vs?
Shall they see vs?
They shall Nerrissa: but in such a habit,
That they shall think we are accomplished
With that we lack; Isle hold thee any wager
When we are both accoutred like young men,
Isle prove the prettier fellow of the two,
And wear my dagger with the braver grace,
And speak between the change of man and boy,
With a reed voice, and turn two mincing steps
Into a manly stride; and speak of frays
Like a fine bragging youth: and tell quaint lies
How honourable Ladies sought my love,
Which I denying, they fell sick and died.
I could not doe withal: then Isle repent,
And wish for all that, that I had not killed them;
And twenty of these puny lies Isle tell,
That men shall swear I have discontinued school
Aboue a twelve month: I have within my mind
A thousand raw tricks of these bragging Jacks,
Which I will practise.
Why, shall wee turn to men?
Fie, what a questions that?
If thou were ne'er a lewd interpreter:
But come, Isle tell thee all my whole device
When I am in my coach, which stays for vs
At the Park gate; and therefore haste away,
For we must measure twenty miles to day.
Yes truly; for look you, the sins of the Fa∣there are to be laid upon the children, therefore I promise you, I fear you, I was always plain with you, and so now I speak my agitation of the matter: therefore be of good cheer, for truly I think you are damned, there is but one hope in it that can doe you any good, and that is but a kind of bastard hope neither.
And what hope is that I pray thee?
Marry you may partly hope that your father got you not, that you are not the Jaws daughter.
That were a kind of bastard hope indeed, so the sins of my mother should be visited upon me.
Truly then I fear you are damned both by fa∣there and mother: thus when I shun Scilla your father, I fall into Charibdis your mother; well, you are gone both ways.
I shall be saved by my husband, he hath made me a Christian.
Truly the more to blame he, we were Christi∣ans enough before, e•no as many as could well live one by a∣another: this making of Christians will raise the price of Hogs, if wee grow all to be porke-eaters, wee shall not shortly have a rasher on the coals for money.
Isle tell my husband Lancelet what you say, here he comes.
I shall grow jealous of you shortly Lancelet, if you thus get my wife into corners?
Nay, you need not fear vs Lorenzo, Launcelet and I are out, he tells me flatly there is no mercy for me in heaven, because I am a Jaws daughter: and hee says you are no good member of the common wealth, for in converting Jaws to Christians, you raise the price of Pork.
I shall answer that better to the Common∣wealth, than you can the getting up of the Negroes bell∣lie: the Moore is with child by you Launcelet?
It is much that the Moore should be more then reason: but if she be less then an honest woman, she is indeed more then I took her for.
How every fool can play upon the word, I think the best grace of wit will shortly turn into si∣lence, and discourse grow commendable in none only but Parrots: go in sir, bid them prepare for dinner?
That is done sir, they have all stomachs?
Goodly Lord, what a witte-snapper are you, then bid them prepare dinner.
That is done to sir, only cover is the word.
Will you cover than sir?
Not so sir neither, I know my duty.
Yet more quarrellng with occasion, wilt thou show the whole wealth of thy wit in an instant; I pray thee understand a plain man in his plain meaning: go to thy fellows, bid them cover the table, serve in the meat, and we will come in to dinner.
For the table sir, it shall be served in, for the meat sir, it shall bee covered, for your coming in to dinner sir, why let it be as humours and conceits shall go∣uerne.
O dear discretion, how his words are suited,
The fool hath planted in his memory
An Army of good words, and I doe know
A many fools that stand in better place,
Garnished like him, that for a tricksie word
Defy the matter: how cheer thou Iessica,
And now good sweet say thy opinion,
How dost thou like the Lord Bassiano's wife?
Past all expressing, it is very meet
The Lord Bassanio live an upright life
For having such a blessing in his Lady,
He finds the joys of heaven here on earth,
And if on earth he doe not mean it, it
Is reason he should never come to heaven?
Why, if two gods should play some heavenly match,
And on the wager lay two earthly women,
And Portia one: there must be something else
Paund with the other, for the poor rude world
Hath not her fellow.
Even such a husband
Hast thou of me, as she is for a wife.
Nay, but ask my opinion to of that?
I will anon, first let vs go to dinner?
Nay, let me praise you while I have a stomach?
No pray thee, let it serve for table talk,
Then how some ere thou speak among other things,
I shall digest it?
Well, Isle set you forth.
What, is Anthonio here?
Ready, so please your grace?
I am sorry for thee, thou art come to answer
A stony adversary, an inhumane wretch,
Incapable of pity, void, and empty
From any dram of mercy.
I have heard
Your Grace hath tan great pains to qualify
His rigorous course: but since he stands obdurate,
And that no lawful means can carry me
Out of his envies reach, I do oppose
My patience to his fury, and am armed
To suffer with a quietness of spirit,
The very tyranny and rage of his.
Go one and cal the Jew into the Court.
He is ready at the door, he comes my Lord.
Make room, and let him stand before our face.
Shylocke the world thinks, and I think so to
That thou but lead this fashion of thy malice
To the last hour of act, and then it is thought
Thou'lt show thy mercy and remorse more strange.
Than is thy strange apparent cruelty;
And where thou now exact'st the penalty,
Which is a pound of this poor Merchants flesh,
Thou wilt not only loose the forfeiture,
But touched with humane gentleness and love:
Forgive a moiety of the principal,
Glancing an eye of pity on his losses
That have of late so huddled on his back,
Enough to press a royal Merchant down;
And pluck commiseration of his state
From brassy bosoms, and rough hearts of flints,
From stubborn Turks and Tartars never trained
To offices of tender courtesy,
We all expect a gentle answer Jew?
I have possessed your grace of what I purpose,
And by our holy Sabbath have I sworn
To have the due and forfeit of my bond.
If you deny it, let the danger light
Upon your Charter, and your Cities freedom.
You'll ask me why I rather choose to have
A weight of carrion flesh, then to receive
Three thousand Ducats? Isle not answer that:
But say it is my humour; Is it answered?
What if my house be troubled with a Rat,
And I be pleased to give ten thousand Ducats
To have it baned? What, are you answered yet?
Some men there are love not a gaping Pig:
Some that are mad, if they behold a Cat:
And others, when the bag-pipe sings in th nose,
Cannot contain their Urine for affection.
Masters of passion sways it to the mood
Of what it likes or loathes, now for your answer:
As there is no firm reason to be rendered
Why he cannot abide a gaping Pig?
Why he a harmless necessary Cat?
Why he a woollen bag-pipe: but of force
Must yield to such inevitable shame,
As to offend himself being offended:
So can I give no reason, nor I will not,
More then a lodged hate, and a certain loathing
I bear Anthonio, that I follow thus
A loosing suite against him? Are you answered?
This is no answer thou unfeeling man,
To excuse the currant of thy cruelty.
I am not bound to please thee with my answer.
Do all men kill the things they do not love?
Hates any man the thing he would not kill?
Every offence is not a hate at first.
What would thou have a Serpent sting thee twice?
I pray you think you question with the Jew:
You may as well go stand upon the beach,
And bid the maine flood bait his usual height,
Or even as well use question with the Wolf,
The Ewe bleat for the Lamb:
You may as well forbid the Mountain Pines
To wag their high tops, and to make no noise
When they are fretted with the gusts of heaven:
You may as well do any thing most hard,
As seek to soften that, then which what harder?
His Jewish heart. Therefore I do beseech you
Make no more offers, use no farther means,
But with all brief and plain convenience
Let me have judgment, and the Jew his will.
For thy three thousand Ducats heereis six.
If every Ducat in six thousand Ducats
Were in six parts, and every part a Ducat,
I would not draw them, I would have my bond?
How shalt thou hope for mercy, rendering none?
What judgment shall I dread doing no wrong?
You have among you many a purchased slave,
Which like your Asses, and your Dogs and Mules,
You use in abject and in slavish parts,
Because you bought them. Shall I say to you,
Let them be free, marry them to your heirs?
Why sweat they under burdens? Let their beds
Be made as soft as yours: and let their palates
Be seasoned with such Viands: you will answer
The slaves are ours. So do I answer you.
The pound of flesh which I demand of him
Is dearly bought, it is mine, and I will have it.
If you deny me; fie upon your Law,
There is no force in the decrees of Venice;
I stand for judgment, answer, Shall I have it?
Upon my power I may dismiss this Court,
Unless Bellario a learned Doctor,
Whom I have sent for to determine this,
Come here to day.
My Lord, here stays without
A Messenger with Letters from the Doctor,
New come from Padua.
Bring vs the Letters, Call the Messengers.
Good cheer Anthonio. What man, courage yet:
The Jew shall have my flesh, blood, bones, and all,
Ere thou shalt loose for me one drop of blood.
I am a tainted Weather of the flock,
Meetest for death, the weakest kind of fruit
Drops earliest to the ground, and so let me;
You cannot better be employed Bassanio,
Then to live still, and write mine Epitaph.
Came you from Padua from Bellario?
From both.
My Lord Bellario greets your Grace.
Why dost thou whet thy knife so earnestly?
To cut the forfeiture from that bankrupt there.
Not on thy soale: but on thy soul harsh Jew
Thou make thy knife keen: but no mettle can,
No, not the hangmans Axe bear half the keenness
Of thy sharpe envy. Can no prayers pierce thee?
No, none that thou hast wit enough to make.
O be thou damned, inexecrable dog,
And for thy life let justice be accused:
Thou almost make me waver in my faith;
To hold opinion with Pythagoras,
That souls of Animals infuse themselves
Into the trunks of men. Thy currish spirit
Governed a Wolf, who hanged for humane slaughter,
Even from the gallows did his fell soul fleet;
And whilst thou lay in thy unhallowed dam,
Infused it self in thee: For thy desires
Are Wolfish, bloody, starved, and ravenous.
Till thou can rail the seal from off my bond
Thou but offend thy Lungs to speak so loud:
Repair thy wit good youth, or it will fall
To endless ruin. I stand here for Law.
This Letter from Bellario doth commend
A young and Learned Doctor in our Court;
Where is he?
He attends here hard by
To know your answer, whether you'll admit him.
With all my heart. Some three or four of you
Go give him courteous conduct to this place,
Mean time the Court shall hear Bellarioes Letter.
You hear the learned Bellario what he writes,
And here (I take it) is the Doctor come.
Give me your hand: Came you from old Bellario?
I did my Lord.
You are welcome: take your place;
Are you acquainted with the difference
That holds this present question in the Court.
I am informed thoroughly of the cause.
Which is the Merchant here? and which the Jew?
Anthonio and old Shylocke, both stand forth.
Is your name Shylocke?
Shylocke is my name.
Of a strange nature is the suit you follow,
Yet in such rule, that the Venetian Law
Cannot impugn you as you do proceed.
You stand within his danger, do you not?
I, so he says.
Do you confess the bond?
I do.
Then must the Jew be merciful.
On what compulsion must I? Tell me that.
The quality of mercy is not strained,
It drops as the gentle rain from heaven
Upon the place beneath. It is twice blessed,
It blesses him that gives, and him that takes,
It is mightiest in the mightiest, it becomes
The throned Monarch better then his Crown.
His Sceptre shows the force of temporal power,
The attribute to awe and Majesty,
Wherein doth sit the dread and fear of Kings:
But mercy is aboue this sceptred sway,
It is enthroned in the hearts of Kings,
It is an attribute to God himself;
And earthly power doth then show likest Gods
When mercy seasons Justice. Therefore Jew,
Though Justice be thy plea, consider this,
That in the course of Justice, none of vs
Should see salvation: we do pray for mercy,
And that same prayer, doth teach vs all to render
The deeds of mercy. I have spoke thus much
To mitigate the justice of thy plea:
Which if thou follow, this strict course of Venice
Must needs give sentence against the Merchant there.
My deeds upon my head, I crave the Law,
The penalty and forfeit of my bond.
Is he not able to discharge the money?
Yes, here I tender it for him in the Court,
Yea, twice the sum, if that will not suffice,
I will be bound to pay it ten times ore,
On forfeit of my hands, my head, my heart:
If this will not suffice, it must appear
That malice bears down truth. And I beseech you
Wrest once the Law to your authority.
To do a great right, do a little wrong,
And curb this cruel devil of his will.
It must not be, there is no power in Venice
Can alter a decree established:
Twill be recorded for a President,
And many an error by the same example,
Will rush into the state: It cannot be.
A Daniel come to judgment, yea a Daniel.
O wise young Judge, how do I honour thee.
I pray you let me look upon the bond.
Here it is most reverend Doctor, here it is.
Shylocke, there's thrice thy money offered thee.
An oath, an oath, I have an oath in heaven:
Shall I lay perjury upon my soul?
No not for Venice.
Why this bond is forfeit,
And lawfully by this the Jew may claim
A pound of flesh, to be by him cut off
Nearest the Merchants heart; be merciful,
Take thrice thy money, bid me tear the bond.
When it is paid according to the tenure.
It doth appear you are a worthy Judge:
you know the Law, your exposition
Hath been most sound. I charge you by the Law,
Whereof you are a well-deseruing pillar,
Proceed to judgment: By my soul I swear,
There is no power in the tongue of man
To alter me: I stay here on my bond.
Most heartily I do beseech the Court
To give the judgment.
Why then thus it is: you must prepare your bosom for his knife.
O noble Judge, O excellent young man.
For the intent and purpose of the Law
Hath full relation to the penalty,
Which here appears due upon the bond.
It is very true: O wise and upright Judge,
How much more elder art thou then thy looks?
Therefore lay bare your bosom.
I, his breast,
So says the bond, doth it not noble Judge?
Nearest his heart, those are the very words.
It is so: Are there balance here to weigh the flesh?
I have them ready.
Have by some Surgeon Shylock on your charge
To stop his wounds, least he should bleed to death.
It is not nominated in the bond?
It is not so expressed: but what of that?
It were good you do so much for charity.
I cannot find it, it is not in the bond.
Come Merchant, have you any thing to say?
But little: I am armed and well prepared.
Give me your hand Bassanio, fare you well.
Grieve not that I am fallen to this for you:
For herein fortune shows her self more kind
Then is her custom. It is still her use
To let the wretched man out-liue his wealth,
To view with hollow eye, and wrinkled brow
An age of poverty. From which lingering penance
Of such misery, doth she cut me off:
Commend me to your honourable Wife,
Tell her the process of Anthonio's end:
Say how I loved you; speak me fair in death:
And when the tale is told, bid her be judge,
Whether Bassanio had not once a Love:
Repent not you that you shall loose your friend,
And he repents not that he pays your debt.
For if the Jew do cut but deep enough,
Isle pay it instantly, with all my heart.
Anthonio, I am married to a wife,
Which is as dear to me as life it self,
But life it self, my wife, and all the world,
Are not with me esteemed aboue thy life.
I would loose all, I sacrifice them all
Here to this devil, to deliver you.
Your wife would give you little thanks for that
If she were by to hear you make the offer.
I have a wife whom I protest I love,
I would she were in heaven, so she could
Entreat some power to change this currish Jew.
It is well you offer it behind her back,
The wish would make else an unquiet house.
These be the Christian husbands: I have a daugh∣la
Would any of the stock of Barrabas
Had been her husband, rather then a Christian.
We trifle time, I pray thee pursue sentence.
A pound of that same merchants flesh is thine,
The Court awards it, and the law doth give it.
Most rightful Judge.
And you must cut this flesh from off his breast,
The Law allows it, and the Court awards it.
Most learned Judge, a sentence, come prepare.
Tarry a little, there is something else,
This bond doth give thee here no jot of blood,
The words expressly are a pound of flesh:
Then take thy bond, take thou thy pound of flesh,
But in the cutting it, if thou dost shed
One drop of Christian blood, thy lands and goods
Are by the Laws of Venice confiscate
Unto the state of Venice.
O upright Judge,
Mark Jew, ô learned Judge.
Is that the law?
Thy self shalt see the Act:
For as thou vrgest justice, be assured
Thou shalt have justice more then thou desire.
O learned Judge, mark Jew, a learned Judge.
I take this offer then, pay the bond thrice,
And let the Christian go.
Here is the money.
Soft, the Jew shall have all justice, soft, no haste,
He shall have nothing but the penalty.
O Jew, an upright Judge, a learned Judge.
Therefore prepare thee to cut off the flesh,
Shed thou no blood, nor cut thou less nor more
But just a pound of flesh: if thou take more
Or less then a just pound, be it so much
As makes it light or heavy in the substance,
Or the division of the twentieth part
Of one poor scruple, nay if the scale doe turn
But in the estimation of a hair,
Thou die, and all thy goods are confiscate.
A second Daniel, a Daniel Jew,
Now infidel I have thee on the hip.
Why doth the Jew pause, take thy forfeiture.
Give me my principal, and let me go.
I have it ready for thee, here it is.
He hath refused, it in the open Court,
He shall have merely justice and his bond.
A Daniel still say I, a second Daniel,
I thank thee Jew for teaching me that word.
Shall I not have barely my principal?
Thou shalt have nothihg but the forfeiture,
To be taken so at thy peril Jew.
Why then the Devil give him good of it:
Isle stay no longer question.
Tarry Jew,
The Law hath yet another hold on you.
It is enacted in the Laws of Venice,
If it be proved against an Alien,
That by direct, or indirect attempts
He seek the life of any Citizen,
The party against the which he doth contrive,
Shall seize one half his goods, the other half
Comes to the privy coffer of the State,
And the offenders life lies in the mercy
Of the Duke only, against all other voice.
In which predicament I say thou standst:
For it appears by manifest proceeding,
That indirectly, and directly to,
Thou hast contrived against the very life
Of the defendant: and thou hast incurred
The danger formerly by me rehearsed.
Down therefore, and beg mercy of the Duke.
Beg that thou moist have leave to hang thy self,
And yet thy wealth being forfeit to the state,
Thou hast not left the value of a cord,
Therefore thou must be hanged at the slates charge.
That thou shalt see the difference of our spirit,
I pardon thee thy life before thou ask it:
For half thy wealth, it is Anthonio's,
The other half comes to the general state,
Which humbleness may drive unto a fine.
I for the state, not for Anthonio.
Nay, take my life and all, pardon not that,
You take my house, when you do take the prop
That doth sustain my house: you take my life
When you doe take the means whereby I live.
What mercy can you render him Anthonio?
A halter gratis, nothing else for Gods sake.
So please my Lord the Duke, and all the Court
To quit the fine for one half of his goods,
I am content: so he will let me have
The other half in use, to render it
Upon his death, unto the Gentleman
That lately stole his daughter.
Two things provided more, that for this favour
He presently become a Christian:
The other, that he doe record a gift
Here in the Court of all he dies possessed
Unto his son Lorenzo, and his daughter.
He shall doe this, or else I doe recant
The pardon that I late pronounced here.
Art thou contented Jew? what dost thou say?
I am content.
Clarke, draw a deed of gift.
I pray you give me leave to go from hence,
I am not well, send the deed after me,
And I will sign it.
Get thee gone, but doe it.
In christening thou shalt have two godfathers,
Had I been judge, thou should have had ten more,
To bring thee to the gallows, not to the font.
Sir I entreat you with me home to dinner.
I humbly doe desire your Grace of pardon,
I must away this night toward Padua,
And it is mere I presently set forth.
I am sorry that your leisure serves you not:
Anthonio, gratify this gentlemen,
For in my mind, you are much bound to him.
Most worthy gentlemen, I and my friend
Have by your wisdom been this day acquitted
Of grievous penalties, in lie • whereof,
Three thousand Ducats due unto the Jew
We freely cope your courteous pains withal.
And stand indebted over and aboue
In love and service to you evermore.
He is well paid that is well satisfied,
And I delivering you, am satisfied,
And therein doe account my self well paid,
My mind was never yet more mercenary.
I pray you know me when we meet again,
I wish you well, and so I take my leave.
Dear sir, of force I must attempt you further,
Take some remembrance of vs as a tribute,
Not as fee: grant me two things, I pray you
Not to deny me, and to pardon me.
You press me far, and therefore I will yield,
Give me your gloves, Isle wear them for your sake,
And for your love Isle take this ring from you,
Doe not draw back your hand, isle take no more,
And you in love shall not deny me this?
This ring good sir, alas it is a trifle,
I will not shame my self to give you this.
I will have nothing else but only this,
And now methinkes I have a mind to it.
There's more depends on this then on the value,
The dearest ring in Venice will I give you,
And find it out by proclamation,
Only for this I pray you pardon me.
I see sir you are liberal in offers,
You taught me first to beg, and now me thinks
You teach me how a beggar should be answered.
Good sir, this ring was given me by my wife,
And when she put it on, she made me vow
That I should neither soll, nor give, nor lose it.
That scuse serves many men to save their gifts,
And if your wife be not a mad woman,
And know how well I have deserved this ring,
She would not hold out enemy for ever
For giving it to me: well, peace be with you.
My L. Bassanio, let him have the ring,
Let his deservings and my love withal
Be valued against your wives commandment.
Go Gratiano, run and ouer-take him,
Give him the ring, and bring him if thou can
Unto Anthonios house, away, make haste.
Come, you and I will thither presently,
And in the morning early will we both
Fly toward Belmont, come Anthonio.
Enquire the Jaws house out, give him this deed,
And let him sign it, we'll away to night,
And be a day before our husbands home:
This deed will be well welcome to Lorenzo.
Fair sir, you are well ore-tane:
My L. Bassanio upon more advice,
Hath sent you here this ring, and doth entreat
Your company at dinner.
That cannot be;
His ring I doe accept most thankfully,
And so I pray you tell him: furthermore,
I pray you show my youth old Shylockes house.
That will I doe.
Sir, I would speak with you:
Isle see if I can get my husbands ring
Which I did make him swear to keep for ever.
Thou moist I warrant, we shall have old swearing
That they did give the rings away to men;
But weal out-face them, and out-sweare them to:
Away, make haste, thou know where I will tarry.
Come good sir, will you show me to this house.
The moon shines bright. In such a night as this,
When the sweet wind did gently kiss the trees,
And they did make no nuyse, in such a night
Troylus me thinks mounted the Trojan walls,
And sighed his soul toward the Grecian tents
Where Cressed lay that night.
In such a night
Did Thisbie fearfully ore-trip the dew,
And saw the Lyons shadow ere himself,
And ran dismayed away.
In such a night
Stood Dido with a Willow in her hand
Upon the wilde sea banks, and waft her Love
To come again to Carthage.
In such a night
Medea gathered the enchanted herbs
That did renew old Icon.
In such a night
Did Iessica steal from the wealthy Iewe,
And with an Unthrift Love did run from Venice,
As far as Belmont.
In such a night
Did young Lorenzo swear he loved her well,
Stealing her soul with many vows of faith,
And ne'er a true one.
In such a night
Did pretty Iessica (like a little shrove)
Slander her Love, and he forgave it her.
I would out-night you did no body come:
But hark, I hear the footing of a man.
Who comes so fast in silence of the night?
A friend.
A friend, what friend? your name I pray you friend?
Stephano is my name, and I bring word
My Mistress will before the break of day
Be here at Belmont, she doth stray about
By holy crosses where she kneels and prays
For happy wedlock hours.
Who comes with her?
None but a holy Hermit and her maid:
I pray you it my Master yet rnturn'd?
He is not, nor we have not heard from him,
But go we in I pray thee Iessica,
And ceremoniously let vs vs prepare
Some welcome for the Mistress of the house,
Sola, sola: wo ha ho, sola, sola.
Who calls?
Sola, did you see M. Lorenzo, &amp; M. Lorenzo, sola, sola.
Leave hollowing man, here.
Sola, where, where?
Here?
Tel him ther's a Post come from my Master, with his horn full of good news, my Master will be here ere morning sweet soul.
Let's in, and there expect their coming.
And yet no matter: why should we go in?
My friend Stephen, signify pray you
Within the house, your Mistress is at hand,
And bring your musique forth into the ayre.
How sweet the moone-light sleeps upon this bank,
Here will we sit, and let the sounds of music
Creep in our ears soft stillness, and the night
Become the tutches of sweet harmony:
Sit Iessica, look how the floor of heaven
Is thick inlayed with pattens of bright gold,
There's not the smallest or be which thou behold
But in his motion like an Angel sings,
Still quiring to the young eyed Cherubins;
Such harmony is in immortal souls,
But whilst this muddy vesture of decay
Doth grossly close in it, we cannot hear it:
Come hoe, and wake Diana with a hymn,
With sweetest tutches pearce your Mistress ear,
And draw her home with music.
I am never merry when I hear sweet musique.
The reason is, your spirits are attentive:
For doe but note a wilde and wanton heard
Or race of youthful and vnhandled colts,
Fetching mad bounds, bellowing and neighing loud,
Which is the hot condition of their blood,
If they but hear perchance a trumpet sound,
Or any ayre of music touch their ears,
You shall perceive them make a mutual stand,
Their savage eyes turned to a modest gaze,
By the sweet power of music: therefore the Poet
Did fine that Orpheus drew trees, stones, and floods.
Since nought so stockish, hard, and full of rage,
But music for time doth change his nature,
The man that hath no music in himself,
Nor is not moved with concord of sweet sounds,
Is fit for treasons, stratagems, and spoils,
The motions of his spirit are dull as night,
And his affections dark as Erobus,
Let no such man be trusted: mark the music.
That light we see is burning in my hall:
How far that little candle throws his beams,
So shines a good deed in a naughty world.
When the moon shone we did not see the can∣dl?
So doth the greater glory dim the less,
A substitute shines brightly as a King
Until a King be by, and then his state
Empties it self, as doth an inland brooke
Into the maine of waters: musique, hark.
It is your music Madame of the house.
Nothing is good I see without respect,
Methinkes it sounds much sweeter then by day?
Silence bestows that virtue on it Madam.
The Crow doth sing as sweetly as the Lark
When neither is attended: and I think
The Nightingale if she should sing by day
When every Goose is cackling, would be thought
No better a Musician then the Wren?
How many things by season, seasoned are
To their right praise, and true perfection:
Peace, how the Moon sleeps with Endimion,
And would not be awaked.
That is the voice,
Or I am much deceived of Portia.
He knows me as the blind man knows the
Cuckoo by the bad voice?
Dear Lady welcome home?
We have been praying for our husbands welfare
Which speed we hope the better for our words,
Are they returned?
Madam, they are not yet:
But there is come a Messenger before
To signify their coming.
Go in Nerrissa,
Give order to my servants, that they take
No note at all of our being absent hence,
Nor you Lorenzo, Iessica nor you.
Your husband is at hand, I hear his Trumpet,
We are no tell-tales Madam, fear you not.
This night methinkes is but the daylight sick,
It looks a little paler, it is a day,
Such as the day is, when the Sun is hid.
We should hold day with the Antipodes,
If you would walk in absence of the sun.
Let me give light, but let me not be light,
For a light wife doth make a heavy husband,
And never be Bassanio so for me,
But God sort all: you are welcome home my Lord.
I thank you Madam, give welcome to my friend
This is the man, this is Anthonio,
To whom I am so infinitely bound.
You should in all sense be much bound to him,
For as I hear he was much bound for you.
No more then I am well acquitted of.
Sir, you are very welcome to our house:
It must appear in other ways then words,
Therefore I scant this breathing courtesy.
By yonder Moon I swear you do me wrong,
In faith I gave it to the Judges Clerk,
Would he were gilt that had it for my part,
Since you do take it Love so much at hart.
A quarrel hoe already, what's the matter?
About a hoop of Gold, a paltry Ring
That she did give me, whose Poesy was
For all the world like Cutlers Poetry
Upon a knife; Love me, and leave me not.
What talk you of the Poesy or the value:
You swore to me when I did give it you,
That you would wear it till the hour of death,
And that it should lye with you in your grave,
Though not for me, yet for your vehement oaths,
You should have been respective and have kept it.
Gave it a Judges Clerk: but well I know
The Clerk will ne'er wear hair on's face that had it.
He will, and if he live to be a man.
I, if a Woman live to be a man.
Now by this hand I gave it to a youth,
A kind of boy, a little scrubbed boy,
No higher then thy self, the Judges Clerk,
A prating boy that begged it as a Fee,
I could not for my heart deny it him.
You were too blame, I must be plain with you,
To part so slightly with your wives first gift,
A thing stuck on with oaths upon your finger,
And so riveted with faith unto your flesh.
I gave my Love a Ring, and made him swear
Never to part with it, and here he stands:
I dare be sworn for him, he would not leave it,
Nor pluck it from his finger, for the wealth
That the world masters. Now in faith Gratiano,
You give your wife too unkind a cause of grief,
And it were to me I should be mad at it.
Why I were best to cut my left hand off,
And swear I lost the Ring defending it.
My Lord Bassanio gave his Ring away
Unto the Judge that begged it, and indeed
Deserved it too: and then the Boy his Clerk
That took some pains in writing, he begged mine,
And neither man nor master would take ought
But the two Rings.
What Ring gave you my Lord?
Not that I hope which you received of me.
If I could add a lie unto a fault,
I would deny it: but you see my finger
Hath not the Ring upon it, it is gone.
Even so void is your false heart of truth.
By heaven I will ne'er come in your bed
Until I see the Ring.
Nor I in yours, till I again see mine.
Sweet Portia,
If you did know to whom I gave the Ring,
If you did know for whom I gave the Ring,
And would conceive for what I gave the Ring,
And how unwillingly I left the Ring,
When nought would be accepted but the Ring,
You would abate the strength of your displeasure?
If you had known the virtue of the Ring,
Or half her worthiness that gave the Ring,
Or your own honour to contain the Ring,
You would not then have parted with the Ring:
What man is there so much unreasonable,
If you had pleased to have defended it
With any terms of Zeal: wanted the modesty
To urge the thing held as a ceremony:
Nerrissa teaches me what to believe,
Isle die for it, but some Woman had the Ring?
No by mine honour Madam, by my soul
No Woman had it, but a civil Doctor,
Which did refuse three thousand Ducats of me,
And begged the Ring; the which I did deny him,
And suffered him to go displeased away:
Even he that had held up the very life
Of my dear friend. What should I say sweet Lady?
I was enforced to send it after him,
I was beset with shame and courtesy,
My honour would not let ingratitude
So much besmear it. Pardon me good Lady,
And by these blessed Candles of the night,
Had you been there, I think you would have begged
The Ring of me, to give the worthy Doctor?
Let not that Doctor ere come near my house,
Since he hath got the jewel that I loved,
And that which you did swear to keep for me,
I will become as liberal as you,
Isle not deny him any thing I have,
No, not my body, nor my husbands bed:
Know him I shall, I am well sure of it.
Lie not a night from home. Watch me like Argos,
If you doe not, if I be left alone,
Now by mine honour which is yet mine own,
Isle have the Doctor for my bedfellow.
And I his Clarke: therefore be well advised
How you doe leave me to mine own protection.
Well, doe you so: let not me take him then,
For if I doe, isle mar the young Clerks pen.
I am the unhappy subject of these quarrels.
Sir, grieve not you,
You are welcome notwithstanding.
Portia, forgive me this enforced wrong,
And in the hearing of these many friends
I swear to thee, even by thine own fair eyes
Wherein I see my self.
Mark you but that?
In both my eyes he doubly sees himself:
In each eye one, swear by your double self,
And there's an oath of credit.
Nay, but hear me.
Pardon this fault, and by my soul I swear
I never more will break an oath with thee.
I once did lend my body for thy wealth,
Which but for him that had your husbands ring
Had quite miscarried. I dare be bound again,
My soul upon the forfeit, that your Lord
Will never more break faith advisedly.
Then you shall be his surety: give him this,
And bid him keep it better then the other.
Here Lord Bassanio, swear to keep this ring.
By heaven it is the same I gave the Doctor.
I had it of him: pardon Bassanio,
For by this ring the Doctor lay with me.
And pardon me my gentle Gratiano,
For that same scrubbed boy the Doctors Clarke
In lieu of this, last night did lye with me.
Why this is like the mending of high ways
In Summer, where the ways are fair enough:
What, are we Cuckolds ere we have deserved it.
Speak not so grossly, you are all amazed;
Here is a letter, read it at your leisure,
It comes from Padua from Bellario,
There you shall find that Portia was the Doctor,
Nerrissa there her Clarke. Lorenzo here
Shall witness I set forth as soon as you,
And but even now returned: I have not yet
Entered my house. Anthonio you are welcome,
And I have better news in store for you
Then you expect: vnseale this letter soon,
There you shall find three of your Argosies
Are richly come to harbour so dainlie.
You shall not know by what strange accident
I chanced on this letter.
I am dumb.
Were you the Doctor, and I knew you not?
Were you the Clark that is to make me cuckold.
I, but the Clark that never means to doe it,
Unless he live until he be a man.
(Sweet Doctor) you shall be my bedfellow,
When I am absent, then he with my wife.
(Sweet Lady) you have given me life &amp; living;
For here I read for certain that my ships
Are safely come to Rode.
How now Lorenzo?
My Clarke hath some good comforts to for you.
I, and Isle give them him without a fee.
There doe I give to you and Iessica
From the rich Iewe, a special deed of gift
After his death, of all he dies possessed of.
Fair Ladies you drop Manna in the way
Of starved people.
It is almost morning,
And yet I am sure you are not satisfied
Of these events at full. Let vs go in,
And charge vs there upon intergatories,
And we will answer all things faithfully.
Let it be so, the first intergatory
That my Nerrissa shall be sworn on, is,
Whether till the next night she had rather stay,
Or go to bed, now being two hours to day,
But were the day come, I should wish it dark,
Till I were couching with the Doctors Clarke.
Well, while I live, Isle fear no other thing
So sore, as keeping safe Nerrissas ring.

YOu do not meet a man but Frowns.
Our bloods no more obey the Heavens
Then our Courtiers:
Still seem, as do's the Kings.
But what's the matter?
His daughter, and the heir of's kingdom (whom
He purposed to his wives sole Son, a Widow
That late be married) hath referred her self
Unto a poor, but worthy Gentleman. She's wedded,
Her Husband banished: she imprisoned, all
Is outward sorrow, though I think the King
Be touched at very heart.
None but the King?
He that hath lost her too: so is the Queen,
That most desired the Match. But not a Courtier,
Although they wear their faces to the bent
Of the Kings looks, hath a heart that is not
Glad at the thing they scowl at.
And why so?
He that hath missed the Princess, is a thing
Too bad, for bad report: and he that hath her,
(I mean, that married her, alack good man,
And therefore banished) is a Creature, such,
As to seek through the Regions of the Earth
For one, his like; there would be something failing
In him, that should compare. I do not think,
So fair an Outward, and such stuff Within
Endows a man, but hee.
You speak him far.
I do extend him (Sir) within himself,
Crush him together, rather then unfold
His measure duly.
What's his name, and Birth?
I cannot delve him to the root: His Father
Was called Sicillius, who did join his Honour
Against the Romans, with Cassibulan,
But had his Titles by Tenantius, whom
He served with Glory, and admired Success:
So gained the Sur-addition, Leonatus.
And had (besides this Gentleman in question)
Two other Sons, who in the Wars of the time
Dyed with their Swords in hand. For which, their Father
Then old, and fond of issue, took such sorrow
That he quit Being; and his gentle Lady
Big of this Gentleman (our Theme) deceased
As he was borne. The King he takes the Babe
To his protection, calls him Posthumus Leonatus,
Breeds him, and makes him of his Bed-chamber,
Puts to him all the Learnings that his time
Could make him the receiver of, which he took
As we do ayre, fast as it was ministered,
And in's Spring, became a Harvest: Lived in Court
(Which rare it is to do) most praised, most loved,
A sample to the youngest: to the more Mature,
A glass that feated them: and to the graver,
A Child that guided Dotards. To his Mistress,
(For whom he now is banished) her own price
Proclaims how she esteemed him; and his Virtue
By her electiō may be truly read, what kind of man he is.
I honour him, even out of your report.
But pray you tell me, is she sole child to the King?
His only child:
He had two Sons (if this be worth your hearing,
Mark it) the eldest of them, at three years old
In the swathing clothes, the other from their Nursery
Were stolen, and to this hour, no guess in knowledge
Which way they went.
How long is this ago?
Some twenty years.
That a Kings Children should be so conveyed,
So slackly guarded, and the search so slow
That could not trace them.
Howsoever, it is strange,
Or that the negligence may well be laughed at:
Yet is it true Sir.
I do well believe you.
We must forbear. Here comes the Gentleman,
The Queen, and Princess.
No, be assured you shall not find me (Daughter)
After the slander of most Step-Mothers,
Euill-ey'd unto you. You're my Prisoner, but
Your Jailer shall deliver you the keys
That locke up your restraint. For you Posthumus,
So soon as I can win the offended King,
I will be known your Advocate: marry yet
The fire of Rage is in him, and it were good
You leaned unto his Sentence, with what patience
Your wisdom may inform you.
'Please your Highness,
I will from hence to day.
You know the peril:
Isle fetch a turn about the Garden, pitying
The pangs of barred Affections, though the King
Hath charged you should not speak together.
O dissembling Courtesy! How fine this Tyrant
Can tickle where she wounds? My dearest Husband,
I something fear my Fathers wrath, but nothing
(Always reserved my holy duty) what
His rage can do on me. You must be gone,
And I shall here abide the hourly shot
Of angry eyes: not comforted to live,
But that there is this Jewel in the world,
That I may see again.
My Queen, my Mistress:
O Lady, weep no more, least I give cause
To be suspected of more tenderness
Then doth become a man. I will remain
The loyall'st husband, that did ere plight troth.
My residence in Rome, at one Filorio's,
Who, to my Father was a Friend, to me
Known but by Letter; thither write (my Queen)
And with mine eyes, Isle drink the words you send,
Though Ink be made of Gall.
Be brief, I pray you:
If the King come, I shall incur, I know not
How much of his displeasure: yet Isle move him
To walk this way: I never do him wrong,
But he do's buy my Injuries, to be Friends:
Pays dear for my offences.
Should we be taking leave
As long a term as yet we have to live,
The loathnesse to depart, would grow: Adieu.
Nay, stay a little:
Were you but riding forth to ayre your self,
Such parting were too petty. Look here (Love)
This Diamond was my Mothers; take it (Heart)
But keep it till you woo another Wife,
When Imogen is dead.
How, how? Another?
You gentle Gods, give me but this I have,
And sear up my embraces from a next,
With bonds of death. Remain, remain thou here,
While sense can keep it on: And sweetest, fairest,
As I (my poor self) did exchange for you
To your so infinite loss; so in our trifles
I still win of you. For my sake wear this,
It is a Manacle of Love, Isle place it
Upon this fairest Prisoner.
O the Gods!
When shall we see again?
Alack, the King.
Thou basest thing, avoid hence, from my sight:
If after this command thou fraught the Court
With thy unworthiness, thou die. Away,
You're poison to my blood.
The Gods protect you,
And bless the good Remainders of the Court:
I am gone.
There cannot be a pinch in death
More sharpe then this is.
O disloyal thing,
That should repair my youth, thou heap
A years age on me•
I beseech you Sir,
Harm not your self with your vexation,
I am senseless of your Wrath; a Touch more rare
Subdues all pangs, all fears.
Past Grace? Obedience?
Past hope, and in despair, that way past Grace.
That might have had
The sole Son of my Queen.
O blessed, that I might not: I chose an Eagle,
And did avoid a Puttock.
Thou took a Beggar, would have made my
Throne, a Seat for baseness.
No, I rather added a lustre to it.
O thou wild one!
Sir,
It is your fault that I have loved Posthumus:
You bred him as my Play-fellow, and he is
A man, worth any woman: Ouer-buyes me
Almost the sum he pays.
What? art thou mad?
Almost Sir: Heaven restore me: would I were
A Neat-heards Daughter, and my Leonatus
Our Neighbour-Shepheards Son.
Thou foolish thing;
They were again together: you have done
Not after our command. Away with her,
And pen her up.
Beseech your patience: Peace
Dear Lady daughter, peace. Sweet Sovereign,
Leave vs to our selves, and make your self some comfort
Out of your best advice.
Nay let her languish
A drop of blood a day, and being aged
Dye of this Folly.
Fie, you must give way:
Here is your Servant. How now Sir? What news?
My Lord your Son, drew on my Master.
Ho?
No harm I trust is done?
There might have been,
But that my Master rather plaid, then fought,
And had no help of Anger: they were parted
By Gentlemen, at hand.
I am very glad on it.
Your Son's my Fathers friend, he takes his part
To draw upon an Exile. O brave Sir,
I would they were in Africa both together,
My self by with a Needle, that I might prick
The gore back. Why came you from your Master?
On his command: he would not suffer me
To bring him to the Haven: left these Notes
Of what commands I should be subject too,
When't pleased you to employ me.
This hath been
Your faithful Servant: I dare lay mine Honour
He will remain so.
I humbly thank your Highness.
Pray walk awhile.
About some half hour hence,
Pray you speak with me;
You shall (at least) go see my Lord aboard.
For this time leave me.
Sir, I would advise you to shift a Shirt; the Vio∣lence of Action hath made you reek as a Sacrifice: where ayre comes out, ayre comes in: There's none abroad so wholesome as that you vent.
If my Shirt were bloody, then to shift it.
Have I hurt him?
No faith: not so much as his patience.
Hurt him: His bodie's a passable Carcass if he bee not hurt. It is a through-fare for Steel if it be not hurt.
His Steel was in debt, it went of the Backside the Town.
The Villain would not stand me.
No, but he fled forward still, toward your face.
Stand you? you have Land enough of your own:
But he added to your having, gave you some ground.
As many Inches, as you have Oceans (Puppies.)
I would they had not come between vs.
So would I, till you had measured how long a Fool you were upon the ground.
And that she should love this Fellow, and re∣fuse me.
If it be a sin to make a true election, she is damned.
Sir, as I told you always: her Beauty &amp; her Brain go not together. Shoe's a good sign, but I have seen small reflection of her wit.
She shines not upon Fools, least the reflection
Should hurt her.
Come, Isle to my Chamber: would there had been some hurt done.
I wish not so, unless it had bin the fall of an Ass, which is no great hurt.
You'll go with vs?
Isle attend your Lordship.
Nay come, let's go together.
Well my Lord.
I would thou grow unto the shores of the Haven,
And questioned'st every Sail: if he should write,
And I not have it, it were a Paper lost
As offered mercy i•: What was the last
That he spake to thee?
It was his Queen, his Queen.
Then wau'd his Handkerchief?
And kissed it, Madam.
Senseless Linen, happier therein then 〈◊〉
And that was all?
No Madam: for so long
As he could make me with his eye, or ear,
Distinguish him from others, he did keep
The Deck, with Glove, or Hat, or Handkerchife,
Still waving, as the fits and stirs of's mind
Could best express how slow his Soul sayl'd on,
How swift his Ship.
Thou should have made him
As little as a Crow, or less, ere left
To after-eye him.
Madam, so I did.
I would have broke mine eye-strings;
Cracked them, but to look upon him, till the diminution
Of space, had pointed him sharpe as my Needle:
Nay, followed him, till he had melted from
The smallness of a Gnat, to ayre: and then
Have turned mine eye, and wept. But good Pisanio,
When shall we hear from him.
Be assured Madam,
With his next vantage.
I did not take my leave of him, but had
Most pretty things to say: Ere I could tell him
How I would think on him at certain hours,
Such thoughts, and such: Or I could make him swear,
The Shees of Italy should not betray
Mine Interest, and his Honour: or have charged him
At the sixth hour of Morn, at Noon, at Midnight,
To encounter me with Orisons, for then
I am in Heaven for him: Or ere I could,
Give him that parting kiss, which I had set
Betwixt two charming word•, comes in my Father,
And like the Tyrannous breathing of the North,
Shakes all our buds from growing.
The Queen (Madam)
Desires your Highness Company.
Those things I bid you do, get them dispatched,
I will attend the Queen.
Madam, I shall.
Believe it Sir, I have seen him in Britain; hee was then of a Crescent note, expected to prove so woor∣thy, as since he hath been allowed the name of. But I could then have looked on him, without the help of Ad∣miration, though the Catalogue of his endowments had bin rabled by his side, and I to peruse him by Items.
You speak of him when he was less furnished, then now hee is, with that which makes him both with∣out, and within.
I have seen him in France: wee had very ma∣ny there, could behold the Sun, with as firm eyes as hee.
This matter of marrying his Kings Daughter, wherein he must be weighed rather by her value, then his own, words him (I doubt not) a great deal from the matter.
And then his banishment.
I, and the approbation of those that weep this lamentable divorce under her colours, are wonderfully
to extend him, be it but to fortify her judgment, which else an easy battery might lay flat, for taking a Beggar without less quality. But how comes it, he is to sojourn with you? How creeps acquaintance?
His Father and I were Soldiers together, to whom I have bin often bound for no less then my life.
Here comes the Britain. Let him be so entertained a∣mong'st you, as suites with Gentleman of your knowing, to a Stranger of his quality. I beseech you all be better known to this Gentleman, whom I commend to you, as a Noble Friend of mine. How Worthy he is, I will leave to appear hereafter, rather then story him in his own hearing.
Sir, we have known together in Orleans.
Since when, I have bin debtor to you for court∣sies, which I will be ever to pay, and yet pay still.
Sir, you o're-rate my poor kindness, I was glad I did atone my Countryman and you: it had been pity you should have been put together, with so more∣tall a purpose, as then each bore, upon importance of so slight and trivial a nature.
By your pardon Sir, I was then a young Travel∣ler, rather shunned to go even with what I heard, then in my every action to be guided by others experiences: but upon my mended judgment (if I offend to say it is men∣ded) my Quarrel was not altogether slight.
Faith yes, to be put to the arbitrament of Swords, and by such two, that would by all likelihood have confounded one the other, or have fallen both.
Can we with manners, ask what was the dif∣ference?
Safely, I think, it was a contention in pub∣like, which may (without contradiction) suffer the re∣port. It was much like an argument that fell out last night, where each of vs fell in praise of our Country-Mistresses. This Gentleman, at that time vouching (and upon warrant of bloody affirmation) his to be more Fair, Virtuous, Wise, Chaste, Constant, Qualified, and less attemptible then any, the rarest of our Ladies in France.
That Lady is not now living; or this Gentle∣mans opinion by this, worn out.
She holds her Virtue still, and I my mind.
You must not so far prefer her, before ours of Italy.
Being so far provoked as I was in France: I would abate her nothing, though I profess my self her Adorer, not her Friend.
As fair, and as good: a kind of hand in hand comparison, had been something too fair, and too good for any Lady in Brittany; if she went before others. I have seen as that Diamond of yours out-lusters many I have beheld, I could not believe she excelled many: but I have not seen the most precious Diamond that is, nor you the Lady.
I praised her, as I rated her: so do I my Stone.
What do you esteem it at?
More then the world enjoys.
Either your vnparagon'd Misters is dead, or she's out-priz'd by a trifle.
You are mistaken: the one may be sold or go∣uen, or if there were wealth enough for the purchases, or merit for the gift. The other is not a thing for sale, and only the gift of the Gods.
Which the Gods have given you?
Which by their Graces I will keep.
You may wear her in title yours: but you know strange Foul light upon neighbouring Ponds. Your Ring may be stolen too, so your brace of vnprizea∣ble Estimations, the one is but frail, and the other Casu∣all;. A cunning Thief, or a (that way) accomplished Courtier, would hazard the winning both of first and last.
Your Italy, contains none so accomplished a Courtier to convince the Honour of my Mistress: if in the holding or loss of that, you term her frail, I do no∣thing doubt you have store of Thieves, notwithstanding I fear not my Ring.
Let vs leave here, Gentlemen?
Sir, with all my heart. This worthy Signior I thank him, makes no stranger of me, we are familiar at first.
With five times so much conversation, I should get ground of your fair Mistress; make her go back, e∣uen to the yielding, had I admittance, and opportunity to friend.
No, no.
I dare thereupon pawn the moiety of my E∣state, to your Ring, which in my opinion o're-values it something: but I make my wager rather against your Confidence, then her Reputation. And to bar your of∣fence herein to, I durst attempt it against any Lady in the world.
You are a great deal abused in too bold a per∣swasion, and I doubt not you sustain what y' are worthy of, by your Attempt.
What's that?
A Repulse though your Attempt (as you call it) deserve more; a punishment too.
Gentlemen enough of this, it came in too so∣dainely, let it dye as it was borne, and I pray you be bet∣la acquainted.
Would I had put my Estate, and my Neighbours on the approbation of what I have spoke,
What Lady would you choose to assail?
Yours, whom in constancy you think stands so safe. I will lay you ten thousands Ducats to your Ring, that commend me to the Court where your La∣die is, with no more advantage then the opportunity of a second conference, and I will bring from thence, that Honour of hers, which you imagine so reserved.
I will wage against your Gold, Gold to it: My Ring I hold dear as my finger, it is part of it.
You are a Friend, and there in the wiser: if you buy Ladies flesh at a Million a Dram, you cannot pre∣seure it from tainting; but I see you have some Religion in you, that you fear.
This is but a custom in your tongue: you bear a graver purpose I hope.
I am the Master of my speeches, and would un∣der-go what's spoken, I swear.
Will you? I shall but lend my Diamond till your return: let there be Covenants drawn between's. My Mistress exceeds in goodness, the hugeness of your unworthy thinking▪ I dare you to this match: heere's my Ring.
I will have it no lay.
By the Gods it is one: if I bring you no suffi∣cient testimony that I have enjoyed the dearest bodily part of your Mistress: my ten thousand Ducats are yours,
so is your Diamond too: if I come off, and leave her in such honour as you have trust in; She your Jewel, this your Jewel, and my Gold are yours: provided. I have your commendation, for my more free entertainment.
I embrace these Conditions, let vs have Articles betwixt vs: only thus far you shall answer, if you make your voyage upon her, and give me directly to un∣derstand, you have prevailed, I am no further your En∣my, she is not worth our debate. If she remain uncle∣duc'd, you not making it appear otherwise: for your ill opinion, and the assault you have made to her chastity, you shall answer me with your Sword.
Your hand, a Covenant: wee will have these things set down be lawful Counsel, and straight away for Britain, least the Bargain should catch cold, and starve: I will fetch my Gold, and have our two Wagers recorded.
Agreed.
Will this hold, think you.
Signior Iachimo will not from it.
Pray let vs follow 'em.
Whiles yet the dewe's on ground,
Gather those Flowers,
Make haste. Who he's the note of them?
I Madam.
Dispatch.
Now Master Doctor, have you brought those drugs?
Pleases your Highness, I: here they are, Madam:
But I beseech your Grace, without offence
(My Conscience bids me ask) wherefore you have
Commanded of me these most poisonous Compounds,
Which are the moouers of a languishing death:
But though slow, deadly.
I wonder, Doctor,
Thou ask me such a Question: Have I not been
Thy Pupil long? Hast thou not learned me how
To make Perfumes? Distill? Preserve? Yea so,
That our great King himself doth woo me oft
For my Confections? Having thus far proceeded,
(Unless thou think me devilish) is it not meet
That I did amplify my judgment in
Other Conclusions? I will try the forces
Of these thy Compounds, on such Creatures as
We count not worth the hanging (but none humane)
To try the vigour of them, and apply
Allayments to their Act, and by them gather
Their several virtues, and effects.
Your Highness
Shall from this practise, but make hard your heart:
Besides, the seeing these effects will be
Both noisome, and infectious.
O content thee▪
Here comes a flattering Rascal, upon him
Will I first work: Hoe's for his Master,
And enemy to my Son. How now Pisanio?
Doctor, your service for this time is ended,
Take your own way.
I do suspect you, Madam,
But you shall do no harm.
Hark thee, a word.
I do not like her. She doth think she he's
Strange lingering poisons: I do know her spirit,
And will not trust one of her malice▪ with
A drug of such damned Nature. Those she he's,
Will stupefy and dull the Sense awhile,
Which first (perchance) she'll prove on Cats and Dogs,
Then afterword up higher: but there is
No danger in what show of death it makes,
More then the locking up the Spirits a time,
To be more fresh, reviving. She is fooled
With a most false effect: and I, the truer,
So to be false with her.
No further service, Doctor,
Until I send for thee.
I humbly take my leave.
Weeps she still (say thou?)
Dost thou think in time
She will not quench, and let instructions enter
Where Folly now possesses? Do thou work:
When thou shalt bring me word she loves my Son,
Isle tell thee on the instant, thou art then
As great as is thy Master: Greater, for
His Fortunes all lye speechless, and his name
Is at last gasp. Return he cannot, nor
Continue where he is: To shift his being,
Is to exchange one misery with another,
And every day that comes, comes to decay
A days work in him. What shalt thou expect
To be depender on a thing that leanes?
Who cannot be new built, nor he's no Friends
So much, as but to prop him? Thou take up
Thou know not what: But take it for thy labour,
It is a thing I made, which hath the King
Five times redeemed from death. I do not know
What is more Cordial. Nay, I prithee take it,
It is an earnest of a farther good
That I mean to thee. Tell thy Mistress how
The case stands with her: do it, as from thy self;
Think what a chance thou change on, but think
Thou hast thy Mistress still, to boot, my Son,
Who shall take notice of thee. Isle move the King
To any shape of thy Preferment, such
As thou'lt desire: and then my self, I chiefly,
That set thee on to this desert, am bound
To load thy merit richly. Call my women.
Think on my words. A sly, and constant knave,
Not to be shook: the Agent for his Master,
And the Remembrancer of her, to hold
The hand-fast to her Lord. I have given him that,
Which if he take, shall quite vnpeople her
Of Leidgers for her Sweet: and which, she after
Except she bend her humour, shall be assured
To taste of too.
So, so: Well done, well done:
The Violets, Cowslips, and the Prime-Roses
Bear to my Closet: Fare thee well, Pisanio.
Think on my words.
And shall do:
But when to my good Lord, I prove untrue,
Isle choke my self: there's all Isle do for you.
A Father cruel, and a Stepdame false,
A Foolish Suitor to a Wedded-Lady,
That hath her Husband banished: O, that Husband,
My supreme Crown of grief, and those repeated
Vexations of it. Had I bin Theefe-stolne,
As my two Brothers, happy: but most miserable
Is the desires that's glorious. Blessed be those
How mean so ere, that have their honest wills,
Which seasons comfort. Who may this be? Fie.
Madam, a Noble Gentleman of Rome,
Comes from my Lord with Letters.
Change you, Madam:
The Worthy Leonatus is in safety,
And greetes your Highness dearly.
Thanks good Sir,
You're kindly welcome.
All of her, that is out of door, most rich:
If she be furnished with a mind so rare
She is alone the Arabian-Bird; and I
Have lost the wager. Boldness be my Friend:
Arm me Audacity from head to foot,
Orlike the Parthian I shall flying fight,
Rather directly fly.
He is one of the Noblest note, to whose kindnesses I am most in∣finitely tied. Reflect upon him accordingly, as you value your trust.
Leonatus.
So far I read aloud.
But even the very middle of my heart
Is warmed by' the rest, and take it thankfully.
You are as welcome (worthy Sir) as I
Have words to bid you, and shall find it so
In all that I can do.
Thanks fairest Lady:
What are men mad? Hath Nature given them eyes
To see this vaulted Arch, and the rich Crop
Of Sea and Land, which can distinguish twixt
The fiery Orbs aboue, and the twinn'd Stones
Upon the numbered Beach, and can we not
Partition make with Spectales so precious
Twixt fair, and foul?
What makes your admiration?
It cannot be in the eye: for Apes, and Monkeys
Twixt two such She's, would chatter this way, and
Contemn with mowes the other. Nor in the judgment:
For Idiots in this case of favour, would
Be wisely definite: Nor in the Appetite.
Sluttery to such near Excellence, opposed
Should make desire vomit emptiness,
Not so allure•d to feed.
What is the matter trow?
The Cloyed will:
That satiate yet unsatisfied desire, that Tub
Both filled and running: Ravening first the Lamb,
Longs after for the Garbage.
What, dear Sir,
Thus rep's you? Are you well?
Thanks Madam well: Beseech you Sir,
Desire my Man's abode, where I did leave him:
He's strange and peevish.
I was going Sir,
To give him welcome.
Continues well my Lord?
His health beseech you?
Well, Madam.
Is he disposed to mirth? I hope he is.
Exceeding pleasant: none a stranger there,
So merry, and so gamesome: he is called
The Britain Reveller.
When he was here
He did incline to sadness, and oft times
Not knowing why.
I never saw him sad.
There is a Frenchman his Companion, one
An eminent Monsieur, that it seems much loves
A Gallian-Girle at home. He furnaces
The thick sighs from him; whiles the jolly Britain,
(Your Lord I mean) laughs from his free lungs: cries oh,
Can my sides hold, to think that man who knows
By History, Report, or his own proof
What woman is, yea what she cannot choose
But must be: will's free hours languish:
For assured bon•age?
Will my Lord say so?
I Madam, with his eyes in flood with laughter,
It is a Recreation to be by
And hear him mock the Frenchman:
But Heauen's know some men are much too blame.
Not he I hope.
Not he:
But yet Heauen's bounty towards him, might
Be used more thankfully. In himself it is much;
In you which I account his beyond all Talents.
Whilst I am bound to wonder, I am bound
To pity too.
What do you pity Sir?
Two Creatures heartily.
Am I one Sir?
You look on me: what wrack discern you in me
Deserves your pity?
Lamentable: what
To hide me from the radiant Sun, and solace
In the Dungeon by a Snuff.
I pray you Sir,
Deliver with more openness your answers
To my demands. Why do you pity me?
That others do,
(I was about to say) enjoy your—but
It is an office of the Gods to avenge it,
Not mine to speak on it.
You do seem to know
Something of me, or what concerns me; pray you
Since doubting things go ill, often hurts more
Then to be sure they do. For Certainties
Either are past remedies; or timely knowing,
The remedy then borne. Discover to me
What both you spur and stop.
Had I this cheek
To bathe my lips upon: this hand, whose touch,
(Whose every touch) would force the Feelers soul
To the oath of loyalty. This obe•ect, which
Takes prisoner the wild motion of mine eye,
Fearing it only here, should I (damned then)
Slaver with lips as common as the stayres
That mount the Capitol: Join gripes, with hands
Made hard with hourly falsehood (falsehood as
With labour:) then by peeping in an eye
Base and illustrious as the smokey light
That's fed with stinking Tallow: it were fit
That all the plagues of Hell should at one time
Encounter such revolt.
My Lord, I fear
Has forgot Britain.
And himself, not I
Inclined to this intelligence, pronounce
The Beggary of his change: but it is your Graces
That from my mutest Conscience, to my tongue,
Charms this report out.
Let me hear no more.
O dearest Soul: your Cause doth strike my hart
With pity, that doth make me sick. A Lady
So fair, and fastened to an Empery
Would make the greatest King double, to be partnered
With Tomboys hired, with that self exhibition
Which your own Coffers yield: with diseased ventures
That play with all Infirmities for Gold,
Which rottenness can lend Nature. Such boiled stuff
As well might poison Poison. Be revenged,
Or she that bore you, was no Queen, and you
Recoil from your great Stock.
Revenged:
How should I be revenged? If this be true,
(As I have such a Heart, that both mine ears
Must not in haste abuse) if it be true,
How should I be revenged?
Should he make me
Live like Diana's Priest, betwixt cold sheets,
Whiles he is vaulting variable Rampes
In your despite, upon your purse: revenge it.
I dedicate my self to your sweet pleasure,
More Noble then that runagate to your bed,
And will continue fast to your Affection,
Still close, as sure.
What hoe, Pisanio?
Let me my service tender on your lips.
Away, I do condemn mine ears, that have
So long attended thee. If thou were Honourable
Thou would have told this tale for Virtue, not
For such an end thou seek, as base, as strange:
Thou wrong'st a Gentleman, who is as far
From thy report, as thou from Honour: and
Solicits here a Lady, that disdains
Thee, and the Devil alike. What hoe, Pisanio?
The King my Father shall be made acquainted
Of thy Assault: if he shall think it fit,
A saucy Stranger in his Court, to Mart
As in a Romish Stew, and to expound
His beastly mind to vs; he hath a Court
He little cares for, and a Daughter, who
He not respects at all. What hoe, Pisanio?
O happy Leonatus I may say▪
The credit that thy Lady hath of thee
Deserves thy trust, and thy most perfect goodness
Her assured credit. Blessed live you long,
A Lady to the worthiest Sir, that ever
Country called his; and you his Mistress, only
For the most worthiest fit. Give me your pardon,
I have spoke this to know if your Affiance
Were deeply rooted, and shall make your Lord,
That which he is, new o'er: And he is one
The truest mannered: such a holy Witch,
That he enchants Societies into him:
Half all men hearts are his.
You make amends.
He sits amongst men, like a defended God;
He hath a kind of Honour sets him off,
More then a mortal seeming. Be not angry
(Most mighty Princess) that I have adventured
To try your taking of a false report, which hath
Honoured with confirmation your great Judgment,
In the election of a Sir, so rare,
Which you know, cannot err. The love I bear him,
Made me to fan you thus, but the Gods made you
(Unlike all others) chaffelesse. Pray your pardon.
Ell's well Sir:
Take my power in the Court for yours.
My humble thanks: I had almost forgot
To entreat your Grace, but in a small request,
And yet of moment too, for it concerns:
Your Lord, my self, and other Noble Friends
Are partners in the business.
Pray what is it?
Some dozen Romans of vs, and your Lord
(The best Feather of our wing) have mingled sums
To buy a Present for the Emperor▪
Which I (the Factor for the rest) have done
In France: it is Plate of rare device, and Jewels
Of rich, and exquisite form, their valewes great,
And I am something curious, being strange
To have them in safe stowage: May it please you
To take them in protection.
Willingly:
And pawn mine Honour for their safety, since
My Lord hath interest in them, I will keep them
In my Bed-chamber.
They are in a Trunk
Attended by my men: I will make bold
To send them to you, only for this night:
I must aboard to morrow.
O no, no.
Yes I beseech: or I shall short my word
By lengthening my return. From Galley,
I crossed the Seas on purpose, and on promise
To see your Grace.
I thank you for your pains:
But not away to morrow.
O I must Madam.
Therefore I shall beseech you, if you please
To greet your Lord with writing, do it to night,
I have out-stood my time, which is material
To the tender of our Present.
I will write:
Send your Trunk to me, it shall safe be kept,
And truly yielded you: you're very welcome.
Was there ever man had such Iucke? when I kissed the Jack upon an vp-cast, to be hit away? I had a hun∣dred pound on it: and then a whore•on Iacke-an-Apes,
mu•t take me up for swearing, as if I borrowed mine o•no• of him, and might not spend them at my pleasure.
What got he by that? you have broke his pate with your Bowl.
If his wit had bin like him that broke it: it would have run all out.
When a Gentleman is disposed to swear: it is not for any standers by to curtal his oaths. Ha?
No my Lord; nor crop the ears of them.
Whoreson dog: I gave him satisfaction? would he had bin one of my Rank.
To have smelled like a Fool.
I am not vexed more at any thing in the earth: a pox on it. I had rather not be so Noble as I am: they dare not fight with me, because of the Queen my Mo∣there: every Iacke-Slaue hath his belly full of Fighting, and I must go up and down like a Cock, that no body can match.
You are Cock and Capon too, and you crow
Cock, with your comb on.
Say thou?
It is not fit you Lordship should undertake every
Companion, that you give offence too.
No, I know that: but it is fit I should commit offence to my inferiors.
I, it is fit for your Lordship only.
Why so I say.
Did you here of a Stranger that's come to Court night?
A Stranger, and I not know on it?
He's a strange Fellow himself, and knows it not.
There's an Italian come, and it is thought one of Leonatus Friends.
Leonatus? A banished Rascal; and he's another, whatsoever he be. Who told you of this Stranger?
One of your Lordships Pages.
Is it fit I went to look upon him? Is there no de•ogation in it?
You cannot derogate my Lord.
Not easily I think.
You are a Fool granted, therefore your Issues being foolish do not derogate.
Come, Isle go see this Italian: what I have lost to day at Bowls, Isle win to night of him. Come: go.
Isle attend your Lordship.
That such a crafty Devil as is his Mother
Should yield the world this Ass: A woman, that
Bears all down with her Brain, and this her Son,
Cannot take two from twenty for his heart,
And leave eighteen. Alas poor Princess,
Thou divine Imogen, what thou endur'st,
Betwixt a Father by thy Step-dame governed,
A Mother hourly coining plots: A Wooer,
More hateful then the foul expusion is
Of thy dear Husband. Then that horrid Act
Of the divorce, heeled make the Heavens hold firm
The walls of thy dear Honour. Keep unshaked
That Temple thy fair mind, that thou moist stand
To enjoy thy banished Lord: and this great Land.
Who's there? My woman: Helene?
Please you Madam.
What hove is it?
Almost midnight, Madam.
I have read three hours then:
Mine eyes are weak,
Fold down the leaf where I have left: to bed.
Take not away the Taper, leave it burning:
And if thou can awake by four of the clock,
I prithee call me: Sleep hath ceiz'd me wholly.
To your protection I commend me, Gods,
From Fey•ies, and the Tempters of the night,
Guard me beseech ye.
The Crickets sing, and mans ore-labor'd sense
Repairs it self by rest: Our Tarquine thus
Did softly press the Rushes, ere he wakened
The Chastity he wounded. Cytherea,
How bravely thou become thy Bed; fresh Lily,
And whiter then the Sheets: that I might touch,
But kiss, one kiss. Rubies vnparagon'd,
How dearly they do it: It is her breathing that
Perfumes the Chamber thus: the Flame of the Taper
Bows toward her, and would vnder-peepe her lids.
To see the enclosed Lights, now Canopied
Under these windows, White and Azure laced
With Blew of Heavens own tinct. But my design?
To note the Chamber, I will write all down,
Such, and such pictures: There the window, such
The adronement of her Bed; the Arras, Figures,
Why such, and such: and the Contents of the Story.
Ah, but some natural notes about her Body,
Aboue ten thousand meaner Movables
Would testify, to enrich mine Inuentorie.
O sleep, thou Ape of death, lye dull upon her,
And be her Sense but as a Monument,
Thus in a Chapel lying. Come off, come off;
As slippery as the Gordian-knot was hard.
It is mine, and this will witness outwardly,
As strongly as the Conscience do's within:
To the matting of her Lord. On her left breast
Amole Cinque-spotted: Like the Crimson drops
In the bottom of a Cowslip. Heere's a Voucher,
Stronger then ever Law could make; this Secret
Will force him think I have picked the lock, and t'ane
The treasure of her Honour. No more: to what end?
Why should I write this down, that's riuete,
Screwed to my memory. She hath bin reading late,
The Tale of Tereus, here the leaffe's turned down
Where Philomele gave up. I have enough,
To the Trunk again, and shut the spring of it.
Swift, swift, you Dragons of the night, that dawning
May bear the Ravens eye: I lodge in fear,
Though this a heavenly Angel: hell is here.
One, two, three: time, time.
Your Lordship is the most patient man in loss, the most coldest that ever turned up Ace.
It would make any man cold to loose.
But not every man patient after the noble temper of your Lordship; You are most hot, and furious when you win.
Winning will put any man into courage: if I could get this foolish Imogen, I should have Gold enough: it's al∣most morning, is it not?
Day, my Lord.
I would this Music would come: I am adieu∣sed to give her Music a mornings, they say it will pene∣trate.
Come on, tune: If you can penetrate her with your fin∣gering, so: we'll try with tongue too: if none will do, let her remain: but Isle never give o'er. First, a very excel∣lent good conceited thing• after a wonderful sweet air, with admirable rich words to it, and then let her consi∣der.
Hark, hark, the Lark at Heavens gate sings, and Phoebus gins arise,
His Steeds to water at those Springs on chalic'd Flowers that lies:
And winking Mary-buds begin to op their Golden eyes
With every thing that pretty is, my Lady sweet arise:
Arise, arise.
So, get you gone: if this pen•trate, I will consider your Music the better: if it do not, it is a voice in her ears which Horse-haires, and Calves-guts, nor the voice of vnpaued Eunuch to boot, can never amid.
Here comes the King.
I am glad I was up so late, for that's the reason I was up so early: he cannot choose but take this Ser∣vice I have done, fatherly. Good morrow to your Ma∣iesty, and to my gracious Mother.
Attend you here the door of our stern daughter
Will she not forth?
I have assailed her with Musickes, but she vouch∣safes no notice.
The Exile of her Minion is too new,
She hath not yet forgot him, some more time
Must wear the print of his remembrance on it,
And then she's yours.
You are most bound to the King,
Who let's go by no vantages, that may
Prefer you to his daughter: Frame your self
To orderly solicity, and be friended
With aptness of the season: make denials
Increase your Services: so seem, as if
You were inspired to do those duties which
You tender to her: that you in all obey her,
Save when command to your dismission tends,
And therein you are senseless.
Senseless? Not so.
So like you (Sir) Ambassadors from Rome;
The one is Caius Lucius.
A worthy Fellow,
Albeit he comes on angry purpose now;
But that's no fault of his: we must receive him
According to the Honour of his Sender,
And towards himself, his goodness fore-spent on vs
We must extend our notice: Our dear Son,
When you have given good morning to your Mistress,
Attend the Queen, and vs, we shall have need
To employ you towards this Roman.
Come our Queen.
If she be up, Isle speak with her: if not
Let her lye still, and dream: by your leave hoe,
I know her women are about her: what
If I do line one of their hand•, it is Gold
Which buys admittance (oft it doth) yea, and makes
Diana's Rangers false themselves, yield up
Their Dear to the stand of the Stealer: and it is Gold
Which makes the True-man killed, and saves the Thief:
Nay, sometime hangs both Thief, and True-man: what
Can it not do, and undo? I will make
One of her women Lawyer to me, for
I yet not understand the case my self.
By your leave.
Who's there that knocks?
A Gentleman.
No more.
Yes, and a Gentlewoman's Son.
That's more
Then some whose Taylors are as dear as yours,
Can justly boast of: what's your Lordships pleasure?
Your Ladies person, is she ready?
I, to keep her Chamber.
There is Gold for you,
Sell me your good report.
How my good name? or to report of you
What I shall think is good. The Princess.
Good morrow fairest, Sister your sweet hand.
Good morrow Sir, you lay out too much pains
For purchasing but trouble: the thanks I give,
Is telling you that I am poor of thanks,
And scarce can spare them.
Still I swear • love you.
If you but said so, it were as deep with me:
If you swear still, your recompense is still
That I regard it not.
This is no answer.
But that you shall not say, I yield being silent,
I would not speak. I pray you spare me, faith
I shall unfold equal discourtesy
To your best kindness: one of your great knowing
Should learn (being taught) forbearance.
To leave you in your madness, it were my sin,
I will not.
Fools are not mad Folks.
Do you call me Fool?
As I am mad I do:
If you'll be patient, Isle no more be mad,
That cures vs both. I am much sorry (Sir)
You put me to forget a Ladies manners
By being so verbal: and learn now, for all,
That I which know my heart, do here pronounce
By the very truth of it, I care not for you,
And am so near the lack of Charity
To accuse my self, I hate you: which I had rather
You felt, then maked my boast.
You sin against
Obedience, which you owe your Father, for
The Contract you pretend with that base Wretch,
One, bred of Alms, and fostered with cold dishes,
With scraps of the Court: It is no Contract, none;
And though it be allowed in meaner parties
(Yet who then he more mean) to knit their souls
(On whom there is no more dependency
But Brats and Beggary) in selfe-figur'd knot,
Yet you are curbed from that enlargement, by
The consequence of the Crown, and must not foil
The precious note of it; with a base Slave,
A Hilding for a Liuorie, a Squires Cloth,
A Pantler; not so eminent.
Profane Fellow:
Were thou the Son of Iupiter, and no more,
But what thou art besides: thou were it too base,
To be his Groom: thou were it dignified enough
Even to the point of Envy. If it were made
Comparative for your Virtues, to be styled
The under Hangman of his Kingdom; and hated
For being preferred so well.
The South-Fog rot him.
He never can meet more mischance, then come
To be but named of thee. His mean Garment
That ever hath but clipped his body; is dearer
In my respect, then all the Heirs aboue thee,
Were they all made such men: How now Pisanio?
His Garments? Now the devil.
To Dorothy my woman hie thee presently.
His Garment?
I am sprighted with a Fool,
Frighted, and angered worse: Go bid my woman
Search for a Jewel, that too casually
Hath left mine Arm: it was thy Masters. Shrew me
If I would loose it for a Revenue,
Of any Kings in Europe. I do think,
I saw't this morning: Confident I am.
Last night it was on mine Arm; I kissed it,
I hope it be not gone, to tell my Lord
That I kiss aught but he.
Twill not be lost.
I hope so: go and search.
You have abused me:
His meanest Garment?
I, I said so Sir,
If you will maked an Action, call witness to it.
I will inform your Father.
Your Mother too:
She's my good Lady; and will conceive, I hope
But the worst of me. So I leave your Sir,
To the worst of discontent.
Isle bereueng'd:
His mean Garment? Well.
Fear it not Sir: I would I were so sure
To win the King, as I am bold, her Honour
Will remain her's.
What means do you make to him?
Not any: but abide the change of Time,
Quake in the present winters state, and wish
That warmer days would come: In these feared hope
I barely gratify your love; they failing
I must die much your debtor.
Your very goodness, and your company,
Ore-payes all I can do. By this your King,
Hath heard of Great Augustus: Caius Lucius,
Will do's Commission thoroughly. And I think
He will grant the Tribute: send the Arrerages,
Or look upon our Romaines, whose remembrance
Is yet fresh in their grief.
I do believe
(Statist though I am none, nor like to be)
That this will prove a War; and you shall hear
The Legion now in Galley, sooner landed
In our not-fearing-Britaine, then have tidings
Of any penny Tribute paid. Our Countrymen
Are men more ordered, then when Iulius Caesar
Smiled at their lack of skill, but found their courage
Worthy his frowning at. Their discipline,
(Now wing-led with their courages) will make known
To their Approvers, they are People, such
That mend upon the world.
See Iachimo.
The swiftest Harts, have posted you by land;
And Winds of all the Corners kissed your Sails,
To make your vessel nimble.
Welcome Sir.
I hope the briefness of your answer, made
The speediness of your return.
Your Lady,
Is one of the fairest that I have looked upon
And therewithal the best, or let her beauty
Look thorough a Casement to allure false hearts,
And be false with them.
Here are Letters for you.
Their tenure good I trust.
It is very like.
Was Caius Lucius in the Britain Court,
When you were there?
He was expected then,
But not approached.
All is well yet,
Sparkles this Stone as it was wont, or is it not
Too dull for your good wearing?
If I have lost it,
I should have lost the worth of it in Gold,
Isle make a journey twice as far, t'enioy
A second night of such sweet shortness, which
Was mine in Britain, for the Ring is won.
The Stones too hard to come by.
Not a whit,
Your Lady being so easy.
Make note Sir
Your loss, your Sport: I hope you know that we
Must not continue Friends.
Good Sir, we must
If you keep Covenant: had I not brought
The knowledge of your Mistress home, I grant
We were to question farther; but I now
Profess my self the winner of her Honour,
Together with your Ring; and not the wronger
Of her, or you having proceeded but
By both your wills.
If you can maked apparent
That you have tasted her in Bed; my hand,
And Ring is yours. If not, the foul opinion
You had of her pure Honour; gains, or looses,
Your Sword, or mine, or Masterless leave both
To who shall find them.
Sir, my Circumstances
Being so ne'er the Truth, as I will make them,
Must first induce you to believe; whose strength
I will confirm with oath, which I doubt not
You'll give me leave to spare, when you shall find
You need it not.
Proceed.
First, her Bed-chamber
(Where I confess I slept not, but profess
Had that was well worth watching) it was hanged
With Tapestry of Silk, and Silver, the Story
Proud Cleopatra, when she met her Roman,
And Sidnus swelled aboue the Banks, or for
The press of Boats, or Pride. A piece of Work
So bravely done, so rich, that it did strive
In Workmanship, and Value, which I wondered
Could be so rarely, and exactly wrought
Since the true life on it was—
This is true:
And this you might have heard of here, by me,
Or by some other.
More particulars
Must justify my knowledge.
So they must,
Or doe your Honour injury.
The Chimney
Is South the Chamber, and Chimney-peece
Chaste Dian, bathing: never saw I figures
So likely to report themselves; the Cutter
Was as another Nature dumb, out-went her,
Motion, and Breath left out.
This is a thing
Which you might from Relation likewise reap,
Being, as it is, much spoke of.
The Roof of the Chamber,
With golden Cherubins is fretted. Her Andirons
(I had forgot them) were two winking Cupids
Of Silver, each on one foot standing, nicely
Depending on their Brands.
This is her Honour:
Let it be granted you have seen all this (and praise
Be given to your remembrance) the description
Of what is in her Chamber, nothing saves
The wager you have laid.
Then if you can
Be pale, I beg but leave to ayre this Jewel: See,
And now it is up again: it must be married
To that your Diamond, Isle keep them.
Jove—
Once more let me behold it: Is it that
Which I left with her?
Sir (I thank her) that
She stripped it from her Arm: I see her yet:
Her pretty Action, did out-sell her gift,
And yet enriched it too: she gave it me,
And said, she prized it once.
May be, she plucked it off
To send it me.
She writes so to you? doth she?
O no, no, no, it is true. Here, take this too,
It is a Basilisk unto mine eye,
Kills me to look on it: Let there be no Honour,
Where there is Beauty: Truth, where semblance: Love,
Where there's another man. The Vows of Women,
Of no more bondage be, to where they are made,
Then they are to their Virtues, which is nothing:
O, aboue measure false.
Have patience Sir,
And take your Ring again, it is not yet won:
It may be probable she lost it: or
Who knows if one her women, being corrupted
Hath stolen it from her.
Very true,
And so I hope he came by it: back my Ring,
Render to me some corporal sign about her
More evident then this: for this was stolen.
By Iupiter, I had it from her Arm.
Hark you, he swears: by Iupiter he swears.
It is true, nay keep the Ring; it is true: I am sure
She would not loose it: her Attendants are
All sworn, and honourable: they induced to steal it?
And by a Stranger? No, he hath enjoyed her,
The Cognisance of her incontinence
Is this: she hath bought the name of Whore, thus dearly
There, take thy hire, and all the Fiends of Hell
Divide themselves between you.
Sir, be patient:
This is not strong enough to be believed
Of one persuaded well of.
Never talk on it:
She hath bin colted by him.
If you seek
For further satisfying, under her Breast
(Worthy her pressing) lies a Mole, right proud
Of that most delicate Lodging. By my life
I kissed it, and it gave me present hunger
To feed again, though full. You do remember
This stain upon her?
I, and it doth confirm
Another stain, as big as Hell can hold,
Were there no more but it.
Will you hear more?
Spare your Arithmetic,
Never count the Turns: Once, and a Million.
Isle be sworn.
No swearing:
If you will swear you have not done it, you lye,
And I will kill thee, if thou dost deny
Thou'st made me Cuckold.
Isle deny nothing.
O that I had her here, to tear her Limb-meale:
I will go there and do it, in the Court, before
Her Father. Isle do something.
Quite besides
The government of Patience. You have won:
Let's follow him, and pervert the present wrath
He hath against himself.
With all my heart.
Is there no way for Men to be, but Women
Must be halfe-workers? We are all Bastards,
And that most venerable man, which I
Did call my Father, was, I know not where
When I was stamped. Some Coiner with his Tools
Made me a counterfeit: yet my Mother seemed
The Dian of that time: so doth my Wife
The Nonpareil of this. Oh Vengeance, Vengeance!
Me of my lawful pleasure she restrained,
And prayed me oft forbearance: did it with
A pudencie so Rosie, the sweet view on it
Might well have warmed old Saturn;
That I thought her
As Chaste, as vn-Sunn'd Snow. Oh, all the Devils!
This yellow Iachimo in an hour, was it not?
Or less; at first? Perchance he spoke not, but
Like a full Acorn'd Boar, a Iarmen on,
Cried oh, and mounted; found no opposition
But what he looked for, should oppose, and she
Should from encounter guard. Could I find out
The Women's part in me, for there's no motion
That tends to vice in man, but I affirm
It is the Women's part: be it Lying, note it,
The women's: Flattering, hers; Deceiving, hers:
Lust, and rank thoughts, hers, hers: Revenges hers:
Ambitions, Coatings, change of Prides, Disdain,
Nice-longing, Slanders, Mutability;
All Faults that name, nay, that Hell knows,
Why hers, in part, or all: but rather all For even to Vice
They are not constant, but are changing still;
One Vice, but of a minute old, for one
Not half so old as that. Isle write against them,
Detest them, curse them: yet it is greater Skill
In a true Hate, to pray they have their will:
The very Devils cannot plague them better.
Now say, what would Augustus Caesar with vs?
When Iulius Caesar (whose remembrance yet
Lives in men's eyes, and will to Ears and Tongues
Be Theme, and hearing ever) was in this Britain,
And Conquered it, Cassibulan thine Uncle
(Famous in Caesars praises, no whit less
Then in his Feats deserving it) for him,
And his Succession, granted Rome a Tribute,
Yearly three thousand pounds; which (by thee) lately
Is left vntender'd.
And to kill the marvel,
Shall be so ever.
There be many Caesars,
Ere such another Iulius: Britaine's a world
By it self, and we will nothing pay
For wearing our own Noses.
That opportunity
Which then they had to take from his, to resume
We have again. Remember Sir, my Liege,
The Kings your Ancestors, together with
The natural bravery of your Isle, which stands
As Neptunes Park, ribbed, and pal'd in
With Oaks vnskaleable, and roaring Waters,
With Sands that will not bear your Enemies Boats,
But suck them up to the Top-mast. A kind of Conquest
Caesar made here, but made not here his brag
Of Came, and Saw, and Ouer-came: with shame
(The first that ever touched him) he was carried
From off our Coast, twice beaten: and his Shipping
(Poor ignorant Baubles) on our terrible Seas
Like Egge-shels moved upon their Surges, cracked
As easily against our Rocks. For joy whereof,
The famed Cassibulan, who was once at point
(Oh giglet Fortune) to master Caesars Sword,
Made Luds-Towne with reioycing-Fires bright,
And Britains strut with Courage.
Come, there's no more Tribute to be paid: our Kingdom is stronger then it was at that time: and (as I said) there is no mo such Caesars, other of them may have crooked Noses, but to owe such strait Arms, none.
Son, let your Mother end.
We have yet many among vs, can gripe as hard as Cassibulan, I doe not say I am one: but I have a hand. Why Tribute? Why should we pay Tribute? If Caesar can hide the Sun from vs with a Blanket, or put the Moon in his pocket, we will pay him Tribute for light: else Sir, no more Tribute, pray you now.
You must know,
Till the injurious Romans, did extort
This Tribute from vs, we were free. Caesars Ambition,
Which swelled so much, that it did almost stretch
The sides of the World, against all colour here,
Did put the yoke vpon's; which to shake off
Becomes a warlike people, whom we reckon
Our selves to be, we do. Say then to Caesar,
Our Ancestor was that Mulmutius, which
Ordained our Laws, whose use the Sword of Caesar
Hath too much mangled; whose repair, and franchise,
Shall (by the power we hold) be our good deed,
Tho Rome be therefore angry. Mulmutius made our laws
Who was the first of Britain, which did put
His brows within a golden Crown, and called
Himself a King.
I am sorry Cymbeline,
That I am to pronounce Augustus Caesar
(Caesar, that hath more Kings his Servants, then
Thy self Domestic Officers) thine Enemy:
Receive it from me then. War, and Confusion
In Caesars name pronounce I against thee: Look
For fury, not to be resisted. Thus defied,
I thank thee for my self.
Thou art welcome Caius,
Thy Caesar Knighted me; my youth I spent
Much under him; of him, I gathered Honour,
Which he, to seek of me again, perforce,
Behooves me keep at utterance. I am perfect,
That the Pannonians and Dalmatians, for
Their Liberties are now in Arms: a President
Which not to read, would show the Britains cold:
So Caesar shall not find them.
Let proof speak.
His Majesty bids you welcome. Make pa∣stem with vs, a day, or two, or longer: if you seek vs af∣terwards in other terms, you shall find vs in our Salt-water-Girdle: if you beat vs out of it, it is yours: if you fall in the adventure, our Crows shall fare the better for you: and there's an end.
So sir.
I know your Masters pleasure, and he mine:
All the Remain, is welcome.
How? of Adultery? Wherefore write you not
What Monsters her accuse? Leonatus:
Oh Master, what a strange infection
Is fallen into thy ear? What false Italian,
(As poisonous tongued, as handed) hath prevailed
On thy too ready hearing? Disloyal? No.
She's punished for her Truth; and undergoes
More Goddesse-like, then Wife-like; such Assaults
As would take in some Virtue. Oh my Master,
Thy mind to her, is now as lowe, as were
Thy Fortunes. How? That I should murder her,
Upon the Love, and Truth, and Vows; which I
Have made to thy command? I her? Her blood?
If it be so, to go do od service, never
Let me be counted serviceable. How look I,
That I should seem to lack humanity,
So much as this Fact comes to? Do it: The Letter.
That I have sent her, by her own command,
Shall give thee opportunity. Oh damned paper,
Black as the Ink that's on thee: senseless bauble,
Art thou a Foedarie for this Act; and look
So Virgin-like without? Lo her she comes.
I am ignorant in what I am commanded.
How now Pisanio?
Madam, here is a Letter from my Lord.
Who, thy Lord? That is my Lord Leonatus?
Oh, learned indeed were that Astronomer
That knew the Stars, as I his Characters,
Heeled lay the Future open. You good Gods,
Let what is here contained, relish of Love,
Of my Lords health, of his content: yet not
That we two are asunder, let that grieve him;
Some griefs are medcinable, that is one of them,
For it doth physic Love, of his content,
All but in that. Good Wax, thy leave: blessed be
You Bees that make these Lockes of counsel. Lovers,
And men in dangerous Bonds pray not alike,
Though Forfeytours you cast in prison, yet
You clasp young Cupids Tables: good News Gods.
IVstice, and your Fathers wrath (should he take me in his Dominion) could not be so cruel to me, as you: (oh the dee∣rest of Creatures) would even renew me with your eyes. Take notic• 〈◊〉 I am in Cambria at Milford-Hauen: what your own Love, will out of this advise you, follow. So he wishes you all happiness, that remains loyal to his Vow, and your encrea∣sing in Love.
Leonatus-Posthumus.
Oh for a Horse with wings: Hear thou Pisanio?
He is at Milford-Hauen: Read, and tell me
How far it is thither. If one of mean affairs
May plod it in a week, why may not I
Glide thither in a day? Then true Pisanio,
Who long like me, to see thy Lord; who long
(Oh let me bate) but not like me: yet long
But in a fainter kind. Oh not like me:
For mine's beyond, beyond: say, and speak thick
(Loves Counsailor should fill the bores of hearing,
To the smothering of the Sense) how far it is
To this same blessed Milford. And by' the way
Tell me how Wales: was made so happy, as
T'inherite such a Haven. But first of all,
How we may steal from hence: nd for the gap
That we shall make in Time, from our hence-going,
And our return, to excuse: but first, how get hence.
Why should excuse be borne or ere begot?
Weal talk of that hereafter. Prithee speak,
How many store of Miles may we well rid
Twixt hour, and hour?
One score twixt Sun, and Sun,
Madam's enough for you: and too much too.
Why, one that rode to's Excution Man,
Could never go so slow: I have heard of Riding wagers,
Where Horses have bin nimbler then the Sands
That run in the Clocks behalf. But this is Foolrie,
Go, bid my Woman feign a Sickness, say
She'll home to her Father; and provide me presently
A Riding Suit: No costlier then would fit
A Franklins Huswife.
Madam, you're best consider.
I see before me (Man) nor here, not here;
Nor what ensues but have a Fog in them
That I cannot look through. Away, I prithee,
Do as I bid thee: There's no more to say:
Accessible is none but Milford way.
A goodly day, not to keep house with such,
Whose Roofe's as lowe as ours: Sleep Boys, this gate
Instructs you how t'adore the Heavens; and bows you
To a mornings holy office. The Gates of Monarchs
Are Arched so high, that Giants may •et through
And keep their impious Turbonds on, without
Good morrow to the Sun. Hail thou fair Heaven,
We house in the Rock, yet use thee not so hardly
As prouder livers do.
Hail Heaven.
Hail Heaven.
Now for our Mountain sport, up to yond hill
Your legs are young: Isle tread these Flats. Consider,
When you aboue perceive me like a Crow,
That it is Place, which lesson's, and sets off,
And you may then revolve what Tales, I have told you,
Of Courts, of Princes; of the Tricks in War.
This Service, is not Service; so being done,
But being so allowed. To apprehend thus,
Draws vs a profit from all things we see:
And osten to our comfort, shall we find
The sharded-Beetle, in a safer hold
Then is the full-wing'd Eagle. Oh this life,
Is Nobler, then attending for a check:
Richer, then doing nothing for a Babe:
Prouder, then rustling in vnpayd-for Silk:
Such gain the Cap of him, that makes him fine,
Yet keeps his Book uncrossed: no life to ours.
Out of your proof you speak: we poor vnfledg'd
Have never winged from view of the nest; nor knows not
What Ayre's from home. Hap'ly this life is best,
(If quiet life be best) sweeter to you
That have a sharper known. Well corresponding
With your stiff Age; but unto vs, it is
A Cell of Ignorance: travailing a bed,
A Prison, or a Debtor, that not dares
To stride a limit.
What should we speak of
When we are old as you? When we shall hear
The Rain and wind beat dark December? How
In this our pinching Cave, shall we discourse
The freezing hours away? We have seen nothing:
We are beastly; subtle as the Fox for prey,
Like warlike as the Wolf, for what we eat:
Our Valour is to chase what flies: Our Cage
We make a Quite, as doth the prisoned Bird,
And sing our Bondage freely.
How you speak.
Did you but know the Cities Usuries,
And felt them knowingly: the Art of the Court,
As hard to leave, as keep: whose top to climb
Is certain falling: or so slippery, that
The feare's as bad as falling. The toil of the War,
A pain that only seems to seek out danger
In the name of Fame and Honour, which dyes in the search,
And hath as oft a slanderous Epitaph,
As Record of fair Act. Nay, many times
Doth ill deserve, by doing well: what's worse
Must curtsy at the Censure. Oh Boys, this Story
The World may read in me: My bodie's marked
With Roman Swords; and my report, was once
First, with the best of Note. Cymbeline loved me,
And when a Soldier was the Theme, my name
Was not far off: then was I as a Tree
Whose boughs did bend with fruit. But in one night,
A Storm, or Robbery (call it what you will)
Shook down my mellow hangings: nay my Leaves,
And left me bare to weather.
Uncertain favour.
My fault being nothing (as I have told you oft)
But that two Villains, whose false Oaths prevailed
Before my perfect Honour, swore to Cymbeline,
I was Confederate with the Romans: so
Followed my Banishment, and this twenty years,
This Rock, and these Demesnes, have been my World,
Where I have lived at honest freedom, payed
More pious debts to Heaven, then in all
The fore-end of my time. But, up to the Mountains,
This is not Hunters Language; he that strikes
The Venison first, shall be the Lord of the Feast,
To him the other two shall minister,
And we will fear no poison, which attends
In place of greater State:
Isle meet you in the Valleys.
How hard it is to hide the sparks of Nature?
These Boys know little they are Sons to the King,
Nor Cymbeline dreams that they are alive.
They think they are mine,
And though trained up thus meanly
In the Cave, whereon the Bow their thoughts do hit,
The Roofs of Palaces, and Nature prompts them
In simple and lowe things, to Prince it, much
Beyond the trick of others. This Paladour,
The heir of Cymbeline and Britain, who
The King his Father called Guiderius. Jove,
When on my three-foot stool I sit, and tell
The warlike feats I have done, his spirits fly out
Into my Story: say thus mine Enemy fell,
And thus I set my foot on's neck, even then
The Princely blood flows in his Cheek, he sweats,
Strains his young Nerues, and puts himself in posture
That acts my words. The younger Brother Cadwall,
Once Aruiragus, in as like a figure
Strikes life into my speech, and shows much more
His own conceiving. Hark, the Game is roused,
Oh Cymbeline, Heaven and my Conscience knows
Thou did unjustly banish me: whereon
At three, and two years old, I stole these Babes,
Thinking to bar thee of Succession, as
Thou refts me of my Lands. Euriphile,
Thou was it their Nurse, they took thee for their mother,
And every day do honour to her grave:
My self Belarius, that am Mergan called
They take for Natural Father. The Game is up.
Thou told me when we came frō horse, ye place
Was near at hand: Ne'er longed my Mother so
To see me first, as I have now. Pisanio, Man:
Where is Posthumus? What is in thy mind
That makes thee stare thus? Wherefore breaks that sigh
From the inward of thee? One, but painted thus
Would be interpreted a thing perplexed
Beyond selfe-explication. Put thy self
Into a hauiour of less fear, ere wildness
Vanquish my staider Senses. What's the matter?
Why tender thou that Paper to me, with
A look vntender? If it be Summer News
Smile too't before: if Winterly, thou need
But keep that countenance still. My Husbands hand?
That Drug-damn'd Italy, hath out-craftied him,
And hoe's at some hard point. Speak man, thy Tongue
May take off some extremity, which to read
Would be even mortal to me.
Please you read,
And you shall find me (wretched man) a thing
The most disdained of Fortune.
THy Mistress (Pisanio) hath plaide the Strumpet in my Bed: the Testimonies whereof, lies bleeding in me. I speak not out of weak Surmises, but from proof as strong as my grief, and as certain as I expect my Revenge. Th• 〈◊〉, thou (Pisanio) must act for me, if thy Faith be not tainted with the breach of hers; let thine own hands take away her life: I shall give thee opportunity at Milford Haven. She hath my Letter for the purpose; where, if thou fear to strike, and to make me certain it is done, thou art the Pander to her dishonour, and equally to me disloyal.
What shall I need to draw my Sword, the Paper
Hath cut her throat already? No, it is Slander,
Whose edge is sharper then the Sword, whose tongue
Out-venomes all the Worms of Nyle, whose breath
Rides on the posting winds, and doth belie
All corners of the World. Kings, Queens, and States,
Maids, Matrons, nay the Secrets of the Grave
This viperous slander enters. What cheer, Madam?
False to his Bed? What is it to be false?
To lye in watch there, and to think on him?
To weep twixt clock and clock? If sleep charge Nature,
To break it with a fearful dream of him,
And cry my self awake? That's false to's bed? Is it?
Alas good Lady.
I false? Thy Conscience witness: Iachimo,
Thou did accuse him of Incontinence,
Thou then look'dst like a Villain: now, me thinks
Thy favours good enough. Some Iay of Italy
(Whose mother was her painting) hath betrayed him:
Poor I am stale, a Garment out of fashion,
And for I am richer then to hang by the walls,
I must be ripped: To pieces with me: Oh!
Men's Vows are women's Traitors. All good seeming
By thy revolt (o• Husband) shall be thought
Put on for Villainy; not borne where't grows,
But worn a Bait for Ladies.
Good Madam, hear me.
True honest men being heard, like false Aeneas,
Were in his time thought false: and Synons weeping
Did scandal many a holy tear: took pity
From most true wretchedness. So thou, Posthumus
Wilt lay the Leaven on all proper men;
Goodly, and gallant, shall be false and perjured
From thy great fail: Come Fellow, be thou honest,
Do thou thy Masters bidding. When thou see him,
A little witness my obedience. Look
I draw the Sword my self, take it, and hit
The innocent Mansion of my Love (my Heart:)
Fear not, it is empty of all things, but Grief:
Thy Master is not there, who was indeed
The riches of it. Do his bidding, strike,
Thou may be valiant in a better cause;
But now thou seem a Coward.
Hence vile Instrument,
Thou shalt not damn my hand.
Why, I must dye:
And if I do not by thy hand, thou art
No Servant of thy Masters. Against Selfe-slaughter,
There is a prohibition so Divine,
That cravens my weak hand: Come, heere's my heart:
Something's afoot: Soft, soft, we'll no defence,
Obedient as the Scabbard. What is here,
The Scriptures of the Loyal Leonatus,
All turned to Heresy? Away, away
Corrupters of my Faith, you shall no more
Be Stomachers to my heart: thus may poor Fools
Believe false Teachers: Though those that are betrayed
Do feel the Treason sharply, yet the Traitor
S• 〈◊〉 in worse case of woe. And thou Posthumus,
That did set up my disobedience against the King
My Father, and makes me put into contempt the suites
Of Princely Fellows, shalt hereafter find
It is no act of common passage, but
A strain of Rareness: and I grieve my self,
To think, when thou shalt be disedg'd by her,
That now thou tyreft on, how thy memory
Will then be panged by me. Prithee dispatch,
The Lamb entreats the Butcher. Wher's thy knife?
Thou art too slow to do thy Masters bidding
When I desire it too.
Oh gracious Lady:
Since I received command to do this business,
I have not slept one wink.
Do it, and to bed then.
Isle wake mine eye-balles first.
Wherefore then
Did undertake it? Why hast thou abused
So many Miles, with a pretence? This place?
Mine Action? and thine own? Our Horses labour?
The Time inviting thee? The perturbed Court
For my being absent? whereunto I never
Purpose return. Why hast thou gone so far
To be vn-bent? when thou hast 'ta•e thy stand,
The elected Dear before thee?
But to win time
To loose so bad employment, in the which
I have considered of a course: good Lady
Hear me with patience.
Talk thy tongue weary, speak:
I have heard I am a Strumpet, and mine ear
Therein false struck, can take no greater wound,
Nor tent, to bottom that. But speak.
Then Madam,
I thought you would not back again.
Most like,
Bringing me here to kill me.
Not so neither:
But if I were as wise, as honest, then
My purpose would prove well: it cannot be,
But that my Master is abused. Some Villain,
I, and singular in his Art, hath done you both
This cursed injury.
Some Roman Courtesan?
No, on my life:
Isle give but notice you are dead, and send him
Some bloody sign of it. For it is commanded
I should do so: you shall be mist at Court,
And that will well confirm it.
Why good Fellow,
What shall I do the while? Where bide? How live?
Or in my life, what comfort, when I am
Dead to my Husband?
If you'll back to the Court.
No Court, no Father, nor no more ado
With that harsh, noble, simple nothing:
That Clotten, whose Loue-suite hath been to me
As fearful as a Siege.
If not at Court,
Then not in Britain must you bide.
Where then?
Hath Britain all the Sun that shines? Day? Night?
Are they not but in Britain? In the worlds Volume
Our Britain seems as of it, but not in it:
In a great Poole, a Swannes-nest, prithee think
There's livers out of Britain.
I am most glad
You think of other place: The Ambassador,
Lucius the Roman comes to Milford-Hauen
To morrow. Now, if you could wear a mind
Dark, as your Fortune is, and but disguise
That which t'appeare it self, must not yet be,
But by selfe-danger, you should tread a course
Pretty, and full of view: yea, happily, near
The residence of Posthumus; so no (at least)
That though his Actions were not visible, yet
Report should render him hourly to your ear,
As truly as he moos.
Oh for such means,
Though peril to my modesty, not death on it
I would adventure.
Well then, heere's the point:
You must forget to be a Woman: change
Command, into obedience. Fear, and Niceness
(The Handmaids of all Women, or more truly
Woman it pretty self) into a waggish courage,
Ready in gybes, quicke-answer'd, saucy, and
As quarrellous as the Weasel: Nay, you must
Forget that rarest Treasure of your Cheek,
Exposing it (but oh the harder heart,
Alack no remedy) to the greedy touch
Of common-kissing Titan: and forget
Your laboursome and dainty Trimmes, wherein
You made great Iuno angry.
Nay be brief?
I see into thy end, and am almost
A man already.
First, make your self but like one,
Fore-thinking this. I have already fit
(It is in my Cloak-bag) Doublet, Hat, Hose, all
That answer to them: Would you in their serving,
(And with what imitation you can borrow
From youth of such a season) before Noble Lucius
Present your self, desire his service: tell him
Wherein you're happy; which will make him know,
If that his head have ear in Music, doubtless
With joy he will embrace you: for hoe's Honourable,
And doubling that, most holy. Your means abroad:
You have me rich, and I will never fail
Beginning, nor supplyment.
Thou art all the comfort
The Gods will diet me with. Prithee away,
There's more to be considered: but we'll even
All that good time will give vs. This attempt,
I am Soldier too, and will abide it with
A Princes Courage. Away, I prithee.
Well Madam, we must take a short farewell,
Least being mist, I be suspected of
Your carriage from the Court. My Noble Mistress,
Here is a box, I had it from the Queen,
What's in it is precious: If you are sick at Sea,
Or Stomacke-qualm'd at Land, a Dram of this
Will drive away distemper. To some shade,
And fit you to your Manhood: may the Gods
Direct you to the best.
Amen: I thank thee.
Thus far, and so fare well.
Thanks, Royal Sir:
My Emperor hath wrote, I must from hence,
And am right sorry, that I must report ye
My Masters Enemy.
Our Subjects (Sir)
Will not endure his yoke; and for our self
To show less Sovereignty then they, must needs
Appear vn-Kinglike.
So Sir: I desire of you
A Conduct over Land, to Milford-Hauen.
Madam, all joy befall your Grace, and you.
My Lords, you are appointed for that Office:
The due of Honour, in no point omit:
So farewell Noble Lucius.
Your hand, my Lord.
Receive it friendly: but from this time forth
I wear it as your Enemy.
Sir, the Event
Is yet to name the winner. Fare you well.
Leave not the worthy Lucius, good my Lords
Till he have crossed the Seuern▪ Happiness.
He goes hence frowning: but it honours vs
That we have given him cause.
It is all the better,
Your valiant Britains have their wishes in it.
Lucius hath wrote already to the Emperor
How it goes here. It fits vs therefore ripely
Our Chariots, and our Horsemen be in readiness:
The Powers that he already hath in Galley
Will soon be drawn to head, from whence he moves
His war for Britain.
It is not sleepy business,
But must be looked too speedily, and strongly.
Our expectation that it would be thus
Hath made vs forward. But my gentle Queen,
Where is our Daughter? She hath not appeared
Before the Roman, nor to vs hath tendered
The duty of the day. She look vs like
A thing more made of malice, then of duty,
We have noted it. Call her before vs, for
We have been too slight in sufferance.
Royal Sir,
Since the exile of Posthumus, most retired
Hath her life bin: the Cure whereof, my Lord.
It is time must do. Beseech your Majesty,
Forbear sharpe speeches to her. Shoe's a Lady
So tender of rebukes, that words are stroke;,
And strokes death to her.
Where is she Sir? How
Can her contempt be answered?
Please you Sir,
Her Chambers are all locked, and there's no answer
That will be given to the loud of noise, we make.
My Lord, when last I went to visit her,
She prayed me to excuse her keeping close,
Whereto constrained by her infirmity,
She should that duty leave unpaid to you
Which daily she was bound to proffer: this
She wished me to make known: but our great Court
Made me too blame in memory.
Her doors locked?
Not seen of late? Grant Heavens, that which I
Fear, prove false.
Son, I say, follow the King.
That man of hers, Pisanio, her old Servant
I have not seen these two days.
Go, look after:
Pisanio, thou that stand so for Posthumus,
He hath a Drug of mine: I pray, his absence
Proceed by swallowing that. For he believes
It is a thing most precious. But for her,
Where is she gone? Happily despair hath seized her:
Or winged with fervor of her love, she's flown
To her desired Posthumus: gone she is,
To death, or to dishonour, and my end
Can make good use of either. She being down,
I have the placing of the British Crown.
How now, my Son?
It is certain she is fled:
Go in and cheer the King, he rages, none
Dare come about him.
All the better: may
This night fore-stall him of the coming day.
I love, and hate her: for she's Fair and Royal,
And that she hath all courtly parts more exquisite
Then Lady, Ladies, Woman, from every one
The best she hath, and she of all compounded
Out-selles them all. I love her therefore, but
Disdaining me, and throwing Favours on
The low Posthumus, slanders so her judgment,
That what's else rare, is choked: and in that point
I will conclude to hate her, nay indeed,
To be revenged upon her. For, when Fools shall—
Who is here? What, are you packing sirrah?
Come hither: Ah you precious Pander, Villain,
Where is thy Lady? In a word, or else
Thou art straightway with the Fiends.
Oh, good my Lord.
Where is thy Lady? Or, by Iupiter,
I will not ask again. Close Villain,
Isle have this Secret from thy heart, or rip
Thy heart to find it. Is she with Posthumus?
From whose so many weights of baseness, cannot
A dram of worth be drawn.
Alas, my Lord,
How can she be with him? When was she missed?
He is in Rome▪
Where is she Sir? Come nearer:
No farther halting: satisfy me home,
What is become of her?
Oh, my all-worthy Lord.
All-worthy Villain,
Discover where thy Mistress is, at once,
At the next word: no more of worthy Lord:
Speak, or thy silence on the instant, is
Thy condemnation, and thy death.
Then Sir:
This Paper is the history of my knowledge
Touching her flight.
Let's see it: I will pursue her
Even to Augustus Throne.
Or this, or perish.
She's far enough, and what he learns by this,
May prove his travel, not her danger.
Humh.
Isle write to my Lord she's dead: Oh Imogen,
Safe may thou wander, safe return again.
Sir, is this Letter true?
Sir, as I think.
It is Posthumus hand, I know it. Sirrah, if thou would not be a Villain, but do me true service: under∣go those Employments wherein I should have cause to use thee with a serious industry, that is, what villainy soar I bid thee do to perform it, directly and truly, I would think thee an honest man: thou should neither want my means for thy relief, nor my voice for thy prefer∣meant.
Well, my good Lord.
Wilt thou serve me? For since patiently and constantly thou hast stuck to the bare Fortune of that Beggar Posthumus, thou can not in the course of grati∣tude, but be a diligent follower of mine. Wilt thou serve me?
Sir, I will.
Give me thy hand, heere's my purse. Hast any of thy late Masters Garments in thy possession?
I have (my Lord) at my Lodging, the same Suite he wore, when he took leave of my Lady &amp; Mi∣stress.
The first service thou dost me, fetch that Suite hither, let it be thy first service, go.
I shall my Lord.
Meet thee at Milford-Hauen: (I forgot to ask him one thing, Isle remember't anon:) even there, thou villain Posthumus will I kill thee. I would these Gar∣mints were come. She said upon a time (the bitterness of it, I now belch from my heart) that she held the very Garment of Posthumus, in more respect, then my Noble and natural person; together with the adornment of my Qualities. With that Suite upon my back will I ra∣uish her: first kill him, and in her eyes; there shall she see my valour, which will then be a torment to his contempt. He on the ground, my speech of insulment ended on his dead body, and when my Lust hath dined (which as I say, to vex her, I will execute in the Clothes that she so praised:) to the Court Isle knock her back, foot her home again. She hath despised me reioycingly, and Isle bee merry in my Revenge.
Be those the Garments?
I, my Noble Lord.
How long is it since she went to Milford-Hauen?
She can scarce be there yet.
Bring this Apparel to my Chamber, that is the second thing that I have commanded thee. The third is, that thou wilt be a voluntary Mute to my design. Be but duteous, and true preferment shall render it self to thee. My Revenge is now at Milford, would I had wings to follow it. Come, and be true.
Thou bid me to my loss: for true to thee,
Were to prove false, which I will never bee
To him that is most true. To Milford go▪
And find not her, whom thou pursue. Flow, flow
You Heavenly blessings on her: This Fools speed
Be crossed with slowness; Labour be his me•de.
I see a mans life is a tedious one,
I have tired my self: and for two nights together
Have made the ground my bed. I should be sick,
But that my resolution helps me: Milford,
When from the Mountain top, Pisanio showed thee,
Thou was it within a ken. Oh Jove, I think
Foundations fly the wretched: such I mean,
Where they should be relieved. Two Beggars told me,
I could not miss my way. Will poor Folks lye
That have Afflictions on them, knowing it is
A punishment, or Trial? Yes; no wonder,
When Rich-ones scarce tell true. To lapse in Fullness
Is sorer, then to lye for Need: and Falsehood
Is worse in Kings, then Beggars. My dear Lord,
Thou art one of the false Ones: Now I think on thee,
My hunger's gone; but even before, I was
At point to sink, for Food. But what is this?
Here is a path too't▪ it is some savage hold:
I were best not call; I dare not call: yet Famine
Ere clean it o're-throw Nature, makes it valiant.
Plenty, and Peace breeds Cowards: Hardness ever
Of Hardiness is Mother. Hoe? who's here?
If any thing that's civil, speak: if savage,
Take, or lend. Hoe? No answer? Then Isle enter.
Best draw my Sword; and if mine Enemy
But fear the Sword like me, he will scarcely look on it.
Such a Foe, good Heavens.
You Polidore have proved best Woodman, and
Are Master of the Feast: Cadwall, and I
Will play the Cooke, and Servant, it is our match:
The sweat of industry would dry, and dye
But for the end it works too. Come, our stomachs
Will make what's homely, savoury: Weariness
Can snore upon the Flint, when resty Sloth
Finds the Downe-pillow hard. Now peace be here,
Poor house, that keep thy self.
I am thoroughly weary.
I am weak with toil, yet strong in appetite.
There is cold meat in the Cave, we will browse on that
Whilst what we have killed, be Cooked.
Stay, come not in:
But that it eats our victuals, I should think
Here were a Faiery.
What's the matter, Sir?
By Iupiter an Angel: or if not
An earthly Paragon. Behold Divineness
No elder then a Boy.
Good masters harm me not:
Before I entered here, I called, and thought
To have begged, or bought, what I have took: good troth
I have stolen nought, nor would not, though I had found
Gold strewed in the Floor. Heere's money for my Meat,
I would have left it on the Board, so soon
As I had made my Meal; and parted
With Prayers for the Provider.
Money? Youth.
All Gold and Silver rather turn to dirt,
As it is no better reckoned, but of those
Who worship dirty Gods.
I see you're angry:
Know, if you kill me for my fault, I should
Have dyed, had I not made it.
Whether bound?
To Milford-Hauen.
What's your name?
Fidele Sir: I have a Kinsman, who
Is bound for Italy; he embarked at Milford,
To whom being going, almost spent with hunger,
I am fallen in this offence.
Prithee (fair youth)
Think vs no Churls: nor measure our good minds
By this rude place we live in. Well encountered,
It is almost night, you shall have better cheer
Ere you depart; and thanks to stay, and eat it.
Boys, bid him welcome.
Were you a woman, youth,
I should woo hard, but be your Groom in honesty:
I bid for you, as I do buy.
Isle maked my Comfort
He is a man, Isle love him as my Brother:
And such a welcome as I'd give to him
(After long absence) such is yours. Most welcome:
Be sprightly, for you fall amongst Friends.
Amongst Friends?
If Brothers: would it had bin so, that they
Had bin my Fathers Sons, then had my prize
Bin less, and so more equal ballasting
To thee Posthumus.
He wrings at some distress.
Would I could free't.
Or I, what ere it be,
What pain it cost, what danger: Gods!
Hark Boys.
Great men
That had a Court no bigger then this Cave,
That did attend themselves, and had the virtue
Which their own Conscience sealed them: laying by
That nothing-guift of differing Multitudes
Could not out-peere these twain. Pardon me Gods,
I'd change my sex to be Companion with them,
Since Leonatus false.
It shall be so:
Boys we'll go dress our Hunt. Fair youth come in;
Discourse is heavy, fasting: when we have supped
We'll mannerly demand thee of thy Story,
So far as thou wilt speak it.
Pray draw near.
The Night to the Owl,
And Morn to the Lark less welcome.
Thanks Sir.
I pray draw near.
This is the tenor of the Emperors Writ;
That since the common men are now in Action
Against the Pannonians, and Dalmatians,
And that the Legions now in Galley, are
Full weak to undertake our Wars against
The falne-off Britains, that we do incite
The Gentry to this business. He creates
Lucius Pro-Consull: and to you the Tribunes
For this immediate Levy, he commands
His absolute Commission. Long live Caesar.
Is Lucius General of the Forces?
I.
Remaining now in Galley?
With those Legions
Which I have spoke of, whereunto your levy
Must be suppliant: the words of your Commission
Will tie you to the numbers, and the time
Of their dispatch.
We will discharge our duty.
I am near to the place where they should meet, if Pisanio have mapp'd it truly. How fit his Garments serve me? Why should his Mistress who was made by him
that made the Taylor, not be fit too? The rather (saving reverence of the Word) for it is said a Women's fitness comes by fits: therein I must play the Workman, I dare speak it to my self, for it is not Vainglory for a man, and his Glass, to confer in his own Chamber; I mean, the Lines of my body are as well drawn as his; no less young, more strong, not beneath him in Fortunes, be∣yond him in the advantage of the time, aboue him in Birth, alike conversant in general services, and more re∣markeable in single oppositions; yet this imperseuerant Thing loves him in my despite. What Mortality is? Posthumus, thy head (which now is growing upon thy shoulders) shall within this hour be off, thy Mistress in∣forced, thy Garments cut to pieces before thy face: and all this done, spurn her home to her Father, who may (happily) be a little angry for my so rough usage: but my Mother having power of his testiness, shall turn all in∣to my commendations. My Horse is tied up safe, out Sword, and to a sore purpose: Fortune put them into my hand: This is the very description of their meeting place and the Fellow dares not deceive me.
You are not well: Remain here in the Cave,
We'll come to you after Hunting.
Brother, stay here:
Are we not Brothers?
So man and man should be,
But Clay and Clay, differs in dignity,
Whose dust is both alike. I am very sick,
Go you to Hunting, Isle abide with him.
So sick I am not, yet I am not well:
But not so Citizen a wanton, as
To seem to dye, ere sick: So please you, leave me,
Stick to your Journal course: the breach of Custom,
Is breach of all. I am ill, but your being by me
Cannot amend me. Society, is no comfort
To one not sociable: I am not very sick,
Since I can reason of it: pray you trust me here,
Isle rob none but my self, and let me dye
Stealing so poorly.
I love thee: I have spoke it,
How much the quantity, the weight as much,
As I do love my Father.
What? How? how?
If it be sin to say so (Sir) I yoke me
In my good Brothers fault: I know not why
I love this youth, and I have heard you say,
Loue's reason's, without reason. The Beer at door,
And a demand who is it shall dye, I'd say
My Father, not this youth.
Oh noble strain!
O worthiness of Nature, breed of Greatness!
"Cowards father Cowards, &amp; Base things Sire Base;
"Nature hath Meal, and Bran; Contempt, and Grace.
I'm not their Father, yet who this should bee,
Doth miracle it self, loved before me.
It is the ninth hour of the Morn.
Brother, farewell.
I wish ye sport.
You health.—So please you Sir.
These are kind Creatures.
Gods, what lies I have heard:
Our Courtiers say, ell's savage, but at Court;
Experience, oh thou disprove Report.
The imperious Seas breeds Monsters; for the Dish,
Poor Tributary Rivers, as sweet Fish:
I am sick still, heart-sicke; Pisanio,
Isle now taste of thy Drug.
I could not stir him:
He said he was gentle, but unfortunate;
Dishonestly afflicted, but yet honest.
Thus did he answer me: yet said hereafter,
I might know more.
To the Field, to the Field:
We'll leave you for this time, go in, and rest.
We'll not be long away.
Pray be not sick,
For you must be our Huswife.
Well, or ill.
I am bound to you.
And shall it be ever.
This youth, how ere distressed, appears he hath had
Good Ancestors.
How Angel-like he sings?
But his neat Cookery?
He cut our Roots in Characters,
And sawc'st our Broths, as Iuno had bin sick,
And he her Dieter.
Nobly he yokes
A smiling, with a sigh; as if the sigh
Was that it was, for not being such a Smile:
The Smile, mocking the Sigh, that it would fly
From so divine a Temple, to commix
With winds, that Sailors rail at.
I do note,
That grief and patience rooted in them both,
Mingle their spurs together.
Grow patient,
And let the stinking-Elder (Grief) untwine
His perishing root, with the increasing Vine.
It is great morning. Come away: Who's there?
I cannot find those Runagates, that Villain
Hath mocked me. I am faint.
Those Runagates?
Means he not vs? I partly know him, it is
Cloten, the Son of the Queen. I fear some Ambush:
I saw him not these many years, and yet
I know it is he: We are held as Out-Lawes: Hence.
He is but one: you, and my Brother search
What Companies are near: pray you away,
Let me alone with him.
Soft, what are you
That fly me thus? Some villaine-Mountainers?
I have heard of such. What Slave art thou?
A thing.
More slavish did I ne'er, then answering
A Slave without a knock.
Thou art a Robber,
A Law-breaker, a Villain: yield thee Thief.
To who? to thee? What art thou? Have not I
An arm as big as thine? A heart, as big:
Thy words I grant are bigger: for I wear not
My Dagger in my mouth. Say what thou art:
Why I should yield to thee?
Thou Villain base,
Know me not by my Clothes?
No, nor thy Taylor, Rascal:
Who is thy Grandfather? He made those clothes,
Which (as it seems) make thee.
Thou precious Varlet,
My Taylor made them not.
Hence then, and thank
The man that gave them thee. Thou art some Fool,
I am loath to beat thee.
Thou injurious Thief,
Hear but my name, and tremble.
What's thy name?
Cloten, thou Villain.
Cloten, thou double Villain be thy name,
I cannot tremble at it, were it Toad, or Adder, Spider,
It would move me sooner.
To thy further fear,
Nay, to thy mere Confusion, thou shalt know
I am Son to the Queen.
I am sorry for 't: not seeming
So worthy as thy Birth.
Art not afraid?
Those that I reverence, those I fear: the Wise:
At Fools I laugh: not fear them.
Dye the death:
When I have slain thee with my proper hand,
Isle follow those that even now fled hence:
And on the Gates of Luds-Towne set your heads:
Yield Rustic Mountaineer.
No Companie's abroad?
None in the world: you did mistake him sure.
I cannot tell: Long is it since I saw him,
But Time hath nothing blurred those lines of Favour
Which then he wore: the snatches in his voice,
And burst of speaking were as his: I am absolute
It was very Cloten.
In this place we left them;
I wish my Brother make good time with him,
You say he is so fell.
Being scarce made up,
I mean to man; he had not apprehension
Of roaring terrors: For defect of judgment
Is oft the cause of Fear.
But see thy Brother.
This Cloten was a Fool, an empty purse,
There was no money in it: Not Hercules
Could have knocked out his Brains, for he had none:
Yet I not doing this, the Fool had borne
My head, as I do his.
What hast thou done?
I am perfect what: cut off one Clotens head,
Son to the Queen (after his own report)
Who called me Traitor, Mountaineer, and swore
With his own single hand heeled take vs in,
Displace our heads, where (thanks the Gods) they grow
And set them on Luds-Towne.
We are all undone.
Why, worthy Father, what have we to loose,
But that he swore to take, our Lives? the Law
Protects not vs, then why should we be tender,
To let an arrogant piece of flesh threat vs?
Play Judge, and Executioner, all himself?
For we do fear the Law. What company
Discover you abroad?
No single soul
Can we set eye on: but in all safe reason
He must have some Attendants. Though his Honour
Was nothing but mutation, I, and that
From one bad thing to worse: Not Frenzy,
Not absolute madness could so far have raved
To bring him here alone: although perhaps
It may be heard at Court, that such as wee
Cave here, hunt here, are Out-lawes, and in time
May make some stronger head, the which he hearing,
(As it is like him) might break out, and swear
Heeled fetch vs in, yet is it not probable
To come alone, either he so undertaking,
Or they so suffering: then on good ground we fear,
If we do fear this Body hath a tail
More perilous then the head.
Let Ord'nance
Come as the Gods fore-say it: howsoever,
My Brother hath done well.
I had no mind
To hunt this day: The Boy Fideles sickness
Did make my way long forth.
With his own Sword,
Which he did wave against my throat, I have tan
His head from him: Isle throw 't into the Creek
Behind our Rock, and let it to the Sea,
And tell the Fishes, hoe's the Queens Son, Cloten,
That's all I reek.
I fear twill be revenged:
Would (Polidore) thou had not done 't: though valour
Becomes thee well enough.
Would I had done 't:
So the Revenge alone pursued me: Polidore
I love thee brotherly, but envy much
Thou hast robbed me of this deed: I would Revenges
That possible strength might meet, wold seek vs through
And put vs to our answer.
Well, it is done:
We'll hunt no more to day, nor seek for danger
Where there's no profit. I prithee to our Rock,
You and Fidele play the Cooks: Isle stay
Till hasty Polidore return, and bring him
To dinner presently.
Poor sick Fidele.
Isle willingly to him, to gain his colour,
Il'd let a parish of such Clotens blood,
And praise my self for charity.
Oh thou Goddess,
Thou divine Nature; thou thy self thou blazon
In these two Princely Boys: they are as gentle
As Zephires blowing below the Violet,
Not wagging his sweet head; and yet, as rough
(Their Royal blood enchaf'd) as the rud'st wind,
That by the top doth take the Mountain Pine,
And make him stoop to the Vale. It is wonder
That an invisible instinct should frame them
To Royalty unlearned, Honour untaught,
Civility not seen from other: valour
That wildely grows in them, but yields a crop
As if it had been fow'd: yet still it's strange
What Clotens being here to vs portends,
Or what his death will bring vs.
Whore's my Brother?
I have sent Clotens Clot-pole down the stream,
In Embassy to his Mother; his Bodie's hostage
For his return.
My ingenuous Instrument,
(Hark Polidore) it sounds: but what occasion
Hath Cadwal now to give it motion? Hark.
Is he at home?
He went hence even now.
What does he mean?
Since death of my dearest Mother
It did not speak before. All solemn things
Should answer solemn Accidents. The matter?
Triumphs for nothing, and lamenting Toys,
Is jollity for Apes, and grief for Boys.
Is Cadwall mad?
Look, here he comes,
And brings the dire occasion in his Arms,
Of what we blame him for.
The Bird is dead
That we have made so much on. I had rather
Have skipped from sixteen years of Age, to sixty:
To have turned my leaping time into a Crutch,
Then have seen this.
Oh sweetest, fairest Lily:
My Brother wears thee not the one half so well,
As when thou grow thy self.
Oh Melancholy,
Who ever yet could sound thy bottom? Find
The Ooze, to show what Coast thy sluggish care
Might easilest harbour in. Thou blessed thing,
Jove knows what man thou might have made: but I,
Thou dyed'st a most rare Boy, of Melancholy.
How found you him?
Stark, as you see:
Thus smiling, as some Fly had tickled slumber,
Not as deaths dart being laughed at: his right Cheek
Reposing on a Cushion.
Where?
Of the floor:
His arms thus leagued, I thought he slept, and put
My clouted Brogues from off my feet, whose rudeness
Answered my steps too loud.
Why, he but sleeps:
If he be gone, he will make his Grave, a Bed:
With female Fairies will his Tomb be haunted,
And Worms will not come to thee.
With fairest Flowers
Whilst Summer lasts, and I live here, Fidele,
Isle sweeten thy sad grave: thou shalt not lack
The Flower that's like thy face. Pale-Primrose, nor
The azured Hare-bell, like thy Veins: no, nor
The leaf of Eglantine, whom not to slander,
Out-sweetned not thy breath: the Raddocke would
With Charitable bill (Oh bill sore shaming
Those rich-left-heyres, that let their Fathers lye
Without a Monument) bring thee all this,
Yea, and furred Moss besides. When Flowers are none
To winter-ground thy Coarse—
Prithee have done▪
And do not play in Wench-like words with that
Which is so serious. Let vs bury him,
And not protract with admiration, what
Is now due debt. To the grave.
Say, where shall's lay him?
By good Euriphile, our Mother.
Be it so:
And let vs (Polidore) though now our voices
Have got the mannish crack, sing him to the ground
As once to our Mother: use like note, and words,
Save that Euriphile, must be Fidele.
Cadwall,
I cannot sing: Isle weep, and word it with thee;
For Notes of sorrow, out of tune, are worse
Then Priests, and Phones that lye.
We'll speak it then.
Great griefs I see med'cine the less: For Cloten
Is quite forgot. He was a Queens Son, Boys,
And though he came our Enemy remember
He was paid for that: though mean, and mighty rotting
Together have one dust, yet Reverence
(That Angel of the world) doth make distinction
Of place 'tweene high, and low. Our Foe was Princely,
And though you took his life, as being our Foe,
Yet bury him, as a Prince.
Pray you fetch him hither,
Thersites body is as good as Aiax,
When neither are alive.
If you'll go fetch him,
We'll say our Song the whilst: Brother begin.
Nay Cadwall, we must lay his head to the East,
My Father hath a reason for 't.
It is true.
Come on then, and remove him.
So, begin.
Fear no more the heate of the Sun,
Nor the furious Winters rages,
Thou thy worldly task hast don,
Home art gon, and tan thy wages.
Golden Lads, and Girls all must,
As Chimney-Sweepers come to dust.
Fear no more the frown of the Great,
Thou art past the Tyrants stroke,
Care no more to cloth and eat,
To thee the Reed is as the Oak:
The Sceptre, Learning, Physic must,
All follow this and come to dust.
Fear no more the Lightning flash.
Nor the all-dreaded Thunderstone.
Fear not Slander, Censure rash.
Thou hast finished Joy and m•no.
All Lovers young, all Lovers must,
Consign to thee and come to dust.
No Exorcise•r harm thee,
Nor no witch-craft charm thee.
Ghost vnlaid forbear thee.
Nothing ill come near thee.
Quiet consumation have,
And renowned be thy grave.

Leave •…e a while my Lords and waite for me,
At the black fountain, by Os•…is grove,
•…le walk alone to holy Irus cave,
Talking a little while with him and then return.
Ianthe begone.
Now Irus Let thy minds eternal eye,
Extend the virtue of it past the Sun.
Ah my Cleanthes where art thou become,
But since I saved thy guiltless life from death,
And turned it onelyinto banishment,
Forgive me love, me pity comfort me.
Moister.
Pego.
VVipe your eyes and you had them.
Why Pego.
The Queen is here to see your blindness.
Her Majesty is well come, Heavens preserve,
And send her highness an immortal rain.
Thanks reverent Irus for thy gentle prayer,
Dismiss thy man a while and I will lead thee,
For I have weighty secretes to impart.
Would I were blind that she might lead me.
Irus thy skill to tell the drifts of fate,
Our fortunes and things hid from sensual eyes,
Hath sent me to thee for advertisement.
Where Duke Cle•…nthes lives that was exiled,
This kingdom for attempting me with love,
And offering stain to Ae•…ipts royal bed.
I hope your majesty will pardon me,
I•… Conscience make me utter what I think,
Of that hye love affairs twixt him and you.
I will sweet Jrus being well assured,
That whatsoever thy sharpe wisdoms sees,
In my sad frailty thou w•…llt h•…ue regard,
To my estate and name and keep 〈◊〉 clo•…▪
Of that your highness may be well assured,
Then I am bound madam to tell you this,
That you your self did seek Cl•…nthes love,
And to aspire it, made away his Duchess,
Which he well knowing and affecting her,
Dear as his life denied to satisfy,
That kindness offered twixt •…our self and him.
Therefore did •…ou in rage inform the Duke,
He sought •…our love, and so he 〈◊〉 him.
To true it is grave Irus •…thou ha•…t told,
But for my loves sake which not Gods can rule,
Strike me no more of that wound yet too greene,
But only tell me where Cleanthes is,
That I may follow him in some disguise,
And make him recompense for all his wrong.
Cleanthes is about this City off,
With whom yo•…r majesty shall meet ere long:
And speak with him, if you will vs•… such means,
As you may use for his discovery.
What shall I use then what is in my power,
I will not use for his discovery,
Isle bind the wings of love unto mine arms,
And like a Eagle prying for her pray,
Will overlook the earths round face for him,
Were this sufficient.
Or I will Moorelike learn to swim and dive.
Into the bottom of the Sea for him.
Least being the son of Egypt•… and now set,
Thetis in rage with love would ravish him.
Were this sufficient.
But Madam this must be the likli•…st mean
To seek him out, and have him at your will
Let his true picture through your land be sent.
Opposing great rewards to him that finds him,
And threaten death to them that succour him,
So Isle assure your grace shall meet with him ear long.
Happy and blessed be Irus for his skill
He sweetly plants in my contentious mind,
For which most reverent and religious man,
I give this Jewel to thee richly worth.
A kentall or an h•…ndreth weight of gold,
Bestow it as thou list on some good work,
For well I know thou nothing dost reserve,
Of all thy riches men bestow on thee,
But would thou leave this place and poor mans life,
The count of Aegipt should embrace thy feet,
And Toples honours be bestowed on thee,
I thank your highness for thus raising me,
But in this barrenness I am most renound.
For wisdom and the sight of heavenly things,
Shines not so clear as eathlye vanities.
Most rich is Irus in his poverty
Oh that to find his skill my crown were lost.
None but poor Irus can of riches boast,
Now my Clea•…these I will straight advance
Thy lovely pictures on each monument
About the City and within the land.
Proposing twice five thousand Crowns to him,
That finds him to be tendered by my hands,
And a kind kiss at my imperial lips,
To him that succours him, Isle threaten death,
But he that doth not threaten him shall die,
For who is worthy, life will see him want.
To all his pictures when they be dispersed.
Will I continual pilgrimages make,
As to the saints and Idols I adore,
Where I will offer sighs, and vows, and tears.
And sac•…ifice a hecatomb of beast,
On several alters built where they are placed,
By them shall Ices stature gently stand,
And Isle pretend my Jealous rites to her
But my Cleanthes shall the object bee,
And I will kneel and pray to none but he.
See Earth and Heaven where her Cleanthes is▪
I am Cleanthes and blind Iru•… too,
And more then these, as you shall soon perceive,
Yet but a shepherds son at Memphis borne,
And I will tell you how I got that name,
My Father was a fortune teller and from him I learnt his art,
And knowing to grow great, was to grow rich,
Such money as I got by palmistry,
I put to use and by that means became
To take the shape of Leon. by which name,
I am well known a wealthy Usurer,
And more then this I am two noble men,
Count Harms is another of my names,
And Duke Cleanthes whom the Queen so loves,
For till the time that I may claim the crown,
I mean to spend my time in sports of love,
Which in the sequel you shall plainly see,
And Joy I hope in this my policy.
Oh moister here comes the three wenches now strike it dead for a •…ortune.
These are the nymphs of Alexandria.
So called because there beauties are so rare.
With two of them at once am I in love
Deeply and Equally the third of them,
My silly brother here as much affects,
Whom I have made the Burgomaister of this rich town,
With the great wealth, I have bestowed on him,
All three are maids kept p•…ssing warily,
Yet lately being at their •…others house as I was Leon the rich usurer
I fell in love with them, and there my brother too,
This fitly chances that they have liberty,
To visit me alone: now will I tell their fortunes so,
As may make way to both their loves at once,
The one as I am Leon the rich usurer,
The other as I am the mad brain Count,
And do the best too, for my brothers love,
Thanks good moister brother, but what are they that
Talk with themso long are they wooers trow,
I do not like it, would they would come near.
O those are three servants that attend on them,
Let them alone, let them talk a while.
Tell vs M•…nippus, Druso, and P•…lydor,
Why all our parents gave you three such charge,
To waite on vs and over see vs still,
What do they fear, think you that we would do.
There fear is least you should accompany,
Such as love wanton talk, and dalliance,
Why what is wanton talk.
To •…ell you that were to offend our selves,
And those that have forbidden you should hear it.
Why what is dalliance says my servant then,
You must not know because you must not dally.
How say you by that, well do you keep it from vs, as much as you can, weal desire it neuerlesse I can tell ye,
Lord what strait keepers of poor maids are you,
You are so chaste you are the worse again:
Pray you good servants will you do vs the service,
To leave vs alone a while.
We are commanded not to be from you,
And therefore to lean you alone,
Were to wrong the trust your parents put in vs.
I cry you mercy sir, yet do not stand all on the
Trust our parents puts in you, but put vs in a little to I pray.
Trust vs good servants by our selves a while.
Lets my mastrs and you say the word,
Theyle but to Irus for to know their fortunes,
And hes a holy man all Egypt knows.
Stay not to long, then mistress and content,
Thats my good servant we will straight return.
And you mistress.
And I trusty servant.
Faith then Isle venture my charge among the rest.
A mighty venture you shall be cronicled in Abra∣hams asses,
Catalog of cockscombs for your resolution.
Now the great fool take them all who could have,
Picked out three such lifeless puppies,
Never to venture on their mistresses.
One may see by them it is not meet choice men should have offices,
A pretty moral work it in the sampler of your hart,
But are we by our selves.
I think so unless you have alone in your belly.
Not I God knows I never camewhere they grew yet,
Since we are alone lets talk a little merrily,
Me thinks I long to know what wanton talk and dalliance is
Isle lay my life tic that my mother uses when she and o∣theirs,
Do begin to talk and that she says to me maid,
Get ye hence fall to your needle: what a maid and Idle.
A maid and Idle why maids must be Idle but not an other thing.
then do not name it for I fear tic nought.
For •…esterday I hard Menippus as he was talking,
With my mothers maid and I stood harkening at the cham∣ber door,
Said that, with that word a maid was got with child.
How with the very word.
I mean with that the word seems to express.
Nay if you be so fine you will not name it now,
We are all alone, you are much too nice.
Why let her choose, let vs two name it,
Do then Elimine.
Nay doe you Martia.
Why woman I dare.
Do then I warrant thee.
Isle warrant my self if I list, but come let it alone,
Let vs to Irus for our fortunes.
God save grave Irus.
Welcome beauteous Nymphs.
How know you Irus we are beautiful and cannot see.
Home•…r was blind yet could he best di•…corn,
The shapes of every thing and so may I,
Indeed wee hear your skill can beautify,
Beauty it self, and teach dames how to deck,
Their heads and bodies fittest to their forms,
To their complexions and their countenances.
So can I beateuous Nymphs, and make all eyes,
Sparkle with love fire from your excellence.
How think you we are tyred to tempte men's looks,
Being thus Nimphlike is it not too strange,
It is the better so it doth become.
But that I may disclose to you your sortunes
Tell me first Pego their true faces forms.
Mary •…r this that speaks to you has a face thin like unto water grewell, but yet it would do your hart good if you could see it
I know and see it better then thy self,
The blaze whereof doth turn me to a fire.
Burning mine Entrails with a strong desire.
Why turnst thou from vs Irus tell my fortune.
I wonder at the glory it presents,
To my souls health that sees upon your head,
Acorronet, and at your gracious feet,
Nobles and princes in their highest state,
Which state shall crown your fortune ear you die,
And ear the hart of Heaven, the glorious sun,
Shall quench his roseate fires within the west.
You shall a husband have noble and rich.
Happy Elimine, oh that I might too.
Thanks for this new•…s good Irus but disclose,
The means to this, if it be possible.
When you come home ascend your Fathers tower
If you see a man come walking by,
And looking up to you, descend,
And Issue, for you shall have leave,
And if he woe, you choose him from the world,
Though he seem humorous and want an eye,
Wearing a velvet patch upon the same,
Choose him your husband, and be bl•…st in him,
Isle doe as thou adieu•…sest gentle Irus,
And proving this Isle love thee 〈◊〉 I live.
My fortune now sweet Irus.
What face hath this Nymph Peg•….
Mary sir a face m•…de in form like the ace of hearts.
And well compared for she commands al•… hearts,
Equal in beauty with that other Nymph,
And equally she burns my hart with love,
Say, s•…y sweet Irus what my fortune is,
Thou turnst from me, as when thou did admire.
The hap•…e fortune of Elimine.
So might I well, admiring yours no less.
Then when the light cround monarch of the hea-
Shall quench his fire within the Oceans breast (ue•…s
Rise you and to your fathers garden hie,
There in an arbour doe a banquet s•…,
And if there come a man that of him self,
Sits down and bi•…s you welcome to your feast,
Accept him for he is the richest man,
That Alexandria or Egypt hath,
And soon possessing him with all his wealth,
In little time you shall be 〈◊〉 of him,
Making your second choice amongst mighty kings.
Blessed be thy •…ppes sweet Irus, and that light,
That guides thy bosom with such deep fore sight,
Sleep shall not make a closet for these eyes,
All this succeeding night for hast to rise.
My fortune now sweet Irus, but I faith,
I have some wrong to be the last of all,
For I am old as they, and big enough,
To bear as great a fortune as the best of them,
What face hath this Nymph Pego.
Oh moister what face hath she not, if I should beg a face I would have her face.
But is it to•…nd, and hath it near a blemmish,
A mouth to wide a look too impudent.
Oh master tic without all these, and without al cry.
Round faces and thin skinned are hapieest still.
And unto you fair Nymph.
Shall fortune be exceeding gracious too,
When the next morning therefore you shall rise,
Put in your bosom rosemary time and rue.
And presently stand at your fathers door,
He that shall come offering kindness there,
And crave for favour those same wholesome herbs,
bestow them on him, and if meeting him,
He keep the nuptial Rosemary and time,
And tread the bitter rue beneath his feet,
Choose him your husband a•…d be blessed in him.
I will sweet Irus nothing grieves me now,
But that Elimine this night shall have,
Her happy husband, and I s•…ay till morning.
Nought gr•…ues me Irus but that we are maids.
Kept short of all things and have nought to give thee,
But take our loves and in the wished proof,
Of these high f•…rtunes thou foretellest vs.
Nothing we have shall bee to dear for thee.
we that are sisters Irus by our vow,
Will be of one self blood and thankful mind,
To adore so clear a sight in one so blind.
farewell most beauteous Nymphs your loves to me.
Shall •…ore then gold or any treasure bee,
Now to my wardroppe for my velvet gown, now doth the sport begin,
Come gird this pistol closely to my side,
By which I make men fear my humour still,
And have slain two or three as it were my
When I have done it most advisedly (mood
To rid them as they were my heavy foes,
Now am I known to be the mad brain Count,
Whose humours twice, five summers I have held,
And said at first I came from stately Rome,
Calling my self Count Harms and assuming
The humour of a wild and frantic man,
Careless of what I say or what I doe,
And so such faults as I of purpose doe,
Is buried in my humour and this gown I wear,
In rain or snow or in the hottest summer,
And never go nor ride without a gown,
which humour doth not fit my frencie well,
But hides my persons form from being known,
When I Cleanthes am to be descried,
How now moister brother.
Oh sir you are very well suited. Now M. Burgomaister.
I pray you remember to seize on all Aleantisthenes his goods
His lands and cattels to my proper use,
As I am Leon the rich usurer.
The sun is down and all is forfeited.
It sh•…lb done my noble Count.
And withal sir I pray you forget not your love,
To morrow morning at her fathers door.
Ah my good Count I cannot that forget,
For still to keep my memory in order,
As I am Burgomaister, so love is my recorder.
Now see a morning in an evening rise.
The morning of my love and of my joy,
I will not say of beauty, that were pride,
With in this tower I would I had a torch,
To light like hero my lender heat•…er,
Who shall be my lea•…der let me see,
Rehearse my fortune.
When you see one clad in a velvet gown
And a black patch upon his eye,
A patch, patch that I am, why that may be a patch of cloth,
Of Buckrome, or a fustian cloth, say with a velvet patch,
Upon his eye &amp; so my thoughts may patch up love the better
See where he comes, the Count, what girl a countess,
See, see, he looks as Irus said he should go not away my love,
Isle meet thee straight.
Oh I thank you I am much beholding to you,
I saw her in the tower and now she is come down,
Luck to this patch and to this velvet gown.
How now shall I be troubled with this rude spani∣art now,
One word sweet nymph.
How now sir what are you,
I am s•…gneor Braggadino the Martial spaniardo the aide of Egypt in her present wars, but lesu what art thou that hast the guts of thy brains gript with such famine of knowledge not to know me.
How now sir Isle try the proof of your guts with my pistol if you be so saucy sir.
Oh I know him well it is the rude Count the uncivil Count, the unstayed Count, the bloody Count, the Count of all Counts, better I were to hazard the dissolution of my brave soul against an host of grants then with this loose Count, o∣therwise I could tickle the Count, I faith my noble Count, I doe descend to the craving of pardon, love blinded me I knew thee not.
Oh sir you are but bonaventure not right spanish I perceive but doe you hear sir are you in love.
Surely the sudden glance of this lady Nymph hath supplied my spanish disposition with love that never before dreamed of a women's concauitie.
•… women's conc•…uitie, sblood whats that,
Her hollow dispositon which you see sweet nature
will supply or otherwise stop up in her with solid or firm faith.
Give me thy hand wear lovers both, shall we have her both
No good sweet Count pardon me.
Why then thus it shall be weal strike up a drum, set up a tent, call people together, put crowns a piece lets ri∣s•…e •…or her.
Nor that my honest Count.
Why then thus it shall be, weal woo her both and him she likes best shall lead her home thorough streets holding her by both her hands, with his face towards her, the other shall follow with his back towards her biting of his thumbs, how say thou by this.
It is ridiculous, but I am pleased for upon my life I do kn•…w this the shame wi•…l light on the neck of the Count.
Well to it lets hear thee.
Sweet Nymph a spaniard is compared to the to the great elixir or golden medicine.
What dost thou come upon her with medicines d•…st thou think she is sore.
Nay by thy sweet favour do not interrupt me.
Well sir go forward.
I say a spaniard is like the Philosophers stone.
And I say an other mans stone may bee as good as a Philosophers at all times.
By thy sweet favour.
Well sir go on.
Sweet nymph I love few words you know my intent my humour is in sophistical &amp; plain I am 〈◊〉 borne, my birth speaks for my nature, my nature for your grace, and should you see a whole Battle ranged by my skill you would commit your whole self to my affection, and so sweet nymph I kiss your hand.
To see a whole battle ha ha ha what a jest is that, thou sh•…lt se a wh•…le battle come forth presently of me sa sa sa.
•…ut up thy pistol tic a most dangerous humour in thee.
Oh is that all why see tic up again, now thou shalt
lee Isle come to her in thy humour, sweet lady I love sue•… words, but sweet deeds are the noble sowndes of a noble spaniard, noble by country, noble by valour, noble by birth, my very foot is nobler then the head of another man, upon my life I love, and upon my love •…iue live, and so sweet N•…ph I kiss your hand, why lo here we are both, I am in this hand, and hee is in that handy dandy p•…ickly brandy, which hand will you have.
This hand my Lord if I may have my choice
Come spaniard to your penance bite your thumbs.
Oh base woman.
Sblood no base woman but bite your thumbs quickly.
Honour commands I must do it.
Come on sweet lady give me your hands if you are mine, I am yours, if you take me now at the worst I am the more beholding to you, if I bee not good enough, Isle •…nd what would you more.
It is •…nough my Lord and I am yours.
Since I well know my fortune is to have you
Now must I leave the •…leasant maiden chase,
In hunting savage beasts with Is•…s nymphs,
And take me to a life which I God knows,
Do know no more then how to scale the heavens.
Well Isle teach you fear not you, what signior •…ot bite your thumbs,
Pardon me sir, pardon me.
By Gods blood I will not pardon you therefore bite your thumbs.
By thy sweet let me speak one word with thee, I do not like this humour in thee in pistoling men in this sort, it is a most dangerous and stigmatical humour, for by thy favour tic the most sinest thing of the world for a man to have a most gentlemanlike car•…jig of himself, for otherwise I doe hold thee for the most tall resolute and accomplished gentleman on the face of the earth, hark ye weal meet at Corrucus and weal have a pipe of Tobacco adieu adieu.
Do you hear sir, put your thumbs in your mouth with out any more ado, by the heavens Isle shoot thee through the mouth.
It is base and ridiculous.
Well thou shalt not do it, lend me thy thumbs Isle bite them for thee
Pardon me.
Swoons and you had I would have made such a wo∣full parting betwixt your fingers and your thumb that your spanish fistes should never meet again, in this world will you do it sir.
I will, I will presto and I will follow thee.
Why so oh that we had a noise of musicians to play to this antique as we go, come on sweet lady give me your 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 to Church and be married straight, bear with 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, Isle be slow enough another time I warrant you, come 〈◊〉 questo, questo, spaniola questo.
Advance that picture on this fatal spring,
And Herald speak uttering the kings edict.
Ptolomie the most sacred king of Egypt first of that n•…me, desiring peace and amity with his neighbour princes hath caused this picture of Cleanthes to be set up in all places, proposing great rewards to him that finds him, and threat∣ning death to him that sucours him.
Which Gods forbid, and put it in his mind.
Not so to stomach his unjust exile.
That he convert the fury of his arm,
Against fosaken Egypt taking part,
With those four neighbour kings that threaten him,
And have besieged his most Imperial town.
Now may it please your highness to leave your dis∣contented passions, and take this mornings pride to hunt the Bore.
We have attended on our grace thus far,
Out of the City being glad to hear,
Your highness had abandoned discontent.
And now will bend your self to merriment,
So will I lovely Ianthe come then.
Let vs go call forth sacred Ices Nymphs,
To help vs keep the game in coalesce view,
That to the busy brightness of his eyes.
We may so interuent his shifts to scope.
That giddy with his turning he may fall, 〈◊〉
Slain with our beauties more then sword•… on darts.
Now am I Leon The rich usurer and here according
To the kings command and mine own promise.
I have brought my sword and fix it by the statue,
She set up, by this am I known to be Cleanthes,
Whose sudden sight I now will take upon me,
And cause the nobles to pursue my shadow,
As for my subs•…nce they shall never find,
Till I my self, do bring my self to light.
Cleanthes, Cleanthes, stop Cleanthes, see Cleanthes,
Pursue Cleanthes, follow Cleanthes.
where is Cleanthes, Leon saw thou him.
I why should I else have thus cried out on him,
I saw him even now here did he fix his sword
And not for dastard fear or cowardice,
For know all Egypt •…inges of his renown.
But fearing for his noble service done,
To be rewarded with ingratitude, he fled
From hence fearing to be pursued,
Come on my Lords then let•… follow him
And pursue him to the death.
Oh do not hurt him gentle Citizens,
See how they fly from him whom they pursue.
I am Cleanthes, and whilst I am hear,
In vain they follow for to find him out,
But here comes my love Bright Psamathis,
Whom I love Equally with fair Elimine,
See here she comes as I appointed her.
But I faith mistress is this for a wore.
Not for a wore only my Jaquine,
But a quick speeder girl for this is he,
That all my •…tune runs upon I tell thee,
O dainty mistress send for some more banquet.
No my fine wench this and my self is well.
And let him not sit down like the ox and the ass,
But give God thanks for we are worthy of it though we feet.
Mistress tic true.
And that he may be good,
I conjure him by these three things a cross,
Now let him come he shall be good I warrant ye,
Nay do not fly me gentle Samathis,
Pardon me sir for if I see a man,
I shall so blush still that I warrant you,
I could make white wine claret with my looks,
But do not blush and fly an old mans sight.
From whom if no•… from old men should I fly
From young men rather that can swift pur∣sue,
And then it is some credit to out go them,
Yet though my years would have me old I am not,
But have the gentle Jerk of youth in me,
As fresh as he that hath a maidens chin.
Thus can I bend the stiffness of my limbs,
Thus can I turn and leap and hoise my gate,
Thus can I lift my love as light as ayre,
Now say my Samathis am I old or yo•…g.
I would have my love no•…there old nor young
But in the middle Just between them both.
Fit am I then for matchless Samathis.
And will be bold to sit. For batchlers
Must not be shamefaced when they meet with maids,
Sweet love now let me entreat you sit,
And welcome you to your own banquet here,
Even thus did •…rsu say that he should say,
Then by your leave sir I will sit with you,
Welcome as gold into my treasury,
And now will I drink unto my love.
VViththe same mind that drinking fi•…st began to one another.
And what was that I pray sir.
Isle tell my love the first kind cause of it.
And why tic used as kindness still amongst vs,
If it be used right tic to this end,
When I doe say I drink this love to you,
I mean I drink this to your proper good,
As if I said what health this wine doth work in me,
Shall be employed for you at your command &amp; to your proper use
And this was first the intent of drinking to you.
Tic very pretty is it not Jaquine.
Oh excellent Mistress hes a dainty man.
Now to your use sweet love I drink this wine,
And with a merry hart that makes long life,
Over the cup Isle sing for my loves sake.
Health, fortune, mirth, and wine,
To thee my love divine.
I drink to my dareling,
Give me thy hand sweating.
UUith cup full ever plied,
And •…arts fullneuer dried.
Mine own, mine own dearest sweating.
Oh oh mine own dearest sweating.
What frolic love mirth makes the banquet sweet.
I love it sir as well as you love me.
That is as well as I do love my self,
I will not Joy my treasure but in thee,
And in thy looks Isle count it every hour,
And thy white arms shall be as bands to me,
Wherein are mighty Lordshippes forfeited,
And all the dames of Alexandria,
For their attire shall take there light from thee,
Well sir I drink to you &amp; pray you think
You are as welcome to me as this wine,
Thanks gentle Samathis, but delicious lo•…e,
Hath been the fig I eat before this wine,
Which kills the taste of these delicious cates,
Will you bestow that banquet love on me,
Nay gentle Leon talk no more of love
If you love God or a good countenance,
For I shall quite be out of countenance then,
Love decks the countenance, speriteth the eye,
And tunes the soul in sweetest harmony,
Love then sweet Samathis.
What shall I doe Iaquine.
Faith Mistress take him.
Oh but he hath a great nose.
Tic no matter for his nose, for he is rich.
Leon I love and since tic forth farewell.
Then triumph Leon •…icher in thy love.
Then all the heaps of treasure I possess,
Never was happy Leon rich before,
Nor ever was I covetous till now,
That I see gold so fined in thy hair.
Impart it to my Parents gentle Leon,
And till we meet again at home farewell.
Soon will I talk with them and follow thee,
So now is my desire accomplished.
Now was there ever man so fortunate.
To have his love so sorted to his wish,
The joys of many I 〈◊〉 one enjoy.
Now do I mean to woe them crossly
The one as I am Leon the rich usurer. (both,
The other as I am the mad brain Count.
Which if it take effect, and rightly prove,
Twill be a sport for any emperors love.
Prince of Arcadia lovely Doricles,
Be not discouraged that my daughter here,
Like a well fortified and lofty tower,
I•… so repulsiue and unapt to yield,
The royal siege of your he•…oycke parts,
In her achievement will be more renound,
And with the greater merit is employed.
The beauteous queen my wife her mother here
Was so well mand and yet had never man,
So mayne a rock of chaste and cold disdain.
My Lord what mean ye, go Aspasia,
Send for some Ladeis to go play with you,
At chess, at Billiards, and at other game,
Ianthe attend her.
You take a course my Lord to make her coy,
To urge so much the love of D•…ricles,
And frame a virtue of her wanton hate,
We must persuade her that he loves her not,
But that his services and vows of love,
Are but the gentle complimentes of court,
So would she think that if she would have loud,
She might have won him.
And with that conceit of hardness to be won,
His merits grace will shine more clearly,
In her turning eyes,
Things hard to win with ease makes love •…ited,
And favours won with ease are hardly quited,
Then make as If you loud her not my Lord.
Love that hath built his temple on my brows
Out of his Battlements into my hart,
And seeing me to burn in my desire,
Will be I hope appeased at the last.
Be ruled by me yet, and I warrant you,
She quickly shall believe you love her not,
What shall I doe Madam.
Look not on her so much.
I cannot choose my neck stands never right,
Till it be turned asside and I behold her.
Now trust me such a wry neck•… love was never scene,
But come with me my Lord and Isle instruct you better
So madam I leave you now from our love sports,
To Antistenes and his great •…ute with Le•…n,
See the Burgomaister Antistenes and Leon.
Comes together stay moister Burgomaister.
What reason made you use your office on the
Lord Antistenes seazing on al his movables,
And goods at the suit of Leon.
I will tell your grace the reason of it or any
Thing else for I know you are a wise prince,
And apt to learn.
I thank you for you•… good opinion sir,
But the reason of your office done upon this noble man
And his lands.
The reason why I have put in office or execution,
My authority upon this nobleman consists,
in three principal points or members,
Which indeed are three goodly matters.
I pray you lets hear them.
The first is the credit of this honest man because he is rich.
Why is he honest because he is rich.
Oh I learn that in any case, the next is the forfeit of his assurance and the last I will not trouble your grace with all.
But this it is whereof I most complain unto your grace,
That hau•…ng occasion in your graces service,
To borrow money of this Leon here,
For which I morgagd al my lands and goods
He only did agree that paying him four
thousand pound at the day I should receive
safely, in which now not only falsely he denies▪ (my statute
But that he hath received one penny due,
Which this my friend can witness I repay de,
Upon the stone of Irus the blindeman,
Four thousand pound in Jewels and in gold,
And therefore crave I justice in this case,
Voutchsafe dre•… sovereign an unpartial •…are.
To that I have to say for my 〈◊〉,
He pleads the pay•…ned of four thousand pound,
Upon the stone before blind Irus cave,
To which I answer and do swear by heaven,
He spake with me at the foresaid place,
And promised payment offoure thousand pound,
If I would let him have his statue•…es in,
And take other assurance for another thousand,
Some three months to come or thereabouts.
Which I refusing he repayed me none,
But parted in a rage and card not for me.
Oh monstrous who ever hard the like.
My Lord I will be sworn he paid him,
On poor Irus stone four thousand pound,
Which I did help to tender and hast thou
A hellish conscience and such a brazen forehead,
To deny it against my witness,
And his noble word.
Sir against your witness and his noble word,
I plead mine own and one as good as his,
That then was present at our whole conference.
My Lord there was not any but our selves,
But who was it that thou affirmst was there,
Count Harms good my Lord a man
Well known though he be humorous to be ho•…orable,
And will he say it.
He will my gracious Lord I am well assured,
And him will I send hither presently,
Entreating your gr•…ious favour if the impediment,
Of a late sickness cause me not return,
For I am passing ill.
Well send him hither and it shall suffi•….
I will my gracious Lord •…nd stand
To any censure passing willingly,
Your highness shall set down or command,
VVorshipfull moister Burg•…moister your officer,
To see performed betwixt vs.
We Thank you heartily, alas poor soul,
How sick he is.
Truly I cannot choose but pity him,
In that he loves your gracious officers,
Oh I thank you sir.
King by your leave, and yet I need not ask leave,
Because I am sent for if not Isle begone again.
without leave, say am I sent for yea or no,
You are to witness twixt Antistenes and wealthy Leon.
I know the matter and I come from that old miser
Leon, who is suddenly fallen sick of a knaves evil,
Which of you are troubled with that disease masters.
Well say what you know of the matter, betwixt them.
Then thus I say my Lord, Antistenes came,
To the stone of the blind fool Irus,
That day when four thousand pounds were to be paid,
Where he made proffer of so much money if Leon would re∣turn the mortgage of his lands, and take assurance for another thousand to be paid I trow some three months to come or there about, which Leon like an old churl as hee was most vncourteously refused: my Lord Antistenes as he might very well departed in a rage but if it had been to me I would have pistoled him I faith.
But you are wondrously deceived my Lord.
And was not by when he and we did talk.
Swoons th•…n I say you are deceived my Lord,
For I was by now by my honour and by all the gods.
Then you stood close my Lord unseen to any,
Why I stood close to you and seen of all, and if You think I am too mad a fellow to witness such a weighty piece of work the holy beggar shall perform as much, For he was by at our whole conference.
But say Count Harms was the beggar by.
I say he was and he shall say he was.
But he is now they say locked in his ca•…e,
Fasting and praying talking with the Gods,
And hath an Iron door twixt him and you,
How will you then come at him,
Isle fetch him from his cave in spite of all his Gods and Iron do•…es, or beat him bli•…de when as I doe catch him next, farewell my Lords you have done with me, Isle send the beggar presently for I am now riding to Corrucus.
I know not what to think in these affairs
I cannot well condemn you my Lord,
And your s•…fficient witness being a gentleman,
Nor yet the other two, both men of credit,
Though in his kind this Count be humorous,
But stay we shall here straight what Irus will depose,
Oh who disturbs me in my holy prayers,
Oh that the king were by that he might here,
What thundering there is at my farther door,
Oh how the good of Aegipt is disturbed in my devotion.
I am here Irus and it was Count He•…mes.
That was so rude to Interrupt thy prayers,
But I suppose the end of thy repair,
Being so weighty could not have displeased,
For on thy witness doth d•…pend the living
Of Lord Antistenes, who doth affirm,
That three days past he tendered at thy stone,
Four thousand pounds to Leon, and desired
His mortgage quited which he promising
On such assurance, more as he proposed,
Received at that time his four thousand pounds.
I then was in the hearing of them both.
But hard no penny tendered, only proposed
By Lord Antistenes, if he would bring him in,
His mortgage and take assurance for another thousand
Some three months to come or there abouts,
Which Leon most vncourteously refused,
My Lord was angry and I hard no more,
And thus must I crave pardon of your grace.
Farewell grave I•…s.
Gods are become oppressors of the right.
Never had right so violent a wrong.
For let the thunder strike me into hell.
If what I have reported be not true,
This holy man no doubt speaks what he hard
And I am sorry for Antistenes.
But Isle relieve your lowe estate my Lord,
And for your service done me guerdon you,
Moister Burgoma•…ster let the Lord have liberty,
And I will answer Leon what is due.
Soft Mistress Burgomaister, pray you stay, your hart is
greater then your parson far or your state either, doe we not
know ye trow, what woman you are but a Burgomaisters wife,
And he no wiser then his neighbours ney•…her,
Give me the place acording to my calling.
What skill for places, do we not all call sisters,
No by my faith I am a countess now,
I should have one to go before me bare,
And say stand by there to the best of them,
And one to come behind and bear my train,
Because my hands must not be put unto it.
My husband is a Lord and past a Lord,
And past a Lord what is that past I pray,
Why hes a what you calt.
A what you call it can you not name it.
I think I must not name it.
And why so I pray.
because it comes so near a thing that I know,
Oh he is a Count that is an Earl.
And yet he is not known to have much land.
Why therefore he is an unknown man.
I but my husband is the kings officer.
I but my husband is able to 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 yours,
You say husband, I may say 〈◊〉 Lord.
And me thinks husband is worth ten o•… Lord.
Indeed I love my Lord to call me 〈◊〉,
Better then Madam yet doe I not mean•…,
To lose my Ladies, titles at your hands,
I may for curtsy and to be termed,
A gentle Lady call you sisters still,
But you must say and please your Ladyship,
Tic thus and so, and as your honour 〈◊〉,
Yet shall my husband call me wife like•… yours,
For why made god the husband and the wife,
But that those terms should please vs more then others
New fashion terms I like not for a man,
To call his wife cony, forsooth, and Lamb,
And Pork, and Mutton, he as well may say,
Well Madam then and please your Ladyship,
What gowns and head tyres will your honour wear.
Twenty are making for me head tyres and gowns,
Head tyres enchased in order like the stars,
Which perfect great and fine cut precious stones,
One hath bright Ariadnes Crown in it,
Even in the figure it presents in heaven,
Another hath the fingers of Diana,
And Berenices ever burning hair,
An other hath the bright Andre•…mica,
With both her silver wristes bound to a rock,
And Perseus that did lose her and save her life,
All set in number and in perfect form,
Even like the Asterismes fixed in heaven,
And even as you may see in Moon shine nights,
The Moon and Stars reflecting on their streams
So from my head shall you see stars take beams,
Oh brave God willing I will have the like.
And so will I by Gods grace if I live.
Come up to supper it will become the house wonder∣full well
Well if my husband will not, let him not loke for one good look of me.
Nor mine I swear.
Isle ask my husband when I am with child,
And then I know I shall be sped I faith.
But every pleasure hath a payne they say
My husband lies each other night abroad,
and so d•…th mine which I like but little,
Well time I hope and change of company,
Will teach vs somewhat to bear out the absence,
I know not what to say,
My husband makes as if each other night he had occasion,
To ride from home at home serves not his turn,
To mygood turn it, cupped I beseech you,
Now will I try to make my self the Count.
An arrant Cuckold and a witto•… too.
Now may I chance to prove a cunning man,
And tell my mistress where mymaister haunts,
Bright Nymph I come in name of all the world,
That now sustains dead winter in the spring,
To have a graces from thy summer darted,
Thy love sweet•…soul is all that I desire,
To make a general summer in this hart,
Where winters duble wrath hath t•…nest.
How dare you Leon thus solicit me,
Where if the Count my husband should come now,
And see you courting you were sure to die.
Oh but he is safe, for at my house,
Booted and spurt and in his velvet gown,
He took his horse and rode unto Corrucus,
And therefore beauteous Lady make•… not strange,
To take a •…nd and add un to thy Joys,
O•… hap•… wedlock: the end of every act,
Is to inc•…se con•…ned and renown,
Both which my love: shall amplye joy in you,
How can •…own ensue an •…ct of shame,
No ac•… hath any shame within itself,
But in the knowledge and ascription.
Of the base world from whom shall this be kept,
As in a labyrinth or a brazen tower.
But virtues sole regard must hold me back.
The virtue of each thing is in the praise,
And I will rea•… thy praises to the skies,
Out of my treasury choose the choice of gold,
Till thou find some matching thy hair in brightness,
But that will never, be so choose thou ever.
Out of my Jewelry choose thy choice of Diamonds▪
Till thou find some as bright some as thine eyes,
But that will never be, so choose thou ever,
Choose Rubies out until thou match thy lips,
Pearl till thy teeth, and Ivory till thy skin,
Be matched in witness but that will never bee.
Nor never shall my treasury have end,
Till on there beauties Ladies loath to spend,
But that will never be so choose thou ever.
Now what a gods name would this vain man have,
Do you not shame to tempt a woman thus,
I know not what to say nor what to doe,
He would have me doe that I fear I should not,
Some thing it is he seeks that he thinks good,
And me thinks he should be more wise then I,
I am a foolish girl though I be married
And know not what to doe, the Gods doe know.
Are you content sweet love to grant me love,
and what then sir.
To grant me lodging in your house this night,
I think the man be weary of his life,
Know you the Count my husband.
Marvelous well and am•…assured of him,
Faith that you •…re as sure as I my self,
So you did talk of gold and Diamonds,
I and gold and Diamonds shall my sweet love have,
Well Isle not bid you sir but if you come,
At your own peril for Isle wash my hands.
A plague of all sanguine simpliciti
But do you hear sir pray you do not think that I gran∣ted you.
No I warrant you, Isle have no such thought. (in any case
Oh this is old excellent.
Now who can desire better sport.
This night my other wife must lie alone,
And next night this wife must doe the like.
Now will I woe the other as the Count▪
Which if she grant and they do break their troth,
Isle make my self a cuckold twixt them both.
Isle follow him until he take the earth, and then isle leave him.
Now if my husband be not all alone,
He is from home and hath left me alone,
So I must learn to lie, as children go,
All alone, all alone, which lesson now.
I am able to bear a child is worse to me then when I was a child
The moral this strength without a health a disadvantage is.
Mistress what will you say if I can tel you where my moister is,
Where Druso I pray thee.
Even close with the young countess I faith.
Out on her strumpet doth she brag so much,
Of her great Count, and glad to take my husband
Hence comes her head tyres and her fey•… gowns,
Her train borne up and a man bare before her,
Was this my fortune that should be so good,
I faith you beggar you, you old false knave,
You holy v•…e you prophetic ass,
Know you no better what shall come to pass,
Isle be revenged I faith, I faith Isle be revenged.
Oh Irus shall thy long approved skill,
Fail in my fortunes only, when shall I meet,
With my Cleanthes what a world of time,
Is it for me to lie as in a sound,
Without my life Cleanthes, can it be,
That I shall ever entertain again,
Having the habit of cold death in me,
My life Cleanthes.
Let me come in you knaves, I say let me come in,
Sir, we are set to guard this place as our lives and None without a warrant from the King or the Queen must enter here.
Swoundes tell not me of your warrants, let me come in I say,
My Lord we are commanded to keep out all co∣mers, because of the branch wherein the kings life remains,
Let me come in you knaves, how dare you keep meout, it was my gown to a mantle of rug, I had not put you all to the pistol.
Shall we be troubled now with this rude Count
How now Queen what art thou doing, passioning over the picture of Cleant•… I am sure for I know thou love him,
VVhats that you traitor.
No traitor neither but a true friend to you, for had Ibene otherwise I should have dis•…lost the secret talk thou had with Cleanthes in the arbour, the night before he was ba∣nished, whilst I stood close and hard all.
The man is mad chains and a whip for him.
Be patient my wench and Isle tell th•… the very words, oh my Cleanthes, love me, pity me, hate me not for love, and it is not lust hath made me thus importunate, for then there are men enough besides Cl•…es, go to tel me were not these your words, &amp; I like no traitor to you but a true•…ie friend now by this pistol which is Gods angel I never uttered them till now
I spake them not but had you been so bad,
As some men are you might have said as much,
By fi•…s only therefore I must needs,
Think much the better of you to conceal it,
Oh your a cunning wench and am not I •… mad slave to have such virtue as s•…resic in me and none never looked •…or any such thing at my hands, and here is a branch forsooth of your little son turned to a Mandracke tree, by Hella the sor∣ceresse.
Tic true and kills me to remember it.
Tut tut remember it and be wise thou would have Cleanthes, come again would thou not,
The king is so advised to give him death.
The King, come come tic you rule the King now would any wise woman in the world be so hungerstarued for a m•…n and not use the means to have him, think thou Clean∣these will come again to have his head chopped of so soon as he comes, but had you plucked up this branch wherein the King thy husbands life consists and burnt it in the fire, his old beard would have stunckefort in the grave ere this, and then thou should have seen whether Cleanthes would have come unto thee or no•….
Oh excreable counsel.
Go to tic good counsel, take the grace of God be∣fore your eyes, and follow it to it wench corragio, I know I have gotten thee with child of a desire, and thou longst but for a knife to let it out, hold there tic serve God and be thank∣full, now you knaves will you let me come out trow.
Please your Lordship to bestow something on vs for we are poor knaves.
Hark you be even knaves still, and if you be poor long your foolish knaves, and so Isle leave you.
Nay swoons my Lord no knaves neither.
Then he was a known that told me so, what dost thou tell me that.
This serpents counsel stings me to the hart.
Mounts to my brain and binds my prince of sense.
My voluntary motion and my life,
Sitting it self triumphing in there thrones,
And that doth force my hand to take this knife,
That bows my knees and sets me by thy branch,
Oh my diones oh my only son,
Can thou now feel the rigour of a knife,
No thou art senseless and Isle cut thee up,
Isle shroud thee in my bosom safe from storms,
And trust no more my trustless guard with thee,
Come then return unto thy mothers arms, and when I
pull thee forth to scrue the fire, turn thy self wholly into a burning tongue, in voking furies and infernal death, to cool thy torments with thy fathers breath.
Now madam countess do you make account.
To take up husbands by your countishippe.
Have you the broad seal for i•…, are you so hye, and stoop,
To one so lowe as is my husband,
Hence come your headtyres and your costly gowns,
Your train borne up and a man bare before you,
Now sye on pride when woman go thous naked.
I ever though•… that pride would have a fall
But little thought it would have such a fall.
What fall I pray you.
There you lay last, forsooth there you lay last.
Be not so angry woman you are deceived
I know I am deceived for thou deceiuedst me,
Thou might as well have pict my purse I tell thee,
Oh would my mother say, when you have a husband.
Keep to him only but now one may see,
How horrible a thing it is to change,
Because it angers one so ho•…bly,
You must have Ushers to make way be•…e you,
The dame is mad, Isle stay no longer with her.
Well mad•… short heals Isle be even withyou,
See where the mad brain Count her husband comes▪
I will begone.
Hear you Usurers wife stay, a plague on you stay, whither go you so fa•…, why did I ever hurt any of your sex yet.
Why no my Lord.
Why no my Lord, why the devil do you tu•… tail when you should not, when you should you will not be half so hasty, a •…n must love you, woe you, spend upon you and the d•…ll of one of you is worthy to kiss the he•… of
my riding gown here.
Is this your riding gown my Lord.
Tic no matter what it is, talk not to me, what the d•…ll did I mean to call thee back again,
Why, my Lord I mean not to trouble you,
Go to stay I say, tic against my will that I use you so kindly I can tell you.
Why you may ch•…se my Lord.
I but I cannot choose, there you lie now, tic love for∣so•…th that Entails me to you, for i•… it had not been for love, I had not been here now, for the Gods do know I hold thee dearer then the Poungranet of mine eye, and thats better by three pence then the apple of mine eye.
My Lord I am sorry for your heaviness.
Nay tic no matter I am not the first ass that hath borne Cupids treasury.
My Lord tic enough to make an ass wise to bear tree∣s•….
Why then be you t•…at wi•… ass, and bear me for
I have some treasure •…ut me will you love me.
Love you my Lord it is strange you will ask it.
I am not the first hath desired you▪
Nor you shall not be the last I wi•… refuse.
Nor are you the fairest I have seen,
Nor the foulest you hau•… loud.
Nor the fittest to be beloved.
Nor the unfittest to hate.
Doe and you dare but sir and thou wilt not love,
I pray thee be proud
Why so my Lord.
Because I would have thee fall, for pride must have a fall.
Do you delight in my fall so much.
As much as in mine own rising I faith, but do not you think it strange that I doe love you, for before I did love you, Cupped pin•…knight me a spanish leather Jerkin with shooting at me, and made it so •…ull of holes that I was fain to leave it of, and this loss have I had for your sake.
My Lord Isle bestow an old Jerkin on you,
Nay that shall not serve your turn, for I have had a greater loss then that, I lost my left eye •…or your sake.
I do not think so.
I but Isle tell you how as I was hunting in the park, I saw Cupped shooting a cockhye into your face, and gazing af∣la his arrow it fell into mine eye.
A pretty fiction.
I but I find this no fiction, and you shall make me amends with love or by this patch of mine eye, and the patch thou wotest where I will swear to all the City I have lain with thee▪
I hope your Lordship will not doe me that wrong.
Then do you me right and let me lie with you, I have made the bottle nosed knave your husband so drunk that he is not able to stand go get you home Isle follow you.
Why my Lord what will you do there.
Go to make no more questions but say I shall bee welcome or by mine honour Isle doe as I say, otherwise be as se∣cret as death.
Twenty to one he will, well my Lord if you come you come.
Oh I thank you heartily, oh exellent or never trust me.
Madam your honour is come somewhat to soon.
Why so Menippus.
Had you stayed never so little longer you should have met my Lord coming out of Leons ••use and out of his movables,
How out of his movables.
Even in plain troth, I see him woe her, win her, and went in with her.
Now of mine honour I will be revenged fetch me the Burgomaister Menippus Isle have them both whipped about the town.
Nay madam you must not dshonor him so,
What shall mine honour doe then.
Do but tongue•… whip him madam and care not,
And so I leave him to the mercy of your tongue,
My tongue shall have hell and no mercy in it
Excellent music exellent m•…sick.
And the Devil take the Instrument,
What art thou so ny.
I and it were a good deed to be a little near too, you make a Count ass of me indeed, as if I were too little for you, but bigness is my fault unless I were a little better used at your hands.
Why thou wilt be to perfect if I should use thee much for use makes perfitnesse.
I but I cannot be too perfect and the•…fore Isle spoil her perfections that helps to spoil mine I warrant her.
Why may not I lie with her as well as thou lay with her husband.
I defy you and all the world that can say black is mine eye.
I think so indeed, for thine eye is gray, but thou did lye with him by that same token he gave thee a carknet, and thou toldst me that thy mother sent it thee, thou did promise to banquet him when I was next abroad, thou did say he could not be so old as he made himself to be, thou d•…dst say it was pity of his nose, for he would have been a fine man else, and that God did well to make him a rich man, for a was a good man too, and these tokens I think are suffi∣cient, •…or these a told me with his own mouth.
He lied like an old knave as he was and that he shall know the next time these lips open in faith, oh wicked periurd man would a d•…sclose my secretes I faith what wo∣man would trust any man a live with her honesty.
Ha ha ha, I have s•…ned her in a pelting ch•…fe,
But Isle follow her and make her mad with anger.
Thus have we trod the sandy vales of Egypt,
Adjoining to the plains of Alexan•…ria,
Where proud king `〈◊〉 keeps his refidence,
Securely trusting to his prophesies,
Which hath foretold him many years ago,
That if the young Arcadian Doricles,
Should link in marriage with his lovely daughter.
He then should conquer all our bordering 〈◊〉,
And make vs subject to his tyranny.
Trusting to his fond fantastic dreams,
He hath exiled the warlike Duke Cleanthes.
Whose name was terror to our valiant troops.
Cleanthes exiled gives vs easy way,
To our attempts where had he stayed,
And been afreind to him, yet should he not
Escape subjection.
We will divide his kingdom twixt vs four,
And reeve from him his four chief ornaments,
And for to grieve his aged mind the more,
He shall b•… kept in lasting servitude.
So to fulfil what fates to him assigned,
Come let vs march and brave him at the walls,
If Porus live to wield his martial sword,
His City walls shall not preserve him safe,
But he shall dye by Porus and his friends.
Sweet madam grant me once a cheerful look
To glad my dying hart with sorrow kilt,
Your father hath resignd his free consent.
You bound by duty to obey his will,
Nay rather let him hail me to my de•…th
Then against my will constrain me match my self.
Dye thou vile wretch and live Aspatia,
〈◊〉 now I hard thy father 〈◊〉
With words that still do tingle in mine 〈◊〉,
〈◊〉 him heir to Alexandria,
Tic time •…or me to stir when such young boys,
Shall have their weak necks over poisd with crowns
Which must become resolved champions,
That for a crowns exchange will sell their souls, He kills hi•….
Wicked Count Harms for this monstrous 〈◊〉,
Egypt will hate thee. and thou sure must dye,
Then hye thee to the hills beyond the Aipes,
Fly tovnknowne and unfrequented climes,
Some des ert place that never saw the sun,
For if the king or any of his friends,
Shall find Count Harms thou art surely dead.
Isle fly no more then doth a settled rock,
No more then mountains or the steadfast powles,
But come sweet love if thou wilt come with me,
We two will live amongst the shadowy groves,
And we will sit like shepherds on a hill,
And with our heavenly voices tice the trees,
To echo sweetly to our 〈◊〉 tunes.
Fls will I angle in the running brookes,
Seasoning our toils with kiss, on the banks,
Sometime Isle dive into the murmerrng springes,
And fetch thee stones to hang about thy neck,
Which by thy splendour will be turned to pearl,
Say fair Aspasia wilt thou walk with me.
No bloody Count but I will clear my self,
And tell thy murders to the amassed court.
Nay if thou wilt not choose you peevish girl
Thou can not say but thou were offered fair,
But here m•…st end Count 〈◊〉 strange disguise,
My velvet gown my pistol and this patch,
No more must hide me in the counts attire,
Now will I turn my gown to Usurers Cotes,
And thus appear unto the world no more,
•…arewell Aspasia.
Go wretched villain hide thy hated head,
Where never heavens light may shine on thee,
Whose there, Come forth for here is murder done,
Murder Murder of good prince Doricles.
Who calls out murder Lady was it you.
As I was walking in the pleasant weeds,
With Doricles the young Arcadian prince,
rushed in Count Harms and in desperate words,
Hath slain this prince.
A baleful deed pursue the murderer,
And tell the King of this foul accident
Oh tell no more in stead of tears,
M•… beating hart dissolves in drops of blood,
And from mine eyes that stares upon this corse.
Leaps out my soul and on it I will die,
Oh Doricles oh dear Arse•… prince,
The bulwark and supporter of my life.
That by decree of fates was promised,
To add four neighbour kingdoms to my crown,
And shield me •…rome a most abhorred death,
Now shall my kingdom leave me with my life,
And suddenly look for some monstrous fate,
Shall fall like thunder on my wretched state.
Arm arm my Lord, my Lords to instant arms,
Four mighty kings are landed in thy coast,
And threaten death and ruin to thy land,
Black 〈◊〉 the 〈◊〉 king,
Comes marching first with twenty thousand men,
Next Rhesus king of sweet Arabia,
In warlike manner marches after him,
In equal number and in battle ray,
Next B•…n king of rich Phasiaca,
And sterne Bebritius of Bebritia,
With each of them full twenty thousand strong
All which hath vowed the death, of Ptolomy, and thus they he∣there bend their speedy feet.
How suddenly is weather over cast,
How is the face of peaceful Egypt changed,
Like as the smiling flowers aboue the ground,
By keenest edge of E•…ras breath is cut.
To arms my Lord and gather up your strength,
Your bands in Memphis and in Caspia,
Joined with your power of Alexandria,
Will double all the forces of these kings,
All shall be done we may mean while,
Bury the body of this slaughtered prince,
Least with the view my senses follow his,
Cursed be his hand that wrought the damned deed,
Cold and uncovered may his body lye.
Let stotmie hail and thunder beat on him
And every bird and beast run over him,
That robbed poor Ptolomy of such a hope,
Pursue the desperate Count that murdered him,
A thousand kingdoms shall not save his life
A miracle a miracle, a dreadful miracle.
What miracle, oh what will heavens do more,
To punish Egypt and her haplesse king,
As I was walking through the Serian groves
I saw the desperate Count the murderer,
Of good prince Do•…isles as I hear say,
Fly through the deserts to the mimphick shades
Where hell to interrupt his passage thither,
Raving beneath the ground work of the earth
As if ten thousand vapours burst in her,
Severed her womb and swallowed quick,
The miserable Count.
Just are the heavens in his most dreadful end,
But come my Lords let vs to instant arms,
To drive away more mischeiefes from our land.
So get you gone and p•…each all with him,
Now shall you know what want you have of me,
Now will I gather up my sommes of money,
And of my creditors borrow what I can,
Because as Leon Isle be seen no more,
This day they promised for to meet me here,
And here comes some of them.
My master sir your friend Calatius, Hath sent you sir your five hundredth crowns for the rich Jewel that he bought of you. I thank him heartily, this Jewel of so many thousand crowns The Queen of Egypt did bestow on me, when that I told her in poor Jrus shape where her Cleanthes was, but soft who hau•… we here.
Druso the Italian Merchant here by me,
Hath sent you sir in Diamonds and in Pearls,
So much as mounts to five thousand crowns,
A•…d craves no more assurance but your word,
Theres my bill and thank thy moister he shall have more then word.
Never shall he nor they see this again,
Nor me neither as I am this present man,
This with the rest I have will make a pretty sum
With this will I employ •…e in these wars,
Now will I take on me the form and shape,
Of Duke Cleanthes, but what intends this alarm▪
Where may I seek to find Cle•…these out,
That martial prince whom Ptolomy unkind,
Hath banished from out the Egyptian Land,
Our warlike troops are scattered and over throne,
And his dear friends Acatos and Acanthes,
Lie in the field besmired in their •…loots,
Isle run through al these groves to find him out.
My sweet Acates and Acanthes slain,
Grief to my hart and sorrow to my soul,
Then rouse thy self Cleanthes and revenge.
Their guiltless blood on these base miscreants
Oh let the cankered trumpet of the deep,
Be rattled out and ring into their ears,
The dire revenge Cleanthes will inflict,
One these four Kings and all there accomplices,
Thus have you strove in vain against those Gods,
That rescues Egypt in Cleanthes arms,
Come yield your crowns and homages to me,
Though Ptolomie is dead yet I survive,
Elect and chosen by the pears to scourge,
The vile presumption of your hated lives,
Then yield as vanquished unto Aegypts king.
First by thy valour and the strength of arms,
Porus the wealthy Ethiopian king,
Doth yield his crown and homage unto thee,
Swearing by all my Gods whom I adore,
To honour Duke Cleanthes whilst he live,
And in his aid with twenty thousand men,
Will always march against whom thou meanst to fight,
Bion whose neck was never forced to bow
Doth yield him captive to thy warlike sword,
Command what so thou list, we will perform,
And all my power shall march at thy command.
Rhesus doth yield his crown and dignity,
To great Cleanthes Aegyptes only strength,
For if Cleanthes lives, who ever lived,
More likelier to be monarch of the world,
Then here accept my vow•… allegiance,
Which as the rest I render •…nto thee.
So saith Bebritius of 〈◊〉.
And lays his crown and homage at thy feet,
Hold take your crowns again and keep your other•… and fealties to me,
So shall you live as free as here to foe•…e
And near hereafter stoup to conquest more.
Here comes the two widows of the beggar and the king, little know they that both their husbands are turned in∣to one king, there would be old st•…iuing who should bee Queen I faith.
Pity dread sovereign.
Pity gracious Lord.
What are your suits.
I the poor countess and the widow left,
Of late Count Harms having all my goods,
seazd to our late kings use for murder done,
Of young prince Dorules humbly pray your grace,
I may have somewhat to maintain my state,
And this poor bu•… then which I go withal.
The haplesse Infant of a haplesse father.
And I my Lord humbly entreat your grace.
That where my husband Leon is deceased,
And left me much in debt, his creditors
Having seized all I have into their hands,
And turned me with this haplesse burden here,
Into the streets your highness will descend,
To my relief by some convenient order.
Poor souls I most extremely pity them,
But say is Leon dead,
Men say my Lord he cast his desperate body,
From Thalexandrian tower into the sea.
Who saw the sight, or gave out this report,
You moister Burgomaister.
I did my gracious Lord.
So I devised indeed that he should say,
That none should never look for Leon more
But these my widows here must not be left,
unto the mercy of the needy world,
Nor mine own Issue that they go withal,
Have such base fortunes and there fire so great,
VVidowes in pity of your widowhood,
And untimely ends of both your husbands,
The slaughter of the Count your husband ma∣dam,
Shall be remitted▪ and your self enjoy,
The utmost of the living he possessed,
So will I pay your husband Leons debt,
And both shall live fitting there wonted states,
Kings in there mercy come most near the Gods,
And can no better show it then in ruth,
Of widows and of children fatherless,
My self will therefore be to both your births,
A careful father in there bringing up.
The Gods for ever bless your majesty,
But tell me were your husbands such bad men,
That every way they did deserve such ends,
Mine was a husband to my hearts content.
But that he used the privilege of men.
What privilege of men,
To take some other love besides his wife
Which men think by their custom they may do,
Although their wives be strictly bound to them.
With whom suspectyou he was great with all.
With this poor widow here the world supposes.
So thinks the world my husband was with you.
Fair dames what will you say to me,
If I can tell you where your husoandes bee.
What can you sir.
Nay nothing sir I did but jest with you, I feared him
I •…yth but Isle be secret thats flat.
Well moister Burgomaister see that you restore,
The goods and lands you ceasd.
Both of the countess a•…d rich Leons wife,
Not p•…ie of their wido •…odes alone,
But their rare beauties move me to this good.
Oh Moister Burgomaster see here is your wife come to
welcome you home from war•….
Oh husband hue•…and will you go to •…re, and leave me in this taking.
This taking why this is a very good taking how say you is it not and like your Majesty.
Tic very well Moister Burg•…ster.
But Shall I entreat one boon of your Majesty.
VVhats that Moister Burgomaister.
Mary even to be god father to my young Burgomai∣ster here.
Withal my hart sir.
Come on sweet husband foot my time draws near.
Fear not thou shalt be a joyful mother I warrant thee.
How say you my Lords is not our Burgomaister a tall man every way, did you not mark how manfully he be haued himself in our late Battle,
We did my Lord and wonder at his courage
His merit doth deserve a better place.
Then to be Burgomaister of Alexandria.
Then say my Lords how shall we deal with him.
Had he been widower he might have wedded with this countess here.
Oh I have one of mine own I thank you sir, here is one has the sweet of them I faith:
My Lord the offer had been to hye a grace for him
For near did eye behold a fairer face.
So saith mine eye that hath my hart incensed.
And Rhesus me thinks this exceeds her far,
No question of it as the son a star.
As suddenly as lightning beauty wounds.
None ever loud but at first sight they loud▪
Loves darts are swift as is the lightning fire.
See he shoots arrows bur•…ing from her eyes.
Why which loves Rhesus.
This celestial dame.
And which loves Bion▪
Even the very same.
Then may I freely Joy the countess here.
No Porus for B•…itins loves her too
Are they in love oh Gods would that were true
My loving joy the fresh desire of kings.
How now my Lords doth beauty startle you▪
More then dead stocks would startle at such beauty,
In vain do I resist my passions,
Mighty Cleanthes to annex •…y hart,
In love to thee as well as victory,
Grant this fair countess here may be my queen.
No great Cleanthes give her to my hand,
Whose hart was first the subject of her graces.
Then let the Arabian king make this his queen.
Nay this •…ends let my love enjoy.
How fatal are these loves now I perceive,
Their fortunes that I told as I was Irus.
Will now in force I see be come to pass.
Oh holy Irus blessed be thy tongue,
That like an orator hath told our fortunes.
He told vs we should soon lose our first loves,
Making our second choice amongst greatest kings.
I did indeed, but God knows knew not how.
How say you moister brother, am not I secret now▪
Thou art and be so still for not the world,
Shall ever know the mad pranks I have played,
Now stand sayre my Lords and let these Ladies view you,
In my eye now the blackest is the fairest,
For every woman chooses white and red,
Come martial Peruse thou shalt have my love.
Out on thee foolish woman thou hast chose a devil.
Not yet sir till he have horns.
Tic not the face and colour I regard,
But fresh and lovely youth allures my choice.
And thee most beauteous Bion I affect.
Haplesse is Rhesus.
Accursed •…britius.
Have patience gentle Lords I will provide,
Other Egyptian Ladies for your t•…no,
So will we link in perfect league of lou•…
So shall the victory you lost to me,
Set double glory on your conquered he•…des.
So let vs go to frolic in our Court.
Carousing free whole boules of greekish win•…▪
In honour of the conquest we have made,
That at our banquet all the Gods may tend,
Plating our victory and this happy end.

RObert of Artoys banished though thou be,
From France thy native Country, yet with vs,
Thou shalt retain as great a Seigniory:
For we create thee Earl of Richmond here,
And now go forwards with our pedigree,
Who next succeeded Phillip of Bew,
Three sons of his, which all successfully,
Did sit upon their fathers regal Throne:
Yet dyed and left no issue of their loins:
But was my mother sister unto those:
She was my Lord, and only Isabel,
Was all the daughters that this Phillip had,
Whom afterword your father took to wife:
And from the fragrant garden of her womb,
Your gracious self the flower of Europes hope:
Derived is inheritor to France.
But not the rancor of rebellious minds:
When thus the lynage of Bew was out;
The French obscured your mothers Privilege,
And though she were the next of blood, proclaimed
Iohn of the house of Valoys now their king:
The reason was, they say the Realm of France,
Replete with Princes of great parentage,
Ought not admit a governor to rule,
Except he be descend of the male,
And thats the special ground of their contempt:
Where with they study to exclude your grace:
But they shall find that forged ground of theirs,
To be but dusty heaps, of brittile sand.
Perhaps it will be thought a heinous thing,
That I a French man should discover this,
But heaven I call to record of my vows,
It is not hate nor any private wrong,
But love unto my country and the right,
Provokes my tongue thus lavish in report.
You are the lineal watch men of our peace,
And Iohn of Valoys, in directly climbs,
What then should subjects but embrace their King,
Ah where in may our duty more be seen,
Then striving to rebate a tyrants pride,
And place the true shepherd of our comonwealth,
This counsel Artoyes like to fruitful showers,
Hath added growth unto my dignity,
And by the fiery vigour of thy words,
Hot courage is engendered in my breast,
Which heretofore was raked in ignorance,
But now doth mount with golden wings of fame,
And will approve fair Issabells descent,
Able to yoke their stubburne necks with steel,
That spurn against my sovereignty in France. 
A messenger, Lord Awdley know from whence,
The Duke of Lorraine, having crossed the seas,
In treats he may have conference with your highness.
Admit him Lords, that we may hear the news.
Say Duke of Lorraine wherefore art thou come.
The most renowned prince K. Iohn of France,
Doth greet thee Edward, and by me commands,
That for so much as by hi• liberal gift,
The Guyen Dukedom is entayld to thee,
Thou do him lowly homage for the same.
And for that purpose here I somon thee,
Repair to France within these forty days,
That there according as
•he coustome is.
Thou may be sworn true liegeman to our King,
Or else thy title in that province dyes,
And hee him self will repossess the place.
See how occasion laughs me in the face,
No sooner minded to prepare for France,
But straight I am invited, nay with threats,
Upon a penalty inioynd to come:
It were but a childish part to say him nay,
Lorraine return this answer to thy Lord,
I mean to visit him as he requests,
But how? not servilely disposed to bend,
But like a conqueror to make him bow,
His lame unpolished shists are come to light,
And truth hath pulled the vizard from his face,
That set a glass upon his arrogance,
Dare he command a fealty in me,
Tell him the Crown that hee usurps, is mine,
And where he sets his foot he ought to kneel,
Tic not a petty Dukedom that I claim,
But all the whole Dominions, of the Realm,
Which if with grudging he refuse to yield,
Isle take away those borrowed plumes of his,
And send him naked to the wilderness.
Then Edward here in spite of all thy Lords,
I doe pronounce defiance to thy face.
Defiance French man we rebound it back,
Even to the bottom of thy masters throat,
And be it spoke with reverence of the King,
My gracious father and these other Lords,
I hold thy message but as scurrilous,
And him that sent thee like the lazy droane,
Crept up by stelth unto the Eagles nest,
From whence wele shake him with so rough a storm,
As others shall be warned by his harm,
Bid him leave of the Lyons case he wears,
Least meeting with the Lyon in the field,
He chance to tear him peecemede for his pride.
••e soundest
counsel I can give his grace,
Is to surrender ere he be constraynd.
A voluntary mischief hath less scorn,
Then when reproach with violence is borne,
Regenerate Traitor, viper to the place,
Where thou was fostered in thine infancy:
Bear thou a part in this conspiracy?
Lorraine behold the sharpness of this steel:
Fervent desire that sits against my heart,
Is far more thorny pricking than this blade.
That with the nightingale I shall be
••art:
As oft as I dispose my self to rest,
Until my colours be displayed in France:
This is thy final Answer, so be gone.
It is not that nor any English brave,
Afflicts me so, as doth his poisoned view,
That is most false, should most of all be true.
Now Lord our fleeting Bark is under sail:
Our gage is thrown, and war is soon began,
But not so quickly brought unto an end.
But wherefore comes Sir william Mountague?
How stands the league between the Scot and vs?
Cracked and dissevered my renowned Lord:
The treacherous King no sooner was informde,
Of your with drawing of your army back:
But straight forgetting of his former other,
He made invasion on the bordering Towns:
Berwick is won, Newcastle spoiled and lost,
And now the tyrant hath beguirt with siege,
The Castle of Rocksborough, where enclosed,
The Counts Salsbury is like to perish:
That is thy daughter Warwick is it not?
Whose husband hath in Britain served so long,
About the planting of Lord Mouneford there?
It is my Lord.
Ignoble Dauid hast thou none to grieve,
But silly Ladies with thy threatening arms:
But I will make you shrink your snail horns,
First therefore Audley this shall be thy charge,
Go levy footmen for our wars in France;
And Ned take muster of our men at arms,
In every shire elect a several band,
Let them be Soldiers of a lusty spirit,
Such as dread nothing but dishonours blot,
Be wary therefore since we do comence,
A famous War, and with so mighty a nation:
Derby be thou Ambassador for vs,
Unto our Father in Law the Earl of Henalt:
Make him acquainted with our enterprise,
And likewise will him with our own allies,
That are in Flaundsrs, to solicit to,
The Emperor of Almaigne in our name:
Myself whilst you are jointly thus employed,
Will with these forces that I have at hand,
March, and once more repulse the traitorous Scot:
But Sirs be resolute, we shall have wars
On every side, and Ned, thou must begin,
Now to forget thy study and thy books,
And ire thy shoulders to an Armours weight.
As cheerful sounding to my youthful spleen,
This tumult is of wars increasing broils,
As at the Coronation of a king,
The joyful clamours of the people are,
When Aue C•…sar they pronounce aloud;
Within this school of honour I shall learn,
Either to sacrifice my foes to death,
Or in a rightful quarrel spend my breath,
Then cheerfully forward each a several way,
In great affairs tic nought to use delay.
Alas how much in vain my poor eyes gaze,
For souccour that my sovereign should send;
A co sin Mountague, I fear thou wants,
The lively spirirt sharply to solicit,
W•th vehement suit
the king in my behalf:
Thou dost not tell him what a grief it is,
To be the scornful captive to a Scot,
Either to be wooed with broad untuned oaths,
Or forced by rough insulting barbarism:
Thou doest not tell him if he here prevail,
How much they will deride vs in the North,
And in their wild uncivil skipping giggs,
Bray forth their Conquest, and our overthrow,
Even in the barren, bleak and fruitless air,
I must withdraw, the everlasting so,
Comes to the wall, Isle closely step aside,
And list their babble blunt and full of pride.
My Lord of Lorraine, to our brother of France,
Commend vs as the man in Christendom,
That we must reverence and entirely love,
Touching your embassage, return and say,
That we with England will not enter parley,
Nor never make fair whether, or take truce,
But burn their neighbor towns and so persist
With eager Rods beyond their City York,
And never shall our bonny riders rest:
Nor rust in canker, have the time to eat,
Their light borne snaffles, nor their nimble spu
Nor lay a side their Jacks of Gymould mayle,
Nor hang their staves of grayned Scottish ash,
In peaceful wise, upon their City walls,
Nor from their buttoned tawny leathern belts,
Dismiss their biting whinyards, till your King,
Cry out enough, spare England now for pity,
Farewell, and tell him that you leave vs hear,
Before this Castle, say you came from vs,
Even when we had that yielded to our hands,
take my leave and fairly will return
Your acceptable greeting to my king.
Now Duglas to our former task again,
For the division of this certain spoil.
My liege I crave the Lady and no more,
Nay soft ye sir, first I must make my choice,
And first I do bespeak her for my self,
Why then my liege let me enjoy her jewels,
Those are her own still liable to her,
And who inherits her, hath those with all.
My liege, as we were pricking on the hills,
To fetch in booty, marching hitherward,
We might descry a mighty host of men,
The Sun reflecting on the armour showed,
A field of plate, a wood of pickes advanced:
Bethink your highness speedily herein,
An easy march within four hours will bring,
The hindmost rank, unto this place my liege.
Dislodge, dislodge, it is the king of England.
Iemmy my man, saddle my bonny black.
Meanst thou to fight, Duglas we are to weak.
I know it well my liege, and therefore fly.
My Lords of Scotland will ye stay and drink:
She mocks at vs Duglas, I cannot endure it.
Say good my Lord, which is he must have the Lady,
And which her jewels, I am sure my Lords
Ye will not hence, till you have shard the spoils.
She heard the messenger, and heard our talk.
And now that comfort makes her scorn at vs.
Arm my good Lord, O we are all surprised▪
After the French ambassador my liege,
And tell him that you dare not ride to York,
Excuse it that your bonnie horse is lame.
He heard that to, intolerable grief:
Woman farewell although I do not stay.
Tic not for fear, and yet you run away,
O happy comfort welcome to our house,
The confident and boisterous boasting Scot,
That swore before my walls they would not back,
For all the armed power of this land,
With faceless fear that ever turns his back:
Turned hence again the blasting North-east wind:
Upon the bare report and name of Arms.
O Summers day, see where my Cousin comes:
How fares my Aunt? we are not Scots,
Why do you shut your gates against your friends?
Well may I give a welcome Cousin to thee:
For thou con•st
well to chase my foes from hence.
The king himself is come in person hither:
Dear Aunt descend and gratulate his highness.
How may I entertain his Majesty,
To show my duty, and his dignity.
What are the stealing Foxes fled and gone
Before we could vncupple at their heals.
They are my liege, but with a cheerful cry,
Hot hunts and hardy chase them at the heals.
This is the Countess Warwike, is it not.
Even she liege, whose beauty tyrants fear,
As a May blossom with pernicious winds,
Hath sullied, withered overcast and donne.
Hath she been fairer Warwike then she is?
My gracious King, fair is she not at all,
If that her self were by to stain herself,
As I have seen her when she was her
self.
What strange enchantment lurk in those her eyes?
When they exceld this excellence they have,
That now her dim decline hath power to draw,
My subject eyes from persing majesty,
To gaze on her with doting admiration.
In duty lower then the ground I kneel,
And for my dull knees bow my feeling heart,
To witness my obedience to your highness,
With many millions of a subjects thanks.
For this your Royal presence, whose approach,
Hath driven war and danger from my gate.
Lady stand up, I come to bring thee peace,
How ever thereby I have purchased war.
No war to you my liege, the Scots are gone,
And gallop home toward Scotland with their hate,
Least yielding here, I pine in shameful love:
Come wele pursue the Scots, Artoyes away.
A little while my gracious sovereign stay,
And let the power of a mighty king
Honour our roof: my husband in the wars,
When he shall hear it will triumph for joy.
Then dear my liege, now niggard not thy state,
Being at the wall, enter our homely gate.
Pardon me countess, I will come no near,
I dreamde to night of treason and I fear.
Far from this place let ugly treasonly.
No farther off, then her conspiring eye,
Which shoots infected poison in my heart.
Beyond repulse of wit or cure of Art.
Now in the Sun alone it doth not lye,
With light to take light, from a mortal eye.
For here to day stars that mine eyes would see,
More then the Sun steals mine own light from me:
Contemplative desire, desire to be,
In contemplation that may master thee.
Warwike, Artoys, to horse and lets away.
What might I speak to make my sovereign stay?
What needs a tongue to such a speaking eye,
That more perswads then winning Oratory.
Let not thy presence like the April sun,
Flatter our earth, and suddenly be done:
More happy do not make our outward wall,
Then thou wilt grace our inner house withal,
Our house my liege is like a Country swain,
Whose habit iude, and winners blunt and plain,
Presages nought yet inly beautified,
With bounties riches; and fair hidden pride:
For where the golden Ore doth buried lie,
The ground vndect with natures tapestry,
Seems barren, ••re,
vnfertill, f•uctles dry,
And where the upper turf of earth doth boast,
His pride perfumes, and party coloured cost,
Delve there, and find this issue and their pride,
To spring from ordure, and corruptions side:
But to make up my all to long compare,
These ragged walls no testomie are,
What is within, b•t
like a cloak doth hide,
From weathers West, the under garnished pride:
More gracious then my terms can let thee be,
Entreat thy self to stay a while with me.
As wise as fair, what fond fit can be heard,
When wisdom keeps the gate as beauties guard,
Countess, albeit my business urges me,
Yt shall attend, while I attend on thee:
Come on my Lords, here will I host to night.
I might perceive his eye in her eye lost,
His care to drink her sweet tongues utterance,
And changing passion like inconstant clouds:
That rack upon the carriage of the winds,
Increase and die in his disturbed cheeks:
Lo when she blushed, even then did he look pale,
As if her cheeks by some enchanted power,
Attracted had the cherie blood from his,
A none with reverent fear, when she grewpale,
His cheek put on their scarlet ornaments,
But no more like her orient all red,
Then Brick to Corrall, or live things to dead,
Why did he then thus counterfeit her looks,
If she did blush it was tender modest shame,
Being in the sacred present of a King.
If he did blush, it was red immodest shame,
To wail his eyes amiss being a king:
If she looked pa•e,
it was silly women's fear,
To bear her self in presence of a king:
If he looked pa•e, it
was with guilty fear,
To dote a mi•se
being a mighty king,
Then Scottish wars farewell, I fear twill prove
A lingering English siege of peevish love,
Here comes his highness walking all alone.
She is grown more fairer far since I came thither,
Her voice more silver every word then other,
Her wit more fluent, what a strange discourse,
Unfolded she of Dauid and his Scots:
Even thus quoth she, he spake, and then spoke broad,
With epithets and accents of the Scot:
But somewhat better then the Scot could speak,
And thus quoth she, and answered then herself,
For who could speak like her but she herself:
Breathes from the wall, an Angels note from Heaven:
Of sweet defiance to her barbarous foes,
When she would talk of peace me thinks her tong,
Commanded war to prison: when of war,
It wakened Caesar from his Roman grave,
To hear war beautified by her discourse,
Wisdom is foolishness, but in her tongue,
Beauty a slander but in her fair face,
There is no summer, but in her cheerful looks,
Nor frosty winter, but in her disdain,
I cannot blame the Scots that did besiege her,
For she is all the Treasure of our land:
But call them cowards that they ran away,
Having so rich and fair a cause to stay.
Art thou thete Lodwicke, give me ink and paper?
I will my liege.
And bid the Lords hold on their play at Chess,
For wee will walk and meditate aloe.
I will my sovereign.
This fellow is well read in poetry,
And hath a lusty and persuasive spirit:
I will acquaint him with my passion,
Which he shall shadow with a veil of lawn,
Through which the Queen of beauties Queen shall see,
Herself the ground of my infirmity.
Hast thou pen, ink and paper ready Lodowike,
Ready my liege.
Then in the summer arbor sit by me,
Make it our counsel house or cabinet:
Since greene our thoughts, greene be the conventicle,
Where we will case vs by disburdning them:
Now Lodwike invoke some golden Muse,
To bring thee hither an enchanted pen,
That may for sighs, set down true sighs indeed:
Talking of grief, to make thee ready groan,
And when thou write of tears, encouch the word,
Before and after with such sweet laments,
That it may raise drops in a Torterseye,
And make a flint heart Sythian pitiful,
For so much mooing hath a Poets pen:
Then if thou be a Poet move thou so,
And be enriched by thy sovereign love:
For if the touch of sweet concordant strings,
Could force attendance in the ears of hell:
How much more shall the strains of poets
wit,
Beguiled and ravish soft and humane minds.
To whom my Lord shall I direct my stile.
To one that shames the fair and sots the wise,
Whose body is an abstract or a brief,
Contains each general virtue in the world,
Better then beautiful thou must begin,
Devise for fair a fairer word then fair,
And every ornament that thou would praise,
Fly it a pitch aboue the soar of praise,
For flattery fear thou not to be convicted,
For were thy admiration ten times more,
Ten times ten thousand more thy worth exceeds,
Of that thou art to praise their praises worth,
Begin I will to contemplate the while,
Forget not to set down how passionate,
How hart sick and how full of languishment,
Her beauty makes me,
Writ I to a woman?
What beauty else could triumph on me,
Or who but women doe our love lays greet,
What thinekst thou I did bid thee praise a horse.
Of what condition or estate she is,
It were requisite that I should know my Lord,
Of such estate, that hers is as a throne,
And my estate the footstool where she treads,
Then moist thou judge what her condition is,
By the proportion of her mightiness,
Write on while I peruse her in my thoughts,
Her voice to music or the nightingale,
To music every summer leaping swain,
Compares his sunburned lover when she speaks,
And why should I speak of the nightingale,
The nightingale singes of adulterate wrong,
And that compared is to satirical,
For sin though fynne would not be so esteemed,
But rather virtue sin, sin virtue deemed,
Her hair far softor then the silk worms twist,
Like to a flattering glass doth make more fair,
The ye low Amber like a flattering glass,
Comes in to soon: for writing of her eyes,
Isle say that like a glass they catch the sun,
And thence the hot reflection doth rebound,
Against my breast and burns my hart within,
Ah what a world of descant makes my soul,
Upon this voluntary ground of love,
Come Lodwick hast thou turned thy ink to gold,
If not, write but in letters Capital my mistress name,
And it will guild thy paper, read Lord, read,
Fill thou the empty hollows of mine ears,
With the sweet hearing of thy poetry.
I have not to a period brought her praise.
Her praise is as my love, both infinite,
Which apprehend such violent extremes,
That they disdain an ending period.
Her beauty hath no match but my affection,
Hers more then most, mine most, and more then more,
Hers more to praise then tell the sea by drops,
Nay more then drop the massy earth by sands,
And said, by said, print them in memory,
Then wherefore talk thou of a period,
To that which craves vnended admiration.
Read let vs hear,
More fair and chaste then is the queen of shades:
That love hath two faults gross and palpable,
Compare thou her to the pale queen of night,
Who being set in da•ke seems therefore light,
What is she, when the sun lifts up his head,
But like a fading taper dim and dead.
My love shall brave the ey of heaven at noon,
And being unmasked outshine the golden sun,
What is the other fault, my sovereign Lord,
Readeore the line again,
More fair and chaste,
I did not bid thee talk of chastity,
To ransack so the treason of her mind,
For I had rather have her chased then chaste,
Out with the moon line, I will none of it,
And let me have his likened to the sun,
Say she hath thrice more splendour then the sun,
That her perfections amulets the sun,
That she breeds sweets as plenteous as the sun,
That she doth thaw cold winter like the sun,
That she doth cheer fresh summer like the sun,
That she doth dazzle gazers like the sun,
And in this application to the sun,
Bid her be free and general as the sun,
Who smiles upon the basest weed that grows,
As lovingly as on the fragrantrose,
Lets see what follows that same moonelightline,
More fair and chaste then is the lover of shades,
More bold in constancy.
In constancy then who,
Then Iudith was,
O monstrousline, put in the next a sword
And I shall woo her to cut of my head
Blot, blot, good Lodwicke let vs hear the next.
Theres all that yet is donne.
I thank thee then thou hast don little ill,
But what is don is passing passing ill,
No let the Captain talk of boisterous war,
The prisoner of emured dark constraint,
The sick man best sets down the pangs of death,
The man that starves the sweetness of a feast,
The frozen soul the benefit of fire,
And every grief his happy opposite,
Love cannot sound well but in lovers tongs,
Give me the pen and paper I will write,
But so•t here comes
the treasurer of my spirit,
Lodwick thou know not how to draw a battle,
These wings, these flankars, and these squadrons,
Argue in thee defective discipline,
Thou shouldest have placed this here, this other here,
Pardon my boldness my thrice gracious Lords,
Let my intrusion here be called my duty,
That comes to see my sovereign how he fares,
Go draw the same I tell thee in what form.
I go.
Sorry I am to see my liege so sad,
What may thy subject do to drive from thee.
Thy gloomy consort, sullome melancholy,
Ah Lady I am blunt and cannot straw,
The flowers of solace in a ground of shame,
Since I came hither Counts I am wronged.
Now God forbid that any in my hows
Should think my sovereign wrong, thrice gentle King:
Acquaint me with their cause of discontent.
How near then shall I be to remedy.
As ne'er my Liege as all my women's power,
Can pawn it self to buy thy remedy.
If thou speak true then have I my redress,
Engage thy power to redeem my Joys,
And I am joyful Counts else I die.
I will my Liege.
Swear Counties that thou wilt.
By heaven I will,
Then take thy self a little way a side,
And tell thy self a King doth dote on thee,
Say that within thy power doth lie.
To make him happy, and that thou hast sworn,
To give him all the Joy within thy power,
Do this and tell me when I shall be happy.
All this is done my thrice dread sovereign,
That power of love that I have power to give.
Thou hast with all devout obedience,
Inploy me how thou wilt in prof thereof,
Thou hearst me say that I do dote on thee,
Yfon my beauty take yt if thou can,
Though little I do prise it ten times less,
If on my virtue take it if thou can,
For virtues store by giving doth augment,
Be it on what it will that I can give,
And thou can take away inherit it.
It is thy beauie that I would enjoy,
O were it painted I would wipe it of,
And dispose my self to give it thee,
But sovereign it is soldered to my life,
Take one and both for like an humble shadow,
Yt haunts the sunshine of my summers life,
But thou moist leave it me to sport with all,
As easy may my intellectual soul,
Be lent away and yet my body live,
As lend my body palace to my soul,
Away from her and yet retain my soul,
My body is her bower her Courther abey,
And she an Angel pure divine unspotted,
If I should leave her house my Lord to thee,
I kill my poor soul and my poor soul me,
Did thou not swear to give me what I would,
I did my liege so what you would I could.
I wish no more of thee then thou moist give,
Nor beg I do not but I rather buy,
That is thy love and for that love of thine,
In rich exchange I tender to thee mine,
But that your lips were sacred my Lord,
You would profane the holy name of love,
That love you offer me you cannot give,
For Caesar owes that tribute to his Queen,
That love you beg of me I cannot give,
For Sara owes that duty to her Lord,
He that doth clip or counterfeit your stamp,
Shall die my Lord, and will your sacred self,
Commit high treason against the King of heaven,
To stamp his Image in forbidden mettel,
For getting your allegiance, and your other,
In violating marriage secred law,
You break a greater honour then your self,
To be a King is of a younger house,
Then to be married, your progenitor
Sole ragning Adam on the vniuerse,
By God was honoured for a married man,
But not by him anointed for a king,
It is a penalty to break your statutes,
Though not enacted with your highness hand,
How much more to infringe the holy act,
Made by the mouth of God, sealed with his hand,
I know my sovereign in my husbands love,
Who now doth loyal service in his wars,
Doth but to try the wife of Salisbury,
Whither she will hear a wantons tale or no,
Lest being therein giulty by my stay,
From that not from my liege I turn away:
Whether is her beauty by her words divine,
Or are her words sweet chaplains to her beauty,
Like as the wind doth beautify a sail,
And as a sail becomes the unseen wind,
So doe her words her beauties, beauty words,
O that I were a honey gathering bee,
To bear the comb of virtue from his flower,
And not a poison sucking envious spider,
To turn the vice I take to deadly venom,
Religion is austere and beauty gentle,
To struck a gordian for so fair a weed,
O that she were as is the air to me,
Why so she is, for when I would embrace
her,
This do I, and catch nothing but my self,
I must enjoy her, for I cannot beat
With reason and reproof fond love away.
Here comes her father I will work with him,
To bear my colours in this field of love.
How is it that my sovereign is so sad,
May I with pardon know your highness grief,
And that my old endeavour will remove it,
It shall not cumber long your majesty,
A kind and voluntary giift thou proferest.
That I was forward to have begged of thee,
But O thou world great nurse of flattery,
Why dost thou tip men's tongues with golden words,
And peise their deeds with weight of heavy lead,
That fair performance cannot follow promise,
O that a man might hold the hearts close book,
And choke the lavish tongue when it doth utter
The breath of falsehood not carectred there:
Far be it from the honour of my age,
That I should owe bright gould and render lead,
Age is a cyncke, not a flatterer,
I say again, that I if knew your grief,
And that by me it may be lesned,
My proper harm should buy your highness good,
These are the vulgar tenders of false men,
That never pay the duty of their words,
Thou wilt not stick to swear what thou hast said,
But when thou know my griefs condition,
This rash disgorged vomit of thy word,
Thou wilt eat up again and leave me helpless.
By heaven I will not though your majesty,
Did bid me run upon your sword and di•…
Say that my grief is no way
•…dicinable,
But by the loss and bruising
•…e honour,
If nothing but that loss may vantage you,
I would accomplish that loss my vantage to,
Think that thou can answer thy oath again,
I cannot nor I would not if I could.
But if thou dost •hat shall I say to thee,
What may be said to any periurd villainy,
That break the sacred warrant of an oath,
What wilt thou say to one that breaks an other,
That hee hath broke his faith with God and man,
And from them both stands excommunicate,
What office were it to suggest a man,
To break a lawful and religious vow.
An office for the devil not for man,
That distills office must thou do for me,
Or break thy oath or cancel all the bond•,
Of love and duty twixt thy self and me,
And therefore Warwike if thou art thy self,
The Lord and master of thy word and other,
Go to thy daughter and in my behalf,
Command her, woo her, win her
〈◊〉 wares,
To be my mistress and my secret love,
I will not stand to hear thee make reply,
Thy oath break hers or let thy sovereign dye.
O doting King, or detestable office,
Well may I tempt my self to wrong my self,
When he hath sworn me by the name of God,
To break a vow made by the name of God,
What if I swear by this right hand of mine,
To cut this right hand of the better way,
Were to prophaine the Idol then confound it,
But neither will I do Isle keep mine oath,
And to my daughter make a recantation,
Of all the virtue I have preached to her,
Isle say she must forget her hue••and Salisbury,
If she remember to embrace the king,
Isle say an other may easily be broken,
But not so easily pardoned being broken:
Isle say it is ••ue
charity to love,
But not true love to be so charitable;
Isle say his greatness may bear out the shame,
But not his kingdom can buy out the sin;
Isle say it is my duty to persuade,
But not her honesty to give consent.
See where she comes, was never father had,
Against his child, an embassage so bad.
My Lord and father, I have sought for you:
My mother and the Peers importune you,
To keep in promise of his majesty.
And do your best to make his highness merry.
How shall I enter in this graceless arrant,
I must not call her child, for wheres the father,
That will in such a suit seduce his child:
Then wife of Salisbury shall I so begin:
No hes my friend, and where is found the friend
That will doe friendship such indammagement:
Neither my daughter, nor my dear friends wife,
I am not Warwike as thou think I am,
But an atturnie from the Court of hell:
That thus have housd my spirit in his form,
To do a message to thee from the king:
The mighty king of England dotes on thee:
He that hath power to take away thy life,
Hath power to take thy honour, then consent,
To pawn thine honour rather then thy life;
Honour is often lost and got again,
But life once gon, hath no recovery:
The Sun that withersheye goth nourish grass,
The king that would distain thee, will advance thee.
The Poets write that great Achilles spear,
Could heal the wound it made: the moral is,
What mighty men misdoo, they can amend:
The Lyon doth become his bloody jaws,
And grace his •orragement by being mild,
When vassal fear lies trembling at his feet,
The king will in his glory hide thy shame,
And those that gaze on him to find out thee,
Will loose their eie-sight looking in the Sun:
What can one drop of poison harm the Sea,
Whose huge vastures can digest the ill,
And make it loose his operation:
The kings great name will temper their misdeeds,
And give the bitter portion of reproach:
A sugared sweet, and most delicious taste:
Besides it is no harm to do the thing,
Which without shame, could not be left undone;
Thus have I in his majesties behalf,
Apparraled sin, in virtuous sentences,
And dwell upon thy answer in his suit.
Unnatural besiege, woe me unhappy,
To have escaped the danger of my foes,
And to be ten times worse in••erd by friends:
Hath he no means to stain my honest blood,
But to corrupt the author of my blood,
To be his scandalous and vile solicitor:
No marvel though the branches be then infected,
When poison hath encompassed the root:
No marvel though the leprous infant dye,
When the sterne dame inuennometh the Dug:
Why then give sin a passport to offend,
And youth the dangerous reign of liberty:
Blot out the strict forbidding of the law,
And cancel every cannon that prescribes,
A shame for shame, or penance for offence,
No let me die, if his too boisterous will,
Will have it so, before I will consent,
To be an actor in his graceless lust.
Why now thou speak as I would have thee speak,
And mark how I unsay my words again,
An honourable grave is more esteemed,
Then the polluted closet of a king,
The greater man, the greater is the thing,
Be it good or bad that he shall undertake,
An vnreputed mote, flying in the Sun,
Presents a greater substance then it is:
The freshest summers day doth soonest taint,
The loathed carrion that it seems to kiss:
Deep are the blows made with a mighty Axe,
That sin doth ten times aggravate it self,
That is committed in a holy place,
An evil deed done by authority,
Is sin and subornation: Deck an Ape
In tissue, and the beauty of the robe,
Adds but the greater scorn unto the beast:
A spacious field of reasons could I urge,
Between his gloomy daughter and thy shame,
That poison shows worst in a golden cup,
Dark night seems darker by the lightning flash,
Lilies that fester, smell far worse then weeds,
And every glory that inclines to sin,
The shame is treble, by the opposite,
So leave I with my blessing in thy bosom,
Which then convert to a most heavy curse,
When thou conuertest from honours golden name,
To the black faction of bed blotting, shame.
Else follow thee, and when my mind turns so,
My body sink, my soul in endless woo.
Thrice noble Audley, well encountered here,
How is it with our sovereign and his peers?
Tic full a fortnight since I saw his highness,
What time he sent me forth to muster men,
Which I accordingly have done and bring them hither,
In fair array before his majesty:
What news my Lord of Derby from the Emperor.
As good as we desire: the Emperor
Hath yielded to his highness friendly aid,
And makes our king lieutenant general
In all his lands and large dominions,
Then via for the spacious bounds of France;
What doth his highness leap to hear these news?
I have not yet found time to open them,
The king is in his closet malcontent,
For what I know not, but he gave in charge,
Till after dinner, none should interrupt him:
The Countess Salisbury, and her father Warwike,
Artoyes, and all look underneath the brows.
Undoubtedly then some thing is a miss.
The Trumpets sound, the king is now abroad,
Hhere comes his highness.
Befall my sovereign, all my sovereigns wish,
Ah that thou were a Witch to make it so.
The Emperor greeted you.
Would it were the Countess.
And ••th accorded to
your highness suite,
Thou lie she hath not, but I would she had,
All love and duty to my Lord the King.
Well all but one is none, what news with you?
I have my liege, levied those horse and foot,
According as your charge, and brought them hither.
Then let those foot trudge hence upon those horse,
According too our discharge and be gone:
Derby Isle look upon the Countess mind anon,
The Countess mind my liege.
I mean the Emperor, leave me alone,
What is his mind?
Lets leave him to his humour.
Thus from the harts abundant speaks the tongue,
Countess for Emperor, and indeed why not?
She is as imperator over me, and I to her
Am as a kneeling vassal that observes,
The pleasure, or displeasure of her eye
What says the more then Cleopatras match,
To Caesar now?
That yet my liege ere night,
She will resolve your majesty.
What drum is this that thunders forth this march,
To start the tender Cupped in my bosom,
Poor shipskin how it brawls with him that beats it:
Go break the thundering parchment bottom out,
And I will teach it to conduct sweet lines,
Unto the bosom of a heavenly Nymph,
For I will use it as my writing paper,
And so reduce him from a scolding drum,
To be the herald and dear counsai•e bearer,
Betwixt a goddess, and a mighty king:
Go bid the diummer learn to touch the Lute,
Or hang him in the braces of his drum,
For now we think it an uncivil thing,
To trouble heaven wrth such harsh resounds, Away. 
The quarrel that I have requires no arms,
But these of mine, and these shall meet my foe,
In a deep march of penytrable groans,
My eyes shall be my arrows, and my sighs
Shall serve me as the vantage of the wind,
To wherle away my sweetest artyilerie:
Ah but alas she wins the sun of me,
For that is she her self, and thence it comes,
That Poets term, the wanton warrior blind:
But love hath eyes as judgment to his steps,
Till two much loved glory daisies them?
How now.
My liege the drum that stroke the lusty march,
Stands with Prince Edward your thrice valiant son.
I see the boy, oh how his mothers face,
Modeld in his, corrects my strayed desire,
And rates my heart, and chides my thievish eye,
Who being rich enough in seeing her,
Yet seek, elsewhere and basest theft is that,
Which cannot cloak it self on poverty.
Now boy, what news?
I have assembled my dear Lord and father,
The choicest buds of all our English blood,
For our affairs to France, and here we come,
To take direction from your majesty.
Still do I see in him delineate,
His mothers visage, those his eyes are hers,
Who looking wistely on me, make me blush:
For faults against themselves, give evidence,
Lust as a fire, and me like lantern show,
Light lust within themselves; even through them
selves:
Away loose ••lkes or
wavering vanity,
Shall the large limit of fair Britain.
By me be overthrown, and shall I not,
Master this little mansion of my self;
Give me an Armour of eternal steel,
I go to conquer kings, and shall I not then
Subdue my self, and be my enemies friend,
It must not be, come boy forward, advance,
Lets with our colours sweet the Air of France.
My liege, the Countess with a smiling cheer.
Desires access unto your Majesty.
Why there it goes, that very smile of hers,
Hath ransomed captive France, and set the
King,
The Dolphin and the Peers at liberty,
Go leave me Ned, and revel with thy friends. 
Thy mother is but black, and thou like her.
Dost put it in my mind how foul she is,
Go fetch the Countess hither in thy hand, 
And let her chase away these winter clouds,
For she gives beauty both to heaven and earth,
The sin is more to hack and hew poor men,
Then to embrace in an unlawful bed,
The register of all rareties,
Since Leathern Adam, till this youngest hour.
Go Lodwike, put thy hand into thy purse,
Play, spend, give, riot, wast, do what thou wilt,
So thou wilt hence awhile and leave me here.
Now my souls plaiefellow art thou come,
To speak the more then heavenly word of yea,
To my objection in thy beauteous love.
My father on his blessing hath commanded.
That thou shalt yield to me.
I dear my liege, your due.
And that my dearest love, can be no less,
Then right for right, and render love for love.
Then wrong for wrong, and endless hate for hate:
But fifth I see your majesty so bent,
That my unwillingness, my husbands love,
Your high estate, nor no respect respected,
Can be my help, but that your mightiness:
Will overbear and awe these dear regards,
I bind my discontent to my content,
And what I would not, Isle compel I will,
Provided that your self remove those lets,
That stand between your highness love and mine,
Name then fair Countess, and by heaven I will.
It is their lives that stand between our love,
That I would have choked up my sovereign.
Whose lives my Lady?
My thrice loning liege,
Your Queen, and Salisbury my wedded husband,
Who living have that title in our love,
That we cannot bestow but by their death,
Thy opposition is beyond our Law,
So is your desire, if the law
Can hinder you to execute the one,
Let it forbid you to attempt the other:
I Cannot think you love me as you say,
Unless you do make good what you have sworn.
No mo•, ethy husband
and the Queen shall dye,
Fairer thou art by far, then Hero was,
Beardless Lender not so strong as I:
He swam an easy currant for his love,
But I will throng a hellie spout of blood,
To arrive at Cactus where my Hero lies.
Nay you'll do more, you'll make the Ryuerto,
With their hart bloods, that keep our love asunder,
Of which my husband, and your wife are twain.
Thy beauty makes them guilty of their death,
And gives in evidence that they shall dye,
Upon which verdict I their Judge condemn them.
O periurde beauty, more corrupted Judge:
When to the great Starre-chamber ore our heads,
The universal Sessions calls to count,
This packing evil, we both shall tremble for it.
What says my fair love, is she resolute?
Resolute to be dissolude, and therefore this,
Keep but thy word great king, and I am thine,
Stand where thou dost, isle part a little from thee
And see how I will yield me to thy hands:
Here by my side doth hang my wedding knifes,
Take thou the one, and with it kill thy Queen
And learn by me to find her where she lies
And with this other, Isle dispatch my love,
Which now lies fast a sleep within my hart,
When they are gone, then Isle consent to love:
Stir not lascivious king to hinder me,
My resolution is more nimbler far,
Then thy prevention can be in my rescue,
And if thou stir, I strike, therefore stand still,
And hear the choice that I will put thee to:
Either swear to leave thy most unholy suit,
And never hence forth to solicit me,
Or else by heaven, this sharpe pointed knife,
Shall stain thy earth, with that which thou would
stain:
My poor chaste blood, swear Edward swear,
Or I will strike and die before thee here.
Even by that power I swear that gives me now,
The power to be ashamed of my self,
I never mean to part my lips again,
In any words that tends to such a suit.
Arise true English Lady, whom our Isle
May better boast of then ever Romaine might,
Of her whose ransacked treasury hath taskt,
The vain endeavour of so many pens:
Arise and be my fault, thy honours fame,
Which after ages shall enrich thee with,
I am awaked from this idle dream,
Warwike, my Son, Derby, Artoys and Audley,
Brave warriors all, where are you all this while?
Warwike, I make thee Warden of the North,
Thou Prince of Wales, and Audley straight to Sea,
Scour to New-hauen, some there stay for me:
My self, Artoys and Derby will through Flaunders,
To greet our friends there, and to crave their aide,
This night will scarce suffice me to discover,
My follies siege against a faithful lover,
For ere the Sun shall guide the esteem sky,
Wele wake him with our Marshall harmony.
Here till our Navy of a thousand and sail,
Have made a breakfast to our foe by Sea,
Let vs encamp to wait their happy speed:
Lorraine what readiness is Edward in?
How hast thou heard that he provided is
Of marshiall furniture for this exploit.
To lay aside unnecessary soothing,
And not to spend the time in circumstance,
Tic bruited for a certenty my Lord,
That hes exceeding strongly fortified,
His subjects flock as willingly to war,
As if unto a triumph they were led.
England was wont to harbour malcontents,
Blood thirsty, and seditious Catelynes,
Spend thrifts, and such as gape for nothing else,
But changing and alteration of the state,
And is it possible,
That they are now so loyal in them selves?
All but the Scot, who solemnly protests,
As here to fore I have enformd his grace,
Never to sheath his Sword, or take a truce.
Ah, thats the anchredge of some better hope,
But on the other side, to think what friends,
King Edward hath retained in Netherland,
Among those euer-bibbing Epicures:
Those frothy Dutch men, puffed with double
beer,
That drink and swill in every place they come,
Doth not a little aggravate mine ire,
Besides we hear the Emperor conjoins,
And stalls him in his own authority:
But all the mightier that their number is,
The greater glory reapes the victory,
Some friends have we beside drum struck power,
The sterne Polonian and the warlike Dane:
The king of Bohemia, and of Cicely.
Are all become confederates with vs,
And as I think are marching hither apace,
But soft I hear the music of their drums.
By which I guess that their approach is near.
King Iohn of France, as league and neighbourhood,
Requires when friends are any way distressed,
I come to aide thee with my countries force,
And from great Musco fearful to the Turk,
And lofty Poland, nurse of hardy men,
I bring these servitors to fight for thee,
Who willingly will venture in thy cause.
Welcome Bohemian king, and welcome all,
This your great kindness I will not forget.
Besides your plentiful rewards in Crowns,
That from our Treasory ye shall receive,
There comes a hare brained Nation decked in pride,
The spoil of whom will be a treble game,
And now my hope is full, my joy complete,
At Sea we are as puissant as the force;
Of Agamemnon in the Haven of Troy:
By land with Zerxes we compare of strength,
Whose soldiers drink up rivers in their thirst:
Then Bayard like, blind overweening Ned,
To reach at our imperial diadem,
Is either to be swallowed of the waives,
Or hacked a pieces when thou come a shore.
Near to the cost I have described my Lord,
As I was busy in my watchful charge.
The proud Armado of king Edwards ships,
Which at the first far off when I did ken,
Seemed as it were a grove of withered pines,
But drawing near, their glorious bright aspect,
Their streaming Ensigns wrought of coloured silk,
Like to a meadow full of sundry flowers,
Adorns the naked bosom of the earth.
Majestic the order of their course,
Figuring the horned Circle of the Moon,
And on the top gallant of the Admiral,
And likewise all the handmaids of his train:
The Arms of England and of France unite,
Are quartred equally by Heralds art;
Thus titely carried with a merry gale,
They plough the Ocean hitherward amain:
Dare he already crop the Flower de Luce:
I hope the honey being gathered thence,
He with the spider afterword approached
Shall suck forth deadly venom from the leaves,
But wheres out Navy, how are they prepared,
To wing them selves against this flight of Ravens.
They having knowledge, brought them by the scouts,
Did break from Anchor straight, and puffed with rage,
No otherwise then were their sails with wind,
Made forth, as when the empty Eagle flies,
To satisfy his hungry griping maw.
Thees for thy news, return unto thy bark,
And if thou scope the bloody struck of war,
And do survive the conflict, come again,
And let vs hear the manner of the fight, 
Mean space my Lords, tic best we be dispersed,
To several places least they chance to land:
First you my Lord, with your Bohemian Troupes,
Shall pitch your battles on the lower hand,
My eldest son the Duke of Normandy,
Togeither with this aide of Muscouites,
Shall climb the higher ground an other way:
Here in the middle cost betwixt you both,
Phillip my youngest boy and I will lodge,
So Lords begone, and look unto your charge. 
You stand for France, an Empire fair and large,
Now tell me Phillip, what is their concept,
Touching the challenge that the English make.
I say my Lord, claim Edward what he can,
And bring he ne'er so plain a pedigree,
Tic you are in possession of the Crown,
And thats the surest point of all the Law:
But were it not, yet ere he should prevail,
Isle make a Conduit of my dearest blood,
Or chase those straggling upstarts home again,
Well said young Phillip, call for bread and Wine,
That we may cheer our stomachs with repast, 
To look our foes more sternely in the face.
Now is begun the heavy day at Sea,
Fight Frenchmen, fight, be like the field of Bears,
When they defend their younglings in their Caves:
Stir angry Nemesis the happy helm,
That with the sulphur battles of your rage,
The English Fleet may be dispersed and sunk,
O Father how this eckoing Cannon shot. 
Like sweet hermony disgests my cates.
Now boy thou hear what thundering terror
tic,
To buckle for a kingdoms souerentie,
The earth with giddy trembling when it shakes,
Or when the exalations of the air,
Breaks in extremity of lightning flash,
Affrights not more then kings when they dispose,
To show the rancor of their high swollen harts,
Retreae is sounded, one side hath the worse, 
O if it be the French, sweet fortune turn,
And in thy turning change the forward winds,
That with advantage of a savouring sky,
Our men may vanquish and thither fly.
My hart misgives, say mirror of pale death,
To whom belongs the honour of this day,
Relate I pray thee, if thy breath will serve,
The sad discourse of this discomfiture.
I will my Lord.
My gracious sovereign, France hath t•no the foil,
And boasting Edward triumphs with success;
These Iron hearted Navies,
When last I was reporter to your grace,
Both full of angry spleen of hope and fear:
Hasting to meet each other in the face,
At last conioynd, and by their Admiral,
Our Admiral encountered many shot,
By this the other that beheld these twain,
Give earnest penny of a further wrack,
Like fiery Dragons took their haughty flight,
And like wise meeting, from their smoky wombs,
Sent many grym Ambassadors of death,
Then began the day to turn to gloomy night,
And darkness did as well enclose the quick,
As those that were but newly reft of life,
No leisure served for friends to bid farewell,
And if it had, the hideous noise was such,
As each to other seemed deaf and dombe,
Purple the Sea whose channel filled as fast,
With streaming gore that from the maimed fell,
As did her gushing moisture break into,
The cranny cleftures of the through shot planks,
Here flew a head dissuuered from the tronke,
There mangled arms and legs were tossed a loft,
As when a wherle wind takes the Summer dust,
And scatters it in middle of the air,
Then might ye see the reeling vessels split,
And tottering sink into the ruthless flood,
Until their lofty tops were seen no more.
All shifts were tried both for defence and hurt,
And now the effect of valour and of force,
Of resolution and of a cowardice:
We lively pictured, how the one for fame;
The other by compulsion laid about;
Much did the N•m
per isle, that brave ship,
So did the black snake of Bullen, then which
A bonnier vessel never yet spread sail,
But all in vain, both Sun, the Wine and tide,
Revolted all unto our foe men's side,
That we perforce were fain to give them way,
And they are landed, thus my tale is donne,
We have vntimly lost, and they have won.
Then rests there nothing but with present speed,
To join our several forces al in one,
And bid them battle ere they raingc to far,
Come gentle Phillip, let vs hence depart,
This soldiers words have perst thy fathers hart.
Well met my masters: how now, whats the news,
And wherefore are ye laden thus with stuff:
What is it quarter day that you remove,
And carry bag and baggage too?
Quarter day, I and quartering pay I fear:
Have we not heard the news that flies abroad?
What news?
How the French Navy is destroyed at Sea,
And that the English Army is arrived.
What then?
What then quoth you? why first not time to fly,
When envy and destruction is so nigh,
Content thee man, they are far enough from hence,
And will be met I warrant ye to their cost,
Before they break so far into the Realm.
I so the Grasshopper doth spend the time,
In mirthful jollity till Winter come,
And then too late he would redeem his time,
When frozen cold hath nipped his careless head:
He that no sooner will provide a Cloak,
Then when he sees it doth begin to reign,
May peradventure for his negilgence,
Be thoroughly washed when he suspects it not,
We that have charge, and such a train as this,
Must look in time, to look for them and vs,
Least when we would, we cannot be relieved.
Be like you then despair of ill success,
And think your Country will be subjugate.
We cannot tell, tic good to fear the worst.
Yet rather fight, then like unnatural sons,
For sake your loving parents in distress.
Tush they that have already taken arms,
Are many fearful millions in respect
Of that small handful of our enemies:
But tic a rightful quarrel must prevail,
Edward is sonnne unto our late kings sister,
Where Iohn Valoys, is three degrees removed.
Besides, there goes a Prophecy abroad,
Published by one that was a Fryer once,
Whose Oracles have many times proved true,
And now he says the time will shortly
come,
When as a Lyon roused in the west,
Shall carry hence the fluerdeluce of France,
These I can tell ye and such like surmises,
Strike many french men cold unto the heart:
Fly country men and citizens of France,
Sweet flowering peace the root of happy life,
Is quite a bandoned and expulst the land,
Insted of whom ransacked constraining war,
Syts like to Ravens upon your houses topps,
Slaughter and mischief walk within your streets.
And unrestrained make havoc as they pass,
The form whereof even now my self beheld,
Upon this fair mountain whence I came,
For so far of as I directed mine eyes,
I might perceive five Cities all on fire,
Come fields and vineyards burning like an oven,
And as the leaking vapour in the wind,
I turned but a side I like wise might discern.
The poor inhabitants escaped the flame,
Fall numberless upon the soldiers pikes,
Three ways these dreadful ministers of wrath,
Do tread the measures of their tragic march,
Upon the right hand comes the conquering King,
Upon the left is hot unbridled son,
And in the midst our nations glittering host,
All which though distant yet conspire in one,
To leave a desolation where they come,
Fly therefore Citizens if you be wise,
Seek out some habitation further of,
Here if you stay your wives will be a bused,
Your treasure shard before your weeping eyes,
Shelter you your selves for now the storm doth
rise▪
Away, away, me thinks I hear their drums,
Ah wretched France, I greatly fear thy fall,
Thy glory shakes like a tottering wall.
Wheres the French man by whose cunning guide,
We found the shalow of this River Soon,
And had direction how to pass the sea.
Here my good Lord.
How art thou called, tell me thy name.
Gobin de Gray if please your excellence,
Then Gobin for the service thou hast done,
We here enlarge and give thee liberty,
And for recompense beside this good,
Thou shalt receive five hundred marks in gold,
I know not how we should have met our son,
Whom now in heart I wish I might behold.
Good news my Lord the prince is hard at hand,
And with him comes Lord Awdley and the rest,
Whom since our landing we could never meet.
Welcome fair Prince, how hast thou sped my son,
Since thy arrival on the coast of France?
Successfully I thank the gracious heavens,
Some of their strongest Cities we have won,
As Harslen, Lie, Crotag, and Carentigne,
And others wasted, leaving at our heals,
A wide apparent field and beaten path,
For solitariness to progress in,
Yet those that would submit we kindly pardned,
For who in scorn refused our poffered peace,
Endured the penalty of sharpe revenge.
Ah France, why shouldest thou be this obstinate,
Against the kind embrace of thy friends,
How gently had we thought to touch thy breast,
And set our foot upon thy tender mould,
But that in froward and disdainful pride
Thou like a skittish and untamed coult,
Dost start aside and strike vs with thy heals,
But tel me Ned, in all thy warlike course,
Hast thou not seen the usurping King of France.
Yes my good Lord, and not two owers ago,
With full a hundred thousand fighting men,
Upon the one side with the rivers bank,
And on the other both his multitudes,
I feared he would have cropped our smaller power,
But happily perceiving your approach,
He hath with drawn himself to Cressey plains,
Where as it seems by his good array.
He means to bid vs battle presently,
He shall be welcome thats the thing we crave.
Edward know that Iohn the true king of France,
Musing thoust o•ldst encroach upon his land,
And in thy tyrannous proceeding slay,
His faithful subjects, and subvert his Towns,
Spits in thy face, and in this manner following,
Obraids thee with thine arrogant intrusion,
First I condeme thee for a fugitive,
A thievish pirate, and a needy mate,
One that hath either no abiding place,
Or else inhabiting some barren soil,
Where neither hey•b
or f•utfull grain is had,
Doest altogether live by pilfering,
Next, insomuch thou hast infringed thy faith,
Broke leage and solemn covenant made with me,
I hold thee for a false pernicious wretch,
And last of all, although I scorn to cope
With one such inferior to my self,
Yet in respect thy thirst is all for gold,
They labour rather to be feared then loved,
To satisfy thy lust in either part
Here am I come and with me have I brought,
Exceeding store of treasure, perle, and coin,
Leave therefore now to persecute the weak,
And armed entering conflict with the armed,
Let it be seen mongest other petty thefts,
How thou can win this pillage manfully.
If gall or wormwood have a pleasant taste,
Then is thy salutation honey sweet,
But as the one hath no such property,
So is the other most satirical:
Yet wot how I regard thy worthless tants,
If thou have uttered them to foil my fame,
Or dim the reputation of my birth,
Know that thy wolfish barking cannot hurt,
If slily to insinuate with the world,
And with a strumpets artifitiall line,
To paint thy vicious and deformed cause,
Bee well assured the counterfeit will fade,
And in the end thy foul defects be seen,
But if thou did it to provoke me on,
As who should say I were but timorous,
Or coldly negligent did need a spur,
Bethink thy self howe slack I was at sea,
Now since my landing I have won no towns,
Entered no further but upon the coast,
And there have ever since securely slept,
But if I have bin other wise employed,
Imagine Valoys whether I intende
Toskirmish, not for pillage but for the Crown,
Which thou dost wear and that I vow to have,
Or one of vs shall fall in to this grave,
Look not for cross invectives at our hands,
Or railing execrations of despite,
Let creeping serpents hide in hollow banks,
Sting with their tongues; we have remorseless swords,
And they shall plead for vs and our affairs,
Yet thus much briefly by my fathers leave,
As all the immodest poison of thy throat,
Is scandalous and most notorious lies,
And our pretended quarrel is truly just,
So end the battle when we meet to day,
May either of vs prosper and prevail,
Or luckless cursed, receive eternal shame.
That needs no further question, and I know
His conscience witnesses it is my right,
Therefore Valoys say, wilt thou yet resign,
Before the sickles thrust into the Corn,
Or that kindled fury, turn to flame:
Edward I know what right thou hast in France,
And ere I basely will resign my Crown,
This Champion field shall be a poole of blood,
And all our prospect as a slaughter house,
I that approves thee tyrant what thou art,
No father, king, or shepherd of thy realm,
But one that tears her entrails with thy hands,
And like a thirsty tiger suckst her blood.
You peers of France, why do you follow him,
That is so prodigal to spend your lives?
Whom should they follow, aged impotent,
But he that is their true borne sovereign?
Obraidst thou him, because within his face,
Time hath ingraud deep characters of age:
Know that these grave scholars of experience,
Like stiff grown oaks, will stand unmouable,
When whirl wind quickly turns up younger trees.
Was ever any of thy fathers house king,
But thy self, before this present time,
Edwards great linage by the mothers side,
Five hundred years hath held the sceptre
up,
Judge then conspirators by this descent,
Which is the true borne sovereign this or that.
Father range your battles, prate no more,
These English fame would spend the time in wodrs,
That night approaching, they might escape unfought.
Lords and my loving Subjects knows the time,
That your intended force must bide the touch,
Therefore my friends consider this in brief,
He that you fight for is your natural King,
He against whom you fight a forrener:
He that you fight for rules in clemency,
And fems you with a mild and gentle bites,
He against whom you fight if hee prevail,
Will straight in throne himself in tyranny,
Make slaves of you, and with a heavy hand
Curtal and courb your sweetest liberty.
Then to protect your Country and your King,
Let but the haughty Courage of your hearts,
Answer the number of your able hands,
And we shall quickly chase their fugitives,
For whats this Edward but a belly god,
A tender and lascivious wantonness,
That tother day was almost dead for love,
And what I pray you is his goodly guard,
Such as but scant them of their chines of beef,
And take away their downy featherbedes,
And presently they are as resty stiff,
As it were a many over ridden jade,
Then French men scorn that such should be your Lords
And rather bind ye them in captive bands,
Viue le Roy, God save King Iohn of France.
Now on this plain of Cressie spread your selves,
And Edward when thou dare, begin the fight:
We presently will meet thee Iohn of France,
And English Lords let vs resolve the day,
Either to clear vs of that scandalous crime,
Or be entombed in our innocence,
And Ned, because this battle is the first,
That ever yet thou foughtest in pitched field,
As ancient custom is of Martialists,
To dub thee with the tip of chivalry,
In solemn manner wee will give thee arms,
Come therefore Heralds, orderly bring forth,
A strong attirement for the prince my son.
Edward Plantagenet, in the name of God,
As with this armour I impall thy breast,
So be thy noble unrelenting heart,
Wald in with flint of matchless fortitude,
That never base affections enter there,
Fight and be valiant, conquer where thou come,
Now follow Lords, and do him honour to.
Edward Plantagenet prince of Wales,
As I do set this helmet on thy head,
Where with the chamber of this brain is fenced,
So may thy temples with Bellonas hand,
Be still adorned with laurel victory,
Fight and be valiant, conquer where thou come.
Edward Plantagenet prince of Wales,
Receive this lance into thy manly hand,
Use it in fashion of a brazen pen,
To draw forth bloody stratagems in France,
And print thy valiant deeds in honours book,
Fight and be valiant, vanquish where thou come.
Edward Plantagener prince of Wales,
Hold take this target, wear it on thy arm,
And may the view thereof like Perscus shield,
Astonish and transform thy gazing foes
To senseless images of meger death,
Fight and be valiant, couquer where thou come.
Now wants there nought but knighthood, which deferd
Wee leave till thou hast won it in the
field,
My gracious father and ye forward peers,
This honour you have done me animates,
And cheers my greene yet scarce appearing strength,
With comfortable good persaging signs,
No otherwise then did old Iacobes words,
When as he breathed his blessings on his sons,
These hallowed gifts of yours when I profane,
Or use them not to glory of my God,
To patronage the fatherless and poor,
Or for the benefit of Englands peace,
Be numb my joints, wax feeble both mine arms,
Wither my hart that like a sapless tree,
I may remain the map of infamy.
Then this our steelde Battles shall be rainged,
The leading of the vowarde Ned is thine,
To dignify whose lusty spirit the more
We temper it with Audlys gravity,
That co••age and
experience joined in one,
Your manage may be second unto none,
For the mayne battles I will guide my self,
And Derby in the rereward march behind,
That orderly disposed and set in ray,
Let vs to horse and God grant vs the day.
Oh Lorraine say, what mean our men to fly,
Our number is far greater then our foes,
The garrison of Genoacs my Lord,
That cam from Paris weary with their march,
Grudging to be suddenly employed,
No sooner in the forefront took their place.
But strait retiring so dismayed the rest,
As likewise they betook themselves to flight
In which for hast to make a safe escape,
More in the clustering throng are pressed to
death,
Then by the enemy a thousand fold.
O haplesse fortune, let vs yet assay,
If we can counsel some of them to stay.
Lord Audley, whiles our son is in the chase,
With draw our powers unto this little hill,
And here a season let vs breath our selves,
I will my Lord.
Just dooming heaven, whose secret providence,
To our gross judgment is inscrutable,
How are we bound to praise thy wondrous works,
That hast this day given way unto the right,
And made the wicked stumble at them selves.
Rescue king Edward, rescue, for thy son,
Rescue Artoys, what is he prisoner?
Or by violence fell beside his horse.
Neither my Lord, but narrowly beset,
With turning Frenchmen, whom he did pursue,
As tic impossible that he should scope.
Except your highness presently descend.
Tut let him fight, we gave him arms to day.
And he is laboring for a knighthood man.
The Prince my Lord, the Prince, oh succour him,
Hes close encompassed with a world of odds.
Then will he win a world of honour to,
If he by valour can redeem him thence,
If not, what remedy, we have more sons,
Then one to comfort our declining age.
Renowned Edward, give me leave I pray,
To lead my soldiers where I may relieve,
Your Graces son, in danger to be slain,
The snares of French, like Emmets on a bank,
Muster about him whilst he Lion like,
Entangled in the net of their assaults,
Frantiquely wrends and bits the woven toil,
But all in vain, he cannot free him self.
Audley content, I will not have a man,
On pain of death sent forth to succour him:
This is the day, ordained by destiny,
To season his courage with those grievous thoughts,
That if he breaks out, Nestors years on earth,
Will make him savor still of this exploit.
Ah but he shall not live to see those days,
Why then his Ephitaph, is lasting praise.
Yet good my Lord, tic too much wilfulness,
To let his blood be spilt that may be saude,
Exclaim no more, for none of you can tell,
Whether a borrowed aid will serve or no,
Perhaps he is already slain or tan:
And dare a Falcon when shees in her flight,
And ever after sheele be huggard like:
Let Edward be delivered by our hands,
And still in danger heal expect the like,
But if himself, himself redeem from thence,
He will have vanquished cheerful death and fear,
And ever after dread their force no more,
Then if they were but babes or Captive slaves.
O cruel Father, farewell Edward then.
Farewell sweet Prince, the hope of chivalry,
O would my life might ransom him from death.
But soft me thinks I hear,
The dismal charge of Trumpets loud retreat:
All are not slain I hope that went with him,
Some will return with tidings good or bad.
O joyful sight, victorious Edward lives.
Welcome brave Prince.
Welcome Plantagenet.
 
 First
having donne my duty as beseemed
Lords I•e greet you
all with hearty thanks,
And now behold after my winters toil,
My painful voyage on the boisterous sea,
Of wars devouring gulphes and steely rocks,
I bring my fraught unto the wished port,
My Summers hope, my travels sweet reward:
And here with humble duty I present,
This sacrifice, this first fruit of my sword,
Cropped and cut down even at the gate of death:
The king of Boheme father whom I slue,
Whom you said, had entrenched me round about,
And lay as thick upon my battered crest,
As on an Anu•ll with
their ponderous glaues,
Yet marble courage, still did underprop,
And when my weary arms with often blows,
Like the continual laboring Wood-mans Axe,
That is enioynd to fell a load of Oaks,
Began to falter, straight I would recover:
My gifts you gave me, and my zealous vow,
And then new courage made me fresh again,
That in despite I c•a•d my passage
forth.
And put the multitude to speedy flight: 
Lo this hath Edwards hand filled your request,
And done I hope the duty of a Knight
I well thou hast deserved a knight-hood Ned,
And therefore with thy sword, yet reeking warm,
With blood of those that fought to be thy bane,
Arise Prince Edward, trusty knight at arms,
This day thou hast confounded me with joy,
And proud thy self fit heir unto a king:
Here is a note my gracious Lord of those,
That in this conflict of our foes were slain,
Eleven Princes of esteem, Four score
Barons,
A hundred and twenty knights, and thirty thousand
Common soldiers, and of our men a thousand.
Our God be praised, Now Iohn of France I hope,
Thou know King Edward for no wantonness,
No love sick cockney nor his soldiers jade,
But which way is the fearful king escaped?
Towards Poyctiers noble father, and his sons,
Ned, thou and Audley shall pursue them still,
Myself and Derby will to Calice straight;
And there begyrt that Haven town with siege:
Now lies it on an upshot, therefore strike,
And wistly follow whiles the games on foot.
What Pictures this.
A Pelican my Lord,
Wounding her bosom with her crooked beak,
That so her nest of young ones might be fed,
With drops of blood that issue from her hart,
The motto Sic &amp; vos, and so should you,
My Lord of Salisbury since by our aide,
Mine enemy Sir Charles of Bloys is slain,
And I again am quietly possessed,
In Btittaines Dukedom, know that I resolve,
For this kind furtherance of your king and you,
To swear allegiance to his majesty:
In figne where of receive this Coronet,
Bear it unto him, and with all mine other,
Never to be but Edwards faithful friend.
I take it Mountsort, thus I hope ear long,
The whole Dominions of the Realm of France
Will be surrendered to his conquering hand: 
Now if I knew but safely how to pass,
I would to Calice gladly meet his Grace,
Whether I am by letters certified.
Yet he intends to have his host remooude,
It shall be so, this policy will serve,
Ho whose within? bring Villiers to me.
Villiers, thou know thou art my prisoner,
And that I might for ransom if I would,
Require of thee a hundred thousand Francks,
Or else retain and keep thee captive still:
But so it is, that for a smaller charge,
Thou moist be quit and if thou wilt thy self,
And this it is, procure me but a passport,
Of Charles the Duke of Normandy, that I,
Without restraint may have recourse to Callis,
Through all the Countries where he hath to doe.
Which thou moist easily obtain I think,
By reason I have often heard thee say,
He and thou were students once together:
And then thou shalt be set at liberty,
How says thou, wilt thou undertake to do it?
I will my Lord, but I must speak with him.
Why so thou shalt, take Horse and post from hence,
Only before thou goosed, swear by thy faith,
That if thou can not compass my desire,
Thou wilt return my prisoner back again,
And that shall be sufficient warrant for me.
To that condition I agree my Lord,
And will unfeignedly perform the same.
Farewell Villiers,
Thus once I mean to try a French mans faith.
Since they refuse our proffered league my Lord,
And will not op their gates and let vs in,
We will entrench our selves on every side,
That neither vituals, nor supply of men,
May come to succour this accursed town,
Famine shall combat where our swords are stopped.
The promised aid that made them stand aloof,
Is now retired and gone an other way:
It will repent them of their stubborn will,
But what are these poor ragged slaves my Lord?
Ask what they are, it seems they come from Callis.
You wretched patterns of despair and woe,
What are you living men, er gliding ghosts,
Crept from your graves to walk upon the earth,
No ghosts my Lord, but men that breath a life,
Far worse then is the quiet sleep of death:
Wee are distressed poor inhabitants,
That long have been deseased, sick and lame;
And now because we are not fit to serve,
The Captain of the town hath thrust vs forth,
That so expense of victuals may be saved.
A charitable deed no doubt, and worthy praise:
But how do you imagine then to speed?
We are your enemies in such a case,
We can no less but put ye to the sword,
Since when we proffered truce, it was refused,
And if your grace no otherwise vouchsafe,
As welcome death is unto vs as life.
Poor silly men, much wronged, and more distressed,
Go Derby go, and see they be relieud,
Command that victuals be appointed them,
And give to every one five Crowns a piece:
The Lion scorns to touch the yielding pray,
And Edwards sword must fresh it self in such,
As wilful stubbornnes hath made perverse.
Lord Persie welcome: whats the news in England:
The Queen my Lord comes here to your Grace,
And from his highness, and the Lord vicegerent,
I bring this happy tidings of success,
Dauid of Scotland lately up in arms,
Thinking belike he soonest should prevail,
Your highness being absent from the Realm,
Is by the fruitful service of your peers,
And painful travel of the Queen her self:
That big with child was every day in arms,
Vanquished, subdued, and taken prisoner.
Thanks Persie for thy news with all my hart,
What was he took him prisoner in the field.
A Esquire my Lord, Iohn Copland is his name:
Who since entreated by her Majesty,
Denies to make surrender of his prize,
To any but unto your grace alone:
Whereat the Queen is greouously displeased.
Well then wele have a Pursuivant dispatch,
To summon Copland hither out of hand,
And with him he shall bring his prisoner king.
The Queen my Lord her self by this at Sea,
And purposes as soon as wind will serve,
To land at Callis, and to visit you,
She shall be welcome, and to wait her coming,
Isle pitch my tent near to the sandy shore.
The Burgesses of Callis mighty king,
Have by a counsel willingly decreed,
To yield the town and Castle to your hands,
Upon condition it will please your grace,
To grant them benefit of life and goods.
They will so: Then belike they may command,
Dispose, elect, and govern as they list,
No sir, tell them since they did refuse,
Our princely clemency at first proclaimed,
They shall not have it now although they would,
Will accept of nought but fire and sword,
Except within these two days six of them
That are the wealthiest merchant in the town,
Come naked all but for their linen shirts,
With each a halter hanged about his neck,
And prostrate yield themselves upon their knees,
To be afflicted, hanged, or what I please,
And so you may inform their masterships.
Why this it is to trust a broken staff.
Had we not been persuaded Iohn our King,
Would with his army have releeud the town,
We had not stood upon defiance so:
But nowt's past that no man can recall,
And better some do go to wrack then all.
I wounder Villiers, thou shouldest importune me
For one that is our deadly enemy.
Not for his sake my gracious Lord so much,
Am I become an earnest advocate,
As that thereby my ransom will be quit,
Thy ransom man: why neatest thou talk of that?
Art thou not free? and are not all occasions,
That happen for advantage of our foes,
To be accepted of, and stood upon?
No good my Lord except the same be just,
For profit must with honour be comixt,
Or else our actions are but scandalous:
But letting pass these intricate objections,
Wilt please your highness to subscribe or no?
Villiers I will not, nor I cannot do it,
Salisbury shall not have his will so much,
To claim a passport how it pleases himself,
Why then I know the extremity my Loid,
I must return to prison whence I came,
Ch Return, I hope thou wilt not,
What bird that hath escaped the fowlers gin,
Will not beware how shees insnard again:
Or what is he so senseless and secure,
That having hardly past a dangerous gulf,
Will put him self in peril there again.
Ah but it is mine other my gracious Lord,
Which I in conscience may not violate,
Or else a kingdom should not draw me hence.
Thine other, why that doth bind thee to abide:
Hast thou not sworn obedience to thy Prince?
In all things that uprightly he commands:
But either to persuade or threaten me,
Not to perform the covenant of my word,
Is lawless, and I need not to obey.
Why is it lawful for a man to kill,
And not to break a promise with his foe?
To kill my Lord when war is once proclaimed,
So that our quarrel be for wrongs receaude,
No doubt is lawfully permitted vs:
But in an other we must be well advised,
How we do swear, and when we once have sworn,
Not to infringe it though we die therefore:
Therefore my Lord, as willing I return,
As if I were to fly to paradise.
Stay my Villeirs, thine honourable mind,
Deserves to be eternally admired,
Thy suit shall be no longer thus deferd:
Give me the paper, Isle subscribe to it,
And wheretofore I loved thee as Villeirs,
Hereafter Isle embrace thee as my self,
Stay and be still in favour with thy Lord.
I humbly thank your grace, I must dispatch,
And send this passport first unto the Earl,
And then I will attend your highness pleasure.
Do so Villeirs, and Charles when he hath need,
Be such his soldiers, howsoever he speed.
Come Charles and arm thee, Edward is entrapped,
The Prince of Wales is fallen into our hands,
And we have compassed him he cannot scope.
But will your highness fight to day.
What else my son, hes scar•• eight thousand strong
and we are threescore thousand at the least,
I have a prophecy my gracious Lord,
Wherein is written what success is like
To happen vs in this outrageous war,
It was delivered me at Crosses field,
By one that is an aged Hermit there,
when fethered soul shall make thine army tremble,
and flint stones rise and break the battle ray:
Then think on him that doth not now dissemble
For that shall be the hapless dreadful day,
Yet in the end thy foot thou shalt advance,
as far in England, as thy foe in France,
By this it seems we shall be fortunate:
For as it is impossible that stones
Should ever rise and break the battle ray,
Or airy foul make men in arms to quake,
So is it like we shall not be subdued:
Or say this might be true, yet in the end,
Since he doth promise we shall drive him hence,
And forage their Country as they have don ours
By this revenge, that loss will seem the less,
But all are frivolous, fancies, toys and dreams,
Once we are sure we have insnard the son,
Catch we the father after how we can.
Audley the arms of death embrace vs round,
And comfort have we none save that to die,
We pay sower earnest for a sweeter life,
At Cressey field our Clouds of Warlike smoke,
choked up those French mouths, &amp; dissevered them
But now their multitudes of millions hide
Masking as it were the beauteous burning Sun,
Leaving no hope to vs but sullen dark,
And eye less terror of all ending night.
This sudden, mighty, and expedient head,
That they have made, fair Prince is wonderful.
Before vs in the valley lies the king,
Vantagd with all that heaven and earth can yield,
His party stronger battaild then our whole:
His son the braving Duke of Normandy,
Hath trimd the Mountain on our right hand up,
In shining plate, that now the aspiring hill,
Shows like a silver quarry, or an orb
Aloft the which the Banners bannarets,
And new replenished pendants cuff the air,
And beat the winds, that for their gaudiness,
Struggles to kiss them on our left handles,
Phillip the younger issue of the king,
Coting the other hill in such array,
That all his gilded upright pikes do seem,
Straight trees of gold, the pendant leaves,
And their device of Antique heraldry,
Quartred in colours seeming sundy fruits,
Makes it the Orchard of the Hesperides,
Behind vs two the hill doth bear his height,
For like a half Moon opening but one way,
It rounds vs in, there at our backs are lodged,
The fatal Crossbows, and the battle there,
Is governed by the rough Chattillion,
Then thus it stands, the valley for our flight,
The king binds in, the hills on either hand,
Are proudly royalized by his sons,
And on the Hill behind stands certain death,
In pay and service with Chattillion.
Deaths name is much more mighty then his deeds,
Thy parcelling this power hath made it more,
As many sands as these my hands can hold,
are but my handful of so many sands,
Then all the world, and call it but a power:
Easily tan up and quickly thrown away,
But if I stand to count them sand by sand
The number would confound my memory,
And make a thousand millions of a task,
Which briefly is no more indeed then one,
These quarters, spuadrons, and these regiments,
Before, behind vs, and on either hand,
Are but a power, when we name a man,
His hand, his foot, his head hath several strengths,
And being al but one self instant strength,
Why all this many, Audely is but one,
And we can call it all but one mans strength:
He that hath far to go, tells it by miles,
If he should tell the steps, it kills his hart:
The drops are infinite that make a flood,
And yet thou know we call it but a Rain:
There is but one France, one king of France,
That France hath no more kings, and that same king
Hath but the puissant legion of one king?
And we have one, then apprehend no odds,
For one to one, is fair equality.
What tidings messenger, be plain and brief.
The king of France my sovereign Lord and master,
Greets by me his foe, the Prince of Walls,
If thou call forth a hundred men of name
Of Lords, Knights, Esquires and English gentlemen,
And with thy self and those kneel at his feet,
He straight will fold his bloody colours up,
And ransom shall redeem lives forfeited:
If not, this day shall drink more English blood,
Then ere was buried in our British earth,
What is the answer to his proffered mercy?
This heaven that covers France contains the mercy
That draws from me submissive orisons,
That such base breath should vanish from my lips
To urge the plea of mercy to a man,
The Lord forbid, return and tell the king,
My tongue is made of steel, and it shall
beg
My mercy on his coward burgonet.
Tell him my colours are as red as his,
My men as bold, our English arms as strong,
return him my defiance in his face.
I go.
What news with thee?
I he Duke of Normandy my Lord &amp; master
Pitying thy youth is so ingirt with peril,
By me hath sent a nimble jointed jennet,
As swift as ever yet thou did bestride,
And therewithal he counsels thee to fly,
Else death himself hath sworn that thou shalt die.
Back with the beast unto the beast that sent him
Tell him I cannot sit a cowards horse,
Bid him to day bestride the jade himself,
For I will stain my horse quite ore with blood,
And double guild my spurs, but I will catch him,
So tell the capering boy, and get thee gone.
Edward of Wales, Phillip the second son
To the most mighty christian king of France,
Seeing thy bodies living date expird,
All full of charity and christian love,
Commends this book full fraught with prayers,
To thy fair hand, and for thy hour of life,
Entreats thee that thou meditate therein,
And arm thy soul for his long journey towards.
Thus have I done his bidding, and return.
Herald of Phillip greet thy Lord from me,
All good that he can send I can receive,
But think thou not the unadvised boy,
Hath wronged himself in this far tendering me,
Happily he cannot pray without the book,
I think him no divine extemporal,
Then render back this common place of prayer,
To do himself good in adversity,
Besides, he knows not my sins quality,
and therefore knows no prayers for my avail,
Ere night his prayer may be to pray to God,
To put it in my heart to hear his prayer,
So tell the courtly wanton, and be gone.
I go.
How confident their strength and number makes them,
Now Audley sound those silver wings of thine,
And let those milk white messengers of time,
Show thy times learning in this dangerous time,
Thy self art busy, and bit with many broils,
And stratagems sore past with iron pens,
Are texted in thine honourable face,
Thou art a married man in this distress.
But danger woos me as a blushing maid,
Teach me an answer to this perilous time.
To die is all as common as to live,
The one in choice the other holds in chase,
For from the instant we begin to live,
We do pursue and hunt the time to die,
First bud we, then we blow, and after seed,
Then presently we fall, and as a shade
Follows the body, so we sollow death,
If then we hunt for death, why do we fear it?
If we fear it, why do we follow it?
If we do tear, how can we shun it?
If we do fear, with fear we do but aide
The thing we fear, to seize on vs the sooner,
If wee fear not, then no resolved proffer,
Can overthrow the limit of our fate,
For whether ripe or rotten, drop we shall,
as we do draw the lottery of our doom.
Ah good old man, a thousand thousand armours,
These words of thine have buckled on my back,
Ah what an idiot hast thou made of life,
To seek the thing it fears, and how disgraced,
The imperial victory of murdering death,
Since all the lives his conquering arrows
strike,
Seek him, and he not them, to shame his glory,
I will not give a penny for a life,
Nor half a half penny to shun grim death,
Since for to live is but to seek to die,
And dying but beginning of new life,
Let come the hour when he that rules it will,
To live or die I hold indifferent.
A sudden darkness hath defast the sky,
The winds are crept into their caves for fear,
the leaves move not, the world is hushed and still,
the birds cease singing, and the wandering brookes,
Murmur no wonted greeting to their shores,
Silence attends some wonder, and expected
That heaven should pronounce some prophecy,
Where or from whom proceeds this silence Charles?
Our men with open mouths and staring eyes,
Look on each other, as they did attend
Each others words, and yet no creature speaks,
A tongue-tied fear hath made a midnight hour,
and speeches sleep through all the waking regions.
But now the pompeous Sun in all his pride,
Looked through his golden coach upon the world,
and on a sudden hath he hid himself,
that now the under earth is as a grave,
Dark, deadly, silent, and uncomfortable.
 
 Hark, what a deadly outcry do
I hear?
Here comes my brother Phillip.
All dismayed. What fearful words are those thy looks
presage?
A flight, a flight.
Coward what flight? thou least there needs no flight.
A flight.
Awake thy craven powers, and tell on
the substance of that very fear in deed,
Which is so ghastly printed in thy face,
What is the matter?
A flight of ugly ravens
Do croak and hover ore our soldiers heads,
And keep in triangles and cornerd squares,
Right as our forces are imbatteled,
With their approach there came this sudden fog,
Which now hath hid the airy flower of heaven,
And made at noon a night unnatural,
Upon the quaking and dismayed world;
In brief, our soldiers have let fall their arms,
and stand like metamorphosd images,
Bloodless and pale, one gazing on another.
I now I call to mind the prophecy,
But I must give no enter•… to a fear,
Return and horton up
〈◊〉 yielding souls,
Tell them the ravens seeing them in arms,
So many fair against a famished few,
Come but to dine upon their handy work,
and pray upon the carrion that they kill,
For when we see a horse laid down to die,
although not dead, the ravenous birds
Sit watching the departure of his life,
Even so these ravens for the carcases,
Of those poor English that are marked to die,
Hover about, and if they cry to vs,
Tic but for meat that we must kill for them,
Away and comfort up my soldiers,
and sound the trumpets, and at once dispatch
This little business of a silly fraud.
Behold my liege, this knight and forty mo,
Of whom the better part are slain and sled,
With all endeavour sought to break our ranks,
And make their wa•e
to the encompassed prince,
Dispose of him as please your majesty.
Go, &amp; the next bough, soldier, that thou see,
Disgrace it with his body presently,
Eor I doo hold a tree in France too good,
To be the gallows of an English thief.
My Lord of Normandy, I have your pass,
And warrant for my safety through this land.
Villiers procured it for thee, did he not?
He did.
And it is currant, thou shalt freely pass.
I freely to the gallows to be hanged,
Without denial or impediment.
Away with him.
I hope your highness will not so disgrace me,
and dash the virtue of my seal at arms,
He hath my never broken name to show,
Carectred with this princely hand of mine,
and rather let me leave to be a prince,
Than break the stable verdict of a prince,
I doo beseech you let him pass in quiet,
Thou and thy word lie both in my command,
What can thou promise that I cannot break?
Which of these twain is greater infamy,
To disobey thy father or thy self?
Thy word nor no mans may exceed his power,
Nor that same man doth never break his word,
That keeps it to the utmost of his power.
The breach of faith dwells in the souls consent,
Which if thy self without consent doo break,
Thou art not charged with the breach of faith,
Go hang him, for thy lisence lies in me,
and my constraint stands the excuse for thee.
What am I not a soldier in my word?
Then arms adieu, and let them fight that list,
Shall I not give my girdle from my wast,
But with a gordian I shall be controlled,
To say I may not give my things away,
Upon my soul, had Edward prince of VVales
Ingagde his word, writ down his noble hand,
For all your knights to pass his fathers land,
The royal king to grace his warlike son,
Would not alone safe conduct give to them▪
But with all bounty seasted them and
theirs.
Dwelst thou on presidents, then be it so,
Say Englishman of what degree thou art.
An Earl in England, though a prisoner here,
And those that know me call me Salisbury.
Then Salisbury, say whether thou art bound.
To Callice where my liege king Edward is.
To Callice Salisbury, then to Callice pack,
and bid the king prepare a noble grave,
To put his princely son black Edward in,
and as thou trauelst westward from this place,
Some two leagues hence there is a lofty hill,
Whose top seems topless, for the embracing sky,
Doth hide his high head in her a sure bosom,
Upon whose tall top when thy foot attains,
Look back upon the humble vale beneath,
Humble of late, but now made proud with arms,
and thence behold the wretched prince of Wales,
Hooped with a bond of iron round about,
After which sight to Callice spur amain,
and say the prince was smoothered, and not slain,
and tell the king this is not all his ill,
For I will greet him ere he thinks I will,
Away be gone, the smoke but of our shot,
Will choke our foes, though bullets hit them not.
How fares your grace, are you not shot my Lord?
No dear Artoys, but choked with dust and smoke,
And stepped aside for breath and fresher air.
Breath then, and too it again, the amazed French
are quite distract with gazing on the crows,
and were our quivers full of shafts again,
Your grace should see a glorious day of this,
O for more arrows Lord, thats our want.
Courage Artoys, a fig for feathered shafts,
When feathered fowls doo bandy on our side,
What need we fight, and sweat, and keep a coil,
〈…〉 outscolde our
adversaries
Up, up Artoys, the ground it self is armed,
Fire containing flint, command our bows
To hurl away their pretty coloured Ew,
and to it with stones, away Artoys, away,
My soul doth prophecy we win the day.
Our multitudes are in themselves confounded,
Dismayed, and distraught, swift starting fear
Hath bust a cold dismay through all our army,
and every petty disadvantage prompts
The fear possessed abject soul to fly,
My self whose spirit is steel to their dull lead,
What with recalling of the prophecy,
and that our native stones from English arms
Rebel against vs, find my self attainted
With strong surprise of weak and yielding fear.
Fly father fly, the French do kill the French,
Some that would stand, let drive at some that fly,
Our drums strike nothing but discouragement,
Our trumpets sound dishonour, and retire,
The spirit of fear that fears nought but death,
Cowardly works confusion on it self.
Pluck out your eyes, and see not this days shame,
An arm hath beat an army, one poor Dauid
Hath with a stone foiled twenty stout Goliahs,
Some twenty naked staruelings with small flints,
Hath driven back a puissant host of men,
Araid and fenced in all accomplements,
Mordiu they quait at vs, and kill vs up,
No less than forty thousand wicked elders,
Have forty lean slaves this day stoned to death.
O that I were some other countryman,
This day hath set derision on the French,
and all the world wilt blurt and scorn at vs.
What is there no hope left?
No hope but death to bury up our shame,
Make up once more with me the twentieth part
Of those that live, are men in ow to quail,
The feeble handful on the adverse part.
Then charge again, if heaven be not opposd
We cannot loose the day.
On away.
How fares my Lord;
Even as a man may do
That dines at such a bloody feast as this.
I hope my Lord that is no mortal scarre,
No matter if it be, the count is cast,
and in the worst ends but a mortal man,
Good friends convey me to the princely Edward
That in the crimson bravery of my blood,
I may become him with saluting him,
Isle smile and tell him that this open scarre,
Doth end the harvest of his Audleys war.
Now Iohn in France, &amp; lately Iohn of France,
Thy bloody Ensigns are my captive colours,
and you high venting Charles of Normandy,
That once to day sent me a horse to fly,
are now the subjects of my clemency.
Fie Lords, is it not a shame that English boys,
Whose early days are yet not worth a beard,
Should in the bosom of your kingdom thus,
One against twenty beat you up together.
Thy fortune, not thy force hath conquered vs.
an argument that heaven aides the right,
See, see, Artoys doth bring with him along,
the late good counsel giver to my soul,
Welcome Artoys, and welcome Phillip to,
Who now of you or I have need to pray,
Now is the proverb verified in you,
Too bright a morning breeds a
•…ing day.
But say, what grym discoragement comes here,
Alas what thousand armed men of France,
Have writ that note of death in Audleys face:
Speak thou that wooest death with thy careless smile
and look so merrily upon thy grave,
As if thou were enamoured on thine end,
What hungry sword hath so bereaved thy face,
And lopped a true friend from my loving soul:
O Prince thy sweet bemoaning speech to me.
Is as a morneful knell to one dead sick.
Dear Audley if my tongue ring out thy end:
My arms shall be the grave, what may I do,
To win thy life, or to revenge thy death,
If thou wilt drink the blood of captive kings,
Or that it were restorative, command
A Heath of kings blood, and Isle drink to thee,
If honour may dispense for thee with death,
The never dying honour of this day,
Share wholly Audley to thy self and live.
Victorious Prince, that thou art so, behold
A Caesars fame in kings captivity;
If I could hold dim death but at a bay,
Till I did see my liege thy loyal father,
My soul should yield this Castle of my flesh,
This mangled tribute with all willingness;
To darkness consummation, dust and Worms.
Cheerely bold man, thy soul is all to proud,
To yield her City for one little breach,
Should be divorced from her earthly spouse,
By the soft temper of a French mans sword:
Lo, to repair thy life, I give to thee,
Three thousand Marks a year in English land.
I take thy gift to pay the debts I owe:
These two poor Esquires redeemd me from the French
With lusty &amp; deer hazard of their lives;
What thou hast given me I give to them,
And as thou love me Prince, lay thy consent.
To this bequeath in my last testament.
Renowned Audley, live and have from me,
This gift twice doubled to these Esquires and thee
But live or die, what thou hast given away,
To these and theirs shall lasting freedom stay,
Come gentlemen, I will see my friend bestowed,
With in an easy Litter, then wele march,
Proudly toward Callis with triumphant pace,
Unto my royal father, and there bring,
The tribute of my wars, fair France his king.
No more Queen Phillip, pacify your self,
Copland, except he can excuse his fault,
Shall find displeasure written in our looks,
And now unto this proud resisting town,
Soldiers assault, I will no longer stay,
To be deluded by their false delays,
Put all to sword, and make the spoil your own.
Mercy king Edward, mercy gracious Lord.
Gontemptuous villains, call ye now for truce?
Mine ears are stopped against your bootless cries,
Sound drums alarm, draw threatening swords?
Ah noble Prince, take pity on this town,
And hear vs mighty king:
We claim the promise that your highness made,
The two days respit is not yet expired,
And we are come with willingness to bear,
What tortering death or punishment you please,
So that the trembling multitude be saved,
My promise, well I do confess as much;
But I require the chiefest Citizens,
And men of most account that should submit,
You peradventure are but servile grooms,
Or some felonious robbers on the Sea,
Whom apprehended law would execute,
Albeit severity lay dead in vs,
No no ye cannot overreach vs thus,
The Sun dread Lord that in the western fall,
Beholds vs now low brought through misery,
Did in the Orient purple of the morn,
Salute our coming forth when we were known
Or may our portion be with damned fiends,
If it be so, then let our covenant stand,
We take possession of the town in peace,
But for your selves look you for no remorse,
But as imperial justice hath decreed,
Your bodies shall be dragd about these walls,
And after feel the stroke of quartering steel,
This is your dome, go souldiets see it done.
Ah be more mild unto these yielding men,
It is a glorious thing to stablish peace,
And kings approach the nearest unto God,
By giving life and fafety unto men,
As thou intend to be king of France,
So let her people live to call thee king,
For what the sword cuts down or fire hath spoiled
Is held in reputation none of ours.
Although experience teach vs, this is true,
That peaceful quietness brings most delight,
When most of all abuses are controlled,
Yet insomuch, it shall be known that we,
As well can master our affections,
As conquer other by the dynt of sword,
Phillip prevail, we yield to thy request,
These men shall live to boast of clemency,
And tyranny strike terror to thy self.
long live your highness, happy be your reign
Go get you hence, return unto the town,
And if this kindness hath deserved your love,
Learn then to reverence Adieu. as your king. 
Now might we hear of our affairs abroad,
We would till glomy Winter were ore spent,
Dispose our men in garrison a while,
But who comes here?
Copland my Lord, and Dauid King of Scots;
Is this the proud presumtious Esquire of the North,
That would not yield his prisoner to my Queen,
I am my liege a Northern Esquire indeed,
But neither proud nor insolent I trust.
What moude thee then to be so obstinate,
To contradict our royal Queens desire?
No wilful disobedience mighty Lord,
But my desert and public law at arms.
I took the king my self in single fight,
and like a soldier would be loath to loose
The least pre-eminence that I had won.
And Copland straight upon your highness charge,
Is come to France, and with a lowly mind,
Doth vale the bonnet of his victory:
Receive dread Lord the custom of my fraught,
The wealthy tribute of my laboring hands,
Which should long since have been surrendered up
Had but your gracious self bin there in place,
But Copland thou did scorn the kings com∣mand
Neglecting our commission in his name.
His name I reverence, but his person more,
His name shall keep me in alleagaunce still,
But to his person I will bend my knee.
I pray thee Phillip let displeasure pass:
This man doth please me, and I like his words,
For what is he that will attmpt great deeds
and loose the glory that ensues the same,
all rivers have recourse unto the Sea,
and Coplands faith relation to his king,
Kneel therefore down, now rise king Edwards knight,
and to maintain thy state I freely give,
Five hundred marks a year to thee and thine
welcomlord Salisbury, what news from Britain
This mighty king, the Country we have won,
And Charles de Mountford regent of that place,
Presents your highness with this Coronet,
Protesting true allegiance to your Grace.
We thank thee for thy service valiant Earl
Challenge our favour for we owe it thee:
But now my Lord, as this is joyful news,
So must my voice be tragical again,
and I must sing of doleful accidents,
What have our men the overthrow at Poitiers,
Ores our son beset with too much odds?
He was my Lord, and as my worthless self,
With forty other serviceable knights,
Under safe conduct of the Dolphins seal,
Did travail that way, finding him distressed,
A troupe of Lances met vs on the way,
Surprised and brought vs prisoners to the king,
Who proud of this, and eager of revenge,
Commanded straight to cut of all our heads,
And surely we had died but that the Duke,
More full of honour then his angry sire,
Procured our quick deliverance from thence,
But ere we went, salute your king, quoth hee,
Bid him provide a funeral for his son,
To day our sword shall cut his thread of life,
And sooner then he thinks wele be with him:
To quittance those displeasures he hath done,
This said, we past, not daring to reply,
Our harts were dead, our looks diffusd and wan,
Wandering at last we climbed unto a hill,
From whence although our grief were much be∣fore
Yet now to see the occasion with our eyes,
Did thrice so much increase our heaviness,
For there my Lord, oh there we did descry
Down in a valley how both armies lay:
The French had cast their trenches like a ring,
And every Barricados open front,
Was thick embossed with brazen ordinance.
Here stood a battle of ten thousand
horse,
There twice as many pikes in quadrant wise,
Here Crossbows and deadly wounding darts,
And in the midst like to a slender point,
Within the compass of the horizon,
as it were a rising bubble in the sea.
A Hasle wand a midst a wood of Pines,
Or as a bear fast chaind unto a stake,
Stood famous Edward still expecting when
Those dogs of France would fasten on his flesh
Anon the death procuring knell begins,
Off go the Cannons that with trembling noise,
Did shake the very Mountain where they stood,
Then sound the Trumpets clangor in the air,
The battles join, and when we could no more,
Discern the difference twixt the friend and so,
So intricate the dark confusion was,
Away we turned our watery eyes with sighs,
as black as powder fuming into smoke,
And thus I fear, unhappy have I told,
The most untimely tale of Edwards fall.
Ah me, is this my welcome into France:
Is this the comfort that I looked to have,
When I should meet with my beloved son:
Sweet Ned, I would thy mother in the sea
Had been prevented of this mortal grief.
Content thee Phillip, tic not tears will serve,
To call him back, if he be taken hence,
Comfort thy self as I do gentle Queen,
With hope of sharpe unheard of dire revenge,
He bids me to provide his funeral.
And so I will, but all the Peers in France,
Shall mourners be, and weep out bloody tears,
Until their empty veins be dry and sere
The pillars of his hearse shall be his bones,
The mould that covers him, their City ashes,
His knell the groaning cries of dying men,
And in the stead of tapers on his tomb,
an hundred fifty towers shall burning blaze,
While we bewail our valiant sons decease.
Rejoice my Lord, ascend the imperial throne
The mighty and redoubted prince of Wales,
Great servitor to bloody Mars in arms,
The French mans terror and his countries fame,
Triumphant rides like a Roman peer,
and lowly at his stirrup comes a foot
King Iohn of France, together with his son,
In captive bonds, whose diadem he brings
To crown thee with, and to proclaim thee king
Away with mourning Phillip, wipe thine eyes
Sound Trumpets, welcome in Plantaginet.
As things long lost when they are found again,
So doth my son rejoice his fathers heart,
For whom even now my soul was much perplexed
Be this a token to express my joy, 
For inward passions will not let me speak.
My gracious father, here receive the gift,
This wreath of conquest, and reward of war,
Got with as mickle peril of our lives,
as ere was thing of price before this day,
Install your highness in your proper right,
and here withal I render to your hands
These prisoners, chief occasion of our strife.
So Iohn of France, I see you keep your word
You promised to be sooner with our self
Then we did think for, and tic so in deed,
But had you done at first as now you do,
How many civil towns had stood untouched,
That now are turned to ragged heaps of stones?
How many peoples lives might thou have saud,
that are untimely sunk into their graves.
Edward, recount not things irrevocable,
Tell me what ransom thou require to
have?
Thy ransom Iohn, hereafter shall be known
But first to England thou must cross the seas,
To see what entertainment it affords,
How ere it false, it cannot be so bad,
as ours hath bin since we arrived in France,
Accursed man, of this I was foretold,
But did misconstrue what the prophet told.
Now father this petition Edward makes,
To thee whose grace hath bin his strongest shield
That as thy pleasure chose me for the man,
To be the instrument to show thy power,
So thou wilt grant that many princes more,
Bred and brought up within that little Isle,
May still be famous for like victories:
and for my part, the bloody scars I bear,
The weary nights that I have watched in field,
The dangerous conflicts I have often had,
The fearful menaces were proffered me,
The heate and cold, and what else might displease
I wish were now redoubled twenty fold,
So that hereafter ages when they read
The painful traffike of my tender youth
Might thereby be inflamed with such resolve,
as not the territories of France alone,
But likewise Spain, Turkie, and what countries else
That justly would provoke fair Englands ire,
Might at their presence tremble and retire.
Here English Lords we do proclaim a rest
an intercession of our painful arms,
Sheath up your swords, refresh your weary limbs,
Peruse your spoils, and after we have breathed.
a day or two within this haven town,
God willing then for England wele be shipped,
Where in a happy hour I trust we shall
Arrive three kings, two princes, and a queen.

