AS I remember Adam, it was upon this fashion bequeathed me by will, but poor a thousand Crowns, and as thou saift, charged my bro∣there on his blessing to breed me well: and there begins my sadness: My brother Iaques he keeps at school, and report speaks goldenly of his profit: for my part, he keeps me rustically at home, or (to speak more properly) stays me here at home vnkept: for call you that keeping for a gentleman of my birth, that dif∣fers not from the stalling of an Ox? his horses are bred better, for besides that they are fair with their feeding, they are taught their manage, and to that end Riders dearly hired: but I (his brother) gain nothing under him but growth, for the which his Animals on his dunghills are as much bound to him as I: besides this no∣thing that he so plentifully gives me, the something that nature gave me, his countenance seems to take from me: hee lets me feed with his Hinds, bars me the place of a brother, and as much as in him lies, mines my gentility with my education. This is it Adam that grieves me, and the spirit of my Father, which I think is within me, begins to mutiny against this servitude. I will no longer endure it, though yet I know no wise remedy how to avoid it.
Yonder comes my Master, your brother.
Go apart Adam, and thou shalt hear how he will shake me up.
Now Sir, what make you here?
Nothing: I am not taught to make any thing.
What mar you then sir?
Marry sir, I am helping you to mar that which God made, a poor unworthy brother of yours with idleness.
Marry sir be better employed, and be nought a while.
Shall I keep your hogs, and eat husks with them? what prodigal portion have I spent, that I should come to such penury?
Know you where you are sir?
O sir, very well: here in your Orchard.
Know you before whom sir?
I, better then him I am before knows me: I know you are my eldest brother, and in the gentle con∣dition of blood you should so know me: the curtsy of nations allows you my better, in that you are the first borne, but the same tradition takes not away my blood, were there twenty brothers betwixt vs: I have as much of my father in me, as you, albeit I confess your com∣ming before me is nearer to his reverence.
What Boy.
Come, come elder brother, you are too young in this.
Wilt thou lay hands on me villain?
I am no villain: I am the youngest son of Sir Rowland de Boys, he was my father, and he is thrice a vile∣lain that says such a father begot villains: were thou not my brother, I would not take this hand from thy throat, till this other had pulled out thy tongue for saying so, thou hast raild on thy self.
Sweet Masters bee patient, for your Fathers remembrance, be at accord.
Let me go I say.
I will not till I please: you shall hear me: my father charged you in his will to give me good educate∣on: you have trained me like a peasant, obscuring and hiding from me all gentleman-like qualities: the spirit of my father grows strong in me, and I will no longer endure it: therefore allow me such exercises as may be∣come a gentleman, or give me the poor allottery my father left me by testament, with that I will go buy my fortunes.
And what wilt thou do? beg when that is spent? Well sir, get you in. I will not long be troubled with you: you shall have some part of your will, I pray you leave me.
I will no further offend you, then becomes me for my good.
Get you with him, you old dog.
Is old dog my reward: most true, I have lost my teeth in your service: God be with my old ma∣ster, he would not have spoke such a word. Ex. Orl. Ad.
Is it even so, begin you to grow upon me? I will physic your ranckenesse, and yet give no thousand crowns neither: holla Dennis.
Calls your worship?
Was not Charles the Dukes Wrestler here to speak with me?
So please you, he is here at the door, and im∣portunes access to you.
Call him in: twill be a good way: and to more∣row the wrestling is.
Good morrow to your worship.
Good Monsieur Charles: what's the new news at the new Court?
There's no news at the Court Sir, but the old news: that is, the old Duke is banished by his yon∣ger brother the new Duke, and three or four loving
Lords have put themselves into voluntary exile with him, whose lands and revenues enrich the new Duke, therefore he gives them good leave to wander.
Can you tell if Rosalind the Dukes daughter bee banished with her Father?
O no; for the Dukes daughter her Cousin so loves her, being ever from their Cradles bred together, that hee would have followed her exile, or have died to stay behind her; she is at the Court, and no less beloved of her Uncle, then his own daughter, and never two La∣dies loved as they doe.
Where will the old Duke live?
They say hee is already in the Forest of Arden, and a many merry men with him; and there they live like the old Robin Hood of England: they say many young Gentlemen flock to him every day, and fleet the time carelessly as they did in the golden world.
What, you wrestle to morrow before the new Duke.
Marry doe I sir: and I came to acquaint you with a matter: I am given sir secretly to understand, that your younger brother Orlando hath a disposition to come in disguised against me to try a fall: to morrow sir I wrestle for my credit, and hee that escapes me without some broken limb, shall acquit him well: your brother is but young and tender, and for your love I would bee loath to foil him, as I must for my own honour if hee come in: therefore out of my love to you, I came hither to acquaint you withal, that either you might stay him from his intendment, or brooke such disgrace well as he shall run into, in that it is a thing of his own search, and altogether against my will.
Charles, I thank thee for thy love to me, which thou shalt find I will most kindly require: I had my self notice of my Brothers purpose herein, and have by vnder-hand means laboured to dissuade him from it; but he is resolute. Isle tell thee Charles, it is the stubbor∣nest young fellow of France, full of ambition, an envious emulator of every mans good parts, a secret &amp; villainous contriver against me his natural brother: therefore use thy discretion, I had as liese thou did break his neck as his finger. And thou were best look to it; for if thou dost him any slight disgrace, or if hee doe not mightily grace himself on thee, hee will practise against thee by poison, entrap thee by some treacherous devise, and no∣for leave thee till he hath tan thy life by some indirect means or other: for I assure thee, (and almost with tears I speak it) there is not one so young, and so vile∣lanous this day living. I speak but brotherly of him, but should I anathemize him to thee, as hee is, I must blush, and weep, and thou must look pale and wonder.
I am heartily glad I came hither to you: if hee come to morrow, Isle give him his payment: if ever hee go alone again, Isle never wrestle for prize more: and so God keep your worship.
Farewell good Charles. Now will I stir this Game∣ster: I hope I shall see an end of him; for my soul (yet I know not why) hates nothing more then he: yet hoe's gentle, never schooled, and yet learned, full of noble devise, of all sorts enchantingly beloved, and indeed so much in the heart of the world, and especially of my own people, who best know him, that I am altogether misprised: but it shall not be so long, this wrestler shall clear all: nothing remains, but that I kindle the boy thither, which now Isle go about.
I pray thee Rosalind, sweet my Cos, be merry.
Dear Cellia; I show more mirth then I am mi∣stress of, and would you yet were merrier: unless you could teach me to forget a banished father, you must not learn me how to remember any extraordinary plea∣sure.
Herein I see thou love me not with the full weight that I love thee; if my Uncle thy banished father had banished thy Uncle the Duke my Father, so thou had been still with me, I could have taught my love to take thy father for mine; so would thou, if the truth of thy love to me were so righteously tempered, as mine is to thee.
Well, I will forget the condition of my estate, to rejoice in yours.
You know my Father hath no child, but I, nor none is like to have; and truly when he dies, thou shalt be his heir; for what hee hath taken away from thy fa∣there perforce, I will render thee again in affection: by mine honour I will, and when I break that oath, let me turn monster: therefore my sweet Rose, my dear Rose, be merry.
From henceforth I will Cos, and devise sports: let me see, what think you of falling in Love?
Marry I prithee doe, to make sport withal: but love no man in good earnest, nor no further in sport ney∣there; then with safety of a pure blush, thou moist in ho∣nor come off again.
What shall be our sport then?
Let vs sit and mock the good housewife For∣tune from her wheel, that her gifts may henceforth bee bestowed equally.
I would wee could doe so: for her benefits are mightily misplaced, and the bountiful blind woman doth most mistake in her gifts to women.
It is true, for those that she makes fair, she scarce makes honest, &amp; those that she makes honest, she makes very ill fauouredly.
Nay now thou goosed from Fortunes office to Na∣tures: Fortune reigns in gifts of the world, not in the lineaments of Nature.
No; when Nature hath made a fair creature, may she not by Fortune fall into the fire? though nature hath given vs wit to flout at Fortune, hath not Fortune sent in this fool to cut off the argument?
Indeed there is fortune too hard for nature, when fortune makes natures natural, the cutter off of natures wit.
Peradventure this is not Fortunes work neither, but Natures, who perceives our natural wits too dull to reason of such goddesses, hath sent this Natural for our whetstone▪ for always the dullness of the fool, is the whetstone of the wits. How now Wit, whether wander you?
Mistress, you must come away to your father.
Were you made the messenger?
No by mine honour, but I was bid to come for you
Where learned you that oath fool?
Of a certain Knight, that swore by his Honour they were good Pan-cakes, and swore by his Honour the Mustard was nought: Now Isle stand to it, the Pancakes were nought, and the Mustard was good, and yet was not the Knight forsworn.
How prove you that in the great heap of your knowledge?
I marry, now vnmuzzle your wisdom.
Stand you both forth now: stroke your chins, and swear by your beards that I am a knave.
By our beards (if we had them) thou art.
By my knavery (if I had it) then I were: but if you swear by that that is not, you are not forsworn: no more was this knight swearing by his Honour, for he no∣for had any; or if he had, he had sworn it away, before ever he saw those Pancakes, or that Mustard.
Prithee, who is it that thou means't?
One that old Frederick your Father loves.
My Fathers love is enough to honour him enough; speak no more of him, you'll be whipped for taxation one of these days.
The more pity that fools may not speak wise∣lie, what Wisemen do foolishly.
By my troth thou says true: For, since the little wit that fools have was silenced, the little foolery that wise men have makes a great show; Here comes Mon∣sieur the Beu.
With his mouth full of news.
Which he will put on vs, as Pigeons feed their young.
Then shall we be newes-cram'd.
All the better: we shall be the more Marketable. Bonjour Monsieur le Beu, what's the news?
Fair Princess, you have lost much good sport.
Sport: of what colour?
What colour Madame? How shall I aun∣swer you?
As wit and fortune will.
Or as the destinies decrees.
Well said, that was laid on with a trowel.
Nay, if I keep not my rank.
Thou loosest thy old smell.
You amaze me Ladies: I would have told you of good wrestling, which you have lost the sight of.
Yet tell vs the manner of the Wrestling.
I will tell you the beginning: and if it please your Ladyships, you may see the end, for the best is yet to doe, and here where you are, they are coming to perform it.
Well, the beginning that is dead and buried.
There comes an old man, and his three sons.
I could match this beginning with an old tale.
Three proper young men, of excellent growth and presence.
With bills on their necks: Be it known unto all men by these presents.
The eldest of the three, wrestled with Charles the Dukes Wrestler, which Charles in a moment threw him, and broke three of his ribs, that there is little hope of life in him: So he served the second, and so the third: yonder they lie, the poor old man their Father, making such pitiful dole over them, that all the behol∣ders take his part with weeping.
Alas.
But what is the sport Monsieur, that the Ladies have lost?
Why this that I speak of.
Thus men may grow wiser every day. It is the first time that ever I heard breaking of ribs was sport for Ladies.
Or I, I promise thee.
But is there any else longs to see this broken Music in his sides? Is there yet another dotes upon rib-breaking? Shall we see this wrestling Cousin?
You must if you stay here, for here is the place appointed for the wrestling, and they are ready to perform it.
Yonder sure they are coming. Let vs now stay and see it.
Come on, since the youth will not be entreated
His own peril on his forwardness.
Is yonder the man?
Even he, Madam.
Alas, he is too young: yet he looks successfully
How now daughter, and Cousin:
Are you crept hither to see the wrestling?
I my Liege, so please you give vs leave.
You will take little delight in it, I can tell you there is such odds in the man: In pity of the challen∣gers youth, I would fine dissuade him, but he will not bee entreated. Speak to him Ladies, see if you can move him.
Call him hither good Monsieuer Le Beu.
Do so: Isle not be by.
Monsieur the Challenger, the Princess calls for you.
I attend them with all respect and duty.
Young man, have you challenged Charles the Wrestler?
No fair Princess: he is the general challenger, I come but in as others do, to try with him the strength of my youth.
Young Gentleman, your spirits are too bold for your years: you have seen cruel proof of this mans strength, if you saw your self with your eyes, or knew your self with your judgment, the fear of your aduen∣ture would counsel you to a more equal enterprise. We pray you for your own sake to embrace your own safe∣tie, and give over this attempt.
Do young Sir, your reputation shall not therefore be misprised: we will make it our suite to the Duke, that the wrestling might not go forward.
I beseech you, punish me not with your harde thoughts, wherein I confess me much guilty to deny so fair and excellent Ladies any thing. But let your fair eyes, and gentle wishes go with me to my trial; wherein if I bee foiled, there is but one shamed that was never gracious: if killed, but one dead that is willing to be so: I shall do my friends no wrong, for I have none to lament me: the world no injury, for in it I have nothing: only in the world I fill up a place, which may bee better supplied, when I have made it empty.
The little strength that I have, I would it were with you.
And mine to eeke out hers.
Fare you well: pray heaven I be deceived in you.
Your hearts desires be with you.
Come, where is this young gallant, that is so desirous to lie with his mother earth?
Ready Sir, but his will hath in it a more modest working.
You shall try but one fall.
No, I warrant your Grace you shall not entreat him to a second, that have so mightily persuaded him from a first.
You mean to mock me after: you should not have mocked me before: but come your ways.
Now Hercules, be thy speed young man.
I would I were invisible, to catch the strong fell∣low by the leg.
Oh excellent young man.
If I had a thunderbolt in mine eye, I can tell who should down.
No more, no more.
Yes I beseech your Grace, I am not yet well breathed.
How dost thou Charles?
He cannot speak my Lord.
Bear him away:
What is thy name young man?
Orlando my Liege, the youngest son of Sir To∣land de Boys.
I would thou had been son to some man else,
The world esteemed thy father honourable,
But I did find him still mine enemy:
Thou should have better pleased me with this deed,
Had thou descended from another house:
But fare thee well, thou art a gallant youth,
I would thou had told me of another Father.
Were I my Father (Cos) would I do this?
I am more proud to be Sir Rolands son,
His youngest son, and would not change that calling
To be adopted heir to Fredricke.
My Father loved Sir Roland as his soul,
And all the world was of my Fathers mind,
Had I before known this young man his son,
I should have given him tears unto entreaties,
Ere he should thus have ventured.
Gentle Cousin,
Let vs go thank him, and encourage him:
My Fathers rough and envious disposition
Sticks me at heart: Sir, you have well deserved,
If you doe keep your promises in love;
But justly as you have exceeded all promise,
Your Mistress shall be happy.
Gentleman,
Wear this for me: one out of suites with fortune
That could give more, but that her hand lacks means.
Shall we go Cos?
I: fare you well fair Gentleman.
Can I not say, I thank you? My better parts
Are all thrown down, and that which here stands up
Is but a quentin, a mere lifeless block.
He calls vs back: my pride fell with my fortunes,
Isle ask him what he would: Did you call Sir?
Sir, you have wrestled well, and overthrown
More then your enemies.
Will you go Cos?
Have with you: fare you well.
What passion hangs these weights vpō my tongue?
I cannot speak to her, yet she urged conference.
O poor Orlando! thou art overthrown
Or Charles, or something weaker masters thee.
Good Sir, I do in friendship counsel you
Te leave this place; Albeit you have deserved
High commendation, true applause, and love;
Yet such is now the Dukes condition,
That he misconsters all that you have done:
The Duke is humorous, what he is indeed
More suites you to conceive, then I to speak of.
I thank you Sir; and pray you tell me this,
Which of the two was daughter of the Duke,
That here was at the Wrestling?
Neither his daughter, if we judge by manners,
But yet indeed the taller is his daughter,
The other is daughter to the banished Duke,
And here detained by her usurping Uncle
To keep his daughter company, whose loves
Are dearer then the natural bond of Sisters:
But I can tell you, that of late this Duke
Hath tan displeasure against his gentle Niece,
Grounded upon no other argument,
But that the people praise her for her virtues,
And pity her, for her good Fathers sake;
And on my life his malice against the Lady
Will suddenly break forth: Sir, fare you well,
Hereafter in a better world then this,
I shall desire more love and knowledge of you.
I rest much bounden to you: fare you well.
Thus must I from the smoke into the smother,
From tyrant Duke, unto a tyrant Brother.
But heavenly Rosaline.
Why Cousin, why Rosaline: Cupped have mercy,
Not a word?
Not one to throw at a dog.
No, thy words are too precious to be cast away upon curs, throw some of them at me; come lame me with reasons.
Then there were two Cousins laid up, when the one should be lamed with reasons, and the other mad without any.
But is all this for your Father?
No, some of it is for my childes Father: Oh how full of briers is this working day world.
They are but burs, Cousin, thrown upon thee in holiday foolery, if we walk not in the trodden paths our very petty-coates will catch them.
I could shake them off my coat, these burs are in my heart.
Hem them away.
I would try if I could cry hem, and have him.
Come, come, wrestle with thy affections.
O they take the part of a better wrestler then my self.
O, a good wish upon you: you will try in time
in despite of a fall: but turning these jests out of service, let vs talk in good earnest: Is it possible on such a so∣deign, you should fall into so strong a liking with old Sir Roulands youngest son?
The Duke my Father loved his Father dearly.
Doth it therefore ensue that you should love his Son dearly? By this kind of chase, I should hate him, for my father hated his father dearly; yet I hate not Orlando.
No faith, hate him not for my sake.
Why should I not? doth he not deserve well?
Let me love him for that, and do you love him
Because I doe. Look, here comes the Duke.
With his eyes full of anger.
Mistress, dispatch you with your safest haste,
And get you from our Court.
Me Uncle.
You Cousin,
Within these ten days if that thou be found
So near our public Court as twenty miles,
Thou die sor it.
I doe beseech your Grace
Let me the knowledge of my fault bear with me:
If with my self I hold intelligence,
Or have acquaintance with mine own desires,
If that I doe not dream, or be not frantic,
(As I doe trust I am not) then dear Uncle,
Never so much as in a thought unborn,
Did I offend your highness.
Thus doe all Traitors,
If their purgation did consist in words,
They are as innocent as grace it self;
Let it suffice thee that I trust thee not.
Yet your mistrust cannot make me a Traitor;
Tell me whereon the likelihoods depends?
Thou art thy Fathers daughter, there's enough.
So was I when your highness took his Dukdome,
So was I when your highness banished him;
Treason is not inherited my Lord,
Or if we did derive it from our friends,
What's that to me, my Father was no Traitor,
Then good my Liege, mistake me not so much,
To think my poverty is treacherous.
Dear Sovereign hear me speak.
I Celia, we staid her for your sake,
Else had she with her Father ranged along.
I did not then entreat to have her stay.
It was your pleasure, and your own remorse,
I was too young that time to value her,
But now I know her: if she be a Traitor,
Why so am I: we still have slept together,
Rose at an instant, learned, plaid, eat together,
And wheresoever we went, like Iunos Swans,
Still we went coupled and inseparable.
She is too subtle for thee, and her smoothness;
Her very silence, and per patience,
Speak to the people, and they pity her:
Thou art a fool, she robs thee of thy name,
And thou wilt show more bright, &amp; seem more virtuous
When she is gone: then open not thy lips
Firm, and irrevocable is my doombe,
Which I have past upon her, she is banished.
Pronounce that sentence then on me my Liege,
I cannot live out of her company.
You are a fool: you Niece provide your self,
If you out-stay the time, upon mine honour,
And in the greatness of my word you die.
O my poor Rosaline, whether wilt thou go?
Wilt thou change Fathers? I will give thee mine:
I charge thee be not thou more grieved then I am.
I have more cause.
Thou hast not Cousin,
Prithee be cheerful; know thou not the Duke
Hath banished me his daughter?
That he hath not.
No, hath not? Rosaline lacks then the love
Which teaches thee that thou and I am one,
Shall we be sundried? shall we part sweet girl?
No, let my Father seek another heir:
Therefore devise with me how we may fly
Whether to go, and what to bear with vs,
And doe not seek to take your change upon you,
To bear your griefs your self, and leave me out:
For by this heaven, now at our sorrows pale;
Say what thou can, Isle go along with thee.
Why, whether shall we go?
To seek my Uncle in the Forest of Arden.
Alas, what danger will it be to vs,
(Maids as we are) to travel forth so far?
Beauty provokes thieves sooner then gold.
Isle put my self in poor and mean attire,
And with a kind of vmber smirch my face,
The like doe you, so shall we pass along,
And never stir assailants.
Were it not better,
Because that I am more then common tall,
That I did suite me all points like a man,
A gallant curtelax upon my thigh,
A bore-speare in my hand, and in my heart
Lye there what hidden women's fear there will,
Weal have a swashing and a marshall outside,
As many other mannish cowards have,
That doe outface it with their semblances.
What shall I call thee when thou art a man?
Isle have no worse a name then Ioues own Page,
And therefore look you call me Ganimed.
But what will you by called?
Something that hath a reference to my state:
No longer Celia, but Alien.
But Cousin, what if we assaid to steal
The clownish Fool out of your Fathers Court:
Would he not be a comfort to our travail?
Heel go along ore the wide world with me,
Leave me alone to woe him; Let's away
And get our Jewels and our wealth together,
Devise the fittest time, and safest way
To hide vs from pursuit that will be made
After my flight: now go in we content
To liberty, and not to banishment.
Now my Coe-mates, and brothers in exile:
Hath not old custom made this life more sweet
Then that of painted pomp? Are not these woods
More free from peril then the envious Court?
Here feel we not the penalty of Adam,
The seasons difference, as the I cie phange
And churlish chiding of the winters wind,
Which when it bites and blows upon my body
Even till I shrink with cold, I smile, and say
This is no flattery: these are counsellors
That feelingly persuade me what I am:
Sweet are the uses of adversity
Which like the toad, ugly and venomous,
Wears yet a precious Jewel in his head:
And this our life exempt from public haunt,
Finds tongues in trees, books in the running brookes,
Sermons in stones, and good in every thing.
I would not change it, happy is your Grace
That can translate the stubbornness of fortune
Into so quiet and so sweet a stile.
Come, shall we go and kill vs venison?
And yet it irkes me the poor dappled fools
Being native Burgers of this desert City,
Should in their own confines with forked heads
Have their round benches goard.
Indeed my Lord
The melancholy Iaques grieves at that,
And in that kind swears you doe more usurp
Then doth your brother that hath banished you:
To day my Lord of Amiens, and my self,
Did steal behind him as he lay along
Under an oak, whose antique root peepes out
Upon the brooke that brawls along this wood,
To the which place a poor sequestered Stag
That from the Hunters aim had tan a hurt,
Did come to languish; and indeed my Lord
The wretched animal heaved forth such groans
That their discharge did stretch his leathern coat
Almost to bursting, and the big round tears
Coursed one another down his innocent nose
In piteous chase: and thus the hairy fool,
Much marked of the melancholy Iaques,
Stood on the extremest verge of the swift brooke,
Augmenting it with tears.
But what said Iaques?
Did he not moralise this spectacle?
O yes, into a thousand similes.
First, for his weeping into the needless stream;
Poor Dear quoth he, thou make a testament
As worldlings doe, giving thy sum of more
To that which had too must: then being there alone,
Left and abandoned of his velvet friend;
It is right quoth he, thus misery doth part
The Flux of company: anon a careless Heard
Full of the pasture, iumps along by him
And never stai• to greet him: I quoth Iaques,
Sweep on you fat and greazie Citizens,
It is just the fashion; wherefore doe you look
Upon that poor and broken bankrupt there?
Thus most inuectiuely he pierces through
The body of Country, City, Court,
Yea, and of this our life, swearing that we
Are mere usurpers, tyrants, and whats worse
To fright the Animals, and to kill them up
In their assigned and native dwelling place.
And did you leave him in this contemplation?
We did my Lord, weeping and commenting
Upon the sobbing Dear.
Show me the place,
I love to cope him in these sullen fits,
For then he's full of matter.
Isle bring you to him strait.
Can it be possible that no man saw them?
It cannot be, some villains of my Court
Are of consent and sufferance in this.
I cannot hear of any that did see her,
The Ladies her attendants of her chamber
Saw her a bed, and in the morning early,
They found the bed vntreasur'd of their Mistress.
My Lord, the roynish Clown, at whom so oft,
Your Grace was wont to laugh is also missing,
Hisperia the Princess Gentlewoman
Confesses that she secretly ore-heard
Your daughter and her Cousin much commend
The parts and graces of the Wrestler
That did but lately foil the sinewy Charles,
And she believes where ever they are gone
That youth is surely in their company.
Send to his brother, fetch that gallant hither,
If he be absent, bring his Brother to me,
Isle make him find him: do this suddenly;
And let not search and inquisition quail,
To bring again these foolish runaways.
Who's there?
What my young Master, oh my gentle master,
Oh my sweet master, O you memory
Of old Sir Rowland; why, what make you here?
Why are you virtuous? Why do people love you?
And wherefore are you gentle, strong, and valiant?
Why would you be so fond to overcome
The bonnie priser of the humorous Duke?
Your praise is come too swiftly home before you.
Know you not Master, to seem kind of men,
Their graces serve them but as enemies,
No more doe yours: your virtues gentle Master
Are sanctified and holy traitors to you:
Oh what a world is this, when what is comely
Enuenoms him that bears it?
Why, what's the matter?
O unhappy youth,
Come not within these doors: within this roof
The enemy of all your graces lives
Your brother, no, no brother, yet the son
(Yet not the son, I will not call him son)
Of him I was about to call his Father,
Hath heard your praises, and this night he means,
To burn the lodging where you use to lye,
And you within it: if he fail of that
He will have other means to cut you off;
I overheard him: and his practises:
This is no place, this house is but a butchery;
Abhor it, fear it, doe not enter it.
Why whether Adam would thou have me go?
No matter whether, so you come not here.
What, would thou have me go &amp; beg my food,
Or with a base and boisterous Sword enforce
A thievish living on the common rode?
This I must do, or know not what to do:
Yet this I will not do, do how I can,
I rather will subject me to the malice
Of a diverted blood, and bloody brother.
But do not so: I have five hundred Crowns,
The thrifty hire I saved under your Father,
Which I did store to be my foster Nurse,
When service should in my old limbs lie lame,
And unregarded age in corners thrown,
Take that, and he that doth the Ravens feed,
Yea providently caters for the Sparrow,
Be comfort to my age: here is the gold,
All this I give you, let me be your servant,
Though I look old, yet I am strong and lusty;
For in my youth I never did apply
Hot, and rebellious liquors in my blood,
Nor did not with vnbashfull forehead woe,
The means of weakness and debility,
Therefore my age is as a lusty winter,
Frosty, but kindly; let me go with you,
Isle doe the service of a younger man
In all your business and necessities.
Oh good old man, how well in thee appears
The constant service of the antique world,
When service sweat for duty, not for mead:
Thou art not for the fashion of these times,
Where none will sweat, but for promotion,
And having that do choke their service up,
Even with the having, it is not so with thee:
But poor old man, thou prun'st a rotten tree,
That cannot so much as a blossom yield,
In lieu of all thy pains and husbandry,
But come thy ways, weal go along together,
And ere we have thy youthful wages spent,
Weal light upon some settled low content.
Master go on, and I will follow thee
To the last gasp with truth and loyalty,
From seventy years, till now almost fourscore
Here lived I, but now live here no more
At seventeen years, many their fortunes seek
But at fourscore, it is too late a week,
Yet fortune cannot recompense me better
Then to die well, and not my Masters debtor.
O Iupiter, how merry are my spirits?
I care not for my spirits, if my legs were not weary.
I could find in my heart to disgrace my mans apparel, and to cry like a woman: but I must comfort the weaker vessel, as doublet and hose ought to show it self coragious to petty-coate; therefore courage, good Alien.
I pray you bear with me, I cannot go no fur∣there.
For my part, I had rather bear with you, then bear you: yet I should bear no cross if I did bear you, for I think you have no money in your purse.
Well, this is the Forest of Arden.
I, now am I in Arden, the more fool I, when I was at home I was in a better place, but Travellers must be content.
I, be so good Touchstone: Look you, who comes here, a young man and an old in solemn talk.
That is the way to make her scorn you still.
Oh Corin, that thou knew how I do love her.
I partly guess: for I have loved ere now.
No Corin, being old, thou can not guess,
Though in thy youth thou wast as true a lover
As ever sighed upon a midnight pillow:
But if thy love were ever like to mine,
As sure I think did never man love so:
How many actions most ridiculous,
Hast thou been drawn to by thy fantasy?
Into a thousand that I have forgotten.
Oh thou did then never love so heartily,
If thou remember not the slightest folly,
That ever love did make thee run into,
Thou hast not loved.
Or if thou hast not sat as I doe now,
Wearing thy hearer in thy Mistress praise,
Thou hast not loved.
Or if thou hast not broke from company,
Abruptly as my passion now makes me,
Thou hast not loved.
O Phebe, Phebe, Phebe.
Alas poor Shepherd searching of they would,
I have by hard adventure found mine own.
And I mine: I remember when I was in love, I broke my sword upon a stone, and bid him take that for coming a night to Iane Smile, and I remember the kiss∣sing of her battler, and the Cowes dugs that her pretty chopped hands had milked; and I remember the wooing of a peascod instead of her, from whom I took two cods, and giving her them again, said with weeping tears, wear these for my sake: wee that are true Lo∣uers, run into strange capers; but as all is mortal in nature, so is all nature in love, mortal in folly.
Thou speak wiser then thou art ware of.
Nay, I shall ne'er be ware of mine own wit, till
I break my shins against it.
Jove, Jove, this Shepherds passion,
Is much upon my fashion.
And mine, but it grows something stale with me.
I pray you, one of you question yon'd man,
If he for gold will give vs any food,
I faint almost to death.
Holla; you Clown.
Peace fool, he's not thy kinsman.
Who calls?
Your betters Sir.
Else are they very wretched.
Peace I say; good even to your friend.
And to you gentle Sir, and to you all.
I prithee Shepherd, if that love or gold
Can in this desert place buy entertainment,
Bring vs where we may rest our selves, and feed:
Here's a young maid with travail much oppressed,
And faints for succour.
Fair Sir, I pity her,
And wish for her sake more then for mine own,
My fortunes were more able to relieve her;
But I am shepherd to another man,
And do not sheer the Fleeces that I graze:
My master is of churlish disposition,
And little wreakes to find the way to heaven
By doing deeds of hospitality.
Besides his Coat, his Flocks, and bounds of feed
Are now on sale, and at our sheep-coat now
By reason of his absence there is nothing
That you will feed on: but what is, come see,
And in my voice most welcome shall you be.
What is he that shall buy his flock and pasture?
That young Swain that you saw here but ere∣while,
That little cares for buying any thing.
I pray thee, if it stand with honesty,
Buy thou the Cottage, pasture, and the flock,
And thou shalt have to pay for it of vs.
And we will mend thy wages:
I like this place, and willingly could
Waste my time in it.
Assuredly the thing is to be sold:
Go with me, if you like upon report,
The soil, the profit, and this kind of life,
I will your very faithful Feeder be,
And buy it with your Gold right suddenly.
Under the greene wood tree, who loves to lye with me,
And turn his merry Note, unto the sweet Birds throat:
Come hither, come hither, come hither:
Here shall he see no enemy,
But Winter and rough Weather.
More, more, I prithee more.
It will make you melancholy Monsieur Iaques
I thank it: More, I prithee more,
I can suck melancholy out of a song,
As a Weasel sucks eggs: More, I prithee more.
My voice is ragged, I know I cannot please you.
I do not desire you to please me,
I do desire you to sing:
Come, more, another stanzo: Cal you 'em stanzo's?
What you will Monsieur Iaques.
Nay, I care not for their names, they owe me nothing. Will you sing?
More at your request, then to please my self.
Well then, if ever I thank any man, Isle thank you: but that they cal complement is like the encounter of two dog-Apes. And when a man thanks me heartily, me thinks I have given him a penny, and he renders me the beggarly thanks. Come sing; and you that will not hold your tongues.
Well, Isle end the song. Sirs, cover the while, the Duke will drink under this tree; he hath bin all this day to look you.
And I have bin all this day to avoid him:
He is too disputable for my company:
I think of as many matters as he, but I give
Heaven thanks, and make no boast of them.
Come, warble, come.
Who doth ambition shun, and loves to live in th Sun:
Seeking the food he eats, and pleased with what he gets:
Come hither, come hither, come hither,
Here shall he see. &amp;c.
Isle give you a verse to this note,
That I made yesterday in despite of my Invention.
And Isle sing it.
Thus it goes.
If it do come to pass, that any man turn Ass:
Leaving his wealth and ease,
A stubborn will to please,
Ducdame, ducdame, ducdame:
Here shall he see, gross fools as he,
And if he will come to me.
What's that Ducdame?
It is a Greek invocation, to call fools into a cir∣cle. Isle go sleep if I can: if I cannot, Isle rail against all the first borne of Egypt.
And Isle go seek the Duke,
His banquet is prepared.
Dear Master, I can go no further:
O I die for food. Here lie I down,
And measure out my grave. Farewell kind master.
Why how now Adam? No greater heart in thee:
Live a little, comfort a little, cheer thy self a little.
If this uncouth Forest yield any thing savage,
I will either be food for it, or bring it for food to thee:
Thy conceit is nearer death, then thy powers.
For my sake be comfortable, hold death a while
At the arms end: I will here be with thee presently,
And if I bring thee not something to eat,
I will give thee leave to die: but if thou die
Before I come, thou art a mocker of my labour.
Well said, thou look cheerely,
And Isle be with thee quickly: yet thou least
In the bleak air. Come, I will bear thee
To some, shelter, and thou shalt not die
For lack of a dinner,
If there live any thing in this Desert.
Cheerely good Adam.
I think he be transformed into a beast,
For I can no where find him, like a man.
My Lord, he is but even now gone hence,
Here was he merry, hearing of a Song.
If he compact of jars, grow Musical,
We shall have shortly discord in the Spheres:
Go seek him, tell him I would speak with him.
He saves my labour by his own approach.
Why how now Monsieur, what a life is this
That your poor friends must woe your company,
What, you look merrily.
A Fool, a fool: I met a fool in th Forest,
A motley Fool (a miserable world:)
As I do live by food, I met a fool,
Who laid him down, and basked him in the Sun,
And railed on Lady Fortune in good terms,
In good set terms, and yet a motley fool.
Good morrow fool (quoth I:) no Sir, quoth he,
Call me not fool, till heaven hath sent me fortune,
And then he drew a dial from his poake,
And looking on it, with lacke-lustre eye,
Says, very wisely, it is ten a clock:
Thus we may see (quoth he) how the world wags:
It is but an hour ago, since it was nine,
And after one hour more, twill be eleven,
And so from hour to hour, we ripe, and ripe,
And then from hour to hour, we rot, and rot,
And thereby hangs a tale. When I did hear
The motley Fool, thus moral on the time,
My Lungs began to crow like Chanticleer,
That Fools should be so deep contemplative:
And I did laugh, sans intermission
An hour by his dial. Oh noble fool,
A worthy fool: Motley's the only wear.
What fool is this?
O worthy Fool: One that hath bin a Courtier
And says, if Ladies be but young, and fair,
They have the gift to know it: and in his braiue,
Which is as dry as the remainder biscuit
After a voyage: He hath strange places crammed
With observation, the which he vents
In mangled forms. O that I were a fool,
I am ambitious for a motley coat.
Thou shalt have one.
It is my only suite,
Provided that you weed your better judgements
Of all opinion that grows rank in them,
That I am wise. I must have liberty
Wiithall, as large a Charter as the wind,
To blow on whom I please, for so fools have:
And they that are most gauled with my folly,
They most must laugh: And why sir must they so?
The why is plain, as way to Parish Church:
Hee, that a Fool doth very wisely hit,
Doth very foolishly, although he smart
Seem senseless of the bob. If not,
The Wise-mans folly is anathomiz'd
Even by the squandering glances of the fool.
Invest me in my motley: Give me leave
To speak my mind, and I will through and through
Cleanse the foul body of the infected world,
If they will patiently receive my medicine.
Fie on thee. I can tell what thou would do.
What, for a Counter, would I do, but good?
Most mischievous foul sin, in chiding sin:
For thou thy self hast been a Libertine,
As sensual as the brutish sting it self,
And all the embossed sores, and headed evils,
That thou with license of free foot hast caught,
Would thou disgorge into the general world.
Why who cries out on pride,
That can therein tax any private party:
Doth it not flow as hugely as the Sea,
Till that the weary very means do ebb.
What woman in the City do I name,
When that I say the City woman bears
The cost of Princes on unworthy shoulders?
Who can come in, and say that I mean her,
When such a one as she, such is her neighbor?
Or what is he of basest function,
That says his bravery is not on my cost,
Thinking that I mean him, but therein suites
His folly to the mettle of my speech,
There then, how then, what then, let me see wherein
My tongue hath wronged him: if it do him right,
Then he hath wronged himself: if he be free,
why then my taxing like a wild-goose flies
Vnclaim'd of any▪ man But who come here?
Forbear, and eat no more.
Why I have eat none yet.
Nor shalt not, till necessity be served.
Of what kind should this Cock come of?
Art thou thus bolden'd man by thy distress?
Or else a rude despiser of good manners,
That in civility thou seem so empty?
You touched my vein at first, the thorny point
Of bare distress, hath tan from me the show
Of smooth civility: yet am I in-land bred,
And know some nurture: But forbear, I say,
He dies that touches any of this fruit,
Till I, and my affairs are answered.
And you will not be answered with reason,
I must dye.
What would you have?
Your gentleness shall force, more then your force
Move vs to gentleness.
I almost die for food, and let me have it.
Sit down and feed, &amp; welcome to our table
Speak you so gently? Pardon me I pray you,
I thought that all things had bin savage here,
And therefore put I on the countenance
Of sterne commandment. But what ere you are
That in this desert inaccessible,
Under the shade of melancholy boughs,
Loose, and neglect the creeping hours of time:
If ever you have looked on better days:
If ever been where bells have knolled to Church:
If ever sate at any good mans feast:
If ever from your eye-lids wiped a tear,
And know what it is to pity, and be pitied:
Let gentleness my strong enforcement be,
In the which hope, I blush, and hide my Sword.
True is it, that we have seen better days,
And have with holy bell bin knowld to Church,
And sat at good men's feasts, and wiped our eyes
Of drops, that sacred pity hath engendered:
And therefore sit you down in gentleness,
And take upon command, what help we have
That to your wanting may be ministered.
Then but forbear your food a little while:
Whiles (like a Doe) I go to find my Fawn,
And give it food. There is an old poor man,
Who after me, hath many a weary steppe
Limped in pure love: till he be first sufficed,
Oppressed with two weak evils, age, and hunger,
I will not touch a bit.
Go find him out.
And we will nothing waste till you return.
I thank ye, and be blessed for your good comfort.
Thou see, we are not all alone unhappy:
This wide and universal Theater
Presents more woeful Pageants then the Scene
Wherein we play in.
All the world's a stage,
And all the men and women, merely Players;
They have their Exits and their Entrances,
And one man in his time plays many parts,
His Acts being seven ages. At first the Infant,
Mewling, and puking in the Nurses arms:
Then, the whining Schoole-boy with his Satchel
And shining morning face, creeping like snail
Unwillingly to school. And then the Lover,
Sighing like Furnace, with a woeful ballad
Made to his Mistress eye-brow. Then, a Soldier,
Full of strange oaths, and bearded like the Pard,
Jealous in honour, sudden, and quick in quarrel,
Seeking the bubble Reputation
Even in the Canons mouth: And then, the Justice,
In fair round belly, with good Capon lined,
With eyes severe, and beard of formal cut,
Full of wise saws, and modern instances,
And so he plays his part. The sixth age shifts
Into the lean and slippered Pantaloone,
With spectacles on nose, and pouch on side,
His youthful hose well saved, a world too wide,
For his shrunk shank, and his big manly voice,
Turning again toward childish treble pipes,
And whistles in his sound. Last Scene of all,
That ends this strange euentfull history,
Is second childishness, and mere oblivion,
Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans every thing.
Welcome: set down your venerable bur∣then, and let him feed.
I thank you most for him.
So had you need,
I scarce can speak to thank you for my self.
Welcome, fall too: I will not trouble you,
As yet to question you about your fortunes:
Give vs some Music, and good Cozen, sing.
Blow, blow, thou winter wind•,
Thou art not so unkind, as mans ingratitude
Thy tooth is not so keen, because thou art not seen, although thy breath be rude.
Heigh ho, sing heigh ho, unto the greene holly,
Most friendship, is feigning; most Loving, mere folly:
The heigh ho, the holly,
This Life is most jolly.
Freize, freize, thou bitter sky that dost not bight so nigh as benefits forgot:
Though thou the waters warp, thy sting is not so sharpe, as friend remembered not.
Heigh ho, sing, &amp;c.
If that you were the good Sir Rowlands son,
As you have whispered faithfully you were,
And as mine eye doth his effigies witness,
Most truly limned, and living in your face,
Be truly welcome hither: I am the Duke
That loved your Father, the residue of your fortune,
Go to my Cave, and tell me, Good old man,
Thou art right welcome, as thy masters is:
Support him by the arm: give me your hand,
And let me all your fortunes understand.
Not see him since? Sir, sir, that cannot be:
But were I not the better part made mercy,
I should not seek an absent argument
Of my revenge, thou present: but look to it,
Find out thy brother wheresoever he is,
Seek him with Candle: bring him dead, or living
Within this tweluemonth, or turn thou no more
To seek a living in our Territory.
Thy Lands and all things that thou dost call thine,
Worth seizure, do we seize into our hands,
Till thou can quit thee by thy brothers mouth,
Of what we think against thee.
Oh that your Highness knew my heart in this:
I never loved my brother in my life.
More villain thou. Well push him out of doors
And let my officers of such a nature
Make an extent upon his house and Lands:
Do this expediently, and turn him going.
Hang there my verse, in witness of my love,
And thou thrice crowned Queen of night survey
With thy chaste eye, from thy pale sphere aboue
Thy Huntress name, that my full life doth sway.
O Rosalind, these Trees shall be my Books,
And in their barks my thoughts Isle character,
That every eye, which in this Forest looks,
Shall see thy virtue witnessed every where.
Run, run Orlando, carve on every Tree,
The fair, the chaste, and vnexpressiue she.
And how like you this shepherds life Mr Touchstone?
Truly Shepherd, in respect of it self, it is a good life; but in respect that it is a shepherds life, it is nought. In respect that it is solitary, I like it very well: but in respect that it is private, it is a very wild life. Now in respect it is in the fields, it pleases me well: but in respect it is not in the Court, it is tedious. As it is a spare life (look you) it fits my humour well: but as there is no more plenty in it, it goes much against my stomach. Has't any Philosophy in thee shepherd?
No more, but that I know the more one sickens, the worse at ease he is: and that hee that wants money, means, and content, is without three good friends. That the property of rain is to wet, and fire to burn: That pood pasture makes fat sheep: and that a great cause of the night, is lack of the Sun: That hee that hath lear∣ned no wit by Nature, nor Art, may complain of good breeding, or comes of a very dull kindred.
Such a one is a natural Philosopher:
Was it ever in Court, Shepherd?
No truly.
Then thou art damned.
Nay, I hope.
Truly thou art damned, like an ill roasted Egg, all on one side.
For not being at Court? your reason.
Why, if thou never was it at Court, thou never saw good manners: if thou never saw good manners, then thy manners must be wicked, and wickedness is sin, and sin is damnation: Thou art in a parlous state shep∣heard.
Not a whit Touchstone, those that are good ma∣ners at the Court, are as ridiculous in the Country, as the behaviour of the Country is most mockeable at the Court. You told me, you salute not at the Court, but you kiss your hands; that curtsy would be vncleanlie if Courtiers were shepherds.
Instance, briefly: come, instance.
Why we are still handling our Ewes, and their
Fels you know are greasy.
Why do not your Courtiers hands sweat? and is not the grease of a Mutton, as wholesome as the sweat of a man? Shallow, shallow: A better instance I say: Come.
Besides, our hands are hard.
Your lips will feel them the sooner. Shallow a∣gen: a more sounder instance, come.
And they are often tarr'd over, with the surgery of our sheep: and would you have vs kiss Tar? The Courtiers hands are perfumed with Civet.
Most shallow man: Thou worms meat in re∣spect of a good piece of flesh indeed: learn of the wise and perpend: Civet is of a baser birth then Tar, the very vncleanly flux of a Cat. Mend the instance Shep∣heard.
You have too Courtly a wit for me, Isle rest.
Wilt thou rest damned? God help thee shallow man: God make incision in thee, thou art raw.
Sir, I am a true Labourer, I earn that I eat: get that I wear; owe no man hate, envy no mans happi∣ness: glad of other men's good content with my harm: and the greatest of my pride, is to see my Ewes graze, &amp; my Lambs suck.
That is another simple sin in you, to bring the Ewes and the Rams together, and to offer to get your living, by the copulation of Cattle, to be bawed to a Bell∣weather, and to betray a shee-Lambe of a tweluemonth to a crooked-pated old Cuckoldly Ram, out of all reasonable match. If thou be not damned for this, the devil himself will have no shepherds, I cannot see else how thou should scope.
Here comes young Mr Ganimed, my new Mistress∣ses Brother.
From the east to western Iude,
no jewel is like Rosalinde,
His worth being mounted on the wind,
through all the world bears Rosalinde.
All the pictures fairest Lined,
are but black to Rosalinde:
Let no face bee kept in mind,
but the fair of Rosalinde.
Isle rime you so, eight years together; dinners, and suppers, and sleeping hours excepted: it is the right Butter-womens rank to Market.
Out Fool.
For a taste.
If a Hart doe lack a Hind,
Let him seek out Rosalinde:
If the Cat will after kind,
so be sure will Rosalinde:
Wintred garments must be lined,
so must slender Rosalinde:
They that reap must sheaf and bind,
then to cart with Rosalinde.
Sweetest nut, bath sourest rind,
such a nut is Rosalinde.
He that sweetest rose will find,
must find Loves prick, &amp; Rosalinde.
This is the very false gallop of Verses, why doe you in∣fact your self with them?
Peace you dull folle, I found them on a tree.
Truly the tree yields bad fruit.
Isle graffe it with you, and then I shall graffe it with a Meddler: then it will be the earliest fruit in th coun∣try: for you'll be rotten ere you bee half ripe, and that's the right virtue of the Meddler.
You have said: but whether wisely or no, let the Forest judge.
Peace, here comes my sister reading, stand a side.
Why should this Desert bee, for it is unpeopled? No:
Tongues Isle hang on every tree, that shall civil sayings shoe.
Some, how brief the Life of man runs his erring pilgrimage,
That the stretching of a span, buckles in his sum of age.
Some of violated vows, twixt the souls of friend, and friend:
But upon the fairest bows, or at every sentence end;
Will I Rosalinda write, teaching all that read, to know
The quintessence of every sprite, heaven would in little show.
Therefore heaven Nature charged, that one body should be filled
With all Graces wide enlarged, nature presently distilled
Helens cheek, but not his heart,
Cleopatra's Majesty:
Attalanta's better part,
sad Lucrecia's Modesty.
Thus Rosalinde of many parts,
by Heavenly Synod was deuis'd,
Of many faces, eyes, and hearts,
to have the touches dearest prised.
Heaven would that she these gifts should have,
and I to live and die her slave.
O most gentle Iupiter, what tedious homily of Love have you wearied your parishioners withal, and never cried, have patience good people.
How now back friends: Shepherd, go off a lit∣tle: go with him sirrah.
Come Shepherd, let vs make an honourable re∣trait, though not with bag and baggage, yet with scrip and scrippage.
Did thou hear these verses?
O yes, I heard them all, and more too, for some of them had in them more feet then the Verses would bear.
That's no matter: the feet might bear ye verses.
I, but the feet were lame, and could not bear themselves without the verse, and therefore stood lame∣lie in the verse.
But did thou hear without wondering, how thy name should be hanged and carved upon these trees?
I was seven of the nine days out of the wonder, before you came: for look here what I found on a Palm tree; I was never so berim d since Pythagoras time that I was an Irish Rat, which I can hardly remember.
Trow you, who hath done this?
Is it a man?
And a chain that you once wore about his neck: change you colour?
I, prithee who?
O Lord, Lord, it is a hard matter for friends to meet; but Mountains may bee removed with Earth∣quakes, and so encounter.
Nay, but who is it?
Is it possible?
Nay, I prithee now, with most petitionary ve∣hemence, tell me who it is.
O wonderful, wonderful, and most wonderful wonderful, and yet again wonderful, and after that out of all hooping.
Good my complexion, dost thou think though I am caparisoned like a man, I have a doublet and hose in my disposition? One inch of delay more, is a South-sea of discovery. I prithee tell me, who is it quickly, and speak apace: I would thou could stammer, that thou might power this concealed man out of thy mouth, as Wine comes out of a narrow-mouth'd bottle: either too much at once, or none at all. I prithee take the Cork out of thy mouth, that I may drink thy tidings.
So you may put a man in your belly.
Is he of Gods making? What manner of man?
Is his head worth a hat? Or his chin worth a beard?
Nay, he hath but a little beard.
Why God will send more, if the man will bee thankful: let me stay the growth of his beard, if thou delay me not the knowledge of his chin.
It is young Orlando, that tripped up the Wrestlers heals, and your heart, both in an instant.
Nay, but the devil take mocking: speak sad brow, and true maid.
In faith (Cos) tic he.
Orlando?
Orlando.
Alas the day, what shall I do with my doublet &amp; hose? What did he when thou saw him? What said he? How looked he? Wherein went he? What makes hee here? Did he ask for me? Where remains he? How parted he with thee? And when shalt thou see him a∣gain? Answer me in one word.
You must borrow me Gargantuas mouth first: it is a Word too great for any mouth of this Ages size, to say I and no, to these particulars, is more then to answer in a Catechism.
But doth he know that I am in this Forest, and in mans apparel? Looks he as freshly, as he did the day he Wrestled?
It is as easy to count Atoms as to resolve the propositions of a Lover: but take a taste of my finding him, and relish it with good observance. I found him under a tree like a dropped Acorn.
It may well be called Ioues tree, when it drops forth fruit.
Give me audience, good Madam.
Proceed.
There lay hee stretched along like a Wounded knight.
Though it be pity to see such a sight, it well becomes the ground.
Cry holla, to the tongue, I prithee: it curuettes unseasonably. He was furnished like a Hunter.
O ominous, he comes to kill my Hart.
I would sing my song without a burden, thou bring me out of tune.
Do you not know I am a woman, when I think,
I must speak: sweet, say on.
You bring me out. Soft, comes he not here?
It is he, slink by, and note him.
I thank you for your company, but good faith
I had as lief have been my self alone.
And so had I: but yet for fashion sake
I thank you too, for your society.
God buy you, let's meet as little as we can.
I do desire we may be better strangers.
I pray you mar no more trees with Writing Loue-songs in their barks.
I pray you mar no more of my verses with rea∣ding them ill-fauouredly.
Rosalinde is your loves name?
Yes, Just.
I do not like her name.
There was no thought of pleasing you when she was christened.
What stature is she of?
Just as high as my heart.
You are full of pretty answers: have you not bin ac∣quainted with goldsmiths wives, &amp; cond thē out of rings
Not so: but I answer you right painted cloth, from whence you have studied your questions.
You have a nimble wit; I think it was made of Attalanta's heals. Will you sit down with me, and wee two, will rail against our Mistress the world, and all our misery.
I will chide no breather in the world but my self
against whom I know most faults.
The worst fault you have, is to be in love.
It is a fault I will not change, for your best ver∣tu: I am weary of you.
By my troth, I was seeking for a Fool, when I found you.
He is drowned in the brooke, look but in, and you shall see him.
There I shall see mine own figure.
Which I take to be either a fool, or a Cipher.
Isle tarry no longer with you, farewell good sig∣nior Love.
I am glad of your departure: Adieu good Mon∣sieur Melancholy.
I will speak to him like a saucy Lackey▪ and un∣der that habit play the knave with him, do you hear For∣rester.
Very well, what would you?
I pray you, what i'st a clock?
You should ask me what time of day: there's no clock in the Forest.
Then there is no true Lover in the Forest, else sighing every minute and groaning every hour wold detect the lazy foot of time, as well as a clock.
And why not the swift foot of time? Had not that bin as proper?
By no means sir; Time travels in divers paces, with divers persons: Isle tel you who Time ambles with∣all, who Time trots withal, who Time gallops withal, and who he stands still withal.
I prithee, who doth he trot withal?
Marry he trots hard with a young maid, between the contract of her marriage, and the day it is solemnised: if the interim be but a seven-night, Times pace is so hard, that it seems the length of seven year.
Who ambles Time withal?
With a Priest that lacks Latin, and a rich man that hath not the Gout: for the one sleeps easily be∣cause he cannot study, and the other lives merrily, be∣cause he feels no pain: the one lacking the burden of lean and wasteful Learning; the other knowing no bur∣then of heavy tedious penury. These Time ambles withal.
Who doth he gallop withal?
With a thief to the gallows: for though hee go as softly as foot can fall, he thinks himself too soon there.
Who stays it still withal?
With Lawyers in the vacation: for they sleep between Term and Term, and then they perceive not how time moves.
Where dwell you pretty youth?
With this Shepherdess my sister: here in the skirts of the Forest, like fringe upon a petticoat.
Are you native of this place?
As the Cony that you see dwell where she is kindled.
Your accent is something finer, then you could purchase in so removed a dwelling.
I have bin told so of many: but indeed, an old religious Uncle of mine taught me to speak, who was in his youth an inland man, one that knew Courtship too well: for there he fell in love. I have heard him read ma∣ny Lectors against it, and I thank God, I am not a Wo∣man to be touched with so many giddy offences as hee hath generally taxed their whole sex withal.
Can you remember any of the principal evils, that he laid to the charge of women?
There were none principal, they were all like one another, as half pence are, every one fault seeming monstrous, till his fellow-fault came to match it.
I prithee recount some of them.
No: I will not cast away my physic, but on those that are sick. There is a man haunts the Forest, that a∣buses our young plants with carving Rosalinde on their barks; hangs Oats upon Hauthornes, and Elegies on brambles; all (forsooth) defying the name of Rosalinde. If I could meet that Fancie-monger, I would give him some good counsel, for he seems to have the Quotidian of Love upon him.
I am he that is so Loue-shak'd, I pray you tel me your remedy.
There is none of my Uncles marks upon you: he taught me how to know a man in love: in which cage of rushes, I am sure you act not prisoner.
What were his marks?
A lean cheek, which you have not: a blew eye and sunken, which you have not: an vnquestionable spy∣rit, which you have not: a beard neglected, which you have not: (but I pardon you for that, for simply your ha∣uing in beard, is a younger brothers revenue) then your hose should be ungartered, your bonnet vnbanded, your sleeve unbuttoned, your shoo untied, and every thing about you, demonstrating a careless desolation: but you are no such man; you are rather point device in your ac∣coustrements, as loving your self, then seeming the Lo∣for of any other.
Fair youth, I would I could make thee believe I Love.
Me believe it? You may as soon make her that you Love believe it, which I warrant she is apter to do, then to confess she do'•: that is one of the points, in the which women still give the lie to their consciences. But in good sooth, are you he that hangs the verses on the Trees, wherein Rosalind is so admired?
I swear to thee youth, by the white hand of Rosalind, I am that he, that unfortunate he.
But are you so much in love, as your rimes speak?
Neither rime nor reason can express how much.
Love is merely a madness, and I tel you, de∣serves as well a dark house, and a whip, as madmen do: and the reason why they are not so punished and cured, is that the Lunacy is so ordinary, that the whippers are in love too: yet I profess curing it by counsel.
Did you ever cure any so?
Yes one, and in this manner. Hee was to ima∣gin me his Love, his Mistress: and I set him every day to woe me. At which time would I, being but a moonish youth, grieve, be effeminate, changeable, longing, and liking, proud, fantastical, apish, shallow, inconstant, full of tears, full of smiles; for every passion something, and for no passion truly any thing, as boys and women are for the most part, cattle of this colour: would now like him, now loath him: then entertain him, then forswear him: now weep for him, then spit at him; that I drove my Suitor from his mad humour of love, to a living humour of madness, wc was to forswear the full stream of ye world, and to live in a nook merely Monastic: and thus I cured him, and this way will I take upon me to wash your Li∣for as clean as a sound sheep heart, that there shall not be one spot of Love in it.
I would not be cured, youth.
I would cure you, if you would but call me Rosa∣lind, and come every day to my Coat, and woe me.
Now by the faith of my love, I will; Tel me where it is.
Go with me to it, and Isle show it you: and by the way, you shall tell me, where in the Forest you live: Will you go?
With all my heart, good youth.
Nay, you must call me Rosalind: Come sister, will you go?
Come apace good Audrey, I will fetch up your
Goats, Audrey: and how Audrey am I the man yet?
Doth my simple feature content you?
Your features, Lord warrant vs: what features?
I am here with thee, and thy Goats, as the most capricious Poet honest Ouid was among the Gothes.
O knowledge ill inhabited, worse then love in a thatched house.
When a mans verses cannot be understood, nor a mans good wit seconded with the forward child, un∣derstanding: it strikes a man more dead then a great rec∣koning in a little room: truly, I would the Gods had made thee poetical.
I do not know what Poetical is: is it honest in deed and word: is it a true thing?
No truly: for the truest poetry is the most fai∣ning, and Lovers are given to Poetry: and what they swear in Poetry, may be said as Lovers, they do feign.
Do you wish then that the Gods had made me Poetical?
I do truly: for thou swear to me thou art ho∣nest: Now if thou were a Poet, I might have some hope thou did feign.
Would you not have me honest?
No truly, unless thou were hard favoured: for honesty coupled to beauty, is to have Honey a sauce to Sugar.
A material fool.
Well, I am not fair, and therefore I pray the Gods make me honest.
Truly, and to cast away honesty upon a foul slut, were to put good meat into an unclean dish.
I am not a slut, though I thank the Gods I am foul.
Well, praised be the Gods, for thy foulness; slut∣tishnesse may come hereafter. But be it, as it may bee, I will marry thee: and to that end, I have bin with Sir Oliuer Mar-text, the Vicar of the next village, who hath promised to meet me in this place of the Forest, and to couple vs.
I would fine see this meeting.
Well, the Gods give vs joy.
Amen. A man may if he were of a fearful heart, stagger in this attempt: for here wee have no Temple but the wood, no assembly but horne-beasts. But what though? Courage. As horns are odious, they are noses∣sarie. It is said, many a man knows no end of his goods; right: Many a man has good Horns, and knows no end of them. Well▪ that is the dowry of his wife, it is none of his own getting; horns, even so poor men alone: No, no, the noblest Dear hath them as huge as the Ras∣call: Is the single man therefore blessed? No, as a walled Town is more worthier then a village, so is the fore∣head of a married man, more honourable then the bare brow of a Bachelor: and by how much defence is bet∣la then no skill, by so much is a horn more precious then to want.
Here comes Sir Oliuer: Sir Oliuer Mar-text you are well met. Will you dispatch vs here under this tree, or shall we go with you to your Chapel?
Is there none here to give the woman?
I will not take her on gift of any man.
Truly she must be given, or the marriage is not lawful.
Proceed, proceed: Isle give her.
Good even good Mr what ye call it: how do you Sir, you are very well met: goddild you for your last company, I am very glad to see you, even a toy in hand here Sir: Nay, pray be covered.
Will you be married, Motley?
As the Ox hath his bow sir, the horse his curb, and the Falcon her bells, so man hath his desires, and as Pigeons bill, so wedlock would be nibbling.
And will you (being a man of your breeding) be married under a bush like a beggar? Get you to church, and have a good Priest that can tel you what marriage is, this fellow will but join you together, as they join Wainscot, then one of you will prove a shrunk panel, and like greene timber, warp, warp.
I am not in the mind, but I were better to bee married of him then of another, for he is not like to mar∣rye me well: and not being well married, it will be a good excuse for me hereafter, to leave my wife.
Go thou with me,
And let me counsel thee.
Come sweet Audrey,
We must be married, or we must live in bawdry:
Farewell good Mr Oliuer: Not O sweet Oliuer, O brave Oliuer leave me not behind thee: But wind away, bee gone I say, I will not to wedding with thee.
It is no matter; Ne'er a fantastical knave of them all shall slout me out of my calling.
Never talk to me, I will weep.
Do I prithee, but yet have the grace to consider, that tears do not become a man.
But have I not cause to weep?
As good cause as one would desire,
Therefore weep.
His very hair
Is of the dissembling colour.
Something browner then Iudasses:
Marry his kisses are Iudasses own children.
In faith his hair is of a good colour.
An excellent colour:
Your Chessenut was ever the only colour:
And his kissing is as full of sanctity,
As the touch of holy bread.
Hee hath bought a pair of cast lips of Diana: a Nun of winters sisterhood kisses not more religiously, the very ye of chastity is in them.
But why did hee swear hee would come this morning, and comes not?
Nay certainly there is no truth in him.
Doe you think so?
Yes, I think he is not a pick purse, nor a horse-stealer, but for his verity in love, I doe think him as concave as a covered goblet, or a Worme-eaten nut.
Not true in love?
Yes, when he is in, but I think he is not in.
You have heard him swear downright he was.
Was, is not is: besides, the oath of Lover is no stronger then the word of a Tipster, they are both the confirmer of false reckonings, he attends here in the for∣rest on the Duke your father.
I met the Duke yesterday, and had much que∣stion with him: he asked me of what parentage I was; I told him of as good as he, so he laughed and let me go. But what talk wee of Fathers, when there is such a man as Orlando?
O that's a brave man, hee writes brave verses, speaks brave words, swears brave oaths, and breaks them bravely, quite travers athwart the heart of his lo∣for, as a puisny Tilter, yt spurs his horse but on one side, breaks his staff like a noble goose; but ell's brave that youth mounts, and folly guides: who comes here?
Mistress and Master, you have oft enquired
After the Shepherd that complained of love,
Who you saw sitting by me on the Turph,
Praising the proud disdainful Shepherdess
That was his Mistress.
Well: and what of him?
If you will see a pageant truly plaid
Between the pale complexion of true Love,
And the red glow of scorn and proud disdain,
Go hence a little, and I shall conduct you
If you will mark it.
O come, let vs remove,
The sight of Lovers feeds those in love:
Bring vs to this sight, and you shall say
Isle prove a busy actor in their play.
Sweet Phebe doe not scorn me, do not Phebe
Say that you love me not, but say not so
In bitterness; the common executioner
Whose heart the accustomed sight of death makes hard
Falls not the axe upon the humbled neck,
But first begs pardon: will you sterner be
Then he that dies and lives by bloody drops?
I would not be thy executioner,
I fly thee, for I would not injure thee:
Thou tellst me there is murder in mine eye,
It is pretty sure, and very probable,
That eyes that are the frailst, and softest things,
Who shut their coward gates on atomyes,
Should be called tyrants, butchers, murderers.
Now I doe frown on thee with all my heart,
And if mine eyes can wound, now let them kill thee:
Now counterfeit to swooned▪ why now fall down,
Or if thou can not, oh for shame, for shame,
Lye not, to say mine eyes are murderers:
Now show the wound mine eye hath made in thee,
Scratch thee but with a pin, and there remains
Some scarre of it: Lean upon a rush
The Cicatrice and capable impressure
Thy palm some moment keeps: but now mine eyes
Which I have darted at thee, hurt thee not,
Nor I am sure there is no force in eyes
That can doe hurt.
O dear Phebe,
If ever (as that ever may be near)
You meet in some fresh cheek the power of fancy,
Then shall you know the wounds invisible
That Loves keen arrows make.
But till that time
Come not thou near me: and when that time comes,
Afflict me with thy mocks, pity me not,
As till that time I shall not pity thee.
And why I pray you? who might be your mother
That you insult, exult, and all at once
Over the wretched? what though you hau no beauty
As by my faith, I see no more in you
Then without Candle may go dark to bed:
Must you be therefore proud and pitiless?
Why what means this? why do you look on me?
I see no more in you then in the ordinary
Of Natures sale-worke? odds my little life,
I think she means to tangle my eyes too:
No faith proud Mistress, hope not after it,
It is not your inky brows, your black silk hair,
Your bugle eye-balls, nor your cheek of cream
That can entame my spirits to your worship:
You foolish Shepherd, wherefore do you follow her
Like foggy South, puffing with wind and rain,
You are a thousand times a properer man
Then she a woman. It is such fools as you
That makes the world full of ill-fauourd children:
It is not her glass, but you that flatters her,
And out of you she sees her self more proper
Then any of her lineaments can show her:
But Mistress, know your self down on your knees
And thank heaven, fasting, for a good mans love;
For I must tell you friendly in your ear,
Sell when you can, you are not for all markets:
Cry the man mercy, love him, take his offer,
Foul is most foul, being foul to be a scoffer.
So take her to thee Shepherd, fare you well.
Sweet youth, I pray you chide a year together,
I had rather here you chide, then this man woo.
Hee• fallen in love with your foulness, &amp; she'll
Fall in love with my anger. If it be so, as fast
As she answers thee with frowning looks, isle sauce
Her with bitter words: why look you so upon me?
For no ill will I bear you.
I pray you do not fall in love with me,
For I am falser then vows made in wine:
Besides, I like you not: if you will know my house,
It is at the tufft of Olives, here hard by:
Will you go Sister? Shepherd ply her hard:
Come Sister: Shepherdess, look on him better
And be not proud, though all the world could see,
None could be so abused in sight as hee.
Come, to our flock.
Dead Shepherd, now I sind thy saw of might,
Who ever loved, that loved not at first sight?
Sweet Phebe.
Ho: what say thou Siluius?
Sweet Phebe pity me.
Why I am sorry for thee gentle Siluius.
Where ever sorrow is, relief would be:
If you doe sorrow at my grief in love,
By giving love your sorrow, and my grief
Were both extermin'd.
Thou hast my love, is not that neighbourly?
I would have you.
Why that were covetousness:
Siluius; the time was, that I hated thee;
And yet it is not, that I bear thee love,
But since that thou can talk of love so well,
Thy company, which erst was irksome to me
I will endure; and Isle employ thee too:
But doe not look for further recompense
Then thine own gladness, that thou art employed.
So holy, and so perfect is my love,
And I in such a poverty of grace,
That I shall think it a most plenteous crop
To glean the broken ears after the man
That the maine harvest reapes: loose now and then
A scattred smile, and that Isle live upon.
Know thou the youth that spoke to me yere-while?
Not very well, but I have met him oft,
And he hath bought the Cottage and the bounds
That the old Carlot once was Master of.
Think not I love him, though I ask for him,
It is but a peevish boy, yet he talks well,
But what care I for words? yet words do well
When he that speaks them pleases those that hear:
It is a pretty youth, not very pretty,
But sure hoe's proud, and yet his pride becomes him;
He will make a proper man: the best thing in him
Is his complexion: and faster then his tongue
Did make offence, his eye did heal it up:
He is not very tall, yet for his years hoe's tall:
His leg is but so so, and yet it is well:
There was a pretty redness in his lip,
A little riper, and more lusty red
Then that mixed in his cheek: it was just the difference
Betwixt the constant red, and mingled Damask.
There be some women Siluius, had they marked him
In parcels as I did, would have gone near
To fall in love with him: but for my part
I love him not, nor hate him not: and yet
Have more cause to hate him then to love him,
For what had he to doe to chide at me?
He said mine eyes were black, and my hair black,
And now I am remembered, scorned at me:
I marvel why I answered not again,
But that's all one: omittance is no quittance:
Isle write to him a very tanting Letter,
And thou shalt bear it, wilt thou Siluius?
Phebe, with all my heart.
Isle write it strait:
The matter's in my head, and in my heart,
I will be bitter with him, and passing short;
Go with me Siluius.
I prithee, pretty youth, let me better acquainted with thee.
They say you are a melancholy fellow.
I am so: I doe love it better then laughing.
Those that are in extremity of either, are abho∣minable fellows, and betray themselves to every mo∣derne censure, worse then drunkards.
Why, it is good to be sad and say nothing.
Why then it is good to be a post.
I have neither the Scholars melancholy, which is emulation: nor the Musicians, which is fantastical; nor the Courtiers, which is proud: nor the Soldiers, which is ambitious: nor the Lawyers, which is politic: nor the Ladies, which is nice: nor the Lovers, which is all these: but it is a melancholy of mine own, com∣pounded of many simples, extracted from many objects, and indeed the sundry contemplation of my travels, in which by often rumination, wraps me in a most humo∣rous sadness.
A Traveller: by my faith you have great rea∣son to be sad: I fear you have sold your own Lands, to see other men's; then to have seen much, and to have nothing, is to have rich eyes and poor hands.
Yes, I have gained my experience.
And your experience makes you sad: I had ra∣there have a fool to make me merry, then experience to make me sad, and to travail for it too.
Good day, and happiness, dear Rosalind.
Nay then God buy you, and you talk in blank verse.
Farewell Monsieur Trauellor: look you lisp, and wear strange suites; disable all the benefits of your own Country: be out of love with your nativity, and almost chide God for making you that countenance you are; or I will scarce think you have swam in a Gundello. Why how now Orlando, where have you bin all this while? you a lover? and you serve me such another trick, never come in my sight more.
My fair Rosalind, I come within an hour of my promise.
Break an hours promise in love? hee that will divide a minute into a thousand parts, and break but a part of the thousand part of a minute in the affairs of love, it may be said of him that Cupped hath clapped him of the shoulder, but Isle warrant him heart hole.
Pardon me dear Rosalind.
Nay, and you be so tardy, come no more in my sight, I had as lief be wooed of a Snail.
Of a Snail?
I, of a Snail: for though he comes slowly, hee carries his house on his head; a better ioyncture I think then you make a woman: besides, he brings his destiny with him.
What's that?
Why horns: wr such as you are fine to be be∣holding to your wives for: but he comes armed in his fortune, and prevents the slander of his wife.
Virtue is no horne-maker: and my Rosalind is virtuous.
And I am your Rosalind.
It pleases him to call you so: but he hath a Rosa∣lind of a better leer then you.
Come, woo me, woo me: for now I am in a holy-day humour, and like enough to consent: What would you say to me now, and I were your very, very Rosalind?
I would kiss before I spoke.
Nay, you were better speak first, and when you were grauel'd, for lack of matter, you might take oc∣cession to kiss: very good Orators when they are out, they will spit, and for lovers, lacking (God warn vs) matter, the cleanliest shift is to kiss.
How if the kiss be denied?
Then she puts you to entreaty, and there begins new matter.
Who could be out, being before his beloved Mistress?
Marry that should you if I were your Mistress, or I should think my honesty ranker then my wit.
What, of my suite?
Not out of your apparel, and yet out of your suite:
Am not I your Rosalind?
I take some joy to say you are, because I would be talking of her.
Well, in her person, I say I will not have you.
Then in mine own person, I die.
No faith, die by Attorney: the poor world is almost six thousand years old, and in all this time there was not any man died in his own person (videlicet) in a love cause: Trotlous had his brains dashed out with a Grecian club, yet he did what hee could to die before, and he is one of the patterns of love. Lender, he would have lived many a fair year though Hero had turned Nun; if it had not bin for a hot Midsomer-night, for (good youth) he went but forth to wash him in the Hell∣lespont, and being taken with the cramp, was droun'd, and the foolish Chronoclers of that age, found it was Hero of Cestos. But these are all lies, men have died from time to time, and worms have eaten them, but not for love.
I would not have my right Rosalind of this mind, for I protest her frown might kill me.
By this hand, it will not kill a fly: but come, now I will be your Rosalind in a more comingon dis∣position: and ask me what you will, I will grant it.
Then love me Rosalind.
Yes faith will I, fridays and saturdays, and all.
And wilt thou have me?
I, and twenty such.
What says thou?
Are you not good?
I hope so.
Why then, can one desire too much of a good thing: Come sister, you shall be the Priest, and marry vs: give me your hand Orlando: What doe you say sister?
Pray thee marry vs.
I cannot say the words.
You must begin, will you Orlando.
Go too: will you Orlando, have to wife this To∣salind?
I will.
I, but when?
Why now, as fast as she can marry vs.
Then you must say, I take thee Rosalind for wife.
I take thee Rosalind for wife.
I might ask you for your Commission, But I doe take thee Orlando for my husband: there's a girl goes before the Priest, and certainly a Women's thought runs before her actions.
So do all thoughts, they are winged.
Now tell me how long you would have her, af∣la you have possessed her?
For ever, and a day.
Say a day, without the ever: no, no Orlando, men are April when they woe, December when they wed: Maids are May when they are maids, but the sky champion∣ges when they are wives: I will bee more jealous of thee, then a Barberry cocke-pidgeon over his hen, more clamorous then a Parrot against rain, more new-fang∣led then an ape, more giddy in my desires, then a mon∣key: I will weep for nothing, like Diana in the Foun∣taine, &amp; I will do that when you are disposed to be merry: I will laugh like a Hyena, and that when thou art inclined to sleep.
But will my Rosalind doe so?
By my life, she will doe as I doe.
O but she is wise.
Or else she could not have the wit to doe this: the wiser, the waywarder: make the doors upon a wo∣mans wit, and it will out at the casement: shut that, and twill out at the key-hole: stop that, twill fly with the smoke out at the chimney.
A man that had a wife with such a wit, he might say, wit whether will it?
Nay, you might keep that check for it, till you met your wives wit going to your neighbours bed.
And what wit could wit have, to excuse that?
Marry to say, she came to seek you there: you shall never take her without her answer, unless you take her without her tongue: ô that woman that cannot make her fault her husbands occasion, let her never nurse her child her self, for she will breed it like a fool.
For these two hours Rosalinde, I will leave thee.
Alas, dear love, I cannot lack thee two hours.
I must attend the Duke at dinner, by two a clock I will be with thee again.
I, go your ways, go your ways: I knew what you would prove, my friends told me as much, and I thought no less: that flattering tongue of yours won me: it is but one cast away: and so come death: two o'clock is your hour.
I, sweet Rosalind.
By my troth, and in good earnest, and so God mend me, and by all pretty oaths that are not dange∣rous, if you break one jot of your, promise, or come one minute behind your hour, I will think you the most pathetic breake-promise, and the most hollow lover, and the most unworthy of her you call Rosalinde, that may bee chosen out of the gross band of the vnfaith∣full: therefore beware my censure, and keep your pro∣mise.
With no less religion, then if thou were indeed my Rosalind: so adieu.
Well, Time is the old Justice that examines all such offenders, and let time try: adieu.
You have simply misused our sex in your loue-prate:
we must have your doublet and hose plucked over your head, and show the world what the bird hath done to her own nest.
O cos, cos, cos: my pretty little cos, that thou did know how many fathom deep I am in love: but it cannot bee sounded: my affection hath an unknown bottom, like the Bay of Portugal.
Or rather bottomless, that as fast as you pour affection in, in runs out.
No, that same wicked Bastard of Venus, that was begot of thought, conceived of spleen, and borne of madness, that blind rascally boy, that abuses every ones eyes, because his own are out, let him bee judge, how deep I am in love: isle tell thee Alien, I cannot be out of the sight of Orlando: Isle go find a shadow, and sigh till he come.
And Isle sleep.
Which is he that killed the Dear?
Sir, it was I.
Let's present him to the Duke like a Roman Conqueror, and it would doe well to set the Deers horns upon his head, for a branch of victory; have you no song Forester for this purpose?
Yes Sir.
Sing it: it is no matter how it bee in tune, so it make noise enough.
What shall he have that kilt the Dear?
His Leather skin, and bornes to wear:
Then sing him home, the rest shall bear this burden;
Take thou no scorn to wear the horn,
It was a crest ere thou wast borne,
Thy fathers father wore it,
And thy father bore it,
The horn, the horn, the lusty horn,
Is not a thing to laugh to scorn.
How say you now, is it not past two a clock?
And here much Orlando.
I warrant you, with pure love, &amp; troubled brain,
He hath t'ane his bow and arrows, and is gone forth
To sleep: look who comes here.
My errand is to you, fair youth,
My gentle Phebe, did bid me give you this:
I know not the contents, but as I guess
By the sterne brow, and waspish action
Which she did use, as she was writing of it,
It bears an angry tenure; pardon me,
I am but as a guiltless messenger.
Patience her self would startle at this letter,
And play the swaggerer, bear this, bear all:
She says I am not fair, that I lack manners,
She calls me proud, and that she could not love me
Were man as rare as Phoenix: 'od's my will,
Her love is not the Hare that I doe hunt,
Why writes she so to me? well Shepherd, well,
This is a Letter of your own device.
No, I protest, I know not the contents,
Phebe did write it.
Come, come, you are a fool,
And turned into the extremity of love.
I saw her hand, she has a leathern hand,
A free-stone coloured hand: I verily did think
That her old gloves were on, but it was her hands:
She has a housewives hand, but that's no matter:
I say she never did invent this letter,
This is a mans invention, and his hand.
Sure it is hers.
Why, tic a boisterous and a cruel stile,
A stile for challengers: why, she defies me,
Like Turk to Christian: women's gentle brain
Could not drop forth such giant rude invention,
Such Ethiop words, blacker in their effect
Then in their countenance: will you hear the letter?
So please you, for I never heard it yet:
Yet heard too much of Phebes cruelty.
She Phebes me: mark how the tyrant vvrites.
Read. Art thou god, to Shepherd turned?
That a maidens heart hath burned.
Can a woman rail thus?
Call you this railing?
Read. Why, thy godhood laid a part,
War thou with a women's heart?
Did you ever hear such railing?
Whiles the eye of man did woo me,
That could do no vengeance to me.
Meaning me a beast.
If the scorn of your bright cine
Have power to raise such love in mine,
Alack, in me, what strange effect
Would they work in mild aspect?
Whiles you chid me, I did love,
How then might your prayers move?
He that brings this love to thee,
Little knows this Love in me▪
And by him seal up thy mind,
Whether that thy youth and kind
Will the faithful offer take
Of me, and all that I can make,
Or else by him my love deny,
And then Isle study how to die.
Call you this chiding?
Alas poor Shepherd.
Doe you pity him? No, he deserves no pity: wilt thou love such a woman? what to make thee an in∣strument, and play false strains upon thee? not to be en∣dur'd. Well, go your way to her; (for I see Love hath made thee a tame snake) and say this to her; That if she love me, I charge her to love thee: if she will not, I will never have her, unless thou entreat for her: if you bee a true lover hence, and not a word; for here comes more company.
Good morrow, fair ones: pray you, (if you know)
Where in the Purlews of this Forest, stands
A sheep-coat, fenced about with Oliue-trees.
West of this place, down in the neighbor bottom
The rank of Osiers, by the murmuring stream
Left on your right hand, brings you to the place:
But at this hour, the house doth keep it self,
There's none within.
If that an eye may profit by a tongue,
Then should I know you by description,
Such garments, and such years: the boy is fair,
Of female favour, and bestows himself
Like a ripe sister: the woman low
And browner then her brother: are not you
The owner of the house I did enquire for?
It is no boast, being asked, to say we are.
Orlando doth commend him to you both,
And to that youth hee calls his Rosalind,
He sends this bloody napkin; are you he?
I am: what must we understand by this?
Some of my shame, if you will know of me
What man I am, and how, and why, and where
This handkercher was stained.
I pray you tell it.
When last the young Orlando parted from you,
He left a promise to return again
Within an hour, and pacing through the Forest,
Chewing the food of sweet and bitter fancy,
Lo what befell: he threw his eye aside,
And mark what object did present it self
Under an old Oak, whose bows were mossed with age
And high top, bald with dry antiquity:
A wretched ragged man, ore-gowne with hair
Lay sleeping on his back; about his neck
A greene and gilded snake had wreathed it self,
Who with her head, nimble in threats approached
The opening of his mouth: but suddenly
Seeing Orlando, it vnlink'd it self,
And with indented glides, did slip away
Into a bush, under which bushes shade
A Lioness, with vdders all drawn dry,
Lay couching head on ground, with cat-like watch
When that the sleeping man should stir; for it is
The royal disposition of that beast
To prey on nothing, that doth seem as dead:
This seen, Orlando did approach the man,
And found it was his brother, his elder brother.
O I have heard him speak of that same brother,
And he did render him the most unnatural
That lived amongst men.
And well he might so doe,
For well I know he was unnatural.
But to Orlando: did he leave him there
Food to the sucked and hungry Lioness?
Twice did he turn his back, and purposed so:
But kindness, nobler ever then revenge,
And Nature stronger then his just occasion,
Made him give battle to the Lioness:
Who quickly fell before him, in which hurtling
From miserable slumber I awaked.
Are you his brother?
Was it you he rescued?
Was it you that did so oft contrive to kill him?
It was I: but it is not I: I doe not shame
To tell you what I was, since my conversion
So sweeetly tastes, being the thing I am.
But for the bloody napkin?
By and by:
When from the first to last betwixt vs two,
Tears our recountments had most kindly bathed,
As how I came into that Desert place.
I brief, he led me to the gentle Duke,
Who gave me fresh array, and entertainment,
Committing me unto my brothers love,
Who led me instantly unto his Cave,
There stripped himself, and here upon his arm
The Lioness had torn some flesh away,
Which all this while had bled; and now he fainted,
And cried in fainting upon Rosalinde.
Brief, I recovered him, bound up his wound,
And after some small space, being strong at heart,
He sent me hither, stranger as I am
To tell this story, that you might excuse
His broken promise, and to give this napkin
Died in this blood, unto the Shepherd youth,
That he in sport doth call his Rosalind.
Why how now Ganimed, sweet Ganimed.
Many will swoon when they do look on blood.
There is more in it; Cousin Ganimed.
Look, he recovers.
I would I were at home.
We'll lead you thither:
I pray you will you take him, by the arm.
Be of good cheer youth: you a man?
You lack a mans heart.
I doe so, I confess it:
Ah, sir, a body would think this was well counterfei∣ted, I pray you tell your brother how well I counterfei∣ted: heigh-ho.
This was not counterfeit, there is too great te∣stimony in your complexion, that it was a passion of ear∣nest.
Counterfeit, I assure you.
Well then, take a good heart, and counterfeit to be a man.
So I doe: but in faith, I should have been a wo∣man by right.
Come, you look paler and paler: pray you draw homewards: good sir, go with vs.
That will I: for I must bear answer back
How you excuse my brother, Rosalind.
I shall devise: something: but I pray you com∣mend my counterfeiting to him: will you go?
We shall find a time Audrey, patience gen∣tle Audrey.
Faith the Priest was good enough, for all the old gentleman's saying.
A most wicked Sir Oliuer, Audrey, a most vile Mar-text. But Audrey, there is a youth here in the Forest lays claim to you.
I, I know who it is: he hath no interest in me in the world: here comes the man you mean.
It is meat and drink to me to see a Clown, by
my troth, we that have good wits, have much to answer for: we shall be flouting: we cannot hold.
Good even Audrey.
God ye good even William.
And good even to you Sir.
Good even gentle friend. Cover thy head, cover thy head: Nay prithee bee eouer'd. How old are you Friend?
Five and twenty Sir.
A ripe age: Is thy name William?
William, sir.
A fair name. Was it borne in th Forest here?
I sir, I thank God.
Thank God: A good answer:
Art rich?
Faith sir, so, so.
So, so, is good, very good, very excellent good:
and yet it is not, it is but so, so:
Art thou wise?
I sir, I have a pretty wit.
Why, thou say well. I do now remember a say∣ing: The Fool doth think he is wise, but the wiseman knows himself to be a Fool. The Heathen Philoso∣pher, when he had a desire to eat a Grape, would open his lips when he put it into his mouth, meaning there∣by, that Grapes were made to eat, and lips to open. You do love this maid?
I do sit.
Give me your hand: Art thou Learned?
No sir.
Then learn this of me, To have, is to have. For it is a figure in Rhetoric, that drink being powered out of a cup into a glass, by filling the one, doth empty the other. For all your Writers do consent, that ipse is hee: now you are not ipse, for I am he.
Which he sir?
He sir, that must marry this woman: Therefore you Clown, abandon: which is in the vulgar, leave the society: which in the boorish, is company, of this fe∣male: which in the common, is woman: which toge∣there, is, abandon the society of this Female, or Clown thou perish: or to thy better understanding, die; or (to wit) I kill thee, make thee away, translate thy life in∣to death, thy liberty into bondage: I will deal in poi∣son with thee, or in bastinado, or in steel: I will bandy with thee in faction, I will ore-run thee with police: I will kill thee a hundred and fifty ways, therefore trem∣ble and depart.
Do good William.
God rest you merry sir.
Our Master and Mistress seeks you: come a∣way, away.
Trip Audrey, trip Audrey, I attend, I attend.
Is it possible, that on so little acquaintance you should like her? that, but seeing, you should love her? And loving woo? and wooing, she should grant? And will you persevere to enjoy her?
Neither call the giddiness of it in question; the poverty of her, the small acquaintance, my sudden wo∣ing, nor sudden consenting: but say with me, I love Alien: say with her, that she loves me; consent with both, that we may enjoy each other: it shall be to your good: for my fathers house, and all the revenue, that was old Sir Rowlands will I estate upon you, and here live and die a Shepherd.
You have my consent.
Let your Wedding be to morrow: thither will I
Inuit the Duke, and ell's contented followers:
Go you, and prepare Alien; for look you,
Here comes my Rosalinde.
God save you brother.
And you fair sister.
Oh my dear Orlando, how it grieves me to see thee wear thy heart in a scarf.
It is my arm.
I thought thy heart had been wounded with the claws of a Lion.
Wounded it is, but with the eyes of a Lady.
Did your brother tell you how I counterfeited to sound, when he showed me your handkercher?
I, and greater wonders then that.
O, I know where you are: nay, tic true: there was never any thing so sudden, but the fight of two Rams, and Cesars Thrasonicall brag of I came, saw, and overcome. For your brother, and my sister, no so∣ner met, but they looked: no sooner looked, but they loved; no sooner loved, but they sighed: no sooner sighed but they asked one another the reason: no sooner knew the reason, but they sought the remedy: and in these degrees, have they made a pair of stairs to marriage, which they will climb incontinent, or else bee inconti∣nent before marriage; they are in the very wrath of love, and they will together. Clubs cannot part them.
They shall be married to morrow: and I will bid the Duke to the Nuptial. But O, how bitter a thing it is, to look into happiness through another mans eyes: by so much the more shall I to morrow be at the height of heart heaviness▪ by how much I shall think my bro∣there happy, in having what he wishes for.
Why then to morrow, I cannot serve your turn for Rosalind?
I can live no longer by thinking.
I will weary you then no longer with idle tal∣king. Know of me then (for now I speak to some pur∣pose) that I know you are a Gentleman of good conceit: I speak not this, that you should bear a good opinion of my knowledge: insomuch (I say) I know you arc:nei∣there do I labour for a greater esteem then may in some little measure draw a belief from you, to do your self good, and not to grace me. Believe then, if you please, that I can do strange things: I have since I was three year old conversed with a Magician, most profound in his Art, and yet not damnable. If you do love Rosalinde so near the hart, as your gesture cries it out: when your brother marries Alien, shall you marry her. I know in∣to what straights of Fortune she is driven, and it is not impossible to me, if it appear not inconvenient to you,
to set her before your eyes to morrow, humane as she is, and without any danger.
Speak thou in sober meanings?
By my life I do, which I tender dearly, though I say I am a Magician: Therefore put you in your best a∣ray, bid your friends: for if you will be married to more∣row, you shall: and to Rosalind if you will.
Look, here comes a Lover of mine, and a lover of hers.
Youth, you have done me much ungentleness,
To show the letter that I writ to you.
I care not if I have: it is my study
To seem despiteful and ungentle to you:
you are there followed by a faithful shepherd,
Look upon him, love him: he worships you.
Good shepherd, tell this youth what it is to love
It is to be all made of sighs and tears,
And so am I for Phebe.
And I for Ganimed.
And I for Rosalind.
And I for no woman.
It is to be all made of faith and service,
And so am I for Phebe.
And I for Ganimed.
And I for Rosalind.
And I for no woman.
It is to be all made of fantasy▪
All made of passion, and all made o• •hes,
All adoration, duty, and obseruan•,
All humbleness, all patience, and impatience,
All purity, all trial, all observance:
And so am I for Phebe.
And so am I for Ganimed.
And so am I for Rosalind.
And so am I for no woman.
If this be so, why blame you me to love you?
If this be so, why blame you me to love you?
If this be so, why blame you me to love you?
Why do you speak too. Why blame you me to love you.
To her, that is not here, nor doth not hear.
Pray you no more of this, it is like the howling of Irish Wolves against the Moon: I will help you if I can: I would love you if I could: To morrow meet me altogether: I will marry you, if ever I marry Wo∣man, and Isle be married to morrow: I will satisfy you▪ if ever I satisfied man, and you shall bee married to more∣row. I will content you, if what pleases you contents you, and you shall be married to morrow: As you love Rosalind meet, as you love Phebe meet, and as I love no woman, Isle meet: so fare you well: I have left you com∣mands.
Isle not fail, if I live.
Nor I.
Nor I.
To morrow is the joyful day Audrey, to morrow will we be married.
I do desire it with all my heart: and I hope it is no dishonest desire, to desire to be a woman of ye world? Here come two of the banished Dukes Pages.
Well met honest Gentleman.
By my troth well met: come, sit, sit, and a song.
We are for you, sit in th middle.
Shall we clap into it roundly, without hawking, or spitting, or saying we are hoarse, which are the only prologues to a bad voice.
I faith, y' faith, and both in a tune like two gipsies on a horse.
It was a Lover, and his lass,
With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
That o'er the greene corn field did pass,
In the spring time, the only pretty rang time.
When Birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding.
Sweet Lovers love the spring,
And therefore take the present time.
With a hey, &amp; a ho, and a hey nonino,
For love is crowned with the prime.
In spring time, &amp;c.
Between the acres of the Rye,
With a hey, and a ho, &amp; a hey nonino:
These pretty Country folks would lie.
In spring time, &amp;c.
This Carroll they began that hour,
With a hey and a ho, &amp; a hey nonino:
How that a life was but a Flower,
In spring time, &amp;c.
Truly young Gentlemen, though there was no great matter in the ditty, yet ye note was very untunable
you are deceived Sir, we kept time, we lost not our time.
By my troth yes: I count it but time lost to hear such a foolish song. God buy you, and God mend your voices. Come Audrey.
Dost thou believe Orlando, that the boy
Can do all this that he hath promised?
I sometimes do believe, and sometimes do not,
As those that fear they hope, and know they fear.
Patience once more, whiles our cōpact is urged:
You say, if I bring in your Rosalinde,
You will bestow her on Orlando here?
That would I, had I kingdoms to give with his.
And you say you will have her, when I bring his?
That would I, were I of all kingdoms King.
You say, you'll marry me, if I be willing.
That will I, should I die the hour after.
But if you do refuse to marry me,
You'll give your self to this most faithful Shepherd.
So is the bargain.
You say that you'll have Phebe if she will.
Though to have her and death, were both one thing.
I have promised to make all this matter even:
Keep you your word, O Duke, to give your daughter,
You yours Orlando, to receive his daughter:
Keep you your word Phebe, that you'll marry me,
Or else refusing me to wed this shepherd:
Keep your word Siluius, that you'll marry her
If she refuse me, and from hence I go
To make these doubts all even.
I do remember in this shepherd boy,
Some lively touches of my daughters favour.
My Lord, the first time that I ever saw him,
Me thought he was a brother to your daughter:
But my good Lord, this Boy is Forest borne,
And hath bin tutored in the rudiments
Of many desperate studies, by his uncle,
Whom he reports to be a great Magician.
Obscured in the circle of this Forest.
There is sure another flood toward, and these couples are coming to the Arc. Here comes a pair of very strange beasts, which in all tongues, are called Fools.
Salutation and greeting to you all.
Good my Lord, bid him welcome: This is the Motley-minded Gentleman, that I have so often met in the Forest: he hath bin a Courtier he swears.
If any man doubt that, let him put me to my purgation, I have trod a measure, I have flattred a Lady, I have bin politic with my friend, smooth with mine enemy, I have undone three Tailors, I have had four quarrels, and like to have fought one.
And how was that tan up?
Faith we met, and found the quarrel was upon the seventh cause.
How seventh cause? Good my Lord, like this fellow.
I like him very well.
God•eld you sir, I desire you of the like: I press in here sir, amongst the rest of the Country copulatives to swear, and to forswear, according as marriage binds and blood breaks: a poor virgin sir, an il-fauor'd thing sir, but mine own, a poor humour of mine sir, to take that that no man else will: rich honesty dwells like a mi∣ser sir, in a poor house, as your Pearl in your foul oy∣ster.
By my faith, he is very swift, and sententious
According to the fools bolt sir, and such dulcet diseases.
But for the seventh cause. How did you find the quarrel on the seventh cause?
Upon a lye, seven times removed: (bear your body more seeming Audrey) as thus sir: I did dislike the cut of a certain Courtiers beard: he sent me word, if I said his beard was not cut well, hee was in the mind it was: this is called the retort courteous. If I sent him word again, it was not well cut, he wold send me word he cut it to please himself: this is called the quip modest. If again, it was not well cut, he disabled my judgment: this is called, the reply churlish. If again it was not well cut, he would answer I spake not true: this is called the reproof valiant. If again, it was not well cut, he wold say, I lie: this is called the countercheck quarrelsome: and so to lye circumstantial, and the lye direct.
And how oft did you say his beard was not well cut?
I durst go no further then the lye circumstantial: nor he durst not give me the lye direct: and so wee mea∣sur'd swords, and parted.
Can you nominate in order now, the degrees of the lye.
O sir, we quarrel in print, by the book: as you have books for good manners: I will name you the de∣grees. The first, the Retort courteous: the second, the Quip-modest: the third, the reply Churlish: the fourth, the Reproof valiant: the fifth, the Countercheck quar∣relsome: the sixth, the Lye with circumstance: the sea∣uenth, the Lye direct: all these you may avoid, but the Lye direct: and you may avoid that too, with an If. I knew when seven Justices could not take up a Quarrel, but when the parties were met themselves, one of them thought but of an If; as if you said so, then I said so: and they shook hands, and swore brothers. Your If, is the only peace-maker: much virtue in if.
Is not this a rare fellow my Lord? He's as good at any thing, and yet a fool.
He uses his folly like a stalking-horse, and un∣der the presentation of that he shoots his wit.
Then is there mirth in heaven,
When earthly things made eauen atone together.
Good Duke receive thy daughter,
Hymen from Heaven brought her,
Yea brought her hither.
That thou might join his hand with his,
Whose heart within his bosom is.
To you I give my self, for I am yours.
To you I give my self, for I am yours.
If there be truth in sight, you are my daughter.
If there be truth in sight, you are my Rosalind.
If sight &amp; shape be true, why then my love adieu
Isle have no Father, if you be not he:
Isle have no Husband, if you be not he:
Nor ne'er wed woman, if you be not she.
Peace hoe: I bar confusion,
It is I must make conclusion
Of these most strange events:
Here's eight that must take hands,
To join in Hymens bands,
If truth holds true contents.
You and you, no cross shall part;
You and you, are hart in hart:
You, to his love must accord,
Or have a Woman to your Lord.
You and you, are sure together,
As the Winter to foul Weather:
Whiles a Wedlock Hymn we sing,
Feed your selves with questioning:
That reason, wonder may diminish
How thus we met, and these things finish.
Wedding is great Iunos crown,
O blessed bond of board and bed:
It is Hymen peoples every town,
High wedlock then be honoured:
Honour, high honour and renowns
To Hymen, God of every Town.
O my dear Niece, welcome thou art to me,
Even daughter welcome, in no less degree.
I will not eat my word, now thou art mine,
Thy faith, my fancy to thee doth combine.
Let me have audience for a word or two:
I am the second son of old Sir Rowland,
That bring these tidings to this fair assembly.
Duke Frederick hearing how that every day
Men of great worth resorted to this forest,
Addressed a mighty power, which were on foot
In his own conduct, purposely to take
His brother here, and put him to the sword:
And to the skirts of this wilde Wood he came;
Where, meeting with an old Religious man,
After some question with him, was converted
Both from his enterprise, and from the world:
His crown bequeathing to his banished Brother,
And all their Lands restored to him again
That were with him exiled. This to be true,
I do engage my life.
Welcome young man:
Thou offer fairly to thy brothers wedding:
To one his lands with-held, and to the other
A land it self at large, a potent Dukedom.
First, in this Forest, let vs do those ends
That here vvete well begun, and well begot:
And after, every of this happy number
That have endured shrewed days, and nights with vs,
Shall share the good of our returned fortune,
According to the measure of their states.
Mean time, forget this new-falne dignity,
And fall into our Rustic Reuelrie:
Play Music, and you Brides and Bridegrooms all,
With measure heaped in joy, to th Measures fall.
Sir, by your patience: if I heard you rightly,
The Duke hath put on a Religious life,
And thrown into neglect the pompous Court.
He hath.
To him will I: out of these convertites,
There is much matter to be heard, and learned:
you to your former Honour, I bequeath
your patience, and your virtue, well deserves it.
you to a love, that your true faith doth merit:
you to your land, and love, and great allies:
you to a long, and well-deserued bed:
And you to wrangling, for thy loving voyage
Is but for two months victualled: So to your pleasures,
I am for other, then for dancing measures.
Stay, Iaques, stay.
To see no pastime, I: what you would have,
Isle stay to know, at your abandoned cave.
Proceed, proceed: we'll begin these rights,
As we do trust, they'll end in true delights. —
It is not the fashion to see the Lady the Epi∣logue: but it is no more unhandsome, then to see the Lord the Prologue. If it be true, that good wine needs no bush, it is true, that a good play needs no Epilogue. Yet to good wine they do use good bushes: and good plays prove the better by the help of good Epilogues: What a case am I in then, that am neither a good Epi∣logue, nor cannot insinuate with you in the behalf of a good play? I am not furnished like a Beggar, therefore to beg will not become me. My way is to conjure you, and Isle begin with the Women. I charge you (O women) for the love you bear to men, to like as much of this Play, as please you: And I charge you (O men) for the love you bear to women (as I perceive by your simpering, none of you hates them) that between you, and the women, the play may please. If I were a Wo∣man, I would kiss as many of you as had beards that pleased me, complexions that liked me, and breaths that I defied not: And I am sure, as many as have good beards, or good faces, or sweet breaths, will for my kind offer, when I make curtsy, bid me farewell.

NOw is the Winter of our Discontent,
Made glorious Summer by this Son of York:
And all the clouds that lowered upon our house
In the deep bosom of the Ocean buried.
Now are our brows bound with Victorious Wreathes,
Our bruised arms hung up for Monuments;
Our sterne Alarms changed to merry Meetings;
Our dreadful Marches, to delightful Measures.
Grim-visag'd War, hath smoothed his wrinkled Front:
And now, in stead of mounting Barbed Steeds,
To fright the Souls of fearful Adversaries,
He capers nimbly in a Ladies Chamber,
To the lascivious pleasing of a Lute.
But I, that am not shaped for sportive tricks,
Nor made to court an amorous Looking-glasse:
I, that am Rudely stamped, and want loves Majesty,
To strut before a wonton ambling Nymph:
I, that am curtailed of this fair Proportion,
Cheated of Feature by dissembling Nature,
Deformed, vn-finish'd, sent before my time
Into this breathing World, scarce half made up,
And that so lamely and vnfashionable,
That dogs bark at me, as I halt by them.
Why I (in this weak piping time of Peace)
Have no delight to pass away the time,
Unless to see my Shadow in the Sun,
And descant on mine own Deformity.
And therefore, since I cannot prove a Lover,
To entertain these fair well spoken days,
I am determined to prove a Villain,
And hate the idle pleasures of these days.
Plots have I laid, Inductions dangerous,
By drunken Prophesies, Libels, and Dreams,
To set my Brother Clarence and the King
In deadly hate, the one against the other:
And if King Edward be as true and just,
As I am Subtle, False, and Treacherous,
This day should Clarence closely be mewed up:
About a Prophecy, which says that G,
Of Edwards heirs the murderer shall be.
Dive thoughts down to my soul, here Clarence comes.
Brother, good day: What means this armed guard
That waits upon your Grace?
His Majesty tendering my persons safety,
Hath appointed this Conduct, to convey me to the Tower
Upon what cause?
Because my name is George.
Alack my Lord, that fault is none of yours:
He should for that commit your Godfathers.
O belike, his Majesty hath some intent,
That you should be new Christened in the Tower.
But what's the matter Clarence, may I know?
Yea Richard, when I know: but I protest
As yet I do not: But as I can learn,
He hearkens after Prophesies and Dreams,
And from the Crosse-row plucks the letter G:
And says, a Wizard told him, that by G,
His issue disinherited should be.
And for my name of George begins with G,
It follows in his thought, that I am he.
These (as I learn) and such like toys as these,
Hath moved his Highness to commit me now.
Why this it is, when men are ruled by Women:
It is not the King that sends you to the Tower,
My Lady Grey his Wife, Clarence it is she.
That tempts him to this harsh Extremity.
Was it not she, and that good man of Worship,
Anthony Woodeulle her Brother there,
That made him send Lord Hastings to the Tower?
From whence this present day he is delivered?
We are not safe Clarence, we are not safe.
By heaven, I think there is no man secure
But the Queens Kindred, and night-walking Heralds,
That trudge betwixt the King, and Mistress Shore.
Heard you not what an humble Suppliant
Lord Hastings was, for her delivery?
Humbly complaining to her Deity,
Got my Lord Chamberlain his liberty.
Isle tell you what, I think it is our way,
If we will keep in favour with the King,
To be her men, and wear her Livery.
The jealous ore-worne Widow, and her self,
Since that our Brother dubbed them Gentlewomen,
Are mighty Gossips in our Monarchy.
I beseech your Graces both to pardon me,
His Majesty hath straightly given in charge,
That no man shall have private Conference
(Of what degree soever) with your Brother.
Even so, and please your Worship Brakenbury,
You may partake of any thing we say:
We speak no Treason man; We say the King
Is wise and virtuous, and his Noble Queen
Well struck in years, fair, and not jealous.
We say, that Shores Wife hath a pretty Foot,
A cherry Lip, a bonny Eye, a passing pleasing tongue:
And that the Queens Kindred are made gentle Folks.
How say you sir? can you deny all this?
With this (my Lord) my self have nought to doo.
Nought to do with Mistress Shore?
I tell thee Fellow, he that doth nought with her
(Excepting one) were best to do it secretly alone.
What one, my Lord?
Her Husband Knave, would thou betray me?
I do beseech your Grace
To pardon me, and withal forbear
Your Conference with the Noble Duke.
We know thy charge Brakenbury, and will obey.
We are the Queens abjects, and must obey.
Brother farewell, I will unto the King,
And whatsoever you will employ me in,
Were it to call King Edwards Widow, Sister,
I will perform it to enfranchise you???
Mean time, this deep disgrace in Brotherhood.
Touches me deeper then you can imagine.
I know it pleases neither of vs well.
Well, your imprisonment shall not be long,
I will deliver you, or else lye for you:
Mean time, have patience.
I must perforce: Farewell.
Go tread the path that thou shalt ne'er return:
Simple plain Clarence, I do love thee so,
That I will shortly send thy Soul to Heaven,
If Heaven will take the present at our hands.
But who comes here? the new delivered Hastings?
Good time of day unto my gracious Lord.
As much unto my good Lord Chamberlain:
Well are you welcome to this open Ayre,
How hath your Lordship brooked imprisonment?
With patience (Noble Lord) as prisoners must:
But I shall live (my Lord) to give them thanks
That were the cause of my imprisonment.
No doubt, no doubt, and so shall Clarence too,
For they that were your Enemies, are his,
And have prevailed as much on him, as you,
More pity, that the Eagles should be mewed,
Whiles Kites and Buzzards play at liberty.
What news abroad?
No news so bad abroad, as this at home:
The King is sickly, weak, and melancholy,
And his Physicians fear him mightily.
Now by S. Iohn, that News is bad indeed.
O he hath kept an evil Diet long,
And ouer-much consumed his Royal Person:
It is very grievous to be thought upon
Where is he, in his bed?
He is.
Go you before, and I will follow you.
He cannot live I hope, and must not dye,
Till George be packed with post-horse up to Heaven.
Isle in to urge his hatred more to Clarence,
With Lies well steeled with weighty Arguments,
And if I fail not in my deep intent,
Clarence hath not another day to live:
Which done, God take King Edward to his mercy,
And leave the world for me to b???ssle in.
For then, Isle marry Warwickes youngest daughter.
What though I killed her Husband, and her Father,
The readiest way to make the Wench amends,
Is to become her Husband, and her Father:
The which will I, not all so much for love,
As for another secret close intent,
By marrying her, which I must reach unto???
But yet I run before my horse to Market:
Clarence still breathes, Edward still lives and reigns,
When they are gone, then must I count my gains.
Set down, set down your honourable load,
If Honour may be shrouded in a Hearse;
Whilst I awhile obsequiously lament
The untimely fall of Virtuous Lancaster.
Poor key-cold Figure of a holy King,
Pale Ashes of the House of Lancaster;
Thou bloodless Remnant of that Royal Blood,
Be it lawful that I invoke thy Ghost,
To hear the Lamentations of poor Anne,
Wife to thy Edward, to thy slaughtered Son,
Stabbed by the selfsame hand that made these wounds.
Lo, in these windows that let forth thy life,
I power the helpless Balm of my poor eyes.
O cursed be the hand that made these holes:
Cursed the Heart, that had the heart to do it:
Cursed the Blood, that let this blood from hence:
More direful hap betide that hated Wretch
That makes vs wretched by the death of thee,
Then I can wish to Wolves, to Spiders, Toads,
Or any creeping venomed thing that lives.
If ever he have Child, Abortive be it,
Prodigious, and untimely brought to light,
Whose ugly and unnatural Aspect
May fright the hopeful Mother at the view,
And that be Heir to his unhappiness.
If ever he have Wife, let her be made
More miserable by the death of him,
Then I am made by my young Lord, and thee.
Come now towards Chertsey with your holy Lode,
Taken from Paules, to be interred there.
And still as you are weary of this weight,
Rest you, whiles I lament King Henries Coarse.
Stay you that bear the Coarse, &amp; set it down.
What black Magician conjures up this Fiend,
To stop devoted charitable deeds?
Villains set down the Coarse, or by S. Paul,
Isle make a Coarse of him that disobeys.
My Lord stand back, and let the Coffin pass.
Unmannered Dog,
Stand thou when I command:
Advance thy Halberd higher then my breast,
Or by S. Paul Isle strike thee to my Foot,
And spurn upon thee Beggar for thy boldness.
What do you tremble? are you all afraid?
Alas, I blame you not, for you are Mortal,
And Mortal eyes cannot endure the Devil.
Avaunt thou dreadful minister of Hell;
Thou had but power over his Mortal body,
His Soul thou can not have: Therefore be gone.
Sweet Saint, for Charity, be not so cursed.
Foul Devil,
For Gods sake hence, and trouble vs not,
For thou hast made the happy earth thy Hell:
Filled it with cursing cries, and deep exclaims:
If thou delight to view thy heinous deeds,
Behold this pattern of thy Butcheries.
Oh Gentlemen, see, see dead Henries wounds,
Open their congealed mouths, and bleed afresh.
Blush, blush, thou lump of foul Deformity:
For it is thy presence that exhales this blood
From cold and empty Veins where no blood dwells.
Thy Deeds inhumane and unnatural,
Provokes this Deluge most unnatural.
O God! which this Blood made, revenge his death:
O Earth! which this Blood drink, revenge his death.
Either Heaven with Lightning strike the murth'rer dead:
Or Earth gape open wide, and eat him quick,
As thou dost swallow up this good Kings blood,
Which his Hell-gouern'd arm hath butchered.
Lady, you know no Rules of Charity,
Which renders good for bad, Blessings for Curses.
Villain, thou know nor law of God nor Man,
No Beast so fierce, but knows some touch of pity.
But I know none, and therefore am no Beast.
O wonderful, when devils tell the truth!
More wonderful, when Angels are so angry:
Vouchsafe (divine perfection of a Woman)
Of these supposed Crimes, to give me leave
By circumstance, but to acquit my self.
Vouchsafe (defused infection of man)
Of these known evils, but to give me leave
By circumstance, to curse thy cursed Self.
Fairer then tongue can name thee, let me have
Some patient leisure to excuse my self.
Fouler then heart can think thee,
Thou can make no excuse currant,
But to hang thy self.
By such despair, I should accuse my self.
And by despairing shalt thou stand excused,
For doing worthy Vengeance on thy self,
That did unworthy slaughter upon others.
Say that I slew them not.
Then say they were not slain:
But dead they are, and devilish slave by thee.
I did not kill your Husband.
Why then he is alive.
Nay, he is dead, and slain by Edwards hands.
In thy foul throat thou Lie,
Queen Margaret saw
Thy murderous Falchion smoking in his blood:
The which, thou once did bend against her breast,
But that thy Brothers beat aside the point.
I was provoked by her slanderous tongue,
That laid their guilt, upon my guiltless Shoulders.
Thou was it provoked by thy bloody mind,
That never dream on ought but Butcheries:
Did thou not kill this King?
I grant ye.
Dost grant me Hedgehog,
Then God grant me too
Thou may be damned for that wicked deed,
O he was gentle, mild, and virtuous.
The better for the King of heaven that hath him.
He is in heaven, where thou shalt never come.
Let him thank me, that help to send him thy???there:
For he was fitter for that place then earth.
And thou unfit for any place, but hell.
Yes one place else, if you will hear me name it.
Some dungeon.
Your Bed-chamber.
Ill rest betide the chamber where thou lie.
So will it Madam, till I lye with you.
I hope so.
I know so. But gentle Lady Anne,
To leave this keen encounter of our wits,
And fall something into a slower method.
Is not the causer of the timeless deaths
Of these Plantagenets, Henrie and Edward,
As blameful as the Executioner.
Thou was it the cause, and most accursed effect.
Your beauty was the cause of that effect:
Your beauty, that did haunt me in my sleep,
To undertake the death of all the world,
So I might live one hour in your sweet bosom.
If I thought that, I tell thee Homicide,
These Nails should rent that beauty from my Cheeks.
These eyes could not endure yt beauties wrack,
You should not blemish it, if I stood by;
As all the world is cheered by the Sun,
So I by that: It is my day, my life.
Black night ore-shade thy day, &amp; death thy life.
Curse not thy self fair Creature,
Thou art both.
I would I were, to be revenged on thee.
It is a quarrel most unnatural,
To be revenged on him that loves thee.
It is a quarrel just and reasonable,
To be revenged on him that killed my Husband.
He that bereft the Lady of thy Husband,
Did it to help thee to a better Husband.
His better doth not breath upon the earth.
He lives, that loves thee better then he could.
Name him.
Plantagenet.
Why that was he.
The selfsame name, but one of better Nature.
Where is he?
Here:
Why dost thou spit at me.
Would it were mortal poison, for thy sake.
Never came poison from so sweet a place.
Never hung poison on a fowler Toad.
Out of my sight, thou dost infect mine eyes.
Thine eyes (sweet Lady) have infected mine.
Would they were Basilisks, to strike thee dead.
I would they were, that I might dye at once:
For now they kill me with a living death.
Those eyes of thine, from mine have drawn salt Tears;
Shamed their Aspects with store of childish drops:
These eyes, which never shed remorseful tear,
No, when my Father York, and Edward wept,
To hear the piteous moan that Rutland made
When black-fac'd Clifford shook his sword at him.
Nor when thy warlike Father like a Child,
Told the sad story of my Fathers death,
And twenty times, made pause to sob and weep:
That all the standers by had wet their cheeks
Like Trees bedash'd with rain. In that sad time,
My manly eyes did scorn an humble tear:
And what these sorrows could not thence exhale,
Thy Beauty hath, and made them blind with weeping.
I never sued to Friend, nor Enemy:
My Tongue could never learn sweet smoothing word.
But now thy Beauty is proposed my Fee,
My proud heart sues, and prompts my tongue to speak.
Teach not thy lip such Scorn; for it was made
For kissing Lady, not for such contempt.
If thy revengeful heart cannot forgive,
Lo here I lend thee this sharpe-pointed Sword,
Which if thou please to hide in this true breast,
And let the Soul forth that adores thee,
I lay it naked to the deadly stroke,
And humbly beg the death upon my knee,
Nay do not pause: For I did kill King Henrie,
But it was thy Beauty that provoked me.
Nay now dispatch: It was I that stabbed young Edward,
But it was thy Heavenly face that set me on.
Take up the Sword again, or take up me.
Arise Dissembler, though I wish thy death,
I will not be thy Executioner.
Then bid me kill my self, and I will do it.
I have already.
That was in thy rage:
Speak it again, and even with the word,
This hand, which for thy love, did kill thy Love,
Shall for thy love, kill a far truer Love,
To both their deaths shalt thou be accessory.
I would I knew thy heart.
It is figured in my tongue.
I fear me, both are false.
Then never Man was true.
Well, well, put up your Sword.
Say then my Peace is made.
That shalt thou know hereafter.
But shall I live in hope.
All men I hope live so.
Vouchsafe to wear this Ring.
Look how my Ring incompasseth thy Finger,
Even so thy Breast encloses my poor heart:
Wear both of them, for both of them are thine.
And if thy poor devoted Servant may
But beg one favour at thy gracious hand,
Thou dost confirm his happiness for ever.
What is it?
That it may please you leave these sad designs,
To him that hath most cause to be a Mourner,
And presently repair to Crosbie House:
Where (after I have solemnly interred
At Chertsey Monast'ry this Noble King,
And wet his Grave with my Repentant Tears)
I will with all expedient duty see you,
For divers unknown Reasons, I beseech you,
Grant me this Boon.
With all my heart, and much it joys me too,
To see you are become so penitent.
Tressel and Barkley, go along with me.
Bid me farewell.
It is more then you deserve:
But since you teach me how to flatter you,
Imagine I have said farewell already.
Towards Chertsey, Noble Lord?
No: to White Friars, there attend my coming
Was ever woman in this humour wooed?
Was ever woman in this humour won?
Isle have her, but I will not keep her long.
What? I that killed her Husband, and his Father,
To take her in her hearts extremest hate,
With curses in her mouth, Tears in her eyes,
The bleeding witness of my hatred by,
Having God, her Conscience, and these bars against me,
And I, no Friends to back my suite withal,
But the plain Devil, and dissembling looks?
And yet to win her? All the world to nothing.
Ho!
Hath she forgot already that brave Prince,
Edward, her Lord, whom I (some three months since)
Stabbed in my angry mood, at Tewkesbury?
A sweeter, and a lovelier Gentleman,
Framed in the prodigality of Nature:
Young, Valiant, Wise, and (no doubt) right Royal,
The spacious World cannot again afford:
And will she yet abase her eyes on me,
That cropped the Golden prime of this sweet Prince,
And made her Widow to a woeful Bed?
On me, whose All not equals Edwards Moiety?
On me, that halts, and am misshapen thus?
My Dukedom, to a Beggarly denier!
I do mistake my person all this while:
Upon my life she finds (although I cannot)
My self to be a maru'llous proper man.
Isle be at Charges for a Looking-glasse,
And entertain a score or two of Taylors,
To study fashions to adorn my body:
Since I am crept in favour with my self,
I will maintain it with some little cost.
But first Isle turn you Fellow in his Grave,
And then return lamenting to my Love.
Shine out fair Sun, till I have bought a glass,
That I may see my Shadow as I pass.
Have patience Madam, ther's no doubt his Majesty
Will soon recover his accustomed health.
In that you brooke it ill, it makes him worse,
Therefore for Gods sake entertain good comfort,
And cheer his Grace with quick and merry eyes
If he were dead, what would betide on me?
No other harm, but loss of such a Lord.
The loss of such a Lord, includes all harms.
The Heavens have blessed you with a goodly Son,
To be your Comforter, when he is gone.
Ah! he is young; and his minority
Is put unto the trust of Richard Glouster,
A man that loves not me, nor none of you.
Is it concluded he shall be Protector?
It is determined, not concluded yet:
But so it must be, if the King miscarry.
Here comes the Lord of Buckingham &amp; Derby.
Good time of day unto your Royal Grace.
God make your Majesty joyful, as you have bin
The Countess Richmond, good my L. of Derby.
To your good prayer, will scarcely say, Amen.
Yet Derby, notwithstanding shoe's your wife,
And loves not me, be you good Lord assured,
I hate not you for her proud arrogance.
I do beseech you, either not believe
The envious slanders of her false Accusers:
Or if she be accused on true report,
Bear with her weakness, which I think proceeds
From wayward sickness, and no grounded malice.
Saw you the King to day my Lord of Derby.
But now the Duke of Buckingham and I,
Are come from visiting his Majesty.
What likelihood of his amendment Lords.
Madam good hope, his Grace speaks cheerfully.
God grant him health, did you confer with him?
I Madam, he desires to make atonement???
Between the Duke of Glouster, and your Brothers,
And between them, and my Lord Chamberlain,
And sent to warn them to his Royal presence.
Would all were well, but that will never be,
I fear our happiness is at the height.
They do me wrong, and I will not endure it,
Who is it that complains unto the King,
There I (forsooth) am sterne, and love them not?
By holy Paul, they love his Grace but lightly,
That fill his ears with such dissentious Rumours.
Because I cannot flatter, and look fair,
Smile in men's faces, smooth, deceive, and cog,
Duck with French nods, and Apish courtesy,
I must be held a rancorous Enemy.
Cannot a plain man live, and think no harm,
But thus his simple truth must be abused,
With silken, sly, insinuating Jacks?
To who in all this presence speaks your Grace?
To thee, that hast nor Honesty, nor Grace:
When have I injured thee? When done thee wrong?
Or thee? or thee? or any of your Faction?
A plague upon you all. His Royal Grace
(Whom God preserve better then you would wish)
Cannot be quiet scarce a breathing while,
But you must trouble him with lewd complaints.
Brother of Glouster, you mistake the matter:
The King on his own Royal disposition,
(And not provoked by any Suitor else)
Aiming (belike) at your interior hatred,
That in your outward action shows it self
Against my Children, Brothers, and my Self,
Makes him to send, that he may learn the ground.
I cannot tell, the world is grown so bad,
That Wrens make prey, where Eagles dare not perch.
Since every Jack became a Gentleman,
There's many a gentle person made a Jack.
Come, come, we know your meaning Brother Gloster
You envy my advancement, and my friends:
God grant we never may have need of you.
Mean time, God grants that I have need of you.
Our Brother is imprisoned by your means,
My self disgraced, and the Nobility
Held in contempt, while great Promotions
Are daily given to ennoble those
That scarce some two days since were worth a Noble.
By him that raised me to this careful height,
From that contented hap which I enjoyed,
I never did incense his Majesty
Against the Duke of Clarence, but have bin
An earnest advocate to plead for him.
My Lord you do me shameful injury,
Falsely to draw me in these vile suspects.
You may deny that you were not the mean
Of my Lord Hastings late imprisonment.
She may my Lord, for???
She may Lord Rivers, why who knows not so?
She may do more sir then denying that:
She may help you to many fair preferments,
And then deny her aiding hand therein,
And lay those Honours on your high desert.
What may she not, she may, I marry may she.
What marry may she?
What marry may she? Marry with a King,
A Bachelor, and a handsome stripling too,
I wis your Grandam had a worser match.
My Lord of Glouster, I have too long borne
Your blunt upbraidings, and your bitter scoffs:
By heaven, I will acquaint his Majesty
Of those gross taunts that oft I have endured.
I had rather be a Country servant maid
Then a great Queen, with this condition,
To be so baited, scorned, and stormed at,
Small joy have I in being Englands Queen.
And lesned be that small, God I beseech him,
Thy honour, state, and seat, is due to me.
What? threat you me with telling of the King?
I will avouched in presence of the King:
I dare adventure to be sent to the Tower.
It is time to speak,
My pains are quite forgot.
Out Devil,
I do remember them too well:
Thou killd'st my Husband Henrie in the Tower,
And Edward my poor Son, at Tewkesburie.
Ere you were Queen,
I, or your Husband King:
I was a packe-horse in his great affairs:
A weeder out of his proud Adversaries,
A liberal rewarder of his Friends,
To royalize his blood, I spent mine own.
I and much better blood
Then his, or thine.
In all which time, you and your Husband Grey
Were factious, for the House of Lancaster;
And Rivers, so were you: Was not your Husband,
In Margarets Battle, at Saint Albons, slain?
Let me put in your minds, if you forget
What you have been ere this, and what you are:
Withal, what I have been, and what I am.
A murderous Villain, and so still thou art.
Poor Clarence did forsake his Father Warwick,
I, and forswore himself (which Iesu pardon.)
Which God revenge.
To fight on Edwards party, for the Crown,
And for his mead, poor Lord, he is mewed up:
I would to God my heart were Flint, like Edwards,
Or Edwards soft and pitiful, like mine;
I am too childish foolish for this World.
High thee to Hell for shame, &amp; leave this World
Thou Cacodemon, there thy Kingdom is.
My Lord of Gloster: in those busy days,
Which here you urge, to prove vs Enemies,
We followed then our Lord, our Sovereign King,
So should we you, if you should be our King.
If I should be? I had rather be a Peddler:
Far be it from my heart, the thought thereof.
As little joy (my Lord) as you suppose
You should enjoy, were you this Countries King,
As little joy you may suppose in me,
That I enjoy, being the Queen thereof.
A little joy enjoys the Queen thereof,
For I am she, and altogether ioylesse:
I can no longer hold me patient.
Hear me, you wrangling Pirates, that fall out,
In sharing that which you have piled from me:
Which off you trembles not, that looks on me?
If not, that I am Queen, you bow like Subjects;
Yet that by you deposed, you quake like Rebels.
Ah gentle Villain, doe not turn away.
Foul wrinkled Witch, what make thou in my sight?
But repetition of what thou hast marred,
That will I make, before I let thee go.
Were thou not banished, on pain of death?
I was: but I doe find more pain in banishment,
Then death can yield me here, by my abode.
A Husband and a Son thou ow'st to me,
And thou a Kingdom; all of you, allegiance:
This Sorrow that I have, by right is yours,
And all the Pleasures you usurp, are mine.
The Curse my Noble Father laid on thee,
When thou did Crown his Warlike Brows with Paper,
And with thy scorns drew Rivers from his eyes,
And then to dry them, gan'st the Duke a Clout,
Steeped in the faultless blood of pretty Rutland:
His Curses then, from bitterness of Soul,
Denounced against thee, are all fallen upon thee:
And God, not we, hath plagued thy bloody deed.
So just is God, to right the innocent.
O, it was the foulest deed to slay that Babe,
And the most merciless, that ere was heard of.
Tyrants themselves wept when it was reported.
No man but prophesied revenge for it.
Northumberland, then present, wept to see it.
What? were you snarling all before I came,
Ready to catch each other by the throat,
And turn you all your hatred now on me?
Did Yorkes dread Curse prevail so much with Heaven,
That Henries death, my lovely Edwards death,
Their Kingdoms loss, my woeful Banishment,
Should all but answer for that peevish Brat?
Can Curses pierce the Clouds, and enter Heaven?
Why then give way dull Clouds to my quick Curses.
Though not by War, by Surfeit dye your King,
As ours by Murder, to make him a King.
Edward thy Son, that now is Prince of Wales,
For Edward our Son, that was Prince of Wales,
Dye in his youth, by like untimely violence.
Thy self a Queen, for me that was a Queen,
Out-liue thy glory, like my wretched self:
Long may thou live, to whale thy Childrens death,
And see another, as I see thee now,
Decked in thy Rights, as thou art stalled in mine.
Long dye thy happy days, before thy death,
And after many length'ned hours of grief,
Dye neither Mother, Wife, nor Englands Queen.
Rivers and Dorset, you were standers by,
And so wast thou, Lord Hastings, when my Son
Was stabbed with bloody Daggers: God, I pray him,
That none of you may live his natural age,
But by some unlooked accident cut off.
Have done thy Charm, you hateful withered Hag.
And leave out thee? stay Dog, for you shalt hear me.
If Heaven have any grievous plague in store,
Exceeding those that I can wish upon thee,
O let them keep it, till thy sins be ripe,
And then hurl down their indignation
On thee, the troubler of the poor Worlds peace.
The Worm of Conscience still begnaw thy Soul,
Thy Friends suspect for Traitors while thou liu'st,
And take deep Traitors for thy dearest Friends:
No sleep close up that deadly Eye of thine,
Unless it be while some tormenting Dream
Affrights thee with a Hell of ugly Devils.
Thou eluish marked, abortive rooting Hog,
Thou that wast sealed in thy Nativity
The slave of Nature, and the Son of Hell:
Thou slander of thy heavy Mothers Womb,
Thou loathed Issue of thy Fathers Loins,
Thou Rag of Honour, thou detested???
Margaret.
Richard.
Ha.
I call thee not.
I cry thee mercy then: for I did think,
That thou had called me all these bitter names.
Why so I did, but looked for no reply.
Oh let me make the Period to my Curse.
It is done by me, and ends in Margaret.
Thus have you breathed your Curse against your self.
Poor painted Queen, vain flourish of my fortune,
Why strew thou Sugar on that Bottel'd Spider,
Whose deadly Web ensnares thee about?
Fool, fool, thou whet a Knife to kill thy self:
The day will come, that thou shalt wish for me,
To help thee curse this poisonous Bunch-backed Toad.
False boding Woman, end thy frantic Curse,
Least to thy harm, thou move our patience.
Foul shame upon you, you have all moved mine.
Were you well served, you would be taught your duty.
To serve me well, you all should do me duty,
Teach me to be your Queen, and you my Subjects:
O serve me well, and teach your selves that duty.
Dispute not with her, she is lunatic.
Peace Master Marquess, you are malapert,
Your fire-new stamp of Honour is scarce currant.
O that your young Nobility could judge
What it were to lose it, and be miserable.
They that stand high, have many blasts to shake them,
And if they fall, they dash themselves to pieces.
Good counsel marry, learn it, learn it Mar???guess.
It touches you my Lord, as much as me.
I, and much more: but I, was borne so high:
Our aerie builds in the Cedars top,
And dallies with the wind, and scorns the Sun.
And turns the Sun to shade: alas, alas,
Witness my Son, now in the shade of death,
Whose bright out-shining beams, thy cloudy wrath
Hath in eternal darkness folded up.
Your aerie builds in our ayeries Nest:
O God that see it, do not suffer it,
As it is won with blood, lost be it so.
Peace, peace for shame: If not, for Charity.
Urge neither charity, nor shame to me:
Uncharitably with me have you dealt,
And shamefully my hopes (by you) are butchered.
My Charity is outrage, Life my shame,
And in that shame, still live my sorrows rage.
Have done, have done.
O Princely Buckingham, Isle kiss thy hand,
In sign of League and amity with thee:
Now fair befall thee, and thy Noble house:
Thy Garments are not spotted with our blood:
Nor thou within the compass of my curse.
Nor no one here: for Curses never pass
The lips of those that breath them in the ayre.
I will not think but they ascend the sky,
And there awake Gods gentle sleeping peace.
O Buckingham, take heed of yonder dog:
Look when he fawns, he bites; and when he bites,
His venom tooth will rankle to the death.
Have not to do with him, beware of him,
Sin, death, and hell have set their marks on him,
And all their Ministers attend on him.
What doth she say, my Lord of Buckingham.
Nothing that I respect my gracious Lord.
What dost thou scorn me
For my gentle counsel?
And sooth the devil that I warn thee from.
O but remember this another day:
When he shall split thy very heart with sorrow:
And say (poor Margaret) was a Prophetess:
Live each of you the subjects to his hate,
And he to yours, and all of you to Gods.
My hair doth stand an end to hear her curses.
And so doth mine, I muse why she's at liberty.
I cannot blame her, by Gods holy mother,
She hath had too much wrong, and I repent
My part thereof, that I have done to her.
I never did her any to my knowledge.
Yet you have all the vantage of her wrong:
I was too hot, to do somebody good,
That is too cold in thinking of it now:
Marry as for Clarence, he is well repaid:
He is franked up to fatting for his pains,
God pardon them, that are the cause thereof.
A virtuous, and a Christian-like conclusion
To pray for them that have done scath to vs.
So do I ever, being well advised.
For had I cursed now, I had cursed my self.
Madam, his Majesty doth call for you,
And for your Grace, and yours my gracious Lord.
Catesby I come, Lords will you go with me.
We wait upon your Grace.
I do the wrong, and first begin to brawl.
The secret Mischiefs that I set abroach,
I lay unto the grievous charge of others.
Clarence, who I indeed have cast in darkness,
I do beweep to many simple Gulles,
Namely to Derby, Hastings, Buckingham,
And tell them it is the Queen, and her Allies,
That stir the King against the Duke my Brother.
Now they believe it, and withal whet me
To be revenged on Rivers, Dorset, Grey.
But then I sigh, and with a piece of Scripture,
Tell them that God bids vs do good for evil:
And thus I cloth my naked Villainy
With odd old ends, stolen forth of holy Writ,
And seem a Saint, when most I play the devil.
But soft, here come my Executioners,
How now my hardy stout resolved Mates,
Are you now going to dispatch this thing?
We are my Lord, and come to have the Warrant,
That we may be admitted where he is.
Well thought upon, I have it hear about me:
When you have done, repair to Crosby place;
But sirs be sudden in the execution,
Withal obdurate, do not hear him plead;
For Clarence is well spoken, and perhaps
May move your hearts to pity, if you mark him.
Tut, tut, my Lord, we will not stand to prate,
Talkers are no good dooers, be assured:
We go to use our hands, and not our tongues.
Your eyes drop Mill-stones, when Fools eyes fall Tears:
I like you Lads, about your business straight.
Go, go, dispatch.
We will my Noble Lord.
Why looks your Grace so heavily to day.
O, I have past a miserable night,
So full of fearful Dreams, of ugly sights,
That as I am a Christian faithful man,
I would not spend another such a night
Though it were to buy a world of happy days:
So full of dismal terror was the time.
What was your dream my Lord, I pray you tel me
Me thoughts that I had broken from the Tower,
And was embarked to cross to Burgundy,
And in my company my Brother Glouster,
Who from my Cabin tempted me to walk,
Upon the Hatches: There we looked toward England,
And cited up a thousand heavy times,
During the wars of York and Lancaster
That had befallen vs. As we paced along
Upon the giddy footing of the Hatches,
Me thought that Glouster stumbled, and in falling
Struck me (that thought to stay him) overboard,
Into the tumbling billows of the maine.
O Lord, me thought what pain it was to drown,
What dreadful noise of water in mine ears,
What sights of ugly death within mine eyes.
Me thoughts, I saw a thousand fearful wrackes:
A thousand men that Fishes gnawed upon:
Wedges of Gold, great Anchors, heaps of Pearl,
Inestimable Stones, vnvalewed Jewels,
All scattred in the bottom of the Sea,
Some lay in deadmen's Sculls, and in the holes
Where eyes did once inhabit, there were crept
(As it were in scorn of eyes) reflecting Gems,
That wooed the slimy bottom of the deep,
And mocked the dead bones that lay scattred by.
Had you such leisure in the time of death
To gaze upon these secrets of the deep?
Me thought I had, and often did I strive
To yield the Ghost: but still the envious Flood
Stopped in my soul, and would not let it forth
To find the empty, vast, and wandering ayre:
But smothered it within my panting bulk,
Who almost burst, to belch it in the Sea.
Awaked you not in this sore Agony?
No, no, my Dream was lengthened after life.
O then, began the Tempest to my Soul???
I past (me thought) the Melancholy Flood,
With that sour Ferry-man which Poets write of,
Unto the Kingdom of perpetual Night.
The first that there did greet my Stranger-soule,
Was my great Father-in-Law, renowned Warwick,
Who spake aloud: What scourge for Perjury,
Can this dark Monarchy afford false Clarence?
And so he vanished. Then came wandering by,
A Shadow like an Angel, with bright hair
Dabbel'd in blood, and he shrieked out aloud
Clarence is come, false, fleeting, perjured Clarence,
That stabbed me in the field by Tewkesbury:
Seize on him Furies, take him unto Torment.
With that (me thought) a Legion of foul Fiends
Environed me, and howled in mine ears
Such hiddeous cries, that with the very Noise,
I (trembling) waked, and for a season after,
Could not believe, but that I was in Hell,
Such terrible Impression made my Dream.
No marvel Lord, though it affrighted you,
I am afraid (me thinks) to hear you tell it.
Ah Keeper, Keeper, I have done these things
(That now give evidence against my Soul)
For Edwards sake, and see how he requits me.
O God! if my deep prayers cannot appease thee,
But thou wilt be avenged on my misdeeds,
Yet execute thy wrath in me alone:
O spare my guiltless Wife, and my poor children.
Keeper, I prithee sit by me awhile,
My Soul is heavy, and I fine would sleep.
I will my Lord, God give your Grace good rest.
Sorrow breaks Seasons, and reposing hours,
Makes the Night Morning, and the Noon-tide night:
Princes have but their Titles for their Glories,
An outward Honour, for an inward Toil,
And for unfelt Imaginations
They often feel a world of restless Cares:
So that between their Titles, and low Name,
There's nothing differs, but the outward fame.
Ho, who's here?
What would thou Fellow? And how came thou hither.
I would speak with Clarence, and I came hi???there on my Legs.
What so brief?
It is better (Sir) then to be tedious:
Let him see our Commission, and talk no more.
I am in this, commanded to deliver
The Noble Duke of Clarence to your hands.
I will not reason what is meant hereby,
Because I will be guiltless from the meaning.
There lies the Duke asleep, and there the Keys.
Isle to the King, and signify to him,
That thus I have resigned to you my charge.
You may sir, it is a point of wisdom:
Far you well.
What, shall we stab him as he sleeps.
No: he will say it was done cowardly, when he wakes
Why he shall never wake, until the great Judge???meant day.
Why then he will say, we stabbed him sleeping.
The urging of that word Judgment, hath bred a kind of remorse in me.
What? art thou afraid?
Not to kill him, having a Warrant,
But to be damned for killing him, from the which
No Warrant can defend me.
I thought thou had bin resolute.
So I am, to let him live.
Isle back to the Duke of Glouster, and tell him so.
Nay, I prithee stay a little:
I hope this passionate humour of mine, will change,
It was wont to hold me but while one tells twenty.
How dost thou feel thy self now?
Some certain dregs of conscience are yet with???in me.
Remember our Reward, when the deed's done.
Come, he dies: I had forgot the Reward.
Whore's thy conscience now.
O, in the Duke of Glousters purse.
When hee opens his purse to give vs our Reward, thy Conscience flies out.
It is no matter, let it go: There's few or none will entertain it.
What if it come to thee again?
Isle not meddle with it, it makes a man a Coward: A man cannot steal, but it accuses him: A man cannot Swear, but it Checks him: A man cannot lye with his Neighbours Wife, but it detects him. It is a blushing shamefaced spirit, that mutinies in a mans bosom: It filles a man full of Obstacles. It made me once restore a Purse of Gold that (by chance) I found: It beggars any man that keeps it: It is turned out of Towns and Cit???ties for a dangerous thing, and every man that means to live well, endeavours to trust to himself, and live with???out it.
It is even now at my elbow, persuading me not to kill the Dkue.
Take the devil in thy mind, and believe him not:
He would insinuate with thee but to make thee sigh.
I am strong framed, he cannot prevail with me.
Spoke like a tall man, that respects thy reputation.
Come, shall we fall to work?
Take him on the Costard, with the hilts of thy Sword, and then throw him into the Malmesey-Butte in the next room.
O excellent device; and make a sop of him.
Soft, he wakes.
Strike.
No, we'll reason with him.
Where art thou Keeper? Give me a cup of wine.
You shall have Wine enough my Lord anon.
In Gods name, what art thou?
A man, as you are.
But not as I am Royal.
Nor you as we are, Loyal.
Thy voice is Thunder, but thy looks are humble.
My voice is now the Kings, my looks mine own.
How darkly, and how deadly dost thou speak?
Your eyes do menace me: why look you pale?
Who sent you hither? Wherefore do you come?
To, to, to???
To murder me?
I, I.
You scarcely have the hearts to tell me so,
And therefore cannot have the hearts to do it.
Wherein my Friends have I offended you?
Offended vs you have not, but the King.
I shall be reconciled to him again.
Never my Lord, therefore prepare to dye.
Are you drawn forth among a world of men
To slay the innocent? What is my offence?
Where is the Evidence that doth accuse me?
What lawful Quest have given their Verdict up
Unto the frowning Judge? Or who pronounced
The bitter sentence of poor Clarence death,
Before I be convict by course of Law?
To threaten me with death, is most unlawful.
I charge you, as you hope for any goodness,
That you depart, and lay no hands on me:
The deed you undertake is damnable.
What we will do, we do upon command.
And he that hath commanded, is our King.
Erroneous Vassals, the great King of Kings
Hath in the Table of his Law commanded
That thou shalt do no murder. Will you then
Spurn at his Edict, and fulfil a Mans?
Take heed: for he holds Vengeance in his hand,
To hurl upon their heads that break his Law.
And that same Vengeance doth he hurl on thee,
For false Forswearing, and for murder too:
Thou did receive the Sacrament, to fight
In quarrel of the House of Lancaster.
And like a Traitor to the name of God,
Did break that Vow, and with thy treacherous blade,
Vnrip'st the Bowels of thy Sovereigns Son.
Whom thou was it sworn to cherish and defend.
How can thou urge Gods dreadful Law to vs,
When thou hast broke it in such dear degree?
Alas! for whose sake did I that ill deed?
For Edward, for my Brother, for his sake.
He sends you not to murder me for this:
For in that sin, he is as deep as I.
If God will be avenged for the deed,
O know you yet, he doth it publicly,
Take not the quarrel from his powerful arm:
He needs no indirect, or lawless course,
To cut off those that have offended him.
Who made thee then a bloody minister,
When gallant springing brave Plantagenet,
That Princely Novice was struck dead by thee?
My Brothers love, the Devil, and my Rage.
Thy Brothers Love, our Duty, and thy Faults,
Provoke vs hither now, to slaughter thee.
If you do love my Brother, hate not me:
I am his Brother, and I love him well.
If you are hired for meed; go back again,
And I will send you to my Brother Glouster:
Who shall reward you better for my life,
Then Edward will for tidings of my death.
You are deceived,
Your Brother Glouster hates you.
Oh no, he loves me, and he holds me dear;
Go you to him from me.
I so we will.
Tell him, when that our Princely Father York,
Blessed his three Sons with his victorious Arm,
He little thought of this divided Friendship:
Bid Glouster think on this, and he will weep.
I Milstones, as he lessoned vs to weep.
O do not slander him, for he is kind.
Right, as Snow in Harvest:
Come, you deceive your self,
It is he that sends vs to destroy you here.
It cannot be, for he be wept my Fortune,
And hugged me in his arms, and swore with sobs,
That he would labour my delivery.
Why so he doth, when he delivers you
From this earths thraldom, to the joys of heaven.
Make peace with God, for you must die my Lord.
Have you that holy feeling in your souls,
To counsel me to make my peace with God,
And are you yet to your own souls so blind,
That you will war with God, by murd'ring me.
O sirs consider, they that set you on
To do this deed, will hate you for the deed.
What shall we do?
Relent, and save your souls:
Which of you, if you were a Princes Son,
Being pent from Liberty, as I am now,
If two such murderers as your selves came to you,
Would not entreat for life, as you would beg
Were you in my distress.
Relent? no: It is cowardly and womanish.
Not to relent, is beastly, savage, devilish:
My Friend, I spy some pity in thy looks:
O, if thine eye be not a Flatterer,
Come thou on my side, and entreat for me,
A begging Prince, what beggar pities not.
Look behind you, my Lord.
Take that, and that, if all this will not do,
Isle drown you in the Malmesey-But within.
A bloody deed, and desperately dispatcht:
How fine (like Pilot) would I wash my hands
Of this most grievous murder.
How now? what mean thou that thou help me not? By Heaven the Duke shall know how slack you have been.
I would he knew that I had saved his brother,
Take thou the Fee, and tell him what I say,
For I repent me that the Duke is slain.
So do not I: go Coward as thou art.
Well, Isle go hide the body in some hole,
Till that the Duke give order for his burial:
And when I have my mead, I will away,
For this will out, and then I must not stay.
Why so: now have I done a good days work.
You Peers, continue this united League:
I, every day expect an Embassage
From my Redeemer, to redeem me hence.
And more to peace my soul shall part to heaven,
Since I have made my Friends at peace on earth.
Dorset and Rivers, take each others hand,
Dissemble not your hatred, Swear your love.
By heaven, my soul is purged from grudging hate
And with my hand I seal my true hearts Love.
So thrive I, as I truly swear the like.
Take heed you dally not before your King,
Lest he that is the supreme King of Kings
Confound your hidden falsehood, and award
Either of you to be the others end.
So prosper I, as I swear perfect love.
And I, as I love Hastings with my heart,
Madam, your self is not exempt from this:
Nor you Son Dorset, Buckingham nor you;
You have been factious one against the other.
Wife, love Lord Hastings, let him kiss your hand,
And what you do, do it unfeignedly.
There Hastings, I will never more remember
Our former hatred, so thrive I, and mine.
Dorset, embrace him:
Hastings, love Lord Marquess.
This interchange of love, I here protest
Upon my part, shall be inviolable.
And so swear I.
Now Princely Buckingham, seal you this league
With thy embraces to my wives Allies,
And make me happy in your unity.
When ever Buckingham doth turn his hate
Upon your Grace, but with all duteous love,
Doth cherish you, and yours, God punish me
With hate in those where I expect most love,
When I have most need to employ a Friend,
And most assured that he is a Friend,
Deep, hollow, treacherous, and full of guile,
Be he unto me: This do I beg of heaven,
When I am cold in love, to you, or yours.
A pleasing Cordial, Princely Buckingham
Is this thy Vow, unto my sickly heart:
There wants now our Brother Gloster here,
To make the blessed period of this peace.
And in good time,
Here comes Sir Richard Ratcliffe, and the Duke.
Good morrow to my Sovereign King &amp; Queen
And Princely Peers, a happy time of day.
Happy indeed, as we have spent the day:
Gloster, we have done deeds of Charity,
Made peace of enmity, fair love of hate,
Between these swelling wrong incensed Peers.
A blessed labour my most Sovereign Lord:
Among this Princely heap, if any here
By false intelligence, or wrong surmise
Hold me a Foe: If I unwillingly, or in my rage,
Have ought committed that is hardly borne,
To any in this presence, I desire
To reconcile me to his Friendly peace:
It is death to me to be at enmity:
I hate it, and desire all good men's love,
First Madam, I entreat true peace of you,
Which I will purchase with my duteous service.
Of you my Noble Cousin Buckingham,
If ever any grudge were lodged between vs.
Of you and you, Lord Rivers and of Dorset,
That all without desert have frowned on me:
Of you Lord Wooduill, and Lord Scales of you,
Dukes, Earls, Lords, Gentlemen, indeed of all.
I do not know that Englishman alive,
With whom my soul is any jot at odds,
More then the Infant that is borne to night:
I thank my God for my Humility.
A holy day shall this be kept hereafter:
I would to God all strifes were well compounded.
My Sovereign Lord, I do beseech your Highness
To take our Brother Clarence to your Grace.
Why Madam, have I offred love for this,
To be so flouted in this Royal presence?
Who knows not that the gentle Duke is dead?
You do him injury to scorn his Coarse.
Who knows not he is dead?
Who knows he is?
All-seeing heaven, what a world is this?
Look I so pale Lord Dorset, as the rest?
I my good Lord, and no man in the presence,
But his red colour hath forsook his cheeks.
Is Clarence dead? The Order was reversed.
But he (poor man) by your first order dyed,
And that a winged Mercury did bear:
Some tardy Cripple bare the Countermand,
That came too lag to see him buried.
God grant, that some less Noble, and less Loyal,
Nearer in bloody thoughts, and not in blood,
Deserve not worse then wretched Clarence did,
And yet go currant from Suspicion.
A boon my Sovereign for my service done.
I prithee peace, my soul is full of sorrow.
I will not rise, unless your Highness hear me.
Then say at once, what is it thou requests.
The forfeit (Sovereign) of my servants life,
Who slew to day a Riotous Gentleman,
Lately attendant on the Duke of Norfolk.
Have I a tongue to doom my Brothers death?
And shall that tongue give pardon to a slave?
My Brother killed no man, his fault was Thought,
And yet his punishment was bitter death.
Who sued to me for him? Who (in my wrath)
Kneeled and my feet, and bid me be advised?
Who spoke of Brother-hood? who spoke of love?
Who told me how the poor soul did forsake
The mighty Warwick, and did fight for me?
Who told me in the field at Tewkesbury,
When Oxford had me down, he rescued me:
And said dear Brother live, and be a King???
Who told me, when we both lay in the Field,
Frozen (almost) to death, how he did lap me
Even in his Garments, and did give himself
(All thin and naked) to the numb cold night?
All this from my Remembrance, brutish wrath
Sinfully plucked, and not a man of you
Had so much grace to put it in my mind.
But when your Carters, or your waiting Vassalls
Have done a drunken Slaughter, and defaced
The precious Image of our dear Redeemer,
You straight are on your knees for Pardon, pardon,
And I (unjustly too) must grant it you.
But for my Brother, not a man would speak,
Nor I (ungracious) speak unto my self
For him poor Soul. The proudest of you all,
Have bin beholding to him in his life:
Yet none of you, would once beg for his life.
O God! I fear thy justice will take hold
On me, and you; and mine, and yours for this.
Come Hastings help me to my Closet.
Ah poor Clarence.
This is the fruits of rashness: Marked you not,
How that the guilty Kindred of the Queen
Looked pale, when they did hear of Clarence death.
O! they did urge it still unto the King,
God will revenge it. Come Lords will you go,
To comfort Edward with our company.
We wait upon your Grace.
Good Grandam tell vs, is our Father dead?
No Boy.
Why do weep so oft? And beat your Breast?
And cry, O Clarence, my unhappy Son.
Why do you look on vs, and shake your head,
And call vs Orphans, Wretches, Castaways,
If that our Noble Father were alive?
My pretty Cousins, you mistake me both,
I do lament the sickness of the King,
As loath to lose him, not your Fathers death:
It were lost sorrow to wail one that's lost.
Then you conclude, (my Grandam) he is dead:
The King mine Uncle is too blame for it.
God will revenge it, whom I will importune
With earnest prayers, all to that effect.
And so will I.
Peace children peace, the King doth love you well.
Incapeable, and shallow Innocents,
You cannot guess who cause your Fathers death.
Grandam we can: for my good Uncle Gloster
Told me, the King provoked to it by the Queen,
Deuis'd impeachments to imprison him;
And when my Uncle told me so, he wept,
And pitied me, and kindly kissed my cheek:
Bad me rely on him, as on my Father,
And he would love me dearly as a child.
Ah! that Deceit should steal such gentle shape,
And with a virtuous Visor hide deep vice,
He is my son, I, and therein my shame,
Yet from my dugs, he drew not this deceit.
Think you my Uncle did dissemble Grandam?
I Boy.
I cannot think it. Hark, what noise is this?
Ah! who shall hinder me to wail and weep?
To chide my Fortune, and torment my Self.
Isle join with black despair against my Soul,
And to my self, become an enemy.
What means this Scene of rude impatience?
To make an act of Tragic violence.
Edward my Lord, thy Son, our King is dead.
Why grow the Branches, when the Root is gone?
Why wither not the leaves that want their sap?
If you will live, Lament: if dye, be brief,
That our swift-winged Souls may catch the Kings,
Or like obedient Subjects follow him,
To his new Kingdom of nere-changing night.
Ah so much interest have in thy sorrow,
As I had Title in thy Noble Husband:
I have be wept a worthy Husbands death,
And lived with looking on his Images:
But now two Mirrors of his Princely semblance,
Are cracked in pieces, by malignant death,
And I for comfort, have but one false Glass,
That grieves me, when I see my shame in him.
Thou art a Widow: yet thou art a Mother,
And hast the comfort of thy Children left,
But death hath snatched my Husband from mine Arms,
And plucked two Crutches from my feeble hands,
Clarence, and Edward. O, what cause have I,
(Thine being but a moity of my moan)
To ouer-go thy woes, and drown thy cries.
Ah Aunt! you wept not for our Fathers death:
How can we aid you with our Kindred tears?
Our fatherless distress was left vnmoan'd,
Your widdow-dolour, likewise be vnwept.
Give me no help in Lamentation,
I am not barren to bring forth complaints:
All Springs reduce their currents to mine eyes,
That I being governed by the watery Moon,
May send forth plenteous tears to drown the World.
Ah, for my Husband, for my dear Lord Edward.
Ah for our Father, for our dear Lord Clarence.
Alas for both, both mine Edward and Clarence.
What stay had I but Edward, and hoe's gone?
What stay had we but Clarence? and he's gone.
What stays had I, but they? and they are gone.
Was never widow had so dear a loss.
Were never Orphans had so dear a loss.
Was never Mother had so dear a loss.
Alas! I am the Mother of these Griefs???
Their woes are parcelled, mine is general.
She for an Edward weeps, and so do I:
I for a Clarence weeps, so doth not she:
These Babes for Clarence weep, so do not they.
Alas! you three, on me threefold distressed:
Power all your tears, I am your sorrows Nurse,
And I will pamper it with Lamentation.
Comfort dear Mother, God is much displeased,
That you take with unthankfulness his doing.
In common worldly things, it is called ungrateful,
With dull unwillingness to repay a debt,
Which with a bounteous hand was kindly lent:
Much more to be thus opposite with heaven,
For it requires the Royal debt it lent you.
Madam, bethink you like a careful Mother
Of the young Prince your son: send straight for him,
Let him be Crowned, in him your comfort lives.
Drown desperate sorrow in dead Edwards grave,
And plant your joys in living Edwards Throne.
Sister have comfort, all of vs have cause
To wail the dimming of our shining Star:
But none can help our harms by wailing them.
Madam, my Mother, I do cry you mercy,
I did not see your Grace. Humbly on my knee,
I crave your Blessing.
God bless thee, and put meekness in thy breast,
Love Charity, Obedience, and true Duty.
Amen, and make me die a good old man,
That is the butt-end of a Mothers blessing;
I marvel that her Grace did leave it out.
You clowdy-Princes, &amp; hart-sorowing-Peeres???
That bear this heavy mutual load of Moan,
Now cheer each other, in each others Love:
Though we have spent our Harvest of this King,
We are to reap the Harvest of his Son.
The broken rancour of your high-swolne hates,
But lately splintered, knit, and joined together,
Must gently be preserved, cherished, and kept:
Me seems good, that with some little Train,
Forthwith from Ludlow, the young Prince be set
Hither to London, to be crowned our King.
Why with some little Train,
My Lord of Buckingham?
Marry my Lord, least by a multitude,
The new-heal'd wound of Malice should break out,
Which would be so much the more dangerous,
By how much the estate is greene, and yet ungoverned.
Where every Horse bears his commanding Reine,
And may direct his course as please himself,
As well the fear of harm, as harm apparent,
In my opinion, ought to be prevented.
I hope the King made peace with all of vs,
And the compact is firm, and true in me.
And so in me, and so (I think) in all.
Yet since it is but greene, it should be put
To no apparent likely-hood of breach,
Which happily by much company might be urged:
Therefore I say with Noble Buckingham,
That it is meet so few should fetch the Prince???
And so say I.
Then be it so, and go we to determine
Who they shall be that strait shall post to London.
Madam, and you my Sister, will you go
To give your censures in this business.
My Lord, who ever journeys to the Prince,
For God sake let not vs two stay at home:
For by the way, Isle sort occasion,
As Index to the story we late talked of,
To part the Queens proud Kindred from the Prince.
My other self, my Counsels Consistory,
My Oracle, My Prophet, my dear Cousin,
I, as a child, will go by thy direction,
Toward London then, for we'll not stay behind.
Good morrow Neighbour, whether away so fast?
I promise you, I scarcely know my self:
Hear you the news abroad?
Yes, that the King is dead.
Ill news by our lady, seldom comes the better:
I fear, I fear, twill prove a giddy world.
Neighbours, God speed.
Give you good morrow sir.
Doth the news hold of good king Edwards death?
I sir, it is too true, God help the while.
Then Masters look to see a troublous world.
No, no, by Gods good grace, his Son shall reign.
Woe to that Land that's governed by a Child.
In him there is a hope of Government,
Which in his nonage, counsel under him,
And in his full and ripened years, himself
No doubt shall then, and till then govern well.
So stood the State, when Henry the sixth
Was crowned in Paris, but at nine months old.
Stood the State so? No, no, good friends, God wot
For then this Land was famously enriched
With politic grave Counsel; then the King
Had virtuous Uncles to protect his Grace.
Why so hath this, both by his Father and Mother.
Better it were they all came by his Father:
Or by his Father there were none at all:
For emulation, who shall now be nearest,
Will touch vs all too near, if God prevent not.
O full of danger is the Duke of Glouster,
And the Queens Sons, and Brothers, haught and proud:
And were they to be ruled, and not to rule,
This sickly Land, might solace as before.
Come, come, we fear the worst: all will be well.
When Clouds are seen, wisemen put on their cloaks;
When great leaves fall, then Winter is at hand;
When the Sun sets, who doth not look for night?
Untimely storms, makes men expect a Dearth:
All may be well; but if God sort it so,
It is more then we deserve, or I expect.
Truly, the hearts of men are full of fear:
You cannot reason (almost) with a man,
That looks not heavily, and full of dread.
Before the days of Change, still is it so,
By a divine instinct, men's minds mistrust
Pursuing danger: as by proof we see
The Water swell before a boisterous storm:
But leave it all to God. Whither away?
Marry we were sent for to the Justices.
And so was I: Isle bear you company.
Last night I heard they lay at Stony Stratford,
And at Northampton they do rest to night:
To morrow, or next day, they will be here.
I long with all my heart to see the Prince:
I hope he is much grown since last I saw him.
But I hear no, they say my son of York
He's almost ouertane him in his growth.
I Mother, but I would not have it so.
Why my good Cousin, it is good to grow.
Grandam, one night as we did sit at Supper,
My Uncle Rivers talked how I did grow
More then my Brother. I, quoth my Uncle Glouster,
Small Herbs have grace, great Weeds do grow apace.
And since, me thinks I would not grow so fast,
Because sweet Flowers are slow, and Weeds make hast.
Good faith, good faith, the saying did not hold
In him that did object the same to thee.
He was the wretched'st thing when he was young,
So long a growing, and so leisurely,
That if his rule were true, he should be gracious.
And so no doubt he is, my gracious Madam.
I hope he is, but yet let Mothers doubt.
Now by my troth, if I had been remembered,
I could have given my Uncles Grace, a flout,
To touch his growth, nearer then he touched mine.
How my young York,
I prithee let me hear it.
Marry (they say) my Uncle grew so fast,
That he could gnaw a crust at two hours old,
It was full two years ere I could get a tooth.
Grandam, this would have been a biting Jest.
I prithee pretty York, who told thee this?
Grandam, his Nurse.
His Nurse? why she was dead, ere you wast borne.
If it were not she, I cannot tell who told me.
A parlous Boy: go too, you are too shrewed.
Good Madam, be not angry with the Child.
Pitchers have ears.
Here comes a Messenger: What News?
Such news my Lord, as grieves me to report.
How doth the Prince?
Well Madam, and in health.
What is thy News?
Lord Rivers, and Lord Grey,
Are sent to Pomfret, and with them,
Sir Thomas ??aughan, Prisoners.
Who hath committed them?
The mighty Dukes, Glouster and Buckingham.
For what offence?
The sum of all I can, I have disclosed:
Why, or for what, the Nobles were committed,
Is all unknown to me, my gracious Lord.
Aye me! I see the ruin of my House:
The Tiger now hath seized the gentle Hind,
Insulting Tyranny begins to Iutt
Upon the innocent and aweless Throne:
Welcome Destruction, Blood, and Massacre,
I see (as in a Map) the end of all.
Accursed, and unquiet wrangling days,
How many of you have mine eyes beheld?
My Husband lost his life, to get the Crown,
And often up and down my sons were tossed
For me to joy, and weep, their gain and loss.
And being seated, and Domestic broils
Clean ouer-blowne, themselves the Conquerors,
Make war upon themselves, Brother to Brother;
Blood to blood, self against self: O prepostorous
And frantic outrage, ???nd thy damned spleen,
Or let me dye, to look on earth no more.
Come, come my Boy, we will to Sanctuary???
Madam, farewell.
Stay, I will go with you.
You have no cause.
My gracious Lady go,
And thither bear your Treasure and your Goods,
For my part, Isle resign unto your Grace
The Seal I keep, and so betide to me,
As well I tender you, and all of yours.
Go, Isle conduct you to the Sanctuary.
Welcome sweet Prince to London,
To your Chamber.
Welcome dear Cousin, my thoughts Sovereign
The weary way hath made you Melancholy.
No Uncle, but our crosses on the way,
Have made it tedious, wearisome, and heavy.
I want more Uncles here to welcome me.
Sweet Prince, the untainted virtue of your years
Hath not yet dived into the Worlds deceit:
No more can you distinguish of a man,
Then of his outward show, which God he knows,
Seldom or never jumped with the heart.
Those Uncles which you want, were dangerous:
Your Grace attended to their Sugared words,
But looked not on the poison of their hearts:
God keep you from them, and from such false Friends.
God keep me from false Friends,
But they were none.
My Lord, the Mayor of London comes to greet you.
God bless your Grace, with health and happy days.
I thank you, good my Lord, and thank you all:
I thought my Mother, and my Brother York,
Would long, ere this, have met vs on the way.
Fie, what a Slug is Hastings, that he comes not
To tell vs, whether they will come, or no.
And in good time, here comes the sweating Lord.
Welcome, my Lord: what, will our Mother come?
On what occasion God he knows, not I;
The Queen your Mother, and your Brother York,
Have taken Sanctuary: The tender Prince
Would fine have come with me, to meet your Grace,
But by his Mother was perforce with-held.
Fie, what an indirect and peevish course
Is this of hers? Lord Cardinal, will your Grace
Persuade the Queen, to send the Duke of York
Unto his Princely Brother presently?
If she deny, Lord Hastings go with him,
And from her jealous Arms pluck him perforce.
My Lord of Buckingham, if my weak Oratory
Can from his Mother win the Duke of York,
Anon expect him here: but if she be obdurate
To mild entreaties, God forbid
We should infringe the holy Privilege
Of blessed Sanctuary: not for all this Land,
Would I be guilty of so great a sin.
You are too senseless obstinate, my Lord,
Too ceremonious, and traditional.
Weigh it but with the grossenesse of this Age,
You break not Sanctuary, in seizing him:
The benefit thereof is always granted
To those, whose dealings have deserved the place,
And those who have the wit to claim the place:
This Prince hath neither claimed it, nor deserved it,
And therefore, in mine opinion, cannot have it.
Then taking him from thence, that is not there,
You break no Privilege, nor Charter there:
Oft have I heard of Sanctuary men,
But Sanctuary children, ne'er till now.
My Lord, you shall o're-rule my mind for once.
Come on, Lord Hastings, will you go with me?
I go, my Lord.
Good Lords, make all the speedy hast you may.
Say, Uncle Gloucester, if our Brother come,
Where shall we sojourn, till our Coronation?
Where it think best unto your Royal self.
If I may counsel you, some day or two
Your Highness shall repose you at the Tower:
Then where you please, and shall be thought most fit
For your best health, and recreation.
I doe not like the Tower, of any place:
Did Iulius Caesar build that place, my Lord?
He did, my gracious Lord, begin that place,
Which since, succeeding Ages have re-edify'd.
Is it upon record? or else reported
Successively from age to age, he built it?
Upon record, my gracious Lord.
But say, my Lord, it were not registered,
Me thinks the truth should live from age to age,
As it were retailed to all posterity,
Even to the general ending day.
So wise, so young, they say doe never live long.
What say you, Uncle?
I say, without Characters, Fame lives long.
Thus, like the formal Vice, Iniquity,
I moralise two meanings in one word.
That Iulius Caesar was a famous man,
With what his Valour did enrich his Wit,
His Wit set down, to make his Valour live:
Death makes no Conquest of his Conqueror,
For now he lives in Fame, though not in Life.
Isle tell you what, my Cousin Buckingham.
What, my gracious Lord?
And if I live until I be a man,
Isle win our ancient Right in France again,
Or dye a Soldier, as I lived a King.
Short Summers lightly have a forward Spring.
Now in good time, here comes the Duke of York.
Richard of York, how fares our Noble Bro???there?
Well, my dear Lord, so must I call you now.
I, Brother, to our grief, as it is yours:
Too late he died, that might have kept that Title,
Which by his death hath lost much Majesty.
How fares our Cousin, Noble Lord of York?
I thank you, gentle Uncle. O my Lord,
You said, that idle Weeds are fast in growth:
The Prince, my Brother, hath out-growne me far.
He hath, my Lord.
And therefore is he idle?
Oh my fair Cousin, I must not say so.
Then he is more beholding to you, then I.
He may command me as my Sovereign,
But you have power in me, as in a Kinsman.
I pray you, Uncle, give me this Dagger.
My Dagger, little Cousin? with all my heart.
A Beggar, Brother?
Of my kind Uncle, that I know will give,
And being but a Toy, which is no grief to give.
A greater gift then that, Isle give my Cousin.
A greater gift? O, that's the Sword to it.
I, gentle Cousin, were it light enough.
O then I see, you will part but with light gifts,
In weightier things you'll say a Beggar nay.
It is too weighty for your Grace to wear.
I weigh it lightly, were it heavier.
What, would you have my Weapon, little Lord?
I would that I might thank you, as, as, you call me.
How?
Little.
My Lord of York will still be cross in talk:
Uncle, your Grace knows how to bear with him.
You mean to bear me, not to bear with me:
Uncle, my Brother mocks both you and me,
Because that I am little, like an Ape,
He thinks that you should bear me on your shoulders.
With what a sharpe provided wit he reasons:
To mitigate the scorn he gives his Uncle,
He prettily and aptly taunts himself:
So cunning, and so young, is wonderful.
My Lord, wilt please you pass along?
My self, and my good Cousin Buckingham,
Will to your Mother, to entreat of her
To meet you at the Tower, and welcome you.
What, will you go unto the Tower, my Lord?
My Lord Protector will have it so.
I shall not sleep in quiet at the Tower.
Why, what should you fear?
Marry, my Uncle Clarence angry Ghost:
My Grandam told me he was murdered there.
I fear no Uncles dead.
Nor none that live, I hope.
And if they live, I hope I need not fear.
But come my Lord: and with a heavy heart,
Thinking on them, go I unto the Tower.
Think you, my Lord, this little prating York
Was not incensed by his subtle Mother,
To taunt and scorn you thus opprobriously?
No doubt, no doubt: Oh it is a perilous Boy,
Bold, quick, ingenious, forward, capable:
Hee is all the Mothers, from the top to toe.
Well, let them rest: Come hither Catesby,
Thou art sworn as deeply to effect what we intend,
As closely to conceal what we impart:
Thou know our reasons urged upon the way.
What think thou? is it not an easy matter,
To make William Lord Hastings of our mind,
For the instalment of this Noble Duke
In the Seat Royal of this famous Isle?
He for his fathers sake so loves the Prince,
That he will not be won to ought against him.
What think thou then of Stanley? Will not hee?
Hee will doe all in all as Hastings doth.
Well then, no more but this:
Go gentle Catesby, and as it were far off,
Sound thou Lord Hastings,
How he doth stand affected to our purpose,
And summon him to morrow to the Tower,
To sit about the Coronation.
If thou dost find him tractable to vs,
Encourage him, and tell him all our reasons:
If he be leaden, icy, cold, unwilling,
Be thou so too, and so break off the talk,
And give vs notice of his inclination:
For we to morrow hold divided Councels,
Wherein thy self shalt highly be employed.
Commend me to Lord William: tell him Catesby,
His ancient Knot of dangerous Adversaries
To morrow are let blood at Pomfret Castle,
And bid my Lord, for joy of this good news,
Give Mistress Shore one gentle Kiss the more.
Good Catesby, go effect this business soundly.
My good Lords both, with all the heed I can.
Shall we hear from you, Catesby, ere we sleep?
You shall, my Lord.
At Crosby House, there shall you find vs both.
Now, my Lord,
What shall wee doe, if wee perceive
Lord Hastings will not yield to our Complots?
Chop off his Head:
Something wee will determine:
And look when I am King, claim thou of me
The Earldom of Hereford, and all the movables
Whereof the King, my Brother, was possessed.
Isle claim that promise at your Graces hand.
And look to have it yielded with all kindness???
Come, let vs sup betimes, that afterwards
Wee may digest our complots in some form.
My Lord, my Lord.
Who knocks?
One from the Lord Stanley.
What is it a Clock?
Upon the stroke of four.
Cannot my Lord Stanley sleep these tedious Nights?
So it appears, by that I have to say:
First, he commends him to your Noble self.
What then?
Then certifies your Lordship, that this Night
He dreamt, the Bore had rased off his Helm:
Besides, he says there are two Councels kept;
And that may be determined at the one,
Which may make you and him to rue at the other.
Therefore he sends to know your Lordships pleasure,
If you will presently take Horse with him,
And with all speed post with him toward the North,
To shun the danger that his Soul divines.
Go fellow, go, return unto thy Lord,
Bid him not fear the separated Council:
His Honour and my self are at the one,
And at the other, is my good friend Catesby;
Where nothing can proceed, that touches vs,
Whereof I shall not have intelligence:
Tell him his Fears are shallow, without instance.
And for his Dreams, I wonder hoe's so simple,
To trust the mock'ry of unquiet slumbers.
To fly the Bore, before the Bore pursues,
Were to incense the Bore to follow vs,
And make pursuit, where he did mean no chase.
Go, bid thy Master rise, and come to me,
And we will both together to the Tower,
Where he shall see the Bore will use vs kindly.
Isle go, my Lord, and tell him what you say.
Many good morrows to my Noble Lord.
Good morrow Catesby, you are early stirring:
What news, what news, in this our tottering State?
It is a reeling World indeed, my Lord:
And I believe will never stand upright,
Till Richard wear the Garland of the Realm.
How wear the Garland?
Doest thou mean the Crown?
I, my good Lord.
Isle have this Crown of mine cut fro?? my shoulders,
Before Isle see the Crown so foul mis-plac'd:
But can thou guess, that he doth aim at it?
I, on my life, and hopes to find you forward,
Upon his party, for the gain thereof:
And thereupon he sends you this good news,
That this same very day your enemies.
The Kindred of the Queen, must dye at Pomfret.
Indeed I am no mourner for that news,
Because they have been still my adversaries:
But, that Isle give my voice on Richards side,
To bar my Masters Heirs in true Descent,
God knows I will not doe it, to the death.
God keep your Lordship in that gracious mind.
But I shall laugh at this a twelue-month hence,
That they which brought me in my Masters hate,
I live to look upon their Tragedy.
Well Catesby, ere a fort-night make me older,
Isle send some packing, that yet think not on it.
It is a vile thing to dye, my gracious Lord,
When men are unprepared, and look not for it.
O monstrous, monstrous! and so falls it out
With Rivers ??aughan, Grey: and so twill doe
With some men else, that think themselves as safe
As thou and I, who (as thou know) are dear
To Princely Richard, and to Buckingham.
The Princes both make high account of you,
For they account his Head upon the Bridge.
I know they doe, and I have well deserved it.
Come on, come on, where is your Bore-speare man?
Fear you the Bore, and go so unprovided?
My Lord good morrow, good morrow Catesby:
You may jest on, but by the holy Rood,
I doe not like these several Councels, I.
My Lord, I hold my Life as dear as yours,
And never in my days, I doe protest,
Was it so precious to me, as it is now:
Think you, but that I know our state secure,
I would be so triumphant as I am?
The Lords at Pomfret??? when?? they rode from London,
Were jocund, and supposed their states were sure,
And they indeed had no cause to mistrust:
But yet you see, how soon the Day o're-cast.
This sudden stab of Rancour I misdoubt:
Pray God (I say) I prove a needless Coward.
What, shall we toward the Tower? the day is spent.
Come, come, have with you:
Wot you what, my Lord,
To day the Lords you talk of, are beheaded.
They, for their truth, might better wear their Heads,
Then some that have accused them, wear their Hats.
But come, my Lord, let's away.
Go on before, Isle talk with this good fellow.
How now, Sirrha? how goes the World with thee?
The better, that your Lordship please to ask.
I tell thee man, it is better with me now,
Then when thou met me last, where now we meet:
Then was I going Prisoner to the Tower,
By the suggestion of the Queens Allies.
But now I tell thee (keep it to thy self)
This day those Enemies are put to death,
And I in better state then ere I was.
God hold it, to your Honours good content.
Gramercy fellow: there, drink that for me.
I thank your Honour.
Well met, my Lord, I am glad to see your Ho???nor.
I thank thee, good Sir Iohn, with all my heart.
I am in your debt, for your last Exercise:
Come the next Sabboth, and I will content you.
Isle wait upon your Lordship.
What, talking with a Priest, Lord Chamberlain?
Your friends at Pomfret, they doe need the Priest,
Your Honour hath no shriving work in hand.
Good faith, and when I met this holy man,
The men you talk of, came into my mind.
What, go you toward the Tower?
I doe, my Lord, but long I cannot stay there:
I shall return before your Lordship, thence.
Nay like enough, for I stay Dinner there.
And Supper too, although thou know it not.
Come, will you go?
Isle wait upon your Lordship.
Sir Richard Ratcliffe, let me tell thee this,
To day shalt thou behold a Subject die,
For Truth, for Duty, and for Loyalty.
God bless the Prince from all the Pack of you,
A Knot you are, of damned Blood-suckers.
You live, that shall cry woe for this here???after.
Dispatch, the limit of your Lives is out.
O Pomfret, Pomfret! O thou bloody Prison!
Fatal and ominous to Noble Peers:
Within the guilty Closure of thy Walls,
Richard the Second here was hacked to death:
And for more slander to thy dismal Seat,
Wee give to thee our guiltless blood to drink.
Now Margarets Curse is fallen upon our Heads,
When she exclaimed on Hastings, you, and I,
For standing by, when Richard stabbed her Son.
Then cursed she Richard,
Then cursed she Buckingham,
Then cursed she Hastings. Oh remember God,
To hear her prayer for them, as now for vs:
And for my Sister, and her Princely Sons,
Be satisfied, dear God, with our true blood,
Which, as thou know, unjustly must be spilt.
Make haste, the hour of death is expiate.
Come Grey, come Vaughan, let vs here embrace.
Farewell, until we meet again in Heaven.
Now Noble Peers, the cause why we are met,
Is to determine of the Coronation:
In Gods Name speak, when is the Royal day?
Is all things ready for the Royal time?
It is, and wants but nomination.
To morrow then I judge a happy day.
Who knows the Lord Protectors mind herein?
Who is most inward with the Noble Duke?
Your Grace, we think, should soonest know his mind.
We know each others Faces: for our Hearts,
He knows no more of mine, then I of yours,
Or I of his, my Lord, then you of mine:
Lord Hastings, you and he are near in love.
I thank his Grace, I know he loves me well:
But for his purpose in the Coronation,
I have not sounded him, nor he delivered
His gracious pleasure any way therein:
But you, my Honourable Lords, may name the time,
And in the Dukes behalf Isle give my Voice,
Which I presume he will take in gentle part.
In happy time, here comes the Duke himself.
My Noble Lords, and Cousins all, good morrow:
I have been long a sleeper: but I trust,
My absence doth neglect no great design,
Which by my presence might have been concluded.
Had you not come upon your O my Lord,
William, Lord Hastings, had pronounced your part;
I mean your Voice, for Crowning of the King.
Then my Lord Hastings, no man might be bolder,
His Lordship knows me well, and loves me well.
My Lord of Ely, when I was last in Holborn,
I saw good Strawberries in your Garden there,
I doe beseech you, send for some of them.
Mary and will, my Lord, with all my heart.
Cousin of Buckingham, a word with you.
Catesby hath sounded Hastings in our business,
And finds the testy Gentleman so hot,
That he will lose his Head, ere give consent
His Masters Child, as worshipfully he terms it,
Shall lose the Royalty of Englands Throne.
Withdraw your self a while, Isle go with you.
We have not yet set down this day of Triumph:
To morrow, in my judgment, is too sudden,
For I my self am not so well provided,
As else I would be, were the day prolonged.
Where is my Lord, the Duke of Gloster?
I have sent for these Strawberries.
His Grace looks cheerfully &amp; smooth this morning,
There's some conceit or other likes him well,
When that he bids good morrow with such spirit.
I think there's never a man in Christendom
Can lesser hide his love, or hate, then hee,
For by his Face straight shall you know his Heart.
What of his Heart perceive you in his Face,
By any livelihood he showed to day?
Mary, that with no man here he is offended:
For were he, he had shown it in his Looks.
I pray you all, tell me what they deserve,
That doe conspire my death with devilish Plots
Of damned Witchcraft, and that have prevailed
Upon my Body with their Hellish Charms.
The tender love I bear your Grace, my Lord,
Makes me most forward, in this Princely presence,
To doom the Offenders, whosoe're they be:
I say, my Lord, they have deserved death.
Then be your eyes the witness of their evil.
Look how I am bewitched: behold, mine Arm
Is like a blasted Sapling, withered up:
And this is Edwards Wife, that monstrous Witch,
Consorted with that Harlot, Strumpet Shore,
That by their Witchcraft thus have marked me.
If they have done this deed, my Noble Lord.
If? thou Protector of this damned Strumpet,
Talk thou to me of Ifs: thou art a Traitor,
Off with his Head; now by Saint Paul I swear,
I will not dine, until I see the same.
Louell and Ratcliffe, look that it be done:
The rest that love me, rise, and follow me.
Woe, woe for England, not a whit for me,
For I, too fond, might have prevented this:
Stanley did dream, the Bore did rouse our Helmes,
And I did scorn it, and disdain to fly:
Three times to day my Foot-Cloth-Horse did stumble,
And started, when he looked upon the Tower,
As loath to bear me to the slaughter-house.
O now I need the Priest, that spake to me:
I now repent I told the Pursuiuant,
As too triumphing, how mine Enemies
To day at Pomfret bloodily were butchered,
And I my self secure, in grace and favour.
Oh Margaret, Margaret, now thy heavy Curse
Is lighted on poor Hastings wretched Head.
Come, come, dispatch, the Duke would be at dinner:
Make a short Shrift, he longs to see your Head.
O momentary grace of mortal men,
Which we more hunt for, then the grace of God!
Who builds his hope in ayre of your good Looks,
Lives like a drunken Sailor on a Mast,
Ready with every Nod to tumble down,
Into the fatal Bowels of the Deep.
Come, come, dispatch, it is bootless to exclaim.
O bloody Richard: miserable England,
I prophecy the fearefull'st time to thee,
That ever wretched Age hath looked upon.
Come, lead me to the Block, bear him my Head,
They smile at me, who shortly shall be dead.
Come Cousin,
Can thou quake, and change thy colour,
Murder thy breath in middle of a word,
And then again begin, and stop again,
As if thou were distraught, and mad with terror?
Tut, I can counterfeit the deep Tragedian,
Speak, and look back, and pry on every side,
Tremble and start at wagging of a Straw:
Intending deep suspicion, ghastly Looks
Are at my service, like enforced Smiles;
And both are ready in their Offices,
At any time to grace my Stratagems.
But what, is Catesby gone?
He is, and see he brings the Mayor along.
Lord Mayor.
Look to the Draw-Bridge there.
Hark, a Drum.
Catesby, o're-looke the Walls.
Lord Mayor, the reason we have sent.
Look back, defend thee, here are Enemies.
God and our Innocence defend, and guard vs.
Be patient, they are friends: Ratcliffe, and Louell.
Here is the Head of that ignoble Traitor,
The dangerous and unsuspected Hastings.
So dear I loved the man, that I must weep:
I took him for the plainest harmless Creature,
That breathed upon the Earth, a Christian.
Made him my Book, wherein my Soul recorded
The History of all her secret thoughts.
So smooth he daubed his Vice with show of Virtue,
That his apparent open Guilt omitted,
I mean, his Conversation with Shores Wife,
He lived from all attainder of suspects.
Well, well, he was the covert sheltered Traitor
That ever lived.
Would you imagine, or almost believe,
Were not, that by great preservation
We live to tell it, that the subtle Traitor
This day had plotted, in the Councell-House,
To murder me, and my good Lord of Gloster.
Had he done so?
What? think you we are Turks, or Infidels?
Or that we would, against the form of Law,
Proceed thus rashly in the Villains death,
But that the extreme peril of the case,
The Peace of England, and our Persons safety,
Enforced vs to this Execution.
Now fair befall you, he deserved his death,
And your good Graces both have well proceeded,
To warn false Traitors from the like Attempts.
I never looked for better at his hands,
After he once fell in with Mistress Shore:
Yet had we not determined he should dye,
Until your Lordship came to see his end,
Which now the loving haste of these our friends,
Something against our meanings, have prevented;
Because, my Lord, I would have had you heard
The Traitor speak, and timorously confess
The manner and the purpose of his Treasons:
That you might well have signified the same
Unto the Citizens, who happily may
Misconstrue vs in him, and whale his death.
But, my good Lord, your Graces words shall serve,
As well as I had seen, and heard him speak:
And doe not doubt, right Noble Princes both,
But Isle acquaint our duteous Citizens
With all your just proceedings in this case.
And to that end we wished your Lordship here,
To avoid the Censures of the carping World.
Which since you come too late of our intent,
Yet witness what you hear we did intend:
And so, my good Lord Mayor, we bid farewell.
Go after, after, Cousin Buckingham.
The Mayor towards Guild-Hall hies him in all post:
There, at your meetest vantage of the time,
Infer the Bastardy of Edwards Children:
Tell them, how Edward put to death a Citizen,
Only for saying, he would make his Son
Heir to the Crown, meaning indeed his House,
Which, by the Sign thereof, was termed so.
Moreover, urge his hateful Luxury,
And bestial appetite in change of Lust,
Which stretched unto their Servants, Daughters, Wives,
Even where his raging eye, or savage heart,
Without control, lusted to make a prey.
Nay, for a need, thus far come near my Person:
Tell them, when that my Mother went with Child
Of that insatiate Edward; Noble York,
My Princely Father, then had Wars in France,
And by true computation of the time,
Found, that the Issue was not his begot:
Which well appeared in his Lineaments,
Being nothing like the Noble Duke, my Father:
Yet touch this sparingly, as it were far off,
Because, my Lord, you know my Mother lives.
Doubt not, my Lord, Isle play the Orator,
As if the Golden Fee, for which I plead,
Were for my self: and so, my Lord, adieu.
If you thrive well, bring them to Baynard Castle,
Where you shall find me well accompanied
With reverend Fathers, and well-learned Bishops.
I go, and towards three or four a Clock
Look for the News that the Guild-Hall affords.
Go Louell with all speed to Doctor Shaw,
Go thou to Fryer Peuker, bid them both
Meet me within this hour at Baynard Castle.
Now will I go to take some privy order,
To draw the Brats of Clarence out of sight,
And to give order, that no manner person
Have any time recourse unto the Princes.
Here is the Indictment of the good Lord Hastings,
Which in a set Hand fairly is engrossed,
That it may be to day read o'er in Paules.
And mark how well the sequel hangs together:
Eleven hours I have spent to write it over,
For yesternight by Catesby was it sent me,
The Precedent was full as long a doing,
And yet within these five hours Hastings lived,
Untainted, unexamined, free, at liberty.
Here's a good World the while.
Who is so gross, that cannot see this palpable device?
Yet who so bold, but says he sees it not?
Bad is the World, and all will come to nought,
When such ill dealing must be seen in thought.
How now, how now, what say the Citizens?
Now by the holy Mother of our Lord,
The Citizens are mum, say not a word.
Touched you the Bastardy of Edwards Children?
I did, with his Contract with Lady Lucy,
And his Contract by Deputy in France,
The unsatiate greediness of his desire,
And his enforcement of the City Wives,
His Tyranny for Trifles, his own Bastardy,
As being got, your Father then in France,
And his resemblance, being not like the Duke.
Withal, I did infer your Lineaments,
Being the right Idea of your Father,
Both in your form, and Nobleness of Mind:
Laid open all your Victories in Scotland,
Your Discipline in War, Wisdom in Peace,
Your Bounty, Virtue, fair Humility:
Indeed, left nothing fitting for your purpose,
Untouched, or slightly handled in discourse.
And when my Oratory drew toward end,
I bid them that did love their Countries good,
Cry, God save Richard, Englands Royal King.
And did they so?
No, so God help me, they spake not a word,
But like dumb Statues, or breathing Stones,
Stared each on other, and looked deadly pale:
Which when I saw, I reprehended them,
And asked the Mayor, what meant this wilful silence?
His answer was, the people were not used
To be spoke to, but by the Recorder.
Then he was urged to tell my Tale again:
Thus saith the Duke, thus hath the Duke inferred,
But nothing spoke, in warrant from himself.
When he had done, some followers of mine own,
At lower end of the Hall, hurled up their Caps,
And some ten voices cried, God save King Richard:
And thus I took the vantage of those few.
Thanks gentle Citizens, and friends, quoth I,
This general applause, and cheerful shout,
Argues your wisdom, and your love to Richard:
And even here brake off, and came away.
What tongue-lesse Blocks were they,
Would they not speak?
Will not the Mayor then, and his Brethren, come?
The Mayor is here at hand: intend some fear,
Be not you spoke with, but by mighty suit:
And look you get a Prayer-Booke in your hand,
And stand between two Church-men, good my Lord,
For on that ground Isle make a holy Descant:
And be not easily won to our requests,
Play the Maids part, still answer nay, and take it.
I go: and if you plead as well for them,
As I can say nay to thee for my self,
No doubt we bring it to a happy issue.
Go, go up to the Leads, the Lord Mayor knocks.
Welcome, my Lord, I dance attendance here,
I think the Duke will not be spoke withal.
Now Catesby, what says your Lord to my request?
He doth entreat your Grace, my Noble Lord,
To visit him to morrow, or next day:
He is within, with two right reverend Fathers,
Divinely bent to Meditation,
And in no Worldly suites would he be moved,
To draw him from his holy Exercise.
Return, good Catesby, to the gracious Duke,
Tell him, my self, the Mayor and Aldermen,
In deep designs, in matter of great moment,
No less importing then our general good,
Are come to have some conference with his Grace.
Isle signify so much unto him straight.
Ah ha, my Lord, this Prince is not an Edward,
He is not lulling on a lewd Loue-Bed,
But on his Knees, at Meditation:
Not dallying with a Brace of Courtesans,
But meditating with two deep Divines:
Not sleeping, to engross his idle Body,
But praying, to enrich his watchful Soul.
Happy were England, would this virtuous Prince
Take on his Grace the Sovereignty thereof.
But sure I fear we shall not win him to it.
Marry God defend his Grace should say vs nay.
I fear he will: here Catesby comes again.
Now Catesby, what says his Grace?
He wonders to what end you have assembled
Such troops of Citizens, to come to him,
His Grace not being warned thereof before:
He fears, my Lord, you mean no good to him.
Sorry I am, my Noble Cousin should
Suspect me, that I mean no good to him:
By Heaven, we come to him in perfect love,
And so once more return, and tell his Grace.
When holy and devout Religious men
Are at their Beads, it is much to draw them thence,
So sweet is zealous Contemplation.
See where his Grace stands, tweene two Clergy men.
Two Props of Virtue, for a Christian Prince,
To stay him from the fall of Vanity:
And see a Book of Prayer in his hand,
True Ornaments to know a holy man.
Famous Plantagenet, most gracious Prince,
Lend favourable ear to our requests,
And pardon vs the interruption
Of thy Devotion, and right Christian Zeal.
My Lord, there needs no such Apology:
I doe beseech your Grace to pardon me,
Who earnest in the service of my God,
Deferred the visitation of my friends.
But leaving this, what is your Graces pleasure?
Even that (I hope) which pleases God aboue,
And all good men, of this ungoverned Isle.
I doe suspect I have done some offence,
That seems disgracious in the Cities eye,
And that you come to reprehend my ignorance.
You have, my Lord:
Would it might please your Grace,
On our entreaties, to amend your fault.
Else wherefore breathe I in a Christian Land.
Know then, it is your fault, that you resign
The Supreme Seat, the Throne Majestic,
The Sceptred Office of your Ancestors,
Your State of Fortune, and your Dew of Birth,
The Lineal Glory of your Royal House,
To the corruption of a blemished Stock;
Whiles in the mildness of your sleepy thoughts,
Which here we waken to our Countries good,
The Noble Isle doth want his proper Limbs:
His Face defaced with skarres of Infamy,
His Royal Stock grafft with ignoble Plants,
And almost shouldered in the swallowing Gulf
Of dark Forgetfulness, and deep Oblivion.
Which to recur, we heartily solicit
Your gracious self to take on you the charge
And Kingly Government of this your Land:
Not as Protector, Steward, Substitute,
Or lowly Factor, for another gain;
But as successively, from Blood to Blood,
Your Right of Birth, your Empire, your own.
For this, consorted with the Citizens,
Your very Worshipful and loving friends,
And by their vehement instigation,
In this just Cause come I to move your Grace.
I cannot tell, if to depart in silence,
Or bitterly to speak in your reproof,
Best fitteth my Degree, or your Condition.
If not to answer, you might happily think,
Tongue-tied Ambition, not replying, yielded
To bear the Golden Yoke of Sovereignty,
Which fondly you would here impose on me.
If to reprove you for this suit of yours,
So seasoned with your faithful love to me,
Then on the other side I checked my friends.
Therefore to speak, and to avoid the first,
And then in speaking, not to incur the last,
Definitively thus I answer you.
Your love deserves my thanks, but my desert
Vnmeritable, shuns your high request.
First, if all Obstacles were cut away,
And that my Path were even to the Crown,
As the ripe Revenue, and due of Birth:
Yet so much is my poverty of spirit,
So mighty, and so many my defects,
That I would rather hide me from my Greatness,
Being a Bark to brooke no mighty Sea;
Then in my Greatness covet to be hid,
And in the vapour of my Glory smothered.
But God be thanked, there is no need of me,
And much I need to help you, were there need:
The Royal Tree hath left vs Royal Fruit,
Which mellowed by the stealing hours of time,
Will well become the Seat of Majesty,
And make (no doubt) vs happy by his Reign.
On him I lay that, you would lay on me,
The Right and Fortune of his happy Stars,
Which God defend that I should wring from him.
My Lord, this argues Conscience in your Grace,
But the respects thereof are nice, and trivial,
All circumstances well considered.
You say, that Edward is your Brothers Son,
So say we too, but not by Edwards Wife:
For first was be contract to Lady Lucy,
Your Mother lives a Witness to his Vow;
And afterword by substitute betrothed
To Bone, Sister to the King of France.
These both put off, a poor Petitioner,
A Care-cras'd Mother to a many Sons,
A Beauty-waning, and distressed Widow,
Even in the afternoon of her best days,
Made prize and purchase of his wanton Eye,
Seduced the pitch, and height of his degree,
To base declension, and loathed Bigamy.
By her, in his unlawful Bed, he got
This Edward, whom our Manners call the Prince.
More bitterly could I expostulate,
Save that for reverence to some alive,
I give a sparing limit to my Tongue.
Then good, my Lord, take to your Royal self
This proffered benefit of Dignity:
If not to bless vs and the Land withal,
Yet to draw forth your Noble Ancestry
From the corruption of abusing times,
Unto a Lineal true derived course.
Do good my Lord, your Citizens entreat you.
Refuse not, mighty Lord, this proffered love.
O make them joyful, grant their lawful suit.
Alas, why would you heap this Care on me?
I am unfit for State, and Majesty:
I doe beseech you take it not amiss,
I cannot, nor I will not yield to you.
If you refuse it, as in love and zeal,
Loath to depose the Child, your Brothers Son,
As well we know your tenderness of heart,
And gentle, kind, effeminate remorse,
Which we have noted in you to your Kindred,
And egally indeed to all Estates;
Yet know, where you accept our suit, or no,
Your Brothers Son shall never reign our King,
But we will plant some other in the Throne,
To the disgrace and downfall of your House:
And in this resolution here we leave you.
Come Citizens, we will entreat no more.
Call him again, sweet Prince, accept their suit:
If you deny them, all the Land will rue it.
Will you enforce me to a world of Cares.
Call them again, I am not made of Stones,
But penetrable to your kind entreaties,
Albeit against my Conscience and my Soul.
Cousin of Buckingham, and sage grave men,
Since you will buckle fortune on my back,
To bear her burden, where I will or no.
I must have patience to endure the Load:
But if black Scandal, or foule-fac'd Reproach,
Attend the sequel of your Imposition,
Your mere enforcement shall acquittance me
From all the impure blots and stains thereof;
For God doth know, and you may partly see,
How far I am from the desire of this.
God bless your Grace, wee see it, and will say it.
In saying so, you shall but say the truth.
Then I salute you with this Royal Title,
Long live King Richard, Englands worthy King.
Amen.
To morrow may it please you to be Crowned.
Even when you please, for you will have it so.
To morrow then we will attend your Grace,
And so most joyfully we take our leave.
Come, let vs to our holy Work again.
Farewell my Cousins, farewell gentle friends.
Who meets vs here?
My Niece Plantagenet,
Led in the hand of her kind Aunt of Gloster?
Now, for my Life, shoe's wandering to the Tower,
On pure hearts love, to greet the tender Prince.
Daughter, well met.
God give your Graces both, a happy
And a joyful time of day.
As much to you, good Sister: whither away?
No farther then the Tower, and as I guess,
Upon the like devotion as your selves,
To gratulate the gentle Princes there.
Kind Sister thanks, we'll enter all together:
And in good time, here the Lieutenant comes.
Master Lieutenant, pray you, by your leave,
How doth the Prince, and my young Son of York?
Right well, dear Madame: by your patience,
I may not suffer you to visit them,
The King hath strictly charged the contrary.
The King? who's that?
I mean, the Lord Protector.
The Lord protect him from that Kingly Title.
Hath he set bounds between their love, and me?
I am their Mother, who shall bar me from them?
I am their Fathers Mother, I will see them.
Their Aunt I am in law, in love their Mother:
Then bring me to their sights, Isle bear thy blame,
And take thy Office from thee, on my peril.
No, Madame, no; I may not leave it so:
I am bound by Oath, and therefore pardon me.
Let me but meet you Ladies one hour hence,
And Isle salute your Grace of York as Mother,
And reverend looker on of two fair Queens,
Come Madame, you must straight to Westminster,
There to be crowned Richards Royal Queen.
Ah, cut my Lace asunder,
That my pent heart may have some scope to beat,
Or else I swoon with this dead-killing news.
Despiteful tidings, O unpleasing news.
Be of good cheer: Mother, how fares your Grace?
O Dorset, speak not to me, get thee gone,
Death and Destruction dogs thee at thy heals,
Thy Mothers Name is ominous to Children.
If thou wilt out-strip Death, go cross the Seas,
And live with Richmond, from the reach of Hell.
Go hye thee, hye thee from this slaughter-house,
Lest thou increase the number of the dead,
And make me dye the thrall of Margarets Curse,
Nor Mother, Wife, nor Englands counted Queen.
Full of wise care, is this your counsel, Madame:
Take all the swift advantage of the hours:
You shall have Letters from me to my Son,
In your behalf, to meet you on the way:
Be not taken tardy by unwise delay.
O ill dispersing??? Wind of Misery,
O my accursed Womb, the Bed of Death:
A Cockatrice hast thou hatched to the World.
Whose vnauoided Eye is murderous.
Come, Madame, come, I in all haste was sent.
And I with all unwillingness will go.
O would to God, that the inclusiue Verge
Of Golden Mettle, that must round my Brow,
Were red hot Steel, to sear me to the Brains,
Anointed let me be with deadly Venom,
And dye ere men can say, God save the Queen.
Go, go, poor soul, I envy not thy glory,
To feed my humour, wish thy self no harm.
No: why? When he that is my Husband now,
Came to me, as I followed Venries Corse.
When scarce the blood was well washed from his hands,
Which issued from my other Angel Husband,
And that dear Saint, which then I weeping followed:
O, when I say I looked on Richards Face,
This was my Wish: Be thou (quoth I) accursed,
For making me, so young, so old a Widow:
And when thou wed, let sorrow haunt thy Bed;
And be thy Wife, if any be so mad,
More miserable, by the Life of thee,
Then thou hast made me, by my dear Lords death.
Lo, ere I can repeat this Curse again,
Within so small a time, my Women's heart
Grossly grew captive to his honey words,
And proved the subject of mine own Souls Curse,
Which hitherto hath held mine eyes from rest:
For never yet one hour in his Bed
Did I enjoy the golden dew of sleep,
But with his timorous Dreams was still awaked.
Besides, he hates me for my Father Warwick,
And will (no doubt) shortly be rid of me.
Poor heart adieu, I pity thy complaining.
No more, then with my soul I morn for yours.
Farewell, thou woeful welcommer of glory.
Adieu, poor soul, that take thy leave of it.
Go thou to Richmond, &amp; good fortune guide thee,
Go thou to Richard, and good Angels tend thee,
Go thou to Sanctuary, and good thoughts possess thee,
I to my Grave, where peace and rest lye with me.
Eighty odd years of sorrow have I seen,
And each hours joy wrecked with a week of teene.
Stay, yet look back with me unto the Tower.
Pity, you ancient Stones, those tender Babes,
Whom Envy hath immured within your Walls,
Rough Cradle for such little pretty ones,
Rude ragged Nurse, old sullen Play-fellow,
For tender Princes: use my Babies well;
So foolish Sorrows bids your Stones farewell.
Stand all apart. Cousin of Buckingham.
My gracious Sovereign.
Give me thy hand.
Thus high, by thy advice, and thy assistance,
Is King Richard seated:
But shall we wear these Glories for a day?
Or shall they last, and we rejoice in them?
Still live they, and for ever let them last.
Ah Buckingham, now doe I play the Touch,
To try if thou be currant Gold indeed:
Young Edward lives, think now what I would speak.
Say on my loving Lord.
Why Buckingham, I say I would be King.
Why so you are, my thrice-renowned Lord.
Ha? am I King? it is so: but Edward lives.
True, Noble Prince.
O bitter consequence!
That Edward still should live true Noble Prince.
Cousin, thou wast not wont to be so dull.
Shall I be plain? I wish the Bastards dead,
And I would have it suddenly performed.
What say thou now? speak suddenly, be brief.
Your Grace may doe your pleasure.
Tut, tut, thou art all Ice, thy kindness freezes:
Say, have I thy consent, that they shall dye?
Give me some little breath, some pause, dear Lord,
Before I positively speak in this:
I will resolve you herein presently.
The King is angry, see he gnaws his Lip.
I will converse with Iron-witted Fools,
And vnrespectiue Boys: none are for me,
That look into me with considerate eyes,
High-reaching Buckingham grows circumspect.
Boy.
My Lord.
Know thou not any, whom corrupting Gold
Will tempt unto a close exploit of Death?
I know a discontented Gentleman,
Whose humble means match not his haughty spirit:
Gold were as good as twenty Orators,
And will (no doubt) tempt him to any thing.
What is his Name?
His Name, my Lord, is Tirrell.
I partly know the man: go call him hither, Boy.
The deep revolving witty Buckingham,
No more shall be the neighbor to my counsels.
Hath he so long held out with me, vntyr'd,
And stops he now for breath? Well, be it so.
How now, Lord Stanley, what's the news?
Know my loving Lord, the Marquess Dorset
As I hear, is fled to Richmond,
In the parts where he abides.
Come hither Catesby, rumour it abroad,
That Anne my Wife is very grievous sick,
I will take order for her keeping close.
Inquire me out some mean poor Gentleman,
Whom I will marry straight to Clarence Daughter:
The Boy is foolish, and I fear not him.
Look how thou dream: I say again, give out,
That Anne, my Queen, is sick, and like to dye.
About it, for it stands me much upon
To stop all hopes, whose growth may damage me.
I must be married to my Brothers Daughter,
Or else my Kingdom stands on brittle Glass:
Murder her Brothers, and then marry her,
Uncertain way of gain. But I am in
So far in blood, that sin will pluck on sin,
Teare-falling Pity dwells not in this Eye.
Is thy Name Tyrrel?
Iames Tyrrel, and your most obedient subject.
Art thou indeed?
Prove me, my gracious Lord.
Dare thou resolve to kill a friend of mine?
Please you:
But I had rather kill two enemies.
Why then thou hast it: two deep enemies.
Foes to my Rest, and my sweet sleeps disturbers,
Are they that I would have thee deal upon:
Tyrrel, I mean those Bastards in the Tower.
Let me have open means to come to them,
And soon Isle rid you from the fear of them.
Thou sing sweet Musique:
Hark, come hither Tyrrel,
Go by this token: rise, and lend thine Ear,
There is no more but so: say it is done,
And I will love thee, and prefer thee for it.
I will dispatch it straight.
My Lord, I have considered in my mind,
The late request that you did sound me in.
Well, let that rest: Dorset is fled to Richmond.
I hear the news, my Lord.
Stanley, hee is your Wives Son: well, look unto it.
My Lord, I claim the gift, my due by promise,
For which your Honour and your Faith is pawned,
The Earldom of Hertford, and the movables,
Which you have promised I shall possess.
Stanley look to your Wife: if she convey
Letters to Richmond, you shall answer it.
What says your Highness to my just request?
I doe remember me, Henry the Sixth
Did prophecy, that Richmond should be King,
When Richmond was a little peevish Boy.
A King perhaps.
May it please you to resolve me in my suit.
Thou trouble me, I am not in the vain.
And is it thus? repays he my deep service
With such contempt? made I him King for this?
O let me think on Hastings, and be gone
To Brecnock, while my fearful Head is on.
The tyrannous and bloody Act is done,
The most arch deed of piteous massacre
That ever yet this Land was guilty of:
Dighton and Forest, who I did suborn
To do this piece of ruthful Butchery,
Albeit they were fleshed Villains, bloody Dogs,
Melted with tenderness, and mild compassion,
Wept like to Children, in their deaths sad Story.
O thus (quoth Dighton) lay the gentle Babes:
Thus, thus (quoth Forest) girdling one another
Within their Alabaster innocent Arms:
Their lips were four red Roses on a stalk,
And in their Summer Beauty kissed each other.
A Book of Prayers on their pillow lay,
Which one (quoth Forest) almost changed my mind:
But oh the Devil, there the Villain stopped:
When Dighton thus told on, we smothered
The most replenished sweet work of Nature,
That from the prime Creation ere she framed.
Hence both are gone with Conscience and Remorse,
They could not speak, and so I left them both,
To bear this tidings to the bloody King.
And here he comes. All health my Sovereign Lord.
Kind Tirrell, am I happy in thy News.
If to have done the thing you gave in charge,
Be get your happiness, be happy then,
For it is done.
But did thou see them dead.
I did my Lord.
And buried gentle Tirrell.
The Chaplain of the Tower hath buried them,
But where (to say the truth) I do not know.
Come to me Tirrel soon, and after Supper,
When thou shalt tell the process of their death.
Mean time, but think how I may do the good,
And be inheritor of thy desire.
Farewell till then.
I humbly take my leave.
The Son of Clarence have I pent up close,
His daughter meanly have I matched in marriage,
The Sons of Edward sleep in Abrahams bosom,
And Anne my wife hath bid this world good night,
Now for I know the Britain Richmond aims
At young Elizabeth my brothers daughter,
And by that knot looks proudly on the Crown,
To her go I, a jolly thriving wooer.
My Lord.
Good or bad news, that thou come in so bluntly?
Bad news my Lord, Morton is fled to Richmond,
And Buckingham backed with the hardy Welshman
Is in the field, and still his power increases.
Ely with Richmond troubles me more near,
Then Buckingham and his rash levied Strength.
Come, I have learned, that fearful commenting
Is leaden servitor to dull delay.
Delay leds impotent and Snaile-pac'd Beggary:
Then fiery expedition be my wing,
Ioues Mercury, and Herald for a King:
Go muster men: My counsel is my Shield,
We must be brief, when Traitors brave the Field.
So now prosperity begins to mellow,
And drop into the rotten mouth of death:
Here in these Confines silly have I lurked,
To watch the waining of mine enemies.
A dire induction, am I witness to,
And will to France, hoping the consequence
Will prove as bitter, black, and Tragical.
Withdraw thee wretched Margaret, who comes here?
Ah my poor Princes! ah my tender Babes:
My vnblowed Flowers, new appearing sweets:
If yet your gentle souls fly in the Ayre,
And be not fixed in doom perpetual,
Hover about me with your aerie wings,
And hear your mothers Lamentation.
Hover about her, say that right for right
Hath dim'd your Infant morn, to Aged night.
So many miseries have crazed my voice,
That my woe-wearied tongue is still and mute.
Edward Plantagenet, why art thou dead?
Plantagenet doth quit Plantagenet,
Edward for Edward, pays a dying debt.
Wilt thou, O God, fly from such gentle Lambs,
And throw them in the entrails of the Wolf?
When did thou sleep, when such a deed was done?
When holy Harry dyed, and my sweet Son.
Dead life, blind sight, poor mortal living ghost,
Woes Scene, Worlds shame, Graves due, by life usurped,
Brief abstract and record of tedious days,
Rest thy unrest on Englands lawful earth,
Unlawfully made drunk with innocent blood.
Ah that thou would as soon afford a Grave,
As thou can yield a melancholy sear:
Then would I hide my bones, not rest them here,
Ah who hath any cause to morn but wee?
If ancient sorrow be most reverent,
Give mine the benefit of signeurie,
And let my griefs frown on the upper hand
If sorrow can admit Society.
I had an Edward, till a Richard killed him:
I had a Husband, till a Richard killed him:
Thou had an Edward, till a Richard killed him:
Thou had a Richard, till a Richard killed him.
I had a Richard too, and thou did kill him;
I had a Rutland too, thou hop'st to kill him.
Thou had a Clarence too,
And Richard killed him.
From forth the kennel of thy womb hath crept
A Hell-hound that doth hunt vs all to death:
That Dog, that had his teeth before his eyes,
To worcester???y Lambs, and lap their gentle blood:
That foul defacer of Gods handy work:
That reigns in gauled eyes of weeping souls:
That excellent grand Tyrant of the earth,
Thy womb let loose to chase vs to our graves.
O upright, just, and true-disposing God,
How do I thank thee, that this carnal Cur
Prays on the issue of his Mothers body,
And makes her Pue-fellow with others moan.
Oh Harries wife, triumph not in my woes:
God witness with me, I have wept for thine.
Bear with me: I am hungry for revenge,
And now I cloy me with beholding it.
Thy Edward he is dead, that killed my Edward,
The other Edward dead, to quit my Edward:
Young York, he is but boot, because both they
Matched not the high perfection of my loss.
Thy Clarence he is dead, that stabbed my Edward,
And the beholders of this frantic play,
The adulterate Hastings, Rivers, ??aughan, Gray,
Untimely smothered in their dusky Graves.
Richard yet lives, Hells black Intelligencer,
Only reserved their Factor, to buy souls,
And send them thither: But at hand, at hand
Ensues his piteous and unpitied end.
Earth gapes, Hell burns, Fiends roar, Saints pray,
To have him suddenly conveyed from hence:
Cancel his bond of life, dear God I pray,
That I may live and say, The Dog is dead.
O thou did prophecy, the time would come,
That I should wish for thee to help me curse
That bottel'd Spider, that foul bunch-backed Toad.
I called thee then, vain flourish of my fortune:
I called thee then, poor Shadow, painted Queen,
The presentation of but what I was;
The flattering Index of a direful Pageant;
One heaved a high, to be hurled down below:
A Mother only mocked with two fair Babes;
A dream of what thou wast, a garish Flag
To be the aim of every dangerous Shot;
A sign of Dignity, a Breath, a Bubble;
A Queen in jest, only to fill the Scene.
Where is thy Husband now? Where be thy Brothers?
Where be thy two Sons? Wherein dost thou Joy?
Who sues, and kneels, and says, God save the Queen?
Where be the bending Peers that flattered thee?
Where be the thronging Troops that followed thee?
Decline all this, and see what now thou art.
For happy Wife, a most distressed Widow:
For joyful Mother, one that wails the name:
For one being sued too, one that humbly sues:
For Queen, a very Caitiff, crowned with care:
For she that scorned at me, now scorned of me:
For she being feared of all, now fearing one:
For she commanding all, obeyed of none.
Thus hath the course of Justice whirled about,
And left thee but a very prey to time,
Having no more but Thought of what thou wast.
To torture thee the more, being what thou art,
Thou did usurp my place, and dost thou not
Usurp the just proportion of my Sorrow?
Now thy proud Neck, bears half my burdened yoke,
From which, even here I slip my wearied head,
And leave the burden of it all, on thee.
Farewell Yorkes wife, and Queen of sad mischance,
These English woes, shall make me smile in France.
O thou well skilled in Curses, stay awhile,
And teach me how to curse mine enemies.
Forbear to sleep the night, and fast the day:
Compare dead happiness, with living woe:
Think that thy Babes were sweeter then they were,
And he that slew them fowler then he is:
Bettering thy loss, makes the bad causer worse,
Revolving this, will teach thee how to Curse.
My words are dull, O quicken them with thine.
Thy woes will make them sharpe,
And pierce like mine.
Why should calamity be full of words?
Windy Attorneys to their Clients Woes,
Aerie succeeders of intestine joys,
Poor breathing Orators of miseries,
Let them have scope, though what they will impart,
Help nothing else, yet do they ease the hart.
If so then, be not Tongue-tied: go with me,
And in the breath of bitter words, let's smother
My damned Son, that thy two sweet Sons smothered.
The Trumpet sounds, be copious in exclaims.
Who intercepts me in my Expedition?
O she, that might have intercepted thee
By strangling thee in her accursed womb,
From all the slaughters (Wretch) that thou hast done.
Hid'st thou that Forehead with a Golden Crown
Where't should be branded, if that right were right?
The slaughter of the Prince that owed that Crown,
And the dire death of my poor Sons, and Brothers.
Tell me thou Villaine-flaue, where are my Children?
Thou Toad, thou Toad,
Where is thy Brother Clarence?
And little Ned Plantagenet his Son?
Where is the gentle Rivers, ??aughan, Gray?
Where is kind Hastings?
A flourish Trumpets, strike Alarm Drums:
Let not the Heavens hear these Tell-tale women
Rail on the Lords Anointed. Strike I say.
Either be patient, and entreat me fair,
Or with the clamorous report of War,
Thus will I drown your exclamations.
Art thou my Son?
I, I thank God, my Father, and your self.
Then patiently hear my impatience.
Madam, I have a touch of your condition,
That cannot brooke the accent of reproof.
O let me speak.
Do then, but Isle not hear.
I will be mild, and gentle in my words.
And brief (good Mother) for I am in hast.
Art thou so hasty? I have staid for thee
(God knows) in torment and in agony.
And came I not at last to comfort you?
No by the holy Rood, thou know it well,
Thou came on earth, to make the earth my Hell.
A grievous burden was thy Birth to me,
Tetchy and wayward was thy Infancy.
Thy School-daies frightful, desperate, wilde, and furious,
Thy prime of Manhood, daring, bold, and venturous:
Thy Age confirmed, proud, subtle, sly, and bloody,
More mild, but yet more harmful; Kind in hatred:
What comfortable hour can thou name,
That ever graced me with thy company?
Faith none, but Humfrey Hour,
That called your Grace
To Breakfast once, forth of my company.
If I be so disgracious in your eye,
Let me march on, and not offend you Madam.
Strike up the Drum.
I prithee hear me speak.
You speak too bitterly.
Hear me a word:
For I shall never speak to thee again.
So.
Either thou wilt dye, by Gods just ordinance
Ere from this war thou turn a Conqueror:
Or I with grief and extreme Age shall perish,
And never more behold thy face again.
Therefore take with thee my most grievous Curse,
Which in the day of Battle tyre thee more
Then all the complete Armour that thou wear.
My Prayers on the adverse party fight,
And there the little souls of Edwards Children,
Whisper the Spirits of thine Enemies,
And promise them Success and Victory:
Bloody thou art, bloody will be thy end:
Shame serves thy life, and doth thy death attend.
Though far more cause, yet much less spirit to curse
Abides in me, I say Amen to her.
Stay Madam, I must talk a word with you.
I have no more sons of the Royal Blood
For thee to slaughter. For my Daughters (Richard)
They shall be praying Nuns, not weeping Queens:
And therefore level not to hit their lives.
You have a daughter called Elizabeth,
Virtuous and Fair, Royal and Gracious?
And must she dye for this? O let her live,
And Isle corrupt her Manners, stain her Beauty,
Slander my Self, as false to Edwards bed:
Throw over her the veil of Infamy,
So she may live vnscarr'd of bleeding slaughter,
I will confess she was not Edwards daughter.
Wrong not her Birth, she is a Royal Princess.
To save her life, Isle say she is not so.
Her life is safest only in her birth.
And only in that safety, dyed her Brothers.
Lo at their Birth, good stars were opposite.
No, to their lives, ill friends were contrary.
All vnauoyded is the doom of Destiny.
True: when avoided grace makes Destiny.
My Babes were destined to a fairer death,
If grace had blessed thee with a fairer life.
You speak as if that I had slain my Cousins?
Cousins indeed, and by their Uncle couzend,
Of Comfort, Kingdom, Kindred, Freedom, Life,
Whose hand soever launched their tender hearts,
Thy head (all indirectly) gave direction.
No doubt the murderous Knife was dull and blunt,
Till it was whetted on thy stone-hard heart,
To revel in the Entrails of my Lambs.
But that still use of grief, makes wilde grief tame,
My tongue should to thy ears not name my Boys,
Till that my Nails were anchored in thine eyes:
And I in such a desperate Bay of death,
Like a poor Bark, of sails and tackling rose,
Rush all to pieces on thy Rocky bosom.
Madam, so thrive I in my enterprise
And dangerous success of bloody wars,
As I intend more good to you and yours,
Then ever you and yours by me were harmed.
What good is covered with the face of heaven,
To be discovered, that can do me good.
The advancement of your children, gentle Lady
Up to some Scaffold, there to lose their heads.
Unto the dignity and height of Fortune,
The high Imperial Type of this earths glory.
Flatter my sorrow with report of it:
Tell me, what State, what Dignity, what Honour,
Can thou demise to any child of mine.
Even all I have; I, and my self and all,
Will I withal endow a child of thine:
So in the Lethe of thy angry soul,
Thou drown the sad remembrance of those wrongs,
Which thou suppose I have done to thee.
Be brief, least that the process of thy kindness
Last longer telling then thy kindness date.
Then know,
That from my Soul, I love thy Daughter.
My daughters Mother thinks it with her soul.
What do you think?
That thou dost love my daughter from thy soul
So from thy Souls love did thou love her Brothers,
And from my hearts love, I do thank thee for it.
Be not so hasty to confound my meaning:
I mean that with my Soul I love thy daughter,
And do intend to make her Queen of England.
Well then, who dost you mean shall be her King.
Even he that makes her Queen:
Who else should bee?
What, thou?
Even so: How think you of it?
How can thou woo her?
That I would learn of you,
As one being best acquainted with her humour.
And wilt thou learn of me?
Madam, with all my heart.
Send to her by the man that slew her Brothers,
A pair of bleeding hearts: thereon engrave
Edward and York, then happily will she weep:
Therefore present to her, as sometime Margaret
Did to thy Father, steeped in Rutlands blood,
A hand-kercheefe, which say to her did dreyne
The purple sap from her sweet Brothers body,
And bid her wipe her weeping eyes withal.
If this inducement move her not to love,
Send her a Letter of thy Noble deeds:
Tell her, thou made away her Uncle Clarence,
Her Uncle Rivers, I (and for her sake)
Made quick conveyance with her good Aunt Anne.
You mock me Madam, this not the way
To win your daughter.
There is no other way,
Unless thou coldest put on some other shape,
And not be Richard, that hath done all this.
Say that I did all this for love of her.
Nay then indeed she cannot choose but hate thee
Having bought love, with such a bloody spoil.
Look what is done, cannot be now amended:
Men shall deal unadvisedly sometimes,
Which after-houres gives leisure to repent.
If I did take the Kingdom from your Sons,
To make amends, Isle give it to your daughter:
If I have killed the issue of your womb,
To quicken your increase, I will beget
Mine issue of your blood, upon your Daughter:
A Grandams name is little less in love,
Then is the doting Title of a Mother;
They are as Children but one steppe below,
Even of your mettle, of your very blood:
Of all one pain, save for a night of groans
Endured of her, for whom you bid like sorrow.
Your Children were vexation to your youth,
But mine shall be a comfort to your Age,
The loss you have, is but a Son being King,
And by that loss, your Daughter is made Queen.
I cannot make you what amends I would,
Therefore accept such kindness as I can.
Dorset your Son, that with a fearful soul
Leads discontented steppes in Foreign soil,
This fair Alliance, quickly shall call home
To high Promotions, and great Dignity.
The King that calls your beauteous Daughter Wife,
Familiarly shall call thy Dorset, Brother:
Again shall you be Mother to a King:
And all the Ruins of distressful Times,
Repaired with double Riches of Content.
What? we have many goodly days to see:
The liquid drops of Tears that you have shed,
Shall come again, transformed to Orient Pearl,
Advantaging their Love, with interest
Often-times double gain of happiness.
Go then (my Mother) to thy Daughter go,
Make bold her bashful years, with your experience,
Prepare her ears to hear a Wooers Tale.
Put in her tender heart, the aspiring Flame
Of Golden Sovereignty: Acquaint the Princess
With the sweet silent hours of Marriage joys:
And when this Arm of mine hath chastised
The petty Rebel, dull-brain'd Buckingham,
Bound with Triumphant Garlands will I come,
And lead thy daughter to a Conquerors bed:
To whom I will retail my Conquest won,
And she shall be sole Victors, Caesars Caesar.
What were I best to say, her Fathers Brother
Would be her Lord? Or shall I say her Uncle?
Or he that slew her Brothers, and her Uncles?
Under what Title shall I woo for thee,
That God, the Law, my Honour, and her Love,
Can make seem pleasing to her tender years?
Infer fair Englands peace by this Alliance.
Which she shall purchase with still lasting war.
Tell her, the King that may command, entreats.
That at her hands, which the kings King forbids.
Say she shall be a High and Mighty Queen.
To veil the Title, as her Mother doth.
Say I will love her everlastingly.
But how long shall that title ever last?
Sweetly in force, unto her fair lives end.
But how long fairly shall her sweet life last?
As long as Heaven and Nature lengthens it.
As long as Hell and Richard likes of it.
Say, I her Sovereign, am her Subject low.
But she your Subject, lothes such Sovereignty.
Be eloquent in my behalf to her.
An honest tale speeds best, being plainly told.
Then plainly to her, tell my loving tale.
Plain and not honest, is too harsh a style.
Your Reasons are too shallow, and to quick.
O no, my Reasons are too deep and dead,
Too deep and dead (poor Infants) in their graves,
Harp on it still shall I, till heart-strings break.
Harp not on that string Madam, that is past.
Now by my George, my Garter, and my Crown.
Profaned, dishonoured, and the third usurped.
I swear.
By nothing, for this is no Oath:
Thy George profaned, hath lost his Lordly Honour;
Thy Garter blemished, pawned his Knightly Virtue;
Thy Crown usurped, disgraced his Kingly Glory:
If something thou would swear to be believed,
Swear then by something, that thou hast not wronged.
Then by my Self.
Thy Self, is selfe-misvs'd.
Now by the World.
It is full of thy foul wrongs.
My Fathers death.
Thy life hath it dishonoured.
Why then, by Heaven.
Heavens wrong is most of all:
If thou did fear to break an Oath with him,
The unity the King my husband made,
Thou had not broken, nor my Brothers died.
If thou had feared to break an oath by him,
The Imperial mettle, circling now thy head,
Had graced the tender temples of my Child,
And both the Princes had been breathing here,
Which now two tender Bedfellows for dust,
Thy broken Faith hath made the prey for Worms.
What can thou swear by now.
The time to come.
That thou hast wronged in the time ore-past:
For I my self have many tears to wash
Hereafter time, for time past, wronged by thee.
The Children live, whose Fathers thou hast slaughtered,
Ungoverned youth, to wail it with their age:
The Parents live, whose Children thou hast butchered,
Old barren Plants, to wail it with their Age.
Swear not by time to come, for that thou hast
Misused ere used, by times ill-vs'd repast.
As I entend to prosper, and repent:
So thrive I in my dangerous Affairs
Of hostile Arms: My self, my self confound:
Heaven, and Fortune bar me happy hours:
Day, yield me not thy light; nor Night, thy rest.
Be opposite all Planets of good luck
To my proceeding, if with dear hearts love,
Immaculate devotion, holy thoughts,
I tender not thy beauteous Princely daughter.
In her, consists my Happiness, and thine:
Without her, follows to my self, and thee;
Her self, the Land, and many a Christian soul,
Death, Desolation, Ruin, and Decay:
It cannot be avoided, but by this:
It will not be avoided, but by this.
Therefore dear Mother (I must call you so)
Be the Attorney of my love to her:
Plead what I will be, not what I have been;
Not my deserts, but what I will deserve:
Urge the Necessity and state of times,
And be not peevish found, in great Designs.
Shall I be tempted of the Devil thus?
I, if the Devil tempt you to do good.
Shall I forget my self, to be my self.
I, if your selfes remembrance wrong your self.
Yet thou did kill my Children.
But in your daughters womb I bury them.
Where in that Nest of Spicery they will breed
Selves of themselves, to your recomforture.
Shall I go win my daughter to thy will?
And be a happy Mother by the deed.
I go, write to me very shortly,
And you shall understand from me her mind.
Bear her my true loves kiss, and so farewell.
Relenting Fool, and shallow-changing Woman.
How now, what news?
Most mighty Sovereign, on the Western Coast
Rides a puissant Navy: to our Shores
Throng many doubtful hollow-hearted friends,
Unarmed, and unresolved to beat them back.
It is thought, that Richmond is their Admiral:
And there they hull, expecting but the aide
Of Buckingham, to welcome them ashore.
Some light-foot friend post to ye Duke of Norfolk:
Ratcliffe thy self, or Catesby, where is hee?
Here, my good Lord.
Catesby, fly to the Duke.
I will, my Lord, with all convenient haste.
Catesby come hither, post to Salisbury:
When thou come thither: Dull unmindful Villain,
Why stay thou here, and go not to the Duke?
First, mighty Liege, tell me your Highness pleasure,
What from your Grace I shall deliver to him.
O true, good Catesby, bid him levy straight
The greatest strength and power that he can make,
And meet me suddenly at Salisbury.
I go.
What, may it please you, shall I doe at Salis???bury?
Why, what would thou doe there, before I go?
Your Highness told me I should post before.
My mind is changed:
Stanley, what news with you?
None, good my Liege, to please you with ye hearing,
Nor none so bad, but well may be reported.
Hoyday, a Riddle, neither good nor bad:
What need thou run so many miles about,
When thou may tell thy Tale the nearest way?
Once more, what news?
Richmond is on the Seas.
There let him sink, and be the Seas on him,
White-liuer'd Runagate, what doth he there?
I know not, mighty Sovereign, but by guess.
Well, as you guess.
Stirred up by Dorset, Buckingham, and Morton,
He makes for England, here to claim the Crown.
Is the Chair empty? is the Sword vnsway'd?
Is the King dead? the Empire unpossessed?
What Heir of York is there alive, but wee?
And who is Englands King, but great Yorkes Heir?
Then tell me, what makes he upon the Seas?
Unless for that, my Liege, I cannot guess.
Unless for that he comes to be your Liege,
You cannot guess wherefore the Welshman comes.
Thou wilt revolt, and fly to him, I fear.
No, my good Lord, therefore mistrust me not.
Where is thy Power then, to beat him back?
Where be thy Tenants, and thy followers?
Are they not now upon the Western Shore,
Safe-conducting the Rebels from their Ships?
No, my good Lord, my friends are in the North.
Cold friends to me: what do they in the North,
When they should serve their Sovereign in the West?
They have not been commanded, mighty King:
Pleases your Majesty to give me leave,
Isle muster up my friends, and meet your Grace,
Where, and what time your Majesty shall please.
I, thou would be gone, to join with Richmond:
But Isle not trust thee.
Most mighty Sovereign,
You have no cause to hold my friendship doubtful,
I never was, nor never will be false.
Go then, and muster men: but leave behind
Your Son George Stanley: look your heart be firm,
Or else his Heads assurance is but frail.
So deal with him, as I prove true to you.
My gracious Sovereign, now in Devonshire,
As I by friends am well advertised,
Sir Edward Courtney, and the haughty Prelate,
Bishop of Exeter, his elder Brother,
With many more Confederates, are in Arms.
In Kent, my Liege, the Guilfords are in Arms,
And every hour more Competitors
Flock to the Rebels, and their power grows strong.
My Lord, the Army of great Buckingham.
Out on ye, Owls, nothing but Songs of Death,
There, take thou that, till thou bring better news.
The news I have to tell your Majesty,
Is, that by sudden Floods, and fall of Waters,
Buckinghams Army is dispersed and scattered,
And he himself wandered away alone,
No man knows whither.
I cry thee mercy:
There is my Purse, to cure that Blow of thine.
Hath any well-aduised friend proclaimed
Reward to him that brings the Traitor in?
Such Proclamation hath been made, my Lord.
Sir Thomas Louell, and Lord Marquess Dorset,
It is said, my Liege, in Yorkshire are in Arms:
But this good comfort bring I to your Highness,
The Britain Navy is dispersed by Tempest.
Richmond in Dorsetshire sent out a Boat
Unto the shore, to ask those on the Banks,
If they were his Assistants, yea, or no?
Who answered him, they came from Buckingham,
Upon his party: he mistrusting them,
Hoised sail, and made his course again for Britain.
March on, march on, since we are up in Arms,
If not to fight with foreign Enemies,
Yet to beat down these Rebels here at home.
My Liege, the Duke of Buckingham is taken,
That is the best news: that the Earl of Richmond
Is with a mighty power Landed at Milford,
Is colder News, but yet they must be told.
Away towards Salsbury, while we reason here,
A Royal battle might be won and lost:
Some one take order Buckingham be brought
To Salsbury, the rest march on with me.
Sir Christopher, tell Richmond this from me,
That in the sty of the most deadly Bore,
My Son George Stanley is franked up in hold:
If I revolt, off goes young Georges head,
The fear of that, holds off my present aid.
So get thee gone: commend me to thy Lord.
Withal say, that the Queen hath heartily consented
He should espouse Elizabeth his daughter.
But tell me, where is Princely Richmond now?
At Penbroke, or at Hertford West in Wales.
What men of Name resort to him.
Sir Walter Herbert, a renowned Soldier,
Sir Gilbert Talbot, Sir William Stanley,
Oxford, redoubted Pembroke, Sir Iames Blunt,
And Rice ap Thomas, with a valiant Crew,
And many other of great name and worth:
And towards London do they bend their power,
If by the way they be not fought withal.
Well hye thee to thy Lord: I kiss his hand,
My Letter will resolve him of my mind.
Farewell.
Will not King Richard let me speak with him?
No my good Lord, therefore be patient.
Hastings, and Edwards children, Gray &amp; Rivers,
Holy King Henry, and thy fair Son Edward,
??aughan, and all that have miscarried
By vnder-hand corrupted foul injustice,
If that your moody discontented souls,
Do through the clouds behold this present hour,
Even for revenge mock my destruction.
This is All-soules day (Fellow) is it not?
It is.
Why then Al-soules day, is my bodies doomsday
This is the day, which in King Edwards time
I wished might fall on me, when I was found
False to his Children, and his Wives Allies.
This is the day, wherein I wished to fall
By the false Faith of him whom most I trusted.
This, this All-soules day to my fearful Soul,
Is the determined respit of my wrongs:
That high All-seer, which I dallied with,
Hath turned my fained Prayer on my head,
And given in earnest, what I begged in jest.
Thus doth he force the swords of wicked men
To turn their own points in their Masters bosoms.
Thus Margarets curse falls heavy on my neck:
When he (quoth she) shall split thy heart with sorrow,
Remember Margaret was a Prophetess:
Come lead me Officers to the block of shame,
Wrong hath but wrong, and blame the due of blame.
Fellows in Arms, and my most loving Friends
Bruised underneath the yoke of Tyranny,
Thus far into the bowels of the Land,
Have we marched on without impediment;
And here receive we from our Father Stanley
Lines of fair comfort and encouragement:
The wretched, bloody, and usurping Boar,
(That spoiled your Summer Fields, and fruitful Vines)
Swilles your warm blood like wash, &amp; makes his trough
In your embowel'd bosoms: This foul Swine
Is now even in the Sentry of this Isle,
Ne'er to the Town of Leicester, as we learn:
From Tamworth thither, is but one days march.
In Gods name cheerely on, courageous Friends,
To reap the Harvest of perpetual peace,
By this one bloody trial of sharpe War.
Every mans Conscience is a thousand men,
To sight against this guilty Homicide.
I doubt not but his Friends will turn to vs.
He hath no friends, but what are friends for fear,
Which in his dearest need will fly from him.
All for our vantage, then in Gods name march,
True Hope is swift, and flies with Swallows wings,
Kings it makes Gods, and meaner creatures Kings.
Here pitch our Tent, even here in Bosworth field,
My Lord of Surrey, why look you so sad?
My heart is ten times lighter then my looks.
My Lord of Norfolk.
Here most gracious Liege.
Norfolk, we must have knocks:
Ha, must we not?
We must both give and take my loving Lord.
Up with my Tent, here will I lye to night,
But where to morrow? Well, ell's one for that
Who hath descried the number of the Traitors?
Six or seven thousand is their utmost power.
Why our Battalion trebles that account:
Besides, the Kings name is a Tower of strength,
Which they upon the adverse Faction want.
Up with the Tent: Come Noble Gentlemen,
Let vs survey the vantage of the ground.
Call for some men of found direction:
Let's lack no Discipline, make no delay,
For Lords, to morrow is a busy day.
The weary Sun, hath made a Golden set,
And by the bright Tract of his fiery Carre,
Gives token of a goodly day to morrow.
Sir William Brandon, you shall bear my Standard:
Give me some Ink and Paper in my Tent:
Isle draw the Form and Model of our Battle,
Limit each Leader to his several Charge,
And part in just proportion our small Power.
My Lord of Oxford, you Sir William Brandon,
And your Sir Walter Herbert stay with me:
The Earl of Pembroke keeps his Regiment;
Good Captain Blunt, bear my goodnight to him.
And by the second hour in the Morning,
Desire the Earl to see me in my Tent:
Yet one thing more (good Captain) do for me:
Where is Lord Stanley quartered, do you know?
Unless I have mistane his Colours much,
(Which well I am assured I have not done)
His Regiment lies half a Mile at least
South, from the mighty Power of the King.
If without peril it be possible,
Sweet Blunt, make some good means to speak with him
And give him from me, this most needful Note.
Upon my life, my Lord, Isle undertake it,
And so God give you quiet rest to night.
Good night good Captain Blunt:
Come Gentlemen,
Let vs consult upon to morrows Business;
Into my Tent, the Dew is raw and cold.
What is it a Clock?
It's Supper time my Lord, it's nine a clock.
I will not sup to night,
Give me some Ink and Paper:
What, is my Beaver easier then it was?
And all my Armour laid into my Tent?
It is my Liege: and all things are in readiness.
Good Norfolk, hye thee to thy charge,
Use careful Watch, choose trusty Sentinels,
I go my Lord.
S???ir with the Lark to morrow, gentle Norfolk.
I warrant you my Lord.
Ratcliffe.
My Lord.
Send out a Pursuiuant at Arms
To Stanleys Regiment: bid him bring his power
Before Sun-rising, least his Son George fall
Into the blind Cave of eternal night.
Fill me a Bowl of Wine: Give me a Watch,
Saddle white Surrey for the Field to morrow:
Look that my Staves be sound, &amp; not too heavy.
My Lord.
Saw the melancholy Lord Northumberland?
Thomas the Earl of Surrey, and himself,
Much about Cockshut time, from Troop to Troop
Went through the Army, cheering up the Soldiers.
So, I am satisfied: Give me a Bowl of Wine,
I have not that Alacrity of Spirit,
Nor cheer of Mind that I was wont to have.
Set it down. Is Ink and Paper ready?
It is my Lord.
Bid my Guard watch. Leave me.
Ratcliffe, about the mid of night come to my Tent
And help to arm me. Leave me I say.
Fortune, and Victory sit on thy Helm.
All comfort that the dark night can afford,
Be to thy Person, Noble Father in Law.
Tell me, how fares our Noble Mother?
I by Attorney, bless thee from thy Mother,
Who prays continually for Richmonds good:
So much for that. The silent hours steal on,
And flakie darkness breaks within the East.
In brief, for so the season bids vs be,
Prepare thy Battle early in the Morning,
And put thy Fortune to the Arbitrament
Of bloody strokes, and mortal staring War:
I, as I may, that which I would I cannot,
With best advantage will deceive the time,
And aid thee in this doubtful shock of Arms.
But on thy side I may not be too forward,
Least being seen, thy Brother, tender George
Be executed in his Fathers sight.
Farewell: the leisure, and the fearful time
Cuts off the ceremonious Vows of Love,
And ample interchange of sweet Discourse,
Which so long sundried Friends should dwell upon:
God give vs leisure for these rites of Love.
Once more Adieu, be valiant, and speed well.
Good Lords conduct him to his Regiment:
Isle strive with troubled noise, to take a Nap,
Lest leaden slumber poise me down to morrow,
When I should mount with wings of Victory:
Once more, good night kind Lords and Gentlemen.
O thou, whose Captain I account my self,
Look on my Forces with a gracious eye:
Put in their hands thy bruising Irons of wrath,
That they may crush down with a heavy fall,
The usurping Helmets of our Adversaries:
Make vs thy ministers of Chastisement,
That we may praise thee in thy victory:
To thee I do commend my watchful soul,
Ere I let fall the windows of mine eves:
Sleeping, and waking, oh defend me still.
Let me sit heavy on thy soul to morrow:
Think how thou stab me in my prime of youth
At Teukesbury: Despair therefore, and dye.
Be cheerful Richmond,
For the wronged Souls
Of butchered Princes, fight in thy behalf:
King Henries issue Richmond comforts thee.
When I was mortal, my Anointed body
By thee was punched full of holes;
Think on the Tower, and me: Despair, and dye,
Harry the sixth, bids thee despair, and dye.
Virtuous and holy be thou Conqueror:
Harry that prophesied thou should be King,
Doth comfort thee in sleep: Live, and flourish.
Let me sit heavy in thy soul to morrow.
I that was washed to death with Fulsome Wine:
Poor Clarence by thy go???le betrayed to death:
To morrow in the battle think on me,
And fall thy edgelesse Sword, despair and dye.
Thou off-spring of the house of Lancaster
The wronged heirs of York do pray for thee,
Good Angels guard thy battle, Live and Flourish.
Let me sit heavy in thy soul to morrow,
Rivers, that dyed at Pomfret: despair, and dye.
Think upon Grey, and let thy soul despair.
Think upon Vaughan, and with guilty fear
Let fall thy Lance, despair and dye.
Awake,
And think our wrongs in Richards Bosom,
Will conquer him. Awake, and win the day.
Bloody and guilty: guiltily awake,
And in a bloody Battle end thy days.
Think on Lord Hastings: despair, and dye.
Quiet untroubled soul,
Awake, awake:
Arm, fight, and conquer, for fair Englands sake.
Dream on thy Cousins
Smothered in the Tower:
Let vs be laid within thy bosom Richard,
And weigh thee down to ruin, shame, and death,
Thy Nephews soul bids thee despair and dye.
Sleep Richmond,
Sleep in Peace, and wake in Joy,
Good Angels guard thee from the Boars annoy,
Live, and be get a happy race of Kings,
Edwards unhappy Sons, do bid thee flourish.
Richard, thy Wife,
That wretched Anne thy Wife,
That never slept a quiet hour with thee,
Now filles thy sleep with perturbations,
To morrow in the Battle, think on me,
And fall thy edgelesse Sword, despair and dye.
Thou quiet soul,
Sleep thou a quiet sleep:
Dream of Success, and Happy Victory,
Thy Adversaries Wife doth pray for thee.
The first was I
That helped thee to the Crown:
The last was I that felt thy Tyranny.
O, in the Battle think on Buckingham,
And dye in terror of thy guiltiness.
Dream on, dream on, of bloody deeds and death,
Fainting despair; despairing yield thy breath.
I dyed for hope
Ere I could lend thee Aid;
But cheer thy heart, and be thou not dismayed:
God, and good Angels fight on Richmonds side,
And Richard fall in height of all his pride.
Give me another Horse, bind up my Wounds:
Have mercy Iesu. Soft, I did but dream.
O coward Conscience! how dost thou afflict me?
The Lights burn blew. It is not dead midnight.
Cold fearful drops stand on my trembling flesh.
What? do I fear my Self? There's none else by,
Richard loves Richard, that is I am I.
Is there a Murderer here? No; Yes, I am:
Then fly; What from my Self? Great reason: why?
Lest I Revenge. What? my Self upon my Self?
Alack, I love my Self. Wherefore? For any good
That I my Self, have done unto my Self?
O no. Alas, I rather hate my Self,
For hateful Deeds committed by my Self.
I am a Villain: yet I Lye, I am not.
Fool, of thy Self speak well: Fool, do not flatter.
My Conscience hath a thousand several Tongues,
And every Tongue brings in a several Tale,
And every Tale condemns me for a Villain;
Perjury, in the high'st Degree,
Murder, sterne murder, in the dyr'st degree,
All several sins, all vs d in each degree,
Throng all to 'th Bar, crying all, Guilty, Guilty.
I shall despair, there is no Creature loves me;
And if I die, no soul shall pity me.
Nay, wherefore should they? Since that I my Self,
Find in my Self, no pity to my Self.
Me thought, the Souls of all that I had murdered
Came to my Tent, and every one did threat
To morrows vengeance on the head of Richard.
My Lord.
Who's there?
Ratcliffe my Lord, it is I: the early Village Cock
Hath twice done salutation to the Morn,
Your Friends are up, and buckle on their Armour.
O Ratcliffe, I fear, I fear.
Nay good my Lord, be not afraid of Shadows.
By the Apostle Paul, shadows to night
Have stroke more terror to the soul of Richard,
Then can the substance of ten thousand Soldiers
Armed in proof, and led by shallow Richmond???
It is not yet near day. Come go with me,
Under our Tents Isle play the Ease-dropper,
To hear if any mean to shrink from me.
Good morrow Richmond.
Cry mercy Lords??? and watchful Gentlemen,
That you have tan a tardy sluggard here?
How have you slept my Lord?
The sweetest sleep,
And fairest boding Dreams,
That ever entered in a drowsy head,
Have I since your departure had my Lords.
Me thought their Souls, whose bodies Rich. murdered,
Came to my Tent, and cried on Victory:
I promise you my Heart is very iocond,
In the remembrance of so fair a dream,
How far into the Morning is it Lords?
Upon the stroke of four.
Why then it is time to Arm, and give direction.
More then I have said, loving Countrymen,
The leisure and enforcement of the time
Forbids to dwell upon: yet remember this,
God, and our good cause, fight upon our side,
The Prayers of holy Saints and wronged souls,
Like high reared Bulwarks, stand before our Faces,
(Richard except) those whom we fight against,
Had rather have vs win, then him they follow.
For, what is he they follow? Truly Gentlemen,
A bloody Tyrant, and a Homicide:
One raised in blood, and one in blood established;
One that made means to come by what he hath,
And slaughtered those that were the means to help him:
A base foul Stone, made precious by the soil
Of Englands Chair, where he is fall???ely set:
One that hath ever been Gods Enemy.
Then if you fight against Gods Enemy,
God will in justice ward you as his Soldiers.
If you do swear to put a Tyrant down,
You sleep in peace, the Tyrant being slain:
If you do fight against your Countries Foes,
Your Countries Fat shall pay your pains the hire.
If you do fight in safeguard of your wives,
Your wives shall welcome home the Conquerors.
If you do free your Children from the Sword,
Your Childrens Children quits it in your Age.
Then in the name of God and all these rights,
Advance your Standards, draw your willing Swords.
For me, the ransom of my bold attempt,
Shall be this cold Corpse on the earth's cold face.
But if I thrive, the gain of my attempt,
The least of you shall share his part thereof.
Sound Drums and Trumpets boldly, and cheerfully,
God, and Saint George, Richmond, and Victory.
What said Northumberland as touching Richmond?
That he was never trained up in Arms.
He said the truth: and what said Surrey then?
He smiled and said, the be???la for our purpose.
He was in the right, and so indeed it is.
Tell the clock there.
Give me a Calendar: Who saw the Sun to day?
Not I my Lord.
Then he disdains to shine: for by the Book
He should have braved the East an hour ago,
A black day will it be to somebody. Ratcliffe.
My Lord.
The Sun will not be seen to day,
The sky doth frown, and lower upon our Army.
I would these dewy tears were from the ground.
Not shine to day? Why, what is that to me
More then to Richmond? For the selfsame Heaven
That frowns on me, looks sadly upon him.
Arm, arm, my Lord: the foe vaunts in the field.
Come, bustle, bustle. Caparison my horse.
Call up Lord Stanley, bid him bring his power,
I will lead forth my Soldiers to the plain,
And thus my Battle shall be ordered.
My Foreword shall be drawn in length,
Consisting equally of Horse and Foot:
Our Archers shall be placed in the midst;
Iohn Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Earl of Surrey,
Shall have the leading of the Foot and Horse.
They thus directed, we will flow
In the maine Battle, whose puissance on either side
Shall be well-winged with our chiefest Horse:
This, and Saint George to boot.
What think thou Norfolk.
A good direction warlike Sovereign,
This found I on my Tent this Morning.
Jockey of Norfolk, be not so bold,
For Dickon thy moister is bought and sold.
A thing devised by the Enemy.
Go Gentlemen, every man to his Charge,
Let not our babbling Dreams affright our souls:
For Conscience is a word that Cowards use,
Deuis'd at first to keep the strong in awe,
Our strong arms be our Conscience, Swords our Law.
March on, join bravely, let vs too't pell mell,
If not to heaven, then hand in hand to Hell.
What shall I say more then I have inferred?
Remember whom you are to cope withal,
A sort of Vagabonds, Rascals, and Run-awayes,
A scum of Britains, and base Lackey Peasants,
Whom their o're-cloyed Country vomits forth
To desperate Adventures, and assured Destruction.
You sleeping safe, they bring you to unrest:
You having Lands, and blessed with beauteous wives,
They would restrain the one, distain the other,
And who doth lead them, but a pa???try Fellow?
Long kept in Britain at our Mothers cost,
A Milke-sop, one that never in his life
Felt so much cold, as over shoes in Snow:
Let's whip these stragglers o'er the Seas again,
Lash hence these ouer-weening Rags of France,
These famished Beggars, weary of their lives,
Who (but for dreaming on this fond exploit)
For want of means (poor Rats) had hanged themselves.
If we be conquered, let men conquer vs,
And not these bastard Britains, whom our Fathers
Have in their own Land beaten, bobbed, and thump'd,
And on Record, left them the heirs of shame.
Shall these enjoy our Lands? lye with our Wives?
Ravish our daughters?
Hark, I hear their Drum,
Right Gentlemen of England, fight boldly yeomen,
Draw Archers draw your Arrows to the head,
Spur your proud Horses hard, and ???id in blood,
Amaze the welkin with your broken staves.
What says Lord Stanley, will he bring his power?
My Lord, he doth deny to come.
Off with his son Georges head.
My Lord, the Enemy is past the Mars???:
After the battle, let George Stanley dye.
A thousand hearts are great within my bosom.
Advance our Standards, set upon our Foes,
Our Ancient word of Courage, fair S. George
Inspire vs with the spleen of fiery Dragons:
Upon them, Victory sits on our helps.
Rescue my Lord of Norfolk,
Rescue, Rescue:
The King enacts more wonders then a man,
Daring an opposite to every danger:
His horse is slain, and all on foot he fights,
Seeking for Richmond in the throat of death:
Rescue fair Lord, or else the day is lost.
A Horse, a Horse, my Kingdom for a Horse.
Withdraw my Lord, Isle help you to a Horse
Slave, I have set my life upon a cast,
And I will stand the hazard of the Dye:
I think there be six Richmonds in the field,
Five have I slain to day, in stead of him.
A Horse, a Horse, my Kingdom for a Horse.
God, and your Arms
Be praised Victorious Friends;
The day is ours, the bloody Dog is dead.
Courageous Richmond,
Well hast thou acquit thee: Lo,
Here these long usurped Royalties,
From the dead Temples of this bloody Wretch,
Have I plucked off, to grace thy Brows withal.
Wear it, and make much of it.
Great God of Heaven, say Amen to all.
But tell me, is young George Stanley living?
He is my Lord, and safe in Leicester Town,
Whither (if you please) we may withdraw vs.
What men of name are slain on either side?
Iohn Duke of Norfolk, Walter Lord Ferric, Sir Robert Brokenbury, and Sir William Brandon.
Inter their Bodies, as become their Births,
Proclaim a pardon to the Soldiers fled,
That in submission will return to vs,
And then as we have tan the Sacrament,
We will unite the White Rose, and the Red.
Smile Heaven upon this fair Conjunction,
That long have frowned upon their Enmity:
What Traitor hears me, and says not Amen?
England hath long been mad, and scarred her self;
The Brother blindly shed the Brothers blood;
The Father, rashly slaughtered his own Son;
The Son compelled, been Butcher to the Sire;
All this divided York and Lancaster,
Divided, in their dire Division.
O now, let Richmond and Elizabeth,
The true Succeeders of each Royal House,
By Gods fair ordinance, conjoin together:
And let thy Heirs (God if thy will be so)
Enrich the time to come, with Smooth-fac'd Peace,
With smiling Plenty, and fair Prosperous days.
Abate the edge of Traitors, Gracious Lord,
That would reduce these bloody days again,
And make poor England weep in Streams of Blood;
Let them not live to taste this Lands increase,
That would with Treason, wound this fair Lands peace.
Now Civil wounds are stopped, Peace lives again;
That she may long live here, God say, Amen.

YEt hath the morning sprinkled throwt the clouds, But half her tincture and the soil of night sticks 〈◊〉 upon the bosom of the ayre: yet sleep doth rest my love for Natures debt, and through her window, and this dun twee-light, her maid, nor any waking I can see. This is the holy Greene my wives close walk, to which not a∣ny but her self alone hath any key, only that I have clapped her key in wax, and made this counterfeit, to the which I steal access, to work this rare &amp; politic device: Fair is my wife and young and delicate, although too re∣•…gious in the purest sort, but pure religion being but mental stuff and sense indeed, al for it self, is to be doub∣ted, that when an object comes fit to her humour she will intercept religious letters sent unto her mind, and yield unto the motion of her blood, here have I brought then two rich agots for her, graven with two poses of mine own devising, for Poets Isle not trust, nor friends, nor any: she longs to have a child, which yet alas I cannot get, Yet long as much as she, and not to make her desperate, thus I write in this f•…re jewel though it simple be, yet tic mine own that means well in nought, tic spare, not of children, love
with the longest, when man is at the weakest, god isatstrō∣gest, I hope tic plain, &amp; knowing in this other that I write, God will reward her a thousand fold, that takes what age can and not what age would, I hope tic pretty &amp; pathetical: Well, even here lie both together till my love arise and let her think you fall out of the skies, I will to bed again.
How like thou this morning Colenet? What, shall we have a fair day?
The sky hangs full of humour, and I think we shall have rain.
Why rain is fair whether when the ground is dry and barren, especially when it rains humour, for then doe men like hot sparrows and pigeons open all their wings ready to receive them.
Why then we may chance to have a fair day, for we shall spend it with so humorous acquaintance, as rains nothing but humour al their life time.
True Colenet, over which will I sit like an old King in an old fashion play, having his wife, his counsel, his i will∣drone, and his fool about him, to whom he will sit and point very learnedly as followed; my counsel grave, and you my noble peers, my tender wife, and you my i will∣drone dear, and thou my fool.
Not meaning me sir I hope.
No sir, but thus will I sit, as it were, and point ou•… all my humorous companions.
You shall do marvelous well sir.
I thank you for your good encouragement, but Colinet thou shalt see Catalian bring me hither an od gen∣tleman presently to be acquainted withal, who in his man∣ner of taking acquaintance will make vs excellent sport.
Why Lemot I think thou sendst about of purpose for young gallants to be acquainted withal, to make thy self merry in the manner of taking acquaintance.
By heaven I do Colenet, for there is no better sport then to obscrue the complement, for thats their word, com∣plement, do you mark sir?
Yea sir, but what humour hath this gallant in his ma∣ner of taking acquaintance?
Marry thus sir, he will speak the very self same word, to a syllable after him of whom he takes acquain∣tance, as if I should say,
I am marvelous glad of your acquaintance, He will reply,
I am marvelous glad of your acquaintance,
I have heard much good of your rare parts &amp; fine carriage,
I have heard much good of your rare parts &amp; fine carriage, so long as the complements of a gentleman last, he is your complete ape.
Why this is excellent.
Nay sir here is the jest of it, when hee is past this gratulation, he will retire himself to a chimney, or a wall stan∣ding folding his arms thus: and go you and speak to him so far as the room you are in will afford you, you shall no∣for get him from that most gentlemanlike set, or behaviour.
This makes his humour persit, I would he would come once.
See where he comes, now must I say, Lupus est in fabula, for these latin ends are part of a gentleman and a good scholar.
O good morrow Monseur 〈◊〉, here is the gentleman you desired so much to be acquainted withal.
He is marvelous welcome, I shall be exceeding proud of your acquaintance.
I shall be exceeding proud of your acquaintance.
I have heard much good of your rare parts and fine carriages.
I have heard much good of your rare parts and fine carriages.
I shall be glad to be commanded by you.
I shall be glad to be commanded by you.
I pray do not you say so.
I pray do not you say so.
Well Gentlemen, this day let's consecrate to mirth, and Colenet you know no man better, that you are mightily in love with love, by Martia daughter to old Foyes.
I confess it here are none but friends.
Well then, go to her this morning in Countess Mo∣ris name, and so perhaps you may get her company, though the old churl bee so i•…alous that he will suffer no man to come at her, but the vain gull Labesha for his living sake, and he as yet she will not be acquainted withal.
Well this Isle •…o whatsoever come on it.
Why nothing but good will come of it, ne'er doubt it man.
Hee hath taken up his stand, talk a little further and see and you can remove him.
I will Cat. now Monsieur Blanuele mark I pray.
I do sir very well I warrant you.
You know the old Count Laberuele, hath a passing fair young Lady, that is a passing foul Puritan.
I know her very well sir, she goes more like a milk maid then a Countess, for all her youth and beau∣tie.
True sir, yet of her is the old Count so jealous that he will suffer no man to come at her, yet I will find •… means, that two of vs will have access to her tho, 〈◊〉 fore his face, which shall so heate his jealous humour till he be start mad: but Colenet go you first to lovely Martia, for tic too soon for the old Lord and his fair young Lady to rise.
Adieu Monseur Blanuel.
A due good Monsieur Colinet.
Monseur Blanuel your kindness in this will bind me much to you.
Monseur 〈◊〉 ot your kindness in this will bind me much to you.
I pray you do not say so sir.
I pray you do not say so sir▪
Wilt please you to go in.
Wilt please you to go in.
I will follow you.
I will follow you.
It shall be yours.
It shall be yours.
Kind Monsieur 〈◊〉.
Kind Monsier 〈◊〉.
Come on fair daughter fall to your work of mind, and make your body fit to embrace the body of this Gentleman's, tic art: happy are they say I.
I protest sir you speak the best that ever I heard.
I pray sir take acquaintance of my daughter.
I do desire you of more acquaintance.
Why dostnot thou say yea, and I the same of you?
That every body says.
O you would be singular.
Single indeed.
Single indeed thats a pretty toy, Your betters dame bear double, and so shall you.
Fxceeding pretty, did you mark it forsooth?
What should I mark forsooth?
Your bearing double, which equificate is &amp; hath fit illusion to a horse that bears double, for your good •…ather means you shall endure your single life no longer, not in worse sense then bearing double forsooth.
I cry you mercy, you know both belike.
Knowledge forsooth is like a horse, and you that can bear double: it nourishes both Bee and Spider, the Bee honnisuckle, the Spider poison, I am that Bee.
I thought so by your stinging wit.
Lady I am a Bee without a sting, no way hurting any, but good to all, and before all, to your sweet self.
Asore God daughter, thou art not worthy to hear him speak: but who comes here?
God save you sir.
You are welcome sir for ought that I know yet.
I hope I shall be so still sir.
What is your business sir, and then Isle tell you?
Ma rye thus sir, the Countess Moron entreats your fair daughter to bear her company this fore-noone.
This forenoon sir, doth my Lord or Lady send for her I pray?
My Lady I assure you.
My Lady you assure me, very well sir, yet that house is full of gallant Gentlemen, dangerous tho•…es to prick•… young maids I can tell you.
There are none but honest and honourable Gen∣tlemen.
Al is one sir for that, Isle trust my daughter with any man, but no man with my daughter, only your self Mon∣ser Bash, whom I will entreat to be her guardian, &amp; to bring her home again.
I will waite upon her, and it please you.
No sir, your weight vpō her will not be so good: here Monser Bash I deliver my daughter unto you a perfect maid, and so I pray you look well unto her.
Farewell Monser Foyes.
I warrant Isle look unto her well enough. Mistress will it please you to preambulate.
With all my heart.
What have I done? put on too many clothes, the day is hot, and I am hotter clad then might suffice health, my conscience tells me that I have offended, and Isle put them off, that will ask time that might be better spent, one sin will draw another quickly so, see how the d•…ell tempts: but whats here? jewels? how should these come here?
Good morrow louelv wife, what hast tho•… there?
Jewels my Lord which here I strangely found.
Thats strange indeed, what, where none comes but when your self is here? surely the heavens have rained thee jewels for thy holy life, and using thy old husband 〈◊〉 or else doe Fairies haunt this holy greene, as ever∣more, mine ancestors have thought.
Fairies were but in times of ignorance, not since the true pure light hath been revealed, and that they come from heaven I scarce belecue: for jewels are vain things, much gold is given for such fantastical &amp; fruitless jewels, and therefore heaven I know will not maintain the use of va∣night, surely I fear I have much sinned to stoup take•… take them up, bowing my body to an idle work, the strength that I have had to this very deed might have been used to take a poor soul up in the hi•… way.
You are too curious wise, behold your jewels: what me thinks theirs pos•…es written on thē. Despair not of i will∣drone, love with the longest, whē man is at the weakest, god is at the strongest. Wonderful rare and wittre, nay d•…in, why this is heavenly cōfort for thee wife, what is this other? God will reward her a thousand •…old that takes what age can, &amp; not what age would. The best that ever I heard, no mortal brain I think did ever utter such conceit for good plain matter, and for honest rime.
Vain Poetry, I pray you burn them sir.
You are to blame wife, heaven hath sent you them to deck your self withal, like to your self, not to go thus like a milk-maid, why there is difference in all estats by al religiō.
There is no difference.
I prithee wife be of another mind, and wear these jewels and a 〈◊〉 hood.
A velvet hood! O vain du•…elish d•…uise a toy made with a superfluous flap, which being cut off, my head were still aswarme. Diogenes did cast away his dish, because his hand would serve to help him drink, surely these heathens
shall rise up against vs.
Sure wife I think thy keeping always close, making thee melancholy, is the cause we have no children, and therefore if thou wilt, be merry, and keep company a gods name.
Sure my lord, if I thought I should be rid of this same banishment of barrennes, and use our marriage to the end it was made which was for procreation, I should sin, if by my keeping house I should neglect the lawful means to be a fruitful mother, &amp; therefore if it plea•…e you isle use resort
Gods my passion what have I done? who would have thought her purenesle would yield so soon to cour∣ses of temptations? nay hark you wife, I am not sure that going abroad will cause fruitfulness in you, that you know none knows but God himself.
I know my lord tic true, but the lawful means must still be used.
Yea, the lawful means indeed must still, but now I remember that lawful means is not abroad.
Well, well, Isle keep the house still.
Nay, hark you lady, I would not have you think, mary, I must tel you this, if you should change the manner of your life, the world would think you changed religion too.
Tic true, I will not go.
Nay, if you have a fancy.
Yea a fancy, but thats no matter.
Indeed fancies are not for judicial &amp; religious womē.
God save your lordship, &amp; you most religious lady.
Sir you may say God save vs well indeed that thus are thrust upon in private walks.
A slender thrust sir, where I touch•… you not.
Well sir what is your business?
Why sir, I have a message to my lady from Mon∣•… du Barto.
To your lady, well sir, speak your mind to your lady.
You are very welcome sir, and I pray how doth he.
In health Madam, thanks be to God, commending his duty to your ladyship, &amp; hath sent you a message which I would desire your honour to hear in private.
My ladyship, and my honour, they be words which I must have you leave, they be idle words, and you shall answer for them truly: my duty to you, or I desire you, were a great deal better, then, my ladyship, or my honour.
I thank you for your christian admonition.
Nay thank God for me: Come I will hear your message with all my heart, and you are very welcome sir.
With all my heart, and you are very welcome sir, and go and talk with a young lusty fellow able to make a mans hair stand upright on his head, what purity is there in this trow you? ha, what wench of the faculty could have been more forward? Well sir, I will know your message, you sir, you sir, what says the holy man sir, come tell true, for by heaven or hell I will have it out.
Why you shall sir, if you be so desirous.
Nay sir, I am more then so desirous: come sir, study not for a new device now.
Not I my lord, this is both new and old, I am a scho∣ler, and being spiritually inclined by your ladies most godly life, I am to profess the ministry, &amp; to become her chap∣lain, to which end monsier du Barte hath commended me.
Her chaplain in the devils name, fit to be vicar of hell.
My good head, what are you afraid of? he comes with a godly &amp; neighborly suit: what think you his words or his looks can tempt me? have you so little faith? if every word he spake were a serpent, as subtle as that which tempted Eve, he cannot tempt me I warrant you.
Well answered for him lady by my faith: well hark you Isle keep your chaplains place yonder for a while, and at length put in one my self: what more yet? Gods my passion whom do I see, the very 〈◊〉 of desolation, the miniō of our
King, whom no man sees to •…nter his house•… but hee looks up, his wife, his children, and his maids, for where hee goes hee carries his house upon his head like a snail: now sir I hope your business is to me.
No sir, I must crave a word with my lady.
These words are intolerable, &amp; she shall hear no more
She must hear me speak.
Must she sir, have you brought the kings warrant for it?
I have brought that which is aboue Kings.
Why every man for her sake is a puritan. The Di∣will I think will shortly turn Puritan, or the Puritan will turn Devil.
What have you brought sir?
Mary this Madam, you know we ought to prove one another constancy, and I am come in all chaste and honourable sort to prove your constancy.
You are very welcome sir, and I will abide your proof: it is my duty to abide your proof.
You le bide his proof, it is your duty to bide his proof, how the devil will you bide his proof?
My good head, no other wise then before your face in all honourable and religious sort, I tell you I am constant to you, and he comes to try whether I be so or no, which I must endure, begin your proof sir.
Nay Madam, not in your husbands hearing, though in his •…ight for there is no woman will show she is tempted from her constancy, though she be a little: withdraw your self sweet lady.
Well I will see though I do not hear, women may be courted without offence, so they resist the courtier.
Dear and most beautiful lady, of al the sweet ho∣nest and honourable means to prove the purity of a lady•… constancy, kisses are the strongest, I will therefore be bold to begin my proof with a kiss.
No sir, no kissing.
No kissing 〈◊〉▪ how shall I pro•… you thē 〈◊〉, not using the mostsufficient proof? to flatter your self by affection of spirit, when it is not perfectly tried, is sin.
You say well sir, that which is truth is truth.
Then do you well Lady and yield to the truth.
By your leave sir, my husband sees, peradventure it may breed an offence to him.
How can it breed an offence to your husband to see your constancy perfectly tried.
You are an odd man I see, but first I pray tel me how kissing is the best proof of ohast Ladies.
To give you a reason for that, you must give me leave to be obscure and Philosophical.
I pray yon be, I love Philosophy well.
Then thus Madam: •…very kiss is made •…s the voice is by imagination and appetite, and as both those are presented to the •…re in the voice, so are they to the silent spirits in our kisses.
To what spirit mean you?
To the spirits of our blood.
What if it doe?
Why then my imagination, and mine appetite working upon your ears in my voice, and upon your spy∣rites in my kisses, piercing therein the more deeply, they give the stronger assault against your constancy.
Why then to say, prove my constancy, is as much as to say, kiss me.
most true rare Lady.
Then prove my constancy.
Believe me Madam, you gather exceeding witti∣lie upon it.
O my forehead, my very heart aches at a blow, what dost thou mean wife? thou wilt loose thy fame, dis∣credit thy religion, and dishonour me for ever.
Away sir, I will abide no more of your proof, nor endure any more of your trial.
O she dares not, she dares no•… I am as glad I have tried your purity as may be: you the most constant La•…y in France? I know an hundred Ladies in this town that will dance, •…will all night amongst gallants, and in the more∣ning go to bed to her husband as clear a woman as if she were new christened, kiss him, embrace him, and say, no, no husband, thou art the man, and he takes her for the wo∣man.
And all this can I doe.
Take heed of it wife.
Fear not my good head, I warrant you for him.
Nay Madam, •…iumph not before the victory, howe can you conquer that, against which you never strive, or strive•… against that which never encounters you To live idle in this walk, to enjoy this company, to wear this habit, and have no more delights then those will af∣ford you, is to make virtue an idle huswife, and to hide herself slothful cobwebs that still should be adore∣ned with actions of victory: no Madam, if you will vnwor∣thilly prove your constancy to your husband, you must put on rich apparel, fare daintily, hear mufique, read Sonetes be continually courted, kiss, dance, feast, revel all night amongst gallants, then if you come to bed to your husband with a clear mind, and a clear body, then are your virtues 〈◊〉; then have you passed the full test of experiment, and you shall have an hundred gallants fight thus far in blood for the defence of your reputati∣on.
O vanity of vanities!
O husband this is perfect trial indeed.
And you will try all this now, will you not?
Yea my good head, for it is written, we must pass to perfection through al temptation, Abacu•… the fourth.
Abacucke, cucke me no cuckes, in a doors I say, th•…ues, Puritans, murd•…s, in a doors I
say.
So now is he start mad in faith: but sir, as this is an old Lord jealous of his young wife, so is ancient Countess Moron jealous of her young husband, weal thither to have some sport in faith.
I prithee Bash keep a little off; hang not upon her shoulders thus for shame.
My Lord, Pardon a moi, I must not let her talk alone with any one, for her father gave me charge.
O you are a goodly charger for a Goose.
A Goose, you are a Gander to call me Goose, I am a christian Gentleman as well as you.
Well sir get you hence, or by my troth Isle have thee taken out in a blanket, tossed from forth our hearing.
In a blanket? what do you make a puppy of me, by •…kies and stones I will go and tell your Lady.
Nay but Bash.
Nay he will tell my Lord.
Why how now my Lord, what thought you I was dead, that you are wooing of another thus, or are you laying plots to worcester•…e my death?
Why n•…ether sweet bird, what need you move these questions unto me, whom you know loves you a∣above all the women in the world?
How he can flatter now he hath made a fault.
He can do little, and he cannot cog.
Out you ass.
Well, come tell me what you did entreat.
Nothing by heaven sweet bird I swear, but 〈◊〉 in•…at her love.
But to entreat her love.
Nay hear me out.
Nay here you are out, you are out too much me thinks, and put me in.
And put you in?
In a fair taking sir I mean.
O you may see what hasty taking is, you women evermore scramble for our words, and never take them mannerly from our mouths.
Come tell me what you did entreat.
I did entreat her love to Colinet.
To Colinet? O he is your dear cousin, and your kind heart in faith is never well but when you are doing good for every man: speak, do you love me?
In faith sweet bird.
Best of all others.
Best of all others?
Thats my good bird in faith.
O mistress, will you love me so?
No by my troth will I not.
No by my troth will I not: Why thats well said, I could never get her to flatter me yet.
Good morrow my good Lord, and these passing lovely Ladies.
So now we shall have all manner of flattering with Monsieur Lemot.
You are all manner of ways deceived Madam, for I am so far from flattering you, that I do not a whit praise you.
Why do you call vs passing lovely then?
Because you are passing from your loveliness.
Madam we shall not have one mot of Monsieur Lem•…, but it shall be as it were a mote to drown al our con∣ceit in admiration.
See what a mote her quick eye can spy in mine, be∣•…ore
she looks in it.
So mote I thee, thine answer is as good as mought be.
Here is a poor name run out of breath quickly.
Why Monsieur Lemot, your name is run out of breath at every word you speak.
Thats because my name signifies word.
Well hit, Monsieur verbum.
What are you good at latin Lady?
No sir, but I know what verbum is.
Why tic greenebum, ver is greene, and you know what bum is, I am sure of that.
No sir, tic a verb, and I can decline you.
That you can Isle be sworn.
What can I do?
Decline me, or take me a hole lower, as the pro∣uerbe is.
Nay sir, I mean plain Gramatical declination
Well, let's hear your scholarship, and decline me.
I will sir, mo•…, motas.
O excellent! she hath called him ass in latin.
Well sir, forward.
Nay theres enough to try both our scholarships
Motto, motas, nay faith forward to motani, or motandi.
Nay sir, Isle leave when I am well.
Why Monsieur Lemot, your name being in word general, is in nine, or in hammer, or in cock, or in buzzard.
Or in wagtail, or in woodcock, or in dotteril, or in dizard.
Or in clot, or in head, or in cow, or in baby.
Or in maukin, or in trash, or in pape, or in Lady.
Or in deed in every thing.
Why then tic in Thing.
Then good Monsier Thing, there let it rest.
Then aboue all things I must have a word with you.
Hands off sir, she is not for your mowing.
She is for your mocking.
And she mock me, Isle tell her father.
Thats a good child, thou smellest of the mother, and she was a fool I warrant you.
Meddle with me, but doe not meddle with my mother.
Thats a good child, come, I must needs have a word with you.
You shall do none of your needs with her sir.
Why what will you do?
What will I doe? you shall see what Isle do.
Go to you ass, offer to draw here, and weal draw thee out of the house by the heals.
What, three against one? now was ever proper hard fauord Gentleman so abused?
Go to Mistress Martia, I see you well enough, are you not ashamed to stand talking alone with such a one as hee?
How sir? with such a one as I sir?
Yea sir, with such a one as you sir.
Why, what am I?
What are you sir? why I know you well enough.
Sir tel me, what you know me for, or else by hey∣uen Isle make thee better thou had never known how to speak.
Why sir, if you will needs know, I know you for an honourable gentleman and the Kings minion, and were it not to you, theres ne'er a gentleman in Paris should have had her out of my hands.
Nay, hes as tall a Gentleman of his hands as auy is in Paris.
Theres a favour for you sir.
But I can get no favour for you sir.
I pray my Lord entreat for your cousin Colinet.
Alas man, I dare not for my wife.
Why my Lord she thinks it is for nothing, but to speak for your cousin.
I pray you bird, give me leave to speak for my cousin.
I am content for him.
Then one word with you more, courteous lady Martia.
Not, and you were my father.
Gentlemen, for God sake thrust this ass out of the doors.
Nay, byr'lady he le run home and tell her fa∣there.
Well, go to her, I warrant he shall not trouble you (kind gentleman) how we dote on thee: embrace him gen∣tlemen.
O sweet Bash how we honour thee.
Nay Gentlemen, look what a piercing eye hee hath.
An eye? I have an eye and it were a pole-cat.
Nay, look what a nose he hath.
My nose is nete crimson.
Nay, look what a handsome man he is, O Nature, Nature, thou never made man of so pure a fea∣ture.
Truly truly Gentlemen, I do not deserve this kind∣ness.
O Lord sir, you are too modest, come shall we walk?
Whither? to the alehouse?
Hark you Madam, have you no more care of the right of your husband, then to let him talk thus affection∣nately with another?
Why he speaks not for himself, but for his cousin Colinet.
Gods my life? he tells you so, nay and these excuses may serve I have done.
By the mass now I observe him, he looks very suspitiously indeed, ne'er trust me if his looks, and his ie∣stur doe not plainly show himself to swear, by this light I do love thee.
Burlady Madam you guess shrewdly indeed, but hark you Madam, I pray let not me be the author of discord between my good Lord and you.
No no Monsieur Lemot, I were blind if I could not see this, isle slit her nose by Iesus
How now whats the matter?
Whats the matter? if I could come at your Mistress, she should know whats the matter.
My Mistress?
Yea your Mistress, O here is fair dissimulation, O ye impudent gossip, do I send for you to my house to make you my cōpanion, and do you use me thus? little dost thou know what tic to love a man truly, for if thou did, thou would be ashamed to wrong me so.
You wrong me Madam to say I wrong you.
Go to, get you out of my house.
I am gone Madam.
Well, come in sweet bird and Isle persuade thee, ther's no harm done.
Well, we shall hear your persuasions.
Well God knows, and I can partly guess what he must do to persuade her: well, take your fair charge, fair and manly L. Monsieur Labes•…a.
One word with you more fair lady.
Not a word, no man on pain of death, not a word, he comes upon my rapiers point, that comes within forty foot on her.
Thanks good Lemot, and thanks gentlemen all, and her father shall thank you.
Much good do it you sir: come Gentlemen, lets go wait upon the king, and see the humour of the young lord Dowseger.
Excuse me to the King, and tell him I will meet him there: so this is but the beginning of sport between this fine lord and his old lady: but this wench Martia hath happy stars reigned at the disposition of her beauty, for the King him self doth mightily dote on her. Now to my Puritan, and see if I can make up my full proof of her.
Now am I up and ready, ready? why? because my clothes once on, that call we ready: but readiness I hope hath reference to some fit action for our several state: for when I am attired thus Countesse-like, tic not to work, for that befits me not, tic on some pleasure, whose chief object is one mans content, and hee my husband is, but what need I thus b•… attired, for that he would be pleased with meaner weed? besides I take no pleasure thus to please him: I am content, because it is my duty to keep to him, and not to seek no further: but if that pleasure be a thing that makes the time seem short, if it do laughter cause, if it pro∣cure the tongue but heartily to say, I thank you, I have no such thing, nor can the godliest woman in the world, a∣against her nature please her sense, or soul, she may say, this I will, or this I will not. But what shall she reap hereby? comfort in an other world, if she will stay till then.
Yea mary sir now I must look about, now if her desolate proouer come again, shall I admit him to make farther trial? Isle have a Dialogue between my self and manly reason: to that special end reason, shall I endure a de∣solate man to come and court my wife, and prove her con∣stance: reason, to court and prove her you may bear my lord, for perfect things are not the worse for trial; gold will not turn to dross for deepest trial: before God a comfor∣table saying; thanks gentle reason, Isle trouble you no more.
God save sweet wife, look up, thy tempter comes.
Let him my lord, I hope I am more blessed then to relent in thought of lewd suggestion.
But if by frailty you should yield in thought, what will you do?
Then shall you keep me close, and never let me see man but your self, if not, then boldly may I go abroad.
But how, shall I know whether you yield, or no?
Hear vs your self, my lord.
Tut, that were gross, for no woman will yield in her husbands hearing.
Then to assure you if I yield or no, mark but these signs: as hee is proving me, if I doe yield, you shall perceive my face blush and look pale, and put on heavy looks. If I resist I will triumph, and smile, and when I hold but up my finger, stop his vain lips, or thrust him on the breast, then is he overthrown both horse and foot.
Why, this doth satisfy me mightily: see hee is come.
Honour to my good lord, and his fair young lady.
Now Monsieur Satan, you are come to tempt and prove at full the spirit of my wife.
I am my lord, but vainly I suppose.
You see she dares put on this brave attire fit with the fashion, which you think serves much to lead a woman into light desires.
My lord I see it: and the sight thereof doth half dismay me to make further proof.
Nay prove her, prove her sir, and spare not: what doth the witty minion of our King think any dame in France will say him nay? but prove her, prove her, see and spare not.
Well sir, though half discouraged in my com∣ming, yet Isle go forward: lady, by your leave.
Now sir, your cunning in a Ladyesproofe.
Madam, in proving you I find no proof against your piercing glancings, but swear I am shot thorough with your love.
I do believe you: who will swear he loves, to get the thing he loves not? if he love, what needs more perfect trial?
Most true rare lady.
Then are we fitly met, I love you too.
Exceeding excellent.
Nay, I know you will applaud me in this cou•…se, but to let common circumstances pass, let vs be familiar.
Dear life, you ravish my conceit with joy.
I long to see the signs that she will make.
I told my husband I would make these signs: if I resisted, first hold up my finger, as if I said, in faith sir you are gone, but it shall say, in faith sir, we are one.
Now she triumphs, and points to heaven I warrant you.
Then must I seem as if I would hear no moret and stop your vain lips, go cruel lips, you have be∣witched me, go.
Now she stops in his scorned words, and rates him for his pains.
And when I thrust you thus against the breast, then are you overthrown both horse and foot.
Now is he overthrown both horse and foot.
Away vain man, have I not answered you?
Madam, I yield and swear, I never saw so con∣stant, nor so virtuous a lady.
Now speak I pray, and speak but truly, have you not got a wrong sow by the ear?
My lord, my labour is not altogether lost, for now I find that which I never thought.
A sirrah, is the edge of your steel wit rebated then against her Adamant?
It is my Lord, yet one word more fair lady.
Fine would he have it do, and it will not be: hark you wife, what sign will you make me now if you re∣lent not?
Lend him my handkerch•… to wipe his lips of their last disgrace.
Excellent good, go forward, see I pray.
An other sign in faith, love is required.
Let him have signs enough, my heavenly love, then know there is a private meeting this day at Verones ordinary, where if you will do me the grace to come, and bring the beauteous Martia with you, I will provide a fair and private room, where you shall be unseen of any man, only of me, and of the King himself, whom I will cause to honour your repair with his high presence, and there with Music and quick r•…llings you may revive your spirits so long time dulled.
Isle send for Martia then, and meet you there, and tell my husband, I will locke my self in my choice walk till supper-time: we pray sir, wipe your lips of the disgrace they took in their last labour.
Mary the devil was never so dispited.
Nay stay, see.
No, no, my L, you have the constantst wife that ever: well, Isle say no more.
Never was minion so disminioned, come con∣stance, come my girl, Isle leave thee loose to twenty of them in faith.
Come my good head, come.
Why sound these Trumpets in the Devils name.
To show the King comes.
To show the King comes? Go hang the Trum∣betters, they mock me boldly, and every other thing that
makes me known, not telling what I am, but what I seem, a King of clouts, a scarcrow, full of cobwebs, spiders and •…arewigs, that sets Iackdawes long tongue in my bosom, and upon my head, and such are all the affections of love swarming in me, without command or reason.
Howe now my liege! what quackemyred in Philosophy, bound with loves whipcord, and quite robbed of reason: and Isle give you a receipt for this pre∣sently.
Peace L•…mot, they say the young lord Dow•…ger is rarely learned, and nothing lunatike as men suppose, but hates company, and worldly trash, the judgment and the just contempt of them, have in reason arguments that break affection (as the most sacred Poets write) and still the roughest wind: and his rare humour come we now to hear.
Yea, but hark you my hege, Isle tell you a better humour then that, here presently will be your fair love Martia, to see his humour, and from thence fair countess Florula, &amp; she will go unto Verones ordinary, where none but you and I, and Count Moron, will be most m•…rye.
Why Count Moron I hope dares not adventure into any women's company, but his wives.
Yes, as I will work, my liege, and then let me alone to keep him there till his wife comes.
That will be royal sport: see where all comes: welcome fair lords and ladies.
My liege you are welcome to my poor house.
I pray, my liege know this Gentleman especially, he is a Gentleman borne I can tell you.
With all my heart: what might I call your name?
Monsieur Labesha, si•…iora defoulasa.
an il sounding barendri•… of my word: but to the purpose, lord Laberuele, we are come to see the hue∣more
of your rare son, which by some means I pray let vs partake.
Your highness shall too unworthily partake the sight which I with griese and tears daily behold, seeing in him the end of my poor house.
You know not that (my lord) your wife is young, and he perhaps hereafter may be moved to more society.
Would to God hee would, that wee might do to your crown of France, more worthy and more accept∣ble service.
Thanks good my lord, see where he appears.
Say Level, where is your friend the yo•…g lord Dowsecer?
I look my liege he will be here anon, but then I must entreat your Majesty and all the rest, to stand unseen, for he as yet will brooke no company.
We will stand close Level, but wherefore bring you this apparel, that picture, and that sword?
To put him by the sight of them in mind of their brave •…ates that use them, or that at the least of the true use they should be put unto.
Indeed the sense doth still stir up the soul, and though these objects do not work, yet it is very probable in time she may, atleast, we shall discern his humour of thē.
See where he comes contemplating, stand close.
Queen•… Dei 〈◊〉 videri magnum in rebus humanise quae aeterni 〈◊〉 to thy •…sque notes sic omnibus magna tutor, what can seem strange to him on earthly things to whom the whole course of 〈◊〉, and the round compass of the world is known? a speech 〈◊〉, but yet I marvel much how it should spring from thee, 〈◊〉 Cicero that sold for gl•…rye the sweet piece of life, &amp; make a torment of rich na∣tu•…s 〈◊〉 work▪ wearing thy selfby watchful candel light, when all the 〈◊〉 &amp; Weavers were at rest, and yet was gallant
ere the day bird sung to have a troop of clients at thy gates, a•…med with religious supplicate•…, such as wold make sterne Minos laugh to read: look on our lawyers bills, not one contains vntue or honest drifts; but he cares▪ he cares, he cares; •…or aco•… now are in request, but the oaks poor fruit did nourish men, men were li cokes of body, tough, and strong men were like Giants then, but Pigmies now, yet full of villainies as their skin can hold.
How like you this humour my liege?
This is no humour, this is but persit judgment.
Is this afrensie?
O were al men such, men were no men but gods: this earth a heaven.
See see the shameless world, that dares present her mortal •…nemie with these gro•…e 〈◊〉 of her 〈◊◊〉 and steel, uncharitable stuff, good spittle-sounders, en∣mies to whole skins, as if there were not ways enough to die by natural and casual accidents, diseases, surfcits, brauc carouses, old aquavitae, and too base wives, and thousands more hence with this art of murder. But here is goodly gear, the soul of man, for tic his better part, take away this, and take away their in•…ites, and their spirits, scarce dare they come in any public view, without this count∣nonce giver, and some dares not come, because they have it too, for they may sing, •…n written books they find it, what is it then the fashion, or the cost, the cost doth match, but yet the fashion more, for let it be but mean, so in the fashion, &amp; tic most gentleman like, is it so? make a hand in the mar∣gent, and burn the book, a large house and a codpe•…ce makes a man a codpece, nay indeed but house must down: well for your gentle forgers of men, and sor you come to rest me into fashion, Il•… wear you thus, and sit upon the matter.
And he doth despise our purposes.
Bear with him yet my Lord, hee is not recall∣ued.
I would not have my friend mock worthy men, for the vain pride of some that are not so.
I do not here deride difference of states, no not in show, but wish that such as want show might not be score∣ned with ignorant Turkish pride, being pompous in ap∣parel, and in mind: nor would I have with imitated shapes •…enne make their native land, the land of apes, •…uing like strangers when they be at home, and so perhaps bear strange hearts to their home, nor loo•…e a snuff like a peon∣n•…ts tail, for nothing but their tails and formal lockes, when like to cream boules all their virtues swim in their set faces, all their in parts then fit to serve peasants or make curdes for daws: but what a stock am I thus to neglect this figure of mans comfort this rare piece?
Heavens grant that make him more humane, and sotiable.
Nay hes more humane then all we are.
I fear he will be too sharp to that sweet sex.
She is very fair, I think that she be painted; and if she be sir, she might ask of me, how many is there of our sex that are not? tic a sharpe question: marry and▪ I think they have small▪ skill, if they were all of pain•… it were safer dealing with them, and indeed were their minds strong enough to guide their bodies, their beauteous deeds should match with their heavenly looks, it were necessa∣rye they should wear them, and would they vouchsafe it, even I would joy in the•… society.
And who would not die with such a man?
But to admire them as our gallants do, O what an eye she hath, O dainty hand, rare foot and leg, and leave the mind respectless, this is a plague, that in both men and women make such pollution of our earthly being: well I will practice yet to court this piece.
O happy man, now have I hope in her.
Me •…inkes I could endure him days and nights.
W•… sir, now thus must I do sir, ere it come to
women▪ now 〈◊〉 a plague upon it, tic so ridiculous I can no further: what poor a•…e was it that set this in my way? now if my father should be the man: Gods precious coals tic he.
Good son go forward in this gentle humour, obe∣serve this picture, it presents a maid of noble birth and ex∣cellent of parts, whom for our house and honour sake, I wish thou would confess to marry.
To marry father? why we shall have children.
Why that's the end of marriage, and the joy of men.
O how youare dozen•…d, you have but me, &amp; what a trouble am I to your joy? but father, if you long to have some fruit of me, see father I will creep into this stuborne earth and mix my flesh with it, and they shall breed grass, to fat oxen, asses and such like, and when they in the grass the spring converts into beasts nourishment, then comes the fruit of this my body forth; then may you well say, seeing my race is so profitably increased, that good fat ox, and that same large eard ass are my son sons, that calf with a white face is his fair daughter, with which, when your fields are richly filled, then will my race content you, but for the joys of children, tush tic gone, children will not deserve, nor parents take it: wealth is the only father &amp; the child, and but in wealth no man hath any joy.
Some course dear son take for thy honour sake.
Then father here is a most excellent course.
This is some comfort yet.
If you will strait be gone and leave me here, Isle stand as quietly as any lamb, and trouble none of you
An haplesse man.
How like you this humour yet my liege?
As of a holy fury, not a frenzy.
See see my liege, he hath seen vs sure.
Nay look how he views Martia and makes him fine.
Yea my liege, and she as I hope well observed, hath uttered many kind conceits of hers.
Well Isle be gone, and when she comes to Ve∣rones ordinary, Isle have her taken to my custody.
Isle stay my liege, and see the event of this.
Do so Lemot.
What have I seen? howe am I burnt to dust with a new Sun, and made a novel Phoenix, is she a wo∣man that objects this sight, able to work the chaos of the world into gestion? O divine aspect, the excellent disposer of the mind shines in thy beauty, and thou hast not chaun∣general my soul to sense but sense unto my soul, and I desire thy pure society, but even as angels do, to angels fly.
Fly soul and follow him.
I marvel much at my sons sudden strange behaviour.
Bear with him yet my Lord, tic but his humour: come, what shall we go to Verones ordinary?
Yea for Gods sake, for I am passing hungry.
Yea, come Monsieur Lemot, will you walk?
What, will you go?
Yea sweet bird, I have promised so.
Go to, you shall not go and leave me alone.
For one meal gentle bird: Veron invites vs to buy some jewels he hath brought of late from Italy: Isle buy the best, and bring it thee, so thou wilt let me go.
Well said flattering Fabian, but tel me then what ladies will be there?
Ladies? why none.
No ladies use to come to ordinaries. Madam.
Go to bird, tell me now the very truth.
None of mine honour bird, you never heard that ladies came to ordinaries.
O thats because I should not go with you.
Why tic not fit you should.
Well hark you bird, of my word you sh•… not g•…,
unless you will swear to me, you will neither court nor kiss a dame in any sort, till you come home again.
Why I swear I will not.
Go to, by this kiss.
Yea, by this kiss.
M•…rtia, learn by this when you are a wife.
I like the kissing well.
My lord Isle leave you, your son Dowsecer hath made me melancholy with his humour, and Isle go locke my self in my close walk till supper time.
What, and not dine to da•…?
No my good head: come Martia, you and I will fast together.
With all my heart Madam.
Well Gentlemen Isle go see my son.
Byr'lady Gentlemen Isle go home to dinner.
Home to dinner? birlord but you shall not, you shall go with vs to the ordinary, when•…e you shall meet Gentlemen of so good carriage, and passing cōplements, it will do your hart good to see them, why you never saw the best sort of Gentlemen if not at ordinaries.
I promise you thats rare, my lord, and Monsieur Le∣mot, Isle meet you there presently.
Weal expect your coming.
Come on my masters, shadow these tables with their white veils, accomplish the court Cupboard, waite diligently to day for my credit and your own, that if the meat should chance to be raw, yet your behauiors being neither rude nor raw, may excuse it, or if the meat should ch•…uncle to be tough, be you tender over them in your at∣tendance, that the one may bear with the other.
Faith some of them bee so hard to please, finding fault with your cheer, and discommending your wine, saying, they fare better at Verones for half the money.
Besides, if there be any cheboules in your napkins, they say your nose or ours have dropped on them, and then they throw them about the house.
But these bee small faults, you may bear with th•…, young Gentlemen and wilde heads will be doing.
Come, whose wit was it to cover in this room, name in the of God I trowee.
Why I hope this room is as fair as the other.
In your foolish opinion: you might have told a wise body so, and kept your self a fool still.
I cry you mercy, how bitter you are in your pro∣uerbs.
So bitter I am sir.
O sweet Sateena I dare not say I love thee.
Must you control vs you proud baggage you?
Baggage? you are a knave to call me baggage.
A knave? my moister shall know that.
I will not see them.
Moister, here is your Maid uses her self so sawsi∣lie, that one house shall not hold vs two long, God will∣ling.
Come hither huswife. P•…rdon me sweet Ease∣nan, I must make an angry face outwardly, though I smile inwardly.
Say what you will to me sir.
O you are a fine Gossip, can I not keep honest servants in my house, but you must control them? you must be their mistress.
Why I did but take up the cloth, because my mi∣stress would have the dinner in an other room, and hee called me baggage.
You called me knave and fool, I thank you 〈◊〉 bones.
Go to, go to, she were wise enough would talk with you.
Go thy ways for the proudest harlo•… that ever came in our house.
Let her alone boy, I have scoold her I warrant thee, she shall not be my maid long, if I can help it.
No, I think so sir, but what, shall I take up the cloth?
No, let the cloth lie, hither theile com •…st, I am sure of it, then If they will dine in the other room, they shall.
Good morrow my host, is no body come yet?
Yo•… worship is the first sir.
I was •…ited by my cousin 〈◊〉, to see your 〈◊〉.
I thank his worship and yours.
Here is a pretty place for an ordinary, I am very so•… I have not used to come to ordinaries.
I hope we shall have your company hereafter.
You are very like so.
Good morrow my host, good morrow good Monsieur Roll.
Good morrow to you sir,
What are we two the first▪ giue's the 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉 come, this gentleman and I will go to card•… while 〈◊〉 be ready.
No •…uly I cannot p•…y at 〈◊〉.
How! not play, O for shame say not so, •…ow can a young gentleman spend his time but in play, and in courting his Mistress: come 〈◊〉 this, least youth take too much of the other.
Faith I cannot play, and yet I care not so much
to venture two or three crowns with you.
O I thought what I should find of you, I pray God I have not met with my match.
No trust me sir, I cannot play.
Hark you my host, have you a pipe of good Tobacco?
The best in the town: boy dry a leaf.
Theres none in the house sir.
Dry a dock leaf.
My host, do you know Monsieur Blanuel?
Yea passing well sir.
Why, he was taken learning tricks at old Luci•… house the muster mistress of all the smocktearers in Paris, and both the bawd and the pander were carried to the dungeon.
There was dungeon upon dungeon, but call you her the muster-mistris of al the smocktearers in Paris?
Yea, for she hath them all trained up before her.
Good morrow my host, good morrow gentlemen al.
Good morrow Monsieur Bl•…l, I am glad of your quick delivery.
Delivery, what did thou think I was with child?
Yea of a dungeon.
Why, how knew you that?
Why Berger told vs.
Berger who told you of 〈◊〉?
One that I heard, by the lord.
O excellent, you are still playing the wag.
Good morrow Gentlemen all, good morrow good Monsieur 〈◊〉▪
At your service.
I pray my lord look what a pretty falling band he hath, tic pretty fantastical, as I have seen made, with good judge∣meant, great show, and but tittle cost.
And so it is I promise you, who made it I pray?
I know not in faith, I bought it by chance.
It is a very pretty one, make much of it.
Boy, I prithee call for a course napkin. Good more∣row Gentlemen, I would you had bin at the tenniscourt, you should have seen me a beat Monsieur 〈◊〉, and I gave him fifteen and all his faults.
Thou did more for him, then ever God will do for thee.
Iaques, I prithee fill me a cup of canary, three parts water
You shall have all water and if it please you.
Who called for a course napkin?
Marry I, sweet heart, do you take the pains to bring it your self, have at you by my hosts leave.
Away sir, fie for shame.
Hark you my host, you must marry this young wench, you do her mighty wrong else.
O sir, you are a merry man.
Good morrow gentlemen, you see I am as good as my word.
You are sir, and I am very glad of it.
You are welcome Monsieur Foyes: but you are not, no not you.
No, welcome that Gentleman, tic no matter for me.
How sir? no matter to you, by this rush I am angry with you, as if al our loves protested unto you were dissem∣bled, no matter for you?
Nay sweet L•…mot be not angry, I did but jest, as I am a Gentleman.
Yea but theres a difference of jesting, you wrong all our affections in so doing.
Faith and troth I did not, and I hope sirs you take it not so.
No matter for me, it was very unkindly said, I must needs say so.
You see how they love me.
I do •…r, and I am very glad of it.
And I hope Le•…ot, you are not angry with me s•…
No faith, I am not so very a fool to be angry with one that cares not for me.
Do not I care for you? nay then.
What, dost thou cry?
Nay I do not cry, but my stomach waters to think that you should take it so heavily, if I do not wish that I were cut into three pieces, and that these pieces were tur∣ned into three black puddings, and that these three black puddings were turned into three of the fairest Ladies in the land for your sake, I would I were hanged, whata devil can you have more then my poor heart?
Well hark you Lemot, in good faith you are too blame to put him to this unkindness, I prithee be friends with him.
Well, I am content to put up this unkindness for this once, but while you live take heed of: no matter for me.
Why is it such a heinous word?
O the h•…ousest word in the world.
Well, Isle never speak it more, as I am a gentleman.
No I pray do not.
My lord, will your lordship go to cards?
Yea with you Monsieur Foyes.
Lemot, will you •…y▪
Pardon good Monsieur Roll, if I had any dispo∣sition to gaming your company should draw me before any mans here.
Labesha, what will you play?
Play, yea with all my heart, I pray lend me three pence.
Isle play no more.
Why, have you won or lost?
Faith I have lost two or three crowns.
Well to him again, Isle be your half.
Sirrah, C•…, while they are playing at cards, •…thou and I will have some excellent sport: sirrah, dost tho•… know that same Gentleman there?
No in faith, what is he?
A very fine gull, and a neat reveller, one thats heir to a great •…ing, yet his father keeps him so short, that h•… shirts will •…cant cover the bottom of his belly, for all his ga•… outside, but the linings be very foul and sue•…, yea and perhaps lousy, with despising the vain shifts of the world.
But he hath gotten good store of money now me thinks.
Yea, and I wonder of it, some ancient serving man of his fathers, that hath gotten foe•… shillings in fifty years upon his great good 〈◊〉, he swearing monstrous oath•… to pay him again, and besides to doe him a good tu•…e (when God shall hear his prayer for his father) hath lent it him I warrant you, but howsoever, we must speak him fair.
O what else!
God save sweet Monsieur R•…, what loose or win, loose or win?
Faith sir save myself, and loose my money.
Theres a proverb hit dead in the neck like a Co•…y, why hark thee Cata•…, I could have told thee be∣fore what he would have said.
I do not think so.
No, thou see heers a fine plump of gallants, such as think their wits singular, and their selves rarely accom∣plished,
yet to show thee how brittle their wits be, I will speak to them severally, and I will tell thee before what they shall answer me.
Thats excellent, lets see that in faith.
Whatsoever I say to Monsieur Roll, he shall say, O sir, you may see an ill weed grows apace.
Come, lets see.
Now Monsieur Roll, me thinks you are excee∣dingly grown since your coming to Paris.
O sir, you may see an ill weed grows a pace.
This is excellent, forward sir I pray.
What so•… I s•…y to Labe•…, he shall answer •…e, black will b•…e no other hue, and that same old Justice, as gr•…e of a stale proverb, he shall come in the •…e of that and say, Black is a pearl in a women's eye.
Yea, much in faith.
Look thee, here comes hither L•…sha, Cat•…. and I have been talking of thy complexion, and I say that all the fair ladies in France would have been in love with thee, but that thou art so black.
O sir black will bear no other hue.
O sir black is a pearl in a •…mans eye.
You say true sir, you say true sir, •…rrah Cata•…, whatsoere I say to Berger that is so busy at Cards, •…e shall answer me, sblood, I do not mean to die as long as I can see one alive.
Come let vs see you.
Why Berger, I thought thou had been d•…d, I have not heard thee chide all this while.
Sblood, I do not mean to die, as long as I can see one alive.
Why but hark you L•…, I hope you cannot •…ache this lord answer so roundly.
O, as right as any of them all, and he shall aun∣swear me with an old Latin Proverb, that is, •…us pro•… facis.
O•… more lets see.
My lord, your lordship could not play at this game very lately, and now me thinks you are grown excee∣ding perfect.
O sir, you may see, vs•… •…ptus facet.
Monsieur L•…ot, here is a Gentleman and two Gentlewomen do desire to speak with you.
What are they come? •…es, convey them into the inward Parlour by the inward room, and there is a brace of Crowns for thy labour, but let no b•… know of their being here.
I warrant you sir.
See where they come: welcome my good lord and ladies, Isle come to you presently: so, now the sport begins, I shall start the disguised King plaguilie, nay I shall put the lady that loves me in a monstrous fright, when her hus∣band comes and finds her here.
The Gentleman, and the two Gentlewomen de∣sires your company.
Isle come to them presently.
Gentlemen, Isle go speak with one, and come to you presently.
My lord, I would speak a word with your lord∣ship, if it were not for interrupting your game.
No, I have done Lemot.
My lord there must a couple of ladies dine with vs to day.
Ladies? Gods my life I must be gone.
Why, hark you my Lord, I knew not of their coming I protest to your Lordship▪ and would you have me turn such fair Ladies as these are a∣way?
Yea but hark you Lemot, did not you hear me swear to my Wife, that I would not tarry, if there
were any women, I wonder you would suffer any to come there.
Why you swore but by a kiss, and kisses are no holy things, you know that.
Why but hark you Lemot, indeed I would be very loath to do any thing, that if my wife should know it, should displease her.
Nay then you are to obsequious, hark you, let me entreat you, and Isle tell you in secrete, you shall have 〈◊〉 worse company then the Kings.
Why will the King be there?
Yea, though disguised.
Who are the ladies?
The flowers of Paris, I can tell you, fair co•…tesse Florila, and the lady Mar•…a.
Monsieur Lemot, the gentleman and the two Gen∣tlewomen desire your company.
Isle come to them straight: but Iaq•…s come his•… I prithee, go to Labesha, and tell him that the Countess Florila, and the lady Martia be here at thy masters house: and if it come in question hereafter, deny that thou told him any such thing.
What, is this all? Sblood Isle deny it, and •…ear it too.
My Lord, Isle go and see the room be •…e and fine, and come to you presently.
Yea but hark you L•…t▪ I prithee take 〈◊〉 order that they be not known of any women in the house.
O how should they now to his wife go in faith!
Hark you, Monsieur Lab•…, I pray let me speak a word with you.
With all my heart, I pray look to my stake, theres three pence under the Candle•….
I pray see, do you know the Countess Florila and the lady Martia?
Do I know the lady Martia? I knew her before she was borne, why do you ask me?
Why, they are both here at my masters house.
What, is Mistress Martia at an ordinary?
Yea that she is.
By skies and stones Isle go and tel her father.
What you are out of breath me thinks Monsieur Lemot?
It is no matter Madam, it is spent in your service, that bear your age with your honesty, better then an hundred of these nise gallants, and indeed it is a shame for your hus∣band, that contrary to his oath made to you before dinner, he shoud be now at the ordinary with that light huswife Martia, which I could not choose but come and tell you; for indeed it is a shame that your motherly ca•… should be so slightly regarded.
Out on thee strumpet and accu•…st, and miserable dame.
Well, there they are: nothing else now, to her hus∣band go I.
Nothing else quoth you, can there be more? O wic∣ked man, would he play false, that would so simply vow, and sue•…re his faith, and would not let me be displeased a minute, but he would sigh, and weep till I were pleased, I have a knife within thats razor sharp, and I will lay an iron in the fire, making it burning hot to mark the strump•…t, but •…will bee cold too ere I can come thither, doe something wretched woman, stays thou here?
My lord, the room is neat and fine, wilt please you go in?
Gentlemen, your dinner is ready.
And we are ready for it.
Iaquis, shut the doors let no body come in.
Where be these puritans, these murderers, let me come in here?
Where is the strumpet?
where is this harlot, let vs come in here.
What shall we do? the streets do wonder at vs, and we do make our shame known to the world, let vs go, and complain vs to the King.
Come Labesha, will you go?
No no I scorn to go; no King shall hear my plaint, I will in silent live a man forlorn, mad, and melancholy, as a cat, and never more wear hat band on my hat.
What dost thou mean? thou must not hang on me.
O good lord Moron, have me home with you, you may excuse all to my father for me.
O my lord, be not so rude to leave her now.
Alas man, and if my wife should see it, I were un∣done.
Pursue them sirs, and taking Martia from him, con∣uay her presently to Valeres house.
What vilain was it that hath uttered this.
Why it was even I, I thank you for your gentle terms, you give me vilain at the first, I wonder where•… this old doter, what doth he think we fear him.
O monstrous man, what, would thou have him take vs?
Would I quoth you, yea by my troth would I, I know he is but gone to cal the constable, or to raise the streets.
What means the man trow? is he mad?
No, no, I know what I do, I doe it of purpose, I long to see him come and rail at you, to call you harlot, and to spu•…e you too, O you'll love me a great deal the better, and yet let him come, and if he touch but one thread of you, Isle make that thread his poison.
I know not what to say.
Speak, do you love me?
Yea surely do I.
Why then have not I reason that love you so dear∣lie as I do, to make you ha•…ull in his sight, that I might more freely enjoy you.
Why let vs be gon my kind Lemot, and not be wondered at in the open streets.
Isle go with you through fire, through death, through hell, come give me your own hand, my own dear heart, this hand that I adore and reverence, and loath to have it, touch an old mans bosom, O let me sweetly kiss it; he bites.
Out on thee wretch, he hath bit me to the bone, O barbarous Canibal, now I perceive thou wilt make me a mocking stock to all the world.
Come, come, leave your passions, they cannot move me, my father and my mother died both in a day, and I •…ung me a peal for them, and they were no so∣ner brought to the church and laid in their graves, but I fetched me two or three fine capers aloft, and took my leave of them, as men do of their mistresses at the ending of a ga∣liard; Besilos manus.
O brutish nature, how accursed was I ever to endure the sound of this damned voice?
Well, and you do not like my humour, I can be but sorry for it, I bit you for good will, and if you accept it, so, if no, go.
Vilain, thou did it in contempt of me.
Well, and you take it so, so be it: hark you Madam, your wisest course is, even to become puritan again, put off this vain attire, and say, I have despised all: thanks my God, good husband, I do love thee in the Lord, and he (good man) will think all this you have done, was but to show thou coldest govern the world, and hide thee as a rainbow doth a storm: my dainty wench, go go, what shall the flattering words of a vain man make you forget your duty to your husband? away, repent, amend your life, you have discredited your religion •…or ever.
Well wench, for this foul shame thou put on me, the curse of all affection light on thee.
Go Abacuck, go, why this is excellent, I shall short∣lie become a schoolmaster, to whom men will put their wives, to practise; well now will I go set the Queen vpō th•… King, and tell her where he is close with his wench: and he that mends my humour, take the spurs: sit fast, for by hey∣uen, isle iurke the horse you ride on.
Well Gentlemen, I am utterly undone without your good helps, it is reported that I received certain la∣dies or gentlewomen into my house: no here is my man, my maid, and my boy, now if you saw any, speak boldly before these Gentlemen.
I saw none sir.
Nor I, by my maid•…ad.
Nor I, as I am a man.
Well my host, weal go answer for your house at this t•…e, but if at other times you have had wenches, and would not let vs know it, we are the less beholding to you.
Peradventure the more beholding to him, but I lay my life Lemot hath devised some i•…ast, he gave
vs the slip before dinner.
Well Gentlemen, since we are so fitly met, Isle tell you an excellent subject for a fit of mirth, and if it bee well handled.
Why, what is it?
Why man, Labe•…ha is grown mar•…elous malecon∣tent, upon some amorous disposition of •…is mistress, and you know he loves a mease of cream, and a spice-cake with his heart, and I am sure he hath not dined to day, and he hath taken on him the humour of the young lord Dowsecer, and we will set a mease of cream, a spice-cake, and a spoon, as the armour, picture, and apparel was set in the way of Dowsecer, which I doub•… not but will work a rare cure upon his melancholy.
Why, this is excellent, Isle go fetch the cream.
And I the cake.
And I the spoon.
See where hee comes as like the lord Dowsecer as may be, now you shall hear him begin with some Latin sentence that hee hath remembered ever since hee read his Accidence.
F•…lix quē faciunt a•…even pericula 〈◊〉. O silly state of things, for things they be that cause this silly state: and what is a thing, a babble, a toy, that stands men in small stead: but what have we here? what vanities have we here?
He is strongly tempted, the lord strengthen •…im, see what a vain he hath.
O cruel fortune, and dost thou spit thy spite at my p•…ore life: but O sour cream what think thou that I love thee still? no, no, fair and sweet is my mistress, if thou hottest strawberries and sugar in thee: but it may bee thou art set with stale cake to choke me: well taste it, and try it, spoonful by spoonful: bitterer and bitterer still, but •… sour cream, were thou an Onion, •…ince Fortune set thee
for me, I will eat thee, and I will de•…our thee in spite of Fortunes spite, choke I, or burst I, mistress for thy sake, to end my life e•…te I this cream and cake.
So he hath done, his Melancholy is well eased I warrant you.
Gods my life Gentlemen, who hath been at this cream?
Cream, had you cream? where is your cream? Isle spend my penny at your cream.
Why, did not you eat this cream?
Talk not to me of cream, for such vain meat I do despise as food, my stomach dies drowned in the cream boules of my mistress eyes.
Nay-stay Labesha.
No not I, not I.
O he is ashamed in faith: but I will tell thee howe thou shalt make him mad indeed, say his mistress for love of him hath drowned her self.
Sblood, that will make him hang himself.
have at them in faith with a lame counterfeit humour: ache on rude arm, I care not for thy pain, I got it nobly in the kings defence, and in the guardians of my fair Queens right.
O tell me sweet Lemot, how fares the king? or what his right was that thou did defend?
That you shall know when other things are told.
Keep not the Queen too long without her longing.
No, for I tell you it is a dangerous thing.
Little care cruel men how women long.
What would you have me then put poison in my breath, and burn the •…ares of my attentive Queen.
Tell me what ere it be, Isle bear it all.
bear with my rudeness then in telling it, for alas you see I can but act it with the left hand, this is my ge∣stur now.
Tic well enough.
Yea well enough you say, this recompense have I for all my wounds: then thus the King inamou∣red of an other lady compares your face to hers, and says that yours is fat and flat, and that your nether lip was pas∣sing big.
O wicked man, doth he so suddenly condemn my beauty, that when he married me he thought divine: for ever blasted be that strumpets face, as all my hopes are blasted, that did change them.
Nay Madam, though he said your face was fat, and flat, and so forth, yet he liked it best, and said, a perfect beauty should be so.
O did he so! why that was right even as it should be.
You see now Madam, howe much too hasty you were in your griefs.
If he did so esteem of me indeed, happy am I.
So may your highness be that hath so good a hus∣band, but hell hath no plague to such an one as I.
Indeed Madam, you have a bad husband: truly then did the king grow mightily in love with the other la∣die, and swore, no king could more enriched be, then to in∣joy so fair a dame as she.
O monstrous man, and acurst most miserable dame!
But says the king I do enjoy as fair, &amp; though I love in al hono•…ed sort, yet Isle not wrōg my wife for al the world
This proves his constancy as firm as brass.
It doth, it doth: O pardon me my lord, that I mi∣stake thy to•…all meaning so.
In heaven your highness lives, but I in hell.
But when he vewd her radiant eyes again, blind was hee struck with her fervent beams: and now good
King he gropes about in corners void of the cheerful light should guide vs all.
O dismal news, what is my sovereign blind?
Blind as a Beetle madam, that a while hovering a∣loft, at last in cowsheds fall.
Could her eyes blind him?
Eyes or what it was I know not, but blind I am sure he is as any stone.
Come bring me to my Prince my lord that I may lead him, none alive but I may have the honour to direct his feet.
How lead him madam? why hee can go as right as you, or any here, and is not blind of eyesight.
Of what then?
Of reason.
Why thou saidest he wanted his cheerful light.
Of reason still I meant, whose light you know should cheerfully guide a worthy King, for he doth love her, and hath forced her into a private room where now they a•…e.
What mocking changes is there in thy words fond man, thou murtherest me with these exclaims.
Why madam tic your fault, you cut me off be∣fore my words be half done.
Forth and unlade the poison of thy tongue.
Another lord did love this curious lady, who hey∣ring that the King had forced her, as she was walking with another Earl, ran straightwaies mad for her, and with a friend of his, and two or three black ruffians more, brake desperately upon the person of the King, swearing to take from him, in traitorous fashion, the instrument of procrea∣tion: with them I fought a while,, and got this wound, but being unable to resist so many, came straight to you to fetch you to his aid.
Why raised you not the streets?
That I forbore, because I would not have the
world, to see what a disgrace my liege was subject to, being with a woman in so mean a house.
Whose daughter was it that he forced I pray?
Your daughter sir.
Whose son was that ran so mad for her?
Your son my Lord.
O Gods, and fiends forbid.
I pray sir, from whom did he take the Lady?
From your good Lord.
O Lord I beseech thee no.
Tic all too true, come follow the Queen and I, where I shall lead you.
O wretched Queen, what would they take from him?
The instrument of procreation.
Now was there ever man so much accursed, that when his mind misgave him, such a man was haplesse, to keep him company? yet who would keep him company but I, O wild Lem•…t, my wife and I are bound to curse thee while we live, but chiefly I, well: seek her, or seek her not; find her, or find her not, I were as good see how hell opens, as look upon her.
We have in faith, stop thou him there, and I will meet him here.
Well, I will venture once to seek her.
Gods Lord, my Lord, come you this way, why your wife runs ranging like as if she were mad, swearing to slit your nose if she can catch you.
What shall I do at the sight of her and hern.
Gods precious my Lord, come you this way, your wife comes ranging with a troop of dames, like Bacchus drunken foes, just as you go, shift for your self my Lord.
Stay good Cat•…lian.
No not I my Lord.
How now Iaques, whats the news?
None but good my Lord.
Why hast not seen my wife run round about the streets.
Not I my Lord, I come to you from my moister, who would pray you to speak to Lemot, that Lemot might speak to the King, that my masters lottery for his jewels may go forward, he hath made the rarest device that ever you heard, we have fortune in it, and she our maid plays, and I, and my fellow carry two torches, and our boy goes before and speaks a speech, tic very fine in faith sir.
Sir in this thou majesty highly pleasure me, let me have thy place to bear a torch, that I may look on my wife, and she not see me, for if I come into her sight abruptly, I were better be hanged.
O sir you shall, or any thing that I can do, Isle send for your wife to.
I prithee do.
This is the house where the mad Lord did vow to do the deed, draw all your swoords courageous gentlemen, Isle bring you there where you shall honour win, but I can tell you, you must break your shin.
Who will not break his neck to save his King: set forward Lemot.
Yea, much good can I do with a wounded arm, Isle go and call more help.
Others shall go, nay we will raise the streets, better dishonour, then destroy the King.
Sbloud I know not how to excuse my villainy, I would fine be gone.
Isle geld the adulterous goat, and take from him the instrument, that plays him such sweet music.
O rare, this makes my fiction true: now isle stay.
Arrest these faithless tra•…trous gentlemen.
What is the reason that you call vs traitors?
Nay, why do you attempt such violence against the person of the King?
Against the King, why this is strange to me.
How now my masters, what? weapons drawn, come you to murder me.
How fares my Lord?
How fare I? well, but you in faith shall get me speak for you another time; he got me here to woo a curious Lady, and she tempts him, say what I can, over what state I will in your behalf Lemot, she will not yield.
In faith my liege, what a hard heart hath she, well hark you, I am content your wit shall save your honesty for this once.
Peace, a plague OR you, peace; but wherefore asked you how I did?
Because I feared that you were hurt my Lord.
Hurt, how I pray?
Why, hurt Madam, I am well again.
Do you ask? why he told me Dowsecer and this his friend, threatened to take away.
To take away, what should they take away.
Name it Madam.
Nay, I pray name it you.
Why then, thus it was my liege, I told her Dow∣secer, and this his friend threatened to take away, and if they could the iustrument of procreation, and what was that now, but Martia being a fair woman, is not she the instrument of procreation, as all women are.
O wicked man.
Go to, go to, you are one of those fiddles too in faith.
Well pardon my minion, that hath frayd you thus, it was but to make you merry in the end.
I joy it ends so well, my gracious •…ord.
But say my gracious Lord, is no harm done, be∣tweene my loving daughter, and your grace?
No, of my honour and my soul Foyes.
The fire of love which she hath •…indled in me be∣ing greater then my heate of vanity, hath quite expelled.
Come Dowsecer, receive with your lost wits your love, though los•…▪ I know you'll yield, my lord and you her father.
Most joyfully my Lord.
And for her part I know her dispositiō well enough.
What, will you have her?
Yea mary will I.
Isle go and tell Labesha presently.
Monsieur I emote, I pray let me speak with you, I come to you from the •…ord Moron, who would desire you to speak to the King for my masters lottery, and he hath my place to bear a torch, for bare faced hee dares not look upon his wife, for his life.
O excellent, Isle further thy masters lottery and it be but for this jest only, har•…e you my liege, here is the poor man hath bin at great charges for the preparation of a lot∣rye, and he hath made the rarest device, that I know you will ta•…e great pleasure in it, I pray let him present it before you at 〈◊〉 house.
With all my heart, can you be ready so soon?
Presently and if it like your grace.
But hark you Lemot, how shall we do for every mans posy.
Will •…ou all trust me with the making of them?
With all our hearts.
Wh•… then Isle go to make the poses and bring I abe∣sha to the lottery presently.
Surely the world is full of vanity, a woman must take heed she do not hear a lewd man speak, for every woman cannot when she is tempted, when the wicked fiend gets her into his snares escape like me, for graces measure is not so filled up, nor so pressed down in every one as me, but yet I promise you a little more: well, Isle go seek my head, who shall take me in the gates of his kind arms untouched of any.
What Madam are you so pure now?
Yea, would not you be pure?
No puritan.
You must be then a devil. I can tell you.
O wife where hast thou been?
where did I tell you I would be I pray.
In thy close walk thou said.
And was 'not?
Truly / know not, I neither looked nor knocked, for Labesha told me that you, and fair Martia were at Ve∣rones ordinary.
Labesha? my lord you are a wise man to belecue a fool.
Well my good head, for my part I forgive you: but surely you do much offend to be suspicious: where there is no trust, there is no love, and where there is no love twixt man and wife, theres no good dealing surely: for as men should ever love their wives, so should they ever trust thē, for what love is there where there is no trust?
She tells you true, my lord.
She doth my liege; and dear wife pardon this and I will never be suspicious more.
Why I say, I do.
Look you my liege, I have done simple service amongst you, here is one had hanged himself for love, thinking his Mistress had done so for him: well, see your Mistress •…ues.
And doth my Mistress live?
She doth, O noble knight, but not your Mi∣stress now.
Sblood, but she shall for me, or for no body else.
How now, what a traitor, draw upon the King.
Yea, or upon any woman here in a good cause.
Well sweet Bash let her marry Dowsecer, Isle get thee a wife worth fifteen of her, wilt thou have one that cares not for thee?
Not I by the Lord, I scorn her, Isle have her better if I can get her.
Why thats well feed.
What Madam, are you turned puritan again?
When was I other, pray?
Marie Isle tell you when, when you went to the Ordinary, and when you made false signs to your hus∣band, which I could tell him all.
Cursed be he that makes debate twixt man &amp; wife.
O rare scripturian! you have sealed up my lips, a hall, a hall, the pageant of the Buttery.
What is he?
This is Verones son, my liege.
What shall he do?
Speak some speech that his father hath made for him
Why is he good at speeches?
O he is rare at speeches.
Fair ladies most tender, and nobles most slender, and gentles whose wits be scarce.
My host, why do you call vs nobles most slender?
And it shall please your Grace, to be slender is to be proper, and therefore where my boy says nobles most slen∣der, it is as much to say, fine and proper nobles.
Yea, but why do you call vs gentles whose wits are scarce.
To be scarce, is to be rare: and therefore where as he says Gentles whose wits be scarce, is as much as to say, Gentles whose wits be rare.
Well, forwards trunchman.
Fair ladies most tender, and nobles most slender, and gentles whose wits bee scarce, Queen Fortune doth come with her trump, and her drum, as it may ap∣pear by my voice.
Come hither, are you a schoolmaster, where was Fortune Queen, of what country or kingdom?
Wy sir, Fortune was Queen over all the world.
Thats a lie, theres none that ever conquered all the world, but moister Alisander, I am sure of that.
O rare Monsieur Labesha, who would have thought hee could have found so rare a fault in the speech.
Isle alter it if it please your grace.
No, tic very well.
Father I must begin again they interrupt me so.
I beseech your grace give the boy leave to begin again.
With all my heart, tic so good we cannot hear it too oft.
Fair ladies most tender, and nobles most slender, and gentles whose wits are scarce, Queen Fortune doth come with her Fife, and her Drum, as it doth appear by my voice, here is Fortune good, but il by the rood, and this nought but good shall do you, dealing the lots out of our pots, and so good Fortune to you sir.
Look you my liege, how hee that caries the torch trembles extremely.
I warrant tic with care to carry his torch well.
Nay there is something else in the wind: why my host •…hat means thy man Iaques to tremble so?
Hold still thou knave, what art thou afraid to look upon the goodly presence of a king: hold up for shame.
Alas poor man, he thinks tic Iaques his man: poor lord, how much is he bound to suffer for his wife?
Hark you mine host, what goodly person is that? is it Fortune herself?
Isle tell your Majesty in secrete who it is, it is my maid Iaquena.
I promise you she becomes her state rarely.
Well my •…ege, you w•…re all content that I should make your poses: well here they be every one: give Ma∣ster Verone his five crowns.
Theres mine and the Queens.
Theirs ours
And there is mine and Martias.
Come Labesha thy money.
You must lend me some, for my boy is run away with my purse.
Thy boy? •… never knew any that thou had.
Had not I a boy three or four years ago, and he ran away.
And never since he went thou had not a penny, but stand by, Isle excuse you. But sirrah 〈◊〉, thou shalt stand on one side and read the prises, and I will stand on the other and read the Poses.
Content Lemot.
Come on Queen Fortune, tell eueryman •…is posy, this is orderly, the King and Queen are first.
Come let vs see what goodly poses you have go∣uen vs.
This is your Majesties, At the fairest, so it bee not Martia.
A plague upon you, you are still playing the vile∣loins with me.
This is the Queens, Obey the •…ueene: and she speaks it to her husband, or to Fort•…no, which she will.
A prise: your 〈◊〉 is the sum of four shil∣lings in gold
Why how can th•…t •…e 〈◊〉 is no such coin.
Here is the worth of it, if it 〈◊〉 your grace.
Well, whats for me?
A heart of gold.
A goodly jewel.
Count Laberuele and Floril•….
Whats my posy sir I pray?
Mary this my Lord,
Of all fortunes friends, that hath joy in this life,
He is most happy that puts a sure trust in his wife.
A very good one sir, I thank you for it.
Whats mine I pray?
M•…rye this Madam,
Good fortune be thou my good fortune bringer,
And make me amends for my poor bitten finger.
Who bit your finger wife?
No body; tic vain posy.
Blank for my lord Laberuele, for his wife a posy, a pair of holy beads with a crucifix.
O bommination Idol, Isle none of them.
Keep•… them thy self Veron, she will not have them.
Dowsecer and Martia I have fitted your lordship for a posy.
Why what is it?
An•…o omnia una.
And what is mine sir?
A serious one I warrant you change: for the better.
Thats not amiss.
A price: Dow•…r hath a cats eyes or Mercuries rod of gold, set with In•…ends and Emeralds.
What is for Martia?
M•…rtia hath the two serpents heads set with Dia∣monds.
What my host Uerone?
What •…s he in for his own •…evils.
O what else my liege, tic our bounty, and his po•…e is To tel you the t•…th in words plain and mild, Veron•… loves his maid, and she is great with child.
What Queen for•…e with child, •…hall we hau•… young fortunes my host?
I am abused, and if it please your My•…sty.
•…le play no more.
No saith you need not now, you have plaid your 〈◊〉 full already
Stand still good 〈◊〉, they do but jest.
Yea, but I like no such jesting.
Come great Queen Fortune, let see your posies, what madam, alas, your ladyship is one of the last.
What is my posy sir I pray?
Marie Madam your posy is made in manner and form of an Echo, as if you were seeking your husband, and fortune should be the Echo, and this you say: where is my husband h•…d so long un•…asked, maskt? says the Echo, but in what place sweet Fortune? let me hear: hear says the Echo.
There you lie Echo, for if he were here we must needs •…ee him.
Indeed sweet King there me thinks the Echo must needs I•…e, if hee were here wee must needs see him, tic one of thē that caries the torches: no that cannot be nei∣there, and yet by the Mass here is Iaques, why my host, did not you tell me that Iaques should be a torchbearer: who is this? Gods my life, my lord.
And you be Gentlemen let me go.
Nay come your way, you may be well enough a∣shamed to show your face that is a perjured wretch, did not you swear, if there were any wenches at the or•…nary, you yo•…lt straight come home.
Why, who told you Madam, there were any there?
He that will stand to it Lemot my l•…ge.
who I stand to it, alas, I told you in kindness, and good will, because I would not have you company long from your husband.
Why lo you bird, how much you are deceived.
Why wherefore were you afraid to be seen?
Who I afraid? alas I bore a torch to grace this honourable presence, for nothing else sweet bird.
Thanks good Moron, see lady with what wrong you have pursued your most enamoured lord: but come now al are friends, now is this day spent with an hurtful motives of delight, and over joys more my senses at the night: and now for Dowsecer, if all will follow my devise, his beaut•…os love and he shall married be, and here I solemnly inuit you all home to my court, where with feasts wee will crown this mirthful day, and vow it to r•…noun.

